Political Prisoners Cambodia | Human Rights WatchSkip to main contentSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights Watchالعربية简中繁中EnglishFrançaisDeutsch日本語РусскийPortuguêsEspañolMore languagesSearchDonate NowSearchCountriesTopicsReportsVideos & PhotosImpactTake ActionAboutJoin UsGive Nowالعربية简中繁中EnglishFrançaisDeutsch日本語РусскийPortuguêsEspañolMore languagesMarch 10, 2022Political Prisoners CambodiaAvailable InEnglishFrançaisShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterThe precipitous decline in respect for human rights in Cambodia in recent years continued with a wave of politically motivated arrests and detentions in 2019. Authorities have detained and often prosecuted people for expressing views critical of the government, taking part in peaceful activism or human rights work, or associating with members of the former opposition party, the Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) by “eating Khmer noodles.” The dissolution of the CNRP by the government-controlled Supreme Court prior to the July 2018 elections assured that the ruling Cambodian People’s Party (CPP) would win all 125 seats in the national parliament, effectively making Cambodia a one-party state.A series of repressive laws and amendments to existing laws adopted in recent years have provided the authorities with legal tools to arbitrarily arrest and detain individuals for the expression of their opinions, including online, associating with others in groups, or conducting peaceful public assemblies.Unlike after previous elections in 2008 and 2013, Prime Minister Hun Sen’s threatening political rhetoric towards dissidents and political opponents has not cooled off one year later. With the help of its politicized and corrupt judiciary, the Cambodian government stepped up its harassment of former CNRP officials and activists. Kem Sokha, the CNRP leader, remains under indefinite house arrest linked to fabricated treason charges. Sam Rainsy and other senior CNRP leaders are in self-imposed exile, and face arrest warrants if they return. Sam Rainsy’s announcement that he and other CNRP exiles would return to Cambodia in November has prompted the government to allege the CNRP is plotting a coup. Since the CNRP announcement on August 16, the government has threatened charges against more than 50 former CNRP members and detained at least 30 of them.Civil society activists, human rights defenders, journalists, and ordinary citizens expressing critical opinions online and offline are regular targets of the government. Trials are conducted in complete disregard of international fair trial standards, with government-controlled judges reaching verdicts in advance of the trials.Concerned governments and donors should respond to the Cambodian government’s widespread human rights violations by strengthening public criticism and calling for the immediate and unconditional release of all political prisoners and others held for the peaceful exercise of their basic rights.POLITICAL PRISONERSChao VeasnaChao Veasna, 54Sentenced: 5 yearsChao Veasna, an ethnic Khmer Krom, was a Poipet commune council deputy chief from the Candlelight Party (renamed from the Sam Rainsy Party after the law changed to ban the use of a person’s name in the name of a political party). During an anti-government protest outside the Poipet customs office in May 2015 at which Veasna was not present, military police fired warning shots to disperse protesters and seriously beat one protester. With commune elections scheduled for June 2017, on February 16, 2017, a Banteay Meanchey Provincial Court investigating judge questioned Veasna for four hours and sent him to Banteay Meanchey provincial prison in connection with the May 2015 protest. Veasna was charged with inciting the commission of a felony (articles 494 and 495 of the Criminal Code) and, as an accomplice, with intentional damage with aggravating circumstances (general aggravation and in relation to status of the victim) (articles 29, 410, 411 and 412), as well as with intentional damage with aggravating circumstances (using dangerous means and causing injury) (articles 413 and 414). On June 7, 2018, the Provincial Court convicted and sentenced Veasna to five years’ imprisonment. He was also ordered to pay a total of approximately US$15,000 for damages to the customs office building and several cars.Thun ChanthaThun Chantha, 44On February 26, 2021, police arrested Thun Chantha, a former commune chief for the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Phnom Penh’s Toul Kork district.On February 28, the Phnom Penh court charged him with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and sent him to pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1 (CC1).On February 18, Chantha had expressed criticism on his Facebook page of Cambodia’s use of the Chinese-made Sinopharm Covid-19 vaccine, stating that Cambodians were being forced to take the vaccine even though they did not want to be vaccinated. The vaccine has been widely viewed with skepticism in Cambodia.Mey SophornMey Sophorn, 43On February 27, 2021, police arrested Mey Sophorn, an activist of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) and a member of a group of relatives of detained opposition activists (“Satrey Khlarhann,” or “Brave Women”) who organize regular Friday protests calling for the release of their relatives.On February 28, the Phnom Penh court charged her with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and sent her to pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 2 (CC2).On February 9, Sophorn had expressed criticism on her Facebook page of Cambodia’s use of the Chinese-made Sinopharm Covid-19 vaccine. She said: “Why is the one-party government rushing to call on the Cambodian people to be injected by Chinese vaccines, which have not yet been recognized by the World Health Organization (WHO)?”Kong MasKong Mas, 37On December 31, 2020, police arrested Kong Mas, a youth member of the arbitrarily dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP), in Svay Rieng province, after he joined a protest in front of a Phnom Penh court calling for the release of detained CNRP members and trade union leader Rong Chhun. The same day, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged him with “conspiracy” (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1 (Prey Sar) prison. Police had previously arrested Kong Meas on January 16, 2019, after he posted on Facebook that the EU was planning to impose a tariff on Cambodian rice. On January 19, the investigating judge sent him to pre-trial detention after charging him with public insult and incitement to commit a felony (articles 307 and 495 of Cambodia’s Penal Code). On October 18, a Phnom Penh court convicted him of incitement to commit a felony and sentenced him to 18 months in prison. After serving his 18-month prison sentence, which included time served in pre-trial detention between January and October 2019, the authorities released Kong Mas on July 23, 2020. Kong Mas is a known government critic who in the past organized and assisted with distribution of information, including political fliers, produced by acting head of the CNRP, Sam Rainsy.Sou YeanSou Yean, 45On October 22, 2020, the authorities arrested Sou Yean, a former provincial party chief of the of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP), in Prey Treak village, Teak commune, Memot district, Tbong Khmum province. On October 3, the authorities arrested and questioned three CNRP activists wearing t-shirts with Khmer imprint, saying “Thank you for peace, but respect Article 2 of the Constitution.” Article 2 upholds the territorial integrity of Cambodia. One of the activists, Sou Yean’s nephew, said that they acquired the t-shirts from Sou Yean. The authorities released the activists after signing pledges that they will stop from engaging in similar protest activities again – a common tactic by the authorities to stifle dissent. On October 23, the investigating judge of the Tbong Khmum provincial court charged Sou Yean with incitement to commit a felony (article 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Kampong Cham provincial prison. There is speculation his arrest may be related to his calls for activists to join protests on October 23, organized to mark the anniversary of the 1991 Paris Peace Accords, in front of Chinese embassy in Phnom Penh. Authorities previously arrested Sou Yean on April 22, 2019, and charged him with “incitement to commit a felony” based on his comments levelled at Prime Minister Hun Sen in a private message on Facebook. His message stated Hun Sen was not keeping his promises such as protecting Cambodia’s forests and fighting corruption and that “Hun Sen is just blind in one eye, while his supporters are blind in both eyes, and deaf too.” The private message was leaked and Pankhem Buthan, deputy chief of the prime minister’s cabinet and president of the Youth Federation of Senaneak, filed a legal complaint against Sou Yean. Upon serving his one-year prison sentence, the authorities released him on April 23, 2020.Ismail Pin OsmanClick to expand ImageIsmail Pin Osman, 45Ismail Pin Osman was a reserve National Assembly candidate for the CNRP in Kampong Cham province in the 2013 national election. He is a member of the ethnic Cham Muslim community. He was arrested by anti-trafficking police in Phnom Penh’s Russey Keo district on February 9, 2018, after returning from Thailand, where he had fled under pressure from authorities to defect to the ruling CPP. He is currently in pre-trial detention on charges of unlawfully removing female workers for cross-border transfer (article 11 of the Law on Suppression of Human Trafficking and Sexual Exploitation). If convicted, he faces from 7 to 15 years in prison. On August 13, 2019, the Phnom Penh court convicted him and sentenced him to the maximum 15 years in prison. The court also convicted his uncle Ahmad Yahya, former Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation secretary of state, for the same offense and sentenced him to 15 years in prison.Sun Chan NoeurnSun Chan Noeurn, 34On April 8, 2017, a group of military police and soldiers arrested Net Sao, a former CNRP Krayear commune councilor in Kampong Thom province, along with land rights activist and local CNRP supporter, Sun Chan Noeurn.On April 9, Kampong Thom provincial court formally charged Sun Chan Noeurn and Net Sao and sent both to pre-trial detention. On January 24, 2018, the same court convicted Sun Chan Noeurn and Net Sao of obstructing deliberate duties and operations of officials (article 100 of the Forestry Law) and intentional violence (article 217 of the Cambodian Criminal Code) and sentenced both to three years in prison. On July 19, the Court of Appeal upheld the verdict.Net Sao ran as a commune chief candidate for the CNRP during the June 2017 commune council elections. He also intervened on behalf of several communities affected by land disputes in Krayear commune.Sok OudomSok OudomOn May 13, 2020, Kampong Chhnang police arrested Sok Oudom, owner of the Rithysen Radio station in Kampong Chhnang province, alleging he committed  “incitement to commit a felony” (article 495 of Cambodia’s penal code).Local police questioned him before sending him on May 14 to the Kampong Chhnang provincial court for further questioning. The police claimed that there was a complaint against the radio station but did not elaborate who the complainant was or what the allegations were about. The police argued that Sok Oudom’s broadcasts encouraged people to occupy state land at Phnom Oral Wildlife Sanctuary in Kampong Chhnang province. Oudom is held in pre-trial detention at Kampong Chnnang provincial prison, awaiting his trial.On May 12, the Ministry of Information revoked the media license for Rithysen Radio Station’s broadcasting on FM99.75 and the radio station’s website. The ministry claimed, but provided no evidence, that the station was “publishing information which is exaggerated information, contains incitement to violence, provocation to commit discrimination and provocation to cause social insecurity and chaos.”Oudom regularly reported on longstanding land disputes between local farming communities and powerful district officials. Local human rights NGO monitors said about the radio owner that “he always cares a lot about injustice in the society, the destruction of public property and abuses by the powerful .”Kak KomphearKak Komphear, 54On May 31, 2020, police arrested Kak Komphear, a former senior CNRP member in Phnom Penh, while he was fleeing to Takeo province. According to the arrest warrant, the authorities ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar Correctional Center (CC1) based on charges of “plotting” and “incitement to commit to a felony” (articles 453, 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) in a case file dated February 20, 2019 (Case file no. 1140).In a separate case (Case file no. 354) dated January 18, 2019, the Phnom Penh municipal court had convicted Komphear in absentia of instigating insult and incitement to commit a felony (articles 28, 494, 495 and 502 of Cambodia’s penal code) and sentenced him to one year and eight months in prison. As a result of staying in hiding, he has not yet served this prison sentence. The charges were based on allegations that he had participated in the government-labelled “Clean Finger” election boycott campaign around which the government manufactured a bogus narrative that the campaign was a coup by the opposition against the government.CNRP leader Mu Sochua  told VOD News that Komphear had been in hiding for over a year out of fear of being arrested. Before his arrest, he had received a phone call from an unidentified man asking him to identify himself on the phone. Later he noticed a man on a motorbike parked in front of his house in Phnom Penh, suspecting that he was going to be arrested. Thereupon, Komphear fled to Takeo by car but the authorities stopped his car and arrested him.Case no. 354 also involves CNRP figures Sam Rainsy and Ho Vann. In October 2019, the court convicted and sentenced them to the same degree as Komphear; however, both remain in exile and therefore have not served their prison sentences. On October 18, 2019, the authorities also tried an opposition activist, Kong Mas , based on insult and incitement charges and sentenced him to 18 months in prison.Pheat MabPheat Mab, 49On May 27, 2020, police arrested Pheat Mab, a former CNRP council member in Dom Tek commune, Sonikum district, in Siem Reap province. He is also a member of the Cambodian Independent Teachers' Association (CITA).Police took him to court the same day and the Phnom Penh municipal court charged Mab with “plotting,” “incitement to commit a felony,” and “inciting military personnel to disobedience” (articles 453, 494, 495 and 471 of Cambodia’s penal code). The authorities ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar Correctional Center (CC1).The authorities allege that the basis of his arrest is a phone conversation about the current microfinance debt crisis. It is unclear how the authorities learned of his private conversation and whether his phone was tapped – a practice that has resulted in previous arbitrary arrests of government critics.Sun ThunSun ThunOn June 1, 2020, four police officers arrested Sun Thun without an arrest warrant . He is a former elected CNRP council member in Thmey village, Treal commune, Tangkok district, in Kampong Thom province. He is also a member of the Cambodian Independent Teachers' Association (CITA).After a few hours of being held in custody at the Ministry of Interior, the authorities placed him in pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar Correctional Center (CC1).The authorities took him to court the same day of his arrest, where the court charged him with “plotting,” “incitement to commit a felony,” and “inciting military personnel to disobedience” (articles 453, 494, 495 and 471 of Cambodia’s penal code).In June 2019, four unidentified men beat Thun while guiding them to go see a plot of land about which they had expressed interest. He reported that they had persuaded him to go with them to talk to the landowner. Thun claimed the attack was an act of “political retribution or intimidation” because he was a former senior CNRP official. He submitted a police complaint against the four men, whom he said he did not know, for attempted murder. Police claimed to be investigating but no arrests were ever made.Thun lost his political post along with all other elected CNRP officials upon the arbitrary dissolution of the party in November 2017. The Ministry of Education did not allow him to resume his teaching position, and he filed a complaint against that decision. In 2019, Thun had openly supported the announced return of exiled CNRP leadership in November that year.Thun’s arrest came hours before Prime Minister Hun Sen “vowed during a speech in Preah Sihanouk to arrest those he claimed intended to overthrow the government and sow social disorder .”Heng ChansothyHeng Chansothy, 56On the morning of June 5, 2020, police detained Heng Chansothy, a former CNRP deputy chief of Pur Sunchey district in Phnom Penh and sent him for pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar Correctional Center (CC1).Authorities previously arrested and charged Chansothy on November 6, 2019 with conspiracy and incitement to commit a felony (articles 453, 495, and 494 of Cambodia’s penal code). His detention occurred amidst a wave of arbitrary arrests of opposition members ahead of the announced return of exiled CNRP figures on November 9. A little more a week later, on November 15, the authorities released Chansothy on bail.On June 3, 2020, the authorities alleged he had violated his bail terms requiring him to report to the police station on a regular basis. Chansothy’s lawyer rejected  the allegation, stating that Chansothy had not received such orders to report from the court.On December 21, 2019, Chansothy was seriously injured near a gas station in Trapang Tea village, Trapang Krasang commune, Pursenchey district, Phnom Penh when two unidentified persons wearing helmets and driving a motorcycle hit him on the head with a metal pipe. The attack occurred at around 5:30 p.m. while he was driving his motorbike, coming from Kandal province. There were factory workers and other witnesses at the site when the attack happened. His son filed a complaint at the Trapang Krasang commune police station. Chansothy feared for his safety after the incident. The police never investigated the attack and no arrests were ever made.Khut ChroekKhut ChroekOn March 10, 2020, Preah Sdech district police arrested Khut Chroek (49 years old), a senior member of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Boeung Dol commune, Preah Sdach district, Prey Veng province. The authorities arrested him based on a critical Facebook post related to COVID-19, which authorities alleged was false information on the coronavirus. On March 11, the authorities charged him with “plotting” and “incitement to commit felony” (articles 453 and 495 of Cambodia’s criminal code) and put him in pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison.Ngin KheanNgin KheanOn March 17, 2020 at approximately 3 p.m., Phnom Penh police arrested Ngin Khean (29 years old) in Phnom Penh’s Steung Meanchey commune. He is the head of the youth wing of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Preah Sdach district of Prey Veng province. The authorities arrested him based on allegations he posted “fake news” about the coronavirus on his Facebook profile page. On the same day, the authorities charged him with “plotting” and “incitement to commit felony” (articles 453 and 495 of Cambodia’s criminal code) and sent him to pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison facility. Ngin Khean is the brother-in-law of Khut Chroeuk, who was arrested in Prey Veng on March 10.Keo ThaiKeo ThaiOn March 26, 2020, Kampong Chhnang police arrested Keo Thai (50 years old), who is a former senior member of the dissolved opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Por Pel commune, Bory Bo district, Kampong Chhnang province, and a member of the Cambodia Independent Teachers Association (CITA). Police surrounded his daughter’s house as part of their search for him. Police transported Thai to Phnom Penh and detained him at Prey Sar prison facility. According to his family, police arrested him without a warrant while confiscating his mobile phone, and the phones of his wife and daughter. The authorities charged Keo Thai with “plotting” and “incitement to commit felony” (articles 453, 494, and 495 of Cambodia’s Criminal Code). On March 27, National Police Commission spokesman Chhay Kim Khoeun alleged that Keo Thai “was on the court’s [black] list but was spared any legal action [with regard to other cases] by the government. Instead, he was put under court observation. After he was forgiven, he did not seem to change. He even created more problems by producing inciteful news, which means he did not change.” Earlier, in March 2020, police attempted to arrest Keo Thai for criticizing the government on Facebook, but he fled before police arrived. His daughter told Radio Free Asia that she was not sure why her father had been detained at this time because he had merely conducted online teaching after schools had been shut on March 16 due to the Covid-19 outbreak. Keo Thai’s lawyer informed Radio Free Asia that he suffers from high blood pressure and must take medication daily.Thai SokuntheaThai SokuntheaOn March 26, 2020, Kampong Chhnang police arrested Thai Sokunthea, an activist of the dissolved opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Kampong Chnnang province. On March 29, the authorities charged Thai Sokunthea with “plotting” and “incitement to commit felony” (articles 453, 494, and 495 of Cambodia’s Criminal Code) and placed him in pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar correctional facility. The reasons for his arrest are not clear but it appears connected to past arbitrary and politically motivated charges being reactivated against him. It appears that Thai Sokunthea has not made any critical Facebook postings in relation to the Cambodian government’s Covid-19 response.Yim SarethYim SarethOn March 27, 2020, Phnom Penh police arrested Yim Sareth (52 years old), a former commune councilor of the dissolved opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Romeas Hak district, Svay Rieng province. The authorities alleged he spread “fake news” about Covid-19 on his Facebook page. However, the only Facebook post that can be found is one from March 20 when he stated that he wears a mask to protect himself from dirt and cement dust, but his real fear is the coronavirus. The Phnom Penh municipal court charged him with “plotting” and “incitement to commit felony” (articles 453, 494, and 495 of Cambodia’s Criminal Code) and placed him in pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar correctional facility. His lawyer informed Radio Free Asia that Yim Sareth suffers from high blood pressure and must take medication daily. Similar to other recently arrested former CNRP activists, the charges against Sareth consist of fabricated and politically motivated charges being reactivated against him as part of a wider crackdown against the opposition.Kheum PheanaKheum PheanaOn April 2, 2020, Phnom Penh police arrested Kheum Pheana (52 years old), a former senior member of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Phnom Penh. On April 3, the Phnom Penh court charged him with “plotting” and “incitement to commit felony” (articles 453, 494, and 495 of Cambodia’s Criminal Code). The authorities ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar correctional center. The rationale for the charges is unclear because it appears that Pheana did not make any critical Facebook post in relation to the Cambodian government’s Covid-19 response.Chum ChanChum ChanOn April 13, 2020, police arrested Chum Chan (52 years old), a former council member of the dissolved opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Prek Khser Khor commune, Peam Ro district, Prey Veng province. He is also a member of the Cambodian Independent Teachers Association in Prey Veng province. The authorities charged him with “plotting,” “inciting military personnel to disobedience” and “incitement to commit felony” (articles 453, 471, 494, and 495 of Cambodia’s Criminal Code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar correctional center. These charges are based on an introductory submission issued by the prosecutor of the Phnom Penh municipal court dated July 11, 2018, approximately two weeks before the general elections on July 29, 2018.The authorities had told Chum Chan to come to a district police station in Prey Veng’s Peam Ro district for questioning, failing to mention the basis for questioning and the possibility of arrest. The authorities seized his two mobile phones, which he was carrying with him. His wife told Radio Free Asia (RFA) that she only found out two days after Chan’s arrest that he had been taken to Phnom Penh when he called her from inside the prison to ask for money to spend for basic needs in prison. A local human rights group, the Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association (ADHOC), told RFA that Chan had been a teacher but was removed from the Ministry of Education’s list of registered teachers on January 30, 2018 due to his affiliation with the CNRP.Nhem VeanNhem VeanOn April 15, 2020, Banteay Meanchey police and national Ministry of Interior police arrested Nhem Vean (50 years old) in Poi Pet city, Banteay Meanchey province, at the border with Thailand. Nhem Vean is a former senior member of the dissolved opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Svay Rieng province. The authorities charged him with “plotting,” “inciting military personnel to disobedience” and “incitement to commit felony” (articles 453, 471, 494, and 495 of Cambodia’s Criminal Code). These allegations are old, reactivated charges imposed amidst a wider crackdown on the political opposition in 2018. He is currently held in pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar correctional center. It appears that Vean has not posted any critical messages on his Facebook about the government’s Covid-19 response.Sok ChanthaSok ChanthaOn April 20, 2020, police arrested Sok Chantha (55 years old), a former senior member of the dissolved opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Kram village, Prey Veng province. The village chief allegedly invited Chantha to come to the commune council office to discuss a possible reduction in his debt payment with a microfinance institution in response to financial challenges caused by Covid-19. At the commune council office, police seized Chantha’s phone, arrested him and took him to Phnom Penh. The authorities failed to present an arrest warrant. The authorities took him to the Ministry of Interior and General Commissariat of National Police in Phnom Penh for further questioning without a lawyer present. The authorities charged him with “plotting,” “inciting military personnel to disobedience” and “incitement to commit felony” (articles 453, 471, 494, and 495 of Cambodia’s Criminal Code) and, on April 22, placed him in pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar correctional facility. The basis for his arrest is unknown. It appears that Chantha has not posted any critical messages on his Facebook about the government’s Covid-19 response.Ros SokhetRos SokhetOn June 25, 2020, the Phnom Penh municipal police’s Cybercrime Bureau arrested Ros Sokhet, the publisher of Cheat Khmer (“Khmer Nation”) newspaper, based on two posts on his Facebook page on June 24. The first post questioned Prime Minister Hun Sen’s declaration of intent to name Hun Manet, his eldest son, as his successor. The second post criticized the lack of government response to Cambodians who unable to pay off their micro-loan debts due to the economic impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic.On June 28, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged him with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) based on allegations that the Facebook posts constituted “incitement to provoke serious chaos in social security.” If convicted, he could face up to two years in prison. Sokhet is in pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison.The Ministry of Information provided Cheat Khmer with its media licence in April 2020. However, at the time of his arrest, Ros Sokhet had not yet made any publications. After his arrest, the ministry announced it would review the license and might revoke it. If revoked, this would be the fourth time the authorities have revoked a media license granted to a local media outlet since the outbreak of Covid-19.Ros Sokhet has a history of publicly criticizing the government. In 2009, the authorities arrested and a court later convicted Ros Sokhet based on allegations of disinformation against a media personality, Soy Sopheap, the publisher of Deum Ampil newspaper.Since the pandemic, Cambodian authorities have detained two other journalists, Sok Oudom and Sovann Rithy, based on fabricated incitement charges. They are currently awaiting their trials.Ouk ChhumOuk Chhum, 74On July 10, 2020, police arrested Ouk Chhum, former elected Khlaeng Meas commune council chief for the disbanded Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP), in Battambang province. On July 8, Chhum allegedly had a phone conversation with another former local CNRP member, Lous Chenglay, with whom he discussed a YouTube video saying that a “fortune teller told the guy [Prime Minister Hun Sen] that he would die without a coffin and his wife would starve to death in 2023, and then the guy’s [Hun Sen’s] bodyguards killed the fortune teller.”The Phnom Penh municipal court charged Chhum with incitement to commit a felony (article 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison.It is unclear how the authorities learned about the private phone conversation since neither participant posted any information about the conversation. However, Cambodian authorities have engaged in unauthorized phone tapping against members of the political opposition members and civil society activists.Lous ChenglayLous Chenglay, 51On July 10, 2020, police arrested Lous Chenglay, former Bavel district party chief for the disbanded Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) ), in Battambang province. On July 8, Chenglay allegedly had a phone conversation with another former local CNRP member, Ouk Chhum , who told him about a YouTube video saying that a “fortune teller told the guy [Prime Minister Hun Sen] that he would die without a coffin and his wife would starve to death in 2023, and then the guy’s [Hun Sen’s] bodyguards killed the fortune teller.”The Phnom Penh municipal court charged Chenglay with incitement to commit a felony (article 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison.It is unclear how the authorities learned about the private phone conversation since neither participant posted any information about the conversation. However, Cambodian authorities have engaged in unauthorized phone tapping against members of the political opposition and civil society activists.In 2019, Chenglay had fled to Thailand due to fear of arrest amidst a crackdown on the political opposition. He had returned to Cambodia in early 2020.Long PharyLong PharyOn March 18, 2020, Phnom Penh police arrested Long Phary at Phnom Penh’s O’Russey market. He is a senior member of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Kampong Trabeik district, Prey Veng province. The authorities said that they arrested him based on a phone conversation he had about COVID-19, and alleged he was spreading what the government labelled as “fake news.” The authorities did not clarify how they learned about the contents of the conversation. On the same day, the authorities charged him with “plotting” and “incitement to commit felony” (articles 453 and 495 of Cambodia’s criminal code) and sent him to Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison. In a speech on March 9, Hun Sen specifically mentioned Phary, accusing him of spreading false information about being secretly transferred to a hospital in Singapore. Hun Sen threatened Long Phary’s arrest and warned him “Don’t ever think that we don’t know what you’re doing!”Kong Sam AnKong Sam AnOn September 6, 2020, police arrested Kong Sam An at his house in Soung commune, Soung district, Tbong Khmum province. He is a former Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) council member in Memout district, Tbong Khmum province.On September 7, the authorities charged him with incitement to commit a felony (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and sent him to pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison facility, Correctional Center 1 (CC1).The police accused him of organizing a protest at Phnom Penh’s Freedom Park on September 7, together with other youth and environmental activist groups, to call for the release of recently detained union leader Rong Chhun and other political prisoners.On September 22, the court convicted Kong Sam An of conspiracy (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code) – together with six other CNRP activists not present at the trial – and sentenced him to seven years in prison. Reporters from VOD News and human rights monitors from NGO LICADHO were not allowed inside the courtroom.Pen MomPen Mom, 39On October 12, 2019, police arrested Penh Mom (also known as Sambo Mom) in Phnom Penh. She is a former vice chair of the Kandor commune executive committee of the Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Kampot province.The arrest was based on a court summons issued on October 9 by the deputy prosecutor of the Kampot provincial court.On October 14, the investigating judge of the Kampot provincial court charged her with plotting a coup under article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code and ordered her pre-trial detention at Kampot provincial prison.Mom had made regular politically oriented posts on Facebook since the dissolution of the CNRP in November 2017. Authorities allege she was engaged in the public mobilization to support the return to Cambodia of the acting CNRP leader, Sam Rainsy.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Pen Mom was released on bail on November 14. However, the criminal charges against her are still pending.On August 25, 2020, the Kampot provincial court conducted a hearing and on September 9, 2020, found her guilty of the crime and sentenced her to five years in prison. She is held at Kampot provincial prison.Kong BunheangKong Bunheang, 66On October 17, 2020, police arrested without a warrant Kong Bunheang, a former provincial member of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Battambang province.On October 16, Kong Bunheang called Hang Seng, another former CNRP member in the province, to talk about the flooding situation in Cambodia and food assistance from the authorities. The authorities alleged both defendants insulted the king in their conversation. On October 18, police also arrested Hang Seng.The authorities acquired a recording of the conversations but have refused to clarify how and why they recorded the conversation. Surveillance of private communications by authorities has on many occasions led to politically motivated charges against government critics and human rights defenders.On October 20, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged Kong Bunheang with lese majeste (insulting the king) (article 437bis of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison.Hang SengHang Seng, 69On October 18, 2020, police arrested without a warrant Hang Seng, a former provincial member of the of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Battambang province.According to Hang Seng’s wife, Sangke district police used the pretext of a job opportunity to invite Hang Seng to the district police station. However, upon arrival, they questioned and arrested him.On October 16, another former CNRP member in the province, Kong Bunheang, called Hang Seng to talk about the flooding situation in Cambodia and food assistance from the authorities. The authorities alleged both defendants insulted the king in their conversation. On October 17, police also arrested Kong Bunheang.The authorities acquired a recording of the conversations but have refused to clarify how and why they recorded the conversation. Surveillance of private communications by authorities has on many occasions led to politically motivated charges against government critics and human rights defenders .On October 20, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged Hang Seng with lese majeste (insulting the king) (article 437bis of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison.Ny NakNy Nak, 41On December 11, 2020, the Phnom Penh police arrested Nak Ny, an agribusiness owner in Phnom Penh, for making a critical post on his business Facebook page “IMan KH.” The post commented on Prime Minister Hun Sen’s reluctance to declare a state of emergency to control and identify clusters of a community outbreak of the Covid-19 virus. Instead of using the word “country” he replaced it with “poultry farm,” doing the same with the word “people,” which he replaced with “chicken.”On December 11, 2020, the Phnom Penh police arrested Nak Ny, an agribusiness owner in Phnom Penh, for making a critical post on his business Facebook page “IMan KH.” The post commented on Prime Minister Hun Sen’s reluctance to declare a state of emergency to control and identify clusters of a community outbreak of the Covid-19 virus. Instead of using the word “country” he replaced it with “poultry farm,” doing the same with the word “people,” which he replaced with “chicken.”On December 11, 2020, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged him with “incitement to commit discrimination” and “insult” (articles 494, 496 and 307 of Cambodia’s penal code). On December 12, the court ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1.On August 19, 2021, the court convicted him and sentenced him to 18 months in prison.The Voice of America reported that his post was shared in a Telegram chat group called “Anti-Fake News Group” with 7,853 members, which was created by government officials with the purpose of combatting “false publication on social and traditional media causing chaos in society.” The National Police labelled his comments using chicken farm references as “teasing or defying” Hun Sen, referring to his past social media posts as “mockery” and “insult” of public figures and institutions, for which they said he never faced any legal action.Nak Ny has often posted critical comments on social media about the government’s agricultural policies and the minister of agriculture.Loem PhengLoem Pheng, 45On November 5, 2020, police arrested Loem Pheng, an activist with the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) from Prek Phnov district, Phnom Penh, and his wife, Nuo Sreymao. The authorities arrested both Pheng and Sreymao as they made their way to Kampong Speu province, and transported them back to Phnom Penh to the Ministry of Interior for questioning.On November 7, the Phnom Penh court charged him with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s Penal Code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1 (CC1).On July 30, 2021, the Phnom Penh municipal court convicted both and sentenced them to 18 months in prison. The court announced the verdict on August 11, 2021.At this time, it is not clear what led to Loem Pheng’s arrest. The authorities have declined to say and provided no additional information. Loem Pheng and his wife have been vocal supporters of CNRP leader Sam Rainsy and his attempted return to Cambodia in November 2019.Nuo SreymaoNuo Sreymao, 40On November 5, 2020, police arrested Nuo Sreymao, an activist with the arbitrarily dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) from Prek Phnov district, Phnom Penh, and her husband, Loem Pheng. The authorities arrested both Sreymao and Pheng on the way to Kampong Speu province and transported them back to Phnom Penh to the Ministry of Interior for questioning.On November 7, the Phnom Penh court charged her with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s Penal Code) and ordered her pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 2 (CC2).On July 30, 2021, the Phnom Penh municipal court convicted both and sentenced them to 18 months in prison. The court announced the verdict on August 11, 2021.At this time, it is not clear what led to Nuo Sreymao’s arrest. The authorities have declined to say and provided no additional information. Sreymao and her husband have been vocal supporters of CNRP leader Sam Rainsy and his attempted return to Cambodia in November 2019.Ly SokhomLy Sokhom, 45On December 8, 2020, police arrested Ly Sokhom, a former commune councilor for the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Kansvay district, Kandal province.On December 8, the Kandal provincial court charged him with lese majeste (“insulting the king”) and “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 437bis, 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s Penal Code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Kandal provincial prison.Sokhom claimed that his Facebook account had been hacked, and denied posting comments, including photos, that compared the king to a dog, and critiqued Prime Minister Hun Sen. The person who allegedly hacked his account remains unidentified. The authorities confiscated his phone during his arrest.Thourk TheuyThourk TheuyOn December 28, 2020, police arrested Thourk Theuy, a former local official with the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Somrong district, Oddar Meanchey province.The Oddar Meanchey provincial court charged him with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s Penal Code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Oddar Meanchey provincial prison.Thourk They had previously joined several Friday protests in Phnom Penh, organized by family members to call for the release of their relatives who are detained opposition activists.He previously was charged with “conspiracy” and detained in 2019 together with around 80 CNRP officials who had expressed support for the return of exiled CNRP leadership to Cambodia in November 2019. The authorities released him on November 15, 2019, but did not drop his charges.Keat PhliKeat PhliOn December 28, 2020, police arrested Keat Phli, a former local official with the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Somrong district, Oddar Meanchey province.The Oddar Meanchey provincial court charged him with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s Penal Code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Oddar Meanchey provincial prison.Keat Phli had previously joined several Friday protests in Phnom Penh, organized by family members of detained opposition activists, calling for their release.Khan BunphengKhan Bunpheng, 62On December 31, 2020, police arrested Khan Bunpheng, a former local official with the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Preaek Preah Sdach commune, Battambang province.The same day, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged him with “conspiracy” (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1 (Prey Sar) prison.Prior to his arrest, the authorities approached Bunpheng to pressure him to join Prime Minister Hun Sen’s ruling Cambodian People’s Party (CPP).Sem ChamnanSem Chamnan, 32On January 16, 2021, Tbong Khmum provincial police arrested Sem Chamnan, a representative of a land rights community in Sre Prang village, Trapang Prinh commune, Dambe district, Tbong Khmum province. He was arrested while in Oddar Meanchey province.On the same day, the Tbong Khmum provincial court charged him with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Tbong Khmum prison.Tort KemsanTort Kemsan, 51On March 14, 2021, plainclothes police arrested Tort Kemsan while she was working in a restaurant in Toul Kork district in Phnom Penh. She is a former commune council member for the dissolved opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Kostun Tem commune, Kampong Siem district, Kampong Cham province.On March 16, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged her with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered her held in pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 2 (CC2).Authorities claimed that she expressed criticism on her Facebook page about Cambodia’s use of the Chinese-made Sinopharm Covid-19 vaccine, stating that the vaccine had caused people in Cambodia to die or develop a disability. Officials accused her of “gravely affecting social security.” Kemsan is the third opposition activist targeted in 2021 by the authorities for having voiced criticism of the Chinese vaccine. Authorities arrested Thun Chantha and Mey Sophon at the end of February on similar charges.Hourn BoryHourn Bory, 32On March 29, 2021, police arrested Hourn Bory in Phnom Proek district, Battambang province.Two days later, the Battambang provincial court charged him with “defamation” and “incitement to discriminate” (articles 305 and 496 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his detention at Battambang provincial prison.On March 29, authorities claimed that Bory posted on his Facebook page an accusation that Prime Minister Hun Sen turned a blind eye to actions by the Phnom Proek district governor, Song Sopheak.  The post also allegedly included a photo of Hun Sen.Pann SophyPann Sophy, 19On April 9, 2021, Kampong Speu provincial police arrested Pann Sophy, a youth activist in Bor Set district, Kampong Speu province. The arrest was based on a video posted on the social media platform TikTok in which he allegedly criticized the Chinese Sinvoac Covid-19 vaccine. The video no longer appears online; however, it is unclear whether the authorities removed it or he was forced to remove it himself.The next day, the Kampong Speu provincial court charged him with an alleged infraction of article 11 of Cambodia’s newly adopted Covid-19 law (“act of obstructing the implementation of measures”), carrying a prison sentence of up to five years and a fine of up to 20 million Cambodian Riels (US$4,900) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Kampong Speu provincial prison.Mey SophornMey Sophorn, 28On April 1, 2021, police arrested Mey Sophorn, a youth activist with the dissolved opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Svay Rolum commune, Takhmao district, Kandal province.The next day, the Kandal provincial court charged him with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and sent him to pre-trial detention in Kandal provincial prison.Sophorn had allegedly posted on his Facebook page about the passing of businesswoman Suy Sophan, claiming that her death had been caused by the Chinese Sinovac vaccine against the Covid-19 virus. The authorities also accused him of making similar types of posts, denigrating the Chinese Sinovac vaccine, on social media between January and March 2021.Sophorn’s recent activism included participating in protest activities on October 23, 2020 in front of China’s Embassy in Phnom Penh as part of a program marking the anniversary of the signing of the Paris Peace Accords.Hong SokClick to expand ImageHong Sok, 51On May 30, 2021, police arrested Hong Sok in Kean Svay district, Kandal province. Sok had joined a land protest with over 500 people whose land had been grabbed by a powerful tycoon.On June 1, the Kandal provincial court charged him with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Kandal provincial prison.Phai ThaiClick to expand ImagePhai Thai, 54On July 2, 2021, police arrested Phai Thai in Saan district, Kandal province. Thai had joined a land protest with over 154 families whose land had been grabbed by a powerful tycoon.On July 4, the Kandal provincial court charged him with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Kandal provincial prison.Kim BorinClick to expand ImageKim Borin, 34On July 2, 2021, police arrested Kim Borin in Saan district, Kandal province. Borin had joined a land protest with over 154 families whose land had been grabbed by a powerful tycoon.On July 4, the Kandal provincial court charged him with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Kandal provincial prison.Kao PisethClick to expand ImageKao Piseth, 32On July 14, 2021, gendarmerie police officers arrested online news journalist Kao Piseth in Battambang province. The authorities accused him of incitement for allegedly posting criticism on his Facebook page regarding efficacy of both Chinese Covid-19 vaccines and against the government, and calling for international aid to Cambodia to be cut. His Facebook account has since been deleted.On July 15, the Battambang court charged him with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and of obstructing the implementation of Covid-19 measures under Cambodia’s new Covid-19 law (article 11). The court ordered his pre-trial detention at Battambang provincial prison.Piseth is the fourth journalist who has been arrested because of his critical reporting since the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic. During the pandemic, there has been an increased clampdown on critical speech, with the government alleging people were spreading so-called “fake news” and inciting chaos and social unrest.Pao RavyClick to expand ImagePao Ravy, 46On August 6, 2021, police arrested Pao Ravy, a former youth chief for the Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Sithor commune, Khsach Kandal district, Kandal province. The action appears to stem from Ravy’s action to produce a leaflet that criticized Prime Minister Hun Sen, and distributing it.On August 7, 2021, the Kandal provincial court charged him with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Kandal provincial prison.Nguon LyClick to expand ImageNguon Ly, 31On August 24, 2021, police arrested Nguon Ly, a farmer in Battambang province.On August 22, Ly had posted a live video and series of photos on his Facebook account, saying district and commune authorities had told people to pick their longan fruits after hearing that Prime Minister Hun Sen would buy them as an intervention to react to Thailand’s recent decision to block exports of the fruit.On August 25, 2021, the Battambang provincial court convicted him of “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and sentenced him to 10 months in prison. He is currently serving his prison sentence at Battambang provincial prison.In an online broadcast Ly apologized for his posts and said that the video was to help farmers because he was afraid that their harvest would spoil if Thailand continued to block exports. Markets have been repeatedly closed during the worsening of the pandemic, leaving farmers and sellers in difficult financial situations.Youn ChhivClick to expand ImageYoun Chhiv, 51©On September 28, 2021, police arrested Youn Chhiv, owner of the news website Koh Kong Hot News.The Koh Kong provincial court charged him with incitement to commit a felony (articles 495 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Koh Kong provincial prison. On September 30, the court sentenced him to one year in prison and a fine of 2 million riel (US$500). The case was sent to trial without a judicial investigation on the grounds that Youn Chhiv was caught in the act of committing a crime.The charges stemmed from Youn Chhiv’s posts on Koh Kong Hot News’ Facebook page related to the eviction of villagers in Botum Sakor National Park and the police demolition of their property on September 3. Youn Chhiv alleged that the police action was illegal. Koh Kong Deputy Governor Sok Sothy, who led the September 3 police raids, filed a complaint against Youn Chhiv, and the prosecution was initiated on the order of Defense Minister Tea Banh. On September 28, police had summoned Youn Chhiv for questioning, leading to his arrest. While in detention, authorities forced him to write a letter of apology to Sok Sothy over the Facebook posts.Bor RonClick to expand ImageBor Ron, 54©On October 22, 2021, police arrested Bor Ron, a representative of a land community of about 241 families in Chompuh Kaek 1 village, Preksmey commune, Chbar Ampov district, Phnom Penh. The land dispute involving over 58 hectares has been protracted for decades, involving tycoon Suy Sophan’s Phanimex company.On the same day of his arrest, the authorities charged him with intentional acts of violence, causing damage and stealing other people's property and sent him to pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1 (CC1).The community had filed a complaint in September to the Land Management Ministry saying the gated-housing developer had begun filling in the disputed wetlands.Hom ThoeurnClick to expand ImageHom Thoeurn, 56©On October 22, 2021, about 100 police and other authorities arrested Hom Thoeurn, together with 43 other members of a land dispute-affected community of 45 families in Thuol Torteng village, Thuol Torteng commune, Preynop district, Sihanoukville province. The protracted land dispute started with forced evictions by the authorities in 2013. A total of 268 hectares of land are contested in a dispute that involves the Than Suo company.On October 24, the authorities sent six community representatives to court. The Sihanoukville provincial court charged them with “clearing the forest, clearing the forest land, occupying the forest land and setting up a construction base or house" (articles 97(1)(6), 98(1)(6) of Cambodia’s Law on Forestry and articles 259 of the Land Law). They are currently being held at Sihanoukville provincial prison, awaiting trial.Several community members have since been arrested and detained after demanding action by authorities in the dispute. On October 21, after years of failing to resolve the land conflict, the 45 affected families decided to unilaterally occupy the disputed land, prompting concerns that more arrests of community members may be forthcoming.Kong NethClick to expand ImageKong Neth, 40©On October 22, 2021, about 100 police and other authorities arrested Kong Neth, together with 43 other members of a land dispute-affected community of 45 families in Thuol Torteng village, Thuol Torteng commune, Preynop district, Sihanoukville province. The protracted land dispute that started with forced evictions by the authorities in 2013 concerns 268 hectares of land and involves Than Suo company.On October 24, the authorities sent six community representatives to court and held them in prison. The Sihanoukville provincial court charged them with “clearing the forest, clearing the forest land, occupying the forest land and setting up a construction base or house" (articles 97(1)(6), 98(1)(6) of Cambodia’s Law on Forestry and articles 259 of the Land Law). They are held at Sihanoukville provincial prison.Several community members have since been arrested and detained after seeking intervention in the dispute by the authorities. On October 21, after years of no resolution of their conflict, the families decided to move onto the land.Oun ThornClick to expand ImageOun Thorn, 50©On October 22, 2021, about 100 police and other authorities arrested Oun Thorn, together with 43 other members of a land dispute affected community of 45 families in Thuol Torteng village, Thuol Torteng commune, Preynop district, Sihanoukville province. The protracted land dispute that started with forced evictions by the authorities in 2013 concerns 268 hectares of land and involves Than Suo company.On October 24, the authorities sent six community representatives to court and held them in prison. The Sihanoukville provincial court charged them with “clearing the forest, clearing the forest land, occupying the forest land and setting up a construction base or house" (articles 97(1)(6), 98 (1)(6) of Cambodia’s Law on Forestry and articles 259 of the Land Law). They are held at Sihanoukville provincial prison.Several community members have since been arrested and detained after seeking intervention in the dispute by the authorities. On October 21, after years of no resolution of their conflict, the families decided to move onto the land.Nen ThumClick to expand ImageNen Thum, 33©On October 22, 2021, about 100 police and other authorities arrested Nen Thum, together with 43 other members of a land dispute affected community of 45 families in Thuol Torteng village, Thuol Torteng commune, Preynop district, Sihanoukville province. The protracted land dispute that started with forced evictions by the authorities in 2013 concerns 268 hectares of land and involves Than Suo company.On October 24, the authorities sent six community representatives to court and held them in prison. The Sihanoukville provincial court charged them with “clearing the forest, clearing the forest land, occupying the forest land and setting up a construction base or house" (articles 97(1)(6), 98 (1)(6) of Cambodia’s Law on Forestry and articles 259 of the Land Law). They are held at Sihanoukville provincial prison.Several community members have since been arrested and detained after seeking intervention in the dispute by the authorities. On October 21, after years of no resolution of their conflict, the families decided to move onto the land.Prak SokchaiClick to expand ImagePrak Sokchai, 36©On October 22, 2021, about 100 police and other authorities arrested Prak Sokchai, together with 43 other members of a land dispute affected community of 45 families in Thuol Torteng village, Thuol Torteng commune, Preynop district, Sihanoukville province. The protracted land dispute that started with forced evictions by the authorities in 2013 concerns 268 hectares of land and involves Than Suo company.On October 24, the authorities sent six community representatives to court and held them in prison. The Sihanoukville provincial court charged them with “clearing the forest, clearing the forest land, occupying the forest land and setting up a construction base or house" (articles 97(1)(6), 98 (1)(6) of Cambodia’s Law on Forestry and articles 259 of the Land Law). They are held at Sihanoukville provincial prison.Several community members have since been arrested and detained after seeking intervention in the dispute by the authorities. On October 21, after years of no resolution of their conflict, the families decided to move onto the land.Nen SamneangClick to expand ImageNen Samneang, 32©On October 22, 2021, about 100 police and other authorities arrested Nen Samneang, together with 43 other members of a land dispute affected community of 45 families in Thuol Torteng village, Thuol Torteng commune, Preynop district, Sihanoukville province. The protracted land dispute that started with forced evictions by the authorities in 2013 concerns 268 hectares of land and involves Than Suo company.On October 24, the authorities sent six community representatives to court and held them in prison. The Sihanoukville provincial court charged them with “clearing the forest, clearing the forest land, occupying the forest land and setting up a construction base or house" (articles 97(1)(6), 98 (1)(6) of Cambodia’s Law on Forestry and articles 259 of the Land Law). They are held at Sihanoukville provincial prison.Several community members have since been arrested and detained after seeking intervention in the dispute by the authorities. On October 21, after years of no resolution of their conflict, the families decided to move onto the land.Lanh ThavryClick to expand ImageLanh Thavry, 32©On November 20, 2021, Cambodian authorities arrested Lanh Thavry, a former elected commune chief for the Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Banteay Meanchey province, after Thai immigration police arrested her in Aranyaprathet district, Sa Kaeo province on November 19. Despite rapid interventions by the Thailand office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), and diplomats from the US Embassy and multiple European embassies in Bangkok, the Thai authorities forcibly returned her on the morning of November 20. At the time of her arrest, Thavry was a fully recognized refugee under the protection of the UNHCR office, so her return constitutes a case of refoulement in violation of Thailand’s obligations under customary international law.On November 20, 2021, the Phnom Penh court charged her with incitement to commit a felony and ordered her pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 2 (CC2).Thavry had supported the planned return of exiled CNRP leader Sam Rainsy.Veourn VeasnaClick to expand ImageVeourn Veasna, 41©On November 9, 2021, Cambodian authorities arrested Veourn Veasna, a Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) online TV broadcaster, when he was forcibly returned from Bangkok by the Thai authorities.On November 8, Thai police arrested Veasna in Bangkok, even though he was fully recognized refugee under the protection of the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). UNHCR officials traveled to the Thai immigration detention center at Suan Phlu in Bangkok and formally notified officials there of his UNHCR-approved refugee status, yet Thai authorities proceeded with the forced return within hours of that visit, violating Thailand’s obligations under customary international law.On November 10, 2021, the Phnom Penh court charged him with conspiracy and ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1 (CC1).Because of the crackdown on the CNRP, Veasna fled to Thailand in early 2020 and applied for and received refugee status from the UNHCR. In April 2021, the authorities charged him with incitement to commit a felony under articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s Criminal Code and obstruction of Covid-19 measures under article 11 of the Law on the Prevention of the Spread of Covid-19 and Other Contagious Diseases. Veasna created several Facebook accounts and pages under the name “Kranhoung Prey Lang.” A poem he wrote labelling Hun Sen a traitor led the prime minister to call for Veasna’s arrest in October.Voeung SamnangClick to expand ImageVoeung Samnang, 31©On November 9, 2021, Cambodian authorities arrested Voeung Samnang, a Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) commune official, when he was forcibly returned from Bangkok to Cambodia by the Thai authorities.On November 8, Thai police arrested Veasna in Bangkok, despite the fact that he was fully recognized refugee under the protection of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). UNHCR officials traveled to the Thai immigration detention center at Suan Phlu in Bangkok and formally notified officials there of his UNHCR approved refugee status, yet Thai authorities proceeded with the forced return within hours of that visit, violating Thailand’s obligations under customary international law.On November 10, 2021, the Phnom Penh court charged him with conspiracy and ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1 (CC1).In September 2019, Cambodian prosecutors charged Samnang with conspiracy and incitement to commit a felony. Samnang fled to Thailand in 2020 and applied for and received refugee status from UNHCR. Samnang created several Facebook accounts and pages under his name, on which he shared posts by the CNRP leader Sam Rainsy that criticized the Cambodian government on various political issues, including the government’s Covid-19 response.Sok VisalClick to expand ImageSok Visal©On December 15, 2021, the authorities arrested Sok Visal a former CNRP deputy commune chief in Choeung Phean commune, Chung Kal district, Oddar Meanchey province.In 2019, the authorities had charged him with conspiracy for his actions to support the planned return to Cambodia by exiled CNRP leader Sam Rainsy in November 2019.Recently, Sok Visal had planned to resume to political activity and join the opposition Candlelight Party as the party treasurer.Ech AmryClick to expand ImageEch Amry, 28©On April 24, 2019, police arrested Ech Amry, a former CNRP activist in Makhleour village, Prey Khpos commune, Bovel district, Battambang province, after she returned from Thailand.The authorities charged her with conspiracy under article 453 of the penal code and ordered her pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 2 (CC2). At the end of November 2019, the court sentenced her to six years’ imprisonment.Authorities prosecuted her because she had publicly supported the planned return to Cambodia by exiled CNRP leader Sam Rainsy in November 2019.Uk RimClick to expand ImageUk Rim, 38©On April 24, 2019, police arrested Uk Rim, a former CNRP activist in Khla Kro Him village, Khla Krom Him commune, Koh Andeth district, Takeo province.The authorities charged him with conspiracy under article 453 of the penal code and ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1 (CC1). At the end of November 2019, the court sentenced him to seven years’ imprisonment.Authorities prosecuted him because he had supported the planned return to Cambodia by exiled CNRP leader Sam Rainsy in November 2019.Chan SaratClick to expand ImageChan Sarat, 35©On April 27, 2019, police arrested Chan Sarat, a former CNRP activist in Thbal Dambong village, Thbal Dambong commune, Choeung Prey district, Kampong Cham province, upon his return from Thailand.On April 28, the court charged him with conspiracy under article 453 of the penal code and ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1 (CC1). At the end of November 2019, the court sentenced him to seven years’ imprisonment.Authorities prosecuted Chan Sarat because he had publicly supported the planned return to Cambodia by exiled CNRP leader Sam Rainsy in November 2019.Choub ChannathClick to expand ImageChoub Channath, 46©On February 5, 2022, Phnom Penh authorities arrested Choub Channath, a member of the local union at NagaWorld casino, the Labor Rights Supported Union of Khmer Employees of NagaWorld (LRSU). Channath had participated in LRSU’s strike action in response to mass layoffs of over 1,000 NagaWorld employees.On February 9, 2022, the Phnom Penh court charged him with obstruction of Covid-19 measures (article 11 of Cambodia’s Law on Measures to Prevent the Spread of Covid-19 and other Serious, Dangerous and Contagious Diseases), and ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Police Judiciaire prison facility. If convicted, he faces up to five years in prison.Channath had left a Covid-19 testing site when he was arrested. On February 4, Cambodia’s Health Ministry ordered several hundred workers engaged in the strike action to take a Covid-19 test, after one striking union member (who had last participated in the strike on January 15) tested positive.Prior to Channath’s arrest, eight other LRSU members, including the union leader, Chhim Sithar had been charged and detained based on bogus “incitement” charges for exercising their right to strike.Sao SambathClick to expand ImageSao Sambath, 33©On February 5, 2022, Phnom Penh authorities arrested Sao Sambath, a member of the local union at NagaWorld casino, the Labor Rights Supported Union of Khmer Employees of NagaWorld (LRSU). Sambath had participated in LRSU’s strike action in response to mass layoffs of over 1,000 NagaWorld employees.On February 9, 2022, the Phnom Penh court charged him with obstruction of Covid-19 measures (article 11 of Cambodia’s Law on Measures to Prevent the Spread of Covid-19 and other Serious, Dangerous and Contagious Diseases), and ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Police Judiciaire prison facility. If convicted, he faces up to five years in prison.Sambath had left a Covid-19 testing site when he was arrested. On February 4, Cambodia’s Health Ministry ordered several hundred workers engaged in the strike action to take a Covid-19 test, after one striking union member (who had last participated in the strike on January 15) tested positive.Prior to Sambath’s arrest, eight other LRSU members, including the union leader, Chhim Sithar had been charged and detained based on bogus “incitement” charges for exercising their right to strike.Seng VannarithClick to expand ImageSeng Vannarith, 45©On February 5, 2022, Phnom Penh authorities arrested Seng Vannarith, a member of the local union at NagaWorld casino, the Labor Rights Supported Union of Khmer Employees of NagaWorld (LRSU). Vannarith had participated in LRSU’s strike action in response to mass layoffs of over 1,000 NagaWorld employees.On February 9, 2022, the Phnom Penh court charged him with obstruction of Covid-19 measures (article 11 of Cambodia’s Law on Measures to Prevent the Spread of Covid-19 and other Serious, Dangerous and Contagious Diseases), and ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Police Judiciaire prison facility. If convicted, he faces up to five years in prison.Vannarith had left a Covid-19 testing site when he was arrested. On February 4, Cambodia’s Health Ministry ordered several hundred workers engaged in the strike action to take a Covid-19 test, after one striking union member (who had last participated in the strike on January 15) tested positive.Prior to Vannarith’s arrest, eight other LRSU members, including the union leader, Chhim Sithar had been charged and detained based on bogus “incitement” charges for exercising their right to strike.Chhim SitharClick to expand ImageChhim Sithar, 34©On January 4, 2022, Phnom Penh authorities arrested Chhim Sithar, leader of the local union at NagaWorld casino, the Labor Rights Supported Union of Khmer Employees of NagaWorld (LRSU). The authorities used violence to arrest Sithar, just seconds after she exited her car at the strike site. Sithar had led and participated in LRSU’s strike action in response to mass layoffs of over 1,000 NagaWorld employees.On January 5, the Phnom Penh court charged her with “incitement to commit felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s Criminal Code) and ordered her pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 2 (CC2). If convicted, she faces up to two years in prison.Sok NarithClick to expand ImageSok Narith, 46©On January 4, 2022, Phnom Penh authorities arrested Sok Narith, a member of the local union at NagaWorld casino, the Labor Rights Supported Union of Khmer Employees of NagaWorld (LRSU). Narith had participated in LRSU’s strike action in response to mass layoffs of over 1,000 NagaWorld employees.On January 5, the Phnom Penh court charged him with “incitement to commit felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s Criminal Code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1 (CC1). If convicted, he faces up to two years in prison.Chhim SokhornClick to expand ImageChhim Sokhorn, 40©On December 31, 2021, Phnom Penh authorities arrested Chhim Sokhorn, a member of the local union at NagaWorld casino, the Labor Rights Supported Union of Khmer Employees of NagaWorld (LRSU). Sokhorn had participated in LRSU’s strike action in response to mass layoffs of over 1,000 NagaWorld employees.On January 3, 2022, the Phnom Penh court charged her with “incitement to commit felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s Criminal Code) and ordered her pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 2 (CC2). If convicted, she faces up to two years in prison.Hay SopheapClick to expand ImageHay Sopheap, 35©On December 31, 2021, Phnom Penh authorities arrested Hay Sopheap, a member of the local union at NagaWorld casino, the Labor Rights Supported Union of Khmer Employees of NagaWorld (LRSU). Sopheap had participated in LRSU’s strike action in response to mass layoffs of over 1,000 NagaWorld employees.On January 3, 2022, the Phnom Penh court charged her with “incitement to commit felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s Criminal Code) and ordered her pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 2 (CC2). If convicted, she faces up to two years in prison.Kleang SobenClick to expand ImageKleang Soben, 41©On December 31, 2021, Phnom Penh authorities arrested Kleang Soben, a member of the local union at NagaWorld casino, the Labor Rights Supported Union of Khmer Employees of NagaWorld (LRSU). Soben had participated in LRSU’s strike action in response to mass layoffs of over 1,000 NagaWorld employees.On January 3, 2022, the Phnom Penh court charged her with “incitement to commit felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s Criminal Code) and ordered her pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 2 (CC2). If convicted, she faces up to two years in prison.Ry SovanndyClick to expand ImageRy Sovanndy, 40©On December 31, 2021, Phnom Penh authorities arrested Ry Sovanndy, a member of the local union at NagaWorld casino, the Labor Rights Supported Union of Khmer Employees of NagaWorld (LRSU). Sovanndy had participated in LRSU’s strike action in response to mass layoffs of over 1,000 NagaWorld employees.On January 3, 2022, the Phnom Penh court charged her with “incitement to commit felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s Criminal Code) and ordered her pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 2 (CC2). If convicted, she faces up to two years in prison.Sun Srey PichClick to expand ImageSun Srey Pich, 30©On December 31, 2021, Phnom Penh authorities arrested Sun Srey Pich, a member of the local union at NagaWorld casino, the Labor Rights Supported Union of Khmer Employees of NagaWorld (LRSU). Srey Pich had participated in LRSU’s strike action in response to mass layoffs of over 1,000 NagaWorld employees.On January 3, 2022, the Phnom Penh court charged her with ‘“incitement to commit felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s Criminal Code) and ordered her pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 2 (CC2). If convicted, she faces up to two years in prison.Touch SereymeasClick to expand ImageTouch Sereymeas, 29©On December 31, 2021, Phnom Penh authorities arrested Touch Sereymeas, a member of the local union at NagaWorld casino, the Labor Rights Supported Union of Khmer Employees of NagaWorld (LRSU). Sereymeas had participated in LRSU’s strike action in response to mass layoffs of over 1,000 NagaWorld employees.On January 3, 2022, the Phnom Penh court charged her with ‘“incitement to commit felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s Criminal Code) and ordered her pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 2 (CC2). If convicted, she faces up to two years in prison.Mech HeangClick to expand ImageMech Heang, 33© PrivateOn November 19, 2021, Thai authorities arrested Mech Heang, an active and vocal supporter of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP), who was also living as a migrant worker in Thailand. After being held in a detention center in Bangkok, the Thai authorities deported Heang to Cambodia on November 21.On November 21, the Phnom Penh court charged him with “insulting the king” and “incitement to commit felony” (articles 437bis, 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s criminal code), and ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1 (CC1).Heang had posted criticism of the Cambodian government and Prime Minister Hun Sen on his Facebook page on topics of social justice, migrant worker rights, and restrictions of civil and political rights.RELEASED ON BAIL, CHARGES PENDING, SUSPENDED SENTENCEKem SokhaKem Sokha, 65Released on bail on September 10, 2018, but placed under house arrestKem Sokha, leader of the now dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) and a member of the National Assembly, was arrested around midnight on September 3, 2017 at his house in Phnom Penh. Eight Prime Minister bodyguard unit officers led a contingent of more than 100 police to carry out the arrest. In a highly unusual move, authorities immediately sent him to the remote Trapeang Phlong prison (Correctional Center 3), in Tbaung Khmom province near the border with Vietnam. On the basis of a false allegation that he had committed a crime in flagrante delicto (caught in the act of committing a crime), the National Assembly stripped him of his parliamentary immunity.On September 5, 2017, prosecutors charged him with conspiring with a foreign power (article 443 of the Criminal Code). If convicted, he faces 15-30 years in prison. Sokha’s arrest came after Hun Sen accused him of plotting to topple the government with support from the United States based on a highly edited videotape of a speech Sokha gave in Australia in 2013. On May 26, 2018, the court summoned eight individuals – including members of nongovernmental organizations – to appear for questioning as witnesses in Sokha’s case.On April 19, 2018, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention in its Opinion No. 9/2018 declared Kem Sokha’s detention “arbitrary” and “politically motivated.”Sokha had been previously convicted in 2016 on politically motivated charges for failure to appear as a witness against two CNRP parliamentary members detained in a fabricated prostitution case. The court sentenced him to five months in prison, but he remained under de facto house arrest, surrounded by CNRP supporters and police outside CNRP headquarters until December 2016, when he received a royal pardon.On September 10, 2018, Sokha was released from prison and placed under house arrest. The court order specifically bans Sokha from meeting with “former officials of the Cambodian National Rescue Party… foreigners, especially those who may be involved in this case” and orders him to “refrain from a political meeting or other political activities…” Treason charges remain in force.On March 3, 2019, Kem Sokha had been detained for 18-months. Under Cambodian law, the investigating judge has 18 months to determine whether to release a detained person or to charge and bring them to trial.On March 19, the investigating judge rejected Sokha’s renewed request to drop the charges against him. The judge provided no update or additional information about the completion of his investigation and whether the case would be sent to trial.On November 10, 2019, the investigating judge decided to lift Sokha’s restrictive judicial supervision order that confined him to his residence, based on the condition that he not participate in political activities, not travel abroad, and continue to cooperate with judicial investigators. On December 3, the Phnom Penh court formally closed the investigation and sent the case to trial: “After investigation and questioning, the judge understands that there is enough evidence against the accused Kem Sokha.…” The investigating judge sent the case to trial, but a trial date has not yet been set.Human Rights Watch has repeatedly pressed the Cambodian government to drop the case against Sokha.Mao KungMao Kung, 40On January 28, 2021, police arrested Mao Kung, a Khmer-English translator at an NGO in Bak Ronoas village, Sangkhoar commune, Svay Rieng city, Svay Rieng province.Earlier that morning, police arrested Mao Kung’s 15-year-old son for allegedly having used a slingshot in a fight at school. The authorities arrested the son and sent him to Svay Rieng police station. Mao Kung went to the police station to see his son. He took a photo of his son in police custody and returned home. Shortly after he arrived at his house, 7 or 8 police officers who had followed him then arrested and transported him to the police station where he was held. The authorities confiscated his phone and searched it, discovering photos and video footage with former local opposition party members.On January 31, the Svay Rieng provincial court charged Mao Kung with violation of privacy (recording a person’s image, article 302 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Svay Rieng provincial prison. Meanwhile, his son was charged with intentional violence (article 513 of Cambodia’s penal code) and sent to pre-trial detention at the same prison. The authorities released Mao Kung on bail on February 10 after paying a bond of US$5000 to the court.Before the dissolution of the Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP), Mao Kung had taken part in CNRP political campaigns and activities; however, he held no formal party position.Kong RayaKong Raya, 28On July 9, 2019, Phnom Penh police arrested a student activist, Kong Raya, his wife, sister, and brother-in-law for printing T-shirts in memory of prominent political commentator Kem Ley, and for selling them on Facebook. On July 10, 2016, Kem Ley had been fatally shot in broad daylight at a gas station in central Phnom Penh. While authorities released Raya’s family members after being forced to sign a “confession” that they would not repeat the act – a requirement that Cambodian authorities frequently impose on released activists – the authorities held Raya overnight at the Phnom Penh police station. On July 11, the Phnom Penh court charged Raya with incitement and sent him to pretrial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1 (CC1). On August 13, 2019, the Phnom Penh court denied Raya bail. On November 4, the Supreme Court upheld the denial of bail.On July 10, a group of Kem Ley supporters gathered at the Caltex gas station where Kem Ley had been killed in 2016. About 50 members of various security forces surrounded them and prevented them from laying floral wreaths or drinking coffee at the station while wearing T-shirts depicting Kem Ley. Those wearing shirts were required to take them off or place other garments over them.In total, authorities detained nine people for marking the third anniversary of Kem Ley’s death.In August 2015, Raya had been convicted of “incitement to commit a felony” for a Facebook post in which he called for a so-called “color revolution” – which the Cambodian government uses as a pretext to silence its critics – and sentenced him to 18 months in prison. Soung Neak Poan, a youth activist who distributed posters calling for an end to extrajudicial killings, was charged on the same day with the same crime as Raya. He spent a little over five months in pretrial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison facility.On November 29, the Phnom Penh court responded to earlier requests by Raya to release him on bail and freed him from pre-trial detention. His charges were not dropped. The court prohibited him from posting any political posts on his Facebook or travel abroad.Prime Minister Hun Sen gave a speech when inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners; however, their criminal charges were not dropped.Long PuthearaLong Putheara, 17On September 7, 2020, police arrested rapper Long Putheara at his house in Phnom Penh.On September 9, the authorities charged him with incitement to commit a felony (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and sent him to pre-trial detention at Siem Reap provincial prison.On December 22, the Phnom Penh court convicted him and sentenced him to 5 months in prison, of which he must spend 3 months and 11 days in prison with the remainder suspended. His release was scheduled for the same day as his conviction.The complaints against him filed by the Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts. Putheara apologized to the ministry during his trial for releasing a song on social issues.Putheara collaborated with the rapper Kea Sokun, who was arrested on September 4 and charged with incitement because of lyrics in Sokun’s music that critically address social issues in Cambodia.Soung Neak PoanSoung Neak Poan, 29On July 10, 2019, in commemoration of the third anniversary since the killing of prominent political commentator Kem Ley, student activist Soung Neak Poan distributed posters calling for an end to extrajudicial killings. Police arrested Soung Neak Poan as well as two other youth activist twin brothers, Chum Hout and Chum Hour, who had carried a flower wreath to place near the station where Ley was killed. At the Phnom Penh police station, Soung Neak Poan refused to sign a “confession” to refrain from similar activities in the future – a requirement that Cambodian authorities frequently impose on released activists – and thus police held Neak Poan overnight. The two twin brothers were released upon signing the confession. On July 12, Soung Neak Poan was charged with incitement to commit a felony and sent to pretrial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1 (CC1). On August 13, 2019, the Phnom Penh court denied Neak Poan bail.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Neak Poan was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Nou PhoeunNou Phoeun, 42On September 1, 2019, plain clothed police arrested former member of the dissolved Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) Nou Phoeun, who contested as a CNRP candidate for the Baray commune council, Kampong Thom province. At the same time, authorities also arrested Sun Bunthon, who had been the former CNRP commune council member of Baray commune.The authorities alleged he had shared information on Facebook that insulted Prime Minister Hun Sen and promoted information about the planned return of acting CNRP head, Sam Rainsy, to Cambodia.The authorities justified conducting the arrest without an arrest warrant on the grounds that he was caught committing the act (“in flagrante delicto”), a justification commonly used by Cambodian authorities to shortcut judicial protections against arbitrary arrest. The authorities alleged that the information the two had shared on Facebook would cause public harm or constitute a threat of a crime about to be committed.After arrest, the authorities held Phoeun overnight at Kampong Thom police station. On September 2, the Kampong Thom provincial court charged him with defamation, “public insult,” “incitement to commit felony,” and “discrediting a judicial decision” (respectively, articles 305, 307, 494, 495, and 523 of the Cambodian criminal code) as well as continuing to be active on behalf of a political party that had been dissolved by the Supreme Court, an allegation that is based on the repressive amendments of the Law on Political Parties (new article 42). The investigating judge ordered his pre-trial detention at Kampong Thom provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Phoeun was released on bail on November 14. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Yat PhearumYat Phearum, 39On September 13, 2019, Banteay Meanchey police arrested Yat Pearum, former Svay Chek district youth deputy chief for the dissolved Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Banteay Meanchey province. He was one of six former CNRP activists who were arrested on September 13 and 14.The arrest was based on a warrant issued on September 10 by the Banteay Meanchey provincial prosecutor. The Banteay Meanchey provincial court charged Phearum with plotting a coup (article 453 of the Cambodian criminal code). The court also ordered his pre-trial detention at Banteay Meanchey provincial prison. On October 30, the investigating judge of the Banteay Meanchey provincial court is scheduled to question Phearum. After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Phearum was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.According to several news reports, Ministry of Interior officials accused him of wanting to topple the government on behalf of the CNRP’s acting president, Sam Rainsy.Tom BunthornTom Bunthorn, 43On September 29, 2021, pursuant to an arrest warrant issued by the Phnom Penh Municipal Court, police arrested Tom Bunthorn, a former commune chief for the opposition Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP), in Phnom Penh’s Psar Depo 2 commune, Toul Kork district.Based on charges of incitement (articles 495 and 494 of Cambodia’s penal code), the authorities sent him to pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison on September 30. The charges are based on allegations that he had communicated with CNRP leader Sam Rainsy about calls to people to stop paying off their micro-loan debts.Bunthorn had previously been arrested on September 13, 2019, amidst a wave of arrests of opposition members in response to the announced return of exiled opposition leadership. He was one of six CNRP members arrested over the span of two days. On September 14, the Phnom Penh court had charged him with conspiracy (article 453 of the Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention. In 2019, according to several news reports, Ministry of Interior officials accused him of wanting to topple the government on behalf of Sam Rainsy. In that instance, Bunthorn was released on bail on November 15, 2019, after a speech by Prime Minister Hun Sen that led to 74 detained opposition members being released on bail. However, the criminal charges against him were never dropped.You ChantheanyYou Chantheany, 25On September 13, 2019, Phnom Penh police arrested You Chantheany, former CNRP youth activist and CNRP online news presenter, in Phnom Penh. She was one of six former CNRP activists who were arrested on September 13 and 14.On September 14, the investigating judge of the Phnom Penh municipal court charged her with incitement to commit a felony and plotting a coup (articles 453, 494 and 495 of the Cambodian criminal code). The court ordered her pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison. On October 18, 2019, the investigating judge is scheduled to question Chantheany.According to several news reports, Ministry of Interior officials accused her of wanting to topple the government on behalf of the CNRP’s acting president, Sam Rainsy.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Chantheany was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against her are still pending.Nuth PichNuth Pich, 63On August 17, 2019, Kampot police arrested Nuth Pich, a former Kampot provincial Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) official, for allegedly violating the Supreme Court’s decision that dissolved the CNRP in November 2017. The Kampot provincial court issued an arrest warrant against Pich on May 17, 2019, charging him with “discrediting judicial decisions” (article 523 of the Cambodia’s criminal code) and “incitement to commit felony” (articles 494 and 495 of the criminal code). Upon hearing about the arrest warrant, Pich went into hiding but was later apprehended.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Nuth Pich was released on bail on November 14. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Pich’s arrest is believed to be linked to the arrest of Nget Khouch on May 7, 2019 and subsequent uncovering of electronic evidence implicating Pich in a group chat. Kampot police arrested Khouch, a former Kampot provincial CNRP official, and detained him for two nights. Investigators were able to access Khouch’s mobile phone and allegedly saw messages exchanged between former CNRP members, in which they expressed support of the return to Cambodia of acting leader of the CNRP, Sam Rainsy. Pich was part of the group message.Pich’s case marks the first arrest of a CNRP member based on allegations of having disobeyed the Supreme Court’s November 2017 dissolution decision.Oun SavenOun Saven, 64On October 10, 2019, Kampong Cham police arrested Oun Saven, an activist of the dissolved Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) at his home in Kampong Cham province. Authorities arrested his fellow CNRP activist Ly Kimheang on the same day.On October 10, the prosecutor of the Kampong Cham provincial court issued a warrant for his arrest based on charges that he had plotted a coup and committed incitement to commit a felony (articles 453, 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code). The court ordered his pre-trial detention at Kampong Cham provincial prison.The authorities accused him of gathering and disseminating information about a plan to topple the government, connected to the announcement that acting head of the CNRP, Sam Rainsy, will return to Cambodia.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Saven was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Sreoun SreangSreoun Sreang, 43On September 26, 2019, Kampong Cham police arrested Sreoun Sreang, a former member of Kampong Cham provincial youth wing of the dissolved Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP).On September 26, the Kampong Cham provincial court issued a statement that Sreang had been charged with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code). The court ordered his pre-trial detention at Kampong Cham provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Sreang was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Authorities accused him of wanting to topple the government on behalf of the CNRP’s acting president, Sam Rainsy.Sam SunSam SunOn June 19, 2018, five soldiers and forest rangers working with the authorities in Kbal Chhay province arrested Ouk Chetny, a former opposition CNRP commune council chief, and his father-in-law, Sam Sun. The following day, the Preah Sihanouk provincial court charged both with “encroaching on state forest land” and illegal logging (article 94 of Forestry Law 2002).On March 12, 2019, the Sihanoukville provincial court convicted Sam Sun and sentenced him to five years in prison. The judge suspended four years and two months of Sam Sun’s prison sentence. Authorities released Sam Sun from Preah Sihanouk prison on April 18, 2019 after he had served 10 months of his sentence.Ouk Chetny’s and Sam Sun’s arrest occurred when they were clearing forestland for farming and cultivation purposes on land they bought in 2017. Local NGOs criticized the authorities for acting too hastily to detain them, and calling for the release of the two men while a thorough and impartial investigation is conducted into the land issue at stake.Ly LinLy Lin, 38On September 14, police arrested Ly Lin, former elected Samraong Thom commune council chief for the dissolved opposition party, the Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP), in Kandal province. He was one of six former CNRP activists who were arrested on September 13 and 14.The Kandal provincial court charged him with incitement to commit a felony (articles 494 and 495 of the Cambodian criminal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Kandal provincial prison. On October 10, the Phnom Penh Appeals Court denied his request for bail.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 74 political prisoners, authorities released Ly Lin on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.According to several news reports, Ministry of Interior officials accused him of wanting to topple the government on behalf of the CNRP’s acting president, Sam Rainsy. Lin had eaten “Khmer noodles” with other former CNRP members and activists, which authorities took as a grounds to arrest him.Chhun Thai YuthChhun Thai Yuth, 56On September 14, police arrested Chhun Thai Yuth, former first deputy commune chief of Prek Sdei commune in Koh Thom district, in Kandal province. He was one of six former CNRP activists who were arrested on September 13 and 14.The Kandal provincial court charged him with incitement to commit a felony (articles 494 and 495 of the Cambodian criminal code) and ordered pre-trial detention at Kandal provincial prison. On October 10, the Phnom Penh Appeals Court denied his request for bail.Authorities agreed to release Thai Yuth on bail on October 25 because he had health problems. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.According to several news reports, Ministry of Interior officials accused him of wanting to topple the government on behalf of the CNRP’s acting president, Sam Rainsy. Thai Yuth had eaten “Khmer noodles” with other former CNRP members and activists, which authorities used as a grounds to arrest him.Ngin SophatNgin Sophat, 56On September 21, 2019, Rattanakiri provincial police arrested Ngin Sophat, a former district chief of Banlung town in Rattanakiri province for the dissolved Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) and secretary of the provincial CNRP working group. On the same day, police arrested another former CNRP member, Thoun Bunthorn.The Rattanakiri provincial court charged Sophat with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Rattanakiri provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 74 political prisoners, authorities released Sophat on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Sophat had recently made several Facebook posts supporting the announcement that acting CNRP head, Sam Rainsy, would return to Cambodia.Thoun BunthornThoun Bunthorn, 50On September 21, 2019, Rattanakiri provincial police arrested Thoun Bunthorn, a former Rattanakiri provincial council member for the dissolved Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) and the chair of the CNRP executive committee of Banlung town in Rattanakiri province. On the same day, police arrested another former CNRP member, Ngin Sophat.The Rattanakiri provincial court charged Bunthorn with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Rattanakiri provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 74 political prisoners, authorities released Bunthorn on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Bunthorn had recently made several Facebook posts supporting the announcement that acting CNRP head, Sam Rainsy, would return to Cambodia.Chhim MaradyChhim Marady, 40On October 10, 2019, Kampong Speu police arrested Chhim Marady, a former activist of the dissolved opposition Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Kampong Speu province.On October 10, the investigating judge of the Kampong Speu provincial court charged him with incitement to commit a felony (article 495 of Cambodia’s penal code). The court ordered his pre-trial detention at Kampong Speu provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 74 political prisoners, authorities released Marady on bail on November 14. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Phon SopheaPhon SopheaOn October 14, 2019, police arrested Phon Sophea, former commune chief of the Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Chheu Khmao, Koh Thom district, Kandal province.The Kandal provincial court charged him with incitement to commit a felony (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Kandal provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 74 political prisoners, authorities released Sophea on bail on November 14. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Teung SambanTeung Samban, 60On October 18, 2019, police arrested Teung Samban, the former district chief executive of the opposition Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) and district council member in Chung Kal district, Oddar Meanchey province.His wife told Radio Free Asia that 20 police officers arrested her husband after surrounding their home.The arrest was based on a warrant issued on October 14 by the prosecutor of the Oddar Meanchey provincial court. The prosecutor claimed Samban had plotted a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention in Oddar Meanchey provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 74 political prisoners, authorities released Samban on bail on November 14. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Samban had expressed support on Facebook of the announced return of the acting head of the CNRP, Sam Rainsy, and helped mobilize support.Poung KamsanPoung KamsanOn October 21, 2019, Mondulkiri police arrested Poung Kamsan, an activist of the opposition Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP).On the same day, the Mondulkiri provincial court issued a statement that it charged Kamsan with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention in Mondulkiri provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 74 political prisoners, authorities released Kamsan on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Kamsan had posted support on his Facebook page for the announced return of acting CNRP head Sam Rainsy to Cambodia.Doung Sam AdeClick to expand ImageDoung Sam AdeOn October 27, 2019, police arrested Doung Sam Ade, a former member of the Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) executive committee in Sre Preah commune, Keo Seima district, Mondulkiri province.The Mondulkiri provincial court charged Sam Ade with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention in Mondulkiri provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 74 political prisoners, authorities released Sam Ade on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Khum KanKhum KanOn October 28, 2019, Mondulkiri police arrested Khum Kan, the former chair of the Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) executive committee in Mondulkiri province. According to Kan’s wife, and reporting by Radio Free Asia, approximately 20 police officers surrounded his house in Keo Siem district and arrested him without an arrest warrant.The Mondulkiri provincial court charged Kan with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention in Mondulkiri provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 74 political prisoners, authorities released Kan on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Dong SovannarithDong Sovannarith, 47On October 1, 2019, Kampong Cham police arrested Dong Sovannarith in Sambo commune, Ba Theay district, Kampong Cham province. He was the former chair of Ba Theay district youth wing of the dissolved Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP).On September 28, the prosecutor of the Kampong Cham provincial court had issued a warrant for his arrest on the basis of charges of incitement to commit felony (article 495 of Cambodia’s penal code).On October 9, the Kampong Cham provincial court charged him for a different crime: plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code), together with Horm Vuthy, another CNRP activist. The court ordered his pre-trial detention at Kampong Cham provincial prison.Authorities accused him of wanting to topple the government on behalf of the CNRP’s acting president, Sam Rainsy.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Sovannarith was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Ly KimheangLy Kimheang, 47On October 10, 2019, Kampong Cham police arrested Ly Kimheang, an activist of the dissolved opposition, Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) at his home in Kampong Cham province. Authorities arrested his fellow CNRP activist Oun Saven.On October 10, the prosecutor of the Kampong Cham provincial court issued a warrant for his arrest based on charges that he had plotted a coup and committed incitement to commit a felony (articles 453, 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code). The court ordered his pre-trial detention at Kampong Cham provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Kimheang was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.The authorities accused him of gathering and disseminating information about a plan to topple the government, connected to the announcement that acting head of the CNRP, Sam Rainsy, will return to Cambodia.Ly Meng KheangLy Meng Kheang, 35On September 14, 2019, police arrested Ly Meng Kheang, former Sa’ang district committee member of the dissolved opposition party, the Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Kandal province. He was one of six former CNRP activists who were arrested on September 13 and 14.The Kandal provincial court charged him with incitement to commit a felony (articles 494 and 495 of the Cambodian criminal code) and ordered pre-trial detention at Kandal provincial prison. On October 10, the Phnom Penh Appeals Court denied his request for bail.According to several news reports, Ministry of Interior officials accused him of wanting to topple the government on behalf of the CNRP’s acting president, Sam Rainsy. Meng Kheang had eaten “Khmer noodles” with other former CNRP members and activists, which authorities used as a grounds to arrest him.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Meng Kheang was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Mean LaMean La, 31On October 6, 2019, Poipet City and Tboum Khmum provincial police joined forces to arrest Mean La, a former Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) commune councilor in Dun Theay commune in Tboum Khmum province and Ponhea Krek district CNRP executive committee member.On October 4, the Tboum Khmum provincial court charged her with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code). The court ordered her pre-trial detention at Tboum Khmum provincial prison.The authorities accused her of having “gathered and mobilized citizens with a plot to lead a group to travel to Phnom Penh to participate in activities of toppling the government.”After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Mean La was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against her are still pending.Horm VuthyHorm Vuthy, 47On October 8, 2019, police arrested Horm Vuthy (also known as Van Pana) at Phnom Penh international airport while he was waiting to depart on a flight. He is a former vice chair of the Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) executive committee in Ba Theay district, Kampong Cham province.On October 9, the Kampong Cham provincial court announced in a statement that he had been charged with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code), together with Dong Sovannarith, another CNRP activist. The court ordered his pre-trial detention at Kampong Cham provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Vuthy was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Khin Sok HeangKhin Sok HeangOn October 7, 2019, Phnom Penh police arrested Khin Sok Heang at his home in Phnom Penh. He is the former chair of the Phnom Penh’s Prek Bra district executive committee of the Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP).On October 7, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged him with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code). The court ordered he be sent to pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Sok Heang was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Tith SophathTith SophathOn October 7, 2019, Phnom Penh police arrested Tith Sophath at her home in Phnom Penh. She is the former elected Psar Depot II Tuol Kork council member from the Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP). She also served as a member of the CNRP Women’s Wing in Phnom Penh’s Tuol Kork district.On October 7, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged her with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered her sent to pre-trial detention in Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Sophath was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against her are still pending.Om YonnOm Yonn, 61On October 9, 2019, Kampong Speu police arrested Om Yonn, an activist in the Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Kampong Speu province. He was arrested together with another former CNRP activist, Puy Takk.On October 8, the investigating judge of the Kampong Speu provincial court charged him with incitement to commit felony and discrediting a judicial decision (articles 495 and 523 of Cambodia’s penal code). The court ordered his pre-trial detention at Kampong Speu provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Om Yonn was released on bail the same day. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Puy TakkPuy Takk, 37On October 9, 2019, Kampong Speu police arrested Puy Takk, a former member of the Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) executive committee in Borsedith district of Kampong Speu province. He was arrested together with another CNRP activist, Om Yonn.On October 8, a Kampong Speu provincial court investigating judge charged him with incitement to commit felony and discrediting a judicial decision (articles 495 and 523 of Cambodia’s penal code). The court ordered his pre-trial detention at Kampong Speu provincial prison.At the time of his arrest, Puy Pakk was transporting meat to sell at a local market. Police also arrested his brother, Hun Tin (30 years old), who was with him at the market, on the basis that he had obstructed a police officer (article 503 of Cambodia’s penal code), but it is unclear whether he is still being held or whether he was formally charged with a crime.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Puy Takk was released on bail the same day. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Men YornMen YornOn October 12, 2019, police arrested Men Yorn, a former Samlot district party chief of the Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Battambang province. Police arrested him together with three other former CNRP members and activists in Battambang province: Dim Saroeun, Ley Sokhon, and Sok Phat.The arrest was based on a warrant issued on October 11 by the prosecutor of the Battambang provincial court. The investigating judge charged him with plotting a coup under article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code. On October 13, authorities transferred Yorn to Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison for pre-trial detention.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Yorn was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Sok PhatSok PhatOn October 12, 2019, police arrested Sok Phat, a former Samlot district party member of the Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Battambang province. Police arrested him together with three other former CNRP members and activists in Battambang province: Dim Saroeun, Ley Sokhon, and Men Yorn.The arrest was based on a warrant issued on October 11 by the prosecutor of the Battambang provincial court. The investigating judge charged him with plotting a coup under article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code. On October 13, authorities transferred Phat to Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison for pre-trial detention.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Phat was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Ley SokhonLey SokhonOn October 12, 2019, police arrested Ley Sokhorn, a former provincial party working group member of the Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) in charge of Samlot district in Battambang province. Police arrested him together with three other former CNRP members and activists in Battambang province: Dim Saroeun, Men Yorn, and Sok Phat.The arrest was based on a warrant issued on October 11 by the prosecutor of the Battambang provincial court. The investigating judge charged him with plotting a coup under article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code. On October 13, authorities transferred Sokhon to Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison for pre-trial detention.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Sokhorn was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Dim SaroeunDim SaroeunOn October 12, 2019, Battambang police arrested Dim Saroeun, a former elected provincial council member of the Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP). Police arrested him together with three other former CNRP members and activists in Battambang province: Men Yorn, Ley Sokhon, and Sok Phat.The arrest was based on a warrant issued on October 11 by the prosecutor of the Battambang provincial court. The investigating judge charged him with plotting a coup under article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code. On October 13, authorities transferred Saroeun to Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison for pre-trial detention.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Saroeun was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Hun Sok KongClick to expand ImageHun Sok Kong, 40On September 5, 2019, O’Chhrov district police arrested Hun Sok Kong in Banteay Meanchey province. He is a former elected commune chief of the opposition Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Bos Khnor commune, Chamkar Leu district, Kampong Cham province. Police did not inform him why they were arresting him.The same evening, Kampong Cham police questioned him for five hours, without a lawyer present, at their commissariat based on allegations of involvement in plotting a coup and inciting the commission of a felony (articles 453, 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code). The court ordered his pre-trial detention at Kampong Cham provincial prison, where he was transferred on September 7.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Sok Kong was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Sam VuthySam Vuthy, 42On October 19, 2019, police arrested Sam Vuthy, the former council member for the Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Thvay Dangkom commune, Siem Reap province.On October 20, the Siem Reap provincial court issued a statement that Vuthy had been charged with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Siem Reap provincial prison. On October 21, the investigating judge questioned Vuthy.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Vuthy was released on bail on November 14. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Vuthy had posted messages on Facebook supporting the announced return to Cambodia of acting CNRP leader Sam Rainsy.Uth CheounUth Cheoun, 46On October 19, 2019, Battambang police arrested Uth Cheoun, the former council district chief of the opposition Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Mong Russey commune, Battambang province.On the same day, the Battambang court issued a statement that Choeun had been charged with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention in Battambang provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Cheoun was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Sim LaoSim Lao, 39On October 21, 2019, Battambang police arrested Sim Lao, a former district councilor of the opposition Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Puchey village, Serey Meanchey commune, Sampov Luon district, Battambang province.On October 22, the Battambang provincial court charged him with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention in Battambang provincial prison.Authorities accused him of mobilizing supporters to join him to Phnom Penh to welcome Sam Rainsy, acting head of the CNRP, when he returns to Cambodia. The spokesperson of the Battambang court informed government aligned Freshnews that article 454 of the penal code, which exempts persons that confess to authorities of the existence of the plotting and the identification of other participants.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Lao was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Soy SinhartSoy SinhartOn October 22, 2019, police arrested Soy Sinhart, the former chair of the opposition Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) Speu commune executive committee in Kampong Cham province.The Kampong Cham provincial court charged Sinhart with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention in Kampong Cham provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Sinhart was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Heng HonHeng HonOn October 22, 2019, police arrested Heng Hon, a former chair of the opposition Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) Svay Teap commune executive committee in Kampong Cham province.The Kampong Cham provincial court charged Hon with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention in Kampong Cham provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Hon was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Kong SivongKong SivongOn October 25, 2019, police arrested Kong Sivong near the Thai border in Banteay Meanchey province. He is a former member of the Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) executive committee in Kampong Cham province.The Kampong Cham provincial court charged Sivong with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention in Kampong Cham provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Sivong was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Chan SophalChan SophalOn the evening of May 28, 2019, a group of mixed commune, district and provincial police officers arrested former Ou Saom commune election candidate for the CNRP in Pursat province, Chan Sophal. The same evening, police officers arrested Noeun Nim, another former Ou Saom commune election candidate for the CNRP, and Touch Sam Ath, a former Pramaoy commune election candidate for the CNRP in Pursat province. The men are currently being held at Pursat provincial prison. Authorities allege the two men were involved in “encroaching on state forest land” and illegal logging.On June 13, 2019, police arrested Nem Nath, another former Pramaoy commune election candidate for the CNRP. And on June 16, police arrested Prak Ren, a former elected Pramaoy commune council member for the CNRP, and Mong Phy, a former elected Ou Saom commune council member for the CNRP. Within 72 hours of their respective arrests, the Pursat provincial court charged all six with “illegal clearing of state land” (article 94 of Cambodia’s Forestry Law 2002).After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14, 2019, in which he announced the release of 74 political prisoners, authorities finally released Chan Sophal on bail on February 10, 2020. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.None of these six former local CNRP officials owns land in the area they are accused to have illegally cleared land. Chan Sophal was known to hold dinners at his house, bringing together members of the opposition, including the five.Prime Minister Hun Sen’s government has increased harassment of the opposition in 2019, with over 147 police or court summons issued against members and supporters of the CNRP based on allegations that they violated the Supreme Court decision that dissolved the CNRP in November 2017. Many former local members and supporters continue to be vocal on social media, expressing support for leading figures of the CNRP who are currently in exile.Toun Sam AthToun Sam AthOn the evening of May 28, 2019, a group of mixed commune, district and provincial police officers arrested former Touch Sam Ath, a former Pramaoy commune election candidate for the CNRP in Pursat. The same evening, police officers arrested province Ou Saom commune election candidate for the CNRP in Pursat province, Chan Sophal, and Noeun Nim, another former Ou Saom commune election candidate for the CNRP. After Sam Ath’s arrest, the officers sent him to the Bromuy commune health center due to health issues. The men are currently being held at Pursat provincial prison. Authorities allege the two men were involved in “encroaching on state forest land” and illegal logging.On June 13, 2019, police arrested Nem Nath, another former Pramaoy commune election candidate for the CNRP. And on June 16, police arrested Prak Ren, a former elected Pramaoy commune council member for the CNRP, and Mong Phy, a former elected Ou Saom commune council member for the CNRP. Within 72 hours of their respective arrests, the Pursat provincial court charged all six with “illegal clearing of state land” (article 94 of Cambodia’s Forestry Law 2002).After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14, 2019, in which he announced the release of 74 political prisoners, authorities finally released Toun Sam Ath on bail on January 30, 2020. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.None of these six former local CNRP officials owns land in the area they are accused to have illegally cleared land. Chan Sophal was known to hold dinners at his house, bringing together members of the opposition, including the five.Prime Minister Hun Sen’s government has increased harassment of the opposition in 2019, with over 147 police or court summons issued against members and supporters of the CNRP based on allegations that they violated the Supreme Court decision that dissolved the CNRP in November 2017. Many former local members and supporters continue to be vocal on social media, expressing support for leading figures of the CNRP who are currently in exile.Nem NathNem NathOn June 13, 2019, police arrested Nem Nath, a former Pramaoy commune election candidate for the CNRP. On June 16, police arrested Prak Ren, a former elected Pramaoy commune council member for the CNRP, and Mong Phy, a former elected Ou Saom commune council member for the CNRP. Within 72 hours of their respective arrests, the Pursat provincial court charged all six with “illegal clearing of state land” (article 94 of Cambodia’s Forestry Law 2002).On the evening of May 28, 2019, a group of mixed commune, district and provincial police officers arrested former Ou Saom commune election candidate for the CNRP in Pursat province, Chan Sophal. The same evening, police officers arrested Touch Sam Ath, a former Pramaoy commune election candidate for the CNRP in Pursat province, and Noeun Nim, another former Ou Saom commune election candidate for the CNRP. The men are currently being held at Pursat provincial prison. Authorities allege the two men were involved in “encroaching on state forest land” and illegal logging.According to his relatives, Nem Nath was accused by authorities of inciting villagers to commit crimes. The Cambodian League for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights (LICADHO) alleged that these arrests were an apparent attempt to intimidate opposition activists. LICADHO also said that Nem Nath’s arrest "was definitely politically motivated because Nem Nath was not involved in any illegal encroachment on public land. The activist is with the CNRP and he refused to defect to the [Cambodian People’s Party] CPP.”After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14, 2019, in which he announced the release of 74 political prisoners, authorities finally released Nem Nath on bail on March 2, 2020. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.None of these six former local CNRP officials owns land in the area they are accused to have illegally cleared land. Chan Sophal was known to hold dinners at his house, bringing together members of the opposition, including the five.Prime Minister Hun Sen’s government has increased harassment of the opposition in 2019, with over 147 police or court summons issued against members and supporters of the CNRP based on allegations that they violated the Supreme Court decision that dissolved the CNRP in November 2017. Many former local members and supporters continue to be vocal on social media, expressing support for leading figures of the CNRP who are currently in exile.Prak RenPrak RenOn June 16, 2019, police arrested Prak Ren, a former elected Pramaoy commune council member for the CNRP. The same day, police arrested Mong Phy, a former elected Ou Saom commune council member for the CNRP. On June 16, police arrested Nem Nath, a former Pramaoy commune election candidate for the CNRP. Within 72 hours of their respective arrests, the Pursat provincial court charged all six with “illegal clearing of state land” (article 94 of Cambodia’s Forestry Law 2002).On the evening of May 28, 2019, a group of mixed commune, district and provincial police officers arrested former Ou Saom commune election candidate for the CNRP in Pursat province, Chan Sophal. The same evening, police officers arrested Touch Sam Ath, a former Pramaoy commune election candidate for the CNRP in Pursat province, and Noeun Nim, another former Ou Saom commune election candidate for the CNRP. The men are currently being held at Pursat provincial prison. Authorities allege the two men were involved in “encroaching on state forest land” and illegal logging.According to his relatives, Nem Nath was accused by authorities of inciting villagers to commit crimes. The Cambodian League for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights (LICADHO) alleged that these arrests were an apparent attempt to intimidate opposition activists. LICADHO also said that Nem Nath’s arrest "was definitely politically motivated because Nem Nath was not involved in any illegal encroachment on public land. The activist is with the CNRP and he refused to defect to the [Cambodian People’s Party] CPP.”After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14, 2019, in which he announced the release of 74 political prisoners, authorities finally released Prak Ren on bail on February 26, 2020. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.None of these six former local CNRP officials owns land in the area they are accused to have illegally cleared land. Chan Sophal was known to hold dinners at his house, bringing together members of the opposition, including the five.Prime Minister Hun Sen’s government has increased harassment of the opposition in 2019, with over 147 police or court summons issued against members and supporters of the CNRP based on allegations that they violated the Supreme Court decision that dissolved the CNRP in November 2017. Many former local members and supporters continue to be vocal on social media, expressing support for leading figures of the CNRP who are currently in exile.Noeun NimNoeun NimOn the evening of May 28, 2019, a group of mixed commune, district and provincial police officers arrested Noeun Nim, a former Ou Saom commune election candidate for the CNRP. The same evening, police officers arrested former Ou Saom commune election candidate for the CNRP in Pursat province, Chan Sophal, and Touch Sam Ath, a former Pramaoy commune election candidate for the CNRP in Pursat province. The men are currently being held at Pursat provincial prison. Authorities allege the two men were involved in “encroaching on state forest land” and illegal logging.On June 13, 2019, police arrested Nem Nath, another former Pramaoy commune election candidate for the CNRP. And on June 16, police arrested Prak Ren, a former elected Pramaoy commune council member for the CNRP, and Mong Phy, a former elected Ou Saom commune council member for the CNRP. Within 72 hours of their respective arrests, the Pursat provincial court charged all six with “illegal clearing of state land” (article 94 of Cambodia’s Forestry Law 2002).After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14, 2019, in which he announced the release of 74 political prisoners, authorities finally released Noeun Nim on bail on January 9, 2020. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.None of these six former local CNRP officials owns land in the area they are accused to have illegally cleared land. Chan Sophal was known to hold dinners at his house, bringing together members of the opposition, including the five.Prime Minister Hun Sen’s government has increased harassment of the opposition in 2019, with over 147 police or court summons issued against members and supporters of the CNRP based on allegations that they violated the Supreme Court decision that dissolved the CNRP in November 2017. Many former local members and supporters continue to be vocal on social media, expressing support for leading figures of the CNRP who are currently in exile.Try Sieng EyTry Sieng Ey, 38On October 10, 2019, Kratie police arrested Try Sieng Ey, a Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) activist.The Kratie provincial court charged her with incitement to commit felony and discrediting a judicial decision (articles 494, 495 and 523 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered her pre-trial detention at Kratie provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Sieng Ey was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against her are still pending.Tem SievTem SievOn November 5, 2019, Phnom Penh police arrested Tem Siev, a security guard at the headquarters of the dissolved opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP).On November 7, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged Siev and nine other security guards at CNRP headquarters with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was detained at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar Correctional facility (CC1).After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Siev was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Tem SomethTem Someth, 48On November 5, 2019, Phnom Penh police arrested Tem Someth, a security guard at the headquarters of the dissolved opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP).On November 7, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged Someth and nine other security guards at CNRP headquarters with plotting a coup and incitement to commit felony (articles 453 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was detained at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar Correctional facility (CC1).After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Someth was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Someth faced harassment from the authorities before his arrest in November. On March 18, 2019, Phnom Penh police summoned Someth and forced him to thumbprint a document pledging that he will no longer serve as a security guard at the CNRP headquarters. However, Someth disregarded this instruction and returned to work at the headquarters.Thorn BunthoeurnThorn BunthoeurnOn November 5, 2019, Phnom Penh police arrested Thorn Bunthoeurn, a security guard at the headquarters of the dissolved opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP).On November 7, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged Bunthoeurn and nine other security guards at CNRP headquarters with plotting a coup and incitement to commit felony (articles 453 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was detained at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar Correctional facility (CC1).After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Bunthoeurn was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Pouk ChandaPouk Chanda, 48On November 5, 2019, Phnom Penh police arrested Pouk Chanda, a security guard at the headquarters of the dissolved opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP).On November 7, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged Chanda and nine other security guards at CNRP headquarters with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was detained at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar Correctional facility (CC1).After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Chanda was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Srang LaySrang LayOn November 5, 2019, Phnom Penh police arrested Srang Lay, a security guard at the headquarters of the dissolved opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP).On November 7, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged Lay and nine other security guards at CNRP headquarters with plotting a coup and incitement to commit felony (articles 453 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was detained in at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar Correctional facility (CC1).After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Lay was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Chourn SophalChourn SophalOn November 5, 2019, Phnom Penh police arrested Chourn Sophal, a security guard at the headquarters of the dissolved opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP).On November 7, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged Sophal and nine other security guards at CNRP headquarters with plotting a coup and incitement to commit felony (articles 453 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was detained at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar Correctional facility (CC1).After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Sophal was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Ouk Som AngOuk Som AngOn November 5, 2019, Phnom Penh police arrested Ouk Som Ang, a security guard at the headquarters of the dissolved opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP).On November 7, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged Som Ang and nine other security guards at CNRP headquarters with plotting a coup and incitement to commit felony (articles 453 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was detained at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar Correctional facility (CC1).After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Som Ang was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Nok OunNok OunOn November 5, 2019, Phnom Penh police arrested Nok Oun, a security guard at the headquarters of the dissolved opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP).On November 7, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged Nok Oun and nine other security guards at CNRP headquarters with plotting a coup and incitement to commit felony (articles 453 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was detained at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar Correctional facility (CC1).After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Nok Oun was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Sey DaraSey DaraOn November 5, 2019, Phnom Penh police arrested Sey Dara, a security guard at the headquarters of the dissolved opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP).On November 7, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged Sey Dara and nine other security guards at CNRP headquarters with plotting a coup and incitement to commit felony (articles 453 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was detained at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar Correctional facility (CC1).After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Sey Dara was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.So TaraSo TaraOn November 5, 2019, Phnom Penh police arrested So Tara, a security guard at the headquarters of the dissolved opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP).On November 7, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged So Tara and nine other security guards at CNRP headquarters with plotting a coup and incitement to commit felony (articles 453 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was detained at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar Correctional facility (CC1).After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, So Tara was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Nov VichetNov Vichet, 44On November 5, 2019, Phnom Penh’s Tuol Kork district police arrested Nov Vichet. a former member of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Boeung Salang commune, Tuol Kork district, Phnom Penh. Authorities accused him of mobilizing support ahead of the announced return of exiled CNRP leaders.On November 7, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged Vichet and nine other security guards at CNRP headquarters with plotting a coup and incitement to commit felony (articles 453, 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was detained at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar Correctional facility (CC1).After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Vichet was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Srey ChandaraSrey Chandara, 60On November 6, 2019, Phnom Penh’s Sen Sok and Por Sen Chey district police arrested Srey Chandara, a former member of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP). Authorities accused him of mobilizing support ahead of the announced return of exiled CNRP leadership.On November 1, investigating judge of the Phnom Penh municipal court issued an arrest warrant for Chandara on the basis of charges of plotting and incitement to commit felony (articles 453, 494, and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code).After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Chandara was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Hem NewdalyHem NewdalyOn November 5, 2019, Kampong Speu police arrested Hem Newdaly, deputy commune chief affiliated with the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Ruska Heik commune, Samrong Tong district, Kampong Speu province.The Kampong Speu provincial court charged Newdaly with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code). Newdaly was detained at Kampong Speu provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech inaugurating a cement factory in Kampot on November 14 during which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Newdaly was released on bail on November 14. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Sun BunthonSun Bunthon, 47On September 1, 2019, plainclothes police arrested former member of the dissolved Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) Sun Bunthon, who had been the CNRP commune council member of Baray commune, Kampong Thom province. At the same time, authorities also arrested Nou Phoeun, who previously contested as a CNRP candidate for the Baray commune council.The authorities alleged he had shared information on Facebook that insulted Prime Minister Hun Sen and promoted information about the planned return of acting CNRP head, Sam Rainsy, to Cambodia.The authorities justified conducting the arrest without an arrest warrant on the grounds that he was caught committing the act (“in flagrante delicto”), a justification commonly used by Cambodian authorities to shortcut judicial protections against arbitrary arrest. The authorities alleged that the information the two had shared on Facebook would cause public harm or constitute a threat of a crime about to be committed.After arrest, the authorities held Bunthon overnight at Kampong Thom police station. On September 2, the Kampong Thom provincial court charged him with defamation, “public insult,” “incitement to commit felony,” and “discrediting a judicial decision” (respectively, articles 305, 307, 494, 495, and 523 of the Cambodian criminal code) as well as continuing to be active on behalf of a political party that had been dissolved by the Supreme Court, an allegation that is based on the repressive amendments of the Law on Political Parties (new article 42). The investigating judge ordered his pre-trial detention at Kampong Thom provincial prison.On October 11, the authorities released him on bail after he confessed at the Kampong Thom provincial police headquarters, but the charges stand.Ros KimsiengRos Kimsieng, 34On September 1, 2019, Kampong Thom provincial police arrested Ros Kimsieng, former CNRP provincial youth chief for Kampong Thom province, together with two other former members of the dissolved main opposition, Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP), Sun Bunthon and Nou Phoeun.Police claimed Kimsieng had shared public information related to the announced return of the acting CNRP head, Sam Rainsy, to Cambodia.The authorities justified conducting the arrest without an arrest warrant on the grounds that he was caught committing the act (“in flagrante delicto”), a justification commonly used by Cambodian authorities to shortcut judicial protections against arbitrary arrest. The authorities alleged that the information the two had shared on Facebook would cause public harm or constitute a threat of a crime about to be committed.After arrest, the authorities held Kimsieng overnight at Kampong Thom police station. On September 2, the Kampong Thom provincial court charged him with defamation, “public insult,” “incitement to commit felony,” and “discrediting a judicial decision” (respectively, articles 305, 307, 494, 495, and 523 of the Cambodian criminal code) as well as continuing to be active on behalf of a political party that had been dissolved by the Supreme Court, an allegation that is based on the repressive amendments of the Law on Political Parties (new article 42). The investigating judge ordered his pre-trial detention at Kampong Thom provincial prison.On September 3, Kampong Thom police detained Ros Kimsieng’s brother-in-law, Heng Soknim, for taking photos inside the courtroom, which is prohibited. However, the authorities held him for two days at the provincial police station before releasing him on September 5. The authorities apparently let him go after instructing him on lawful conduct inside a courtroom.On October 11, the authorities released him on bail after he provided a confession at the Kampong Thom provincial police headquarters. According to the Phnom Penh Post, he urged former CNRP members and supporters not to listen to Sam Rainsy’s “provocation and appeals.”Heng Chan SothyHeng Chan Sothy, 57On November 6, 2019, police from Phnom Penh’s Sen Sok and Por Sen Chey districts arrested Heng Chan Sothy, a former member of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP). Authorities accused him of mobilizing support ahead of the announced return of exiled CNRP leaders. He was detained at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison facility.On November 1, an investigating judge of the Phnom Penh municipal court issued an arrest warrant for Chandara on the basis of charges of plotting a coup and incitement to commit felony (articles 453, 494, and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code).After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Chan Sothy was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Touk ToeuryTouk Toeury, 48On November 9, 2019, Oddar Meanchey police arrested Touk Toeury, an activist affiliated with the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Phnov commune, Angkor Chum district, Siem Reap province, He had been active in the mobilization of support ahead of Sam Rainsy’s announced return to Cambodia from exile. Since he currently lives in Oddar Meanchey province's Samrong district, authorities detained him at Oddar Meanchey provincial prison.The arrest was based on the Oddar Meanchey provincial court charged Toeury on November 7 with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code).After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Toeury was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Hu Srea (known as “Narong”)Hu Srea (known as “Narong”), 41On November 5, 2019, Koh Kong police arrested Hu Srea (also known as “Narong”) who is a former member of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Koh Kong province.The Koh Kong provincial court charged Narong with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was detained at Koh Kong provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Narong was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Chea ChivChea Chiv, 38On November 6, 2019, Battambang police arrested Chea Chiv, a former executive committee chief of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Battambang province.On November 7, the Battambang provincial court charged him with plotting and incitement to commit felony (articles 453 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code). Authorities detained him at Battambang provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Chiv was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Thav RithThav Rith, 48On November 6, 2019, Takeo police arrested Thav Rith, a former member of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Takeo province.On November 7, the Takeo provincial court charged him with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code). Authorities detained him at Takeo provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Rith was released on bail on that day. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Koy ChanthaKoy Chantha, 35On November 7, 2019, Takeo police arrested Koy Chantha, a former member of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Takeo province.On the same day, the Takeo provincial court charged him with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was detained at Takeo provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Chantha was released on bail that day. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Phoeun KimsengPhoeun Kimseng, 40On November 8, 2019, Battambang police arrested Phoeun Kimseng, a former member of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Battambang province.On the same day, the Battambang provincial court charged him with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was detained at Battambang provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Kimseng was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Sim KimleangSim Kimleang, 43On November 11, 2019, Phnom Penh police arrested Sim Kimleang, a former bodyguard of acting leader of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP), Sam Rainsy, who remains in exile.On November 12, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged Kimleang with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was detained at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison facility.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Kimleang was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Chhoun SarethChhoun Sareth, 54On November 11, 2019, Phnom Penh police arrested Chhoun Sareth, a former bodyguard of acting leader of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP), Sam Rainsy, who remains in exile.On November 12, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged him with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was detained at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison facility.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Sareth was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Soem/Sim VuthySoem/Sim Vuthy, 54On November 11, 2019, Phnom Penh police arrested Soem/Sim Vuthy, a former bodyguard of acting leader of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP), Sam Rainsy, who remains in exile.On November 12, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged him with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was detained at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison facility.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Vuthy was released on bail that day. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Ros BunthanRos Bunthan, 41On November 11, 2019, Phnom Penh police arrested Ros Bunthan, a former bodyguard of acting leader of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP), Sam Rainsy, who remains in exile.On November 12, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged him with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was detained at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison facility.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Bunthan was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Huot ChendaHuot Chenda, 51On November 11, 2019, Phnom Penh police arrested Huot Chenda, a former bodyguard of acting leader of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP), Sam Rainsy, who remains in exile.On November 12, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged him with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was detained at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison facility.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Chenda was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Leang Bunthorn (also known as “Ta Svet”)Leang Bunthorn (also known as “Ta Svet”), 31On November 11, 2019, Banteay Meanchey police arrested Leang Bunthorn (also known as “Ta Svet”) a former member of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Banteay Meanchey province.The Banteay Meanchey provincial court charged him with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code), and authorities detained him at Banteay Meanchey provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Bunthorn was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Bou So Oeurn (also known as “Bou Sokheang”)Bou So Oeurn (also known as “Bou Sokheang”), 33On November 10, 2019, Kandal police arrested Bou So Oeurn (also known as “Bou Sokheang”), a former member of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Kandal province.On November 11, the Phnom Penh court charged him with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was detained at Kandal provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Bou So Oeurn was released on bail the same day. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Sao RathaClick to expand ImageSao Ratha, 24On November 9, 2019, Sihanoukville police arrested Sao Ratha, a supporter of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Sihanoukville province.On November 14, the Sihanoukville provincial court charged Ratha with plotting a coup and incitement to commit felony (articles 453, 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was detained at Sihanoukville provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Ratha was released on bail the same day. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Ngok Sam OunNgok Sam Oun, 61On November 11, 2019, Phnom Penh police arrested Ngok Sam Oun, a supporter of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in in Beoung Kok 1 commune, Toul Kork district, Phnom Penh.On November 11, the Sihanoukville provincial court charged Sam Oun with plotting a coup (article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was detained at Sihanoukville provincial prison.After Prime Minister Hun Sen’s speech in Kampot on November 14 in which he announced the release of 72 political prisoners, Sam Oun was released on bail on November 15. However, the criminal charges against him are still pending.Sath SrosSath SrosOn March 17, 2020 at about 8 a.m., Phnom Srouch district and provincial police arrested Sath Sros, a teacher at Dak Por Primary School in Krang Dey Vay village, Phnom Srouch distict, Kampong Speu province. Authorities alleged Sros had shared “fake news” on his Facebook page about the coronavirus. On the same day the Kampong Speu provincial court questioned him and charged him with conspiracy and incitement to commit a felony (articles 453 and 495 of Cambodia’s criminal code). On March 20, police released him after he signed a pledge to refrain from spreading so-called “fake news” about the virus in the future. However, the charges against him are still pending and he will need to report after one month to the police.Hin ChhanHin ChhanOn March 20, 2020, the police chief and deputy district police inspector of Sambath Meanchey commune police, accompanied by 10 officers, arrested Hin Chhan (56 years old), a former district councilor for the dissolved opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Prey Sras village, Sambath Meanchey commune, Romeas Haek district, Svay Rieng province. The authorities alleged that Chhan incited social unrest through a Facebook post commenting on the government’s Covid-19 response. After taken into police custody, Chhan suffered a stroke. Due to his critical medical condition, the authorities held him overnight at the district public hospital and the next day transferred him to the provincial public hospital. Chhan was in a coma for several days. The Svay Rieng provincial court charged him with “incitement to commit felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s criminal code). On April 6, the authorities released him on bail due to his serious medical condition but Chhan will have to appear at the police station once a month.Ngoy ThanNgoy ThanOn October 13, 2019, police arrested Ngoy Than, a former CNRP commune councilor in Pramuy commune, Veal Veang district, Pursat province. The authorities charged him with illegal clearing of forestry land under Cambodia’s Forestry Law of 2002. He remained in pre-trial detention in Pursat provincial prison.Than’s arrest came amidst a heightened crackdown on the political opposition in 2019, when exiled opposition leaders announced plans to return to Cambodia on November 9, 2019. The government alleged local CNRP members who gathered to eat noodle soup were starting a “Khmer noodle revolution,” laying the groundwork for the government to make bogus allegations that participants sought to overthrow the government. Than had joined other opposition members in eating Khmer noodles and shared posts on his Facebook page in support of the return of opposition leadership.On June 17, 2020, the authorities released Than after he paid a US$2,000 bail sum.Ouk ChetnyOuk ChetnyOn June 19, 2018, five soldiers and forest rangers working with the authorities in Kbal Chhay province arrested Ouk Chetny, a former opposition CNRP commune council chief, and his father-in-law, Sam Sun. The following day, the Preah Sihanouk provincial court charged both with “encroaching on state forest land” and illegal logging (article 94 of Forestry Law 2002).On March 12, 2019, the Sihanoukville provincial court convicted Ouk Chetny and sentenced him to five years in prison. The judge suspended three years of Ouk Chetny’s prison sentence. Ouk Chetny was serving his prison sentence at Preah Sihanouk prison.Ouk Chetny’s and Sam Sun’s arrest occurred when they were clearing forestland for farming and cultivation purposes on land they bought in 2017. Local NGOs criticized the authorities for acting too hastily to detain them, and calling for the release of the two men while a thorough and impartial investigation is conducted into the land issue at stake.After serving two years of his prison sentence, the authorities suspended three years of the five-year prison sentence and released Chetny on June 19, 2020.Sovann RithySovann RithyOn April 7, 2020, Phnom Penh police arrested journalist and director of online TVFB news site, Sovann Rithy (31 years old) based on allegations that he was inciting chaos by quoting words from a recent Hun Sen speech. Specifically, Sovann Rithy wrote the words on this Facebook page, quoting the prime minister saying “If motorbike-taxi drivers go bankrupt, sell your motorbikes for spending money. The government does not have the ability to help” when reporting on the economic impact of Covid -19. On April 9, the investigating judge of the Phnom Penh municipal court charged him with “incitement to commit felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s criminal code). On April 8, the Ministry of Information revoked TVFB's broadcasting license on grounds that Rithy allegedly had broadcasted information “which was to generate an adverse effect on the security, public order and safety of society.”On October 5, the court convicted him and sentenced him to an 18-month prison term. The five months and 28 days he spent in pre-trial detention were deducted, and the court suspended the remainder of the prison sentence.Sovann Rithy was released from prison on October 5.Kak Sovann ChhayClick to expand ImageKak Sovann Chhay, 16In the evening of June 24, 2021, around 30 police officers arrested Kak Sovann Chhay at his home in Phnom Penh without an arrest warrant. The officers did not explain the reasons for his arrest. His father is Kak Komphear, a senior member of the political opposition, who has been detained since May 2020 and is facing criminal charges. Sovann Chhay has autism.On June 25, police sent him to the Phnom Penh municipal court where the court charged him with “incitement to commit a felony” and “public insult” (articles 494, 495 and 502 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1 (CC1). His trial was held on September 29, 2021, concluded on October 13, 2021. The judge indefinitely postponed the reading of his verdict because he was “busy.” On November 1, the court sentenced him to eight months in prison.He served four months and 15 days in prison, with the remainder of the sentence suspended. Sovann Chhay was released from prison on November 10, 2021. For the next two years, he will be required to appear before the court whenever summoned; inform the court if he changes his address; and obtain permission to leave the country, among other conditions.In their handling of the case, the authorities have not taken into account that Sovann Chhay is a person with a disability or that he is a child, being under age 18. According to the International Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which Cambodia ratified, the authorities have a duty to make "reasonable accommodations" for persons with disabilities when interrogated by the police, held in police custody and pre-trial detention or prison. At trial, Sovann Chhay’s defense lawyer requested twice that Sovann Chhay's disability and support needs be evaluated, however, the court refused both those requests. The prosecution had argued that Sovann Chhay no longer had a disability. Human Rights Watch received reports that no accommodations were made for Sovann Chhay, either during police custody and questioning or in prison.Before his arrest, an unidentified person contacted him on the mobile Telegram app, asking Sovann Chhay who he was, calling his father a traitor and telling Sovann Chhay that he will be jailed too.This was not the first time Sovann Chhay has been targeted. On October 4, 2020, police had arrested Sovann Chhay and detained him overnight at the police station after he had climbed into the CNRP’s abandoned former headquarters in Phnom Penh to collect flags for his room. The authorities released him two days later after a "confession" was extracted in which he apologized for "causing mischief." Then on April 27, two men attacked Sovann Chhay while he was driving his motorbike, leaving him seriously injured after being hit with a brick. The injury was severe enough that he had to go to the hospital for treatment of a fractured skull. The police never found the two assailants.UN human rights experts expressed that they were “deeply disturbed” by the detention of Sovann Chhay, calling for his release.Chum PuthyClick to expand ImageChum PuthyOn August 4, 2020, police arrested Chum Puthy, a CNRP, a former member of the Svay Rieng provincial executive committee of the opposition Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP). The authorities also arrested Chhuor Pheng, a CNRP activist in Phnom Penh, and two other CNRP activists, Ouk Sam Oun and Chhin Sovanna; the two latter were released without charges the next day.On August 6, the Phnom Penh court charged Puthy with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and sent him to pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison. On October 26, 2021, the court sentenced him to 20 months in prison and a two million riels fine (US$500).On November 5, 2021, amid a wave of releases of activists ahead of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) Summit hosted by Cambodia in late November, the authorities released him and suspended the remainder of the prison sentence.Phnom Penh municipal police chief, Sar Thet alleged that the police possessed an audio recording by unidentified persons that named Pheng and Puthy as recruiters for protesters in Phnom Penh to participate in demonstrations calling for the release of prominent union leader Rong Chhun. No further information was provided about this recording, where it came from, how the police acquired it, or whether it was authentic.On August 4, the four CNRP activists visited Than Pagoda in Phnom Penh’s Chamkarmon district to meet with eight monks who had travelled from Battambang to Phnom Penh to protest for the release of Rong Chhun. The authorities stopped the monks on their way to join the demonstration and forced them to return to their pagoda.Chhuor PhengClick to expand ImageChhuor PhengOn August 4, 2020, Phnom Penh police arrested Chhuor Pheng, an opposition Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) activist in Phnom Penh. The authorities also arrested Chum Puthy, a local CNRP member in Svay Rieng, and two other CNRP activists, Ouk Sam Oun and Chhin Sovanna; the two latter were released without charges the next day.On August 6, the Phnom Penh court charged Pheng with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and sent him to pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison. On October 26, 2021, the court sentenced him to 20 months in prison and a two million riels fine (US$500).On November 5, 2021, amid a wave of releases of activists ahead of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) Summit hosted by Cambodia in late November, the authorities released him and suspended the remainder of the prison sentence.Phnom Penh municipal police chief, Sar Thet alleged the police possessed an audio recording by unidentified persons that named Pheng and Puthy as recruiters for protesters in Phnom Penh to participate in demonstrations calling for the release of prominent union leader Rong Chhun. No further information was provided about this recording, where it came from, how the police acquired it, or whether it was authentic.On August 4, the four CNRP activists visited Than Pagoda in Phnom Penh’s Chamkarmon district to meet with eight monks who had travelled from Battambang to Phnom Penh to protest for the release of Rong Chhun. The authorities stopped the monks on their way to join the demonstration and forced them to return to their pagoda.Mean Prom MonyClick to expand ImageMean Prom MonyOn September 6, police arrested Mean Prom Mony, vice-president of the Khmer Student Intelligent League Association and a member of the Active Citizens for Justice youth movement. Mony and other activists, including the Venerable Keut Saray who authorities arrested the same day, planned a protest on September 7 at Phnom Penh’s Freedom Park to call for the release of detained union leader Rong Chhun.After questioning by the prosecutor and investigating judge at the Phnom Penh municipal court on September 7, the court charged him on September 8 with incitement to commit a felony (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and sent him to pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison facility, Correctional Center 1 (CC1). On October 26, 2021, the court sentenced him to 20 months in prison and a two million riels fine (US$500).On November 5, 2021, amid a wave of releases of activists ahead of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) Summit hosted by Cambodia in late November, the authorities released and suspended the remainder of the prison sentence.In early August, Phnom Penh Municipal Hall issued a statement prohibiting organizers to hold the planned gathering, claiming they would not be able to control the number of attendees. City officials also accused organizers of “inciting” members of the public to protest. On September 5, the Active Citizens for Justice announced that they would go forward with their planned gathering between September 7-15.Tha LavyClick to expand ImageTha Lavy, 19On September 7, 2020, Phnom Penh police arrested Tha Lavy, a member of youth movement Khmer Thavrak, as he was stepping out of a tuk-tuk taxi at Phnom Penh’s Freedom Park on his way to conduct a peaceful demonstration calling for the release of detained union leader, Rong Chhun.The same day, the authorities charged him with incitement to commit a felony (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and sent him to pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison facility, Correctional Center 1 (CC1). On October 26, 2021, the court sentenced her to 20 months in prison and a two million riels fine (US$500).On November 5, 2021, amid a wave of releases of activists ahead of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) Summit hosted by Cambodia in late November, the authorities released her and suspended the remainder of the prison sentence.On September 7, the Interior Ministry released a statement, instructing authorities to take legal action against members of the Khmer Thavrak youth group and Mother Nature Cambodia environmental organization, accusing both groups of causing “social chaos.”Venerable Keut SarayClick to expand ImageVenerable Keut Saray, 33On September 6, police arrested Venerable Keut Saray, an ordained Buddhist monk and a member of the Active Citizens for Justice youth movement. The Venerable Keut Saray and other activists, including Mean Prom Mony who authorities arrested the same day, had planned a protest at Phnom Penh’s Freedom Park to call for the release of detained union leader Rong Chhun.Upon questioning by the prosecutor and investigating judge at the Phnom Penh municipal court on September 7, on September 8 the court charged him with incitement to commit a felony (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and sent him to pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison facility, Correctional Center 1 (CC1). On October 26, 2021, the court sentenced him to 20 months in prison and a two million riels fine (US$500).On November 5, 2021, amid a wave of releases of activists ahead of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) Summit hosted by Cambodia in late November, the authorities released him and suspended the remainder of the prison sentence.In early August, Phnom Penh Municipal Hall had issued a statement prohibiting the planned gathering, claiming organizers would not be able to control the number of attendees and accusing them of “inciting” members of the public to protest. On September 5, the Active Citizens for Justice announced that they would go forward with their planned gathering between September 7 and September 15.On September 7, as a result of his detention, Venerable Keut Saray was defrocked.Eng Malai (also known as "So Metta"Click to expand ImageEng Malai (also known as So Metta)On the evening of September 7, 2020, police arrested Eng Malai, a member of Khmer Thavrak youth group as she was leaving the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in Phnom Penh. Police followed her from the planned site of a peaceful protest at Phnom Penh’s Freedom Park, calling for the release of detained union leader Rong Chhun and other political prisoners. Preemptively, on the morning of September 7, the authorities deployed hundreds of security forces to Freedom Park, preventing the protest from happening.On the day of the planned protest, the Interior Ministry released a statement, instructing authorities to take legal action against members of the Khmer Thavrak youth group and Mother Nature Cambodia environmental movement, accusing the groups of causing social chaos by organizing the protest.On September 8, the authorities charged Malai with incitement to commit a felony (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and sent her to pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison facility, Correctional Center 2 (CC2). On October 26, 2021, the court sentenced her to 20 months in prison and a fine of two million riels (US$500).On November 8, 2021, amid a wave of releases of activists ahead of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) Summit hosted by Cambodia in late November, the authorities released her and suspended the remainder of the prison sentence.Muong SopheakClick to expand ImageMuong Sopheak, 24On September 10, 2020, Phnom Penh police arrested Muong Sopheak, a youth activist with the Khmer Student Intelligent League Association (KSILA), while he was standing outside the Khmer Will Party headquarters. Sopheak took part in a protest organized by youth activists on September 6 at Phnom Penh’s Freedom Park and participated in delivering a petition to the US Embassy, requesting the embassy intervene in the cases of detained union leader Rong Chhun and other activists.On September 11, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged Sopheak with incitement to commit a felony (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and sent him to pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison facility (Correctional Center 1). On October 26, 2021, the court sentenced him to 20 months in prison and a fine of two million riels (US$500).On November 11, 2021, amid a wave of releases of activists ahead of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) Summit hosted by Cambodia in late November, the authorities released him and suspended the remainder of the prison sentence.Since August, the authorities have arrested over a dozen activists for protest activities calling for the release of Rong Chhun and other political prisoners.Sopheak has spoken up about social injustices and other human rights issues. KSILA is headed by Muong Sony, Sopheak’s brother.Kim TolaClick to expand ImageKim Tola, 35On July 22, 2021, police arrested Kim Tola, a former elected commune chief for the Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Treng Troyeng commune, Phnom Srouch district, Kampong Speu province.The Kampong Speu provincial court charged her with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code). She was placed in pre-trial detention at the Kampong Speu provincial prison.On April 28, 2021, the court convicted and sentenced her to two years in prison and a fine of two million riels (US$500).On November 13, 2021, amid a wave of releases of activists ahead of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) Summit hosted by Cambodia in late November, the authorities released her and suspended the remaining prison sentence.Kim Tola, fearing arrest in Cambodia, had fled to Thailand and lived there since after the CNRP was dissolved in November 2017. Authorities arrested her shortly after her return from Thailand in early 2021.Penh Chan SangkreamClick to expand ImagePenh Chan Sangkream, 47On December 23, 2020, police arrested Penh Chan Sangkream, a former local official with the arbitrarily dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Phnom Penh.The same day, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged him with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1 (Prey Sar) prison. On July 16, 2021, the court sentenced him to 18 months in prison and a fine of three million riels (US$735). However, the court only read out the verdict on July 28.On November 12, 2021, amid a wave of releases of activists ahead of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) Summit hosted by Cambodia in late November, the authorities released him and suspended the remainder of his prison sentence.Penh Chan Sangkream had previously joined several Friday protests in Phnom Penh, organized by family members of detained opposition activists, calling for their release.Hun VannakClick to expand ImageHun VannakOn August 13, 2020, plainclothes officers arrested Hun Vannak as he was walking home from a demonstration and still live-streaming events via Facebook. Vannak is the founder of the youth group Khmer Thavarak and an environmental activist.Vannak was among the approximately 30 peaceful protesters in front of the Phnom Penh court calling for the dropping of charges and immediate release of prominent trade union leader Rong Chhun, who was being questioned by the court on that day.On the same day, the Phnom Penh court charged Vannak with incitement to commit a felony (articles 494 and 495) and sent him to pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1. The authorities accused him of inciting social disorder and insecurity by participating in the protest. On October 26, 2021, the court sentenced him to 20 months in prison and a fine of two million riels (US$500).On November 12, 2021, amid a wave of releases of activists ahead of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) Summit hosted by Cambodia in late November, the authorities released him and suspended the remainder of his prison sentence.Five other activists who protested with Vannak that day were also arrested and brought to the National Police Commission for questioning. Sar Thet, spokesperson for the Phnom Penh Police said to Radio Free Asia that four of the activists were “educated about why they must stop taking part in protests” – which meant authorities forced them to sign pledges that they would not participate in protests in the future.Rong Chhun’s arrest has spurred daily protests in Phnom Penh in which peaceful protesters faced excessive use of force by security forces and plainclothes officers. Footage by Radio Free Asia shows that some of the protesters incurred injuries.This is the third time that authorities arrested Hun Vannak for his peaceful activism. Between 2017 and 2018, he spent five months in prison for documenting suspected illicit sand-dredging – for illegal export as a construction material to other countries in Southeast Asia – off the coast of Cambodia. In May 2020, police detained him for several hours for participating in a peaceful protest calling for debt relief of micro-loan borrowers impacted by the Covid-19 crisis.Chhoeun DaravyClick to expand ImageChhoeun DaravyOn August 13, 2020, Phnom Penh police arrested Chhoeun Daravy, an activist and a member of the youth group Khmer Thavarak. Daravy was one of approximately 30 people who protested peacefully in front of the Phnom Penh court to call for the dropping of charges against prominent union leader Rong Chhun, and his immediate release.On the same day, the Phnom Penh court charged Daravy with incitement to commit a felony (articles 494 and 495) and sent her to pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 2. Specifically, the authorities accused her of inciting social disorder and insecurity by participating in the protest. On October 26, 2021, the court sentenced her to 20 months in prison and a fine of two million riels (US$500).On November 12, 2021, amid a wave of releases of activists ahead of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) Summit hosted by Cambodia in late November, the authorities released her after suspending the remainder of her prison sentence.The Phnom Penh court also issued a search warrant for her phone because she had livestreamed some of the violent dispersal of protesters by the security forces. Security forces dragged Daravy by her hair and threw her into a van after forcibly confiscating her belongings. The police brought her to the headquarters of the National Police Commission. Five other activists who protested with Daravy that day were also arrested and brought in for questioning.Sar Thet, spokesperson for the Phnom Penh Police said to Radio Free Asia that four of the activists were “educated about why they must stop taking part in protests” – which meant that they had to sign written pledges at the police station promising they would not particiate in protests in the future; Daravy and fellow youth and environmental activist Hun Vannak were detained and charged with incitement.Rong Chhun’s arrest has spurred daily protests during which security forces and plainclothes men used force against peaceful protesters. Security forces violently dispersed Daravy and other protesters. Footage by Radio Free Asia shows that some of the protesters incurred injuries from the violence.Soung SophornClick to expand ImageSoung SophornOn August 14, 2020, police arrested Soung Sophorn at his home in Phnom Penh’s Tuol Kork district. Sophorn is the president of the minor political party Khmer Win Party (KWP). The police justified the lack of an arrest warrant by claiming that Sophorn had been caught “red-handed” committing a crime. The authorities accused him of making “false statements” about the demarcations of the Cambodia-Vietnam border.The Phnom Penh court charged him with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and sent him to pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1. On February 10, 2021, the court convicted him and sentenced him to 20 months in prison and ordered him to pay 2 billion Cambodian riel (US$500,000) in damages to the governmental Border Affairs Committee.On November 12, 2021, amid a wave of releases of activists ahead of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) Summit hosted by Cambodia in late November, the authorities released him after suspending the remainder of his prison sentence.On August 10, Sophorn visited the border area in question in Ponhea Krek district, Tbong Khmum province, and posted a Facebook live video commentary in which he alleged there were irregularities in border demarcation.On August 13, Sophorn attend a protest calling for the release of Rong Chhun; the authorities arrested six protesters, two of whom, Chhoeun Daravy and Hun Vannak, are in pre-trial detention on baseless incitement charges.Sophorn is the second person to be arrested in a few weeks regarding comments made about the Vietnam-Cambodia border dispute. Rong Chhun’s claims that farmers had lost land were rejected by the government’s Border Committee as spreading so-called “fake news” on the border issue based on “groundless accusations”; Chhun had previously visited the same area as Sophorn in order to talk with aggrieved villagers. Chhun is in pre-trial detention on baseless incitement charges.Yim LeanghyClick to expand ImageYim Leanghy, 32On June 16, 2021, the police arrested Yim Leanghy in Kandal province. He is an activist affiliated with the Mother Nature Cambodia environmental group, and the arrest apparently arose from his documentation that raw sewage was entering the Tonle Sap River near the Royal Palace.On June 20, the court charged Leanghy with “conspiracy” and lese majeste (“insulting the king”) under articles 453 and 437 bis of Cambodia’s penal code. The court ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1 (CC1).On November 12, 2021, amid a wave of releases of activists ahead of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) Summit hosted by Cambodia in late November, the authorities released Leanghy on bail, but maintained the charges against him as the investigation continued.An Interior Ministry spokesperson alleged the authorities had proof that “rebellious” Mother Nature Cambodia had used foreign funding to try to topple the government, but did not make any evidence public.The authorities also arrested Mother Nature Cambodia activists Ly Chandaravuth and Sun Ratha and charged them, respectively, with conspiracy and with conspiracy and insulting the king (lese majeste). Founder of Mother Nature Cambodia and Spanish national Alejandro Gonzalez-Davidson, who had been deported in 2015, was charged in absentia with conspiracy and lese majeste.Mother Nature Cambodia has repeatedly been subjected to harassment by the authorities.Thun RathaClick to expand ImageThun Ratha, 28At around noon on September 3, 2020, police arrested Thun Ratha, an environmental activist and member of Mother Nature Cambodia. The arrest came after approximately 25 government officials and police surrounded his rented property in Phnom Penh for two hours to ensure he could not escape. As they left with Ratha in custody, the authorities padlocked the house and left a notice on the door informing the public that the arrest was led by the deputy chief of the Phnom Penh municipal police, in cooperation with the department of information, deputy prosecutor and relevant authorities. The notice also stated the arrest concerned allegations that Ratha “published the information without legal permission,” However, the letter did not specify which information was referred to.After questioning by the prosecutor and investigating judge at the Phnom Penh municipal court on September 6, Ratha was charged with incitement to commit a felony (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code). Authorities sent him to pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison facility, Correctional Center 1 (CC1). On May 5, 2021, after eight months in pre-trial detention, the court sentenced Thun Ratha to 20 months in prison and ordered the payment of a fine of four million riels (US$980).On July 19, 2021, the Phnom Penh court additionally charged Thun Ratha, Phoung Keoreaksmey and Long Kunthea with conspiracy under article 453 of the penal code, which are charges connected to a case against environmental rights defenders Sun Ratha, Seth Chhiv Limeng, Ly Chandarvuth, Yim Leanghy, and Alejandro González-Davidson, who have faced charges of conspiracy and “insulting the King” since June 2021.On November 5, the court of appeals upheld Thun Ratha’s conviction but suspended six months of his prison sentence.On November 12, the authorities released him after Thun Ratha’s lawyer requested release on bail while investigations into the additional charges were ongoing.Thun Ratha, Long Kunthea and Phoung Keoreaksmey engaged in peaceful activities that called for attention to the government’s decision to fill Phnom Penh’s Boeung Tamok lake for development purposes, which experts state will destroy the habitat of animal species, set back biodiversity, and cause significant flooding in Phnom Penh.Ly ChandaravuthClick to expand ImageLy Chandaravuth, 22On June 16, 2021, the police arrested Ly Chandaravuth in Phnom Penh. He is an activist affiliated with the Mother Nature Cambodia environmental group, and the arrest apparently arose from his documentation that raw sewage was entering the Tonle Sap River near the Royal Palace.On June 20, the court charged Chandaravuth with “conspiracy” under article 453 of Cambodia’s penal code. The court ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1 (CC1).On November 12, 2021, amid a wave of releases of activists ahead of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) Summit hosted by Cambodia in late November, the authorities released Chandaravuth on bail, but maintained the charges against him while the investigation continues.An Interior Ministry spokesperson alleged the authorities had proof that “rebellious” Mother Nature Cambodia had used foreign funding to try to topple the government, but did not make any evidence public.The authorities also arrested Mother Nature Cambodia activists Yim Leanghy and Sun Ratha and charged them with conspiracy and insulting the king (lese majeste). Founder of Mother Nature Cambodia and Spanish national Alejandro Gonzalez-Davidson, who had been deported in 2015, was charged in absentia with conspiracy and lese majeste.Mother Nature Cambodia has repeatedly been subjected to harassment by the authorities.Long KuntheaClick to expand ImageLong Kunthea, 22On the morning of September 3, 2020, police arrested Long Kunthea, an environmental activist and member of Mother Nature Cambodia, while she was walking from Wat Phnom to Prime Minister Hun Sen’s house where she intended to hand over a petition to raise her concerns over the government’s decision to fill Phnom Penh’s Boeung Tamok lake for development purposes.After questioning by the prosecutor and investigating judge at the Phnom Penh municipal court on September 6, Kunthea was charged with incitement to commit a felony (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code). Authorities sent her to pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison facility, Correctional Center 2 (CC2). On May 5, 2021, the court sentenced Kunthea to 18 months in prison and ordered the payment of a fine of four million riels (US$980).On July 19, 2021, the Phnom Penh court additionally charged Long Kunthea, Phoung Keoreaksmey, and Thun Ratha with conspiracy under article 453 of the penal code, which are charges connected to a case against environmental rights defenders Sun Ratha, Seth Chhiv Limeng, Ly Chandarvuth, Yim Leanghy, and Alejandro González-Davidson, facing these charges of conspiracy and “insulting the King” since June 2021.On November 5, the court of appeal upheld the verdict but suspended four months of the sentence.On November 12, the authorities released her after Kunthea’s lawyer requested release on bail while investigations into the additional charges were ongoing.The same day, the authorities also arrested two other environmental activists, Thun Ratha and Phoung Keoreaksmey; they engaged in peaceful activities that called for attention to the government’s decision to fill Phnom Penh’s Boeung Tamok lake for development purposes, which experts state will destroy the habitat of animal species, set back biodiversity, and cause significant flooding in Phnom Penh.Phoung KeoraksmeyClick to expand ImagePhoung Keoreaksmey, 19On the morning of September 3, 2020, police arrested Phoung Keoreaksmey, an environmental activist and member of Mother Nature Cambodia, while she was walking from Wat Phnom to Prime Minister Hun Sen’s house where fellow activist Long Kunthea intended to hand over a petition to raise her concerns over the government’s decision to fill Phnom Penh’s Boeung Tamok lake for development purposes.After questioning by the prosecutor and investigating judge at the Phnom Penh municipal court on September 6, Keoreaksmey was charged with incitement to commit a felony (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code). Authorities sent her to pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison facility, Correctional Center 2 (CC2). On May 5, 2021, the court sentenced Keoreaksmey to 18 months in prison and ordered the payment of a fine of four million riels (US$980).On July 19, 2021, the Phnom Penh court additionally charged Phoung Keoreaksmey, Thun Ratha and Long Kunthea with conspiracy under article 453 of the penal code, which are charges connected to a case against environmental rights defenders Sun Ratha, Seth Chhiv Limeng, Ly Chandarvuth, Yim Leanghy, and Alejandro González-Davidson, facing these charges of conspiracy and “insulting the King” since June 2021.On November 5, the court of appeal upheld his verdict but suspended four months of the prison sentence.On November 12, the authorities released him after Keoreaksmey’s lawyer requested release on bail while investigations into the additional charges were ongoing.The same day, the authorities arrested also two other environmental activists, Thun Ratha and Long Kunthea; they engaged in peaceful activities that called for attention to the government’s decision to fill Phnom Penh’s Boeung Tamok lake for development purposes, which experts state will destroy the habitat of animal species, set back biodiversity, and cause significant flooding in Phnom Penh.Sun RathaClick to expand ImageSun Ratha, 26On June 16, 2021, the police arrested Sun Ratha in Phnom Penh. She is an activist affiliated with the Mother Nature Cambodia environmental group, and the arrest apparently arose from her documentation that raw sewage was entering the Tonle Sap River near the Royal Palace.On June 20, the court charged Ratha with “conspiracy” and lese majeste (“insulting the king”) under articles 453 and 437 bis of Cambodia’s penal code. The court ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 2 (CC2). On November 5, the Phnom Penh court of appeal suspended part of Ratha’s sentence, rendering her eligible for release.On November 12, 2021, amid a wave of releases of activists ahead of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) Summit hosted by Cambodia in late November, the authorities released Ratha on bail while the charges remain and investigations continue.An Interior Ministry spokesperson alleged the authorities had proof that “rebellious” Mother Nature Cambodia had used foreign funding to try to topple the government, but did not make any evidence public.The authorities also arrested Mother Nature Cambodia activists Ly Chandaravuth and Yim Leanghy and charged them, respectively, with conspiracy and with conspiracy and insulting the king (lese majeste). Founder of Mother Nature Cambodia and Spanish national Alejandro Gonzalez-Davidson, who had been deported in 2015, was charged in absentia with conspiracy and lese majeste.Mother Nature Cambodia has repeatedly been subjected to harassment by the authorities.RELEASED, CHARGES DROPPED, SENTENCE SERVED, PARDONEDHeng SokHeng SokReleased on August 28, 2018On February 23, 2018, Heng Sok, a community representative for families involved in a land dispute in Kiri Sakor district, Koh Kong province, was detained and brought to the Koh Kong provincial police station by security forces working for Ly Yong Phat (LYP) Group, a business empire owned by powerful Cambodian People’s Party Senator Ly Yong Phat. Police arrested him based on a complaint filed by LYP Group about Heng Sok’s effort to demarcate a land boundary in a dispute between 50 local families and the LYP Group. The dispute concerns 103 hectares of land granted to the LYP Group as part of an agricultural economic land concession inside the Botum Sakor National Park. On February 25, 2018, the Koh Kong provincial court charged Heng Sok with use of violence against a possessor in good faith of immovable property (article 253 of the Land Management Law) and sent him to pre-trial detention. On August 21, 2018, the Koh Kong provincial court convicted Sok and sentenced him to 18 months in prison.Heng Sok was released on May 28, 2019, after serving his prison sentence.Rath Rott MonyRath Rott Mony, 47On December 7, 2018, Thai authorities detained Rath Rott Mony, a dissident and former president of the Cambodian Construction Workers Trade Union Federation (CCFTUF), who had fled Cambodia because he feared arrest. Thai immigration officials acted based on a Cambodian government request to return Mony for prosecution.Cambodian authorities charged Mony based on his role supporting the Russia Today documentary “My Mother Sold Me,” which includes accounts of poverty-stricken families sending their daughters to engage in sex work. Cambodian authorities accused the documentary makers of paying the featured girls and their mothers to lie on camera as part of an effort to harm Cambodia’s reputation.On December 12, the Thai government deported Mony to Cambodia. Cambodian authorities detained him at Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison. The court charged him with “incitement to discriminate” (article 496 of Cambodia’s Criminal Code), a charge commonly used by Cambodian authorities to silence critics. The Phnom Penh municipal court denied his bail request, and on January 31, 2019, the Phnom Penh Appeal Court upheld that denial.Human Rights Watch obtained a copy of a letter issued by Russia Today’s head of documentary department, Ekaterina Yakovleva, addressed to the Embassy of Cambodia in Moscow. The letter clarified Mony’s role in the production of the documentary. It stressed that during the period from January 22 to February 6, 2018, Mony acted as an interpreter, local fixer and liaison on the crew’s behalf with the Cambodian authorities. The letter further clarified Russia Today had received written consent from all Cambodian interviewees featured in the documentary. The letter stated the entire editing process of the documentary was done in Russia by Russia Today staff, and not by Mony, who was simply a consultant.These statements contradict the allegations made on June 12 by the trial judge of the municipal court, which indicated that Mony had been involved in the production of the documentary.On March 25, 2019, the investigating judge announced the closure of his judicial investigation and sent the case to trial. On May 30, the Phnom Penh municipal court held the first trial hearing. After three hours, which focused on Rath Rott Mony’s relationship with Moscow’s RT news service and his exact role in the production of “My Mother Sold Me,” the judge postponed the hearing until June 12, citing the absence of the two plaintiffs listed in the complaint, Tep Salin and her daughter Lim Sreyty, who is featured in the documentary. Mony repeated that he was merely providing translations and had no input in the content of the documentary. Mony’s lawyers had objected because they were denied an opportunity to question the plaintiff. On June 12, the two plaintiffs, Tep Salin and Lim Sreyty appeared in court, accusing Mony of promising to help them set up a hairdresser salon and laundry business in Phnom Penh in return for their testimony in the documentary. Changing their story – the mother never sold her daughter – they sought US$10,000 in damages from Mony.On June 26, the court convicted Mony of “incitement to discriminate” (article 496 of Cambodia’s Criminal Code) and sentenced him to two years in prison, and imposed a 70 million Cambodian riel (US$17,500) compensation payment that Mony must pay to the two plaintiffs. The verdict was delivered rapidly, in approximately 10 minutes in a courtroom filled with journalists, diplomats, and UN and NGO staffers.In July 2020, the Supreme Court ordered Mony’s retrial, finding that the Appeal Court’s decision in December 2019 to uphold his conviction was “incorrect.”On December 11, 2020, the authorities released him upon completion of his two-year prison sentence. While released, his case remains open pending the judicial appeals process.Chhun SithiChhun SithiSentenced: 1 yearChhun Sithi, a CNRP commune councilor in Stung Kach commune, Pailin province, was arrested on October 24, 2017, a day after he posted a video clip on social media with a message to Prime Minister Hun Sen stating that he would not defect to the ruling Cambodian People’s Party (CPP) even if the main opposition party, the CNRP, was dissolved or he was stripped of his position. On March 23, 2018, the Pailin Provincial Court convicted him of inciting the commission of a felony (article 495 of the Criminal Code) and insulting a public official (article 502). The court sentenced him to one year in prison with a fine of eight million riels (US$2,000).Sithi was released on October 24, 2018, after completing his sentence.An BathamAn Batham, 37Released on August 28, 2018An Batham is a Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) youth member. He is one of the 14 officials, supporters, and activists of Cambodia’s dissolved opposition party, the CNRP, and was convicted of politically motivated insurrection charges for events that occurred in July 2014 during a CNRP-led protest. On July 21, 2015, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court convicted Batham of participating in an insurrectionary movement (articles 456 and 457 of the Criminal Code), in a trial that did not meet international fair trial standards, and sentenced him to seven years in prison. On May 20, 2018, the Phnom Penh Court of Court of Appeal upheld both his conviction and prison sentence.On August 28, 2018, Batham was released after a royal pardon granted by King Norodom Sihamoni.Hin Van SreypovHeng Leakhena, 37Senteced: 1 yearHeng Leakhena (also known as Hin Van Sreypov), a former CNRP member, was arrested on July 12, 2017, at a local bus station after she had posted on Facebook a video in which she accused Prime Minister Hun Sen of ordering the murder of prominent political commentator Kem Ley. On January 11, 2018, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court convicted her of inciting the commission of a felony (article 495 of the Criminal Code) and sentenced her to one-year in prison and a one million riel fine (US$250).On July 13, 2018, Sreypov was released from prison after serving her prison sentence.James RicketsonJames Ricketson, 69Sentenced: 6 yearsJames Ricketson, an Australian filmmaker, was arrested on June 3, 2017, on fabricated charges of “stealing information.” Authorities photographed him flying a drone without a permit over a political rally staged by the CNRP. On June 9, 2017, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court charged Ricketson with espionage (article 446 of the Criminal Code), claiming he gathered information for a foreign power that could damage national security. After a seven-day trial, on August 31, 2018, the Phnom Penh Court convicted him of espionage (articles 439 and 446) and sentenced him to six years in prison.A month after his conviction, on September 21, Ricketson was granted a royal pardon by King Sihamoni. The government deported Ricketson to Australia the following evening. On September 25, Immigration Department chief Kem Sarin referred to a 2016 decree on deportation saying that “a person convicted of a crime in Cambodia is permanently barred from entering the Kingdom.” Ricketson had resided for over 23 years in Cambodia prior to his deportation.Ke KhimKe Khim, 35Released on August 28, 2018Ke Khim is a CNRP supporter. He is one of the 14 members of Cambodia’s now-dissolved CNRP convicted of politically motivated insurrection charges for events that occurred in July 2014 during a CNRP-led protest. On July 21, 2015, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court sentenced him to seven years in prison for participating in an insurrectionary movement (articles 456 and 457 of the Criminal Code) in a trial that did not meet international fair trial standards. After hearings from April 21 to 23, 2018, the Phnom Penh Court of Appeal ruled on May 20 to uphold both the conviction and prison sentence.On August 28, 2018, Khim was released after a royal pardon granted by King Norodom Sihamoni.Khin ChamreunKhin Chamreun, 34Released on August 28, 2018Khin Chamreun is a CNRP Phnom Penh youth chief. He is one of the 14 officials, supporters and activists of the dissolved CNRP who were convicted on politically motivated insurrection charges for helping lead a CNRP-led protest in July 2014. The Phnom Penh Municipal Court convicted Chamreun in July 2015 of participating in and leading an “insurrectionary” movement (articles 456, 457, and 459 of the Criminal Code) in a trial that did not meet international fair trial standards. The court sentenced him to 20 years in prison. In April 2018, the Phnom Penh Court of Appeal upheld both his conviction and prison sentence.On August 28, 2018, Chamreun was released after a royal pardon granted by King Norodom Sihamoni.Kim SokKim Sok, 37Released on August 17, 2018, after serving his prison sentenceKim Sok, a political commentator, was arrested on February 17, 2017, and charged with criminal defamation and incitement based on a complaint filed by Prime Minister Hun Sen. The charges stemmed from an interview he gave to Radio Free Asia in which he alluded to the alleged involvement of the ruling CPP in the murder of prominent political commentator Kem Ley in July 2016. On August 10, 2017, a court convicted Sok of defamation (article 305 of the Criminal Code) and inciting the commission of a felony (articles 494 and 495) and sentenced him to 18 months in prison and a fine of 8 million riels (US$2,000) to be paid to the government and 800 million riels ($200,000) in damages to be paid to the CPP. On November 17, 2017, the Court of Appeal upheld both his conviction and sentence. On July 2, 2018, the Supreme Court also upheld the verdict. A second defamation complaint filed by Hun Sen is pending at the Phnom Penh Municipal Court.On August 17, 2018, Kim Sok was released after serving his sentence. After his release Kim Sok said he would continue to speak out against the government and in favor of democracy. On August 28, a Phnom Penh judge issued a summons for Kim Sok to appear on September 14 on second charges of defamation and incitement. Kim Sok fled Cambodia to avoid arrest and reportedly because of threats made to his young daughter. In October 2018, Finland granted him asylum.Meach SovannaraMeach Sovannara, 47Released on August 28, 2018Meach Sovannara was a CNRP candidate for parliament from Banteay Meanchey province and is a dual Cambodian and US national. He is one of the 14 officials, supporters and activists of Cambodia’s now-dissolved opposition CNRP convicted of politically motivated insurrection charges connected to July 2014 protests in Phnom Penh. On July 21, 2015, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court convicted Sovannara of participating in and leading an insurrectionary movement (articles 456, 457, and 459 of the criminal code), in a trial that did not meet international fair trial standards. The court sentenced him to 20 years in prison. The Phnom Penh Court of Appeal upheld his conviction and sentence on May 20, 2018.On March 26, 2018, Prime Minister Hun Sen scolded officials of Correctional Center 1 for allegedly allowing Sovannara to use a mobile phone in prison and ordered them to remove it “immediately,” while telling Sovannara he would never “come out.”On August 28, 2018, Sovannara was released after a royal pardon granted by King Norodom Sihamoni.Neang SokhunNeang Sokhun, 34Released on August 28, 2018Neang Sokhun is a CNRP Chhbar Ampov district youth leader. He is one of the 14 officials, supporters and activists of the now-dissolved CNRP convicted of politically motivated insurrection charges in connection with July 2014 protests led by the CNRP. The Phnom Penh Municipal court convicted Sokhun on July 21, 2015, on charges of participating in an insurrectionary movement (articles 456 and 457 of the criminal code). The Phnom Penh Court of Appeal upheld his conviction and sentence on May 20, 2018.On August 28, 2018, Sokhun was released after a royal pardon granted by King Norodom Sihamoni.Oeur NarithOeur Narith, 38Released on August 28, 2018Oeur Narith is one of the 14 CNRP officials, supporters and activists convicted of politically motivated insurrection charges in connection with a CNRP-led protest in July 2014 in Phnom Penh. The Phnom Penh Municipal Court convicted Narith, a CNRP public affairs officer, of participating in and leading an insurrectionary movement (articles 456, 457, and 459 of the criminal code), in a trial that violated the defendant’s fair trial rights and sentenced him to 20 years’ imprisonment. The Phnom Penh Court of Appeal upheld the conviction and sentence in a ruling released on May 20, 2018.On August 28, 2018, Narith was released after a royal pardon granted by King Norodom Sihamoni.Ouk Pich SamnangOuk Pich Samnang, 54Released on August 28, 2018Ouk Pich Samnang is one of the 14 officials, supporters and activists of the now-dissolved CNRP convicted on politically motivated insurrection charges in connection with a CNRP-led protest in July 2014. The Phnom Penh Municipal Court found him guilty of participating in an insurrectionary movement (articles 456 and 457 of the Criminal Code) and sentenced him to seven years in prison. Both the conviction and prison sentence were upheld by the Phnom Penh Court of Appeal on May 20, 2018.Authorities harassed Samnang in a separate case related to an October 2014 protest outside Hun Sen’s house. A farming community from Preah Vihear province protested and demanded that the government help solve their land dispute. On September 10, 2015, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court convicted Samnang of committing intentional violence and obstructing authorities despite the prosecutors’ failure to present evidence of wrongdoing. The judge sentenced him to two years in prison and ordered him to pay 10 million riels (US$2,500) in damages to pay for medical treatment of injured security guards and damaged Daun Penh district security equipment. On July 20, 2016, the Phnom Penh Court of Appeal upheld his conviction and prison sentence.On August 28, 2018, Samnang was released after a royal pardon granted by King Norodom Sihamoni.Roeun ChetraRoeun Chetra, 34Released on August 28, 2018Roeun Chetra is a CNRP youth member. He is one of the 14 officials, supporters and activists of the now-dissolved opposition CNRP who was convicted of politically motivated insurrection charges for events that occurred in July 2014 during a CNRP-led protest. Authorities arrested Chetra, on August 4, 2015. On June 13, 2016, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court convicted him of participation in an insurrectionary movement (article 457 of the Criminal Code), intentional acts of violence (article 218) and inciting the commission of a felony (article 495), in a trial that did not meet international fair trial standards and sentenced him to seven years’ imprisonment.On August 28, 2018, Chetra was released after a royal pardon granted by King Norodom Sihamoni.San KimhengSan Kimheng, 31Released on August 28, 2018San Kimheng is a CNRP district youth leader from Tuol Kork in Phnom Penh. He is one of the 14 officials, supporters and activists of the now-dissolved CNRP convicted of politically motivated insurrection for events that occurred in July 2014 during a CNRP-led protest. On July 21, 2015, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court convicted Kimheng of participating in an insurrectionary movement (articles 456 and 457 of the Criminal Code), in a trial that did not meet international fair trial standards and sentenced him to seven years in prison. After appeal hearings from April 21 to 23, 2018, the Phnom Penh Court of Appeal upheld both the conviction and prison sentence on May 20.On August 28, 2018, Kimheng was released after a royal pardon granted by King Norodom Sihamoni.San SeihakSan Seihak, 31Recently ReleasedSan Seikhak is a CNRP youth member. He is one of the 14 officials, supporters and activists of the now-dissolved CNRP convicted of politically motivated insurrection charges for events that occurred in July 2014 during a CNRP-led protest. Along with the others, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court convicted Seikhak on July 21, 2015, of participating in an insurrectionary movement (articles 456 and 457 of the Criminal Code), in a trial that did not meet international fair trial standards. The court sentenced Seikhak to seven years in prison. After appeal hearings from April 21 to 23, 2018, the Phnom Penh Court of Appeal on May 20 upheld both the conviction and prison sentence.On August 28, 2018, Seikhak was released after a royal pardon granted by King Norodom Sihamoni.Sourn Serey RathaSourn Serey Ratha, 44Released on August 23, 2018Sourn Serey Ratha, a dual Cambodian-US citizen, is the founder and president of the Khmer People Power Movement (KPPM) and later the Khmer Power Party (KPP). He was arrested on August 13, 2017 for criticizing the deployment of Cambodian troops to the Lao border during a trip by Prime Minister Hun Sen to Laos in mid-2017 to settle a border dispute between the two countries. On August 14, authorities charged Ratha with inciting military personnel to disobedience (article 471 of the Criminal Code), demoralizing the army (article 472) and inciting the commission of a felony (articles 494). On August 25, 2017, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court convicted Ratha and sentenced him to five years in prison and fined him 10 million riels (US$2,500). On October 12, 2017, the Court of Appeal upheld his conviction. On May 18, 2018, the Supreme Court also did.The government has labelled Ratha’s KPPM party a terrorist group. While in self-imposed exile in 2015, a court convicted Ratha in absentia for endangering government institutions or violating the integrity of the national territory (article 453) and of using force or violence to deter eligible voters from voting (article 124 of the Law on Election of Members of the National Assembly). The court sentenced him to seven years in prison. Upon Hun Sen’s request, King Sihamoni pardoned Ratha on July 10, 2015, thereby allowing him to return to Cambodia without fear of imprisonment. In March 2015, the Ministry of Interior gave permission to Ratha to form a political party to contest in the elections: Ratha formed the Khmer Power Party.In December 2015, Ratha filed a complaint against Foreign Minister Hor Namhong for defamation and incitement because the minister had failed to write an official apology letter, recanting his allegation that his KPP party had committed terrorist acts.On May 15, 2018, Ratha posted a letter on his Facebook page, apologizing to Prime Minister Hun Sen and the Royal Armed Forces and seeking a pardon. He was released on August 23, 2018 after a royal pardon granted by King Norodom Sihamoni based on a request by Prime Minister Hun Sen.Sum PuthySum Puthy, 50Released on August 28, 2018Sum Puthy is a CNRP Chhbar Ampov district council member. He is one of the 14 officials, supporters and activists of Cambodia’s now-dissolved CNRP convicted of politically motivated insurrection charges for events that occurred in July 2014 during a CNRP-led protest. With the others, Puthy was tried on July 21, 2015 in a judicial process that did not meet international fair trial standards. The Phnom Penh Municipal Court convicted Puthy of participating in an insurrectionary movement (articles 456 and 457 of the Criminal Code) and sentenced him to seven years’ imprisonment. After appeal hearings from April 21 to 23, 2018, the Court of Appeal on May 20 upheld both his conviction and prison sentence.On August 28, 2018, Puthy was released after a royal pardon granted by King Norodom Sihamoni.Tep NarinTep Narin, 31Released on August 28, 2018Tep Narin is a CNRP youth member. He is one of the 14 officials, supporters and activists of Cambodia’s now-dissolved CNRP convicted of politically motivated insurrection charges for events that occurred during a July 2014 CNRP-led protest. On July 21, 2015, Narin was convicted by the Phnom Penh Municipal Court of participating in an “insurrectionary” movement (articles 456 and 457 of the Criminal Code), in a speedy trial that violated the defendant’s fair trial rights and sentenced to seven years’ imprisonment. After appeal hearings from April 21 to 23, 2018, the Phnom Penh Court of Appeal upheld on May 20 both the conviction and prison sentence.On August 28, 2018, Narin was released after a royal pardon granted by King Norodom Sihamoni.Tep VannyTep Vanny, 36Released on August 20, 2018, but convicted four days later in a separate case – enforcement of that suspended prison sentence is pending appealTep Vanny is a prominent community land rights activist in Phnom Penh and the recipient of the 2013 Vital Voices Global Leadership Award.Vanny long opposed the government’s now completed plan to drain Boeung Kak lake for high-end residences and commercial properties, which the city rented to Shukaku Inc., a private company led by ruling CPP Senator Lao Meng Khin. Authorities arrested her on August 15, 2016, during a peaceful protest. On August 22, 2016, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court convicted Vanny and Bov Sophea, a fellow community member, of insulting a public official (article 502 of the Criminal Code) and sentenced them both to the six days they had already served in pre-trial detention.The authorities then restarted long-dormant politically motivated charges against Vanny. On September 19, 2016, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court convicted Vanny and three other Boeung Kak lake community members (Kong Chantha, Bo Chhorvy, and Heng Mom) for obstructing a public official with aggravating circumstances and insulting a public official (articles 502 and 504) and sentenced them to six months in prison. The charges stemmed from their participation in a protest in November 2011 outside the Phnom Penh municipality office, where they demanded justice in the Boeung Kak land dispute. On February 23, 2017, the Court of Appeal upheld their conviction and prison sentence. On December 8, 2017, the Supreme Court agreed, though the Supreme Court’s presiding judge left the enforcement of the prison sentence to the discretion of the prosecutor, so none of the four women have yet served their prison sentence.For Vanny’s participation in a protest outside Hun Sen’s house in March 2013, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court convicted her on February 23, 2017 of intentional violence with aggravating circumstances (article 218) and sentenced her to two and a half years in prison and a fine of 5 million riels (approximately US$1,250). The court also ordered Vanny to pay compensation of 9 million riels (approximately $2,250) to two security guards, the plaintiffs who alleged injury. The court denied consideration of video evidence showing that the two security guards were responsible for the violence, in a trial that otherwise did not meet international fair trial standards. On August 8, 2017, the Phnom Penh Court of Appeal upheld the ruling, as did the Supreme Court on February 8, 2018.On August 23, 2018, Tep Vanny was released after a royal pardon granted by King Norodom Sihamoni. Four days later, on August 27, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court convicted her and five fellow community members of making death threats related to a community dispute. Although the complainant retracted her complaint, the prosecutor and investigating judge continued to pursue the case. The court sentenced all six to suspended six-month prison sentences; the suspension is conditional for five years, during which the sentence may be enforced against any of the defendants who are found guilty of having committed a crime.Um Sam AnUm Sam An, 44Released on August 25, 2018Um Sam An is a dual US-Cambodian national and a former Member of Parliament of the now-dissolved CNRP. In May 2015, Sam An left Cambodia for the United States to seek evidence that would substantiate his allegations that Prime Minister Hun Sen had used the wrong maps to demarcate the Cambodia-Vietnam border. He was arrested on his return to Cambodia on April 11, 2016, on the basis of a post he made on Facebook that included his findings on the politically contentious dispute. Although covered by parliamentary immunity, prosecutors used a loophole in the law – permitting prosecutions for crimes in flagrante delicto (caught in the act), to bring him to trial. The Phnom Penh Municipal Court convicted Sam An on October 10, 2016 of inciting the commission of a felony (article 495 of the Criminal Code) and inciting racial discrimination (article 496) and sentenced him to two and a half years in prison. The court also fined him 4 million riels (US$1000). On October 27, 2017, the Supreme Court upheld his conviction and prison sentence. After further appeals, the Supreme Court again upheld the conviction and prison sentence.On August 25, 2018, Sam An was released after a royal pardon granted by King Norodom Sihamoni.Horn SophannyHorn Sophanny, 25Sentenced: 2 yearsVenerable Horn Sophanny is an activist member of the Independent Monk Network for Social Justice, a group led by monk But Buntenh. Authorities arrested and defrocked Sophanny on June 21, 2017. He was charged with illegal possession of a weapon after he had posted a photo of himself on social media posing with a toy gun, accompanied by a statement that he needed a gun to protect himself from what he called Prime Minister Hun Sen’s upcoming “civil war” during the 2018 elections. On December 19, 2017, the Battambang Provincial Court convicted Sophanny of inciting the commission of a felony (article 495 of the Criminal Code) and sentenced him to two years in prison.On June 21, 2019, authorities released Sophanny after he completed his sentence.Uon ChhinUon Chhin, 49Released on bail August 21, 2018Uon Chhin, a former Radio Free Asia (RFA) cameraman, was arrested on November 14, 2017, in Phnom Penh, on the same day as his colleague Yeang Sothearin. The arrests occurred two months after the RFA shut down its Cambodia operations, alleging government harassment of its reporters. Prosecutors filed baseless espionage charges, accusing Chhin and Sothearin of illegally setting up a broadcast studio with the purpose of continuing to file news reports for RFA’s headquarters in Washington, DC. On November 18, 2017, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court formally charged Chhin with supplying a foreign state with information prejudicial to Cambodia’s national defense (article 445 of the Criminal Code). If convicted, he faces between 7 to 15 years in prison. The court has repeatedly denied his bail requests.In March 2018, prosecutors brought unfounded charges against Chhin and Sothearin that they produced pornography in violation of the Law on the Suppression of Human Trafficking and Sexual Exploitation. If convicted of these additional charges, they face 16 years in prison.While Chhin was released on August 21, 2018, the charges against him were not dropped.On March 15, 2019, the investigating judge issued a closing order to end his judicial investigation, and sent Chhin’s and Sothearin’s cases to trial. On July 26, 2019, the judge of the Phnom Penh court scheduled the first trial hearing. On July 26, the trial began and was continued on August 9. The verdict related to their espionage charges will be delivered on August 30. The second set of charges will be heard on August 30.Yeang SothearinYeang Sothearin, 35Released on bail August 21, 2018Yeang Sothearin, Radio Free Asia’s (RFA) former Phnom Penh bureau office manager and a news editor, was arrested on November 14, 2017, in Phnom Penh on the same day as his colleague Uon Chhin. The arrests occurred two months after the RFA shut down its Cambodia operations, alleging government harassment of its reporters. Prosecutors filed baseless espionage charges, accusing Sothearin and Chhin of illegally setting up a broadcast studio with the purpose of continuing to file news reports for RFA’s headquarters in Washington, DC. The Phnom Penh Municipal Court charged Sothearin on November 18, 2017, with supplying a foreign state with information prejudicial to Cambodia’s national defense (article 445 of the Criminal Code). He faces 7 to 15 years in prison if convicted and has been repeatedly denied bail since his arrest.In March 2018, prosecutors brought unfounded charges against Chhin and Sothearin that they produced pornography in violation of the Law on the Suppression of Human Trafficking and Sexual Exploitation. If convicted of these additional charges, they face 16 years in prison.While Sothearin was released on August 21, 2018, the charges against him were not dropped.On March 15, 2019, the investigating judge issued a closing order and ended his judicial investigation, and sent Sothearin’s and Chhin’s case to trial. On July 26, 2019, the judge of the Phnom Penh court scheduled the first trial hearing. On July 26, the trial began and was continued on August 9. The verdict related to their espionage charges will be delivered on August 30. The second set of charges will be heard on August 30.Yea ThongYea Thong, 27Released on August 28, 2018Yea Thong is a CNRP youth member. He is one of the 14 officials, supporters and activists of the dissolved CNRP convicted of politically motivated insurrection charges connected to events during a CNRP-led protest in July 2014. Authorities arrested him on August 4, 2015. The Phnom Penh Municipal Court convicted him on June 13, 2016, on charges of participation in an insurrectionary movement (article 457 of the Criminal Code), intentional acts of violence (article 218) and inciting the commission of a felony (article 495) and sentenced him to seven years in prison after a trial that did not meet international fair trial standards.On August 28, 2018, Thong was released after a royal pardon granted by King Norodom Sihamoni.Yun KimhourYun Kimhour, 29Released on August 28, 2018Yun Kimhour is a CNRP youth member. He is one of the 14 officials, supporters and activists of the now-dissolved CNRP convicted of politically motivated insurrection charges connected to a July 2014 CNRP-led protest. Authorities arrested him on August 4, 2015. On June 13, 2016, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court convicted Kimhour of participating in an insurrectionary movement (article 457 of the Criminal Code), intentional acts of violence (article 218), and inciting the commission of a felony (article 495) and sentenced to seven years in prison. The trial failed to meet international fair trial standards.On August 28, 2018, Kimhour was released after a royal pardon granted by King Norodom Sihamoni.Ban SamphyBan Samphy, 70On May 13, 2018, Ban Samphy, former head of the CNRP in Siem Reap province, shared a post on Facebook that included a photo of Prime Minister Hun Sen and his wife, Bun Rany, and a photo of King Norodom Sihamoni, accompanied by a video clip of angry villagers affected by flooding. His post compared the king unfavorably to Cambodia’s former kings. On May 20, 2018, the police in Chikreng district, Kampong Kdey commune, Siem Reap province, arrested Samphy and questioned him. The investigating judge of the Siem Reap Provincial Court charged Samphy the same day with “insult of the king” (article 437 bis of Cambodia’s Criminal Code), which carries a punishment of up to five years in prison. He is currently in pre-trial detention.On October 4, a court in Siem Reap convicted Samphy of lese majeste and sentenced him to one year in prison. The sentence would require him to serve seven months in prison and suspend the remaining five months.However, on January 28, 2019, the Court of Appeals conducted a hearing in Samphy’s absence. During the hearing, the deputy prosecutor appealed to the judge to impose a heftier sentence on Samphy. Siem Reap provincial court spokesperson Yin clarified that due to the prosecutor’s appeal complaint, Samphy could not be released. On February 12, 2019, the Appeal Court sentenced him to a one-year prison term, two months of which were suspended. Prison authorities released Samphy on March 22.Kheang NavyKheang Navy, 50Kheang Navy, a primary school headteacher in Cambodia’s Kampong Thom province, was arrested on May 13, 2018. Police questioned him for hours without a lawyer present. He remains in pre-trial detention and faces 1-5 five years in prison, a large fine for a May 12, 2018 social media post blaming the king and the Cambodian royal family for the 2017 dissolution of Cambodia’s main opposition party, the CNRP, as well as for the “loss of Khmer land.” Navy allegedly posted the comment on the Facebook page of a Kampong Thom government official who had attended a celebration of King Norodom Sihamoni’s birthday in Kampong Thom province. Under article 437 bis, the new lese majeste law, prosecutors may bring a criminal lawsuit on behalf of the monarchy against anyone deemed to have insulted the royal family.On October 1, 2018, the Kampong Thom provincial court convicted Navy of lese majeste. The court sentenced him to two years in prison, with the first six months in prison and the rest of the sentence suspended. On November 13, 2018, Navy was released from prison.Hun YuthHun Yuth, 36On July 18, 2019, Siem Reap police arrested Hun Yuth (also known as Thon Yuth), a supporter of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Siem Reap province. Yuth has a disability resulting from polio. He had criticized Prime Minister Hun Sen on his Facebook account alleging that Hun Sen’s claims in Geneva that he protects human rights in Cambodia do not match his actions inside Cambodia. He also criticized Hun Sen’s anti-drug measures. Yuth had also previously shared videos, in which he commented on other social issues in Cambodia, such as the European Union’s withdrawal process of its preferential “Everything But Arms” (EBA) trade scheme for Cambodia.On July 19, the Siem Reap provincial court charged Yuth with incitement to commit a felony and public insult (articles 494, 495 and 307 of Cambodia’s penal code). On August 6, the investigating judge decided to send the case to trial. After a trial hearing on October 3, the Siem Reap judge sentenced him to 18 months’ imprisonment on October 31. Authorities imprisoned Yuth at Siem Reap provincial prison.On December 26, the Court of Appeal ordered his release on December 31, after serving five months and eight days of his sentence. The court suspended the rest of the 18 months’ prison sentence based on Yuth’s disability, his changed behavior to a “good person” who can “adapt to society,” as well as Yuth’s acceptance that he had gone “too far.”Mai HongsreangMai Hongsreang, 38On July 30, 2019 at 8 a.m., Phnom Penh police arrested Mai Hongsreang, a former member of the CNRP in Preah Sihanouk province. Hongsreang had fled to Thailand in May 2019 fearing his arrest; shortly after his return police arrested him. Hongsreang had posted a comment on Facebook about the infighting between Prime Minister Hun Sen and Interior Minister Sar Kheng. In a more recent Facebook post he commented on Hun Sen’s health condition stating: “If you are sick, be true to yourself. When I am sick I still smile and accept the truth. Don’t get away from national duties and take photos with your grandchild happily. Is my nation not as worthy as your grandchild? You are surviving because you plunder the nation,” Before his arrest, he posted how he had escaped the police. The Ministry of Interior’s Anti-Cybercrime Department questioned Hongsreang before he appeared before the Phnom Penh municipal court, which charged him with incitement to commit a felony and insult (articles 307 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention.In the midst of a Cambodian government crackdown on the opposition ahead of July 2018 general elections, hundreds of opposition members fled abroad out of fear of arbitrary arrest. From January to June 2019 over 150 CNRP activists and members were summoned to court or police stations for questioning.On September 26, 2019, the Phnom Penh municipal court conducted a one-day trial and on October 10, issued a guilty verdict, convicting Hongsreang of “incitement to commit a felony” (article 495 of Cambodia’s penal code). The court sentenced him to 18 months in prison. On April 3, 2020, Hongsreang was released from prison after serving his prison sentence.Mong PhyMong PhyOn June 16, 2019, police arrested Mong Phy, a former elected Ou Saom commune council member for the CNRP. The same day, police arrested Prak Ren, a former elected Pramaoy commune council member for the CNRP. On June 13, police arrested Nem Nath, another former Pramaoy commune election candidate for the CNRP. Within 72 hours of their respective arrests, the Pursat provincial court charged all six with illegal clearing of state land (article 94 of Cambodia Forestry Law 2002).On the evening of May 28, 2019, a group of mixed commune, district and provincial police officers arrested former Ou Saom commune election candidate for the CNRP in Pursat province, Chan Sophal. The same evening, police officers arrested Touch Sam Ath, a former Pramaoy commune election candidate for the CNRP in Pursat province, and Noeun Nim, another former Ou Saom commune election candidate for the CNRP. The men are currently being held at Pursat provincial prison. Authorities allege the two men were involved in encroaching on state forest land and illegal logging.On December 17, 2020, the authorities released Mong Phy on bail after he spent 18 months in pre-trial detention. However, the charges against him were not dropped and his trial continues.None of these six former local CNRP officials owns land in the area they are accused to have illegally cleared land. Chan Sophal was known to hold dinners at his house, bringing together members of the opposition, including the five.Prime Minister Hun Sen government has increased harassment of the opposition in 2019, with over 147 police or court summons issued against members and supporters of the CNRP based on allegations that they violated the Supreme Court decision that dissolved the CNRP in November 2017. Many former local members and supporters continue to be vocal on social media, expressing support for leading figures of the CNRP who are currently in exile.Net SaoNet Sao, 65On April 7, 2017, a group of military police and soldiers arrested Net Sao, a former CNRP Krayear commune councilor in Kampong Thom province, along with land rights activist and local CNRP supporter, Sun Chan NoeurnNet Sao ran as a commune chief candidate for the CNRP during the June 2017 commune council elections. He also intervened on behalf of several communities affected by land disputes in Krayear commune. Authorities arrested him while he was speaking to a group of community members and transported him to the provincial forestry department for questioning. The investigation focused on allegations he had disturbed and obstructed the work of law enforcement officers. On April 9, Kampong Thom provincial court formally charged him and Sun Chan Noeurn and sent both to pre-trial detention. On January 24, 2018, the same court convicted both Net Sao and Sun Chan Noeurn of obstructing deliberate duties and operations of officials (article 100 of the Forestry Law) and intentional violence (article 217 of the Cambodian Criminal Code) and sentenced both to three years in prison. On July 19, the Court of Appeal upheld the verdict.On April 8, 2020, the authorities released him from prison upon completion of his prison sentence.Pan SoksovannyPan Soksovanny, 40On February 2, 2019, after being followed by plainclothes police close to Phnom Penh Central Market, a group of military and Ministry of Interior police officers arrested Pan Soksovanny, a former opposition CNRP member from Krang Thnong commune, Pur Sunchey district, Phnom Penh. The arrest was carried out without an arrest warrant, and officials questioned him for two days at Phnom Penh National Police Commissariat. On February 3, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged Soksovanny with public defamation and incitement to commit felony (articles 307 and 495 of the Criminal Code). Soksovanny allegedly had made posts critical of the government on Facebook, and expressed his support for acting CNRP president Sam Rainsy.On September 13, 2019, the court convicted him and sentenced him to 18 months in prison.On August 3, 2020, the authorities released him from prison upon completion of his prison sentence.Phut Thona LornPhut Thona LornOn March 11, 2020, Siem Reap police arrested Phut Thona Lorn (also known as Lorn Ly –32 years old), a supporter of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP). The authorities accused him of spreading what the government called fake news about the coronavirus outbreak. On March 12, the Siem Reap provincial court charged him with spreading false information (article 425 of Cambodia’s criminal code).On May 21, 2020, the Siem Reap court convicted and sentenced him to one year in prison. On December 21, 2020, the Battambang Appeal Court upheld the Siem Reap court’s verdict.On March 12, 2021, the authorities released him from prison upon completion of his prison sentence.The police said they surveilled Lorn Ly Facebook account for a week prior to the arrest but did not disclose a legal basis for such surveillance. Lorn Ly had shared two videos on his Facebook profile page in which the speaker claimed the Cambodian government needed the Vietnamese government information about an arrival to Cambodia who later tested positive for COVID-19. He is being held in pre-trial detention at Siem Reap provincial prison.Chum SarathChum Sarath, 66On October 6, 2020, police arrested Chum Sarath, a former elected Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) commune councilor in Anlong Reap commune, Pursat province, on charges related to a land dispute from 2014 involving villagers and timber tycoon Try Pheap M.D.S. Import Export Co. The next day, the Pursat provincial court charged him with illegal occupation of property, and use of violence against a possessor of land (articles 249 and 253 of Cambodia’s Land Law and article 350 of Cambodia’s penal code) and sent him for pre-trial detention at Pursat provincial prison.On March 23, 2021, the court dropped the charges and ordered his release.On April 1, 2021, the Pursat prison authorities released him from prison. In total, he spent six months in pre-trial detention before the charges were dropped.The charges are based on a complaint brought by M.D.S. against Chum Sarath, alleging he used a machete to clear forest on company land. The case laid dormant for over five years until being suddenly taken up by the authorities.Kea SokunKea Sokhun, 22On September 4, 2020, Siem Reap provincial police arrested Kea Sokhun, a Khmer rap music artist, at his house in Trapang Ses village, Kokchork commune, Siem Reap district, Siem Reap province.On September 5, the Siem Reap provincial court charged him with incitement to commit a felony (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and sent him to pre-trial detention at Siem Reap provincial prison.On December 22, a Phnom Penh court convicted him and sentenced him to 18 months in prison, of which he must spend 12 months in prison with the remainder suspended. Sokhun will be released in September 2021.On September 3, 2021, the authorities released him after he completed his prison sentence.The Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts filed the complaints against him. Sokhun maintained during his trial that he had nothing to apologize for and refused to apologize to the ministry.While the authorities did not formally confirm the reasons for his arrest and charges, civil society activists pointed to Sokhun’s four-month-old song “Khmer Land” (“Dey Khmer”), which has over 1.5 million views on YouTube and which speaks critically about social issues and border demarcation matters in Cambodia, as the most likely reason for his arrest.Ieng CholsaIeng Cholsa, 26On June 14, 2018, the Ministry of Interior’s Anti-Cybercrime Department arrested Ieng Cholsa in Boeung Keng Kang II commune in Phnom Penh’s Chamkarmon district. The charges involved insulting King Sihamoni in three Facebook posts dated June 13 and using drugs. According to local media, in his posts Cholsa called the monarch “useless” and a “dog king” and added three photos: a 500 Cambodian riel note, which features King Sihamoni’s portrait; a photo of drugs; and a shot of the king and the king’s mother Norodom Monineath Sihanouk.On June 18, 2018, the Phnom Penh court charged him with insulting the king (lese majeste, article 437bis of the Cambodian penal code). On December 18, 2018, the Phnom Penh municipal court tried his case but in violation of fair trial rights, neither Cholsa nor his lawyer were present.On January 9, 2019, the Phnom Penh court convicted Cholsa of lese majeste and sentenced him to three years’ imprisonment and a fine of five million riel ($1,250).Cholsa was released after serving his prison sentence.Men VoeunMen Voeun, 34On March 31, 2018, the Serei Sophoan district police chief, accompanied by six officers, arrested Men Voeun, a Cambodian migrant worker just returned from Thailand, in Kampong Svay commune, Serei Sophoan district, Banteay Meanchey province. Police charged him for allegedly posting a video clip in February 2016 to Facebook that insulted Prime Minister Hun Sen.On April 2, 2018, Banteay Meanchey provincial court investigating judge charged Voeun with public defamation and incitement to commit a felony (articles 307 and 495 of the Criminal Code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Banteay Meanchey provincial prison.On September 4, 2018, the court sentenced him to one year in prison. On April 2, 2019, the authorities released him after he completed his prison sentence.Sorn Sam NeangSorn Sam Neang, 37On July 15, 2018, Kampong Thom provincial military police arrested Sorn Sam Neang, a former deputy military police chief in O Suosdei village, Baray commune, Baray district, Kampong Thom province. Sam Neang alleged in his Facebook posts that the military was involved in drug trafficking in Cambodia. There was no arrest warrant for the arrest, but authorities alleged that the Facebook posts adversely affected the military’s reputation.In 2013, Sam Neang had posted documents on Facebook showing he received orders to crack down on drugs. Subsequently he stated that he was involved in a traffic stop of a car loaded with 172 kilograms of marijuana traveling from Preah Vihear province. He alleged he received a US$300,000 bribe to look the other way. The case was reopened in mid-July 2018, when national military police spokesman Brigadier General Eng Hy called on the Anti-Corruption Unit to investigate who received the US$300,000 in 2013, with the justification that other military officials may have been involved. He also alleged that Sam Neang had been taken to court several times in the past for other criminal offenses. Provincial military police commander Hang Thol alleged without basis that Sam Neang had “seized more than 100 kilograms of marijuana [… and after] seizing it, he hid the marijuana and did not report the matter hoping to extort money from the traffickers.” He stated that Sam Neang was “punished” later.In 2017, the military dismissed Sam Neang from service, allegedly because of his repeated critical Facebook posts about the military, including documents on the drug case and the disappearance of 90 pieces of luxury rosewood confiscated from an arrested truck driver. He called the dismissal unjust.On July 17, 2018, the Kampong Thom provincial court issued a detention order that sent him to pre-trial detention on the basis of public defamation and incitement to commit felony charges (articles 305 and 495 of Cambodia’s Penal Code). He faces up to two years in prison if convicted.On January 31, 2019, the court sentenced him to seven months in prison based on charges of “public defamation” and “incitement to commit a felony.” On February 15, 2019, the authorities released him after serving his prison sentence, as six months in pre-trial detention were counted against his final prison sentence.Koy Sam AthOn March 9, 2020, Phnom Penh police arrested Koy Sam Ath (35 years old), an online seller in Phnom Penh, based on a video he posted on his Facebook page under the name “Tep Visal.” In the video, he critically commented on a coronavirus case in Cambodia, alleging that the authorities only knew about it because Vietnam told them. The Phnom Penh police questioned him upon arrest. On March 10, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged him with “incitement to commit felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s criminal code). He is currently in pre-trial detention in Phnom Penh’s Prey Sar prison.The court convicted Sam Ath and sentenced him to two years in prison. On March 11, 2021, the authorities released him from prison after suspending his remaining year of imprisonment.Lek SeanglyOn April 13, 2020, Kampong Thom police arrested Lek Seangly (21 years old), a petroleum station worker in Thon Maong village, Kampong Thmar commune, Santok district, Kampong Thom province. On April 12, he had posted a Tik Tok video, in which he stated “no Covid-19 spread during the Khmer New Year, so we can travel and now petroleum is cheap – just 3000 riel per liter, we are happy to ride and travel during the Khmer New Year.”Ahead of Khmer New Year, which traditionally sees Cambodians travel to their home provinces, the government issued Directive No. 02 dated April 9 imposing one-week travel restrictions, preventing travel between provinces. The authorities alleged that his Facebook post “affected public order.”On April 14, the Kampong Thom court charged him with “incitement to commit felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code). He was held in pre-trial detention at Kampong Thom provincial prison. On May 5, the authorities released him, apparently based on his signing an agreement with the authorities. It is unclear whether his charges were dropped or the contents of that agreement.Keo HourOn August 7, 2020, Kampong Chhnang provincial gendarmerie officials arrested Keo Hour, a journalist for Sneha Cheat (“National Love”) online news site, which is owned by San Buntheoun.The next day, the Kampong Chhnang provincial court charged him with incitement to commit a felony (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and sent him to pre-trial detention at Kampong Chhnang provincial prison.On September 8, 2020, the authorities released him on bail, but did not drop the charges against him.In May, Hour reported on a land dispute at Phnom Oral Wildlife Sanctuary in Kampong Chhnang province involving a powerful military official. Reporting on the same story previously led authorities to detain and charge radio and online journalist Sok Oudom.Leap SophengClick to expand ImageLeap Sopheng, 58On December 28, 2020, police arrested Leap Sopheng, a former local official with the arbitrarily dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Memut district, Tbong Khmum province.On the same day, the Tbong Khmum provincial court charged him with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Tbong Khmum prison. On February 24, 2021, the court sentenced him to 10 months’ imprisonment. On October 28, 2021, the authorities released him after he finished serving his prison sentence.Leap Sopheng is linked to the cases of former CNRP official Um Yet and former CNRP official Sou Yean’s case, who was arrested and charged with incitement in 2020.Lim SanClick to expand ImageLim SanOn October 23, 2020, the authorities arrested Lim San, an activist with the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) from Takhmao district, Kandal province, as she participated in a peaceful protest in front of the Chinese embassy in Phnom Penh, organized to mark the anniversary of the 1991 Paris Peace Accords. The authorities also arrested two other CNRP activists, Ton Nymul and Yory Sreymom.On October 25, 2020, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged San with incitement to commit a felony (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered her pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 2. On May 17, 2021, the court sentenced San to 18 months in prison, but the verdict was only announced on August 2, 2021.On November 12, the authorities released Lim San.Protesters held up banners with a message stating that Cambodia’s Ream Naval Base should not be used as a military base for China.Ahead of the anniversary, Hun Sen had threatened groups planning to protest on the 29th anniversary of the Paris Accords, stating that “Your identities are under the control of authorities.”San Chan SreyneathClick to expand ImageSan Chan SreyneathOn December 28, 2020, police arrested San Chan Sreyneath, also known as “Mary,” who is a supporter of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) and a member of the group “Sattrey Khlahan” (“Brave Women”), which was formed by CNRP activists. She came to Phnom Penh to show support during the trial of detained opposition activists.On December 30, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged her as an accomplice for allegedly having committed “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 29, 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s Penal Code) and ordered her pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 2 (Prey Sar) prison. On May 17, 2021, the court sentenced Sreyneath to 18 months in prison, but the verdict was only announced on August 2, 2021.On November 12, the authorities released Sreyneath.San Chan Sreyneath had previously joined several Friday protests in Phnom Penh, organized by largely female relatives of detained opposition activists to demand for their immediate release.Pai RanClick to expand ImagePai RanOn December 29, 2020, police arrested Pai Ran also known as “Kim Sokhunisa,” who is a supporter of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) and a head of the group “Sattrey Khlahan” (“Brave Women”), which was formed by CNRP activists. She came to Phnom Penh to show support during the trial of detained opposition political activists from the CNRP.On December 30, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged her with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s Penal Code) and ordered her pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 2 (Prey Sar) prison. On May 17, 2021, the court sentenced her to 18 months in prison, but the verdict was only announced on August 2, 2021.On November 12, the authorities released Pai Ran.Pai Ran had previously joined several Friday protests in Phnom Penh, organized by largely female relatives of detained opposition activists to demand for their immediate release.Hong AnClick to expand ImageHong AnOn December 28, 2020, police arrested Hong An, who is a supporter of the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) and a member of the group Sattrey Khlahan” (“Brave Women”), which was formed by CNRP activists. She came to Phnom Penh to show support during the trial of detained opposition activists.On December 30, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged her as an accomplice for allegedly having committed “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 29, 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s Penal Code) and ordered her pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 2 (Prey Sar) prison. On May 17, 2021, the court sentenced Hong An to 18 months in prison, but the verdict was only announced on August 2, 2021.On November 12, the authorities released Hong An.Hong An had previously joined several Friday protests in Phnom Penh, organized by largely female relatives of detained opposition activists to demand for their immediate release.Yory SreymomClick to expand ImageYory SreymomOn October 23, 2020, the authorities arrested Yory Sreymom, an activist with the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) from Takhmao district, Kandal province, as she participated in a peaceful protest in front of the Chinese embassy in Phnom Penh, organized to mark the anniversary of the 1991 Paris Peace Accords. The authorities also arrested two other CNRP activists, Ton Nymul and Lim San.On October 25, 2020, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged Sreymom with incitement to commit a felony (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered her pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 2. On May 17, 2021, after more than seven months in pre-trial detention, the court sentenced Yory Sreymom to 18 months in prison, but the verdict was only announced on August 2, 2021.On November 12, the authorities released Yory Sreymom.Rong ChhunClick to expand ImageRong ChhunOn July 31, 2020, police arrested Rong Chhun, president of the independent Cambodian Confederation of Unions, without an arrest warrant at his home in Phnom Penh, alleging he was committing an in flagrante delicto (caught in the act) offense.On August 1, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged him with “incitement to commit a felony” under articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code and sent him to pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1.On August 18, 2021, the court sentenced him to 24 months in prison and a fine of two million riels (US$500) as well as one-third of a 400 million riels (US$100,00) damages payment due to the Border Affairs Committee. On November 12, the Court of Appeal upheld the conviction but reduced his sentence to 15 months and 11 days in prison.On November 12, 2021, amid a wave of releases of activists ahead of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) Summit hosted by Cambodia in late November, the authorities released him.The charges against Rong Chhun apparently are connected to his recent advocacy for the land rights of villagers living near Cambodia’s border with Vietnam. In an interview with Radio Free Asia on July 31, shortly before his arrest, Rong Chhun responded to a government statement on the matter and urged the Border Affairs Committee to visit the border provinces themselves and speak to the aggrieved villagers.Rong Chhun is a vocal union leader and political activist who for years has advocated for human rights and workers’ rights in Cambodia. He is also active in opposition politics. He has long raised concerns about the demarcation of the border between Vietnam and Cambodia. He repeatedly met with affected Cambodian villagers to hear their concerns that newly determined border demarcations encroach on their land.Ton NymulClick to expand ImageTon Nymul, 37On October 23, 2020, the authorities arrested Ton Nymul, an activist with the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) from Takhmao district, Kandal province, as he participated in a peaceful protest in front of the Chinese embassy in Phnom Penh, organized to mark the anniversary of the 1991 Paris Peace Accords. The authorities also arrested two other CNRP activists, Lim San and Yory Sreymom, at the same time.On October 25, 2020, the Phnom Penh municipal court charged Nymul with incitement to commit a felony (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1.On August 18, 2021, the court sentenced him to 20 months in prison and a fine of two million riels (US$500) as well as one-third of a 400 million riels (US$100,00) damages payment due to the Border Affairs Committee. On November 12, the Court of Appeal upheld the conviction but reduced his sentence to 14 months and 24 days in prison.On November 12, 2021, amid a wave of releases of activists ahead of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) Summit hosted by Cambodia in late November, the authorities released him.Protesters held up banners with a message stating that Cambodia’s Ream Naval Base should not be used as a military base for China.Ahead of the anniversary, Hun Sen had threatened groups planning to protest on the 29th anniversary of the Paris Accords, stating that “Your identities are under the control of authorities.”Sar KanikaClick to expand ImageSar KanikaOn August 7, 2020, in Phnom Penh, six police arrested Sar Kanika, an opposition Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP) activist, and 32-year-old twins who are both CNRP activists, Chum Houth and Chum Hour, on their way from a meeting. Police took them to the National Police Commissariat in Phnom Penh for further questioning. The authorities released Chum Houth and Chum Hour after questioning them for three hours, but Sar Kanika was sent to pre-trial detention.The authorities charged Sar Kanika with “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s criminal code) and ordered her pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 2. On August 18, 2021, the court sentenced her to 20 months in prison and a fine of two million riels (US$500) as well as one-third of a 400 million riels (US$100,00) damages payment due to the Border Affairs Committee. On November 12, the Court of Appeal upheld the conviction but reduced her sentence to 15 months and 5 days in prison.On November 12, 2021, amid a wave of releases of activists ahead of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) Summit hosted by Cambodia in late November, the authorities released her.Their arrest is presumably linked to their participation in protests calling for the release of prominent union leader Rong Chhun. All three activists are regular participants in protest activities calling for justice and human rights. Police asked Chum Houth and Chum Hour about their association with Sar Kanika and the CNRP.In 2019, Sar Kanika supported efforts around the planned return of exiled CNRP leaders, including Sam Rainsy; however, her support of the opposition dates back much further. Authorities subjected Sar Kanika to surveillance and harassment long before the August arrest.Khon TonClick to expand ImageKhon Ton, 39On January 26, 2021, police arrested Khon Ton, an activist affiliated with the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP), in Phnom Penh.On January 27, the Tbong Khmum provincial court charged her with being an accomplice to “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 29, 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered her pre-trial detention at Tbong Khmum prison. On February 24, 2021, the court convicted her and sentenced her to one year in prison and a fine of two million riels (US$500).On January 27, 2022, the authorities released her from prison, after she served the prison sentence.Khnon Ton had previously joined protests in Phnom Penh, organized primarily by female relatives calling for the release of detained opposition activists.Prao BunthoeurnClick to expand ImagePrao Bunthoeurn, 42On January 14, 2021, police arrested Prao Bunthoeurn, a former local official with the arbitrarily dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Choam Kravean commune, Memut district, Tbong Khmum province. He was arrested together with Pok Sam An, another former CNRP official.On January 15, the Tbong Khmum provincial court charged him as an accomplice for “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 29, 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Tbong Khmum prison. On February 24, 2021, the court convicted him and sentenced him to one year in prison and a fine of two million riels (US$500).On January 14, 2022, the authorities released him from prison, after he served his prison sentence.He had previously joined protests in Phnom Penh, organized primarily by female relatives calling for the release of detained opposition activists.Pok Sam AnClick to expand ImagePok Sam An, 40On January 14, 2021, police arrested Pok Sam An, a former local official with the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Choam Kravean commune, Memut district, Tbong Khmum province. He was arrested together with Prao Bunthoeurn, another former CNRP official.On January 15, the Tbong Khmum provincial court charged him as an accomplice for “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 29, 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Tbong Khmum prison. On February 24, 2021, the court convicted him and sentenced him to one year in prison and a fine of two million riels (US$500).On January 14, 2022, the authorities released him from prison, after he served his prison sentence.He had previously joined protests in Phnom Penh, organized primarily by female relatives calling for the release of detained opposition activists.Phon SophalClick to expand ImagePhon Sophal, 30On December 30, 2020, police arrested Phon Sophal, a representative of the membership-based Coalition of Cambodian Farmer Community (CCFC) in Choam Kravien commune, Memot district, Tbong Khmum province.On December 31, 2020, the Tbong Khmum provincial court charged him with “conspiracy” and “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 453, 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Tbong Khmum provincial prison. On February 24, 2021, the court convicted him and sentenced him to one year in prison and a fine of two million riels (US$500).On December 30, 2021, the authorities released him from prison, after he served his prison sentence.One month prior to his arrest, police ordered him to report to the police station for questioning about his activities in distributing CCFC t-shirts in his community. He has also repeatedly participated in protests and was accused by the authorities of being affiliated with the dissolved opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP).CCFC has been subject to police surveillance and repeated incidents of harassment by local authorities.Um YetClick to expand ImageUm Yet, 66On December 28, 2020, police arrested Um Yet, a former local official with the dissolved Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) in Soung district, Tbong Khmum province.The same day, the Tbong Khmum provincial court charged him with being an accomplice to “incitement to commit a felony” (articles 29, 494 and 495 of Cambodia’s penal code) and ordered his pre-trial detention at Phnom Penh’s Correctional Center 1 (Prey Sar) prison. On February 24, 2021, the court convicted him and sentenced him to one year in prison and a fine of two million riels (US$500).On December 28, 2021, the authorities released him from prison, after he served his prison sentence.Um Yet’s case is linked to the cases of former CNRP official Ieap Sopheng and former CNRP official Sou Yean’s case, who was arrested and charged with incitement in 2020.Sam SokhaClick to expand ImageSam Sokha, 38Sentenced: 2 yearsSam Sokha, a labor and opposition activist, was seen in an April 2017 video throwing her shoe at a CPP campaign billboard that contained photos of Prime Minister Hun Sen and National Assembly President Heng Samrin. The 13-second video went viral on social media. Sokha fled to Thailand after government called for her arrest. She received refugee status from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). On January 25, 2018, the Kampong Speu Provincial Court convicted her in absentia of insulting a public official and incitement to discriminate (articles 494, 496 and 502 of the Criminal Code) and sentenced her to two years in prison and a fine of 5 million riels (US$1,250).Despite her protected status as a refugee, Thai authorities arrested her and, over UNHCR and diplomatic objections, forcibly returned her to Cambodia on February 8, 2018. On February 9, Cambodian officials transferred her to Kampong Speu provincial prison to start serving her sentence. Sokha filed a motion to seek a retrial in which she would be present, basing her argument on the provisions of article 365 of the Criminal Procedure Code. The Kampong Speu provincial court heard her motion on March 15, 2018, and upheld her conviction and prison sentence. She appealed that decision and on May 7, 2019, the Phnom Penh Appeals Court held a hearing in which Sokha and her lawyers were present to argue their case. On May 31, the court of appeal upheld the verdict.In the meantime, in relation to comments Sokha made on Facebook during the time she sought refuge in Bangkok, a Phnom Penh prosecutor pursued additional charges of incitement to discriminate and public insult under articles 307, 494 and 496 of the Criminal Code. The charges arose in connection with a Kampong Speu provincial police commissariat report alleging Sokha had insulted Prime Minister Hun Sen and his wife, Bun Rany. The Kampong Speu provincial court heard the case on December 6, 2018. On January 9, 2019, the court sentenced her to an additional two years in prison, accompanied by a fine of 5 million riel (US$1,250). She appealed this decision, and the Phnom Penh appeal court scheduled a hearing for May 6. However, for some unexplained reason, prison officials failed to transport Sokha to court, leading the judge to postpone her hearing. On May 31, the hearing took place with Sokha and her lawyers present. On June 21, the Phnom Penh appellate court upheld the verdict.On February 10, 2022, the authorities released her from prison, after she served four years in prison. She paid also a fine of US$2,500 upon being released.DECEASED IN CUSTODYTith RornTith Rorn, 37Tith Rorn was an opposition CNRP activist and the son of former CNRP official Eam Tith. He was arrested on April 15, 2019, related to a 13-year-old assault charge, even though the statute of limitations had expired. He died on April 18, 2019, after less than 72 hours in police custody. Visible bruises on his body suggest he was beaten.Cambodian authorities claim Tith Rorn fell in the bathroom of his jail cell due to “being addicted to alcohol,” but they failed to conduct an independent, thorough, and impartial investigation into the cause of death. His father stated that when “my son left home prior to his arrest, there were no bruises or injuries on him, and he wasn’t suffering from any illness.”Activists and Tith Rorn’s family were dismissive of obviously edited video footage publicized by the Phnom Penh Post that was received from Kampong Cham provincial police headquarters. They are demanding a prompt, thorough, and independent investigation into his death.Som BophaSom Bopha, 39On October 30, 2019, Som Bopha, a Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) activist in Svay Rieng province, died after falling from a police officer’s motorbike on her way to the police station after officers arrested her. She had publicly voiced support of the announced return of acting CNRP leader, Sam Rainsy.In mid-October, local officials pressured her father-in-law, Hun Yoap, a former elected CNRP commune councilor in Tnaot commune in Kampong Ro district, Svay Rieng province, to defect to the ruling Cambodian People’s Party. He was later listed as one of the 50 former CNRP members who surrendered to the authorities to avoid charges of plotting a coup (article 454 of Cambodia’s criminal code). After Bopha and her husband had an argument, Hun Yoap had filed a domestic abuse complaint against her with the police. Authorities cited the complaint as the reason they arrived at the house to arrest her, but they did not have an arrest warrant.More than a dozen police officers arrived at her house to arrest her. Bopha told them she was not feeling well. Family members proposed to the police to drive her instead with their car to the police station, but the arresting officers refused. The police arrived in an SUV and seven motorbikes. A video posted on Facebook shows her unconscious after the fall off the motorbike.Tuoy SrosTuoy SrosOn December 28, 2019, more than 30 Banteay Meanchey [gendarmerie police] cracked down on a land protest in front of the Banteay Meanchey provincial hall, upon orders of Col. Sar Bunsoeung, the Banteay Meanchey deputy provincial military police chief. They arrested the land rights activist, Tuoy Sros, and four other protesters – Nov Noeun, Yip Mok, Him Kiri and An Ruon. The authorities held the five men in a cell at the Banteay Meanchey headquarters of the gendarmerie that is commonly used to detain drug users. Upon arrest and thereafter in detention , the provincial gendarmerie officers allegedly beat and kicked the five men, inflicting serious injuries.On December 31, the prosecutor of the Banteay Meanchey provincial court charged all five men with intentional acts of violence on a private property (articles 248 and 253 of Cambodia’s 2001 Land Law), and sent them to pre-trial detention at Banteay Meanchey prison.On January 1, 2020, due to his deteriorating medical condition, authorities transported Sros from jail to the Japan-Cambodia Friendship Hospital in Banteay Meanchey province. On the way to the hospital, Sros died.On January 2, authorities also transferred Nov Noeun, Him Kiri and An Ruon, to the same hospital for medical examination. The three men filed a complaint against the Banteay Meanchey military police about the ill-treatment while in custody.On January 3, authorities granted the four detained protesters release on bail. While the prison released Yip Mok on January 3, the hospital discharged the three men on January 5. The authorities did not drop the charges against the four protesters.On January 14, Prime Minister Hun Sen announced that an investigation was to be conducted and that all officials should be held accountable for the ill-treatment against the protesters, including Sros’ death. Hun Sen instructed Sao Sokha, the National Military Police Commander, to establish an investigative committee because “the person who caused injury must be punished without any tolerance.”On January 18, authorities arrested two military police officials, Col. Sar Bunsoeung, and First Lt. Chhoy Rathana, an officer working with the provincial anti-drug office, based on charges of “intentional violence and aggravating circumstances” (articles 218 and 224 of Cambodia’s Criminal Code) after they confessed to being “negligent in their duty.” Both men are currently in pre-trial detention at Banteay Meanchey provincial prison.According to An Ruon, one of the protesters, “Sar Bunsoeung hit the victim [Sros] and pointed a pistol at his temple, threatening to kill him, saying, ‘I took 11 bodies out of this place, do you want to be the 12th?’” On January 1, authorities claimed that Sros had suffered from alcoholism withdrawal, while also denying that they had inflicted any ill-treatment on the detainees, despite physical evidence to the contrary. Sros’ wife, Buy Kimlak, denied that her husband was an alcoholic or had any health issues. When she last visited her husband in prison on December 31, she noticed he was very weak and barely conscious due to the injuries he had suffered.An Ruon also said that Sros had been handcuffed and kicked in the ribs “until he screamed for mercy.” He said that Sros had “screamed all through the night, and they [the police] finally took him to another place, but they [the police] kept beating him until he lost his memory.” Him Kiri, one of the protesters, added that police had ordered drug addicts held in the same cell to beat Sros.RFA reported that authorities had donated 10 million Cambodian riels (US$2,500) to Sros’ wife for funeral expenses and financial support for her children’s school fees.Region / CountryAsia,CambodiaTopicFree SpeechProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch