"Look at Us with a Merciful Eye": Juvenile Offenders Awaiting Execution in Yemen | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportSearchDonate NowSearchVideoDownloadsDownload the full reportMarch 4, 2013"Look at Us with a Merciful Eye"Juvenile Offenders Awaiting Execution in YemenAvailable InEnglishالعربيةVideoYemen is one of only four countries known to have executed people in the last five years for crimes committed as children. The others are Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Sudan. President Hadi should break with Yemen’s past of arbitrary justice and state-sanctioned violence by reversing the execution orders of the three young men with signed execution decrees. Ending executions of juvenile offenders is a clear and straightforward way for Yemen’s government to show it honors its human rights commitments.Walid Hussein Haikal, sentenced to death for a crime allegedly committed when he says he was 15. Bashir Mohammed Ahmed Ali al-Dihar, sentenced to death for a crime committed when he says he was 14. Ibrahim Fouadhy al-Omaisy, sentenced to death for a crime he allegedly committed when he says he was either 15 or 16.  Mohammed Ahmed Sanhan, sentenced to death for a crime committed when he says he was 17. Qauid Youssef Omar al Khadamy, sentenced to death for a crime he allegedly committed when he says he was 15.VideoYemen is one of only four countries known to have executed people in the last five years for crimes committed as children. The others are Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Sudan. President Hadi should break with Yemen’s past of arbitrary justice and state-sanctioned violence by reversing the execution orders of the three young men with signed execution decrees. Ending executions of juvenile offenders is a clear and straightforward way for Yemen’s government to show it honors its human rights commitments.SummaryI want the world to know that here they are executing[juvenile offenders]. No one cares or checks these juvenile cases.… Ifyou don’t have anybody [to help you,] they just execute you, whether youare young or not.— Qaid Youssef Omar Al-Khadamy, on death row in SanaaCentral Prison for a murder he committed when he says he was 15 years old,March 27, 2012On the afternoon of December 3, 2012, Hind Ali Abdu al-Bartiwas taken from her cell in Sanaa Central Prison and executed by a firing squad.Prison authorities only informed Hind’s family that morning of herimminent execution. Hind was sentenced to death for committing murder, and hersentence had been ratified by Yemen’s highest court and confirmed bythen-President Ali Abdullah Saleh.Though her family produced a birthcertificate showing that she was 15 years old at the time of the alleged crime,and a forensic examination concluded she was no more than 16, courtsdisregarded this evidence. When the Yemeni government executed her after 4years in prison, Hind was no more than 20 years old.International law prohibits, without exception, theexecution of individuals for crimes committed before they turn 18. When courtscannot establish conclusively that a defendant was 18 or older at the time ofthe alleged crime, international law indicates that they cannot impose a deathsentence. Yemen has ratified both the International Covenant on Civil andPolitical Rights (ICCPR) and the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC),which specifically prohibit capital punishment of persons under 18 at the timeof the offense. Since 1994, Yemen’s penal code has also banned theexecution of juvenile offenders and stipulates a maximum penalty of 10years’ imprisonment for minors who commit capital offenses.Yet since 2007, Yemen has executed 15 young men and womenwho claimed to be under 18 at the time of their offense. Prosecutors havedemanded death sentences for dozens of additional juvenile offenders. In somecases, defendants lack the documentation to prove they were under age 18 at thetime of their alleged crime; in other cases, public prosecutors and judgessimply disregard available evidence. At present, the Yemeni government doeslittle to counter either problem.Yemen has one of the lowest rates of birth registration inthe world—between 2000 and 2010, the state registered only 22 percent ofall births. Thus, most juvenile offenders lack official birth certificates toprove their age. Yemen’s judiciary lacks impartial and accuratemechanisms to determine the age of youths in criminal proceedings, increasingthe risk that juveniles are sentenced to death. Prosecutors ordered forensicexaminations in some of the cases reviewed for this report, but theseexaminations relied on error-prone and outdated methods. In some cases, bothprosecutors and defense lawyers ordered age examinations that yielded differentresults, but courts relied on the prosecution’s examinations thatestimated defendants were over 18.As of January 2013, at least 23 young men and women awaitexecution under death sentences in Yemeni prisons despite having producedevidence indicating they were under 18 at the time of the crimes for which theywere convicted. Three of them, Mohammed Taher Sumoom, Walid Hussein Haikal, andMohammad al-Tawil, could be executed at any moment. They have exhausted allforms of appeal, and Saleh, the former president, signed their executiondecrees before he left office. The president’s signature is the finalstep before carrying out death penalty sentences. In addition to the 23possible juvenile offenders on death row, Yemen’s public prosecution hascalled for the death penalty in pending cases of at least 186 other allegedjuvenile offenders, according to both the United Nations Children’s Fund(UNICEF) and the Yemeni NGO Coalition on Child Rights Care (YNGOC), a localcivil society group monitoring inhumane juvenile sentencing.All of these alleged juvenile offenders under the deathsentence were convicted of murder, a crime some of them admit and otherschallenge. Many of the stories surrounding these crimes reflect the lack ofdevelopment common to adolescents, including following adults and older peersinto fraught situations, and a quickness of action in the moment withoutappreciation of the consequences. But it is because of such reasons of lack ofmaturity and judgment that both international and Yemeni law require judges toconsider the age of the defendant as a mitigating factor, and recognize thatsuch individuals are not yet sufficiently responsible for their own actions todeserve the ultimate punishment.Under Yemeni law, courts may only sentence juvenilesconvicted of murder to a maximum of 10 years in prison. However, Yemen’scurrent child protection law, called the Juvenile Welfare Law, only requirescourts to refer children 15 years of age and younger to the juvenile courtsystem, leaving many juvenile offenders to defend their cases before adultcriminal courts.Yemen’s judicial system also frequently fails to meetinternational fair trial standards, meaning that defendants, adults, andjuveniles may be sentenced to death after forced confessions or based upontestimony given without having had access to legal counsel. Some juvenileoffenders interviewed by Human Rights Watch said that police investigatorstortured them to extract confessions and described in detail the methods oftorture they had endured. Ibrahim al-Omaisy and Walid Haikal, death rowprisoners interviewed for this report, described how police investigatorsforcibly extracted confessions, interrogating them while or after torturingthem. Neither had access to legal counsel until these confessions had beenrecorded and their cases reached trial.This report documents the stories of young men who have beensentenced to death in Yemen against the backdrop of international conventionsand domestic law which prohibit the execution of individuals for crimescommitted before they turn 18. In March 2012, Human Rights Watch interviewedfive young men at Sanaa Central Prison who had been sentenced to death forcrimes committed when they say they were younger than 18. Prison authoritiesgranted us access to the prison, and permission to interview these individualsin a private room outside the presence of prison officials.Human Rights Watch obtained an additional 18 names ofalleged juvenile offenders on death row from UNICEF and YNGOC. YNGOC conductsregular prison monitoring visits and aims to track all juvenile death penaltycases. We subsequently reviewed court rulings, forensic reports, and appealsfiled in these cases.Based upon this research, Human Rights Watch concluded thatYemeni criminal courts sentenced juvenile offenders to death either bydisregarding entirely proof of their age at the time of the alleged crime, orusing forensic examinations of dubious evidentiary value to determine thedefendants’ age.Human Rights Watch opposes capital punishment in all circumstances.Human rights principles and protections are founded upon respect for theinherent dignity of all human beings and the inviolability of the human person.These principles cannot be reconciled with the death penalty, a form ofpunishment that is unique in its cruelty and finality.Yemen’s transitional government has before it anopportunity to reverse one of the country’s most stark human rightsviolations through a few simple but urgent steps. First, the president shouldimmediately reverse the execution orders of Mohammed Taher Sumoum, WalidHussein Haikal, and Mohammad Abdu Qassim at-Tawil, juvenile offenders who haveexhausted all forms of appeal and risk imminent execution, and refer theircases to courts so that their sentences may be reviewed. If a fair andimpartial review of evidence concerning their age at the time of their crimedetermines they were under 18, they should be commuted under Yemen’sPenal Code, meaning that as all 3 have already served 10 years or more of jailtime, the maximum permissible sentence for juveniles convicted of murder, theyshould be released. Judicial authorities should immediately suspend allexecutions of individuals who claim to have been under 18 at the time of theiralleged crime, at least until the cases are reviewed by an independentcommittee and their ages are determined in a fair and impartial manner. Toprovide an impartial age determination process, the Ministry of Justice shouldestablish an independent review committee including trained forensic medicalprofessionals to develop standardized age determination procedures that followinternational best practices in this area. Finally, authorities should work toguarantee fair trials and provide appropriate safeguards as required by boththe International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Convention onthe Rights of the Child, both treaties ratified by Yemen’s government.The Yemeni government should publish clear procedures outlininghow authorities will handle future murder cases involving alleged juveniledefendants. The government should also raise awareness regarding the importanceof birth registration through public information campaigns, and ensure thatcivil registration units equipped to register new births are available acrossthe country and accessible to poor and rural communities. Finally, thegovernment should declare a moratorium on the death penalty in all cases,consistent with the moratorium declared by the United Nations General Assemblyin 2007, with a view to abolishing the death penalty at the earliest possibleopportunity.MethodologyIn March 2012, two researchers from Human Rights Watchinterviewed five young men and one woman at Sanaa Central Prison who had beensentenced to death for crimes committed when, according to them, they wereyounger than 18. They represented all of the juvenile offenders sentenced todeath in the prison at that time. Interviews were conducted in Arabic byresearchers who spoke the language, or with the assistance of a translator. Prisonauthorities granted us access to the prison and permission to interview theseindividuals in a private room outside the presence of prison officials. Theydid not enter the room while interviews were in progress.Human Rights Watch obtained an additional 18 names ofalleged juvenile offenders on death row from UNICEF and the Yemeni NGOCoalition on Child Rights Care (YNGOC), a civil society organization thatconducts regular prison monitoring visits and works to end inhumane sentencesfor juvenile offenders in Yemen. YNGOC employs lawyers who focus on juveniledeath penalty cases and social workers providing services to juveniles inprison, and aims to track all juvenile death penalty cases.We also reviewed court rulings, forensic reports, and appealsfiled in these cases.I. BackgroundYemen carries out one of the highest numbers of deathpenalty executions in the world. In 2011, according to data collected byAmnesty International, Yemen carried out at least 47 executions, the 5thhighest worldwide after China, Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Iraq.[1]Death sentences are administered for a wide variety of offenses, including drugtrafficking and consensual same-sex sexual activity.[2]In addition, Yemen’s judicial system often fails toprovide fair trials, meaning that defendants, adults and juveniles, may besentenced to death after giving forced confessions or based upon testimony theygave without access to legal counsel. In 2010, the United Nations CommitteeAgainst Torture stated that it:Remain[ed] seriously concerned at the State party’sfailure in practice to afford all detainees, including detainees held in Statesecurity prisons, with all fundamental legal safeguards from the very outset oftheir detention. Such safeguards comprise the right to have prompt access to alawyer and an independent medical examination, to notify a relative, and to beinformed of their rights at the time of detention, including about the chargeslaid against them, and to appear before a judge within a time limit inaccordance with international standards.[3]Some juvenile offenders interviewed for this report saidthat police investigators tortured them to extract confessions and described indetail the methods of torture and ill-treatment they had faced in policestations, including severe beatings, prolonged suspension, and threats.[4]Human Rights Watch has documented mistreatment in Yemen detention facilitiesincluding beatings, insufficient food and water, and prolonged incommunicadodetention.[5] A groupof eight Yemeni civil society organizations, in a 2009 submission to theCommittee against Torture, also documented twelve cases of torture in statecustody, including three cases of children who were tortured in prisons duringthe investigative detention phase.[6] Policeofficers beat the children with sticks and electric cables, suspended them forlong periods of time, and threatened to rape them, according to the report.[7]Yemen’s failure to implement basic fair trialprotections remains problematic in all death penalty cases, but violates theinternational legal commitments it has made to protect children’s rightsto an even higher degree. In the past six years, Yemen has executed at least 16individuals who claimed to be under 18 at the time of their alleged offense,according to data collected by the United Nations Children’s Fund(UNICEF), Amnesty International, and local civil society groups.Yemen also has one of the lowest rates of birth registrationworldwide. Between 2000 and 2010, according to UNICEF, the country registeredonly 22 percent of all births.[8] Only 16percent of births in rural areas were registered, and a mere 5 percent ofbirths among the poorest one-fifth of Yemen’s population.[9]Yemenis interviewed for this report as well as for other Human Rights Watchresearch placed little importance on knowing their exact age, and many knew atmost their birth year, instead of the exact date or month of their birth.In addition to the 20 juvenile offenders sentenced to deathwhose cases are included in the appendix, Yemen’s public prosecution hascalled for the death penalty in pending cases of at least 186 other allegedjuvenile offenders, according to the Yemeni National NGO Coalition on ChildRights (YNGOC) which has reviewed their case files and found evidence that theymay have been under 18 at the time of their alleged offense.[10]Though most juvenile offenders lack official birthcertificates, Yemen’s judiciary has yet to implement impartial andaccurate mechanisms to determine their age in criminal proceedings. HumanRights Watch reviewed five state-ordered forensic reports that allegedlyestablished individuals accused of murder had passed 18 years of age. All fiveage assessments relied on wrist x-rays, or on arm and wrist x-rays, thoughassessments based on these tests are known to be unreliable, particularly forchildren between 16 and 18 years of age. For example, the Netherlandsgovernment Committee on Age Determination found that, “The exclusive useof the hand-wrist region means that about 90% of all girls and 50% of all boysreach the physical criterion for exclusion before they reach the age of 18,which means they may be unjustly refused treatment as minors,” while theBritish Royal College of Pediatrics and Child Health has stated that x-raytests or “radiological assessment is extremely imprecise and can onlygive an estimate within two years in either direction.”[11](See Section III for further details.)In November 2011, in the 10th month of anuprising seeking his resignation after 33 years of rule, then-President AliAbdullah Saleh agreed to cede power to his deputy, Abdu Rabu Mansour Hadi.Under the terms of the power transfer, the transition government agreed toconvene a Conference on National Dialogue to implement a series of democraticreforms. The promised measures included judicial reform, protection of humanrights, and “the adoption of legal and other means to strengthen theprotection and rights of vulnerable groups, including children.”[12]Failing to remove juvenile offenders from death row would violate the guiding principlesof all three measures.II. Juvenile Offenders on Death Row inSanaa’s Central PrisonHuman Rights Watch interviewed five young men on death rowin the Sanaa Central Prison, the largest prison in Yemen’s capital city.The cases below represent all cases recorded by local civil societyorganizations and UNICEF of alleged juvenile offenders on death row in thatfacility who consented to be included in this report. Hind al-Barti, executedon December 3, 2012, was the sole juvenile offender who asked not to have heraccount included for fear that the victim’s family would campaign againsta pardon, though she too agreed to be interviewed. In each case, Human RightsWatch explained the purpose of our research and the potential results of publication.In each case, the individual interviewed providedinformation indicating that his age could have been under 18 at the time of hisalleged crime, and that evidence to the contrary remains inconclusive. Twointerviewees, Walid Haikal and Ibrahim al-Omaisy, gave credible accounts ofbeating and torture during their periods of pre-trial detention. None of theyoung men interviewed had access to a lawyer or other representation beforetheir first trial sessions, in violation of Yemen’s obligation to provideappropriate counsel under the International Covenant on Civil and PoliticalRights (ICCPR) and the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC).[13]Bashir Mohammed Ahmed Ali Al-DiharBashir Al-Dihar was bornin Bani Sa’ad district of Al-Mahwit governorate in 1994, according toboth him and a birth registration document (not an official birth certificate)from his village.When he was approximately 15 year old, on October 25, 2008,according to Bashir, he got into a fight with 3 older males who poked his jambiya,the traditional dagger Yemeni males wear in a belt around their waist. Bashirtold Human Rights Watch:[One of the guys] poked me in my arm and in my jambiya asI was leaving a fast-food restaurant, and they were entering the place. I asked“Why did you poke my jambiya?” Then we grabbed each other,and he slapped me. When we were fighting, I took out my jambiya todefend myself.I was moving my jambiya right and left if anyoneapproached me.… [One of them, Samy Saleh] raised his hand twice to hitme, and I tried to stab him in the hand, but he bowed a little and the jambiyahit him in the back of his shoulder. He fell on the ground. His friendsstepped back. I put my jambiya back in its sheath, and I took him to thehospital along with his friends.[14]At the hospital, where the victim, Samy Saleh, died, policearrested Bashir and took him to the local police station. He described what hadhappened, and the police brought him to the district police station. The policeheld him there for three days before transferring him to the juvenile section ofSanaa’s Central Prison. After 45 days there, he was taken to theprosecutor’s office.Bashir told Human Rights Watch that the prosecutor asked himsome questions but had already prepared a written paper that he told Bashir tosign this with his fingerprint. In trial court, he testified that while it wasindeed his fingerprint on the written testimony produced, he had not providedthe testimony.[15] Theprosecutor charged Bashir with intentionally murdering Samy Saleh.Bashirclaimed that he had acted in self-defense, and that he had not intended to killthe victim.Bashir told Human Rights Watch that he was taken for aforensic examination where his hands were placed into “a device,”and as he remembers it, the doctor told him, “You did not yet start being16 years old.”[16]According to Bashir’s court records, at trial, a judgedetermined that he was in fact a child at the time of the murder.However, part waythrough the trial, a different judge took over the proceedings. Bashir said:The new judge, he only reviewed the file of the case in onetrial session and … he said “I sentence him to death.” [Mylawyer] brought the judge the forensic doctor’s report that said I wasunderage. And the judge said, “Even if he was 10 years old, then thepunishment for a murderer is death.”[17]The October 2010 trial court decision states that Bashir was17 years old at the time of the decision, but affirms that the court sentencedhim to death. The decision also orders him to pay 300,000 rials (US$1,400)compensation to the victim’s family. His case is currently under reviewby an appeals court.Bashir started school when he was 8 years old, and was inthe 7th grade at the time of his arrest. During his three years inprison, he finished the ninth grade and has started the first year of highschool studies, concentrating on computers and English.Reflecting on the attack four years ago, Bashir said:I was young.… I feel regret for what I did.… Wereceive the most extreme punishment, and we were children. We should get thediscipline and punishment appropriate for our age. This is what we want: thatthey look at us with a merciful eye.[18]Qaid Youssef Omar Al-KhadamyQaid told Human Rights Watch that he was born in Raymah,Capital governorate in what he believes was 1989.[19]In 2004, when he says he was approximately 15 years old, he and a group of sixmen from his village were accused of intentionally murdering Fouad Mohsen Rabihby stabbing him in the back with a knife.[20] Qaidsays that while one of the co-defendants in the case worked with Rabih’sbrother, he had never met Rabih.[21]According to Qaid’s trial transcript, a group of youngmen met the day before the murder and agreed to take revenge on Amr MohsenRabih, who had fired one of them from his job at a local restaurant. They wentto the restaurant, and when Amr Mohsen Rabih left the building, they beat himwith sticks. Fouad Mohsen Rabih, Amr’s brother who closely resembled him,was there at the same time, the transcript indicates. It states that theaccused (Qaid) stabbed Fouad with a knife, and that a witness took Fouad to amilitary hospital where he died.Qaid told Human Rights Watch that on July 31, 2004, while hewas living in Sanaa, a group of men from his village took him to a fight:They came and said, “Come with us, we have aproblem.” I didn’t know that they were going to have a fight. Ididn’t think. [But I went along] because they were from my same village.I feel regret about what happened.… I hadn’t expected this tohappen, because I didn’t even know this person [Fouad Mohsen Rabih] whodied. We didn’t have any previous problems. I just went along with peoplefrom my village. But me and that person, we didn’t have any personalproblems between us.[22]Tribal and other alternative forms of justice, includingrevenge attacks, are common in many areas of Yemen and often involve leaderssummoning men and boys from a community to take up arms. Qaid’s courtrecords indicate that his lawyer told the court he was examined by a forensicdoctor in 2004, shortly after the crime, and that the doctor determined thatQaid was not older than 16. Qaid told Human Rights Watch that this doctor cameto the juvenile section of the prison where he was being held.[23]The doctor x-rayed Qaid’s wrists, and according to Qaid, noted that hehad not yet grown facial hair. According to the decision published by theappeals court, a second forensic doctor examined Qaid in 2006, 2 years afterthe crime, and determined that he had been between 18 and 19 years of age atthe time of the crime in 2004.[24] Theappeals court sentenced Qaid to death.[25]Qaid says he was jailed for alleged murder when he was just15 years old. He had finished eighth grade at the time of the crime, and washoping to start in the ninth grade.[26]Qaid’s death sentence was confirmed by the appealscourt, and as of January 2013 his case had been pending for three years withthe Supreme Court.Mohammed Ahmed SanhanMohammed comes from Tihama district of Hodeidah province. Hewas working as a street sweeper in Sanaa when on July 6, 2006, he stabbed afellow guest at a wedding. He said that he was 17 years old at the time of theincident.[27]Mohammed told Human Rights Watch that the victim,Abdelrahman Saleh Saleh al-Matri, began arguing with him and then started toslap and beat him. At that point, he said, he pulled out his jambiya:He came to me. I was sitting down. He wanted to fight withme. He was older than me. Then he beat me. And I did not show patience, and Itook out my jambiya and we fought.[28]After stabbing al-Matri in the chest with his jambiya,Mohammed returned home. At 4 a.m. the next day he was taken by the police totheir station, where he admitted to carrying out the stabbing. Al-Matrispenta month in the intensive care unit of Sanaa’s al-Thawra hospital but diedin September 2005.[29]Mohammed had his wrists and elbows x-rayed as part of aforensic examination of his age. The forensic report ordered by the publicprosecution states that he was at least 19 years of age.[30]Ibrahim Fouad Mohsen al-OmaisyIbrahim Fouad Mohsen al-Omaisy says he was either 15 or 16years old at the time of the murder for which he was accused. During aninterview in March 2012, he told Human Rights Watch that he was 22 years oldand had been in prison for 6 years.[31] Ibrahimlived in Sanaa with his family, and worked with his cousin driving a microbus.He told Human Right Watchthat about six years ago, three men hired him to drive them to a neighborhoodin Sanaa where they wanted to purchase a car. One of the men had a revolver,not uncommon in Yemen. He said that the men got into a dispute with the sellerover the price of the car, began fighting, and that a shot was fired at random,killing one of the men who had hired him. Ibrahim said he saw the men runningaway, so he left. He stayed at home for two days, but after learning that thepolice had arrested the two other men who had hired him, he went to a policestation in Aden to describe what he had witnessed. He told Human Rights Watchthat, “I thought I had nothing to fear, but [the police] insulted me andhit me. At this age, we try to make ourselves older so I had told them I wasolder than I was.”[32]Ibrahim said that after he went tothe station, the police took him into custody where they continued to abusehim:They beat me with their hands, sometimes they would electro-shockme until I fell down. At that point if they had asked me, “Did you kill one-thousand?”I would have said, “Yes,” out of fear.[33]Ibrahim added that he had no legalcounsel during his interrogations, and that the first time he saw a lawyer wason his first trial date:In the trial court, I got a sentence of 10 years and a fineof 5,500,000 rials [US $25,600]. There was a forensic report regarding my age,we produced my mom and dad’s wedding contract, which showed how long theyhad been married. They proved I was a juvenile, that’s why I got 10 yearsin the first court.However, on appeal, Ibrahim wassentenced to the death penalty.Walid Hussein HaikalWalid Haikal lived in Sanaa before his arrest. Though he isYemeni, he was born in Saudi Arabia.[34] Walidtold Human Rights Watch that he is now 26 years old, and that he has been inprison for 11 years—since age 15. On February 26, 2005, a trial courtsentenced Walid to death, and his sentence was affirmed by all appeals courts.The president’s signature is all that remains for his sentence to becarried out.[35]Walid told Human Rights Watch that he was arrested forallegedly killing Najib Saleh Jarallah al-Tha’wani, a man in hisneighborhood:I was in the seventh grade. There was a baltajiya[thug] in our neighborhood. He used to drink and fight and bother women. Oneday, he grabbed me by my lip, so I slapped him. Then, he sliced me with hisjambiya on my cheek, and on my shoulder. I ran away and we filed a policereport. This happened one week before he was killed.Walid described his arrest just over a week later:I was arrested onFriday night. I was lying with my head in my mother’s lap watching afilm. The police came and knocked on the door, and said they wanted me only forfive minutes. Of course, that was the last time I was home.Walid told Human Rights Watch that he spent two months atSanaa’s criminal investigations division, and that police beat andtortured him throughout his time there. He said:They’d shackle us like a chicken, put metal betweenour legs and do falaka. This means beating you with a wooden stick onthe bottom of your feet. Of course you’d want to confess anything. Theyalso broke my fingers. I felt helpless, I would dream about them at night, andthen they would come in the morning. I felt so scared, I thought my heart wouldburst out of my body. So of course I told them I did it. I told them a lie.A forensic doctor’s report ordered by Walid’slawyer and issued on September 1, 2001 states that Walid was 15 when theincident took place. However, in his court decision, the presiding judge arguedthat because the accused stated that he was 18 years old during hisinterrogation, the forensic report should not be used to establish his age.Haikal told Human Rights Watch that because he was born in Saudi Arabia, hislawyers have already spent between three and four years trying to obtainofficial documents proving his age.Walid said he was a student in theseventh grade at the time of his alleged crime. In prison, he was able tofinish secondary school coursework and begin university studies. “Istudied on my own, and I would take the exams. I buy books myself,” hesaid. “There’s a school [in prison,] but people sentenced to thedeath penalty are not allowed to go.”[36]III. Forensic Age Assessments:An Inexact MeasureInternational law prohibits the death penalty for crimescommitted by individuals under age 18.[37] The UnitedNations Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC Committee) stated in itsGeneral Comment No. 10, on children’s rights in juvenile justice, that,“If there is no proof of age, the child is entitled to a reliable medicalor social investigation that may establish his/her age and, in the case ofconflict or inconclusive evidence, the child shall have the right to the ruleof the benefit of the doubt.”[38]Addressing age-determination proceedings in the migrationand asylum context, the CRC Committee stated in General Comment No. 6 (2005),on the treatment of unaccompanied and separated children outside their countryof origin, that:The assessment must be conducted in a scientific, safe,child and gender-sensitive and fair manner, avoiding any risk of violation ofthe physical integrity of the child; giving due respect to human dignity; and,in the event of remaining uncertainty, should accord the individual the benefitof the doubt such that if there is a possibility that the individual is achild, she or he should be treated as such.[39]These standards provide important guidance in juvenile deathpenalty cases, where a government’s failure to adequately protectchildren in its justice system has even more severe consequences.In all five of theforensic age determination reports examined by Human Rights Watch for thisreport, Yemeni judicial authorities accepted as conclusive age assessmentsbased on wrist x-rays, or on arm and wrist x-rays. However, according to areview of medical and scientific literature, bone-age assessments may beinfluenced by factors including socio-economic background and nutrition, andthat the margin of error, particularly in boys between the ages of 16 and 18,is up to 2 years.[40]Yemen presents a particularly challengingcase, with exceptionally high rates of children who are stunted andunderweight, making it difficult to accurately assess children’s agebased on bone size, using internationally standardized charts.[41]Age determinations basedon wrist x-rays remain controversial, and subject to a wide margin of error inpractice. For example, in the Netherlands, the government Committee on AgeDetermination has criticized age assessments conducted solely on the basis ofx-rays of the hand-wrist region because “the exclusive use of thehand-wrist region means that about 90% of all girls and 50% of all boys reachthe physical criterion for exclusion before they reach the age of 18, whichmeans they may be unjustly refused treatment as minors.”[42]Similarly, the Royal College of Pediatrics andChild Health in the United Kingdom, in the context of determining the ages of unaccompaniedmigrant children, states that x-ray tests or “radiological assessment isextremely imprecise and can only give an estimate within two years in eitherdirection.”[43]Rather than relying on the inexact conclusions of medicalexaminations, the Yemeni government should develop an age-determinationprotocol using impartial records and methodology. The government should developits protocol based on best practice recommendations from international expertopinion, including the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, which hascalled for official age verification systems focused on objective evidence suchas birth and school records. Many of the alleged juvenile offenders in thisreport were able to produce these documents as part of their defense, thoughthey lacked official birth certificates. The government should also recognizethe assessment of the UN High Commissioner for Refugee (UNHCR) that, “Themargin of appreciation inherent to allage-assessment methods needs to be applied in such a manner that, in case ofuncertainty, the individual will be considered a child.”[44]IV. International and Yemeni LawThe Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), aninternational treaty with 193 member countries—including Yemen—andthe International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), with 161member countries—also including Yemen—specifically prohibit thedeath penalty for persons under 18 at the time of the offense.[45]In 1994 the Human Rights Committee—the internationalbody of experts that interprets the ICCPR—stated that it considered theprohibition against executing children to be part of customary internationallaw, and thus binding on all states.[46]In its General Comment No. 10, the UN Committee on theRights of the Child—the international expert body that interprets theCRC—states that within the juvenile justice system, “if there is noproof of age, the child is entitled to a reliable medical or socialinvestigation that may establish his/her age and, in the case of conflict orinconclusive evidence, the child shall have the right to the rule of thebenefit of the doubt.”[47] Thisprescription bears particular weight in death penalty cases, given the absoluteprohibition on juvenile executions under the convention.In 1994 Yemen amended its Penal Code to abolish the deathpenalty for persons under the age of 18, and stipulated a maximum penalty of 10years’ imprisonment for those who commit capital offenses.[48]Article 31 of the Penal Code states:Any person who has not reached the age of 7 is notaccountable at the time of the act that constituted the crime. If the crime wasperpetrated by a minor who has reached the age of 7, but still has not reachedthe age of 15, the judge may order any of the arrangements stipulated in theLaw of Juveniles in lieu of the normal punishment for the crime. If theperpetrator has reached the age of 15 but not 18, the individual shall besentenced to a maximum of half the punishment set forth in law. If the sentencewas the death penalty, the individual shall be punished by imprisonment for aminimum of 3 years up to a maximum of 10 years.In all cases,imprisonment shall be carried out in special facilities, subject to appropriatetreatment of the indicted juveniles. No minor shall bear full criminal responsibility,unless the individual has reached the age of 18 years old at the time ofcommitting the crime. If the age of the defendant is not easily determined, thejudge may estimate it with the assistance of an expert’s council.[49]This law, however, doesnot clarify how the determinations should be conducted, nor does it requirethat defendants receive the benefit of the doubt if their age is in question.According to nongovernmental organizations working on juvenile justice inYemen, the country lacks adequate forensic facilities with staff trained inconducting age determinations.Yemen retains the death penalty for a wide variety ofoffenses, among them murder of a Muslim, arson or explosion, endangeringtransport and communications, apostasy, robbery, prostitution, adultery, and consensualsex between adults of the same sex.[50]Before the death sentence can be carried out against anindividual, the president must ratify the sentence and issue a decree.[51]The president may also issue a decree for an alternative punishment or exemptthe sentenced defendant.[52] Oncethe presidential decree has been issued, the general prosecutor will issue anorder confirming that the president has issued the necessary decree, and thatthe required legal procedures have been fulfilled.[53]The death sentence can be carried out through beheading bysword, shooting, or stoning.[54]Yemen’s current child protection law, Law No. 24 of1991 as amended by Law No. 26 of 1997 (the Juvenile Welfare Law), only requirescourts to refer children 15 years of age and younger to the juvenile courtsystem and provides for their detention in juvenile facilities.[55]However, the current parliamentary agenda includes a proposed amendment to thelaw, including an article that would expand the jurisdiction of Yemen’sjuvenile courts to all individuals under 18 years of age, rather than thecurrent law, which limits jurisdiction to children 15 years old and younger. Sendingjuvenile offenders before child courts should allow them to be sentenced byjudges whose mandate would be to sentence juveniles within the bounds of thereduced penalties prescribed by Yemen’s criminal law.In 2009 Yemen’s human rights record was examined aspart of the Universal Periodic Review process at the UN Human Rights Council inGeneva. At the review, the government stated that executions of juvenileoffenders “do not exist and have no place in legislation or the judicialsystem.”[56]Yemen did, however, support a recommendation from Denmark to remove juvenileprisoners from death row,[57]and a recommendation from Austria to raise the legal age of criminalresponsibility, develop alternative sentences for juvenile offenders, andensure that prison for offenders under 18 is used only as a last resort.[58]RecommendationsTo President Abdu Rabu Mansour HadiImmediately reverse thepending execution decrees signed by former president Ali Abdullah Saleh inthe cases of Mohammed Taher Somoum, Walid Hussein Haikal, and MohammadAbdu Qassim al-Tawil, three alleged juvenile offenders at risk of imminentexecution.Order a review of all deathsentences where there is doubt that the individual was at least 18 at thetime of the offense, including the 23individuals identified inthis report, and commute all sentences when evidence regarding anoffender’s age remains inconclusive or in conflict.Issue instructions to relevantministries to increase Yemen’s rate of birth registration by raisingpublic awareness regarding the importance of registration and by improvingaccess to registration in poor and rural communities.Impose a moratorium on thedeath penalty in all cases, with a view towards its prompt abolition.To the Ministry of Justice and the Supreme JudicialCouncilImmediately implement amoratorium on all executions of persons convicted of crimes committedbefore age 18.Establish an independentreview committee (separate from the office of the public prosecutor) thatincludes trained medical professionals to develop clear procedures andguidelines with immediate as well as retroactive effect to ensure that alljuveniles accused of murder and other offenses will have access to anindependent impartial age determination process.Suspend the executions of allindividuals who claim to have been under 18 at the time of their allegedcrime, at least until their cases are reviewed by the independentcommittee described above, and their ages are determined in a fair andimpartial manner.Review all death sentenceswhere the accused has presented evidence indicating they were under 18 atthe time of the alleged crime, including the 23individualsidentified by this report. Commute all sentences to custodial or othersentences in conformity with international juvenile justice standards,when evidence regarding an offender’s age remains inconclusive or inconflict.Ensure that judicialauthorities understand and enforce the ban on the juvenile death penalty,including by providing judges and prosecutors with training on itsapplication.Retry all cases in whichcourts accepted prosecution-ordered forensic examinations as determinativeproof of defendant’s ages. Cease using as determinative evidenceforensic age assessments based solely on x-ray evidence and upon theassessment of a single doctor. Instruct judges not to issue death sentencesin cases where evidence regarding an offender’s age remainsinconclusive or in conflict. Develop an impartial age-determinationprocess that relies on more than one expert opinion.Direct prosecutors to excludefrom evidence all forced or compelled testimony, in particular, admissionsor confessions obtained by means of torture, cruel, inhuman, or degradingtreatment.Ensure that no interrogationsare carried out in which the suspect did not have access to legal or otherappropriate counsel at the time. Ensure that children in conflict with thelaw have prompt access to legal assistance, including assistance inproving their age at the time of an alleged offense, and access to familymembers. Require police and prosecutors to record the ages of children whoare brought before them.Ensure legal representation ofjuveniles by a lawyer during all stages of prosecution, including thestage of collecting evidence, during which criminal suspects arequestioned by the police.To the ParliamentAbolish the death penalty.Amend the jurisdiction ofYemen’s Juvenile Care Law (Law No. 24 of 1992, as amended by Law No.26 of 1997), which refers juvenile defendants to child courts, to includeall children below the age of 18.AmendYemen’s minimum age of criminal liability from the age of seven tothe age of twelve or higher to be consistent with the internationallyaccepted standards.To the United States, the European Union and MemberStates, and Other Donor CountriesRaise juvenile death penaltyas a matter of priority requiring urgent attention in dialogues with theYemeni government.Call upon the Yemenigovernment to review the three cases discussed in this report involvingjuvenile offenders at risk of imminent execution. Urge the government toretry cases in which age-related evidence is weak or inconclusive, orwhich incorporated forensic exams based on outdated techniques or examsordered by the prosecution.Make public statementsstressing the importance of adhering to the international ban on executingjuvenile offenders.Appendix: Other Alleged Juvenile Offenderson Death Row in YemenIbb Central Prison:MohammadAbdu Qassim al-TawilAccused of committing murder on June 7,1987Claims to be 17 years old at the time ofthe crimeDeath sentenced confirmed by both appealsand high court, could be executed at any timeMohammedAbdulwahab FaisalAccused of committing murder on February14, 1998Claims he was 15 years old at the time ofthe crimeDeath sentence confirmed by both appealsand high court, court reviewing age informationMohammedTaher SomoumAccused of committing murder on June 8,1999Death sentence confirmed by both appealsand high court and ratified by the president, could be executed at any timeFaisalNaji Said al-HadiAccused of committing murder in 1999Claims to be 16 years old at the time ofthe crimeSentenced to death by an appeals courtTawfiqMohyub al-HabishiAccused of committing murder on May 26,2002Claims to have been 17 years old at thetime of the crimeDeath sentence issued by North Ibb trialcourt on November 18, 2007 and confirmed by appeals courtMuwafiqMuthana Ahmad Hussein al-MadhrahiAccused of committing murder in 2004Claims to have been 17 years old at thetime of the crimeDeathsentence issued by trial court and confirmed by appeals court on March 8, 2010SamirNaji Ahmad al-MahdiAccused of committing murder on February27, 2005Claims to have been 16 years old at thetime of the crimeSentenced to death by a trial courtMohammedAbdullah Mathar al-WashliAccused of committing murder in January2009Sentenced to death by an appeals courtAwa’adMusaed Ahmad Hussein al-SouriAccused of committing murder on December29, 2009Claimed to be 17 years old at the time ofthe crimeDeath sentence issued by trial court on May29, 2011Dammar Central Prison:NasserAhmad Ali HurqidahAccused of committing murder on October 17,2010Forensic examination found him to be 16years old at the time of the crimeDeath sentence issued by trial courtMohammedAbdu Mohammed A’ajinahAccused of committing murder on June 15,2010Forensic examination found him to be 17years old at the time of the crimeDeath sentence issued by a trial court.Sanaa Central Prison:NadimHatim al-Aza’aziAccused of committing murderClaims to have been 15 at the time of thecrime, based on three forensic examinationsSentenced to death by a trial courtSamiral-Shara’abi,Accused of committing murderClaims to have been under 18 (either 15 or16) at the time of the crimeSentenced to death by a trial courtAkramMohammed Abdullah al-FaqihAccused of committing murder on February 6,2002Claims to have been 15 at the time of thealleged crimeSentenced to death by trial court, caseunder appealAden Central Prison:HaniAbdu QaidAccused of committing murder on November17, 2005Claims to have been 17 years old at thetime of the crimeSentenced to death by the high courtHodeida Central Prison:MariamYahia Youssef al-BatahAccused of committing murder on November 4,2009Claims to have been 16 at the time of thecrimeSentenced to death by a trial court inHodeidaMahweet Central Prison:AhmadBahal Ahmad al-RasisahAccused of committing murder on March 17,2010Birth certificate produced at court makeshim 15 years old at the time of the crimeSentenced to death by a trial courtAcknowledgmentsThis report was researched and written by PriyankaMotaparthy and Bede Sheppard, researchers in the Children’s RightsDivision of Human Rights Watch. Farida Kalagy and Mariam Kirollos, researchassistants in the Middle East and North Africa division, provided valuableassistance.The report was edited by Zama Coursen-Neff, directorof the Children’s Rights Division; Letta Tayler, Yemen and Terrorism/Counterterrorismresearcher; Nadim Houry, deputy director of the Middle East and North Africadivision; James Ross, legal and policy director; and Babatunde Olugboji, deputyprogram director.Noah Beaudette, associate in the Children’s RightsDivision provided editing and production assistance. Anna Lopriore, creativemanager; Grace Choi, publications director; Kathy Mills, publicationsspecialist; and Fitzroy Hepkins, mail and print manager, provided productionassistance.We wish to thank the UNICEF officein Yemen, the lawyers and social workers from the Yemeni NGO Coalition on ChildRights, and the five individuals on death row who agreed to share their storiesfor the purpose of this report.[1]According to Amnesty International data, China executed thousands ofindividuals (though the exact number is unknown), while Iran had 360+, SaudiArabia 82+, and Iraq 68+ known executions. Amnesty International, “DeathSentences and Executions in 2011,”2012, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/ACT50/001/2012/en/241a8301-05b4-41c0-bfd9-2fe72899cda4/act500012012en.pdf(accessed September 14, 2012), p. 7.[2]US State Department, Bureau of Democracy,Human Rights and Labor, “Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for2011 - 2011, Yemen,”http://www.state.gov/j/drl/rls/hrrpt/humanrightsreport/index.htm#wrapper(accessed December 1, 2012).[3]UN Committee Against Torture,“Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Parties under Article 19 ofthe Convention, Conclusions and recommendations of the Committee againstTorture, Yemen,” CAT/C/YEM/CO/2/Rev.1, May 25, 2010,http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G10/426/51/PDF/G1042651.pdf?OpenElement(accessed December 1, 2012), para. 9.[4]Human Rights Watch interview with Ibrahim al-Omaisy, Sanaa Central Prison,March 27, 2012; Human Rights Watch interview with Walid Hussein Haikal, SanaaCentral Prison, March 27, 2012.[5]Human Rights Watch, “Report on Human Rights in Yemen,” February 1,2012, http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/related_material/Report%20on%20Human%20Rights%20in%20Yemen.pdf(accessed September 16, 2012).[6]Yemeni Civil Society Organizations, “The Status of Torture in Yemen,Second Parallel Report by Yemeni Civil Society Organizations on Yemen’sCompliance with the Convention Against Torture and All Forms of Inhuman andDegrading Treatment,” October 12, 2009, http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cat/docs/ngos/SAF_Yemen43.pdf(accessed September 16, 2012).[7]Ibid.[8]UNICEF, “At a glance: Yemen,” total birth registration2000–2010, measures the percentage of children less than five years ofage that were registered at the moment of the survey, http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/yemen_statistics.html(accessed September 14, 2012).[9]Ibid.[10]Human Rights Watch group interview with lawyers and social workers from theYemeni National NGO Coalition on Child Rights, Sanaa, March 26, 2012.[11]Royal College of Pediatrics and Child Health, “X-Rays and Asylum-SeekingChildren: Policy Statement,” November 19, 2007, http://www.rcpch.ac.uk/sites/default/files/asset_library/Policy%20and%20Standards/X%20rays%20and%20asylum%20seeking%20children%20policy%20statement.pdf(accessed September 2, 2012).[12]“Implementation Mechanism for the Transition in Yemen Pursuant to the GulfCooperation Council Initiative,” November 23, 2011, sections 21(e),21(f), 21(g), copy on file with Human Rights Watch.[13]International Covenant on Civil and PoliticalRights (ICCPR), adopted December 16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAORSupp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered intoforce March 23, 1976, acceded to by the People’s Democratic Republic ofYemen on February 9, 1987, art. 14; Convention on the Rights of the Child(CRC), adopted November 20, 1989, G.A. Res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp.(No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered into force September 2,1990, ratified by the Yemen Arab Republic on May 1, 1991, art. 40.[14]Human Rights Watch interview with BashirMohammed Ahmed Ali Al-Dihar, Sanaa Central Prison, March 27, 2012.[15]Decision, Bani al-Harith Trial Court, July 10, 2010 (Arabic original on filewith Human Rights Watch) .[16]Human Rights Watch interview with Bashir Mohammed Ahmed Ali Al-Dihar, March 27,2012.[17]Ibid.[18]Ibid.[19]Human Rights Watch interview with Qaid Youssef Omar al-Khadamy, Sanaa CentralPrison, March 27, 2012.[20]Decision, Shima’al al-Amanah Trial Court, Criminal Case No. 202, July 1,2006 (Arabic original on file with Human Rights Watch).[21]Ibid.[22]Human Rights Watch interview with Qaid Youssef Omar Al-Khadamy, March 27, 2012.[23]Human Rights Watch interview with Qaid Youssef Omar Al-Khadamy, March 27, 2012.[24]Decision, Shima’al al-Amanah Trial Court, July 1, 2006.[25]Ibid.[26]Human Rights Watch interview with Qaid Youssef Omar Al-Khadamy, March 27, 2012.[27]Human Rights Watch interview with Mohammed Ahmed Sanhan, Sanaa Central Prison,March 27, 2012.[28]Ibid.[29]Decision, Shima’al al-Amanah trialcourt, Criminal Case No.135, July 15, 2009 (Arabic original on file with HumanRights Watch).[30]Forensic Determination of Age Report for Mohammed Ahmed Sanhan, August 12, 2006(Arabic original on file with Human Rights Watch).[31]Human Rights Watch interview with Ibrahim al-Omaisy, March 27, 2012.[32]Ibid.[33]Ibid.[34]Human Rights Watch interview with Walid Hussein Haikal, Sanaa Central Prison,March 27, 2012.[35]Procedural complaint filed by Walid’s lawyers, Arabic original on filewith Human Rights Watch.[36]Human Rights Watch interview with Walid Hussein Haikal, March 27, 2012.[37]ICCPR, art. 6(5); CRC, art. 37(a).[38]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC Committee), General comment No. 10(2007): Children’s Rights in Juvenile Justice, UN Doc. CRC/C/GC/10, para39.[39]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC Committee), General comment No. 6(2005): Treatment of Unaccompanied and Separated Children Outside Their Countryof Origin, CRC/GC/2005/6, para. 31(i).[40]Terry Smith and Laura Brownlees, “AgeAssessment Practices: A Literature Review and Annotated Bibliography,”UNICEF 2011 (New York),http://www.unicef.org/protection/Age_Assessment_Practices_2010.pdf(accessed September 2, 2012).[41]World Bank, “Nutrition at a Glance,Yemen Country Profile,” Based on data from 1995 to 2005,http://siteresources.worldbank.org/NUTRITION/Resources/281846-1271963823772/Yemen.pdf(accessed December 1, 2012).[42]Ibid, p.18.[43]Royal College of Pediatrics and ChildHealth, “X-Rays and Asylum-Seeking Children: Policy Statement,”November 19, 2007,http://www.rcpch.ac.uk/sites/default/files/asset_library/Policy%20and%20Standards/X%20rays%20and%20asylum%20seeking%20children%20policy%20statement.pdf(accessed September 2, 2012).[44]UNHCR, Guidelines on International Protection: Child Asylum Claims underArticles 1(A)2 and 1(F) of the 1951 Convention and/or 1967 Protocol relating tothe Status of Refugees, December 22, 2009, U.N. Doc. HCR/GIP/09/08, http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/4b2f4f6d2.html,(accessed February 7, 2013) para. 75.[45]CRC, art. 37(a) (“Neither capital punishment nor life imprisonmentwithout possibility of release shall be imposed for offences committed by personsbelow eighteen years of age”); ICCPR, art. 6(5) (“Sentence of deathshall not be imposed for crimes committed by persons below eighteen years ofage”).[46]Human Rights Committee, General Comment 24 (1994), General comment on issuesrelating to reservations made upon ratification or accession to the Covenant orthe Optional Protocols thereto, or in relation to declarations under article 41of the Covenant, U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.6 (1994)., para. 8.[47]UN Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC Committee), General comment No. 10(2007): Children’s Rights in Juvenile Justice, UN Doc. CRC/C/GC/10 (2007),para 39.[48]Yemeni Penal Code, art. 31.[49]Ibid.[50]Yemeni Penal Code, arts. 124, 141, 226, 227, 228, 234, 249, 259, 263, 264, 280,306.[51]Yemeni Criminal Procedure Code, arts. 479 and 480.[52]Ibid, art. 480.[53]Ibid, art. 480.[54]Ibid, arts. 485 and 487.[55]Human Rights Council, National Report submitted to the Human Rights Council,Government of Yemen, February 20, 2009, U.N. Doc. A/HRC/WG.6/5/YEM/1, http://lib.ohchr.org/HRBodies/UPR/Documents/Session5/YE/A_HRC_WG6_5_YEM_1_E.pdf(accessed September 14, 2012).[56]Human Rights Council, Report of the Working Group on theUniversal Periodic Review: Yemen, June 5, 2009, U.N. Doc. A/HRC/12/13,para. 53[57]Ibid, para. 91.[58]Ibid, para. 91; see CRC, art. 37(b) (“The arrest, detention orimprisonment of a child shall be in conformity with the law and shall be usedonly as a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period oftime”).Related ContentMarch 4, 2013News ReleaseYemen: Juvenile Offenders Face ExecutionAt Least 22 on Death Row; Dozens More at Risk of Death SentenceMarch 4, 2013News ReleaseYemen: Juvenile Offenders Face ExecutionRegion / CountryMiddle East/North Africa,YemenProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch