November 2006    
                       Number 2 
  
Widespread Torture in the Chechen Republic 
 
Human Rights Watch Briefing Paper for the 37th Session  
UN Committee against Torture 
 
November 13, 2006 
 
Introduc tion ................................................................................................................... .... 1 
Torture by personnel of the Second Oper ational Investigative Bureau (ORB-2).................... 3  
Illegal arrest and torture of two br others, Sulim S. and Salambek S. ................................5  
Torture by units under the effective command of Chechen Prime Minister Ramzan Kadyrov 7  
Background note on the structure of fo rces under Kadyrov’s effective command .............7  
Torture in secret  detention.............................................................................................. 9  
Illegal detention and torture of  Magomed M. and four of his fellow villagers...........10  
Illegal detention and to rture of Kh amid Kh............................................................... 11  
Continuing “dis appearan ces”........................................................................................... 12  
Enforced disappearance of Balaudi Melkaev .................................................................12  
Lack of Acco untabili ty .......................................................................................................14   
 1 
Introduction 
 
In 2006 Human Rights Watch conducted two investigative missions to Chechnya, 
focusing specifically on the issues of t orture and unlawful detention. Based on 
interviews with victims of abuses, their relatives and, in some cases, their lawyers, 
we gathered information—and in some cases documented in detail—on the torture of 
115 persons between July 2004 and Sept ember 2006. The present briefing paper 
summarizes this research. 
 While statistics on the scale of illegal detention and torture in Chechnya are unavailable, our research, taken together with that of the Memorial Human Rights 
Center and Nizhnii Novgorod Committee against Torture—two Russian human rights 
nongovernmental organizations—strongly suggests that torture and ill-treatment in 
detention in Chechnya are systematic.
1  
 In the majority of cases documented by Human Rights Watch, pro-Moscow Chechen forces under the effective command of Prime Minister Ramzan Kadyrov—known as 
“Kadyrovsty”—were responsible for the a buses; we also documented torture by 
personnel of the Second Operational Investigative Bureau (ORB-2) of the North Caucasus Operative Department of Chief Directorate of the Federal Ministry of Interior in the Southern Federal District.   
Torture and other forms of ill treatment by ORB-2 personnel appear aimed at coercing 
confessions from detainees, which then lead to fabricated criminal charges and court convictions. Kadyrovtsy, by contras t, resort to such treatment to secure 
incriminating information about rebe l forces from detainees whom they 
subsequently release or force to join their  ranks. They have also taken hostage and 
mistreated relatives of alleged rebel fighters.  
                                                     
 
1  An analysis of cases summarized in Chronicle of Violence  –an internet bulletin published by the Memorial Human Rights 
Center that documents human rights violat ions in Chechnya and neighboring republics—shows that from January 2005 to the 
beginning of October 2006, Memorial documented 277 cases of torture in Chechnya. The regularly updated Chronicle of 
Violence  is available at: http://www.memo.ru/hr/hotpoints/caucas 1/index.htm. Memorial has four regional offices in 
Chechnya and an office in Nazran, Ingushet ia. Its staff emphasize that the actual number of torture incidents is likely to be 
several times higher, as the organization covers only about 25-30 percent of Chechnya, and because in many cases victims 
request that their cases not be publicized. Human Rights Watch has not compared cases researched by our respective organizations to determine whether, and if so the degree to which,  they overlap. According to Memorial, “the use of torture at 
both legal and unofficial places of detention in Chechnya is not just a system, but a rule, while the unwillingness of victims to 
speak out proves the effectiveness of this system of terroriz ing the population.” Human Rights Watch telephone interview 
with a senior staff member of the Memorial Human Rights Center, October 30, 2006. Experts from the Nizhnii Novgorod Committee against Torture agree, based on their research in Chechnya and information prov ided by lawyers working on 
criminal cases there, that for “as many criminal cases there are in Chechnya, there are as many cases of torture or ill-treatment.” Human Rights Watch telephone interview with a senior staff member of Nizhnii Novgorod Committee against 
Torture, October 30, 2006.   
    
 2 
Many interviewees said they were detained and tortured by Kadyrovtsy in unlawful detention facilities run by these forces. Such facilities, which exist throughout 
Chechnya, are clearly illegal under Russian and international law. Their “secret” 
nature makes detainees particularl y vulnerable to abuse.  
 In the majority of cases we documented, victims of unlawful detention and torture 
were young males. We also documented a number of cases where the victims were 
women, elderly, disabled people, and minors , the youngest of whom was 13 years 
old.   Methods of torture used against the detainees include prolonged beatings, often with boots, sticks, plastic bottles filled with water or sand, and heavy rubber-coated 
cables; inflicting of burns with open fire or red-hot metal rods and wires, and 
widespread use of electric shocks. In addit ion, a number of interviewees told Human 
Rights Watch about psychological pressure, such  as threats or imitation of execution 
or sexual abuse, as well as threats to harm their relatives.   
This briefing paper has been prepared in advance of the U.N. Committee against 
Torture’s examination of the fourth perio dic report of the Russian Federation. Since 
2002, when the committee examined the Russ ian Federation’s third periodic report, 
Human Rights Watch has conducted regular visits to the North Caucasus to document continued human rights vi olations in the Chechen Republic and 
neighboring republics perpetrated by all sides to the armed conflict there. In 
research prior to 2006 Human Rights Watch documented numerous cases of torture, 
ill-treatment, and enforced disappearances by Russia’s federal forces and by 
Kadyrovtsy. These findings have been summ arized in Human Rights Watch’s earlier 
publications.
2 
 
There have been many changes in Chechn ya since the committee’s examination of 
Russia’s third periodic report. Begi nning in 2003, under a policy known as 
“Chechenization” of the conflict, day-to -day law enforcement operations, including 
counterterrorism, have increasingly become the r esponsibility of Kadyrov’s forces. At 
present there are almost no more large-scale “sweep” operations, which, as the 
committee noted in its 2002 concluding obser vations on Russia’s third periodic 
report, would give rise to arbitrary detentions and “disappearances” by federal 
                                                      
2 See e.g. Human Rights Watch, Worse than a War: Disappearances in Chechnya—a Crime Against Humanity , March 2005, 
http://hrw.org/backgrounder/eca/chechnya0305/; Into Harm's Way: Forced Return of Displaced People to Chechnya ,  vol. 15, 
no. 1(D), January 2003 , http://hrw.org/rep orts/2003/russia0103; Russia: Last Seen: Disappearances in Chechnya ,  vol.14, no. 
3 (D), April 2002, http://rhw.org/reports/2002/russchech02;  Russia : Swept Under: Torture, Forced Disappearances, and 
Extrajudicial Killings During Sweep Operations In Chechnya ,  vol. 14, no. 2 (D), February 2002, 
http://hrw.org/reports/2002/russchech.  
 3forces. More common today are targ eted raids ostensibly aimed at apprehending 
rebel fighters and their supporters.    
We were pleased to note the committee’ s many detailed and highly relevant 
questions regarding Chechnya in its list of issues drawn up in advance of the upcoming review of Russia’s fourth periodic report. We hope the present briefing paper will help inform the committee’s examination of Russia—particularly on points 39-42 on the list of issues—and the conclusions and recommendations resulting 
from its review.  
 
The names of most victims and witnesses interviewed for this briefing paper have 
been disguised with names and initials (wh ich do not reflect real names) in the 
interest of the security of the individuals concerned. For the same reason we have 
also withheld certain details that might identify them, such as precise dates of 
detention, the names of villages where they reside, and the like. 
 
Torture by personnel of the Se cond Operational Investigative 
Bureau (ORB-2) 
 ORB-2 was established in 2002 and formally charged with detecting, preventing and 
suppressing actions by organized criminal groups.
3  
 
Following their visits to ORB-2 premises in Grozny in 2003 and 2004 respectively, the 
European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) and th en-Council of Europe Human Rights 
Commissioner Alvaro Gil-Robles expressed se rious concerns about the numerous 
allegations of mistreatment of detainees he ld in the facility run by ORB-2 and 
questioned its legal status.
4  
 The ORB-2 holding cells were finally f ormally “legalized” as a temporary holding 
facility (IVS) in November 2004 by an internal order of the Ministry of Interior,  but 
operational investigative bureaus do no t figure in a supposed comprehensive list—
                                                     
 
3 ORB-2 mainly covers the Chechen Republic, although in a few cases documented by Human Rights Watch residents of 
Chechnya arrested in other regions of the North Cauc asus, such as Ingushetia, were also brought there. 
4 See European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and In human or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT), “Public 
statement concerning the Chechen Republic of the Russian Fe deration,” CPT/Inf (2003) 33, Strasbourg, July 10, 2006, 
http://cpt.coe.int/documents/rus/2003-33-inf-eng.pdf (access ed November 4, 2006); Commissioner for Human Rights,  
“Report by Mr. Alvaro Gil-Robles, Commissioner for Human Rights, on his visits to the Russian Federation 15 to 30 July 2004 
and 19 to 29 September 2004 for the attention of the Committee of Ministers and the Parliamentary Assembly,” Comm DH (2005) 2,  Strasbourg, April 20, 2005,  
https://wcd.coe.int/com.instranet.InstraServlet?Index=no &Command=com.instranet.CmdBlobGet&DocId=831880&SecMod
e=1&Admin=0&Usage=4&InstranetImage=45188 (accessed November 7, 2006).  
 4contained in the Federal Law of the Russian F ederation on the Detention of Suspects 
and Accused Persons—of facilities authorized to hold detainees.5 
 
Human Rights Watch interviewed several dozen people who were detained and 
tortured at ORB-2 premises between 2004 and 2006, as well as their relatives and lawyers; they consistently told of ORB-2 personnel coercing confessions under brutal 
ill-treatment and torture; denying deta inees access to lawyers of their choice; 
preventing medical documentation of signs of torture by denying access to doctors 
and keeping detainees in custody until the si gns of torture fade and, if suspects 
sought to renounce their coerced confessions after they were transferred to remand 
custody, subjecting them to further ill-tr eatment as punishment and to force them to 
stand by the original statements.    
In cases we researched, ORB-2 personnel seiz ed persons, usually young males, from 
their homes, places of work, or the st reets without identifying themselves or 
providing a warrant or any explanation. They then brought the detainees to the ORB-
2 temporary detention facility and immediately started interrogating them.   
In almost all cases, the detention was offi cially registered only after several days. 
During this time detainees’ families had no information on their relatives’ 
whereabouts, and the ORB-2 personnel  interrogated the detainees in the absence of 
a lawyer, or with the participation of a lawyer appointed by ORB-2 personnel. 
According to the interviewees, the appointed lawyers ignored their complaints about 
torture—although they saw the torture marks on their clients’ bodies—and instead 
encouraged them to accept the charges.   During interrogations, ORB-2 personnel subj ected the detainees to severe beatings, 
torture with electric shocks, suffocation, and threats or imitation of sexual violence. 
Most interviewees told Human Rights Watc h that during these interrogations, which 
lasted for many hours, they were forced to confess to serious crimes, such as multiple murders or terrorist attacks, as well as to name other people allegedly involved with the rebel movement. In so me cases, the confession had been prepared 
beforehand by the interrogators and contained  exact dates, places, and identities of 
the victims. In other cases, the detainees themselves had to “choose” a crime and 
invent details that the interrogators would then record.   
                                                     
 
5 Order of the Ministry of Interior of Russian Federation No  709, November 3, 2004, cited in: the Memorial Human Rights 
Center, “Official Illegal Prisons: A Mechanis m of Forcing Confessions,” April 18, 2006, 
http://www.memo.ru/2006/04/18/orb2.htm (accessed Oc tober 31, 2006). IVS is the Russian acronym for izoliator 
vremmengo zaderzhania .  
 5Once the confession was obtained and signed, the detainee was kept in the ORB-2 
temporary detention facility for several days or sometimes weeks to allow any signs of torture, such as bruises or burns, to fade. The investigators would then transfer 
the accused to the remand prison (SIZO-1) in Grozny, where they stayed until and 
during trial.
6  
 Several interviewees told Human Rights Watch that after being transferred to the 
SIZO, they complained to their lawyers or investigators about being tortured by ORB-
2 personnel and tried to renounce their confession. They were then brought back to 
ORB-2, where the personnel would beat a nd abuse them with greater severity, 
forcing them to revert to their prior statements. Some interviewees said their lawyers often advised them to just accept the charges, believing this to be the only way to protect them from further abuse.  
 
While initially detainees were usually ch arged with serious crimes, these charges 
were often dropped before or at trial. In the majority of cases documented by Human 
Rights Watch, the charges were even tually reduced to “organization of or 
participation in illegal armed formations” or “unlawful possession or transfer of 
weapons” (articles 208 and 222 of the Russian criminal code).
7  
 In many cases the courts sentenced the defendants to prison terms shorter than those prescribed by the criminal code, to  probation, or even released them, applying 
the time spent in pretrial detention toward the sentence. The courts, however, 
blatantly disregarded the defendants’ allegations of torture, even in cases where 
such allegations were supported by medical records and witness testimonies.   The case of two brothers, Sulim S. and Salambek S., documented by Human Rights 
Watch in September 2006 is illustrative of the above-described pattern.  
 
Illegal arrest and torture of two br others, Sulim S. and Salambek S.  
In mid-March 2006, 29-year-old Sulim S. was on his way to work when about 10 
armed men stopped him on the street a nd forced him into a car, where they 
handcuffed and blindfolded him and pushed him down to the floor. They drove 
Sulim S. to what he later found out wa s the ORB-2 premises. Sulim S. described the 
torture he endured there:  
                                                      
6 SIZO is the Russian acronym for sledztvennyi izoliator . 
7 The maximum sentence under article 208.1 (0rganization of an illegal armed formation) is seven years of imprisonment; the 
minimum sentence is two years of imprisonment. The maximum sent ence under article 208.2 (participation in an illegal armed 
formation) is five years of imprisonment; the minimum senten ce is six months of detention. The maximum sentence under 
article 222.1-4 (illegal acquisition, transfer, sale, storage, transportation, or bearing of firearms,) is eight years of 
imprisonment; the minimum sentence is six months of detention.  
 6For the first five days they kept me blindfolded. I did not know what they 
wanted. They kept saying, “We know that you know, and you know that we know!” and when I asked what I was su pposed to know, they tortured me. 
They put a gas mask on my face and would cut the airflow until I started 
suffocating. They repeatedly gave me el ectric shocks—my head was swinging 
back and forth; one discharge went through my tongue, and my tongue got all swollen and was falling out of my mouth.   
They beat me mercilessly. They put me against the wall with my legs spread 
apart and kicked me on my privates—I later saw that the entire area in between my thighs was all black from br uises. They pulled my pants down 
and threatened to rape me.   
I kept telling them, “Just kill me!” but th ey said, “No, we won’t kill you right 
away—we’ll do it slowly, and we will als o rip your brother apart.” I felt like 
during these interrogations I was dying ov er and over again, and they would 
revive me to continue. Finally, after they realized I could not come up with anything, they offered me three crimes to choose from—a bombing of a bus, a 
killing of two policemen or a killing of one woman. But I refused.
8 
 Sulim S.’s family learned about his whereabouts three days after his detention and hired a lawyer to represent him. About a week after Sulim S.’s detention, a group of armed men detained his brother, Salambek, a nd brought him to the ORB-2 facility. 
Salambek S. described his ordeal at ORB-2 to Human Rights Watch: 
 
The men started beating me while we were still in the car, but did not explain where they were taking me and why. Then they put me into a room, and told 
me to tell them “everything.” I thought th ey were referring to a short period of 
time in 1999 when I helped to dig trenches in the city along with everybody 
else, but they  . . . said they were not interested in that—they wanted me to confess to bombings and killings. I sa id they must have mistaken me for 
someone else.   
They attached wires to my fingers and ears, and started giving me electric 
shocks—I could not see the device, as they put a gasmask on my head, but heard the clicking sound. They pushed me against the wall and started beating me on the kidneys, and then th rew me on the floor—I was lying on my 
stomach, and one of the men put his boot  under my heart area, while [at the 
same time] another was sitting on my back. As other men pressed the pain 
                                                     
 
8 Human Rights Watch interview with Sulim S., Grozny, September 21, 2006.  
 7zones on my legs I would twitch and the boot would press hard into my 
heart—I felt like my heart was stopping and couldn’t breathe.   
They repeated these interrogations and be atings for several days, and then 
told me that if I did not confess, they would bring my wife and rape her in front of my eyes, and then do the same  with me. They brought a club and said 
they would stick it up my ass.   
I would rather die than be dishonored like  that; it is just unthinkable in our 
culture—I told them I would confess to  a bombing of a bus, and made up a 
story, coming up with the most unbeliev able details. When I tried to take my 
confession back, they started torturing my brother in the adjacent cell, saying, ‘Do you hear? That’s your brother screaming.’
9  
 
After spending about 10 days in the ORB-2 holding facility, Salambek S. was transferred to the remand facility in Grozny,  where some of his injuries sustained 
during interrogations were documented by a medical professional. Sulim S., who refused to sign a confession, spent a total of  25 days in the ORB-2 holding facility. 
Sulim said that upon transfer to the rema nd facility in Grozny, he was examined by a 
doctor who documented his injuries, inclu ding broken ribs, bruises on his legs and 
inner thighs, swollen hands and tongue, and burned ears.   Most of the charges against the two brothers  were dropped, and both stood trial for 
“membership in illegal armed formations.” In  August 2006, a court released both 
men under the applicable statute of limitatio ns. Although the brot hers told the judge 
they had been tortured in det ention and the medical reports were entered into the 
case record, the court took no action to investigate the torture allegations.
10  
 
Torture by units under the effect ive command of Chechen Prime 
Minister Ramzan Kadyrov 
 
Background note on th e structure of forces under Kadyrov’s effective 
command 
Most Chechen government law enforcement and security units originate from the 
personal security service of the late Chechen President Akhmad Kadyrov, which was 
headed by his son, Ramzan, who has since become prime minister of Chechnya.11 
                                                      
9 Human Rights Watch interview with Salambek S. , Grozny, September 21, 2006. 
10 Ibid. 
11 This was called the Sluzhba Bezopasnosti, or Securi ty Service, and was known by the acronym, SB.   
 8After Akhmad Kadyrov’s assassination in 2004, this security service was disbanded, 
and its personnel were gradually reassigned to different branches of the Ministry of Interior of the Chechen Republic, including the Second Regiment of the Checkpoint 
Guard Service of the Police (PPSM-2) and th e Oil Protection Unit (“Neftepolk”) of the 
Extra-departmental Protection Service (UVO). They were also assigned to the Anti-Terrorism Center (ATC), which itself wa s disbanded in April 2006, with personnel 
reassigned to two battalions of Interi or Troops of the Russian Federal Ministry of 
Interior.
12  
 
Despite changes in formal affiliation, these units continue to be loyal to Ramzan Kadyrov personally and to some of his clo sest allies, such as Adam Demilkhanov, 
head of the Oil Protection Unit and curr ently the vice prime minister of the Chechen 
government.
13  
 
These units operate in a questionable legal framework. PPSM-2 and the Oil Protection Unit routinely participate in secur ity operations, even though they do not 
appear to be authorized by law to do so, and make use of ATC bases, even after the ATC was disbanded.
14 More important, PPSM-2, the Oil Protection Regiment, and ATC 
personnel detain people, holding them secretly at unlawful detention facilities, and 
use illegal methods of interrogation, including torture and ill-treatment.   Another law enforcement structure in Ch echnya are the local police departments 
(ROVD), whose top personnel for the most part were installed by Kadyrov to ensure 
his control over the police force.
15 ROVD personnel process detainees within the 
                                                      
12 Announcing this latest change, Ramzan Kadyrov confirmed the evolution of his personal militia, saying “The [SB] was 
reformed into the [ATC], and, no w, on the basis of the [ATC], tw o new battalions under the authority of federal structures are 
formed.” See “Ramzan Kadyrov obiavil ‘kadyrovtsev’ vne zakona,” Newsru.com, April 29, 2006, 
http://www.newsru.com/russia/ 29apr2006/ramzan_print.html  (accessed May 25, 2006). 
13 Reports by the Memorial Human Rights Center repeatedly emphasized this close connection. For example, on April 1, 2005, 
Memorial states that “despite the reorganization of the SB and its incorporation into the Ministry of Interior structures, many  
personnel continue wearing uniforms with ‘Security Service’ insignia.” Chronicle of Violence , 
http://www.memo.ru/hr/hotpoints/caucas1/index.htm (accessed  November 4, 2006). On May 1, 2005, in a report 
documenting the beating of a loca l administration chief by Kadyrovtsy in the village of Duba-Yurt, the Memorial noted that the 
personnel “was subordinate personally to R. Kadyrov—that’s  how they identified themselves.” Memorial Human Rights 
Center, Chronicle of Violence, ”  http://www.memo.ru/hr/hotpoints/caucas1/ index.htm (accessed October 29, 2006).  
14 Officially, PPSM-2 is supposed to be carrying out the functions of regular patrolling and road police, while the Oil Protectio n 
Unit is charged with guarding Chechnya’s petroleum resources. Legislation governing PPSM units states their basic functions 
as “safeguarding the personal safety of citizens, guarding civil order and providing for civil defense, preventing and 
suppressing crimes and civil violations on the streets, public tr ansport facilities, and other public places.” Amendment to the  
Order of the Ministry of Interior of the Russian Federation of from April 13, 1993 (No.166), “Primernoe polozhenie o stroevikh 
podrazdeleniakh patrulno-postovoi sluzhbi militsii obshchestve nnoi bezopasnosti (mestnoi militsii) Rossiskoi Federatasii,” 
§1.1, http://zakon.kuban.ru/zakon/pps.htm#p (accessed February 16, 2006). The Russian Federal Law on the Police suggests 
that the Extra-departmental Protection Service (UVO) is limite d to protecting specific objects designated by the Russian 
government. In the case of the Oil Protection Unit, these ob jects are linked to the operation of Chechnya’s regional oil 
company, Grozneftegaz. See Russian Federal Law on the Police April 18, 1991, No. 1026-I, http://zakon.kuban.ru/zakon/zm.htm  (accessed October 31, 2006). 
15 ROVD is the Russian acronym for raionnoe otdelenie vnutrennykh del . Since 2004, Ramzan Kadyrov has been gradually 
replacing the heads of local police department with people lo yal to him. For example, in early 2005 he appointed the new  
 9criminal justice system and have lawful det ention facilities, but personnel at some 
police stations—for example, in the villages of Kurchaloi, Shali, and Achkhoi-Martan—have become notorious for tortur e of detainees. For example, during our 
last two research trips to Chechnya, Huma n Rights Watch docum ented eight cases of 
people who had been detained and tortured by personnel of the Achkhoi-Martan ROVD.   Despite the gradual “legalization” of Kadyrov ’s forces, detention at their facilities—
both official and unlawful—and torture continue unabated to date. During our 
September 2006 mission to the region Human Rights Watch documented 82 cases of 
torture by these forces, 54 of which h appened in 2006. The most recent of these 
cases were from summer and early fall of 2006.
16  
 
Torture in secret detention 
Kadyrov’s units hold and torture detainees in premises that are not lawful places of 
detention. The detention has no legal f ramework, and detainees cannot exercise 
their rights guaranteed by Russian and int ernational law, including access to lawyers 
or medical professionals. In the vast majority of cases, the family has no information of the detainee’s whereabouts, unless they manage to obtain it through personal 
contacts with Kadyrov’s forces. 
 In most cases, people detained by these forces are released without any formal charges brought against them—they are simply warned to keep complete silence 
about their ordeal unless they want to face even harsher consequences.  
 
In some cases Kadyrov’s forces use short-t erm, unlawful detention and torture to 
obtain information that could be useful  in their counterterrorism operations against 
Chechen rebels. In others, torture is used to punish or intimidate families whose relative has joined the rebel movement (even if the relative had been killed, arrested, 
or surrendered to the authorities), people  who sought justice for abuses by 
Kadyrov’s forces, and individuals suspected of collaborating with Chechen rebels.  
 In a number of cases documented by Huma n Rights Watch, Kadyrov’s forces also 
held former or active rebel fighters, but  instead of prosecuting them forced them, 
under torture and threats of execution, to join their ranks. Finally, in a large number 
                                                                                                                                                             
 
head of Achkhoi-Martan ROVD. See the Memorial Human Rights Center, Chronicle of Violence , March 4, 2005, 
http://www.memo.ru/hr/hotpoints/caucas1/index.htm (accessed October 29, 2006). In August 2005, Kadyrov replaced the 
head of Kurchaloi ROVD with his “friend and a close ally.” See the Memorial Human Rights Center, Chronicle of Violence ,  
September 21, 2005, http://www.memo.ru/hr/hotpoints/ caucas1/index.htm (accessed October 29, 2006). 
16 Specifically, at bases in Tsentoroi and Jalka, see below. 
  
 10of cases documented by Human Rights Wa tch and other organizations, Kadyrov’s 
forces seized and ill-treated, including through  torture, relatives of rebel fighters and 
kept them hostage in order to force such rebels to surrender.  
 
Human Rights Watch obtained detailed descript ions of at least 10 unlawful detention 
facilities—for the most part bases or pri vate houses owned or used by regional 
commanders loyal to Kadyrov — in towns and villages throughout Chechnya. They include at least two different bases located in Kadyrov’s home village of Tsentoroi; 
the ATC headquarters in the city of Gudermes; ATC bases in the villages of Tsotsin-
Yurt, Mairtup, Geldagen, Novogroznyi, and Avtury; and facilities run by the Oil Protection Unit in Grozny and the village of Jalka. 
 Most detainees whom Human Rights Watch interviewed spent from several days to 
several weeks in detention. Those detained as  hostages to compel the surrender of 
their relatives were held considerably longer, sometimes for many months. For example, seven relatives of Aslan Maskhado v were tortured at the Tsentoroi base, 
where they were held for six months, f rom early December 2004 to late May 2005.
17  
 
With very few exceptions, all interviewees who were detained by Kadyrov’s forces 
told Human Rights Watch that they had been brutally tortured. The most common methods of torture they described were the use of electric shocks and beatings 
through punching, kicking and the use of  clubs. Victims, interviewed separately, 
consistently described the administration of  electric shocks through a portable 
device with a handle for producing electricity and wires that the torturers attached to 
the victims’ fingers, toes, ears, or other body parts.   The following two cases illustrate the typical pattern of detention and torture by Kadyrov’s forces. 
 
Illegal detention and tortur e of “Magomed M.” and four  of his fellow villagers 
In early June 2006, Kadyrov’s forces detained five young males, including 24-year-old 
Magomed M., from a village in central-eastern Chechnya.18  
 
                                                      
17 The case of Aslan Maskhadov’s relatives was documented in Human Rights Watch, Worse than a War , pp. 25-28.  
Maskhadov’s relatives were released. In addition, the mother, sister, and  wife of Maskhadov’s close ally, Vakhid Murdashev, 
were held at the Tsentoroi base and then at the ATC headquart ers in Gudermes for five months from November 2004 to April 
2005. Three brothers—Adam, Kureish and Movla Chersiev—were init ially detained by the Oil Protection Unit and then spent 
five months in the Gudermes ATC facility, while ATC personnel  tried to force their relative, a well-known rebel, to surrender.  
According to information received by Human Rights Watch the Murdashev relatives and the Chersiev brothers  were not subjected to torture. Human Rights Watc h interviews, September 2006, Chechnya. 
18 Human Rights Watch interview with Magomed M. (not his re al name), September 26, 2006, Chechnya, (exact location 
withheld to protect the witness).   
 11Magomed M. told Human Rights Watch that  Kadyrov’s forces brought him and the 
four other men to one of Kadyrov’s bases on  the outskirts of the village of Tsentoroi. 
Personnel at first put them in a boiler room on the base, and soon thereafter the 
base commander took three of the detainees out to a nearby field for questioning. 
Magomed M. told Human Rights Watch: 
 There were three or four personnel th ere—the same ones who brought us to 
the base. They kept asking about a re bel fighter from our area—they said we 
should know him since we are the same  age. I knew nothing about the man, 
but they wouldn’t believe me. They kept kicking me and beating me with sticks; it lasted for five or six hours.
19  
 Magomed M. said that he was taken out for questioning and severely beaten every 
day during his detention.  
 Relatives of the five detainees learned of their whereabouts through a contact in 
Kadyrov’s forces and managed to secure their release; four of the men were released 
the day following their detention, and Magomed M., several days later. “Before 
releasing me they warned me not to say a single word about my detention,” he told 
Human Rights Watch. “Otherwise, they sa id they would take me away again and I 
would disappear.”
20  
 After his release Magomed M. spent more than three weeks in a hospital, where he 
said doctors documented his injuries, in cluding multiple hematomas on his body, 
kidney damage, and a concussion.  
Illegal detention and torture of Khamid Kh. 
One night in early April 2006 a group of about ten armed, masked men broke into the 
house of an elderly construction worker, Khamid Kh., in a village in western Chechnya. They asked his name, and, wi thout providing any explanations, put a bag 
over his head and drove him away.  
 
The abductors brought Kham id Kh. to a local ATC base and put him in a room where 
they immediately started interrogating him, accusing him of providing food and weapons to rebels. He told Human Rights Watch:   
They started kicking me, and then brough t an ‘infernal machine’ to give me 
electric shocks. They attached the wir es to my toes and kept cranking the 
                                                     
 
19 Ibid. 
20 Ibid.  
 12handle to release the current. I couldn’t bear it. I was begging: “Give me any 
paper – I’ll sign it, I’ll sign anything.”21 
 
The ATC personnel released Khamid Kh. the next day. He spent the following two 
weeks in a hospital with serious heart proble ms that he believed resulted from the 
electric shock torture. Although Khamid Kh. said he remembered and would have 
recognized his torturers, he had no intentio n to seek justice as he was warned that 
only “keeping his mouth shut” would guarantee his safety.22  
 
Continuing “disappearances” 
 
Continued enforced disappearances in Chechnya are of interest to the committee 
because they place civilians outside the protection of the law, making them 
particularly vulnerable to torture. In a number of cases documented by Human Rights 
Watch during its recent missions and earl ier, relatives of the “disappeared” later 
found the bodies of their loved ones in unmarked graves or other locations. In most cases, the bodies bore marks of torture.   
Some of those detained by Kadyrov’s forc es later “disappear” without a trace. Based 
on extensive research, Human Rights Watch concluded in 2005 that enforced disappearances in Chechnya are so widespread and systematic that they constitute 
crimes against humanity.
23 Memorial documented 316 cases of “abductions” in 
2005. Of those, 127 “disappeared” without a trace and 23 were found dead, their 
bodies bearing marks of execution.24 While the number of reported cases of 
“disappearances” decreased in 2006, hu ndreds of people “disappeared” by 
Kadyrov’s forces remain unaccounted for to date, and Human Rights Watch 
continued to document new cases of “disappearances,” the latest of which took place in September 2006.  
 
In an illustrative case, Balaudi Melkaev (b. 1967), a resident of the village of Valerik, “disappeared” after he had been detained by ATC personnel.   
 
Enforced disappearance of Balaudi Melkaev 
Around midnight on December 16, 2005 , a group of eight or nine armed Chechen 
men in camouflage uniforms arrived at the Melkaev residence in Valerik in three 
                                                      
21 Human Rights Watch interview with Khamid Kh., April 27, 2006, Chechnya. 
22 Ibid. 
23 See Human Rights Watch, Worse than a War.  
24 The Memorial Human Rights Center, “O n the situation of residents of the Chechen Republic, July 2005-July 2006,” 
http://www.memo.ru/hr/hotpoints/N-Caucas/dGan/ index.htm (accessed on October 31, 2006).  
 13cars.25 The men, two of whom wore masks, searched the house and seized Balaudi 
Melkaev, taking him away barefoot. Th e same night, the armed men abducted 
another resident of the village, Ilias Murtazaliev. 
   
While the men did not identify themselves and did not tell the family where they 
were taking Melkaev, his relatives later found out that the men who drove him away  produced documents at a nearby checkpoint identifying them as ATC staff.
26  
 
On December 17, 2005, the relatives of both men went to the ATC headquarters in 
Gudermes to inquire about Melkaev and Murtazal iev with two ATC officers they knew. 
The officers confirmed that both men were  “under suspicion” at the base, accepted 
warm clothes the relatives had brought f or them, and suggested that the relatives 
speak with the ATC commander, Muslim Iliasov.  
 
One of Melkaev’s relatives managed to meet with Iliasov, who provided no information but promised that both men would be returned home the next day. 
Indeed, on December 18 ATC personnel drove home Ilias Murtazaliev, but not 
Balaudi Melkaev. Murtazaliev’s father told Melkaev’s relatives that his son had been 
beaten while in detention and had retu rned home in a confused and distressed 
state, believing that he had been away for a month.
27  
 When Melkaev’s relatives again inquired wi th their ATC contacts about Balaudi’s 
fate, they were told that he had been taken to Khankala military base. However, 
personnel at Khankala denied that Melkaev had been brought there. One of 
Melkaev’s relatives told Human Rights Watch, “I did not believe a single word [of the 
ATC personnel]—they just thought Kh ankala was inaccessible and we wouldn’t go 
there to search. But we did, and also che cked through our contacts there, and he 
was not at the base.”
28  
 
Melkaev’s relatives appealed again to the ATC commander Iliasov, who sent them away; they also wrote to Ramzan Kadyrov, but received no response. The family also appealed to the prosecutor’s office requesting it to open a criminal investigation into 
the abduction. 
 
In April 2006, the Chechen prosecutor’s offi ce informed the family in writing that on 
February 23, 2006 it had opened a criminal investigation, but the document stated 
                                                     
 
25 They were: a VAZ-2199 without registration plates, an UAZ-451 (also called a “ tabletka ”)  (registration no. 351), and a VAZ- 
21010. 
26 Human Rights Watch interviews with relatives of Balavdi Melkaev, Valerik, April 27, 2006 and September 27, 2006. 
27 Ibid. 
28 Ibid.  
 14that the investigation had been opened into the murder, rather than the abduction, 
of Balaudi Melkaev. Despite the relatives’ eff orts, they did not manage to get the 
prosecutor’s office to provide any further information, including whether and why 
they had reasons to believe that Melkae v had been killed or to provide any details.29 
As of late September 2006, the family ha d received no further information on the 
fate or whereabouts of Balavdi Melkaev.   
Lack of Accountability 
 One of the main factors contributing to th e widespread pattern of illegal detention 
and torture in Chechnya is the total lack of accountability for perpetrators.   The perpetrators themselves—be they ORB-2  personnel or Kadyrov’s forces—try to 
ensure that their abuses do not come to light by threatening their victims into 
silence. Indeed, few victims or witnesses dare to report instances of torture to the authorities, such as the prosecutor’s offi ce, and in many cases refuse to speak to 
human rights organizations.   
During our last two research missions to Chechnya Human Rights Watch found that 
witnesses were extremely scared to talk about their experiences, fearing retribution. 
Those who agreed to relate their story did so u nder strict condition that we withhold 
any details that would allow the authorities to identify them.   
In many cases Human Rights Watch found that the perpetrators were so confident 
that there would be no consequences for their abuses that they did not wear masks 
or otherwise attempt to conceal their identity. In fact, a number of witnesses told Human Rights Watch that they knew their tormentors by name, or at least would be 
able to identify them. These witnesses, however, did not dare to report this 
information to prosecutorial authorities, and were, in some cases, considering 
personal revenge against the perpetrators.   In torture cases researched by Human Rights Watch prosecutors and courts took no 
action to bring the perpetrators to justice. In particular, those who had been tortured 
by ORB-2 personnel said that their injuries sustained as a result of torture were 
documented by doctors at SIZO-1, and that these documents were presented during court hearings. The courts, however, appeared to disregard this evidence altogether, and took no action to ensure that the allegations of torture were duly investigated 
and the perpetrators held to account.  
 
                                                     
 
29 Ibid. A copy of the statement is on file with Human Rights Watch.   
 15The prosecutor’s office, which under Russia n law should be the primary body to 
investigate allegations of torture in detention, also did little or nothing to address the allegations of torture in cases researched by Human Rights Watch. In rare cases 
where victims dared to launch a formal com plaint with the prosecutor’s office, the 
prosecutors refused to open a criminal investigation, stating that the facts reported by the victim “have not been confirmed by  the preliminary inquiry” conducted by the 
office.   
For example, on June 5, 2006, 26-ye ar-old Ruslan Lechaev complained to the 
Chechen Republic prosecutor’s office abou t being tortured by ORB-2 personnel and 
forced to incriminate himself. Two days lat er, he received a letter from one of the 
officials at the prosecutor’s office stating that there would be no investigation into 
the torture allegations. The letter stated th at ORB-2 personnel denied ever using any 
“pressure” against Lechaev. It also referred to a medical report that allegedly stated 
that there were no injuries on Lechae v’s body. However, a medical report prepared 
by a doctor at SIZO-1 on June 23, 200 6, when Lechaev was brought there, clearly 
stated that he had multiple bruises a nd hematomas on his neck, thighs, and 
wrists.
30    
 
Russian authorities occasionally provide statistics on investigations and prosecutions of military and police personnel for crimes committed in the context of the conflict in Chechnya. The Memorial Human Rights Center and the International Helsinki Federation analyzed this data, and fo und that only a handful of cases reach 
trial and that the vast majority of the defendants are eventually acquitted, 
amnestied, or receive minimal or suspended sentences.
31 Regarding torture, Human 
Rights Watch is aware of only one case in which an official was convicted for 
physically abusing someone in custody.32  
The climate of impunity is worsened by the persistent efforts by Chechen and 
Russian authorities to close Chechnya to ou tside scrutiny. Most unlawful places of 
detention run by Kadyrov’s forces are off limi ts to journalists or international experts 
visiting the region. Moreover, in seve ral instances when outside observers were 
                                                      
30 Human Rights Watch interview with a relative of Ruslan Le chaev, September 27, 2006, Grozny. Copies of both documents—
the response from the prosecutor’s office and the original  medical report—are on file with Human Rights Watch.  
31 For a detailed analysis of Russia’s statistics on prosecutions  of military and police personnel see e.g., the Memorial Human 
Rights Center, “Deceptive Justice: Situation on the investigat ion on crimes against civilians committed by members of the 
Federal Forces in the Chechen Republic during military op erations 1999–2003,” 2003, h ttp://www.memo.ru/hr/hotpoints/N-
Caucas/do100603/orlov_2003_engl.pdf (accessed November 7, 2006 ); International Helsinki Federation for Human Rights, 
“Impunity: A Leading Force behind Continued Massive Viol ations in Chechnya,” May 19, 2005, http://www.ihf-
hr.org/viewbinary/viewdocument .php?download=1&doc_id=6363 (accessed November 7, 2006). 
32 In 2005, the Oktiabrsky District Court in Grozny sentenced Serg ei Lapin, a police officer from the city of Khanty Mansiisk, to  
11 years of imprisonment in a strict regime prison colony for inte ntionally inflicting serious harm to the health of Zelimkhan 
Murdalov under aggravating circumstances (article 111, part 3 of the Russian criminal code); exceeding official authority under  
aggravating circumstances (article 286, part 3), and forgery by  an official (article 292). The conviction, however, did not 
include a reference to Murdalov’s “disappearance,” al though his whereabouts remain unknown to date.   
 16allowed to visit these facilities, such as the Tsentoroi bases, the authorities removed 
the detainees from the premises prior to th e visit. A number of witnesses told Human 
Rights Watch about being moved to another base or simply driven away and kept in 
cars for several hours when a “delegation” wa s expected to visit the base where they 
were being detained.   On May 1, 2006, a CPT delegation wa s denied access to the village of Tsentoroi, 
which led it to take “the exceptional me asure of interrupting the visit,” which was 
resumed following assurances from the president of the Chechen Republic. The 
delegation gained access to Tsentoroi in the early afternoon of May 2.
33 
  When visiting officials were allowed to meet with detainees in such lawful detention 
facilities such as ORB-2, they perceived th at the detainees “did not feel they could 
speak freely.”
34 
 Russia’s refusal to agree to the terms of reference of the UN special rapporteur on torture caused him to postpone indefinitely his visit to Russia and Chechnya, 
planned for October 2006. The refusal concerned the special rapporteur’s 
conducting unannounced visits to detentio n facilities and interviewing detainees in 
private.
35  
                                                      
33 “Visit by Council of Europe Anti-Torture Committee to the No rth Caucasian region of the Russian Federation,” European 
Committee for Prevention of To rture (CPT) news flash, May 9, 2006, http ://www.cpt.coe.int/documents/rus/2006-05-09-
eng.htm (accessed October 31, 2006).  
34 The comment was made by Mr. Alvaro Gil-Robles, Commissioner  for Human Rights after his visits to the Russian Federation, 
including Chechnya, in 2004. See “Report by Mr. Alvaro Gil- Robles, Commissioner for Human Rights, on his visits to the 
Russian Federation 15 to 30 July 2004 and 19 to 29 September 2004.” 
35 “Special Rapporteur on Torture Regrets Postponement of Visit  to Russian Federation,” UN press release, October 4, 2006, 
http://www.unhchr.ch/huricane/huricane.nsf/view01/4FBC 8B4AABF40CDFC12571FD003E28A B?opendocument (accessed 
November 7, 2006). 