Dead Men Walking: Convict Porters on the Front Lines in Eastern Burma | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload summary and recommendations: photo featureSearchDonate NowSearchDownloadsDownload the full reportDownload summary and recommendations: photo featureJuly 12, 2011Dead Men WalkingConvict Porters on the Front Lines in Eastern BurmaDead Men WalkingConvict Porters on the Front Lines in Eastern BurmaTransport Routes and Area Use ofConvict Porters in the 2011 OffensiveMap of Post-Election Offensive Area2010-2011Acronyms and Burmese TermsSummaryKey RecommendationsTo the Burmese GovernmentTo China, Russia, US, European Union,Japan, and ASEAN Member StatesMethodologyI. Forced Labor in BurmaConvict Porters in Armed ConflictRole of the ILO in Combating ForcedLaborOngoing Use of Convict PortersApplicable International LawII. From Prison to ConflictZoneSelecting Prisoners for Porter DutyTransportation from PrisonAssembly Close to Conflict AreaIII. Abuses against Convict Portersin Armed ConflictExtrajudicial Executions“Atrocity Demining”Human ShieldsTorture and BeatingsDenial of Medical AssistanceInadequate Food, Water, andSanitationExperiences during EscapeIV. After Escape to ThailandRecommendationsTo the Burmese Government52To the Corrections Department of theMinistry of Home AffairsTo the Commander in Chief of theArmed Forces of BurmaTo the International LabourOrganizationTo Members of the UN SecurityCouncil, UN Secretary-General, and Members of the UN Human Rights CouncilTo the UN Country Team andBurma-based UN AgenciesTo the United Nations HighCommissioner for RefugeesTo China, Russia, US, European Union,Japan, and ASEAN Member StatesTo the Government of ThailandAppendix A: List of Labor Camps underthe  Correctional Department in BurmaAcknowledgementsClick to expand ImageBurmese army columnwith several convict porters moves through a village in Karen State. © 2011 Free BurmaRangersClick to expand ImageBurmese army soldier walks behind a convict porter innorthern Karen State. During this operation, the army used approximately 140prisoners from Insein prison in Rangoon, and Toungoo prison in Karen State. ©2011 Free Burma RangersClick to expand ImageAgroup of escaped convict porters show their injuries from carrying heavy loadsof military supplies, Karen State in 2000. © 2000 Karen Human Rights GroupClick to expand ImageThe remains of four convict porters killed by the Burmesearmy in northern Karen State in 2006. © 2006 Karen Human Rights GroupClick to expand ImageBurmese army mortar rounds andlandmines carried by convict porters. © 2011 Karen Human Rights GroupClick to expand ImageFormer convict porter Tun Tun Aung, 20, receives treatment for a gunshotwound. Burmese soldiers shot him in the shoulder when he escaped to Thailand inJanuary 2011. © 2011 Phil ThorntonClick to expand ImageFormer convict porter Maung Nyunt  escapedin January 2011. © 2011 Phil ThorntonTransport Routes and Area Use of ConvictPorters in the 2011 OffensiveClick to expand ImageMapof Post-Election Offensive Area 2010-2011Click to expand ImageAcronyms and BurmeseTermsBGFBorderGuard Forcebo-gyicaptainDKBADemocraticKaren Buddhist ArmyIBInfantryBattalionICRCInternationalCommittee of the Red CrossILOInternationalLabour OrganizationKNLAKarenNational Liberation ArmyKNUKarenNational UnionKyatBurmese currency, the official rateis US$1 to 6 Kyat, but the effective market rate is US$1 to 1,000 Kyat.LIBLightInfantry BattalionLIDLightInfantry DivisionLouqa payForced LaborMOCMilitaryOperations Command (similar to a brigade, comprising 10 battalions)por-taporter,Burmese use of the English wordSa Ka KaMilitaryOperations CommandSit-thasoldierSLORCState Law and Order RestorationCouncil (ruling military council from 1988-1997)SPDCState Peace and Development Council(ruling military council from 1997-March 2011)TatmadawBurmese armed forcestaung bpaing kyiprisonwardenwan hsawnpublicservice personnel, term for a porteryeh behlaborcampSummaryWe were carrying food up to the camp and one porter steppedon a mine and lost his leg. The soldiers left him, he was screaming but no onehelped. When we came down the mountain he was dead. I looked up and saw bits ofhis clothing in the trees, and parts of his leg in a tree.–Escaped convict porter “Maung Nyunt,”March 2011Theyoung boy told them [soldiers], “If I run you will shoot me.” Theysaid, “No, we won’t kill you. You can run.” They ordered theguy to run. Just as he walked down to the gorge, they shot him in the back. Andthey told us, “You guys see what happens? If you can’t climb up, wewill kill you.” We were afraid.–Escaped convict porter “Matthew,” January2011For decades the Burmese army has forced civilians to risklife and limb serving as porters in barbaric conditions during militaryoperations against rebel armed groups. Among those taken to do this often deadlywork, for indefinite periods and without compensation, are common criminalsserving time in Burma’s prisons and labor camps.Escaped convict porters described to us how the authoritiesselected them in a seemingly random fashion from prison and transferred them toarmy units fighting on the front lines.  They are forced to carry hugeloads of supplies and munitions in mountainous terrain, and given inadequatefood and no medical care. Often they are used as “human shields,”put in front of columns of troops facing ambush or sent first down mined roadsor trails, the latter practice known as "atrocity demining.” Thewounded are left to die; those who try to escape are frequently executed.Burma’s military government promised that the November2010 elections, the country’s first elections in more than 20 years,would bring about human rights improvements. But soon after election day theBurmese army, the Tatmadaw, launched military operations that have beenaccompanied by a new round of abuses.In January 2011, the Tatmadaw, in collusion with theCorrections Department and the Burmese police, gathered an estimated 700prisoners from approximately 12 prisons and labor camps throughout Burma toserve as porters for an ongoing offensive in southern Karen State, in the eastof the country. The same month, another 500 prisoners were taken for use asporters during another separate military operation in northern Karen State andeastern Pegu Region, augmenting 500 porters used in the same area in an earlierstage of the operation in the preceding year. The men were a mix of serious andpetty offenders, but their crimes or willingness to serve were not taken intoconsideration: only their ability to carry heavy loads of ammunition, food, andsupplies for more than 17 Tatmadaw battalions engaged in operations againstethnic Karen armed groups. Karen civilians living in the combat zone, who wouldnormally be forced to porter for the military under similarly horrendousconditions, had already fled by the thousands to the Thai border.The prisoners selected as porters described witnessing orenduring summary executions, torture and beatings, being used as “humanshields” to trip landmines or shield soldiers from fire, and being deniedmedical attention and adequate food and shelter.One convict porter, Ko Kyaw Htun (all prisoner names used inthis report are pseudonyms), told how Burmese soldiers forced him to walk aheadwhen they suspected landmines were on the trails: “ They followed behind us. In their minds, if the mineexplodes, the mine will hit us first.” Another porter, Tun Mok, describedhow soldiers recaptured him after trying to escape, and how they kicked andpunched him, and then rolled a thick bamboo pole painfully up and down hisshins.This report, based on Human Rights Watch and Karen HumanRights Group interviews with 58 convict porters who escaped to Thailand between2010 and 2011, details the abuses. The porters we spoke with ranged in age from20 to 57 years, and included serious offenders such as murderers and drugdealers, as well as individuals convicted of brawling and fraud—evenillegal lottery sellers. Their sentences ranged from just one year to more than20 years’ imprisonment, and they were taken from different facilities,including labor camps, maximum security prisons, such as Insein prison inRangoon, and local prisons for less serious offenders.The accounts shared by porters about the abuses theyexperienced in 2011 are horrific, but sadly not unusual. The use of convictporters is not an isolated, local, or rogue practice employed by some units orcommanders, but has been credibly documented since as early as 1992. Thisreport focuses on recent use of convict porters in Karen State, but the use ofconvict porters has also been reported in the past in Mon, Karenni, and ShanStates. The International Labour Organization (ILO) has raised the issue ofconvict porters with the Burmese government since 1998, yet the problempersists, particularly during major offensive military operations.Burma’s forcible recruitment and mistreatment ofconvicts as uncompensated porters in conflict areas are grave violations of internationalhumanitarian law and human rights law. Abuses include murder, torture, and theuse of porters as human shields. Those responsible for ordering orparticipating in such mistreatment should be prosecuted for war crimes.Authorities in Burma have previously admitted the practiceoccurs, but have claimed that prisoners are not exposed to hostilities. Theinformation gathered for this report, consistent with the evidence gatheredover the past two decades, demonstrates that this simply is not true. Thepractice is ongoing, systematic, and is facilitated by several branches ofgovernment, suggesting decision-making at the highest levels of the Burmesemilitary and political establishment. Officials and commanders who knew orshould have known of such abuses but took no measures to stop it or punishthose responsible should be held accountable as a matter of commandresponsibility.The use of convict porters on the front line is only onefacet of the brutal counterinsurgency practices Burmese officials have usedagainst ethnic minority populations since independence in 1948. These includedeliberate attacks on civilian villages and towns, large-scale forcedrelocation, torture, extrajudicial executions, rape and other sexual violenceagainst women and girls, and the use of child soldiers. Rebel armed groups havealso been involved in abuses such as indiscriminate use of landmines, usingcivilians as forced labor, and recruitment of child soldiers. These abuses haveled to growing calls for the establishment of a United Nations commission ofinquiry into longstanding allegations of violations of internationalhumanitarian and human rights law in Burma.As the experiences contained in this report make clear,serious abuses that amount to war crimes are being committed with theinvolvement or knowledge of high-level civilian and military officials.Officers and soldiers commit atrocities with impunity. Credible and impartialinvestigations are needed into serious abuses committed by all parties toBurma’s internal armed conflicts. The international community’sfailure to exert more effective pressure on the Burmese military to end the useof convict porters on the battlefield will condemn more men to take theirplace.Key RecommendationsTo the Burmese GovernmentAcknowledge past failures to pursue justice and fully support theestablishment of a UN commission of inquiry into allegations of seriousviolations of international humanitarian and human rights law by all parties tothe internal armed conflicts in Burma.Immediately cease the practice of using civilian porters,including convict porters, in armed conflict areas in Burma.Credibly investigate and prosecute those responsible for abusesagainst porters during military operations, regardless of rank or position,including senior government officials and military commanders responsible foruse of uncompensated porters in conflict areas.To China,Russia, US, European Union, Japan, and ASEAN Member StatesPublicly support a UN commission of inquiry into seriousviolations of international humanitarian and human rights law by all parties tothe internal armed conflicts in Burma. Actively mobilize other countries tosupport the creation of a UN commission of inquiry at the UN General Assemblyor at the Human Rights Council.Publicly call on Burma to immediately end the practice of usingcivilian porters, including convicts, in armed conflict areas.MethodologyThisreport is based largely on interviews with 58 escaped convict porters from anestimated 26 prisons and labor camps throughout Burma since January 2010,either in Karen State or in locations along the Thailand-Burma border. HumanRights Watch interviewed 12 escaped convict porters in February, March, and June 2011, as well as 8 Burmese army soldiers. TheKaren Human Rights Group interviewed 46 escaped convict porters from January2010 through January 2011. The Karen Human Rights Group has conductedadditional interviews with escaped porters since 2008, and those accounts havealso been included where relevant.Interviews were conducted in Burmese or in Karen, sometimeswith Burmese to English translation. We have given pseudonyms to all Burmese weinterviewed and in some cases have withheld certain other identifyinginformation to protect their safety. Locations of interviews done in Burma havebeen generalized to the township or district level, so that those interviewedcannot be easily identified. Where possible and in a majority of cases,interviews were conducted on a one-on-one basis. All those interviewed wereinformed of the purpose of the interview, its voluntary nature, and the ways inwhich the data would be used, and orally consented to be interviewed and for theirtestimony to be used in Human Rights Watch and Karen Human Rights Groupreporting. All were told that they could decline to answer questions or couldend the interview at any time. None received compensation.Human Rights Watch used a common list of questions forinterviews with convict porters and separate questions for soldiers, but not aformal questionnaire. Karen Human Rights Group researchers are trained toconduct interviews based upon a basic set of interview guidelines; standardquestionnaires are not used. Karen Human Rights Group reporting aims to presentthe perspectives of individual interviewees, allowing them to raise issues thatthey consider to be the most important and to express their individualconcerns. This means that a given question or issue may or may not be raised inevery interview.HumanRights Watch and the Karen Human Rights Group have attempted to include,wherever possible, the ranks, insignia, and unit identification of Burmesemilitary personnel implicated in using convict porters. Names of allegedperpetrators are given where the information could be independentlycorroborated. Not all porters interviewed were clear on which units they wereassigned to. Many did not recognize unit insignia, or comprehend military rankinsignia, but researchers would have them explain or draw what the soldierswore, for example three chevrons means a sergeant, or three stars is a captain.In most cases, Human Rights Watch researchers showed an array of military unitinsignia: LID-22, artillery command, Southeast Command, for example, to discernwhat unit the porters were assigned to or witnessed during their service. Insome cases convict porters had clear details and names of their unit commandersand abusive personnel. One prisoner had precise details of the unit he wasassigned to, and when asked how he knew so much, he replied that all thesoldiers had their battalion numbers stenciled onto the butts of their MA-1assault rifles.In addition, Human Rights Watch and the Karen Human RightsGroup drew from a number of secondary sources including United Nations reports,academic studies, and nongovernmental organization reports.We take no position on the guilt or innocence of the convictporters interviewed for this report. While many freely admitted to committingthe crimes that put them in prison and provided detailed information on their prisonexperience, our interviews were centered on their experiences after beingtransferred to military custody.This report does not examine the legal system in Burma orconditions in Burmese prisons. We recognize that the judicial system in Burmais not independent; trials are unfair, official corruption is pervasive, andconditions in penal facilities are extremely dire, but such issues are beyondthe scope of the present report.[1]I. Forced Labor in BurmaThe Burmese Defense Services, or Tatmadaw, is one of thelargest armed forces in Asia, with an estimated 300,000 to 400,000 personnel.The Tatmadaw has been battling a wide range of primarily ethnic minorityinsurgencies throughout the country since independence in 1948. In the past twodecades it has succeeded in confining most armed resistance to the borderlandswith Thailand, China, and India.The Burmese army’s brutal human rights record has beenwell documented for nearly two decades.[2]Violations during military operations include attacks on civilian populations,summary executions, torture, rape, and looting, as well as forced labor. Theseviolations, carried out with complete impunity, and abuses by non-state armedgroups, have led to calls for the United Nations to establish an international commissionof inquiry into allegations of war crimes and crimes against humanity in Burma.[3]One of the most serious and widespread reported abusesagainst civilians has been unpaid forced labor. In the 1990s, Burmese soldierspress-ganged civilians off the streets in cities, towns, and villages to beused by army units as porters on combat operations or by local officials fordevelopment and infrastructure projects. The practice of forced labor hasgradually transformed from a common urban problem where civilians were press gangedinto work in towns and cities, or taken by force from urban areas and sent tocarry supplies in conflict zones in the hinterlands, to one now predominantly,but by no means exclusively, confined to isolated rural areas. Especiallytargeted have been those living in conflict areas, where the military continuesto routinely force civilians into carrying supplies or providing labor for arange of military related duties.Convict Porters in Armed ConflictTheBurmese army has long used prison convicts as porters in armed conflict zoneswith the complicity of both civilian and military officials. Their use inlarge-scale military operations has been documented since at least 1992 byHuman Rights Watch, the Karen Human Rights Group, the United Nations, theInternational Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and Amnesty International. Forinstance, in 1995,Human Rights Watch interviewed more than 50 men who escaped from army unitsinvolved in a large-scale offensive against the headquarters of the rebel KarenNational Union (KNU) at Manerplaw on the Burmese-Thai border. Thousands ofporters forcibly recruited from the civilian population and from variousprisons were used to carry weapons and supplies to army units at the front lineof the operation.[4]Past reports have described the process of transferringprisoners from prison facilities to the front lines, where convict porters havesuffered a range of abuses from the military units they were serving. Duringoperations, Tatmadaw officers ordered convict porters to carry heavy suppliesof munitions and rations into battle zones, routinely exposed them tohostilities, beaten and tortured them for complaining or attempting to escape,forced them to walk ahead of troops to deter ambushes or trigger landmines, andexecuted some when they became too weak to carry supplies, or were injured. A1992 report by Amnesty International described convict porters facing extrajudicialexecutions, beatings, lack of food and medicines, and poor conditions,describing the use of criminal prisoners for portering as a “apparently anew phenomenon.”[5]Many of these reports emerged from Karen State, where armedconflict has continued for more than five decades. The ethnic Karen KNU hasbeen in armed revolt against the central government since 1948 and controls oneof the largest ethno-nationalist armed groups in Burma, the Karen NationalLiberation Army (KNLA). Since 1989, the central government has reachedceasefire agreements with approximately 17 non-state armed groups in the northand east of Burma, and where since then conflict has been largely sporadic orsmall scale. The then-ruling State Peace and Development Council (SPDC) agreedto a ceasefire with the KNU between December 2003 and October 2004, but sincethen large-scale military offensives have resumed. Convict porter use has alsobeen reported in parts of Mon, Karenni, and Shan States by grassroots humanrights organizations, but has not been investigated or conclusively documentedby Human Rights Watch or the Karen Human Rights Group.While small numbers of prisonersare used to perform manual labor around military camps, and sometimes to carrysupplies to the frontlines, the large-scale use of prison labor at thefrontlines is more often associated with large-scale military offensives.[6]That the Tatmadaw has often employed brutally punitive measures during its sixdecades-long counter-insurgency campaign has been well documented. Less wellunderstood is why the army—which since at least 1988 has made massiveoutlays for trucks, armored personnel carriers, and helicopters to carrysupplies and weapons—needs civilian porters.[7]In response to pressure from the ILO, the Tatmadaw expanded their use of mulesto carry supplies in some conflict areas, including the purported use of fiveAnimal Transport Battalions, which were of limited use on combat operations.[8]In spite of these outlays, theTatmadaw has continued to rely on civilian labor to support military operationsin remote or mountainous areas, where roads are too undeveloped for the use ofmechanized transport and animal transport too noisy to evade guerrilla attacks.Maung Aung Myoe, a Burmese academic specializing in the Tatmadaw, argues that acombination of rugged terrain in the mountains of eastern Burma where mostinsurgent groups operate, and longstanding logistics shortcomings are a keyreason for low morale within frontline army units. He writes:The Tatmadaw troops operate in a very rough operationalenvironment where there is no guarantee of a re-supply of rations andammunition or medical evacuation. Logistics has always been an issue in theTatmadaw, which also hampers the troops’ mobility. This is particularlytrue in counter-insurgency operations. “Yeikkha-Santsar” orstretching of the ration in the frontline has become a common phenomenon.[9]Roleof the ILO in Combating Forced LaborTheInternational Labor Organization is the key international agency working to endthe practice of forced labor in Burma. For over 15 years the ILO has beenpressing the military government to bring Burma’s laws and practices inline with the government’s obligations under ILO Convention No. 29 (1930)concerning Forced or Compulsory Labor, which Burma ratified in 1955. Accordingto a recently published history of the ILO’s efforts in Burma, the use ofconvict porters in conflict areas has been a longstanding practice:The use of convicts as porters was nothing new. But starting around1999, an organized system was introduced for selecting suitable inmates(able-bodied men of working age, excluding – because of the possibilitiesfor escape – political prisoners and violent criminals with long periodsstill to serve), transferring them to holding facilities around the country,and then sending them to army units in response to specific requests. Whereasin the past, convicts had continued to wear their prison uniforms whileportering, under the new system they were dressed in special uniformsidentifying them as (convict) porters. (The fact that the increased and moresystematic use of prisoners as porters stemmed from a specific policy decision wasconfirmed by the Director-General of the Prison Service in a meeting with theILO on 13 May 2002.)[10]Following widespread reports ofthe use of forced labor in Burma, the ILO established a Commission of Inquiryinto the practice in 1997. The commission’s report was released in 1998,and while its main focus was the use of civilian labor, it made mention ofconvict labor as an established practice. “Prisoners were also regularlysent from prisons and labour camps across the country to be used by the army inmajor offensives. They continued to wear prison uniforms and were usually keptseparate from the other porters. In certain cases, prisoners were forced tocontinue working in such conditions beyond their normal release date.”[11]In its response to the ILO investigation, the Burmese government admitted usingporters to carry supplies but categorically denied exposing them to armedconflict. The government’s argument, as summarized in the commission’sreport, stated:Since 1948, successive Myanmar governments have had to dealwith insurgent groups. Therefore, under certain circumstances the Myanmar armedforces had to employ porters for transportation of supplies and equipment overdifficult terrain in remote places and mountains near the frontier areas wheremilitary campaigns against the armed groups were launched. The Governmentstated that the porters employed were not treated harshly and inhumanely by theMyanmar armed forces. Criteria for the recruitment of these porters requiredthat they must be unemployed casual labour, that they must be physically fit towork as porters, and that a reasonable amount of wages must be fixed and agreedto before recruitment. Also, these porters were never required to accompany thetroops in the actual scene of the battle, nor exposed to danger. In theunfortunate event of loss of limb unconnected with any armed conflict, they ortheir family were equitably compensated in accordance with the prevailing law.[12]Due to the ILO’s inquiry, thegovernment issued SPDC Order 1/99 in May 1999 and a supplementary order inOctober 2000, which specifically outlawed the use of forced labor of any kind.[13]In early 2008, the new constitution that the SPDC had been drafting since 1993and had completed in September 2007, was released with a specific passage onforced labor, “The Union prohibits forced labor except hard labor as apunishment for crime duly convicted and duties assigned by the Union in accordwith the law in the interest of the public.”[14]The ILO requested the government of Burma to amend this clause and bring it inline with the forced labor convention.Despite international attention to the ILO’s efforts, theTatmadaw’s use of convict porters in military operations has continued,and grassroots human rights organizations havereported episodically on the issue.[15] A court sentenced Zaw Zaw Tun, a 30-year-old former cadet of the prestigious DefenseServices Technological Academy (DSTA) in Pyin U Lwin, to seven years in prisonfor his involvement in a cadet protest at the college in 2002. In early 2004,he and 100 other prisoners were driven from Sittwe prison in Arakan State acrossBurma to Tenasserim Division (region) to serve with the army’s 9thInfantry Division. Zaw Zaw Tun remembers that there were approximately 800prisoners from four different prisons in Burma, and that prisoners wereassigned to specific battalions to carry supplies including food and munitionsto frontline bases and on routine patrols. The porters were forced to carryheavy loads, walk ahead through trails suspected of containing landmines, andendure routine brutal treatment. In one incident, a soldier tortured a porteras an example for the rest of the group. Zaw Zaw Tun said:One old man over 50 [years old] had to climb a highmountain and he was getting tired. A soldier got angry with him and took hisknife and cut off the old man’s ear. That man ran up the mountain, butthe soldier grabbed him, forced him to take off his clothes, then tied him tothe bamboo. The soldiers told the porters to gather around, and then in frontof us that soldier broke the old man’s legs and arms with the butt of hisgun. Then the soldier warned us, “If you act like this man, this is whatwill happen to you.” We had to leave that man there alive.[16]Zaw Zaw Tun escaped withanother prisoner after one month, with the assistance of one of thebattalion’s officers who encouraged him to flee. By the time he escaped,the former army cadet estimates that 200 porters remained of the 800, with some600 escaping, falling ill, being killed by landmines and ambush, or executed byBurmese army soldiers.In a major military offensive innorthern Karen State from 2005 to 2006, the Tatmadaw allegedly used hundreds ofprisoners drawn from numerous prisons throughout Burma to carry supplies. TheKaren Human Rights Group interviewed 25 prisoners who escaped from this fighting.One of the prisoners, a 25-year-old ethnic Shan, described the mistreatmentporters suffered:A person I knew from Mandalay prison named Lwan Maung …fell down on the ground. The soldiers beat him. He could not stand up again. Hetried to roll away into a gorge but then the SPDC captain shot him in the headwith his pistol and killed him there. That captain was very cruel. He beat andpunched porters who could not walk. He threatened to shoot us like the otherone he had shot. I heard that three porters died along the way.[17]Soldiers we interviewed admittedthat abuses were committed against convict porters at the front. Let Ya, a24-year-old army soldier, told Human Rights Watch how his battalion usedconvict porters on routine unit rotation movements in Karen State in 2010, butonly in small numbers and just to carry officer supplies:Whenwe rotated base up to the front line at Karen State, there were 120 soldiersand three porters. The porters carried heavy loads, but for the officers. Wehad to carry our own supplies and weapons. The porters would be beaten forsmall things, if they didn’t move fast enough, if they walked aroundduring rest [stops]. I felt bad for them, but I knew I will be beaten if I sayanything. For me, the porters were the same as us; the officers treated us allbadly. But if we soldiers got one tin of rice to eat, the porters would gethalf a tin.[18]In June 2007, the InternationalCommittee of the Red Cross (ICRC) released a rare public statement denouncing“major and repeated violations of international humanitarian law”committed by government forces during the conflict. The statement outlinedabuses against civilians in eastern Burma, making specific reference to convictporters:Under the prison system set up by the government, everyyear thousands of detainees have been forced to support the armed forces byserving as porters. This institutionalized and widespread practice hasfrequently led to the abuse of detainees and exposed them to the dangers ofarmed conflict. Many detainees used as porters have suffered from exhaustionand malnutrition and been subjected to degrading treatment. Some have beenmurdered.[19]In2007 the ILO signed a Supplementary Understanding with Burma to create a legalmechanism for reporting cases of forced labor. Since then, the ILO has received770 complaints of forced labor by the authorities, looked into illegalrecruitment of child soldiers, and facilitated the release and discharge of 168underage soldiers from military custody. In February 2011, a High Level Team ofthe ILO visited Burma to discuss a range of issues relating to forced labor.According to the ILO’s March 2011 report on the visit:The issue of the use of prison labour for the portering ofmilitary supplies in conflict zones was discussed. The mission indicated thatthis unacceptable practice should be discontinued. The representative of theCorrections Department indicated that the review of the 1894 Jail Manual, whichregulates the use of prison labour, was 75 per cent complete and on completionwould be submitted to Parliament for adoption. He indicated that the amendmentwould be in line with international standards and, as such, would meet ILOconcerns.[20]Despite the hard-won accomplishments of the ILO, the mostegregious forms of forced labor persist in Burma, including the continuing useof convict porters in armed conflict. And the Tatmadaw remains the Burmeseinstitution most resistant to reform or independent investigation of allegedabuses. The ILO conducts frequent workshops with government officials, thesecurity services, and community-based organizations. It has produced aninformation brochure in Burmese on forced labor and the work of the ILO and itswork is featured routinely in the state run media and exiled mediaorganizations. Despite these efforts, ILO officials acknowledge that:[A] large portion of society would not yet have access tothat knowledge. It is hoped that agreement to produce thebrochure in other national [ethnic] languages will be reached as this wouldhelp considerably.... The number of complaints received continues to increasereflecting increased awareness of the law and rights under the law as well asincreased confidence to complain. Forced labour continues, however, to be aserious problem, particularly in respect of its use by the military.[21]The ILOwould also benefit from an augmented staff presence, especially in rural andregional areas, and more logistics support to enhance monitoring in isolatedareas which would raise awareness in ethnic regions where the military presenceis much greater, the Tatmadaw’s use of forced labor more entrenched, andlocal awareness much less than in towns and cities of central Burma. One recentpositive example was the ILO’s visit to Chin State in May 2011, wherereports of widespread forced labor persist, and where the ILO conductedinvestigations of forced labor complaints and workshops with local Burmeseofficials.[22]Ongoing Useof Convict PortersConvict porters continue to beused extensively in multi-unit Tatmadaw operations in northern Karen State and easternPegu Region. In northern Karen State and easternPegu Region, porters are being used as part of ongoing Tatmadaw operationsagainst the KNLA. In 2010, several hundred porters were used to carry suppliesto camps along primitive roads linking Tatmadaw camps in Papun and Nyaunglebinin northern Karen State and eastern Pegu Region. In January 2011, a new groupof at least 500 men were congregated at the prison in Toungoo Town and thenused to supply Tatmadaw positions to the south and east, in northeastern PeguDivision and into northernmost Karen State.A major use of convict portersoccurred in January 2011, when the military escalated its offensive in KarenState following the November 2010 elections, eventually forcibly drawing anestimated 700 prisoners from more than 12 prisons and labor camps.On November 7, 2010, election-dayacross Burma, a faction of the Democratic Karen Buddhist Army (DKBA) brieflytook control of the border town of Myawaddy in Karen State. The motives for theattack are not clear, whether political considerations or illicit tradedisputes, but the broader issue was the DKBA faction’s refusal to agreeto transform into a Border Guard Force (BGF), a government initiative toincorporate under direct Burmese army command all ethnic armed groups that hadagreed to ceasefires.[23] TheDKBA, a splinter group from the larger Karen National Union/Karen NationalLiberation Army, agreed to transform into a Karen State BGF in September 2010. Buta unit of the DKBA under the command of Brig. Nah Kham Wey refused to sign ontothe BGF scheme and attacked and occupied Myawaddy on November 7. Fighting continuedthe following day there and further south at Three Pagodas Pass across fromKanchanaburi province in Thailand.The fighting initially displacedmore than 20,000 civilians who fled into Thailand, as bullets and mortar roundswere fired into the Thai town of Mae Sot. Many of these people returned toBurma soon after as fighting ceased. In the following days and weeks, clashescontinued between the Tatmadaw and DKBA factions, and at times with the KNLAsouth of Myawaddy.Many villagers interviewed byHuman Rights Watch and the Karen Human Rights Group spoke of fears of beingtaken as a porter, and these fears being their primary reason for fleeing toThailand. A 30-year-old Karen farmer told Human Rights Watch:I was called with others to carry the Burmese wounded[after an ambush]. There were five wounded and four dead. They buried the deadones there. They told us to bring hoes and shovels for that. I carried one ofthe wounded soldiers to Palu town for one hour. I was afraid to carry them—Iwas scared there would be another attack on the way, either the DKBA or KNLAwould ambush all of us. It is not safe to go back, I am afraid to be taken as aporter for the Burmese.[24]From November 9, 2010, to March2011, more than 11,000 civilians were displaced internally or fled to Thailandbecause of the fighting, large-scale planting of landmines around civiliansettlements, and fears of being taken as porters by the Tatmadaw. In additionto fighting south of Myawaddy, renewed fighting between the Tatmadaw and the KNLAalso occurred north of the former KNU headquarters at Manerplaw, resulting infurther displacement of civilians into Thailand.[25]In military operations such as those in the rugged terrainaround the Dooplaya area where ordinary trucks cannot be used, the Tatmadawoften use civilian porters to carry equipment, munitions, and food. Convictporters appear to be preferred to ordinary civilians for a number of reasons.Many of the villagers in the areas of fighting quickly flee, so there are fewpeople available to force into portering duties. And because they are drawnfrom the very population the army is fighting, they are less reliable and morelikely and capable of fleeing. Convict porters by contrast provide a reliablesource of relatively able men to do the difficult work.As discussed below, theTatmadaw’s use of uncompensated convict porters in dangerous armedconflict areas violates Burma’s obligations under internationalhumanitarian law. It is one of many violations of international law committedby the Tatmadaw in its fighting against insurgent forces. Yet, as is evident inthe response of the Burmese government during Burma’s Universal PeriodicReview at the Human Rights Council in Geneva on January 26, 2011, theauthorities do not acknowledge that any kind of inquiry into alleged abuses iswarranted and claim to investigate abuses allegedly perpetrated by Burmese armypersonnel even though they do not make public the results of any purportedinvestigation:The insurgency is confined to a few localities in theborder areas. Counter insurgency activities are conducted only against thoseremnant insurgents. Military operations are carried out in accordance withrules of engagement and strict instructions are also given to avoid civiliancasualties. The Government is committed to investigate any allegation of humanrights violations and takes action against any perpetrator in accordance withlaw.[26]In March 2011, atthe Human Rights Council, the Burmese government included a section on forcedlabor in its response to the report by UN SpecialRapporteur on the situation of human rights in Myanmar Tomás OjeaQuintana even though convict labor was not specificallymentioned in the special rapporteur’s report. Under the heading“Use of forced labor by military,” the government asserted:The authorities concerned have only sought prison labour ontheir own volition.  Prisoners in return can enjoy benefits such asreducing certain period of their prison terms, receiving daily allowanceincluding food rations and reparation in case of injuries.[27]The numerous accounts obtained byHuman Rights Watch, the Karen Human Rights Group, and others paint a verydifferent picture.ApplicableInternational LawThe abuses against convict porters violate international humanitarianand human rights law. International humanitarian law, or the laws of war,applies in areas of armed conflict to both government and rebel forces. Article3 common to the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 provides for the humanetreatment of persons under the control of an armed force.[28]For persons taking no active part in the hostilities, it specifically prohibits“violence to life and person,” murder, cruel treatment and torture,and humiliating and degrading treatment.[29]Customary international humanitarian law addresses a rangeof issues relating to the Tatmadaw’s use of convicts as porters in armedconflict areas.[30] Thelaws of war prohibit the use of uncompensated orabusive forced labor, including work directly related to the conduct of militaryoperations or that would oblige them to take part in military operations.[31]  Parties to a conflict have an obligation totake all feasible precautions to protect civilians under their control againstthe effects of attack.[32] In addition to the prohibitions against murder,torture, and other ill-treatment, international humanitarian law also prohibits“human shielding.”  Shielding occurs when a party to aconflict deliberately uses civilians to render its forces immune from attack.[33] Individuals who order the use of human shields arecommitting a war crime.[34]  Moreover, officials and commanders arecriminally responsible if they knew or had reason to know that war crimes werebeing committed by their subordinates and did not take all necessary andreasonable measures to prevent their commission or punish those responsible.[35]Internationalhuman rights law also remains applicable during armed conflictsituations.  The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which is broadlyaccepted as reflective of customary international law, prohibits violations ofthe right to life and torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment orpunishment.[36]Theinvoluntary use of convict labor as porters in conflict zones also comes withinthe definition of forced labor in ILO Convention No. 29 because it fails tomeet any of the rules provided in respect of the prison labor exclusion.[37]II. From Prison toConflict ZoneThe Tatmadaw’s brutality and long history of disregardfor civilian life in counterinsurgency operations, its unwillingness to devotegreater resources to logistics particularly in rugged border areas, and thelarge pool of easily accessible labor in the country’s prisons may explainbut do not justify the illegal and immoral use of convict porters on thefrontlines. This practice has been long utilized as a cheap and replaceableform of labor for the Tatmadaw predominantly in large-scale operations, butalso in normal military deployments, such as the building of military bases andother activities.Interviewsconducted by Human Rights Watch and the Karen Human Rights Group over severalyears show that the use of convict labor is common but not widespread. It isusually employed to support major operations in rugged terrain, even when,according to some Tatmadaw deserters, combat units are capable of carryingtheir own supplies and equipment. Using convict porters thus becomes a cheap,expendable, and easy solution to logistical challenges. It is a willfuldeferment of military obligation onto a vulnerable civilian population.In the offensive military operations following the November2010 elections, the Tatmadaw, the correctional authorities, and the policeworked in concert to choose and transport large numbers of prisoners to the militaryfor use on the frontline. Burma’s Prisons Department and the MyanmarPolice Force come under the purview of the Ministry of Home Affairs, which hasbeen implicated in facilitating the transport of prisoners to staging areaswhere they are handed over to military units.[38]There are currently 42 prisons and 45 labor camps in Burmaunder control of the Corrections Department. Prisons are divided into threedifferent classes: Class A prisons are equivalent to maximum security, Class Bare medium security facilities, and Class C prisons are for petty offenders orthose serving short sentences. Political prisoners are usually sent to Class Aprisons. Serious offenders or those committing further offenses in prison aresent to labor camps, which include gravel production, agricultural service,road building, and specially designated porter camps which are little differentfrom standard labor camps, but from which convicts are drawn on a regularbasis. The authorities select porters from all classes of prison and from laborcamps.SelectingPrisoners for Porter DutyConvict porters are drawn from a range of prisons throughoutBurma, from the central Dry Zone, the former capital of Rangoon, and fromprisons close to ethnic conflict areas such as Toungoo or Hpa-an in KarenState. The selection of prisoners from a large number of facilities indicates awell-established system of drawing prisoners, typically small groups of 30 to100 men or so—for portering duties. One consequence of this system isthat prison and military officials can reasonably argue that inmates who end upnot accounted for have become “lost in the system” if they perishduring portering service.The allocation of prisoners for porter use reflects Tatmadawpractices dating back to the 1990s. In 1995, Human Rights Watch interviewedover 50 men who escaped from Tatmadaw units involved in a large-scale offensiveagainst the rebel Karen National Union (KNU) headquarters at Manerplaw, wherethousands of porters drawn from the civilian population and from variousprisons were used. A porter recounted how one group of about 1,000 prisoners hadcome from Pa'an, the capital of Karen State, Insein jail in Rangoon, and fromMyainggone prison labor camp.[39]None of those interviewed by Human Rights Watch or the KarenHuman Rights Group in 2010-2011 had volunteered for portering duty; even ifporter service were voluntary, this would not justify inhumane treatment andabuse of porters. Only male prisoners were chosen. There are no crediblereports of female prisoners being selected for porter duties, although civilianwomen and girls are often ordered by the army to engage in forced labor inconflict areas. Those interviewed by Human Rights Watch and the Karen HumanRights Group ranged in age from 17 to 57 years. Prison authorities selectednames without any clearly stated criteria. There appeared to be no distinctionaccording to the crime committed or length of sentence.Prisonsand Labor Camps from which Prisoners were Drawn in 2010-2011 for thePost-Election Offensive in Karen StateFacilityLocationEstimated Number of PrisonersMiektilaPrisonMandalayRegion30PakokkuPrisonSagaingRegion30InseinPrisonRangoonRegion100Zin-kyikeLabor CampMonState75-100Taung-zunLabor CampMonState100Yin-nyeinLabor CampMonState75PyaPrisonPeguRegion50Prisonsand Labor Camps from which Prisoners were Drawn in 2009-2011 for Ongoing Operationsagainst the KNLA in Northern Karen State and Eastern Pegu RegionFacilityLocationEstimated Number of PrisonersTaungooPrisonPeguRegion125YamethinPrisonMandalayRegion175Kin-tha(1) Labor CampMandalayRegion200Kin-tha(2) Labor CampMandalayRegion150Mote-pa-linLabor CampMonState150Other prisons from which porters were drawn for service inthe 2011 offensive include: Monywa, Mandalay, Magwe, Thayet, and Myingyan. Ofthe 20 escaped convict porters Human Rights Watch and the Karen Human RightsGroup interviewed for this report in early 2011, the estimated total number ofprisoners assembled in Hpa-an and Kawkariek on the first few days of January2011 was 700-800.Most of the prisoners we interviewed for this report werenot informed of the purpose of their transfer. This is likely designed toconfuse the prisoner and their relatives into believing their removal is partof a regular prison transfer. Some prisoners related how they at first believedthey were being transferred to a labor camp, possibly to serve hard time with areduction of sentence. Many of those already in labor camps, already at themost punitive end of the penal system, suspected they were being sent forportering duties. Labor camps are deemed to be the harshest facilities: theonly thing considered worse is portering.GovernmentDepartments and Military Units Involved in Transporting andUsing Convict PortersClick to expand ImagePrisons Department under Ministryof Home AffairsClick to expand ImageMyanmar Police ForceClick to expand ImageTatmadaw infantry insigniaClick to expand ImageSoutheastRegion Military Command (Moulmein, Mon State)Click to expand ImageLight Infantry Division 22 (Hpa-an, Karen State)Click to expand ImageArtillery Operations CommandSoe Myint, a 32-year-old drug offender from Mandalay withfive years left in his seven-year sentence, was part of a group of 30 prisonersselected from Meiktila Class C prison in Mandalay Region in late December 2010.He told Human Rights Watch, “The prison guard told us we had the chanceto go to a labor camp and have our sentences reduced. Thirty of us were chosen.I thought it was a chance to break rocks and get out of prison early.”[40]Choosing prisoners from prisons in central Burma also meantmany of the prisoners have never been to Karen State or the hinterlands ofeastern Burma, cannot speak the local languages, and are not familiar with traversingthick jungles and mountains. Some prisoners in central Burma are ethnicminorities from northern Burma, such as Shan, Wa, and others, who may not speakBurmese fluently, and often Burmese is the only language that prisoners andKaren civilians share. Escape becomes even more daunting if the prisoner isunfamiliar with the terrain or limited in their ability to communicate.In some cases, prisoners attempted to pay bribes in order toavoid being sent to the front lines, but these bribes were not alwayssuccessful. Some were given perfunctory health checks, indicating collusion byprison medical authorities. Thaing Soe, a 30-year-old ethnic Burman imprisonedat Meiktila prison for getting into a brawl, suspected he was being sent onportering detail. He said:No one told me at Meiktila prison where we were going. Theychose 30 of us to go. I asked one of the guards to tell my family I had beentold to go as a porter. We had two days until we left. My family paid 100,000Kyat [US$100] to the prison warden to make sure I didn’t go. He took themoney and sent me anyway.[41]Thi Ha Soe, 30, had served only10 days of his five-year sentence for murder (or manslaughter) in Pakokku,Sagaing Region, when authorities selected him as a porter in late 2010. He toldthe Karen Human Rights Group how some prisoners tried to bribe their way out ofthe service:There were many people who gave money [to get off the list].And we heard from other people and they said the jailers got a lot of moneywhen porters were called. First they said 30 had to go as porters and 50 had togo to yeh beh [labor camp]. We thought, “We are new arrivals andwe won’t be included to go porter.” There was no preparationbecause we had just arrived. We knew nothing about prison. They chose people onDecember 29and 30and they locked our legs withchains…. The jail warden [told us we going to be porters]. They alreadycollected the name list. They already had the name list that would be included.For us, we knew nothing. From Pakokku, the army didn’t come and call,just military trucks came with jailer U Kyaw Tha and policemen from thedistrict. Ten policemen were in each truck with 15 prisoners. In total, therewere 25 people in a truck.[42]Ko Kyaw Htun, 28, was part of a group of 100 prisoners takenfrom Insein prison in Rangoon on January 1, 2011. He said:They didn’t say that they were taking us out to beporters, they said it was for yeh beh. They sent us to Hpa-an prison [inKaren State]. When we arrived at Hpa-an, they said we were going to be porters.We were all aghast when we heard “porter”because being aporter is very bad. They ordered us to carry their loads and we knew fromthere. The jailer and jail warder didn’t tell us anything before aboutthis. You can pay money if you don’t want to go. You have to pay 30,000Kyat [US$30]. You have to pay to the leader, the three-striped guy [sergeant].The jailer and jail warder also take it [the money]. They [the militaryofficers] shared it with the jailer and jail warden after.[43]For prisoners drawn from labor camps, the treatment was moreperfunctory and brutal. Maung Pwe, an ethnic Mon imprisoned for manslaughter in2003 and taken with 75 other prisoners from the Zin-kyike labor camp in MonState, told Human Rights Watch, “They [prison authorities] didn’tsay anything, they picked us as they want. The soldiers kicked us and beat usonto trucks.”[44]Transportationfrom PrisonMany of the prisoners interviewed provided details of how,though guarded by policemen, they were transported by military trucks through anumber of other prisons before they reached the prison in Hpa-an, the capitalof Karen State. During their transport, the prisoners were shackled orhandcuffed, ordered to sit with their heads on their knees, and instructed notto talk or look around. Most were never told by their guards where they beingtransported to, or for what purpose.Authorities transported Kyaw Min, a prisoner from Pya(Prome) prison in Pegu Region, with a group of 50 prisoners to Hpa-an in earlyJanuary 2011. He said:On December 20, 2010, at 4 p.m., they called out people’snames one by one. They ordered us to line up and said that we were going toporter. I didn’t know what “porter” is. I had never heard.They said people who can pay money can stay but people who can’t paymoney would be included. They took out 50 people from Pya (Prome) prison.People from my home [family] couldn’t come [to give money] so I wasincluded as a porter…. They took us out on December 31at 8 a.m. [We drove] to Peguprison. We had to sleep one night there. There were two trucks. They carried 25people in a truck. There were five police included in each truck. They coveredthe truck with tarps. We couldn’t see anything outside. Sometime wecouldn’t breathe very well. We had to wear prisoner uniforms and theyshackled our legs in pairs. Just only one time we could eat. They packaged a smallamount of rice when we [left] the prison. We could drink the water that webrought with us but if you didn’t bring water, they didn’t givewater to us.[45]Soe Myint from Meiktila prison told Human Rights Watch abouthis transportation:The trucks were driven by soldiers but the guards werepolice. We were chained together on the way around our ankles. We had a smallbag of rice, but we could use our money to give to the guards who brought usfood on the way. We spent one night at Pegu [prison], then arrived at Hpa-an.[46]Myint Swe, 23, in the same Meiktila group, described thejourney to Human Rights Watch:We could only talk at night. In the truck we had to sitwith our heads on our arms around our knees. We were chained together. When wegot to Kawkariek we were told by a [military] battalion officer that we weregoing to be porters, that we would be divided up to go with certain Tatmadawunits. I was afraid, I really wanted to run away, the army was treating us likeanimals, but we couldn’t go anywhere. I shouldn’t have been put onthe list; my sentence was only one and a half years.[47]Maung Pwe, from a labor camp in Paung Township of Mon Statesaid, “Some of the prisoners were tied by their thumbs with plastic ties,others were tied [by their thumb] to the person next to them.”[48]These accounts are similar tothose heard two decades ago. In 1992, the Karen Human Rights Group interviewedMyint Aung, a 24-year-old prisoner from Mandalay prison who managed to escapefrom serving with Tatmadaw Infantry Battalion 117. He said:One day near the end of September [1992] the guards told usto be ready, because in two or three days they’d come and call us.That’s all they told us. Later we were each given one plastic sheet, apair of flip-flops and another set of prison clothes. The next morning, onSeptember 28, the army came and took 325 of us away on army trucks. When thishappened we knew they were taking us to be porters, but we didn’t knowwhere. We were part of a truck convoy of prisoners from Mandalay, Myingyan, andMeiktila prisons. There were about 50 of us in the back of each truck, crowdedtogether sitting with our legs drawn up. We traveled like this night and dayfor three days without ever stopping to get off the truck, except twice a dayfor just one hour for meals. They took us all the way from Mandalay to Pa Zau [Papun]town.[49]Interviews conducted by the KarenHuman Rights Group over the past several years indicates that prisoners areroutinely drawn from prisons and labor camps and assigned to battalions at thefront line to do menial labor, or retained in case of use in combat operations.Lwin Kaing, a 44-year-old ethnic Arakanese who was sentenced to 12 years inprison for drug offenses, was taken from the Hin Tha labor camp in the nationalcapital, Naypyidaw, along with 200 other prisoners in December 2009. They weretransported to Taungoo prison in northern Karen State where they stayed forfour or five days. Lwin Kaing remembers that there were 86 trucks full ofsoldiers and porters who eventually transported them from Taungoo prison toShwegyin township in Karen State. He told the Karen Human Rights Group:[I]twas after 6 or about 7 in the evening when the army came to pick us up with themilitary truck and drove us to a place in a big jungle. In the jungle, therewere big [army] barracks. They tied us with ropes, five people together, and[20] prisoners had to line up together and we slept like this. In the morning,we had to get into the truck, still tied with the ropes. The truck was going toShwegyin [in northern Karen State]. We had to urinate and defecate together inthe truck. We reached Kyauk Kyi in Shwegyin [township] at night. We had tosleep there for a night. In the morning, they drove again to Bpoh Hseh Koh.[50]AssemblyClose to Conflict AreasIn early January 2011, the authorities assembledapproximately 700 prisoners from an estimated 13 penal facilities at the prisonin Hpa-an. Many stayed for one to two days, were issued specific convict porteruniforms, and then were transferred en masse by army truck to the headquartersof the Tatmadaw Military Operations Command No.12 (MOC-12) at Kawkariek, closeto Myawaddy town. There, according to several former porters, the prisonerswere kept in two large barracks for one to two days. Around January 3 or 4,dozens of army trucks then drove the prisoners to the town of Palu, across fromthe Thai town of Baan Mae Khon Kaen, about 20 kilometers south of the bordertown of Myawaddy. From there, the prisoners were divided among an estimated 17Tatmadaw units, and sent off on a range of duties in the Palu area and furthersouth around the town of Waw Lay. These duties included carrying supplies tothe front line, detecting landmines, foraging for firewood and water,fulfilling base support duties, and cooking for soldiers.Theassembly at Hpa-an prison and the army camp at Kawkariek illustrate themilitary command’s deliberate policy to deploy convict porters to thefront line, reflected in prepared uniforms and fixed assembly dates. This wasnot an ad-hoc gathering in an emergency, but indicative of patterns documentedpreviously by human rights groups over the past two decades.Soe Myint, from Meiktila prison, told Human Rights Watchwhat happened when his group of 30 prisoners arrived at Hpa-an prison:One of the officers at Hpa-an prison told us there wereover 800 prisoners from prisons all over Burma, so “you are notalone.” At Hpa-an I spoke with other prisoners from different prisons,they sent a lot more than Meiktila prison. I met men from Monywa, Pya [Prome],and other places. We were locked inside a building, and only allowed outsidefor bathing and for meals. We were all given new porter uniforms by the prisonguards: a blue hat, two [blue] shirts, one longyi [sarong], one pair ofpants, sandals, and a plastic sleeping mat. We kept our normal clothes fromprison, we only had to wear the blue clothes when we were on patrol or walkingto the front line. The guards came to each building and told us we were goingto be porters, we would be going to Myawaddy. I knew that there was fighting inthat place because at [Meiktila] prison we listened to the BBC Burmese Service[radio]. I was really afraid. I didn’t want to go to the war area.[51]AtKawkariek, we were separated into different groups. All of us were separated:three went to a medical unit, some to carry supplies. Others went into amine-clearance unit. The soldiers had metal detectors, but we were given sticksto check for mines. Luckily, I just had to cook for the officers. I had tocarry a bamboo basket full of rice, fish paste, and oil. It was about 50kilograms, on my shoulders and with a longyi strapped around myforehead. [52]Thi Ha Soe, a 23-year-old convicted murderer from Pakokkuprison, was issued the same uniform for portering duties:They gave us prisoner uniforms in Hpa’an prison, bluecolored clothes: two shirts, two longyis, and a pair of trousers. Webrought our own clothes, civilian clothes, but we couldn’t wear them.They wanted to see us wearing the clothes that they gave to us. We were notallowed to change and wear other clothes because the military ordered it and weare civilians, so there was no opportunity for us to respond to them.[53]Maung Pwe, from a labor camp in Mon State, told Human RightsWatch that an army captain from Military Operations Command-12 (MOC-12, or SaKa Ka) told him, “We had nothing to be afraid of, we would be takencare of, and we would be returned alive and then freed.”[54]Other prisoners were told nothing by any prison or military officials. Tun Mok,a 45-year-old drug offender from Shan State, had been drawn from one of thelabor camps in Mon State. He told Human Rights Watch:When we arrived at Hpa-an there were over 500 prisonersthere already, a lot of trucks bringing prisoners from lots of other camps inthe area. We drove to Kawkariek and stayed there for two nights, then drove toMyawaddy and then to Palu. Ah, there were a lot of prisoners!  The armydidn’t tell us anything, where we were going or what we would be doing.When we were on the truck we all said if we were made to carry supplies for thearmy, we would run away. We didn’t want to die. One prisoner on the trucksaid he had carried supplies for the Tatmadaw before, and had seen a soldierstep on a landmine, and the explosion had blinded three prison porters.[55]Matthew, an ethnic Chin from Pya prison in Pegu Region,described the experience of how he and other prisoners from Hpa-an weretransported close to the front line:Thearmy came and picked us up from [Pa’an prison]. The army [from Zin PhyuTaung] wore camouflage uniforms. They came and picked us up with green trucks.They were horrible. They pointed at us with guns and said, “You guys,don’t try to run or move.” They climbed up on the roof of the carand they kept us inside the car. We were afraid. They called to us and saiddon’t look around and keep your head down and we had to keep our headsdown.[56]Burmese authorities arrested Ko Kyaw Zwa in the IrrawaddyDelta for selling illegal lottery tickets in 2010 and first sent him to aprison close to his home before transferring him to a labor camp in Mon State.He was part of a group of 75 prisoners sent first to Hap-an, and then straightto Palu. Ko Kyaw Zwa said:Thesoldiers told us on the way to Palu, “When you get there you have tofulfill your duty, and when it’s finished you will be sent back andreleased. You will just have to collect firewood, build fences around thecamps, that’s all.” Some of the prisoners believed all this andwere happy, but I knew it wasn’t true. With Burmese soldiers they alwayssay one thing and do another.[57]III. Abuses against Convict Porters in ArmedConflict“Aliveor Dead, It’s the Same Thing Here”Tun Tun Aung, 20, an illiterate laborer from the Mandalay region,was sentenced to one year in prison for fighting with a neighbor. Theauthorities took him as part of a group of 30 prisoners from Meiktila prisonin late December 2010. He told Human Rights Watch:I didn’t know I was being taken as a porter. When wearrived in Karen State that’s when we knew, we were all afraid. Therewere about 1,000 prisoners there, but we were separated into small groups. Mygroup went to La-pan village. We had to carry bombs [mortar or rocket-propelledgrenade rounds] in a basket, 13 in each. We would start at 7 a.m. and reachthe mountain [Tatmadaw base] at 3 p.m. We were never given food, never givenwater. After we dropped our loads [at the camp] we walked back down, but someof the porters had to stay there. We had to dig pits for their mortars. Wehad to struggle the whole time, the sit-tha [soldiers] would yell atus, “Quick, hurry, I will kill you! Are you fucking your mother or yoursister?” Most of the soldiers are bad. We are Burmese like them, butthe sit-tha have no kindness, they are selfish. It is easy to torturepeople.Some of the porters went first [walking ahead]. Otherswere between the sit-tha. At 10 different times I saw porters step onlandmines. Some died, others lost their legs or eyes. If the soldiers gotinjured we carried them back, but the injured porters just stayed there.Three or four times I had to carry the wounded sit-tha. Some had lostarms, a whole leg, injuries on their face and chest. We had to carry themslowly down the mountains and the soldiers would swear at us to go faster.The soldiers told us at night that there was a lot offighting on the mountain, and that if we were alive tomorrow night we wouldbe lucky. We are all dead, I thought. Alive or dead, it’s the samething here. So 15 of us planned to escape. It was a full moon that night, sowe decided to run away at 11 p.m. We were not tied up. We were outside amonastery, and when the sit-tha fell asleep, we crept away. We werenot far from the [Moei] river [along the Thai border], just five minutes towalk. We walked through the river to the Thai side. We heard the sit-thayell, “Don’t run! Don’t run!” I turned around to lookand was hit with the first shot. They shot at us four times I think. Thebullet hit my right shoulder and broke my arm. It knocked me down onto theground. I first felt dizzy, everyone else just ran. My friend stayed anddragged me into a sugarcane field. We spent the night hiding there. In themorning we met a Thai man. I think he owned that field, and he called theThai [health] officials who took me to the hospital [in Mae Sot].I was told that if we escaped the army would send a letterto our family saying that we were killed by the enemy. I’ve never seenmy son; he was born while I was in prison. I want to see him. I also want tosee my grandfather, he is very sick. I will work here in Thailand for two orthree months to get money and then go back [to Burma] to my family. I am worriedI will get into trouble if I go back, but I have to go back.[58]Convict porters used in northern Karen State in 2009-2010 and during thepost-election offensive south of Myawaddy in 2011 endured horrific abuses atthe hands of the Tatmadaw. These include killings and summary executions,“atrocity demining” (defined below), torture and beatings, denialof medical assistance, ill-treatment including denial of food and shelter, and abuseswhile attempting to escape.Extrajudicial ExecutionsPorterstold Human Rights Watch and the Karen Human Rights Group about specificincidents they witnessed in which Tatmadaw soldiers or officers summarilyexecuted porters. Soldiers usually killed porters for no longer being able tocarry the loads, attempting to escape, or having injuries from landmines orfrom being beaten that rendered them unable to walk. Most of the porters weinterviewed said they were repeatedly threatened that they would be killed ifthey could no longer carry the loads, if they were injured, or if they tried toescape.Matthew, an ethnic Chin, told the Karen HumanRights Group of his experience with a military unit. He described other portershaving their throats cut, being shot, and their bodies being thrown over steepcliffs:In front of me, two porters from [army] company askedpermission from the captain to take a rest. They said they couldn’t walkanymore. Their legs were full of wounds and their faces became swollen becausethey had been beaten and struck with guns. They apologized, explaining thatthey couldn’t go on, and said “Let us take a rest.” Thesoldiers said “We didn’t call you here to take a rest. We calledyou here to work. Are you really sure that you can’t go anymore?”They said “We can’t walk anymore,” and they apologized. They[the soldiers] said, “If that is so, put your basket down.” Andthose two people put down their baskets because they thought they would begiven a rest. They were called to the cliff and he sliced their necks and kickedthem down to the valley.A guy whose legs were locked together with mine, his namewas Aung Thu Win. He couldn’t climb up [the mountain] anymore. I wantedto go and help him. He [a soldier] said don’t go. He said, “If youcan carry, can you carry the whole basket?” I couldn’t carry [thewhole basket] but I wanted to go and help [Aung Thu Win carry it]. He said, “Don’tgo and help him. He will carry it by himself. You go [keep walking].” Hethreatened me.… They ordered him to go to the gorge and run. The youngboy [Aung Thu Win] told them, “If I run you will shoot me.” Theysaid “No, we won’t kill you. You can run.” They ordered theguy to run. Just as he walked down to the gorge, they shot him in the back. Andthey told us, “You guys, see what happens. You guys, if you also can’tclimb up, we will kill you like this.” We were afraid.[59]PyitZon from Insein prison witnessed three porters from the same prison attemptingto escape on the front line:One of them [porters] ran from the front [of the column]and escaped. The second one stepped on landmines. The last one was afraid andran back. He ran back to be arrested. The soldiers pointed at him with guns andshot him on the mountain. They shot at him and kicked him. The one who was hitby landmines, he shouted, “Help me, help me.” While he was shoutingbeside the tree, he was stabbed with a bayonet. They just left him like that.[60]Many of the escaped porters described howsoldiers executed porters who were wounded by landmines (see next section). KoKyaw Htun told the Karen Human Rights Group “Most of my friends [porters]were hit by mines and their legs were blown off. The soldiers said they wouldsend them back and they called them behind the troops and shot and stabbed themwith knives and kicked them down to the valley.”[61]Maung Pwe, from a gravel labor camp in Mon State, witnessedsoldiers and officers shooting porters after they had been wounded bylandmines:Every day we had to walk ahead of the soldiers. They said,“Walk head, go first, there are landmines.” It was our duty, we couldn’tsay anything. Sometimes porters were injured by landmines and we carried themback. Other times they were shot. They [insurgents] shot at us about noon. Iwas carrying water gallons [bottles]. They shot at the front of the column, andI jumped on the ground. About 20 soldiers and porters were wounded or killed.We carried the wounded soldiers back, but the soldiers shot the woundedporters. I saw three of the wounded porters being shot: one by a captain,another by a corporal. They were shot in the leg first by the [rebel] DKBA [inan ambush]. Then the sit-tha shot them in the belly with the big gun[assault rifle]. The bo-gyi [captain] said, “Don’t carrythem back to the camp, kill them on the spot.” I didn’t feelanything, I know I had to do anything they told me to do. The bo-gyitold me, “Your life can be sent back, but your body will stayhere.” I knew I had to escape after that.[62]Authorities took Soe Win, a young man serving time forbreaking and entering, with a group of 500 prisoners from the Kin Tha laborcamp near Naypyidaw in late 2009.  They assigned him together with a smallgroup of other porters to Infantry Battalion 58, on its way to the front linein Papun district of Karen State. Along the way soldiers beat him and deprivedhim of food. Aung Kyaw Moe witnessed a young soldier shooting and killing twoporters. He said:Theypunched me and hit me because I did not porter anymore during the trip andcouldn’t continue to climb the mountains because I was sick. Otherprisoners also were tortured and some were killed when they could not porterduring the trip. I saw for myself that they shot dead two porters who tried todesert. One porter was shot in the side of his ear and another was shot in thechest. One of the majors told the soldier [name withheld] who had shot theporters to stop. After the major said that, he stopped shooting. The major didnot give him any punishment even though his action was beyond the limit andcaused death. These porters were Aung Zaw Min, Burmese ethnicity, about 25years old, and the other one was Shan ethnicity, about 25 or 26 years old,also.[63]Soldiers also provided accountsof the summary execution of convicts used by the military. Tin Soe, a 21-year-oldsoldier, told Human Rights Watch how one of his officers killed two convictlaborers at his camp in October 2009:We had two prisoners from Moulmein [Mon State] prison whowere serving ten-year sentences. After they had been prisoners for seven years,their families came to our camp to get them out. They paid our commander tohave them released. So our officer signed the papers, took the money, andpromised to send them to the town the next day. We were walking them and oneother prisoner to the town to release them when our officer said he forgot thekeys to the shackles, and then shot the two men. The other one escaped, but hehad been badly wounded. I buried the bodies myself. Usually we just throw them [deadprisoners] in the river.[64]“AtrocityDemining”Inviolation of international humanitarian law prohibitions against “humanshielding,” placing civilians at unnecessary risk, and using forced laborin combat areas, porters reported that they were forced to walk with patrols inmined areas. “Atrocity demining”—the practice of forcingporters to walk ahead of columns or patrols to detonate enemy antipersonnellandmines or command-detonated IEDs—is a war crime. Porters are alsoforced to clear and mark areas suspected of containing landmines or IEDs, withno specialist training or equipment to perform this task. In most cases, theporters were just ordered to use a stick to locate the mines.The term“atrocity demining,” also referred to as “human minesweeping,” has been used to describe forced passage of civilians overconfirmed or suspected mined areas or the forced use of civilians to clearmines without appropriate training or equipment.[65] The International Campaign to BanLandmines has documented the use of forced labor, civilian and prisoner, forforced mine clearance with their bodies or with tools without training in areaswith a known mine hazard every year in Burma since 1999.[66] It is a form of human shielding,which is a war crime.Many of the convict porters interviewed by Human RightsWatch and the Karen Human Rights Group in 2010-2011 reported landmine deathsand injuries, several of which have already been described in the sectionabove, highlighting the dangers arising from military operations to whichporters are routinely exposed. Porters told Human Rights Watch and the KarenHuman Rights Group that soldiers forced them to dig out landmines, to strike orbeat the ground with a pitchfork or pickaxe before soldiers walked on it, or towalk in front of Tatmadaw columns in a mined area or in an area suspected tohave been mined.According to Htway Thu, a 28-year-old man fromMagwe Region sentenced to 5 years for brawling, soldiers forced him to walkahead of the column and probe for landmines:“Theydid not ask us to walk in the same position because sometimes we had to sweeplandmines with a kind of tool that has prongs like a pitchfork. We used it toscrape the ground and find the landmines. We did not know anything aboutlandmines, but we had to scrape the ground and find landmines.”[67]Ko Kyaw Htun recalls soldiers forcing them towalk ahead, knowing it was the wrong thing for them to do:“They[soldiers] ordered us to walk in the front. When we went and carried water, wedidn’t know about mines and had never heard what guns sounded like.Actually we were supposed to follow behind them. They knew and they weresupposed to go in the front. But they ordered us to go first. They followedbehind us. In their mind, if the mine explodes, the mine will hit usfirst.”[68]Laing Oo, 43, who had been in prison since 1990, told the Karen Human Rights Groupabout two incidents in 2011 in which porters were injured by mines and thenleft by the soldiers without administering any medical assistance. He said:The “point section” is the porters who walk atthe front. One of the people [porters] from the point section ran. He ran andstepped on a mine. He ran and “Taw!” — we heard the sound ofa landmine. He shouted that he couldn’t walk any more. They kept him likethat there. There was nothing we could do for him. In front of us, there weretwo young guys who came together with us. They swept the road with us. Acorporal wanted to move forward and he didn’t dare step off the path buthe ordered the young guy [another convict porter] to move aside. That young guywas about 20.… [He] was hit by the mine when he moved aside. After the youngguy stepped on the mine, both of his legs were blown off.[69]Matthew, from Pya(Prome) prison, described how soldiers ordered him to walk ahead of theformation and search for mines: “The soldiers said, ‘Many of oursoldiers were hit by mines. We will keep the porters at the front. If theydon’t go, we will shoot them in the back. We will shoot them if theydon’t go in the front. We will order them to clear upmines.’”[70]Pyit Zon, who witnessed prisoners killedattempting to escape, was also present when a young porter was ordered to stepoff the path, when the soldiers clearly feared that landmines were present. Hesaid:There was a very narrow road that was only wide enough forone person to be able to walk [single-file]. A service personnel worker [porter]stood up here, the soldiers came across to him and they did not dare to stepoutside of the road. They ordered that service personnel worker to step outsideof the road. That man moved beside them outside of the road and both of hislegs were blown off. They shot him with a gun and left him like that.[71]Maung Nyunt was carrying supplies to a Tatmadaw camp inearly January 2011 when a porter walking ahead of troops stepped on a landmineand was seriously injured:If the porters stepped on a landmine and were injured, thesoldiers would just leave them there. We were carrying food up to the camp andone porter stepped on a mine and lost his leg. The soldiers left him, he wasscreaming but no one helped. When we came down the mountain he was dead. Ilooked up and saw bits of his clothing in the trees, and parts of his leg in atree. I was always afraid of the landmines. I came to fear the moon, because Iknew that in the morning we would have to carry supplies.[72]The Tatmadaw and non-state armed groups have usedantipersonnel landmines extensively in Karen State and elsewhere in easternBurma for many years. Burma is not a party to the 1997 Mine Ban Treaty, whichbans the use, production, transfer, and stockpiling of antipersonnel landmines,and has abstained from voting the UN General Assembly’s annual resolutioncalling for universalization of the treaty. Because landmines cannotdistinguish between civilians and combatants, their use even where the Mine BanTreaty is not in effect violates the international humanitarian law provisionagainst indiscriminate attacks.[73]In recent years, the militaries of Burma and Col.Gaddafi’s Libya have been the only government armed forces confirmed tohave used antipersonnel mines. Insurgent groups in Burma make use of improvisedexplosive devices (IEDs) for ambushes, and homemade landmines for use ontrails. Their use by both government forces and insurgents is a seriousviolation of international humanitarian law.Reported casualties remainhigh, but do not necessarily reflect the full extent of deaths and injuriesbecause of haphazard and incomplete reporting by the Burmese authorities and bynon-state armed groups. No party to Burma’s armed conflicts has everincluded numbers of convict porters in their official reporting on landmineinjuries and deaths, nor has there ever been any official acknowledgement ofthe scale of injuries due to landmines.[74]Human ShieldsIn addition to their use in “atrocity demining,”described above, convict porters have also been subject to other forms of“human shielding,” a violation of international humanitarian lawthat amounts to a war crime. Porters interviewed by Human Rights Watch and theKaren Human Right Group described how soldiers deliberately intermingled porterswhile walking in military columns in frontline areas.Porters related how they were forced to walk ahead of troopsto either detonate landmines or draw fire from an ambush. Several portersspecifically reported that soldiers forced them to walk before or on eitherside of them to shield military personnel during hostile fire.They also described other practices that, even when notamounting to shielding, violate the international humanitarian law prohibitionon putting civilians at unnecessary risk. Porters described how soldiers didnot allow them to seek shelter in the trenches; forced them to stay out in theopen during firefights; sent them to areas the army had just vacated under firein order to retrieve military equipment hastily abandoned; and made them sleepin an unsheltered open area while soldiers slept in trenches or under shelter.Laing Oo described his experiences within a Tatmadaw columnon the front line:It was like they [Burmese soldiers] took cover behind us.The point section [of porters] went in the front. We went after the pointsection. At the front, two service personnel [porters] had to go first and wedirectly had to follow after them. They sandwiched the soldiers with us. Forinstance, four or five service personnel would die if they shot one soldier.They were sandwiched in the middle like this.[75]Chit Kawn, a 37-year-old ethnic Han Chinesetaken from Myitkina prison with approximately 100 other convicts in northernKachin State in late 2009, described his experiences at the front line innorthern Karen State in 2010:When fighting happened or when they heard a gun firing,they [soldiers] dragged us [the porters] roughly to walk in front of them. In adangerous situation, they let the porters die. During my time as a porter,whenever fighting occurred, the captain and lieutenant ordered the porters towalk in front. I was forced to walk in the front. They [soldiers] were afraidto go, but they ordered the porters to go.[76]Thi Ha Soe, who was with an army unit duringthe January 2011 fighting south of Myawaddy told the Karen Human Rights Groupwhat happened when DKBA insurgents started directing fire on their position:We were on the hill and had to hide. We dared not put upour heads. The bullets were flying at us and went over our heads but theydidn’t hit us. The soldiers who were kind told us how to stay low whenthe bullets came. The Burmese army marched to the front and the soldiers arrivedat the top of a hill and the [DKBA] soldiers on this side shot at them and theydared not stay on the hill anymore. They retreated and their mortars andbackpacks were still left on the hill. They could only bring their guns withthem. We had to carry their materials for them. They asked seven porters to goand get back their materials. They said the DKBA would not shoot won shawn[porters]. They ordered us to go and get their materials back. They ordered usand we had to go and get them back.[77]In other cases, military personnel forced porters to pillagecivilian houses in the conflict area, a war crime. Ko Kyaw Zwa explained how heand other prisoners were ordered to loot civilian goods for the Tatmadaw:Sometimes I had to go into Palu-gyi to steal things for thearmy. We took good things like TVs, motorbikes, CDs, good mattresses, doors,clothes, and food. We had to take all the rice storage as well, a lot of thefood stocks, and all the animals we could see. About 10 or 15 of us prisonershad to do it. We forced doors open and stole things. The soldiers told us to doit, so we had to. The army trucks came and we put it all into the trucks. Wekept it all at the monastery, and then the [army] officers came and took thevery best things, the rest the sit-tha [soldiers] took. There were stillsome villagers in the town, if the sit-tha saw any women they wouldtease them, but most times the people would avoid the soldiers.[78]Torture and BeatingsWithout exception, all porters we interviewed reportedviolence, physical abuse, or threats of violence against them. Porters saidthat Tatmadaw soldiers and officers beat them for things such as requesting arest, slowing down, stopping, speaking to soldiers or with other porters,requesting a lighter load, or being unable to climb either up or down amountain. Other porters reported that soldiers tortured them when theyattempted to escape or failed to stop other prisoners from escaping. They said thatsoldiers and officers insulted them, punched them, kicked them with militaryboots, prodded them forward with gun barrels, stabbed them, and beat them withthe butts of their weapons.KoKyaw Htun told the Karen Human Rights Group, “They beat the prisonerswhen they didn’t do what they ordered. They stabbed them with a knife orbeat them with their gun butts in the prisoners’ faces. Prisoners’faces became swollen.”[79]Matthew elaborated on thisill-treatment:They [soldiers] treated us very rudely. We couldn’ttalk to them. We had to go when they called us and do what they ordered us.Just a word, we couldn’t even talk back to them. We had no chance tospeak. They beat, punched, and swore at us. Every day, we were called “sister/motherfucker.” They swore and called us “sister/mother fucker” andthen beat us. They kicked us when we were not acting how they wanted. They beatus and ordered us to climb up the mountains.… They kicked us down andkicked us in the back when we couldn’t climb down and the porters rolleddown [the mountain].[80]TunMok, an ethnic Shan from northern Burma, told Human Rights Watch how soldiersbeat him after he attempted to run away from the Tatmadaw just days afterarriving in the conflict area:I ran away from themonastery with two other prisoners at about 10 at night. On the way, we werecaught by soldiers from another unit, at about 1 a.m. near the [Moei] river.These four soldiers beat us with big sticks, all over our bodies. We were sentback to Palu, to the monastery. The soldiers tied my hands behind my back, andtied up my ankles and stretched my legs out straight. One of the soldiers tooka thick bamboo pole and rolled it hard up and down my shins for an hour. Therewere five or seven soldiers at the time, they were very drunk. The soldierswanted to know why we left, and we told them we were scared. They got angry andsaid, “Don’t you love your country?” But when they beat usthey didn’t say much. One sergeant came and yelled at me, “If youtry to escape again, I will kill you!”[81]Soldiers beat Myint Swe, 23, twice:They [soldiers] see prisoners about the age of theirfathers and they kick them and beat them. They have no respect. I was beaten bythe soldiers twice. Once I was too tired, so I rested [on the ground], thesoldiers beat me with a big stick, all over my body. Another time I was onsentry duty at night, and after I fell asleep two prisoners escaped. He [thesoldier] beat me and the prisoner who slept next to the two who escaped. Hebeat me all over for about 15 minutes, he was so mad. He told all of us, if anymore prisoners escaped he would cut off our heads.[82]Kaw Kay, an ethnic Han Chinese from the China-Burma border,was incarcerated in 2008 for drug related offenses. The authorities took himwith hundreds of other porters to northern Karen State in late 2009, where heendured constant beatings at the hands of officers and soldiers, and witnessedother porters being beaten unconscious, possibly to death. He said:Sometimes, they beat us and shouted at us…. Sometimesthey swore at us, “You are not humans. You are prisoners. You came herefor your crimes.” They felt a lot of hatred for us, the prisoners. Therewere many porters who could not continue walking in the front. The SPDC armybeat, kicked, and hit them with guns. We could not count how many times theyshouted or swore at us. I myself was tortured too. I was beaten three or fourtimes. I was beaten with sticks and I was hit with guns. They tortured usbecause they do not have any sense of humanity. They cannot feel sympathy andpity for us because they do not see us as being human. Officers and soldiersare all the same. They all abuse the convict porters. Even though officerssawsoldiers torturing the porters, they didn’t say anything to them. Theycommit abuses together. I saw a porter who was beaten and could not walk afterwards.They just left him there. I don’t know whether he lived or died.[83]Lwin Kaing was assigned with 11 other prisoners to LightInfantry Battalion 237 or 238. He was forced to carry a heavy load of militarymess tins as the battalion moved into the Bpleh Koh army camp. He said:The oldest porters were over 50 years old. There were twoporters, Kyaw Min and TheinHtay or Thein Myat, who were kicked and hit with a gun because they could notporter during the trip. These two porters threw their clothes and continued toporter, but the loads were still too heavy for them to carry as they had toclimb the mountains. The SPDC army scolded them and called them“fuckers” and shouted at them “Even this, you cannotcarry.” They hit Thein Htay or Thein Myat's hips twice with their gunsand they kicked Kyaw Min's back with their foot. They treated us very cruelly.They never said nice words to us.[84]Denialof Medical AssistanceMany of the porters interviewed by Human Rights Watch andthe Karen Human Rights Group said that the military denied porters basic orlife-saving medical treatment. This resulted in convict porters dying fromtreatable injuries and diseases; porters being forced to carry loads while sickor injured; and porters being abandoned when injured, unable to walk, or in anyother way incapacitated.International humanitarian law requires that parties to anarmed conflict “collect and care for the wounded and sick.”[85]The ILO Forced Labour Convention provides that governments using forcedlabor under the exemption provisions must ensure “all necessary measuresare taken to safeguard the health of the workers and to guarantee the necessarymedical care.”[86]The Forced Labour Convention requires that workers be “medically examinedbefore commencing the work and at fixed intervals during the period of service.”[87]Only two convict porters interviewed said that the prisonfrom which they were sent conducted a medical examination. Both reported thatprisoners were sent to be porters based on their ability or inability to pay bribes,and health considerations did not matter.Ko Kyaw Htun described how injuries and ailments accumulatedduring his forced service, and how Tatmadaw medical personnel refused to providetreatment:Many of my friends who stayed in the same prison as medidn’t have footwear. [The soldiers] wore boots. When we crossed rockyland, our legs got abrasions. We got injured and when we couldn’t walk,they beat us with the butt of the gun and stabbed prisoners’ thighs withknives. The prisoners were afraid and got sick at night. They didn’t givethem medical treatment. They let them die. You get sick and you die.[88]Matthew likewise related how the soldiers refused to giveany medicine for common ailments, and how many of the porters feared gettingill and weak, because it would signal almost certain death at the hands of thesoldiers:They don’t give treatment. They don’t havemedicine. I had a cough, a runny nose, and a headache. I went and asked for themedicine. The medical officer was included with the army but the medicines werenot included. He said, “We cure the people who get injured but wedon’t give medicines for diseases [illness]. We treat the people who getinjured by guns. No medicine for fever or disease.” They will shoot youwhen you get sick. They will shoot you when you can’t walk anymore. Wehave to walk carefully so our legs are not hit by mines or injured by anything.They will kill you when your legs fold. We know that so we walk carefully.[89]Inadequate Food, Water, andSanitationAlmost all of the 58 porters weinterviewed reported that the military did not feed them often enough orprovide them with enough food to carry out the work required of them on thefront line. The ILO Forced Labour Convention requires that workers under theexemption provisions be guaranteed a “supply of … food”[90] and an increased or ameliorated diet where performing“work to which they are not accustomed.”[91]Some convict porters describedgoing full days without being fed once, being fed only once a day or beinggiven food only if some was left over after the soldiers had finished eating.Others describe having to share small amounts of food between three or fourother porters or having to forage for food in the jungle in order to try to getenough to eat. Many also described enormous disparities between what soldiersand porters were given to eat.The Forced Labour Conventionalso requires that workers be guaranteed a supply of drinking water.[92] Many porters reported that they did not have readyaccess to water or that they were not permitted to drink a sufficient amount ofwater while portering. Porters reported being forced to work full days withoutbeing provided any water. Seven porters mentioned that they were notallowed to bathe or even wash their hands before eating despite extremelyunhygienic and unsanitary conditions.Ko Kyaw Zwa spent most of his service in the rear area,stealing from villages, digging foxholes, and cooking for soldiers. While hewas rarely exposed to actual weapons fire or landmines, he was not immune fromill-treatment. He said:We stayed at the monastery in Palu-gyi [Big Palu]. Ididn’t go to the front line, I had to dig a lot of holes [foxholes andtrenches] for the soldiers to sleep in. I heard the sound of the fighting allthe time. I was ordered by a soldier to cut grass [around the base] and do itwithin 30 minutes, but it was very tall. The soldier was drunk when he gave theorder, and after 30 minutes he came and yelled at me, hit me a lot with thebutt of his gun, and swore at me a lot, then gave me another 30 minutes tofinish the job.[93]Ko Kyaw Zwa was also privy to one of the paradoxes of armedconflict in Burma: Burmese soldiers listening to ostensibly banned exiled radiostations that carry news on Burma that circumvents Burma’s strictcensorship on news, especially reports on ongoing armed conflict.  Hesaid:The soldiers listened to the BBC Burmese radio and heardinterviews with porters who had escaped [in January 2011] who said they hadbeen badly treated, were not given food, and some had been killed. The soldiersgot very angry and said “What are those porters talking about? They lie!If they come back we will kill them!”[94]Experiencesduring EscapeHuman Rights Watch and the Karen Human Rights Groupinterviewed 20 prisoners who escaped the post-election offensive in KarenState. It is impossible to estimate how many of the large group assembled inHpa-an and Kawkariek managed to escape, were killed, or remain in service. Portersreported that they chose to escape because they believed they would be forcedto porter on the frontline until they were killed or died from malnourishment,exhaustion, or disease. Many porters interviewed by the Karen Human RightsGroup reported that after having served one battalion, the army forced them toremain on the front line to serve new battalions that rotated forward. Win Naing, a 27-year-old porter, told the Karen HumanRights Group about his fears of being kept in the conflict zone:Ididn’t want to stay with them anymore. Life and death, there is a greaterchance of death when we stay with them. We didn’t know when they would goback. They go back and if they transfer us to another column, what can we do?Even if we don’t die with them, maybe we will die with another upcomingcolumn.[95]In addition to the widespread abuses they suffered whileportering, many porters also reported abuses as they attempted to escape,including being shot at by Tatmadaw troops. Some prisoners were lucky in thatthey received help from soldiers, non-state armed groups, or villagers, whourged them to escape and in some cases helped them with information or money,food, shelter, and medical support after their escape. A soldier who was fromthe same town in Burma as Soe Myint was kind to him, and helped him during histime at Palu. Soe Myint eventually escaped in a group of 11 convict porters:He [the soldier] told me that the officer and unit wouldrotate out, and that the unit coming after them would not be that nice. He toldme to run away.  Our camp in Palu was right by the river so we jumped overa fence and five feet away was the [Moei] river, so we crossed [it]. During theday we were so close we could see farmers in cornfields on the Thai side. TheBurmese soldier told me if we crossed to the Thailand side, the sit-thacould not shoot at us. We ran away at midnight when the soldiers were changing[guard]. There was a big party to celebrate their victory. The 11 of us ran.The sit-tha shot once into the air, then fired the machine gun at us.Brrrrrrrr! One of the men was shot in the back. We all carried him to the topof the hill. Then we saw the sit-tha cross the river to chase after us.They had flashlights looking for us. They searched for about 10 minutes, thenthey went back [to the Burma side of the border]. We hid in the bushes and thegrass. The man who was shot, we left him with his friend and we all ran away.[96]Maung Nyunt was carrying mortar shells from an artilleryunit when he and another porter took advantage of the widening distance betweenhim and his Tatmadaw column and also their proximity to the Thailand border. Hemade his escape after less than two weeks on the frontline. He said:The gap widened [between the soldiers and lead-porters], soI and one other man we dropped our baskets and ran through the field and intothe river. The soldiers in the column couldn’t see us run. The soldierson the hill [at the base] saw us and shot at us, about eight times. Ididn’t dare to turn back, I just kept running.[97]Laing Oo, 43, who had been in prison for more than 20years, managed to escape with one other prisoner while doing menial chores forthe officers at the river in the late morning. He said:Our captain ordered us to wash the clothes. [As I washed Iwas thinking] I’m not sure I’ll be alive or dead in four or fivemonths. They [the soldiers] were about 200 feet from the place where we washedthe clothes but they stayed under the bushes. They did not dare come out intothe open. So we ran and crossed the river, it was about 40 or 60 feet wide. [Weswam for] about five or six minutes. So tired at the shallow area. We heard sixgunshots. We arrived at the Thai side. They could not see me once we arrived atthis side. They shot the gun three times for each of us. We just wanted toescape that dangerous life. I thought, I just don’t want to be dead.[98]IV. After Escape toThailandTwenty of the prisoners interviewed for this report escapedto Thailand between January and March 2011. All of these individuals expresseda desire to return home to Burma, and an equally strong fear of arrest andpunishment, possibly death, if they did. Many others interviewed by the KarenHuman Rights Group in other parts of Karen State in the past three yearsexpressed similar dilemmas. We also learned that prisoners who survive theirservice as porters and remain in Burma may face difficulties upon return toprison, such as being transferred to prisons far from their homes or beingdenied special medical care.Thailandis not a party to the 1951 Refugee Convention and its 1967 Protocol, and it hassuspended its refugee status determination process for several years. Thismeans that many of the 140,000 refugees in nine separate camps along theThailand-Burma border are not officially recognized by United Nations HighCommissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), though Thailand does allow the UNHCR toprocess refugees for eventual resettlement in third countries. Escaped Burmese convictporters seeking refugee protection in Thailand and other neighboring countriesface particular difficulties in seeking refugee status because many are notmembers of minority ethnic groups long subject to persecution in Burma, [99] and because of their criminal records.[100] Many are too afraid to try.Thailand is a party to the Convention against Torture and OtherCruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“Convention againstTorture”), which prohibits a state from returning a person to a country“where there are substantial grounds for believing that he would be indanger of being subjected to torture.”[101] Thailand is also bound under customary international law by theprinciple of non-refoulement, which protects refugees and asylum seekers frombeing returned to any country where their lives or freedoms could be threatenedor where they face persecution. Thus, to the extent that the treatment orpunishment meted out by Burmese authorities to convict porters constitutestorture or a form of persecution, their asylum claims should be givenconsideration.Options for escaped convict porters in Thailand are slim. Manytold us they planned to work in Thailand for some time to earn money to send totheir families or save up, and that they would attempt to return in the future,be it in a few months or a few years. Thailand is currently host to anestimated two million migrant workers. About a third are legally registeredwith Thai migrant worker cards, but most live perilously as undocumentedworkers in fields such as agriculture, factory work, fishing, hospitality,construction, and domestic or sex work.KoKyaw Htun from Insein prison told the Karen Human Rights Group he could not gohome to Burma:I will be arrested if I go back to Rangoon. So I will workin this country. My parents are poor. I never even dreamed about this place. Ihave never been to Thailand. We know we will get a lot of money if we work.Instead of going back, I will work and send the money back to my parents.[102]MyintShwe, who was initially sentenced to three years for fraud when he was 21,bribed the judge to reduce the sentence to one-and-a-half years. Within a yearhe was in Karen State carrying supplies on the front line. He said:I feelfoolish that I made a small mistake because I didn’t understand the law,and now all of this happened. I would like to call my family, but I knowthey’re being watched and will get in trouble if I call them. Before allthis happened I used to believe the SPDC loved the people, that they are savingthe country. When I was in prison I started to question this, and after workingwith the army I see they don’t care about the people at all, they treatedus like animals.[103]Pyit Zon, also from Insein prison said:In my heart, I want to fight these [Tatmadaw] people. Ifnot, I don’t want to go back to Burma. I will work here and support myparents. I will send money from here. I don’t want to go back and Idon’t dare to go back. I’m afraid.… I would like to request thatyou don’t hand us over to the [Burmese or Thai] government.[104]Soe Myint, from Mandalay, said he would try and return to Burma:We [were] told that we were released from prison to serveas porters, that if we go back home we won’t be arrested. So, from that,the soldiers say you are free, or dead, the same thing [you are dead]. I thinkit will be safe to go home to Mandalay, but I worry about getting arrested. Iam worried about my life and all the danger I’ve been through. Idon’t want to talk about it. I do consider myself very lucky.[105]Htway Thu, from the Irrawaddy Delta, fears returning toBurma and being put back into prison again, but mostly wants his family to knowwhere he is:Iwant to stay and work peacefully [in Thailand]. If I go back, I will bearrested again and have to stay in prison for a second time. I have my villagephone number, but I do not know how to contact them [my family] for now. I wantto contact them to let them know that I am still alive. It is good for me tomake my father happy.… He will be happy when he knows that I am stillalive.[106]RecommendationsThe Burmese government has long been responsible forserious violations of international humanitarian and human rights law in theconduct of military operations against rebel armed groups. It has failedcompletely to credibly investigate or hold accountable civilian officials andmilitary personnel responsible for serious abuses, including the use andmistreatment of convict porters on the battlefield. This longstanding impunity ledthe UN Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Myanmar, TomásOjea Quintana, to recommend in his March 2010 report to the UN Human RightsCouncil the formation of a UN commission of inquiry into serious violations ofinternational humanitarian and human rights law in Burma.Holding individuals accountable for human rights abuses andwar crimes is important because it may deter future violations, promote respectfor the rule of law, and provide avenues of redress for the victims and theirfamilies. It can promote discipline and professionalism in the armed forces andlaw enforcement agencies, maintain responsible command and control, and improverelations with the civilian population.The United Nations through the General Assembly, the HumanRights Council, and its special rapporteurs has issued highly critical humanrights reports on Burma annually for nearly two decades. These reports frequentlydemonstrate that serious crimes by government security forces are widespreadand systematic. But while many commissions of inquiry have been establishedaround the world to investigate violations of international law, no UN body hasdone so with respect to Burma. Human Rights Watch believes that it is notenough for the UN to simply continue to document and publish reports on thehuman rights situation in Burma. Instead, the UN General Assembly or HumanRights Council should use its existing reports as a basis for establishing aninternational commission of inquiry that can impartially investigateallegations of international crimes, with a view to bringing justice to thevictims and holding perpetrators to account.As of this writing, 16 countries have backed the specialrapporteur’s call and publicly voiced support for a commission of inquiryin Burma. These are Australia, Belgium, Canada, the Czech Republic, Denmark,Estonia, France, Hungary, Ireland, Latvia, Lithuania, the Netherlands, NewZealand, Slovakia, the United Kingdom, and the United States.To the Burmese GovernmentImmediately cease the practice of using civilian porters,including convict porters, in armed conflict areas in Burma.Order the immediate release of civilian porters currently servingthe Burmese military in conflict areas in Burma.Compile, in cooperation with the International LabourOrganization (ILO), a complete list of all prisoners used as convict porterssince the practice began, including information on their fate or currentwhereabouts, and provide this information to their families.Publiclyorder the armed forces to cease using porters as human shields, includingordering a halt to having porters lead military columns and using them for“atrocity demining.”Credibly investigate and prosecute those responsible for abusesagainst porters during military operations, regardless of rank or position.Suspend all military personnel implicated in committing abuses against porterspending investigation.Investigate and prosecute as appropriate senior governmentofficials and military commanders responsible for planning and instituting thelarge-scale use of uncompensated convict porters in conflict areas.Bring law and practice on the use of forced labor in line with Burma’sobligations under international law, including prohibiting forced labor that isuncompensated or in conflict areas. Burma should ratify International LabourOrganization (ILO) Convention No. 105 on the Abolition of Forced Labour (1957).Establish a parliamentary committee to report on the use offorced labor generally in Burma, including the use of convict labor in conflictareas.Provide the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)access to prisons in accord with its standard procedures, and permit the ICRCto reopen its offices in ethnic conflict areas, specifically Moulmein in MonState, Hpa-an in Karen State, and Kengtung in Shan State.Permit anincrease in the number of ILO staff in Burma, including in regions outsideRangoon.Ratify the Mine Ban Treaty.Acknowledgepast failure to pursue justice and fully support the establishment of a UNcommission of inquiry into allegations of serious violations of internationalhumanitarian and human rights law by all parties to the internal armedconflicts in Burma.Develop a national plan to address issues concerning all formerconvict porters, including commutation of sentences, medical care, andassistance by domestic and international organizations for psychologicalcounseling and vocational training.To the Corrections Department of the Ministry of Home AffairsImmediatelycease the practice of using convicts as porters in armed conflict areas inBurma.Identify and disclose the whereabouts of all prisonerstransferred to military custody to serve as porters since the practice wasinitiated, and publish the list of whereabouts in the media or through theGovernment Gazette.Permit unfettered visits to prisons by the ILO to verify that thepractice of forcibly sending prisoners for military service has ended.Withoutwaiting for the current review of the 1894 Jail Manual to be completed,immediately enact specific regulations to ensure that prisoners cannot beremoved from any prison or labor camp facility and placed in hazardousconditions or combat zones.Ensure theupdated 1894 Jail Manual contains specific language banning the use ofprisoners in conflict areas is fully in line with relevant ILO conventions and conformsto the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, aspromised in Burma’s official submission to the Universal Periodic Reviewin January 2011.Tothe Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of BurmaImmediatelycease the practice of using convicts as porters by all military units throughoutBurma, in combat zones, and permit independent verification of theseactivities.Credibly investigate and prosecute Tatmadaw personnel, officersand rank and file, found to have committed serious crimes against convictporters.Immediately end the practice of forced labor of civilians andconvict labor, by all military units in any capacity, in line with ordersissued in 1999 and 2000.Immediately halt the practice of “atrocity demining”and instruct all field commanders to end the use of civilians as humanminesweepers.To the International Labour OrganizationSeek to expand activities outside Rangoon to monitor use ofporters, including convict porters, in conflict areas.Strengthen the ILO operation in Burma to ensure both theeffective application of the Supplementary Understanding Forced LabourComplaints Mechanism (2007), which includes the use of convict porters towardsproviding legal redress to complainants, and enhanced monitoring and reportingmechanisms on the different categories of forced labor including the use ofconvict labor by the military.Assist the Burmese government in revising the 1894 Jail Manual toensure it is in compliance with relevant ILO Conventions on prison and forcedlabor.Support civil society groups in assisting former convict porters,including safe return and access to channels by which they and their familiescan seek legal redress.Facilitate contact between former convict porters and families,including notification of the deaths of porters and protection of families fromreprisal.To Members of the UN Security Council,UN Secretary-General, and Members of the UN Human Rights CouncilPublicly support a UN commission of inquiry as called for in theMarch 2010 report of the UN Special Rapporteur for the situation of human rightsin Myanmar.Tothe UN Country Team and Burma-based UN AgenciesSupport civil society initiatives to reunite former convictporters with their families.Report incidents or information on forced labor including theunlawful use of civilian and convict porters to the ILO.Commence regular and systematic monitoring and reporting on thehuman rights situation in Burma, including the use of civilian or convictporters by the military.Tothe United Nations High Commissioner for RefugeesTake steps to address the specific problems faced by escapedconvict porters who are in Thailand.ToChina, Russia, US, European Union, Japan, and ASEAN Member StatesPublicly support creation of a UN commission of inquiry to lookinto serious violations of international humanitarian and human rights law byall parties to the conflicts in Burma. Actively mobilize other countries tosupport UN General Assembly or UN Human Rights Council action to create such acommission.Publicly call on Burma to immediately end the practice of usingcivilian porters, including convicts, in armed conflict areas.Support as possible an expansion of the ILO’s activities inBurma.Tothe Government of ThailandUphold the principle of non-refoulement with respect to allBurmese asylum seekers in Thailand, including convict porters.Ratify the Refugee Convention and its 1967 Protocol.Appendix A: List of Labor Camps under theCorrectional Department in BurmaNo.NameCategoryLocation1.Taw-gyi-tanAgricultureTwante Township, Rangoon Region2.Shwe-tha-htayAgricultureTwante Township, Rangoon Region3.Kyike-sagawLivestockDike-U Township, Pegu Region4.Hlay-hlaw-InnAgricultureHlegu Township, Rangoon Region5.Prison Labor Camp (KaLaTha)GeneralHlegu Township, Rangoon Region6.No. 2 New Life CampAgricultureI-Kalaung, Tikekyi Township,Rangoon Region7.No. 9 New Life CampAgricultureTanyin Township, Rangoon Region8.Shwe-mya-yaAgriculture (Rubber)Pegu Region9.No. 11 New Life CampKyu-Inn, Pyin Oo Lwin Township, MandalayRegion10.No. 11 New Life CampHo-Kho, Pyin Oo Lwin Township,Mandalay Region11.No. 6 New Life CampAgricultureKyike-Mayaw Township, Mon State12.No. 7 New Life CampAgricultureHpa-an Township, Karen State13.Porter BattalionPorter Recruiting CenterThaton Township, Mon State14.No. 1 Porter BattalionPorter Recruiting CenterHpa-an Township, Karen State15.No. 2 Porter BattalionPorter Recruiting CenterHpa-an Township, Karen State16.Ka-Sa-KaeAgricultureWakhema Township, IrrawaddyRegion17.No. 3 New Life CampAgricultureNyaungdon Township, IrrawaddyRegion18.In-ga-boAgriculture (Rubber)Belin Township, Mon State19.Shwe-kyin-tooGravel ProductionWakhema Township, IrrawaddyRegion20.No. 1 New Life CampTha-nan, Tamu Township, SagaingRegion21.No. 1 New Life CampMyo-thit, Tamu Township, SagaingRegion22.No. 1 New Life CampTamu Township, Sagaing Region23.No. 10 New Life CampYa-za-gyo (1), Kalay Township,Sagaing Region24.No. 10 New Life CampYa-za-gyo (2), Kalay Township,Sagaing Region25.Taung-zunGravelBelin Township, Mon State26.Yin-nyeinGravelPaung Township, Mon State27.Zin-kyikeGravelPaung Township, Mon State28.Mote-pa-linGravelKyikehto Township, Mon State29.Kin-tha (1)GravelPyinmana Township, MandalayRegion30.Kin-tha (2)GravelPyinmana Township, MandalayRegion31.Htone-bo (male)GravelPathaingyi Township, MandalayRegion32.Htone-bo (female) (1)GravelPathaingyi Township, MandalayRegion33.Htone-bo (female) (2)GravelPathaingyi Township, MandalayRegion34.Bae-lin (male)GravelPathaingyi Township, MandalayRegion35.Pa-ya-nga-suGravelPathaingyi Township, MandalayRegion36.Mote-pa-lin (female)GravelKyikehto Township, Mon State37.Taungoo (4 mile)GravelTaungoo Township, Pegu Region38.Sun-pra-bumRoad ProjectMyitkyina Township, Kachin State39.Myitkyina Porter BattalionPorterMyitkyina Township, Kachin State40.Hti-kanAgricultureYatsauk Township, Shan State41.Ban-kanAgricultureYatsauk Township, Shan State42.No. 8 New Life CampAgricultureTanai Township, Kachin State43.No. 4 New Life CampAgricultureMergui Township, TenaserrimRegion44.No. 5 New Life CampAgricultureMergui Township, TenaserrimRegion45.Loikaw Porter BattalionPorterLoikaw, Kayah StateAcknowledgementsThis report was researched and written by David Mathieson,senior researcher in the Asia Division of Human Rights Watch, and Jill Davison,research officer for the Karen Human Rights Group. Many of the interviews wereconducted by Karen Human Rights Group region-based staff in Karen State inBurma and in Thailand who cannot be named for security reasons. The report wasedited by Elaine Pearson, deputy Asia director at Human Rights Watch; Matt Finch,advocacy coordinator at the Karen Human Rights Group; James Ross, legal andpolicy director at Human Rights Watch; and Joseph Saunders, deputy programdirector at Human Rights Watch. Specialist review was provided by Steve Goose,arms division director at Human Rights Watch; Philippe Bolopion, United Nationsadvocacy director at Human Rights Watch; Bill Frelick, refugees director atHuman Rights Watch; and Sophie Richardson, Asia advocacy director at HumanRights Watch.Production assistance was provided by Jake Scobey-Thal, associatein the Asia Division; Kathy Mills, publications coordinator; Fitzroy Hopkins,production manager; and Anna Lopriore, photo editor, who assisted with thephoto feature.[1] NickCheesman, “Thin Rule of Law or Un-Rule of Law in Myanmar?,” PacificAffairs, Winter 2009/2010, pp. 597-613.[2]See Amnesty International,Myanmar: Lack of security in counter-insurgency areas, AI Index ASA16/007/2002, July 2002, Amnesty International, Myanmar: Crimes againsthumanity in eastern Myanmar, AI Index ASA 16/011/2008, June 2008, Mary P.Callahan, Making Enemies. War and State Building in Burma, CornellUniversity Press, 2003, pp.207-28, Human Rights Watch, “They Came andDestroyed Our Village Again”. The Plight of Internally Displaced Personsin Karen State, June 2005, International Center for Transitional Justice, ImpunityProlonged: Burma and its 2008 Constitution, ICTJ, September 2008,International Human Rights Clinic, Crimes in Burma, Harvard Law School,May 2009, Martin Smith, Burma. Insurgency and the Politics of Ethnicity,Zed Books, 1999, Thailand Burma Border Consortium, Internal Displacement andInternational Law in Eastern Burma, Bangkok, TBBC, October 2008.[3]See Human Rights Watch, “Burma: Q&A on anInternational Commission of Inquiry,” March 24, 2011,http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2011/03/24/burma-q-international-commission-inquiry.[4]Human Rights Watch/Asia, Burma: AbusesLinked to the Fall of Manerplaw, C. 705, March, 1995.[5] AmnestyInternational, “Myanmar. No Law At All: Human rights violations undermilitary rule,” London, AI Index, ASA 16/11/92, September 30, 1992.[6]The term “militaryoffensive” is often misapplied in conflict areas of Burma. Normal patrolactivities by Tatmadaw units often entail abuses against civilians, but theyare not an offensive in the sense of being a multi-unit operation with clearlydefined aims of taking over territory, destroying a target, or relocating largenumbers of civilians as part of a counter-insurgency operation. The historicallabel “Four Cuts” campaign has likewise often been misapplied. Thisspecific counter-insurgency campaign is not an everyday phenomenon, but amulti-unit specific campaign designed to pacify a designated area of insurgentactivity.[7]On post-1988 foreign arms sales to Burma, see AndrewSelth, Burma’s Armed Forces. Power Without Glory, Norwalk CT,Eastbridge, 2002.[8] InternationalLabour Organization, “Developments concerning the question of theobservance by the Government of Myanmar of the Forced Labour Convention, 1930(No. 29). Report of the High-Level Team,” Geneva, 282nd  Session,GB.282/4, November 2001, para. 60. p.15.[9]Maung Aung Myoe, Building the Tatmadaw. Myanmar Armed ForcesSince 1948, Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 2009, p.201.[10]Richard Horsey, Ending ForcedLabor in Myanmar: Engaging a Pariah Regime, Routledge, 2011, Conclusion,footnote 2, p.233 (parentheses in original). See also the ILO report of 1992,in which the ILO liaison officer writes “On the question of prisonersbeing used as porters, the L.O. ad interim stressed that this should not beseen as an acceptable alternative to the use of civilians.” See alsoInternational Labour Organization, “Developments concerning the questionof the observance by the Government of Myanmar of the Forced Labour Convention,1930 (No. 29),” Geneva, 285th Session, GB.285/4, November 2002, para. 27,p.10.[11]International Labor Organization, “Forced labour in Myanmar(Burma). Report of the Commission of Inquiry appointed under article 26 of theConstitution of the International Labour Organization to examine the observanceby Myanmar of the Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29),” Geneva, July2, 1998, para. 303.[12]The government also stated that the Tatmadaw was under astrict military code of conduct, was highly disciplined, and did not resort toonerous or oppressive actions against the people. Any isolated aberration wasmet with severe punishment meted out by a military court. Finally, the governmentasserted that the use of porters had significantly diminished as a result offewer military operations against opposition armed groups.ILO, Forced Laborin Myanmar, para. 112.[13]Ministry of Home Affairs,“State Peace and Development Council Order No. 1/99. Order directing notto exercise powers under certain provisions of The Towns Act, 1907 and TheVillage Act, 1907 (sic, 1908),” Yangon, Government of the Union ofMyanmar, May 14, 1999.[14]Chapter VII, Citizen, Fundamental Rights and Duties of Citizens, Clause 359, Constitutionof the Republic of the Union of Myanmar, Printing and PublishingEnterprise, Ministry of Information, May 2009, p. 151.[15]Assistance Association for Political Prisoners (Burma), “TheUse of Prisoners as Forced Porters and Labor by the Military Junta inBurma,” Mae Sot, Thailand, September 19, 2000, Burma Issues, “FromPrison to Frontline. Portering for SPDC Troops During the Offensive in EasternKaren State, Burma, September-October, 2003,” Mae Sot, Thailand, January2005, and Karen Human Rights Group, “Convict Porters: The brutal abuse ofprisoners on Burma’s frontlines,” Mae Sot, KHRG #2000-06, December2000. See also the testimony of “Aye Maung” in Maggie Lemere andZoë West, Nowhere to be Home. Narratives from Survivors of Burma’sMilitary Regime, Voice of Witness, February 2011.[16]HumanRights Watch interview with escaped convict porter Zaw Zaw Tun, Thailand-Burmaborder, June 11, 2011.[17] Karen Human Rights Group, “Less than Human: Convict Portersin the 2005-2006 Northern Karen State Offensive,” Mae Sot, KHRG #2006-03, August 22, 2006, p.17.[18] HumanRights Watch interview with Tatmadaw deserter Let Ya, Thailand-Burma border,March 3, 2011.[19] International Committee of the Red Cross, “Myanmar: ICRCdenounces major and repeated violations of international humanitarianlaw,” ICRC News Release 82/07, June 29, 2007 http://www.icrc.org/eng/resources/documents/news-release/myanmar-news-290607.htm(accessed March 25, 2011).[20]International Labour Organization, “Developmentsconcerning the question of the observance by the Government of Myanmar of theForced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29),” Geneva, 310th Session,GB.310/5, March 2011, para. 26, p.5.[21] TheaForbes, “The ILO and forced labour in Burma,” Mizzima News,March 7, 2011 http://www.mizzima.com/edop/interview/4973-the-ilo-and-forced-labour-in-burma.html(accessed June 16, 2011).[22] See“ILO conducts forced labour workshops with Burmese gov’t officials,”Mizzima News, May 26, 2011, http://www.mizzima.com/edop/interview/5326-ilo-conducts-forced-labour-workshops-with-burmese-govt-officials.html(accessed June 5, 2011). See also Human Rights Watch, “We Are LikeForgotten People.” The Chin People of Burma: Unsafe in Burma, Unprotectedin India, January 2009, Physicians for Human Rights, Life Under theJunta: Evidence of Crimes Against Humanity in Burma’s Chin State,Cambridge Mass, January 2011.[23] In2008, Burma's ruling SPDC announced that all armed groups under ceasefireswould have to transform into BGFs under the direct operational control of theTatmadaw, as stipulated in the 2008 Constitution. To date, nine small militiashave agreed to the terms and transformed into BGFs throughout Burma. Largeethnic armed groups such as the United Wa State Army (UWSA), the Kachin IndependenceOrganization (KIO), and the New Mon State Party (NMSP), have refused to jointhe BGF scheme according to Transnational Institute and Burma CentrumNederland, “Ethnic Politics in Burma: The Time for Solutions,”Amsterdam, Burma Policy Briefing Nr.5, February 2011. Other insurgent groupssuch as the KNLA and Shan State Army-South have not been offered to transforminto BGFs because they are still in open conflict with the central government.[24] “Burma: Eyewitness Accounts of Abuses in Eastern Fighting,”Human Rights Watch news release, December 4, 2010, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2010/12/04/burma-eyewitness-accounts-abuses-eastern-fighting,and Karen Human Rights Group, “Villagers flee to avoid fighting andportering: Conflict continues to impact civilians in Dooplaya District,”KHRG News Bulletin, KHRG #2010-B16, December 4, 2010.[25] UnitedNations High Commissioner for Refugees, “UNHCR urges Thailand againstforced returns to Myanmar,” UNHCR Press Release, December 28, 2010, andPhil Thornton, “When the people are the enemies of the state,” BangkokPost, March 6, 2011, pp.3-5 (Spectrum section), Backpack Health WorkerTeam, “Update on the Conflict and Displacement of Civilians along theThai-Burma border,” Mae Sot, BPHWT, February 15, 2011, RefugeesInternational, “Thailand: No Safe Refuge,” RI Field Report, March24, 2011.[26] United Nations Human Rights Council, “Draft report of theWorking Group on the Universal Periodic Review: Myanmar,” Geneva, A/HRC/WG.6/10/L.7, February 2, 2011, para. 96, p.11.  “Burma:UN Should Tackle Rights Crisis as New Parliament Convenes,” Human RightsWatch news release, January 25, 2010, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2011/01/25/burma-un-should-tackle-rights-crisis-new-parliament-convenes.[27] Human Rights Council, “Note verbale dated 11 March 2011 fromthe Permanent Mission of Myanmar  addressed to the Secretariat of theHuman Rights Council,” A/HRC/16/G/9, March 11, 2011, p.4.[28]Geneva Conventions of 1949, art. 3.  Article 3applies to “armed conflict not of an international character occurring inthe territory of one of the High Contracting Parties.”[29] Ibid.[30] Customaryinternational humanitarian law can be found in the International Committee ofthe Red Cross (ICRC), CustomaryInternational Humanitarian Law (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2005) (available at http://www.icrc.org/customary-ihl/eng/docs/home).Many of the provisions of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of InternationalArmed Conflicts (Protocol I), 1125 U.N.T.S. 3, entered into force December 7,1978, and relating to the Protection of Victims of Non-International ArmedConflicts (Protocol II), 1125 U.N.T.S. 609, entered into force December 7, 1978,are considered reflective of customary international law during internal armedconflicts.[31] SeeICRC, Customary International Humanitarian Law, rule 95, citing FourthGeneva Convention, arts. 40 and 95.[32]Ibid.,  rule 22, citing Protocol I, art. 58(c); Protocol II, art. 13(1).[33] Ibid.,rule 97, citing, e.g. Fourth Geneva Convention, art. 28; Protocol I, art.51(7).[34] Ibid.,rule 156, citing Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, art.8(2)(b)(xxiii).[35] Ibid.,rule 153, citing, e.g. Protocol I, art. 86(2); Rome Statute of theInternational Criminal Court, art. 28.[36]Universal Declaration of HumanRights, G.A. res. 217A (III), U.N. Doc A/810 at 71 (1948), arts. 3and 5.[37] UnderArticle 2 of ILO Convention No. 29, amongst other factors,  forced orcompulsory labor shall not include “any work or service exacted from anyperson as a consequence of a conviction in a court of law, provided that thesaid work or service is carried out under the supervision and control of apublic authority and that the said person is not hired to or placed at thedisposal of private individuals, companies or associations.”[38] Thedepartments under the Ministry of Home Affairs are the Myanmar Police Force,the General Administration Department, Corrections (or Prisons) Department, andBureau of Special Investigation. The Ministry also controls several relatedorganizations, the National Intelligence Bureau, Central Committee for HomeAffairs, Central Committee for Drug Abuse Control, Myanmar Passport issuingBoard, the Visa Issuing Board, Central Registration Board for Printer andPublishers, the Committee for Restriction of Transfer Immovable Property,Preliminary Scrutiny Committee for Awarding Titles and Medals, and the Board ofProduct using Prison Labors Objectives.[39] Human Rights Watch/Asia, Burma: Abuses Linked to the Fall ofManerplaw, March 1995.[40]Human Rights Watch interview with escaped convictporter Soe Myint, Thailand-Burma border, March 5, 2011.[41]Human Rights Watch interview with escaped convictporter Thaing Soe, Thailand-Burma border, February 17, 2011.[42]Karen Human Rights Group interview with escapedconvict porter Thi Ha Soe, Thailand-Burma border, January 13, 2011[43]Karen Human Rights Group interview with escapedconvict porter Ko Kyaw Htun, Thailand-Burma border, January 28, 2011.[44]Human Rights Watch interview with escaped convictporter Maung Pwe, Thailand-Burma border, March 2, 2011.[45]Karen Human Rights Group interview with escapedconvict porter Kyaw Min, Thailand-Burma border, January 28, 2011.[46]Human Rights Watch interview with escaped convictporter Soe Myint, Thailand-Burma border, March 5, 2011.[47] Human Rights Watch interview with escaped convict porter Myint Swe,Thailand-Burma border, February 6, 2011.[48]Human Rights Watch interview with escaped convictporter Maung Pwe, Thailand-Burma border, March 9, 2011.[49]Karen Human Rights Group, “Report by an escaped SLORC munitions porter,” Manerplaw, November 1992.[50]Karen Human Rights Groupinterview with escaped convict porter Lwin Kaing , December 24, 2009, PapunDistrict, Karen State.[51] Human Rights Watch interview with escaped convict porter SoeMyint, Thailand-Burma border, March 5, 2011.[52] Human Rights Watch interview with escaped convict porter SoeMyint, Thailand-Burma border, March 5, 2011.[53] Karen Human Rights Group interview with escapedconvict porter Thi Ha Soe, Thailand-Burma border, January 13, 2011.[54]Human Rights Watch interview with escaped convictporter Maung Pwe, Thailand-Burma border, March 9, 2011.[55]Human Rights Watch interview with escaped convictporter Tun Mok, Thailand-Burma border, February 6, 2011.[56] Karen Human Rights Group interview with escaped convict porter Matthew,Dooplaya district, Karen State, January 28, 2011.[57] Human Rights Watch interview with escaped convict porter Ko KyawZwa, Thailand-Burma border, March 9, 2011.[58] Human Rights Watch interview with escaped convict porter Tun TunAung, Thailand-Burma border, February 17, 2011.[59] Karen Human Rights Group interview with escaped convict porter Matthew,Dooplaya district, Karen State, January 28, 2011.[60]Karen Human Rights Group interview with escapedconvict porter Pyit Zon, Thailand-Burma border, January 28, 2011.[61] Karen Human Rights Group interview with escaped convict porter KoKyaw Htun, Thailand-Burma border, January 28, 2011.[62] Human Rights Watch interview with escaped convict porter Maung Pwe,Thailand-Burma border, March 2, 2011.[63] KarenHuman Rights Group interview with escaped convict porter Soe Win, PapunDistrict, Karen State, Burma, January 2010.[64] HumanRights Watch interview with Tatmadaw deserter Tin Soe, Thailand-Burma border,February 5, 2011.[65] Theterm “atrocity demining” was coined by Yeshua Moser-Puangsuwan ofthe International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL) in the ICBL publication LandmineMonitor in 1999. “Atrocity demining is the use of human beings toremove landmines. In a suspected mine area, they [the Burma army] will take[civilians] and they will march them ahead of military units to trigger anymines that may be there, intentionally to detonate any mines that may be there.Up to 70% of these people die during their military service. They can die beingcaught in the crossfire, they can die due to malnutrition and malaria, but theyare also being killed by landmines, by being casualties simply in a war zonebut also as human mine sweepers.” See Richard S. Ehrlich, “Makingdemining an atrocity,” Bangkok Post, September 16, 2003.[66]See International Campaign to Ban Landmines, “Myanmar.Submission to the UN Universal Periodic Review,” Geneva, July 2010, http://lib.ohchr.org/HRBodies/UPR/Documents/Session10/MM/ICBL_InternationalCampaigntoBanLandmines_eng.pdf  (accessed May 9, 2011).[67] Karen Human Rights Group interview with escaped convict porterHtway Thu, Thailand-Burma border January 13 2011.[68]Karen Human Rights Group interview with escapedconvict porter Ko Kyaw Htun, Thailand-Burma border, January 28, 2011.[69]Karen Human Rights Group interview with escapedconvict porter Laing Oo, January 28, 2011.[70]Karen Human Rights Group interview with escapedconvict porter Matthew, Dooplaya district,  Karen State, January 28, 2011.[71] KarenHuman Rights Group interview with escaped convict porter Pyit Zon,Thailand-Burma border, January 28, 2011.[72]Human Rights Watch interview with escaped convictporter Maung Nyunt, Thailand-Burma border, March 9, 2011.[73] SeeICRC, Customary International Humanitarian Law, rule 81.[74]See International Campaign to Ban Landmines,“Landmines and Cluster Munition Monitor. Country Report: Myanmar/Burma,”December 2010.[75] KarenHuman Rights Group interview with escaped convict porter Laing Oo,Thailand-Burma border, January 28, 2011.[76] KarenHuman Rights Group interview with escaped convict porter Chit Kawn, NorthernKaren State, January 6, 2010.[77] KarenHuman Rights Group interview with escaped convict porter Thi Ha Soe,Thailand-Burma border, January 13, 2011.[78]Human Rights Watch interview with escaped convictporter Ko Kyaw Zwa, Thailand-Burma border, March 9, 2011. Palu town is only 20kilometers south of the border town of Myawaddy, and directly across the MoeiRiver from the Thai town of Baan Mae Khon Kaen. It has been a main DKBA basefor several years, and as such has benefited from the relative peace in thearea, and a thriving cross border trade in logging, corn cultivation, and othergoods, as well as alleged methamphetamines production. It is thus relativelymore prosperous than other border towns. For a map of the border checkpoints inthis area, see the Human Rights Watch report, From the Tiger to theCrocodile. Abuse of Migrant Workers in Thailand, February 2010, p.24.[79] KarenHuman Rights Group interview with escaped convict porter Ko Kyaw Htun,Thailand-Burma border, January 2011.[80] KarenHuman Rights Group interview with escaped convict porter Matthew, Dooplayadistrict,  Karen State, January 28, 2011.[81]Human Rights Watch interview with escaped convict porter Tun Mok,Thailand-Burma border, February 6, 2011.[82]Human Rights Watch interview with escaped convictporter Myint Shwe, Thailand-Burma border, February 6, 2011.[83]Karen Human Rights Group interview with escaped convict porter Kaw Kay, Papundistrict, Karen State Burma, January 2010.[84] KarenHuman Rights Group interview with escaped convict porter Lwin Kaing, Papundistrict Karen State, December 30, 2009.[85] See Common Article 3 to the 1949 Geneva Conventions; see alsoICRC, Customary International Humanitarian Law, rules 109 and 110,citing and Protocol II, art. 7(2).[86] ILO Forced Labour Convention (1930), art. 17(1).[87]ILO Forced Labour Convention (1930), art. 17 (1)(a).[88]Karen Human Rights Group interview with escapedconvict porter Ko Kyaw Htun Thailand-Burma border, January 28, 2011.[89] KarenHuman Rights Group interview with escaped convict porter Matthew, Dooplayadistrict, Karen State, January 28, 2011.[90] ILOForced Labour Convention (1930), art. 17[91] ILOForced Labour Convention (1930), art. 16 (4)[92] ILOForced Labour Convention (1930), art. 17.[93]Human Rights Watch interview with escaped convictporter Ko Kyaw Zwa, Thailand-Burma border, March 9, 2011.[94]Human Rights Watch interview with escaped convictporter Ko Kyaw Zwa, Thailand-Burma border, March 9, 2011.[95] KarenHuman Rights Group interview with escaped convict porter Win Naing, Dooplayadistrict, Karen State, January 2011.[96]Human Rights Watch interview with escaped convictporter Soe Myint, Thailand-Burma border, March 5, 2011.[97]Maung Nyunt told Human Rights Watch that the base hewas carrying supplies from was a large fire-support base with numerous heavymortars, called “artillery mountain” south of the town of Palu. Heidentified shoulder patches of the Tatmadaw’s Artillery OperationsCommand worn by soldiers at this base. “The sit-tha had accidentlyfired shells into Thailand, I overheard [from the soldiers], and they worriedthat if they did it again the Thai army would shoot at them, so they weremoving the camp.” Human Rights Watch interview with escaped convictporter Maung Nyunt, Thailand-Burma border, March 9, 2011.[98] KarenHuman Rights Group interview with escaped convict porter Laing Oo,Thailand-Burma border, January 28, 2011.[99] Article1(A)(2) of the Refugee Convention states that a refugee is someone with“a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion,nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion, isoutside the country of his nationality and is unable or unwilling to availhimself of the protection of that country.”[100]The Refugee Convention excludes from refugeestatus criminals who committed “a serious non-political crime”before admission to the host country, which might make ineligible those convictporters convicted of murder or other serious crimes. RefugeeConvention, art. 1(F)(b).[101]Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,G.A. res. 39/46, annex, 39 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 51) at 197, U.N. Doc. A/39/51(1984), entered into force June 26, 1987, art. 3.[102] KarenHuman Rights Group interview with escaped convict porter Ko Kyaw Htun,Thailand-Burma border, January 28, 2011.[103] HumanRights Watch interview with escaped convict porter Myint Swe, Thailand-Burmaborder, February 6, 2011.[104] KarenHuman Rights Group interview with escaped convict porter Pyit Zon,Thailand-Burma border, January 28, 2011.[105] HumanRights Watch interview with escaped convict porter Soe Myint, Thailand-Burmaborder, March 5, 2011.[106] KarenHuman Rights Group interview with escaped convict porter Htway Thu,Thailand-Burma border, January 13, 2011.Related ContentJuly 12, 2011News ReleaseBurma: War Crimes Against Convict PortersRampant Abuse of Prison Labor Shows Need for UN InquiryJuly 12, 2011News ReleaseBurma: War Crimes Against Convict PortersRegion / CountryAsia,Myanmar (Burma)Protecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch