Uprooted and Forgotten: Impunity and Human Rights Abuses in Northern Uganda | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload this reportSearchDonate NowSearchDownloadsDownload this reportSeptember 20, 2005Uprooted and ForgottenImpunity and Human Rights Abuses in Northern UgandaUprooted and ForgottenImpunity and Human Rights Abuses in Northern UgandaGlossary ofAcronymsSummaryAbbreviatedRecommendationsTo theGovernment of UgandaTo theUganda Peoples' Defence ForcesTo theLord's Resistance ArmyTo theInternational Criminal CourtTo theOffice of the High Commissioner for Human RightsTo theUganda Human Rights CommissionTo the WorldBank and the International Donor CommunityTo theUganda Government (including the UPDF and UHRC), Humanitarian Organizations andDonorsBackgroundAbuses bythe LRA and the UPDF against CiviliansBy the LRA..Willfulkilling of civiliansTorture andOther MistreatmentMutilationsRapeAbductionsBy the UPDFWillfulkilling of civiliansUPDF 11thBattalion: Cwero and Awach, Gulu districtTorture andOther Mistreatment by UPDF soldiersArbitraryarrest and DetentionThe Lack of AccountabilityLRA ImpunityAmnesty andReconciliationUPDFImpunityInadequateResponse and Ineffective Remedies for Abuses by the UPDFFear of andIntimidation by UPDF Impedes AccountabilityLack ofPolice Presence in Northern UgandaThe WeakJudicial System in Northern UgandaUgandanNongovernmental Human Rights Monitoring Organizations in Northern UgandaUganda HumanRights Commission (UHRC) in Northern UgandaTheInternational Criminal CourtOngoingPeace Negotiations and the ICCJustice andReconciliation: What Do the Victims Want?Not the ICCAlone: Comprehensive Mechanisms for Peace and Justice in UgandaLack ofProtection for CiviliansHumanitarianCrisisInternationalProtection Activities for the Displaced: Protection Officers and Working GroupsTheGovernment's Forced Displacement in Northern UgandaGovernmentProtection and Safety for the Internally DisplacedFullRecommendationsTo theGovernment of UgandaTo theUganda Peoples' Defence ForcesTo theLord's Resistance ArmyTo theInternational Criminal CourtTo theOffice of the High Commissioner for Human RightsTo theUganda Human Rights CommissionTo the WorldBank and the International Donor CommunityToHumanitarian Organizations, OCHA (including the Inter-Agency InternalDisplacement Division of OCHA), UNICEF and the UN Country Team for UgandaTo theUganda Government (including the UPDF and UHRC), the HumanitarianOrganizations, and the DonorsAcknowledgmentsGlossary of AcronymsCMI                        Chieftaincyof Military IntelligenceGISO                     GombololaInternal Security OrganHURIFO                                HumanRights Focus, Gulu, UgandaICC                         InternationalCriminal CourtICLA                       Information,Counseling and Legal AidIDP                         InternallyDisplaced PersonJPC                         Justiceand Peace CommissionLC                           LocalCouncilorLDU                        LocalDefence UnitLRA                        Lord'sResistance ArmyMP                         Memberof ParliamentNGO                      NongovernmentalOrganizationNRA                       NationalResistance ArmyNRC                       NorwegianRefugee CouncilOCHA                    UnitedNations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian AffairsOHCHR                 Office of theUnited Nations High Commissioner for Human RightsSPLM/A               Sudan People'sLiberation Movement/ArmyUHRC                    Uganda Human Rights CommissionUN                          UnitedNationsUNHCR                 UnitedNations High Commissioner for RefugeesUNICEF                 The UnitedNations Children's FundUNMIS                 UnitedNations Mission in SudanUPDF                     Uganda Peoples' Defence ForcesSummaryFor nineteen years the people of northern Uganda have suffered, victims of a war waged between the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), abrutal rebel group responsible for countless acts of willful killing, torture,mutilation and abduction, and the Ugandan government, whose undisciplined army,the Uganda Peoples' Defence Forces (UPDF), has committed crimes againstcivilians with near total impunity. While the war continues, the displacedpeople of northern Uganda remain isolated, ignored and unprotected, vulnerableto abuses by both rebel and army forces.The UN undersecretary general for humanitarian affairs andemergency relief coordinator Jan Egeland describes northern Uganda as one of the world's worst humanitarian disasters-and least known. While certainaspects of the war such as the LRA's mutilations and abductions of childrenhave received occasional media coverage, comparatively little has been done bythe Ugandan government and the international community to alleviate thesuffering of the more than 1.9 million people forced from their homes innorthern Uganda to a precarious existence in government displaced personscamps.Even less has been done by the government and internationalcommunity to assist their safe return to their homes and livelihoods. Beforethis war, northern Uganda was overwhelmingly rural, like the rest of Uganda, and poor. Following the forced displacement of 95 percent of the population in thethree districts inhabited primarily by the Acholi ethnic group, and the lootingand destruction of property by the LRA, northern Uganda is poorer than ever.The failure of the Ugandan government to address theconcerns of the people of northern Uganda has been especially troubling. TheUPDF has not provided adequate protection to its own citizens, even to thoseliving in its displaced persons camps. The LRA's 2005 offensive again targeteddisplaced persons camps and resulted in numerous atrocities, but the Ugandanarmy did little to protect this vulnerable population. At the same time, UPDFforces were responsible for widespread abuses against the civilian populationin northern Uganda. And while President Yoweri Museveni has gained donor favorby pursuing economic reforms that brought some prosperity to the rest of Uganda, these improvements have not been shared in the north and the area remains economicallymarginalized.Despite nineteen years of fighting, there is no sign thatthe war is abating. In 2002, the Ugandan army embarked on large operations torout the LRA from its bases in southern Sudan where the LRA received Sudanesegovernment support; the rebels probably continue to receive some aid fromelements of the Sudanese army, according to commanders of the Sudan People'sLiberation Army (SPLA), Sudanese rebels who concluded a peace agreement withtheir own government in early 2005. The Ugandan government claims that the LRAhas only 400 fighters-while SPLA commanders estimate there are 1,000 LRA rebelsstill in Sudan.In 2004, peace talks were held between the Ugandangovernment and the LRA spearheaded by the efforts of Betty Bigombe, a former governmentminister who is from the north. These negotiations broke down in early 2005 andfighting was renewed.Both the LRA and the UPDF enjoy almost complete immunityfrom prosecution for their crimes in northern Uganda. Human Rights Watchbelieves all of those responsible for war crimes and other serious abusesshould be held accountable, be they LRA or UPDF combatants and theircommanders.Thousands of LRA fighters and commanders, including manyresponsible for grave abuses, are among the 15,000 persons who have receivedamnesties under the Amnesty Act of 2000, which was enacted to encourage rebelsto lay down their arms and surrender. The government provides these ex-fighters"amnesty packages" of cash and supplies to help them start over, which has createdresentment among the impoverished civilian population in the north.In December 2003, the Ugandan government referred the"situation concerning the Lord's Resistance Army" to the International CriminalCourt (ICC). The ICC has since expanded the scope of its inquiry to cover thesituation in northern Uganda more generally, implicitly including seriouscrimes committed by Ugandan government forces.The ICC referral, the first ever by a state party to the ICCtreaty, has not generally been well received by the leadership of somecommunities in northern Uganda. Many traditional, civic and religious leadersas well as civil society groups in northern Uganda have opposed the ICCinvestigation on the grounds that it undermines the peace process and will leadto increased violence against civilians. They have instead advocated amnestyfor all members of the LRA, including the top leaders who would be the individualsthe ICC would most likely investigate and prosecute.Opposition to the ICC also stems from the perception amongmany northerners that it will only investigate the LRA and not governmentforces despite the UPDF's long record of abuses. The ICC is to blame for suchperceptions: it has failed to undertake an effective outreach strategy toactively engage civil society and the general population in northern Uganda to explain its mandate and the scope of its inquiry. Despite its shortcomings,however, the ICC remains the best option for achieving some measure of justiceand ending impunity for the people of northern Uganda.Justice in northern Uganda requires that the ICC thoroughlyexamine UPDF abuses of the civilian population as well as abuses by the LRA.The willful killings, torture and mistreatment, rape and arbitrary arrests anddetention of civilians by UPDF soldiers highlighted in this report are seriouscrimes that may fall within the ICC's jurisdiction. The ICC has jurisdictionover war crimes particularly when committed as part of a policy or plan or on alarge scale.The government remains responsible for many of the hardshipsand abuses endured by the displaced population. Since 1996 the government hasused the army to undertake a massive forced displacement of the population inthe north and imposed severe restrictions on freedom of movement. Whilejustifying the displacements on grounds of security, the government hasforcibly displaced people without a lawful basis under international law andthen has failed to provide the promised security. Many of those displaced,including almost the entire population of the three Acholi districts live in squalidconditions in displaced persons camps that are susceptible to LRA attacks. The Ugandanarmy has failed to protect these camps, compounding the harm inflicted by the originalforced displacement.People in the camps are forced by extreme necessity totravel outside to farm, hunt and gather firewood or water, where army soldiershave raped women and girls and beaten and detained men and boys. And thosedisplaced persons who must leave the camp confines may be greeted on theirreturn by undisciplined soldiers who beat them for coming back past curfew houror other minor infractions.The government has failed to meaningfully prosecute militarypersonnel responsible for abuses or otherwise discipline its forces in thenorth. These forces have committed deliberate killings, routine beatings, rapesand prolonged arbitrary detentions of civilians to such an extent that there isextreme resentment against their presence. Most complaints of army abuse resultin no action. Even when action is taken, it is usually transfer of theoffending soldier or unit, the dispersal of a small sum of money for "medicalcosts," or the beating of the soldier in the barracks. Human Rights Watch foundthat the 11th Battalion of the UPDF based in Cwero and Awach camps of Gulu districtcommitted numerous deliberate killings and beatings of civilians during the monthsin 2005 when it was assigned to those camps; it was transferred out of the areaafter numerous international complaints.The current protection and accountability structures withinthe camps and within the army are grossly inadequate-charges the Ugandangovernment denies. In effect the safety of the camp population rests with thelocal army commander: where he does not tolerate undisciplined behavior, thelevel of abuse is far less. Unfortunately most commanders, up to the highestlevels, show far too much tolerance for abuses, despite lip service given torespect for human rights.The importance of army discipline is even greater because inmost displaced persons camps the army post is the only governmentpresence-aside from local councilors who are often intimidated by the army.Police are far too few to address the widespread criminal acts committed byUPDF soldiers (and civilians) in the more than eighty displaced persons campsof northern Uganda. The Uganda Human Rights Commission (UHRC), a governmentbody, is almost entirely absent from northern Uganda, with only four of its onehundred officers placed there.While increased police and UHRC presence could provide otheravenues of redress for the population against government army abuses, theseorganizations would need the consistent backing of higher authorities, up toPresident Museveni, to affirm their mandates to investigate and prosecutesoldiers in the northern "war zone."The active involvement of civilian officials and the highcommand of the army in efforts to end impunity could radically improve thesituation. In Bobi camp, Gulu district, training in 2004 of local leaders by aUgandan human rights nongovernmental organization helped build confidence andunderstanding in the displaced population on what their rights were and how tocomplain about abuses. A high-ranking Ugandan army official was invited to andattended the workshop. His subsequent intervention with the local battalionhelped to halt recurring sexual abuse in the camp. Such interventions are rare,however.An international protective presence in the camps is justbeginning-again, very late. Some protection activities were undertaken by UNagencies such as UNICEF and the Office for the Coordination of HumanitarianActivity (OCHA) and nongovernmental relief organizations in 2003 but theirprotection efforts remain a work in progress. The May 2005 decision of theOffice of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) to deploy severalhuman rights monitors in northern Uganda is to be welcomed. It should makeassistance to local nongovernmental rights organizations its priority.The international community and the Ugandan government mustact now to radically overhaul the protection and accountability structures inthe north to ensure that, in peace or war, the continuing suffering of thepeople of northern Uganda is alleviated.Northern Uganda has been ignored for too long. Despite theoccasional spike in media coverage of the conflict the people remain subject toan unremitting assault of human rights abuses from both sides, and persistentpoverty is exacerbated by the abuses. The intensification of hostilities thisyear has only highlighted the vulnerabilities of the civilian population; as ofthe time of this writing, the war is far from over, and the victims still haveno peace, justice or protection.Abbreviated Recommendations[1]To the Government of Uganda:Overhaul governmentalcomplaints procedures in the north to provide accountability for seriouscrimes committed by the military. Ensure that the resolution of complaintsis not at the sole discretion of the military commander, and that there isindependent oversight of the complaints process.Design and implement clear procedures for complainants,such as where and to whom to report complaints and how and to whom toappeal. Make sure these procedures are disseminated at all levels of thepopulation in northern Uganda through public awareness campaigns and inpartnership with traditional leaders and local civil society actors.To the Uganda Peoples' Defence Forces:Investigate and discipline or prosecute as appropriateserious violations of international human rights and humanitarian lawcommitted by UPDF personnel regardless of their rank. Investigations innorthern Uganda should focus first on abuses by the 11th Battalion.To the Lord's Resistance Army:Immediately cease all attacks against civilians and othernon-combatants including willful killing, torture, mutilation andabduction.To the International Criminal Court:Prepare and implement acommunications and outreach strategy to create awareness of the ICC'smission among communities and civil society in northern Uganda.Reiterate and implement itscommitment to investigate crimes falling within the jurisdiction of theICC committed by all parties to the conflict, including the UPDF.Immediately implement adequate witness protection measuresand ensure that all investigators working in northern Uganda are properly trained to conduct their investigations while minimizing the risk tovictims and witnesses.To the Office of the High Commissioner for HumanRights:Provide training and supportto national and local non-governmental human rights organizations based inKampala, Gulu and other parts of northern Uganda.Urge the Ugandan government to act in accordance with theGuiding Principles on Internal Displacement, particularly with respect tocamp security and freedom of movement for internally displaced personsoutside of displaced persons camps.To the Uganda Human Rights Commission:Develop a plan with nongovernmental organizations anddonors to assist in the protection of internally displaced persons throughstationing UHRC staff in camps to receive complaints of LRA and UPDFabuses.To the World Bank and the International DonorCommunity:Support programs forprotection of displaced persons and for their voluntary return home indignity and safety.Support programs for nongovernmental organizations toeducate citizens of northern Uganda about their rights and procedures tofile complaints against the government.To the Uganda Government (including the UPDF andUHRC), Humanitarian Organizations and Donors:Ensure that individuals who receive complaints and reportsof sexual and gender-based violence, whether they be community leaders,law enforcement officers or humanitarian workers, be properly, extensivelyand repeatedly trained covering a wide range of issues on such violence.BackgroundThe conflict between the government of Uganda and the Lord'sResistance Army (LRA) began shortly after the Ugandan rebel National ResistanceArmy (NRA) led by current President Yoweri Museveni seized power in 1986.Defeated soldiers of the deposed government fled to their birthplaces innorthern Uganda and in many cases continued to fight the new government; otherssought refuge across the border in Sudan. The Acholi leader Alice Lakwenacreated the Holy Spirit Movement and it fought the NRA's abuses againstnortherners during this campaign and in its aftermath. She combined Acholi and Christiandoctrine to inspire her followers.The Holy Spirit Movement advanced south until it was routedby the NRA just one hundred kilometers from Kampala in late 1986. Joseph Kony'sLord's Resistance Army followed quickly on the heels of her movement,incorporating her Holy Spirit followers as well as remnants of the defeatedgovernment army. Joseph Kony claimed to have inherited the spirits thatpossessed Alice Lakwena, who went into exile in Kenya where she remains.The relations between northerners and the Ugandan governmentof President Museveni have never been good. The abusive early conduct of thegovernment army in 1986 has never been forgotten or forgiven. The forceddisplacement by the government, its severe restrictions on movement, continuingabuses by the government military forces (no longer mostly northerners) andwidespread detentions without trial of civilians on suspicion of rebelcollaboration have further alienated many northern citizens. Northerners votedagainst the incumbent President Museveni and for the opposition presidentialcandidates in the 1996 and 2001 races, sent opposition leaders to Parliament andelected anti-Museveni people to local positions.In the late 1980s the LRA had some popular backing, but itssupport waned in the early 1990s as it responded to the government's formationof local militias and displaced persons camps by waging a campaign ofabducting, killing and mutilating civilians, cutting off their lips, ears,noses, hands and feet. It considered anyone living in the camps (created in themid-1990s) a government ally or supporter.The LRA was able to sustain itself through Sudanesegovernment support that reportedly started in 1994.[2]In 1999 the Ugandan and Sudanese governments agreed with each other to stopsupporting opposing rebel groups in either country. At the time, the Ugandangovernment allegedly supported the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/Army(SPLM/A). The SPLM and the Sudanese government signed a peace agreement inJanuary 2005. Sudanese support for the LRA reportedly waned since the U.S. government placed the LRA on its list of terrorist organizations in October 2001, butit is not clear that all Sudanese government supply lines to the LRA have beenbroken.[3]In March 2002 the Ugandan army launched "Operation IronFist" in southern Sudan with Sudanese government consent. The LRA response wasto flee from its Sudanese bases back into northern Uganda, where in mid-2002 itexpanded the theater of war to the south and southeast including areas lessaffected by the conflict such as Lira and the Teso sub-region of eastern Uganda, dominated by the Langi and Iteso peoples respectively. The LRA began morewide-scale abductions, killings and looting throughout the north and east,causing an upsurge in people fleeing their homes. This lead the UPDF to issuean October 2, 2002 order, transmitted widely over radio only, giving peopleliving in the "abandoned villages" of the three Acholi districts only forty eighthours to move to government camps.[4]In early 2002, there were still more than 500,000 civiliansinternally displaced in northern Uganda.[5] By theend of 2002, as a result of the LRA's return to northern Uganda and the UPDF order, this figure had almost doubled to over 800,000.[6]Many northerners blamedOperation Iron Fist for stirring up the hornet's nest of theLRA.[7]The heavy-handed displacement strategy to protect civiliansappears also to have been aimed at carrying out the classic counter-insurgencystrategy of "draining the sea"-removing the population from the rural areas inwhich the rebels operate, the population being the sea and the rebels the fish.[8]The Ugandan government began this policy of forced displacement in 1996 and todate almost the entire rural population of the three Acholi districts ishomeless as the displaced camps have become sprawling shantytowns.Despite the supposed security provided by these camps, theLRA regularly has conducted devastating attacks on them. One of the worstattacks ever on displaced persons camps occurred on February 21, 2004, when theLRA massacred 330 people at the Barlonyo camp in Lira district to the south ofGulu. Many victims were burned alive inside their huts. One witness, fleeingthe camp, saw the rebels setting "the huts on fire. Children ran out and theythrew them back into the fire. There were children who were ordered to burntheir families' huts."[9]In 2004, the UPDF embarked on "Operation Iron Fist II" withSudanese government permission. The renewed government offensive seemed to havesome success. One LRA victim told Human Rights Watch that the LRA fighters whocaptured her in May 2004 were trying to surrender to the UPDF but were afraidthey would be shot. These forty LRA fighters had not eaten for three days untilthey found a field of cabbage.[10] Ifofficer attrition is any indication, one Sudanese commander who knew the LRA in1993 said to Human Rights Watch that in those days Vincent Otti, an LRAcommander, was number twenty-seven in the hierarchy under Joseph Kony; today heis number two.[11]The Ugandan forces reportedly came close to capturing JosephKony in a raid on an LRA base at Nesitu in southern Sudan in July 2004.[12]The Ugandan government claims that only 400 LRA fighters remain,[13]although few accept that such a small force could continue to cause suchdamage. Since mid-2004, however, some measure of calm has returned to areassuch as Lira district and the adjacent Teso sub-region of eastern Uganda.Many northern Ugandans believe their plight is intertwinedwith the war that has raged in southern Sudan since 1983, especially as Uganda and Sudan seemed to be engaged in a proxy war across this border by supplying each other'srebels.[14] The warin Sudan between the Sudanese government and southern-based rebels, the SPLM/A,was brought to a negotiated solution with a Comprehensive Peace Agreementsigned on January 9, 2005 between the Sudanese government and the SPLM/A.[15]The ex-Sudanese rebel leader John Garang was sworn in as First Vice Presidentof Sudan on July 9, 2005. In his inaugural speech, outlining the securityconcerns of the new government from his perspective, he said, "we must expelthe LRA from Eastern Equatoria [southern Sudan]."[16]Despite Vice President Garang's unexpected death in ahelicopter crash only three weeks after his swearing-in in Khartoum,[17]many in the SPLA, particularly those responsible for operations in the areawhere the LRA has been present, are also concerned about eliminating the LRA.One high-ranking SPLA commander responsible for that sector, Obuto Mamur Mete,suspects that the LRA still receives support not from the central Sudanesegovernment but from Sudanese army personnel based in Juba, southern Sudan's capital some one hundred miles north of the Uganda border. This SPLA commander alleges thatthe deliveries have continued on at least four occasions in April, May and June2005 in two locations south of Juba.[18]Cmdr. Obuto Mamur, who is from the Latuka people of the areain southern Sudan affected by the LRA, said that the SPLA has fought the LRA inSudan many times. The LRA has attacked and displaced southern Sudanese insideSudan since 2002 on an ongoing basis-in late July 2005, the LRA killed nine insouthern Sudan; since early 2005, 9,000 southern Sudanese have fled for refugein Uganda on account of LRA attacks on them in Sudan.[19]The LRA has attacked Sudanese in refugee camps in Uganda as well over theyears, causing many to be relocated within Uganda.[20]Cmdr. Obuto Mamur claims that the LRA numbers some 1,000 fighters inside Sudan, and has avoided capture or destruction in 2005 by slipping inside Sudanese government linesnear Juba. He insists that cutting off this escape and the supply lines fromJuba are essential if the LRA is to be expelled from Sudan. Commander ObutoMamur has also expressed willingness to chase the LRA into northern Uganda.[21]The rebel SPLA will be converted into an army for the southernregional government pursuant to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement with theSudanese government, but nevertheless Sudanese government army troops mayremain in Juba until July 2007, which may complicate efforts to end LRApresence in Sudan-if the personnel friendly to the LRA remain in Juba.[22]The 10,000-strong UN peace support operation that is being deployed primarilyin southern Sudan, known as the United Nations Mission in Sudan (UNMIS), willnot actively pursue the LRA but will provide protection to humanitarian convoyswhere they might be vulnerable to LRA attack inside Sudan.[23]A military solution to the conflict in northern Uganda remains elusive, however, and its primary victims remain northern Ugandans. Thisconflict has been devastating for them: as of mid-2005, more than 1.9 millionpersons have been internally displaced in northern Uganda, of which 1.1 millionlive in the three Acholi districts, and represent 90-95 percent of thatsub-region's population.[24] UNICEFestimates that more than 20,000 children have been abducted over the course ofthe conflict since 1986 to serve as child soldiers and sex slaves. Althoughmost child and adult abductees have escaped, many remained for years with theLRA. They remain psychologically and often physically scarred by the treatmentthey suffered and were forced to inflict[25]-as arethose who although not abducted witnessed killings, rapes and other violence byboth sides.[26]Peace negotiations seemed on the verge of a majorbreakthrough when it was reported that the LRA was ready to sign a ceasefireagreement in December 2004. The signature was never forthcoming, however. Theviolence that abated in November 2004 quickly mounted again after the main LRAnegotiator, Brig. Sam Kolo, defected to the government side in mid-February2005.The conflict in northern Uganda has been designated "one ofthe worst humanitarian crises in the world" by UN under secretary general forhumanitarian affairs and emergency relief coordinator Jan Egeland. He has beentrying to draw attention to this dire situation since 2003, with little successas newer international disasters continue to draw attention away from Uganda's chronic tragedy.[27]Abuses by the LRA and the UPDF against CiviliansThe reason I ran was because I know how soldiers are in thebush. It is best to run from them, unless they catch you red-handed. You can'tseparate between LRA and UPDF so you must just run.-Walter K,[28] Awachcamp, Gulu, February 28, 2005.Northern Uganda is one of the worst humanitarian crises inthe world because of the extensive and prolonged displacement of a very highproportion of its inhabitants into large camps where the conditions are poor toappalling and there is little prospect of work, health care, education, orreturn home. The displacement has been caused by widespread human rights abusesby both sides.Under international humanitarian law (the laws of war), thearmed conflict in northern Uganda is considered a non-international (internal)armed conflict. Applicable law includes article 3 common to the four GenevaConventions of 1949,[29] theSecond Additional Protocol of 1977 to the Geneva Conventions,[30]and customary international humanitarian law.[31]International humanitarian law, which applies to both government forces andrebel groups, prohibits direct or indiscriminate attacks against civilians and civilianproperty, and requires the humane treatment of all persons in custody.The Ugandan government is also bound by international andregional human rights law such as found in the International Covenant on Civiland Political Rights[32] and theAfrican Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights[33] Humanrights law places a burden on states not only to prevent abuses by governmentofficials and personnel but also to prosecute those responsible for seriousviolations. The Ugandan constitution and laws recognize human rights and theUganda Human Rights Commission was authorized in that constitution.Although engaging in a few attacks on UPDF detaches(military detachments or posts), the LRA continues to make the people ofnorthern Uganda its main targets. The LRA is responsible for years of willfulkillings, beatings, large-scale abductions, forced recruitment of adults andchildren, sexual violence against girls whom it assigns as "wives" or sexslaves to commanders, large-scale looting and destruction of civilian property,forcing the displacement of hundreds of thousands and being a prime factor in thedestruction of the economy of northern Uganda and the resultant impoverishment ofits inhabitants. Many northern Ugandans have abandoned hope of justice-althoughnot of personal revenge-and long for peace at any price.The Ugandan army is stationed in or near every camp in thedistricts of Gulu, Kitgum and Pader in northern Uganda, ostensibly to protectthe civilians residing in the camps. It frequently fails to live up to thisresponsibility, rarely patrolling aggressively and sometimes running away iffaced by a large LRA force. Its performance has somewhat improved in the lastyear, as indicated by some witness comments.In every camp visited, Human Rights Watch found cases ofabuse by the LRA and also by UPDF soldiers. UPDF-administered beatings ofcivilians were extremely commonplace, but the killing of civilians, sometimesinside the camps, was also documented. In some camps, civilians faced UPDFabuse on a daily basis. The scale of UPDF abuse continues at an unacceptablelevel and the protection and accountability structures that would put a stop tosuch abuse are not in place.By the LRAWillful killing of civiliansThe LRA continues to commit mass killing of civilians innorthern Uganda, keeping the population-and its own combatants, mostly forciblyrecruited during childhood-in a constant state of terror. Since February 2005,rebel attacks on camps and settlements have increased. In March, sevencivilians were beaten to death with hoes in Adjumani in an attack on Dzaipitrading center.[34] In May,ten civilians were killed in a raid near Koch Goma camp in Gulu district.[35]In July, the LRA killed fourteen civilians in an ambush on a pickup in Kitgumdistrict; several of them were burned inside the vehicle.[36]The LRA abducts children and adults to serve as soldiers,and girls to serve as sex slaves to its commanders-and brutalizes all abducteesto deter their escape. Those abducted persons attempting to escape are killedor seriously wounded as an example to other abductees. One woman, abducted bythe LRA on August 9, 2004 told Human Rights Watch how a girl, a fellowabductee, tried to escape. When she was captured the rebels "beat her until shedied. They used traditional tools, used to make sculpture, to beat her-they hither on her neck, her hands and her legs until she died."[37]Some LRA killings appear to be the result of simpleannoyance and the LRA attitude of callous disregard for human life. The LRAabducted a group of women going to fetch water on February 24, 2005. Accordingto several eyewitnesses interviewed by Human Rights Watch, one of the women hada baby with her who was crying.[The five LRA fighters] told the woman they wanted thebaby-they were going to kill it. After some minutes the woman threw the baby downand ran. The rebels grabbed the woman and beat her to death with a gun. Whenthe woman was killed one rebel got a stick and pierced through the child's head.The child was two weeks old.[38]The LRA does not hesitate to execute those who do not obeythe rebels' orders to perform certain tasks, even if the person is physicallyincapable of carrying out the task. One woman described how the rebels beat todeath Malone Okwir, a man of about sixty, after he threw down the large load offood he was carrying on his back. He was unable to transport it further thanthe three miles he had already traveled-"so they beat him to death with a hoeand cut him with a panga [farming implement with a long blade]."[39]Local officials are commonly targeted by the LRA. A relativeof this parish-level local councilor[40] (LC2)recalls how he was killed while performing his duties:Okello Saul was killed on May 20, 2004. He was going fromPaicho camp to Cwero to supervise the building of the hospital. On his way backhe was ambushed by the LRA. He was on his motorcycle. And they shot him dead.Then they burned his motorcycle and took his belongings. They undressed him,leaving him in his underwear. He was shot with eight bullets.[41]The victim left behind a wife and four children.Several LRA deliberate killings have been committed underduress by abductees, often children. One twelve-year-old boy interviewed byHuman Rights Watch killed a civilian by beating him with a stick. This occurredone week after the youngster was roused from his sleep and abducted by the LRAin June 2004 at a village outside the camp. At first he refused the order tokill the civilian but the LRA abductors beat him until he agreed. He escapedtwo months later.[42] Asimilar case involving a twenty-four-year-old farmer took place in 2003: thefarmer witnessed and under duress participated in the deliberate killings ofnine civilians during the two months he was held by the LRA.[43]Others are killed, or left for dead, because the LRAfighters simply want to rob them. One thirty-eight-year-old man was on hisbicycle in January 2005 when he saw five LRA fighters coming toward him on theroad; he threw down his bicycle and ran. They pursued him and when he tiredthey shot him through the cheek from a distance of less than two meters. Helost consciousness. When he awoke hours later he found they had stolen hisbicycle and the clothes he was wearing. He was hospitalized for three weeks.[44]Torture and OtherMistreatmentCivilians in northern Uganda continue to suffer gross abuse at the hands of the LRA. The LRA beats and otherwisemistreats civilians as a part of a campaign intended to instill terror in thepopulation. It severely punishes anyone who does not do what it demands, evenif that person lacks the physical capacity to comply.One woman was abducted by a group of LRA rebels who wereinterested in surrendering to the UPDF. The commander of the rebels asked herto ensure that the soldiers would not attack them if they went to surrender,then when she failed to comply sufficiently, beat her unconscious and left herfor dead.According to the woman:When I tried to answer the questions they [the rebels] gotfour young boys to go and get sticks. They returned with many sticks. Some weretied in a bundle. They began to beat me seriously. I tried to cry and reached aposition where I kept quiet. They beat me on the head and the leg. I don't knowwhat happened-I was unconscious. While they beat me they told me I would bebeaten to death because I was tricking them. They said, "You women like to makefalse statements in order that we release you."When they left me I was unaware. It was dark. I tried towake up. I looked around and didn't see rebels. I couldn't walk. I was verythirsty, very hungry and very very weak. I started to crawl following the way back.I crawled looking for water at the river. I crawled into the water and gotwater. I tried to cry but I couldn't.When I came out of the water I tried to walk with grass asa support. I was dizzy, fell down, rested a bit. I began to crawl and heardvehicles. I tried to crawl in their direction and came abruptly to the road.The road was too hard to crawl on and I fell to the roadside. I met a mancoming from Namkara and he took me to Kitgum Matidi, to the barracks. The Intelligenceofficer took a brief statement then they took me to the hospital.[45]Another woman described her temporary abduction in January2004 by a unit of the LRA under the command of Lagony Otti. She was pregnant atthe time, and had gone with a group of ten women to harvest their fields. Therebels intercepted the women, who "were beaten through Saturday and Sunday. Therebels kept hitting my chest and waist. They hit my chest with the butt of agun while at the same time using tree branches to hit me." The baby she waspregnant with survived but was born "very weak," which she attributed to thebeating. "Up to now I feel chest pain. I was beaten until I was unconscious. Idon't know how they set me free-I was rescued by friends."[46]A nineteen-year-old woman said that she lives in fear of theLRA. In 2003, her father and two brothers were abducted from their camp andbeaten to death with sticks by the LRA the same day; her sister was abductedone week later by the LRA and killed that same day. She said:I stopped school in 2003 when I was in P.6. My father diedand I was heartbroken and stopped going. There was no one paying the school fees.I live with my mother and one brother and two sisters.[47]In December 2004 she went with another woman to a gardenfive miles from the camp, where seven LRA fighters found them at 10 a.m.The rebels ordered us to go with them to the bush. Theybeat us. One of the rebels said they should kill me, but another said let hergo back home. They were boys and men. I was undressed, they took everything, Iwas naked. They told me to hurry back home. None of them defiled me.I found some lady with a child who gave me a headscarf towear home. I still go and work in the garden. I get scared. Sometimes I don'teven reach the gardens and come back home. I fear the rebels the most.[48]Other attacks seem motivated by the need for suppliesfollowing cutbacks by the Sudanese government. One farmer, on his way back fromharvesting simsim (sesame) with his wife in Pipei parish near Agoro campon September 5, 2004, encountered rebels who "began beating me and my wifeusing sticks." The couple dropped their bundles and escaped: "I startedrunning-they went off, they were contented with the simsim," he said.[49]MutilationsSince February 2005 there has been an upsurge in attacks inwhich the LRA has brutally disfigured civilians. The LRA first startedmutilating civilians in the early 1990s as a response to the government'sattempts to form local militias in northern Uganda. Victims' hands, feet,noses, ears, lips and breasts were cut off, often as punishment, causingwidespread panic amongst the population. These brutal tactics have been extremelyeffective in promoting fear and deterring cooperation with the government: mutilationssymbolically cut off the allegedly offending part, i.e., the ears that hear,the lips that kiss, according to what the LRA fighters tell the victims.[50]As with other methods, a surge in mutilations may followquickly on the heels of government statements the LRA wishes to disprove.President Museveni declared on February 17, 2005 following the surrender oflead LRA peace negotiator Sam Kolo that the military conflict in northern Uganda was "finished-those remaining fugitive commanders can't fight anymore."[51]Just a few days after the publication of this and similarstatements, eleven women were briefly abducted by the LRA near Ngomoromo, Kitgum.One of the women was beaten to death with her baby because the baby was makingtoo much noise. The other women were herded into an abandoned hut, made to stripnaked, and then mutilated.[52]One woman told Human Rights Watch:After discussing with his colleagues he [the rebel] came inand started chopping off our lips. When he was cutting he ordered us not tomake any noise otherwise he would kill us-so we persevered. The rebels cut ourlips because they said we "loved the soldiers at Ngomoromo barracks."[53]In the ensuing weeks the LRA conducted several more brutalattacks on civilians. Thirty women who had gone out to collect firewood wereattacked by the LRA in Agoro subcounty, Kitgum on March 20, 2005. The rebelscut the lips and ears off one woman and the breasts off another. Then therebels left, abducting others among the group of thirty women and leaving thedisfigured victims to find a way home.One man's four children were abducted by the LRA on May 24,2004 and his finger was cut off as punishment for farming. He said:It was at eight in the night. A group of LRA came to myhouse. I was living there with my wife and children. The rebels looted my household….They beat me with pangas on my back and rear three times. They burned all ofour huts. Then they put my hand down. They cut off my finger with a panga. Therebel who cut off my finger was a young boy in his early teens. I pleaded withthem not to hurt my hand, but they said since they found me farming at homethey would have to kill me…. Then they left with my children.[54]RapeIn general, the LRA has not been implicated in acts of rapeduring attacks on displaced persons camps or even when encountering women inrural areas. On this mission, Human Rights Watch did not document any cases of rapeby the LRA in the camps, or when rebels encountered women or girls in thefields.Rape, on many occasions gang rape, has been committed afterthe young women and adolescent girls were taken back to the LRA camp. The lackof rape in the field and the gang rape after returning to base suggests thatthese crimes are sanctioned if committed according to orders. A woman toldHuman Rights Watch how she was abducted with her sister in January 2004 by agroup of one hundred rebels near Agoro camp in Kitgum. They were taken back toa rebel encampment "and distributed to the top commanders who raped us duringthe night."[55]One community leader told Human Rights Watch that the reasonLRA fighters did not rape captured women and girls before taking them to theLRA stronghold was Kony's hold over the LRA combatants: "They are superstitiousthat Kony knows everything they do. Kony doesn't want them to 'contaminate'women because Kony picks the women and then shares the rest among the others."[56]The LRA has abducted thousands of women and girls who arestill being held by the LRA and have given birth to children in captivity.Others have escaped, with or without their children.Over the years, many caretakers and community leaders havesurmised that this behavior was due to a perverse awareness of HIV/AIDS. LRAfighters have sometimes accused older married women they have captured and thenreleased of being wives of UPDF soldiers and therefore of being infected withthe HIV virus.[57] The LRAabducts younger girls who are more likely to be virgins and therefore notexposed to the HIV virus.AbductionsUNICEF estimates that some 20,000 children have beenabducted in the nineteen years of war. The level of abductions surged after theLRA returned from Sudan following the UPDF Operation Iron Fist inside Sudan starting in mid-2002. Abductions appeared to be declining in the second half of 2004,but reports in February and March 2005[58] indicatedthat the LRA was again abducting children to bolster its ranks.The LRA often engages in large-scale attacks on camps orvillages where they will abduct many people all at once. At other times,farmers and others are abducted in small groups or alone when they go to theirfields for food to complement the small emergency food rations they receive.Although forced outside the camps to look for necessary supplies the camps arelacking, the displaced rarely are given protection by the UPDF when they ventureout.After abduction, the LRA brutally indoctrinates children andadults alike and incorporates them into its ranks. Families have been tornapart by these abductions. On May 24, 2004, all four of the children in onefamily were abducted on the same night; only two returned and the other two arestill missing.[59]A pregnant woman, living outside the camp at the time,described how rebels assaulted her, robbed food, demanded money, and thenabducted her twelve-year-old daughter. She said:In July 2004, I was… sleeping at our house in the T…village, behind the center. The rebels came at 10 p.m. There were nine rebels.My husband was away and I was pregnant with my child.… They asked me for money.I said there was no money and they hit my chest with their guns. Then they justleft me in the house but they took my eldest daughter.The child moved with them for some time. They got attackedby the government soldiers and she was rescued. She was twelve years old. Thenshe came back home. The rebels should all come back home. The leaders should beput in jail.[60]The LRA forces the children and adults to commit atrocitiesas part of the indoctrination process following abduction. Children especiallyare intimidated and brutalized to such an extent that often they are frightenedto return home. Extreme violence is a way for the LRA to psychologically removethe abductees from their previous, normal life at home. One abductee from Agorocamp, aged twelve, told Human Rights Watch how, after he was abducted on July21, 2004, he was beaten until he agreed to kill a civilian with a stick.[61]The rebels often do not abduct adults permanently butrelease them after they transport stolen goods to the LRA camps. One woman'sexperience was illustrative of these two different trends, permanent abductionfor military recruitment or "marriage" and temporary abduction as a porter. Sheand her five fellow abductees were forced to carry baggage. When they reachedtheir destination "the pregnant and weak ones were released but the young andstrong remained. Two girls remained, Scovia Akello, aged fifteen, and herfriend of the same age. They have not returned."[62]The short-term porter abductees transport stolen food andother property such as clothing and radios. Commonly the abductees are beateninto submission and then forced to carry heavy loads for hours at a time. Thosethat tire on the journey are beaten more severely or even killed.By the UPDFWillful killing of civiliansThe UPDF has unlawfully killed a number of civilians innorthern Uganda in recent years. People found outside the camps are commonlyassumed by the army to be rebels or "rebel collaborators" and frequently findthemselves being shot at by the army. But several victims have been shot insidethe camps. Many shootings occur at night at close range, and are deliberate andnot merely cases of mistaken identity as the army often asserts in its defense.[63]Other deaths are the result of beatings so severe the victim dies.On August 3, 2004, a Local Defence Unit (LDU,locally-recruited guards under army supervision) member killed David Nyeko, atwenty-eight-year-old farmer from Pajimo camp in Kitgum district, after findinghim with a group of friends inside his hut at ten o'clock in the evening. Inresponse to an inquiry from Human Rights Watch, the government of Uganda set forth its knowledge of the case as follows:[David Nyeko] was killed around 15 Feb 05 at 07:30 hrs by11th Battalion foot patrol soldiers. He had ambushed the foot patrolsoldiers, he aimed and threw a spear at them. This took place at Gwengdiavillage in Awach in Gulu district. Inquiries made indicated David Nyeko had a militarybackground, he served in various armies respectively; UNLA, UPDA and later asan LDU at Awach. He later deserted as an LDU and was living at Obade village.After his death he was buried by the locals of Awach Internally DisplacedPersons Camp.[64]Human Rights Watch found witnesses whose account sharplycontradicted the Ugandan government version of events. Human Rights Watch wastold that the shooting was witnessed by several people who were present withthe victim in his house and one witness said:We were in our house with some friends conversing, but notdrinking.… One soldier [actually LDU] came to the house and ordered all of the mento lie down. But they protested, saying they would not lie down. They said [tothe LDU] that he could do what he wanted, they would not lie down. The LDU thenfired three shots, without saying anything. Two shots went into the wall, andone hit Nyeko in the stomach. He died instantly.[65]In this case, the LDU, who ran away, was arrested and sentto the barracks. A postmortem autopsy of the victim was conducted. The LDU,whose identity is known to community members, apparently remained on duty inthe same barracks at the time of the Human Rights Watch interview six monthslater.[66]The killings sometimes seem to be for no discerniblereason-other than because the soldiers can do as they wish and later claim thecivilians injured or killed were "rebel collaborators," whatever thecircumstances.For example, Charles B left his wife and fifteen-year-olddaughter in Pabbo camp, Gulu overnight to go to work his small plot of land.When he returned to the camp the next day, in early February, 2004, he foundhis wife and daughter dead. His neighbors told him that ten UPDF soldiers hadsurrounded the house of a prostitute nearby and knocked repeatedly on her door.When she did not answer they fired into her hut. These neighbors saw one of thesoldiers enter Charles' hut. Shortly afterwards they heard gunshots from insidethe hut. After the soldiers left, the neighbors went to look inside Charles'home and found his wife and daughter dead.[67]Charles B reported the case to the local barracks and a fewdays later soldiers arrived and removed some discarded bullet casings,presumably evidence. A military report about the incident, which Charles read,said that the soldiers had been looking for rebel collaborators at the house ofthe prostitute, and they saw two men in black approach Charles B's hut nearbyso they started shooting into it.His neighbors who witnessed the shootings told Human RightsWatch that this story was false. The official investigation apparently endedthere.[68]Regardless of the presence of possible rebels or rebelcollaborators inside displaced persons' homes inside the camps, the UPDF hasthe duty to take all feasible precautions to protect the civilian populationunder its control against the effects of attacks. Soldiers carrying out anattack must be able to distinguish between legitimate military targets and civilians.Shooting into huts inside displaced persons camps where there was no apparentrebel activity is an indiscriminate use of force in violation of the laws ofwar. The summary execution of any person is a war crime.UPDF 11th Battalion: Cwero and Awach, Gulu districtThe abuses in Cwero and Awach displaced persons camps stoodout among the ten camps that Human Rights Watch visited in February and March2005: they were "protected" by the 11th Battalion of the UPDF, which hadgenerated many more complaints of abuse than other military units in northern Uganda at that time.These two camps, situated next to each other some ten tofifteen kilometers northeast of Gulu, had experienced the same pattern ofgeneral UPDF abuses noted in other camps-until the 11th Battalion was deployedto the area at the end of 2004. In the few months that the 11th Battalion wasstationed near those camps, UPDF abuses of displaced persons increaseddramatically.The abuses were not the acts of just a few undisciplinedsoldiers. People going out to the fields to harvest or fetch firewood and waterinvariably found themselves confronted by the UPDF, whose soldiers beat ortortured people almost every day for the first two months of 2005.Human Rights Watch documented four negligent or willful killingsof civilians by the UPDF in three weeks in February 2005 alone. This does notinclude one other person suspected of being summarily executed by the army andtwo people who reported being shot at and badly injured. Beatings of civilianshad been occurring almost daily since the 11th Battalion arrived.In some of the UPDF killings, the civilians appeared to havebeen summarily executed. The government of Uganda provided the followinginformation to Human Rights Watch about the cases of Vincent Ayeila and RichardKidega:The two above were killed during across-fire between UPDFand LRA enemies. It was around 18 Feb 05 in the areas of Ogur. Subsequently on the19 Feb 05 their dead bodies were identified in the battle areas together withthose of LRA by one called Mr. Obina Willy. He (Obina Willy) later informed ourforces that the two had been abducted by LRA around 17 Feb 05 at Pukanyovillage.[69]One witness, a farmer living in Awach camp, told a differentstory, however. He left the camp on February 18 with Vincent Ayeila and RichardKudega to fetch poles to build a hut. Soldiers found them in the bush andshouted at them to stop, then they fired on the men. The witness managed toescape but the other two were arrested by the soldiers.The following day, a friend went to the barracks to ask forthe two men. Both nearby barracks denied arresting the two. At 4:00 p.m. thatday, their bodies were found. "Both had been shot in the head and chest, andboth had been cut with bayonets on their hands and arms. One of the dead wasstill wearing gumboots and if the LRA finds these, they take them, so wesuspected it was the army," said a friend.[70]The 11th Battalion has treated civilians, whom they aresupposed to protect, in a callous and brutal manner. In Cwero camp, an old manwas beaten to death by 11th Battalion soldiers. The man was out late at nightattending a funeral. A witness narrated how soldiers ordered a group of peopleto disperse, and then beat the elderly man as he emerged from the latrine:The soldiers began to beat him with the butt of his rifleseveral times in the chest until the old man fell to the ground. The soldiersthen turned back to the group which was now dispersing and threatened them, tellingthem to leave. My mother went to the old man and tried to help him get up, buthe couldn't move. Then one of the soldiers went over and started talking to theold man, but he wouldn't respond.[71]The man died after lying incapacitated in his hut for twodays.The 11th Battalion also brutally punished breaches of thecurfew. The curfew hours were irregular, depending on the mood of the soldiers.According to a local leader at Awach:The soldiers are not cooperative at all, they don't listento the leadership [of the camp]. They normally accept people to leave [thecamp] between 9-5. Even if they have set the time [for curfew], sometimes theyopen the roadblock at 11, depending on their mood. Sometimes you enter [returnto the camp] five minutes late and you get beaten and taken to the barracks.[72]At a UPDF roadblock outside Cwero camp during February,2005, a local council official found soldiers arresting civilians for violatingthe curfew. He protested that the curfew did not begin until 5 p.m., and it wasonly 4 p.m. The soldiers said they had changed the law. The council official(referred to as an "LC" throughout Uganda) continued to protest, and, accordingto him, the soldiers said they would "cane me [the official] also. They gave mesixteen strokes." At the same time they beat the civilians at the roadblock.When the LC went to the barracks to complain he saw other civilians beingbeaten at the barracks in front of a lieutenant. When he asked why the peoplewere being beaten the lieutenant asked him, "Do you know the rebels?" Theelected official went away without registering a complaint, fearful of therepercussions.[73]Soldiers of the 11th Battalion were also responsible fortorture. A forty-year-old farmer from Cwero was accosted by soldiers when hewas found making a fire break around his cultivation five kilometers outsidethe camp in mid-February, 2005. The soldiers claimed that he was working forthe rebels and then tortured him, he said:They made me lie down and started caning me and kicking meso many times. Then they tied a rope around my testicles and pulled on it. Theytook me unconscious to Cwero barracks where I stayed one night. Because I wasvery sick they released me.[74]In early February, 2005, UPDF soldiers shot atwenty-nine-year-old man. It was 10 p.m. and the man was with four othersconversing in his home at Awach camp. Then two soldiers arrived and one enteredthe hut and stood inside. When the young man went outside, the second soldiershot him in the leg by putting the gun against the victim's leg and shootinghim point blank.The first soldier rushed out of the hut and said to theshooter, "What have you done?"The victim, who was not running away before he was shot, ranafter he was shot as the bone in his leg was not broken. "I kept running andfalling down, getting up, until I reached the LC's [local council official]place. I reported to the LC and they took me to the health center. They rangthe hospital the next morning, and then sent an ambulance" and took him to Gulu Hospital, where he remained for several weeks.The LC lodged a complaint with the police who sent a letterto the UPDF Public Relations Officer and the 11th Battalion. The UPDF 11thBattalion commander in Awach, however, claimed that the other three men whowere in the victim's home "should find the soldier who shot…, otherwise theywere the ones with the gun."One of the three men was detained for two days at thebarracks then released with orders to report daily as to whether he had foundthe soldier, which orders were not enforced. "It is a way to intimidate us,"the victim said. A case was also filed with the Uganda Human Rights Commission,the government human rights monitoring body that has the power to hear anddecide human rights cases.[75]Such gross mistreatment was so routine it became part ofnormal life at Cwero and Awach camps. One woman who was beaten by soldiers whopulled her out of her shop at 9:00 p.m. on January 10, 2005, said, "I did notcomplain. I thought soldiers were on their work so I didn't take it to the LC[local councilor]."[76]Torture and OtherMistreatment by UPDF soldiersGovernment soldiers routinelyabuse civilians in the displaced persons camps of northern Uganda.Civilians alleged to be "rebel collaborators" are commonlydetained and sometimes tortured or severely beaten with sticks as part of theinterrogation process. Some of the detainees reported being held in pits withother prisoners for several days. Very few of those detained ever receive atrial.One farmer, twenty-three, was beaten together with hisfriend by UPDF soldiers near Cwero camp on the morning of January 23, 2005. Thesoldiers, apparently as punishment, beat the hands of nine men captured thatday with a large stick until they bled, then the soldiers left. The man said:That morning my friend and I went to cut sorghum in agarden near the camp. While we were working a group of soldiers approached us.They had with them seven other civilians from the camp who they had stoppedalong the path to the camp. They must have been coming to the fields to work aswell. Anyway, they forced all of us on the ground. One by one, we were taken toa tree stump and told to put our hands across it. Then they beat our hands witha large stick until they bled. When they had beaten everyone they left. I tookmy friend to a nearby river and washed his hands because they were bleeding sobadly.… [The soldiers] also destroyed my identity papers.[77]One man, a relative of LRA commander Vincent Otti, wasarrested by soldiers near Pabbo camp in Gulu on February 20, 2005. They allegedthat he was a rebel collaborator and took him back to the barracks. At thebarracks he was taken into a "small hut, a torture house, where they killpeople. Four big wooden logs were hanging in the hut. The soldiers tried to hitme with the logs but I dodged them."The soldiers then took him out of the barracks; they "beatme with sticks, hitting my head and chest with the butts of their guns. Whenthey beat me they said I had no energy to move." The soldiers forced him towalk on further until they reached a place called Guru Guru and stopped. Theman said:They [the soldiers] were hitting me with sticks and thebutts of their guns. I was suffering from pain in my legs and chest. When I washit on the head I was spinning around. I couldn't move anymore. The men put arope around my neck and started strangling me. Four soldiers were sitting on mychest and the fifth was pulling the rope around my neck. They told me they weregoing to kill me because I was the [relative] of Otti. I fainted, I don't knowwhat happened after.[78]Many UPDF beatings of civilians occurred where the soldiersbelieved the victims were breaking the army-imposed local curfew, whichrestricts the times that civilians are allowed to be outside the camps. Theyeven impose a curfew on how late the displaced can be outside their homes atnight-although the homes are small huts in the middle of a displaced personscamp.In a case that is typical of this kind of abuse, soldiers inPaicor camp beat Patrick F at 7:30 p.m. in mid-August, 2004 outside his home.Two soldiers came when I was sitting in front of my house.They started beating me. They were drunk and said, "Get inside, nobody shouldbe outside by now," and just started beating me. They hit me with their sticksand told me to lie down inside the hut. As I was lying down they hit me andwounded me badly.[79]The situation has become so serious that some civilians seemto view such outright abuse at the hands of the soldiers as normal. As one mansaid, after being beaten by LDUs for returning late to the camp, "We did notcomplain to anyone about this. It is a normal thing when you come late and noone follows it up. We were late because we had gone far."[80]The soldiers stole what the men had hunted, leaving them with one small animaleach.Many more than one-third of the 170 people at displacedpersons camps interviewed by Human Rights Watch said that they had experiencedor witnessed a beating by the UPDF in the past year, 2004-2005.Rape by UPDF SoldiersRape and other sexual violenceare also frequent occurrences in and around the camps. A report by UNICEFreleased on June 15, 2005 concluded that rape is the most common form ofviolence in the sprawling Pabbo internally displaced persons camp, Guludistrict.[81] Rape,however, is not limited to one camp or town. The lack of discipline within thearmy and the almost complete lack of accountability contribute to an environmentand atmosphere in which women are extremely vulnerable to abuse, both from theUPDF and within the community.Women in a number of camps told Human Rights Watch how theyhad been raped by soldiers from the Ugandan army. Women are particularlyexposed at night if they are found outside of their huts.One woman from Amida camp in Kitgum went out at night to usethe latrine. A soldier forced her at gunpoint to the edge of the camp and rapedher, threatening to kill her if she refused him. She said:He said to me if I rejected him he would kill me. He beganto squeeze me, he forced me on the ground and raped me. When he finished heleft me-he knocked me down on the legs with his knee so I didn't know where hewas going.[82]Girls are often the victims. A man from Bobi camp, Guludiscovered that his sixteenyear-old daughter had gone missing on the morning ofJanuary 26, 2005. He learned from a nephew that she had been taken by UPDFsoldiers and one of the soldiers was raping her in a hut on the other side ofthe camp. He said, "When I arrived at the hut the soldier had gone and mydaughter was inside the hut crying." At the hospital the next day doctorsconfirmed she had been raped.[83]In Kitgum Matidi camp, the UPDF beefed up its presence dueto increased LRA activity in the area in April 2004. The supposed "extraprotection" turned out to be a nightmare for the residents of the camp. Onewoman described how "a lot of women were raped at that time." Two women toldHuman Rights Watch about similar incidents of soldiers barging into their hutsand raping them.[84] In thesame month at Kitgum Matidi camp, a soldier raped a grandmother, according toher adult son, whose hut was also invaded by soldiers. He said:Afterwards they went to my mother-perhaps the soldiersorganized themselves before going to abuse the civilians. They beat my mother. Theyraped my mother. At night I didn't know but in the morning we organized as agroup of fifteen households to find out what had happened. My mother explainedthat she had been raped. She was raped by one soldier…I did not report the incident. The chairman of thehousehold took the report to the army barracks-up to now we don't know, therehave been no repercussions.[85]Soldiers prey upon women and girls they find travelingoutside the camps out of necessity-to collect firewood or water or to sow, tendor harvest crops. In such situations they are risking not only an attack andabduction by the LRA but also rape and physical abuse by the army.In an August 2004 case, a sixteen-year-old girl was raped bya soldier while she was in the fields picking millet; her mother had left heralone briefly to go to another garden. The mother took her daughter to thedoctor and then complained to the Pabbo police post. The police asked the UPDFto investigate, according to the victim, and the rapist and his commandingofficer came to the hut of the girl and her mother in Pabbo camp. The rapistthen returned to the hut when the mother was out, kidnapped the victim and madeher his third wife in September 2004. She lived in his hut in another camp fortwo months with the two other co-wives, became pregnant and returned to hermother after the "husband" mistreated her. As of the interview, the rapist wasstill in the barracks as a soldier and had not been punished.[86]In another sexual assault in Jengare camp in August 2004, amarried woman with two children was raped when she left the camp briefly. Shetold Human Rights Watch:It was around 9 pm. I wanted to boil some groundnuts for myson and went to look for some firewood. Out in the bush I ran into one soldier.He got me and took me behind the camp and raped me. He threatened me with thegun. I told him that I didn't want to and he replied that if I refused he wouldshoot me. I stopped fighting and he raped me.[87]After the rape, he told her to get up and start runningwithout looking back. She fled, hid and slept in the bush. When she did notreturn that night, her husband reported her missing. She identified the soldierthe next day and he was taken to Pabbo barracks; both were tested for the HIVvirus. Although the soldier was positive she tested negative. After two daysthe family took the matter to the police, but no action was taken and the soldier,a private, has been seen moving freely at the barracks.[88]It is exceptionally difficult for women to find protectionfrom sexual abuse by government soldiers. Rape is very stigmatized in Ugandansociety and women often are ashamed to report it; many women Human Rights Watchspoke to had never described their experiences to anyone. These women were veryfearful that the community would shun or reject them.The impoverishment of displaced persons, among otherfactors, has caused a breakdown in social values. As one community leader putit, "Soldiers are often the only ones in the camps with money. They can enticeyoung girls, even married women, into sex."[89] Soldiersare often the "richest" people in area because they receive regular income. Parentssometimes complain that soldiers have "defiled" their children, many younger thansixteen. They complain that soldiers have tried to marry girls without theparents' consent and sometimes in the face of the parents' opposition.Overcrowded camp conditions have contributed to theoccurrence of sexual violence and rape, which are reported to occur at a higherrate than when people lived in rural outposts. One fourteen-year-old girl wasraped by a group of boys who dragged her away from the hut she was going tosleep in. She said:It was on October 25, 2004. I was about to go to sleep inanother woman's house when I was grabbed and dragged out of the hut. There werefive people who dragged me out. They were civilians. The woman had gone for ashort call at the time…. I was sleeping in this hut because there is no spacein my parents' hut. They [the men] took me to their hut. Then I was defiled byone of them…. I didn't know him before. He used force with me. He slapped meand hit me because I had to resist.[90]Arbitrary arrest and DetentionFear of the authorities and reluctance to report abusesinflicted by the UPDF on the part of victims often results from fear ofretaliation. Victims fear beatings, torture and perhaps death, inflicted in thebarracks or elsewhere. UPDF officers have suggested that protests against UPDFabuses may be false propaganda designed to "make the government look bad,"particularly when the complaints are made to international organizations.[91]Military intelligence suspicions may be raised against those complaining on thegrounds that they may be "rebel supporters." The complainant may be detained formilitary interrogation.UPDF's practice of detaining suspects for prolonged periodsin barracks is not only used against people complaining of army abuses but alsoagainst others suspected of rebel activity. It is in the barracks where tortureand other forms of ill treatment most often occur.[92]Those so held are denied their right to be free from arbitrary arrest and detentionunder international human rights law.[93]While the Ugandan army is entitled to capture LRA fighterson the battlefield as a matter of international humanitarian law, the militarymust turn such persons over to the civilian justice authorities for possibleprosecution. Under international law, LRA fighters may be prosecuted by theUgandan government for taking up arms or for specific criminal acts, althoughthe government has chosen to amnesty most LRA fighters. There is no basis underUgandan law for the military to detain persons beyond an immediate battlefieldsituation.Most of those interviewed by Human Rights Watch over theyears and for this report who have been held in military detention, often forweeks or months, said they were not captured on the battlefield. They rarelyhad the opportunity to challenge their detentions or evidence against them in acourt of law. If charged with a capital crime such as treason or terrorism,they usually have had to wait the constitutional period of 360 days on remandin prison while the public prosecutor investigates the case.[94]The remand period starts only when the UPDF turns the suspects over to thepolice and they are brought to the Magistrates' Court, however-without creditfor the time already spent in military detention.Furthermore, the military does not investigate cases in themanner required by the criminal law. The superintendent of police in Guludistrict complained to Human Rights Watch that the UPDF would sometimes arrestsuspects, usually civilians, and then dump them on the police without obtainingsufficient evidence to allow for a conviction. "The police are not involved inthe preliminary investigation in these cases, and as a result we almost alwayslose them."[95] Most ofthese cases, however, are never brought to trial.[96]The Chieftancy of Military Intelligence (CMI) of the UPDFsometimes intrudes into ongoing police investigations. While Human Rights Watchwas visiting northern Uganda, two men were in the Gulu police station underpolice investigation for a complaint of assault filed by a local politicalrival. UPDF agents arrived and removed the men from police custody to the UPDFbarracks. They were held there for several weeks for investigation by CMIbefore they were returned to the police and charged with another, earliercrime, a murder not related to combat. Human Rights Watch asked to interview themin private while they were in UPDF custody in the 4th Brigade headquarters, butwas refused a private meeting.[97]To the knowledge of Human Rights Watch, such violations ofcriminal procedure andcivil rights law by the UPDF have not been investigated norpunished.The Lack of AccountabilityVery little transparency or accountability for UPDF or LRAabuses exists in northern Uganda. Both perpetrate abuses of civilians in thenorth with almost complete impunity. The Amnesty Act of 2000 confers immunityfrom prosecution on the LRA, and the UPDF has said that its members should alsobe exempt from prosecution.[98] Human RightsWatch believes all of those responsible for war crimes and other serious abusesshould be held accountable, whether they are LRA fighters or UPDF soldiers.LRA ImpunityAmnesty and ReconciliationIn 2000, the Uganda Parliament passed the Amnesty Act: itoffers amnesty to all Ugandans engaged or engaging in acts of rebellion againstthe government since January 26, 1986, on condition that they report to a localauthority, renounce and abandon the rebellion, surrender all weapons in theirpossession, and are issued a certificate of amnesty by the government.[99]The Act has been promoted as a tool to promote peace and to encourage rebelsfrom all parts of Uganda to come home.It is estimated that the Amnesty Commission, the bodyestablished by the act to oversee its implementation, has granted amnesty tosome 15,000 applicants.[100] Amongthese are ex-LRA rebels but this number also includes rebels belonging to ahost of other armed groups who have opposed the Museveni government since itsinception.[101] Theamnesty has encouraged thousands of LRA combatants, including abductees, toescape and surrender.Neither the Amnesty Act nor any other law, however, has anyprovision for a wider reconciliation mechanism such as a truth andreconciliation commission or a committee to award compensation to victims ofthe LRA's atrocities.The LRA rebels who return are to receive resettlementpackages distributed by the Amnesty Commission. There has been only selectivefunding of the resettlement packages.[102] Of the15,000 people granted amnesty in Uganda, Justice Peter Onega estimates that10,000 have still not received their packages, although the World Bank releasedU.S. $ 4.2 million for this purpose earlier in 2005.[103]The resettlement package includes a lump sum of 263,000 Uganda shillings (US $150), as well as a mattress, a blanket, a hoe and seeds.[104]Recently, a group of some 600 ex-LRA rebels began work at agovernment farm at Labora in Gulu district. In a move that almost mirrors the LRAstructure in the bush, the ex-rebel commander Kenneth Banya-whom the UPDFdescribed as the "main military and technical brain behind the rebellion"[105]at his time of capture-was appointed head of the farm.[106]The farm is exclusively for LRA returnees; it could contribute to adeterioration of relations between returnees benefiting from its produce andthose still living in impoverished conditions in camps nearby.The issue of packages for returned rebels is contentious innorthern Uganda. A resident of Gulu town originally from Paicor camp expressedsome bitterness to Human Rights Watch at how rebels coming out of the bush weregetting a nice financial package "for having killed people." Unless thegovernment handles the matter with greater sensitivity than has been shown todate, the packages given to the returning rebels could be a source ofcontinuing resentment and hinder reconciliation.The issue of returnee packages and compensation has beenfurther distorted by the government. Ex-LRA commander Kenneth Banya and a fewothers live as guests of the UPDF in the barracks or in Colonel Otema'srenovated hotel in Gulu, the Acholi Inn. These rebels are the people mostresponsible for the LRA's atrocities in the past-but they are to allappearances being rewarded despite their high-level involvement with the LRAand possibly leading role in its abuses. While the average returnee is quicklysent home to his village or camp with no or a delayed resettlement package orfollow-up, the commanders live in relative luxury in Gulu town.Maj. Shaba Bantariza, UPDF spokesman, told Human RightsWatch that one reason for the barracks residence and twenty-four-hour armedguard and military transport afforded to one ex-LRA commander was security. Heeffectively has no home. "If he goes to an internally displaced persons camp,personal security is not guaranteed," the major said,[107]no doubt on account of possible revenge-taking by LRA victims or punishment fordesertion by his former LRA comrades.The generous treatment given to the rebel commanders may befueled by partisan political motives. Some of the LRA commanders who havereturned have been used for propaganda for the ruling Movement party. Shortlyafter he was captured and granted amnesty, Cmdr. Kenneth Banya appeared at apublic rally in Kitgum town saying, "Museveni deserves another term [asPresident]."[108]Presidential elections are to be held in March 2006. Another returned LRAcommander urged a crowd at Agoro and Madi Opei camps in Kitgum in early 2005 tokeep Museveni as their leader.[109]While the high-level commanders are given twenty-four-hourarmed guard by the UPDF, usually ex-LRA returnees seek out displaced andmissing family members in camps, but there is little further monitoring orfollow-up by any agency. Human Rights Watch received unverified reports ofrevenge attacks on ex-LRA returnees resulting in injuries and even death.[110]The government, however, makes efforts to assure potential returnees that theywill be safe, and it sponsors recently surrendered LRA combatants to speak onthe radio about the favorable treatment they received from the UPDF and others.No organization is specifically charged with following up onthis protection issue of former LRA fighters returning home; the femalefighters/wives/mothers and their children's difficulties in reintegration havebeen noted, but the physical protection needs of the male ex-LRA fighters is anentirely different issue. There is currently no monitoring of these ex-LRAreturnees and little is known about how they are actually received by thecommunity. The Amnesty Commission does not have the resources to follow upafter issuing amnesty certificates and packages to applicants. The Head of the AmnestyCommission, Justice Peter Onega, stated that the Commission is "supposed to followup on the grants of amnesty but we cannot. There are financial constraints."[111]Although very little is actually known about how well thesereturnees are received, as a result of the advocacy efforts of the Acholitraditional and religious leaders it has become received wisdom that there islittle or no retribution because the Acholi are so "forgiving." In one sensethis is an exhortation to the community to treat the returnees well byappealing to indigenous cultural values.Many victims interviewed by Human Rights Watch did not agreewith the prospect of having the LRA leaders forgiven, however, but insteadwanted justice, even retribution.[112] Thereis a division of opinion between community leaders and victims on the topics ofjustice, accountability and reconciliation, as reflected in a recent survey.[113]The survey provides evidence of the need for protection and for follow-up withex-LRA fighters who have accepted the amnesty.Human Rights Watch supports amnesties for individuals for theirparticipation in internal armed conflicts but opposes in all circumstancesamnesties for those implicated in war crimes, crimes against humanity andgenocide.UPDF ImpunityNo effective accountability structure exists in the camps;reports of UPDF abuses rarely result in any investigation or prosecution ofUPDF personnel. While there is a military detachment in each camp, police arefew and far between in rural northern Uganda. Ultimately the level ofdiscipline, protection of civilians and accountability rests on the will andpersonality of the immediate commander. Unfortunately, at times the commanderof the detachment or other unit-with seemingly no consistent higher orders topunish those who abuse civilians-may be both the perpetrator and judge of theabuses and often has a conflict of interest.The Ugandan government said, in response to the Human RightsWatch finding of lack of accountability for abuses committed by governmentsoldiers in displaced persons camps:There is a well established function[ing] accountabilitystructure in the IDPC (Internally displaced people camp) for any abuses by the governmentofficials more especially the UPDF. Lt Col Francis Achoka deputized by CaptMzee Tutu are presidential appointees for IDPC Gulu for security monitoring andhandling all cases of Human rights nature for subsequent action with either theUPDF courts and/or police in the civil courts.In conclusion we note that most complaints are fronted byopposition Members of Parliament to malign the UPDF. Most of these alleged complaintsare made when it is even commonly known that some of these people are killedalong side and/or among the LRA rebels in the cross fire which is inevitable toavoid.[114]The lack of accountability is exacerbated by the army's preponderanceof power in northern Uganda and the weakness of comparable civilianinstitutions. Local civilian officials and the civilian criminal justice systemhave neither the effective authority nor the capacity to hold the armyaccountable for the abuses it commits daily, although they have jurisdictionover military personnel in theory.For those daring to complain about army abuse, the localcouncil system is usually the first step. This system operates much as it doesin the rest of the country; local village councilors (LC-1s), parish councilors(LC-2s), sub-county councilors (LC-3s), county councilors (LC-4s) or evendistrict-level councilors (LC-5s) are elected but do not have the same level ofauthority in practice as the military personnel, especially military commanders.[115]Local councilors take the complaint, on behalf of the citizen affected, to thelocal army commander who is supposed to investigate the matter. Consequently,the abuse of a civilian commonly becomes an internal matter for army disciplineto deal with.[116]In many cases, complaints are not followed up norinvestigated. Although the UPDF has internal mechanisms to maintain disciplinein the ranks, the army rarely holds soldiers accountable for the abuses theycommit against civilians. The most a victim of army abuse can expect is someminimal compensation, usually limited to small sums of money for loss ofproperty, and occasionally the summary beating or transfer of a soldier. In mostcases, however, the complaint appears to disappear into the barracks. There isno discernible attempt to investigate or follow up by the commander and thevictim is left without any remedy. "Nothing was done" is a common refrain ofthose protesting abuse by soldiers.The army has a system of courts martial for trying soldiersaccused of anything from the smallest offenses to the most serious crimes orcapital offenses.[117]Although the courts martial are open to the public, they sit within thebarracks and as such are intimidating places for civilians to attend.Inadequate Response and Ineffective Remedies forAbuses by the UPDFIf a soldier is punished for abusing a civilian the victimrarely knows about it. Although the court martial system is supposed to be opento the public, in practice few know about the outcome of cases nor can theytake issue with the results. As one camp leader said:In most cases we are not satisfied with the way they areresolved. The soldiers do not follow the legal system of reporting to thepolice. They resolve it inside the barracks-we can't follow up with the caseinside the barracks.[118]More often than not, when a complaint is lodged with thebarracks there is hardly ever any further investigation of the case-manyinterviewees described how they simply did not hear anything further on thecase, not even an interview by an army investigator or prosecutor, leaving themwith the obvious conclusion that nothing was done to investigate or punish theperpetrator.In a case that is typical of this experience, a man fromKitgum Matidi complained to the barracks through the sub-county councilchairman after a soldier beat him with a club in his hut in March 2004.Although the incident had occurred almost a year before the interview withHuman Rights Watch, the victim said, "Up to now there is no reaction."[119]In many cases there were simply "no repercussions,"[120]no investigations, and no answers to people's complaints at the barracks.The Justice and Peace Commission project officer in Kitgumsaid it was "a common complaint in the camps-people are beaten and crimes arecommitted [by soldiers]. The local commander says 'we are going to followthis,' but nothing happens."[121]Even when a response is elicited from the local barracks itis rarely encouraging. Where victims cannot identify their assailants, a commonoccurrence where many attacks happen at night and there is turnover in theunits posted to the area, normally no further investigation is undertaken. Oneman from Kitgum Matidi camp tried to complain about being tied up and robbed bysome soldiers but was asked by the army officer if he recognized any of them.He did not, so, instead of a vigorous investigation by the commander, "nothinghappened."[122]This attitude seems to have been conveyed down to the localcouncilors and leaders who usually field the complaints. The village councilorin Paicor camp told Juliane A, whom soldiers beat with sticks, that it would bedifficult to follow up her case because she did not know the soldier.[123]Okello A told zone leaders in Bobi camp about his beating at the hands ofsoldiers in February. The zone leaders told Okello that as he could not identifythe soldiers, "it was not worth pursuing."[124]The ineffectiveness of the complaints procedure hascontributed to a broader lack of confidence in the system of justice-peoplesaid that they did not bother to complain about abuse as nothing was expectedto come from it. A sub-county councilor who had been beaten and then detainedin a pit in the barracks explained that he had "seen many times that soldiersbeat civilians and we take the cases to higher authorities and nothing happens-sothere is now no use in bringing cases."[125]In some cases, the army just did not bother to punish theperpetrator who was identified. A victim of rape in Pabbo camp identified the soldierwho had attacked her. The result, according to her: "They did not imprison him,I don't know why."[126] Anotherwoman, who was raped by a soldier in Jengare camp in August 2004, said that shetook her case to the police and identified the soldier. However, "nothinghappened to the soldier. Others saw him at the barracks and nothing hashappened to him."[127]In Paicor camp, a twenty-six-year-old man who worked at asmall kiosk was left unconscious by a local commander after refusing to sellcigarettes below the normal sale price. He complained of this beating tointernal security (GISO), a civilian administration, which sent a letter to thepolice, "but since then nothing has happened and [the commander] is still there[in the barracks]."[128]Where corrective action is taken by the army, it isfrequently inadequate. The UPDF sometimes offers small amounts of compensationor payment of medical treatment as opposed to any full investigation orpunishment of the soldiers. After soldiers beat a fifty-five-year-old farmer onDecember 28, 2004, he complained to the local commander. The commander did notconduct an investigation into the incident but paid for some medical treatment.[129]The army sometimes transfers soldiers, or even wholebattalions, theoretically as "punishment" for abuse. This seems to be an actiondesigned to prevent soldiers from being identified as abusers and to moot outcomplaints of abuse. It also deals with the problem by relocating it ratherthan stopping it.A young man who had been displaced since 1996 was beaten upby soldiers in Pabbo camp. He tried to follow up his case with the localcouncilor but was told that nothing could be done "because the soldier was nolonger there."[130] Thispractice is also dangerous in that it foists an abusive battalion or soldier ona new group of civilians who will in all likelihood be subjected to the sameabusive behavior.Human Rights Watch complained to authorities in Uganda about the notorious UPDF 11th Battalion's activities it documented in Cwero and Awachdisplaced persons camps; others complained as well. It was reported to HumanRights Watch that this battalion was transferred from Cwero and Awach camps tomobile duties.[131]Although the transfer was no doubt welcomed by camp residents it seems unlikelythat the soldiers will be held accountable for the numerous abuses theycommitted in these two camps. The battalion continues to operate as a unit innorthern Uganda.Fear of and Intimidation by UPDF ImpedesAccountabilityMany people expressed their fear of possible repercussionsif they complain about abuses by UPDF soldiers. A Legal Aid Officer with theNorwegian Refugee Council in Kitgum said, "People fear to report a case-theythink it is better to keep quiet. They have the fear that something terriblewill happen if they report the case."[132] A manwho had been beaten up by soldiers in Pajule camp said that other people in thecamp had told him not to report the case because "if you say something badabout the soldiers, the soldiers may kill you."[133]A thirty-four-year-old father of eleven children wasdetained and beaten at the barracks near Cwero on February 8, 2005, but did notfile a complaint because he felt "it would only bring me greater suffering."[134]Another resident of the same camp who was beaten and robbed by soldiers when hewent to the stream to drink also said that he was "too scared to file acomplaint."[135]This fear is not without basis. Following Human RightsWatch's visit to Cwero camp in Gulu on February 26, 2005, soldiers harassedsome of the interviewees. People were reportedly interrogated about what theytold Human Rights Watch researchers and warned not to speak to outsiders again.It is not only the camp residents who are intimidated. Boththe police and local councilors seem to be afraid of the army. A projectofficer with the Justice and Peace Commission, who works on cases brought bydisplaced persons to him through a network of volunteers in the camps, saidthat only "sometimes [do] police get involved" in cases of abuse by the armyagainst civilians. He is "sure that the police are scared to arrest a soldier."[136]The elected local councilors are frequently either victimsor witnesses of abuses by the local commander themselves, making it bothintimidating and difficult for them to complain on behalf of others. SeverinoOkello was detained and beaten by soldiers when returning from a hunting tripoutside the camp. Following his release he complained to two local councilorsbut "the [local councilors] did nothing because one of the LCs… was beaten." Headded, "LCs told us that cases like [his] hunting [case] should not be taken tothem because they, as LCs, fear soldiers-the soldiers don't listen to the LCs."[137]The government of Uganda made the following response to thiscase:There is nothing on record to indicate that [SeverinoOkello] was ever arrested, detained and or beaten by soldiers of 11thBattalion. Most cases hunters are organized in groups and each time they gohunting they notify the local area commander in order to avoid mistakenidentity for the LRA for their safety. It is not possible for a hunter to goalone unless he has ulterior motive.[138]Soldiers beat a group of men who had gone hunting outsidethe camp then took them back to the barracks. The local council chair came tointervene but the commander insisted, "These people were beaten because theywere outside [the camp]. Why did they go outside?" The civilians were beaten anadditional twenty-five lashes and then released, but as one said, "Since the LCwas there and saw it, how can we complain to him?"[139]In some cases, the local councilors were able to obtain therelease of someone illegally detained at the local barracks, but rarely werethey able to intervene and stop a beating in progress.Sometimes the complaint does not even get past the localcouncilor, often because the councilors are afraid. A farmer from Cwero campsaid, "Even if everyone takes cases concerning the military, the LC just sitson it. The LCs themselves fear the soldiers."[140]Many councilors, although they are an elected part of theadministrative and political system, lack confidence in their government or areunwilling to confront the local commander. Several interviewees described howwhen they attempted to complain the councilor told them that nothing could bedone. In one case the LC seemed to condone soldiers' abusive actions by tellinga group of civilians who had been beaten by soldiers to "stop moving late[after curfew]."[141]Other interviewees described how they felt the beatings bysoldiers had become so normal that they did not bother to register a complaint;they thought the beatings were just part of the soldier's normal work. Forinstance, soldiers beat a woman from Paicor with sticks on an evening in June2004 but she "didn't report the case because it is very common to be beatenlike this."[142]It is also extremely difficult for women who are victims ofsexual abuse or rape to report their cases. Most reporting through the localcouncilors becomes extremely public, and women explained that they were veryfearful of the negative reaction of the community to rape victims. Two womentold Human Rights Watch that because of their fear of public opinion they hadnever before told anyone what had happened to them-and asked Human Rights Watchto keep their identities confidential.[143]Lack of PolicePresence in Northern UgandaThe police in Uganda are obliged to "prevent the commission of offences" and "detect and bring offendersto justice."[144] Policeare not expected to fight the LRA but to investigate possible criminal lawviolations.Many camps each containing tens of thousands of people havenot a single police officer to monitor, investigate or prosecute crime,however. In any normal Ugandan towns of this size, this would be unheard of.The lack of police services is scandalous given that the total populationdeprived of police in the camps easily exceeds one million.For example, in Gulu district-where government capacity isgreater than in Kitgum and Pader-there are police posts in only three out of atotal of approximately fifty-one camps. In addition, those police posts aregrossly understaffed. For example, in Pabbo camp, Gulu there are only ten totwelve police officers for a population of about 65,000 camp residents. TheDistrict Superintendent of Police for Gulu district complained to Human RightsWatch of his lack of resources and manpower, explaining that despite his requeststo Kampala for greater manpower, little had changed in his two years at thepost.[145]The absence of police presence in the camps-with very fewexceptions-undermines systematic civilian protection and governmentaccountability in northern Uganda. The congested camps are in dire need of aneffective police force to halt abusive acts within the community such asdomestic violence, act as a mediator in the army's interactions with civiliansand investigate complaints of abuses by the army. The police have the authorityto investigate criminal offenses committed by army soldiers and officers.Yet there is a military presence in each camp. The DistrictSuperintendent for Gulu police admitted, "Policing [in the camps] is done bythe army."[146]Consequently, people find themselves in a situation where they have to bringtheir complaints directly to those abusing them.The police bemoan the fact that they are so understaffed.The District Superintendent complained that he had asked for 350 extra policeofficers (the total number he has under his command at the time of Human RightsWatch's visit was one hundred) but his requests to Kampala go unmet.The general funding for the district of Gulu is poor. Thereare general operational costs and the money sent is not enough. There is onepolice vehicle, which is not new and not very sound. The police have to tend toall activities: escort dignitaries, administration, inquiries, traffic,murders, etc.[147]If lack of resources is the reason then international donorsto Uganda should act to fill the gap. Donors already fund some 50 percent of Uganda's budget.[148] It isbecoming clear that donors are increasingly concerned not about the lack ofresources but the government's allocation of those resources and that this isresponsible for the lack of progress in social development, including law andorder. In the budget presented to the Ugandan Parliament on June 8, 2005, theexecutive branch allocated a massive US$200 million to defense spending,accompanied by a donor protest against this level of military funding.[149]Donors should continue to pressure the Ugandan government toaddress urgent needs in northern Uganda such as civilian protection andgovernment accountability. Although the police are reluctant to proceed againsttheir UPDF colleagues, a signal from donors in the form of increased financialsupport for policing services to communities in northern Uganda even in the midst of war might reinforce and strengthen the police response.The Weak Judicial System in Northern UgandaIn addition to court martial proceedings, soldiers in Uganda can be tried in regular civilian courts. In Gulu there is a High Court that can hearserious criminal (capital) offenses as well as Magistrates' courts in Gulu andKitgum that can hear cases of a less serious nature. However, relatively fewcriminal cases are brought against UPDF soldiers because of the lack of anyreal police presence in the camps in northern Uganda and police reluctance toproceed against soldiers in a war zone.Civil cases for compensation against the army can also bebrought, but individual private litigation is an expensive process, far beyondthe means of most displaced persons. The legal mechanism of habeas corpus isavailable to force the army to produce any individual it has detainedincommunicado but this remedy is open only to those with enough money to hire alawyer; the mechanism does not appear to have been adopted for popular use andfew individuals have tried.The courts are grossly understaffed. Kitgum and Pader-whichwith Gulu constitute the Acholi region-remain backwaters compared to Gulu:little or no judicial presence exists in those two districts. Kitgum has onlytwo magistrates for the entire district and all cases dealing with serious(capital) offenses for both districts are referred to the High Court in Gulu,as magistrates' courts do not have jurisdiction over serious or capital cases.[150]In March 2005, no High Court judge had sat in Gulu for morethan five months: a large backlog exists of cases two to three years old.Justice Peter Onega, the head of the Amnesty Commission who was also a memberof the judiciary and backup High Court judge for Gulu, was assigned there inearly 2005. It was arranged that he would leave his duties and go to Gulu tosit in the High Court, but for only one session lasting about a month. The HighCourt hears habeas petitions and presides over trials of serious (capital)offenses such as murder, treason and terrorism.[151]With such a backlog, and so few cases against soldiersreaching the courts, the court system in northern Uganda is ineffectual inholding soldiers accountable for their abuses. An officer with HURIFO, whichtakes cases to court, explained she was "hoping the High Court judge will comeback as all our cases [against soldiers] are pending."[152]There are no private attorneys based in Gulu but those basedin Kampala travel to Gulu for court appearances and other work. Gulu is somefive to six hours by private car from Kampala. The roads in 2005 were passableand usually secure.UgandanNongovernmental Human Rights Monitoring Organizations in Northern UgandaUgandan NGOs have been themain, and usually only, organizations doing human rights monitoring work in thenorth, accompanied by occasional interventions by foreign organizations. HumanRights Focus (HURIFO), an NGO with its office in Gulu, investigates abuses,writes reports, conducts human rights educational programs and takes humanrights cases to court, among other activities.Its monitoring activities are conducted through a team ofmonitors who travel regularly to the camps and a network of volunteer trainedinformation gatherers who keep tabs on the day-to-day situation in the camps.Civilians, especially the displaced, usually lack the resources to reach theHURIFO office in Gulu town.HURIFO manages a caseload of individual complaints(including court proceedings against the UPDF regarding its use of forced laborof civilians to clear high grass from near the roads where the LRA could set upan ambush). It has achieved some success with its small staff and volunteersbut it does not have the capacity to deal with the large number of abuse casesin northern Uganda.Despite limited capacity, HURIFO has been effective on someissues. HURIFO conducts training of civilians in camps on basic human rightsand how to effectively lodge complaints against the UPDF. In the case of Bobicamp, Gulu district, this training was extremely successful in stemming asustained pattern of sexual abuse by soldiers in 2004. HURIFO organized aworkshop for one hundred community leaders in Bobi camp to teach human rightsand show how to press an effective complaint.HURIFO invited the army officer in charge of the displacedcamps in northern Uganda, Lt. Col. Achoka. Reportedly he went to the localcommander and "told all the soldiers about the problem of rights violations,"[153]demonstrating how firm direction from above can have an immediate impact onhalting army abuses.The change in the behavior of the army detachment at Bobiwas striking. The camp leader described how "before the training there werethreats [by the army], now there are none." He added, "After the training,rape, defilement and torture have stopped."[154]HURIFO has also conducted research into the abuses committedby the LRA, and works to raise the level of human rights awareness throughseminars, workshops and other community outreach activities. HURIFO undertookan advocacy campaign encouraging the government of Uganda to accept an amnestyfor rebels in exchange for peace.[155]Only a few other independent human rights monitoring groupsare working in northern Uganda. There is a much smaller NGO presence in Kitgumand Pader than in Gulu. The Justice and Peace Commission (JPC) of the CatholicChurch's Archdiocese in Gulu carries out work similar to that of HURIFO, mostnotably in Kitgum where it has the only presence, with one officer workingthrough a network of volunteers in six camps on a limited caseload.This is a relatively recent innovation and still quitelimited in scope and capacity. The volunteers received their first trainingfrom the JPC in October 2004 and JPC had only one staff member in Kitgum byMarch 2005. If cases are taken on they are usually forwarded to the alreadyoverburdened HURIFO or the Uganda Human Rights Commission.The Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC) has an Information,Counseling and Legal Aid (ICLA) project with four lawyers in Gulu who visit thecamps. The caseworkers mainly deal with disputes relating to land, gratuitiesand pensions as opposed to human rights abuses.The NRC ICLA project visits each camp in the two districtsabout twice a month but an officer reported, "There is a problem of money forgetting the case to court." ICLA usually works through local partners (such asHURIFO in Gulu) but the ICLA officer in Kitgum said, "There are noorganizations and few with qualities to do the work for ICLA [in Kitgum]."[156]Uganda Human Rights Commission (UHRC) in Northern UgandaThe UHRC, which was mandated by the Uganda Constitution,[157]has a renewed presence in Gulu. It has investigated and heard individual casesagainst the government army, monitored abuses and provided some human rightstraining for the UPDF. However, it is under-funded and understaffed for itswork in northern Uganda and its limited authority has been undercut by lack ofgovernment implementation. Another UHCR activity that potentially has benefitsfor the north is training in human rights for army personnel.[158]The UHRC's power to conduct investigations and hearings onindividual complaints relieves the usually impecunious victims of abuses fromthe need to pay for a lawyer. Victims may report incidents of abuse to the Guluoffice. A UHRC human rights officer investigates the case and reports back toUHRC's headquarters in Kampala. The case is then scheduled for a tribunalhearing in which victims of abuse can be awarded compensation. The hearing isconducted by a judge who must be one of the UHRC commissioners.The UHRC has the power to order compensation, the release ofa person from detention or restriction and any other legal remedy or redress.Its powers are civil but not criminal, except the power to hold someone incontempt.[159] Itsorders have been almost entirely in the form of awards of compensation forvictims of human rights abuses.There are several drawbacks to this system in practice. TheUHRC is understaffed, underfunded and backlogged, particularly in northern Uganda. The UHRC's commissioners are nominated by the president of Uganda and approved by Parliament and have no right of tenure, which leaves them vulnerableto government pressure-and the war in the north is increasingly controversial.[160]Finally, although the UHRC has made a number of awards of compensation againstthe state, the UHCR reported that more than 90 per cent of such awards have notbeen paid by the government.[161] The activitiesof the UHRC have been undercut by the government's lack of enforcement. On May19, 2005, the UN Committee Against Torture expressed concern "about the frequentlack of implementation by the State party [Uganda] of the [UHRC] Commission'sdecisions."[162]The UHRC, as well as the larger international community, hasbeen markedly absent from the field in northern Uganda: apparently it has notbeen a priority to assign staff or funds there. At the time of the research forthis report, the UHRC had only four senior staff in northern Uganda, based in Gulu. One of the four is the human rights officer, who covers ten northerndistricts from the Congo to the Kenyan borders. He estimated that in athree-month period he visits "perhaps five camps in four or five districts" buthis travel is often limited because "sometimes funding is not available."[163]Consequently it is very difficult for the UHRC Gulu officeto handle many cases. The office in Gulu has a courtroom for a UHRC tribunal tosit but Commissioners only come periodically to hear cases.[164]According to the Human Rights Officer, "There is a serious backlog of cases."In March 2005 Commissioners were hearing cases from "two to three years ago."[165]The Human Rights Officer in Gulu claimed that the UHRC "tried to establish anoffice in Kitgum but there are no funds."It is shocking that the UHRC does not have a greaterpresence in northern Uganda where a humanitarian and human rights crisis haspersisted for nineteen years. Its total staff throughout Uganda numbers more than one hundred,[166]indicating that northern Uganda is not a significant commitment for thisinstitution, which should have been providing a much more robust staff for thenorth. It is imperative that the government, with the assistance of donors,takes prompt action to ensure that the UHRC can expand its presence in thenorth, preferably with earmarked funds.The International Criminal CourtThe International Criminal Court (ICC) was created in 1998by an international treaty, the Rome Statute, which came into effect in July2002, with a mandate to investigate and bring to justice persons who bearresponsibility for the most serious crimes of international concern. PresidentMuseveni called upon the ICC to investigate the "situation concerning theLord's Resistance Army" in December 2003, the first state referral that the ICChad received since its inception. On January 29, 2004 the ICC Chief Prosecutor,Luis Moreno Ocampo, participated in a joint press conference in London with President Museveni to announce the referral. On July 29, 2004 the ICCannounced that it would undertake a full investigation of the situation innorthern Uganda.The joint press conference generated enormous controversyover the ICC in northern Uganda. Northern leaders felt that the timing of theinvestigation was wrong because the conflict was still ongoing and issuance ofarrest warrants by the ICC could only serve to scuttle the peace process,leading to further attacks on the civilian population.[167]Traditional and religious leaders have advocated amnesty and traditionalreconciliation mechanisms in lieu of criminal prosecution and internationaljustice for the rebels. They argued that the court's investigation wasinconsistent with traditional reconciliation rituals of the Acholi people, themain ethnic group affected by the mostly-Acholi LRA.A major shortcoming of the traditional reconciliationapproach is the tolerance of impunity. The process involves acceptance ofperpetrators back into the community after certain rituals, but does not takeinto account the views of the individual victims who might not want to forgiveserious crimes, nor does it require the perpetrators be punished or paymaterial compensation to the victims.Moreover, such rituals could not be expected to satisfythose who are not Acholi, and the Acholi have not been the only victims of theLRA. The Langi of Lira district and Teso in Soroti district to the south andsoutheast of Gulu respectively have been greatly affected by the LRA conflictsince 2002, as have southern Sudanese, most of whom are non-Acholi.The ICC investigation has had its shortcomings. Due to lackof an effective outreach strategy by the ICC, its potential role in ensuringjustice and ending impunity in the conflict has been largely misunderstood. TheProsecutor's appearance with the Ugandan President at a press conferencecoupled with the fact that the ICC's intervention in the conflict was through agovernment referral led to serious questions about the court's impartiality.This perception of the ICC has contributed to significantmisinformation, rumors and confusion about the role of the court in theconflict. False reports in the press in late 2004 that the ICC had alreadyissued arrest warrants for LRA leader Kony and some top LRA commanders causedwidespread speculation about the effect this might have on northern Uganda and the peace discussions then underway.[168] It isdifficult to understand why the ICC did not publicly correct this misstatementof fact about its actions.The Office of the Prosecutor has only recently begunengaging in greater dialogue with civil society in northern Uganda. Several northern Ugandan leaders traveled to The Hague in February 2005[169]and on April 14-16, 2005[170] tourge the ICC Prosecutor not to issue arrest warrants while peace negotiationswere ongoing. They included a member of parliament who has been a supporter ofthe ICC.[171]The ICC needs to take immediate action to reach out to thepeople and civil society groups in northern Uganda. This will help thepopulation understand the mandate of the court. The ICC badly needs to regainthe confidence and trust of the people whose interests it is pursuing. It mustcorrect the image it has acquired of an institution subject to manipulation bythe Ugandan government for political expediency. It must restore the image of acredible international institution and seek to work with victims of human rightscrimes to achieve the ends of justice.The ICC needs to put in place a robust plan to clarify itsmandate, explain its role and clearly outline to the people of northern Uganda what it can and cannot do. For instance, the ICC must make it clear to northernUgandans that it can only investigate crimes committed after July 2002, whenthe ICC statute came into effect.It is also vital that the Prosecutor quickly act todemonstrate the court's impartiality. Civil society remains concerned that theICC is being manipulated by President Museveni, whose statements have notdispelled that impression.[172] Inrecent media interviews, the ICC Prosecutor Luis Moreno Ocampo did not rule outthe court's jurisdiction over crimes committed by the UPDF,[173]and President Museveni welcomed the possibility.[174]However, a clear reiteration that the ICC can investigate crimes committed byboth sides to the conflict accompanied by some activity on the ground to backthis up would bolster the court's credibility.The ICC must impartially and objectively investigate crimescommitted by the LRA and government forces falling within its jurisdiction,namely war crimes and crimes against humanity that are "the most serious crimesof concern to the international community as a whole." Because any prosecutionsconducted by the ICC will be limited to only a few offenders, the Ugandangovernment must still pursue prosecutions of those violating Ugandan andinternational law, including crimes committed by the UPDF and LRA forces priorto July 2002.The ICC must also put in place adequate witness protectionmeasures. A consultant for Save the Children in Uganda went to Gulu district inNovember 2004 and easily was able to find witnesses who had spoken to the ICCprosecutor's office. If a foreign consultant is able to do this then certainlythe LRA and the UPDF can, and this places potential ICC witnesses in greatdanger.The LRA has a history of singling out its civilian "enemies"and LRA deserters for abduction or assassination. Agnes, who was abducted in1995 and became the second wife (of seven) of LRA Brig. Gen. Vincent Otti,escaped at age twenty in 2004. Otti wrote a letter after Agnes escaped,threatened to massacre everyone in the parish where Agnes came from unless shewas returned to him. The LRA went to Agnes' village and beat her mother todeath, according to a relative.[175]One problem the ICC might face is enforcement of its arrestwarrants, should any be issued. The ICC does not have any means of enforcingits decisions, and depends on the goodwill of the member states to effectarrests. As an international body with a clear mandate to prosecute war crimesand crimes against humanity, the ICC represents the most credible and impartialoption in ensuring that justice is done in northern Uganda. It is important forfuture stability and peace that those most responsible for atrocities are heldaccountable. The international community should continue to support, andcritically engage with, the ICC in its ongoing investigation and prosecution ofthose responsible for the most serious crimes in northern Uganda.Ongoing PeaceNegotiations and the ICCIn November 2004, theprospect of a peaceful solution to the war received a boost when PresidentMuseveni announced a unilateral ceasefire in certain designated areas in northernUganda. The initial ceasefire period was extended and it seemed they were on theverge of a major breakthrough. The LRA did not sign a ceasefire agreement by a December31, 2004 deadline, and talks were gravely set back.Talks revived in late May 2005. Betty Bigombe, a formergovernment minister of the north who undertook a private initiative in 2004 torestart the talks, returned to Uganda and reportedly tried to meet with Kony.She is one of the few mediators or negotiators to ever meet with Kony. She wasjoined in May by Hans Jacob Frydenlund, a counselor with the Norwegian missionto the UN with extensive peace negotiation experience.[176]No ceasefire has been declared. A government military offensive against theLRA, suspended in November 2004 and then reinstated in early 2005, is ongoing.Bigombe has been vocal in her criticism of the ICC,expressing concern that the issuance of arrest warrants could derail the peaceprocess. In February 2005, Bigombe threatened to completely withdraw fromnegotiations if the ICC issued arrest warrants. "The International CriminalCourt just wants to prove itself at the cost of peace, and they seem not tocare… I have told the prosecutor that the moment they issue arrest warrants, Iwill stop the peace process."[177]Accountability and justice are not inherently inimical topeace. In fact, the converse is true: long-term peace and stability cannot beachievable in an environment of impunity. Accountability for gross violationsof human rights and justice for the victims of such violations comprises astrong foundation upon which peace and stability are built. Perpetrators ofcrimes that go unpunished are likely to commit crimes in the future, particularlythose who are able to achieve positions of power. Individual and communal actsof revenge as a result of the lack of government prosecution-and in the face ofgovernment rewards to the persecutors-would threaten the peace. The ICC couldplay a central role by ensuring that accountability and justice are present inthe peace and reconstruction process in northern Uganda and being more publicabout its activities.It may be that the issuance of arrest warrants results inthe LRA cutting off peace negotiations, but this may be only a pretext for aforeordained result. The ICC may be criticized unfairly-indeed, peacenegotiations have never been successful before in the nineteen-year war, andthe ICC did not even come into effect until 2002.Justice and Reconciliation: What Do the VictimsWant?Alongside the Amnesty Act, traditional reconciliation isstrongly advocated by almost all traditional and religious leaders in the northas the alternative to the ICC. Many working in northern Uganda and other concerned individuals and organizations, including many internationalNGOs, have supported the views of the Acholi traditional and religious leaderson reconciliation.[178] Thereare exceptions, including an anthropologist of Acholi spiritual cults, whoargues that the traditional rites are intended for resolution of individual andclan-level disputes only; they are not for reconciliation for crimes committedin wartime by armed rebels (or government soldiers) against the whole community.[179]Very few victims of LRA abuses interviewed by Human RightsWatch in the camps expressed any desire for "forgiveness"-many asked for"punishment" of the commanders.[180] Oneactivist reported that the people of his community, Atiak in Gulu, would not behappy to have its native son, Vincent Otti, the LRA's number two, return home.Otti is regarded as responsible for an attack that claimed more than onehundred lives in Atiak many years ago. "They want him 'Savimbi'd,'" theactivist reported, referring to the violent death of the Angolan rebel leader.[181]Even if there were a consensus among the Acholi about thedesire to follow traditional services and forgive the LRA, it is not certainthat non-Acholi victims of the LRA, such as the Teso, Langi, and Sudaneseattacked by the LRA in Sudan and in Sudanese refugee camps in northern Uganda,would agree to resolve their complaints against the LRA through Acholimechanisms.A formal survey of attitudes of ordinary northern Ugandansand victims published in July 2005 reveals that many more than previouslythought support prosecution of LRA leaders and some also want the UPDF heldaccountable for their crimes (76 percent). A majority of those surveyed wantedboth peace and justice, and did not think they were mutually exclusive.[182]Regardless of victim and community attitudes, however, Human Rights Watchconsiders that those most responsible for war crimes and crimes against humanityshould be investigated and prosecuted.Not the ICC Alone: Comprehensive Mechanisms forPeace and Justice in UgandaUltimately the ICC's mandate is limited and itsinvestigation of crimes against humanity and war crimes committed after July2002 in northern Uganda cannot operate in isolation from the national context. Thearbitrary impact of the July 2002 date does not take into account the longhistory of the war in the north.A broader truth and reconciliation process would be avaluable supplement to the ICC investigation. This process could work alongsidetraditional rituals in which those affected wish to participate. A truth andreconciliation commission could focus on the period from the end of the war inthe Luwero Triangle in the mid-1980s-between forces of President Milton Oboteand the rebel NRA headed by Yoweri Museveni-to the present. It couldinvestigate the NRA defeat of the Obote army, comprised mostly of Acholi,Langi, West Nilers and other northern Ugandans, and their flight to northern Uganda and over the border into Sudan. It could examine the Museveni rebels' pursuit of the remainsof the Obote army into the Acholi sub-region in 1986, locally perceived as ahuman rights catastrophe and an "invasion" for the purpose of revenge-taking(for Luwero Triangle and other massacres by Obote's northern forces) onnorthern civilians by southerners in the NRA. The greatest human rights abusesby the Museveni forces against northern civilians, according to local accounts,stem from this period.This truth reconstruction and telling process would givepeople in northern Uganda a forum in which they could raise human rights abusesthat occurred during the entire nineteen years of war that they believe need tobe addressed.Tim Allen, an anthropologist of the Acholi, noted that sucha truth telling process may be triggered by the ICC trial of those ultimatelyarrested.[183]Participants in the truthtelling process would not be constrained by the ICCJuly 2002 jurisdictional limit. They may raise incidents and events occurringlong before July 2002. This may prompt the first public evaluation of some ofthe more controversial events in the war, bringing allegations, rumors, andfacts into the open that were not previously discussed nor carefully examinedto present a more complete historical record.Economic reconstruction on a massive scale must beundertaken in northern Uganda so the area can become prosperous once again; thephysical and social devastation of northern Uganda during nineteen years ofbrutal armed conflict has been thorough. Fair and independent adjudication ofclaims to land will be necessary for economic recovery. Land is an increasinglydelicate issue in northern Uganda where more than 90 percent of the Acholipopulation has been displaced for such a prolonged time. Vulnerable groups, suchas child-headed households (who may have no knowledge of the land they are entitledto), widows, and those with absent leaders will possibly be exploited. The equitableadjudication of land disputes will be key to the success of any future peace aswell.The Ugandan government will have to work assiduously toensure greater inclusiveness of the Acholi in local and national government.Many Acholi feel they have been marginalized by the current government andrumors persist that Museveni has no interest in ending the war as the sufferingis punishment of "southerners" for being abused and excluded by "northerners"controlling the government in previous decades. The full representation andinvolvement of the Acholi in their diversity at local and national levels willbe vital to ensuring a future peace and respect for human rights.Lack of Protection for CiviliansThe beleaguered displaced population of northern Uganda remains extremely vulnerable to serious abuse. It is confined to living ininternally displaced persons camps by an LRA campaign of terror directedagainst persons it imagines to be "with" the government and by constantcoercion and intimidation by the UPDF-which moved tens to hundreds of thousandsinto camps for their safety. The civilian protection provided by herding peopleinto camps, at the cost of their livelihoods, health and education, has been questionable.The present Ugandan government system for protection ofinternally displaced persons in northern Uganda is ineffective. An overallshift is required from a management system based on confinement and abuse, thelegacy of a military strategy which included displacement and encampment as acounter-insurgency tactic, to a system of at least part-civilian managementfocused on protection and assistance.A greater protection presence must be put in place to ensurethe adequate protection of civilians in the north. This protection must beaccompanied by enhanced capacity for monitoring by UN agencies, particularlythe Office for the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), and Ugandan andinternational NGOs, described above.Humanitarian CrisisThe extreme squalor of the displaced persons camps is veryapparent when driving on the rough dirt road into one of the camps in northern Uganda. Most of the camps lack efficient sanitation and consequently outbreaks of choleraand other water-borne diseases are common. The intense heat and crowdedconditions result in fires in the dry thatched roofs, making people homelesswithin the displaced camps. The population in the camps still lives inintensely deprived conditions years after they moved there, ill-catered for bythe meager humanitarian assistance afforded by international donors for such aprolonged crisis. The international appeal for donor funding for northern Uganda for 2005 was greatly improved over 2004, however, when only 19 percent was committedat mid-year.[184]Many protection problems stem from the extremely deprivedconditions in which the displaced population of northern Uganda lives. The rations are not enough to live off and people in the camps are forced byeconomic necessity and the need to survive to travel outside to the fieldsnearby. The LRA has made such travel extremely hazardous by killing, maiming,beating and abducting civilians to the point where many are afraid to ventureout even for the food that they and their malnourished children need.Women are particularly vulnerable. Many women intervieweesbecame victims of the LRA or the UPDF when outside the camps collectingfirewood or water, or sometimes going to farm.The LRA seems to allow some sowing but actively discouragesfarmers from harvesting their crops. Its fighters seem to rely for their ownfood on what they can steal from the fields and huts. Aware that relieforganizations distribute food to displaced persons, the rebels tell civiliansfound in the fields such things as, "The food in the field is ours. Why do yougo to the fields when WFP gives you food?"[185]Yet LRA ambushes on vehicles traveling most northern roadscan be frequent. Many roads to displaced persons camps are so unsafe thatmilitary escorts have been used for most relief and commercial vehicles foryears.The government army does little to provide security topeople traveling outside the camps and towns on foot, to the fields or tovillages. In only one camp, Bobi in Gulu district, civilians reported that aprogram had been set up for the army to patrol with people going to till theirfields. This initiative had developed following the workshop in the camp heldby the Gulu-based NGO Human Rights Focus (HURIFO) and is perhaps furtherevidence of how civilian-military relations can be improved by constructive collaborationbetween a senior military officer and an organized community.The UPDF imposes limits on how far outside the camps ortowns civilians are allowed to move. This varies according to the judgment ofthe UPDF of the LRA threat. In 2004, the more than 33,000 displaced persons inPajule camp, Pader district, were allowed to move in a perimeter of twokilometers around the camp to go to their gardens. In 2005, because ofsuspected LRA movement in the area, they were limited to the perimeter of thecamp.[186]As previously described, the UPDF also imposes strictcurfews at irregular times. The curfews may be enforced by abusive soldiers whobrand anyone returning late as a "rebel" or "rebel collaborator." Suchcivilians are arbitrarily beaten, detained and tortured for minorinfringements.As a result of the situation described above, people areforced to become even more reliant on often inaccessible and insufficienthumanitarian assistance.International Protection Activities for theDisplaced: Protection Officers and Working GroupsThe UN protection presence in northern Uganda has been notable for its absence for almost two decades. Despite continual conflictin northern Uganda since 1986, only one UN officer was responsible forprotection of internally displaced persons in all of Uganda before 2003: anassistant protection officer with UN Office for the Coordination ofHumanitarian Affairs (OCHA) based in Kampala. Many UN personnel have beenworking on behalf of displaced persons for years, although their positions werenot conceived of as "protection officers" and their responsibilities wereprimarily for service and food delivery, not monitoring the safety of orproviding protection for their beneficiaries.Since Jan Egeland declared in 2003 that "the United Nationshas done too little,"[187] the UNhas begun to scale up its presence. In 2003, OCHA deployed an officerresponsible for humanitarian coordination in Gulu. Although not officiallyresponsible for protection, this officer, OCHA's head of office in Gulu, wasable to encourage and coordinate protection activities in the area. He helpedto initiate the NGO working groups on protection now active in the north.UNICEF first deployed a child protection officer in Gulu inDecember 2003. Since then other child protection officers have been located inLira and Kitgum. There is now a head of child protection in Kampala who isrecruiting experienced staff to increase UNICEF's presence and effectiveness inthe north. In early 2005, the first of three UNICEF protection officers wasinstalled in Kitgum.These UNICEF protection officers have a broader mandate thantraditional child protection officers in that they are to monitor human rightsabuses and intervene with authorities to stop the abuses. They are alsomandated to train local people on measures that can be taken to enhanceprotection at a grassroots level.The UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights(OHCHR) is planning to deploy some eight international staff members to monitorthe situation in northern Uganda and support, both in terms of resources andcapacity building, the expansion of the government's Uganda Human RightsCommission presence in the north. While this is to be encouraged, OHCHRmonitoring offices and staff should carry out monitoring independently, toensure high standards in research methodology, to guarantee the security ofconfidential information, and to protect witnesses. The priority should be on supportfor independent NGOs which to date have been the most effective human rightsmonitoring organizations in northern Uganda.The deployment as planned, however, will still not beenough. The UN needs to dramatically increase the number of officers present inthe north to monitor the widespread ongoing abuses committed by the LRA and theUPDF.Such monitoring would provide valuable information andinform appropriate responses to the conflict by the United Nations, donorgovernments, human rights and humanitarian organizations, and other members ofthe international community, and should be accompanied by effective, high-levelinterventions to stamp out abuses. The increased presence and information thatwould come from such a presence would enable the UN to develop more effectivestrategies for protection of civilians from abuse by all (including by otherdisplaced persons and domestic abuse). It could create reporting avenues forpersons who have suffered human rights abuses and promote accountability, thusproviding a deterrent.Largely at the instigation of OCHA, UN agencies,international and national NGOs and national authorities started formingprotection working groups in northern Uganda in 2002-2003. A nationalprotection working group, chaired by OCHA, meets in Kampala and protectionworking groups exist at the district level. Some such district level groups havesub-groups for specific protection issues. For example, in Kitgum, protection subgroupson sexual and gender-based violence, formerly abducted children and "nightcommuters,"[188] havebeen created.[189] InGulu, the protection working group is cochaired by HURIFO and UHRC and attendedby most operational NGOs in northern Uganda.The protection working groups are still relatively new. Thegroup in Gulu has been established longer and has achieved some success. It hasprotested that the UPDF is forcing civilians to cut down grass from theroadsides; the UPDF clears elephant grass yearly, as it can grow taller thanmen and provide a secure hiding place from which the LRA can launch ambushes.Forcing civilians to do this heavy manual labor without compensation, however,became a major problem in Gulu, Kitgum and Pader in 2004. At the same time,HURIFO began litigation on cases of forced labor. As a result of theseinterventions, this practice of forced labor has declined. Internationalhumanitarian law prohibits uncompensated or abusive forced labor.[190]The Gulu protection working group also rallied efforts tobring attention to rape problems in Bobi camp (alongside HURIFO's efforts) andthis advocacy probably helped to curtail the abuse there.The working group in Gulu is limited in its ability to actand exchange information, however, because the UPDF public relations officerattends meetings and it is difficult to openly discuss controversial issuesregarding army abuses and formulate strategies for dealing with them in frontof him.The situation in Kitgum and Pader lags behind Gulu. Thefledgling protection working groups have not yet established themselves inthose districts. More is needed to bolster their capabilities and coordinatetheir activities. An enhanced UN protection presence could spur them on.The protection working groups, however, are comprised mostlyof organizations that do not specialize in protection work, mostly operationalNGOs experienced in the provision of humanitarian aid. OCHA, as chair of theProtection Working Group, and other protection-mandated agencies such as UNHCR,UNICEF and OHCHR, also should provide training and technical support to otheragencies, with particular attention to protection of vulnerable groups such aschildren and women.An effective protection strategy must incorporate the needsof the relief operations. Some protection concerns are closely linked to theprovision of humanitarian aid (or lack thereof) by both UN and NGOs. Forexample the eight women who had their lips cut off by the LRA in February 2005referred to earlier in this report went for water outside the camp becausethere was only one functioning borehole in the camp. A coordinated humanitarianand protection strategy would help to minimize the risks internally displacedpersons are subjected to-which requires close collaboration between the UN, thegovernment, the army, human rights organizations and operational humanitarian NGOs.These mostly NGO working groups on protection should not beforced to take the lead in protection work in northern Uganda as most areassistance delivery, not human rights, NGOs. They can act far more effectivelyas support to an enhanced presence of institutions and personnel with a primaryprotection mandate and expertise. The working groups should continue as avaluable source of insights and recommendations into how food and non-food aidcould be delivered in a manner that enhances security, and as a source ofinformation on new and unresolved abuses arising in the communities they serve.The Government's Forced Displacement in Northern UgandaA government has the duty to protect its citizens.International humanitarian law requires all parties to a conflict to take allfeasible precautions to protect the civilian population under their control againstthe effects of attacks.[191]International humanitarian law prohibits the forceddisplacement of the civilian population for reasons connected to theconflict-except when done for the "security of the civilians involved" or for"imperative military reasons." These prohibitions are applicable to bothgovernments and insurgents.Displacement or capture of civilians solely to deny a socialbase to the enemy has nothing to do with the security of the civilians. Nor isit justified by "imperative military reasons," which require "the mostmeticulous assessment of the circumstances" because such reasons are so capableof abuse. One authority has stated:Clearly, imperative military reasons cannot be justified bypolitical motives. For example, it would be prohibited to move a population in orderto exercise more effective control over a dissident ethnic group.[192]The UN Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement statethat, "prior to any decision requiring the displacement of persons, theauthorities concerned shall ensure that all feasible alternatives are exploredin order to avoid displacement altogether."[193] The principlesstate that states are under "a particular obligation to protect against the displacementof… peasants, pastoralists, and other groups with a special dependency on andattachment to their lands."[194]The government might in the case of northern Uganda invoke both the security of civilians and imperative military reasons for requiringcivilians to move for reasons connected to the conflict. Should it engage in alegal discussion, the LRA might claim imperative military reasons-although ineither case the military reasons must be "imperative" and the movement may notbe forced or carried out through humanitarian law violations. Whether eitherparty to the conflict has met these legal requirements cannot be determinedwithout a more extended development of the facts and history of displacement innorthern Uganda over the years.It must be noted that "violations of international law maybe the cause of large-scale population movements and at the same time betray adeliberate policy on the part of the authorities to provoke such movements."[195]International humanitarian law forbids displacement on the grounds of ethnicityor other discriminatory factors.[196]International humanitarian law offers another caveat to theprohibition on forced movement of civilians for conflict-related reasons."Although not expressly stipulated, it is understood that such movements may beonly temporary." The displacement in northern Uganda has lasted years and in somecases more than a decade.[197]Since 1996, the UPDF has followed the military strategy ofmassive displacement of the overwhelmingly agricultural civilian population-toallow free UPDF movement and operations throughout rural northern Uganda as wellas to remove the social base in which the LRA might find food and support, orthe classic "drain the sea [farmers] where the fish [rebels] swim."[198]The protection of the civilian population living in remote areas is a reasonfrequently invoked for creation and maintenance of the huge internallydisplaced persons camps, which receive both people fleeing LRA abuses or peoplemoving on account of government orders.Whatever the legal basis for displacement of the civilianpopulation, the government has additional duties when it comes to orderingpeople to move for safety or other reasons connected with the conflict: whensuch displacements are carried out, "all possible measures" must be taken sothat the civilian population receives satisfactory conditions of shelter,hygiene, health, nutrition-and safety.[199]Government Protection and Safety for the InternallyDisplacedIn northern Uganda, 90-95 percent of the population of thethree northern Acholi districts has been uprooted by LRA and UPDF actions. Thispopulation must be properly cared for in conditions of safety, pursuant tointernational humanitarian law. The UPDF falls short of providing adequatesafety for the displaced people living against their will in camps.The 2005 resurgence in LRA hostilities has revealed howresilient the LRA is. The attack on Koch Goma camp in Gulu on May 5, 2005 wasdemonstrative of the continued ability of the diminished LRA to breachprotective measures put in place by the UPDF-and how vulnerable to attack thecamps remain.[200]In the past, many people in northern Uganda blamed the army's military tactics for its failure to protect the camps. Somepointed to illogical deployment: some detaches are located in the center of thedisplaced persons' camps, as in Amuru.[201] Thismakes the civilian homes the perimeter protecting the military force, insteadof having the military force guarding the perimeter. The army has not explainedwhy it decided to locate barracks in the center of some internally displacedpersons camps.The local defense units (LDUs) were created to help protectthe camps. But they have not been an effective protective force in the past.This was most dramatically revealed at Barlonyo, Lira district, on February 21,2004 when more than 300 people were killed after the five members of the Amuka(Rhino) Boys militia who were left to guard the camp fled the much larger LRAattacking forces.[202]In 2004, the army continued to recruit LDUs to protect thecamps, instead of the somewhat better trained UPDF units.[203]This was a controversial issue in northern Uganda and both Reagan Okumu andMichael Ocula, the Members of Parliament (MPs) for Aswa and Kilak countiesrespectively, refused to take part in the LDU recruitment, for various reasons.[204]Other MPs are concerned about the announcement that Ugandantroops would be sent on a peacekeeping mission to Somalia, when the situationin the north has not been stabilized. Aggrey Awori, an MP from northern Uganda, said it was "absurd [that] an army that has unresolved internal obligations goesinternational."[205]Full RecommendationsTo the Government of Uganda:Enhance the police capacityand presence in northern Uganda by dramatically increasing the number ofpolice officers. Place police officers in all displaced persons camps in adequatenumbers to bring security to camp residents, and work to establish thecivilian nature of camp management to the greatest extent possible.Strengthen the judicial systemin the north by hiring and training competent and impartial judges andprosecutors. More judges should be permanently assigned to Magistrates andHigh Courts.Initiate court prosecutions ofmilitary personnel in civil jurisdictions where abuses of civilians are atissue and the military fails to prosecute in a timely fashion.Make concerted efforts toreduce the backlog of pending judicial cases by imposing and respectingprocedural deadlines, for instance.Clearly designateresponsibilities between the police and the army as to detentionprocedures and train police to deal with various issues including civilian-soldierconflicts.Overhaul governmentalcomplaints procedures in the north so that there is civilian and militaryaccountability. Ensure that complaints do not stop at the militarycommander, and that there is independent oversight of the complaints processby a respected member of the Supreme Court.Design and implement clearprocedures for these complainants, such as where and to whom to reportcomplaints and how and to whom to appeal. Make sure these procedures aredisseminated at all levels of the population and government in northern Uganda through public awareness campaigns and in partnership with traditional leaders andlocal civil society actors.Strengthen the capacity andindependence of the Uganda Human Rights Commission by, among other things,providing it with sufficient resources to monitor and investigate abusesin northern Uganda by all parties to the conflict, including unlawfuldetentions by the UPDF.Establish and fund a Truth andReconciliation Commission for Northern Uganda to investigate all crimes,regardless of the perpetrator, from the beginning of the conflict in 1986.Make its hearings and findings public.Prepare a detailed plan forthe eventual voluntary return of internally displaced persons to theirareas of origin for post-conflict development projects focusing, amongother things, on shelter, potable water, education, sanitation, hygiene, nutritionand food security.Until such solutions can beimplemented, provide satisfactory conditions, such as spelled out inrelevant Ugandan policy and regulations, in particular the National Policyon Internal Displacement of Persons (Office of the Prime Minister,Department of Disaster Management and Refugees January 2004) and Operationalisingthe National Policy for IDPs (April 2005), and the UN Guiding Principleson Internal Displacement, of shelter, hygiene, health, safety and nutritionfor internally displaced persons.Except for extremecircumstances of insecurity, allow those internally displaced persons whowish to leave the camps, whether briefly or permanently, to do so, inkeeping with the National Policy on Internal Displacement of Persons and Operationalisingthe National Policy for IDPs and the UN Guiding Principles on InternalDisplacement, principles 12(2) and 14(2).Lift curfews wherever possible or, at a minimum, ensurethat they are enforced in a reasonable and proportionate manner.To the Uganda Peoples' Defence Forces:Investigate and discipline orprosecute as appropriate serious violations of international human rightsand humanitarian law committed by UPDF personnel regardless of their rank.Investigations in northern Uganda should focus initially on abuses by the11th Battalion.Penalties imposed must respectthe basic rights of the accused and should not include the simple transferof rights violators to other locales.Provide appropriate humanrights and humanitarian law training to all UPDF personnel deployed innorthern Uganda. All personnel involved with the internally displacedshould receive appropriate training on the UN Guiding Principles onInternal Displacement and relevant Ugandan regulations.Except for the capture of LRAfighters on the battlefield, forbid the UPDF from arresting or detainingany persons or conducting interrogations; discipline or prosecute asappropriate UPDF personnel who unlawfully detain or mistreat persons incustody.When invited, participate inall community and NGO-based efforts to educate citizens about their rightsand procedures for complaining about government abuses and oversights.Design and implement effective oversight of armycommanders, ensuring that they are ultimately responsible and accountablefor the actions of those under their command.To the Lord's Resistance Army:Immediately cease all attacks against civilians and othernon-combatants, including willful killing, torture, mutilation, abduction,looting and destruction of civilian property.To the International Criminal Court:Prepare and implement acommunications and outreach strategy to create awareness of the ICC'smission among communities and civil society in northern Uganda. Priority should be placed on better informing the affected population of themandate and scope of the ICC investigation, such as the fact that onlycrimes committed after July 2002 fall within its jurisdictionImmediately implement adequatewitness protection measures and ensure that all investigators working innorthern Uganda are properly trained to conduct their investigations whileminimizing the risk to victims and witnesses.Investigate crimes falling within the jurisdiction of theICC committed by all parties to the conflict, including the UPDF.To the Office of the High Commissioner for HumanRights:Ensure that the OHCHR presencein northern Uganda is sufficient to effectively monitor human rightsabuses committed by all parties to the conflict.Make the results ofinvestigations carried out by OHCHR monitors publicly available promptlyand periodically.OHCHR monitoring offices andstaff should carry out monitoring independently of the Uganda Human RightsCommission. OHCHR staff, however, should undertake efforts to strengthenthe capacity of national institutions, including the UHRC.Provide training and supportto national and local non-governmental human rights organizations based inKampala, Gulu and other parts of northern Uganda.Urge the Ugandan government to act in accordance with theGuiding Principles on Internal Displacement and relevant Ugandanregulations, particularly with respect to camp security and freedom ofmovement for internally displaced persons outside of camp confines.To the Uganda Human Rights Commission:Develop a plan with nongovernmental organizations anddonors for effective protection of internally displaced persons through stationingUHRC staff in camps to receive complaints of LRA and UPDF abuses.To the World Bank and the International DonorCommunity:Support programs that improvethe capabilities, particularly respect for basic rights, of the judiciary,the UHRC and the police in northern Uganda.Support programs for theprotection of displaced persons and for their voluntary return home indignity and safety.Support programs for nongovernmental organizations toeducate citizens of northern Uganda about their rights and procedures tofile complaints against government.To Humanitarian Organizations, OCHA (including theInter-Agency Internal Displacement Division of OCHA), UNICEF and the UN CountryTeam for Uganda:Establish effective inter-agency coordination mechanismsto assess, review, monitor and evaluate protection strategies in allinternally displaced persons camps throughout northern Uganda on an ongoing basis.To the Uganda Government (including the UPDF andUHRC), the Humanitarian Organizations, and the Donors:Ensure that individuals whoreceive complaints and reports of sexual and gender-based violence,whether they are community leaders, law enforcement officers orhumanitarian workers, be properly, extensively and repeatedly trained coveringa wide range of issues and best practices on such violence.Provide counseling services to victims, their families,and their communities, especially for victims of sexual and gender-basedviolence. Family and community counseling will improve acceptability andintegration of victims within their respective families and societies.AcknowledgmentsThe research for this report was conducted by AlexMoorehead, consultant to the Africa division; Jemera Rone, East Africacoordinator for the Africa division of Human Rights Watch; Peter Bouckaert, senior emergencies researcher at Human Rights Watch; and Eric Stover, Directorof the Human Rights Center and Adjunct Professor of Public Health, Universityof California, Berkeley. The report was written by Alex Moorehead and JemeraRone.It was edited by Jemera Rone; Georgette Gagnon, deputydirector of the Africa division; Richard Dicker, director of the internationaljustice program; Iain Levine, program director; and Eric Stover. James Ross, senior legal advisor, provided legal review. Research and editing assistance wasprovided by Nicholas Galletti, associate to the Africa division. Researchassistance was also provided by Muthee Kiunga and Katie Rowley, interns withthe international justice program and the Africa division, respectively.Nicholas Galletti, Andrea Holley, publications director, and Fitzroy Hepkins, mail manager, provided production assistance.We would like to thank The Sandler Family SupportingFoundation for the participation of Eric Stover in the research of this report.We would also like to acknowledge the John D. and CatherineT. MacArthur Foundation, which has made possible our work in northern Uganda.Human Rights Watch wishes to acknowledge with gratitude themany Ugandans who shared their experiences with us and the individuals andorganizations in and outside Uganda who provided invaluable support.[1]Full recommendations may be found at the end of the report.[2]See Gerard Prunier, "Rebel Movements and Proxy Warfare: Uganda, Sudan and the Congo (1986-99), African Affairs (London: 2004), 103/412, pp. 359-83.[3]See for example Frank Nyakairu, "Sudan still supporting LRA," The Monitor,Kampala, May 20, 2005. While enjoying the hospitality of the Sudanesegovernment, the LRA joined in fighting its enemies, the rebel Sudan People'sLiberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A).[4]Human Rights Watch, Abducted and Abused: Renewed War in Northern Uganda,June 15, 2003, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2003/uganda0703/uganda0703a-05.htm,See this report for more details on that displacement order and the militaryoperation that followed it.[5]Human Rights Watch, Abducted and Abused: Renewed War in Northern Uganda,June 15, 2003, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2003/uganda0703/uganda0703a-05.htm,quoting UN OCHA, "Humanitarian Update – Uganda," Vol. IV, Issue 2 , February28, 2002. (Some 508,400 internally displaced Ugandans in southwestern andnorthern Uganda presently reside in and around protected villages/IDP camps ona full or part-time basis.) Since early 2002, the number of internallydisplaced persons in northern Uganda has more than tripled.[6]Human Rights Watch, Abducted and Abused: Renewed War in Northern Uganda,June 15, 2003, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2003/uganda0703/uganda0703a-05.htm.[7]See Lucy Hovil and Zachary Lomo, Behind the Violence: Causes, Consequencesand the Search for Solutions to the War in northern Uganda (Kampala: Refugee Law Project, Makerere University, 2004), Institute for Security Studies,Monograph No. 99, http://www.iss.co.za/pubs/Monographs/No99/Contents.html(retrieved July 4, 2005).[8]See Human Rights Watch, Abducted and Abused: Renewed War in Northern Uganda, June 15, 2003, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2003/uganda0703/uganda0703a-05.htm; Sudan, Oil, and Human Rights, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2003/sudan1103/24.htm;"War Crimes in Kosovo," March 1999,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2001/kosovo/undword-03.htm (all retrieved July 20,2005).[9]Human Rights Watch interview with witness, Ogur camp, Apac District, April 8,2004.[10]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Kitgum Matidi camp, Kitgum, March 5,2005.[11]Human Rights Watch interview, SPLA Cmdr. Martin Kenyi, Rumbek, southern Sudan, July 16, 2005.[12]John Muto-Ono P'lajur, "Army saw Kony escape, says Iron Fist IntelligenceOfficer," The Monitor, Kampala, August 5, 2004.[13]"Ugandan minister says LRA decimated with fewer than 400," AFP, Kampala, February 15, 2005.[14]For an account of the larger Sudan-Uganda proxy wars, see Gerard Prunier,"Rebel Movements and Proxy Warfare: Uganda, Sudan and the Congo (1986-99), African Affairs (London: 2004), 103/412, pp. 359-83.[15]"The Comprehensive Peace Agreement between the Government of the Republic ofthe Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement / Sudan People'sLiberation Army, Nairobi, 9 January 2005". Institute for Security Studies, http://www.iss.org.za/AF/profiles/sudan/darfur/compax/index.htm(retrieved July 21, 2005).[16]Dr. John Garang de Mabior, "Address on Inauguration of the Sudan CollegiatePresidency," SPLMToday.com, Khartoum, July 9, 2005, http://www.splmtoday.com/myInc/downloads/speech09jul2005.pdf(retrieved July 21, 2005).[17]SPLM/A Press Statement, SPLM/A General Headquarters, Nairobi, Kenya, August 1, 2005.[18]Human Rights Watch interviews, SPLA Cmdr. Obuto Mamur, Rumbek, southern Sudan,July 16, 2005; SPLA Cmdr. Martin Kenyi, Rumbek, southern Sudan, July 16, 2005.[19]The UN reported that the LRA attacked a camp for displaced southern Sudaneseoutside of Juba, southern Sudan, on July 25, 2005, killing nine. "Uganda: Suspected LRA rebels kill 9 in southern Sudan camp," IRIN, Nairobi, July 28, 2005, http://www.irinnews.org/report.asp?ReportID=48338&SelectRegion=East_Africa&SelectCountry=SUDANUGANDA(retrieved August 8, 2005).[20]"Sudan-Uganda: Rebel attacks force thousands of Sudanese into Uganda," IRIN, Kampala, June 17, 2005, http://www.irinnews.org/report.asp?ReportID=47693&SelectRegion=East_Africa(retrieved June 24, 2005). The LRA has attacked Sudanese refugee camps innorthern Uganda over the years, causing hundreds of deaths. As a result, theSudanese refugee camps formerly in the three Acholi districts in northern Uganda have been relocated by the Ugandan government to northwestern Uganda. Southern Sudanese wholive in territory near LRA bases in southern Sudan (territory controlled by theSudanese government) have also been attacked, killed, robbed, tortured andforcibly displaced. Most Sudanese affected by the LRA are not Acholi, as thearea of LRA bases and operations in southern Sudan is shared by many differenttribes. The Sudanese Acholi do not share the views of the Ugandan Acholi in anyevent, according to Cmdr. Martin Kenyi.[21]Human Rights Watch interview, Cmdr. Obuto Mamur, SPLA, Rumbek, southern Sudan, July 16, 2005.[22]Annexure II of December 31, 2004, "Implementation Modalities of the Protocol onPower Sharing of 26 May, 2004 [to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement], signedNaivasha, Kenya, December 31, 2004, pp. 100-101, http://www.iss.org.za/AF/profiles/sudan/darfur/implementation31dec04.pdf(retrieved July 24, 2005). Except for the forces in joint units with the formerSPLA, the Sudanese government army forces are to be redeployed north of thenorth-south border by and within a time period running from the Pre-Interimperiod-beginning January 9, 2005-up to two and a half years from then, or byJuly 9, 2007.[23]UN Mission in Sudan, briefing, Rumbek, southern Sudan, July 13, 2005.[24]"Consolidated Appeals Process (CAP): Mid-Term Review of the Humanitarian Appeal2005 for Uganda," OCHA, Geneva, June 22, 2005,http://www.reliefweb.int/rw/RWB.NSF/db900SID/HSHU-6DL849?OpenDocument&rc=1&emid=ACOS-635PRQ&cc=uga.(retrieved July 24, 2005). Not all the displaced live in camps; some moved tothe towns.[25]Kun Li, "Children bear the brunt of Uganda's 19-year conflict," UNICEF, Kampala, March 23, 2005.[26]International Center for Transitional Justice and the Human Rights Center, University of California, Berkeley, "Forgotten Voices: A Population-Based Surveyon Attitudes About Peace and Justice in Northern Uganda" (July 2005).[27]"Humanitarian Aid to Africa Sadly Lacking, U.N. Official Warns," StateDepartment Press Releases and Documents, May 11, 2005.[28]All names of children have been changed to protect their privacy. The names ofadults who requested anonymity have been changed or omitted.[29]Four Geneva Conventions of 1949. Uganda ratified the 1949 Geneva Conventions in1964.[30]Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relatingto the Protection of Victims of Non-International Armed Conflicts (ProtocolII), June 8, 1977. Uganda ratified Protocol II in 1991. Protocol II prohibits,among other things, murder, torture and other cruel treatment, rape, acts ofterrorism, and pillage. Article 4.[31]See generally, International Committee of the Red Cross, CustomaryInternational Humanitarian Law (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2005).[32]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, G.A. res. 2200A (XXI), 21UN GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, UN Doc. A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, enteredinto force March 23, 1976. Uganda ratified the ICCPR in 1995.[33]African [Banjul] Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights, adopted June 27, 1981,OAU Doc. CAB/LEG/67/3 rev. 5, 21 I.L.M. 58 (1982), entered into force October21, 1986. Uganda ratified in charter in 1995.[34]Emmy Allio and Justin Moro, "LRA kills seven in Adjumani," New Vision, Kampala, March 11, 2005. The Adjumani district is northwest of Gulu district on the rightbank of the Nile, and also borders Sudan.[35]Daniel Wallis, "Rebels kill 19 in northern Uganda as attacks worsen," Reuters, Kampala, May 6, 2005.[36]"Uganda: LRA kills 14 in northern weekend ambush," IRIN, Kampala, July 11, 2005, http://www.irinnews.org/report.asp?ReportID=48065&SelectRegion=East_Africa&SelectCountry=UGANDA(retrieved August 8, 2005).[37]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Paicor camp, Gulu, February 27, 2005.[38]Human Rights Watch interview with victims, Kitgum, March 3, 2005.[39]Human Rights Watch interview, eyewitness, Agoro camp, Kitgum, March 3, 2005.[40]Starting at the village level (LC1), the local council system progresses upfrom the parish (LC2) to the subcounty (LC3), county (LC4), and district (LC5).The councilors are elected. The councils at the county and district level (LC4and LC5) are local government and have financial, legislative, andadministrative powers. The lower level councilors have administrative powersonly. The numbers of officials on each council depends on the population of thearea. See World Bank, "Module A: Decentralization Practices and Policies, CaseStudy Uganda," June 2003, http://info.worldbank.org/etools/docs/library/117196/sloga/docs/sloga/MODA-ENCaseStudyUganda.pdf(retrieved August 3, 2005).[41]Human Rights Watch interview, relative of victim, Paicho camp, February 27,2005.[42]Human Rights Watch interview, boy, Agoro camp, Kitgum, March 3, 2005.[43]Human Rights Watch interview, abductee, Agoro camp, Kitgum, March 3, 2005.[44]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Agoro camp, Kitgum, March 3, 2005.[45]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Kitgum Matidi camp, Kitgum, March 5,2005.[46]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Paicor camp, Gulu, February 27, 2005.[47]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Pabbo camp, Gulu, February 25, 2005.[48]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Pabbo camp, Gulu, February 25, 2005.[49]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Agoro camp, Kitgum, March 3, 2005.[50]Human Rights Watch interview, caregiver, Gulu, February 26, 2005.[51]Frank Nyakairu, "Guns forced Kolo out, says Museveni," The Monitor, Kampala, February 18, 2005.[52]Some of the ex-rebel commanders who since surrendered suggested that theseattacks may have been prompted by the LRA's desire to show that it is still aforce to be reckoned with. Kakaire A. Kirunda, "Kolo [former LRA commander]explains LRA attacks," The Monitor, Kampala, March 11, 2005.[53]Human Rights Watch interview with eight female victims, Kitgum Hospital, March 2, 2005.[54]Human Rights Watch interview, Robert B, Paicor camp, Gulu, February 27, 2005.[55]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Kitgum Matidi camp, Kitgum, March 5,2005.[56]Human Rights Watch interview, Dr. Okun Okaka, Kitgum town, March 7, 2005; forother instances of LRA fighters' fear of and reverence for Joseph Kony's"powers," see "Stolen Children: Abduction and Recruitment in Northern Uganda," HumanRights Watch Report, vol. 15, no. 7(A), March 2003.[57]Human Rights Watch interview, anonymous woman victim, Gulu, 2000.[58]OCHA, Humanitarian Update Uganda, February 2005, Volume VII, Issue II, http://www.reliefweb.int/rw/rwb.nsf/db900SID/DDAD-6AKPMP?OpenDocument&cc=uga(retrieved June 28, 2005), and OCHA, Humanitarian Update Uganda, March 2005, Volume VII, Issue III, http://www.reliefweb.int/rw/rwb.nsf/db900SID/EGUA-6BNKZ2?OpenDocument&cc=uga(retrieved June 28, 2005).[59]Human Rights Watch interview, Robert B, Paicor camp, Gulu, February 27, 2005.[60]Human Rights Watch interview, Winnie P, Agoro camp, Kitgum, March 3, 2005.[61]Human Rights Watch interview, former LRA child soldier, Agoro camp, Kitgum,March 3, 2005. He escaped the first opportunity he got, less than two monthsafter his capture.[62]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Paicor camp, Gulu, February 27, 2005.[63]When confronted with several killings committed by the UPDF in Awach and Cwerocamps, UPDF Col. Charles Awany Otema, military intelligence officer for thenorth and Operation Iron Fist, claimed that these were cases of "mistakenidentity." Human Rights Watch interview, Colonels Charles Awany Otema andNathan Mugisha, 4th Division Barracks, Gulu, March 16, 2005.[64]Statement of Ugandan government to Human Rights Watch Complaints, received byHuman Rights Watch on August 23, 2005. The UNLA is the former government army,the Uganda National Liberation Army, which was defeated in 1986 by the rebelforces of the NRA led by current president Yoweri Museveni; the UPDA, the UgandanPeople's Democratic Army, was a rebel formed in 1986 from the remnants of theUNLA (which included a majority of northerners).[65]Human Rights Watch interview, eyewitness, Pajimo camp, Kitgum, March 2, 2005.[66]Human Rights Watch interview, eyewitness, Pajimo camp, Kitgum, March 2, 2005.[67]Human Rights Watch interview, Charles B, Pabbo camp, Gulu, February 25, 2005.[68]Human Rights Watch interview, Charles B, Pabbo camp, Gulu, February 25, 2005.[69]Statement of Ugandan government to Human Rights Watch Complaints, received byHuman Rights Watch on August 23, 2005. The UNLA is the former government army,the Uganda National Liberation Army, which was defeated in 1986 by the rebelforces of the NRA led by current president Yoweri Museveni; the UPDA, the UgandanPeople's Democratic Army, was a rebel formed in 1986 from the remnants of theUNLA (which included a majority of northerners).[70]Human Rights Watch interview, Walter K, Awach camp, Gulu, February 28, 2005.[71]Human Rights Watch interview with witness, Cwero camp, Gulu, February 26, 2005.[72]Human Rights Watch interview, Emanuel G, Awach camp, Gulu, February 28, 2005.[73]Human Rights Watch interview, Local Councilor (LC) official, Cwero camp, Gulu,February 26, 2005.[74]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Cwero camp, Gulu, February 26, 2005.[75]Human Rights Watch interviews with witnesses, victim, Gulu, February 28 andMarch 15, 2005. See the discussion of the Uganda Human Rights Commission,below.[76]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Cwero camp, Gulu, February 26, 2005.[77]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Cwero camp, Gulu, February 26, 2005.[78]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Pabbo camp, Gulu, February 25, 2005.[79]Human Rights Watch interview, Patrick F, Paicor camp, Gulu, February 27, 2005.[80]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Pajimo camp, Kitgum, March 2, 2005.[81]UNICEF, "Suffering in Silence: A Study of Sexual and Gender Based Violence(SGBV) in Pabbo Camp, Gulu District, Northern Uganda," Gulu, Uganda, June 15,2005, http://www.unicef.org/media/files/SGBV.pdf (retrieved June 24, 2005).[82]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Amida camp, Gulu, March 6, 2005.[83]Human Rights Watch interview with witness, Bobi camp, Gulu, February 28, 2005.[84]Human Rights Watch interviews with victims, Kitgum Matidi camp, Kitgum, March5, 2005.[85]Human Rights Watch interview with victim's son, Kitgum Matidi camp, Kitgum,March 5, 2005.[86]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Pabbo camp, Gulu, February 25, 2005.[87]Human Rights Watch interview, victim, Pabbo camp, Gulu, February 25, 2005.[88]Human Rights Watch interview, victim, Pabbo camp, Gulu, February 25, 2005.[89]Human Rights Watch interview, community leader, Kitgum, March 7, 2005.[90]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Pabbo camp, Gulu, February 25, 2005.[91]Human Rights Watch interview, Colonels Charles Awany Otema and Nathan Mugisha,4th Division Barracks, Gulu, March 16, 2005.[92]See Human Rights Watch, State of Pain: Torture in Uganda (March 2004).[93]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, article 9 (1): "1.Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person. No one shall besubjected to arbitrary arrest or detention. No one shall be deprived of his libertyexcept on such grounds and in accordance with such procedure as are establishedby law." While this right may be suspended in time of "emergency whichthreatens the life of the nation" under article 4, no state of emergency hasbeen declared in Uganda or even in northern Uganda, and no effort has been madeto suspend these and related civil rights in the ICCPR or under Ugandan laws.[94]Human Rights Watch, State of Pain: Torture in Uganda (March 2004).[95]Human Rights Watch interview, Richard Mvule, District Superintendent of Police,Gulu District, Gulu, March 15, 2005.[96]Human Rights Watch, State of Pain: Torture in Uganda (March 2004).[97]Human Rights Watch interview, Richard Mvule, District Superintendent of Police,Gulu District, Gulu, March 15, 2005; Human Rights Watch interview, ColonelsCharles Awany Otema and Nathan Mugisha, 4th Division Barracks, Gulu, March 16,2005; see "Ugandan army arrests opposition politicians for alleged LRA collaboration,"AFP, Kampala, March 10, 2005.[98]The Ugandan Amnesty Act states in Section 3 (1):An Amnesty is declared inrespect of any Ugandan who has at any time since the 26th day of January, 1986engaged in or is engaging in war or armed rebellion against the government ofthe Republic of Uganda by-(a)actualparticipation in combat;(b)collaboratingwith the perpetrators of the war or armed rebellion;(c)committingany other crime in the furtherance of the war or armed rebellion; or(d)assistingor aiding the conduct or prosecution of the war or armed rebellion.Government of Uganda, The Amnesty Act, 2000, http://www.c-r.org/accord/uganda/accord11/downloads/2000_Jan_The_Amnesty_Act.doc(retrieved June 21, 2005).[99]Government of Uganda, The Amnesty Act, 2000, http://www.c-r.org/accord/uganda/accord11/downloads/2000_Jan_The_Amnesty_Act.doc(retrieved June 21, 2005).[100]Human Rights Watch interview, Justice Peter Onega, Head of the AmnestyCommission, Kampala, March 18, 2005.[101]See, e.g., Gerard Prunier, "Rebel Movements and Proxy Warfare: Uganda, Sudan and the Congo (1986-99)," African Affairs (London: 2004), 103/412, pp. 359-83.[102]For example, one international donor provided the funding for the package of4.2bn Ugandan shillings that was apportioned for returning UNRFII rebels in West Nile.[103]"Uganda receives fund from World Bank to be used for ex-rebels," Xinhua newsagency, Kampala, March 21, 2005.[104]"Uganda: Forgiveness as an instrument of peace," IRIN, Kitgum, June 9, 2005.http://www.irinnews.org/S_report.asp?ReportID=47575 (retrieved June 24, 2005).[105]"Uganda: Senior LRA commander captured by the army," IRIN, Kampala, July 15, 2004.[106]Dennis Ojwee, "Ex-LRA rebels start farming 500 acres in Gulu," New Vision,Kampala, April 26, 2005.[107]Human Rights Watch interview, Maj. Shaban Bantariza, Public Relations Officer,UPDF, Kampala, March 18, 2005.[108]Justin Moro, "Ex-rebel asks Acholi to support third term," New Vision, Kampala, July 26, 2004.[109]Wokorach Oboi, "Cancel 2006 polls - former rebels," New Vision, Kampala, April 21, 2005.[110]Human Rights Watch interview, program officers, international aid organization,Gulu, March 14, 2005.[111]Human Rights Watch interview, Justice Peter Onega, Head of the AmnestyCommission, Amnesty Commission offices, Kampala, March 18, 2005.[112]Allen, Tim, War and Justice in Northern Uganda: An Assessment of theInternational Criminal Court's Intervention (Draft), Crisis States ResearchCentre, London School of Economics, London, February 2005, p. 48,http://www.crisisstates.com/download/others/AllenICCReport.pdf (retrieved July4, 2005).[113]International Center for Transitional Justice and the Human Rights Center, University of California, Berkeley, "Forgotten Voices: A Population-Based Surveyon Attitudes About Peace and Justice in Northern Uganda" (July 2005).[114]Statement of Ugandan government to Human Rights Watch Complaints, received byHuman Rights Watch on August 23, 2005. The UNLA is the former government army,the Uganda National Liberation Army, which was defeated in 1986 by the rebelforces of the NRA led by current president Yoweri Museveni; the UPDA, the UgandanPeople's Democratic Army, was a rebel formed in 1986 from the remnants of theUNLA (which included a majority of northerners).[115]The LC1 is able to adjudicate certain minor disputes between community members.More serious cases, involving for example human rights abuses by the army,normally would be taken to the police to investigate. But with few exceptionsthere are no police in displaced persons camps in northern Uganda.[116]Courts martial are constituted as required at each barracks or division, butmore serious cases may be referred to the general court martial. These courtsmartial are supposedly open to the public but it seems that the localpopulation rarely attends the proceedings, perhaps from fear of going into thebarracks or lack of publicity about the hearing.[117]The defense review noted that under the UPDF Act of 1992, in effect at the timeof this research, even the smallest disciplinary matter, usually subject tosummary trial in other countries, must be taken to a formal court martial inUganda, which is cumbersome; backlogs develop as the courts martial have theirown problems, http://www.defenceuganda.mil.ug/court_martial.php (retrieved June20, 2005).[118]Human Rights Watch interview, camp leader, Paicor camp, Gulu, February 27,2005.[119]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Kitgum Matidi camp, Kitgum, March 5,2005.[120]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Kitgum Matidi camp, Kitgum, March 5,2005.[121]Human Rights Watch interview, James Onen, Project Officer, Justice and PeaceCommission, Kitgum town, March 7, 2005.[122]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Kitgum Matidi camp, Kitgum, March 5,2005.[123]Human Rights Watch interview, Paicor camp, Gulu, February 27, 2005.[124]Human Rights Watch interview, Bobi camp, Gulu, February 28, 2005.[125]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Paicor camp, Gulu, February 27, 2005.[126]Human Rights Watch interview with woman victim, Pabbo camp, Gulu, February 25,2005.[127]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Pabbo camp, Gulu, February 25, 2005.[128]Human Rights Watch interview with vendor, Paicor camp, Gulu, February 27, 2005.[129]Human Rights Watch interview with witness, Paicor camp, Gulu, February 27,2005.[130]Human Rights Watch interview with young man, Pabbo camp, Gulu, February 25,2005.[131]"Mobile" means that it would be involved in active patrolling operations ratherthan camp protection.[132]Human Rights Watch interview with Grace Atim, Information, Counseling and LegalAid Officer, Norwegian Refugee Council, Kitgum, March 1, 2005.[133]Human Rights Watch interview with witness, Pajule camp, Pader, March 4, 2005.[134]Human Rights Watch interview with witness, Cwero camp, Gulu, February 26, 2005.[135]Human Rights Watch interview with witness, Cwero camp, Gulu, February 26, 2005.[136]Human Rights Watch interview, James Onen, Project Officer, Justice and PeaceCommission, Kitgum town, March 7, 2005.[137]Human Rights Watch interview, Severino Okello, Cwero camp, Gulu, February 26,2005.[138]Statement of Ugandan government to Human Rights Watch Complaints, received byHuman Rights Watch on August 23, 2005. The UNLA is the former government army,the Uganda National Liberation Army, which was defeated in 1986 by the rebelforces of the NRA led by current president Yoweri Museveni; the UPDA, the UgandanPeople's Democratic Army, was a rebel formed in 1986 from the remnants of theUNLA (which included a majority of northerners).[139]Human Rights Watch interview with hunter, Cwero camp, Gulu, February 26, 2005.[140]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Cwero camp, Gulu, February 26, 2005.[141]Human Rights Watch interview with witness, Agoro camp, Gulu, March 3, 2005.[142]Human Rights Watch interview with woman, Paicor camp, Gulu, February 27, 2005.[143]Human Rights Watch interviews with victims, Kitgum Matidi camp, Kitgum, March5, 2005.[144]S. 21 Police Act 1994 Cap. 303, Statute 13/1994.[145]Human Rights Watch interview, Richard Mvule, District Superintendent of Police,Gulu District, Gulu, March 15, 2005.[146]Human Rights Watch interview, Richard Mvule, District Superintendent of Police,Gulu District, Gulu, March 15, 2005.[147]Human Rights Watch interview, Richard Mvule, District Superintendent of Police,Gulu District, Gulu, March 15, 2005.[148]The budget for 2005/05, which was under debate as of the writing of thisreport, would be funded by donors at a somewhat lower level, estimated at 40percent.[149]Okodan Akwapt, "Uganda Military Allocated $200m as Donors Protest," The EastAfrican, Nairobi, June 20, 2005.[150]A new High Court was established in West Nile districts, which removed some ofthe burden and backlog from the Gulu High Court. One of two judges who sat onthe High Court in Gulu, however, was transferred to the new High Court, leavingthe Gulu High Court with only one judge. Then that one fell ill. Human RightsWatch interview, Justice Peter Onega, Head of the Amnesty Commission, AmnestyCommission offices, Kampala, March 18, 2005.[151]Human Rights Watch interview, Justice Peter Onega, Head of the AmnestyCommission, Amnesty Commission offices, Kampala, March 18, 2005. Justice Onegarecused himself from hearing any cases of treason or terrorism in the HighCourt, however, on the grounds that he might later receive such cases at the AmnestyCommission.[152]Human Rights Watch interview, Odoki Okello Gorreti, Information and Counselingofficer, HURIFO, Gulu, February 28, 2005.[153]Human Rights Watch interview with camp resident, Bobi camp, Gulu, February 28,2005.[154]Human Rights Watch interview with camp resident, Bobi camp, Gulu, February 28,2005.[155]Martin Komakech, "The Northern Uganda Conflict, Civil Society Initiatives andInterventions, and Human Rights Focus (HURIFO) Operations in theConflict-Zone," HURIFO, November 14, 2003, http://www.armedgroups.org/images/stories/pdfs/komakech_paper3.pdf(retrieved June 21, 2005).[156]Human Rights Watch interview, Norwegian Refugee Council, Kitgum, March 1, 2005.[157]Uganda constitution, articles 51 and 58.[158]See Uganda Human Rights Commission, announcement, "Training of TrainersWorkshop, 25 April-6 May, 2005," http://www.uhrc.org/new_detail.php?storyId=96(retrieved August 24, 2005), for sixty-five participants, including politicalcommissars, intelligence and administrative officers of the UPDF.[159]Uganda Constitution, article 53 (1-2).[160]The UHRC has avoided speaking out forcefully about some contentious issues,such as the full scope of abuses committed by the UPDF in the DemocraticRepublic of Congo, and of human rights violations committed in the 2001presidential and parliamentary elections.[161]The UHRC has nevertheless issued decisions and reached conclusions critical ofthe government, particularly regarding torture and police brutality. .See UHRC,6th Annual Report, November 2003 Chapter 2 at http://www.uhrc.org/publications.php(retrieved June 24, 2005).[162]UN Committee Against Torture, "Draft Conclusions and Recommendations of theCommittee against Torture: Uganda," Consideration of Reports Submitted byStates Parties under Article 19 of the Convention, Advanced Unedited Version,CAT/CO/34/UGA. Also see Human Rights Watch and Foundation for Human RightsInitiative's submission to the Committee, "Concerns regarding Torture and otherCruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in Uganda," May 2005, http://hrw.org/backgrounder/africa/uganda0505/index.htm.[163]Human Rights Watch interview, Ogwal, Regional Human Rights Officer, UgandaHuman Rights Commission, Gulu office, Gulu, March 1, 2005.[164]Some commissioners already have heavy travel schedules that take them to otherUHRC offices throughout Uganda.[165]Human Rights Watch interview, Francis Ogwal, Regional Human Rights Officer,Uganda Human Rights Commission, Gulu office, Gulu, March 1, 2005.[166]Uganda Human Rights Commission, 6th Annual Report, November 2003 (Kampala: UHRC, 2003), p.48, table 5.5. It is not clear how many of the one hundred aresenior staff.[167]See for example, "Uganda: ICC jeopardising local peace efforts – northernleaders," IRIN, Gulu, March 25, 2005.[168]The ICC does not issue indictments. The Office of the Prosecutor seeks arrestwarrants from the Pre-Trial Chamber.[169]This delegation included a member of parliament who has been a supporter of theICC and its ratification by Uganda, MP Jacob Oulanyah, representing a mostlyAcholi district in northern Uganda. Human Rights Watch interview, MP JacobOulanyah, Kampala, March 21, 2005.[170]See "Joint Statement by ICC Chief Prosecutor and the visiting Delegation ofLango, Acholi, Iteso and Madi Community Leaders from Northern Uganda," TheHague, April 16, 2005, http://www.icccpi.int/press/pressreleases/102.html(retrieved June 23, 2005).[171]Human Rights Watch interview, MP Jacob Oulanyah, Kampala, March 21, 2005.[172]President Museveni told IRIN on June 9, 2005, "The involvement of theICC in hunting Kony is very important, mainly because it enables us to dealwith Khartoum. Khartoum is fully aware of the consequences of dealing withsomebody under the ICC's indictment. If Kony is in Uganda or in the areas of Sudan where Khartoum has allowed us to operate, then we do not need assistance - we shall catch himourselves. But if Kony goes deeper into Sudan, beyond where Sudan has allowed us to pursue him, we need the ICC's assistance to get the Sudanesegovernment to cooperate with us and help us to get him. That is why we need theICC." "Uganda: Interview with President Yoweri Museveni," IRIN, Kampala, June 9, 2005, http://www.irinnews.org/S_report.asp?ReportID=47569 (retrieved June24, 2005).[173]"Uganda: Interview with ICC prosecutor Louis Moreno-Ocampo," IRIN, Nairobi, June 9, 2005, http://www.irinnews.org/S_report.asp?ReportID=47572 (retrieved June23, 2005).[174]"There are no atrocities committed by our soldiers. If there are atrocitiescommitted, we punish them ourselves - the evidence of that is plenty. We haveexecuted soldiers for killing people. But I would not mind if the ICC wanted toinvestigate [the Ugandan army]. They are more than welcome," "Uganda: Interview with President Yoweri Museveni," IRIN, Kampala, June 9, 2005, http://www.irinnews.org/S_report.asp?ReportID=47569(retrieved June 24, 2005).[175]Human Rights Watch interview, witness, West Ocetoke, Kitgum district, Uganda, April 3, 2004.[176]Emmy Allio, "Norwegian Joins Bigombe in Peace Process," New Vision, Kampala, May 25, 2005.[177]Daniel Wallis, "Court probe undermines Uganda peace moves – mediators,"Reuters, Gulu, February 22, 2005.[178]See, e.g., Refugee Law Project, Working Paper No. 15, "Whose Justice?Perceptions of Uganda's Amnesty Act 2000: the Potential for Conflict Resolutionand Long-Term Reconciliation," Kampala, February 2005, http://www.refugeelawproject.org/papers/workingpapers/RLP.WP15.pdf(retrieved June 24, 2005).[179]Human Rights Watch interview, Prof. Tim Allen (London School of Economics),Kampala, March 9, 2005; Tim Allen, War and Justice in Northern Uganda: AnAssessment of the International Criminal Court's Intervention (Draft),Crisis States Research Centre, London School of Economics, London, February2005, http://www.crisisstates.com/download/others/AllenICCReport.pdf (retrievedJuly 4, 2005).[180]Human Rights Watch interviews with victims, Gulu, Kitgum and Pader districts,February 25-March 7, 2005.[181]Human Rights Watch interview, activist, Kampala, March 23, 2005.[182]International Center for Transitional Justice and the Human Rights Center, University of California, Berkeley, "Forgotten Voices: A Population-Based Surveyon Attitudes About Peace and Justice in Northern Uganda" (July 2005), pp. 4-5.[183]Tim Allen, War and Justice in Northern Uganda: An Assessment of theInternational Criminal Court's Intervention (Draft), Crisis States ResearchCentre, London School of Economics, London, February 2005, p. 48,http://www.crisisstates.com/download/others/AllenICCReport.pdf (retrieved July4, 2005).[184]"Consolidated Appeals Process (CAP): Mid-Term Review of the Humanitarian Appeal2005 for Uganda," OCHA, Geneva, June 22, 2005, http://www.reliefweb.int/rw/RWB.NSF/db900SID/HSHU-6DL849?OpenDocument&rc=1&emid=ACOS-635PRQ&cc=uga.(retrieved July 24, 2005).[185]Human Rights Watch interview with woman farmer, Paicor camp, Gulu, February 27,2005.[186]Human Rights Watch interview, Pajule camp, Pader, March 4, 2005.[187]"War in northern Uganda world's worst forgotten crisis: UN," AFP, Nairobi, November 11, 2003.[188]For more information on the phenomenon of children who become "night commuters"in northern Uganda, see Human Rights Watch, Abducted and Abused: Renewed Warin Northern Uganda, June 15, 2003, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2003/uganda0703/uganda0703a-05.htm,pp. 68-70.[189]OCHA, Inter-Agency Internal Displacement Division Mission Report, Uganda, November 29-December 7, 2004, http://www.reliefweb.int/internally displacedpersons/docs/reports.htm (retrieved June 22, 2005).[190]Protocol II provide that persons who are deprived of their liberty for reasonsrelated to the armed conflict "shall, if made to work, have the benefit ofworking conditions and safeguards similar to those enjoyed by the localcivilian population." Art. 5(1)(e). See also, ICRC, Customary InternationalHumanitarian Law, vol. 1, pp. 330-332.[191]See ICRC, Customary International Humanitarian Law, vol. 1, pp. 68-71.[192]"The ICRC and internally displaced persons," International Review of the RedCross, no. 305, April 30, 1995, pp.181-91, http://www.icrc.org/Web/Eng/siteeng0.nsf/iwpList74/7DD0CC08E02E3914C1256B660059344F(retrieved July 20, 2005).[193]UN Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, (contained in the annex ofdocument E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2 dated 11/02/1998), Office of the HighCommissioner for Human Rights http://www.unhchr.ch/Huridocda/Huridoca.nsf/0/d2e008c61b70263ec125661e0036f36e?Opendocument.[194]Ibid.[195]"The ICRC and internally displaced persons," International Review of the RedCross, no. 305, April 30, 1995, pp.181-91, http://www.icrc.org/Web/Eng/siteeng0.nsf/iwpList74/7DD0CC08E02E3914C1256B660059344F(retrieved July 20, 2005).[196]"The ICRC and internally displaced persons," International Review of the RedCross, no. 305, April 30, 1995, pp.181-91, http://www.icrc.org/Web/Eng/siteeng0.nsf/iwpList74/7DD0CC08E02E3914C1256B660059344F(retrieved July 20, 2005). "Article 3 common to the four Geneva Conventionsforbids parties to a conflict to have recourse to discriminatory treatmentfounded on 'race, colour, religion or faith, sex, birth or wealth, or any othersimilar criteria'."[197]Jean-Philippe Lavoyer, "Refugees and internally displaced persons:International humanitarian law and the role of the ICRC," International Reviewof the Red Cross, no. 305, April 30, 1995, pp.162-180, http://www.icrc.org/Web/Eng/siteeng0.nsf/iwpList74/506EC37C76B53993C1256B66005934DE(retrieved July 20, 2005).[198]See Human Rights Watch, Abducted and Abused: Renewed War in Northern Uganda,June 15, 2003, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2003/uganda0703/uganda0703a-05.htm; Sudan, Oil, and Human Rights, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2003/sudan1103/24.htm; "War Crimesin Kosovo," March 1999, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2001/kosovo/undword-03.htm(all retrieved July 20, 2005).[199]Protocol II, article 17.[200]Daniel Wallis, "Rebels kill 19 in northern Uganda as attacks worsen," Reuters,Kampala, May 6, 2005.[201]OCHA Humanitarian Update Uganda, May 2004, Vol. VI, Issue V, June 23, 2004, http://www.reliefweb.int/rw/rwb.nsf/db900SID/SKAR-628DB2?OpenDocument(retrieved June 28, 2005).[202]Human Rights Watch interviews, Ogur camp, Lira district, April 8, 2004.[203]Julius Mucinguzi, "LDUs replace ghost soldiers"' New Vision, Kampala, July 28,2004.[204]Emmy Allio and Dennis Ocwich, "Army, MPs clash over militias," New Vision,Kampala, July 5, 2004. Human Rights Watch interview, Ronald Reagan Okumu, MPfor Aswa county, Kampala, March 22, 2005. These two MPs were released on bailafter being charged in 2005 with the death of a pro-government politician in2002. On the arrests, see Human Rights Watch press release, "Uganda: Key Opposition MPs Arrested," New York, April 27, 2005,http://hrw.org/english/docs/2005/04/27/uganda10548.htm (retrieved August 4,2005).[205]Julius N. Uma, "UPDF integrity questioned ahead of UN peacekeeping mission," TheMonitor, Kampala, May 6, 2005.Region / CountryAfrica,UgandaProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch