"No Blood, No Foul": Soldiers' Accounts of Detainee Abuse in Iraq | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsus0706arwebwcover.pdfDownload this reportSearchDonate NowSearchDownloadsus0706arwebwcover.pdfDownload this reportJuly 22, 2006"No Blood, No Foul"Soldiers' Accounts of Detainee Abuse in IraqAvailable InEnglishالعربية"No Blood, No Foul"Soldiers' Accounts of Detainee Abuse in IraqSummaryRecommendationsSoldiers' AccountsI. TaskForce 20/121/6-26/145 Camp Nama, BaghdadII. ForwardOperating Base "Tiger," near al Qaim, Iraq.III. Mosul:Camp Diamondback/Camp GloryLegal StandardsConclusionsAcknowledgmentsSummaryI pulled the guy out[an E6 interrogator, and said]: "I looked-I looked this stuff up and this isnot the way it's supposed to be," you know? He was like, "This is the directivewe had. You need to go ahead and drop this, sergeant." You know, and heoutranked me. "Drop this sergeant," [he said]. It was repeatedly emphasized tome that this was not a wise course of action to pursue . . . It was blown off,but it was a little more stern: "You don't want to take this inquiry anywhereelse," kind of thing. "You should definitely drop this; this is not somethingyou wanna do to yourself."-U.S.Army M.P. Sergeant stationed at Forward Operating Base Tiger, al Qaim, Iraq,in 2003, describing his efforts to complain about detainee abuse.I was very annoyedwith them because they were saying things like we didn't have to abide by the Geneva Conventions,because these people weren't POWs. . . . [T]hey're enemy combatants, they'renot POWs, and so we can do all this stuff to them and so forth. . . . It justwent against everything we learned at Huachuca.-MilitaryIntelligence Interrogator attached to a secretive task force stationed at CampNama, atBaghdad airport in Iraq, describing a briefing bymilitary lawyers in early 2004 after soldiers raised concerns about abusiveinterrogation methods.U.S. forceshave now been deployed in Iraqfor over three years. During this time, tens of thousands of Iraqis have beenarrested, detained, and interrogated by U.S. personnel. Many of thedetainees-held at Forward Operating Bases (FOBs) or at central detentioncenters such as Abu Ghraib prison, CampCropper, and CampBucca-havebeen interrogated by personnel from U.S. Military Intelligence (MI) or theCentral Intelligence Agency (CIA). While some detainees have been insurgents, othershave been innocent civilians caught up in U.S. military operations, in the wrongplace at the wrong time.There is mounting evidence to show that many detainees havebeen abused. The Abu Ghraib scandal, which broke in April 2004, brought theissue of detainee abuse to the world's attention, but it is now clear that thescope of the problem is far broader than was known at the time. Since 2003, HumanRights Watch has reviewed hundreds of credible allegations of serious mistreatmentand torture of detainees in U.S.custody. Alleged abuses have taken place in locations all over Iraq, in bothFOBs and centralized facilities, and have involved CIA agents, military interrogators,MP guards, and ordinary combat soldiers. Abuses have also been alleged indetention facilities in Afghanistanand at GuantanamoBay, where smallernumbers of detainees are held. In many cases, it has taken years for abuses tocome to light.This report is based largely on firsthand accounts by U.S. military personnel stationed in Iraq, and describes abuses that took place inthree separate locations in Iraqin 2003-2005. Many of the accounts are from soldiers who witnessed and in somecases participated in the abuses. First, the report discusses incidents involvinga special military and CIA task force based at CampNama, near Baghdad, in 2003-2004, and near Balad in2004-2005. Second, the report describes abuses in 2003-2004 at a ForwardOperating Base on the Syrian border, called FOB Tiger. Third, the reportdetails abuses in 2004 at detention facilities at the Mosul airport. The military's owninvestigations and reports by journalists and other observers support many ofthe accounts, and provide further details from soldiers about abuses at thesefacilities, including abuses in 2005.In all three locations, soldiers witnessed seriously abusivetreatment and interrogation of detainees, including beatings, psychological tortureof varying kinds, and other physical torture and mistreatment. At CampNama,for instance, detainees were regularly stripped naked, subjected to sleepdeprivation and extreme cold, placed in painful stress positions, and beaten. AtFOB Tiger, they were held without food or water for over 24 hours at a time, intemperatures sometimes exceeding 135 degrees Fahrenheit, and then taken intointerrogations where they were beaten and subjected to threats. At Mosul,detainees were regularly subject to extreme sleep deprivation, exposure toextreme cold, forced exercises, and were threatened with military guard dogs.In all three locations, the abuses appear to have been partof a regularized process of detainee abuse-"standard operating procedure," inthe words of some of the soldiers.The accounts in this report provide compelling new evidencethat detainee abuse was an established and apparently authorized part of thedetention and interrogation processes in Iraq for much of 2003-2005. The accountsalso suggest that U.S.military personnel who felt the practices were wrong and illegal have facedsignificant obstacles at every turn when they attempted to report or expose theabuses.One military interrogator, cited at the beginning of thisreport, described to Human Rights Watch what happened when he and other colleaguescomplained about abuses to the colonel on duty: "a team of two JAG officers,JAG lawyers, came and gave us a couple hours slide show on why this isnecessary, why this is legal, they're enemy combatants, they're not POWs, andso we can do all this stuff to them and so forth." After that presentation, theinterrogator said, the abuses continued, but he and the others who were unhappywith the situation felt that they had nowhere else to turn. As far as he knew,no other reporting mechanism existed. "That was it, case closed," he explained. "There was nobodyelse to talk to."Many of the soldiers who have spoken with Human Rights Watchabout detainee abuse have voiced anger at the way their concerns and complaintswere dismissed, and said that they decided to speak publicly because they wereconcerned about the systemic problems that made reporting abuse so difficult.*** **The military and the Bush Administration appear to be indenial. Both have consistently portrayed abuse cases from Iraq as exceptionaland perpetrators as lone and independent actors-"rotten apples"-despiteevidence that Military Intelligence officers and higher-echelon military andcivilian leaders knew about or may even have authorized abusive techniques thatwere used against detainees. Such sweeping denials, and the military's generalfailure to place any blame on leadership for abuses that occurred, havehindered candid assessments about the detainee abuse problem.Take, for example, the role of U.S. Military Intelligence(MI) in formulating and executing interrogation and detention policy in Iraq. There areclear indications that MI battalions systematized the use of abusive techniquesin Iraqin 2003 and 2004, and that MI interrogators-including officers-are implicatedin the widespread abuses that occurred during that time. As detailed in thisreport, internal military documents and soldiers' own accounts show that MIinterrogators were using abusive tactics through much of 2003-2005; and thatfor much of this time these tactics were authorized by officers up the chain ofcommand. Yet to date, no military intelligence officers who have served in Iraqhave been charged with any criminal acts, either as a principal or under thedoctrine of command responsibility. The few courts-martial that have occurredin relation to detainee abuse in Iraq have primarily involvedmilitary police, most of whom have claimed in courts-martial that they wereordered or authorized by military intelligence interrogators to use the tacticsthey were charged with.Notably, Gen. Barbara Fast, the chief of militaryintelligence in Iraq duringthe period of the most serious abuses-late 2003 through 2004-has since beenpromoted for her work in Iraq.She is now the commander of the ArmyIntelligenceCenter, the U.S. Army'sinterrogation school at Fort Huachuca,Arizona.CIA personnel have also gone unpunished. Several homicidecases, involving detainees who died while being interrogated by the CIA, werereferred to the Department of Justice for prosecution in 2004 and 2005, yet todate not one CIA agent has been charged. Human Rights Watch has repeatedlyurged Justice Department officials to move forward with the investigation andprosecution of civilian personnel implicated in abuses, but as of June 2006only a single civilian contractor had been indicted, for a case from Afghanistan. And there are others who have escapedinvestigation as well-for instance, military Judge Advocate Generals, SpecialForces personnel, and civilian leadership in the Department of Defense.Human Rights Watch is aware that U.S.forces in Iraqare fighting armed groups who themselves have shown little willingness to abideby international humanitarian law. As Human Rights Watch has detailed inprevious reports, Iraqi insurgent groups routinely violate internationalhumanitarian law, carrying out abductions and attacks against civilians andhumanitarian aid workers, and detonating hundreds of bombs in bazaars, mosques,and other civilian areas. Human Rights Watch has previously stated that thoseresponsible for violations, including the leaders of these groups, should, ifcaptured, be investigated and prosecuted for violations of Iraqi law and thelaws of war.But the activities of these groups are no excuse for U.S.violations. Abuses by one party to a conflict, no matter how egregious, do not justifyviolations by the other side. This is a fundamental principle of internationalhumanitarian law.RecommendationsThe U.S.government has refused to acknowledge the systemic nature of the problem ofdetainee abuse in Iraqsince 2003, and done little to address the underlying problems that have led toabuse.It is time for the Bush Administration to admit that therehas been no real accountability for detainee abuses. It is time for militaryand CIA leaders to acknowledge that serious and systemic abuse has occurred,and recognize the weakness of their internal reporting procedures. It is timefor the U.S. Congress to get serious about oversight on these issues, and workto ensure that systemic flaws are corrected and that criminal conduct is adequatelyinvestigated and punished, both now and in the future.Human Rights Watch makes the following recommendations:Congress should appoint an independentbipartisan commission to investigate the scope of current and past detaineeabuses, identify the involvement of military and civilian officials inauthorizing and allowing abusive interrogation techniques, and determine whymilitary and civilian leaders who are implicated in abuse have not been heldaccountable.Congress should also re-open hearings ondetention abuse issues, to address the same issues as above.Congress should push the President to appointindependent prosecutors-in the military and Justice Department-to investigateand prosecute detainee abuse cases, focusing not only on abusive interrogatorsand guards, but also on military and civilian leaders who authorized orcondoned abuse.The U.S. military and CIA shouldidentify institutional flaws that make it difficult for personnel to complainabout illegal conduct and report crimes and abuses being committed bypersonnel, and remedy those flaws.The Secretary of Defense should appoint a panel ofhigh-level members of the various Judge Advocate General Corps to considerreforms in the criminal justice system of the U.S. military, to increase thepower and independence of military criminal investigators, and to removeinstitutional obstacles that make it difficult for personnel to report abuse.The Attorney-General should work with theSecretary of Defense, the National Director of Intelligence and the Director ofthe Central Intelligence Agency to revise procedures and protocols forinvestigating and prosecuting cases of abuse by non-military personnel.Soldiers' AccountsI. Task Force 20/121/6-26/145 CampNama,BaghdadSome of the most serious allegations of detainee abuse in Iraq since2003 have concerned a special military and CIA task force-known at varioustimes as Task Force 20, Task Force 121, Task Force 6-26, and Task Force 145-chargedwith capturing or killing high-level combatants.[1]Its targets have included Saddam Hussein and Abu Musab Al-Zarqawi, but also hundreds of anonymous,and often innocent, detainees. Through most of 2003 and 2004, the task forcemaintained a detention and interrogation facility within CampNama, at the BaghdadInternationalAirport (often called"BIAP").The camp was off-limits to theInternational Committee of the Red Cross, as well as ordinary military personnel.[2] Thetask force moved to another location near Balad in the summer of 2004, and alsoreportedly maintains outposts in or near Fallujah, Ramadi and Kirkuk.As described in more detail below, from 2003 to the present,numerous U.S. personnel and Iraqi detainees have reported serious mistreatmentof detainees by the special task force, including beatings, exposure to extremecold, threats of death, humiliation, and various forms of psychological abuseor torture. Many of these allegations have been contained in documents releasedto the American Civil Liberties Union and other human rights groups pursuant toFreedom of Information Act litigation. Human Rights Watch has also spoken toseveral veterans and government officials about the task force's abuses.The account below provides new information about the dailyroutine at CampNama, including details about how thecamp was set up, and about how interrogators used abusive techniques ondetainees. The account also contains details about how abusive treatment was aregular part of interrogations there, for instance, interrogators used an"authorization template" on computers at Nama, on which interrogators wouldcheck-off the harsh methods they intended to use on detainees. The account alsodetails how the military leadership at the camp dealt with soldiers whoexpressed their discomfort with the methods then in regular use.*****CampNamaSergeant "Jeff Perry"[3]was an interrogator with the special task force at CampNamaduring the first half of 2004. He told Human Rights Watch about his experiencesthere, about abuses he saw, and about his efforts to report the abuses.Jeff described how he came to join the task force and how itwas set up:At the time I didn't know exactly what BIAP was, but itwas intriguing to work with them and so forth. It was kind of like a high-speedjob and [we were told] we would be doing something important. . . they wantedpeople who spoke Arabic. . . . that's why we were chosen first off.My chain of command was-well, I didn't have any contactwith my normal uniformed battalion. [Task Force 121/6-26] was my new chain ofcommand for several months. It was pretty loose as far as chain of commandgoes. There was no rank within the task force. There was no rank as far as teammember or interrogative analyst and so forth. Everybody was in civilianclothes. There was no rank. That's the way they wanted it. They had us, youknow, [for] input and expertise and so forth. It worked better that way. Youdidn't have to worry about sucking up to whoever and pleasing this person orthat person. But there was a sergeant major there who was in charge ofeverything, and there was also a commander who was at one point a captain 03["03" refers to the Department of Defense rank of captain] and then next timean 06 [a colonel]. So they were actually in charge of this. Later on there wasa senior interrogator who was a CW-5 [Chief Warrant Officer level five-a seniorenlisted officer].Jeff said that personnel at the facility only used theirfirst names, and that he rarely learned anyone's family name:We called the colonel by his first name, called the sergeantmajor by his first name. . . . I couldn't tell you the sergeant major's lastname if I tried. Same with the colonel. A lot of my fellow interrogators, Ididn't know their last names either. Some I did, 'cause I knew them fromHuachuca [the U.S. militaryinterrogation school in Arizona].But yeah, when you asked somebody their name they don't offer up the last name.. . . The consensus was, more often than not, when they gave you their name itprobably wasn't their real name anyway.Jeff said that most of the task force was comprised of U.S.military special forces and CIA personnel, and most were highly secretive abouttheir identity:The people who were involved with that task force werejust kind of brought up within that organization to be very secretive about notdisclosing any kind of information. Some of them used their real name, theysaid, and some of them used something else. Some of these guys had differentjobs rather than this specific task force within their organization, so theymight do some clandestine work or something. . . . [There were] special forces.. . out of FortBragg. A loose chain of command. They goall over, and then they bring them back into the fold and they work in Afghanistan and Iraq and other places. They're verymobile, they're able to pick up and go. Highly mobile.Jeff said the CIA personnel were mostly situated in a nearbybuilding, and that CIA personnel would often take part in field operations (inwhich detainees were captured) and interrogations at the facility at NAMA.Jeff described the interrogation facility at NAMA as "anormal-sized building, maybe even a small building," with five interrogationrooms: the black room, the blue room, the red room [also known as the woodroom], the soft room, and the medical screening room (reportedly the same roomused for the initial medical screening of Saddam Hussein immediately after hiscapture; parts of the video footage of the screening were televisedinternationally). Jeff said detainees were also taken outside the building forinterrogations, into a courtyard between that building and another one.Jeff described the black room, where the harshestinterrogations would take place:The black room was 12 by 12 [feet]. It was painted blackfloor to ceiling. The door was black, everything was black. It had speakers inthe corners, all four corners, up at the ceiling. It had a small table in oneof the corners, and maybe some chairs. But usually in the black room nobody wassitting down. It was standing, stress positions, and so forth. The table wouldbe for the boom box and the computer. We patched it into the speakers and madethe noise and stuff.Most of the harsh interrogations were in that room. . . .Sleep deprivation, environmental controls, hot and cold, water. . . . I neversaw anybody who was hot, you know, but it was cold a lot of times or we usedcold water, we poured cold water onto them. [Certain times interrogators would]take clothes from the prisoners and so forth. . . loud music, strobe lights-theywere used as well.Jeff said that some interrogators would beat detainees inthe black room-hitting and kicking them during interrogations.The other two rooms used for interrogation were the blueroom and the red room (also called the wood room). As Jeff described them:The blue room is more of a rectangle. It was right nextto the wood room so these would look the same, only the blue room was paintedblue and the wood is just wood finish on plywood. And so they were the exactsame size. They were about 6 by 10. A lot of times they [the interrogators] justsat down and talked to them and there was normal interrogations, you know, likedown or up [referring to different legal interrogation techniques], or "love offamily,' or so forth. Whatever. They were just talking to them. Become theirfriend or whatever, just sitting down. If it's not a harsh interrogation, youfree up the backlog for that type of interrogation. And so you're just talkingto them and so forth, you know? So that's what that was. Just a table in themiddle, you'd sit on each side, and you'd have a chair for your interpreter. .. .If interrogators wanted to show respect to a detainee whowas cooperating, or needed to interview a cooperating intelligence sourcebrought on base, they would use the "soft room." The soft room was a littlenicer. It was smaller than the other rooms, but they had some nice rugs, a backrow of couches, prayer rugs hanging on the wall. Sometimes we had tea in there,teacups and so forth and you'd offer them soda or water. A nice little table inthe middle. Three or four black leather chairs. We would bring people in therewho we wanted to show respect to or show deference, maybe an ex-colonel orgeneral in the Iraqi Army, somebody important or somebody who we thought we'dget more information by being nice to him.Jeff said detainees would be taken from one room intoanother, depending on the level of their cooperation:We would do that to show him if you tell us what we wantto hear, then this is the treatment that you'll get [the soft room]. If youdon't, then this is the treatment that you'll get [the black room]. So therewas a lot of that, going back and forth between the rooms.Human Rights Watch asked about how detainees were chosen tobe placed in the black room, where the harshest techniques were used. As Jeffexplained:It depends on what the [detainee's] status is coming infrom their target reporting. O.K., when they come in, for whatever reason theywere chosen to get rounded up in the first place-sometimes it's just the wrongguy or whatever, but that's neither here nor there. If it's the right guy, ifwe think it's the right guy, and it's kind of a higher-value type of target orsomebody who can push us further into the circle, as they said-you have acircle, and Zarqawi's in the middle, and lieutenants and so forth, like it wasan onion-and if he can push us further into the circle, and we didn't thinkthat we couldn't get past through normal methods or a normal type of approachin interrogation-then they would want to go hard on them. . . .The senior interrogator-the interrogation leader [atNama], who was actually a lieutenant in the Air Force, I believe-he usuallywanted to go hard on people like that.And then just normal, everyday type of detainees who havecome in and you have maybe a screening or interrogation, in one of those rooms[the other rooms, the blue room or the red/wood room], and the interrogatorthinks he's being lied to or he's not going to get anywhere with just talkingto him and so forth, we would march with him into the black room, or [ifinterrogators were] angry at him and want to punish him for some reason.AbusiveInterrogationsJeff also saw several more severe interrogations that tookplace outside the main facility in the courtyard, including one that took placesoon after he arrived at Nama, involving a detainee who was linked to Abu MusabAl-Zarqawi, the Jordanian insurgent leader who was later killed by a U.S. airstrike, in June 2006:He was kind of a financier of Zarqawi, or one of themfrom the beginning. He was caught and he didn't want to talk and say anything.I had no part in this interrogation, I was just observing. In fact, it wasshortly after I got there, so I was observing this and a few other interrogationsat the same time. Whenever I went in, there was a kind of courtyard in betweenwhat was next to the soft room and the other side of the main office, but noroof, in the middle of this building. There was kind of a garden-like area withdirt and mud and a hose out there.He was stripped naked, put in the mud and sprayed withthe hose, with very cold hoses, in February. At night it was very cold. Theysprayed the cold hose and he was completely naked in the mud, you know, andeverything. [Then] he was taken out of the mud and put next to an airconditioner. It was extremely cold, freezing, and he was put back in the mudand sprayed.This happened all night. Everybody knew about it. Peoplewalked in, the sergeant major and so forth, everybody knew what was going on,and I was just one of them, kind of walking back and forth seeing [that] thisis how they do things.At another time, Jeff saw a British SAS officer beat adetainee:[It] was a beating in a kind of a bunker behind the mainfacility. . . . this British guy actually who wasn't supposed to beinterrogating anybody-a British soldier. SAS. That's all I know about him. Idon't know his name or anything. But we went back there and he gave the guy apretty good pounding. Nothing really in the face. A lot of stomach shots, and Iwould say two or three groin shots, very harsh. A knee to the abdomen. Thrownagainst the wall and so forth.He was very frustrated with this person, who supposedlyhad information about the whereabouts of Zarqawi. And he did. But we didn'tknow exactly that. He was blatantly stalling us and lying to us. It wasfrustrating, but he [the British soldier] decided to go that route and getphysical with him. . . . [W]e ended up cutting in. "This is not working, weneed to stop this.". . . I took the prisoner back and my partner took the otherguy. It was reported. They weren't upset about any type of abuse or anything. Theywere just upset that he [the British soldier] was interrogating anybody at all,because it was not in adherence with the rules. Because he wasn't American orhe wasn't, you know, signed on to do that type of job. He was allowed to stickaround, but he wasn't allowed to talk to any more detainees.AuthorizationsMany of the abusive interrogation methods that were beingused at Nama were clearly authorized by the command structure at the camp. Jefftold Human Rights Watch that written authorizations were required for mostabusive techniques, indicating that the use of these tactics was approved upthe chain of command.There was an authorization template on a computer, asheet that you would print out, or actually just type it in. And it was achecklist. And it was all already typed out for you, environmental controls,hot and cold, you know, strobe lights, music, so forth. Working dogs, which,when I was there, wasn't being used. But you would just check what you want touse off, and if you planned on using a harsh interrogation you'd just get itsigned off.I never saw a sheet that wasn't signed. It would besigned off by the commander, whoever that was, whether it was 03 [captain] or06 [colonel], whoever was in charge at the time. . . . When the 06 was there,yeah, he would sign off on that. . . . He would sign off on that every time itwas done.Some interrogators would go and use these techniqueswithout typing up one of those things just because it was a hassle, or hedidn't want to do it and knew it was going to be approved anyway, and you'renot gonna get in that much trouble if you get caught doing one of these thingswithout a signature.Techniques involving outright assault-hitting, slapping, andbeating-were apparently not on the list, but were regularly used at Nama,indicating that the harsh methods that were approved often degenerated intoeven harsher treatment in practice.Jeff said that the colonel who was on duty for most of hisdeployment at BIAP often observed the interrogation process, including abusiveinterrogations:He worked there. He had his desk there. They were workingin a big room where the analysts, the report writers, the sergeant major, thecolonel, some technical guys, they're all in that room. And the interrogatorsare in this little side room right next to the bigger room.Human Rights Watch asked whether Jeff knew whether the colonelwas receiving orders or pressure to use the abusive tactics. Jeff said that hisunderstanding was that there was some form of pressure to use aggressivetechniques coming from higher up the chain of command; however neither he norother interrogators were briefed on the particular source.We really didn't know too much about it. We knew that wewere only like a few steps away in the chain of command from the Pentagon, butit was a little unclear, especially to the interrogators who weren't reallypart of that task force.Jeff said that he did see Gen. Stanley McChrystal, commanderof U.S. Joint Special Operations forces in Iraq, visiting the Nama facility onseveral occasions. "I saw him a couple of times. I know what he looks like."Jeff also said that the commanding officer at Nama wouldsometimes tell the interrogators that the White House or Secretary of DefenseRumsfeld had been briefed on intelligence gathered by the team, especiallyintelligence about Zarqawi:[They'd say:] "Rumsfeld was informed, such and such areport is on Rumsfeld's desk this morning, read by Secdef [Secretary ofDefense]. . . it's a big morale booster for people working 14 hour days. Hey,we got to the White House!"Attempts to ComplainJeffwas not comfortable with what he was seeing. Jeff said that after a few weeksof seeing abuse-andin particular the abuse of the detainee described above who was stripped naked,thrown in the mud outside in the cold, and put in front of an air conditioner-he began to feel uneasy.A few more weeks of this, and a group of us went to thecolonel there and told him we were uneasy about it. . . about four of us. Toldhim we were uneasy about this type of abuse, or just the treatment. . . . Ithink he said, I'll get back to you. . . .And within a couple hours a team of two JAG officers, JAGlawyers, came and gave us a couple hours slide show on why this is necessary,why this is legal, they're enemy combatants, they're not POWs, and so we can doall this stuff to them and so forth. Yeah, they came the very same day. . . .Oh,it was very fast. We[laughing] it was like they were ready. I mean they hadthis two hour slide show all prepared, and they came in and gave it to us andthey stopped interrogations for it. It was a PowerPoint. It was on a computerlaptop. . . .TheJAG presentation took place during a change-of-shift meeting, and Jeff saidnumerous interrogators and other personnel were ordered to attend.Some of the slides were about the laws of war, the GenevaConvention, but it was kind of a starting-off point for them to kind of spoutoff, you know: why we don't have to follow these Geneva Convention articles andso forth. Like, you know, inhumane and degrading treatment, well, thisspecifically relates to POWs, so we don't have to do this. So basically, we cando inhumane and degrading treatment.And then they went on to the actual treatment itself,what we were doing, what we'd signed off on and those types of things: coldwater and nudity, strobe lights, loud music-that's not inhumane because they'reable to rebound from it. And they claim no lasting mental effects or physicalmarks or anything, or permanent damage of any kind, so it's not inhumane. Andthen there was also [discussion about] degrading [treatment]. Like what's moredegrading than being thrown completely naked in the middle of a mud pile, witheverybody looking at you and spraying water on you. . . .I remember being very annoyed with them. . . . It wasprobably just like any other PowerPoint presentation in the Army, which is veryboring and dry. But I was very annoyed with them because they were sayingthings like we didn't have to abide by the Geneva Conventions, because thesepeople weren't POWs. And it was just-everything went against-this really hadn'tcome out of any big debate of "what can we do to these people" and "what can'twe do," and so forth. It just went against everything we learned at Huachuca. Andjust faulty logic, you know? Just really bad argument. . . . I felt that theywere really kind of patronizing us and blowing smoke and just treating us likechildren. Like, "Well, it's OK." [They] just came in and said whatever they hadto say to patch it up and continue with the war.Jeffsaid that some of the interrogators appeared indifferent to the whole matter,but that an equal number supported the use of abusive techniques:[P]eople wanted to go, go, go harsh on everybody. Theythought that was their job and that's what they needed to do, and do it everytime. So they had no problem with the lawyers' explanations. The only problemthey had was with us bringing it up. . . .[Then]we went back to work. That was it, case closed. There was nobody else to talkto, you know?HumanRights Watch asked if there was any other way to report to Army criminalinvestigators about the abuses taking place at CampNama.We didn't have CID there [the Criminal InvestigativeCommand of the U.S. Army]. There was nothing. CampNamawas completely closed off. You had to get a special ID to get onto that littlecompound there.Jeffsaid the only way in which he could have reported abuses, hypothetically, wouldhave been to leave Nama, return to his unit at Abu Ghraib, and report tocriminal investigators there. But he said that route was problematic:That was a little hazy, too. I mean are we violating ourNDA? [The non-disclosure agreement Jeff signed before joining the task force.]Are we doing that? Because they had this special order from-you know, they toldus we have our special orders from the Pentagon, and we do this, and they [theorders] supersede any other. You can't even tell your chain of command [i.e.,the unit he was originally drawn from] about-they told us we can't tell ourchain of command about who works here or what it does. You're completely shutoff. You can only discuss it amongst yourselves. That's what they told us fromthe very first day. I mean, I could have. [If there had been no non-disclosureagreement] I would have stopped working there, and then went back to my unit,and then talked to our CID, you know?No Access by the Red Crossor Criminal InvestigatorsHumanRights Watch asked whether any representatives of the International Committeeof the Red Cross (ICRC) ever came to the facility, or requested access.Absolutely not. I never saw any Red Cross people.HRW: Was there any discussion of the Red Cross coming?Yeah, they said that the Red Cross would never be able toget in there at all.HRW: Why would somebody bring that up?I think because the Red Cross and a couple other agencieswere going around different places around Iraq, different facilities, andthey were getting access. So somebody brought it up to somebody else. I thinkthe colonel, or somebody in charge. You know, will they come here? It was thecolonel, yeah. And he said absolutely not.Jeff explained that the coloneltold them that he "had this directly from General McChrystal and the Pentagonthat there's no way that the Red Cross could get in." Jeff did not question thecolonel further on how these assurances were given to those in command in CampNama.He explained that they were told:"they just don't have access, and they won't have access, and they never will.This facility was completely closed off to anybody investigating. Even Armyinvestigators."HRW: Even CID investigators?CID was not allowed. No, it was very closed off. We were very tight.Jeff said that he and other interrogators, and the commanders at Nama, knewthat the tactics being used at Nama, and its very existence, were supposed to staysecret. Jeff said that this was why the colonel in charge at Nama assured theinterrogators that no one would be allowed into the facility, including the ICRC:The commander was insistent that they wouldn't come, andthat they never would come because it was just very secretive. It was a verysecretive place, and that's kind of what we took it as, that the Red Crosswouldn't come because-it was very necessary for the efficacy of the operation,and we don't want people to know even our name, of the unit, and this and that.[The name has] been changed a couple of times, when people learn the name.[4]The Red Cross-we can't have all this transparency andpeople knowing where we are, 'cause we don't even want the prisoner to knowwhere we are or where exactly we got them. We don't want news reports and soforth. That's kind of what it was about the Red Cross."Creative"InterrogationJeff acknowledged to Human Rights Watch that none of the specifictechniques used by interrogators were in the Army field manual forinterrogations. Human Rights Watch then asked Jeff why he thought commandersand trained interrogators would chose abusive tactics, and not use thetechniques they were trained in.Well, some did [use the legal methods], but it wasdifficult to because it takes more thought. It takes so much more thought. There'sno promise there that you're gonna get more results. And untrained people goingat that person, doing these "creative" means of interrogation-that really isthe most uncreative means. In reality, the people who are untrained-and [thepeople] who matter to them, like the commanders, the captains, and thehigh-ranking people who aren't really trained but who look through the windowand they see this, they see the intimidation and the "go-get-'em," they think it'svery high speed. "That's what we want to see! He's really into it!" And "that'sa good thing," right? And that's what they think. . . . It's a lot easier totake somebody's shirt off, pants off, to yell at them and make them do exercises.. . .If [the detainees] were going to lie, they were going tostick with it-unless it became too harsh and they would break, or whatever. Butthen you get into the too-harsh area. . . and that's when you don't know ifyou're getting the right information-are they doing it just because of the painor the discomfort?Jeff said he was concerned that harsh tactics were not aseffective as more traditional interrogation methods. When detainees providedinformation, yielding to abusive or harsh techniques, it would take time tocorroborate and determine whether the information was accurate, whereas withtraditional techniques, interrogators would usually determine immediatelywhether the information was accurate.You know, the time difference of checking out the story,and this and that. Because if you're talking to somebody and you break themusing a mental tactic or so forth, you just know when that person breaks. Butfrom what I've seen of harsh physical tactics, where they supposedly break,that's harder to tell [whether the information is accurate] because they'rejust saying something to stop the discomfort. But if a prisoner breaks when youuse the love of family approach [a traditional tactic, suggesting to theprisoner it is better for his family if he talks], the more traditional means,you instantly know it. So you don't have to fact check, you just know.*****CorroboratingAccountsJeff's accounts about the abuses at Camp Nama-and the factthat many of the abusive techniques were authorized-are consistent with otheraccounts provided by military investigators, soldiers familiar with theoperations there, and other U.S. personnel.A front page article about CampNama in the New York Times in March 2006, based on interviews with over a dozenU.S.personnel who served at Nama or were familiar with operations there, containedaccounts about abuse at Nama consistent with Jeff's. The New York Times article also contained additional facts about thefacility, and included allegations that some interrogators sometimes firedpaintball guns at detainees, and engaged in other more physical abuses. A signfrom CampNama obtained by the New York Times, reading"No Blood / No FoulThe High Five Paintball Club," was reportedly posted on awall inside the compound at some point in 2004. (The sign is reproduced on thecover of this report.)Declassified Department of Defense documents containadditional allegations. A CID investigation file from May 2004 containsstatements from an interrogator with the 22nd Military Police Battalion whoreported that he knew of abuses being committed at the Temporary HoldingFacility at Baghdad International Airport (BIAP), involving members of taskforce at Nama. The reported abuse included sleep deprivation, 20-hour interrogationsessions, and a guard giving a prisoner urine to drink. According to thestatement, the interrogator "was reporting this conduct because he felt theactions were inhumane even though every harsh interrogation was approved by theJ2 of the TF [Task Force 6-26] and the medical personnel prior to itsexecution." The CID investigation was apparently ended because "the subject ofthis investigation is a member of TF 6-26 and the Special Agent in Charge, SOTF[Security Operations Training Facility], has accepted investigativejurisdiction in this matter."[5]Another CID investigation file, from May 2004, details a complaintby a human intelligence "Augmentation Team" civilian interrogator at BIAPdescribing "harsh interrogations and inhumane conduct" by task force interrogatorsand BIAP guards in April 2004.[6] TheCID report redacts two parts of the document's section describing the actual abuse,but contains the following part:One time, I walked out to the bunk to locate one interrogator.They were in the middle of breaking a detainee. I could only hear groaning loudhuman noises and shouting by many people (I think they were beating the shitout of the detainee).According to the same document, a captain at "CampNAMA"told CID investigators that "inhumane treatment" allegations listed in the statementwere unsubstantiated as they "fell within the Coalition Task Force-7interrogation guidelines for the period in question."[7]In early May 2004, several soldiers who worked at Camp Cropper,near to the Nama complex, gave sworn statements to Army investigators aboutproblems at Camp Cropper, including allegations that detainees who had beenarrested and interrogated by "Task Force 20 and Seal Team 5" (other names usedby the special task force at Nama) showed signs of abuse that they hadpresumably suffered before being processed into Camp Cropper-i.e., while theywere in the custody of the task force, at camp Nama. For instance, an interrogatorattached to the 519th Military Intelligence Battalion at CampCropperfrom May to September 2003 gave a sworn statement to CID that:[W]hile at CampCropper, I was concernedabout some detainees that were brought in by SEAL Team 5 andTask Force 20that appeared to be very severely beaten. When we would inquireabout these wounds, the SEALs/TF 20 members would provide a general "theyresisted" response. [REDACTED] was responsible for reporting these injuries andwrote reports, I believe, on all such incidents.[8](The interrogator also stated that interrogators with the519th Battalion, at CampCropper, were using painful"stress positions" against detainees.)A Lieutenant Colonel who commanded the 115th Military PoliceBattalion at CampCropper, from April toNovember 2003, also gave a sworn statement to investigators outlining aparticular case of abuse he knew about involving "Task Force 20":[The] incident regarded a detainee returned to the SP/CF [SpecialPrison/Confinement Facility at CampCropper] by Task Force20. The detainee was bruised over a large portion of his body. I reported theincident to the 10th MP Bn (CID) [a military police battalion]. I did not hearthe outcome of their investigation.[9]An interrogator in the 321st MilitaryIntelligence Battalion, stationed at CampCropper in August 2003, alsogave a sworn statement mentioning abuse by the task force:At the Cropper facility it was well known that detaineeswho were brought into the facility complained of beatings from members of SealTeam 5 and TF 20 [Task Force 20] personnel. . . . These instances of beatingswere photographed and documented by [redacted].[10]In June 2004, an FBI official at a temporary holdingfacility in Baghdad sent an e-mail to FBI headquarters reporting that a newlyadmitted detainee, transferred to the facility by a Task Force 6-26 team, hadsuspicious burns on his body, and that the military had launched anadministrative investigation into the incident.[11]Around the same period, a civilian Defense IntelligenceAgency interrogator filed a "memorandum of record" to his superiors about abuseby "Task Force 6-26," stating that he witnessed "two counts of violations ofthe Geneva Conventions" involving "detainee abuse" and "illegal detainment ofnon-combatants."[12] Inthe first, the author of the memorandum stated that, on or about May 11, 2004,he or she "witnessed the mistreatment of a TF 6-26 detainee," as follows:During the interrogation, conducted by a U.S. Armyinterrogator, four or five non-interrogator personnel from the Task Forceentered the room and began slapping the detainee while he was attempting torespond to the questioning.According to the DIA interrogator, the abuse lasted forfifteen minutes, before a senior officer "going by the call sign 'X03'" enteredthe room, and told all the interrogators to leave. The memorandum then readsominously: "I am not aware of what specifically occurred during my absence." Theinterrogator also reported that he interviewed a different detainee whoreported being slapped by task force personnel.The DIA interrogator also reported an incident on May 9,2004, in which TF-6-26, against the DIA agent's objections, detained a 28-yearold woman during a raid, "the wife of a suspected Iraqi terrorist [and targetof the raid]," who task force personnel recommended be "detained and held inorder to leverage the primary target's surrender." The woman, who had threeyoung children (one only six months old and still nursing) was released twodays later.In June 2004, Vice Adm. Lowell E. Jacoby wrote to the UnderSecretary of Defense for Intelligence, Stephen A. Cambone, about other reports byDIA personnel about abuse by 6-26 personnel. In a memorandum dated June 25,2004, entitled "Alleged Detainee Abuse by TF 6-26 Personnel," he wrote that twoDIA personnel, in the Directorate for Human Intelligence, had observed abuses bytask force personnel:Prisoners arriving at the Temporary Detention Facility inBaghdad withburn marks on their backs. Some have bruises, and some have complained ofkidney pain.One of the two DIA/DH interrogators/debriefers witnessedTF 6-26 officers punch a prisoner in the face to the point the individualneeded medical attention. This record of treatment was not recorded by TF 6-26personnel. In this instance, the debriefer was ordered to leave the room.One DIA/DH interrogator/debriefer took pictures of theinjuries and showed them to his TF 6-26 supervisor, who immediately confiscatedthem.TF 6-26 personnel have taken the following actions withregards to the DIA/DH interrogators/debriefers:-Confiscated vehicle keys-Instructed them not to leave the compoundwithout specific permission, even to get a haircut at the PX-Threatened them-Informed them that their e-mails were beingscreened-Ordered them not to talk to anyone in the U.S.[13]According to the memo, the DIA personnel reported the abusesthey witnessed to other Department of Defense officials, who forwarded them tothe Defense Intelligence Agency Inspector General, the Deputy Commander forDetainee Affairs, to Gen. Stanley McChrystal and the commander of Centcom. A handwrittennote from Cambone to his top deputy, Lt. Gen. William G. Boykin, dated June 26,2004 reads: "Get to the bottom of this immediately. This is not acceptable. Inparticular, I want to know if this is part of a pattern of behavior by TF6-26."[14]According to the New York Times, a spokesman for General Boykin,when asked about what General Boykin reported back to Cambone, said on March17, 2006 that "at the time he told Mr. Cambone he had found no pattern of misconductwith the task force."[15]In December 2004, Lawrence Di Rita, a Pentagon spokesman, toldjournalists who asked about the allegations raised in the Jacoby memo that fourSpecial Operations soldiers in task force 6-26 had in fact received"administrative punishments" for cases involving "excessive use of force"including "unauthorized use of [a] Taser."[16]Criminal CulpabilityAlmost all of the abuses as described above appear to violateU.S.military and federal criminal law, and international humanitarian law. (Formore information on legal provisions applicable to the treatment of detaineesin Iraq,see section on "Legal Standards," below.) Yet there are few indications that therehave been effective investigations or identification of any perpetrators at CampNama.As noted above, military officials have stated that a small number of taskforce members have been administratively disciplined, but not court-martialed.Five Army Rangers associated with the task force were reportedlycourt-martialed for abuses they carried out against detainees in September2005, but the sentences were all six months or less. There are no indicationsthat officers up the chain of command have been held accountable, despite seriousquestions about officers' criminal culpability.In December 2004, the Washington Post obtained a memorandum writtena year earlier, in December 2003, by Col. Stuart A. Herrington, a retiredmilitary intelligence officer involved in counter-insurgency operations duringthe Vietnam war. Herrington was brought to Iraqin late 2003 by the chief of military intelligence in Iraq, Gen. Barbara Fast, to evaluate andcritique intelligence-gathering and counter-insurgency operations in Iraq.[17] Herringtonreportedly visited numerous operational sites, including the facilities at Baghdad airport, and wroteup a memorandum to General Fast about his findings.During his mission, Task Force 121 denied Herrington accessto the detention site at Nama. However, from talking to other intelligenceofficers, Herrington concluded that Task Force 121 was abusing detainees andintentionally keeping them "off the books," not registering them in the U.S.military's detention records or with the International Committee of the RedCross. As he wrote in his memorandum: "Detainees captured by TF 121 have showninjuries that caused examining medical personnel to note that 'detainee showssigns of having been beaten.'. . . It seems clear that TF 121 needs to bereined in with respect to its treatment of detainees."[18]This report was written in December 2003, and most of theabuses described above occurred afterward-suggesting that the memorandum didnot result in any significant changes. In other words, military intelligenceofficers, including Gen. Barbara Fast, were specifically informed of credibleallegations of detainee abuses involving the task force, yet appear to havetaken no action, or inadequate action, to correct the situation and stopabuses.The fact that this memorandum was filed raises seriousquestions about the MI leadership's complicity in the abuses described in thisreport. Under the doctrine of command responsibility, commanders may be liablefor crimes committed by subordinates, in cases where they knew or should haveknown about the crimes but failed to stop them.More investigation is needed into these issues and into the underlyingabuses themselves, but the Herrington memorandum strongly suggests thatmilitary intelligence officers and other commanders could be held criminallyliable for the abuses documented here. From the memorandum, it appears thatsenior officers were alerted to abuses at Nama in late 2003, and then failed toact, which potentially makes them criminally liable under the commandresponsibility doctrine.II. Forward Operating Base "Tiger," near al Qaim, Iraq.Human Rights Watch has also documented allegations aboutabuse committed in 2003 at Forward Operating Base Tiger, near al Qaim, inwestern Iraq on the borderof Syria.The account below, from a soldier stationed at FOB Tiger, details routine abuseat the facility, apparently built into the interrogation regime. The account detailshow detainees were kept in oppressively hot metal containers for 24-hourperiods as temperatures reached 130s and 140s, how interrogators hit detaineesduring interrogations, and how senior officers squelched soldiers' efforts tocomplain about the abuse.FOB Tiger"Nick Forrester"[19]was stationed at FOB Tiger from early May 2003 through late September 2003,serving as a sergeant with the 82nd Airborne Division.In October 2005 and May and June 2006, Human Rights Watchinterviewed Nick about his experience at FOB Tiger.For most of his time at Tiger, Nick was ordered to serve asan MP guard for the detention and interrogation operations at the facility. Hewas responsible for guarding detainees brought to the base and for transportingdetainees from holding areas to interrogation areas, where they would beinterrogated by Army and CIA interrogators.As described below, Nick told Human Rights Watch that almostall of the detainees captured and interrogated at Tiger were subject to seriousmistreatment, either in detention or while being interrogated.[20] Specifically,he told Human Rights Watch that he and other guards, under orders, subjecteddetainees to severe sleep deprivation and exposure to dangerously hightemperatures, forcing them to stand with their faces to the wall for twenty-fourhours straight inside a metal shipping container, with the door open, but with littleventilation. And he said that he repeatedly saw interrogators subjectingdetainees to severe mistreatment, including beatings and threats.Nick described what happened when detainees were first broughtinto the facility:Standard procedure, when I was there, you [i.e., thedetainees] had twenty-four hour inside the Conex [container] . . . you'reblind-folded, you're zip-stripped, your hands are behind your back; your feetusually weren't, unless there was a particularly volatile prisoner-somebodywho'd caused a lot of trouble, they'd hitch the feet as well. You were there,twenty-four hours: no sleep, no food, no water.The temperatures inside the container, Nick said, wereextreme:Early on, when I first got there, it only got up to about115, but by July and August, we were regularly between 135 and 145[Fahrenheit]. [Inside the container] it was really extremely hot, to the pointwhere it was irritating to go into the back of the Conex to get somebody out touse the restroom, which is usually the only thing they were allowed to do. ..there was no talking, none of that inside there.Nick said that the MPs were instructed to keep the detaineesawake for the initial 24-hour period, by forcing them to stand in the metalshipping container:It was your job to make sure that they weren't sleeping.. . . You'd shout something in there, every once in a while, you'd have a headcheck, or something like that. Nod their head, you know. . . .They're standing. And their hands are usuallyzip-stripped behind. Some of them would jump their thing and put it in front[i.e., kneel down and bring the zip-cuff beneath their feet and stand up againwith the cuffed hands in front].For me, it didn't really matter, if they needed to go tothe restroom, I'd put [the zipcuffs] back behind, and you know, walk them out.. . .At night time, a lot of the guards would walk by, unloadthe magazine from the rifle, bang on the side [of the metal container] for alittle bit to make sure that you know, everybody was awake. And you'd catchthem if they'd fall asleep-they'd fall over because they're bound. You see,they'd try to lean their head against the wall [but] you'd slap on [thecontainer] to make sure they lift their head back up off the wall, or do whateverit took to make sure they'd stay awake.And then usually, after that 24 hour period, they weretaken over and talked to [interrogated] for the first time.InterrogationsHuman Rights Watch asked Nick who interrogated thedetainees:Sometimes, military interrogators. Sometimes, civilianpersonnel. We had a lot of various different-we could have CIA rollingthrough-it was chaos. We had special forces, CIA, everybody-various people atdifferent times. The civilian people, I couldn't really tell you who they were,you know, they weren't wearing tags or tapes or anything. You couldn't reallyknow, unless you went up and asked them.Nick would bring detainees from the metal shipper containerover to a nearby building, where interrogators subjected detainees to jarringnoise and lights, and then physically beat them. Nick had to stand guard duringthe interrogations, and he described to Human Rights Watch what he often sawoccurring in the interrogation facility:Typical case, you've been here for 24 hours. . . you werewalked [over to the interrogation building] by one of my guys [MPs]. . . andthen you were handed over to the MI guys-the two or three that was there. They'dsit you down on a chair. They start off with some softball questions, gettingyour name, getting warmed up, like that. And then, at the first "no," at thefirst "I don't know," at the first "I don't have any information," the firstwrong answer-that's when the lights went off, they put some strobe light on,put some kind of a heavy metal on-just some kind of loud music, whatever theycould put on. One time, they put Barney[21]on real loud and it annoyed the hell out of me. You listen to that over andover for 2 hours and it's really annoying. Whatever they put on, it was realannoying. . . .So, typical first time interrogation consisted of somekind of heavy metal music really loud, strobe light, lot of yelled questionsand stuff like that, until they finally would break down and cry and say "Idon't know anything, I don't know anything!" If [the detainee] was a particulartarget of interest that they thought knew something, you know, they'd grab him,punch him-stomach, neck, arms-you know, right in here [indicating the back ofthe arm, above the elbow], you'd punch them in the back of the elbows-hold yourarms up-you'd punch them in the back of the elbow, I guess, so not to leave amark. . . . Particularly people of interest, they really want to talk to, theywould use everything.Nick said music or noise was often played so loud in theinterrogation room that soldiers standing 30 feet away, at the metal containerwhere detainees were initially held, would have to yell at each other to beheard: "They had a nice sound system. On the 4th of July, it's what we used toplay music. . ." Nick also said that interrogators used their M-16s(U.S.-issued automatic weapon) to intimidate or threaten detainees:Typically, everybody got the chair kicked out from underthem-you know, the kind of "bad cop" part, chair kicked out-at that point theguys would pull the chair out and hand them [the other interrogators] all theM16s you know, to make it, even though the weapon was all ready, they would pullthe charge [chamber a round in the weapon] to get the full effect of "Hey,we're serious," and stuff like that.At this point, usually the guy would say something meaningless-usually,for the most part, they would say something: "I can get you somebody," or "Iknow something," you know. For the most part, we'll say, 60-70 percent of thetime, they'd say something right then. Then the interrogator would keep on hisline of questioning.He's on his knees, usually a rifle pointed at him, strobelight going, music going, whatever. Then the guys sitting at the desk askinghim questions directly. It was always yelling at that point-you had to, inorder to hear [over the music]. . . . For the most part, that would drag on forquite a while. They'd ask and ask and ask and ask.I would say, about, overall, about half the guys to 60percent of the guys got at least one gut shot-either punched or the butt of therifle in the stomach. . . . I couldn't put an exact figure, somewhere on thelow ball, I would say, 60 percent. . . .Civilian guys [civilian contractors or CIA] seem to get alittle rougher-that always seemed to be the case. There was one military guy-hewas blatantly racist towards Arabs, you know, as far as stuff went. He seemedto drag on a lot longer and he had a higher quantity of people getting punchedor whatever else. [But generally] it seems to me the civilian guys-when thecivilian guys are doing the interrogating, that's when things got rougher.Nick said he saw numerous detainees abused as describedabove-he couldn't say a precise number, but estimated it was somewhere betweenthirty to fifty people. Interrogators often would have one detainee watch themas they abused another detainee, in order to intimidate them: "They would have[another] person first, and then they would come back and get the guy and seeif they could get information out of him-as a 'this is what's coming to you'kind of thing."Human Rights Watch asked: "And if you totally cooperate,what would happen?"If you totally cooperate and give out information-"Yes,sir," or "No, sir," "Yes, Mister, No Mister"-for the most part you'd still havethe chair kicked out from under you, you still got at least one gut shot.Human Rights Watch then asked: "And if you were completelyuncooperative?" Nick described one of the worst cases he saw, which took placearound July 2003, involving a detainee who a Special Forces team had arrested,and who the Special Forces team had decided had valuable information aboutinsurgent activities. "They brought him back [to FOB Tiger] and he got the messbeat out of him," Nick said. "He got the hell beat out of him." Nick told HumanRights Watch what he saw when the detainee was brought into the interrogationbuilding:He wouldn't say anything, and they kept screaming at himand screaming at him. And they picked him up and threw him against the wall-andit's a concrete wall. They threw him up against the wall, they punched him inthe neck, punched him in the stomach-you know, gut shot-they threw him down. [Atone point,] they actually threw him outside-they had two guys [other detainees]outside watching-threw him outside the building, just threw him outside likethat. And then they picked him up, dragged him back, pulling him by the hairand stuff. . . . They hold his arms like this [out behind his back] and thenbeat him down-enough so they could break it, to give you a little bit of thepain. Same with the kneecaps: kicked him in the kneecaps, you know, reallyhard, with those boots-combat boots.They were [usually] very conscious of trying not to leavemarks [on the body] most of the time, but with that guy-they really didn't[i.e., they made no effort to avoid leaving bruises and cuts]. . . . [Later,]they took some of the sani-wipes from the MRE pack [Meals Ready to Eat], youknow, clean his face off and stuff like that, but the next day, he was prettybruised.The detainee was beaten and interrogated for about twohours, Nick said. "He was there for a long time, a long time." Later on, Nicksaid, the interrogators told guards and other soldiers that the detainee hadinflicted the damage on himself: "They blamed it on him-a 'falling-down-the-stairs'deal or whatever."As it turned out, the detainee who was beaten was Iranian:Nick said he was a middle aged man, probably in his late 40s, and said he wasprobably a small-time businessman or smuggler who brought electronics to andfrom Syria and through Kurdish areas in Iran and Iraq. The fact that the man didn'tspeak Arabic apparently made the interrogators beat him more severely:The guy didn't speak Arabic at all; he spoke Farsi. Andthere was nobody who spoke Farsi on the post and he just kept getting the crap beatout of him because they thought that he was being silent when he only spokeFarsi.Nick said that one of the Special Forces soldiers on thebase-who was not trained as an interrogator or part of a military intelligenceunit-was responsible:The guy who was doing most of the roughing up in thatcase, I'm pretty sure that he was one of the SF [Special Forces] guys that justrotated through, and was just helping out in the interrogation. But they reallythought this guy had a bunch of information, and he never opened his mouthexcept to scream incoherently, when he was getting hit.After interrogations, Nick said, detainees would be taken toa second nearby facility, with a tile floor, where they were given Meals Readyto Eat (MREs) and were allowed to sit or lie down. (Since there were nomattresses, detainees usually used the cardboard MRE containers as pillows.) Butnot everyone was immediately brought there:If you were pissing people off, if you pissed the guardoff, and it was a hot day, they'd probably throw you back [in the metalcontainer]. Blindfold you, zip-strip you, where he can directly eye on you, andput you back into that corner [of the container] where it's really, really hot.Raising ConcernsNick said that some soldiers at FOB Tiger were troubled bywhat they were seeing, but that most didn't complain, and that in any case itwas difficult for enlisted troops to complain. "I asked a few questions andstuff like that and it was pretty much kind of 'Shut up' or 'Drop it now.'"Human Rights Watch asked Nick about his reaction to theabuse, and whether he raised objections with his superiors or theinterrogators:It was very unsettling to me. I walked over to talk to[the interrogators] later and I started asking a couple of questions because Ifigure those guys were probably-they're at duty and little more versed in theGeneva Conventions than I am. I try to read up on everything-I'm a reader; Ilove books and stuff. And I try to read all the rules and regulations andstuff.I started asking questions and [the lead interrogator,with an E6 rank] was like, "No, this is the way we do things" and stuff likethat. It didn't sound right, so I went back and checked and everything. . . .The first time that I talked to [the E6 interrogator] itwas more inquiry, bringing it up that I didn't think that was right, you know? [Iasked] what are the rules about-what does it say about this? "I was under theimpression that we're not allowed to hit somebody," like that-you know, stufflike that. And it was-the first time, it was brushed aside:"Oh, this is how we do things," you know? "Tough up, man.This is how the Army does things."Nick said he looked up the Geneva Conventions on a mini-laptophe had on the base-he had a CD-ROM of training manuals and military documents-andthen went back to the interrogators to ask again:And the next time around, I pulled the guy out [the E6interrogator, and said]: "I looked-I looked this stuff up and this is not theway it's supposed to be," you know? He was like, "This is the directive we had.You need to go ahead and drop this, sergeant." You know, and he outranked me. "Dropthis sergeant" [he said]. It was repeatedly emphasized to me that this was nota wise course of action to pursue. . .It was blown off, but it was a little more stern: "Youdon't want to take this inquiry anywhere else," kind of thing. "You shoulddefinitely drop this; this is not something you wanna do to yourself," kind ofthing.Nick said there was another soldier he was friends with, whoshared his concerns ("he and I talked a lot about it kinda being bullshit"),but that for the most part, other soldiers didn't seem to care, or worse,supported mistreating the detainees:The guys that I was with-the duty guys that I had underme especially-were like [using the inflexion of an immature teenager:] "Didsomeone bring a camera?" You know, and stuff like that. They were out forblood. The army has some odd mentality people, you know. You've got a widespectrum of people, but there are some odd people out there that are just, youknow-get off on that kind of thing. They get off on the violence and stuff. AndI don't understand that, you know. And cameras were, supposedly, strictlyforbidden. There's a little sheet posted there that you are not to bring anycameras into the area at all. But that rule is broken many times-many, manytimes."Geneva'sa town in Switzerland"As described earlier, Nick and MPs he worked with were underorders to keep newly arrived detainees awake and standing in the metalcontainer. But Nick ordered the enlisted soldiers working under him not to hitdetainees:[I told them:] this is what I expect, this is how I dothings. I don't care what the other guys do, the rules are "don't bring acamera," so don't bring a camera, you don't hit the guys. I try to tell them totreat them the way you wanna be treated and stuff like that. . . GenevaConventions, that's what I do-I remind them of Geneva Conventions-this is whatwe do, this is what we don't do to prisoners.Nick said that neither he nor any of his troops had trainingin detention operations, or Geneva Conventions standards on treatment ofdetainees:Geneva Conventions-I mean, a lot of people's knowledge-99percent of people's knowledge extends to "hey, there's a Geneva ConventionsCategory one in the back of my ID card," [referring to the classificationwritten on soldiers identification cards]. Or: "Geneva'sa town in Switzerland."For a lot of people, you know, that's what it extends to. I knew a little bit more,you know, as far as that goes: Those are rules governing warfare and stuff likethat. But I didn't know a lot of specific information or anything like that. Ilooked up specific information based on the treatment of POWs, detainees, etc.etc. That's what I was looking for. And right now, I couldn't quote you much. .. .That's pretty much how it went. That's the prevailingthought [process] and it was mentioned that, "Oh, that's an antiquated set ofrules.""You can't get information out of people these dayswithout breaking them"-that kind of thing. That was the prevalent attitude. Thatwas voiced by the E6. That was the quote: "You cannot get information out of themwithout breaking that stuff."From Nick's perspective, the interrogators did not appear professional.He believed that much of the abuse stemmed from racist attitudes towarddetainees. Many of the guards and interrogators called Iraqi's "Hajis," andwould often mock or taunt them. Nick also said he didn't believe that abusiveinterrogation tactics worked:I'm not an interrogator, so I can't render an expertopinion there. But to me, it seemed like some things that they did [showed]that they knew what they were doing as far as that stuff goes. But I think theycould have used more training. They seemed a little lost at points. I mean theywere very fluent in Arabic. They knew-they had a lot of information as far asthat kind of stuff went. But with the process, you know, they could haveprobably used a lot more training on. . . .I think part of the problem is the blatant racism againstthe Arabs. Just blatant, you know-bad. When you have an enemy you kinda have todemonize them a little bit like that in order to make yourself capable ofpulling a trigger. . . . But I think, rather than demonize a whole race ofpeople or anything like that, there are better ways to try to. . . [motivateyour troops]. . . .As far as the interrogation process, there are plenty ofways to get information out of people. Given enough time, and stuff like that,you can get information. I understand torture was effective back in the day,but was it really? I mean how much information that was given out was real andhow much was given just to escape pain? In this case, I feel there wereprobably a couple of instances like that out there, at Qaim. People are justtired of dealing with bullshit so they'd say something. . . .I don't think that those were the right way to do things.I think that encourages other people to do the same to us. If we were-wehaven't had the opportunity to be on the invaded side, if you will, and see howit goes if the shoe were on the other foot, and I think that if it were, U.S. peoplewould be up in arms if that happened. The same people who say that it's okay tocircumvent that now, if it were happening to them, would definitely have aproblem with it.CorroboratingAccountsNick's accounts about FOB Tiger are consistent with andreinforced by other accounts from soldiers provided to Human Rights Watch. HumanRights Watch spoke with a guard and a captain, both of whom served at FOB Tigerin 2003. The guard said he observed abusive interrogations by civilianinterrogators at FOB Tiger. The captain was not directly involved in detentionoperations, but said he heard from other personnel about abuse at the base, andonce heard sounds of physical violence coming from rooms where civilianinterrogators were questioning detainees.[22]Military investigators also heard of other serious abuses atFOB Tiger, including a homicide in November 2003. (Nick departed Tiger inSeptember 2003.) Serious allegations about abuse and torture at FOB Tiger wereraised during two courts-martial convened in Fort Carson, Colorado,related to the torture and death of a 56-year-old Iraqi named Abed HamedMowhoush, who died at FOB Tiger in November 2003. Mowhoush had served as one ofSaddam Hussein's generals and, at the time of his arrest, was suspected ofinvolvement in attacks on U.S.forces.[23](CIA personnel were also reportedly involved in the death,and a case was reportedly referred to the U.S. Department of Justice forinvestigation. Human Rights Watch asked officials in the Justice Departmentcriminal division in April 2006 for an update on this and other cases, and wastold that investigations were still open, but that no CIA personnel had beenindicted.)In March 2005, Chief Warrant Officer Lewis Welshofer Jr. andSpec. Jerry Loper were charged in Army courts-martial at FortCarsonwith assault and murder in connection with Mowhoush's death. Many of the proceedingswere sealed, and numerous documents connected to the case were classified, butinformation presented during the trial revealed numerous details about thestandard interrogation techniques used at FOB Tiger and near al Qaim generally.During the trial, several classified documents related to the case were leakedto journalists at the Washington Postand Denver Post.One classified investigation report, obtained by the Washington Post, described Mowhoush'sdetention and custody in detail. It stated that, two days before his death, hewas severely beaten by a group of Army interrogators and Iraqi paramilitaries,reportedly paid by the CIA. According to the document, the group severely beatMowhoush using "fists, a club and a length of rubber hose." A CIA operative wasinvolved, referred to in the documents as "OGA Brian" (OGA is a commonly usedacronym for "other government agency," a moniker used by military personnel forthe CIA).At the court-martial for Welshofer and Loper, an armyinvestigator testified about the beatings (the hearing was sealed but themilitary did release a redacted transcript):When he didn't answer or provided an answer that theydidn't like, at first [redacted] would slap Mowhoush, and then after a fewslaps, it turned into punches. And then from punches, it turned into [redacted]using a piece of hose.An Army investigation report said that soldiers heardMohwoush "being beaten with a hard object" and "screaming."Soon after the beating described above, on November 26, 2003,Army personnel took over the interrogation: the two defendants, Welshofer andLoper, as well as a Sgt. 1st Class William Sommer (a linguist) and ChiefWarrant Officer Jeff Williams (an intelligence analyst). According to testimonygiven at the court-martial, the interrogators decided to put Mowhoush inside asleeping bag, close it, and tie an electrical cord around him. And it was whileMowhoush was inside the sleeping bag that he died.Mowhoush's death certificate listed his cause of death as"asphyxia due to smothering and chest compression," and a December 2, 2003autopsy stated that Mowhoush had "contusions and abrasions with patternimpressions" on a large part of his body, as well as six fractured ribs. Armyinvestigators found that the investigation was complicated by the fact that Mowhoushhad been severely beaten before being mistreated by Army interrogators.Testimony given during the courts-martial process made clearthat many of the abusive techniques used on Mowhoush were authorized and regularlyused at FOB Tiger.During a pre-court-martial hearing in March 2005, a ChiefWarrant Officer who worked with Welshofer in Iraq, Richard Manwaring, testifiedthat the use of the sleeping bag technique and similar techniques, like puttingdetainees in lockers and banging on them, were in his opinion "appropriate" andthat he himself used the tactics to intimidate detainees. At the same hearing,Col. David A. Teeples, who commanded the 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment at thetime of the incident, testified that in his opinion the "claustrophobictechnique" was effective and stated on the record that it had been authorizedfor use at the base. Teeples blamed Mowhoush's death on the beating by the CIAand Iraqi group.At trial, inJanuary 2006, Welshofer himself testified regarding an August 30, 2003memorandum that he said stated that there were no specific "Rules ofEngagement" for interrogations, because detainees' legal status as"unprivileged combatants" was unclear:Basically [the August 30 memo] said that as far as they[senior commanders] knew there were no ROE [Rules of Engagement] forinterrogations. They were still struggling with the definition for a detainee.It also said that commanders were tired of us takingcasualties and they wanted the gloves to come off . . . . Other than a memosaying that they were to be considered unprivileged combatants, we received noguidance from them.[24]Criminal CulpabilityThe abuses described above appear to violate U.S.military and federal criminal law, and international humanitarian law. Many ofthe "techniques" that were later said in the FortCarsontrials to be "appropriate" or "authorized" were illegal. (For more informationon legal provisions applicable to the treatment of detainees in Iraq,see section on "Legal Standards," below.) But as with the abuses at Nama, thereare few indications the military undertook any systematic efforts toinvestigate and prosecute abuses.Besides the Welshofer-related investigation, there are no other knowncriminal investigations about abuses at al-Qaim.Nor are there any indications that officers up the chain ofcommand have been investigated or held accountable, even though the accountshere and the testimonies at the Fort Carson trials suggest that officers couldbe held liable for authorizing illegal techniques, and held liable as principalsas well, under the command responsibility doctrine, since they appear to haveknown about abuse taking place and failed to stop it.III. Mosul: Camp Diamondback/Camp GloryHuman Rights Watch has also documented allegations aboutabuse that took place at detention facilities at Mosulairport, in northern Iraq.The account below looks at abuses at the "Brigade Holding Area" (BHA) for the2nd Brigade Combat Team (a unit of the 101st Airborne Division at Mosul), and aseparate detention compound at the airport used exclusively by a special NavySEALS team, "Naval Special Warfare Squadron 7," sometimes known as Navy SEALTeam 7. (Forces stationed at Mosul airport in2003-2004 referred to facilities at Mosulairport as CampDiamondbackand CampGlory.)The account includes details about how military intelligence officersencouraged interrogators to use increasingly harsh techniques on detaineesduring questioning, including painful stress positions, sleep deprivation, andthreatening detainees with military guard dogs.InterrogationsTony Lagouranis, an Army interrogator at the rank ofSpecialist with the 202nd Military Intelligence Battalion, was based at Mosul airport from Februaryto April 2004.[25] Heprovided intelligence-gathering support for combat operations in Mosul and also worked with the 311th Military IntelligenceBattalion, based in Mosulat the time. He interrogated numerous detainees brought to the facility, aswell as detainees initially detained in the Navy SEAL facility and thentransferred into Army custody. The detainees he interrogated included personsarrested by both the Navy SEALs and Army units based at Mosul, who at the time were mostly comprisedof units in the 101st Airborne Division.[26]Lagouranis told Human Rights Watch that from the very firstdays he was deployed at Mosul, he saw abusive techniques being used, includingsleep deprivation, exposure to severe cold, forced exercises and use of painfulstress positions, use of guard dogs to intimidate blindfolded detainees, anduse of loud music and strobe lights to disorient detainees and keep them awake.Largouranis-who was a Specialist-says he did not himself employ the techniquesat first. However, after a few days at Mosul-andafter pressure from Military Intelligence officers up the chain of command-he beganparticipating in interrogations in which MPs and MI personnel were abusingdetainees:It sort of developed. We were doing normalinterrogations, running your normal approaches [standard legal interrogationtechniques]. But a week or two after we were there, the Warrant Officer [incharge of the interrogation unit] decided that we needed to step it up a littlebit. So he introduced us to certain things, like we were to have a guard allnight long on a guy, while he was on his knees and sitting out in the compound[i.e., outside, in the cold]. . . .Lagouranis described to Human Rights Watch how one particularinterrogation session, involving two brothers detained as suspected insurgents,became abusive after his MI officer pushed him and his team to become more aggressive:[During the initial interrogation] we worked hard onthese guys. There were two brothers and basically we knew that they had stuff,right, and so the Warrant Officer [name withheld] said: "Look, this is what weare gonna do: we're gonna keep them up all night long, we're gonna keep them ontheir knees and we're not gonna let them sleep." He was very specific about it.He didn't say: "I want you guys to go nuts on these guys," but he was veryspecific about what he wanted. . . .Later we had a few dogs on these guys too, and all thewhole thing. . . . [The MI officer] said, you know, I've got these doghandlers, these MPs, they are going to come in and you're gonna use them in theinterrogation. . . . The guard members came in and we just sort of like talkedabout what was possible and what we could do. So we just worked it out withthem. . . . There was never beating or anything. But we were making these guysdo PT [exercise], which were pretty rough on them. And the stretch positionswere pretty rough on them too. . . you know like kneeling in the gravel,walking on your knees in the gravel. . . having them stand with outstretchedarms with water bottles in [their] hands for extended periods of time. Crawlingthrough the gravel. And the guards in the prison were helping with this.Lagouranis explained that the abusive techniques were commonplaceat Mosul, andthat the general situation was chaotic. There were also signs of more seriousabuse being committed by the Navy SEALS, in their facility. Largouranis said hesaw bruises and other signs of abuse on detainees transferred into Army custodyfrom the Navy SEAL facility, and described how SEALs would often drop off orpick up detainees from Army custody, without explanation.Lack of GuidanceThere was not any initial training or guidance about whatinterrogators could and couldn't do, he said, just instructions from a militaryintelligence officer to use the abusive techniques. Generally, Langouranis said,there was little guidance or oversight into how the interrogations were beingconducted: "I wasn't really trained by interrogators up there. We just sort ofset up under the Chief Warrant Officer and then started interrogating."In March 2004, when Lagouranis and another interrogatorvoiced concerns about the techniques, their supervising MI officer providedthem with an Interrogation Rules of Engagement card, authorizing the use of dogs,exposure to hot and cold temperatures, sleep deprivation, forced exercises anduse of painful stress positions, and environmental manipulation (allowingstrobe lights and loud music):When we were doing that stuff it was under the directionof Chief Warrant Officer [name withheld]; he was telling us, this is what hewants. But when he told us this, you know, of course, we got a little worried. Sowe asked for IROE [Interrogation Rules of Engagement] and he gave us the IROEthat his unit was supposedly using.I think it was sort of an outdated IROE now that I thinkabout it,[27]because I felt-because I saw others later that were different. I think he wasusing one from Afghanistanor something like that. But everything that he said, as far as I could tell,was it was legal on the IROE [i.e., the techniques were detailed in the IROE:]that we could use dogs, we could use environmental manipulation, sleepdeprivation, sort of stress positions. But who knows-I don't know if it waslegal or not, what we were doing.CorroboratingAccountsLagouranis' accounts-including about abuses by Navy SEALs atMosul-are consistent with other accounts ofmistreatment at the Mosulfacility documented by military investigators from late 2003 and through 2004.For example, on December 9, 2003, according to Army criminalinvestigation documents, a detainee named Abu Malik Kenami (also known asAbdureda Lafta Abdul Kareem) died while in custody at MosulAirport,after undergoing interrogation tactics similar to the tactics described above.[28] (Thiswas about a month before Lagouranis arrived at Mosul.) Army personnel told investigatorsthat Kenami, who was arrested a few days before his death, was repeatedlypunished "for talking" by being forced to do exhaustive exercises while he hada sandbag hood on his head. On the night of his death, he had his handszip-tied behind his back and was placed with other detainees in a holding celland told to sleep. Kenami was found dead the next morning. No autopsy was everconducted and no official cause of death was determined. A review of the Kenamicase was initiated after the Abu Ghraib scandal became public. Army reviewerscriticized the initial criminal investigation for failing to conduct anautopsy, failing to interview the interrogators, medics, or detainees presentat the scene of the death, and failing to collect physical evidence. As of July2006, the Army appears to have taken no punitive or disciplinary action in thecase.A separate Army investigation in January 2004 detailed anotherdetainee abuse case at the same facility at Mosul, reported on December 10, 2003 (the dayafter the death of Kenami, the detainee above). A teenage detainee who wasundergoing stress exercises, as set out below, alleged that he was hit by asolider and that his jaw was broken.[29] Hewas flown to Baghdadfor surgery. An Army investigation, ordered by Army General General DavidPetraes, established the following details, entitled "FACTS" in theinvestigative report:Detainee [Redacted] was either struck or fell at about115030DEC03 [11:50 AM, December 30, 2003] and broke his jaw. [The date appearsto be misprinted: the incident is described in all other accounts as takingplace on December 10, 2003.] . . . There were soldiers from 1/502, 3/327, 2/44,and 311 MI at the BHA at this time, serving as either guards or in other MIroles.The detainees [at Mosul airport] were beingsystematically and intentionally mistreated (heavy metal music, bullhorn, hitwith water bottles, forced to perform repetitive physical exercises until theycould not stand, having cold water thrown on them, deprived of sleep, androughly grabbed off the floor when they could no longer stand).The detainees had sand bags on their heads with "IED"written on them, the infantry soldiers stated they felt this was done to makethem angry at the detainees and it had exactly this effect. . . .The 3d & 4d Geneva Conventions were violated inregard to the treatment afforded to these detainees.[30]The investigating officer also provided a synopsis of"Witness Statements" he took from various members of the 101st AirborneDivision. The synopsis is as follows:[Redacted] 1/502[31]:We always harassed the hell out of the detainees. They always told us to "smokethe detainees,[32]but to not physically harm them." I sawthe Chief throw them down, put his knee in his neck and back and grind theminto the floor. He would use a bull-horn and yell at them in Arabic and playheavy metal music extremely loud, they got so scared they would urinate onthemselves. He was very aggressive and rough with the detainees. We were toldto only feed them crackers & water (may have been because of late hour).[Redacted] 1/502: They were setting it up to makethe infantry guys angry by writing IED[33]on the sand bags over their heads.[Redacted] of Guard Detail) 3/327[34]:We would force them to stay awake, by banging on metal doors, playing loudmusic, screaming at them all night-those were our instructions. We were toldnot to strike them.[Redacted] & [Redacted] 3/327: Ourinstructions were to keep them awake, smoke them, yell at them, but to not hurtthem.[Redacted] 2/44[35]:We "hazed" the detaineeswe had a lot fall and hurt themselves.[Redacted] 1/502: [Redacted, presumably thedetainee whose jaw was broken] had IED [written] on the sandbag over his head,the guards were all over him, screaming at him things like "you like to useIED's motherfucker," and smoking him extra. They were smoking him really hardwhen I heard him cry in pain (he could have been hit or fell).[Redacted] 3/327: A lot of detainees had IEDwritten on their bags. I was near [Redacted] when he fell and I helped him up. Interpreters(ICDC) blew cigarette smoke up their sand bag hoods. They also poured water onthem to get them up, after they were exhausted from being smoked.[Redacted] 3/327: "We were yelling in a bullhornat the detainees, making them do PT, things like flutter kicks, ups and downs,stuff like that." We knew were supposed to do these things because MI wasalready doing this stuff when we got there. He did not say it was part of theSOP [Standard Operating Procedure]. He stated, "we were briefed to keep themawake, do not let them talk, and to not hurt them." I had seen "detaineescollapse before because of the intensive physical training."Despite documenting the above abuse, the investigation didnot recommend court-martial or disciplinary action against any soldiers or thecommander of the military intelligence unit at Mosul airport. Instead, the investigation putthe blame on systemic problems and failures, noting that the MI unit wasoverburdened and not trained to operate a detainee holding facility. Theinvestigation then noted that: "All deficiencies at the Strike BHA have beencorrected"[36]-an assertion that cannot be reconciled with the later reports of abuse in 2004provided by Lagouranis and contained in the other documents cited in thisreport.In fact, there were numerous other reports of abuse at Mosul airport in 2004, afterthe above investigation-including another death. A detainee named FashadMohammad died at the Mosulairport around April 5, 2004.[37] Accordingto military autopsy records released under a FOIA request, Mohammad was arrestedby Navy SEALs in the Mosul area, and thentransferred to the Mosulairport for interrogation.[38] (Itis not clear whether Mohammad was in SEAL custody for the entire time, orwhether he was temporarily transferred into Army custody for part of the time).The Medical Examiner's report on Mohammad's death states that:This approximately 27 year-old male civilian, presumedIraqi national, died in U.S.custody approximately 72 hours after being apprehended. By report, physicalforce was required during his initial apprehension during a raid. During hisconfinement, he was hooded, sleep deprived, and subjected to hot and coldenvironmental conditions, including the use of cold water on his body and hood.[39]The autopsy report also describes "multiple minor injuries,abrasions and contusions" and "blunt force trauma and positional asphyxia," butthen states that the cause of death and manner of death is "undetermined."[40] Accordingto reports in late 2004, three Navy Seals were later recommended forcourts-martial in relation to Mohammad's death, for aggravated assault, and crueltyand maltreatment of detainees, but it is not known whether any were evercharged.[41]Human Rights Watch asked military public affairs officialsin May and June 2006 for information on the outcome of these cases. On June 21,2006, Navy Commander Jeffrey Bender, a public affairs official with the NavySpecial Warfare Command, communicated to Human Rights Watch in an e-mail that hisoffice had no information about any courts martial or disciplinary measuresrelated to the case.It should be noted also that the accounts provided above-bothLagouranis' and those in military investigation documents-are consistent withaccounts provided by detainees held at Mosulin 2003 and 2004. For instance:Two detainees, Haitham Saeed al-Mallah and YasirRubaii Saeed al-Qutaji, told a British lawyer that they were held andmistreated at the facility in the Mosul airport in early 2004, which they called"the disco" (the name that, according to Largouranis, soldiers sometimes usedto describe the BHA facility at Mosul). Al-Mallah says that he was detained atthe disco in January 2004, and that U.S. personnel "left me standingfor hours, handcuffed and hooded. . . . I was kicked very hard in the stomach,which was followed by continuous beating with a stick and with their bootsuntil I fell unconscious. I only woke up after they poured over my head verycold water." Al-Mallah said other detainees were also mistreated, forced tocarry out exhausting exercises, beaten, and doused with cold water wheneverthey fell to the floor. They were not permitted to use the toilet during thesesessions, and allowed only two hours sleep at a time. The other detainee, al-Qutaji,had similar allegations. According to Shiner, Al-Qutaji was arrested in March2004. While in custody, he says he was forced into painful stress positions anddoused with cold water.[42]A detainee held at Abu Ghraib made credibleallegations in June 2004 that he was severely mistreated at Mosul airport afterhis arrest in March 2004: specifically, that he was beaten, subjected to loudmusic and other sleep deprivation, kept outside in the cold weather andrepeatedly doused with cold water, dragged naked over rocky ground, and, at onepoint, tied up and put close to some sort of fire, which burned one of hisknees.[43] Thedetainee's account suggested he was transferred to the Army facility at Mosul airport but on atleast one occasion taken back by the SEALs for additional interrogation. Theinvestigation confirmed that the detainee had been arrested by Navy SEALs from theNaval Special Warfare Squadron 7, around March 6, 2004, in Mosul,and that he was held at the detention facility at Mosul airport, where the SEALs had a separatefacility. The investigation also confirmed that the detainee was held in theSEAL facility at the airport, and obtained medical records confirming that thedetainee suffered injuries at Mosul during his detention, including burns;specifically, a medical record for March 21, 2004 stating that the detainee,"after being interrogated the evening prior, had 2nd degree burns and singedtissue on his body." Despite all these findings, the investigation was closedand no personnel were ever disciplined or prosecuted. Navy SEALs interviewedduring the investigation made dubious claims about the detainee injuringhimself by throwing himself on the ground. One investigating officer concludedwithout argument that the detainee's account was not credible, and stated thatthe medical records did not corroborate the allegations, with an unexplainedassertion that the "alleged burns [on the detainee's body] were not consistentwith thermal burns."[44]Criminal CulpabilityMost of the abuses described here, as with the testimoniesfrom other detention facilities, appear to constitute violations of U.S. militaryand federal criminal law, and international humanitarian law. (For moreinformation on legal provisions applicable to the treatment of detainees in Iraq,see section on "Legal Standards," below.) Yet as in the other cases, there arefew indications the military has undertaken any meaningful efforts toinvestigate and prosecute abuses, besides the few inadequate investigationsnoted above. Besides the few efforts noted above, Human Rights Watch knows ofno other investigations and courts-martial into abuses involving detainees at Mosul airport. As notedabove, Human Rights Watch requested information from the Navy Special WarfareCommand in June 2006 about investigations involving Navy SEALS near Mosul, but was told thatno information was available.There are no indications that officers up the chain ofcommand at Mosulhave been held accountable for any wrongdoing-though serious questions can beraised about the culpability of officers. A January 2004 investigation intoabuse at Mosul, described above, reported systemic abuses in the detention andinterrogation process at Mosul, yet it appears officers made no real efforts-ormade inadequate efforts-to correct the situation or punish abusers.As noted earlier, under the command responsibility doctrine,commanders can be held liable for the crimes of their subordinates if they knewor should have known about abuses but failed to stop them. Furtherinvestigation is needed into the role of the leadership at Mosul,and the underlying abuses themselves, but the accounts and documents cited heresuggest that military commanders at Mosulshould be investigated and, as the facts dictate, be held criminally liable forabuses.Legal StandardsThe acts of torture and other cruel and inhumane treatmentalleged in this report do not fall within gray areas in the law. During theperiods discussed in this report, U.S.and coalition forces in Iraqwere bound by various provisions of the 1949 Geneva Conventions, as well as bycustomary international law.[45] TheGeneva Conventions applied not only to the armed conflict between the United States and Iraq during March and April 2003, butalso to the period of occupation thereafter. Specifically, the United States continuedto be bound as an occupying power by the terms of the Fourth Geneva Conventionuntil at least June 28, 2004, when sovereignty was formally transferred to theInterim Iraqi government.[46]Article 130 of the Third Geneva Convention and Article 147of the Fourth Geneva Convention deem torture and other inhumane treatment of personsprotected by the respective conventions to be "grave breaches" of thoseconventions.[47] Acts of torture and other mistreatment thattook place against protected persons detailed in this report constituted gravebreaches of the Geneva Conventions. The UnitedStates is bound to investigate and prosecute gravebreaches that are committed by U.S.personnel in Iraq.The Geneva Conventions impose on the United States an obligation to"search for persons alleged to have committed, or order to be committed" gravebreaches and to prosecute them.[48]Other relevant provisions of the laws of war arealso applicable. The continuing hostilities in Iraq since the end of the SaddamHussein government are considered a non-international (internal) armedconflict, governed primarily by Article 3 common to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 ("CommonArticle 3"), which details minimal standards of treatment for persons duringnon-international armed conflict.[49](Common Article 3,along with provisions of the 1977 Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions thatalso protect detainees, are also considered reflective of customaryinternational law.[50])Common Article 3 prohibits "at any time and in any placewhatsoever . . . violence to life and person, in particular murder of allkinds, mutilation, cruel treatment and torture, [and] outrages upon personaldignity, in particular, humiliating and degrading treatment." Additionalapplicable provisions, similar to those above, exist in the "fundamentalguarantees" provided under article 75 of Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions,which as stated above is accepted as reflective of customary law on armedconflict, both international and non-international.The mistreatment of prisoners as detailed in this reportalso violated U.S.obligations under international human rights law. The Convention againstTorture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,prohibits both torture and "cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment," andprovides that "[n]o exceptional circumstances whatsoever, whether a state ofwar or a threat or war, internal political instability or any other publicemergency, may be invoked as a justification of torture."[51]The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,[52]which also bans torture and other mistreatment, ensures that the right to befree from torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment can never besuspended by a state, including during periods of public emergency.[53]In addition to binding international legal obligations,various provisions of the U.S. Uniform Code of Military Justice subjectsoldiers to court-martial or disciplinary measures for mistreating prisoners.[54]Applicable UCMJ criminal provisions include article 93 (cruelty andmaltreatment), article 128 (assault), and articles 118 and 119 (murder andmanslaughter), as well as article 120 (rape and carnal knowledge), article 124(maiming), and, for officers, article 133 (conduct unbecoming an officer).Superior officers who order the mistreatment of prisoners or who knew or shouldhave known that such mistreatment was occurring and did not take appropriatemeasures can be prosecuted as a matter of command responsibility.[55]U.S.federal criminal law is also applicable. The War Crimes Act of 1996 (18 U.S.C.2441) makes it a criminal offense for any U.S. personnel to commit warcrimes, which includes any conduct defined as grave breach of the GenevaConventions and any conduct which is a violation of Common Article 3. Inaddition, the federal anti-torture statute (18 U.S.C.2340A), enacted in 1994,provides for the prosecution of a U.S. national or anyone present in the UnitedStates who, while outside the United States, commits or attempts to committorture. U.S.personnel are also bound by applicable federal provisions on assault, sexualabuse, and homicide.ConclusionsMany of the crimes detailed in this report are violations ofinternational humanitarian law, U.S.military law, and U.S.federal criminal law. The U.S.government's failure to properly investigate these violations is an affront tothe victims of the abuses, and a violation of U.S. obligations under the GenevaConventions, which obligate states to prosecute serious violations of theconventions' provisions ("grave breaches").The accounts in this report are further evidence thatdetainee abuse was an established and apparently authorized part of detentionand interrogation processes in Iraqfor much of 2003-2005. The cases also show that U.S.military personnel have faced systemic obstacles to reporting or exposing abuses,that the U.S.military in numerous cases has not taken adequate measures to stop reportedabuses.The report also shows that the U.S. militaryhas often failed to properly investigate and prosecute perpetrators, includingofficers who allowed abuses to occur on their watch.AcknowledgmentsThis report was written by JohnSifton, senior researcher on terrorism and counterterrorismfor Human Rights Watch. It is based on research conducted by Sifton and Marc Garlasco, senior military analyst for HumanRights Watch. It was edited by Joanne Mariner,director of Human Rights Watch's terrorism and counterterrorism program, andJoe Saunders, deputy program director. Aisling Reidyprovided legal review. Thodleen Dessources and Andrea Holley formatted the report, and Rafael Jimenez designed the cover. FitzroyHepkins provided production assistance. Daniel Matza-Brown, Colleen Peppard, Zoe Salzman, Hanna Abrams, andBrendan Kao provided invaluable research assistance.Human Rights Watch would particularly like to thankKatherine Hawkins, who conducted in-depth background research for this report.Human Rights Watch would like to thank the American CivilLiberties Union, Human Rights First, the Center for Constitutional Rights, andthe New YorkUniversityCenter for Human Rights and GlobalJustice, for their work and collaboration in investigating and compilinginformation about detainee abuse in Iraq.Human Right Watch's research on Iraq and counterterrorism issuesrequires significant resources. Human Rights Watch would like to thank Omar S. Amanat, Amberstone Trust, PaulNewman, The Pears Family Charitable Foundation, and Herman Warsh.[1]Serious allegations about CampNama were revealed in a front page article in the NewYork Times in March 2006, based on interviews with U.S. personnel who served at Namaor were familiar with operations there. Eric Schmitt and Carolyn Marshall, "In Secret Unit's 'BlackRoom,' a Grim Portrait of U.S. Abuse," New York Times, March 19, 2006.[2]The camp was so secure that in August 2003, Gen. Geoffrey Miller, the formercommander of the GuantanamoBay detention facility in Cuba,who was brought to Iraqin 2003 to evaluate and critique the military's intelligence-gathering methods,was denied access when he sought to visit. In the end, he was only admittedafter he made several calls to higher-level military commanders. Human RightsWatch telephone interview with a former military interrogator familiar with theincident, May 2006.A few months later, Col. Stuart A. Herrington, aretired Army intelligence officer who was asked by the chief of militaryintelligence in Iraq,Gen. Barbara Fast, to carry out an assessment of the military'sintelligence-gathering and counter-insurgency tactics, was also denied access.Human Rights Watch interview with a person familiar with the contents of amemorandum written by Herrington to Fast. See also Josh White,"U.S.Generals in Iraq Were Told of Abuse Early, Inquiry Finds," Washington Post, December 1, 2004 (describing the contents of theHerrington memorandum).[3]This soldier requested that Human Rights Watch not use his real name or detailsabout his deployment. The quotes and accounts provided by this soldier havebeen lightly edited-no substantive details have been altered in any way-solelyto remove repetition and ensure readability.[4]As noted above, the task force at Nama changed its name several times in2003-2006. The names have included Task Force 5, 20, 121, 6-26, and 145.[5]Investigation files from Army Criminal Investigative Command, Baghdad, Iraq,obtained under the Freedom of Information Act by the American Civil LibertiesUnion and other human rights groups,available at: http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/030705/9117_9134.pdf.[6]Investigation files from Army Criminal Investigative Command, Baghdad, Iraq,obtained under the Freedom of Information Act by the American Civil LibertiesUnion and other human rights groups, available at: http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/030705/9135_9166.pdf.The underlying investigation concerns an allegation that a military guard atBIAP urinated into a bottle and gave it to a detainee to drink. The guardreportedly admitted to holding the bottle of urine to detainee's nose andmaking him smell it, "to teach him a lesson."[7]Ibid.[8]Sworn statement of an Army interrogator (name redacted) in the 1st EngineerBattalion, 3rd Combat Support Brigade, 95th Division, attached to the 519thMilitary Intelligence Battalion, obtained under the Freedom of Information Actby the American Civil Liberties Union and other human rights groups, availableat: http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/030905/DOD565_615.pdf(PDF p. 36), originally placed in the classified annex to the combinedinvestigation report of Gen. Anthony R.Jones and Gen. George R. Fay, AR15-6 Investigation of the Abu Ghraib Detention Facility and 205th MilitaryIntelligence Brigade, August 2004 [hereinafter Fay-Jones Report], availableat: http://www4.army.mil/ocpa/reports/ar15-6/AR15-6.pdf.[9] Swornstatement of a Lieutenant Colonel (name redacted) in the 115thMilitary Police Battalion, originally placed in the classified annex of theFay-Jones report, obtained under the Freedom of Information Act by the AmericanCivil Liberties Union and other human rights groups, available at http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/030905/DOD780_821.pdf(PDF p. 50).[10] Swornstatement of a soldier in the 321st Military Intelligence Battalion,originally placed in the classified annex of the Fay-Jones report, obtainedunder the Freedom of Information Act by the American Civil Liberties Union andother human rights groups, available at: http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/030905/DOD452_517.pdf(PDF p. 71).[11]E-mail with redacted FBI sender and recipient, entitled "TF 6-26 Update," June25, 2004, obtained under the Freedom of Information Act by the American CivilLiberties Union and other human rights groups, available at: http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/FBI.121504.4887.pdf.[12]Unknown (name redacted) DIA interrogator, "Memorandum For Record: Report ofViolations of The Geneva Conventions and the International Laws of LandWarfare," obtained under the Freedom of Information Act by the American CivilLiberties Union and other human rights groups, available at: http://www.aclu.org/projects/foiasearch/pdf/DODDIA000172.pdf.[13]Memorandum from Vice Adm. Lowell E. Jacoby Under Secretary of Defense forIntelligence, Stephen A. Cambone, "Alleged Detainee Abuse by TF 6-26Personnel," June 25, 2004, obtained under the Freedom of Information Act by theAmerican Civil Liberties Union and other human rights groups,, available at: http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/t2596_0297.pdf.[14] Cambone'snote is at the same link: http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/t2596_0297.pdf.[15]Schmitt and Marshall, "In Secret Unit's 'Black Room,' aGrim Portrait of U.S. Abuse," New YorkTimes, March 19, 2006.[16]Transcript of Department of Defense Press Briefing with Lawrence Di Rita, December 8, 2004. Thereported punishments were that two of the personnel were "reassigned to otherresponsibilities, and two were removed from the unit." Di Rita said that tentask force members in total had been issued "letters of reprimand" in relationto allegations of abuse, and that two special courts-martial were pending (note:special courts-martial can only result in a maximum of one year confinement).[17]See Josh White, "U.S. Generals in IraqWere Told of Abuse Early, Inquiry Finds," Washington Post, December 1, 2004. Human RightsWatch also interviewed a person familiar with the Herrington mission andmemorandum, who requested that his name not be used.[18]Josh White, "U.S.Generals in Iraq Were Toldof Abuse Early, Inquiry Finds," Washington Post, December 1, 2004.[19]This soldier requested that Human Rights Watch not use his real name or detailsabout his deployment. The quotes and accounts provided by this soldier havebeen lightly edited-no substantive details have been altered in any way-solelyto remove repetition and ensure readability.[20]Nick told Human Rights Watch that about 20-40 detainees were typically held atTiger at any one time, and that most detainees-after being interrogated atTiger-were not released but usually sent south to Abu Ghraib or to otherfacilities. He said most detainees spent about one month at Tiger.[21]I.e., the main theme song from the children's television show "Barney," asimplistic and short song with the lyrics: "I love you/ You love me/ We're ahappy family/ With a great big hug and a kiss from me to you/ Won't you say youlove me too?/ I love you/ You love me/ We're best friends as friends should be/With a great big hug and a kiss from me to you/ Won't you say you love me too?"[22]See Human Rights Watch, "Leadership Failure: Firsthand Accounts of Torture ofIraqi Detainees by the U.S. Army's 82nd Airborne Division," September 2005, Volume17, No. 3(G), pp. 6-8, available at http://hrw.org/reports/2005/us0905/.[23]The description of this case is based on numerous sources, including: ArmyCriminal Investigation Command documents and Autopsy Examination Reports andDeath Certificate, obtained under the Freedom of Information Act by theAmerican Civil Liberties Union and other human rights groups, available at: http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/041905/m001_203.pdf;Arthur Kane, "Iraqi General Beaten 2Days Before Death," Denver Post,Apr. 5, 2005; "Guardsman: CIA beat Iraqis with hammer handles," Denver Post, July 25, 2005; Josh White,"U.S. Army Officer Convicted in Death of Iraqi Detainee," Washington Post, January 23, 2006; and notes taken by Human RightsFirst during the Welshofer court-martial, see "Welshofer In His Own Words," January20, 2006 (on file with Human Rights First), excerpts available at:http://www.humanrightsfirst.org/us_law/etn/trial/welshofer-012006d.asp.[24] ChiefWarrant Officer Lewis Welshofer, testifying during his court-martial, January19, 2006, see "Welshofer In His Own Words," January 20, 2006 (on file withHuman Rights First), excerpts availableat:http://www.humanrightsfirst.org/us_law/etn/trial/welshofer-012006d.asp.[25] Thequotes and accounts provided by this soldier have been lightly edited-nosubstantive details have been altered in any way-solely to remove repetitionand ensure readability.[26] Servingat these holding areas, besides the Navy SEALS, were various soldiers in the101st Airborne Division, including soldiers from the division's 1st Battalion,502nd Infantry Regiment ("1/502"); soldiers from the 1st Battalion, 327thInfantry Regiment ("1/327"); soldiers from 2nd Battalion, 44th Air DefenseArtillery Regiment ("2/44"); and soldiers from the 311th Military IntelligenceBattalion ("311 MI").[27]The IROE does appear to have been outdated. Lt. Gen. Ricardo S. Sanchez, thenthe chief commander in Iraq,had authorized a set of interrogation rules allowing these abusive techniquesin September 2003, but then formally withdrew them in October 2003. However, asdetailed in this report and in other accounts, personnel throughout Iraqcontinued to use many of the techniques well into 2004. See Article 15-6 Investigation of CJSOTF-AP and 5th SF GroupDetention Operations by General Richard P. Formica (redacted and declassifiedcopy), November 2004 (on file with Human Rights Watch). The Formica reportfound that Special Forces groups working in Iraq were still using many of therescinded techniques, months after Sanchez's order. See also Eric Schmitt, "Pentagon Study Describes Abuse byUnits in Iraq," New York Times, June 17, 2006.[28]The facts described here are discussed in more detail in a recent joint reportby Human Rights Watch, Human Rights First, and NYU Center for Human Rights andGlobal Justice: "By the Numbers: Findings of the Detainee Abuse andAccountability Project," April 2006, appendix B.[29]The description of this case is based on Army investigation documents obtainedunder the Freedom of Information Act by the American Civil Liberties Union andother human rights groups, available at: http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/032505/1081_1180.pdf(see PDF pp. 84-100)[30]See ibid.[31]Signifies 1st Battalion, 502nd Infantry Regiment of the 101st Airborne Division.[32]"Smoking detainees" refers to the technique of using forced exercises andpainful stress positions on detainees. For more information and descriptionsabout "smoking detainees," see: Human Rights Watch, "Leadership Failure:Firsthand Accounts of Torture of Iraqi Detainees by the U.S. Army's 82ndAirborne Division," September 2005, Volume 17, No. 3(G), p. 7, available at http://hrw.org/reports/2005/us0905/.[33]Stands for "Improvised Explosive Device," the commonly used acronym for bombsused by insurgent groups against U.S.forces in Iraq.The personnel appear to have used the term to imply that detainees wereresponsible for setting bombs targeting U.S. forces.[34]Signifies 3rd Battalion, 327th Infantry Regiment of the 101st AirborneDivision.[35]Signifies 2nd Battalion, 44th Air Defense Artillery Regiment of the 101stAirborne Division.[36]See ibid.[37]See autopsy report cited in footnote below. Lagouranis told Human Rights Watchthat he heard about a death that took place in Navy SEAL custody while he wasat Mosul, buthe had no first hand knowledge of what happened. Human Rights Watch telephoneinterview with Lagouranis, May 2006.[38]Office of the Armed Forces Medical Examiner, Final Autopsy Report for AutopsyNo. ME-04-309 (Fashad Mohammad), November 22, 2004, (on file with the advocacygroup Human Rights First).[39]Ibid.[40]Ibid.[41]Eric Schmitt, "Navy Charges 3 Commandos With BeatingOf Prisoners," New York Times,September 25, 2004. ("The new Navy charges stem from the death in early Aprilof Fashad Muhammad, an Iraqiseized by the commandos after a struggle and turned over to Army personnel at alogistics support base called Diamondback, near Mosul. A preliminary autopsyindicated blows to the torso and a lack of oxygen, possibly caused by severerestraint.") See also Josh White, "3More Navy SEALs Face Abuse Charges; Sailors Linked to Two Deaths in Iraq," Washington Post, September 25, 2004 (Thethree were "charged with counts that include assault with a dangerous weapon,aggravated assault with intent to cause death or serious bodily harm, andmaltreatment of detainees";althoughinvestigators linked these and other SEALs in the same unit to other detaineedeaths in Iraq in November 2003 and April 2004, no personnel have been chargedwith manslaughter or homicide).[42]This information is based on written statements Haitham Saeed al-Mallah andYasir Rubaii Saeed al-Qutaji provided in September 2004 to a British lawyer,Phil Shiner. Shiner provided copies of the statements to Human Rights Watch inJune 2006. See also, Peter Graff, "U.S. Torture in Iraq Spread to Mosul," Reuters, September14, 2004.[43]The description of this case is based on Army investigation documents obtainedunder the Freedom of Information Act by the American Civil Liberties Union andother human rights groups, available at: http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/1248_1288.pdf.[44]See ibid. It is not specified what other types of burns the officer believedthe detainee had; in any case, the burns were not merely "alleged" but wereconfirmed in the medical files obtained by the investigation.[45] GenevaConvention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick inArmed Forces in the Field (First Geneva Convention), 75 U.N.T.S. 31, enteredinto force Oct. 21, 1950; Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of theCondition of Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea(Second Geneva Convention), 75 U.N.T.S. 85, entered into force Oct. 21, 1950;Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War (Third GenevaConvention), 75 U.N.T.S. 135, entered into force Oct. 21, 1950; GenevaConvention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War (ThirdGeneva Convention), 75 U.N.T.S. 287, entered into force Oct. 21, 1950.[46]U.S. officials have made statements before andafter the transfer stating that they consider the United States bound by the GenevaConventions. Secretary of State Colin Powell,at the time of handover, wrote that "the forces that make up the MNF are andwill remain committed at all times to act consistently with their obligationsunder the law of armed conflict, including the Geneva Conventions." See Letter from Secretary of State Colin Powellto the President of the U.N. Security Council, June 5, 2004, Annex to S/RES/1546 (2004).In October 2005, Condoleezza Rice confirmed that: "The forces that makeup the MNF will remain committed to acting consistently with their obligationsunder international law, including the law of armed conflict." See Letter of October 29, 2005 from Secretary ofState Condoleezza Rice to the President of the U.N. Security Council, Annex IIto S/RES/1637 (2005).[47]Prisoners of war, defined in Article 4 of the Third Geneva Convention, areprotected persons for the purposes of that Convention. The Fourth GenevaConvention defines persons protectedby the convention as all persons not otherwise protected by the first threeconventions who, "at a given moment and in any manner whatsoever, findthemselves, in case of a conflict or occupation, in the hands of a Party to theconflict or Occupying Power of which they are not nationals."[48]See Art. 130, Third Geneva Convention, Art. 147, Fourth Geneva Convention.[49] Forguidance on applicable rules under customary international law, see studycommissioned by the International Committee of the Red Cross, Jean-Marie Henckaerts and Louise Doswald-Beck, CustomaryInternational Humanitarian Law(Cambridge:Cambridge Univ. Press, 2005), in particular, on the law relating tohumane treatment of detainees, see pp. 299 - 396. See also U.S. Army JudgeAdvocate General's Legal Center and School, Law of War Handbook 144 (2004),stating that Common Article 3 "serves as a 'minimum yardstick of protection inall conflicts, not just internal armed conflicts,'" (quoting Nicaragua v.United States, 1986 I.C.J. 14,218, 25 I.L.M. 1023); Prosecutor v.Tadic, International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, CaseNo. IT. 94.1, Decision on the Defense Motion for Interlocutory Appeal onJurisdiction, 102 (ICTY App. Chamber, Oct. 2, 1995) ("the character of theconflict is irrelevant" in deciding whether Common Article 3 applies).[50] SeeHenckaerts and Doswald-Beck, Customary International Humanitarian Law; see also Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 548 U. S.(2006), opinion of Justice Stevens: "Although the United States declined to ratifyProtocol I, its objections were not to Article 75 thereof. Indeed, it appearsthat the Government "regard[s] the provisions of Article 75 as an articulationof safeguards to which all persons in the hands of an enemy are entitled." Seealso William Taft, "The Law of Armed Conflict After 9/11: Some SalientFeatures," 28 Yale J. Int'l L. 319, 322 (2003).[51] Conventionagainst Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,G.A. Res. 39/46, annex, 39, U.N. Doc. A/39/51 (entered into force June 26,1987; ratified by the UnitedStates on October 21, 1994).[52] InternationalCovenant on Civil and Political Rights, 999 U.N.T.S. 171 (entered into forceMarch 23, 1976, ratified by the UnitedStates on June 8, 1992).[53]See UN Human Rights Committee, generalcomment No. 29: Article 4: "Derogations during a state of emergency," Adoptedat the 1950th meeting, on 24 July 2001, paras. 7, 11, and 13.[54] TheUniform Code of Military Justice is codified at Title 10, Chapter 47 of theU.S. Code (10 U.S.C.801 et seq.).[55]For further details on the doctrine of command responsibility, see Human RightsWatch, "Getting Away with Torture? , Command Responsibility for the U.S. Abuseof Detainees," April 2005, Vol. 17, No. 1 (G), Annex, available at http://www.hrw.org/reports/2005/us0405/10.htm#_Toc101408106.Related ContentJuly 22, 2006News ReleaseU.S.: Soldiers Tell of Detainee Abuse in IraqAbusive Techniques Were Authorized, Soldiers’ Complaints IgnoredJuly 22, 2006News ReleaseU.S.: Soldiers Tell of Detainee Abuse in IraqRegion / CountryUnited States,Iraq,US Foreign PolicyProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch