"A Long Way from Reconciliation": Abusive Military Crackdown in Response to Security Threats in Côte d’Ivoire | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportSearchDonate NowSearchDownloadsDownload the full reportNovember 18, 2012"A Long Way from Reconciliation"Abusive Military Crackdown in Response to Security Threats in Côte d’IvoireAvailable InEnglishFrançaisSoldiers from the Republican Forces of Côte d’Ivoire patrol the streets of Dabou on August 16, 2012, after attacks the previous night on the town’s military base and prison.© 2012 AFP PHOTO/ SIA KAMBOU“A Long Way from Reconciliation”Abusive MilitaryCrackdown in Response to Security Threatsin Côte d’IvoireMapsSummaryRecommendationsMethodologyBackgroundPost-ElectionCrisisOngoingSecurity ThreatsLiberian,Ghanaian ResponseI. Torture,Mistreatment, Inhuman Conditions at the Adjamé Military Police CampTorture andInhuman TreatmentII. MassArbitrary Arrests, Illegal Detention, and ExtortionYopougon BAECampCriminalActs by the FRCI during Arrests and DetentionsThe Cost ofImpunity: “Bin Laden” and Recurring Human Rights AbusesDetention-RelatedAbuses and Extortion in Dabou Military CampIrregularDetention Sites, Access Problems for Family, MonitorsMarginalizationof Police, GendarmesImpact onReconciliation, Government ResponseAcknowledgementsAnnex I:Human Rights Watch Letter to the Ivorian GovernmentAnnex II:Response from the Chief of Staff in the Ivorian PresidencyAnnex III:Response from the Minister of Human Rights and Public LibertiesMapsClick to expand ImageCôte d’Ivoire. © 2010 Human Rights WatchClick to expand ImageAbidjan. © 2012 Human Rights WatchSummaryAs it emerges from a tumultuous decade of election-relatedviolence and grave human rights abuses, Côte d’Ivoire faces a realthreat to its national security. A string of seemingly coordinated andwell-organized attacks against the security forces from August through October2012 followed previous raids along the Liberian-Ivorian border in whichcivilians were targeted. Since April 2012, at least 50 people, including manycivilians, have been killed during these attacks. Thousands more have beendriven from their homes. Unfortunately, the state response to the threat,undertaken primarily by the military, has been marked by widespread arbitrary arrestsand detentions, detention-related abuses including torture, and criminalbehavior against the civilian population.The month of August saw seven attacks against militaryinstallations, highlighted by a deadly raid on one of the most importantmilitary bases in the country—in which the attackers made off with asubstantial cache of arms. After a brief lull, there were separate attacks inAbidjan and along the Ghanaian-Ivorian border on September 21, leading Ivorian authoritiesto briefly close the border with Ghana. The border with another of Côted’Ivoire’s neighbors, Liberia, remains partially closed after aseries of cross-border attacks from Liberia into Côte d’Ivoirebetween July 2011 and June 2012, culminating in a June 8 attack in which seven UnitedNations peacekeepers and at least ten civilians were killed.Ivorian authorities have been quick to blame the attacks on militantswho remain loyal to former President Laurent Gbagbo, now in The Hague facingcharges before the International Criminal Court for crimes against humanity. Manyof Gbagbo’s military and civilian allies remain in exile in Ghana andLiberia. Previous work by Human Rights Watch showed links between thesemilitants in recruiting and organizing for deadly cross-border raids fromLiberia into Côte d’Ivoire. The nature of some of the more recentattacks, combined with additional credible evidence, gives weight to theIvorian government’s theory that many of the attacks appear to have been wagedby pro-Gbagbo militants.While Côte d’Ivoire faces a legitimate securitythreat, the Ivorian security forces—and in particular the country’smilitary, the Republican Forces of Côte d’Ivoire (known as theFRCI, for the French acronym)—have committed a myriad of human rightsabuses in responding to these attacks, including mass arbitrary arrests, illegaldetention, extortion, cruel and inhuman treatment, and, in some cases, torture.Youth from typically pro-Gbagbo ethnic groups are all too often treated as if,in the words of one person interviewed by Human Rights Watch, they are “allguilty until proven innocent.”Based on a three week research mission to Côted’Ivoire in late August and early September 2012, this report focusesprimarily on the crackdown by security forces in the Abidjan neighborhood of Yopougonand in the town of Dabou, some 40 kilometers to the west of Abidjan. The majorityof the abuses documented occurred at three military camps: the military policebase in the Abidjan neighborhood of Adjamé; the former anti-riot brigade(known as the BAE, for its French acronym) base, now controlled by themilitary, in Yopougon neighborhood; and a military camp in Dabou.The Republican Forces were created by a decree fromPresident Alassane Ouattara in March 2011, during the height of the post-electioncrisis, and were then composed primarily of fighters from the ForcesNouvelles rebel group that controlled northern Côte d’Ivoirefrom 2002 through 2010. After arresting Gbagbo on April 11, the FRCI faced thedaunting task of uniting fighters who fought on each side of the post-electionconflict, in which at least 3,000 people were killed. The suspicion between theformer belligerents remains deep, aggravated by the widespread belief that atleast one of the recent attacks had support from individuals within the FRCIstill loyal to Gbagbo. The result is minimal progress in fully integrating intothe official army the forces that remained under Gbagbo’s command duringthe crisis. Eighteen months after the conflict’s end, a successfulsecurity sector reform appears distant.Within this context, a measured and professional response tothe security threat has been undermined by the concentration of power in theformer Forces Nouvelles commanders, including “volunteer” fightersunder their command who are not formally part of the Ivorian army. The policeand gendarmerie, responsible under Ivorian law for responding to internalsecurity threats, have been largely marginalized; Ivorian officials are quickto point out that Gbagbo stacked these forces with his supporters. The judicialpolice, who are legally responsible for arresting andinterrogating civilian suspects and serving search warrants, played no role inthe vast majority of arrests and interrogations documented by Human RightsWatch in the aftermath of the August attacks. Instead, it was the FRCI who almostexclusively undertook neighborhood sweeps, arrests, interrogations, anddetentions. They held civilians at sites—namely, military camps—whichare not authorized for the detention of any civilian, regardless of the allegedcrime.In the weeks following the August 6 attack on theAkouédo military camp in Abidjan, Ivorian security forces arrested hundredsof people. Some arrests occurred in hot pursuit or based on intelligence, whileothers occurred in mass sweeps of youth from ethnic groups which had generallysupported Gbagbo in the 2010 election.More than 100 people, including civilians and military menwho remained with pro-Gbagbo forces during the crisis, were sent to themilitary police camp in Adjamé. Many were subjected to severemistreatment. Human Rights Watch interviewed five victims of torture, whodescribed being beaten brutally as soldiers demanded that they sign confessionsor provide “information” about the location of weapons or others allegedlyinvolved in attacks. Several of the torture victims had physical scars from beingbeaten with belts, clubs, and guns, and displayed severe emotional distress asthey articulated their detention experiences. They described seeing tens ofother detainees who appeared to have likewise been subject to severe physicalmistreatment. Soldiers threatened to rape and kill the wife of one soldier who wasdetained if he did not confess.The conditions of confinement at the Adjamé camp alsocontributed to the inhuman nature of the treatment. A civilian detained at thecamp said after interrogators were displeased with his answers, he was throwninto a room that was filled with excrement and forced to spend the night. Hesaid that the punishment was used on a number of occasions. Several formerdetainees described being held in rooms that were severely overcrowded. Onesoldier detained after the Akouédo attack described becoming“delirious” between the constant beatings and the almost completedenial of food and water.Torture as such did not appear to be systematic, as severalother former detainees at the Adjamé military police camp described onlyminimal physical abuse. However, the scale and nature of the abuses indicatethat at least some former Forces Nouvelles fighters continue to resortto grave crimes at moments of tension.Mass arbitrary arrests of perceived pro-Gbagbo supporters occurredalmost daily in Yopougon through much of August and in Dabou through at leastSeptember 11. Security forces arbitrarily arrested youth in their homes, at maquis(neighborhood restaurants), at bars, in taxis and buses, when walking homefrom church, and when at traditional community celebrations. Soldiers would oftenarrive in neighborhoods in military cargo trucks and force 20 or more perceivedpro-Gbagbo youth to board. In total, hundreds of young men appear to have beenrounded up and detained largely on the basis of their ethnicity and place ofresidence.Detainees were frequently subject to beatings during theirarrest and when subsequently brought to detention sites—generally unauthorizeddetention sites, particularly military camps, where civilians were held inviolation of Ivorian and international law. Conditions of confinement at thesemilitary camps were often inhuman, with detainees packed so tightly in a roomthat they could not lie down. Former detainees described how they weregenerally provided no food or water and had to survive by sharing what a fewdetainees’ family members were able to pass to them via a soldier-guard. Overcrowdingwas so severe at some sites that, with cells packed full, other detaineesroutinely spent the night outside in the open air; detainees described soldierson some nights walking around and kicking or striking with a gun anyone whotried to sleep.Nearly all of those interviewed said members of the securityforces, particularly the FRCI, committed criminal acts. During neighborhoodsweeps and mass arrests, soldiers stole cash and valuables such as cell phones,computers, and jewelry from people’s homes. Then, at the various militarycamps serving as detention sites in and around Abidjan, detainees described howsoldiers demanded money—as much as 150,000 CFA (US$300) in some cases—inorder to guarantee a person’s release. The victims described a securityoperation which appeared to degenerate into a lucrative extortion scheme. Severalformer detainees told Human Rights Watch that they were not even asked fortheir names, much less questioned; they described simply being held for days inmiserable conditions and then forced to pay the soldiers in exchange for theirfreedom. They complained bitterly about the impact this had on their livelihoods.Many of the worst abuses associated with the mass arrests occurredunder the command of Ousmane Coulibaly, known by his nom de guerre“Bin Laden.” Coulibaly was the commanding officer at the former YopougonBAE camp from May 2011 through late September 2012, and was also placed incharge of operations in Dabou after the August 15 attack there. In bothlocations, Human Rights Watch documented widespread arbitrary arrests, frequentinhuman treatment of detainees, and the extortion of money from detainees bysoldiers under Coulibaly’s command. In an October 2011 report on thepost-election violence, Human Rights Watch named Coulibaly as one of the FRCIleaders under whose command soldiers committed dozens of summary executions andfrequent acts of torture during the final battle for Abidjan in April and May2011. The continued abuses by his forces lay bare the cost of impunity forforces linked to the government.While high-level government officials interviewed by HumanRights Watch admitted there had been some excesses in the security forces’response to the August attacks, they stressed that the abuses needed to be seenalongside the gravity of the threat and the determination of the attackers toreturn the country to conflict. These officials stressed the need to be insolidarity with the military in the face of deadly attacks. The minister of interiorand minister of human rights both promised to inspect the military campsidentified by Human Rights Watch as marked by abuses and to urge militarycommanders to respect due process guarantees and to treat detainees humanely. Thesecommitments need to be followed up with investigations by the public prosecutor’soffice into cases of torture. Moreover, the Ivorian government should ensurethat monitors from Ivorian and international organizations have full access todetention facilities on an ad hoc and unannounced basis.The Ivorian criminal justice authorities have theresponsibility to question, arrest, and detain individuals suspected of involvementin planning, financing, and carrying out attacks on its military. But inresorting to tactics that violate the rights of detainees and appear to target peoplelargely on the basis of their ethnicity and perceived political preference,Ivorian security forces may be fueling the ethnic and political divisions thatare at the root of these attacks. These abuses build on the already existingfrustration on the part of Ivorian civil society and former Gbagbo supportersthat military forces linked to the party in power remain largely above the law.Although armed forces on both sides of the post-election crisis were implicatedin grave crimes—including war crimes and likely crimes against humanity—arrestsand prosecutions have so far only targeted the Gbagbo camp.For a decade the former Forces Nouvelles fightershave operated with complete impunity, despite being repeatedly implicated ingrave crimes since the 2002-2003 armed conflict. President Ouattara and hisgovernment must follow through on their oft-repeated promises of endingimpunity and ensure that soldiers engaged in or overseeing torture or inhumantreatment are removed from the military and subject to prosecution.Victor’s justice and widespread abuses against perceivedGbagbo supporters is not the path to a return to rule of law. It is the path torenewed conflict, with all the grave human rights abuses that have marked thelast decade. Ivorian authorities need to recognize the cost of continuedimpunity and sanction soldiers, regardless of their rank, who are implicated inhuman rights abuses. As a leader of an Ivorian civil society organization toldHuman Rights Watch, “Today’s impunity is tomorrow’scrime…. So long as there is impunity for [those linked to thegovernment], there will not be a durable peace.”RecommendationsTo the President, Acting Defense Minister, and Interior MinisterEnsure a prompt, fair, and transparent investigation intoallegations of torture and cruel or inhuman treatment. Put onadministrative leave any soldier or law enforcement official against whom thereis credible evidence showing that he ordered, carried out, or acquiescedto acts of torture or ill-treatment.Direct the Office of the Public Prosecutor to investigatein a thorough, impartial, and prompt manner all torture allegationsagainst law enforcement officials, regardless of rank and whether thevictim or family has formally filed a complaint.Urgently take steps to permit independent visiting ofplaces of detention by representatives of human rights and humanitarianorganizations, lawyers, medical professionals, and members of local barassociations. Ensure complete access to international and Ivorian detentionmonitors, including the ability to speak confidentially with detainees.Cease immediately the holding of civilians at militarycamps. Ensure that any civilian arrested is promptly brought to a policeor gendarme station, even in cases where the military was inappropriatelyinvolved in the arrest.Ensure that, in accordance with Ivorian and internationallaw, any person arrested appears before a judge within 48 hours to considerthe legality of detention and the charges against him or her. Release theperson if a specific charge is not presented promptly.Ensure that arrests and house searches are done inaccordance with Ivorian law and international standards. In particular,ensure that arrests occur in hot pursuit or on the basis of an arrestwarrant, rather than in mass sweeps based on a collective suspicion ofperceived supporters of the former president.Ensure that interrogations only occur at places that thelaw recognizes as being official locations. Ensure that civilians are onlyinterrogated by the branches of the Interior or Justice Ministries legallyauthorized to do so, rather than by members of the military.Reinstate previously successful measures aimed at endingcheckpoint extortion by security forces. Sanction any member of thesecurity forces found to be operating an illegal checkpoint or engaging inextortion.Progressively return primary authority in internalsecurity to the police and gendarmerie, including through providing sufficientmaterial support so that these forces can undertake basic securityfunctions. In situations where the military is involved in neighborhoodsweeps or patrols, ensure that it is done jointly with the police orgendarmerie, to check potential abuses and to build confidence between thedifferent security forces.Routinely provide family members of those in detentionwith information on where the person is currently being held. If a personis transferred to another detention site, inform the family as quickly aspossible.To the National AssemblyRatify the Optional Protocol to the Convention againstTorture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, andimplement the Protocol through establishing an independent national bodyto carry out regular and ad hoc unannounced visits to all places ofdetention.To the Ghanaian and Liberian GovernmentsArrest and prosecute or extradite individuals against whomthere is an international arrest warrant based on evidence linking theperson to grave crimes committed during the post-election crisis or to therecent attacks within Côte d’Ivoire, taking into account theIvorian authorities’ compliance with the UN Convention againstTorture.To European Union Member StatesIn line with the Guidelines to EU Policy towards ThirdCountries on Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment orPunishment, EU member states should, through private démarches andpublic statements, urge Ivorian authorities to take effective measuresagainst torture and ill-treatment, bring all those responsible for tortureand ill-treatment to justice, and provide redress to victims.Condition parts of the development aid targeted forsecurity sector reform to the government taking rapid steps to addressgaps in compliance with international human rights law regarding detentionconditions, particularly torture and inhuman treatment.To the United States and the UN Operation in Côte d’Ivoire(UNOCI)Speak out publicly on the Ivorian government’s needto respond to security threats through measures that correspond tointernational standards on arrests and the treatment of detainees. Stressthat continued abuses by security forces against certain populations willonly further the divisions that threaten Côte d’Ivoire’sability to move out of its decade of grave human rights abuses.Discuss with the Ivorian government the importance ofensuring complete access at all sites to detention monitors, including forunannounced, ad hoc visits and to speak individually with detainees in aconfidential location. In particular, press for the involvement indetention monitoring of Ivorian organizations, several of whom have historicallyworked extensively on prison conditions.Assist the Ivorian government in making it standardpractice at all detention sites to keep a full list of those who are orhave been detained, and the date on which the lawful authority to detainthem expires.Condition parts of assistance to the Ivorian government onits taking rapid steps to address gaps in compliance with internationalhuman rights law regarding detention conditions, particularly torture and inhumantreatment. For the United States in particular, ensure that no securityassistance is provided unless a thorough vetting guarantees that all unitsmeet the requirements of the Leahy Law, including that Ivorian authoritiesdemonstrate the will and capacity to take effective measures to holdaccountable soldiers implicated in serious crimes.Work closely with the Ivorian, Liberian, and Ghanaiangovernments to ensure better information sharing, monitoring, andcoordination regarding the arrest and prosecution of people implicated inserious crimes during the Ivorian post-election crisis and in the morerecent attacks within Côte d’Ivoire.MethodologyThis report is based on a three week research mission toCôte d’Ivoire in late August and early September 2012. The workfocused primarily on the crackdown by security forces in the Abidjanneighborhood of Yopougon and in the town of Dabou, some 40 kilometers to thewest of Abidjan.During its field work, Human Rights Watch interviewed 39people who had been arrested and detained in August or September 2012, as wellas another 14 witnesses to mass arrests, beatings, and other abuses. Inaddition, Human Rights Watch spoke with drivers of commercial and passengertransport vehicles, family members of people still in detention, leaders fromIvorian civil society, representatives of humanitarian organizations,representatives of the United Nations peacekeeping mission in Côted’Ivoire, and diplomats in Abidjan. In total, Human Rights Watchinterviewed 84 people related to the security forces’ response to theAugust attacks.Human Rights Watch interviewed victims and witnesses inlocations chosen by the interviewees, including their homes, churches, and othersites where they felt secure in speaking openly. Victims were identifiedthrough community leaders, neighbors, and other victims. Interviewees were notoffered any incentive for speaking with Human Rights Watch, and they were ableto end the interview at any time. Human Rights Watch did not request access tothe detention sites; the information in this report is based on interviews withindividuals who were released from detention. Human Rights Watch has withheldnames and identifying information of victims and witnesses in order to protecttheir privacy and security. Most spoke on the condition of not beingidentified, as they feared reprisals from the military should it become knownthat they had spoken with a Human Rights Watch researcher.The description of events is based on informationcorroborated through multiple direct sources, particularly victims andeyewitnesses. Before an individual or security force unit was named asresponsible for certain crimes, Human Rights Watch ensured that the informationwas corroborated by multiple independent sources, including victims, witnesses,and other perpetrators involved.At the end of field research in September, Human RightsWatch shared its principal findings with the Ivorian government, including inmeetings with Interior Minister Hamed Bakayoko; and Human Rights MinisterGnénéma Coulibaly. Human Rights Watch appreciates thegovernment’s consistent openness to meetings on human rights issues andwelcomes the commitments made by both ministers to investigate and respond tothe concerns raised in this report.Human Rights Watch also wrote to Marcel Amon-Tanoh, chief ofstaff in the Ivorian presidency, on October 8, detailing the report’smain findings and asking for an official government response (see Annex I). Mr.Amon-Tanoh forwarded the request to the minister of human rights and public liberties(see Annex II), who responded to Human Rights Watch on November 1. Human RightsWatch has incorporated the government’s answers into the report body andhas also included the entire response in Annex III.BackgroundEighteen months after the heinous crimes that marked the post-electioncrisis, Côte d’Ivoire continues to be awash with small arms and to sufferfrom periodic internal and cross-border attacks on both civilian and militarytargets. These security threats crystallized in a series of attacks on Ivorian militaryinstallations in August 2012, following attacks in western Côted’Ivoire that originated across the border in Liberia. Côted’Ivoire’s neighbors to the east and west—Ghana and Liberia,respectively—have often responded inadequately to the presence in theircountry of people involved in planning and undertaking these attacks. Cooperationhas improved in recent months, however, particularly from Liberia.Post-Election CrisisAfter five years of postponing presidentialelections, Ivorians went to the polls on November 28, 2010 to vote in a run-offbetween incumbent President Laurent Gbagbo and former Prime Minister AlassaneOuattara. After the Independent Electoral Commission announced Ouattara thewinner with 54.1 percent of the vote—a result certified by the UNOperation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) and endorsed by regional bodiesand countries around the world—Gbagbo refused to step down.[1]Six monthsof violence followed, in which at least 3,000 civilians were killed and morethan 150 women raped, often in attacks perpetrated along political, ethnic, andreligious lines.During the first three months of thepost-election crisis, the vast majority of abuses were carried out by securityforces and militia groups under Gbagbo’s command.[2]Pro-Ouattara forces[3]launched amilitary offensive in March 2011 to take control of the country and, as thecrisis shifted to full-scale armed conflict, they were likewise implicated inatrocities. By conflict’s end in May 2011, both sides had committed war crimesand likely crimes against humanity, as documented by a UN-mandatedinternational commission of inquiry and human rights organizations.[4]In August2012, a national commission of inquiry created by President Ouattara publisheda report likewise documenting hundreds of summary executions and other crimesby both sides’ armed forces.[5]Yet, in spite of both forces’involvement in atrocities against civilians, Ivorian authorities have so faronly charged individuals from the Gbagbo camp with crimes related to thepost-election crisis—leading to concerns of victor’s justice thatwill only further the country’s politico-ethnic divisions.[6]By the end of the conflict, several hundred thousand people hadfled to Liberia or Ghana, a majority of whom either supported or were fromethnic groups which largely supported Gbagbo during the 2010 election. As of September2012, more than 60,000 remained in Liberia and thousands more were in Ghana.[7]Many were refugees who had witnessed or been victim to serious crimes, or had losttheir home during the fighting; they fear further abuses by government forcesif they return. Others in exile, however, are linked to grave crimes committedby pro-Gbagbo forces during the crisis. The UN Group of Experts on Liberiareported that at least hundreds of pro-Gbagbo militiamen who played an activerole in the 2010-2011 violence are among those living in Liberia.[8]A number of people who occupied civilian and military leadership positionsunder Gbagbo are in Ghana.[9] Some ofthese pro-Gbagbo militants in Ghana and Liberia now appear determined to use aneighboring country as a base to plot and organize attacks into Côted’Ivoire.[10]Ongoing Security ThreatsSporadic attacks along the Liberian-Ivorian border were initiallymet with tepid response from authorities on both sides of the border. However,a high-profile cross-border attack in which UN peacekeepers were killed,followed by a string of attacks on military installations in and aroundAbidjan, demonstrated a sophistication and organization among the attackers andprompted swift, but often draconian, measures from Ivorian authorities.Between July 2011 and April 2012, more than 40 civilians fromtypically pro-Ouattara ethnic groups were killed during four cross-borderattacks from Liberia into Côte d’Ivoire. Based on interviews onboth sides of the border, Human Rights Watch documented how the attackersgenerally crossed in the night, raided a village in targeting perceivedOuattara supporters, and then moved back into Liberia.[11]In April and May 2012, Human Rights Watch interviewed pro-Gbagbo militants inLiberia who admitted to having taken part in these attacks; they also madeclear that they were recruiting and mobilizing for additional attacks.[12]On June 8, seven UN peacekeepers from Niger and at least 10 civilians werekilled in another cross-border attack, prompting international condemnation andpressure to resolve security threats in the border region.[13]The Ivorian and Liberian militaries, as well as the UN missions in both countries,reinforced their presence and patrols in the area.[14]Click to expand ImageBlood remains on the floor of the Akouédo military base, where six Ivorian soldiers were killed during an August 6 raid. Pro-Gbagbo militants were alleged to be responsible, with support from soldiers inside the camp. ©SIA KAMBOU/AFP/GettyImagesClick to expand ImageSoldiers from the Republican Forces patrol Dabou on August 16, 2012, following an attack on an army base, a prison, and a police station the previous night. Progress in security sector reform remains minimal, and many soldiers continue to conduct policing functions. ©SIA KAMBOU/AFP/GettyImagesAfter more than a year of raids confined mostly toCôte d’Ivoire’s western border, a string of attacks onmilitary installations throughout the country in early August indicated a broaderand more complicated security threat. Early on August 5, a small military postand a police station were attacked in the Abidjan neighborhood of Yopougon. Atleast five soldiers were killed. Around the same time, a military base in thetown of Abengourou, near the Ghanaian border, likewise came under gunfire.[15]One day later, attackers launched their most ambitious assault yet—againstone of the largest military camps in Abidjan, known as Akouédo. At leastsix soldiers were killed, and the attackers made off with a substantial cacheof weapons from the camp’s armory.[16] The easewith which the attackers entered the camp and had access to the armory made itvery likely that there was assistance from soldiers within the camp, a factwidely recognized by government officials, diplomats, UN representatives,journalists, and others in Côte d’Ivoire.[17]Several more attacks against military posts followed insubsequent days, including on August 7 near the town of Agboville, 80kilometers to the north of Abidjan; on August 13 near Toulepleu, near theLiberian border; and on the night of August 15 in Dabou, some 40 kilometers tothe west of Abidjan. A prison was also broken into during the Dabou attack,leading to the evasion of all those detained.[18] Around20 people, including at least a dozen Ivorian soldiers, were killed during thecourse of seven August attacks.[19]The wave of attacks led to the re-militarization of Abidjan,with ubiquitous roadblocks and military patrols, particularly in the longtimepro-Gbagbo neighborhood of Yopougon. Concern about further attacks was stillpalpable when Human Rights Watch arrived on August 25. The tension was further fueledby the hyper-partisan and rumor-filled stories common in the Ivorian press. Themilitary presence and fear among the population gradually declined, thoughcontinued to exist, during the three weeks Human Rights Watch was in Abidjan.Immediately after the Akouédo attack, the Ouattaragovernment said that pro-Gbagbo militants were responsible. Interior MinisterHamed Bakayoko indicated that the attacks in Abidjan and the attacks in westernCôte d’Ivoire, such as the one during which the UN peacekeeperswere killed, were linked—with oversight and organization by hard-line Gbagbosupporters currently in Ghana.[20] The leadershipin Côte d’Ivoire of Gbagbo’s Ivorian Popular Front (FPI) deniedthe accusations and denounced the August attacks.[21]Several analysts suggested that the August attacks could be linked todiscontent among the tens of thousands of youth who fought with pro-Ouattaraforces during the crisis, retain their guns, and now feel forgotten asdisarmament, demobilization, and reinsertion (DDR) creeps forward at asnail’s pace.[22]Analysts positing this theory, however, generally saw pro-Gbagbo militants asthe more likely attackers, or saw the two potentially destabilizing issues occurringsimultaneously.[23]Although the precise details of the August attacks remainunclear, Human Rights Watch has documented clear connections between pro-Gbagbomilitants in Liberia and Ghana—and coordinated efforts to plan and carryout attacks in Côte d’Ivoire.[24] The UNGroup of Experts on Côte d’Ivoire reported similarly in an October15, 2012 report, stating that “military actions that have been conductedsince early 2012 in Côte d’Ivoire were planned in Ghanaianterritory, funds were transferred from Ghana to Liberia (physically or via banktransfers) and recruitment took place in Liberia.”[25]Among those against whom there is credible evidence of involvement in financingor planning attacks are a number of military and civilian leaders from theGbagbo regime who are subject to Ivorian and international arrest warrants, aswell as European Union sanctions.[26] Yet,until the August attacks, most appeared to live in neighboring countries,particularly Ghana, without fear of arrest and extradition to Côted’Ivoire.Liberian, Ghanaian ResponseFor more than a year after the end of the post-electioncrisis, Liberian authorities were slow and ineffective in responding to theflood of pro-Gbagbo militiamen and Liberian mercenaries—many implicatedin grave crimes—who crossed into Liberia. Several high-profile Liberianmercenaries responsible for serious international crimes during Côted’Ivoire’s post-election crisis were quietly released after aninitial arrest, and the militants steadily recruited and mobilized along theborder without effective response from Liberian authorities.[27]After the June 8 attack, however, Liberian authorities took steps toward monitoringtheir territory and finding those suspected of involvement in cross-borderattacks against civilians. On June 14, Liberia’sinformation minister announced that the country’s National SecurityCouncil had ordered the arrest of 10 Liberians and Ivorians potentiallyconnected to attacks along the Liberian-Ivorian border. Liberian authorities alsoannounced the closure of its border with Côte d’Ivoire, thedeployment of additional military forces to the area, and the suspension ofartisanal gold mining near the border due to its possible role in funding armedgroups.[28] A hearing was held that led to the June 23 extradition of 41 Ivoriansdetained in Liberia in connection with post-election crimes in Côted’Ivoire.[29]In July, Liberian authorities made additional arrestsrelated to the UN peacekeeper attack. On August 30, seven of those arrestedappeared before a Monrovia court to hear charges against them related tocross-border attacks.[30] Then onOctober 18, Liberian authorities announced the arrest of Bobby Sarpee, whosename was referenced as involved in recruitment and attacks by peopleinterviewed by Human Rights Watch along the border in April and May.[31]Liberian President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf met with President Ouattara in Abidjanthe same day, and the two signed an agreement that pledged, among other things,joint military action along the border before the end of 2012.[32]In Human Rights Watch’s meetings with Ivorian government officials inAbidjan, there was generally praise for the current cooperation betweenLiberian and Ivorian authorities in responding to the border threats.[33]Human Rights Watch remains concerned about Liberian authorities’inability or unwillingness to prosecute several Liberian mercenaries who havebeen implicated in serious international crimes in Côte d’Ivoire.[34]Key among this group is Isaac Chegbo, better known as “Bob Marley,”who was released on bail in February 2012 without the knowledge of theprosecutor in charge of the case.[35] Noprogress in prosecuting the case is apparent, despite, as reported by a UNPanel of Experts, that Chegbo admitted to Liberian authorities that he had beeninvolved in mercenary activities in Côte d’Ivoire—a seriouscrime under Liberian law.[36] Duringthe post-election crisis, forces under Chegbo’s command were involved in atleast two massacres in western Côte d’Ivoire in which more than 100people were killed on the basis of the ethnicity or nationality.[37]After Chegbo was granted bail, the UN Panel of Experts on Liberia reportedreceiving information “that Chegbo attended meetings among Liberian mercenariesin Grand Gedeh County … to discuss and plan cross-border attacks intoCôte d’Ivoire.”[38]The praise for Liberian authorities was in marked contrastto the frustration Ivorian officials expressed for the lack of cooperation fromthe Ghanian government. Many key civilian and military leaders close to Gbagbo—alongwith at least hundreds of pro-Gbagbo militiamen and soldiers—crossed intoGhana at the end of the post-election crisis. By mid-2011, Ivorian authoritieshad issued around two dozen international arrest warrants, most of them againstindividuals believed to be in Ghana.[39] Many ofthose subject to an extradition request were credibly implicated in gravecrimes during the post-election crisis; seven remain on the EuropeanUnion’s financial sanctions list, in part for their alleged continuedthreat to Côte d’Ivoire’s stability.[40]Yet prior to the August 2012 attacks in Côte d’Ivoire, Ghanaianauthorities had not acted on any of the warrants. Togo extradited one ofGbagbo’s former defense ministers, Moise Lida Kouassi, in June 2012.[41]After the attacks in Côte d’Ivoire in earlyAugust, there were signs of better cooperation from Ghana. The attacks closelyfollowed the July 24 death of Ghanaian President John Atta Mills, who waswidely seen as close to Gbagbo and protective of Gbagbo’s allies whocrossed into Ghana. On August 24, Ghanaian authorities arrested JustinKoné Katinan, Gbagbo’s budget minister during the crisis, after hereturned from South Africa.[42] Katinan’sarrest warrant originally related to economic crimes committed during thepost-election crisis.[43] Ivorianofficials also believe he is involved in financing efforts to attack anddestabilize in Côte d’Ivoire.[44] Katinan’sextradition hearing in Ghana has been repeatedly delayed.[45]During a visit to Côte d’Ivoire in earlySeptember, interim President John Mahama, who took power after President AttaMills’ death, promised that Ghana would not serve as a “rearbase” for threats to Côte d’Ivoire’s security.[46]On September 14, Ghanaian authorities arrested three men attempting to buyweapons who, according to a deputy police commissioner cited by Reuters,“admitted they were mobilizing arms to overthrow” the Ouattaragovernment.[47]Only one week later, early on September 21, armed men appearto have crossed from Ghana into Côte d’Ivoire to carry out anattack on an Ivorian military post in Noé, near the Ghanaian border.[48]The night before, two new attacks had been launched in the Abidjan neighborhoodsof Port-Bouët and Vridi, with three people killed.[49]The Ivorian government responded to the Noé attack by closing its land,air, and sea borders with Ghana,[50] thoughquickly reopened air traffic.[51] Landand sea borders reopened on October 8.[52]A new round of seemingly coordinated attacks occurred earlyin the morning of October 15, when armed men near simultaneously attacked anelectrical power station in Yopougon and a police station and gendarmerie inBonoua, a town around 60 kilometers to the east of Abidjan.[53]Better regional cooperation on arrests, prosecution, andextradition is crucial both to provide justice for the grave post-electioncrimes and to address threats to regional security. It is likewise essential thatIvorian authorities ensure that accountability occurs through fair trials andwithin the confines of international and Ivorian law. The military’sresponse to the August attacks instead shows that they are resorting topractices akin to those that marred the post-election crisis—namely,human rights abuses that stem from assigning collective guilt to certain ethnicgroups, and particularly young males from those ethnic groups, that tend tosupport Gbagbo.I. Torture, Mistreatment, Inhuman Conditions at theAdjamé Military Police CampEven now, I haven’t found myself. I wake up at night and thinkthat I’m still in the cell, that I’m still being questioned andbeaten.—Soldier detained at Adjamé militarypolice camp, August 2012[54]In the aftermath of the early August attacks, in particularthe August 6 attack on the Akouédo military camp, Ivorian securityforces arrested hundreds of young men alleged to have been involved in or haveknowledge about the attacks. More than 100 of those arrested were detained atthe Adjamé military police base, under the command of the former ForcesNouvelles commander Koné Zakaria.[55] Themilitary police was reactivated by President Ouattara in December 2011 andtasked primarily with tracking down “fake” members of theRepublican Forces—in effect, fighters who were not to be incorporatedinto the army but yet remained armed and active in security functions.[56]While the military police base may have been an appropriate place to questionand detain soldiers believed to have been involved in the attacks,[57]many of those held there were civilians—in contravention of Ivorian andinternational law.Human Rights Watch interviewed eight former detainees at themilitary police camp, five of whom provided detailed evidence suggesting thatthey had been victims of torture. They described how military personnelsubjected them to beatings, flogging, and other extreme forms of physical mistreatmentgenerally with the purpose of demanding answers to questions about the locationof guns or alleged suspects, or in order to pressure the detainee to sign a confessionof involvement in an attack against state security. Many former detainees describedexperiencing severe physical injuries, including one who, a week after hisrelease, continued to have blood in his urine from the beatings. They alsodescribed seeing other detainees come back to the cell with bruised faces,severe swelling, and open wounds.Detainees at the military police camp also describedsuffering grossly inadequate detention conditions, including severeovercrowding, near complete denial of food and water, and humiliating practiceslike being placed in a room filled with excrement. Many were forced to pay thesoldiers guarding them to secure their release.The former detainees interviewed by Human Rights Watch wereall young men from ethnic groups perceived to support Laurent Gbagbo. Theydescribed their detention rooms as being full with people from the same ethnicgroups, including the Bété, Guéré, Ebrié,Oubi, and Adioukrou—though, if the government is correct in stating thatpro-Gbagbo militants carried out the attacks, the ethnic breakdown of detaineesis perhaps unsurprising. According to former detainees as well asrepresentatives from international organizations who have monitored thegovernment’s response to the August attacks, some of those arrested werepicked up in the immediate aftermath of the specific attacks, as securityforces pursued the attackers. Others were arrested based on some measure ofevidence, for example a neighbor saying that the person had housed militiamen.Finally, many young men were picked up during mass arrests in areas with aconcentration of perceived Gbagbo supporters (the mass arrests will bediscussed in Chapter II).Once in detention at the military police base inAdjamé, many individuals were held for extended periods without being chargedor appearing before a judge. Ivorian law stipulates that a civilian should becharged or released within 48 hours of being arrested or detained.[58]Military personnel are likewise to be brought before the competent judicialauthority within 48 hours.[59] Yet oneformer detainee at the Adjamé camp was held and routinely beaten for twoweeks before being released without charges; another was held and beaten formore than 20 days before being released without charges. Detentions of at leasta week without being charged or appearing before a judge were common.Human Rights Watch wrote the Ivorian government on October 8requesting an official response to the main findings from our field work (seeAnnex I). In responding to a question on prolonged detention without appearingbefore a judge, Ivorian Minister of Human Rights and Public LibertiesGnénéma Coulibaly wrote:The slowness documented in the judicial procedures predatesthe current government. For several decades there has been an obstruction ofthe courts, too much rigidity in the Penal Code in the face of evolutions inIvorian society, and, above all, a lack of resources given to judges—all ofwhich has made it difficult, at present, to strictly respect the period forappearing before a judge for all detainees.Moreover, the gravity of the crimes that those arrestedhave been implicated in demands that the investigations are done thoroughly,which requires some time.[60]Human Rights Watch agrees that previous governments inCôte d’Ivoire likewise failed to respect Ivorian and internationalhuman rights law regarding detainees’ right to a prompt appearance beforea judge in order to hear the charges against them. However, abuses thatoccurred under the Gbagbo government should be avoided, not replicated, inrestoring the rule of law. The minister’s response also seems tooverstate the difficulty of meeting this requirement. It does not demand atrial within 48 hours, but merely that there should be sufficient evidence tokeep a person in detention and that the person be informed of the chargesagainst him or her. People are innocent until proven guilty under Ivorian andhuman rights law, and should not be held in confinement when authorities areunable to gather sufficient evidence linking the person to a crime grave enoughto warrant pre-trial detention. The apparent lack of individualized evidencethat authorities relied on during the mass roundups makes this all the moreurgent.Mr. Coulibaly also responded to a question on the legalbasis for detaining civilians in military camps, including the Adjamémilitary police camp and two other military camps discussed in Chapter II ofthis report. The minister justified the practice in part on account of prison escapesthat had occurred at two of the main prison facilities in and around Abidjanprior to and during the period of the August attacks. He continued:In the face of these events, although the law states thatpreventative detentions are to occur in prisons, it was inconceivable to detainindividuals suspected of involvement in attacks against state security withouttaking a minimum of precautions. The military sites were at that point the mostsecure places to avoid likely escapes.In addition, it is important to note that we are notspeaking of ordinary citizens, but combatants and militiamen who do nothesitate to kill Ivorian soldiers in cold blood. Whatever the cause, theIvorian government is working to find solutions to these problems by renovatingthe prisons.[61]Human Rights Watch welcomes the government’scommitment to renovate the prisons and use them as the sole detention sitesgoing forward, as stipulated under Ivorian law. However, Human Rights Watch isconcerned with the rest of the government’s response to the question ondetaining civilians in military camps. Although a serious security threat mayexist, this is not a situation of armed conflict and international humanitarianlaw does not apply—meaning that normal rules on the use of force inpolicing situations apply, and the attackers cannot be considered “combatants”under humanitarian law.Moreover, as described above and detailed more fully in thenext chapter, the vast majority of individuals detained were arrested in masssweeps—neither in hot pursuit after attacks nor on the basis ofindividualized suspicion connecting a person to specific attacks. Human RightsWatch is concerned by the government’s apparent characterization of all thedozens of young men rounded up en masse in August as combatants or militiamen. Thischaracterization supports the contention of pro-Gbagbo youth that they are treatedas guilty, or as militiamen, until proven otherwise, rather than the other wayaround.Regarding the minister’s assertion that prison escapesmade military camps necessary as detention sites, it is disingenuous at best topretend that all of those detained in August were high-profile suspects. Thevast majority of former detainees interviewed by Human Rights Watch merelybelonged to ethnic groups perceived as pro-Gbagbo and found themselves in thewrong place—namely Yopougon neighborhood—at the wrong time. Thefact that hundreds of these young men were released further calls into questionthe minister’s statement that it was “inconceivable” to holdthem in legally authorized detention sites. For those detained less than 48hours, police or gendarme stations would have worked adequately; for thosedetained longer, the main Abidjan prison continued to house detainees duringthis period. More fundamentally, the military has no role under Ivorian law inarresting, questioning, or detaining civilians.Torture and Inhuman TreatmentOf particular concern at the Adjamé military policebase was the physical mistreatment of detainees that, in some cases, appearedto reach the level of torture. Torture is defined under the Convention againstTorture as:any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physicalor mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person for such purposes asobtaining from him or a third person information or a confession, punishing himfor an act he or a third person has committed or is suspected of havingcommitted … when such pain or suffering is inflicted by or at theinstigation of or with the consent or acquiescence of a public official orother person acting in an official capacity.[62]In the cases documented by Human Rights Watch, severephysical pain appeared to be inflicted by state agents, namely militarypersonnel, in order to pressure people into a confession or to divulgeinformation about the location of weapons. Torture did not appear to besystematic, as other detainees described only minimal physical abuse. However,the cases documented by Human Rights Watch raise concerns about the totalnumber of potential victims.Three of the five torture victims interviewed by HumanRights Watch were civilians who, according to Ivorian and international law, shouldnot be detained at the military camp. A 36-year-old civilian described hisarrest and detention at the Adjamé military camp, which included theinfliction of severe physical pain in an attempt to extract information:Several weeks ago [around August 20], I was leavingAdzopé around 7:30 p.m. It was too late to take a minibus, so I gotaboard a big [commercial transport] truck. When passing through the corridor ofAnyama to enter N’Dotré, the FRCI had a checkpoint there andstopped the truck. They said that I was a militiaman, that’s why I was ina transport truck and not a minibus or Gbaka. They immediately startedhitting me, saying that I was hiding a gun…. They put me in a 4x4 andtook me to the Adjamé military base, [Koné] Zakaria’s [thehead of the military police] base. They put me in a cell there. There were fourrooms that I saw where they were holding people, but it’s a big camp,there could have been other cells. We were about 20 in each of thosecells….I was there for a week, and they questioned me every daybut the last one. Each day they pulled me out and took me to another room forquestioning. They would say, “We know you’re a militiaman, and thatyou’re hiding guns in the bush. You’re trying to destroy thecountry. Where are your guns?” They’d demand this over and over,“Where are your guns hidden?” And when I’d say that Ididn’t know, that I didn’t have any guns, they’d strike me.They’d strike me over and over, hard. “Where are the guns?”“I don’t own a gun, I’ve never held a gun.” Whack!They’d wrap their belt around their hand and hit me in the head, theface, the side. The metal [ring] of the belt was on the end they hit you with,[I think] to inflict the most pain. It wore me out…. I had a lot ofwounds, from when they’d strike you just right with the metal ring. Otherpeople in my cell also had wounds—people would come back with swollenfaces, bleeding from open wounds. The interrogations would last about 30minutes, and after enough times of saying you didn’t know anything, andgetting hit, they’d take you back to the cell.After a week of beating me, they said that I had to pay100,000 CFA ($200) or I would be sent elsewhere and killed. I used one of theirphones to call my parents, who brought the money to get me out.[63]Another civilian detainee informed Human Rights Watch that hesuffered similar physical mistreatment as his military interrogators demandedhe provide information about the whereabouts of specific individuals theinterrogators alleged to have been involved in carrying out or supporting theattacks. He also described hearing fellow detainees scream out in pain fromnearby interrogation rooms, wondering if others suffered even worse cruelty.[64]Two of the torture victims interviewed by Human Rights Watchwere soldiers still formally in the Ivorian military, but who were fromtypically pro-Gbagbo ethnic groups and had remained in Gbagbo’s securityforces (often called ex-FANCI, for the former army name, ForcesArmées Nationales de Côte d’Ivoire) duringthe post-election crisis. Both were arrested within two days of theAkouédo attack. Although specific details have been omitted to protecthis identity, one such soldier, who appeared severely distressed wheninterviewed by Human Rights Watch several days after his release, described:I was beaten repeatedly. They were trying to get me to signa confession, saying that I [had played a role in the attacks]. They would putthe paper in front of me, telling me to sign it. And when I refused,they’d beat me. They beat me with clubs, with their belts, withfists…. A couple days they were particularly rough. During onequestioning, one guy took the back of his Kalash[nikov] and kept slamming itinto my [leg bone]. It hurt so bad that I thought it was broken…. Acouple of them would say things like, “You the old military men,we’re going to be finished with all of you.”We were held in a little building inside the camp withoutany light. There was just a small hole we could see out. People were sleepingon top of each other, or sitting up because there wasn’t room…. Wegot a small thing of bread every two days. And they would toss in a couple one-and-a-halfliter bottles of water, and all of us in the room—at least 50 people—wouldhave to share it. We got so hungry and thirsty…. One day we saw the RedCross come. We could see their people, but they weren’t allowed to speakto us.Later it was the gendarmes who questioned me. Theydidn’t rough you up like [the FRCI], they just asked questions. [I think]they decided I wasn’t involved, because the questioning stopped after acouple days with them. But I did more than three weeks in detention beforebeing released.I became delirious from the beatings, the lack of food andwater…. Even now, I haven’t found myself. I wake up at night andthink that I’m still in the cell, that I’m still being questionedand beaten. I bleed sometimes when I [go to the bathroom]. And the worst woundsare inside, in my head…. I don’t know what to do, I’m freenow, but I feel like I could be picked up again at any moment. All of us whoaren’t ex-FN [Forces Nouvelles], who are from certain [perceivedpro-Gbagbo] ethnic groups, that’s who they’re going after. Theydon’t trust us.[65]Of those detained in the same adhoc cell as the soldier, he said there were both civilians and military men—butthat the civilians were more numerous than the military. He indicated that somepeople were taken out for questioning more than others and that he was one ofthe most frequently questioned. He described other detainees coming back afterquestioning with bruised faces, swelling throughout their body, and in extremepain.[66]Another soldier who had been in Gbagbo’s militaryduring the war described similar physical mistreatment following his arrest inthe days after the Akouédo attack. Moreover, he said that during severalinterrogations the military police in charge of his questioning threatened to rapeand kill his wife if he did not confess to supporting those trying to attackCôte d’Ivoire. He was ultimately released after more than 10 daysin detention.[67]In addition to the severe physical abuse, several detaineesdescribed inhuman and degrading conditions of confinement. A civilian describedhow soldiers used a specific cell to further punish certain detainees:One of the cells was used for people to piss and shit. Itwas the only room with a hole for a toilet, but there were so many of us thatsoon the whole room was just covered with urine and shit. One day, I guess [thesoldiers who interrogated me] decided they didn’t like my answers. Ithink it was the second day. At the end of questioning, they put me in thetoilet room; there were a couple other people in there already. The smell washorrible, and I had open wounds from being beaten. You couldn’t sitanywhere without being in [excrement]…. They did this to people everyday, it only happened to me once. If they weren’t happy with youranswers, or thought you were acting up, they threw you in the shit room forhours, sometimes all night…. By the time I was released, I’ddeveloped these skin infections [seen by Human Rights Watch, though the causecould not be confirmed] on my arm and leg.[68]Human Rights Watch also interviewed several family membersof people who had been held at the Adjamé military camp prior to atransfer to another detention facility. The family members had been able tospeak with the detainee at a new facility (either the Plateau police station orthe main Abidjan prison, known as MACA), and reported descriptions of severephysical abuse prior to the transfer.[69] Asister who had recently visited her brother at the MACA reported that heremained bruised and swollen in the face, saying he described being struckrepeatedly above the ear with the back of soldiers’ guns. She told HumanRights Watch that her brother had spent several days at the MACA infirmary torecover from his mistreatment.[70] HumanRights Watch was not able to interview the victim directly to confirm the storyof abuse and where it took place, as he remained in detention.Other detainees at the military police camp did not reporttorture. Human Rights Watch interviewed three former detainees at the militarycamp who described experiencing only minimal physical abuse. They were forcedto pay money for their release, similar to what is described in the followingchapter on mass arrests.The commander of the military police and the military campin Adjamé is Koné Zakaria—a longtime Forces Nouvelles commander and one of the most powerful military leaders in Côte d’Ivoire.None of the former detainees interviewed by Human Rights Watch said thatZakaria himself was involved in his mistreatment. Only one of the detaineessaid that they ever saw Zakaria personally at the camp, and it was through aneyehole in the detainee’s cell.[71] However,even if not directly overseeing torture and other inhuman treatment at theAdjamé military camp, Zakaria is the commander in charge of the camp andof the soldiers in his military police unit who are based at the camp. Moreover,given the large number of detainees held at his camp, the length of some people’sdetention there, and the pervasive nature of the abuses, it is likely that Zakariaknew or should have known about the mistreatment. Military commanders have aresponsibility to take reasonable and necessary steps to prevent abuses bythose under their command and to punish those responsible for abuses.[72]In addition, Human RightsWatch received credible information about recent cases of torture against detaineesheld in a Republican Forces military base in San Pedro, a town in southwesternCôte d’Ivoire about 350 kilometers from Abidjan.[73] On October 4, the Associated Press reported thatsoldiers at the San Pedro military camp had subjected at least four civiliandetainees to electric shock, finding that “long wires were attached to their feet, midsections and necksbefore electrical shocks were administered.”[74] The Associated Pressdescribed the beating of detainees andinhuman conditions more generally in the camp.[75]As a State Party to the Convention against Torture, Côte d’Ivoire has a responsibility to take allnecessary measures to prevent torture within its territory.[76]The Convention makes clear that “[n]o exceptionalcircumstances whatsoever, whether a state of war or a threat of war, internalpolitical instability or any other public emergency, may be invoked as ajustification of torture.”[77]Minister Coulibaly’s response to Human Rights Watchaddressed the findings of torture:In regards to the allegations of torture, be assured thatthe authors of these crimes, if they are identified, will be brought tojustice…. President Ouattara has never wavered in affirming his strongwill to fight against impunity, and this has been seen in recent days with theinvestigation into soldiers in the Republican Forces suspected of havingparticipated in the killings that happened at Nahibly [an internally displacedcamp outside Duékoué] in July.[78]Human Rights Watch appreciates the government’scommitment to ensure justice for victims of torture and welcomes recentprogress toward prosecutions for murders committed during the Nahibly campattack in July.[79] Thereality remains, however, that there has been minimal progress in addressing impunityamong the Republican Forces, particularly at the command level. No member ofthe Republican Forces has been arrested for crimes committed during thepost-election violence, and soldiers and commanders implicated in seriouscrimes in response to the August attacks appear to have been similarlyprotected from accountability. For the Ivorian government to fulfill itspromise to fight against impunity, credible investigations and prosecutions forhuman rights abuses must become the norm—rather than for isolatedincidents.II. Mass Arbitrary Arrests, Illegal Detention, andExtortionHow does the government expect reconciliation when the FRCI steal fromus, treat us all with suspicion, [and] do daily mass arrests?—Pro-Gbagbo youtharbitrarily arrested in Yopougon and detained at the BAE camp, August 2012[80]Although arbitrary arrests occurred in June 2012 after theIvorian government said it had thwarted a coup d’état attempt, theAugust 6 attack on Akouédo precipitated a crackdown unlike any since theend of the post-election crisis. A diplomat from a key partner to Côted’Ivoire told Human Rights Watch that there were deep concerns about howIvorian authorities had framed the issue: “The language they use is veryconcerning: ‘eradication,’ ‘terrorism,’ ‘cleanthe country up’. They’re so convinced they’re right [aboutthe nature of the threat and the extent of grassroots involvement] … thatthey’ve decided to put reconciliation aside.”[81]Human Rights Watch interviewed 31 people picked up in massarrests between August 7 and September 11 in Yopougon and around Dabou, andtheir statements indicated that hundreds more had been similarly arrested anddetained. In the vast majority of cases, the security forces did not presentany specific reason as to why the person was being arrested, much less anarrest warrant. Rather, the security forces—primarily the military—arrivedin typically pro-Gbagbo areas and forced young men en masse to board militarytrucks in which they were shuttled to detention sites.The overwhelming majority of those interviewed by HumanRights Watch were civilians detained at military bases—particularly theYopougon BAE base, the Dabou military camp, and the Adjamé base of themilitary police, discussed in the previous section. In some cases, the arrests,though done without any individual statement of reasons for the arrest, letalone the filing of charges, appeared to be tangentially related to security:once in detention, members of the Republican Forces (FRCI) demanded thelocation of guns or militia leaders and took detainees’ fingerprints or picture.In other cases, the arrests appeared to be little more than an extortionscheme: many interviewed by Human Rights Watch said they were never askedquestions, even their name. Whether questioned or not, the way to be releasedwas consistent: meet the FRCI’s demand and pay an often substantial sumof money.None of those interviewed who were detained after massarrests ever appeared before a judge, despite the requirement under Ivorian lawthat an individual appear within 48 hours. Many were in illegal detention atmilitary camps for between three and six days.The majority of those interviewed by Human Rights Watchsuffered physical abuse at the hands of the Republican Forces at the moment ofthe arrest, while in detention, or both. While in these cases of mass arrestsuch treatment generally did not reach the level of torture, it often met thedefinition of cruel and inhuman treatment.The worst and most recurrent abuses documented by HumanRights Watch linked to mass arrests occurred under the command of OusmaneCoulibaly, known as “Bin Laden,” the officer then in charge of theBAE camp in Yopougon Gesco. There, Yopougon residents and former detaineesdescribed near-daily illegal detentions, abusive treatment, and extortionduring the month of August. In addition, Coulibaly was in charge of overseeingthe response to the August 15 attack in Dabou—a response likewise plaguedby mass arbitrary arrests and extortion of detainees to obtain their release. HumanRights Watch continued to document new rounds of arbitrary arrests in Dabou throughSeptember 11, two days before the researcher left Côte d’Ivoire.Article 9 of the ICCPR forbids arbitrary arrests anddetentions, requiring that “[a]nyone who is arrested shall be informed,at the time of arrest, of the reasons for his arrest and shall be promptlyinformed of any charges against him.”[82] Article7 of the ICCPR, along with the Convention against Torture, protects individualsfrom cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment by state agents like the RepublicanForces.[83] Here,the definition of cruel or inhuman treatment is met in a number of cases eitherby the severity of physical suffering inflicted or by the poor detentionconditions, including lack of access to food and water.Human Rights Watch did document several cases in which thetraditional security forces responsible for internal security—the policeand gendarmerie—tried to intervene to stop abuses by the military. Attimes they were successful, while in other cases they were told by soldiersthat it was not their affair. Abuses by the Republican Forces appeared to be lessacute during searches or patrols when police officers or gendarmes werepresent.Yopougon BAE CampIn the aftermath of the August 5 attacks on a military postand police station in Yopougon, a neighborhood known as a bastion of Gbagbosupporters, members of the Republican Forces responded with mass arbitraryarrests often done apparently on the basis of little more than theperson’s ethnicity. Although the August 6 attack on Akouédooccurred on the other side of Abidjan, the allegation of involvement ofpro-Gbagbo elements was likewise followed by the mass detention of young men incertain areas of Yopougon, without any individual charges brought.The frontline of the military’s response in Yopougonwas directed by the Republican Forces based at the BAE (for Brigadeanti-émeute, or anti-riot unit) police camp. The BAE camp is one ofseveral police camps and stations still controlled by the military.[84]For much of August, the BAE camp served as a revolving door of detainees—withdozens of people arriving after new arrests each day, and dozens of othersreleased upon the payment of an extorted sum of money. Inhuman treatment waspervasive.A 27-year-old from Yopougon described his arrest on August24 and subsequent detention at the BAE camp, a testimony similar to several dozenothers taken by Human Rights Watch:I was in a maquis (neighborhood restaurant) with agroup of friends. Around 9 p.m., the FRCI arrived in a cargo truck and took allof us from the maquis, even the owner and manager. We were taken to the37th police precinct, still controlled by the FRCI. There we had toshow our ID cards, and they said, “Oh, you’re Bété [awestern, typically pro-Gbagbo ethnic group], go here. Oh, you’re Dioula[85][encompassing several northern, typically pro-Ouattara ethnic groups], gothere.” The Dioulas stayed at the 37th [precinct], those of usfrom [pro-Gbagbo] ethnic groups were taken to the BAE camp in [Yopougon] Gesco….In the cargo truck, the forced us down and beat us, saying “It’syou the militiamen who we’re looking for.” They stepped on us,kicked us with their boots. They’d even walk on your head, making jokesabout squashing militiamen. One guy next to me tried to talk, and one of theFRCI quickly smacked him on the head with the back of his gun. He startedbleeding.When we arrived at the camp, we were put in a cell, about30 of us. It was really hot in there, and we were packed together, therewasn’t enough room to lie down. They took us out in groups to questionus, asking us where guns were hidden. They didn’t question me for long, Iguess they believed me. They separated a couple people; I didn’t see themagain….The next morning, the FRCI brought in a guy that works at aphone stand nearby. They told us that we would have to pay 300,000 CFA ($600)to be released. We pleaded and bargained them down to 150,000. I used theguy’s phone to call my cousin. He and my mother came and paid the money,and I was released. I was lucky I only did one day there, but now we havenothing left; my family gave everything for my release.[86]A Ouattara supporter who lives near the BAE camp told HumanRights Watch, “You wouldn’t believe the things we see there eachday. [There are] always youth being trucked in, being beaten. They don’teven hide [the abuses]; it’s often in plain view. [The FRCI there]aren’t afraid of any consequences.”[87]An Ivorian civil society leader agreed: “[The soldiers implicated inabuses] are at ease. They don’t fear anything, and that’s the mostdangerous thing: the complete impunity.”[88]Arbitrary ArrestHuman Rights Watch interviewed Yopougon residents who werearrested in their homes, while eating at a maquis, with friends at a bar,when walking home from church, when in a taxi or a bus, and when attending a funeral.These arrests primarily occurred in perceived pro-Gbagbo areas of Yopougon,including the Koweit, Sicogi, and Niangon neighborhoods. Detainees and other witnessessaid often 20 or more people would be arrested at the same time, none of theminformed of any specific allegations, much less an arrest warrant, againstthem.In almost all of the arrests documented by Human RightsWatch in Yopougon, soldiers from the Republican Forces acted alone or in thelead role in performing the arrests—a role inconsistent with Ivorian andinternational law. Under Ivorian law, the responsibility for arrestingcivilians rests primarily with the judicial police, which includes specificcategories of the administrative police and the gendarmerie—but not themilitary.[89] Indelegating the responsibility for neighborhood searches and arrests to soldiersnot trained to perform such activities—and in particular in delegating tospecific former Forces Nouvelles commanders, who often rely on“volunteers” not formally part of the military—Ivorianauthorities opened the door to the human rights abuses that followed.A 28-year-old who was arrested on August 25 told HumanRights Watch that soldiers were clear that there was no individualized basisfor the arrest:I was sitting down in my house when [soldiers] arrived ataround 10 or 11 a.m. They announced that they were doing a house-by-housesearch for guns and a mass roundup. They told me to follow them, and we walkedto Carrefour Koweit, where there was a cargo truck waiting with lots of youthalready inside. They took 20 to 30 of us to the BAE camp, then went back to theneighborhood to pick up more. They did this all day…. I stayed three daysat the BAE, you wouldn’t believe how many people were detainedthere…. They threatened to send me to the military headquarters if myfamily didn’t pay for my release…. It was 60,000 CFA ($120) that myfamily ultimately paid.[90]A 24-year-old similarly described the FRCI arriving inYopougon Niangon in a 4x4 covered pickup truck on August 15 and announcing a“systematic mass arrest” as he was walking home around 8:30 p.m. Hewas told to get into the back of the truck, where there were already eight otheryouth males, and was taken to the 16th police precinct in Yopougonbefore being transferred to and detained at the BAE camp for two days. Hisfamily ultimately paid 10,000 CFA ($20) for his release.[91]In most cases documented by Human Rights Watch, the securityforces appeared to target youth from typically pro-Gbagbo ethnic groups. As oneformer BAE detainee said, “You look around [at the detainees] and you seeBété, Guéré, Goro, but no Dioulas.”[92]But at times the mass arrests also swept up people from perceived pro-Ouattaragroups. Human Rights Watch interviewed a Malinké who was among a grouparbitrarily arrested en masse on August 11. He said that he tried to presenthis ID card to show that he was from a northern ethnic group, but the soldierssaid they were not interested in seeing papers. As he was being forced into acargo truck, he recalled saying, incredulously, “I voted ADO[Ouattara’s initials], I voted ADO!” But the soldiers said,“We’re taking everyone here in today.” After arriving at theBAE camp, however, the man was able to call a contact in the local RDR youthwing and was quickly released without having to pay anything.[93]Yopougon residents, particularly in pro-Gbagbo areas, toldHuman Rights Watch that they lived with a de facto curfew because of theroutine arbitrary arrests. Many related that any group of young men frompro-Gbagbo ethnic groups outside after 8 p.m.—whether at a restaurant, abar, or walking along the street—was likely to be arrested. In asentiment expressed almost unanimously, a 27-year-old from Yopougon Koweitsaid: “You have to be in your house after 8 p.m., or you’ll haveproblems. If you’re outside after then, especially with a group offriends, you’ll be arrested…. Yopougon becomes a ghost town.”[94]In response to a Human Rights Watch question about thejuridical basis for mass arrests, the minister of human rights and public libertiessaid that after attacking the military, the assailants “would ridthemselves of their arms and hide among the population. It was on the basis ofa body of evidence and often after denunciation that these people were arrestedas part of an investigation. It was targeted arrests and not massarrests.”[95]As noted above, particularly in regards to the Adjamécamp, Human Rights Watch did document a few cases in which people were arrestedon the basis of “denunciations” or some other form of intelligence.But in the vast majority of cases documented by Human Rights Watch, arrestswere clearly not targeted on the basis of individualized suspicion. Rounding up20-50 young men seated at a maquis, on board a bus, or in house-to-housearrests in certain neighborhoods is not targeted and is in conflict withIvorian and human rights law. As detailed below, the arbitrary nature of thearrest was further confirmed by the fact that many of those detained for daysat the BAE and Dabou military camps were never questioned. They were merelyheld, often subjected to inhuman treatment, and then forced to pay a sum ofmoney to gain their release. The government’s answer also does notrespond to the fact that the Republican Forces—in contrast to police,gendarmes, and judicial police—do not appear to have any basis underIvorian law to perform such arrests, whether targeted or mass in nature.Arbitrary Detention, Inhuman TreatmentThe former detainees at the BAE camp interviewed by Human RightsWatch were all civilians and therefore should not have been brought to ordetained at a military camp. The length of detention at the BAE camp rangedfrom one to six days among those who Human Rights Watch interviewed. No oneinterviewed had charges presented against him, nor did anyone interviewedappear before a judge. As noted above, Ivorian law stipulates that any civilianunder arrest is to be charged or released within 48 hours,[96]making anything beyond that time an arbitrary detention under the Code ofCriminal Procedure and the Ivorian constitution.[97]Because Human Rights Watch interviewed people who had beenreleased, the information is likely skewed toward those that spent the leastamount of time in detention. Interviewees universally said that many people remainedin detention when they were released, since release was dependant on paying asum of money. And many former detainees described specific individuals beingseparated out, handcuffed, and moved from the BAE to another facility—likelymore permanent detention sites, including the military police base inAdjamé, the Direction de la surveillance du territoire (Departmentof Territorial Surveillance, commonly known as the DST) in Plateau, and themain Abidjan prison, known as MACA.Physical abuse against detainees at the BAE camp was common,although did not always occur; several former detainees reported not beingphysically mistreated after the initial arrest. For those who were beaten, itwas generally during questioning or while outside in the courtyard due toovercrowding in detention rooms. One former detainee described being slappedrepeatedly as soldiers referred to him as a “militiaman” during aninterrogation.[98] Anotherdetainee described soldiers striking him with their belts while being askedabout the location of hidden guns. He related, “If they weren’tsatisfied with my response, they hit me—in the head, on the back. Andthey were never satisfied, as I didn’t know anything about guns and kepttelling them so.”[99] Thedetainee showed Human Rights Watch several scars on his back and head that hesaid were from wounds suffered during detention.Another detainee, arrested on August 17, described how soldierstormented him and other detainees as they tried to sleep outside at the camp:We had to sleep outside because of how crowded the campwas. All night the first night, if you started to fall asleep, one of thesoldiers would walk by and smack you with the back of his gun, or kick you.They would laugh as they were doing it and call us “bastards”….After a couple times of them hitting me, I stopped trying to fall asleep. Myface was swollen from when they struck me with the back of a Kalash[nikovrifle]….[100]After their release, several people interviewed by HumanRights Watch sought medical treatment for injuries suffered during their arrestor detention. One had been repeatedly kicked in the chest by soldiers at theBAE camp, resulting in severe pain and difficulty breathing.[101]Another former detainee reported having his hand broken when a soldier slammedthe back of his Kalashnikov down on it.[102]Several former detainees also described hearing what theybelieved was physical abuse. One person taken to the BAE camp on August 20after soldiers removed and arrested all males on a mini-bus entering Yopougon Koweittold Human Rights Watch:There were guys we heard crying out in pain. Icouldn’t see it, because they didn’t do it inside the cell. Butyou’d hear what sounded like beatings, like [the soldiers] were landingpunches or striking someone with a cord. You’d hear “Please stop,please stop,” and then the person crying out as they were being struck….Sometimes it was people they would take from my cell, and they would returnlater with marks [from being hit]. Other times it was people from other cells,as I never saw them but you could hear these beatings going on.[103]In addition to physical abuse, those detained at the BAEcamp experienced abusive conditions linked to the fact that the camp is anirregular detention site, rather than a prison or police station. Rooms around 12feet by 12 feet in size were packed with as many as 30 detainees. Severaldetainees said they slept seated next to each other at night. Others describedtaking turns sleeping, with 10 people lying down for a couple hours while theothers stood or sat until it was time to rotate.[104]On days in which a particularly large number of people were arbitrarilyarrested, dozens of detainees were forced to spend the night outside at the BAEcamp—left to the elements, including rain and mosquitoes.[105]All of those interviewed by Human Rights Watch detained atthe BAE camp said that the soldiers in charge of the camp did not provide anyfood or water. Any food was brought by family members who knew that a relativewas detained there; new detainees tried to then pass the news of theirdetention back to their family through those that brought food. Detaineesshared the food that was brought, though this generally meant eating as littleas a few bites of bread per day. Many detainees described going several dayswithout eating anything.[106]Criminal Acts by the FRCI duringArrests and DetentionsNearly all of those interviewed described the widespreadcommission of criminal acts by members of the FRCI in Yopougon. These crimeswere perpetrated first during the process of neighborhood sweeps and massarrests, when soldiers stole cash and valuables such as cell phones, computers,and jewelry from people’s homes and off people being arrested; and second,by demanding money in order to secure a detainee’s release. The massarrests appear to have been a financial boon for members of the RepublicanForces based at the BAE camp, and a crippling hardship to those who were sweptup because of their age and perceived political affiliation.All but two detainees at the BAE interviewed by Human RightsWatch said they were forced to pay soldiers there in order to obtain theirrelease. In general, those arrested and detained in the week after the Akouédoattack reported having to pay between 10,000 and 30,000 CFA ($20-$60), while bythe end of August the demanded sum appeared to have risen to between 60,000 and150,000 CFA ($120-$300). A number of detainees described a “negotiation”with the soldiers, in which a higher sum was originally demanded before thedetainee or his family bargained them down to a lower figure. Soldiers wouldoften hand the detainee a phone to call his parents and report the amountneeded for a release; in other cases, as described in the formerdetainee’s statement at the beginning of this chapter, the soldiersbrought in a person who ran a phone stand near the BAE camp to place the calls.Human Rights Watch spoke with seven people who were either victimor witness to theft perpetrated by individuals in or aligned with theRepublican Forces during the course of neighborhood sweeps after the Augustattacks. A 26-year-old from western Côte d’Ivoire described theongoing financial consequences of his ordeal:On Saturday [August 25], they came to my house at around 1p.m. They were doing searches throughout the neighborhood [Yopougon Koweit].They said that they were looking for weapons and went through my rooms. Theytook a laptop [computer] that was in my room, a computer that had been given tome for work by my boss. They also stole the money I had in my house, my LG cellphone, and a cylinder of gas. Everything I had of value, they took…. Theydemanded that my wife and I show our [ID] papers, and when they saw mine theysaid, “You’re from the West. You’re one of the pro-Gbagbosthat did checkpoints here.” On and on, telling me that I was amilitiaman. They ripped up my [ID] papers and told me to get in their truck.I spent a night at the 37th police precinct [inYopougon], and then at 6 a.m. I was put in a cargo truck to go to the BAE[military camp]. There were so many people at the 37th precinct,more than 50, maybe more than 100. They’d take people in a cargo truck tothe BAE, drop them off, then come back and pick up more.There was no more space in the cell at the BAE, so we sleptoutside. They roughed us up a little, would kick people as they watched overus. They never asked me anything. Later that day they told me to call myfamily, to have them come pay for my release. I told them that my family hadleft Abidjan [after Akouédo] and were back in our [native] village. Iwas scared that I was never going to get out, so I called my boss, the onlyperson I could think of. He came and paid 100,000 CFA ($200) for my release onSunday, and I was let go around 10 a.m…. My boss has said that I’llwork off what he paid, plus the cost of the computer. I lost everything, andnow I won’t even get paid [for awhile]. What these FRCI are doing,it’s bullshit.[107]Although going into debt with a boss was unique among thoseinterviewed by Human Rights Watch, many others interviewed described theirimmediate family not having sufficient money easily accessible—forcingfamilies to pool money from uncles, cousins, friends, and others willing tolend assistance.Minister Coulibaly, in his response to Human Rights Watch,indicated that the government would open an investigation into criminalactivities by the Republican Forces, including extortion in exchange forrelease from detention. He continued: “If the allegations are proven inregards to members of the security forces, they will be brought before thecourts. In addition, the minister of human rights and public liberties willcontinue to train the security forces on human rights. We reiterate that theyhave already received such training.”[108]Human Rights Watch welcomes the ongoing human rightstraining for the Ivorian security forces. However, training has to date proveninsufficient in changing the behavior of at least some members of theRepublican Forces. Ending the culture of impunity through arrests andprosecutions for human rights abuses is therefore critical. Human Rights Watchwelcomes the government’s commitment in this regard and will monitor itsprogress going forward.TheCost of Impunity: “Bin Laden” and Recurring Human Rights AbusesThecommander in charge of the BAE military camp through September 2012 wasOusmane Coulibaly, better known by his nom de guerre “Bin Laden.”Coulibaly was also put in charge of the similarly abusive “clean-upoperations” after the August 15 attack in Dabou (see section below).Multiple former detainees at the BAE camp identified Coulibaly as being atthe camp while soldiers carried out human rights abuses and criminal acts,including cruel and inhuman treatment and extortion in exchange for release.A person with intimate knowledge of the camp said that Coulibaly’soffice there was in view of where many detainees were held[109]and subjected to abuse, accordingto their statements. A soldier in the Ivorian military told Human RightsWatch that many of the neighborhood mass arrests were being carried out byCoulibaly’s petits—literally “little ones,”meaning former fighters under his personal chain of command who are not to beincorporated into the regular army but remain active in security functions.This characterization is supported by how some people from Yopougon describedthose who arrested them: wearing old military uniforms with“FRCI” patches sewn on and arriving in trucks marked“FRCI” but without the official military licenseplates—with which they transported the people to the BAE camp, ratherthan to a police station.As detailedin Human Rights Watch’s report on the post-election violence, OusmaneCoulibaly was in charge of troops in Yopougon neighborhood that witnesses andvictims repeatedly implicated in summary executions, torture, and arbitrarydetentions.[110]The U.S. State Department’s2009 Human Rights Report on Côte d’Ivoire cited a close aide ofCoulibaly “as the perpetrator responsible for torturing three cattlebreeders in Odienne in May 2008,” without any sanction from Coulibaly.[111]During the 2002-2003 civil war inCôte d’Ivoire, Coulibaly was a leading military commander in therebel group known as the Movement for Justice and Peace (Mouvement pour lajustice et la paix, or MJP) in the western town of Man.[112]MJP, later part of the ForcesNouvelles, had close ties to Charles Taylor and Liberian mercenaries.[113]Human Rights Watch,[114]International Crisis Group,[115]the 2004 international commissionof inquiry,[116]and Amnesty International[117]all implicated the MJP forces inand around Man in grave international crimes.At aminimum, Coulibaly appears unable to control soldiers under his command or tosanction soldiers in his ranks who are responsible for serious abuses. OneIvorian government official told Human Rights Watch that “BinLaden’s” name had been cited on several occasions in terms ofabusive behavior and stated, “As we say, ‘Where there’ssmoke, there’s usually fire.’”[118]Despite therecurrent accusations of his men being involved in serious human rightsabuses, Coulibaly has retained his command role and even been promoted toever more lucrative positions. Two weeks after Human Rights Watch briefed theIvorian ministers of interior and human rights on the abuses occurring underCoulibaly’s command, he was named the prefect—or regionaladministrator—of San Pedro.[119]San Pedro is host to one ofCôte d’Ivoire’s two main ports for the cocoa trade.In hisresponse, the minister of human rights and public liberties said that OusmaneCoulibaly’s move to the position of San Pedro prefect was not a“promotion” but rather a “nomination” made by thepresident within his “discretionary legal power.” The ministercontinued: “Furthermore, the fact that Ousmane Coulibaly is mentionedin a report is not the same as a conviction, and at present, no juridical actincriminates Ousmane Coulibaly for acts in violation of human rights.”[120]Theminister’s response misses the point that it is not a single reportimplicating Coulibaly as a commander whose soldiers have committed gravecrimes, but rather repeated accusations by multiple independent internationalorganizations and the U.S. State Department over the period of a decade. Giventhe nature of the alleged abuses and the detail of the documentation, Ivorianauthorities should have, at a minimum, vetted Coulibaly with a thoroughinvestigation before giving him a key command post in one of the tensestareas of the country.Moreover,Human Rights Watch is concerned that President Ouattara personally made thedecision to nominate Coulibaly to the San Pedro post. Although the Ivoriangovernment often states that no one is above the law, regardless of politicalallegiance, Coulibaly is a reminder that the reality is continuedimpunity—an impunity which fuels repeat offenders who feel no threat ofconsequences.Detention-Related Abuses andExtortion in Dabou Military CampAfter the August 15 attack in Dabou that targeted a militaryinstallation and resulted in the freeing of some 100 people from the localprison,[121] theRepublican Forces proceeded to replicate many of the abuses seen in Yopougonafter the August 5 and 6 attacks in Abidjan. Young males and, in some cases,females, were rounded up during mass arrests, brought to the Dabou militarycamp, and generally forced to pay to be released. Many of the men were beatenduring the arrest or detention. Mass arrests around Dabou were still ongoingwhen the Human Rights Watch researcher left the country on September 13. As inYopougon, the vast majority of those arrested hailed from typically pro-Gbagboethnic groups, in particular the Adjoukrou and Ebrié.Dabou residents said that mass arrests occurred almost dailyafter the August 15 attack, with surrounding villages perceived as pro-Gbagbotargeted in particular. A resident of Orbaff, a village some 15 kilometers fromDabou, said that that village had been subject to three different mass arrestsin the month after the attack.[122] Residentsfrom three villages near Dabou said that their village chief or deputy villagechief had been arrested, maltreated, and detained—released only after aparticularly exorbitant sum was paid.[123]Human Rights Watch obtained videos taken inside the Daboumilitary camp, one of them showing some 20 young men stripped to theirunderwear and another showing a soldier striking an older detainee—reportedto be a village chief—with a belt. In general, similar to Yopougon,people were detained for between one and four days at the camp. However,several former detainees and other Dabou residents said that a few peopleremained unaccounted for, as they had been moved elsewhere rather than releasedwith others when money was paid.[124]A 23-year-old woman arrested around 10 p.m. on September 9while at a maquis in Dabou described her arrest and detention:There was a big group of us at the maquis. Two cargotrucks pulled up around 10 p.m. and they took everyone, men and women. Theysaid it was a simple mass arrest. They forced the men to strip and putthem in one of the cargo trucks, and then put [the women] in the other cargotruck. They took all of us to their camp, just outside Dabou. We were probablyaround 40 or 50 people in total [that were arrested]. All of those that arrestedus were FRCI, in their military fatigues with Kalash[nikovs].When we got there, they took my photo and my fingerprints.They questioned us one by one, about militiamen, guns. It’s always thesame stuff. We stayed outside at the camp until morning. The FRCI sleep intheir little houses there; we were outside, with someone watching overus…. They didn’t hit the women, but they beat the men. They hitthem when they arrested them, and they hit them in the camp. With theirKalash[nikovs], with belts, whatever they have in their hand.The next morning [a local official] came and pleaded to let[the women] go, [and the FRCI agreed]. I asked them to let my [male] cousin gotoo, but one of the FRCI guys said they would only let [my cousin] go if Islept with [the soldier]. A lot of the women had [male] relatives there too,and several of the FRCI were saying the same thing: sleep with us andwe’ll let him go. We all refused, so they let us go but kept the men….We were only able to free my cousin yesterday, when we paid 5,000 CFA ($10).[125]According to detainees and family members interviewed byHuman Rights Watch, the money demanded for a person’s release from theDabou military camp was generally much lower than what was reported at the YopougonBAE camp—usually either 5,000 CFA or 10,000 CFA ($20).[126]Human Rights Watch interviewed two witnesses to a massarrest on September 11 that occurred during a fête de generation, acelebration among the Ébrié and Adjoukrou people representingthat youth have reached the age of maturity. The Republican Forces arrived in avillage near Dabou as the celebration was ongoing and arrested all the youngmen present, in addition to a village elder. The witnesses indicated that thesoldiers beat those that they were arresting repeatedly as they put them intothe cargo truck to take them to the camp.[127]Irregular Detention Sites, AccessProblems for Family, MonitorsDetaining civilians within illegal detention sites like the FRCI-controlledBAE camp, the Dabou military camp, and the military police camp inAdjamé has made observation of conditions difficult for family membersand independent monitors. The problems are compounded by the government’srefusal to give access to some Ivorian organizations that have traditionallydone prison monitoring. The situation is even worse, however, in a number of impromptudetention sites that are not even sanctioned military camps—particularlyhouses and hotels that soldiers in the Republican Forces, or“volunteers” still associated with the Republican Forces, continueto occupy.A family member whose relative had been moved between severaldetention sites in Abidjan described the inconsistencies in access:He was first taken to [military police commander]Zakaria’s camp in Adjamé, but we couldn’t see him there.Then he was transferred to the main police station downtown, where we could seeand visit him. After three or four days, he was moved to MACA [the main Abidjanprison], where we could again monitor how he was doing and bring him food. Thena couple days ago we went to MACA and were told he wasn’t there anymore.We don’t know where he is. We’ve heard the DST, but there are alsorumors that he has been abducted and sent [to an unknown site]. We went to theDST, but they wouldn’t tell us anything. [Note: Human Rights Watchreceived credible information that he was at the DST.] It was better when hewas at MACA, at least we could monitor how he was doing. Now we know nothing,and fear the worst.[128]Groups tasked with monitoring detention sites likewiseexpressed frustration. The president of an Ivorian human rights organizationthat has traditionally done extensive work on prison monitoring told HumanRights Watch that for more than a year they have made demands to the interiorand defense ministries for authorization to visit detention sites. They had yetto receive a response, despite assurances to the government that theirmonitoring would be done discreetly.[129] Theresult is a void in assuring that human rights are respected in detentionsites.Regarding UNOCI’s monitoring of detention sites after theAugust attacks, a UN official told Human Rights Watch in September,“Access is getting better, but it hasn’t been systematic. There aretimes when we’ve been given access, and times when we haven’t. Thelast time we went to the BAE camp, for example, we didn’t have accessbecause [the commander] wasn’t there…. It’s never clear howfar we can go in our monitoring, whether we can talk to detainees individually,whether we’ll have complete access.”[130]Another UN official noted that the difficulty of monitoring was compounded bythe fact that people were being arrested, released, and transferred betweensites every day.[131] UNofficials did stress that cooperation was improving and that access was gettingbetter at most of the main detention sites.On top of the challenges in monitoring sites like the BAEand Adjamé military camps that have housed hundreds of detainees, somemembers of the Republican Forces have continued to use neighborhood sites thatthey occupy illegally. Paul Koffi Koffi, the acting defense minister, issued acircular in May 2012 demanding that, by June 30, soldiers stop occupying policeand gendarme stations, schools and training centers, hotels, office buildings,and public and private residences.[132] Hethreatened those who failed to comply, as well as their commanders, withremoval from the military, disciplinary sanctions and, in certain cases,prosecution.[133]Yet, in spite of this order, people linked to the RepublicanForces continue to occupy such buildings and, in some cases, to use them asdetention centers. Human Rights Watch documented detentions at the HôtelBlanc in Yopougon Koweit, at the Hôtel Timotel in YopougonNiangon, and at a small military camp in a village outside Dabou. Crediblereports indicated that at least one of the houses of a former official close toGbagbo may also have been used for detentions.[134]Human Rights Watch did not document abuses at these sites that went beyond thetreatment described above at the BAE camp and main Dabou military camp, butusing such sites is in contrast with Ivorian and international law—andraises concern about the potential for more serious abuses. In responding tofuture security threats, Ivorian authorities need to ensure that people subjectto arrest are brought to official detention sites and questioned by thoseauthorized under Ivorian law, and that monitors receive complete access toensure that conditions are in accordance with Ivorian and internationalstandards.In his response to Human Rights Watch, the minister of humanrights and public liberties wrote that in regards to individuals“implicated in murderous attacks against the FRCI or for attacks againststate security, you understand that we cannot, at a certain stage of the investigations,give free access to [observers]. It goes to the country’s security.Moreover, in regards to detainees in prisons, visitors must follow proceduresoutlined under Ivorian law, as exists throughout the world.”[135]The monitoring of detention conditions by international andIvorian observers poses no threat to the country’s security. Indeed,ensuring the humane treatment of detainees—particularly detainees athigh-risk for abuse, like those picked up in mass sweeps for “statesecurity” reasons—is a crucial part of the country’s returnto rule of law. When the minister speaks of those in detention as“implicated in murderous attacks,” it also masks that the vastmajority of those interviewed by Human Rights Watch had not been charged with,much less convicted of, any crime. The “evidence” against themappeared to primarily be their ethnicity and location of residence, picked upen masse without arrest warrants.Marginalization of Police, GendarmesSince the end of the post-election crisis, the RepublicanForces and armed “volunteers” loyal to them have unlawfully takenover many functions that the police and gendarmes are legally mandated to do,including conducting home and vehicle searches, performing arrests andinterrogations of civilians, operating road checkpoints, and even directingtraffic at intersections. Police and gendarmes had progressively re-assumedsome of their responsibilities in the months before the August attacks, but theprior division of Abidjan into zones controlled by different militarycommanders effectively returned in the face of the security threat. Given theabuses that have plagued the military’s response—and consistent reportsof fewer abuses when the police or gendarmes are involved in basic securityfunctions—it is essential that the government make progress in equippingand entrusting the police and gendarmerie to perform their duties.A diplomat in Abidjan told Human Rights Watch, “AfterAkouédo, the government put the [former Forces Nouvelles] com-zonenetwork[136] backin place. It was a step back for the SSR [security sector reform]process.”[137] Anotherdiplomat said, “The President is aware of the problems [associated withreturning security functions to the FRCI], but the lack of confidence in theex-FDS [forces previously under Gbagbo, including the police and gendarmes] pushedhim to re-activate the com-zones, with all the problems that come along withthat.”[138] Arepresentative from an international organization in Abidjan similarly toldHuman Rights Watch, “[The government] went from one extreme to the otherafter [Akouédo]—it went from the military being back in thebarracks to [the FRCI] being in charge [again] and completely out ofcontrol.”[139]During three weeks in Abidjan, including daily trips toYopougon, the vast majority of road checkpoints that a Human Rights Watchresearcher encountered were manned only by FRCI soldiers. Although the citybecame less overtly militarized by early September, with fewer checkpoints andmilitary patrols, the FRCI remained the security forces primarily visible atcheckpoints and on patrol. Moreover, even when a checkpoint had both soldiersand police officers or gendarmes, the FRCI were usually responsible forchecking papers and searching cars, while the other security forces stood by. Ofthe nine times a Human Rights Watch researcher was stopped at a checkpoint inYopougon, FRCI soldiers performed all of them. Several checkpoints Human RightsWatch encountered at night in other Abidjan neighborhoods were likewise mannedby soldiers.In explaining the military’s primacy in responding tothe August attacks, Ivorian government officials said that a significant numberof police weapons and cars were stolen when police stations were looted duringthe crisis, leaving the police ill-equipped to deal with security threats.[140]In previous public statements, government officials have also blamed theinability to re-arm the police and gendarmerie on the UN Security Council armsembargo still in place.[141] However,Côte d’Ivoire remains awash in guns; the government has failed tomake progress in disarmament and demobilization, which could return stolenequipment to the police and gendarmes while reducing the troubling authority of“volunteer” former fighters who continue to maintain relationshipswith certain FRCI commanders.Yopougon residents indicated that human rights abuses wereoften less frequent or less severe when police officers or gendarmes wereinvolved in the search, arrest, or detention, even if the action was donejointly with members of the Republican Forces. Several victims of arbitraryarrest or detention told Human Rights Watch that police officers or gendarmestried to intervene on their behalf and stop abuses. During house-to-housesearches in Yopougon, several residents said that the presence of police orgendarmes appeared to deter soldiers from stealing from homes.A youth arrested while walking home from a church function onAugust 25 described how police kept him from being detained and upbraidedsoldiers who had stolen dozens of cell phones from those arrested:There were security forces everywhere conducting a massarrest…. They walked all the youth they had arrested in Indian [single]file through Koweit to carrefour Koweit, where they told us to lay down.My uncle called my cell phone at that moment, and I answered to tell him whatwas happening. An FRCI element started insulting me, yelling at me to hang upthe phone. Another FRCI had a sack and was going around taking everyone’scell phones. When he got to me, I said no, how is my family going to find outwhere I am. He hit me across the face. Another FRCI came over and pointed hisKalash[nikov] at me, and I put my phone in the sack….God thankfully made that there was a police officer nearby.It was a mixed patrol in the neighborhood, but the FRCI were the majority wherewe were lying down…. I said to the police officer, “I was arrestedwhen coming from a church meeting.” And I showed him papers that proved Iwas coming from church. The policeman went to the FRCI to try to persuade himto let me go, but the FRCI guy got very angry and said that I was a militiaman.Two 4x4s came by with police officers, including acommissioner [from the CRS II]. The police officer I talked to went to hiscommander and explained my story. The commissioner asked the officer my name,and the guy started to shake with fear, he was nervous about intervening forme. I spoke up and explained the situation to the commissioner. Thecommissioner told me to get out of the line of people arrested…. I askedhim about my phone, telling him the FRCI had put them all in a sack. Thecommissioner got really angry and went to the FRCI guy and asked him,“Who gave you the authority to take cell phones? That is not whatwe’re doing here!” He came back and told me to put my phone numberon a paper, and they’d get my phone back to me—the sack was so fullof phones it would have taken too long to search through it …. The CRSpolice officer said that he would go and get my phone from the BAE camp. Hesaid, “If I let you go alone, it’s not clear that you’llreturn.”… With their help, I was able to get my phone back later andwasn’t detained with [everyone else] at the BAE camp.[142]Not all such efforts were successful. A person arrested onAugust 24 and taken to the BAE camp reported that “some gendarmes triedto intervene and tell the FRCI [to let us go, that we weren’t militiamen],but the FRCI told them to go back to their own camp, that this wasn’ttheir area.”[143] Onecivil society leader told Human Rights Watch that a key problem was thecontinued imbalance of power between the different security forces: “Whatcan the police do? They have one gun for every five of them. The gendarmesmight have one gun for every two or three. The police in particular [often] don’thave cars. The FRCI, especially the former FN, are heavily armed, they havetrucks, 4x4s, cars.”[144]Even with the power imbalance, the mere presence of policeofficers or gendarmes was beneficial according to some Yopougon residentsinterviewed by Human Rights Watch. As reported above, several Yopougonresidents reported having valuables—like computers, money, jewelry, andcell phones—stolen during FRCI house searches done ostensibly to look forweapons. One person whose house was searched by a joint group of FRCI andgendarmes on August 25 explained how he was spared from having valuables stolen:When they came to my house, it was a guy in a gendarmeuniform with an FRCI guy behind him holding an RPG [rocket-propelled grenade].The gendarme guy did the search. No search warrant, he just came and said, “We’regoing to look around.” He did it quickly, and they didn’t takeanything from my house. When they started the searches [in another part ofYopougon Koweit] earlier that day, it was just FRCI, and they were stealingfrom everyone. I had friends and family who were stolen from. People complainedto the police, the gendarmes, anyone we could call. By early afternoon therewere gendarmes and police with them.[145]There remains an uneasy relationship between the differentsecurity forces, and government officials are quick to point out that Gbagbostacked certain forces—including parts of the police and gendarmerie—withpeople from ethnic groups that tended to support him, marginalizing northernIvorians.[146] Thatis true, and the August attacks have heightened the mistrust, particularly asAkouédo appeared to include assistance from people within the militarycamp. However, relying exclusively on the military—and, at times, formerfighters not even part of the Ivorian army—appears to produce a greaternumber of abuses against civilians, hardening even moderate Gbagbo supportersagainst the government and army. Progress needs to be made toward returninginternal security functions to the police and gendarmerie.Impact on Reconciliation, GovernmentResponseThe abusive response by some soldiers in the RepublicanForces to the attacks on military installations has furthered the perceptionamong many Gbagbo supporters that they are all “guilty until proveninnocent.”[147] At atime when the country remains deeply divided along political and ethnic lines,the military’s actions pose a dangerous risk in terms of further alienatingGbagbo supporters. Several government officials admitted excesses in themilitary’s response, but focused on the gravity of the security threatand promised that steps had been and would be taken in order to check abuses inthe future.As one person who had been detained at the BAE camp said, ina line repeated by many others interviewed by Human Rights Watch: “How willthere be harmony and reconciliation in this context?”[148]Another former detainee at the BAE camp said similarly:How does the government expectreconciliation when the FRCI steal from us, treat us all as militiamen, [and]do daily mass arrests? I have nothing left now, allmy money was taken or [used to pay for my release]. If someone asks me tomorrowto pick up a gun and fight the FRCI, I don’t know what I will say. Whenpeople have been stripped of everything, when all we are left with is hatred… we’re a long way from reconciliation.[149]A leading civil society activist in Côted’Ivoire said similarly:People are trying to break from their FESCI or YoungPatriots [two longtime, violent pro-Gbagbo militia groups] past, but thegovernment is throwing them right back into it by arresting them simply becausethey’re labeled as being pro-Gbagbo…. Hatred is crystallizing. Bothsides must stop fooling around with this.[150]When presented with Human Rights Watch’s findings,Interior Minister Hamed Bakayoko said, “We can and should respond withinthe law, and every day we try to press the importance of human rights. But wealso need to stand together with the military, as they have been killed in coldblood. We just need a little time.” Bakayoko stressed that progress hadbeen made despite the fact that “a lot of pro-Gbagbos do not want peaceor reconciliation.”[151] HumanRights Minister Gnénéma Coulibaly said similarly, “Whenfaced with people who kill without giving it thought, you have to respond.Searches, arrests, that is okay. But it has to be done within the law.”[152]Both ministers promised to speak with those in charge of theBAE camp in Yopougon and to do site visits. Bakayoko also agreed that mixedpatrols and mixed units at security checkpoints could be a way to reducetensions between the military and the population perceived as pro-Gbagbo.[153]AcknowledgementsThis report was researched and authored by Matt Wells, WestAfrica researcher. It was reviewed and edited by Corinne Dufka, senior West Africaresearcher; Sarah Margon, deputy Washington director; Clive Baldwin, seniorlegal adviser; and Babatunde Olugboji, deputy program director. Additionalresearch and editing assistance was provided by Marianna Enamoneta, West Africaassociate. The report was translated into French by Sarah Leblois; vetting ofthe translation was provided by Marianna Enamoneta and Peter Huvos, Frenchwebsite editor. John Emerson designed the maps. The report was prepared forpublication by Grace Choi, publications director; Ivy Shen, multimediaproduction associate; and Fitzroy Hepkins, mail manager.Human Rights Watch deeply appreciates the assistance ofcertain individuals in connecting its researcher to victims of human rightsabuses in Abidjan and Dabou. They cannot be named due to security concerns, buttheir courage was essential to the success of the research. Human Rights Watchalso welcomes the continued collaboration with Ivorian civil societyorganizations working tirelessly for the promotion and protection of humanrights in the country.Human Rights Watch is particularly grateful to the victimsand eyewitnesses who shared their stories. Many had suffered inhuman treatmentin detention only several days or weeks before speaking with Human RightsWatch. Their bravery and determination in demanding an end to the types ofhuman rights abuses that Ivorians have suffered for the last decade shouldserve as a call to action for Ivorian authorities and their internationalpartners. There is urgent need to address the root causes of Côted’Ivoire’s politico-military crisis, particularly the longstandingimpunity of the security forces.Annex I: Human Rights Watch Letter to the IvorianGovernmentOctober 8, 2012Marcel Amon TanohChief of StaffPresidencyRepublic of Côte d’IvoireDear Mr. Amon Tanoh,We write to receive the formal response of the presidency inregards to key findings from our recent field work in Côted’Ivoire, undertaken from August 25 to September 14. We hope to includethese responses in a report that will be published in November.We appreciate your government’s openness to humanrights groups like Human Rights Watch. While in Abidjan, we had the pleasure ofsharing our preliminary findings with Interior Minister Hamed Bakayoko, HumanRights Minister Gnénéma Coulibaly, Deputy Public ProsecutorNoël Djé, and the Directeur de Cabinet in the Ministry of Justice,Fodjo Abo. Your government’s willingness to meet and exchange freely onhuman rights issues is a clear and positive change from the previous governmentin Côte d’Ivoire, and we hope that the fruitful engagementcontinues going forward.Our work while in Côte d’Ivoire focused on theIvorian security forces’ response to the August attacks on the military.We fully recognize that Côte d’Ivoire faces a real security threatand express our condolences for the lives claimed and destruction wrought bythese attacks. In June 2012, Human Rights Watch published a short reportdocumenting cross-border attacks from Liberia into Côte d’Ivoireand warning that pro-Gbagbo militants there were recruiting and organizing forfuture attacks. We recognize the concerning links between militants in Liberiaand Ghana, as well as the Ivorian government’s right to respond to thesethreats within the framework of international and Ivorian law.Unfortunately, the security forces – and inparticularly certain members of the Republican Forces – have responded tothese threats with a myriad of human rights abuses. We interviewed more than 50people in Abidjan and Dabou who had been subject to arbitrary arrest anddetention. Many of them had experienced cruel and inhuman treatment while indetention at military camps, including the military police camp inAdjamé, the former Brigade anti-émeute (BAE) camp inYopougon, and the military base in Dabou. The vast majority of thoseinterviewed by Human Rights Watch were civilians, for whom the legal basis ofdetention at a military camp appears in conflict with Ivorian and internationallaw.At the military camp in Adjamé, overseen by KoneZakaria, Human Rights Watch interviewed five former detainees who were victimsof torture. They described being beaten savagely with guns, fists, belts, andother objects, as members of the Republican Forces at the camp demanded thatthey sign confessions or divulge information about the location of weapons. Ofthe five victims interviewed, three were civilians and two were militarypersonnel who had remained in Gbagbo’s Forces de défense et desécurité (FDS) during the crisis. These detainees describedseeing other victims of severe mistreatment in their cell. Detainees alsodescribed horrible conditions of confinement, including being forced aspunishment to stay in a room full of excrement; having rooms so overcrowdedthat detainees could not even lie down; and being provided such smallquantities of food and water that they became delirious.At the former BAE camp in Yopougon, Human Rights Watchdocumented a revolving door of detainees brought in almost daily during massarrests throughout the neighborhood. Human Rights Watch interviewed Yopougonresidents who were arrested in their homes, while eating at a maquis,with friends at a bar, when walking home from church, when in a taxi or a bus,and when attending a funeral. These arrests primarily occurred in perceivedpro-Gbagbo areas of Yopougon, and often appear to have been done largely on thebasis of the person’s ethnicity and age. Detainees and other witnessessaid often 20 or more people would be arrested at the same time, none of theminformed of any specific allegations, much less an arrest warrant, againstthem. After being brought to the BAE camp, detainees were frequently subject tocruel and inhuman treatment – including beatings, overcrowding so severethat many people had to sleep outside, denial of food and water, and sleepdeprivation.We also documented a worrying pattern of criminal behaviorby the security forces. Victims and neighborhood residents described how,during home searches, members of the Republican Forces often stole cell phones,computers, money, and jewelry. Detainees also described how the response to asecurity threat devolved into a widespread extortion scheme: Almost everyonedetained at the BAE camp described having to pay a substantial sum of money tothe Republican Forces in order to obtain their release. The demanded amount ofmoney varied from 10,000 CFA to as high as 150,000 CFA. Witnesses frequentlyidentified commanding officers as being at the camp while these abuses wereoccurring, and our work shows the abuses continued in a similar pattern for atleast four weeks. We therefore believe that, at a minimum, the commanders atthese camps knew about the ongoing abuses and failed to act to stop them.The abuses at the Dabou military camp were similar to thoseat the BAE camp, perhaps unsurprising given that both operations were overseenby the same commander: Ousmane Coulibaly, better known as “BinLaden.” We note with concern that Coulibaly was recently promoted to theposition of prefect in San Pedro. His promotion came two weeks after HumanRights Watch briefed the Interior Minister and the Human Rights Minister on ourfindings that directly implicated Coulibaly in overseeing mass arbitrary arrestand detention, cruel and inhuman treatment in detention, and mass extortion ofdetainees in exchange for their release. Coulibaly was also named by HumanRights Watch as responsible in a command role for war crimes during the battlefor Abidjan in April and May 2011. In 2009, the United States Department ofState named Coulibaly in its annual report on human rights, noting that hisclose aide had engaged in torture without punishment from Coulibaly. His forceswere likewise implicated in grave crimes during the 2002-2003 armed conflict.Despite his repeated implication in grave human rights abuses by independentgroups, he has again been promoted by the Ivorian government – and promotedto oversee one of the tensest areas of the country, given the longstandingrumors that pro-Gbagbo militants might target the region for an attack. We findhis promotion deeply concerning in the face of the Ivorian government’scommitments to impartial justice and a rights-respecting military.Finally, people involved in the transport industry expressedto Human Rights Watch frustration with the return of rampant extortion bysecurity forces at checkpoints. In a September 2011 release, Human Rights Watchpraised the Ouattara government for the efforts it had taken to end the scourgeof checkpoint extortion. We recognized that the problem long predated theOuattara government, and that the current government had prioritized addressingthe issue in a way that brought clear results and was welcomed by Ivorians.However, it appears that the progress has been largely reversed in theaftermath of the August attacks. Several businessmen involved in the transportindustry said that they had stopped their movement of goods at present, becausethe extortion was too costly to make a profit.As noted at the outset, we will be publishing a report inearly November. We want to best reflect the government’s position,providing it with an opportunity to respond to our main findings, in additionto the responses we received during meetings with Mr. Bakayoko and Mr.Coulibaly.Due to our publication timeline, we would be grateful for awritten response to the below questions by October 22. If easier, wecould, in the alternative, discuss these issues during a phoneconversation.Under what legal basis are civilians beingheld in detention at military camps, including the Yopougon BAE base, the Daboumilitary camp, and the Adjamé military police camp? If there is no legalbasis for holding civilians at these military sites, can you commit to endingthe practice?Under what legal basis are soldiers from theRepublican Forces conducting mass arrests, including in Yopougon and Dabou?What is the justification for arresting and detaining people en masse,without an arrest warrant and not in hot pursuit?Is every detainee held in detention broughtpromptly brought before a judge, as required by Ivorian and international humanrights law? If not, is there a reason why detainees, in particular at thesemilitary camps, have not been afforded the right to appear before a judgewithin 48 hours of being detained? Will the government ensure in the futurethat all detainees appear promptly or are released, in conforming to the law?What is the process in the government– and in particular the Defense Ministry – for vetting militarycommanders for promotions? Does an evaluation of allegations of human rightsabuses factor into decisions?In selecting Ousmane Coulibaly for theposition of prefect in San Pedro, was there discussion of his implication,including by the U.S. State Department, for command responsibility in seriouscrimes such as torture? What about Mr. Coulibaly makes the government feel heis the best person for handling the sensitive area of San Pedro?As noted above, victims and witnessesdescribed numerous cases of torture and cruel treatment in the Adjamémilitary police camp in the aftermath of the August attacks. What measures isthe government taking to safeguard detainees from such abuse? Will theprosecutor conduct investigations into allegations of torture, with a view toprosecute members of the Republican Forces deemed responsible for such abuses?What measures has the government taken orwill the government take in order to stop criminal practices by the securityforces, including the extortion of detainees in return for their release?Given the abuses in detention, what measureshas the government taken or will the government take to ensure that independentinternational and Ivorian monitors have complete access to all detention sites,including on unannounced visits? Representatives from several Ivorianorganizations that have historically monitored detention conditions told HumanRights Watch that the government has not approved their requests for access forover a year. Is that accurate and, if so, why?The government of President Ouattara hadconsiderable success in reducing the practice of checkpoint extortion duringits first months. What measures does the government intend to take to ensurethat this progress is not lost?We thank you again for the openness that your government hasshown in engaging on human rights issues, and we look forward to your responseon the important matters raised in this letter. If you have any questions,please contact us by email at wellsm@hrw.orgor by fax at: +1-212-736-1300.Click to expand ImageCorinne Dufka, West Africa directorClick to expand ImageMattWells, WestAfrica researcherCC: SEM Président Alassane OuattaraCC: Prime Minister and Minister of Justice, Garde des SceauxJeannot Ahoussou-KouadioCC: Minister of Interior, Hamed BakayokoCC: Minister of Human Rights, GnénémaCoulibalyAnnex II: Response from the Chief of Staff in theIvorian PresidencyClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageAnnex III: Response from the Minister of HumanRights and Public Liberties1. Sur quel fondementjuridique des civils sont-ils détenus dans des camps militaires,notamment le camp de la BAE à Yopougon, le camp militaire de Dabou et lecamp de la police militaire d’Adjamé ? S’il n’y apas de fondement juridique à la détention de civils sur ces sitesmilitaires, pouvez-vous vous engager à mettre fin à ces pratiques ?Durant les semaines qui ontprécédé les attaques contre des positions del’armée - mais également pendant qu’elles sedéroulaient  -, des évasions avaient étéorganisées de la Maison d’Arrêt et de Correctiond’Abidjan et de la prison de Dabou.Face à de telsévénements et alors que la loi prévoit que lesdétentions préventives s’effectuent dans des maisonsd’arrêt, il était inconcevable de détenir desindividus soupçonnés d’attenter à lasûreté de l’Etat, sans prendre au préalable unminimum de précautions. Les sites militaires constituaient dèslors les lieux les plus sûrs pour éviter de probablesévasions.Bien plus, il convient derelever  qu'il ne s'agit pas en l'espèce de citoyens ordinairesmais de combattants et miliciens, qui du reste n'ont pas hésitéà abattre froidement des soldats ivoiriens.En tout état de cause,le Gouvernement ivoirien s'attèle à trouver des solutionsà de telles situations en rénovant les maisons d'arrêt.2. Sur quel fondementjuridique les soldats des Forces républicaines procèdent-ilsà des arrestations massives, y compris à Yopougon et àDabou ? Quel est le motif de ces arrestations et détentions depersonnes en masse, sans mandat d’arrêt ou sans situation de flagrantdélit ?Le mode opératoireadopté par les assaillants était qu'après avoir lesattaques faisant de nombreux morts dans les rangs des forcesrépublicaines, ils se débarrassaient de leurs armes pour ensuitese mêler aux populations.C'est sur la base d'un faisceaud'indices et souvent sur dénonciation que ces personnes ontété arrêtées pour nécessitéd'enquête. Il s'agissait bien d'arrestations ciblées et nonmassives.3. Est-ce que chaquepersonne maintenue en détention est présentée rapidementà un juge, comme stipulé par la loi ivoirienne et le droit internationaldes droits humains ? Si non, y a-t-il une raison pour laquelle lesdétenus, en particulier dans ces camps militaires, n’ont pas pubénéficier du droit à comparaître devant un jugedans les 48 heures suivant leur arrestation ? Est-ce que le gouvernements’assurera à l’avenir que tous les détenuscomparaissent rapidement ou soient libérés, conformémentà la loi ?Les lenteursenregistrées dans les procédures judiciaires ne datent pas de lamise en place de l’actuel gouvernement. Depuis plusieurs décenniesont été constatées un engorgement des tribunaux, une tropgrande rigidité du Code pénal face aux évolutions de lasociété ivoirienne, ou encore un manque de moyens mis à ladisposition des magistrats ; toutes choses qui rendent difficile,pour l’heure, le respect strict des délais de comparution pourchacun des détenus.Par ailleurs, la gravitédes faits imputés aux personnes arrêtées imposent que lesenquêtes soient bien menées, ce qui exige souvent un peu de temps.4. Quelle est laprocédure au sein du gouvernement, et en particulier au ministèrede la Défense, pour se renseigner sur les commandants militaires avantune promotion ? Est-ce qu’une évaluation desallégations de violation des droits humains est prise en compte dans cesdécisions ?Le cas auquel il est faitallusion ici ne concerne pas une « promotion », mais une« nomination » en qualité de préfet derégion, acte pour lequel le Président de la République disposed’un pouvoir discrétionnaire légal.5. En choisissant OusmaneCoulibaly pour la fonction de préfet de San Pedro, y a-t-il eu unediscussion sur son implication, notamment par le Départementd’Etat des Etats-Unis, dans des crimes graves contre la torture en tantque responsable du commandement ? Pourquoi le gouvernementconsidère-t-il M. Coulibaly comme la personne la mieux àmême de gérer la région sensible de San Pedro ?Comme rappeléprécédemment, une telle nomination relève del'appréciation exclusive du Président de la République.De plus, le fait que le nom deM. Ousmane Coulibaly soit mentionné dans un rapport ne vaut pascondamnation et pour l’heure, aucun acte juridique n’incrimine M.Ousmane Coulibaly pour des actes de violations des droits humains.6. Comme indiquéprécédemment, les victimes et les témoins ontdécrit de nombreux cas de tortures et de traitements cruels dans le campde la police militaire d’Adjamé au lendemain des attaquesd’août. Quelles mesures le Gouvernement prend-il pourprotéger les détenus de tels abus ? Le procureurmènera-t-il des enquêtes sur les allégations de torture, envue de traduire en justice les membres des Forces républicainesconsidérés comme responsables de ces abus ?Le Chef de l’Etat necesse de rappeler sa volonté ferme de lutter contrel’impunité et cela s’est traduit ces derniers jours pard'enquête contre les soldats des forces républicainessoupçonnées d’avoir participé aux tueries qui ont eulieues à Nahibly au mois de juillet dernier.Pour ce qui est de cesallégations de torture, soyez assurés que les auteurs de cespratiques, s’ils sont identifiés, seront traduits devant lajustice.7. Quelles mesures legouvernement prend-il ou prendra-t-il afin de mettre un terme aux pratiquescriminelles des forces de sécurité, y compris l’extorsionà l’encontre des détenus en échange de leurlibération ?Pour l'heure, leGouvernement va ouvrir une enquête. Si les allégations deviolations des droite de l'Homme sont avérées à l'encontrede membres des forces de sécurité, ils seront traduits devant lestribunaux. À côté de cela, le Ministère des droitsde l'Homme et des Libertés publiques va continuer la formation desforces de sécurité aux droits de l'Homme. Rappelons que celles-cien ont déjà reçu.Le Gouvernement voudraitréitérer son engagement à ne favoriser aucuneimpunité sur son territoire et en cela, le temps nous donnera raison.8. Face aux abus endétention, quelles mesures le Gouvernement a-t-il pris ou prendra-t-ilpour s’assurer que des observateurs ivoiriens et internationauxindépendants aient un accès total à tous les sites de détention,y compris lors de visites inopinées ? Les représentants deplusieurs organisations ivoiriennes qui surveillent depuis longtemps lesconditions de détention ont déclaré à Human rightsWatch que le gouvernement n’avait pas approuvé leurs demandes d’accèsdepuis plus d’un an. Est-ce exact ? Et si oui, pourquoi ?Il faut faire la part deschoses. S'il s'agit d'accéder aux personnes impliquées dans lesattaques meurtrières contre les militaires des Frci ou pour atteinteà la sûreté de l'Etat, vous comprendrez qu'on ne peut pas,à un certain stade des enquêtes donner libre accès àcelles-ci. Il y va de la sécurité du pays.Par ailleurs, lorsqu'ils'agit de détenus dans les maisons d'arrêt, la loi ivoirienne enl'état, soumet les visites à des procédures, comme partoutau monde. Il faut pour tous les respecter jusqu'à nouvel ordre.9. Le Gouvernement duPrésident Ouattara a eu un succès considérable dansla  réduction des pratiques d’extorsion aux points decontrôle pendant ses premiers mois au pouvoir. Quelles mesures legouvernement prévoit-il de prendre pour faire en sorte qu’on nerevienne pas en arrière sur ce point ?Le Gouvernement continue desensibiliser les forces de l'ordre au respect de l'interdiction de cettepratique. Il punira tout agent qui fera l'objet de la preuve d'une extorsion defonds. Nous demeurons vigilant sur la question.[1]Thebasis of Gbagbo’s claim rested with the December 3, 2010 decision of theConstitutional Council, led by Paul Yao N’Dre, a close ally of Gbagbo, tooverturn the electoral commission’s results and to proclaim Gbagbo thevictor. The Council annulled hundreds of thousands of ballots from northernregions, where Ouattara drew significant support, based on alleged votingirregularities. When the UN Special Representative of the Secretary-General forCôte d’Ivoire certified the electoral commission’s results,he also “certified that the Constitutional Council’s proclamation[that Gbagbo won] was not based on facts.” Y.J. Choi, “Statement onthe certification of the result of the second round of the presidentialelection held on 28 November 2010,” December 3, 2010. See also VijayNambiar, “Dear President Mbeki: The United Nations Helped Save the IvoryCoast,” Foreign Policy, August 17, 2011.[2]HumanRights Watch, “They Killed Them Like It Was Nothing”: The Needfor Justice for Côte d’Ivoire’s Post-Election Crimes,October 5, 2011, http://www.hrw.org/node/102071. Since at least 2002, theGbagbo government actively supported militia groups, particularly in Abidjan andin western Côte d’Ivoire. These militia groups were repeatedlyimplicated in grave crimes against northern Ivorians and West Africanimmigrants. Human Rights Watch, Trapped Between Two Wars: Violence againstCivilians in Western Côte d’Ivoire, vol. 15, no. 14 (A), August2003, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2003/08/05/trapped-between-two-wars; HumanRights Watch, “Because they have guns … I’m left withnothing”: The Price of Continuing Impunity in Côte d’Ivoire,vol. 18, no. 4 (A), May 25, 2006, http://www.hrw.org/node/11314. During thepost-election crisis, pro-Gbagbo militia groups played a particularly prominentrole—in part because Gbagbo had concerns about the loyalty of much of themilitary rank-and-file, and in part because he named the longtime head of theYoung Patriots militia group, Charles Blé Goudé, as his youthminister. Tens of thousands of youth were engaged as militiamen, many of themsupplied with Kalashnikov rifles.[3]President Ouattara signed a decree on March 17, 2011 that created theRepublican Forces of Côte d’Ivoire (FRCI, for its French acronym),comprised primarily at the time of members of the Forces Nouvelles rebelgroup.[4]Rapport dela Commission d’enquête internationale indépendante sur laCôte d’Ivoire [hereafter “2011 COI report”], U.N.Doc. A/HRC/17/48, June 7, 2011; Human RightsWatch, “They Killed Them Like It Was Nothing”; AmnestyInternational, “They looked at his identity card and shot him dead”:Six Months of Post-Electoral Violence in Côte d’Ivoire, May2011; Amnesty International, “We want to go home but wecan’t”: Côte d’Ivoire’s continuingdisplacement and insecurity, July 28, 2011; FIDH, Côted’Ivoire: Massacre in Duekoue and serious abuses against the civilianpopulation all over the country, April 2, 2011; Opération desNations unies en Côte d’Ivoire Division des Droits del’Homme, Rapport sur les violations des droits de l’homme et dudroit international humanitaire commises à l’Ouest de laCôte d’Ivoire, May 10, 2011.[5]Commissionnationale d’enquête, Rapport d’enquête sur lesviolations des droits de l’homme et du droit international humanitairesurvenues dans la période du 31 octobre 2010 au 15 mai 2011, July2012.[6]SeeMatt Wells, “La CPI doit encore asseoir sa légitimité enCôte d’Ivoire,” Le Monde, July 19, 2012; Human RightsWatch interviews with representatives from Ivorian civil society, Abidjan,August and September 2012.[7]UNHCR, Refugeesin Liberia: Population at a Glance, available at http://data.unhcr.org/liberia/regional.php(accessed September 23, 2012, reporting 63,272 refugees in Liberia as of August31, 2012).[8]UNPanel of Experts on Liberia, Final report of the Panel of Experts on Liberiasubmitted pursuant to paragraph 6 (f) of Security Council resolution 1961(2010), U.N. Doc. S/2011/757, December 7, 2011.[9]SeeAndré Silver Konan, “Côte d’Ivoire: pro-Gbagbo exilesau Ghana, la revanche dans la peau,” Jeune Afrique, May 8, 2012;UN Group of Experts on Côte d’Ivoire, Final report of the Groupof Experts submitted in accordance with paragraph 14 of Security Councilresolution 1980 (2011), U.N. Doc. S/2012/196, April 14, 2012 (noting inparagraph 20 that “[s]ince the end of the post-electoral crisis, numerousIvorian individuals with close ties to the former Ivorian administration… are operating from Ghana.”).[10]Konan,“Côte d’Ivoire: pro-Gbagbo exiles au Ghana, la revanche dansla peau,” Jeune Afrique; Jean-Philippe Rémy, “Paiximpossible en Côte d’Ivoire,” Le Monde, June 14, 2012;UN Group of Experts on Côte d’Ivoire, Final report of the Groupof Experts submitted in accordance with paragraph 14 of Security Councilresolution 1980 (2011) (finding, in paragraph 20, that “attempts bythose individuals [in Ghana] to destabilize the new administration ofCôte d’Ivoire cannot be ruled out.”).[11]“Liberia: Ivorian Government Foes Wage, Plot Attacks,” Human RightsWatch news release, June 6, 2012, http://www.hrw.org/news/2012/06/06/liberia-ivorian-government-foes-wage-plot-attacks;“Côte d’Ivoire: Second Deadly AttackNear Liberian Border,” Human Rights Watch newsrelease, September 21, 2011, http://www.hrw.org/news/2011/09/21/c-te-d-ivoire-second-deadly-attack-near-liberian-border.[12]“Liberia: Ivorian Government Foes Wage, Plot Attacks,” Human RightsWatch news release, June 6, 2012.[13]“U.N. says 7 peacekeepers killed in Ivory Coast,” Associated Press,June 8, 2012; “Analysis: Tracking down Liberia’s mercenaries,”IRIN, June 27, 2012, http://www.irinnews.org/report/95753/Analysis-Tracking-down-Liberia-s-mercenaries(accessed November 8, 2012); “Ivory Coast Insecurity Grows as ResidentsFlee Western Attacks,” Bloomberg, June 13, 2012.[14]“Liberia: Strong Action on Justice for Border Attacks,” HumanRights Watch news release, June 19, 2012, http://www.hrw.org/news/2012/06/19/liberia-strong-action-justice-border-attacks.[15]“Côte d’Ivoire: cinq militaires tués dans deuxattaques à Abidjan,” Agence France-Presse, August 5, 2012; “10 soldiers killed in two separate attacks in Ivory Coast,”CNN, August 6,2012, http://www.cnn.com/2012/08/06/world/africa/ivory-coast-violence/index.html(accessed November 8, 2012); “Côte d’Ivoire: Gunfire and fear in Abidjan,” IRIN, August 10, 2012, http://www.irinnews.org/Report/96080/COTE-D-IVOIRE-Gunfire-and-fear-in-Abidjan(accessed November 8, 2012)[16]“Six dead in pre-dawn raid on Ivory Coast military camp,” Reuters, August6, 2012; “6 soldiers killed in attack in Ivory Coast,” AssociatedPress, August 6, 2012; Baudelaire Mieu, “Côte d’Ivoire: surla piste des assailants de la caserne d’Akouédo,” JeuneAfrique, August 7, 2012.[17]HumanRights Watch interviews, Abidjan, August and September 2012.See also “Côte d’Ivoire : six morts au moins etplusieurs blessés dans l'attaque d'un camp militaire à Abidjan,”Radio France Interationale, August 6, 2012, http://www.rfi.fr/afrique/20120806-cote-ivoire-mort-plusieurs-blesses-attaque-camp-militaire-abidjan(accessed November 8, 2012); T. Guy, “Attaques d’Akouedo BertKoenders : « Il y eu a des complicités dans le camp »,”Le Democrate (Abidjan), August 9, 2012.[18]“Attaque près d`Abidjan, trois civils tués, desdizaines de détenus évadés,” Agence France-Presse, August16, 2012; “Gunmen attack army posts, raid prison in Ivory Coast,” Reuters,August 17, 2012.[19]“Ivory Coast using attacks as pretext for crackdown: opposition,”Reuters, August 20, 2012.[20]“Despro-Gbagbo responsables des attaques meurtrières d`Abidjan (ministre),”Agence France-Presse, August 7, 2012; Lacina Ouattara, “Aprèsles attaques de Yopougon et d’Akouédo : Hamed Bakayoko fait desrévélations et rassure,” Le Patriote (Abidjan),August 9, 2012, http://news.abidjan.net/h/438601.html.[21]“Côted`Ivoire: le parti de Gbagbo condamne la vague de violence à Abidjan,”Agence France-Presse, August 8, 2012; S. Débailly, “Accusationportée contre les pro-Gbagbo / Koua Justin réplique : ‘Lesséquestrations et les intimidations nous confortent dans notrecombat’,” l’Intelligent d’Abidjan, August 13,2012.[22]BaudelaireMieu, “Côte d’Ivoire: sur la piste des assailants de lacaserne d’Akouédo,” Jeune Afrique, August 7, 2012; “Ayear after crisis, aftershocks rock Ivory Coast,” Associated Press, August20, 2012; Robbie Corey-Boulet, “Cote d’Ivoire: A Reluctant Farewellto Arms,” September 22, 2012, Inter Press Service, http://www.ipsnews.net/2012/09/reluctant-farewell-to-arms-in-cote-divoire/.[23]Baudelaire Mieu, “Côte d’Ivoire: sur la piste desassailants de la caserne d’Akouédo,” Jeune Afrique,August 7, 2012; “A year after crisis, aftershocks rock IvoryCoast,” Associated Press, August 20, 2012.[24]“Liberia: Ivorian Government Foes Wage, Plot Attacks,” Human RightsWatch news release, June 6, 2012.[25]UNGroup of Experts on Côte d’Ivoire, Midterm report prepared inaccordance with paragraph 16 of Security Council resolution 2045 (2012), UNDoc. S/2012/766, October 15, 2012, para. 38.[26]Human RightsWatch interviews with diplomats, Ivorian government officials, and UNrepresentatives, Abidjan, September 2012. For the European Union sanctionslist, see Council of the European Union, Council Implementing Regulation (EU)No 193/2012 of 8 March 2012 implementing Regulation (EC) No 560/2005 imposingcertain specific restrictive measures directed against certain persons andentities in view of the situation in Côte d’Ivoire (hereinafter EUsanctions list), available at http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32012R0193:EN:NOT(accessed September 23, 2012).[27]“Liberia: Ivorian Government Foes Wage, Plot Attacks,”Human Rights Watch news release, June6, 2012; UN Panel of Experts on Liberia, Finalreport of the Panel of Experts on Liberia submitted pursuant to paragraph 6 (f)of Security Council resolution 1961 (2010).[28]“Liberia: Strong Action on Justice for BorderAttacks,” Human Rights Watch news release,June 19, 2012.[29]“Liberia to extradite Ivorian mercenary suspects,” Reuters, June22, 2012; “Liberia extradites 41 unrest suspects to I.Coast,”Agence France-Presse, June 23, 2012.[30]“Several Persons Arrested in Connection with‘Mercenarism,’” Heritage (Liberia), August 31, 2012;Kennedy L. Yangian, “Witch Hunt in Liberia: 7 Grand Gedeans Implicated inIvorian Crisis Tells Court,” Front Page Africa, August 30, 2012.[31]“Ivory Coast, Liberia plan joint military operation onborder,” Reuters, October 18, 2012; “Liberia: arrestation d`un chefde guerre impliqué dans des violences en Côte d`Ivoire,” AgenceFrance-Presse, October 18, 2012.[32]“Ivory Coast, Liberia plan joint military operation on border,”Reuters, October 18, 2012; “Frontière ivoiro-libérienne:manoeuvres militaires d`ici fin 2012 (officiel),” Agence France-Presse, October18, 2012.[33]HumanRights Watch interviews with Gnénéma Coulibaly, minister of humanrights and public liberties, Abidjan, September 7, 2012; and with high-levelofficial in the justice ministry, Abidjan, September 11, 2012.[34]“Liberia: Ivorian Government Foes Wage, Plot Attacks,”Human Rights Watch news release, June6, 2012.[35]“Liberian authorities release mercenary onbail,” Associated Press, April17, 2012; UN Panel of Experts on Liberia, Finalreport of the Panel of Experts on Liberia submitted pursuant to paragraph 6 (f)of Security Council resolution 1961 (2010), para. 63.[36]UNPanel of Experts on Liberia, Final report of the Panel of Experts on Liberiasubmitted pursuant to paragraph 6 (f) of Security Council resolution 1961(2010), para. 62-63. Mercenarism is an “egregious domesticcrime” under Liberia’s Penal Code. Government of Liberia, New PenalCode of Liberia, §11.13: Mercenarism.[37]HumanRights Watch, “They Killed Them Like It Was Nothing”, pp.59-64.[38]UNPanel of Experts on Liberia, Final report of the Panel of Experts on Liberiasubmitted pursuant to paragraph 6 (f) of Security Council resolution 1961(2010), para. 63. See also UN Panel of Experts on Côted’Ivoire, Midterm report prepared in accordance with paragraph16 of Security Council resolution 2045 (2012), para. 42 (“The Groupunderstands that several Ivorian and Liberian field commanders, known as“Generals”, are actually mobilizing elements and training recruitsand have been involved in current military operations. Among these commanders,the Group already identified Isaac Chegbo (alias Bob Marley), Oulai TakoAnderson (alias Tarzan de l’Ouest), Gouhian Mompoho Julien (aliasColombo), Augustin Vlayee (alias Bushdog), Jefferson Gbarjolo (alias IronJacket), Bobby Sarpee and Moses Juru.”). In its June 2012 report, HumanRights Watch also named Augustin Vlayee and Oulai Tako as leaders ofrecruitment for attacks into Côte d’Ivoire.[39]“Ivory Coast closes frontier with Ghana over border attack,”Reuters, September 21, 2012.[40]EU sanctions list, Annex II.[41]“Ivory Coast: Ex-President Gbagbo ally Kouassi arrested,” BBCNews Online, June 7, 2012.[42]“Ghana arrests three in suspected Ivory Coast coup plot,” Reuters,September 17, 2012.[43]“Ivory Coast ex-president's spokesman arrested,” Agence France-Presse,August 25, 2012. Ivorian authorities added charges related to two murdersduring the post-election crisis, but a Ghanaian judge dismissed these chargeson October 24. “Ghana judge sets one-week deadline in I.Coast case,”Agence France-Presse, October 17, 2012; “Ghana frees ally of ex-IvoryCoast leader, drops murder charge,” Reuters, October 24, 2012.[44]HumanRights Watch interviews with high-level Ivorian government officials, Abidjan,September 2012.[45]“Ghana court frees Gbagbo spokesman, new hearing set,” AgenceFrance-Presse, October 24, 2012; “Ghana grants bail to spokesman of ex-I.Coast leader,” Agence France-Presse, September 25, 2012.[46]“Ghana arrests three men ‘planning coup’in I. Coast,”Agence France-Presse, September 18, 2012. Presidential elections will be heldin Ghana on December 7, 2012.[47]“Ghana arrests three in suspected Ivory Coast coup plot,” Reuters,September 17, 2012.See also “Ghana : arrestation detrois hommes ‘planifiant un coup d`Etat’ en Côte d`Ivoire(police),” Agence France-Presse, September 18, 2012.[48]“Ivory Coast closes frontier with Ghana over border attack,”Reuters, September 21, 2012.[49]Ibid.[50]Ibid.See also “Ivory Coast closes Ghana border after deadly attack,” BBCNews Online, September 21, 2012, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-19683708(accessed November 8, 2012).[51]“Ivory Coast to reopen air space with Ghana,” BBC News Online,September 23, 2012, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-19696977 (accessedNovember 8, 2012).[52]“Ivory Coast reopens Ghana land and sea borders,” BBC NewsOnline, October 8, 2012, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-19867303(accessed November 8,2012).[53]“Gunmen attack Ivory Coast power stations, security facilities,”Reuters, October 15, 2012; “Gunmen attack power plant, police post inIvory Coast: minister,” Agence France-Presse, October 15, 2012.[54]HumanRights Watch interview with ex-FANCI detained at military police camp, Abidjan,September 5, 2012.[55]Thebase is the former military engineer (génie militaire) camp.[56]Yves-M.Abiet, “Police militaire : Pourquoi le choix de Koné Zakaria estjudicieux,” Le Patriote (Abidjan), December 23, 2011, http://news.abidjan.net/h/420826.html;Hamadou Ziao, “Chasse aux faux FRCI : Une bombe entre les mains deZakaria,” l’Inter (Abidjan), December 23, 2011, http://news.abidjan.net/h/420813.html.[57]Evenfor military detainees, the military police base appears to be an improperdetention site. Under the Ivorian Code of Military Procedure, militarypersonnel under arrest are to be held “in a secure room in a gendarmeriebarracks or in a military prison.”République de Côted’Ivoire, Loi No. 74-350 du 24 Juillet 1974 relative àl’institution d’un code de procédure militaire (hereinafterCode of Military Procedure), art.55(2) (French original : « Lesmilitaires qui sont ainsi arrêtés peuvent êtredéposés dans la chambre de sûreté d’unecaserne de Gendarmerie ou dans une prison militaire. »).As the Adjamé military police base is the former site of themilitary engineer camp, it is neither a gendarme barracks nor an officialmilitary prison.[58]Codeof Criminal Procedure, arts. 63, 76.[59]Codeof Military Procedure, arts. 55, 57. There is an exception in time of war.Ibid., art. 58(2). However, there is no credible argument that Côted’Ivoire is in an armed conflict—nor has the government made anyformal declaration indicating a belief that it is in an armed conflict.[60]Letterfrom Gnénéma Coulibaly, minister of human rights and public liberties,to Human Rights Watch, November 1, 2012.[61]Letterfrom Gnénéma Coulibaly, minister of human rights and public liberties,to Human Rights Watch, November 1, 2012.[62]Conventionagainst Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishmentart. 1(1), G.A. res. 39/46, annex, 39 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 51) at 197, U.N.Doc. A/39/51 (1984), entered into force June 26, 1987, ratified byCôte d’Ivoire December 18, 1995.[63]HumanRights Watch interview with 36-year-old former detainee at military policecamp, Abidjan, September 3, 2012.[64]HumanRights Watch interview with 31-year-old former detainee at military policecamp, Abidjan, September 3, 2012.[65]HumanRights Watch interview with ex-FANCI detained at military police camp, Abidjan,September 5, 2012.[66]Ibid.[67]HumanRights Watch interview with ex-FANCI detained at military police camp, Abidjan,September 6, 2012.[68]HumanRights Watch interview with 29-year-old former detainee at military policecamp, Abidjan, September 5, 2012.[69]HumanRights Watch interviews with sister and aunt of person still in detentionrelated to Akouédo attack, Abidjan, August 29, 2012; and with mother ofperson still in detention related to Akouédo attack, Abidjan, August 30,2012.[70]HumanRights Watch interview with sister and aunt of person still in detentionrelated to Akouédo attack, Abidjan, August 29, 2012.[71]HumanRights Watch interview with ex-FANCI detained at military police camp, Abidjan,September 5, 2012.[72]General Comment no. 2 to the Convention against Torture outlines an obligationon commanders similar to that which exists under the Rome Statute. It states:“At the same time, those exercising superiorauthority—including public officials—cannot avoid accountability orescape criminal responsibility for torture or ill-treatment committed bysubordinates where they knew or should have known that such impermissibleconduct was, or was likely, to occur, and they took no reasonable and necessarypreventive measures. The Committee considers it essential that theresponsibility of any superior officials whether for direct instigation orencouragement of torture or ill-treatment or for consent or acquiescencetherein- be fully investigated through competent, independent and impartialprosecutorial and judicial authorities.” Committee Against Torture,General Comment 2, Implementation of article 2 by States Parties, U.N. Doc.CAT/C/GC/2/CRP. 1/Rev.4 (2007).[73]HumanRights Watch interview with representative of an international organization,Abidjan, September 6, 2012; and telephone interview with Ivorian journalist, SanPedro, September 24, 2012. There were strong rumors in August 2012 that SanPedro was a potential target for a larger-scale attack bypro-Gbagbo militants.[74]“IvoryCoast: Ex-detainees describe torture by military following roundup afterattacks,” Associated Press, October 4, 2012.[75]Ibid.[76]Convention against Torture, art. 2(1).[77]Ibid.,art. 2(2).[78]Letterfrom Gnénéma Coulibaly, minister of human rights and public liberties,to Human Rights Watch, November 1, 2012.[79]OnJuly 20, at least seven people at an internally displaced persons camp inwestern Côte d’Ivoire were killed, with allegations of involvementby members of the Republican Forces and allied militia groups, including theDozos. Those at the camp were from ethnic groups that tended to support Gbagbo.The camp was largely burned to the ground, displacing around 5,000 people wholived there, still afraid to return home after the post-election crisis. Theattack on Nahibly was believed to have been in part an act of vengeance for arobbery the night before in which five people from typically pro-Ouattaraethnic groups were killed, with accusations that people from the camp wereinvolved. See “At least seven dead in attack on civilian camp in IvoryCoast,” Reuters, July 20, 2012. On October 11, six bodies were exhumedfrom a well in Duékoué, believed to be additional victims fromthe Nahibly camp attack.“Six corps retirésd`un puits à Duékoué, dans l`Ouest ivoirien,” AgenceFrance-Presse, October 11, 2012. See also InternationalFederation for Human Rights (FIDH), Ivory Coast : Justice to combathuman rights violations and insecurity, November 2, 2012, http://www.fidh.org/Ivory-Coast-Justice-to-combat-12371(accessed November 8, 2012).[80]HumanRights Watch interview with 29-year-old former detainee at BAE camp, Abidjan,September 1, 2012.[81]HumanRights Watch interview with diplomat, Abidjan, September 2012. In one ofseveral disturbing ways that recent Ivorian history appears to be repeating,the former government of Laurent Gbagbo similarly used the language of“terrorism” after the attempted coup d’état inSeptember 2002 and during the early years of the Forces Nouvellesrebellion. International Crisis Group, Côte d’Ivoire: “TheWar Is Not Yet Over,” pp. 4, 13, November 2003, http://www.crisisgroup.org/en/regions/africa/west-africa/cote-divoire/072-cotedivoire-the-war-is-not-yet-over.aspx.[82]InternationalCovenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) art. 9, G.A. res. 2200A(XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S.171, entered into force Mar. 23, 1976, acceded to byCôte d’Ivoire on March 26, 1992.[83]ICCPRart.7. Convention against Torture, art. 16.[84]Anasse Anasse, “Des FRCI occupent encore dans les édificespublics et privés,” l’Inter (Abidjan), July 26, 2012,http://africatime.netdivision.fr/CI/nouvelle.asp?no_nouvelle=685125&no_categorie=(accessed September 29, 2012).[85]Theterm “Dioula” is actually a Senoufo word for trader. It also refersto a small ethnic group from the northeast of Côte d’Ivoire, howeverit is most commonly used to refer to people of several ethnicities fromnorthern Côte d’Ivoire who are in fact not ethnic Dioula but oftenspeak a colloquial form of the language. The language has become widely used bymany Ivorians as the language of trade and commerce, particularly in the marketculture of Côte d’Ivoire, which is dominated by northerners andimmigrants. As these groups tended to back Ouattara in the 2010 election,Gbagbo supporters often use the term Dioula to describe anyone they perceive asa Ouattara supporter.[86]HumanRights Watch interview with 27-year-old former detainee at the BAE camp,Abidjan, September 2, 2012.[87]HumanRights Watch interview with resident near the BAE camp, Abidjan, August 29,2012.[88]HumanRights Watch interview with the president of an Ivorian NGO, Abidjan, September10, 2012.[89]République de Côte d’Ivoire, Loi No. 60-366 du 14 Novembre1960 Portant Code de Procédure Pénale (hereinafter Ivorian Codeof Criminal Procedure) arts. 12-29, available at http://www.loidici.com/codeprocepenalecentral/codepropenalepolicejudiciaire.php (accessed September 29, 2012).[90]HumanRights Watch interview with 28-year-old former detainee at BAE camp, Abidjan,September 2, 2012.[91]HumanRights Watch interview with 24-year-old former detainee at BAE camp, Abidjan,August 29, 2012.[92]HumanRights Watch interview with 26-year-old former detainee at BAE camp, Abidjan,August 31, 2012.[93]HumanRights Watch interview with 33-year-old former detainee at BAE camp, Abidjan,August 31, 2012.[94]HumanRights Watch interview with 27-year-old Yopougon Koweit resident, Abidjan,September 4, 2012.[95]Letterfrom Gnénéma Coulibaly, minister of human rights and public liberties,to Human Rights Watch, November 1, 2012.[96]Ivorian Code of Criminal Procedure, arts. 63, 76. If the Public Prosecutorgives specific authorization, the period can be extended by another 48 hours.Ibid. This does not appear to have been done in any of these cases. Thedetainees were held in military camps outside of the purview of the civilianprosecutor.[97]Ivorian Code of Criminal Procedure, art. 125.Républiquede Côte d’Ivoire, Constitution de la République deCôte d’Ivoire du 23 juillet 2000, art. 22, available at http://democratie.francophonie.org/IMG/pdf/Cote_d_Ivoire.pdf(accessed September 29, 2012).[98]HumanRights Watch interview with 26-year-old former detainee at BAE camp, Abidjan,August 31, 2012.[99]HumanRights Watch interview with 23-year-old former detainee at BAE camp, Abidjan,September 4, 2012.[100]HumanRights Watch interview with 31-year-old former detainee at BAE camp, Abidjan,September 2, 2012.[101]HumanRights Watch interview with 29-year-old former detainee at BAE camp, Abidjan,September 3, 2012.[102]HumanRights Watch interview with 25-year-old former detainee at BAE camp, Abidjan,September 4, 2012.[103]HumanRights Watch interview with 30-year-old former detainee at BAE camp, Abidjan,September 4, 2012.[104]HumanRights Watch interviews with former detainees at BAE camp, Abidjan, August and September2012.[105]HumanRights Watch interviews with former detainees at BAE camp, Abidjan, August and September2012.[106]HumanRights Watch interviews with former detainees at BAE camp, Abidjan, August and September2012.[107]HumanRights Watch interview with 26-year-old former detainee at BAE camp, Abidjan,September 2, 2012.[108]Letterfrom Gnénéma Coulibaly, minister of human rights and public liberties,to Human Rights Watch, November 1, 2012.[109]HumanRights Watch interview with person who had met with Coulibaly and been insidethe BAE camp on several occasions, Abidjan, September 1, 2012.[110]HumanRights Watch, “They Killed Them Like It Was Nothing”.[111]United States Department of State, “2009 Human Rights Report,Côte d’Ivoire,” March 11, 2010.[112]See International Crisis Group, Côte d’Ivoire:“The War is Not Yet Over,” pp. 24-26; United States Departmentof State Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, “Côted’Ivoire, 2003,” February 25, 2004.[113]International Crisis Group, Côte d’Ivoire:“TheWar is Not Yet Over,” pp. 18-21, 51.[114]Human Rights Watch, Trapped Between Two Wars, pp. 26-28 (findingthat after retaking Man from Gbagbo forces on December 19, 2002, forcesincluding Ousmane Coulibaly’s MJP “specifically targeted thosecivilians, many of them self-defense committee members, who had collaboratedwith the government forces in targeting civilians” and also took women as“wives” in subjecting them to repeated sexual violence).[115]International Crisis Group, Côte d’Ivoire:“The Waris Not Yet Over,” pp. 25-26. ICG notes that, after repeated attackson civilians by their Liberian mercenary allies, Coulibaly was placed in chargeof “clean-up” between February and April 2003. This involvedpushing the Liberian mercenaries toward the border. Ibid., p. 24. A United StatesDepartment of State report from 2004 also mentioned Coulibaly in this role,stating:“On May 8, Ousmane Coulibaly, MJP military commander in Man, toldthe media that 140 Liberians were being detained ‘for their ownprotection.’” The report also notes, however, “In April,several sources reported that fighting between the western rebels, MPIGO, MJP,and their Liberian/Sierra Leonean allies resulted in execution of more than 50Liberian mercenaries in the western region. A BBC reporter said he saw deadLiberian combatants with their hands tied and sometimes their heads and toessevered.” United States Department of State Bureau of Democracy, HumanRights, and Labor, “Côte d’Ivoire, 2003,” February 25,2004.[116]The UN Security Council never made public the report, but the reportwas leaked and is now widely available. Conclusion 28 identifies Man as one ofmany towns where both sides’ committed widespread or systematic attacksagainst civilian populations, including murders, rape, and torture, comprisecrimes against humanity.[117]Amnesty International, Côte d’Ivoire: Targeting Women:The Forgotten Victims of the Conflict, March 2007 (“[W]omen weresystematically attacked by both pro-government militias and armed oppositiongroups such as the MJP and the MPIGO…. [who] used sexual violence againstwomen to terrorize the civilian population and extort money, reducing manywomen to sexual slavery.”); Amnesty International, Côted’Ivoire: No Escape, June 24, 2003 (documenting atrocities by the MJPagainst Liberian refugees in the far west).[118]HumanRights Watch meeting with high-level Ivorian government official, Abidjan,September 2012.[119]Baudelaire Mieu, “Côte d’Ivoire : Ouattara nommetrois anciens chefs de guerre de la rébellion à la tête derégions sensibles,” Jeune Afrique, September 26, 2012, http://www.jeuneafrique.com/Article/ARTJAWEB20120926161042/.[120]Letter from Gnénéma Coulibaly, minister of human rights and publicliberties, to Human Rights Watch, November 1, 2012.[121]“Côte d’Ivoire : trois civils tués dans l'attaqueprès d’Abidjan,” Le Monde, August 16, 2012, http://www.lemonde.fr/afrique/article/2012/08/16/cote-d-ivoire-l-armee-attaquee-a-dabou-pres-d-abidjan_1746798_3212.html.[122]HumanRights Watch interview with 23-year-old former detainee in Dabou, Abidjan, September12, 2012.[123]HumanRights Watch interviews with people detained and released in Dabou, Abidjan,August 28, September 7, and September 12, 2012.[124]HumanRights Watch interviews with people detained and released in Dabou, Abidjan,August 28, September 7, and September 12, 2012.[125]HumanRights Watch interview with 23-year-old former detainee in Dabou, Abidjan,September 12, 2012.[126]HumanRights Watch interviews with people detained and released in Dabou, Abidjan,August 28, September 7, and September 12, 2012.[127]HumanRights Watch interviews with residents of a village near Dabou, Abidjan,September 7 and September 12, 2012.[128]HumanRights Watch interview with sister of detainee, Abidjan, August 29, 2012.[129]HumanRights Watch interview with president of Ivorian human rights organization,Abidjan, September 10, 2012.[130]HumanRights Watch interview with UN official, Abidjan, September 5, 2012.[131]HumanRights Watch interview with UN official, Abidjan, September 5, 2012.[132]Konan Kan, “11 jours après l’expiration del’ultimatum du ministre de la Défense : Les FRCI occupent toujoursles domaines publics et privés,” Le Mandat (Abidjan), July11, 2012, http://news.abidjan.net/h/437024.html; Xinhua, “Côted`Ivoire : le gouvernement lance un ultimatum pour le dépôt volontairedes armes,” May 23, 2012, http://news.abidjan.net/h/433972.html.[133]Kan,“11 jours après l’expiration de l’ultimatum duministre de la Défense : Les FRCI occupent toujours les domaines publicset privés,” Le Mandat.[134]HumanRights Watch interview with representative from international organization,Abidjan, September 2012.[135]Letterfrom Gnénéma Coulibaly, minister of human rights and public liberties,to Human Rights Watch, November 1, 2012.[136]The“com-zone network” refers to when the Forces Nouvellescontrolled northern Côte d’Ivoire, and the area was divided intoregions controlled by different zone commanders, or “com-zones.”[137]HumanRights Watch interview with diplomat, Abidjan, September 12, 2012.[138]HumanRights Watch interview with diplomat, Abidjan, September 13, 2012.[139]HumanRights Watch interview with representative from international organization,Abidjan, September 6, 2012.[140]HumanRights Watch interviews with Hamed Bakayoko, minister of interior, Abidjan,September 12, 2012; and with Gnénéma Coulibaly, minister of humanrights and public liberties, Abidjan, September 7, 2012.[141]K.M.,“Coulibaly Gnénéma, ministre des Droits de l’Homme,à propos du rapport de Doudou Diène : «Le gouvernementivoirien prend note»,” Nord-Sud (Abidjan), March 23, 2012, http://news.abidjan.net/h/429866.html;Marc Dosso, “Hamed Bakayoko, ministre de l’Intérieur :«L’embargo pour nous n’a plus sa raisond’être»,” Nord-Sud, November 12, 2011, http://news.abidjan.net/h/416524.html.[142]HumanRights Watch interview with 28-year-old, Abidjan, September 1, 2012.[143]HumanRights Watch interview with 27-year-old former detainee at the BAE camp,Abidjan, September 2, 2012.[144]HumanRights Watch interview with Ivorian civil society leader, Abidjan, September 7,2012.[145]HumanRights Watch interview with 31-year-old in Yopougon Koweit, Abidjan, September2, 2012.[146]HumanRights Watch interview with high-level Ivorian government officials, Abidjan,September 2012.[147]HumanRights Watch interview with 30-year-old former detainee at BAE camp, Abidjan,August 30, 2012.[148]HumanRights Watch interview with 32-year-old former detainee at BAE camp, Abidjan,August 31, 2012.[149]HumanRights Watch interview with 29-year-old former detainee at BAE camp, Abidjan,September 1, 2012.[150]HumanRights Watch interview with Ivorian civil society representative, Abidjan,September 10, 2012.[151]HumanRights Watch interview with Hamed Bakayoko, Abidjan, September 12, 2012.[152]HumanRights Watch interview with Gnénéma Coulibaly, Abidjan, September7, 2012.[153]HumanRights Watch interviews with Hamed Bakayoko, Abidjan, September 12, 2012; andwith Gnénéma Coulibaly, Abidjan, September 7, 2012.Related ContentNovember 19, 2012News ReleaseCôte d’Ivoire: New Spate of Abuses by MilitaryForces Used Torture, Inhuman Treatment in Response to Recent Security ThreatsNovember 19, 2012News ReleaseCôte d’Ivoire: New Spate of Abuses by MilitaryRegion / CountryAfrica,Côte d'IvoireProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch