"They Put Me in the Hole": Military Detention, Torture, and Lack of Due Process in Cabinda | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full report in EnglishDownload report with coverSearchDonate NowSearchDownloadsDownload the full report in EnglishDownload report with coverJune 22, 2009"They Put Me in the Hole"Military Detention, Torture, and Lack of Due Process in CabindaAvailable InEnglishPortuguês“They Put Me in the Hole”Military Detention, Torture, and Lack of Due Process inCabindaI. Glossaryof AcronymsII. SummaryIII.RecommendationsTo thePresident and Government of AngolaIV.MethodologyV.BackgroundVI.Individuals Arrested for Security Crimes since September 20071. FernandoLelo and co-accused FAA members2. PersonsArrested in Rural Areas3. FormerFLEC Members Arrested in the DRC and CabindaVII. Abusesby the Angolan Armed ForcesArbitraryArrestsIncommunicadoDetentionTorture inMilitary CustodyVIII.Treatment in Civilian PrisonsIX.Violations of Due Process RightsAcknowledgementsAnnex:Persons Held for Security Charges at Yabi PrisonCurrentDetaineesPreviousKnown DetaineesI. Glossary of AcronymsANR     CongoleseNational Intelligence Service (Agence Nationale de Renseignement)DRC     DemocraticRepublic of CongoFAA     AngolanArmed Forces (Forças Armadas Angolanas)FCD     CabindanForum for Dialogue (Fórum Cabindês do Diálogo)FLEC     LiberationFront of the Enclave of Cabinda (Frente de Libertação do Enclavede Cabinda)FLEC-FAC     LiberationFront of the Enclave of Cabinda – Cabindan Armed Forces (Frente deLibertação do Enclave de Cabinda – Forças ArmadasCabindesas)GOI     OperativeIntelligence Group (Grupo Operativo de Inteligência)ICCPR     InternationalCovenant on Civil and Political RightsMPLA     PopularLiberation Movement of Angola (Movimento Popular de Libertação deAngola)OAA;     AngolanBar Association (Ordem dos Advogados de Angola)UNITA     NationalUnion for the Total Independence of Angola (União Nacional para aIndependência Total de Angola)VOA     Voiceof AmericaII. SummaryAt least 38 people who have been arrested by Angolanmilitary and intelligence officials in Cabinda, Angola’s oil-richenclave, from September 2007 to March 2009 have been subjected to torture andcruel or inhumane treatment in military custody and been denied basic dueprocess rights as well as the right to a fair trial. The detainees are accusedby the authorities of involvement in armed opposition in Cabinda in the contextof a separatist insurgency.The intensity of the armed conflict in Cabinda has declinedas a result of large-scale counterinsurgency operations in 2002-2003, and thegovernment publicly claims that the Cabinda conflict came to a close in 2006,when a peace agreement was signed with a faction of the rebel Liberation Frontfor the Independence of the Enclave of Cabinda (FLEC). But the campaign forindependence remains unresolved, and sporadic guerrilla attacks have beenongoing.Despite its insistence that the insurgency is no longeractive, the military’s systematic arbitrary detention and torture ofpeople in Cabinda suggests that the government has resorted to unlawful meansto retaliate against people with perceived sympathy for the FLEC’s armedindependence campaign. Angolan military and intelligence services have awidespread presence in the small territory, and they have intimidated and harassedpeople with perceived dissident views.Human Rights Watch has previously reported on governmentintimidation in Cabinda. In a February 2009 report on the parliamentaryelections of September 2008, HumanRights Watch showed how the government has continued to use security concernsin Cabinda to justify restrictions on freedom of expression, association, andmovement, as well as arbitrary arrests and unfair trials. In December 2008, Human Rights Watch called attentionto the Angolan government’suse of torture and unfair trials in state security cases, in connection with 14civilians who were arbitrarily detained and tortured in military custody inCabinda.This report extends that work with new first-hand,field-based information and shows a disturbing pattern of human rightsviolations during pre-trial detention of persons accused of state securitycrimes in Cabinda. In most of the 38 cases that Human Rights Watchinvestigated, those accused of security crimes endured arbitrary arrests,lengthy incommunicado detention, and interrogations under torture in militarycustody. All 38 detainees were eventually brought to the judicial authoritiesand a civilian detention facility. But trial records in several cases show thatdue process rights were violated.In addition to providing further detail on the high-profilecase of Fernando Lelo, a former Voice of America correspondent who wasconvicted of national security crimes in September 2008, this report also drawsattention to those cases that have attracted much less public attention andrisk being overlooked.The Angolan government should immediately adopt allnecessary measures to ensure that the Angolan Armed Forces (FAA) act inaccordance with Angola’s obligations under international human rights andhumanitarian law. In particular, the government should ensure, in accordancewith Angolan law, that the armed forces promptly transfer individuals detainedfor security crimes to the competent civilian authorities, hold them accordingto international standards for pre-trial detention, and provide a prompt andfair trial.The Angolan courts should also promptly review theproceedings against detainees currently or previously held for state securityoffenses, and then release unconditionally or fairly retry individualsconvicted in trials that violated basic fair trial standards. The Angolangovernment should investigate allegations of serious human rights violations bymembers of the military and intelligence services, and prosecute allegedperpetrators.In order to prevent further abuses, the Angolan governmentshould set up an independent and impartial inquiry into human rights violationsallegedly committed by the Angolan Armed Forces and branches of intelligence inCabinda and establish mechanisms to compensate victims of torture and arbitrarydetention.III. RecommendationsTo the President and Government of AngolaTake all necessary measures toensure that the Angolan Armed Forces act in accordance with Angola’sobligations under international human rights and humanitarian law.Ensure that persons taken intocustody are promptly brought before an independent officer authorized bylaw to exercise judicial power, and held only in official places ofdetention; that all detainees are provided with immediate and regularaccess to family members and legal counsel, and that criminal proceedingsare in accordance with international fair trial standards.Ensure that coercedconfessions, particularly those made under torture, are not admitted asevidence against persons at trial and that prosecutors and judges have theindependence to investigate torture and illegal detention by any branch ofthe military and domestic intelligence services, free from obstruction orinterference.Release prisoners that havebeen convicted in unfair trials or appropriately retry them in accordancewith international fair trial standards.Provide adequate remedies,including compensation, for persons arbitrarily arrested or tortured orotherwise mistreated in detention.Ensure that military andintelligence officers committing torture or other human rights violationsagainst persons in their custody are appropriately disciplined orprosecuted.Allow independent scrutiny ofdetention facilities where detainees allege having been held illegally andtortured by security forces, including the detention center at theheadquarters of the second regional command of the Angolan Armed Forcesand all military garrisons.Set up an independent andimpartial inquiry into human rights violations committed by the AngolanArmed Forces and branches of intelligence services, including thearbitrary detention of persons in military custody.Ratify the Convention againstTorture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment andits Optional Protocol and allow visits by the Protocol’sSubcommittee on Prevention of Torture.IV. MethodologyBetween March 2008 and March 2009, a Human Rights Watchresearcher visited the Angolan enclave province of Cabinda (capital andmunicipality of Cacongo) three times and conducted interviews there, in Luanda,and elsewhere. The researcher interviewed 60 persons, in person, by phone, oremail, including lawyers, members of religious groups and civil societyorganizations, activists, journalists, diplomats and officials of thegovernment, military, police, and the judiciary. In March 2009, the researcheralso conducted in-person group and individual interviews with 20 personsdetained at Yabi prison in Cabinda who had been charged with “crimesagainst the security of the State” and related crimes. Interviews withdetainees were conducted freely, without interference or the presence ofgovernment officials. Yet, provincial government, military, and policeofficials were less open for Human Rights Watch interviews in March 2009 thanpreviously. In response to official meeting requests, most claimed beingunavailable. The researcher also consulted legal documents referring to thecases. The initials of detainees whose accounts were quoted have been changedto protect their security.V. BackgroundThe Angolan enclave province of Cabinda, with an estimatedpopulation of 300,000, is separated from the country’s other 17 provincesby a strip of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). It produces half ofAngola’s oil.The armed separatist FLEC movement, founded in 1963, firstfought for independence from Portugal, Angola’s colonial rulers, and thenfrom Angola itself when Angola became independent in 1975. Following the end ofa civil war in Angola in 2002 between the government, dominated by the PopularLiberation Movement of Angola (MPLA), and the main opposition movement,National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA), the Angolan ArmedForces (FAA) re-deployed some 30,000 government soldiers to Cabinda to wipe outthe remaining separatist insurgency. These military efforts led to thedestruction of FLEC’s main bases in the interior and considerablyweakened the guerrilla’s military capacity.In 2004, Human Rights Watch documented human rights violationsagainst civilians in Cabinda in the course of these counter-insurgencyoperations, including extrajudicial killings, arbitrary detention, torture, andexcessive restrictions on freedom of movement. According to that research, mostof the human rights violations were committed by the Angolan Armed Forces withimpunity.[1]In 2004, the government claimed that the war in Cabinda was over, but dialoguewould continue. However, successive attempts to reach a formal peace agreementwith several wings of the FLEC remained unsuccessful, and sporadic insurgentattacks continued.In 2006, a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) signed by theAngolan government and António Bento Bembe, the former leader of theFLEC Renovada wing and president of the Cabindan Forum for Dialogue (FCD),sought to formally end the armed conflict. The FCD had been established in 2004as a joint commission including representatives of the two main FLECfactions—FLEC Renovada and FLEC-FAC—as well as members of civilsociety and the churches, to facilitate peace negotiations with the government.The MOU included an amnesty, a demobilization and reintegration plan for formerFLEC combatants, and the allocation of a number of government posts to a rangeof former FLEC officials.[2]The peace agreement, however, has enjoyed little credibilityin Cabinda, because the most active FLEC wing, FLEC-FAC, as well as othermembers of the FCD, had been excluded from the talks, and no politicalconcessions were made to the separatists. The armed insurgency has continued,but since 2006 the government has claimed the war ended in Cabinda and hasattributed continuing sporadic attacks to “bandits.” FLEC-FAC hasclaimed responsibility for a number of armed attacks targeting governmentforces and expatriate workers of private companies. The intensity of the armedconflict and the level of serious human rights violations have decreased since2004, but the FAA presence is proportionately higher in Cabinda than elsewherein Angola today, suggesting the government’s continuing concern about theseparatist movement.Despite the peace agreement in 2006, freedom of expressionand association remains restricted in Cabinda. The government has used statesecurity concerns to crack down on peaceful opposition and scrutiny. In late2006 and early 2007, two high-profile civil society activists were arrested foralleged state security crimes in Cabinda and were later released, followinglocal and international public pressure, without having been formally charged.[3]In July 2006, the provincial court banned the civic association of Cabinda,Mpalabanda, founded in 2003, and alleged that the organization had incitedviolence and acted as a political party campaigning for Cabinda’sindependence. The new bishop who took office in June 2006 temporarily dissolvedthe Catholic Justice and Peace Commission, which had been essential todocumenting human rights violations since 2002. As a result, local andinternational organizations have struggled to obtain independent informationfrom the interior to corroborate allegations of human rights abuses committedby both the FAA and FLEC since 2006.VI. Individuals Arrested for Security Crimes sinceSeptember 2007Officially, since the MOU in 2006, the Angolan governmenthas denied the continued existence of an armed FLEC guerrilla movement. Senior FAA and police officials explained to Human Rights Watch inMarch 2008 that those people who were arrested for national security crimeswere “bandits who oppose development,”[4] or “people whostill identify with FLEC, seeking to call attention to compromise thegovernment’s cooperation with countries and companies.”[5]Bento Bembe—former FLEC Renovada and FCD leaderand current minister without portfolio—explainedto Human Rights Watch in March 2009 that “those people cannot be from theFLEC, because I represent the guerrillas.”[6] However, the casesdocumented in this report clearly contradict this claim, as many of the chargesin the cases refer to alleged involvement in concrete acts of armedinsurgency. Court records also often explicitly refer toalleged cooperation with FLEC-FAC.Between September 2007 and March 2009, at least 38 persons,including six members of the Angolan Armed Forces, (see list in Annex) werearrested by military and intelligence agents for alleged “crimes againstthe security of the State,” including armed rebellion and sabotage, andother crimes relating to the armed FLEC insurgency in Cabinda, such ashomicide, illegal possession of arms, and desertion. The Angolan law on crimesagainst the security of the state from 1978, which allows for up to 215 dayspre-trial detention,[7] includesan overly broad and ambiguous range of offenses: “Every and any act, notprovided for by law, that endangers or may endanger the security of theState...”[8]All 38 detainees were initially held in military custody forlong periods—from 26 days to six months—before being transferred tothe civilian prison at Yabi in Cabinda and brought either before a prosecutoror to be formally charged or before a judge.[9] So far,two trials have taken place, as a result of which seven persons were convictedand four were acquitted.The 38 individuals targeted, arrested and charged canroughly be grouped into three categories:1. Fernando Lelo and co-accused FAA membersThe Angolan Armed Forces in September 2007 arrested six FAApersonnel: António Santos Nguimbi (soldier), Lourenço Ila Dembe(soldier), Alberto Suami (1st sergeant), Alberto JoãoChimbinda (soldier), Basílio Muanda (1st corporal), andCustódio Nguimbi Sumbo (1st sergeant). Their arrests led tothe November 15, 2007 arrest of former Voice of America (VOA) journalistJosé Fernando Lelo by the Angolan military at his workplace in the oilcompound of Malongo.All of these men were eventually charged with havingorganized or carried out three armed attacks between December 2006 and July2007; the FAA members were additionally charged with having committed militarycrimes such as desertion.[10]Lelo and the six were put on trial before the Cabinda military court from May 5to June 11, 2008 and convicted on September 16, 2008. Lelo was sentenced to 12years of imprisonment. Five of the co-accused were sentenced to 13 years ofimprisonment. Custódio Nguimbi Sumbo was acquitted. Lelo and the five convictedmilitary personnel are currently prisoners at Yabi prison in Cabinda, whichHuman Rights Watch visited, while an appeal against their conviction to theSupreme Military Court is pending.Human Rights Watch and other organizations believe that Lelowas primarily targeted for arrest and conviction as a result of opinions heexpressed as a VOA journalist until December 2006, which were perceived to becritical of the Angolan government and the 2006 Memorandum of Understanding.[11]2. Persons Arrested in Rural AreasMost of those who were arrested and charged with securitycrimes between January 2008 and March 2009 were residents of villages in theinterior of Cabinda. The majority were arrested in groups during militaryraids, which followed armed attacks attributed to the FLEC separatist guerrillamovement in the municipalities of Buco Zau and Cacongo.[12]So far, only five of those arrested—João MateusLuemba, Elias Menos, Garcia David António, António Zau, andNatalício Mbatchi—were tried by the provincial civil court fromMarch 24 to April 22, 2009. On May 7, the judge acquitted four of the accusedfor lack of evidence, while sentencing Mbatchi to 18 months in prison forillegal possession of arms. All five had been arrested in January 2008, over ayear previously, and charged with “crimes against the security of theState” and related crimes. At that time, all were released from custody,including Mbatchi, who had already spent 17 months in pre-trial detention.Local human rights activists told Human Rights Watch thatmore people have been arrested during such military raids and were laterreleased from military custody without having been charged and presented to thepublic prosecutor.[13]3. Former FLEC Members Arrested in the DRC andCabindaSeven detainees at Yabi prison interviewed by Human RightsWatch confirmed that they previously were FLEC members. Five had been living inthe Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) since 2005 and 2006. They said that theyhad not been FLEC members since. They were arrested in different places in theDRC in October 2008 by the Congolese Agence Nationale de Renseignement (ANR)and later transferred to Angola. Two former FLEC members were also arrested inCabinda in Dinge (Cacongo) and in Cabinda city in the same month. They allegednot having yet been formally charged with any crime.Human Rights Watch also interviewed two registered refugeesfrom Cabinda, including one former FLEC member now in Lisbon, Portugal, and thecurrent Voice of America correspondent in Kinshasa, both of whom allege havingbeen threatened with arrest and transfer to Angola in early 2008 and early2009, respectively.[14]These firsthand accounts and secondary reports received by Human Rights Watchsuggest a wider pattern of arrests of Cabindans in the DRC at the request ofthe Angolan authorities.VII. Abuses by the Angolan Armed ForcesThis chapter details key human rights violations committedby the Angolan Armed Forces against persons detained under the charge of“crimes against the security of the state” and related crimes sinceSeptember 2007.Arbitrary ArrestsThe 20 detainees interviewed at Yabi prison and lawyers ofthose and other detainees told Human Rights Watch that all were arrestedwithout warrants, most of them by the military. Arrests without a warrant arepermitted under Angolan law when the persons are caught in the act of whichthey are accused, but the arrests need to be validated by the public prosecutoron the same day, or within five days maximum, when a public prosecutor cannot bereached immediately.[15] Thistime limit is often exceeded in Angola, as even the Cabinda public prosecutorconceded to Human Rights Watch.[16]According to the detainees, lawyers, and legal counsel, noneof those arrested was apprehended in combat situations or with arms alleged tohave been used in guerrilla attacks, nor were the detainees presented to anyauthorized magistrate immediately following their arrest, as required by law.Lelo was presented with an arrest warrant, with no issuing authority, at hiswork place in Cabinda and was taken in handcuffs to the military section ofSão Paulo prison in Luanda, where he was held for more than three monthsbefore being transferred back to Cabinda on March 30, 2008. Most of thedetainees arrested in villages said they were arrested following a guerrillaattack that had taken place close to their village or several villages away. Inaddition, several detainees told Human Rights Watch that they were arrestedwhen they presented themselves to the authorities, either because they hadheard a military commander was looking for them at their homes, were seekinginformation about an arrested relative, or, as in the case of three former FLECmembers in the DRC, because they formally announced to the Congolese authoritiestheir intention to return to Cabinda.Incommunicado DetentionAll detainees told Human Rights Watch that they were heldincommunicado in military custody for long periods of time—in severalcases, for more than 35 days and in some cases for up to 50 days—beforebeing presented to an authorized magistrate (the public prosecutor) and thecriminal investigation police and eventually brought to the civilian prison ofYabi. During military custody, they were unable to contact legal counsel orfamily members. Only Fernando Lelo had access to a lawyer five days after hisarrest.FAA members co-accused with Lelo (but arrested before him)were held incommunicado in military custody for up to six months in Cabinda andLuanda, without access to a legal counsel, until they were transferred toCabinda on March 30, 2008, brought to the prison at Yabi, and presented to theCabinda public prosecutor.[17]Those detainees who were arrested in rural areas told HumanRights Watch that they first were held in different military garrisons and inthe FAA headquarters in Cabinda, before eventually being brought to the prisonat Yabi and presented to the public prosecutor.[18]Detainees arrested in the DRC by Congolese intelligenceagents said they were first sent to and held in unknown places in the capital,Luanda, before being directly transferred to the FAA headquarters in Cabinda,where they were held for more than three weeks before being presented to thepublic prosecutor and finally brought to the prison at Yabi.[19]According to Angolan law, incommunicado detention is alloweduntil the public prosecutor interrogates the detainee. This must occur on thesame day, or within five days maximum. Incommunicado detention can be extendedafter the first interrogation—for national security crimes for up to 10days—but only if authorized by the public prosecutor.[20]Extended incommunicado detention violates the fundamentalhuman rights to humane treatment and access to counsel, as provided under theInternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), which Angolaratified in 1992.[21]The UN Commission on Human Rights has repeatedly said that incommunicadodetention should be prohibited.[22]In addition, Angola’s practice is contrary to the minimum internationalstandards of detention as set out in the UN Standard Minimal Rules for theTreatment of Prisoners.[23]Torture in Military CustodyMany detainees told Human Rights Watch that militaryofficers and soldiers under their command tortured them to force them toincriminate themselves and others. Others said they were threatened that theywould be killed unless they “say the truth.” Some were forced tosign written confessions at gunpoint in local military garrisons, before theywere transferred to the FAA headquarters in Cabinda city.All detainees interviewed by Human Rights Watch werespecific about where and how they were tortured. Several practices of tortureand degrading treatment described to Human Rights Watch in March 2009 areconsistent with practices documented by Human Rights Watch in 2003—aperiod when the armed conflict in Cabinda was more intense.[24]A Human Rights Watch researcher saw that most of the detainees had visiblescars on their arms near their elbows, consistent with their accounts of havingbeen tied up with cords across their back.One of the legal counsel of the FAA members convicted alongwith Lelo in 2008 told Human Rights Watch that his clients were subjected totorture and inhumane treatment—including mock executions, severe injurieswith firearms, beatings with various objects, and public humiliation ofrelatives—in several FAA garrisons. One soldier lost a leg as a result ofinjuries suffered in military custody.[25]Lelo was the only detainee interviewed by Human Rights Watch who said he hadnot been physically mistreated.Three other detainees described to Human Rights Watch theirtreatment by the military as follows:I slept at the police post, and the morning after, the FAAcame to fetch me, and a military security commander took me to the military garrisonat Loma. There soldiers tied me up with cords across my back and beat me,shouting ‘because you are FLEC’, ‘because you attacked a carof a company and killed a worker’, ‘You are the head of thegroup’. I bled a lot. They took me—tied up—to the militarygarrison at Caio and put me in a hole full of water. I stayed there for 19days, after which they took me back to Loma where I was presented to a group ofsenior military. I insisted I was innocent. Then they put me again in the‘hole’ in Caio where I stayed for another nine days.[26]They beat me, squeezed my testicles and my tongue with apincer, telling me to ‘say the truth.’ I cried in pain. They calleda nurse to give me an injection. Commander Lacrau then asked, ‘Tell ushow many arms the coordinator gave you to attack this car.’[27]In the village, the military tied our arms up withbootlaces, stripped our shirts, and beat us. I vomited blood. They searched thevillage for arms and ammunition but didn’t find any. We were taken to thenext military garrison in Necuto where they stripped us naked and tied mytesticles to a mortar. Then they took us to the military unit at Loma, BucoZau. There, the military commander, Lacrau, accused me of having taken arms tothe village from the city. He gave a guard a weapon and a bucket and told himto dig a grave and execute me. Then he fired a shot in the air and told theguard to lock me in the latrine and tell the others arrested with me that I wasdead and the same would happen to them if they didn’t tell the truth…throughout the night military counter-intelligence operatives came to beat us.They threatened us with pistols and knives ‘to tell the truth.’ Atsome stage we said anything. The beatings were too much. Later we were taken bystate security agents and two military in a civilian Land Cruiser to themilitary garrison at Dinge. There they shouted at us, ‘You areFLEC.’ They beat us with whips and rifle butts and burned our testicleswith cigarettes.[28]Detainees told Human Rights Watch that they were eventuallyheld for varying periods of time under inhumane conditions at the FAAheadquarters in Cabinda in a dark, dirty cellar without windows and sanitationfacilities, which floods when it rains. This detention facility is commonlyknown and feared as “the hole.” The FAA spokesperson in Cabinda inMarch 2008 denied to Human Rights Watch the existence of such a prison.[29]Some detainees said they met military personnel who were being held there forinternal disciplinary offenses. Most who had been detained there complainedthat they were prevented from washing for up to 17 days and defecating for upto five days. A lawyer acting as defense counsel for the six FAA membersco-accused with Lelo told Human Rights Watch that the detained FAA members werehandcuffed for three months in the “hole,” where they were beatenand often denied food.[30]Another defense lawyer told Human Rights Watch his client was beaten at the FAAheadquarters with whips until he fell unconscious.[31]Former FLEC members arrested in October 2008 in the DRC andtransferred to Angola told Human Rights Watch that they were held in the“hole” for long periods of time—between 25 and 30 days—wherethey were threatened with execution, beaten, and kicked by officials identifiedonly by aliases—“Colonel Walter,” “MajorCafundinho”—and several unidentified military, including militarypolice officers from the FAA headquarters. As a former FLEC member arrested inCabinda described:Members of the military police who arrested me threatenedto shoot me, tied me up with bootlaces, and took me to the headquarters of thesecond regional command of the FAA. There, “Major Kafumbira” beatme with metal sticks and rifle butts and shouted “Take off your clothes!We will kill you!” They took my money and ordered me to tell them thenames of all the people I work with, whether I knew guerrilla members in theforest, and why I came to the city. Blood poured out of my ears.[32]The local representative of the Angolan Bar Association(OAA) told Human Rights Watch that 10 people arrested on March 26, 2009 in thevillage Liambo-Lione (Cacongo municipality) alleged that they were severelybeaten by military personnel inside the FAA headquarters. Only five of themen—after 26 days of incommunicado detention—were eventually presentedto the public prosecutor. The other five, including the wife of one detainee,were released directly from military custody after five days.[33]According to Angolan law, only the public prosecutor has thepower to interrogate detainees.[34]However, detainees and lawyers interviewed by Human Rights Watch said that, inall cases, military intelligence officers carried out interrogations. Inaddition, military officials in command of interrogation sessions that involvedtorture, in which some participated actively, never formally identifiedthemselves, either by name or affiliation. Thus, soldiers and commandingofficers involved in the torture of detainees are only known by aliases, or nomsde guerre, the most quoted being “Colonel Fuchi,”“Colonel Walter,”[35]and “Major Cafundinho.” Some detainees, lawyers, and others toldHuman Rights Watch that the officers belong to a unit called the OperativeIntelligence Group (Grupo Operativo de Inteligência or GOI), created someyears ago to coordinate the counter-insurgency activities of Angola’sdomestic and military intelligence services in Cabinda.[36]Human Rights Watch could only identify the full name of one well-known seniormilitary officer, Col. António José da ConceiçãoKambanda, alias “Lacrau,” commander of the Third Infantry Regimentof the FAA, who oversaw the torture of detainees in Buco Zau. Several detaineestold Human Rights Watch that some local administrators and military commandersas well as senior military officials tried to intervene on behalf of detaineesthey perceived to be innocent, but were overruled by Colonel“Lacrau.”The provincial public prosecutor and former militaryprosecutor, António Nito, denied having “any knowledge” ofunofficial military detention places, as well as interrogations under torturein military custody, and questioned the credibility and accuracy ofdetainees’ accounts. He told Human Rights Watch: “They would sayanything, but this is not sufficient. They have to present evidence and file alegal complaint.”[37]Nevertheless, the accounts collected by Human Rights Watch are remarkablyconsistent and suggest a systematic pattern of abuse by the Angolan militaryand intelligence services.The prohibition on torture is a fundamental principle ofinternational human rights law; torture is prohibited at all times and underall circumstances. Angola has yet to ratify the Convention against Torture andOther Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, which obliges statesto prevent and sanction acts of torture and other mistreatment. The Angolangovernment has on several occasions promised to ratify the convention and itsoptional protocol, which allows international monitoring of detentionfacilities. It reiterated this promise in its voluntary pledges submitted tothe UN General Assembly in May 2007[38]before being elected as a member of the Human Rights Council for 2007-2010.As a member of the United Nations, Angola has agreed toabide by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which bans all use oftorture and other mistreatment.[39] Angolais party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and theAfrican Charter on Human and People’s Rights, both of which prohibitarbitrary detention and outlaw the use of torture and cruel, inhuman, ordegrading treatment.[40]In addition, Angola is bound by international humanitarian law, the laws ofwar. Common article 3 of the 1949 Geneva Conventions, which applies duringinternal armed conflicts, protects captured combatants and detained civiliansagainst torture and cruel, humiliating, and degrading treatment.In addition, Angola’s constitution, which is currentlyunder review in parliament, states that “Constitutional and legal normsrelated to fundamental rights shall be interpreted and integrated harmoniouslywith the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the African Charter on Humanand People’s Rights and other international instruments to which Angolais party,” and that “In the assessment of disputes by Angolancourts, those international instruments shall apply even when not invoked byparties.”[41]These international instruments place a legal obligation on Angola to end itsarbitrary detention, torture, and mistreatment of detainees in Cabinda.VIII. Treatment in Civilian PrisonsDetainees at Yabi prison told Human Rights Watch thatdetention conditions at the newly built prison facility, where all wereeventually brought, were generally good. That was less true for the former VOAjournalist Fernando Lelo, who told Human Rights Watch that he was only allowedto leave his cell for the prison yard after several months. “My detentionconditions are not determined by the prison director, but by orders from hissuperiors,” he said. “It’s as if I was in a private prisonhere.”[42]However, several detainees at Yabi prison told Human RightsWatch that after finally being presented to the public prosecutor and criminalinvestigation police, they were first shuttled back and forth to differentcells of the “Cadeia Civil,” a transit detention center for militaryand civilian detainees, including illegal migrants.[43]Some detainees told Human Rights Watch they were “forced under theseats” of the cars by officials shuttling them to and from the CadeiaCivil.[44]Others described to Human Rights Watch the inhumaneconditions at that jail:We stayed 17 days in the ‘dark cell’ of theCadeia Civil. We had to do everything there—urinate, defecate, eat—butthey didn’t beat us. After being presented to the public prosecutor, wewere taken back to the military headquarters, where we stayed for seven days.Then they took us back to the Cadeia Civil, to the civilian part, for anotherfour days.[45]One detainee described his stay inthe Cadeia Civil as “cramped into a cell of four square meters maximumtogether with 17 other people.”[46]IX. Violations of Due Process RightsHuman Rights Watch’s research into the criminalproceedings and trial of Fernando Lelo and the co-accused FAA members foundthat their treatment fell far short of international due process standards.The six FAA members were arrested in September 2007 withouta warrant and were held incommunicado in military custody for up to six months,during which time they were forced to confess and incriminate Lelo andthemselves under torture and degrading and inhumane treatment.Lelo and the six co-accused FAA members were formallycharged by the military prosecutor of Cabinda in March 2008 with crimes againstthe security of the state and military crimes. They were tried by a militarycourt in hearings lasting from May 5 to June 11, 2008. This was in violation ofAngolan law, because crimes against the security of the State and cases againstcivilians, like Lelo, should be tried in civilian courts.[47]No credible evidence, either during the criminalinvestigation or at the trial, was presented against any of the detainees,while evidence in defense of the accused was not taken into account. Themilitary prosecutor and military judge dismissed all objections regardingarbitrary arrest, evidence obtained under torture, and the jurisdiction ofmilitary courts.[48]Lelo was accused of having “undertaken a vastrecruitment” of former FLEC soldiers integrated into the FAA, with theaim of carrying out armed attacks against the FAA in order to influencenational and international opinion that the separatist insurgency in Cabindacontinues to be active.[49]However, the co-accused FAA members had not identified Lelo during two lineups.They allege that they were tortured to incriminate themselves and Lelo. Noother evidence was presented to suggest that Lelo had met the FAA soldiers whomhe was accused of paying and instructing to carry out armed attacks.[50]The trial was further tainted by government statements thatinfringed upon judicial independence and Lelo’s right to a fair trial.Long before the start of the trial, Attorney General João Maria deSousa, stated repeatedly in the state media that there were “strongindications” of Lelo’s guilt.[51]Such statements were widely viewed as intended to exert pressure on the judgeto hand down a conviction.In addition, according to Angolan law and internationalhuman rights standards, trials are to be public.[52]However, several trial observers told Human Rights Watch that public access tothe hearings, including for family members and the privately owned press, wasrestricted, while a large number of domestic and military intelligence andpolice agents occupied the courtroom.[53] Lelohimself described the atmosphere during the trial to Human Rights Watch:Almost every day they suspended the trial. We spent twohours maximum there a day. Every time I was shuttled from the prison to court,escorted by a motorcade of several cars with armed agents of the Public OrderPolice, the Rapid Intervention Police, and the FAA. The car I was indidn’t have windows. This spectacle served to present me to the public asa highly dangerous criminal and to intimidate the population watching thescene. At court, the military prosecutor dominated the trial, despite not beingfamiliar with the legal process.[54]On September 16—almost three months after thetrial—five FAA members were sentenced to 13 years of imprisonment formilitary crimes (violence against a superior and subordinate and desertion) andcrimes against the security of the state, including armed rebellion. One FAAmember was acquitted. Fernando Lelo was sentenced to 12 years of imprisonmentfor inciting the co-accused to commit the crimes.Human Rights Watch has argued that the court’s verdictwas delayed until after Angola’s parliamentary elections on September5-6, 2008, in order to avoid potential damage to the ruling party MPLA’selectoral campaign in Cabinda.[55]While Lelo and the FAA soldiers convicted along with himwere tried before a military court, current detainees charged with statesecurity crimes in Cabinda have had their cases signed by the civilianprosecutor and so will be brought before a civilian court. This is a stepforward. Nevertheless, Human Rights Watch research found that other currentdetainees have been denied basic due process rights, even when transferredafter varying periods in military custody, to the civilian prison of Yabi andpresented to the criminal investigation police and the public prosecutor.Human Rights Watch has documented a number of proceduralirregularities in the judicial proceedings against two groups of detainees,both arrested in January 2008.According to international humanrights standards, evidence obtained under duress, such as interrogations undertorture, must be considered inadmissible in judicial proceedings.[56]However, in both cases, records of the criminal proceedings show that lawyerswere denied access to military and intelligence interrogation files quoted bythe prosecution as evidence. In one case, interrogation files were classifiedas “secret,” according to the Law on the Secret of the State.[57]By withholding essential information to the defense and failing to dismissevidence alleged to have been obtained by coercion and torture, the prosecutorviolated international principles guaranteeing a fair hearing.[58]In addition, military intelligence officers who were called for questioningduring the investigation by the defense failed to show up during the criminalinvestigation and at court.[59] In onecase, the defense objected to the public prosecutor’s conclusion thatthere were “strong indications of a linkage between the accused and theFLEC FAC guerrillas,” simply because several known guerrilla members“have relatives in that particular village.”[60]The Cabinda public prosecutor and two of the three judges inthe civil judiciary previously served as military magistrates in otherprovinces before being appointed in Cabinda in 2006. It is not uncommon inAngola for military magistrates to occupy posts in the civilianjudiciary—the Attorney-General himself is a former military magistrate.But rights advocates credibly fear that, in national security cases, thesejudges will not show sufficient independence from the government to providefair trials. Indeed, a senior military official told Human Rights Watch thatprevious civilian magistrates in Cabinda had been replaced in 2006 because they“never managed to convict anybody” for crimes against the securityof the state.[61]There are some cautious grounds for hope for fairer trialsin national security cases. A judge in Cabinda on May 7, 2009 cited lack ofevidence and the principle of in dubio pro reo to acquit four men onnational security charges, while sentencing one man for a minor offense.[62]The public prosecutor challenged the judge’s sentence at the SupremeCourt, which has not yet issued a ruling. Lawyers have expressed hope that theverdict, if upheld by the Supreme Court, may reflect a willingness by judges toact independently and impartially in national security cases.[63]However, with more upcoming trials of the remaining detainees—all with afar lower public profile than Fernando Lelo—and as-yet unconfirmedreports that more arrests for national security crimes have occurred in April2009, concerns about the due process rights of detainees in national securitycases in Cabinda remain.AcknowledgementsThe report was researched and written by Lisa Rimli,Human Rights Watch researcher. It was edited by Jon Elliott, advocacy directorof the Africa Division; Rona Peligal, deputy director of the Africa Division;Iain Levine, program director; and James Ross, legal and policy director.Jeffrey Severson, associate of the Africa Division, provided productionassistance.Human Rights Watch acknowledges withgratitude the contribution provided by lawyers, journalists, human rightsactivists, members of churches, national and international organizations,officials of the government, military, police and judiciary, and detainees whoagreed to be interviewed for this report. We own special gratitude to thoseindividuals who gave us invaluable and unfailing support during our research onthe ground and follow-up. We also thank NOVIB for the funding that made thisresearch possible.Annex: Persons Held for Security Charges at YabiPrisonCurrent DetaineesAntónio Santos Nguimbi–soldierin the Angolan Armed Forces (FAA), arrested on September 9, 2007 in Buco Zau.Sentenced by the provincial military court on September 16, 2008 to 13 yearsprison.Lourenço Ila Dembe–FAAsoldier, arrested in Buco Zau on September 17, 2007. Sentenced by theprovincial military court on September 16, 2008 to 13 years in prison.Alberto Suami–1stsergeant in the FAA, arrested on September 18, 2007 in Cabassango (Buco Zaumunicipality). Sentenced by the provincial military court on September 16, 2008to 13 years in prison.AlbertoJoão Chimbinda–FAA soldier, arrested inCabassango (Buco Zau) in September 2007. Sentenced by the provincialmilitary court on September 16, 2008 to 13 years in prison.Basílio Muanda–1stcorporal in the FAA, arrested in Buco Zau on September 22, 2007. Sentenced bythe provincial military court on September 16, 2008 to 13 years in prison.José Fernando Lelo–employeeof Algoa and former VOA journalist, arrested at the Cabinda Gulf Oil Companycompound Malongo on November 11, 2007. Sentenced by the provincial militarycourt on September 16, 2008 to 12 years in prison.Sebastião Sambo–catechist,arrested in Tando Malele (Inhuca commune, Buco Zau) on January 24, 2008.Carlos José Sambo–arrestedin Tando Malele on January 24, 2008.João Domingos Mabete–traditionalleader and deputy village coordinator, arrested in Tando Malele on January 24,2008.Paulo Simão–arrestedin Tando Malele on January 24, 2008.Luís GeraldoBarros–traditional leader, arrested in the village of Conde (Inhucacommune, Buco Zau) on January 29, 2008    .João Paulo Mombo–teacherand coordinator of Micuma I (Buco Zau), arrested in the village of Micuma I onApril 2, 2008.Joao Baptista Maeia–employeeof Encica, arrested in Micuma I on April 2, 2008.Zacarias João Zau–arrestedin Micuma I on April 2, 2008.Marcos Lúbuca MalilaTovo–arrested in Micuma I on April 2, 2008.Joaquim Valentim Culebi–arrestedin Micuma I on April 2, 2008.Armando Muabi–arrestedby the Agence Nationale de Renseignement (ANR) in Buendi Kassanfu, DemocraticRepublic of Congo (DRC), on October 7, 2008.Próspero Bianga–arrestedby the ANR in Buendi Kassanfu, DRC, on October 7, 2008.João Alfredo Dumbi–arrestedby the ANR in Buendi Kassanfu, DRC, on October 7, 2008.João de Deus DeuMuanda–arrested by the ANR in Tshela, DRC, on October 14, 2008.César DéneriDunge–arrested by the ANR in Kimbadi Kuimba, DRC, on October 19,2008.José Fernandes Jorge–arrestedin Dinge (Cacongo) on October 20, 2008.Cornélio Mabiala–arrestedin his home in Cabinda city on October 28, 2008.Clemente João Mavungo–coordinatorof Cossuenda, arrested in Necuto (Buco Zau) on January 2, 2009.PauloMavungo–teacher, arrested in Sassa ZauVelho (Buco Zau) on January 7, 2009.Rafael Futi–arrestedin Sassa Zau Velho on January 7, 2009.AlexandreFundo–arrested in Sassa Zau Velho on January 7, 2009.MassotaVunda–arrested in Liambo-Lione(Cacongo) on March 26, 2009.AlexandreAntónio Fortunato–arrested inLiambo-Lione on March 26, 2009.Francisco LindaLuemba Panzo–arrested in Liambo-Lione on March26, 2009.LuísMassiti Gomes–arrested in Liambo-Lione on March26, 2009.JoãoBaptista Puati–village coordinator,teacher and pastor, arrested in Liambo-Lione on March 26, 2009.Previous Known DetaineesCustódio Nguimbi Sumbo–1stsergeant in the Angolan Armed Forces, arrested in Buco Zau in September 2007.Acquitted by the provincial military court on September 16, 2008.NatalicioMbatchi–arrested in Sevo da Vula (Necuto, BucoZau) on January 16, 2008. Sentenced on May 7, 2009 by the provincialcourt to one year and six months in prison, and released.João Mateus Luemba–nurse,arrested in Sevo da Vula on January 16, 2008. Acquitted by the provincial courton May 7, 2009.Elias Menos–arrestedin Sevo da Vula on January 16, 2008. Acquitted by the provincial court on May7, 2009.Garcia DavidAntónio–arrested in Sevo da Vula onJanuary 16, 2008. Acquitted by the provincial court on May 7, 2009.António Zau–arrestedin Sevo da Vula on January 16, 2008. Acquitted by the provincial court on May7, 2009.[1]Human Rights Watch, Angola: Between War and Peace in Cabinda, briefingpaper, December 2004,http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2004/12/22/angola-oil-rich-cabinda-army-abuses-civilians.Local civil society, including the civic association of Cabinda, Mpalabanda,and the Catholic Church’s Justice and Peace Commission also issuedseveral human rights reports detailing abuses in Cabinda, most of them by theFAA.[2]The Memorandum of Understanding for Peace and Reconciliation in the Province ofCabinda was signed on August 1, 2006 and approved by the Angolan parliament onAugust 16, 2006. See Resolution 27-B/06 of August 16, 2006, published in thestate gazette (Diário da República) on August 16, 2006.[3]Raul Danda, then spokesperson of the civic association Mpalabanda, was arrestedunder state security charges on September 29, 2006 in Cabinda, allegedly forcarrying newspaper articles that expressed criticism of the government’spolicy in Cabinda. He was released on November 3, 2006 and later formallypardoned under the amnesty law, despite never having been charged. Sarah Wykes,a campaigner for the international organization Global Witness, was arrested inCabinda on February 18, 2007 under alleged charges of espionage, and was laterreleased and allowed to leave the country in March 2007.[4]Human Rights Watch interview with Miguel José Luís Muhonga,provincial first superintendent and second commander of the National Police,Cabinda, March 26, 2008.[5]Human Rights Watch interview with Colonel Antonino Pessala, spokesperson of thesecond regional command of the FAA, Cabinda, March 27, 2008.[6]Human Rights Watch interview with General Bento Bembe, Luanda, March 26, 2009.[7]Law on Pre-trial detention (18-A/92) (Lei da prisão preventivaem instrução preparatória), arts. 25-26, allows 90 dayspre-trial detention in cases of crimes against the security of the state, whichcan be extended three times for 45, 45 and 35 days.[8]Law on crimes against the security of the State (Law 17/78 of May 26, 1978),art. 26.[9]The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) in article 9requires that “Anyone who is arrested shall be informed, at the time ofarrest, of the reasons for his arrest and shall be promptly informed of any chargesagainst him” and that “Anyone arrested or detained on a criminalcharge shall be brought promptly before a judge or other officer authorized bylaw to exercise judicial power.”[10]The Cabinda military prosecutor’s accusation quoted the following attacks:On December 29, 2006 against a military vehicle in Buco Zau, killing three andinjuring two soldiers; on July 27, 2007 against military guarding a cell phoneantenna in Buco Zau, killing one soldier and injuring another; and on September13, 2007 against a military vehicle, killing two soldiers and seriouslyinjuring five. Cópia do Despacho da Pronúncia,Procuradoria Militar da Segunda Região, Cabinda, March 5, 2008.[11]Human Rights Watch, “Angola–End Torture and Unfair Trials inCabinda”, Human Rights Watch news release, December 10, 2008,http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2008/12/05/angola-end-torture-and-unfair-trials-cabinda; see also Amnesty International, “Angola: Unfair Trial of FernandoLelo”, AFR 12/008/2008, September 22, 2008, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/AFR12/008/2008/en(accessed June 5, 2009).[12]Five men were arrested in January 2008 in the village of Sevo da Vula, BucoZau, following an attack on December 29, 2007 against border police, killingone. Five men were arrested in January 2008 in the village of Tando Malele,Buco Zau, after an attack against the oil company Grant on December 29, 2007,which killed a Brazilian worker. Five men were arrested in April 2008 in MicumaI, Buco Zau, following an attack against staff of the private company Emcica onDecember 31, 2008, which killed two workers. One man was arrested in January2009 in Cossuenda, Buco Zau, after the assassination of a traditional leader onDecember 30, 2008. Three men were arrested in the village of Sassa Zau Velho, BucoZau, on the day of an attack against a military vehicle on January 7, 2009.Five men were arrested in the village of Liamba-Lione, Cacongo, on the day ofan attack against a vehicle, which killed one Chinese worker and seriouslyinjured two on March 26, 2009.[13]Local human rights activists documented 11 such cases between June 2007 andJanuary 2008. This includes the case of José Gabriel Puati, who wasallegedly killed by FAA soldiers upon his arrest on December 29, 2007. HumanRights Watch interviews with three human rights activists (names withheld) inCabinda, March 2008 and March 2009.[14]Human Rights Watch phone interviews with VOA correspondent in Kinshasa,February 11, 2009, and with José Luis Luemba Veras, in Lisbon, April 6,2009. Human Rights Watch also had access to a letter of complaint written byMr. Veras to the regional UNHRC delegation in Kinshasa from March 24, 2008,describing the threats he was subjected to, which led him to seek refuge inPortugal in July 2008.[15]Law on Pre-trial detention (18-A/92) (Lei da prisãopreventiva em instrução preparatória), art. 9 and 14.[16]Human Rights Watch interview with António Nito, public prosecutor,Cabinda, March 18, 2009. See also: United Nations General Assembly, HumanRights Council: Report of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention,Addendum–Mission to Angola, A/HRC/7/4/Add. 4, February 29, 2008; HumanRights Watch interview with Fernando Macedo, member of the Angolan human rightsorganization Association Justice Peace and Democracy (AssociaçãoJustiça Paz e Democracia or AJPD) in Luanda, March 20, 2009.[17]Their legal counsel, Arão Tempo, spoke with his clients for the firsttime on April 7, 2008. Human Rights Watch phone interview with ArãoTempo, May 30, 2009.[18]Human Rights Watch interviews with detainees at Yabi prison, Cabinda, March 16,2009.[19]Human Rights Watch interviews with detainees arrested in the DRC at Yabiprison, Cabinda, March 16, 2009.[20] Law on Pre-trial detention (18-A/92) (Lei da prisãopreventiva em instrução preparatória), art. 3. Angolanhuman rights activists of the Association Justice Peace and Democracy (AJPD)challenge this provision. See Pedro Romão and FernandoMacedo, Anotações à Lei da Prisão Preventiva eLegislação Complementar, Coimbra, May 2008, p. 18.[21]See ICCPR, G.A. res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc.A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force Mar. 23, 1976, arts. 10 (1),and 14 (3).[22]See, e.g. UN Commission on Human Rights, Resolution 2003/32, para 11.[23]United Nations Minimal Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, adopted 1955, U.N.Doc A/CONF/611, annex I, E.S.C. res. 663C, 24 U.N. ESCOR Supp. (n° 1) at11, U.N. Doc E/3048 (1957), amended E.S.C. res. 2076, 62. U.N. ESCOR Supp.(n° 1) at 35, U.N. Doc. E/5988 (1977).[24]These practices include, for example, tying detainees’ elbows together atthe back or holding detainees in pits dug into the ground. See Human RightsWatch, Between War and Peace in Cabinda, p. 16f.[25]See “Angola–End Torture and Unfair Trials in Cabinda”, Human RightsWatch news release, December 10, 2008,http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2008/12/05/angola-end-torture-and-unfair-trials-cabinda.[26]According to the detainee A.B.C. (fictitious abbreviation), these abuses tookplace in April 2008. Human Rights Watch interview at Yabi prison, Cabinda,March 16, 2009.[27]According to the detainee D.E.F. (fictitious abbreviation), these abuses tookplace in April 2008. Human Rights Watch interview at Yabi prison, Cabinda,March 16, 2009.[28]Human Rights Watch interview with G.H. (fictitious abbreviation), at Yabiprison, Cabinda, March 16, 2009.[29]Human Rights Watch interview with Colonel Antonino Pessala, FAA spokespersonand head of the department for patriotic education, Cabinda, March 27, 2008.See “Angola–End Torture and Unfair Trials in Cabinda”, HumanRights Watch news release, December 10, 2008,http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2008/12/05/angola-end-torture-and-unfair-trials-cabinda.In March 2009, the office of the second regional FAA command in Cabindadeclined a meeting with the Human Rights Watch researcher by referring to anoutstanding authorization from the head of the general chief of staff of theFAA in Luanda.[30]Human Rights Watch email interview with Arão Tempo, November 25, 2008.See also “Angola–End Torture and Unfair Trials in Cabinda”,Human Rights Watch news release, December 10, 2008.[31]Human Rights Watch interview with Francisco Luemba in Cabinda, March 25, 2008;Objection to the Judges Counselors of the Chamber for Crimes against theSecurity of the State of the Supreme Court, presented by Francisco Luembaregarding the process 490-C/08of the public prosecutor against LuísGeraldo Barros and others, Cabinda, January 31, 2009.[32]Human Rights Watch interview with I.J. (fictitious abbreviation), detainee atYabi prison, Cabinda, March 16, 2009.[33]Human Rights Watch phone interview with Arão Tempo, Cabinda, May 4,2009.[34]Law on Pre-trial detention (18-A/92) (Lei da prisãopreventiva em instrução preparatória), art. 4.[35]Former detainees interviewed by Human Rights Watch in Cabinda in 2004 hadreferred to an officer called “Walter” as head of the intelligence.See Human Rights Watch, Between War and Peace in Cabinda, p. 18.[36]Human Rights Watch interviews with a local lawyer and journalist (nameswithheld) in Cabinda, March 2009 and follow-up email and phone interviews inMay 2009.[37]Human Rights Watch interview with António Nito, public prosecutor,Cabinda, March 18, 2009.[38]Angola’s voluntary pledges to promote human rights, Annex to the letterdated 3 May 2007 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the UnitedNations addressed to the President of the General Assembly,http://daccessdds.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N07/331/59/PDF/N0733159.pdf?OpenElement(accessed May 12, 2009).[39]Universal Declaration of HumanRights, G.A. res. 217A (III), U.N. Doc A/810 at 71 (1948), art. 5.[40]ICCPR, art. 7; The African Charter on Human and People’s Rights, adoptedon June 27, 1981, entered into force on October 21, 1986, ratified by Angola in1990, art. 5.[41] Lei Constiticional (1992), art. 21. See also comments by the UNWorking Group on Arbitrary Detention: United Nations General Assembly, HumanRights Council: Report of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, Addendum -Mission to Angola, A/HRC/7/4/Add. 4, February 29, 2008, p. 11, para 32.[42]Human Rights Watch interview with Fernando Lelo at Yabi prison in Cabinda,March 16, 2009.[43]An official request by Human Rights Watch to visit the Cadeia Civil in March2009 was not responded to.[44]Human Rights Watch interview with K.L., M.N., O.P. (fictitious abbreviations),detainees at Yabi prison, Cabinda, March 16, 2009.[45]Human Rights Watch interview with K.L. (fictitious abbreviation), detainee atYabi prison, Cabinda, March 16, 2009.[46]Human Rights Watch interview with Q.R. (fictitious abbreviation),detainee atYabi prison, Cabinda, March 16, 2009.[47]Law on Military Crimes (4/94 of January 28). See also United Nations GeneralAssembly, Human Rights Council: Report of the Working Group on ArbitraryDetention, Addendum–Mission to Angola, A/HRC/7/4/Add. 4, February 29,2008, p. 11, para 28.[48]See: Objection to the President Judge of the Military Court of the 2ndRegion presented by defense counselors Francisco Luemba and Arão Temporegarding the process 19/2008 of the military prosecutor against AlbertoJoão Chimbinda and others, Cabinda, May 5, 2008. According to theAngolan Criminal Procedure Code–currently under review–defenselawyers may only challenge an accusation alleging procedural irregularitiesafter the criminal investigation is completed. The UN Working Group onArbitrary Detention expressed concern with the fact that a detention cannot beeffectively challenged during the investigation phase and judges are not involvedbefore trial in Angola. See: United Nations General Assembly, Human RightsCouncil: Report of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention,Addendum–Mission to Angola, A/HRC/7/4/Add. 4, February 29, 2008, para40-45 and 75-77.[49] Cópia do Despacho da Pronúncia, Procuradoria Militar daSegunda Região, Cabinda, March 5, 2008.[50]According to the defense lawyer Martinho Nombo, a former municipal policecommander whose testimony was quoted by the accusation, denied at court havingever seen Lelo at the village in Buco Zau where he allegedly met the co-accusedsoldiers on July 12, 2007 , while Lelo’s employer confirmed he had beenworking within the Malongo compound on the same day. Human Rights Watchinterviews with Martinho Nombo, Cabinda, March 2009.[51]For example: “Detention of journalist Lelo is not arbitrary, saysAttorney-General” (Detenção do jornalistaFernando Lelo não é arbitrária, diz PGR), RádioNacional de Angola/ Angop, January 7, 2008.[52]ICCPR, art 14 (1).[53]Human Rights Watch interviews with local journalists (names withheld), March2009.[54]Human Rights Watch interview with Fernando Lelo at Yabi prison, Cabinda, March16, 2009.[55]Human Right Watch, “Angola–End Torture and Unfair Trials inCabinda”, Human Rights Watch news release, December 10, 2008,http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2008/12/05/angola-end-torture-and-unfair-trials-cabinda.[56]Human Rights Committee General Comment 20, para 12.[57]Law on the Secret of the State (10/02) from August 16. See Objection to theJudges Counselors of the Chamber for Crimes against the Security of the Stateof the Supreme Court, regarding the process 490-C/08 of the public prosecutoragainst Luís Geraldo Barros and others, presented by lawyer FranciscoLuemba, Cabinda, January 31, 2009.[58]Human Rights Committee General Comment 13, para 15.[59]Objection to the Judges Counselors of the Chamber for Crimes against theSecurity of the State of the Supreme Court, regarding the process 490-C/08 ofthe public prosecutor against Luís Geraldo Barros and others, presentedby lawyer Francisco Luemba, Cabinda, January 31, 2009; Objection to theHonorable Judge of the Common Crimes Chamber of the provincial court in Cabindaregarding the process 0470-C/08 of the public prosecutor againstNatalício Mbatchi and others, Cabinda, presented by lawyer ArãoTempo, Cabinda, March 27, 2009.[60]Objection to the Judges Counselors of the Chamber for Crimes against theSecurity of the State of the Supreme Court, regarding the process 490-C/08 ofthe public prosecutor against Luís Geraldo Barros and others, presentedby lawyer Francisco Luemba, Cabinda, January 31, 2009.[61]Human Rights Watch interview with senior military official (name withheld) inCabinda, March 17, 2009.[62]See Verdict of the Provincial Court of Cabinda, Cabinda, May 7, 2009.[63]Human Rights Watch phone interview with Arão Tempo, May 7, 2009, andemail correspondence with Francisco Luemba, May 8, 2009.Related ContentJune 22, 2009News ReleaseAngola: Stop Military Abuses in CabindaReport Describes Pattern of Torture and Due-Process Violations Against Rebel SuspectsJune 22, 2009News ReleaseAngola: Stop Military Abuses in CabindaRegion / CountryAfrica,AngolaProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch