"What Did I Do Wrong?": Papuans in Merauke Face Abuses by Indonesian Special Forces | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsAlso available in Bahasa IndonesiaDownload reportDownload report with coverSearchDonate NowSearchDownloadsAlso available in Bahasa IndonesiaDownload reportDownload report with coverJune 24, 2009"What Did I Do Wrong?"Papuans in Merauke FaceAbuses by Indonesian Special Forces“What Did I Do Wrong?”Abuses by Indonesian Special Forces against Papuans inMeraukeI. SummaryII.Kopassus: A History of AbuseIII.Kopassus Beatings and Abuses in MeraukeCase One:BenjaminCase Two:AntoniusCase Three:Nicolaas, Andrew and BertCase Four:YehezkielCase Five:Nathan and PatrickCase Six:PetrusIV. RecommendationsTo theIndonesian GovernmentTo theUnited States, United Kingdom, Australia and other concerned countriesV.AcknowledgmentsI. SummaryClick to expand ImageIn recent years, the armed forces of key allies ofIndonesia, including the United Kingdom, Australia, and the United States, havesought improved ties with Indonesia’s elite military special forces,Komando Pasukan Khusus, known as Kopassus. While Kopassus was once scorned bysuch countries because of its long history of human rights violations, it hascome to be seen as an important partner on a range of issues, particularlycounterterrorism. Australia has resumed regular trainings with Kopassus, andthe United Kingdom plans to commence training. US military leaders, onceprohibited by Congress from allowing Kopassus personnel to join certaintraining programs, have had increased contact with Kopassus commanders. Onejustification for the intensified contact is that it would contribute to thereform of Kopassus, leading to an improved human rights record. The armedforces of countries like Thailand, South Korea, Singapore, and Malaysia allhave contact with Kopassus forces.This report presents new evidence that Kopassus’abusive activities continue with impunity. While Human Rights Watch was conductingresearch in the vicinity of Merauke, a town in the southeast corner ofIndonesia’s Papua province, numerous residents reported Kopassus abuses. FromMarch to May 2009, Human Rights Watch researchers conducted more than 20interviews with victims of Kopassus abuses, their relatives, and eyewitnesses. Whatemerged is a picture of frequent brutality against ordinary Papuans.Residents of the Kelapa Lima neighborhood in Merauke told usthat Kopassus soldiers pick Papuans off the streets or from their homes withoutlegal authority. The soldiers typically do not wear uniforms and have no formalrole in policing, but act on their own or in response to complaints of publicdisturbances. Those taken back to the Kopassus barracks in town are likely tobe ill-treated, including by beatings with a rubber hose or by being forced to chewvery hot raw chilies. Many ethnic Papuans chew betel nut, which opens scratchesin the mouth that makes chili-eating intolerable.One former detainee of Kopassus told Human Rights Watch:“They stripped us down to just our underwear. They immediately beat us,without saying anything. They used a water hose. They beat us till we bled andhad cuts. Then they asked us to go to the tennis court. They forced us to facethe sun and chew chilies ... We were not allowed to spit. It was very hot.”Another victim said, “They kicked me in the chest with their boots on... anofficer shouted at me, ‘You Papuans, one single Kopassus soldier can killyou like chickens.’”The cases of abuse documented in this report do not involvepolitically motivated violence against suspected Papuan separatists, for whichKopassus forces have often been alleged responsible, but ordinary law and ordermatters, which are not in the force’s authority. Local residents say thattheir complaints against Kopassus soldiers go unheeded by the police.  Localpolice have no jurisdiction over Kopassus soldiers. Local police do not refercases to military police, being simply too afraid of retaliation to take any action.The Kopassus command structure has not made a serious effort to uphold militarydiscipline or hold soldiers accountable for abuses.The long history of political tensions and abuses by theIndonesian security forces in Papua have created a climate of fear in theprovince. The role Kopassus is playing in Merauke deepens that fear. An elderlyman in Merauke told Human Rights Watch, “It happens so often, almostevery week, that, finally, we consider abuse to be normal. The police arehelpless. Kopassus acts like they are the policemen in Merauke.”The cases in this report illustrate how violence thriveswhen a culture of impunity persists in the heart of what is supposed to be oneof Indonesia’s best trained fighting units.Detailed recommendations to the Indonesian government andconcerned foreign governments are provided at the end of the report. HumanRights Watch urges the Indonesian government to conduct independent andimpartial investigations into alleged human rights violations by Kopassus inPapua, including arbitrary arrest and detention, torture and other ill-treatment,and discipline or prosecute perpetrators and responsible commanding officers asappropriate.Human Rights Watch also calls upon the United States, the UnitedKingdom, Australia and other concerned governments to withhold training for Kopassuspersonnel until serious efforts are made to investigate and hold accountableKopassus members, regardless of rank, for past serious rights violations,including the incidents in Merauke reported here.II. Kopassus: A History of AbuseKomando Pasukan Khusus, or Kopassus, was formed in 1952 tofight armed insurgencies in Java,[1]and has participated in many of the country’s high-profile militarycampaigns, from “Confrontation” with Malaysia in the early 1960s toarmed conflict and covert operations in East Timor and Aceh.  There arenow approximately 6,000 Kopassus soldiers. They are divided into five groups.Group 1 and 2 are Para Commando, meaning they are trained towork in extreme conditions behind enemy lines. They are specialists in airborneoperations and trained to drop by parachute. Group 3 is Sandi Yudha, especiallytrained and mobilized to conduct covert operations, gathering intelligence and“conditioning” or spearheading low-intensity conflict.[2]These three groups have between 1,200 and 1,500 soldiers each. Kopassus has atraining facility in Batujajar, West Java. It also has the 81stAnti-Terror Unit, with two battalions, headquartered in Cijantung, Jakarta.Kopassus is currently headed by Maj.- Gen. Pramono EdhieWibowo, brother-in-law of President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono and the son of thelate Lt.-Gen. Sarwo Edhie Wibowo, who commanded the special  forces in the1960s[3].Major-General Pramono officially reports to the chief of staff of theIndonesian army, Gen. Agustadi Sasongko.Kopassus has a long record of human rights violations in itsoperations across Indonesia, particularly during the 1970s in East Timor, Aceh,Papua, and Jakarta. In 1974-75, Kopassus infiltrated then Portuguese Timor (nowEast Timor), allegedly involved in the killing of five internationaljournalists in the border town of Balibo in October 1975. The sixth, RogerEast, went to East Timor to investigate the murder and was shot to death inDili, allegedly on the orders of a former Kopassus commander, in December 1975.[4]In 1998, a military court found 11 Kopassus officers guiltyin the kidnapping and torturing of student activists in Java. Kopassus Maj.Bambang Kristiono admitted that he and his men abducted the activists, thoughhe denied killing them (seven of 22 remain missing to this day). He and his immediatesuperiors—Col. Chairawan, Maj.- Gen. Muchdi Purwopranjono, and Lt.-Gen.Prabowo Subianto—were dismissed from their posts in Kopassus as a result,but they were never tried. Muchdi later became a deputy director ofIndonesia’s State Intelligence Agency (BIN). In December 2008, in acontroversial decision, the South Jakarta court acquitted Muchdi ofmanslaughter for the 2004 murder of prominent human rights activist MunirThalib. Prabowo is now a candidate for vice-president of Indonesia.Kopassus has a long history in Papua, stemming back to whenPapua was still under Dutch rule.[5]In 1962, Kopassus was involved in a covert operation to infiltrate Merauke,which was then under Dutch authority. Capt. Benny Moerdani led a unit thatparachuted behind enemy lines into a swamp near Merauke to attack the Dutchmilitary.[6]After the Dutch withdrew later that year, Kopassus continuedto be involved in the often bloody campaign of intimidation that ensued, culminatingin the UN-sponsored “Act of Free Choice” in 1969, in which just1,054 Papuans, hand-picked by Jakarta, voted unanimously to join Indonesia, anevent viewed by many Papuans today as a fraudulent basis for Indonesianannexation of the territory. Estimates of the number of Papuans killed duringthe period are unknown because United Nations officials faced tightrestrictions inside Papua from Indonesian commander Maj.-Gen. Sarwo EdhieWibowo,[7]Impunity remains a huge problem for the Indonesian militaryacross the country and continues to mar the reputation of Kopassus in Papua. WhilePapuans allege widespread violations by Kopassus in remote locations, evenprominent Papuans in the capital, Jayapura, have been targeted. In a notablecase that many Papuans still cite, Kopassus soldiers arrested and torturedanthropologist-cum-musician Arnold Ap of Cenderawasih University in Jayapura inNovember 1983.[8]On April 25, 1984, after his escape from a Jayapura police station, he waskilled by a gunshot to his stomach.In November 2001, Kopassus soldiers kidnapped and killedPapuan separatist leader Theys Eluay in Jayapura. Eluay had attended a Kopassuscelebration on the eve of his death. Initially, Kopassus denied involvement inthe murder. But international outrage prompted the Indonesian police toinvestigate. In 2003, a court in Surabaya found seven Kopassus soldiers and low-levelofficers, including Lieutenant – Colonel Hartomo, guilty of mistreatmentand battery leading to Eluay’s death, but crucially not of murder.Sentences served by the seven ranged from two to three-and-a-half years. Thecontroversial murder also prompted then President Megawati Sukarnoputri toorder Kopassus to leave Papua that year, but the army chief of staff, Gen.Ryamizard Ryacudu, hailed the convicted men as “Indonesian heroes”for the killing of a “rebel.” No further investigations have beenundertaken into who ordered the killing and no senior officer has been heldaccountable.In another case, on October 17, 2007, a Kopassus soldierworking undercover as a driver to a local Papuan government official beatCharles Tafor, the district head of Arso in Keerom, Papua, over a trafficincident.[9]The beating prompted Arso residents to demand the withdrawal of Kopassus fromKeerom. Lt.-Col. Isak Pangemanan, the Kopassus commander in Jayapura,apologized publicly. However, there has been no public disclosure of anypunishment or action taken against the Kopassus soldier responsible for thebeating.III. Kopassus Beatings and Abuses in MeraukeMerauke is a city on the southern coast of Papuan province,close to the border of Papua New Guinea. Many transmigrants from Java havesettled there. The Kelapa Lima neighborhood of Merauke is a quiet and leafyarea. Kopassus personnel have been stationed in Kelapa Lima since 2006. Localresidents report a sign on the wall of the local barracks that says“Kopassus Mess.” Over time, the size of the Kopassus unit hasincreased. In 2006, Kopassus rented one building; at present it reportedly usesabout six attached flats inside a compound.On April 17, 2009, Indonesian Defense Minister JuwonoSudarsono told Human Rights Watch that there are only about 50 Kopassussoldiers throughout Papua and West Papua, organized in groups of 10 to 20. However,an estimated 30 Kopassus soldiers operate in Kelapa Lima, Merauke alone, and Kopassusalso reportedly has a presence in Jayapura, Wamena, Asikie, Timika, Keroom, Manokwari,Nabire, Puncak Jaya, and Sorong, suggesting a much higher number of troops.Officially Kopassus operates in Papua to monitor and to suppressthe Papuan separatist movement which has been leading an armed struggle againstthe Indonesian government since the 1960s.[10]  A Timikajournalist told Human Rights Watch, “They are very mobile, moving fromone regency to another. They think that they are ‘taming’ thePapuans.”[11]The following six incidents took place between August 2007 andMay 2009 in Merauke. The names of those detained and other information has beenwithheld to protect the security of those with whom Human Rights Watch spoke.Case One: Benjamin[12]On a Friday night in May 2009, Benjamin, age 23, wasdrinking sopi, a traditional alcoholic drink, with three friends inside hishouse in Kelapa Lima, when a woman started screaming. Suspecting a rape attempt,he and his friend Abner, went looking for the source of the scream.At a street junction, they ran into five Kopassus soldiers withflashlights and a Papuan man who were also trying to find out who was screaming.Benjamin knew the Papuan man and they talked briefly before the soldiers left. About15 minutes later, the five soldiers unexpectedly returned and stopped Benjaminand Abner.Benjamin said the soldiers asked them to come withthem.  When he asked, “What did I do wrong?” one soldier slappedhim on the face five times. The soldiers kept asking him about his friends andthe screaming woman, about which he said he knew nothing. When Abner broke fromthe group and ran away, the soldiers didn’t bother to chase him.The soldiers took Benjamin inside the Kopassus mess hall, wherethey slapped him, beat him on the head and chest, and kicked him in thestomach. He said the beating continued for around one hour until around 11 p.m.when a police truck arrived. The Kopassus soldiers released Benjamin into thecustody of the police[13].Case Two: AntoniusAround 9 p.m. one evening in September 2008, Antonius, 21,  attendeda street party in Kelapa Lima close to the Kopassus mess where he had a coupleof drinks and joined in the dancing. Suddenly, a van pulled up and out came sixmen holding rifles, who wore black jackets and balaclavas that covered theirfaces. Without questioning anyone, they started beating the young men there.Many tried to run away. Antonius told Human Rights Watch:I reached an intersection, a waterway. I fell down. They [thearmed men] came and grabbed me and pulled me in through the sliding door of thevan. They brought me to the [Kopassus] barracks and beat me. They put me into aroom; they handcuffed my hands around my back, and asked me to kneel down onthe floor. They hit me on the face. I fell down. I could not protect my head,so my head hit the floor.[14]The soldiers hit Antonius on the face repeatedly, and beathim with a water hose while he was lying on the floor. They later asked him tosit on a chair. Every Kopassus soldier who entered the room—ultimately 12of them—hit him. Antonius said the soldiers kicked him from night untilmorning. He told Human Rights Watch:They beat me on my face repeatedly. My face was bleeding.My eyes were also swollen. Once one soldier held my chest and another onekicked my stomach. I asked them, “What did I do wrong?”[15]Several soldiers pulled Antonius into a corner and kickedhim with their boots until he was bleeding from the mouth and vomited blood.Early the next morning, the soldiers forced him to eat about 10 hot chilies.Then they took him outside into the compound and threw him into the muddy drainagepond. Then they told him to clean up the garden. He said:I could not eat the whole day because of the chili. Theybeat me here on my jaw and the inside of my mouth was bleeding. For one week afterwardI just ate noodle soup. I told my parents, but they could do nothing.“What can we do? Even if we want to be angry, they are Kopassus!”It was mistreatment, they hurt me, but we are so scared ofKopassus. I did not see a doctor but I took antibiotics. I did not report it tothe police or anyone else. I just told my friends, “If you are drunkdon’t walk around the Kopassus mess.”[16]Case Three: Nicolaas, Andrew and Bert[17]At around 8 a.m. one morning in April 2008, five Kopassussoldiers surrounded the house of Nicolaas, 27.  He had had a party withhis friends the night before. The soldiers took Nicolaas and two of hisfriends, Andrew, 25, and Bert, 26, to the Kopassus mess hall. His parents watchedas he was taken away, but were too scared to try to intervene. Nicolaasdescribed to Human Rights Watch what happened at the mess:They stripped us down to just our underwear. Theyimmediately beat us, without saying anything. They used a water hose. They beatus till we bled and had cuts. Then they asked us to go to the tennis court.They forced us to face the sun and chew chilies... We were not allowed to spit.It was very hot. After eating the chilies, knowing that most people in Meraukeare Catholics, they asked us to say “The Lord’s Prayer (Our Fatherin Heaven)” and “Hail Mary.” But I refused, saying that it isnot a holy place, not a place to pray. My two other friends did pray. TheKopassus soldiers kicked me. They stripped Andrew totally naked. A Kopassussoldier took his picture with a cell phone camera. Many people saw us beingtortured in the compound. One elderly Papuan lady cried when she saw us,helplessly, being tortured by Kopassus soldiers.[18]Nicolaas said the mistreatment lasted about two hours. Fromthe tennis court, the soldiers took the three men back inside the office. Thesoldiers asked them to take a shower and offered to treat the cuts with alotion, but they refused. They were then sent home. Nicolaas said:Now Papuan young men do not want to stay in the vicinity ofthe Kopassus mess. The soldiers like to look for drunken kids; they even comeinside their own houses. Prior to Kopassus’ arrival, the Kelapa Limaneighborhood was a nice area. Now we don’t feel secure any more.[19]Case Four: YehezkielOne afternoon in March 2008, Yehezkiel, 19, walked past theKopassus mess hall while drunk. A plainclothes Kopassus soldier, whom he knewonly as “Acong,” an ethnic Batak, pulled him inside the mess and startedasking him questions about one of his friends.According to Yehezkiel, when he said he did not know wherehis friend was, Acong began to beat him. When Yehezkiel fell to the floorunconscious, Acong threw water on him to wake him up. Yehezkiel estimates thatthe beating lasted more than one hour.Some youth on the street heard Yehezkiel screaming and toldhis relatives, one of whom went to the Kopassus mess. Yehezkiel said he beggedhim, “Please help me, he [the soldier] is going to kill me.”[20]Therelative persuaded the Acong to let Yehezkiel go.Another relative told Human Rights Watch:Yehezkiel said he was beaten all over, especially in thestomach with a water pipe this big [about 7 centimeters in diameter]. There wasno bleeding, and no visible bruising, but it is hard to see as his skin is sodark. He did not want to go to the hospital. He refused, but we were worried hemight have some internal bleeding. But our cousin is a doctor and he treatedhim at home.[21]Case Five: Nathan and PatrickOne morning in January 2008, Nathan, 22, was taking a walkwith his brother, Patrick, 24, and their friend when a soldier on a motorcyclepassed by. Nathan’s friend stopped the soldier and asked for a cigarette.The two brothers kept on walking. A moment later the friend returned with thecigarette. Suddenly, two Kopassus soldiers started chasing them, shouting andfiring a warning shot into the air. They all ran away. But the soldiers chasedthem, demanding that they stop.Nathan and Patrick hid in a house but the Kopassus soldiersfound them. According to Nathan, they beat him until he was bleeding. Theybrought both of them to the Kopassus mess hall. Inside, the soldiers chainedPatrick’s hands with a dog chain. Nathan told Human Rights Watch:We were ordered to put our hands behind our backs and kneeldown. They began to beat us. They repeatedly beat us on the face, blood waseverywhere. I do not know the reason. I assumed they didn’t likePatrick’s friend asking for a cigarette from the soldier.[22]According to Nathan, six Kopassus soldiers beat the brothersfrom 8 to 9 a.m.  The soldiers asked a carpenter working near the barracksto beat Nathan and Patrick, and he did so. Later the soldiers ordered thebrothers to eat raw chilies and then continued to beat them. Nathan said manyneighbors witnessed the beating, as they could see into the compound through anopening in the fence from the street, but they kept quiet.The soldiers then called the Merauke police, who picked upthe brothers from the mess, taking them to the Merauke police precinct.The police later released them without charge.Case Six: PetrusAround 4 p.m. one late afternoon in August 2007, a fightbroke about among young people partying and drinking at a house in Kelapa Lima.Petrus, 41, who had been drinking nearby, went to see what was happening. When fiveplainclothes Kopassus soldiers arrived at the house on motorbikes, the youthran away. According to Petrus, who was standing across the street, the soldiersapproached him. He told them he was not involved in the fighting, but theyhandcuffed him and took him by motorbike to the Kopassus mess hall.Inside the mess, the soldiers told Petrus to squat on thefloor, hit him repeatedly with a water hose, and kicked him in the chest withtheir boots. Petrus told Human Rights Watch that he recognized the one whokicked him as a Kopassus officer.  Another officer shouted at him:“You Papuans, one single Kopassus soldier can kill you like chickens!”[23]Petrus told Human Rights Watch:I had my head down and I could not see, but I estimatedabout 10 people took part. Later I had blue bruises on my chest—it wasvery painful. Up till now [18 months later] I still feel pain. It is difficultfor me to lift weights. I had bruises on my back—long black marks withthe skin peeled off.[24]Petrus said the beating lasted around 15 to 30 minutes,until a relative of his arrived, at which point the soldiers stopped beatinghim and called the police. The police took Petrus from the Kopassus mess, puthim in a cell for a night, and then released him the next day without charge.Petrus tried to report the beating to the police, but thepolice said it was dangerous for them to do anything and that Kopassus troopswere not under their authority. Petrus asked whether he could report the caseto the military police, but the police discouraged him from doing so, sayingthat the military police are afraid of Kopassus.IV. RecommendationsAs the cases in this report demonstrate, violations of humanrights by Kopassus forces are committed not only against those labeled asPapuan “rebels” or “separatists,” but against ordinarymembers of the population. To our knowledge, no soldiers have been investigatedor punished in any way for any of the beatings described above.To the Indonesian GovernmentIndependently and impartially investigate allegations ofhuman rights violations by Kopassus forces in Papua, including ill-treatment,torture, and arbitrary arrest and detention.Discipline or prosecute as appropriate perpetrators ofabuses. Investigate and hold accountable superior officers for commandresponsibility if they knew or should have known of abuses and failed toprevent them or take action against those responsible.Take all necessary measures to protect victims andwitnesses from retaliation by members of Kopassus or others.Ensure that Kopassus troops are not involved in lawenforcement activities, which are the responsibility of the police.  Publiclylist the duties of Kopassus in Papua.Provide greater transparency about the number of Kopassussoldiers deployed in Papua, their location, and their responsibilities.End restrictions on access to Papua for independentobservers, including diplomats, foreign journalists, and human rightsorganizations, so that they can visit Papua without need for specificpermission or approval.To the United States, United Kingdom, Australia andother concerned countriesWithhold training for Kopassus personnel until seriousefforts are made to investigate and hold accountable Kopassus members,regardless of rank, responsible for past serious rights violations,including the incidents in Merauke reported here. Indonesia values itsmilitary-to-military relationships, in particular training for itspersonnel, and targeted sanctions on the Indonesian military can provideimportant pressure to help end the climate of impunity long enjoyed by thesecurity forces.Urge the Indonesian government to investigate allegationsof human rights violations by Kopassus personnel in Papua and holdaccountable those responsible, regardless of rank.Provide greater assistance to local nongovernmental organizations in Papua and Indonesia to monitor human rights abuses, provide human rights education to government agencies and civilians, and assist victims of abuses to obtain legal and medical services.Support comprehensive police training in Papua to build policecapacity to respond effectively to criminal complaints while respectinghuman rights.Publicly press the government to end restrictions onaccess to Papua for independent observers, including diplomats,international journalists, and human rights organizations.V. AcknowledgmentsThis report was written and edited by the Asia division,based on research conducted by the authors from March – May 2009.James Ross, legal and policy director for Human RightsWatch, provided legal review, and Program review was done by Joseph Saunders,deputy program director of Human Rights Watch. Administrative and technicalassistance was provided by Pema Abrahams and Andrea Cottom, associates in theAsia division, and Fitzroy Hepkins and Grace Choi provided productionassistance for the report.[1]Indonesianspecial forces have gone by different names since their establishment in 1952,from KKAD [Korps Komando Angkatan Darat or Army Commando Corps] to RPKAD[Resimen Pasukan Komando Angkatan Darat or Army Commando Force Regiment] toKopassadha [Komando Pasukan Sandi Yudha or Secret War Commando Force] toKopassus. To simplify, we refer to Kopassus throughout this report. Ken Conboy,Kopassus: Inside Indonesia’s Special Forces (Jakarta: EquinoxPublishing, 2003). Kopassus, “Sejarah Singkat Kopassus,” http://www.kopassus.mil.id/single/home/21/Sejarah+Kopassus.html(accessed June 5, 2009).[2]In Sanskrit, the words “sandi yudha”literally mean “secret war.” The Sandi Yudha unit was officiallyestablished “to condition” or “to spearhead” militaryoperations. Sometimes it is also referred “to condition” aconflict. The Kopassus website describes Group 3/Sandi Yudha “… biasanyadigerakkan/ditugaskan jauh sebelum pertempuran dimulai untuk merintis jalangerakan berikutnya guna menggarap sasaran dalam rangka menciptakan danmematangkan kondisi yang dikehendaki.” It literary means, “…usually mobilized long before a battle to prepare the next movement … andto create the expected conditions.” Kopassus website, “PenjelasanDhuaja Grup-3 Kopassus.”  http://www.kopassus.mil.id/single/home/68/Dhuaja+Grup-3+Kopassus.html(accessed June 1, 2009).[3]Pramono became the Kopassus commander on October 30, 2008. “Brigjen TNIPramono Edhie Wibowo Danjen Kopassus Baru,” Kopassus, October 30,2008, http://www.kopassus.mil.id/dynamic/home/8/Berita/26/Brigjen+TNI+Pramono+Edhie+Wibowo+Danjen+Kopassus+Baru.html(accessed June 19, 2009).[4]JillJollifee, Cover-up: the Inside Story of the Balibo Five (Melbourne:Scribe Publications, 2001); Tony Maniaty, Shooting Balibo: Blood and Memoryin East Timor (Sydney: Penguin, 2009).[5]TheIndonesian territory of Papua occupies the western half of the island of NewGuinea. Originally one province in the republic, in 2003 it was controversiallydivided into two new provinces. The new province of West Papua now occupies thewestern part of the region with a new provincial capital of Manokwari. The newprovince in the eastern half is still called Papua, with Jayapura still servingas the provincial capital.[6]BennyMoerdani later became the Indonesian Armed Forces commander in 1983-1988.Julius Pour, Benny Moerdani: Profile of a Soldier Statesman  (Jakarta:Yayasan Kejuangan Panglima Besar Sudirman, 1993), pp. 161-191. According toBenny Moerdani, he took the initiative to infiltrate Merauke because of theslogan, “From Sabang to Merauke” (Sabang is the western-most townin Aceh, Sumatra, while Merauke is the eastern-most town in the Indonesianarchipelago). The slogan is a well known battle cry in Indonesia to unite thesix thousand kilometer long archipelago. Moerdani thought that controllingMerauke would have a psychological impact on President Soekarno’scampaign to take over Papua from the Dutch. Soekarno used the phrase whencalling for a military invasion of Papua.[7]JohnSaltford, The United Nations and the Indonesian Takeover of West Papua,1962-1969 (London: Routledge Curzon, 2003).[8]RobinOsborne, Indonesia’s Secret War: The Guerilla Struggle in Irian Jaya(Sydney: Allen & Unwin, 1986) pp. 149-154. Anne Marie Feith, Wedon’t want bullets.... We can do this through talk: A Human RightsResponse to Indonesian Rule in West Papua (Melbourne: RMIT University,School of Social Science & Planning, June 2005). Diana Glazebrook, “TeachingPerformance Art is Like Sharpening the Blade of a Knife,” The AsiaPacific Journal of Anthropology, Vol. 5, No. 1, April 2004, pp. 1-14.[9]“TNIdi Perbatasan Papua Jangan Teror Warga,”Voice of Human Rights, VHRmedia, October 24, 2007, http://www.vhrmedia.com/vhr-news/berita,TNI-di-Perbatasan-Papua-Jangan-Teror-Warga-903.html(accessed June 19, 2009).[10]The armed wing of the separatist movement is the Organisasi Papua Merdeka (OPM,known in English as the Free Papua Movement). The separatist insurgency in theprovince has resulted in a large military presence and a climate of mutualsuspicion and fear. Pro-independence guerrillas have conducted repeatedlow-level armed attacks against Indonesian security forces, while Indonesiansecurity forces, fearful of a repeat of the successful movement forindependence in East Timor, have conducted regular sweeping operations tosearch for OPM guerillas or their supporters. All too often Papuans notinvolved in the armed insurgency are caught up in anti-separatist sweeps orarrested as trouble makers for peacefully expressing their political views, aright protected by basic international free speech guarantees. See also HumanRights Watch, Indonesia - Out of Sight: Endemic Abuse and Impunity inPapua’s Central Highlands, July 4, 2007, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2007/07/04/out-sight-0.Human Rights Watch, Indonesia - Protest and Punishment: Political Prisoners inPapua, February 20, 2007, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2007/02/20/protest-and-punishment,(accessed June 19, 2009).[11]Human Rights Watch interview (name withheld), Timika, April 2009.[12]Human Rights Watch separate interviews with “Benjamin” andBenjamin’s relative (name withheld), Merauke, June 2009.[13]Police were unable to locate the screaming woman.[14]Human Rights Watch interview with “Antonius,” Merauke, March 2009.[15]Ibid.[16]Ibid.[17]HumanRights Watch joint interview with “Nicolaas” and“Andrew” Merauke, March 2009.[18]Ibid.[19]Ibid.[20]HumanRights Watch interview with “Yehezkiel,” Merauke, March, 2009.[21]HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of “Yehezkiel” (namewithheld), Merauke, March 2009. Human Rights Watch also verified her statementwith two neighbors.[22]Human Rights Watch interview with “Nathan,” Merauke, March 2009.[23]HumanRights Watch interview with “Petrus,” Merauke, March 2009.[24]Ibid.Related ContentJune 24, 2009News ReleaseIndonesia: Abuses by Special Forces Continue in PapuaMilitary Allies Should Push Jakarta for AccountabilityJune 24, 2009News ReleaseIndonesia: Abuses by Special Forces Continue in PapuaRegion / CountryAsia,IndonesiaProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch