The Islamic Republic at 31: Post-election Abuses Show Serious Human Rights Crisis | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportSearchDonate NowSearchDownloadsDownload the full reportFebruary 11, 2010The Islamic Republic at 31Post-election Abuses Show Serious Human Rights CrisisThe Islamic Republic at 31Post-election Abuses Show Serious Human Rights CrisisExecutive SummaryKey Recommendations to the Government of IranMethodologyViolence against Peaceful Protestors Following theElectionRaids in Residential AreasAbuse of Detainees: Beatings, Forced Confessions, andRapeMajor Attacks on Peaceful Protestors since AugustConclusionRecommendations to the Government of IranRecommendations to members of the United Nationsincluding the Human Rights CouncilExecutive SummaryThe nearly nine months since Iran's presidential electionsparked widespread popular demonstrations against alleged vote-rigging havebeen among the most tumultuous in the history of the Islamic Republic, whichmarks the 31st anniversary of the revolution that paved the way for itsestablishment on February 11, 2010. This has been a period of repeated serioushuman rights abuses that include extra-judicial killings, violations of therights to freedom of assembly and expression, and the prohibition of torture,not to mention arbitrary arrest and detention and countless due processviolations.In the two months immediately following the June 12election, the government carried out a major campaign of repression thatincluded mass detentions of protestors, political reform figures, and rightsactivists, culminating in public trials in August. November and December sawrenewed attacks on protestors as large demonstrations commemorated significantdates in the history of the Islamic revolution and the Shia Muslim religiouscalendar.This report brings together testimonies and informationreflecting the continuing human rights crisis since the election and itssharply disputed results. Over the course of 5 months, Human Rights Watchconducted interviews with over two dozen individuals, including ordinaryprotestors, journalists, political figure and their families, and human rightsdefenders. The report's findings indicate a widespread governmental crackdownacross various sectors of Iranian society. Although the government hasacknowledged some abuses and even named responsible individuals, no one hasbeen prosecuted for committing major human rights violations.On June 12, 2009, Iran's incumbent president, MahmoudAhmadinejad, stood for re-election against challengers Mehdi Karroubi, MirHossein Mousavi, and Mohsen Rezaii. Although the one-month campaign periodproduced some notable transparency, such as live televised presidential debatesfor the first time, the government mobilized its institutions and mediaresources to promote President Ahmadinejad and harass his opponents. Theauthorities closed reformist publications, blocked opposition websites, anddisrupted SMS services prior to the election. Rival candidates' accusations ofofficial favoritism and electoral meddling by the government came to a head onelection day. After the announcement of preliminary results on election day,the three opposition candidates quickly charged that the authorities had riggedthe voting in favor of President Ahmadinejad and later filed complaints withthe Guardian Council. (The Guardian Council is an unelected body of six clericsand six jurists whose range of powers includes supervisory authority overpresidential elections).On June 13, following the government's announcementthe previous afternoon that preliminary election results showed Ahmadinejad tobe the winner, large numbers of protestors took to the streets. They gatheredthroughout Tehran and other major cities for the next several days. Thedemonstrations were overwhelmingly peaceful. However, police and securityforces confronted protestors, including those who played no part in theoccasional acts of vandalism that occurred, with batons, clubs, and in somecases live ammunition. State violence extended beyond demonstrations, withplainclothes and Basij paramilitary forces attacking student dormitoriesand staging nighttime raids in residential areas. Security forces arrestedthousands of protestors in the course of these governmental crackdowns during thefirst week following the election.In addition to massive detentions of ordinary protestors andpeaceful activists, as early as the day after the election, authorities roundedup scores of well-known writers and political figures affiliated with the reformmovement.  (The reform movement is a term dating to the 1997 election ofPresident Mohammad Khatami, who planned to bring about greater social andpolitical freedoms. Since that time, the term is often broadly applied toinclude political figures and activists who advocate for change within theframework of the current governmental system.)The worst abuses against ordinary protestors have takenplace at police stations and detention centers, most notoriously at theKahrizak detention center outside of Tehran. At least three detainees have dieddue to injuries sustained in Kahrizak. In August, authorities dismissed thedirector of Kahrizak and said that three guards would be prosecuted forprisoner abuse. In January 2010, a parliamentary panel investigated the deathsand allegations of torture and named former Tehran Prosecutor-General SaeedMortazavi as the person responsible. Although the panel dismissed allegationsof sexual abuse, it found that widespread violations had taken place in thedetention center. However, neither Mortazavi nor anyone else implicated in theabuse has yet been prosecuted.Authorities also abused detainees in Evin, a large prisoncomplex where Human Rights Watch has previously documented systematic abuses.In Evin, authorities held prominent political figures and activists, who gaveconfessions that appeared to have been coerced incriminating themselves andothers of vaguely-worded political offenses. In August, the government held thefirst mass trial for over 100 reformists, with defendants confessing to havingcolluded to promote a "velvet revolution." After the first day of the trial,state television showed two of the defendants, Mohammad Ali Abtahi and MohammadAtrianfar, denying that their confessions were coerced and claiming to have"changed" their opinions since they were detained. Testimonies collected byHuman Rights Watch indicate that authorities coerced the detainees intoproviding these confessions. Families of detainees told Human Rights Watch thattheir relatives were put under severe physical and psychological pressure toproduce self-incriminating statements.Despite widespread repression in the weeks following theelection, peaceful demonstrations and expressions of opposition continued.Former candidates and their supporters, primarily depending on the internet,have spoken out against human rights violations and called on the government tohold abusers accountable. In response, the government harassed and intimidatedactivists, journalists, and human rights defenders, detaining many, subjectingsome to trials that did not meet international fair trial standards, andconvicting others solely for exercising their right to peaceful dissent.During the fall and winter of 2009, government harassment ofpeaceful protestors in response to major demonstrations such as those held onNovember 4 (the anniversary of the takeover of the US embassy in 1979),December 7 (National Student Day), and in conjunction with the Shia religiousholiday of Ashura on December 27 continued unabated. Attacks by security forcesacting alongside the Basij injured many and killed at least 8. Authorities alsoarrested scores of additional activists and protestors, and threatened to trysome on charges that carry the death penalty. As of February 10, the governmenthad executed 2 persons who had in fact been detained prior to the elections oncharges of moharebe (enmity with God). In January, the governmentsentenced 9 others to the death penalty on the same charges and put on trial 16others on charges that carry the death penalty upon conviction.Key Recommendations tothe Government of IranEstablish an independent and impartial fact-finding commission toidentify those who ordered the crackdown on post-election protesters and thoseresponsible for serious human rights violations.Investigate promptly and impartially all allegations of tortureor ill-treatment in detention.Ensure that victims of torture or ill-treatment receiveappropriate compensation from the government.Release all detainees held for exercising their right to freeexpression, assembly, and associationMethodologyThe Iranian government does not allow independentorganizations such as Human Rights Watch to enter the country for the purposesof unimpeded investigations into human rights abuses. Due to such restrictions,Human Rights Watch collected information for this report through extensivetelephone and internet based interviews with over two dozen individualsincluding ordinary protestors, journalists, human rights defenders, as well aspolitical figure and their families. Human Rights Watch relied on a network oftrusted human rights defenders to identify and verify the identity ofindividuals who provided testimonies for this report.  Their names, locations anddates of interview have been kept confidential to protect their security.Violence againstPeaceful Protestors Following the ElectionTehran was the locus of the largest post-electiondemonstrations, and there protestors faced the biggest show of governmentalforce.  On June 15, three days after the vote, hundreds of thousands ofsupporters of Mir Hossein Mousavi, the main opposition candidate, turned outfor a mass rally at Azadi Square.[1]Although some protestors engaged in acts of vandalism, the demonstrators wereoverwhelmingly peaceful.[2]Making no distinction between the two, security forces attacked demonstratorsaided by motorcyclist in plainclothes, believed to be Basij members. In anaccount typical of many, a journalist living in Tehran, told Human RightsWatch:I've seen the Basij when they come through on theirmotorcycles. There are two guys, one in front and one in the back, and theybeat and harass people. People know that they are Basiji. They have batons mostof the time.  They are in various parts of the city, like in Vanak Square,where there were probably twenty motorcycles. People were walking throughpeacefully chanting, not provoking the Basijis, but they came and startedbeating people.One witness to the June 15 events told Human Rights Watch:I walked toward Vanak Square. By the time I arrived,crowds were gathering but no one was shouting slogans. People were afraidbecause there were hundreds of riot police standing around. I started walkingnorth from Vanak Square towards Mirdamad. I saw riot police on motorcyclessuddenly come up on the sidewalk in pairs. They were hitting people with batonsand hoses. They passed me on the sidewalk and hit me for no reason. They alsoaccidentally hit some Basijis as well, not recognizing friend from foe. Thisresulted in a small skirmish that was quickly resolved as the Basijis warnedthe riot police to pay attention not to hit them.People on the scene implicated individuals in plainclothes,believed to be Basij, in attacks that killed peaceful demonstrators. Theshooting of Neda Agha-Soltan was one of the first such incidents. On June 20,Sultan, 26, was on her way to join demonstrations at Azadi Square. She was shotafter she and two companions got out of their car on Karegar Street.[3]Some officials blamed her death on protestors, opposition groups, and foreignpowers.[4]Authorities forced the family to bury Agha-Soltan without conducting an autopsyor investigation. A relative told Human Rights Watch that authorities told thefamily they would face terrible consequences if they challenged thegovernment's version of her death. They also prohibited the family from holdinga public funeral. The government has not carried out any investigation into thekilling of Neda Agha-Soltan.Sohrab Aarabi, 19, another young protestor, died, apparentlyafter being shot on the day of a protest. Aarabi disappeared on June 15, theday of one of the largest demonstrations in Tehran. According to statements shemade to the press, Aarabi's mother said that she searched for her son andauthorities at Evin Prison told her he was being held inside. Nearly a monthafter his disappearance, authorities summoned his mother to identify her sonand showed her a coroner's report stating the cause of death as a bullet to theheart.[5]At least 40 others died during the post-election crackdownin the month of June. Due to the government's lack of transparency, the actualnumber of casualties – both those killed and injured – remains unknown.[6]Among the confirmed dead, it is not clear how many died as a result of woundssustained during demonstrations or while in detention. As documented in thediscussion below of police raids on university dormitories, unprovoked attacksnot related to demonstrations caused other casualties.On the night of June 14, two days after the election, policeand Basij forces attacked Tehran University dormitories, injuring students anddamaging buildings. Some students were asleep when the attack occurred. Policearrested a number of students at the dormitory that night and transferred themto different police stations. They took a few dozen students to a basement roomfour levels below ground at the Ministry of Interior. There, the students said,Basij and police physically and verbally abused them.One student who spent 48 hours in the ministry basementtold Human Rights Watch:During the attack the plainclothes forces grabbed me andsome other students randomly, although we were not chanting or anything. I wasblindfolded and could not recognize where we were headed.  On the way, theycursed and beat me. In the 48 hours in that place, which I learned from theconversations of the guards was the basement of the Ministry of Interior, theyput food in our hands and forced us to eat, and if any food fell on the groundthey would beat us with batons.  They made harsh noises to terrify us.  We hadto beg to go to the toilet.  Some of the detainees had open wounds and neededmedical attention, but they were treated the same way.On June 15, Ali Larijani, the speaker of the parliament,appointed a six-member panel to investigate the attacks on the dormitories.[7]Although parliamentarian Hamid-Reza Katouzian and other members of the panelgave statements to the press confirming that the panel had found extensivedamage to the dormitories, the government has not made available final findingsof the panel or held anyone accountable for the attacks.[8]Raids in ResidentialAreasIn addition to marching through major streets and gatheringin city squares, demonstrators took to their rooftops nightly in someresidential areas throughout the country, chanting Allah-o akbar (God isgreatest), recalling one of the emblematic forms of protests during the 1979revolution that toppled the Pahlavi monarchy. Opposition leaders encouragedsupporters to chant such slogans as a form of peaceful protest. With the severecrackdown making street protests increasingly difficult, nightly chantingbecame one of the remaining forms of mass public protests against the disputedelection results.[9]Plainclothes individuals, believed to be Basij, forcefullydisrupted these nighttime chanting sessions by raiding buildings, damagingprivate property, and intimidating residents.  Several witnesses told HumanRights Watch that they received threatening, anonymous phone calls from personssaying that they have seen them chanting on the rooftops.An eyewitness to one raid by plainclothes officers on aresidential home told Human Rights Watch:On July 30, at 9:00 a.m., several plainclothes officersrepeatedly knocked on our door, yelling for us to open it. They weretrying to gain the attention ofour neighbors, too. My father openedthe door to them. They entered our house without any warrants. Theysaid they had identified our address as one of the homes from which the chantof Allah-o-akbar had been heard. Then they showed us that our entry doorhad been marked on the outside the night before. First, they threatenedto arrest my father. They did not have a search warrant, but they went toour rooftop and broke our satellite dish and neighbors' dishes on adjoiningproperties; as many as they could reach. They also confiscated oursatellite receiver. They also threatened my father that if the chant ofAllah-o-akbar was heard from our house again, they would arrest hischildren. Then they left and went to our other neighbors' homes where thedoors had also been marked the night before.Abuse of Detainees:Beatings, Forced Confessions, and RapeOn August 13, Judiciary spokesman Ali Reza Jamshidiacknowledged that the authorities detained some 4,000 people in thepost-election protests.[10]This number included more than one hundred journalists, prominent politicalfigures, and human rights defenders. Both ordinary and well-known individualsfaced harsh treatment and were denied any semblance of due process.In June and July, Human Rights Watch spoke with 22protestors from Tehran who reported the circumstances of their arrests anddetention. Many said they were beaten once they were taken to detention centersor police stations. Authorities refused to provide information on the number ofarrests made, the condition of detainees, or where protesters were kept. Somewere released in the middle of the night, far from where they were detained.A woman who was apprehended near Baharestan Square on June17 and later taken to Shapour police station described the conditions of herdetention:There was a fluorescent lamp that didn't really help us todistinguish day from night. There was no soap. They confiscated all ourpersonal belongings. It was hard to lay down or sleep. We were not allowed touse restrooms when we needed to. In Tehran's hot weather, we were deprived of afan or water. They interrogated us. If anyone had a green scarf, shawl, orbracelet indicating that they were Mousavi supporters, their situation wasworse. On the last day, I was feeling sick and a female guard came and kickedme a few times to stop me from crying.Protesters sent to Evin prison faced similar situation.Three released detainees told Human Rights Watch that due to lack of space,every small solitary confinement cell held five prisoners.  One detainee whospent nine days in Evin told Human Rights Watch:I was interrogated three times ... and most of the questionsrelated to my personal and political beliefs. During the interrogation I wasbeaten by baton and insulted verbally.  Once the interrogator told me, "If youdie here nobody will know because no-one knows that you have been arrested."A journalist who was detained a few days after the electionand held for 35 days described his situation to Human Rights Watch:Six officers entered our house and collected all of mywork and personal items. We then went to my office, and they collectedall my belongings there, too. They transferred me to a military base insoutheastern Tehran. It was like hell. For the first three daysthey didn't feed us. They said they had "forgotten." I asked whythey hadn't forgotten to beat us. I was blindfolded even in solitaryconfinement. It was so hot I couldn't move. The interrogators keptcoming in and cursing me. On the second night they came and startedbeating and cursing me. They hit my body, my back, and my feet with kicksand wire cables, telling me that I wouldn't survive. On the [third] day,they brought me my meal and told me to eat with my hands. I said I hadn'twashed my hands in three days, having had to wipe my butt with myhands."This is your problem," they said.After four days the authorities transferred him to Evinprison:While arguing with my interrogator over his questions,they hit me with cables several times. They also put pens between myfingers [and squeezed my hands] several times. In solitary confinement, Ikept thinking that they would come and take me to interrogation anyminute. Several times they came and woke me up violently in the middle ofthe night and took me to the interrogation room. I was going crazy.Some of the worst violations documented by Human RightsWatch occurred at Kahrizak Prison, a detention center outside of Tehran. Atleast three detainees died due to injuries sustained in Kahrizak.[11]The severity of abuses reported at Kahrizak prompted Supreme Leader AliKhamenei to order the center's closing on July 27.[12]The government also carried out two separate inquiries involving the center,one of which found Tehran's former prosecutor general, Saeed Mortazavi,directly responsible for the ill treatment of detainees there.[13]One former Kahrizak detainee, Ebrahim Sharifi, had to fleethe country after publicly revealing abuses he had suffered in the detentioncenter. He spoke with Human Rights Watch about his experiences:On June 23, three men in a car arrested me near myfather's house and took me to an unknown location blindfolded and in handcuffs.On June 24, guards beat me violently with something that felt thicker than awhip, possibly a hose.  I was not given any food or water. On June 25, fakeexecution sessions started.  They gave us a piece of bread and water thattasted foul.  We were randomly selected and beaten.  On June 26, prison guardsone more time set up fake executions, cursing and randomly beating people whoasked for water or to use the toilet.I said, "Execute me if you want and get it over with."  Ireceived a kick to my stomach and when I fell to the ground more kicks in thestomach, until I started throwing up blood.  Another man said, "Take thisfaggot and make him pregnant, so he won't be a smartass again."  That mangrabbed me violently and pulled me to another location.  He tied my hands andfeet and pulled down my underwear and [...] while he was raping me he said, "Iwas so wrong to enjoy 12 and 13-year-old girls before. You little faggots areso much better. You can't even defend your own ass, how do you want to start avelvet revolution?" I threw up blood and passed out.When I regained consciousness I found myself in whatlooked like a clinic.  I was throwing up blood and I was bleeding withexcruciating pain in my anus. It took 16 or 17 hours until someone came andsaid to the doctor, "Doctor, is he going to die by himself or should we wastehim ourselves?"  That guy replied, "He is in a very bad shape.  Let him go orhe will become trouble for us, like the other two did." They transferred me toa location, which I believe was the same room as the one I had been in before.On June 30 they left me on Sabalan highway after driving me around blindfoldedfor a few hours.At Evin prison the most serious abuses Human Rights Watchdocumented were directed against well-known political figures and human rightsdefenders. As early as June 13, the day after the election, authorities set outto arrest scores of leading figures in the reform movement.  Mostafa Tajzadeh,former deputy at the Ministry of Interior under President Mohamed Khatami, wasamong them.  Saeed Hajarian, former editor of the banned daily Sobh-e Emroozand a well-known theoretician of the reform movement who was gravely wounded inan assassination attempt in 2000, was arrested and detained without charge onJune 16.[14]Also on June 16, authorities arrested Mohammad Ali Abtahi, a former vicepresident under President Khatami and advisor to reformist presidentialcandidate Mehdi Karroubi.  In statements to Human Rights Watch, the families ofall three detainees said that the authorities were severely pressuring thedetainees to make false confessions.The families' fears were realized on August 1, when thegovernment started public trials of over 100 of those detained after the election.A visibly thinner Abtahi recited statements implicating key reformist figures,including former president Khatami and leading presidential candidate MirHossein Mousavi, as being involved in behind-the-scenes plots to foment unrestafter the election.[15]Prior to this court session, Abtahi's wife told Human Rights Watch that in herlast prison visit he looked very agitated and had lost more than 30 pounds."He told me he is taking pills which help him forget everything, and stop himfrom thinking good or bad thoughts," she said. A released political prisonertold Human Rights Watch that during his interrogations he could hear Abtahibeing interrogated in the next cell and practicing his confession with hisinterrogators: "During the few days that I was interrogated in that room,sometimes I could hear the voices of Abtahi and his interrogators," this personsaid. "Most of the discussion was around his personal life and his professionalrelations with others." He also told Human Rights Watch that he had beenbriefly in the same room with Abtahi, who told him that he had been brought tothe court to practice his confessions.On September 20, during his Eid-e Fetr sermon, SupremeLeader Ali Khamenei stated that confessions of one detainee against others werenot admissible in court or permissible from a Sharia point of view. However, henoted that confessions against oneself in court or in "front of cameras and anaudience of millions" are "admissible, sufficient, and acceptable." [16]In addition to detaining ordinary protestors and well-knownpolitical reform figures, the government targeted prominent human rightsactivists. On June 16, security officers claiming to be clients entered the lawoffices of Abdolfatah Soltani, confiscated his computer and documents, andarrested him.[17]Soltani, along with Nobel Laureate Shirin Ebadi and others, co-founded theTehran-based Center for Defense of Human Rights, which defends victims of humanrights abuses.[18]At the time of his arrest, Soltani was serving as the senior member of thelegal team representing seven Baha'i leaders imprisoned since May 2008.[19]He was released on August 28, after 72 days of confinement. In an interviewwith Human Rights Watch, Soltani listed the human rights violations he enduredin the course of his arrest and detention:I was in solitary confinement for 18 days with no accessto my lawyer or to my family, no shower, and harsh physical conditions. I hadno access to books, television, radio, or a pen...According to Article 32 ofIranian Constitution, a detainee is entitled to two things within 24 hours: thereading of the charges against him, and the reasons for those charges.After 27 hours in solitary confinement, I was charged with things that weren'teven crimes.They told me, "You have raised doubts about theelection." They regarded this as a crime. I had not shared anopinion about the elections with anyone.  They told me to separate myself fromthe Center for Defenders of Human Rights and from other civil society groups.They told me I was pursuing a velvet revolution and a soft overthrow and assuch I wasn't allowed to continue my activities. They said I couldn'thave an organization.Soltani said that his interrogators threatened to flog andbeat him if he didn't answer them. The security forces also threatened to re-arresthim if he spoke publicly about his imprisonment.On July 15, plainclothes security forces seized human rightslawyer and women's rights advocate Shadi Sadr while she was walking to attendFriday prayers. According to a friend who witnessed her arrest, two men incivilian clothes approached them on motorcycles as a greenPeugeot with three passengers stopped in front of them; the men pushed Sadrinto the car. When Sadr managed to get out, after her friend opened the cardoor, one of the men beat her with a cable and threw her back into the car.[20]After authorities released Sadr nearly twoweeks later, on July 28, she told Human Rights Watch:I was in jail for 12 days without awarrant. On the second day, they took me to the office of Judge Haddad'srepresentative at Unit 209 [in Evin prison]. Mr. Sobhani, Judge of 2ndBranch was there and he issued the 50 million Toman bail order [approximately$50,000 USD]. By noon, all steps were completed for my freedom.Later I realized this all was a psychological game because they never informedmy family to post my bail.They took away my glasses and only gave themback to me during interrogations. I am almost blind without myglasses. I refrained from eating for two days to get my glasses back. [Ialso experienced] what others have also said about [Unit] 209: solitaryconfinement, blindfolds, forced chadors, personal questions, questionsunrelated to charges, questions about my beliefs.Since my release, theintelligence service keeps calling. They must have called a thousand times,saying they want to interview me, and that unlessI show up in person toanswertheir questions theywill not returnmy personalbelongings.On July 6, 2009, security forces arrestedMohammad Ali Dadkhah, a prominent human rights lawyer and founding member ofthe Center for Defense of Human Rights, in his law office.Nasrin Sotoudeh, Dadkhah's attorney, after meeting him on August 28, told HumanRights Watch:He has been under pressure in prison toconfess.For example, they kept him on top of a high staircase andpushed him, catching him just before he went tumblingdown. When hewas arrested, he wasnt fed for 48 hours. They wouldn't let him use a bathroom.Theytold him to denounce Shirin Ebadi and other attorneys with Center forthe Defense of Human Rights as traitors.On September 14, authorities released Dadkhahon a bail of 500 million Toman [approximately 500,000 USD].Major Attacks onPeaceful Protestors since AugustAfter August, authorities did not let up on their campaignto silence peaceful critics of the Ahmadinejad government and its policies.Security forces and Basij militias continue to detain, and courts continue toconvict activists, journalists, and human rights defenders following unfairtrials. The harshest crackdowns in the months since the mass summer protestshave been in response to large street demonstrations or efforts to organizethem.On November 4, protestors in Tehran and other cities such asShiraz and Tabriz, gathered to hold alternative demonstrations in response toofficially sanctioned demonstrations commemorating the take-over of the USembassy in 1979.  The alternative demonstrations were the largest oppositionstreet protests since those that immediately followed the June election.[21]Riot police and members of the Basij attacked protestors, attempting todisperse crowds by beating demonstrators and firing tear gas.[22]One month later, students used the occasion of NationalStudent Day on December 7 to stage protests throughout the country.[23]Students on the campuses of major universities in Tehran, Mashad, Tabriz,Isfahan and other cities participated. Police and Basij forces clashed withprotestors, with major confrontations occurring on the campus of TehranUniversity, where security forces blocked all entrances to the university.[24]According to press reports, confrontations with students extended beyond thecampuses to streets where police tear-gassed demonstrators.[25]One witness to the clashes near Tehran's Amir KabirUniversity told Radio Farda:As soon as the crowd begins to gain momentum the policeattack, and the Basijis, or security forces, or plainclothesmen – or whateverthey are – disperse them. At the moment I am close to the Vali Asr gate at AmirKabir University. Students have broken down the door and people are going inand out. Some people have entered the university. The situation is very tenseat the moment. Those students who are trying to get out of the [university] areencountering difficulty because they could be arrested. It looks as if they'vearrested several people who have exited ... There are clashes all the way fromthe intersection of Vali Asr to the side streets and people are running towardEnqelab Square.[26]On December 20, Grand Ayatollah Hossein Ali Montazeri, thehighest-ranking clerical critic of the government, died. His death occurred oneweek before the day of public mourning on the Shia calendar known as Ashura. InShia Muslim mourning rituals, the seventh day after a death is a significantday of commemoration. Demonstrators used the occasion of Montazeri's death, andits proximity to the Ashura rituals, to mourn him publicly and show theiropposition to the government's policies after the election. On December 27,demonstrators gathered in major cities throughout the country, includingTehran, Qom, Isfahan, and Mashhad. Clashes between demonstrators and riotpolice plus Basij resulted in the death of at least 8 demonstrators.[27]Ali Habibi Mousavi, a nephew of former presidential candidate Mir HosseinMousavi, was among those killed.[28]One witness in Tehran reported to the BBC that a police cardeliberately ran over a protestor:We entered from Palestine Street, and we headed easttoward the Vali Asr intersection. Plainclothes forces were waiting for us atthe Vali Asr intersection. They forced the crowd to disperse in differentdirections and prevented us from gathering ... When the crowd reached Vali AsrSquare it split apart. One group headed toward Haft-e Tir, and the other towardKeshavarz Boulevard ... I was standing at the corner of [Vali Asr] Square. FromKeshavarz Boulevard, [we witnessed] a Law Enforcement Forces pickup truck thathad the word "police" written on it run over [one of the protesters]. Theman had walked past me only 2 to 3 minutes earlier. He was a 40-year-old guywith long hair. He lost a lot of blood. When the crowd reached him he no longerhad a pulse. The truck was speeding around as if it wanted to run over thewhole crowd.Over the following week authorities arrested hundreds ofdemonstrators and activists in conjunction with the Ashura gatherings.[29]Authorities claimed once again that foreign governments and media outlets werefomenting unrest in the country. Ten members of the Baha'i community were amongthose the government arrested in connection with the Ashura protests. OnJanuary 12, 2010, Abbas Jafari Dolatabadi, the General Prosecutor of Tehran,told the Iranian press that the ten Baha'is detained on January 3 faced chargesof "organizing the unrest on Ashura [December 27] and sending photos of theunrest abroad." He also claimed that authorities had found arms and ammunitionin the homes of some of the ten detainees.[30]On January 28, the Iranian government hanged Mohammad-RezaAli-Zamani, 37, and Arash Rahmanipour, 20.[31] Although both menhad been arrested prior to the presidential election, they were tried as partof the mass trials in August, where they reportedly confessed to membership inthe illegal Kingdom Assembly Party and to having planned a deadly 2008 bombingof a mosque in Shiraz.[32]The lawyer for Rahmanipour, well-known human rights defender Nasrin Soutoudeh,has said that her client's conviction was based on a coerced confession andthat authorities prevented her from adequately defending him.[33]It appeared that the government was attempting to associatethose detained in connection with peaceful post-election protests with personsaccused of armed terrorist attacks. On the same day, the government sentencednine people to death on charges of "enmity with God" and accused them of"counterrevolutionary and norm-breaking acts and rioting" during demonstrationslinked to Ashura and other post-election protests.[34]In the context of Iranian laws, the vaguely defined chargeof "being at enmity with God" can be applied to membership in or support for anorganization that seeks to overthrow the Islamic Republic.On January 30, the trial of 16 individuals arrested inconnection with the Ashura protests began in a branch of the RevolutionaryCourt of Tehran, with Judge Abul Qasim Salavati presiding; the prosecutorclaimed in court that the defendants were working to achieve the "regimechange" interests of foreign states – a charge that can also result in deathsentences.[35]ConclusionAs the rulers of the Islamic Republic commemorate the 31stanniversary of the overthrow of the Shah, they confront the results of theircontinuing efforts to suppress the extensive peaceful protests provoked byalleged official vote-rigging in the June 12 presidential election. Theirattacks have left scores dead, untold hundreds injured, and thousandsarbitrarily arrested. Show trials of ordinary protestors and prominentreformist figures have displayed to Iranians and the world a flagrant disregardfor the rule of law. Nearly 9 months after the disputed election, thegovernment has not acted to investigate and hold accountable those responsiblefor ordering or carrying out these serious human rights abuses. Instead,authorities continue their campaigns of intimidating, arresting, and convictingindividuals for peacefully exercising their opposition to the government andprotesting its policies.Recommendations to theGovernment of IranEstablish an independent and impartial fact-finding commission toidentify those who ordered the crackdown on post-election protesters and thoseresponsible for serious human rights violations.Investigate promptly and impartially all allegations of tortureor ill-treatment in detention.Ensure that victims of torture or ill-treatment receiveappropriate compensation from the government.In accordance with the findings of the Special ParliamentaryCommittee to Investigate the Status of Post-Election Arrestees, prosecuteformer Tehran Prosecutor General Saeed Mortazavi for abuses at Kahrizak prison,including the deaths of three detainees.Investigate and hold accountable all persons implicated in abusesin prisons and detention facilities, including Evin and Kahrizak prisons andpolice detention centers.Re-open investigations into allegations of rape and sexual abuseat Kahrizak detention center.Close down all illegal detention centers, including ward 209 ofEvin prison.Release all detainees held for exercising their right to freeexpression, assembly, and association.Recommendations tomembers of the United Nations including the Human Rights CouncilUrge the Iranian government to carry out transparent andcomprehensive investigations into the killings of peaceful protestors andarbitrary detentions of thousands of demonstrators and civil society advocatesfollowing the disputed June 12 presidential election.Call on the Iranian government to investigate, prosecute, andpunish government and security officials as well as Basij members implicated inunlawful killings, arbitrary arrests and detention, and other serious humanrights abuses in connection with events since the disputed presidentialelection.Call on the Iranian government to release immediately persons whohave not been charged with a recognizable criminal offense, and provide dueprocess protections for persons charged with recognizable crimes.Urge the Iranian government to fulfill its previous invitationsto the Office of the High Commissioner of Human Rights and special rapporteursto visit Iran.[1]"Protesters Rally for Mousavi in Election Dispute," MSNBC, June 15,2009, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/31365097, (accessed August 3, 2009).[2]"Iran: End Violence Against Peaceful Protests," Human Rights Watch NewsRelease, June 15, 2010, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2009/06/15/iran-end-violence-against-peaceful-protests.[3]"Iranian Authorities Scramble to Negate Neda Soltan 'martyrdom,'" Newsweek, June23, 2009, http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/world/middle_east/article6561253.ece(accessed August 6, 2009).[4]"Iranian Leaders Blaming CIA, Protestors, for Killing Neda," ABC News Blogs,June 26, 2009, http://blogs.abcnews.com/politicalpunch/2009/06/iranian-leaders-blaming-cia-protestors-for-killing-neda.html(accessed August 6, 2009).[5]"Slain Iranian Teenager Becomes Symbol of Protests," The Los Angeles Times, July14, 2009, http://articles.latimes.com/2009/jul/14/world/fg-iran-sohrab14(Accessed February 1, 2010).[6]In August, Iran's deputy police chief, Gen. Ahmad Reza Radan, said that thepolice was standing by numbers given in June by the provincial governor ofTehran, who had claimed that 19 were killed that month. In September, a seniorcommander in the Revolutionary Guards, Abdollah Araghi, placed the number at36.  The Iranian opposition has claimed more than twice those numbers, but theclaims have been difficult to verify.  See, "Iran Election Unrest Killed 69: Opposition,"CBC News, August 11, 2009, http://www.cbc.ca/world/story/2009/08/11/iran-opposition-protest-election-death482.html(accessed February 9, 2010) and "Iran Official Says 36 Killed in Post-Vote Unrest,"AFP, September 9, 2009, http://www.google.com/hostednews/afp/article/ALeqM5j8GPoWmrf2qerPWQNHb8Z9eGjT3Q(accessed February 9, 2010).[7]"Larijani Orders Inquiry into the Attacks on the Dormitories," BBC Persian, June15, 2009, http://www.bbc.co.uk/persian/iran/2009/06/090615_mm_larijani_courtorder_tuniversity.shtml,(accessed February 3, 2010).[8]"Katouzian: the Fact-finding Panel has Not Issued its Report," ParliamentNews, September 28, 2009, http://www.parlemannews.ir/index.aspx?n=4017,(accessed February 3, 2010).[9]"Iran:Night Raids Terrorize Civilians," Human Rights Watch News Release, June26, 2009.[10]"Iran admits 4,000 June detentions," BBC, August 11, 2009, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/middle_east/8195586.stm(accessed August 13, 2009).[11]"Iran: Prosecute Mortazavi for Detention Deaths," Human Rights Watch NewsRelease, January 13, 2010, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2010/01/13/iran-prosecute-mortazavi-detention-deaths.[12]"Reports of Prison Abuse and Deaths Anger Iranians," New York Times, July28, 2009, http://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/29/world/middleeast/29iran.html,(accessed February 3, 2010).  Iran's Judiciary authorities had ordered theKahrizak detention facilities closed two years ago, citing "nonconformanceto standards," but it remained open until the end of July, when AyatollahKhamenei ordered it to be closed.[13]The first inquiry was carried out by a six member parliamentary panel tasked bythe Parliament Speaker Ali Larijani for investigating the June attacks onuniversity dormitories. The second inquiry was completed by another Larijaniappointed panel, the Special Parliamentary Committee to Investigate the Statusof Post-Election Arrestees.  Further information about both can be found at"Iran: Prosecute Mortazavi for Detention Deaths," Human Rights Watch NewsRelease, January 13, 2010, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2010/01/13/iran-prosecute-mortazavi-detention-deaths.[14]"Iran: Release Disabled Reformist," Human Rights Watch News Release, July1, 2009, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2009/07/01/iran-release-disabled-reformist.[15]"The Details of Abtahi's Court Confession," Fars ["Farsi"?] News, August1, 2009, http://www.farsnews.com/newstext.php?nn=8805100778, (Accessed February2, 2010).[16]"SundayEid-e Fetr Prayers Carried Out by Ayatollah Khamenei," BBC Persian Service, September20, 2009,  http://www.bbc.co.uk/persian/world/2009/09/090920_ba-khamenei-eid-fitr.shtml,(accessed February 4, 2010).[17]"Iran's Human Rights Activists Being Arrested, Nobel Prize Winner Tells NPR," NPR,June 16, 2009, http://www.npr.org/blogs/thetwo-way/2009/06/ebadi.html(accessed August 17, 2009).[18]"Iran: Harassment of Rights Defenders Escalates," Human Rights Watch NewsRelease, August 2, 2005, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2005/08/02/iran-harassment-rights-defenders-escalates.The Center for Defense of Human Rights, based in Tehran, has a record of takingup high profile cases involving serious human rights violations, such as thecase of Iranian-Canadian Zahra Kazemi who died in detention in 2003, the serialmurders of intellectuals in the 1990s, and the imprisonment of the Baha'i leadership.[19]"Trial of Seven Imprisoned Baha'i Leaders Postponed," Baha'i World NewsService, August 17, 2009, http://news.bahai.org/story/727 (accessed August17, 2009).[20]"Iran: Stop Arresting, Intimidating Rights Lawyers," Human Rights Watch NewsRelease, July 27, 2009,http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2009/07/27/iran-stop-arresting-intimidating-rights-lawyers.[21]"Dissidents Mass in Tehran to Subvert an Anti-U.S. Rally," New York Times,November 4, 2009, http://www.nytimes.com/2009/11/05/world/middleeast/05iran.html(accessed January 29, 2010).[22]"Protesters Injured and Arrested During Peaceful Demonstrations," InternationalCampaign for Human Rights in Iran, November 4, 2009. http://www.iranhumanrights.org/2009/11/4novprotests/,(accessed January 29, 2010).[23]National Student Day commemorates the December 7, 1953 killing of 3 TehranUniversity students during demonstrations against Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlaviand his recent return to power after a coup d'état.[24]"Students Day Protests Sweep Campuses Across Iran," Tehran Bureau,December 8, 2009, http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/tehranbureau/2009/12/student-protests-mark-16-azar-all-over-iran.html,(accessed January 29, 2010).[25]"Protests and Confrontations on Student Day," Deutsche Welle Persian Website, December 7, 2009, http://www.dw-world.de/dw/article/0,,4972852,00.html  (accessed January 29, 2009).[26]"Eyewitness to Clashes on Vali Asr Street, the Breaking of the Door of AmirKabir University, and People Entering the Campus," Interview on Radio Farda,December 7, 2009, audio file available at http://www.radiofarda.com/content/f2_Iran_postelection_Azar_Student_Day/1896864.html,(accessed February 3, 2010).[27]"Iran tries 16 people over Ashura Day protests," BBC News Service, January30, 2010, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/middle_east/8489012.stm (accessed February1, 2010).[28]"Iran Clamps Down on Protests," The Los Angeles Times, December 29,2009, http://articles.latimes.com/2009/dec/29/world/la-fg-iran-protests29-2009dec29(accessed February 1, 2010).[29]"Eight killed and hundreds detained in fresh clashes in Tehran," DeutscheWelle Persian Website, Deutsche Welle Persian Website, December 28, 2009, http://www.dw-world.de/dw/article/0,,5060406,00.html (accessed February 1, 2010).[30]"Baha'i Arrested in Connection With Ashura to be Tried Next Week," Fars NewsAgency, January 9, 2010, http://www.farsnews.com/newstext.php?nn=8810190440,(accessed February 1, 2010).[31]"'Shocking Execution of Iran Protesters Condemned," Amnesty International, January28, 2010. http://www.amnestyusa.org/document.php?id=ENGPRE010282010 (accessedFebruary 4, 2010).[32]"Iran Executes 2 Alleged Government Opponents," Los Angeles Times, January29, 2010, http://www.latimes.com/news/nation-and-world/la-fg-iran-executions29-2010jan29,0,6488228.story(accessed February 4, 2010).[33]"Iran Lawyer Haunted by Young Man's Execution," The Los Angeles Times, February8, 2010. http://www.latimes.com/news/nation-and-world/la-fg-iran-lawyer8-2010feb08,0,1951270.story(accessed February 9, 2010).[34]"Iran Executes 2, Sentences 9 Protesters to Die," San Francisco Chronicle, January29, 2010,http://articles.sfgate.com/2010-01-29/news/17840912_1_iranian-cities-protesters-president-mahmoud-ahmadinejad(accessed February 4, 2010).[35]"Trial of 16 Ashura Riot Detainees Begins in Iran," Tehran Times, http://www.tehrantimes.com/index_View.asp?code=213354,(accessed February 1, 2010).Related ContentFebruary 10, 2010News ReleaseIran: Crackdown’s Torrent of AbusesRights Violations Mounting as Government Celebrates Revolution’s AnniversaryFebruary 10, 2010News ReleaseIran: Crackdown’s Torrent of AbusesRegion / CountryMiddle East/North Africa,IranProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch