By the Numbers: Findings of the Detainee Abuse and Accountability Project | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload this reportDownload the Summary and Recommendations in ArabicDownload the Summary and Recommendations in FrenchDownload the Summary and Recommendations in PersianSearchDonate NowSearchDownloadsDownload this reportDownload the Summary and Recommendations in ArabicDownload the Summary and Recommendations in FrenchDownload the Summary and Recommendations in PersianApril 25, 2006By the NumbersFindings of the Detainee Abuse and Accountability ProjectBy the NumbersFindings of the Detainee Abuseand Accountability ProjectSummaryBy theNumbersAnalysisCriminalPunishments: Verdicts and SentencingOfficers'Liability Under the Command Responsibility DoctrineReliance onNon-judicial Hearings and PunishmentInvestigativeFailuresRecommendationsAppendix A:Chart of Key StatisticsAppendix B:Sample Homicide Cases Documented by Human Rights FirstSummaryTwo years ago, revelations about the abuse of detainees in U.S. custody at Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq shockedpeople across the world. In response, U.S. government officials condemnedthe conduct as illegal and assured the world that perpetrators would be heldaccountable.Two years later, it has becomeclear that the problem of torture and other abuse by U.S. personnel abroad wasfar more pervasive than the Abu Ghraib photos revealed-extending to numerous U.S.detention facilities in Afghanistan, Iraq, and at Guantnamo Bay, and includinghundreds of incidents of abuse. Yet an analysis of alleged abuse cases showsthat promises of transparency, investigation, and appropriate punishment forthose responsible remain unfulfilled. U.S. authorities have failed toinvestigate many allegations, or have investigated them inadequately. Andnumerous personnel implicated in abuses have not been prosecuted or punished.In order to collect and analyze allegations of abuse ofdetainees in U.S. custody in Afghanistan, Iraq, and at the Guantnamo Baydetention facility, and to assess what actions, if any, the U.S. government hastaken in response to credible allegations, the Center for Human Rights andGlobal Justice at NYU School of Law, Human Rights Watch and Human Rights Firsthave jointly undertaken a Detainee Abuseand Accountability Project (DAA Project). The Project tracks abuseallegations and records investigations, disciplinary measures, or criminalprosecutions that are linked to them. (This briefing paper does not discussallegations of torture or abuse at secret U.S. detention facilities in othercountries, or allegations of torture following illegal rendition or otherinformal transfer to other countries.[1])This briefing paper presents the Project's preliminaryconclusions based on data collected as of April 10, 2006. It also highlights anumber of individual cases that illustrate the following key findings:Detainee abuse has been widespread. The DAAProject has documented over 330 cases in which U.S. military and civilianpersonnel are credibly alleged to have abused or killed detainees. These casesinvolve more than 600 U.S.personnel and over 460 detainees. Allegations have come from U.S. facilities throughout Afghanistan, Iraqand at GuantnamoBay. (These numbers areconservative and likely lower than the actual number of credible allegations ofabuse. See box, "Methodology and Sources of Information," opposite.)Only fifty-four military personnel-a fraction ofthe more than 600 U.S.personnel implicated in detainee abuse cases-are known to have been convictedby court-martial; forty of these individuals have been sentenced to prisontime.Available evidence indicates that U.S. militaryand civilian agencies do not appear to have adequately investigated numerouscases of alleged torture and other mistreatment. Of the hundreds of allegationsof abuse collected by the DAA Project, only about half appear to have beenproperly investigated. In numerous cases, military investigators appear to haveclosed investigations prematurely or to have delayed their resolution. In manycases, the military has simply failed to open investigations, even in caseswhere credible allegations have been made.DAA Project researchers found over 400 personnelhave been implicated in cases investigated by military or civilian authorities,but only about a third of them have faced any kind of disciplinary or criminalaction. And even in cases where U.S.military investigations have substantiated abuse, military commanders haveoften chosen to proceed with weaker non-judicial forms of disciplinary actioninstead of criminal prosecution.In cases where courts-martial have convened,only a small number of convictions have resulted in significant prison time.Many sentences have been for less than a year, even in cases involving seriousabuse. Of the hundreds of personnel implicated in detainee abuse, only tenpeople have been sentenced to a year or more in prison.No U.S. military officer has been heldaccountable for criminal acts committed by subordinates under the doctrine ofcommand responsibility. That doctrine provides that a superior is responsiblefor the criminal acts of subordinates if the superior knew or should have knownthat the crimes were being committed and failed to take steps to prevent themor to punish the perpetrators. Only three officers have been convicted bycourt-martial for detainee abuse; in all three instances, they were convictedfor abuses in which they directly participated, not for their responsibility ascommanders.The U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) hasinvestigated several cases of abuse involving its personnel, and reportedlyreferred some individuals to the Department of Justice for prosecution. But fewcases have been robustly investigated.The Department of Justice appears to have takenlittle action in regard to the approximately twenty civilians, including CIAagents, referred for criminal prosecution for detainee abuse by the militaryand the CIA, and has shown minimal initiative in conducting its owninvestigations into abuse cases. The Department of Justice has not indicted asingle CIA agent for abusing detainees; it has indicted only one civiliancontractor.Methodology and Sourcesof InformationThe DAAProject collects data on alleged detainee abuses in Afghanistan,Iraq and at GuantnamoBay,occurring in the context of U.S.military and intelligence operations. The data are based primarily on documentsreleased by the U.S.government itself, including tens of thousands of pages of internal governmentdocuments obtained under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) by the AmericanCivil Liberties Union and other non-governmental groups. Additional sourcesinclude: Human Rights Watch and Human Rights First interviews with witnessesand victims of abuse; the U.S. military's reports of investigations conductedinto alleged abuse;[2] legal documents relating to abuseinvestigations and prosecutions (including court filings and transcripts fromproceedings conducted at the Guantnamo Bay detention facility); detaineeaccounts recorded by other organizations or by the detainees' attorneys;reports from credible media sources; official U.S. military statements; andresponses from the U.S. military and Department of Justice to questions fromProject researchers.Thenumbers presented in this report are likely an undercount. There are tworeasons for this: First, U.S.military and intelligence agencies maintain a high level of secrecy withrespect to detainee operations, allegations of abuse and ensuinginvestigations. Too often, accounts of abuse come to light or are fullyinvestigated only after media attention is focused on them.[3] In many cases, despite repeatedrequests, DAA Project researchers were not able to obtain more than the mostbasic information about alleged abuses from government agencies.[4] Second, the Project has taken aconservative approach, and included accounts of alleged abuses fromnongovernmental sources only if they are specific, detailed, and coherent. TheProject has not included allegations about systemic detainee abuse-forinstance, allegations that a particular military unit or set of soldierssystematically committed abuses, no matter how well supported-if theseallegations did not include allegations about specific incidents, personnel, ordetainees.Definitions and ExplanationsForthe purposes of the DAA Project, a "case" is defined as a set of events that tookplace at a particular time and location, involving a particular set of allegedperpetrators and victims. A case may involve a single perpetrator abusing asingle detainee or multiple perpetrators, victims, and acts of abuse.Aspecific act allegedly committed by a particular person against an individualdetainee (for instance, a military guard beating a detainee) is an "act ofabuse" for the purposes of this Project. Separate acts by different personnelagainst detainees are considered separate acts of abuse (for instance, twomilitary guards beating up a detainee is two acts of abuse). Projectresearchers deemed conduct an act of abuse only if the alleged conduct wouldviolate provisions of the U.S. Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ),applicable to U.S.service men and women, or federal criminal statutes, applicable to bothcivilians and military personnel.[5]Relevant violations of the UCMJ include homicide, assault, cruelty andmaltreatment, and maiming;[6]relevant violations of U.S.federal law include homicide, assault, sexual abuse, and torture.[7](Note: "Acts of abuse" are not equivalent to the individual criminal chargesthat prosecutors could seek under these provisions. Charges in criminal casesare decided by prosecutors on a case-by-case basis and can include severalcounts stemming from a single act.) Project researchers excluded from the countinstances in which military investigations found evidence that justified orexcused physical force, e.g., instances in which guards used arguably justifiedlevels of force to subdue allegedly violent or unruly detainees.A"detainee" is defined here as it is by the Army's criminal investigationcommand, as "any person captured or otherwise detained by an armed force."[8]By the NumbersThe DAA Project has to date documented at least 330 cases inwhich U.S.military and civilian personnel are alleged to have abused detainees, rangingfrom beatings and assaults, to torture, sexual abuse, and homicide.Among the cases:At least 600 U.S. personnel are implicated(numerous cases involve more than one perpetrator). Military personnel compriseover 95 percent of those implicated (at least 570 people), and at least ten CIAor other intelligence personnel are implicated, and approximately twenty civiliancontractors working for either the military or the CIA.At least 460 detainees have been subjected toabuse, including people held in Iraq,Afghanistan, and at GuantnamoBay.The majority of the approximately 330 cases tookplace in Iraq (at least 220cases), followed by Afghanistan(at least sixty cases), and GuantnamoBay (at least fiftycases).DAA Project researchers found that authoritiesopened investigations into approximately 210 out of the 330 cases (about 65percent).[9]In the remaining 35 percent ofcases-approximately 120 cases-either no investigation was opened or theauthorities have not publicly disclosed whether one took place.Over 70 percent of these 120 unresolved casesinvolve incidents that took place more than two years ago.The 210 cases in which there is evidence of aninvestigation involve at least 410 personnel (in many cases, more than oneperpetrator is alleged to be involved in a case).Almost all of the military personnel who havebeen investigated are enlisted soldiers (approximately 95 percent of thetotal), not officers.Of the approximately 410 personnel implicated incases that the military and civilian authorities have investigated, only abouta third have faced any kind of disciplinary or criminal action. As of April 10,2006, the DAA Project identified seventy-nine military personnel who wereordered by commanders for court-martial.[10](This number includes summary courts-martial conducted abroad, for which thirtydays' confinement is the maximum sentence.) Only one person, a civiliancontractor, has been indicted in federal court.Of the seventy-nine courts-martial ordered bycommanders, fifty-four resulted in conviction or a guilty plea. Anotherfifty-seven people have faced non-judicial proceedings in which punishmentsinclude no or minimal prison time. (See box below on "Parallel DisciplinaryMechanisms: Criminal and Non-judicial Proceedings.")[11]75 percent of the cases in which investigationswere conducted do not appear to have resulted in any kind of punishment(approximately 160 of the 210 investigated cases, involving approximately 260accused personnel).The DAA Projectfound approximately 110 cases (involving approximately 190 accused personnel)were closed without punishment. And in at least fifty cases (involving at leastseventy other people), the Project could not find any evidence thatinvestigations had resulted in punishment and could not determine whether thecase was still open.Researchers identified more than 1,000individual criminal acts of abuse.The most common alleged types of abuse wereassault (found in at least 220 cases), use of physical or non-physicalhumiliation (at least ninety cases), sexual assault or abuse (at least sixtycases), and use of "stress" techniques (at least forty cases).AnalysisThe numbers documented by the DAA Project reveal a generalfailure of accountability in detainee abuse cases, particularly with respect tocommanders.Reasons include an apparentdisinclination by commanding officers and civilian authorities to pursuemeaningful punishment of serious offenses, and a series of generalinvestigative failures, described in more detail below.Criminal Punishments: Verdicts and SentencingEven though approximately 600 U.S. personnel are implicated in thecases of detainee abuse documented by the DAA Project, as of April 10, 2006,only seventy-nine military personnel are known to have been recommended forcourt-martial, and only sixty-four appear to have actually beencourt-martialed. (This number includes eleven summary courts-martial, in which themaximum sentence is thirty days of confinement, and thirteen specialcourts-martial, in which the maximum sentence is one year).[12]Ten courts-martial are still pending, and charges were dropped in the fiveother cases.With respect to the sixty-four concluded courts-martial, theDAA Project found that:Approximately 85 percent-fifty-four of the sixty-fourconcluded courts-martial-resulted in guilty verdicts on at least one charge.(In at least five instances, the accused pled guilty before the verdict.) Tendefendants were acquitted of all charges or had verdicts overturned.Of the fifty-four guilty verdicts, fortyresulted in sentences involving prison time (74 percent). In the other fourteenverdicts, defendants were sentenced to punishments not involving prison time,such as extra duty, discharge, or reduction in rank.In close to 75 percent of the sentencesresulting in confinement (thirty out of forty instances), the punishmentimposed was less than a year of prison time; the average sentence was aboutfour months. The remaining ten personnel were sentenced to imprisonment forperiods ranging from one year to one instance of life imprisonment; the averagefor the nine people sentenced to less than life was approximately four years.While those cases actually brought to court-martial produceda relatively high rate of conviction, punishments that included prison timewere not consistent. Substantial prison sentences were given in a few highprofile cases covered by the media, but a number of other equally serious casesresulted in punishments far less severe. Examples of people sentenced tosignificant prison time include Charles Graner and Ivan Frederick, bothconvicted for assaults and other misconduct in the notorious photographedabuses at Abu Ghraib prison in late 2003, who were sentenced to ten and eightyears respectively. Two other soldiers have received heavy sentences: Sgt.Michael P. Williams and Spec. Brent May were convicted of murder for the killingsof two men they detained near Baghdadin August 2004. Williams was sentenced to life in prison; May was given fiveyears.However, other serious cases resulted in light punishments.Examples include:In April 2003, a Marine in the 3rd Battalion, 5thMarine Regiment in Iraqwas alleged to have "mock executed" four Iraqi juveniles by forcing them tokneel next to a ditch while the Marine fired his weapon to simulate anexecution. He was found guilty of cruelty and maltreatment and sentenced tothirty days of hard labor without confinement, and a fine of $1,056.[13]In April 2004, three Marines in the 2ndBattalion, 2nd Marine Regiment in Iraq were alleged to have shocked adetainee "with an electric transformer" during an interrogation. According toinvestigation documents, a Marine witness stated that one of the three Marines"held the wires against the shoulder area of the detainee and that the detainee'danced' as he was shocked," a second Marine operated the transformer, and athird guarded the detainee. After court-martial, the first Marine was given oneyear of confinement and a dishonorable discharge; the second received eightmonths of confinement and a dishonorable discharge. The third Marine, thedetainee's guard escort, was given sixty days of confinement.[14]In June 2003, two soldiers were charged insummary courts-martial with assault for beating an Iraqi detainee. Theinvestigation determined that one of the soldiers punched the detainee in theface several times and fractured his jaw, and that the other soldier also hitthe detainee. Both soldiers were convicted of assault and were reduced in rank,ordered to forfeit pay, and were sentenced to sixty and forty-five daysimprisonment, respectively. (Two other soldiers and a lieutenant were found guiltyof assault in a non-judicial hearing and given punishments not involving prisontime.)Two homicide cases from December 2002, in Afghanistan, have resulted in only minorpunishments for the personnel prosecuted. (See appendix B: Sentencing in the December2002 Bagram Homicides.)Officers' Liability Under the CommandResponsibility DoctrineThe vast majority of the courts-martial cases detailed here (95percent) involved enlisted personnel, not officers.Under the doctrine of command responsibility, along-recognized principle of U.S.domestic and international law, commanders can be held criminally liable asprincipals for the criminal acts of their subordinates, if they knew or shouldhave known about criminal activity, but did not take steps to prevent it or topunish the perpetrators. For example, if prosecutors demonstrate thatcommanders knew their troops were committing abuses, but failed to stop them,the commanders can be charged as though they committed the crimes themselves.[15]Not a single U.S.military officer serving in Iraq,Afghanistan, or GuantnamoBay has been criminally charged underthe doctrine of command responsibility for detainee abuses committed by his orher subordinates. The DAA Project found no evidence that the military has evensought to prosecute officers under the doctrine of command responsibility.As of April 10, 2006, only five officers had been criminallycharged in connection with the cases of abuse detailed in this report, and noneunder the doctrine of command responsibility. Christopher Beiring, an Armycaptain, was charged for dereliction of duty in a case involving the death oftwo detainees in Afghanistanin December 2002; he was acquitted.[16] AndrewLedford, a Navy lieutenant, was charged with assault and dereliction of duty,among other counts, for his involvement in the November 2003 interrogation atAbu Ghraib of Manadel al-Jamadi, anIraqi detainee who died in custody; Ledford too was acquitted.[17]Three other officers-a lieutenant, a captain,and a major-were convicted at court-martial for their involvement in detainee abuse;in all three cases the officers were charged for direct participation in thecriminal acts, and had taken part in abuses themselves or had ordered troops tocommit abuses.[18]One was sentenced to only two months in prison, another to forty-five days, andthe third was discharged and received no prison sentence.[19]Reliance on Non-judicial Hearings and PunishmentParallelDisciplinary Mechanisms: Criminal and Non-judicial ProceedingsThe U.S.military may conduct two types of investigations in a case involving detaineeabuse: criminal or administrative.[20] The procedures for each type of investigation aredifferent. Generally, administrative investigations are less strict aboutevidentiary issues, while criminal investigations are geared toward collectingevidence of specific criminal acts.[21] After a military investigation-criminal oradministrative-is completed, commanders decide whether and how an offender (ifone is identified) is to be charged.[22] Commanders' options include taking no action,initiating non-judicial disciplinary proceedings, or referring the case for acourt-martial.[23]If the commander decides that no action will be taken,the case is closed. If the commander decides on non-judicial proceedings, he orshe holds a hearing to adjudicate the matter and decide what punishment, ifany, is to be imposed. Non-judicial proceedings are disciplinary mechanismsthat have lesser evidentiary standards than courts-martial, and cannot resultin criminal punishment.[24]Non-judicial punishments include reprimands, pay and rank reductions, extraduties, discharge from the military, or short-term confinement. Commanders canalso impose other administrative disciplinary measures outside of the non-judicialpunishment system.If the commander decides to refer the case tocourt-martial (akin to criminal prosecution in the civilian system), there arethree types that may be used: summary, special, and general.[25] General courts-martial, the military's highest-leveltrial court, are meant for serious criminal offenses. Punishment bycourt-martial can, depending on the crime, include punitive discharges andincarceration, including life imprisonment or death in murder cases. Specialand summary courts-martial are usually used for less serious abuses. Themaximum punishment in special courts-martial is one year of incarceration,while summary courts-martial can only order thirty days.[26]Under U.S.military law, commanders have broad discretion to hold non-judicial hearings inlieu of criminal prosecution.[27]Even though non-judicial hearings are meant to adjudicateminor offenses and can result only in relatively weak penalties likereprimands,[28]in practice, commanders in Iraq,Afghanistan, and at GuantnamoBay have used these hearings in numerouscases that warranted criminal prosecution. DAA Project researchers found thatin over seventy instances, commanders who were faced with evidence thatsupported criminal prosecution chose instead to impose non-judicial punishmentsor to use non-punitive administrative actions.[29] (Inaddition to non-judicial punishments, commanders can impose administrativedisciplinary measures.) Many of the personnel punished were implicated inserious abuses, including over ten personnel implicated in homicide cases, andapproximately twenty personnel implicated in assault cases. Little is knownabout the results of non-judicial proceedings and other administrativeprocesses, because the military refuses to release information about them.The following are some of the stories behind the numbers:An Army criminal investigation in January 2004revealed that an Army specialist in the 300th Military Police Company in Iraqphysically abused a detainee and subjected him to a "mock execution" during asearch operation in late 2003. The specialist took the detainee into a fieldaway from other detainees and guards, "head-butted" the detainee, placed thebarrel of his unloaded M-4 automatic weapon in the detainee's mouth, and"dry-fired" the weapon. The specialist then put a round into the weapon andfired the round into the dirt next to the detainee.Criminal Investigators concludedthat the specialist had committed aggravated assault, assault/battery, andnegligent discharge of a firearm, and found probable cause to bring charges.Commanders instead ordered a non-judicial hearing, and the specialist receiveda punishment of two months of extra duty, restriction to base, reduction ofrank, and a fine.[30]In a case detailed in the military investigationreport of Maj. Gen. George Fay and Lieut. Gen. Anthony Jones, three soldiers inthe 519th Military Intelligence Battalion sexually assaulted a female detaineein Iraqin 2003.[31]The Fay-Jones report described the assault:First, the group took herout of her cell and escorted her down the cellblock to an empty cell. [Unnamed Soldier]stayed outside the cell while another held her hands behind her back, and theother forcibly kissed her. She was escorted downstairs to another cell whereshe was shown a naked male detainee and told the same would happen to her ifshe did not cooperate. She was then taken back to her cell and forced to kneeland raise her arms while one of the soldiers removed her shirt. She began tocry, and her shirt was given back as the soldier cursed at her and said they wouldbe back.During the Army's criminalinvestigation, the victim identified the three soldiers from a photographlineup provided by military investigators. Two months later, the criminalinvestigation was closed. Instead of a court-martial, commanders chose topunish the soldiers involved in this case non-judicially. The three soldierseach received one month of confinement and one of the soldiers was fined $500, whilethe other two were fined $750.As Human Rights First documented in a February2006 report, non-judicial punishment, in lieu of prosecution, was taken againstnine Navy personnel implicated in the November 2003 homicide death of Manadelal-Jamadi at Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq. In another case, the firstreported death of a detainee in U.S.custody in Afghanistan,occurring in August 2002, commanders used non-judicial punishment even aftercriminal investigators found probable cause to recommend charges of murder andconspiracy against four members of a Special Forces unit who captured thedetainee (a civilian non-combatant) and later shot him. The troops' commanderdeclined to order a court-martial and instead ordered that one of the soldierssimply be discharged from the military. (These cases are discussed in greaterdetail in Appendix B.)What the Government SaysThe DAA Project has repeatedlysought clarification from Pentagon and Department of Justice officials on the initiationand status of investigations into detainee abuse, largely without success. Inresponse to queries, Pentagon officials have claimed that the Army hasinvestigated more than six hundred allegations of abuse.[32]According to the Department of Justice, twenty cases have been referred to it bythe Department of Defense or the CIA's Inspector General.[33]But neither the Pentagon nor the Department of Justice have providedinformation on what these numbers include, or on the status of specific cases.Forexample, DAA Project researchers sought to clarify with military officialswhether the figure of 600 refers to investigations into events (e.g.,investigations into 600 different cases) or acts (e.g., investigations into 600specific bad acts), or people (investigations into 600 suspects).Researchers also sought to clarify whether thefigure of 600 is a tally of criminal investigations, administrativeinvestigations, or both.Militaryspokespersons have not provided answers to these queries.Onthe outcomes of investigations, Army Public Affairs officials told DAA Projectresearchers that 259 abuse cases have been resolved as of April 2006, in thefollowing manner: "there have been 85 Courts-Martial, 93 Non-JudicialPunishments, and 81 admin[istrative] actions." (In other words, a total of 174 individualsdid not face criminal prosecution.) DAA Project researchers have repeatedlyrequested from Public Affairs officials details about these non-judicial andadministrative measures, but have been told that the results and proceedingsare sealed.JusticeDepartment officials told DAA Project researchers in April 2006 that one of thetwenty persons referred to the Justice Department for prosecution was indicted:David Passaro, a CIA contractor indicted for assault in the case of an Afghandetainee beaten to death in eastern Afghanistan in June 2003. Officialssaid that seventeen other individuals were still being investigated and thatthe department had decided not to prosecute two others. Officials said theycould not discuss any of the cases individually or provide further detailsabout their status.Investigative FailuresBoththe U.S.military and the Justice Department have the necessary resources and proceduresto investigate abuse allegations, document the facts, and determine whetherprosecutions are warranted. Yet the DAA Project found numerous cases in whichauthorities failed to initiate investigations, delayed in initiatinginvestigations (often adversely affecting their outcome), or failed to followbasic investigative techniques, including interviewing victims and witnessesand gathering physical evidence.The following are examples of cases in which authoritieseither failed to investigate credible allegations of abuse, or failed toconduct adequate or timely investigations of such allegations:On January 2, 2004, U.S.forces in Iraqarrested Reuters cameraman Salem Ureibi, photographer Ahmad Mohammad Husseinal-Badrani, and driver Sattar Jabar al-Badrani, along with NBC cameraman AliMuhammed Hussein al-Badrani. The arrests took place near Fallujah, where thejournalists were trying to film the wreckage of a downed U.S. helicopter.[34]The four were taken to Forward Operating Base Volturno and interrogated bymembers of the U.S.82nd Airborne Division. After three days, the men were sent to ForwardOperating Base St. Mere and released.Immediately after their release,the four men told their employers that they had been tortured and otherwisephysically abused during their three days of detention. Ureibi and Ahmad al-Badranialleged that they were repeatedly kicked and hit (with enough force to beknocked over) between and during interrogation sessions, subjected to sleepdeprivation, and forced to perform difficult and humiliating physical motions orhold painful stress positions for hours at a time (including kneeling with theirarms in the air, forced standing overnight, and standing up-and-down repeatedly).Both say they were forced to drink large quantities of water until they feltsick. Sattar al-Badrani and Ahmed al-Badrani also alleged acts of degradationand humiliation: Ahmad was forced to put his middle finger in his anus and thenlick it, while Sattar was forced to put a finger in his anus and then smell it.Ureibi, who says he was separated from the others, also alleged that he wasforced to crawl around on the floor with his head between another detainee'slegs. He reported that an object (possibly a shoe) was put in his mouth andthat soldiers said they would rape him and his wife. Ali, who gave an accountto NBC officials, also said that he was beaten and kicked, and that he wassubjected to sleep deprivation, stress positions, and forced exercises.An unclassified executive summaryof the Army investigation into the case, dated January 29, 2004, reviewedstatements obtained from soldiers involved in the detention and stated that thedetainees were "purposefully and carefully put under stress, to include sleepdeprivation, in order to facilitate interrogation; they were not tortured." Thesummary then dismissed the allegations of abuse by the four detainees as notcredible. In a February 3,2004, letter to Pentagon officials, Reuters called the Armyinvestigation "woefully inadequate," noting that investigators had only takenstatements from soldiers and not from the alleged victims of the abuse. Reutersrequested that investigators speak with the journalists themselves, butinvestigators never did so. In a March 2004 letter to Reuters, Lt. Gen. RicardoSanchez (then commander of U.S.operations in Iraq)stated that the military would not reopen the case, and wrote that the"conclusions and findings of the Investigating Officers are sound." Even afterthe Abu Ghraib scandal broke in late April 2004, the military refused to reopenthe investigation. In August 2004, the military again confirmed to Reuters thatthe investigation was closed.On May 11, 2004, the Los Angeles Times published an article by reporter Tracy Wilkinsonincluding allegations of abuse of women detainees at Abu Ghraib. These includedfive women who said they were beaten, one who alleged she was raped, andanother who said she had been forced to take off her clothes in front of maleguards.[35]The allegations were based on the accounts of Iraqi lawyers who visited thedetainees and complained on their behalf. Internal Army documents, disclosedlater in 2004, indicated that an Army Criminal Investigation Command (known as "CID")investigation into the claims was initiated in late May 2004.[36]But the military's own files show that the agents' efforts to investigate theallegations were minimal, and mostly limited to a review of case files orrecords at Abu Ghraib.[37]In fact, officials repeatedly recommended closing the case on the dubiousgrounds that another investigation suggested that two other women detainees atAbu Ghraib were believed to have made false allegations about abuse. The finalinvestigation report closed the case because the investigation "failed toproduce any identifiable subjects, all investigative leads were exhausted inattempts to identify and interview the alleged victims. . . ."[38]Yet there are few signs that leads were pursued let alone exhausted. Accordingto the investigation records, investigators were unable to identify the allegedvictims. But the records show that investigators did not interview TracyWilkinson, the author of the article, or the Iraqi attorneys who visited thedetainees and were identified in the article.According to detainee accounts from Abu Ghraib,a civilian interpreter working for the contractor company Titan raped a juvenilemale detainee at Abu Ghraib in November 2003.[39]These accounts were judged "credible" by, and contained in, the U.S.military's own investigation into the abuses at Abu Ghraib, conducted by MajorGeneral Antonio Taguba and issued in April 2004. A detainee witness toldGeneral Taguba's investigators that he heard and saw a male civilianinterpreter rape a male juvenile detainee, and saw a female U.S. soldier taking pictures. Thedetainee witness identified the civilian as a man named Abu Hamid, of Egyptianethnicity. Hamid's identity as a Titan interpreter is corroborated by themilitary's own criminal investigators as well as by a plaintiff in a U.S.civil suit against Titan.[40]But, according to military records, U.S. criminal investigators "didnot develop sufficient evidence to prove or disprove [the witness']allegations." (The documents also note that the delay in initiation of theinvestigation precluded gathering physical evidence.) An undated email from anFBI official to FBI director Robert Mueller suggests that the investigation mayhave been transferred to the Violent Crimes Section of the Department ofJustice, or alternatively to a Department of Justice task force working in theEastern District of Virginia.[41]DAA Project researchers requested information and updates on this case fromDepartment of Justice officials in April 2006; as of April 14, 2006 they hadreceived no response.The military and Department of Justice have notadequately investigated numerous cases of detainee homicides, as recentlydocumented in a February 2006 report by Human Rights First,[42]including: the December 2005 death of Abu Malik Kenami (also referred to asAbdureda Lafta Abdul Kareem), a 44-year-old Iraqi man, at a U.S. detentionfacility in Mosul, Iraq in December 2003; the November 2003 death of detaineeManadel al-Jamadi, during an interrogation by CIA interrogator Mark Swanner, atthe Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq; and the December 2002 death of an Afghandetainee during a CIA interrogation a facility near Kabul, Afghanistan. (SeeAppendix B.)Numerous abuses allegedly committed at AbuGhraib prison in late 2003 by Steven Stefanowicz, a civilian interrogator thenemployed by the corporation CACI, are documented both in an Army investigationconducted by Maj. Gen. George Fay and other Army documents obtained by HumanRights Watch.[43]Fay's investigation report contains allegations that Stefanowicz conspired withArmy Sgt. Mike Eckroth and dog handler Michael Smith to use dogs to intimidatea detainee during an interrogation on or around December 18, 2003. The Fay Reportconcludes that it is "highly plausible that [Stefanowicz] used dogs withoutauthorization and directed the abuse in this incident as well as others relatedto this detainee" and that "It appeared CIVILIAN-21 [Stefanowicz] wasencouraging and even directing the MP abuse with dogs; likely a 'softening up'technique for future interrogations." The Fay Report details another instancein which "[Stefanowicz] bragged and laughed about shaving a detainee andforcing him to wear red women's underwear." The same detainee told Armyinvestigators that Stefanowicz tied him to his cell window with his handsbehind his back, a position so painful that the detainee lost consciousness.(Charles Graner, himself found guilty of detainee abuse, has testified thatStefanowicz instructed him not to give the same detainee any pain medication,in order to "break" him.) DAA Project researchers asked Department of Justiceofficials about the Stefanowicz case in April 2006, but they refused to confirmwhether it was among Department of Justice detainee abuse cases still beinginvestigated.In December 2002, a CIA officer working at afacility near Kabul, Afghanistan, allegedly ordered an Afghan detainee to bestripped naked, dragged around naked on rocky ground, and then restrainedovernight, naked, in the cold.[44]The detainee died that night-presumably from hypothermia. An internal CIAinvestigation into the death resulted in a criminal referral to the Departmentof Justice, but the Department of Justice has yet to bring criminal charges.The officer implicated in the death was promoted. Department of Justiceofficials refused to provide DAA Project researchers with any details aboutwhether this case was among detainee abuse cases still being investigated.RecommendationsHundreds of credible allegations of abuses against detaineesin U.S.custody abroad have not been adequately investigated or prosecuted.In order to remedy the serious problems documented here, theDAA Project makes the following recommendations:Congress should appoint an independentcommission to review U.S.detention and interrogation operations worldwide in the "war on terror." Such acommission should identify and analyze the systemic failures that have lead towidespread torture and abuse, and make detailed and specific recommendations toensure that reforms are instituted.The Secretary of Defense and Attorney Generalshould order their departments to move forward promptly with investigations of allegationsof torture and other abuse of detainees in U.S. custody abroad, to initiateprosecutions where evidence is uncovered, and to instruct relevant authoritiesto ensure that appropriate criminal action be undertaken against all persons implicatedin killings, torture, and other abuse, whatever their rank or position.The Secretary of Defense should appoint asingle, high-level, centralized convening and prosecuting authority (i.e., asingle authority who can convene and prosecute courts-martial) across thebranches of the military to investigate all U.S. military personnel-no mattertheir rank-who participated in, ordered, or bear command responsibility for warcrimes or torture, or other prohibited mistreatment of detainees in U.S.custody. The creation of this authority should be designed to bring uniformity,certainty, and a greater degree of independent oversight to the process ofdiscipline and punishment in the military; it should allow for investigationsand punishments of abuses at all levels of the military. The Secretary ofDefense should also issue instructions down the military chain of commandspecifying that commanders should not use administrative investigations ornon-judicial hearings for detainee cases in which claims of serious abusesincluding homicide, torture, aggravated assault, or sexual abuse have beensubstantiated.Congress should implement a check on officerpromotions, by requiring that each branch of the military certify, for anyofficer whose promotion requires Senate confirmation, that the officer is notimplicated in any case of detainee torture, abuse, or other mistreatment,including through the doctrine of command responsibility.Appendix A: Chart of Key StatisticsClick to expand Image-Click to expand Image-Click to expand Image-Click to expand Image-Click to expand Image-Click to expand Image-Click to expand Image-Click to expand Image-Click to expand Image-Click to expand Image-Click to expand Image-Click to expand ImageAppendix B: Sample Homicide Cases Documented byHuman Rights FirstInvestigation Problems, Failures to Prosecute and Inappropriate Uses ofNon-judicial PunishmentIn December 2003, Abu Malik Kenami (alsoreferred to as Abdureda Lafta Abdul Kareem), a 44-year-old Iraqi man, died in aU.S. detention facility in Mosul, Iraq.[45]U.S. military personnel whoexamined him when he first arrived at the facility determined that Kenami hadno pre-existing medical conditions. As a disciplinary measure for talking,however, Kenami was required to do extreme amounts of exercise, after which hishands were cuffed behind his back with plastic handcuffs, he was hooded, andwas forced to lie down among other detainees in an overcrowded cell. Kenami wasfound dead the next morning, still bound and hooded. No autopsy was ever conductedin connection with an initial administrative investigation into Kenami's death.Without an autopsy, no official cause of death was determined. An internalreview of the Kenami case was initiated after the Abu Ghraib scandal becamepublic. Army reviewers criticized the initial criminal investigation forfailing to conduct an autopsy, failing to interview the interrogators, medics,or detainees present at the scene of the death, and failing to collect physicalevidence. The Army has taken no punitive or disciplinary action in the case.In November 2003, Mark Swanner, a CIAinterrogator, nine Navy special forces personnel, and a sailor, were implicatedin the interrogation death of a "ghost" detainee named Manadel al-Jamadi at AbuGhraib prison.[46](Pictures of Abu Ghraib personnel Charles Graner and Sabrina Harman posing withal-Jamadi's body were among some of the most notorious of the Abu Ghraibphotographs published in April 2004.) U.S. forces did not releaseal-Jamadi's body to the International Committee of the Red Cross until February11, 2004, more than three months after his death. The ICRC delivered the bodyto Baghdad's mortuary the same day, but anexpert from Baghdad'smain forensic institute said that the refrigeration of al-Jamadi's body for thatperiod made it difficult for the Iraqis to establish the real cause of death byautopsy. An autopsy conducted by the U.S. military five days afteral-Jamadi's death had found that the cause of death was "Blunt Force InjuriesComplicated by Compromised Respiration."[47]Of the ten Navy personnel accusedby prosecutors of being involved in al-Jamadi's death, nine were givennon-judicial punishment, including rank reductions and letters of reprimand. Atenth was acquitted. After an investigation, the CIA referred the case to theDepartment of Justice for possible criminal prosecution of CIA personnelinvolved, but no charges have been brought. DAA Project researchers requestedinformation and updates on the case from Department of Justice officials inApril 2006, but as of April14, 2006, they had received no response.In the first reported death of a detainee in U.S. custody in Afghanistan, occurring in August2002, an Army CID investigation found probable cause to recommend charges ofmurder and conspiracy against four members of a Special Forces unit whocaptured a detainee (a civilian non-combatant) and later shot him.[48]Investigators also recommended dereliction of duty charges against three ofthem and a charge of obstruction of justice against the highest-ranking, acaptain. After consultation with legal advisors, however, commanders decidednot to order a court-martial, and the case was closed. To date, the only actioncommanders have taken in response to the criminal investigators'recommendations is to reprimand the captain for destroying evidence. Thecaptain was disciplined-he had admittedly destroyed evidence-but he receivedonly a letter of reprimand. No further action was taken against the foursoldiers.Sentences in the December 2002 Bagram Homicide CasesThe accountability record has been particularly poor in aset of cases in Afghanistaninvolving two detainees who died at the Bagram airbase in December 2002 aftersuffering extensive beatings and mistreatment by military intelligence andmilitary police. The events surrounding the killings were investigated by Armycriminal investigators, who recommended that at least twenty-seven differentpersonnel, including military police, be criminally charged, both for crimesrelating to the deaths and for other abuses of detainees at Bagram that weredocumented during the investigation.As of April 2006, most of the soldiers and officersimplicated in connection with the killings have avoided punishment, and none ofthe four who have been convicted were sentenced to more than a few months inprison (the sentences were two months, two-and-a-half months, three months, andfive months, respectively).[49]One of the military police not sentenced to prison time gota particularly light sentence: Willie Brand, who admitted to kicking andstriking one of the detainees over thirty times, and who was initially chargedwith homicide and ultimately found guilty of cruelty and maltreatment, assault,maiming, and making a false official statement-crimes that carried a potentialsixteen-year prison sentence-was only punished with a rank reduction andreceived an honorable discharge.[50]Another soldier directly involved in beating the detaineesand found guilty of assault and dereliction of duty was merely fined $1000 (payablein four monthly installments of $250) and given a letter of reprimand.[51]Moreover, though evidence was uncovered during theinvestigation that commanders up the chain of command had authorized harshinterrogation methods at the time of the beatings, no senior officers have evenbeen investigated for criminal liability under the command responsibilitydoctrine. The one officer charged for command failures was charged fordereliction of duty in failing to properly train his troops-and he wasacquitted. No officer has been charged in this case as a principal in thecommission of any crime.[1] Forinformation about secret detention facilities and allegations of tortureoccurring in them, see Human Rights First, "Ending Secret Detentions," June2004, retrieved April 17, 2006, at http://www.humanrightsfirst.org/us_law/PDF/EndingSecretDetentions_web.pdf;Human Rights First, "Behind the Wire," March 2005, retrieved April 17, 2006, athttp://www.humanrightsfirst.org/us_law/PDF/behind-the-wire-033005.pdf; Human RightsWatch "The United States' 'Disappeared': The CIA's Long-Term 'Ghost Detainees,"October 2004, retrieved April 17, 2006, at http://www.hrw.org/backgrounder/usa/us1004/us1004.pdf;see also Human Rights Watch, "List of Ghost Prisoners Possibly in CIA Custody,"November 30, 2005, retrieved April 17, 2006, at http://hrw.org/english/docs/2005/11/30/usdom12109.htm;and NYU Center for Human Rights and Global Justice, "Fate and WhereaboutsUnknown: Detainees in the 'War on Terror,'" December 2005, retrieved April 17,2006, at http://www.nyuhr.org/docs/Whereabouts%20Unknown%20Final.pdf. For ananalysis of the practice and legality of rendition, see NYU Center for HumanRights and Global Justice & New York City Bar Association, "Torture byProxy: International and Domestic Law Applicable to 'Extraordinary Rendition,'"October 2004, at http://www.nyuhr.org/docs/TortureByProxy.pdf; NYU Center forHuman Rights and Global Justice, "Beyond Guantnamo: Transfers to Torture OneYear After Rasul v. Bush," June 2005, at http://www.nyuhr.org/docs/Beyond%20Guantanamo%20Report%20FINAL.pdf.See also Human Rights Watch, "Still at Risk:Diplomatic Assurances No Safeguard Against Torture," April 2005, at http://hrw.org/reports/2005/eca0405/eca0405.pdf;Human Rights Watch, "Black Hole: The Fate of Islamists Rendered to Egypt,"May 2005, at http://hrw.org/reports/2005/egypt0505/egypt0505.pdf.[2]For a description of some of the official military investigations conducted anddiscussion of their shortcomings, see Human Rights First, "Getting to GroundTruth: Investigating U.S. Abuses inthe War on Terror," September 2004, athttp://www.humanrightsfirst.org/us_law/PDF/detainees/Getting_to_Ground_Truth_090804.pdf.[3] SeeHuman Rights First, "Command's Responsibility: Detainee Deaths in U.S. Custodyin Iraq and Afghanistan," February 2006, p. 31, at http://www.humanrightsfirst.info/pdf/06221-etn-hrf-dic-rep-web.pdf[hereinafter Human Rights First, Command'sResponsibility] (discussing the impact of public attention on militaryinvestigations of detainee deaths in U.S. custody). See also "New Detainee Deaths Uncovered in Afghanistan,"Human Rights Watch press releaseand letter to Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, December 13, 2004, at http://hrw.org/english/docs/2004/12/13/afghan9837.htm(information about deaths was updated after media attention to the letter).[4] Projectresearchers made numerous letter, telephone, and e-mail inquiries to militaryand Department of Justice officials requesting information. In a few instances,military public affairs officers provided additional information about specificcases or general information about the military's record of investigating andprosecuting abuse. In most other cases, however, Project researchers were toldthat information requested is unavailable, or that it can only be obtainedunder FOIA.DAA Project Members havefiled FOIA requests connected to several cases reviewed in this report; almostall of these requests are still pending.[5]The Uniform Code of Military Justice is codified at Title 10, Chapter 47 of theU.S. Code (10 U.S.C.801 et seq.) [hereinafter UCMJ]. Crimes punishable underthe UCMJ are found in articles 77134 of the UCMJ (10 U.S.C.877-934). Federalcrimes, applicable to both civilians and military personnel, are codified in Title18 of the U.S. Code ("Crimes and Criminal Procedure").[6]UCMJ arts. 118-119 (homicide), art. 128 (assault), art. 93 (cruelty andmaltreatment), and art. 124 (maiming).[7]18 U.S.C.1111-1112 (homicide), 18 U.S.C.113 (assault), 18 U.S.C.109A(sexual abuse), and 18 U.S.C.2340A (torture).[8]Department of the Army, Criminal Investigative Command (CID), CID Report of InvestigationInitial/FinalSSI0037-04-CID201-54050 (November 16, 2004), pp. 68-69, retrieved April17, 2006, athttp://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/042105/9290_9388.pdf.[9] Thiscount of "investigations" includes both criminal investigations carried out bythe military or Department of Justice and other preliminary administrative ornon-judicial investigations into specific cases conducted by the military.For a description of the different types ofinvestigation that may be conducted by military authorities, see box on"Disciplinary Mechanisms: Criminal and Non-Judicial Proceedings," p. 13.The DAA Project did not count asinvestigations broader inquiries by military officials such as those conductedby Maj. Gen. Antonio Taguba and Gen. Anthony Jones and Gen. George Fay, sincethose inquiries were intended to examine systemic problems and failures indetainee operations and were not mandated to gather facts and evidence aboutparticular cases.See, e.g., Maj. Gen.Antonio Taguba, Article 15-6Investigation of the 800th Military Police Brigade, April 2004, annex 26 [hereinafter Taguba Report] and Gen. Anthony R. Jones, AR 15-6 Investigation of the Abu GhraibPrison and 205th Military Intelligence Brigade and Gen. George R. Fay,AR 15-6Investigation of the Abu Ghraib Detention Facility and 205th MilitaryIntelligence Brigade, August 2004 [hereinafter Fay-Jones Report], retrievedApril 17, 2006, at http://www4.army.mil/ocpa/reports/ar15-6/AR15-6.pdf.[10]As noted in the box "What the Government Says" on page 16, a military PublicAffairs official told DAA researchers in early April 2006 that "there have been85 Courts-Martial" to date, but did not respond to requests for details on thenames of the accused and the allegations that lead to the courts-martial, orprovide an explanation on whether the number refers to courts-martial thatcommanders have ordered or ones that have actually been completed.[11]The numbers of persons who have faced courts-martial or administrativeproceedings should not be directly compared with the overall numbers of cases investigatedbecause many cases involve more than one alleged perpetrator.[12]As noted above, another fifty-seven individuals faced non-judicial punishments.[13]See United States Marine Corps, USMCAlleged Detainee Abuse Cases Since 11 Sep 01, August 5, 2004, retrievedApril 17, 2006, at http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/navy3740.3749.pdf.[14] Seeibid.[15] Fora discussion of the concept of command responsibility in U.S. law, see In ReYamashita, 327, U.S. 1, 16 (1946) and decisions under the Torture VictimProtection Act of 1991 (28 U.S.C.1350) applying the doctrine of commandresponsibility: Hilao v. Estate of Ferdinand Marcos, 103. F. 3d 767, 777-78(9th Cir.1996); Kadic v. Karadzic, 70 F. 3d 232, 239, 242 (2d Cir. 1995); Paulv. Avril, 901 F. Supp. 330, 335 (S.D. Fla.1994); Xuncax v. Gramajo, 886 F. Supp. 162, 171-172 (D. Mass. 1995). In a recent decision, Ford v.Garcia, 289 F. 3d 1283 (11th Cir. 2002), family members of victims ofatrocities committed by members of the Salvadoran National Guard filed a casein a Florida federal court against a general and the former minister ofdefense. The judge directed that the two generals could be held responsible forthe crimes of their subordinates if the defendants were in "effective command"and if they "knew or should have known" that persons under their effectivecommand were committing such crimes.[16] TimGolden, "Years After 2 Afghans Died, Abuse Case Falters," New York Times, February 13, 2006.[17]Marty Graham, "U.S. Navy commandocleared in Abu Ghraib case," Reuters, May 27 2005.[18]One case involved Lieutenant Jack Saville, who ordered troops to throw twoIraqi detainees into the TigrisRiver (one drowned);Saville was sentenced to 2 months of prison time. See "U.S. soldier gets 45 days for Iraqi assaults," Reuters,March 15 2005.The second case involvedCapt. Shawn Martin, who was convicted of three counts of assault againstdetainees, including two assaults he carried out himself and a case in which heordered a detainee to dig his own grave and then fired shots next to thedetainees head in a mock execution. Martin was sentenced to 45 days prison timeand a fine of $1,000 per month for twelve months. See Erin Emery, "Officer sentenced to prison Convicted Armycaptain gets 45 days, cut in salary,"Denver Post, March 18, 2005. The third case involved Maj. ClarkePaulus, who was convicted of ordering troops to drag a detainee out of his cellby his neck, strip him naked and leave him outside; Paulus was not sentenced toprison time but simply discharged from the military.See Seth Hettena,"Marine is sentenced in abuse of Iraqiprisoner," Associated Press, November 12, 2004.[19]See preceding note.[20]For details on regulations governing criminal and administrativeinvestigations, see Army Regulation 15-6, Procedure for Investigating Officersand Board of Officers, September 30, 1996, retrieved April 17, 2006, at http://www.usma.edu/EO/regspubs/r15_6.pdf;Department of the Army, AdministrativePublications, 195 Series Collection, retrievedApril 17, 2006, at http://www.army.mil/usapa/epubs/195_Series_Collection_1.html.For additional information, see Human Rights First, Command's Responsibility, p. 30 and fns. 429-441. A criminalinvestigation is required after the death of any detainee in U.S. custody.[21]As noted in Command's Responsibility,p. 30, administrative investigations, unlike criminal investigations, can onlybe used to investigate an incident or individual within the appointingcommander's chain of command. In other words, investigators cannot investigatewrongdoing at the level of, or higher than, the commander who initiated theinvestigation.[22]See RCM 306.[23]See ibid. If a commander orders a general court-martial, a pre-trial hearingmust be held (known as an article 32 hearing, roughly similar to a civiliangrand jury).[24]UCMJ art. 15.[25]See UCMJ arts. 18-20.[26]See RCM 201(f)(2) and RCM 1301(d)(1).[27]See UCMJ, art. 15.[28]See ibid. See also Rules for Courts-Martial (RCM) [hereinafter RCM], 306(c)(3),contained in the U.S. Manual for Courts-Martial (MCM), United States (2005 ed.)[hereinafter MCM]; and MCM pt. V,5(b).[29] The DAA Project identified 57 casesin which non-judicial article 15 hearings were used, and at least twenty othercases in which other administrative disciplinary measures were imposed. Militarypublic affairs officials told DAA Project researchers in April 2006 that themilitary has used non-judicial punishments against ninety-three personnel, butit is unclear which of these cases overlap with the cases recorded by Projectresearchers, because military officials have refused to identify the casesindividually. See box on page 16,"Whatthe Government Says."[30]See Department of the Army, CID, CIDReport of Investigation, January 30, 2004, retrieved April 17, 2006, at http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/28TF.pdf.[31]See Fay-Jones Report, case No. 2,p. 71. See also Department of the Army, CommandersReport of Discplinary or Adminstrative Action and Army Investigation (documents), retrieved April 17, 2006, at http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/22TFa.pdf(commander's report) and http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/22TFb.pdf(investigation notes). See also, Elise Ackerman, "Abu Ghraib InterrogatorsInvolved in Afghan Case," Knight-Ridder, August 22, 2004.[32]This figure was provided by Army Public Affairs officials in e-mails to Projectresearchers in April 2006.[33] Seeletter from William E. Moschella, Assistant Attorney General, to SenatorRichard Durbin, January 17, 2006, retrieved April 17, 2006, at http://www.aclu.org/images/asset_upload_file606_23910.pdf.[34]The description of this case is based on multiple sources, including:interviews with Salem Ureibi, Ahmad Mohammad Hussein al-Badrani, and SattarJabar al-Badrani, by Reuters correspondent AndrewMarshall, Baghdad, January 8, 2004; Human Rights Watchinterview with Salem Ureibi, Baghdad, March 22, 2006; U.S. Army, "Reuters/NBCEmployee Detention" (Unclassified Executive Summary), January 29, 2004; Letterfrom David Schlesinger (Reuters Global Managing Editor) to Lawrence Di Rita(special assistant to the secretary of defense), February 3, 2004; letter fromLt. Gen. Ricardo Sanchez to David Schlesinger, March 5, 2004.[35]Tracy Wilkinson, "A Double Ordeal for Female Detainees," Los Angeles Times, May 11, 2004, p. A1.[36]Army Criminal Investigative Command investigation notes and memorandum on the Los Angeles Times case, April-August2004, retrieved April 17, 2006, at http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/1209_1247.pdf.[37]See ibid. The investigators' efforts, with few exceptions, appear to have beenfocused on recording these few investigatory efforts made and then recommendingthe case be closed. A June23, 2004 investigation report noted that the female attorneymentioned in the Los AngelesTimes article visited Abu Ghraib inMarch 2004, interviewed five detainees, and reviewed the files for those fivedetainees. (It is unclear why agents assumed this visit, in March 2004, wouldhave bearing on the allegations, which were reportedly raised by detainees inMay 2004.) The investigation report concluded: "This office coordinated withthe originating Case Agent, who advised to close this RFA." A month later, anotation dated July 20, 2004, reads: "Pending one coordination w/[ith] Mr. []to locate Ms. []. If he is unable to locate her, then close this down. Allfemales except for two, who we already titled for False Swearing in0106-04-[illegible], have been released. According to their custom, the femalesare forbidden to discuss these allegations." On August 3, 2004, another entrycited the failure to locate the victims and the allegation that two other womenhad, according to investigators, been found to have made false allegations, andconcluded: "close this." The files discuss the fact that another investigationidentified a separate sexual abuse claim, but no further efforts to investigatethe case appear to have been made. The notes contain additional notations abouthow the limited steps already taken should be better documented, and then onAugust 26, 2004, the case is closed.[38]Department of the Army, CID, CID Reportof InvestigationFinal (C)/SSI-0123-04-CID259-80248 (Aug. 26, 2004),retrieved April 17, 2006, at http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/1209_1247.pdf.[39]For details about this case, see the Taguba Report, annex 26; and records ofArmy criminal investigators released under FOIA litigation, retrieved April 17,2006, at http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/FBI.121504.4311.pdf and http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/294_334.pdf.See also, Joel Brinkley, "9/11 Set Army Contractor on Path to Abu Ghraib," New York Times, May 19, 2004, p. A13; JoelBrinkley, "Translator Questioned by Army in Iraq Abuse," New York Times, May 23, 2004, p. A12; Osha Gray Davidson, "Contractto Torture," Salon.com, August 9, 2004[online], retrieved April 17, 2006, at: http://dir.salon.com/story/news/feature/2004/08/09/abu_ghraib/index.html.[40]See Second Amended Complaint, Saleh v. Titan Corp, No. 04 CV 1143 (U.S. District Court for theSouthern District of California, filed July 30, 2005), retrieved April 17,2006, at http://www.ccr-ny.org/v2/legal/docs/Saleh%20v%20Titan%20Corp%20Second%20Amended%20Complaint.pdf.[41]Email message from FBI official Chris Swecker to FBI Director Robert Mueller,retrieved April 17, 2006, at http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/FBI_4882_4885.pdf.[42] HumanRights First, Command's Responsibility.[43] Informationhere is derived from the Fay-JonesReport, cases No. 15, 24 and 25; and from un-redacted documents from theFay-Jones investigation with the names of implicated personnel, on file withHuman Rights Watch.[44]For details about the case discussed here, see Dana Priest, "CIA AvoidsScrutiny of Detainee Treatment," WashingtonPost, March 3, 2005.[45]Department of the Army, AR15-6 Investigation Into the Death of Abu Malik Kenami (Dec. 28, 2003), p.2, retrieved April 17, 2006, at http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/032505/1281_1380.pdf;Dep't of the Army, CID, CID Report ofInvestigationFinal0140-03-CID389-61697-5H9B (Jan. 1, 2004), p. 1, retrievedApril 17, 2006, at http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/DOA_1206_1234.pdf.[46]"Ghost" detainees are those who were held off the books and hidden from theInternational Committee of the Red Cross. For details about the case discussedhere, see Human Rights First, Command'sResponsibility, p. 11. See also Jane Mayer, "A Deadly Interrogation," TheNew Yorker, November 14, 2005; John McChesney, "The Death of an IraqiPrisoner," All Things Considered, National Public Radio broadcast, October 27, 2005;Douglas Jehl and Tim Golden, "CIA is Likely to Avoid Charges in Most PrisonerDeaths," New York Times, October 23, 2005, p. A6; David S. Cloud, "NavyOfficer Found Not Guilty in Death of an Iraqi Prisoner," New York Times,May 28, 2005, p. A6; David S. Cloud, "SEAL Officer Hears Charges in CourtMartial in Iraqi's Death," New York Times, May 25, 2005, p. A6; Seth Hettena, "Iraqi Died While Hung From Wrists," Associated Press, February 17,2005; Seth Hettena, "Navy SEAL: CIARoughed Up Iraqi Prisoner," Associated Press, November 1, 2004; Office of theArmed Forces Medical Examiner, FinalAutopsy Report, Autopsy No. ME03-504, January 9, 2004), [hereinafterAutopsy, al-Jamadi], p. 85, retrieved April 17, 2006, at http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/041905/m001_203.pdf.[47]Autopsy, al-Jamadi, p. 85.[48]For details about the case discussed here, see Human Rights First, Command's Responsibility, p. 11;Department of the Army, CID, Criminal Investigative Command Report ofInvestigationFinal (C)/SSI-0114-02-CID369-23525 -5H1A (May 23, 2003), Part1, retrieved April 17, 2006, athttp://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/745_814.pdf, and Part 4, retrievedApril 17, 2006, at http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/908_963.pdf. Seealso John J. Lumpkin, "Army Overturns Afghan Death Finding," Associated Press,January 24, 2005.[49]This case is discussed in more detail in Human Rights First, Command's Responsibility, pp. 14-15.[50]See ibid.[51] See"A Look at the Soldiers Charged in the Afghanistan Abuse Investigation," AssociatedPress, October 5, 2005.Related ContentApril 26, 2006News ReleaseU.S.: More Than 600 Implicated in Detainee AbuseInvestigations Lag Two Years After Abu Ghraib PhotosApril 26, 2006News ReleaseU.S.: More Than 600 Implicated in Detainee AbuseRegion / CountryAsia,Middle East/North Africa,United States,Afghanistan,Iraq,US Foreign PolicyProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3)nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch