Submitted via Federal eRulemaking Portal  
 
October 23 , 2020  
 
Lauren Alder Reid, Assistant Director  
Office of Policy  
Executive Office for Immigration Review  
5107 Leesburg Pike, Suite 2616  
Falls Church, VA 22041  
 
RE: Public Comment Opposing  Proposed Rule  on Procedures for Asylum and Withholding 
of Removal RIN 1125 -AA93; EOIR Docket No. 19 -0010; A.G. Order No.  4843 -2020   
  
Dear Ms. Alder Reid : 
 
The Center for Victims of Torture  (CVT)  respectfully submit s this comment in opposition to  the 
Proposed Rule by the Department of Justice (DOJ) on Procedures for Asylum and Withholding 
of Removal, EOIR Docket No. 19 -0010 published on September 23, 2020.  
 
The Proposed R ule does not provide adequate time to comment given the  substantial changes i t 
would enact to the procedures for asylum and withholding of removal, and the myriad  of serious 
consequences that could flow from those changes.  However, it is clear that the Proposed Rule 
would  undermine due process by taking away asylum seekers’ fair opportunity to demonstrate 
their status as  refugees before an immigration judge , and would do so by burdening  asylum 
seekers in ways  wholly unrelated to the merits of their claims . In so doing , the Proposed Rule 
risks survivors of torture –who comprise a shocking percentage of the U.S. refuge e and asylum 
seeking populations –being returned to danger  in violation of U.S. legal obligations.   
 
The DOJ should immediately withdraw its  current proposal and dedicate  its efforts to advancing 
policies that safeguard individuals fleeing persecution, including torture.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit comments on this Proposed Rule. Please do not hesita te 
to contact us with any questions or for further information.  
 
Andrea Carcamo /s/                Scott Roehm /s/                                                              
Senior Policy Counsel                                    Washington Director  
acarcamo@cvt.org                                         sroehm@cvt.org   
 DETAILED COMMENTS in Opposition to Proposed Rule  on Procedures for Asylum and 
Withholding of Removal RIN 1125 -AA93; EOIR Docket No. 19 -0010; A.G. Order No. 
4843 -2020.  
 
The Center for Victims of Torture (CVT) welcomes the opportunity to comment on the  proposed 
rule titled  “Procedures for Asylum and Withhold ing of Removal ,” RIN 1125 -AA93; EOIR 
Docket No. 19 -0010;  (“Proposed Rule,” or “ Rule”).  
 
Founded in 1985 as an independent, non -governmental organization, CVT is the largest 
organization of its kind in the world. Through programs operating in the U.S., the Middle East, 
and Africa – involving psychologists, social workers, physical therapists, physicians, 
psychiatrists, and nurses – CVT annually rebuilds the live s and restores the hope of nearly 
30,000 primary and secondary survivors of torture, other gross human rights violations, and 
severe war -related trauma. The vast majority of CVT’s clients in the United States are asylum 
seekers.  
CVT also conducts research, tra ining and advocacy, with each of those programs rooted in 
CVT’s healing services. The organization’s policy advocacy leverages the expertise of five 
stakeholder groups: survivors, clinicians, human rights lawyers, operational/humanitarian aid 
providers, an d foreign policy experts. CVT helps organize a network of torture treatment 
programs focused on rebuilding the lives of survivors of torture across the nation. These 
programs serve primarily asylum seekers, asylees, and refugees.    
 
I. Background  
 
On September 23, 2020 the Executive Office for Immigration Review (EOIR) (a component of 
DOJ) published the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking that is the subject of this commen t. Through 
substantial changes to the procedures for asy lum and withholding of removal the Proposed Rule 
would deny  asylum seekers and others facing danger a fair opportunity to present their claims. 
More specifically , the rule  proposes the following regulatory changes:    
 
First, the Proposed Rule would amend the filing deadline for asylum applicants in asylum -and-
withholding -only proceedings.  In revising 8 CFR 1208.2(c) , DOJ would add a 1 5-day deadline 
from the date of asylum seeker s’ first hearing to file an application for asylum and withholding 
of removal . The current system allows immigration judges to set these deadlines  based on each 
applicant’s unique  situation .  
 
Second, the Proposed Rule would require that asylum seekers re -file inc omplete applications 
with EOIR . Through  revis ions to  8 CFR 1208.3(c)(3) , DOJ would remove the current provision 
that an asylum seeker’s incomplete asylum application submitted by mail will be deemed 
complete if the immigration court fails to return the application within 30 days of receipt.  Instead, the Proposed Rule requir es immigration courts to reject all incomplete applications and 
return them to the applicants in a timely fashion. The Rule w ould also add a maximum of 30 
days for the asylum seeker to correct any deficiencies in his or her application, failure of which 
can lead to the denial of the application.   
 
Third, the Proposed Rule would give guidance to immigration judges as to what type s of 
evidence they are allowed to consider and would allow them to submit evidence.  In this Rule the 
DOJ clarifies what are the  “external materials upon which an immigration judge may rely… and 
proposes to revise the standard for an immigration judge’s con sideration of information from 
non-governmental sources to ensure that only probative and credible evidence is considered.” By 
revising 8 CFR 1208.12 the DOJ would allow an immigration judge to submit evidence into the 
record and consider that evidence .        
 
Fourth, the Proposed Rule would limit the duration of an immigration case to 180 days from the 
date the asylum and/or withholding of removal application was filed . The DOJ argues that  
Congress intended asylum cases to last 180 days based on INA 208(d)((7) and INA 208(d)(2). 
To warrant an extension, asylum seekers will have to show “exceptional circumstances,”  a 
burden beyond the “good cause ” standard they must meet now.        
 
If the Rule were to take effect as proposed, it would almost certainly lead to the denial of 
protection for asylum seekers, survivors of torture , and other s fleeing persecution  for reasons 
wholly unrelated t o the validity of their claim.  
 
II. The Proposed R ule is Part of a Larger Scheme to End Asylum  
 
Through the establishment of policies, agreements, and dubious unilateral changes to well-settled 
asylum law, it is clear that the Trump administration seeks to prevent individuals  from accessing 
the U.S. asylum process at all, much less actually obtaining asylum. The  actions  below  form the 
backdrop to the Proposed Rule and include the following:   
 
Barring asylum on national security and health grounds: On July 9, 2020 DHS and DOJ 
proposed  a joint  rule to bar  asylum seekers and others in search of protection  from asylum  based 
on the likelihood they might have a disea se. This determination would be made by someone 
lacking medical training and will preclude from protection asylum seekers that fall ill from 
COVID -19 while awaiting an asylum hearing while in the U.S.  
 
Proposed rule dismantling asylum : On June 15, 2020 the DHS and DOJ proposed  jointly a rule 
that gives rise to the most sweeping changes to asylum since the 1996 overhaul of the 
Immigration and Nationality Act through the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigration Responsibility Act (IIRIRA ). It severely limits the number of individuals who will qualify for 
asylum , which will lead  to the removal of survivors of torture and other trauma.    
 
Blanket ban for asylum seekers at the borders: On March 19, 2020 the Centers for Disease 
Control and P revention (CDC) issued an order allowing the closure of the U.S. borders using 
COVID -19 as a public health justification.  The order allows DHS to remov e those seeking 
protection at the border and between ports of entry  without implementing a procedure to 
determine whether they might qualify for humanitarian protection.    
 
Changing asylum immigration  case law: The attorney general certified to himself several 
immigration court cases and decided them in a way that upends longstanding law. In overruling 
Matter of A -B- and Matter of L -E-A-, the attorney general made it significantly more difficult 
for individuals from Central America to win their asylum cases, since they largely rely on these 
two cases.  
 
Zero tolerance leading to family separation:  The adm inistration adopted a policy of pursuing 
criminal charges against every  individual , including asylum seekers,  who crossed the border 
outside of a port of entry, then forcibly separated children from the parents who were subjected 
to criminal proceedings. F amily separation was a cruel practice  that will have long lasting 
consequences for  children,  asylum seekers and  the United States.1 
 
Asylum ban 1.0:  In November 2018, the president issued a proclamation banning individuals 
who enter the United States betwe en ports of entry from asylum , currently subject to an 
injunction .2 
 
Migrant Protection Protocols:  Established in January 2019, this policy forces asylum seekers 
to wait in dangerous Mexican border cities during the pendency of their cases. Besides placing 
asylum seekers in danger, it undermines their ability to obtain assistance of counsel, greatly 
diminishing their ability to win their case.3   
 
Asylum ban 2.0:  In July 2019, the administration disqualified from asylum any individual who 
transited through a third country before arriving at the United States southern border. This 
                                                           
1 See Center for Victims of Torture, 8 Facts about Refugees and Asylum Seekers , Fact 4 , 
https://www.cvt.org/AsylumFact4  
2 See White House,  [Individuals] Subject to a Bar on Entry Under Certain Presidential Proclamations; Procedures 
for P rotection Claims , https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2018/11/09/2018 -24594/aliens -subject -to-a-bar-
on-entry -under -certain -presidential -proclamations -procedures -for-protection  
3 See Human Rights First. Delivered to Danger: Illegal Remain in Mexico Policy Imperils Asylum Seekers’ Lives 
and Denies Due Process , https://www.humanrightsfirst.org/sites/default/files/Delivered -to-Danger -August -
2019%20.pdf   disqualifies all but Me xican asylum seekers arriving at our southern border from asylum , and the 
rule is subject to an injunction .4 
 
Agreements with other countries:  The Trump administration has forced some countries  that are 
not safe  into entering into “safe third country” agreements —from which people are fleeing 
viole nce and persecution that these countries’ governments cannot, or will not, effectively 
address —including El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras.     
 
Fees for asylum seekers: The administration has finalized a rule creating fees for asylum 
applications and i nitial work authorizations for asylum seekers.  Although there has been an 
injunction on this rule, implementation was scheduled for  October  2020 , and asylum seekers will 
have to pay $50 to submit an asylum application and $550 for their initial work authorization.   
 
Work authorization restrictions: The administration recently  finalized a rule that  doubles the 
time an asylum seeker must wait before qua lifying for a work permit (from 150  days to 365 
days) and imposes additional restrictions on eligibility. Yet a nother final rule  eliminates entirely 
the time limit previously imposed on USCIS to adjudicate work authorization applications, 
which implicitly authorizes the agency to delay any such adjudication indefinitely.     
 
III. A 30-day Comment Period  Does not Give the Public  Sufficient Time to Provide  
Diverse,  Evidence -Based  Feedback   
 
Under the Administrative Procedures Act, federal  agencies have a duty: “(1) to ensure that 
agency regulations are tested via exposure to diverse public comment, (2) to ensure fairness to 
affected parties, and (3) to give affected parties an opportunity to develop evidence in the record 
to support their objections to the rule and thereby enhance the quality of judicial review.”5  
 
Over the past several months, the Department of Justice, and in some instances the Department 
of Homeland Security, have been frantically  rewriting the rules on which noncitizen s and their 
counsel have relied for decades without giving adequate opportunity for thoughtful comments, or 
considered review of those comments by the agencies. For this procedural reason alone, we urge 
the administration to rescind the Proposed Rule. If  it wishes to reissue the proposed regulations, 
it should wait until it has finalized (or withdrawn) overlapping proposed rules that are still 
pending, and then grant the public at least 60 days to have adequate time to provide 
comprehensive comments.  For example, this Rule  does not take into account the final rule on  
                                                           
4 See Asylum Eligibility and P rocedural Modifications, A Rule by  the Homeland  Security  Department  and 
the Executive  Office  for Immigration  Review  on 07/16/2019,  
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2019/07/16/2019 -15246/asylum -eligibility -and-procedural -
modifications  
5 Capital Area Immigrants’ Rights Coalition (CAIR) v. Trump , No. 19 -cv-2117, ECF No. 72, 24 -25 (D.D.C. June 30, 
2020) (internal citations omitted).  asylum employment authorization document (EAD), which prohibit s asylum seekers from 
applying for an EAD until 365 days after their asylum application has been pending. 8 CFR § 
208.7(a)(ii). The overlap of that rule with the currently Proposed Rule would mean that asylum 
seekers who file defensive asylum applications woul d not be authorized to work until after there 
is a decision on their application, thereby making it much less likely that they could afford 
counsel for their individual hearing, and interfering with their statutory right to representation. 
See INA § 292.  Further, t he Rule  issued on June 15, 2020 titled “Procedures for Asylum and 
Withholding of Removal; Credible Fear and Reasonable Fear Review” 85 Fed. Reg. 36264 (June 
15, 2020), proposed the most sweeping changes to asylum eligibility since the 1996 Illegal 
Immigration Ref orm and Immigrant Responsibility Act. Without knowing how the agencies may 
alter that proposed rule based on the 88,933 comments they received,6 it is impossible to 
adequately comment on the current Proposed Rule. 
 
The Proposed  Rule will have the effec t of denying protection to asylum seekers with valid 
claims, which will lead to the return to danger, torture, and/or death  of individuals seeking 
protection.  Despite the catastrophic effect this could have for those seeking asylum,  DOJ has 
given no reason for allowing only 30 days for the pu blic to submit comments on these 
considerable changes to asylum procedures  rather than the customary 60 -day comment period. 
The shortened comment period presents particular challenges given that the United States 
continues to be in the midst of an unprecedented pandemic, forcing many members of the public, 
including government workers, to work from home and balance childcare and other 
extraordinary obligations with work activities.  The public shou ld be given adequate time to 
consider these dramatic revisions to existing law to provide thoughtful and well -researched 
comments.  
 
IV. The Substance of  the Proposed Rule Will Curtail Due Process  for Asylum 
Seekers and Result in the  Return of Refugees  to Danger, Torture, and D eath.    
Although we object to the agency’s unfair 30 -day deadline for submit ting comment on the 
Proposed Rule, we submit this comment  nonetheless  because we are compelled to object to 
policies and practices  which would greatly reduce the rights of asylum seekers7 appearing before 
EOIR , and would result in the wrongful removal of bona fide asylum seekers to the countries 
they fled where they would likely face further persecuti on or even death.  Any omission in 
discussing specific provisions does not mean we agree with them.    
 
                                                           
6 See Federal Registrar, Procedures for Asylum and Withholding of Removal; Credible Fear and Reasonable Fear 
Review , https://www.regulations.gov/ document?D=EOIR -2020 -0003 -0001 .  
7 To the ex tent that this comment addresses issues that affect applicants for asylum, withholding of removal and 
protection under the Convention Against Torture, it will use the term “asylum seekers” to mean applicants for all of 
these forms of protection.  a. The Proposed Rule Does Away with Due P rocess  for the Sake of  Speedy 
Adjudications  
Judges are best positioned to create timelines for each of the asylum requests before them, a s 
they are most familiar with individual  cases and their own dockets.  This rule imposes a cookie -
cutter approach to all asylum cases by dictating how judges should manage their dockets, 
without considering the realities asylum seeke rs and survivors of torture are exposed to  and with 
which most immigration judges  are familiar .   
i. A 15 -day Deadline A fter a First Immigration Hearing to File an 
Asylum Application  will Result in Refugees  Being Returned  to Danger    
Proposed 8 CFR § 1208.4(d) would impose a 15-day deadline for asylum seekers to file an 
asylum application after their first master calendar hearing.  Often, asylum applicants first hear 
they can hire an attorney to help them in their case and are provided with a list of pro -bono 
resources  at their first  master calendar hearing.  CVT clinicians have explained that their clients 
often have to wait several weeks before they can schedule an initial consult  with a legal service 
provider.  Indeed, pro-bono service providers are  often  unable to provide an initial consult  within 
the prop osed time -period, much less to sign a retainer and file an asylum application for a new 
client  within the  proposed  15-day timeline . For years  immigration j udges have allowed asylum 
seekers additional time, as they understand and recognize the di fficulties in obtaining counsel. 
Immigration judges experience first -hand how  critical  it is for  asylum seekers to have counsel for  
a fair chance at presenting their case . In fact,  data shows that a sylum seekers  might be  5 times 
more likely to be successful in their claims  when represented by an attorney .8 The effect of the 
rule will be that more asylum seekers will represent themselves. Pro se representation in a field  
as complex as  immigration law , coupled with the Proposed Rule’s unreasonable requirement  that 
an application must  essentially  be technically perfect,  will undoubtedly lead  many asylum 
seekers  with valid claims to miss th eir filing deadline and be returned to the country where they 
fear persecution and torture.  
 
Unsurprisingly , the admin istration  does not seem to have  considered that its June 15, 2020  rule, 
see 85 Fed. Reg. 36264,  would place  all asylum seekers who have gone through the cr edible fear 
process into asylum  and withholding -only proceedings, making them subject to the 15 -day filing 
deadline . In 2018, DHS found a credible fear in 74,287 cases it heard.9 Thus, tens of thousands 
of asylum seekers would be subject to the new 15 -day deadline. Yet the Rule contains no 
explanation as to how the administration will address the stress this will cause on the need for 
counsel , or court operations.  This is consistent with our concern above regarding the reckless 
                                                           
8 See American Immigration Council, Access to Counsel in Immigration Court at 
https://www.americanimmigrationcouncil.org/research/access -counsel -immigration -court   
9 See DHS, Credible Fear Cases Completed and Referrals for Credible Fear Inte rview , www.dhs.gov/ immigration -
statistics/ readingroom/ RFA/ credible -fear-cases -interview .  imposition of rule after rule by this administration without first understanding the effect of the 
previous  ones.  
ii. A 180-day Deadline for J udges to Adjudicate Asylum Cases  will 
Result in Some Asylum Seeker’ s Inability to Present an Adequate  
Case   
Through interpretation of sections 8 CFR §§ 1003.10(b), 1003.29, 1003.31, and 1240.6  the Rule  
would require immigration judges to complete asylum cases within 180 days after the as ylum 
application is filed , unless the respondent can demonstrate “exceptional cir cumstances. ”  
 
The Rule’s 180-day deadline raises serious practical and due process concerns –whether it  is 
applied  to all pending cases or prospectively only . Asylum seekers face serious due process 
concerns if their cases are scheduled too  quickly for them to adequately prepare, and equally 
serious concerns if their cases languish so long that evidence becomes stale and memories fade .10 
If this aspect of the Rule applies to pending cases , the courts would be overwhelmed, and 
practitioners who have caseloads of, in some instances, hundreds of asylum cases with individual 
hearing dates scheduled years in advance, would be forced to choose between withdrawing from 
cases or providing inadequa te representation. On the other hand, if EOIR applies the Rule 
prospectively, EOIR would essentially recreate the “Last In, First Out” policy that the Asylum 
Offices use. Those who would file asylum cases after the Rule is published would have to go 
forw ard on their applications, in many cases before they are ready to do so. At the same time, 
asylum seekers whose cases have already been languishing in the EOIR backlog  would  have to 
wait even longer . For many who want to obtain asylum to bring family who are still in danger in 
their country of origin, this wait is already devastating. In fact, the healing of many of CVT’s 
clients is hindered by their inability to reunite with  their family  due to  the long waits in the 
affirmative asylum process . 
 
Although currently immigration judges grant continuances for “good cause ” shown  regardless of 
the number of days after the initial application for asylum ,11 the Rule prohibits  immigration 
                                                           
10 See, Southern Poverty Law Center and Innovation Law Lab,  The Attorney  General's Judges How The U.S. 
Immigration Courts Became A Deportation Tool  at 20 (June 2019), www.splcenter.org/ sites/ default/ files/
com_policyreport_the_attorney_generals_judges_final.pdf , (“‘arbitrary prioritizations wreak havoc on case 
management,’ giving so -called ‘priority’ cases inadequate time to prepare while further extending the backlog for 
pending cases that may ha ve been waiting for years.’”)  
11 The attorney general has already substantially limited the definition of “good cause” for continuing cases in 
Matter of L -A-B-R-, 27 I& N Dec. 405 (A.G. 2018) while DOJ has imposed performance metrics that give 
immigration judges a financial incentive to complete cases quickly. See, Judge A. Ashley Tabaddor, President 
National Association of Immigration Judges, Testimony Before the Senate Judiciary Committee, Border Security 
and Immigration Subcommittee Hearing on “Strengthening and Reforming America’s Immigration Court System”  
(Apr. 18, 2018), www.judiciary.senate.gov/ imo/media/ doc/04-18-18%20Tabaddor%20Testimony.pdf  (“production 
quotas and time -based deadlines violate a fundamental canon of judicial ethics which requires a judge to recuse 
herself in any matter in which she has a financial interest that could be affected substantially by the outcome of the 
proceeding.”)  judge s from  granting a continuance under this threshold  if doing so would push the end of the 
case beyond the 180 -day mark. The Proposed Rule would demand that  applicants  demonstrate 
that there are  “exceptional circumstances” warrant ing an extension  if the request for a 
continuance would set the case to end beyond 180 d ays from the filing of the asylum application .  
Although INA § 208(d)(5)(ii) does not define the term “exceptional circumstances,” EOIR giv es 
examples of qualifying circumstances that would rarely be met  – “such as battery or extreme 
cruelty to the alien or any child or parent of the alien, serious illness of the alien, or serious 
illness or death of the spouse, child, or paren t of the alien, but not including less compelling 
circumstances.” Proposed 8 CFR § 1003.10(b).  The asylum application process as it stands is re -
traumatizing for applicants as they have to repeatedly recount, explain, defend and try to “prove’ 
their traumat ic experiences.  The need to show “exceptional circumstances” to obtain additional 
time might lead survivors to internalize the expectation that only through continued suffering 
will they receive support, which is likely to cause helplessness and generalized fear.  
 
This Rule would  also take away immigration judges’ ability to make decisions about indivi dual 
cases  based  on the unique circumstances each asylum seeker  experiences . It would  prohibit  the 
judge  from using  his or her discretion to allow  additional time to the applicant based on the 
judge’s  knowledge of immigrati on law and what it takes to provide  a fair opportunity for relief.  
There are many factors that could impact an  asylum seeker ’s ability to have a meaningful  
opportunity to present their case  within 180 days of filing their asylum application , includi ng 
lack of funds  and opportunity  to secure an attorney, lack of evidence  from their home country , 
inability to provide certain facts due to  the trauma suffered , or their situation at home . In fact, 
many of CVT’s clients depend on mental health counseling to manage anxiety and depression 
symptoms that may otherwise hinder their ability to navigate through the asylum process , and 
some  are waiting to receive critical documentati on from abroad.  
Amanda McDonald, MSW, LICSW  at CVT explains that :  
 
Occasionally  client s live  with relative s or hosts who prevent them  from leaving the house 
and control their  activities .  Clients often don’t have access to a computer or free use of a 
phone and therefore ca nnot ap ply for asylum nor can they  look for an attorney.  
 
b. Immigration Judge s will Cease to be  Impartial Part ies  
The Proposed Rule would severely l imit immigration judge s’ ability to consider country 
conditions evidence submitted by asylum seekers while a llowing immigration j udge s to compile 
and introduce their own evidence, shifting the role of immigration j udge s from adjudicators to 
prosecutors .  
The Proposed Rule imposes a bifurcated standard for supporting documentation about country 
conditions: the immigration judge “may rely” on evidence that comes from U.S. government 
sources but can only rely on non-governmental sources or foreign government  sources  “if those sources are determined by the immigration judge to be credible and probative.” The proposal to 
direct immigration judges to give  considerably  more weight to U.S. government documents is  
especially  concerning  under th e Trump  administration  given its at tempts “to change or suppress 
intelligence reports that contradi cted their immigration policy initia tives on the Mexico -U.S. 
border and Central American migrants.”12 Political appointees in the Trump administration “are 
willing to go to hide fa cts or outright lie to the American people to support its cruel –and in 
several ways illegal –immigration policy.”13 A DHS whistleblower recently filed a report 
accusing senior DHS officials of asking him to change reports about “corruption, violence, and 
poor economic conditions” in Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador that would “undermine 
President Donald J. Trump’s (“ President Trump”) policy objectives with respect to asylum.”14 A 
recent report also found that a “Comparative Analysis of U.S. Department of State Country 
Reports on Human Rights Practices identified serious omissions of human rights issues and 
inadequately  substantiated reports of improvements .”15 Non-governmental organizations –whose 
evidence the immigration judge could only consider after it has been found to be “credible and 
probative” –have likewise found that  the State Department  reports are subject to political 
pressure.16 Thus, if the Rule were implemented, immigration judges could be required to  rely on 
information that  was manufactured to carry out the Trump administration ’s immigration policies 
of keeping immigrants out, regardless of their need for protection. This takes away a fair 
opportunity for asylum seeker s to present real facts on their claim, and undermines our 
democracy.   
 
By allowing judges to introduce their  own evidence into the record, the Proposed R ule would 
fundamentally alter the role o f the judge . The only procedural safeguard the Proposed Rule 
would provide is that the immigration judge would have to provide “a copy of the evidence . . . 
to both part ies and both parties have had an opportunity to comment on or object to the evidence 
prior to the issuance of the immigration judge’s decision .” [Emphasis added.] Thus, although the 
asylum seeker and DHS are required by the Immigration Court Procedures Manual to submit 
evidence at least 15 days before the hearing,17 the immigration judge would be allowed to submit 
                                                           
12 See Just S ecurity , Whistleblower: DHS  Suppressed Reports on Central America and Inflated Risk of Terrorist 
Border -Crossers . https://www.justsecu rity.org/72451/whistleblower -dhs-suppressed -reports -on-central -america -
and-inflated -risk-of-terrorist -border -crossers/   
13 Id.   
14 See DHS, Office of the Inspector General, Matter of Brian Murphy, (Sep. 8, 2020) https://intelligence.house.gov/
uploadedfiles/ murphy_wb_dhs_oig_complaint9.8.20.pdf .  
15 See ARC, Trump ’s State Department Excludes Key Human Rights Issues from ist Reports. 
https://asylumresearchcentre.org/wp -content/uploads/2020/10/ARC -Press_release_USDOS -Comparative -analysis -
21-October.pdf   
16 See Amanda Klasing & Elisa Epstein, Human Rights Watch US Again C uts Women from State Department’s 
Human Rights Report , (Mar. 13, 2019) www.hrw.org/ news/ 2019/ 03/13/us-again -cuts-women -state-departments -
human -rightsreports ; Tarah Demant, Amnesty International A Critique of the US Department of State 2017 Country 
Reports on Human Rights Practices , (May 8, 2018) https://medium.com/ @amnestyusa/ a-critiqueof -the-us-
department -of-state-2017 -country -reports -on-human -rights -practices -f313ec5fe8ca .  
17 EOIR, Immigration Court Practice Manual, at 36 (Jul. 2, 2020), www.justice.gov/ eoir/page/ file/1258536/
download .  evidence on the date of the hear ing. The regulation fails to consider  how a non -English speaker 
would understand the documents in English,  and does not provide a  provision allowing for a 
continuance for the parties to respond to the newly introduced  evidence.  
 
The Rule  dising enuously likens this proposed change to the immigration judge’s existing duty to 
develop the record. 85 Fed. Reg. 59695. However, the immigration judge’s duty to elicit 
testimony about claims from unrepresented respondents is wholly consistent with the rol e of a 
fact-finding adjudicator. The role of the immigration judge is to weigh the facts that the parties 
put before the court, not to introduce their own facts into the record. Allowing the immigration 
judge to create their own record in the case would fu rther erode the rights of respondents who 
appear in immigration court.  
c. The Proposed Rule Would Require Immigration Judges to Reject Asylum 
Applications  for Absurd Technical Reasons   
The Proposed R ule at 8 CFR § 1208.3(c)(3) will lead EOIR to reject and consider  bona fide 
asylum applications abandoned because asylum seekers  might  leave a box blank on the asylum 
application form .  
  
Since 2019, USCIS has been rejecting affirmative asylum applications  if any box o n the Form I -
589 is left blank  – even boxes that have no legal relevance to the case  – or questions that 
evidently  do not apply, such as the name of a child when the applicant has already acknowledged 
that he or she has no children. The Proposed Rule would now codify th is practice  and require 
immigration judges to reject any inc omplete application. Once the court rejects the application, 
the applicant would have 30 days to make the correction , otherwise their application would  be 
consid ered abandoned .  
 
In a system that does not provide appointed counsel despite the life or death consequences of 
asylum cases , this change would have a devastating impact on pro se asylum seekers,  which will 
likely increase in number per the analysis  provided  above regarding the 15 -day filing deadline . 
Depriving asylum seekers of their right to pursue asylum because of reasons completely 
unrelated to the merit of their claim  is wrong  and undercuts U.S. obligations pursu ant to the 
Refugee Act of 1980  as it would return refugees to danger . The effects of  the Proposed Rule 
would be especially profound on those in detention and those subjected to the “Migrant 
Protection Protocols” (MPP)  where people are in particularly precarious situations and a lower 
percentage are represented .  If the immigration judge  rejects  application s on this basis and 
asylum seekers still do  not understand the need to write the word “none” or “n/a” in the  empty  
boxes, they would be unable to seek asylum  and will be deported to the country they fled . 
 
 V. The R ule would  Undermine U. S. Legal Obligations   
The rule abrogates the United States’ obligations under the 1951 Convention Relating to the 
Status of Refugees (the Refugee Convention). The United States, while not a party to the 1951 
Refugee Convention itself, did ratify the 1967 Protocol. In ratifying the 1967 Protocol, the 
United States bound itself to the obligations of the 1951 Refugee Convention as well.18 Under 
the Refugee Convention, the expulsion of a refugee shall be only in “pursuance of a decision 
reached in accordance with due process of law.”19  
 
As illustrated above, in practice the  Proposed  Rule w ould undercut a fair opportunity for asylum 
seekers to demonstrate they are refugees. By codifying extremely short timeline s for the filing of 
the asylum application and completion of the case, the administration is taking away immigration 
judges’ authority to manage each case as they deem appropriate. Doing so, as explained above,  
would result in the denial of appl ications for the inability to meet the 15 -day filing deadline , to 
prepare adequate cases and obtain attorneys within the 180 -day deadline to finalize the case.  
These unrealistic timelines are accompanied by a requirement to fill out every empty slot of an 
asylum application, a task that is counterintuitive  and has no effect on the merits of the claim.  
This will lead to the r ejection and accidental abandonment of asylum applications.  As a result of 
this complete disregard for due process,  asylum applications will be denied for reasons unrelated 
to the merit of asylum  seekers ’ claim s and refugees will be returned to danger, death, and t orture.         
 
The Refugee Convention also states that “ no Contracting State shall expel or return (“refouler”) a 
refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where his life or freedom would 
be threatened on account of his race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social 
group or political opinion.”20 UNHCR has made clear  that this is “an essential and non -derogable 
component of international refugee protection.” As this Rule creates  hurdles that undermine due 
process that will lead to the rejection of valid claims for asylum , it would inevitably  lead to the 
return of a significant number of refugees  to the country they  fled, thus viol ating the principle of 
non-refoulement .  
 
VI. Conclusion  
 
The administration must abstain from implementing the Proposed Rule, which will undermine 
due process  and otherwise harm asylum seeker s, including the torture  survivors among them . 
                                                           
18 See UN General Assembly,  Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees , 31 January 1967,  United Nations, Treaty 
Series, vol. 606, p. 267,  Article 1, available at:  
19 See UN General Assembly,  Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees , 28 July 1951,  United Nations, Treaty 
Series, vol. 189, p. 137,  Article 32.2, available at: https://www.refworld.org/docid/3be01b964.html   
20 See UN General Assembly,  Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees , 28 July 1951,  United Nations, Treaty 
Series, vol. 189, p. 137,  Article 33.1, available at: https://www.refworld.org/docid/3be01b964.html   