	  	  	  	  	  	  The	  New	  York	  City	  Council	  Committee	  on	  Transportation	  	  Hearing	  RE:	  Int.	  No.	  725	  -­‐	  In	  relation	  to	  the	  unlawful	  use	  of	  vehicles	  for	  the	  purpose	  of	  promoting	  prostitution;	  and	  Int.	  No.	  735	  -­‐	  In	  relation	  to	  strengthening	  the	  penalties	  for	  illegally	  operating	  non-­‐TLC	  licensed	  vehicles	  for	  hire.	  	  Testimony	  of	  Sienna	  Baskin,	  Esq.	  Co-­‐Director	  Sex	  Workers	  Project	  Urban	  Justice	  Center	  	  123	  William	  Street,	  16th	  Floor	  New	  York,	  New	  York	  10038	  T:	  646/602-­‐5695	  sbaskin@urbanjustice.org	  	  10	  AM,	  December	  14,	  2011	  250	  Broadway,	  16th	  FL,	  New	  York,	  NY	  10007	  	  Good	  morning,	  Council	  Member	  Ferreras,	  Council	  Member	  Vaca	  and	  members	  of	  the	  Committee	  on	  Transportation.	  	  	  	  The	  Sex	  Workers	  Project	  at	  the	  Urban	  Justice	  Center	  very	  much	  appreciates	  the	  opportunity	  to	  offer	  comment	  on	  these	  proposed	  changes	  to	  administrative	  law.	  My	  name	  is	  Sienna	  Baskin	  and	  I	  am	  an	  attorney	  and	  Co-­‐Director	  of	  the	  Sex	  Workers	  Project.	  I	  offer	  legal	  representation	  to	  sex	  workers	  and	  victims	  of	  human	  trafficking	  on	  criminal,	  civil,	  and	  immigration	  matters.	  The	  Sex	  Workers	  Project	  also	  provides	  therapeutic	  counseling	  and	  case	  management	  to	  our	  clients.	  We	  are	  recognized	  experts	  on	  the	  profound	  human	  rights	  abuses	  victims	  of	  trafficking	  and	  sex	  workers	  face,	  and	  perform	  research	  and	  documentation	  on	  these	  abuses,	  with	  a	  focus	  on	  New	  York	  City.	  	  Over	  the	  past	  10	  years,	  we	  have	  served	  many	  sex	  workers	  and	  survivors	  of	  trafficking	  whose	  experience	  involved	  vehicles.	  Thus,	  we	  have	  expertise	  to	  share	  on	  how	  the	  Bill	  introduced	  by	  Council	  Member	  Ferreras	  may	  affect	  our	  clients.	  	  
It	  is	  our	  understanding	  that	  this	  bill	  is	  intended	  to	  combat	  human	  trafficking.	  However,	  we	  have	  concerns	  that	  it	  will	  have	  little	  impact	  on	  human	  trafficking,	  and	  in	  fact	  may	  have	  a	  negative	  effect	  on	  trafficking	  victims	  and	  on	  vulnerable	  sex	  workers.	  	  	  The	  bill	  requires	  education	  on	  the	  penalties	  and	  definition	  of	  “promoting	  prostitution,”	  as	  it	  applies	  to	  drivers	  of	  for-­‐hire	  vehicles	  and	  taxis.	  The	  problem	  is	  that	  “promoting	  prostitution”	  has	  a	  very	  vague	  definition.	  It	  could	  include	  anyone	  who	  knowingly	  aids	  another	  person	  to	  commit	  prostitution	  and	  anyone	  who	  receives	  money	  from	  someone	  else,	  knowing	  it	  came	  from	  prostitution.	  We	  are	  concerned	  that	  the	  proposed	  education	  will	  be	  understood	  by	  drivers	  to	  mean	  that	  any	  time	  they	  give	  a	  sex	  worker	  a	  ride,	  they	  are	  committing	  “promoting	  prostitution.”	  	  	  In	  our	  experience,	  vehicles	  are	  used	  in	  human	  trafficking	  and	  prostitution	  in	  a	  few	  ways.	  	  	  First,	  sex	  workers	  frequently	  use	  yellow	  cabs	  and	  for-­‐hire	  cars	  to	  get	  to	  out-­‐call	  locations	  or	  get	  home	  from	  out-­‐call	  locations	  safely.	  Escort	  services	  may	  employ	  yellow	  cabs	  or	  for-­‐hire	  cars	  for	  the	  same	  purpose.	  The	  drivers	  of	  these	  vehicles	  may	  or	  may	  not	  know	  that	  their	  passenger	  was	  engaging	  in	  prostitution.	  Without	  taxi	  cabs	  or	  for-­‐hire	  vehicles,	  these	  sex	  workers	  could	  face	  considerably	  greater	  dangers	  in	  going	  to	  and	  from	  their	  workplace.	  Additionally,	  a	  driver	  who	  knows	  that	  their	  passenger	  is	  engaging	  in	  prostitution	  can	  help	  or	  report	  information	  to	  the	  police	  should	  the	  sex	  worker	  disappear	  or	  if	  she	  is	  the	  victim	  of	  a	  crime.	  For	  this	  category	  of	  driver,	  we	  are	  concerned	  that	  the	  provision	  requiring	  extra	  education	  on	  “promoting	  prostitution”	  may	  make	  drivers	  fearful	  to	  give	  rides	  to	  sex	  workers,	  offer	  aid	  to	  a	  sex	  worker	  in	  trouble,	  or	  report	  crimes	  against	  sex	  workers	  to	  the	  police.	  We	  are	  also	  concerned	  that	  the	  penalties	  on	  for-­‐hire	  vehicle	  drivers	  for	  engaging	  in	  this	  activity	  may	  discourage	  them	  from	  offering	  a	  ride	  or	  help	  to	  a	  sex	  worker.	  For-­‐hire	  cars,	  which	  serve	  more	  remote	  neighborhoods,	  are	  an	  especially	  important	  safety	  resource	  for	  lower	  income	  and	  vulnerable	  sex	  workers.	  	  As	  we	  documented	  in	  our	  studies,	  “Revolving	  Door”	  and	  “Behind	  Closed	  Doors,”	  people	  working	  in	  the	  sex	  industries	  experience	  assault,	  rape,	  robbery,	  and	  other	  violent	  crimes	  at	  significantly	  higher	  levels	  than	  others.	  We	  are	  concerned	  first	  and	  foremost	  with	  the	  safety	  of	  our	  community	  members,	  no	  matter	  their	  occupation.	  	  We	  know	  that	  access	  to	  a	  vehicle	  to	  exit	  a	  potentially	  dangerous	  situation	  is	  very	  important	  to	  meet	  that	  #1	  priority	  of	  safety.	  	  Second,	  some	  trafficking	  operations	  employ	  vehicles	  to	  transport	  their	  victims	  from	  a	  residence	  to	  a	  brothel	  or	  to	  a	  customer’s	  house.	  In	  some	  cases,	  trafficking	  operations	  use	  vehicles	  as	  spaces	  for	  the	  sexual	  conduct	  to	  take	  place.	  	  We	  have	  only	  heard	  of	  situations	  where	  these	  vehicles	  were	  privately	  owned	  by	  members	  of	  the	  trafficking	  ring.	  The	  driver	  does	  not	  usually	  just	  get	  a	  fee	  just	  for	  the	  ride,	  but	  shares	  in	  the	  proceeds	  of	  the	  trafficking	  generally.	  This	  appears	  to	  be	  the	  category	  of	  driver	  that	  the	  law	  is	  intending	  to	  reach,	  but	  these	  are	  not	  licensed	  for-­‐hire	  vehicles	  and	  therefore,	  would	  not	  be	  affected	  at	  all	  by	  this	  law.	  They	  would	  not	  attend	  the	  required	  education,	  would	  not	  learn	  about	  or	  be	  deterred	  by	  the	  “promoting	  prostitution”	  penalties,	  and	  in	  fact	  would	  not	  be	  subject	  to	  these	  penalties.	  We	  are	  aware	  that	  Council	  Member	  Vaca’s	  bill	  addresses	  drivers	  operating	  unlicensed	  for-­‐hire	  cars,	  which	  may	  reach	  this	  kind	  of	  driver,	  and	  imposes	  additional	  penalties	  un-­‐related	  to	  prostitution	  or	  trafficking.	  Not	  being	  expert	  on	  how	  this	  kind	  of	  law	  would	  function,	  we	  cannot	  comment	  on	  Council	  Member	  Vaca’s	  bill.	  However,	  as	  a	  point	  of	  information,	  sometimes	  even	  these	  drivers	  are	  potential	  resources	  to	  victims	  of	  trafficking.	  They	  are	  often	  low-­‐level	  employees	  of	  the	  trafficking	  ring	  and	  may	  have	  sympathy	  for	  the	  victims.	  For	  example,	  our	  client	  “Amy”	  was	  trafficked	  at	  the	  young	  age	  of	  16	  and	  forced	  to	  engage	  in	  commercial	  sex.	  During	  this	  time	  she	  only	  had	  access	  to	  her	  trafficker,	  drivers	  who	  were	  employed	  by	  the	  trafficker	  and	  customers.	  On	  two	  occasions	  she	  requested	  help	  from	  a	  driver	  to	  help	  her	  leave	  the	  trafficker.	  On	  both	  occasions,	  the	  drivers	  did	  try	  to	  help	  her	  and	  take	  her	  to	  another	  location.	  Unfortunately,	  the	  trafficker	  found	  her	  and	  took	  her	  back	  into	  custody.	  Even	  these	  drivers	  should	  be	  encouraged	  to	  report	  trafficking	  and	  come	  to	  the	  aid	  of	  victims.	  	  Finally,	  it	  is	  possible	  that	  some	  trafficking	  operations	  may	  hire	  vehicles	  or	  taxi	  cabs	  to	  transport	  their	  victims	  to	  different	  locations.	  	  Victims	  of	  trafficking	  who	  have	  a	  bit	  more	  freedom	  of	  movement	  may	  hire	  a	  taxi	  or	  for-­‐hire	  car	  themselves.	  In	  our	  experience,	  these	  drivers	  are	  not	  involved	  in	  the	  trafficking	  scheme,	  and	  may	  or	  may	  not	  know	  that	  their	  passenger	  is	  doing	  prostitution.	  However,	  this	  category	  of	  driver	  is	  an	  incredibly	  important	  potential	  resource	  to	  victims	  of	  trafficking.	  They	  may	  be	  the	  only	  people	  the	  trafficking	  victim	  sees	  besides	  her	  customers	  and	  her	  abusers.	  	  They	  may	  be	  able	  to	  act	  as	  a	  good	  Samaritan	  and	  offer	  the	  victim	  an	  escape	  route:	  a	  ride	  to	  a	  friend	  or	  family	  member’s	  house,	  a	  referral	  to	  a	  service	  provider,	  a	  ride	  to	  a	  shelter,	  a	  hospital,	  or	  a	  police	  station.	  We	  are	  concerned	  that	  the	  proposed	  bill	  could	  actually	  dissuade	  these	  drivers	  from	  offering	  help	  or	  rides	  to	  victims	  of	  trafficking	  for	  the	  already-­‐mentioned	  reasons.	  	  	  We	  do	  agree	  with	  the	  recently	  added	  amendment,	  which	  could	  support	  driver’s	  potential	  as	  resources	  or	  escape	  routes	  for	  victims	  of	  trafficking,	  and	  not	  punish	  or	  discourage	  them	  from	  driving	  sex	  workers.	  Education	  on	  how	  to	  identify	  a	  victim	  of	  trafficking	  and	  what	  resources	  are	  available	  for	  victims	  of	  trafficking	  could	  be	  very	  useful	  to	  drivers.	  Drivers	  having	  this	  information	  could	  be	  potentially	  life-­‐saving	  for	  victims	  they	  encounter.	  However,	  this	  education	  would	  have	  to	  be	  delivered	  by	  an	  expert	  on	  human	  trafficking.	  And,	  trying	  to	  educate	  drivers	  on	  human	  trafficking,	  while	  simultaneously	  raising	  concerns	  that	  even	  giving	  a	  sex	  worker	  a	  ride	  could	  get	  them	  in	  trouble	  for	  promoting	  prostitution,	  has	  the	  potential	  to	  confuse	  drivers	  	  and	  leave	  them	  unsure	  how	  they	  should	  interact	  with	  potential	  victims.	  	  We	  thank	  you	  for	  your	  attention	  to	  this	  important	  issue,	  and	  for	  your	  desire	  to	  help	  victims	  of	  trafficking.	  	  	  	  	  	  	  