1  
 
 
 
 
NEW YORK STATE SENATE   
PUBLIC HEARING:  
SENATE  COMMITTEE ON CODES  
 
Human Trafficking in New York State (A. 1898 a; A. 9038 ; S. 3914 —B; and  S. 5246 ) 
 
February  2, 200 6 
 
Testimony of Juhu Thukral, Esq.  
Director  
Sex Workers Project  
Urban Justice Center  
666 Broadway, 10 th Floor  
New York, New York  10012  
T: 646/602.5690  
jthukral@urbanjustice.org   
 
The Sex Workers P roject1 at the Urban Justice Center thanks you for this opportunity to present our 
comments to p roposed New York State legislation on the issue of traffick ing in persons. We applaud 
the efforts of the New York State Legislature  to address the problem of human trafficking at the state 
and local level. It is critical that state legislation be comprehen sive in addressing criminal and civil 
remedies; provide services and facilitate  immigration and other benefits  for trafficked persons  to 
which they have a right; and be effective  in preventing  the problem of human trafficking . State 
legislation must ensure  that victims in state -level trafficking cases are able to access the same rights 
and benefits that are available for victims in federal -level trafficking cases.    
 
Trafficking in Persons  
 
Many sex workers are immigrant and undocumented women and girls, an d a large number of them 
come into the U.S. as a result of global trafficking. The traffickers may threaten victims, take their 
                                            
1 The Sex Workers Project (SWP) is the first program in New York City and in the country to focus on the 
provision of legal services, legal training, documentation, and policy advocacy for sex workers. Using a harm 
reduction and human rights model, the SWP protects the rights and safety of sex workers who by choice, 
circumstance, or coercion remain in the industry.  
  
The SWP’s program on trafficking in persons advises and represents trafficking victims in legal cases; informs  
and educates immigrant communities about the issue of trafficking and possible legal options; and trains 
attorneys on this issue. The SWP also coordinates with various law enforcement agencies to better identify 
victims of trafficking, and to ensure that trafficked persons who cooperate with law enforcement are protected 
through the legal process. Finally, we collaborate with other non -governmental organizations to advocate for 
trafficking -related policies that focus on the human rights of trafficked perso ns and respect their dignity. The 
SWP is a member of the national Freedom Network and the NYC Anti -Trafficking Network (Co -Chair, Policy & 
Advocacy Committee; Member, Steering and Legal Committees).  
Urban Justice Center  
666 Broadway, 10th floor, New York, NY 10012  
Tel:  (646) 602 -5600 • Fax:  (212) 533 -4598  2 passports, and limit their contact with the outside world. The U.S. Department of State estimates that 
14,500 -17,500 people are trafficked into the U.S. every year; 2 many of the them are from Eastern 
Europe, China and Southeast Asia, and Mexico. With its large immigrant population, New York City 
and New York State are  major destination s and hub s for trafficking in persons . Traffick ed persons 
need a variety of services, particularly housing, mental health, language training, job skills, and legal 
services. The Trafficking Victims Protection Act 3 (TVPA) created the T visa, which offers work 
authorization and the possibility of adjustm ent to permanent resident status to “victim[s] of a severe 
form of trafficking,” most often to victims who assist with prosecutions. Many women who have been 
trafficked are unaware of their legal rights and are afraid to seek help and assistance for fear t hey will 
be harmed, or deported to their country of origin.  
 
Need for Comprehensive New York Legislation Against Trafficking in Persons  
 
While the  federal TVPA has allowed for greater assista nce for trafficked persons, there also exists a 
need for compreh ensive anti-trafficking legislation in New York State, for the following reasons:  
 
• Current New York State Penal Code does not include sections which properly cover the crime of 
trafficking in persons, especially with respect to trafficking into sectors suc h as domestic work, 
agricultural work, and sweatshop labor. Trafficking is a crime primarily defined by subtle 
coercion —a net of innuendo, threats of force, and abuse of legal process —essentially, a climate 
of fear  that clearly inform s the victim that harm  will befall him or her if he or she leaves the 
trafficker. This coercion is used against victims who often do not know the language or 
prevailing social and legal customs in this country ; 
 
• Many trafficking cases are discovered by members of local immigran t communities  whose first 
instinct is to call local police rather than federal law enforcement —in fact, members of these  
communities will not  contact federal law enf orcement because of fear of harassment or removal ; 
 
• Many trafficking cases are unearthed by  local police and law enforcement, who often do not 
recognize these cases as trafficking  and need to receive more training and information in order to 
properly ass ist victims ; and  
 
• Federal law enforcement does not have the resources to provide certificatio n for all trafficked 
persons who are willing to come forward and cooperate with law enforcement —without state and 
local law enforcement being aware of the need for these certification s and being mandated to 
provide them  when appropriate , it is extremely di fficult for trafficked persons to obtain the 
immigration status and benefits to which they have a right under the law .4 
                                            
2 U.S. Department of State, Trafficking in Persons Report  (2004) at 23. The State Department did not offer updated 
numbers  of persons trafficked into the U.S.  in its 2005 report.  
3 Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000, Pub. L. No. 106 -386 Division A, 114 Stat. 1464 (2000) (codified as 
amended in scattered sections of the U.S.C.) [ hereinafter  TVPA]. The TVPA was amended and reauthorized in 
December 2003 by the Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2003, Pub. L. No. 108 -193, 117 Stat. 
2875 (2003) (codified as amended in scattered sections of t he U.S.C.) [ hereinafter  TVPA Reauthorization].  
 
4 See TVPA Reauthorization § 4(a)(3) (“ In making the certification…with respect to the assistance  to investigation 
or prosecution …the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall consider statements from Stat e and local law 
enforcement officials that the  person… has been willing to assist in every reasonable way with respect to the 
investigation and prosec ution of State and local crimes…”); TVPA Reauthorization  § 4(b)(2)(B) (“In making a 3  
It is critical that the New York State Penal Code reflect the full arsenal of behaviors which traffickers 
use to control their victims by enacting the definitions of Labor Servitude  and Sexual Servitude  provided 
in A. 1898a; Involuntary Labor Servitude or Involuntary Sexual Servitude  provided in S. 3914 —B; or 
Involuntary Servitude  provided in S. 5246. While the language  in S. 3914 —B and S . 5246 is not as broad 
as that in A. 1898a, we believe that these definitions will be meaningful and accurate  representations 
of the situations which create coercive environments for trafficked persons. It is my understanding 
that Attorney General Eliot Sp itzer’s office has issued a recommendation that the New York State 
Legislature use the definition found in both S. 3914 —B and S. 5246. We support the Attorney General’s 
position on this.  
 
It is also critical, for the reasons  stated above , that  New York Sta te pass comprehensive legislation that 
includes a broad definition that corresponds with the definitions in the federal TVPA , such as the 
definitions mentioned above . The TVPA Reauthorization of 2003 specifically allows for state and local 
law enforcement to provide certification to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and 
the U.S. Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services that a trafficked person has cooperated with 
them regarding a trafficking crime that is defined consistently with the f ederal definitions. Without 
corresponding definitions, trafficked persons who cooperate with  state and local law enforcement will 
be unable to pursue their rights to immigration status and benefits as provided for under the TVPA 
and its Reauthorization.  
 
Providing Services and Facilitating Coordination of Immigration Status and Benefits   
 
Keeping in mind the need for state and local law enforcement to provide documentation and 
certification for trafficked persons who are willing to cooperate in investigatio ns, A. 9038 , which 
relates to benefits and services to trafficked persons,  includes a Section 637 -g: Assisting trafficked persons 
to secure immigration status and  federal benefit  and Section s 637-a-d, which provide for services at the state 
level .  
 
We bel ieve that enacting a Penal Code Section relating to trafficking, without also enacting funding for 
services; funding for training; public assistance for trafficked persons; and coordination between state 
and federal governments to assure necessary immigrat ion benefits, is almost useless.  The need for 
these section s is best illustrated by a case in which the Sex Workers Project represented the victims:  
 
“Carmen ”5 and “Victoria ” were 17 and 19 year -old girls  from Mexico who came to the U.S. with  a 
trafficker named Daniel. Daniel had befriended Carmen  and offered to help her join her mother in the 
U.S., saying that her mother could pay him back once they were reunited. He courted Victoria and told 
her that he wanted to marry her, but first he wanted them to mov e to the U.S. to build a better life.  
 
However, once Daniel, Carmen, and Victoria entered the U.S., things changed. He raped them both 
repeatedly, and passed Carmen around to a number of men who gang -raped her. These were her first 
sexual experiences. He then set them up in two brothels, where they were forced to work as 
                                                                                                                                                       
determination …statement s from State and local law enforcement officials that the alien has complied with any 
reasonable request for assistance in the investigation or p rosecution of crimes… where severe forms of trafficking 
in persons (as defined in section 103 of the Trafficking  Victims Protection Act of 2000) appear to have been 
involved, shall be considered .”) 
5 The names “Carmen” and “Victoria” are aliases.  4 prostitutes and turn all of their earnings over to him. Daniel beat the two young women regularly 
when they were at home with him and repeatedly threatened that they should not try to leav e him.  
 
After a few months, Carmen  and Victoria did escape from Daniel, with the assistance of a man who 
worked in the brothel and recognized that they were working against their will and needed help. 
Carmen and Victoria  contacted the local police, who arr ested Daniel with their assistance. A local 
prosecutor was interested in prosecuting the case. In fact, a federal prosecutor was interested also, but 
the local prosecutor was already invested in the case and decided to keep it.  
 
The Sex Workers Project rep resented Carmen and Victoria in their  criminal justice  and immigration 
matters. I immediately tried to get three things for my clients:  
 
1. A grant of Continued Presence , which is a temporary lawful immigration status conferred upon 
trafficked persons when  requested by a federal agent;  
 
2. A Law Enforcement Certification (Form I -914B) , which certifies in an application for a T visa that a 
victim has been willing to cooperate with reasonable requests from law enforcement; and  
 
3. A Certification  Letter  from  the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services , certifying that 
Carmen and Victoria were trafficked persons who should receive federal benefits and assistance that 
would help them re -build their lives.  
 
I found that, despite the fact that no less than 1 0 different people  within the federal government  were 
aware of my clients’ case and situation, and that all of these people believed that my clients had been 
trafficked and were cooperative, thus making them  eligible for benefits, not one of these people i n the 
federal government could provide me wit h the necessary documentation. Why? Because there was no 
specific federal agent assigned to the case who could formally identify Carmen and Victoria as 
trafficked and request Continued Presence or a Certificatio n Letter, or fill out an I -914B.  This also left 
us without any options to pursue benefits at the state level.  
 
The U.S. Department of Justice got involved and after many months of advocacy, we were able to 
secure the necessary assistance by finding a feder al agent who was willing to sign for the case, even 
though it was not officially her case, or a case in which the federal government was  officially  involved.  
 
However, in the intervening months, my clients had no way to work legally, and we cobbled togeth er 
housing, services including medical and counseling, as well as  cash for them by contacting Good 
Samaritans and agencies willing to assist without reimbursement, and by raising money ourselves and 
operating a clothing drive to obtain coats and gloves for  Carmen and Victoria during the winter 
months.   
 
Therefore, even though Carmen and Victoria were trafficked persons who had enthusiastically 
cooperated with law enforcement, their ability to receive even minimal  assistance was hampered by 
the fact that, th rough no decisions of their own, this was treated as a state case rather than a federal 
one. 
 
If we had New York State anti -trafficking legislation such as A. 9038 at the time, we could have 
applied for public assistance and benefits for Carmen and Victori a, to help them create some stability 5 in their lives. We also could have pushed local law enforcement to make requests for Continued 
Presence or a Certification Letter, and to fill out an I -914B, because the state law would recognize 
trafficking as a crime  and would provide for state benefits . Furthermore, state and federal law would 
be fully coordinated  in a way that they were not at the time that we worked on this case.  
 
It is critical, for these reasons, that New York State pass comprehensive legislation  that provides for 
access to state benefits and facilitat es coordination of i mmigration status and benefits for trafficked 
persons who cooperate with state and local law enforcement . 
 
Effective in Preventing  the Problem of Trafficking  in Persons  
 
It is cri tical that all efforts at the state level be effective and mindful of safe and appropriate law 
enforcement interventions. Currently , A. 1898 a includes a Section  136.17 : Patronizing a trafficking victim , 
which creates a Class A misdemeanor  for a person who patronizes a person who is subjected to sexual 
servitude. This section creates strict liability for anyone who patronizes a sex worker (even for legal 
sex work outside of prostitution) but who does not know that this person has been trafficked into sex 
work. 
 
This section should not stand —demand for sexual labor or services does not drive trafficking in 
persons. Instead, poverty and economic desperation drive people to migrate in order to support their 
families. Therefore, law enforcement efforts that do no t address the traffickers themselves are 
inappropriate and ineffective : 
 
• Such strict liability standards that target de mand for sex work have not proven to be  effective in 
preventing trafficking in persons , since trafficking occurs in all low -wage industri es that use cheap 
immigrant labor. Instead, i ncreased awareness and education of the public and of law enforceme nt 
do effectively address human trafficking ; 
 
• Many customers in these trafficking situations do not know that the worker has been trafficked, 
and will be dissuaded from reporting what they see if they fear additional criminal consequences, 
as many do now; and  
 
• Perpetuating the idea that it is instantly easy to see whether a person is trafficked or not falsely 
promotes the notion that trafficking h as to do with people literally in chains, rather than the subtle 
forms of coercion and abuse of process mentioned above.  
 
It is critical, for these reasons, that New York State pass legislation that is effective in preventing 
trafficking in persons , such as increasing community awareness and training law enforcement, rather 
than increasing criminal penalties for persons who are  not likely to know that they are accessing  the 
services of a trafficked person.  
 
Thank you for offering advocates such as the Sex Workers Project an opportunity to share our 
experiences  and concerns with you  as you consider these important pieces of legislation . We look 
forward to working with the New York State Legislature on comprehensive and effective New York 
State legislation  against trafficking in persons.  
 