Raising the 
stakes
Drug Policy Alliance 
Annual ReportLetter from the President & Executive Director 
Are you ready to 
step up?
We are at a profoundly challenging—yet enormously hopeful—
inflection point in our struggle to end the devastation wrought 
by the global war on drugs and to build a more just and 
humane future.
If we don’t push back with all our might now, we may be at the 
threshold of the worst period yet in the drug war. Yet we are also, 
astonishingly, at our moment of greatest opportunity ever in the 
United States.
Overdose rates in the U.S. are soaring, while the president and 
attorney general are stoking fear, hatred and xenophobia to 
reinvigorate the war on drugs. 
The administration is pushing for ever harsher drug sentences, 
getting “very, very tough” on the southern border, and targeting the 
“pretty tough hombres” Donald Trump blames for the overdose 
crisis. Holding out China and Singapore as models, he’s even 
calling for the imposition of the death penalty for drug offenses. 
All this is happening while the drug war continues to spread 
misery and death around the world, from the extrajudicial killings 
in the Philippines —whose bloodthirsty president Trump has 
praised—to the large-scale violence and corruption in 
Mexico, Afghanistan and Colombia. 
If we don’t push back 
with all our might 
now, we may be at 
the threshold of the 
worst period yet in 
the drug war. Contents
 1  Letter from the president & executive director 
 4 Addressing a national crisis of preventable deaths
	 7	 Safety	first:	real	drug	education	for	teens
	 8	 Ending	mass	criminalization	in	the	name	of	fighting	drugs
 12 Responsible & equitable marijuana legalization
	16	 A	matter	of	life	and	death:	global	drug	policy
 19 Major contributors
 20 Advocacy grants
 21 Board of directors
	22	 Drug	Policy	Alliance	financials	
	24		 Drug	Policy	Action	financials
The work described herein includes that of the Drug Policy Alliance, a 501 (c)
(3) organization, and Drug Policy Action, a 501 (c)(4) organization. References 
to “DPA” refer to the work of both organizations.
1administration’s craven use of overdoses to spread fear, the 
reality is that vast swathes of the public are increasingly looking 
for alternatives to the failed drug war. Outside the U.S., growing 
numbers of countries are taking steps towards decriminalizing 
the personal use of drugs, showing that a different way of 
approaching drugs is possible.
This new openness, coupled with the record-breaking support 
for marijuana legalization in the U.S. and abroad, has the 
potential to fracture the foundation of the drug war. 
Our challenge is to rise to the occasion and reveal the ultimate 
lie—that the trillions of dollars poured into the enforcement of 
laws criminalizing drug use, production, and distribution since 
the 1970s have never actually prevented drug misuse.
In fact, prohibition is a root cause of the current opioid overdose 
crisis in the U.S—because when people are kept in the dark 
about drugs, and forced to use them underground, they are far 
more likely to use drugs in unsafe ways and overdose. And when 
states prioritize criminalization over social supports, prevention 
and treatment, those who want help can’t find it.
This message, this truth, is resonating more than ever 
before, and thanks to your support, we are ready to seize 
the opportunity to amplify our approach to drug policy that is 
grounded in science, compassion, health and human rights, 
rather than deception, cruelty, racism and stigma.
We can’t thank you enough for standing with us.Attorney General Jeff Sessions has increasingly signaled a 
willingness to enforce marijuana prohibition even in states that 
have legalized. Meanwhile, prosecutors in multiple states are 
responding to overdose by pursuing devastating—and utterly 
pointless—homicide prosecutions against people who use and 
share drugs, or small-time sellers. 
At the same time, our many recent victories are multiplying in 
states and cities across the country. 
Marijuana legalization is continuing to build momentum—and the 
conversation has evolved beyond whether we’ll legalize to how we 
should legalize. California’s Proposition 64 set a new bar, with its 
groundbreaking provisions providing redress for past harms. We’re 
now working to build on this model in New York, New Jersey, New 
Mexico, at the federal level, and beyond. 
Harm reduction is entering the mainstream. Driven by our 
advocacy, policymakers from coast to coast are increasingly 
embracing naloxone access, syringe exchange, 911 Good 
Samaritan laws, and even supervised consumption services. 
Bipartisan criminal justice reforms are also advancing—from bail 
to asset forfeiture to sentencing reform, as well as pre-arrest 
diversion for drug offenses. Our effort is increasingly shifting 
from not just reducing  criminal punishment for drug possession, 
but ending  it.
None of this would have been possible without DPA and your 
support.
Perhaps the biggest gain we’ve made is the dramatic shift 
in public opinion in the U.S. and beyond. Despite the Trump Marijuana legalization 
is continuing to build 
momentum—and 
the conversation 
has evolved beyond 
whether  we’ll legalize 
to how  we should 
legalize. 
Maria McFarland 
Sánchez-Moreno  
Executive Director
Ira Glasser  
President
3The overdose crisis has placed the United States at a 
crossroads. Despite occasional mentions of public health 
policies, the Trump administration seems intent on using the 
crisis as an excuse to double down on the war on drugs and 
demonize vulnerable groups—particularly immigrants—whom it 
portrays as responsible for the crisis.
To stem the rising tide of opioid overdose deaths, DPA is 
working to advance innovative and effective public health 
interventions focused on access to evidence-based treatment, 
harm reduction, prevention and education, and—critically—
reducing the role of criminalization. Many of these interventions 
have already been implemented successfully in other countries.
Much recent progress can be credited to our efforts. All 50 states 
have now passed legislation to increase access to naloxone, the 
overdose reversal medication, and over 40 states have passed 
“911 Good Samaritan” laws to stop arresting and prosecuting 
people for drug possession when they call 911 to report an 
overdose. We also played a pivotal role in securing federal funding 
for community-based organizations who provide naloxone.
DPA has also been instrumental in expanding access to 
replacement therapies such as methadone and buprenorphine, 
which extensive research has unequivocally and repeatedly 
proven to be the most effective treatment for long-term recovery 
and reduction of overdose fatality risk. 
But it’s clear that much more needs to be done. For one thing, 
we’ve shone light on the fact that overdose is not only a white 
problem, but also one that has long affected communities of 
color—yet been ignored. To stem the rising tide 
of opioid overdose 
deaths, DPA is working to 
advance innovative and 
effective	public	health 	
interventions focused 
on access to evidence-
based treatment, harm 
reduction, prevention and 
education.Addressing a national crisis  
of preventable  deaths 
DPA	is	leading	the	fight	to	reduce	the	death,	disease,	crime	and 	
suffering	associated	with	both	drug	use	and	drug	prohibition. 	
This means supporting harm reduction and other public 
health interventions grounded in science, compassion, 
health and human rights.
5 4Our work building support for the first supervised consumption 
facility in the U.S. is especially promising. Thanks to your 
support, San Francisco will open the first licensed facility 
in the U.S. this summer. We’ve also drafted and advised on 
legislation in several other cities and states to implement such 
facilities; we are hoping that the US will follow the example of 
Canada, which has authorized over 30 supervised consumption 
sites in response to their rise in overdose rates, and many 
other countries. There is overwhelming evidence from over 
100 facilities operating in dozens of cities worldwide that they 
drastically reduce new HIV infections, overdoses, and public 
nuisance without increasing drug use or criminal activity. 
We are simultaneously advancing the implementation of heroin-
assisted treatment (HAT), a critical intervention for those who 
have not found success with methadone or buprenorphine. 
Despite its historical success and strong evidence base 
from nine other countries, HAT has never been studied or 
implemented in the U.S. In 2017, DPA organized a convening 
of researchers and advocates to build the foundation for 
establishing a HAT trial in the United States.
Between all the policy victories and the groundswell of press 
coverage, it’s clear that there is a growing opportunity to not only 
address overdose, but also to change public opinion on drug policy 
more broadly. It is now up to us to ensure the nation’s focus on 
overdose does not lead to a backlash, and that instead we build on 
the momentum to push for more effective, public health-centered 
approaches to problematic drug use in society. 
Many thanks to you for making all of this possible. Your support 
is helping save lives every day, all over the country.Between all the policy 
victories and the 
groundswell of press 
coverage, it’s clear 
that there is a growing 
opportunity to not only 
address overdose, but 
also to change public 
opinion on drug policy 
more broadly. Safety	first
The lack of meaningful public education about drugs, their real 
effects,	and	the	concrete	dangers	around	them—for	example,	that	
opioids are more fatal when mixed with alcohol and 
benzodiazepines—means that those who try drugs are likely to do 
so in riskier ways. DPA is pioneering an innovative approach to drug 
education,	and	in	2017	unveiled	a	new	curriculum,	Safety	First:	Real	
Drug Education for Teens. 
The curriculum, which is currently being piloted and evaluated in a 
New York City high school, comports with National Health Education 
Standards, and is designed to supplant the governments’ decades-
long failed experiment with DARE and “Just Say No”. 
While it does not condone adolescent drug use, DPA’s Safety First 
curriculum does recognize the reality that some youth will choose to 
use drugs. The lessons empower students to make healthier 
decisions by helping them evaluate information about alcohol and 
other drugs, understand the impact of drug policies on personal and 
community health, and develop personal and social strategies to 
manage
Safety	first:	real	drug	education	  
for teens
The	lack	of	meaningful	 public	education	 about	drugs,	their	real	effects,	
and the concrete dangers around them—for example, that mixing 
opioids with alcohol or benzodiazepines can lead to an overdose—
means that those who try drugs are likely to do so in riskier ways. 
That’s why DPA is pioneering an innovative approach to drug 
education.	In	2017	we	completed	the	development	of	a	new,	first-
of-its-kind curriculum, Safety First: Real Drug Education for Teens . 
The curriculum, based in principles of harm reduction, is designed 
to supplant the decades-long failures of abstinence-only programs 
like D.A.R.E.. It comports with National Health Education Standards 
and is currently being piloted and evaluated in a prestigious New 
York City high school. 
While it introduces abstinence as a key strategy for teens, DPA’s 
Safety First curriculum does recognize the reality that some youth 
will choose to use drugs. The lessons empower students to make 
healthier decisions by helping them evaluate information about 
alcohol and other drugs, understand the impact of drug 
policies on personal and community health, and develop 
personal and social strategies to manage the potential 
harms	and	benefits.
7Ending mass criminalization  
in	the	name	of	fighting	drugs
DPA has been at the forefront of many of the United States’ major drug 
sentencing reforms over the past two decades. 
There are many tens of thousands fewer people behind bars today as a 
result	of	DPA’s	efforts—and	hundreds	of	thousands	who	either	did	not 	
go to jail or prison, or who spent less time there, because of our work.
As support for criminal justice reform grows 
around the country, drug policy reform is at 
the cutting-edge of broader efforts to end mass 
criminalization and re-envision the criminal justice system.
Our focus is increasingly on ending criminal punishment for 
drug possession for personal use. Last summer, DPA released 
a groundbreaking report,  It’s Time for the U.S. to Decriminalize 
Drug Use and Possession , which lays out a roadmap for how 
U.S. jurisdictions can move toward ending the criminalization 
of personal drug use, which is now responsible for more than 
a million arrests per year, dwarfing the number of arrests for all 
violent crimes combined.
Internationally and domestically, an unprecedented and wide-
ranging coalition of powerful stakeholders with whom we have 
engaged over the years is now calling for decriminalization. 
These include the United Nations, World Health Organization, 
International Red Cross, Human Rights Watch, the NAACP , 
Movement for Black Lives, and American Public Health 
Association. And policymakers in France, Norway, Ghana, 
Ireland and Canada are actively examining the possibility of 
decriminalizing the personal use of drugs.
In the U.S., we’ve conducted polls and comprehensive messaging 
research to determine how best to move public opinion on 
decriminalization. We’re working with legislators, most notably 
in Maryland, to end the criminalization of drug possession. And 
we’re exploring ways to work with new District Attorneys to 
reduce prosecutions for drug possession and low-level sales. 
We are actively working to educate our partners and allies about 
the benefits of decriminalization—including through a site visit Drug policy reform is 
at the cutting-edge of 
broader	efforts	to	end	
mass criminalization 
and re-envision 
the criminal justice 
system.
9to Portugal, which has 
successfully decriminalized—
and we are exploring possible 
routes to decriminalizing all drugs in 
specific states and cities.
At the local level, we’re leading efforts to initiate and 
implement Law Enforcement Assisted Diversion (LEAD) 
programs—in which, instead of arresting people for drug use, 
law enforcement diverts them to other services and supports—in 
numerous cities across the country such as New York City, Los 
Angeles, Ithaca, Denver, Santa Fe and San Francisco. LEAD 
is the closest thing so far to decriminalization in the U.S. and 
an important step toward our ultimate goal of ending criminal 
penalties for drug use and possession. 
In response to the overdose crisis, some policymakers are 
introducing punitive, counter-productive measures. A critical 
part of our work is fighting back against problematic policies, 
including federal bills that seek to increase harsh sentences for 
opioid-related offenses.
One such set of regressive policies is the significant rise 
we have documented in prosecutions for “drug-induced 
homicide,” in which prosecutors pursue murder or 
manslaughter charges against those who sell or share drugs 
that result in a death. In November 2017, DPA released a 
report on this law enforcement response, which evidence 
suggests is aggravating, rather than helping, the problem. 
DPA was successful in blocking legislation to increase such 
prosecutions in 13 states in 2017 alone.Our focus is 
increasingly on ending 
criminal punishment 
for drug use and 
possession.With your support, DPA is transforming the way people think 
about drugs and prohibition—from a matter of fear, stigma, and 
punishment, to one of fundamental justice, truth, health and 
human rights.
11Responsible & equitable  
marijuana legalization
In recent years we have seen a sea change in public attitudes 
toward marijuana legalization, leading to our growing collection  
of victories. 
In turn, the spread of marijuana legalization is sparking 
new conversations that may ultimately open the 
door to broader drug policy reforms, including 
decriminalization of personal use of drugs.As we continue to 
build on the gains 
we’ve made, we’re 
making sure we 
legalize marijuana in 
a way that recognizes 
and repairs the 
disastrous, decades-
long harms of the 
drug war and mass 
incarceration.DPA is leveraging marijuana policy reform to help communities 
most impacted by prohibition and criminalization. As we continue 
to build on the gains we’ve made, we’re making sure we legalize 
marijuana in a way that recognizes and repairs the disastrous, 
decades-long harms of the drug war and mass incarceration. 
California’s Proposition 64, which DPA played a key leadership 
role in drafting and passing, set a new bar for marijuana 
legalization. California’s new law has provisions for record 
expungement, equity in licensing, and reinvestment in the 
communities that have been most harmed. That’s what we’re 
now trying to replicate in our resident states of New York, New 
Jersey, and New Mexico, and on upcoming ballot initiatives in 
the works for 2018 and 2020.
The past year marked another breakthrough in our work on 
Capitol Hill to reform federal marijuana policy. We worked closely 
with Senator Cory Booker, Representative Barbara Lee, and 
other members of Congress to introduce the Marijuana Justice 
Act, which would end federal marijuana prohibition and contains 
a broad range of provisions to repair the communities most 
devastated by the war on drugs, which are disproportionately 
Black and Brown.
And we’re finding new allies in our efforts to keep Attorney 
General Jeff Sessions from undermining state marijuana 
laws. We played an instrumental role in renewing 
legislation to prevent interference with state 
medical marijuana laws, and we’re actively 
working to expand those protections to 
all legal marijuana states, as well as 
tribal lands in those states. 13Our work goes well beyond legislative and ballot initiative 
campaigns. Ensuring effective implementation is essential.  
We work closely with government agencies to devise 
regulations even as we mobilize external pressure to ensure 
laws are implemented in good faith. Our public relations 
work has generated earned media coverage valued at tens 
of millions of dollars over the years, shaping national and 
international perception in ways that advance our agenda.  
Our work has contributed to a growing conversation on 
marijuana reform internationally, starting with Uruguay’s 
legalization and now spreading to numerous other countries.
Despite all our progress, there’s a long way to go. Police 
continue to use the suspicion of minor marijuana offenses 
to profile, harass, arrest and even lock up massive numbers 
of people, especially in Black and Latino communities. With 
each passing year, over 600,000 people continue to get 
branded with a lifelong criminal record simply because they 
got caught with a small amount of marijuana. Young Black 
and Latino people are arrested for marijuana use at much 
higher rates than white people, even though white people use 
marijuana at similar rates. Families are being ripped apart as 
minor drug offenses such as marijuana possession are being 
used as an excuse to deport people who have lived in the U.S. 
for years and even decades. 
The end of marijuana prohibition in the U.S. is finally within our 
sights. It’s up to us to ensure it happens as soon as possible 
—and to shape new policies grounded in the best interests of 
public health, justice, and human rights.We work closely with 
government agencies 
to devise regulations 
even as we mobilize 
external pressure 
to ensure laws are 
implemented in  
good faith.
15A matter of life and 
death:	 global drug policy
Globally, drug policy reform is in a similar place to where it is in the 
U.S. We face tremendous challenges, with some leaders using the 
drug	war	as	an	excuse	for	horrific	abuses. 	
But we’re also at a time of great opportunity, as the global drug war 
consensus continues to dissolve and more nations take steps 
toward reform.Some of the most grotesque atrocities being committed in the 
name of the drug war today are the extrajudicial killings in the 
Philippines, where death squads, police and vigilantes alike have 
murdered more than 12,000 people suspected of using or selling 
drugs. There is a risk this approach will spread: in Indonesia, 
government leaders have spoken of copying the Philippines, and in 
the U.S., President Donald Trump has praised the Philippines’ drug 
war. In a potentially positive development, the International Criminal 
Court has opened a preliminary investigation into the killings in the 
Philippines. Countries such as China and Singapore continue to 
apply the death penalty for drug offenses, though in a positive move 
that will have to be monitored, Iran has announced it will be moving 
away from that practice. Meanwhile, in Mexico, we’re seeing deaths 
connected to the drug war skyrocket yet again. 
In countries around the world that target people suspected of 
using or selling drugs, much of the focus is on marginalized 
communities, not least of whom are immigrant communities or 
migrant workers. By accusing foreigners of being responsible 
for drug trafficking—as the Trump administration is now doing in 
the U.S.—governments try to excuse xenophobic rhetoric and 
practices and deny the rights of immigrants. 
It is critical that we keep working with our allies globally to 
oppose and end these abuses, while preventing them from 
turning into models that are copied in the U.S. and elsewhere. 
Simultaneously, we’re seeing a growing number of countries move 
in positive directions. Marijuana law reform efforts in the U.S., 
which undercut the crude prohibitionist posture of the federal 
government, has helped to capture the public imagination abroad, 
galvanizing public support for reforms. By accusing foreigners 
of being responsible for 
drug	trafficking—as	 the	
Trump administration 
is now doing in the 
U.S.—governments try 
to excuse xenophobic 
rhetoric and practices 
and deny the rights of 
immigrants.
Major contributors
DPA would like to acknowledge the following people and institutions who contributed 
financially	to	us	in	2017.	Thank	you	for	believing	in	our	mission	and	supporting	our	work.
ACLU Campaign for Smart Justice
Adam Schoenfeld
Andrew Tobias
Angela and Matt Stone
Aria Foundation
Brightwater Fund
California Wellness Foundation
Candace Carroll and Len Simon
Change Happens Foundation
craigslist Charitable Fund
Curtis W. McGraw Foundation
David and Elizabeth Sherman
Doris Goodwin Walbridge 
Foundation
Dr. Bronner’s Magic Soap
The Eric and Cindy Arbanovella 
Fund
Fund for New Jersey
Fund for Policy Reform
Good Ventures
Green Lion Partners
Greenbridge Corporate Counsel
H. van Ameringen Foundation
J.K. Irwin FoundationJason Flom
Jockey Hollow Foundation
Jodie Evans
Joseph Padula Living Trust
Joshua Mailman
Kathy Jaharis
Ken and Teri Hertz
Ken Miller and Lybess Sweezy
Kovler Family Foundation
Laura and John Arnold Foundation
Lawrence and Suzanne Hess
Leafly
Leonard Goodman
Libra Foundation
Lisa and Josh Tane
MAC AIDS Fund
Marijuana Business Daily
Marsha Rosenbaum
McCune Charitable Foundation
New Rachel Foundation
Open Philanthropy Project
Open Society Foundations
Padosi FoundationPhil Harvey
PSEG Foundation
Public Welfare Foundation
Mr. René Ruiz and Dr. Susan Ruiz
Richard Dennis
RiverStyx Foundation
Robert W. Wilson Charitable Trust
Rockefeller Family Fund
San Francisco Foundation
Santa Fe Community Foundation
Selvitelle Foundation, a Donor 
Advised Fund of the U.S. Charitable 
Gift Trust
The Selz Foundation
Shanbrom Family Foundation
Stephen Silberstein
Susan Pernick
Terra Tech Corporation
Vital Projects Fund
Canada is poised 
to become the 
second country in the 
world to approve the legal 
regulation of marijuana—Uruguay 
was the first to do so, in 2013—and 
more are sure to follow. Medical marijuana, 
meanwhile, is rapidly expanding in numerous 
regions, especially Latin America. Colombia, which 
legalized medical marijuana through an Executive Order, is 
now in the process of awarding licenses and is making efforts 
to guarantee that small-scale growers are included in the new 
system. Peru also legalized medical marijuana last year, and 
Mexico has taken steps in the same direction.
And as we work toward ending the criminalization of drug use 
and possession in the U.S., we’re drawing inspiration from the 
success of decriminalization in countries like Portugal—which a 
delegation of DPA staff, partners, and allies recently visited—and 
the Czech Republic. Norway, France, Canada, Ghana, and 
Ireland have recently started conversations at senior levels about 
decriminalizing the personal use of drugs. 
These reforms are turning the tide globally on the war on 
drugs, creating health-centered models for new policies, and 
helping to build momentum for reform in the U.S. as well. And 
it’s only possible because of the work of DPA and our many 
allies and partners around the world. Thank you for helping to 
make this possible.These reforms are 
turning the tide 
globally on the war on 
drugs, creating health-
centered models 
for new policies, 
and helping to build 
momentum for reform 
in the U.S. as well.
19 18Advocacy grants 
DPA’s Advocacy Grants Program promotes policy change and advances drug policy reform 
at the local, state and national levels by strategically funding smaller, geographically limited 
or single-issue projects. Funded annually at a level of roughly $1.2 million, the program 
raises	awareness	and	promotes	policy	change	through	two	vehicles:	the	Promoting	Policy	
Change Program and the Special Opportunities Program.
Promoting Policy Change
A New P .A.T.H.
A New Way of Life Re-Entry Project
AlterNet
BOOM!Health
Brotherhood/Sister Sol
Californians United for a Responsible 
Budget
CANGRESS
Center for Law and Justice
Center for Living and Learning
Colorado Criminal Justice Reform 
Coalition
DRCNet Foundation
Drug Policy Forum of Hawaii
Drug Truth Network
Harm Reduction Action Center
Illinois Consortium on Drug Policy 
(Roosevelt University)
Impact Network
Institute of the Black World, 21st Century
Intercambios Puerto Rico
Justice StrategiesLatino Justice
Legal Services for Prisoners with Children
Los Angeles Regional Reentry Partnership
Maine Harm Reduction Alliance
New York Academy of Medicine
North Carolina Harm Reduction Coalition
Oakland Community Organizations
One Voice Mississippi
Partnership for Safety and Justice
Protect Families First
Public Defender Association
Samuel DeWitt Proctor Conference
San Francisco Drug Users’ Union
Southern Coalition for Social Justice
Texas Criminal Justice Coalition
The Ordinary People Society
VOCAL-NY
Women With A Vision
Young Women UnitedSpecial Opportunities 
Program
A New P .A.T.H.
ACLU Foundation of Oregon
Atlanta Harm Reduction Coalition
California Society of Addiction Medicine
Canadian HIV/AIDS Legal Network
Disability Rights Legal Center
El Punto en la Montana
HIPS
Hood Incubator
Interfaith Movement for Human Equity
Iowans for Safe Access
John Hopkins Bloomberg School of 
Public Health
People for the American Way Foundation
People’s Harm Reduction Alliance
Race Forward
Suncoast Harm Reduction Project
Trinity United Church of Christ
VOCAL-NY
21Drug Policy Alliance Board of Directors 
Christine Downton  
Former Vice Chairman and Founding Partner of 
Pareto Partners
Jodie Evans  
Co-founder, CODEPINK
James E. Ferguson, II  
Senior Partner, Ferguson, Stein, Chambers Law 
Offices
Jason Flom  
President, Lava Records
Ira Glasser, President  
Former Executive Director,  
American Civil Liberties Union
Kenneth Hertz  
Senior Partner, Hertz Lichtenstein &  
Young LLP
David C. Lewis, MD  
Founding Director, Center for Alcohol and 
Addiction Studies, Brown University
Pamela Lichty  
President, Drug Policy Forum of Hawai’iAngela Pacheco  
Former District Attorney, 1st Judicial District, 
New Mexico  
Josiah Rich, MD  
Professor of Medicine and Community Health, 
The Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown 
University
Rev. Edwin Sanders, Secretary  
Senior Servant, Metropolitan 
Interdenominational Church Coordinator, 
Religious Leaders for a More Just and 
Compassionate Drug Policy
George Soros  
Chairman, Soros Fund Management
Ilona Szabó de Carvalho  
Director, Igarapé InstituteStatement of Activities 2017
 Program expenses $ 10,061,890
 Management $ 2,949,800 
 Fundraising $ 1,600,808
Total Expenses  $ 14,612,498Support & Revenue
Contributions unrestricted $ 14,126,747
Contributions temporarily restricted $ (1,289,462)
Total Income  $ 12,837,285
Change in Net Assets
Unrestricted $ (485,751)
Temporarily restricted $ (1,414,462)
Change in Net Assets
Net assets, beginning of year $ 2,609,490
Net assets, end of year $ 709,277Expenses
Total Expenses
$14,612,498
Several Drug Policy Alliance and Drug Policy Action donors have made multi-year pledges to these or ganizations. These unfulfilled pledges are projected 
future revenue that will be received within one to nine years and does not constitute an endowment. These donor commitments reflect a strong current and 
future financial outlook for the Drug Policy Alliance and Drug Policy Action.Drug Policy Alliance  
financials
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents $ 1,590,930
Investments $ 722,237
Grants receivable $ 3,400,957
Prepaid expenses and other assets $ 142,008
Deposits $ 98,946
Property, equipment and leasehold  
improvements (net) $ 5,379,080
Total Assets  $ 11,334,158Liabilities and Net Assets
Liabilities
 Accounts payable and accrued $ 562,640  
 expenses
 Compensated absences $ 349,028
 Note payable $ 7,000,000
 Mortgage payable $ 2,713,213 
Total Liabilities  $ 10,624,881
Net Assets
 Unrestricted $ (3,727,855)
 Temporarily restricted $ 4,437,132
Total Net Assets $ 709,277
Total Liabilities and Net Assets $ 11,334,158Statement of Financial Position, June 1 2016–May 31 2017
22Total Expenses
$2,687,762
Several Drug Policy Alliance and Drug Policy Action donors have made multi-year pledges to these or ganizations. These unfulfilled pledges are projected 
future revenue that will be received within one to nine years and does not constitute an endowment. These donor commitments reflect a strong current and 
future financial outlook for the Drug Policy Alliance and Drug Policy Action.
Statement of Activities 2017
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents $ 13,786,356
Investments $ 5,961,255
Note receivable $ 7,000,000
Prepaid expenses $ 7,420
Grants receivable, net $ 13,657,291
Total Assets  $ 40,412,322
 Program expenses $ 5,927,315
 Management $ 285,932
 Fundraising $ 9,129
Total Expenses  $ 6,222,376Liabilities and Net Assets
Liabilities
 Accounts payable and accrued $ 26,051  
 expenses
Net Assets
 Unrestricted $ 26,728,980
 Temporarily restricted $ 13,657,291
Total Liabilities and Net Assets $ 40,412,322Support & Revenue
Contributions unrestricted $ 9,397,133
Contributions temporarily restricted $ (5,538,365)
Total Income  $ 3,858,768
Change in Net Assets
Unrestricted $ 3,174,757
Temporarily restricted $ (5,538,365)
Change in Net Assets
Net assets, beginning of year $ 42,749,879
Net assets, end of year $ 40,386,271Statement of Financial Position, June 1 2016–May 31 2017
Expenses
Total Expenses
$6,222,376Drug Policy Action  
financials
24California
Los Angeles, CA  
la@drugpolicy.org
Bay Area, CA  
oakland@drugpolicy.org
Colorado
Denver, CO  
co@drugpolicy.org
District of Columbia
Washington, D.C.  
dc@drugpolicy.org
New Jersey
Trenton, NJ  
nj@drugpolicy.org
New Mexico
Santa Fe, NM  
nm@drugpolicy.org
New York
Drug Policy Alliance Headquarters  
131 West 33rd Street, 15th Floor  
New York, NY 10001
212.613.8020 phone  
212.613.8021 fax  
nyc@drugpolicy.org
www.drugpolicy.org
