 
Submitted via Federal eRulemaking Portal  
 
April 23 , 2020  
 
Kyle McGowan , Office of the Chief of Staff  
Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 
 
Re: A gency CDC , Docket No. CDC -2020 -0033 Public Comment Opposing the Interim 
Final Rule on “Suspension of Introduction of Persons Into United States From Designated 
Foreign Countries or Places for Public Health Purposes .” In the Federal Register at 85 F.R. 
16559 . 
 
 
Dear Mr . McGowan : 
 
The Center for Victims of Torture (CVT) respectfully submit s this comment to oppose the 
Interim Final Rule titled “Suspension of Introduction of Persons Into  United States From 
Designated Foreign Countries or Places for Public Health Purposes” issued by the Center s for 
Disease Control  and Prevention  (CDC)  within the Department of Health and Human Services , 
Docket No. CDC -2020 -0033 , on March 24 , 2020 . 
 
The interim final rule , along with the Order invoking the rule’s authority, are  extremely 
detrimental to survi vors of torture, who are likely to comprise a  high percentage of the asylum 
seekers  looking for protection at our border s. It is yet anoth er step by the administration to  
prevent  asylum seekers f rom obtaining refuge in the United States.  DHS has interpreted  the rule, 
along with the accompanying Order, as  grant ing permission to  the agency to  summarily expel all 
individuals who attempt to cross or have cross ed the U.S.  borders, including asylum seekers and  
survivors of torture.  The rule is currently expelling  torture survivors  to places where th ere are 
substantial grounds for believing that they would be in danger of being tortured or persecuted,  
and expos es them to re -traumatization and re -victimization.      
 
For the reasons detailed in the com ments that follow, the CDC should immediately halt  any 
action purportedly allowed under the interim final rule  and dedicate its  efforts to advancing 
policies  and procedures to safe guard individuals  fleeing per secution, including  torture , while 
minimizing the spread of COVID -19 through legitimate public health measures, such as 
comprehensive screenings of asylum seekers.   
 
Thank you for the oppo rtunity to submi t comments on this interim final rule.  Please do not 
hesitate to contact us with any questions or for further information.  
 
Andrea Carcamo /s/       Scott Roehm /s/  
Andrea Carcamo                                                             Scott Roehm  
Senior Policy Counsel                                                     Washington Office Director  
acarcamo@cvt.org                                           sroehm@cvt.org   DETAILED COMMENTS opposing  the department of Health and Human Services 
Interim Final Rule , Docket No. CDC -2020 -0033 on “Suspension of Introduction of Persons 
Into United States From Designated Foreign Countries or Places for Public Health 
Purposes .”   
 
The Center for Victims of Torture (CVT)  welcome s the opportunity to comment on the  
“Suspension of Introduction of Persons Into United States From Designated Foreign Countries or 
Places for Public Health Purposes, ” CDC Docket No. CDC -2020 -0033 (“the proposed rule,” or 
“the rule”).  
 
Founded in 1985 as an independent non -governmental organization, CVT is the oldest and 
largest torture survivor rehabilitation center in the United States and one of the two largest in the 
world.  Through programs operating in the U.S., the Middle East, an d Africa —involving 
psychologists, social workers, physical therapists, physicians, psychiatrists, and nurses —CVT 
annually rebuilds the lives and restores the hope of more than 25,000 primary and secondary 
survivors of torture, other gross human rights viol ations, and severe war -related trauma. The vast 
majority of CVT’s clients in the United States are asylum seekers and refugees.   
CVT helps organize a network of torture treatment programs focused on rebuilding the lives of 
survivors of torture across the nation. These programs serve primarily asylum seekers, asylees, 
and refugees.     
CVT also conducts research, training and advocacy, with each of those programs rooted in 
CVT’s healing services. The organization’s policy advocacy leverages the expertise of  five 
stakeholder groups: survivors, clinicians, human rights lawyers, operational/humanitarian aid 
providers, and foreign policy experts.  
 
I. Background  
 
On March 24 , 2020, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) of the Department of 
Health and Human Services (HHS) published an interim final rule that allows for the creation of 
a “procedure for CDC to suspend the introduction of persons from designated co untries or 
places, if required, in the interest of public health.”  On the same day, the CDC issued an order 
(Order) invoking its  authority under the r ule to suspend the introduction of persons without 
documentation who seek to enter the United States via Mexico or Canada on the grounds that 
they could be “vectors” for transmission of COVID -19. As of the drafting of this comment, the  
order is scheduled to be in effect until May 20, 2020, as it was extended 30 days on April 20, 
2020. The Order can continue t o be renewed for 30 -day periods thereafter. Together, the rule and 
Order invoke baseless public health concerns to justify the violation of domestic and 
international law.    
 II. This R ule, along with the Order , are part of a larger scheme  by the 
administration  to stop  asylum  seekers who come to  the United States  through 
the U.S. southern border  from finding refuge , and to deter others from trying  
 
Through the establishment of policies, agreements, and dubious unilateral changes to well-settled 
asylum law, and now the Trump a dministration’s reaction towards asylum seekers in the face of 
COVID -19, it is clear  the administration seeks  to prevent  individuals —especially, but not only, 
those arriving at our south ern border —from  access ing the U.S. asylum process at all, much less 
actually obtaining asylum . These actions for m the backdrop to the proposed  rule and include the 
following:    
 
Changing asylum  immigration  law: The attorney general certified to himself several  
immigration court cases and decided them in a way that upends longstanding  law. In overruling  
Matter  of A-B- and Matter of L -E-A-, the attorney general made it significantly more difficult 
for individuals from Central Americ a to win their asylum cases, si nce they  largely rely on these 
two cases.  
 
Zero Tolerance leading to Family Separation:  The administration adopted a policy of 
pursuing  criminal charges against  every individual who crossed the border  outside of a port of 
entry , then forcibly separated  children from the parents who were subjected to criminal 
proceedings. Family separation was a cruel practice that traumatiz ed both  children and parents . It 
will have long lasting consequences  for asylum seekers and for the United States .1 
 
Asylum Ban 1.0:  In November 2018 , the president issued a proclamation banning individuals 
who enter the United States between ports of entry from asylum.2 
 
Migrant Protection Protocols:  Established in January 2019, this policy forces asylum seekers 
to wait in dangerous Mexican border cities during the pendency of their cases. Besides placing 
asylum seekers in danger, it undermines their ability to obtain assistance of counsel, greatly 
diminishing their ability to win their case.3   
 
                                                           
1 Center for Victims of Torture.  Asylum Fact 4. Available at  https://www.cvt.org/AsylumFact4  (last accessed on 
12/30/2019) . 
2 https://www .federalregister.gov/documents/2018/11/09/2018 -24594/aliens -subject -to-a-bar-on-entry -under -
certain -presidential -proclamations -procedures -for-protection . 
3 Human Rights First. Delivered to Danger: Illegal Remain in Mexico Policy Imperils Asylum Seekers’  Lives and 
Denies Due Process.  Available at  https://www.humanrightsfirst.org/sites/default/files/Delivered -to-Danger -August -
2019%20.pdf  (last acces sed on 12/30/2019).  Asylum Ban 2.0:  In July 2019 , the administration disqualified from asylum any individual who 
transited through a third country before arriving at the United States  southern border . This 
disqualifies all but Me xican asylum seekers arriving at our southern border from asylum.4 
 
Agreements  with other countries : The Trump administratio n has bullie d countries into 
agreeing to  Asylum Cooperative Agreements  to send asylum seekers to countries that are not 
safe—from which people are fleeing violence and persecution that these countries’ governments 
cannot, or will not, effectively address —including El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras.  These 
agreements  essentially trap asylum seekers in the countries where they are be ing persecuted or 
are otherwise at significant risk of harm .     
 
Work Authorization Restrictions: The administration is seeking to double the time an asylum 
seeker must wait before qualifying for a work permit (from 180 days to 365 days) and to impose 
additional  restrictions on eligibility.  A third  proposed rule eliminates entirely  the time limit  
previously imposed on  USCIS to adjudicate  work authorization  applications , which implicitly 
authorizes the agency  to delay any such adjudication  indefinitely.  The administration also 
proposed a rule that imposes a $490 fee for the initial work permit, further restricting access to 
work authorizations.      
 
Fee for asylum applications: The administration plans to impose a $50 fee for asylum 
applications filed before the U. S. Citizenship and Immigration S ervices  (USCIS) and with the 
Immigration Court , a fee that will  prevent many from having the choice to apply for asylum.    
 
III. As implemented, t he Rule violate s the Refugee Act of 1980  
 
The Refugee Act of 1980 amended the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) by codifying the 
international human rights obligations conferred on the United States as a party to the 1951 
Refugee Convention.  United States  refugee and immigration laws explicitly guarantee 
individuals an opportunity to request protection at ports of entry or after crossing into the United 
States (8 U.S.C. § 1158(a)(1)).   As this rule, through the accomp anying Order, allow s for the 
expulsion of individuals without a screening for relief, the U.S. i s eliminating their opportunity 
to request protection .   
 
IV. The administration’s action s allowed under the rule  violate the 1951 Convention 
Relating to the Status  of Refugees and the 1967 Protocol    
 
The rule abrogates the United States’ obligations under the 1951 Convention Relating to the 
Status of Refugees (the Refugee  Convention). The United States, while not a party to the 1951 
                                                           
4 https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2019/07/16/2019 -15246/asylum -eligibility -and-procedural -
modifications  Refugee Convention itself, did r atify the 1967 Protocol. In ratifying the 1967 Protocol, the 
United States bound itself to the obligations of the 1951 Refugee Convention as well.5 Under the 
Refugee  Convention, any noncitizen in the U .S. can apply for asylum “whether or not at a 
designated port of arrival” and “irrespective of [their immigration] status.”6 Contracting States 
shall not expel a refugee lawfully in their territories save  on grounds of national security or 
public order.7 The expulsion of such a refugee shall be only in “pursuance of a decision reached 
in acc ordance with due process of law. ”8 The rule has allowed  the U .S. government to summarily 
remove  (“expel ”) individuals at the  southern and northern  border s without screening them for 
humanitarian protection, thereby taking away their ability to pres ent a case to demonstrate they 
are refugees.   Although the CDC  might invoke  the COVID -19 pandemic as a “national security 
or public order” justification , the expu lsions are still not acceptable . UNHCR, the U.N. Refugee 
Agency, has clarified in guidance on COVID -19 that states cannot impose “blanket measure[s] to 
preclude the admission of refugees or a sylum -seekers” in response to the COVID -19 pandemic.   
The Refugee Convention also states that “ no Contracting State shall expel or return (“refouler”) a 
refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where his life or freedom would 
be threatened on account of his race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social 
group or political opinion.”9  UNHCR has made clear  that this is “an essential and non -derogable 
component of in ternational refugee protection .” Guidance reportedly provided  to the U.S. Border 
Patrol instructing agents to expel individuals under t he authority provided by this rule lacks 
reference  to protections for a sylum -seekers under the Refugee Convention and Protocol.  These 
expulsions are returning Central Americans to d angerous Mexican border cities where asylum 
seekers are specifically targeted for extortion, sexual violence, kidnapping, and even torture. The 
administration is interp reting its authority under the r ule as superseding its mandatory duty of 
non-refoulement . As of April 9, 2020 the Administration had alrea dy expelled 10,000 migrants .  
This r ule is allowing for the  mass refoulement of asylum -seekers.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
5 UN General Assembly,  Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees , 31 January 1967,  United Nations, Treaty 
Series, vol. 606, p. 267,  Article  1, available at: https://www.refworld.org/docid/3ae6b3ae4.html . 
6 8 USC §1158(a)(1).  
7 UN General Assembly,  Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees , 28 July 1951,  United Nations, Treaty 
Series, vol. 189, p. 137,  Article 32.1, available at: https://www.refworld.org/docid/3be01b964.html   
8 UN General Assembly,  Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees , 28 July 1951,  United Nations, Treaty 
Series, vol. 189, p. 137,  Article 32.2, availabl e at: https://www.refworld.org/docid/3be01b964.html   
9 UN General Assembly,  Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees , 28 July 1951,  United Nations, Treaty 
Series, vol. 189, p. 137,  Article 33.1, available at: https://www.refworld.org/docid/3be01b964.html   V. The administration’s actions violate the U.N. Convention Against Torture  and 
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment  
 
The United States signed the Convention against  Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or 
Degrading Treatment or Punishment ( CAT ) in 1988 and it was codified into U.S. law in 1998.10 
Article 3 of the Convention states that “No State Party shall expel, return (" refouler") or extradite 
a person to another State where there are substantial grounds for believing that he would be in 
danger of being subjected to torture.”  The Committee against Torture, which monitors 
implementation of CAT, has interpreted  the non-refoulement  obligation to be “similarly  
absolute ” as the prohibition on torture itself ; in other words,  “no exceptional circumstances 
whatsoever, whether a state of war or a threat of war, internal political instability or any other 
public emergency, may be invoked as a justification ” for any exception to the obligat ion. 
 
The “expulsions ” DHS has undertaken under the r ule and Order contemplate return of 
individuals to the countries they have fled as well as to dangerous Mexican border cities without 
appropria te screenings in violation  of the principle of non-refoulement  under CAT.  Reports  show 
that a significant number of migrants have been tortured in  these Mexican cities. While internal 
guidance  reportedly  circulated by DHS to U.S. Border Protection (CBP) indicates that survivors 
of torture  might be refer red to an asylum officer if the  survivor  makes an “affirmative, 
spontaneous, and reasonably believable claim” that they might be tortured, in practice  this quasi -
screening effort will be ineffectual, as it  is extremely unlikely that someone who was tortu red 
would communicate this effectively and without any prompting to a uniformed (and likely 
armed) officer.  
 
Conclusion  
 
The administration must halt the implement ation of  the proposed rule, which will continue to 
harm the asylum system, asylum seekers generally, and survivors of torture specifically.   
 
 
                                                           
10 Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT), Dec. 10, 
1984, 1988 U.S.T. 202, 1465 U.N.T.S. 85 (enacted into U.S. Law on October 21, 1998 by Fiscal Year 1999  
Omnibus Consolidated and emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act, Pub. L. No. 104 -277, Div. G, Sub. B, 
Title XXI S2242 of the foreign Affairs Reform and Restructuring Act of 1998, Pub. L. No. 105 -277, 112 Stat. 2681 -
822 (1998)  