 
                   
 
Statement for the Record by th e Center for Victims of Torture  
U.S. House of Representatives  Committee on Homeland Security on  
“The Way Forward on Border Security.”  
March  6, 2019  
 
 
The Center for Victims of Torture (CVT) commends the  House Homeland Security  Committee 
for holding an oversight hearing on the Trump Administration’s border policies , which have 
contributed to the creation of an actual  crisis at the U.S. southern border. We appreciate the 
opportunity to submit this statemen t for the record.1   
  
Founded in 1985 as an independent non -governmental organization, the Center for Victims of 
Torture  is the oldest and largest torture survivor rehabilitation center in the United States and one 
of the two largest  in the world. Through programs operating in the U.S., the Middle East, and 
Africa —involving psychologists, social workers, physical therapists, physicians, psychiatrists, 
and nurses —CVT annually rebuilds the lives of nearly 25,000 primary and secondary su rvivors, 
including children.  CVT also conducts research, training, and advocacy, with each of those 
programs rooted in CVT’s healing services. The organization’s policy advocacy leverages the 
expertise of five stakeholder groups: survivors, clinicians, hum an rights lawyers, operational / 
humanitarian aid providers, and foreign policy experts.  The vast majority of CVT’s clients in the 
United States are asylum seekers. Indeed, according to the Department of Health and Human 
Services Office of Refugee Resettle ment, research indicates that 44% of asylum seekers, asylees 
and refugees now living in the Unite d State s are torture survivors.2   
 
CVT ’s extensive experience providing mental health services to asylum seekers and refugees in 
the United States and around the globe uniquely positions us to speak to the adverse effects 
certain border practices  have on the mental health of children and adults fle eing persecution,  as 
                                                           
1 For questions or for more information about CVT’s work in this area and on related issues, please contact Andrea 
Carcamo, Senior Policy Counsel at the Center for Victims of Torture at acarcamo@cvt.org .  
2 Office of Refugee Resettlement. Survivors of Torture Program. Retrieved from 
https://www.acf.hhs.gov/orr/programs/ survivors -of-torture  
 
 well as t he United States’ dwindling reputation a s a global leader in human rights . We focus here 
on two such practices: the migrant protection protocols  and family separation . 
 
The Migrant Protection Protocols are Putting Asylum Seekers at Risk of Further 
Traumatization  
 
Forcing people seeking safe haven in the United States to remain in Mexico during the pen dency 
of the their asylum cases is unnecessary, unsafe, and will exacerbate the pain and suffering the 
torture and trauma survivors already are experiencing.  
 
According to t he head of Mexico’s National Migration Institute, Tonatiuh Guillen,  Mexico is not 
prepared to host thousands of asylum  seekers for years, or even months3. Its government simply 
is not equipped for the task the United States has imposed  on it, especially when it  comes to 
hosting torture and trauma  survivors . Border cities are not sa fe for residents, much less for 
vulnerable populations, such as survivors of torture fleeing persecution.4 Many asylum seekers 
will be at high risk of re -victimiz ation by becoming targets for human trafficking, labor 
exploitation, rape, and ki dnapping. A significant number of survivors of torture from Ce ntral 
America suffer violence at the hands of gangs that have powerful networks extending to 
Mexico ,5 making the country especially unsafe.  
Even putting aside the host of serious dangers to w hich asylum seekers are exposed and 
additionally susceptible as a result of having to remain in Mexico, the policy is damaging. One of 
the most valuable resources survivors of torture  have to help their recovery is the support of 
friends, family and fellow  countrymen. Many of the individuals who choose to flee to the United 
States do so because they have connections through friends or family.  These contacts can prove 
invaluable for asylum seek ing survivors of torture or other trauma, as their contacts help them 
navigate within a new culture and language. CVT sees this with our clients ; for example, 
Ethiopians who come to Minnesota because they have connections to family or to fellow 
Ethiopians  there . Lack of access to these networks , and the support they pro vide,  adds stress and 
exacerbate s trauma .    
 
 
                                                           
3 McDon nell, Patrick (Dec. 21, 2018). Los Angeles  Times. Mexico is Unprepared for the Deal it Made with the U. S. 
on asylum seekers, immigration chief says. Retrieved from  https://www.latimes.com/world/mexico -americas/la -
fg-mexico -remain -20181221 -story.html   
4 Human Rights First (February, 2019). A Sordid  Scheme: The Trump Administration ’s Illegal Return of Asylum 
Seekers to Mexico. Retrieved from https://www.humanrightsfirst.org/sites/default/files/A_Sordid_Scheme.pdf  . 
5 Squires, Scott (March 8, 2018). In  Sight Crime. MS 13 Fe ud Spreads  to Mexico , but G ang’s Presence Remains 
Limited. Retrieved from https://www.insightcrime.org/news/brief/ms13 -feud -spreads -mexico -gangs -presence -
remains -limited/    
 Family Separation Exacerbates the Trauma faced by Families fleeing Persecution  
 
A significant number o f the Central American  families  who come to the United States  are 
survivors of torture ,6 and many more are fleeing persecution.  Because of the nature of t rauma , 
oftentimes children  who accompany  traumatized parents experience symptoms as secondary 
survivors  (even if they have not been directly harmed previously) . These highly -traumatized 
popu lations  are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of detention and separation from 
their loved ones.   
 
According to Susan Jasko MSW, LICSW , a CVT therapist with  over 20 years of  clinical  
experience working with children and  families:  
 
“When children are young, they are bonding with their parents, and good bonding leads to 
positive relationships with other people in adolescence and adulthood.  Breaking that bon d can 
have consequences in the child’s  ability to socialize with others.  When childr en come from an 
area where they experienced violence, it teaches them that the world is not safe.  Then, when 
they are separated from their parent, this idea is solidified, which can have a profound effect o n 
the development of the child.  I f a child lives  in a state of trauma, as children fleeing conflict 
areas that are separated from their families do, it can affect their brain development at a 
biological level as well.”    
 
Many of the children Ms. Jasko  has treated over the years were struggling with sep aration from 
or loss of parents, and  all presented severe symptoms, including nightmares, fears, anxiety and 
depression.   
 
Ms. Jasko’s experience is far from unique. Indeed, o ver 20,000 medical and mental health 
professionals and researchers working in th e United States (including Andrea Northwood, CVT 
director of client services), have previou sly made cl ear—directly to the DHS —that “[t]he 
relationship of parents and children is the strongest social tie most people experience, and a 
threat to that tie is among the most traumatic events people can experience.”7 They further 
explained  that separating a child from a parent causes an effect known as adverse childh ood 
experience (ACE), which can  lead to multiple forms of impairment and increased risk of serious  
mental health conditions including post -traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).    
 
                                                           
6 Meyer and Pachico (Feb 1, 2018). Washington Office on Latin America. Fact Sheet: U.S. Immigration and Central 
American Asylum Seekers. Retrieved from https://www.wola.org/analysis/fact -sheet -united -states -
immigrationcentral -american -asylum -seekers/ .  
7 Physicians for Human Rights (June 14, 2018). Letter to Secretary Nielsen and Attorney General Sessions. 
Retrieved from https://s3.amazonaws.com/PHR_other/Separation_Letter_FINAL .pdf.    
 Disturbingly, this information was  not new  to officials from the Trump administration : on July 
31, 2018 , Commander Jonathan White , formerly of the Department of Health and Human 
Services , testified that he raised the very real concern that separating families could cause long -
term emotional and psychological effects on  children  when the policy  was presented  to him 
before its implementation .8       
 
While the damage to children mus t be central , we urge Members also to appreciate  the harm  
family separation has caused, and continues to cause, to  affected parents . At CVT , 67 percent of 
U.S. based clients —refugees and asylum seekers from around the world —have been separated 
from their families, sometimes by force and other times by nec essity when clients  must  flee 
without warning to escape  imminent danger. During her time at CVT,  in addition to her work 
with children , Ms. Jasko has also treated adult clients seeking asylum who had n o option but to 
leave  their country without th eir children. “T he uncertainty of not knowing when they will next 
see their children makes  me worry about my client s,” she says,  “as they express feelings of 
hopelessness and suicidal thoughts.”    
 
Family Separatio n is a Technique  Utilized by Tyrants and Other Oppressors  That t he 
United States Has Long Condemned   
 
CVT has served  hundreds  of children , some of whom were  subjected to separation as a tool  to 
coerce  their parents . For example, Jana, a 10 -year-old Syrian girl, endured forced separation 
from her family and imprisonment before crossing the Syrian -Jordanian border seeking safety. 
She had been detained —along with other children—for nearly a month in an attempt to  force her 
father to turn himself in. He did, and he was murdered.  Saad ’s little brother , a young boy, was 
held for two weeks in prison and tortured.  The militia sent pictures of his abuse to Saad’s family 
with a message warning them to leave Iraq. When his little brother wa s returned to them, Saad 
and his family fled to Jordan.  
 
This is what tyrants, dictators, and other  oppressors  do. It is  not how democracies  are supposed 
to behave . And yet , the Trump Administration embraced the practice of separating children  from 
their p arents  admittedly as a deterrent: to dissuade vulnerable people from seeking safe haven in 
the United States at all, and for those it did not entirely deter then to coerce them  into forgo ing 
their right to seek asylum and to sign a deportation order, which  for many would return them to 
countries and circumstances where they face significant risk of further persecution, violence, or 
even death.9  
                                                           
8 C-Span (July 13, 2018). Public Health Service Commander Warned Against Family Separation. Retrieved from 
https://www.c -span.org/video /?c4742969/public -health -service -commander -warned -family -separations .   
9 Van Schaak, Beth (Nov 27, 2018). Just Security. New Proof Surfaces that Family Separation was About Deterrence 
and Punishment. Retrieved from https://www.justsecurity.org/61621/proof -surfaces -family -separationdeterrence -
punishment/  ; Bernal, Rafael (June 19, 2018). The Hill. HHS Official Says Family Separation Policy will ‘have 
  
  
Family separation of this kind is not only immoral, it is also unlawful. Most directly, Article 31 
of the Refuge e Convention prohibits contracting states from “impos[ing] penalties” on the basis 
of how a refugee arrived to the U.S. —whether through illegal entry, pre sence, or without 
authorization. Indeed, the international community has recognized the importance of a child’s 
bond with a parent, for example through Article 9 of the United Nations Conventions on the 
Rights of the Child  (CRC) , 196 countries have agreed that they “ shall ensure that a child shall 
not be separated from his or her parents against their will , except when competent authorities 
subject to judicial review determine, in accordance with applicable law and pr ocedures, that such 
separation is  necessary for the best interests of the  child.”10 Although the U.S. has not ratified 
this treaty (the only country in the world not to have done so), as a signatory the U.S. is bound to 
not engage in actions that “defeat” the CRC’s “object and purpose.”11 
 
The United States  must not underestimate  how its  actions reverberate globally; in particular the 
implicit permission that U.S. practice  might give other nations to act the same. The United States 
cannot  maintain a credible global  leader ship role in  the human rights sphere if separating 
families to deter asylum seekers  is the kind of example the executive branch is going to set.     
 
Conclusion  and Recommendations  
  
Custom and Border Patrol’s actions at the border  are the  actual crisis at our Southern border, 
which have  a profound impact on the lives of  some of  the world’s most vulnerable people, 
torture survivors among them.  The practice s of family separation and returning asylum seekers to 
Mexico  must be stopped, those responsible should be held accountable, victims de serve redress, 
and preventive mechanisms need to be adopted. More specifically , we urge the executive branch 
and Congress to take the following actions, respectively:  
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Deterrence Effect.’ Retrieved from https://thehill.com/latino/393000 -hhs-official -says -family -separationpolicy -will-
have -deterrence -effect    
10 United Nations Human Rights, Office of the High Commissioner (Sept 2, 1990). Convention on the Rights of the 
Child. Retrieved from https://www.ohchr.org/en/professionalintere st/pages/crc.aspx    
11 United Nations Treaty Collection, Chapter XXIII (May 23, 1969). Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, Article 
18. Retrieved from 
https://treaties.un.org/pages/ViewDetailsIII.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=XXIII1&chapter=23&Temp=mtdsg3&c la 
ng=_en.   Although the United States is not a party to the Vienna Convention, “many commentators claim that 
Article 18 reflects customary international law that is binding on nations that have not joined the Convention, a 
claim that the United States has  not denied.” Curtis A. Bradley, Unratified Treaties, Domestic Politics, and the U.S. 
Constitution, 48 Harv. Int’l L. J. 307, 307 -308 & n.1 (2007); see also Roper v. Simmons, 543 U.S. 551 (2005) 
(acknowledging “the overwhelming weight of international opin ion against the juvenile death penalty,” including 
the direct prohibition in Article 37 of the CRC).   
 Executive branch:  
 
 Stop the expansion and implementat ion of the Migration Protection Protocols.   
 Immediately reunify all families.   
 End the practice of separating families to deter individuals from coming to the United 
States and seeking refuge.    
 Ensure family separation determinations are not arbitrary, but instead made by child 
welfare professionals where the child’s safety is the primary consideration . 
 Whenever there is an appropriate determination to separate a child from a parent for the 
child’s safety, ensure there is an adequate s ystem to track the family and their 
relationship to each other.  
 ICE and CBP must facilitate  communications between a child and a parent who have 
been separated.  
 
Congress  
 
 Conduct rigorous , ongoing oversight of family separation and its consequences, with an 
immediate focus on ensur ing the executive branch reunifies families  and discontinue s the 
practice of arbitrary family separation.  
 Support the REUNITE Act.  
 
 