Submitted via Federal eRulemaking Portal  
 
August 10 , 2020  
 
Lauren Alder Reid, Assistant Director,  
Office of Policy   
Executiv e Office for Immigration Review   
Department of Justice  
 
Andrew Davidson, Asylum Division Chief  
Refugee, Asylum and International Affairs Directorate  
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services  
Department of Homeland Security  
 
Re: Public Comment Opposing  Proposed Rules  on Security Bars and Processing Docket 
Number USCIS 2020 -0013  / RIN 1615 -AC57; A.G. Order No. 4747 -2020  / RIN 1125 -AB08  
  
Dear Ms. Alder Reid  and Mr. Davidson : 
 
The Center for Victims of Torture  (CVT)  respectfully submit s this comment in opposition to  the 
Proposed Rule by the Department of Justice (DOJ) and Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS) on Security Bars and Processing, Docket No. USCIS 2020 -0013 published  on July 9,  
2020. 
 
The Proposed R ule will put the lives and wellbeing of torture  survivors —who comprise a 
shocking percentage of the U.S. refuge e and asylum seeking populations —at needless 
heightened risk. As the comments that follow make clear, there is no legitimate public health or 
national security rationale for excluding asylum seekers. Those claims are a pretext for  yet 
another attempt  by the administration to  prevent  asylum seekers fr om pursuing  humanitarian 
relief  in the United States. Were the rule to take effect as proposed, asylum seekers would be 
returned to danger in violation of domestic and international law.      
 
DOJ and DHS  should immediately withdraw their current proposal and dedicat e their efforts to 
advancing policies that safeguard individuals fleeing persecution, including torture.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit comments on this Proposed Rule. Please do not hesitate 
to contact us with any questions or for further inform ation.  
 
 
Andrea Carcamo /s/   Darlene Lynch /s/     Scott Roehm /s/                                                              
Senior Policy Counsel            Head of External Relations (CVT Georgia)    Washington Director  
acarcamo@cvt.org                   dlynch@cvt.org                         sroehm@cvt.org  
   
 DETAILED COMMENTS in opposition to proposed r ule on Security Bars and Processing 
Docket Number USCIS 2020 -0013/RIN  1615 -AC57; A.G. Order No. 4747 -2020 / RIN 1125 -
AB08 . 
 
The Center for Victims of Torture (CVT) welcomes the opportunity to comment on the  proposed 
rule titled  “Security Bars and Processing,” Docket No. USCIS 2020 -0013 ( “the Proposed Rule,” 
or “the R ule”).  
 
Founded in 1985 as an independent non -governmental organization, CVT is the oldest and 
largest torture survivor rehabilitation center in the United States an d one of the two largest in the 
world. Through programs operating in the U.S., the Middle East, and Africa —involving 
psychologists, social workers, physical therapists, physicians, psychiatrists, and nurses —CVT 
annually rebuilds the lives and restores the hope of more than 25,000 primary and secondary 
survivors of torture, other gross human rights violations, and severe war -related trauma. The vast 
majority of CVT’s clients in the United States are asylum seekers.    
 
Since 20 16, CVT has operated a torture survivor rehabilitation center in the state of Georgia, 
home to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and other leading public health 
institutions and academic programs. As a member of the Georgia Global Health Alliance, it 
works in partnership wi th these groups to advance science -based public health initiatives, 
particularly with respect to mental health.   
 
CVT also conducts research, training and advocacy, with each of those programs rooted in 
CVT’s healing services. The organization’s policy ad vocacy leverages the expertise of five 
stakeholder groups: survivors, clinicians, human rights lawyers, operational/humanitarian aid 
providers, and foreign policy experts. CVT helps organize a network of torture treatment 
programs focused on rebuilding the  lives of survivors of torture across the nation. These 
programs serve primarily asylum seekers, asylees, and refugees.    
 
I. Background  
 
On Ju ly 9, 2020 United States Citizenship and Immigration Services  (a component of DHS ) and 
the Executive Office for Immigration Review  (a component of DOJ) (“the agencies”)  published 
jointly the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking that  is the subject of this comment.   
 
The Proposed Rule would make drastic changes to asylum and related  humanitarian protection s 
designed by Congress to ensure that the United States  can efficiently and eff ectively recognize  
and process  individuals who are  refugees and deserve our protection. More specifically, the Rule  
purports to “mitigate the risk of a deadly communicable diseas e being brought to the United 
States, or being further spread within the country,” through four dangerous regulatory changes:  
 
First, the Proposed R ule would add public health emergencies to the national security grounds on 
which people seeking asylum or w ithholding of  removal  could be denied. Specifically, asylum 
seekers for whom DHS determines that “entry would pose a risk of further spreading infectious 
or highly contagious illnesses or diseases, because of declared public health emergencies in the 
Unite d States or because of conditions in their country of origin or point of embarkation to the United States” would be banned for “pos[ing] a significant danger to the security of the United 
States.”  
 
Second, the R ule would make these same bars applicable at the initial credible fear screening 
stage for asylum seekers in expedited removal proceedings. In other words, DHS would have the 
power to swiftly deport asylum seekers who DHS determines pose “a danger to the s ecurity of 
the United States” on public health grounds, without affording them basic due process 
protections.  
 
Third, the R ule would force those seeking protection under the Convention against Torture  and 
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment of Pun ishment  (CAT) to demonstrate , 
affirmatively,  at the initial credible fear screening stage that they would more likely than not be 
tortured in their country of removal.  
 
Finally, even for those who manage at this initial stage to convince DHS that it is mo re likely 
than not that they would be tortured in their prosp ective country of removal, the R ule would 
nevertheless allow removal to a third country.  
 
As Human Rights First has explained ,1 if the R ule were to take effect as proposed, it would have 
consequences both devastating and senseless. This is especially the case given the 
administration’s concurrent efforts to expand expedited processing of asylum seekers into the 
interior of the Uni ted States. For example, the R ule could:  
 
 “Bar from asylum ( and the lesser withholding of removal relief) asylum -seeking nurses, 
doctors, health aides, cleaners and other essential personnel who have ‘come into contact 
with’ COVID -19 while risking their lives in the pandemic response in the United States;  
 
 Bar asyl um-seekers from refugee protections who have fallen ill from COVID -19 while 
in the United States waiting for an asylum hearing, including asylum -seekers who 
contract  coronavirus in ICE detention centers;  
 
 Bar asylum -seekers from refugee protection merely b ecause they recently came from a 
country other than the United States where COVID -19 is prevalent, even if they have a 
well-founded fear of persecution;  
 
 Block asylum -seekers coming to U.S. airports, land ports of entry, or after crossing the 
border from r equesting protection, if they were recently in a country where COVID -19 is 
prevalent, such as Russia, Brazil,  [and]  El Salvador, even if they are not in fact infected; 
… 
 
                                                           
1 Trump Administration Expands Public Health Pretext to Block Asylum -Seekers, July 8, 2020,  
 https://www.humanrightsfirst.org/press -release/trump -administration -expands -public -health -pretext -
block -asylum -seekers    Allow the administration to potentially extend the ban to other  diseases ,2 including 
treatable conditions like gonorrhea, syphilis and TB, to block even more asylum -seekers.           
 
II. The Proposed R ule is part of a larger scheme to end asylum  
 
Through the establishment of policies, agreements, and dubious unilateral changes to well -settled 
asylum law, it is clear that the Trump administration seeks to prevent individuals —especially, 
but not only, those arriving at our south ern border —from accessing the U.S. asylum process at 
all, much less actually obtaining asylum. These actions form the backdrop to the proposed rule 
and include the following:   
 
Proposed Rule D ismantling Asylum : On June 15, 2020 the DHS and DOJ proposed  jointly a 
rule that  gives rise to the most sweeping changes to asylum since the 1996 overhaul of the 
Immigration  and Nationality Act through the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigration 
Responsibility Act (IIRIRA).  It severely limits the number of individuals who will qualify for 
asylum , which will lead  to the removal of survivors of torture and other trauma.    
 
Blanket Ban for asylum seekers at the borders: On March 19, 2020 the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC) issued an order allowing the closure of the U.S. borders using 
COVID -19 as a public health justification.  The order allows DHS to remov e those seeking 
protection at the border and between ports of entry  without implementing a procedure to 
determine whether they might qualify for humanitarian protection.    
 
Changing asylum immigration  case law: The attorney general certified to himself sev eral 
immigration court cases and decided them in a way that upends longstanding law. In overruling 
Matter of A -B- and Matter of L -E-A-, the attorney general made it significantly more difficult 
for individuals from Central America to win their asylum cases , since they largely rely on these 
two cases.  
 
Zero Tolerance leading to Family Separation:  The administration adopted a policy of 
pursuing criminal charges against every  individual , including asylum seekers,  who crossed the 
border outside of a port of en try, then forcibly separated children from the parents who were 
subjected to criminal proceedings. Family separation was a cruel practice  that will have long 
lasting consequences for  asylum seekers and  the United States.3 
 
Asylum Ban 1.0:  In November 2018, the president issued a proclamation banning individuals 
who enter the United States between ports of entry from asylum.4 
 
                                                           
2 USCIS, Policy Manual, Chapter 6 - Communicable Disease s of Public Health Significance,  
https://www.uscis.gov/policy -manual/volume -8-part-b-chapter -6  
3 Center for Victims of Torture , 8 Facts about Refugees and Asylum Seekers, Fact 4 , 
https://www.cvt.org/AsylumFact4  
4 Aliens Subject to a Bar on Entry Under Certain Presidential Proclamations; Procedures for P rotection 
Claims, https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2018/11/09/2018 -24594/aliens -subject -to-a-bar-on-
entry -under -certain -presidential -proclamations -procedures -for-protection  Migrant Protection Protocols:  Established in January 2019, this policy forces asylum seekers 
to wait in dangerous M exican border cities during the pendency of their cases. Besides placing 
asylum seekers in danger, it undermines their ability to obtain assistance of counsel, greatly 
diminishing their ability to win their case.5   
 
Asylum Ban 2.0:  In July 2019, the admin istration disqualified from asylum any individual who 
transited through a third country before arriving at the United States southern border. This 
disqualifies all but Mexican asylum seekers arriving at our southern border from asylum.6 
 
Agreements with ot her countries:  The Trump administration has forced some countries  that are 
not safe  into entering into “safe third country” agreements —from which people are fleeing 
violence and persecution that these countries’ governments cannot, or will not, effectively  
address —including El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras.     
 
Fees for Asylum seekers: The administration has finalized a rule creating fees for asylum 
applications and initial work authorizations for asylum seekers.  Beginning in October  2020 , 
asylum seek ers will have to pay $50 to submit an asylum application and $550 for their initial 
work authorization.   
 
Work Authorization Restrictions: The administration recently  finalized a rule that  doubles the 
time an asylum seeker must wait before qualif ying for a work permit (from 150  days to 365 
days) and imposes additional restrictions on eligibility. Yet a nother final rule  eliminates entirely 
the time limit previously imposed on USCIS to adjudicate work authorization applications, 
which implicitly authorizes t he agency to delay any such adjudication indefinitely.     
 
III. A 30-day comment period  does not provide  the public  sufficient time to provide  
diverse, evidence -based  feedback   
 
Under the Administrative Procedures Act, the agencies have a duty: “(1) to ensure that agency 
regulations are tested via exposure to diverse public comment, (2) to ensure fairness to affected 
parties, and (3) to give affected parties an opportunity to develop evidence in the record to 
support their objections to the rule and thereby enh ance the quality of judicial review.”7  
 
Moreover, as 31 organizations explained in an August 6 letter to DOJ and DHS:  
 
Executive Order 12866 requires agencies to “…afford the public a meaningful 
opportunity to comment on any proposed regulation, which in most cases should include 
                                                           
5 Human Rights First. Delivered to Danger: Illegal Remain in Mexico Policy Imperils Asylum Seekers’ 
Lives and Denies Due Process , https://www.humanrightsfirst.org/sites/default/files/Delivered -to-Danger -
August -2019%20.pdf  (last accessed on 12/30/2019)  
6 Asylum Eligibility and Procedural Modifications, A Rule by  the Homeland  Security  Department  and 
the Executive  Office  for Immigration  Review  on 07/16/2019,  
https:/ /www.federalregister.gov/documents/2019/07/16/2019 -15246/asylum -eligibility -and-procedural -
modifications  
7 Capital Area Immigrants’ Rights Coalition (CAIR) v. Trump , No. 19 -cv-2117, ECF No. 72, 24 -25 
(D.D.C. June 30, 2020) (internal citations omitted).  a comment period of not less than 60 days.” Executive Order 13563 likewise directs 
agencies to “...afford the public a meaningful opportunity to comment through the 
Internet on any proposed regulation, with a comment period that s hould generally be at 
least 60 days.” There is no compelling reason to except the NPRM from the Executive 
Orders’ general rule of providing a minimum of 60 days for public comment. Rather, the 
highly technical, nuanced, legal and policy issues the NPRM add resses —and, above all, 
the severe human cost it is certain to inflict —illustrate why a minimum of 60 days must 
be allowed for the public to file comments in response to the rule.8 
 
A 30 day comment period is especially unreasonable during the pandemic, when challenges 
ranging from child -care, to caring for sick relatives, to the stress of the pandemic itself  will make 
it impossible for many to meaningfully respond absent the typical 60 day period.   
 
IV. Excluding asylum seekers on specious “public health” grounds would undermine 
national security  
 
a. Barring asylum seekers would serve no legitimate public health purpose  
 
Over the last several months, scores of public health professionals have made clear that barring 
asylum seekers serves no le gitimate public health purpose.9 
 
In May, 57 public health experts wrote to DHS Secretary Alex Azar and Centers for Disease 
Control Director Robert Redfield objecting to the March 20 CDC order that cl oses the U.S. 
border to Mexico and Canada (now indefinitely ) to those who  lack “valid travel papers” —such 
as asylum -seekers —under the guise of protecting public health.  
 
“There is no public health rationale for denying admission to individuals based on le gal status,” 
the experts wrote.   
 
The order’s stated justification is that the migrants and asylum seekers who are subject to 
it would normally be held by Customs and Border Protection (CBP) in “congregate 
settings” for prolonged periods of time. However,  instead of holding individuals in 
facilities widely recognized as dangerous and unsanitary,  CBP has the discretion and 
legal authority to parole adults and families seeking asylum or other legal protection, and 
the government could facilitate the expediti ous release of unaccompanied children from 
custody.  A recent study found that of several hundred asylum seekers currently at the 
Mexico -U.S. border, 92 percent have family or friends they could live with in the United 
                                                           
8 Request to Provide a Minimum of 60 days for Public Comment in Response to the Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS) United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) and Department 
of Justice (DOJ) Executive Office for Immigration Review (EOIR) (th e Departments) Joint Notice of 
Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM), July 24, 2020, https:// s33660.pcdn.co/wp -
content/uploads/2020/08/Comment -Period -Extension -Request_Security -Bars-and-Processing -RIN-1615 -
AC57 -Docket -No.-USCIS -2020 -0013 -.pdf 
9 Joanna Naples -Mitchell , There Is No Public Health Rationale for a Categorical Ban on Asylum Seekers, 
Just Security, April 17, 2020,  https://www.justsecurity.org/69747/there -is-no-public -health -rationale -for-
a-categorical -ban-on-asylum -seekers/   States.  Allowing individuals to shelte r in place with family or friends would reduce the 
need for quarantine facilities, resolving another concern stated in the CDC order.10 
 
The experts then provided a roadmap , using evidence -based public health measures, for safely 
processing asylum seekers and others crossing the U.S. border.  
 
The politicization of public health has been particularly troubling to public health professionals 
based in Georgia, which is not only the home of the CDC, but has also been long -recognized as a 
national center of publ ic health leadership and expertise.  In June, Georgia public health experts 
spoke out in opposition to the administration’s  misuse of the CDC’s public health authority to 
shut the U.S. border . In a rare rebuke of the CDC in its own backyard, a coalition of more than 
40 professionals condemned the CDC’s order and urged the director to rescind it:  
 
In Georgia, we take justifiable pride in the CDC and applaud it when it insists on science -
based public health measures in the f ace of political attacks, including during the current 
pandemic … [F]or this reason, we are deeply dismayed that you have chosen to sacrifice 
CDC’s independence and allow CDC’s voice to be used instead to advance the current 
administration’s anti -immigrati on policies. This not only damages the CDC’s reputation 
as a global public health authority, but it hurts all of us who have come to depend on 
CDC for credible, unbiased guidance.11 
 
Most recently, 170 public health and medical experts from leading public h ealth schools, medical 
schools, hospitals, and other institutions across the country wrote a letter to Acting Secretary 
Wolf and Attorney General Barr to express grave concerns about the rule and the “specious” 
health justifications it employs to target as ylum -seekers and deny them humanitarian protections.  
 
The r ule ignores and misuses the science and core principles of public health. It would 
grant the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and the Department of Justice 
(DOJ) —agencies that lack public heal th expertise —authority to label asylum seekers as a 
national security threat, scapegoating them as vectors for a potentially vast array of 
diseases and denying them protection. These sweeping new bans would direct 
immigration authorities to deport people s eeking refugee and torture protection to life -
threatening dangers in violation of U.S. law and treaty obligations.12  
 
                                                           
10 Letter to HHS Secretary Azar and CDC Director Redfield Signed by Leaders of Public Health  Schools, 
Medical Schools, Hospitals, and Other U.S. Institutions, May 18, 2020, 
https://www.publichealth.columbia.edu/public -health -now/news/public -health -experts -urge-us-officials -
withdraw -order -enabling -mass -expulsion -asylum -seekers   
11 Letter to CD C Director Robert Redfield from a coalition of Georgia professionals from the fields of 
public health, medicine, law and immigration, June 17, 2020, 
https://www.cvt.org/sites/default/files/attachments/u101/downloads/letter_to_dir._redfield_from_georgia
_professionals_re_border_closure_order_final_dcl61420.pdf   
12 Letter to DHS Secretar y Wolf and Attorney General Barr Signed by Leaders of Public Health Schools, 
Medical Schools, Hospitals, and Other U.S. Institutions, August 6, 2020, 
https://www.publichealth.columbia.edu/public -health -now/news/public -health -experts -urge-us-officials -
withdraw -proposed -rule-would -bar-refugees -asylum -and-and  More than one -quarter of the experts who joined the letter come from the Georgia public health 
community, where it is well understood that public health is only credible when it uses science to 
analyze public health threats and responds in a way that prote cts the public through the least 
restrictive means necessary. Flouting these core principles undermines the credibility of our 
public health institutions, erodes public trust, and does lasting damage to our nation’s ability to 
confront the current pandemic  and future health crises. It does all this without any discernible 
public health benefit and with life -threatening consequences for vulnerable individuals seeking 
refuge in the U.S.   
 
b. The Proposed R ule would at once endanger asylum seekers and make the 
American public less safe.  
 
As Mr. Roehm and former Reagan White House official Linda Chavez  have  explained 
elsewhere :  
 
Immigrants of all stripes … are disproportionately on the front lines providing all of us 
with essential services [during the pandemic] , often at tremendous personal risk. 
Immigrants are more likely to work in the very jobs we depend on at this perilous 
moment. Nearly 30%  of doctors and 40%  of health aides in the  United States are foreign 
born, and immigrants disproportionately work in th e service or food industries  that keep 
us fed during this crisis. They are also becoming sick and dying in alarming numbers to 
do so.13 
 
This includes refugees, asylum seekers, and the many torture survivors among them. Indeed, at 
CVT , the vast majority of our clients receiving rehabilitation services are asylum seekers, who 
include nursing home and daycare staff, personal care attendants, delivery drivers, grocery 
store and other food supply chain employees, and poultry plant workers.    
 
By further diminishing the possibility that asylum seekers can come to the United States and 
instead facilitating their return to danger — especially when public health experts  have 
emphasized that fair treatment of refugees does not undermine e fforts to combat COVID -19 —
the Proposed R ule would needlessly make all of us less safe.  
 
V. The Proposed Rule violates  domestic and  international law as it would lead to 
the refoulement of refugees and survivors of torture  
 
The Proposed Rule violates both the 1951 Refugee Convention  and CAT.  
 
The United States, while not a party to the 1951 Refugee Convention itself, did ratify the 1967 
Protocol. In ratifying the 1967 Protocol, the United States bound itself to the obligations of the 
1951 Refugee Convention as well.14 The Refugee Convention states that “ no Contracting State 
                                                           
13 Linda Chavez and Scott Roehm, Trump's coronavirus order scapegoats immigrants and doesn't make us 
safer, USA TODAY, April 28, 2020, https://www.usatoday.com/story/opinion/2020/04/28/trump -plays -
politics -coronavirus -immigration -2020 -campaign -column/3030329001/   
14 UN General Assembly,  Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees , 31 January 1967,  United Nations, 
Treaty  Series, vol. 606, p. 267,  Article 1, https://www.refworld.org/docid/3ae6b3ae4.html  shall expel or return (“refouler”) a refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of 
territories where his life or freedom would be threatened on account of his race, religion, 
nationality, me mbership in a particular social group or political opinion.”15   
 
As explained in Section I above, the Proposed Rule would bar from asylum and withholding of 
removal  asylum seekers who have “ come into contact with’ COVID -19;” contracted the virus  
while in the United States waiting for an asylum hearing, including  those infected  in ICE 
detention centers;  or who have  recently arrived  from a country other than the United States 
where COVID -19 is prevalent —which now includes much of the world —even if they have a 
well-founded fear of persecution  and are not in  fact infected . Moreover, in some cases, whether 
individuals fleeing persecution qualify for asylum would depend on the ability of asylum officers 
and immigration judges —presumably few, if any, of whom have medical training —to determine 
if a claimant has COVID -19 based on their symptoms and their travel history.  
 
These draconian regulatory changes would inevitably lead to violations of the United States ’ 
non-refoulement obligations under the Refugee Convention. They will similarly inevitably result 
in violations of the same obligation under CAT.  
 
The United States  signed CAT in 1988 and codified the Convention into U.S. law in 1998.16  
Pursuant to Article 3 of CAT,  “No State Party shall expel, return  or extradite a person to another 
State where there are substantial grounds for believing that he would be in danger of being 
subjected to torture.” Th is obligation is non -derogable, including during the current pandemic.17  
 
Again as described in Section I above,  the Proposed Rule  would force those seeking protection 
under CAT  to demonstrate at the initial credible fear screening stage that they would more likely 
than not be tortured in their country of removal. This would require that survivors  spontaneously 
raise and then prove their CAT claim when they are fresh off a typica lly perilous journey to the 
United States. That is asking the near -impossible of many survivors, who can and often do suffer 
profound psychological harm from their trauma, including shame, stigma, denial, communication 
difficulties, and damage to memory . 
 
It often takes several sessions for the clinicians at CVT to obtain details of clients’ torture . As 
Cecil Walker, MFT, Psychotherapist, at CVT  Georgia  explains :  
 
                                                           
15 UN General Assembly,  Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees , 28 July 1951,  United Nations, 
Treaty Series, vol. 189, p. 137,  Article 33.1, https://www.refworld.org/docid/3be01b964.html    
16 Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT), 
Dec. 10, 1984, 1988 U.S.T. 202, 1465 U.N.T.S. 85 (enacted into U.S. Law on October 21, 1998 by Fiscal 
Year 1999 Omnibus Consolidated and emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act, Pub. L. No. 104 -
277, Div. G, Sub. B, Title XX I S2242 of the foreign Affairs Reform and Restructuring Act of 1998, Pub. 
L. No. 105 -277, 112 Stat. 2681 -822 (1998) . 
17 Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or 
Punishment, Advice of the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture to States Parties and National 
Preventive Mechanisms relating to the Coronavirus Pandemic (adopted on 2 5th March 2020), 
https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/OPCAT/AdviceStatePartiesCoronavirusPandemic2020.pdf   Even in a therapeutic setting, it is often difficult for clients to thoroughly describe their  
traumatic experiences, necessitating several sessions before they’re able to carefully unfold 
their narrative without triggering excessive psychological stress, so to ask them to detail and 
prove their CAT claims at the immediate moment of arrival, as the  new administrative rules 
ask, would likely be too overwhelming for them. Also, several of our clients have worked 
through COVID -19 in essential positions in the food industry and janitorial services 
providing basic, necessary labor during the current publ ic health crisis as opposed to being a 
danger to public health as the new rules imply.  
 
Absent a fair and meaningful  mechanism  to determine if asylum seekers are survivors of torture,  
the Propose Rule cannot safeguard against violations of the United State s’ non -refoulement 
obligations under CAT.   
 
VI. Conclusion  
 
The administration must abstain from implementing the Proposed Rule, which will denigrate  the 
asylum system  and harm asylum seeker s, including the torture  survivors among them . 