  
AAIA  
 
Association on American Indian Affairs  
 
2015Annual Report  
 
 
Protecting Sovereignty  
 
Preserving Culture  
 
Educating Youth  2 Table of Contents   
2015:  The Issues  
Table of Contents                                                                              
 
AAIA  - Impacting Lives  
 
Letter from the President   
 
                                                                                               
Leadership  
 Board of Directors  
 Council of Advisors          
 Staff  
 
Executive Director’s Report                                                                              
Protect Sovereignty, Constitutional, Legal and Human Rights and Natural 
Resources   
 Indian Child Welfare Act   
 Federal Recognition         
 Juvenile Justice  
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Sustain and Perpetuate Cultures and Languages   
 International Repatriation Project    
    
Improve Health, Education, and Economic and Community Development  
 Health  
 Scholarships     
 Youth Summer Camps      
   
Public Education  
 Newsletter  
 Annual Meeting of the Members and Native American Film & Music 
Event  
   
Financial Information  
 Statement of Financial Position   
 Statement of Activities   
       
How You Can Help                                                                                          
  
Contact Information                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Page  2 
 
 3 
 
 4 
 
 
 5 
 
  
 
 
  8  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 10. 
  
 
 13 
 
  
 
 
 14 
  
 
 
 
 15 
 
 
 
 18 
 
 19
  3 AAIA: Impacting Lives 1922 -2015  
We Were There — As the oldest Native American service and advocacy 
organization in the United States, the Association on American Indian Affairs 
(AAIA) has impacted the lives of Native American and Alaska Natives in many 
ways over the past 94 years.  From helping the Pueblo people keep their land 
and water rights in the 1920’s, to the scholarships provided to Native college 
students in the 1940’s, to the Field Nursing Program in the 1950’s which sent 
nurses to reservations, to helping Alaska Natives to protect their lands and 
hunting and fishing rights in the 1960’s, to the studies that were done in the 
1970’s which led to the Indian Child Welfare Act, AAIA was there.   
In the 1980’s we were still there working to establish the Tribal Governmental 
Tax Status Act, and in the 1990’s we were there to gain enactment of the Native 
American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act and ensure its implementation 
and helped to protect sacred lands.  In the 2000’s we were there too —making 
sure that tribes have access to funding for their child welfare programs, fighting 
for the right to use eagles and other birds for sacred ceremonies, providing 
funding so Native children can attend summer camps that focus on cultural 
preservation and health education, and helping to change the process by which 
tribes are federally recognized among other things.  AAIA has worked to protect 
sacred sites with many positive results, including designation of the Bighorn 
Medicine Wheel Medicine Mountain sacred site as a National Historical 
Landmark based upon its traditional cultural value. As we move into our 9th 
decade of providing services to Native Americans and Alaska Natives, we will 
continue to be here to impact Indian Country for future generations.  
AAIA is governed by an all -Native Board of Directors from across the country 
representing a diversity of tribes, geography and areas of expertise.  We work in 
close cooperation with Native Americans and other organizations that have 
similar missions in determining which issues will be pursued and the amount of 
emphasis to be placed on each issue.  Our national advocacy work and grass 
roots initiatives fall into three main categories:  youth/education, cultural 
preservation and sovereignty.  4 A Letter from the President   
AAIA:  Who we are in a snapshot  
 
Dear Friends,  
 
I am proud to present this Annual Report of 2015.  AAIA is the oldest Native American 
advocacy and service organization, having been founded in 1922.  Preserving Native cultures 
while promoting self -determination and the well -being of Indian and Alaska Native children 
and families is a priority for our organization and has been for most of our long history.  During 
2015, AAIA continued to focus on Preservation of Tribal Cultures (international repatriation 
and sacred sites protection), Promoting Sovereignty (federal recognition reform) and Youth/
Education (scholarships, summer camps, juvenile justice and Indian child welfare advocacy 
training, research and legal assistance).  
 
On November 16 -17, 2015 AAIA was able to meet one of the major goals of its International 
Repatriation Project by bringing together Native Nations to discuss International Repatriation.  
AAIA hosted the first Indigenous International Repatriation Conference at the Artesian Hotel in 
Sulphur Springs, Oklahoma, a beautiful venue owned by the Chickasaw Nation.  
 
The work AAIA undertakes is possible because we are an independent organization.  This work 
is done in partnership with Native communities and other Native and non -Native NGOs, 
wherever possible.  Individual, tribal, corporate and other non -profit contributors make possible 
the flexibility we have to put our resources where they are most needed.  Thus, we are able to 
work on issues and problems that are vitally important to Indian people, communities and 
tribes, but which don’t get the attention that they need and deserve.  
 
Thank you for your continued support to make possible our important assistance to Indian 
Country.  
 
 
Sincerely  
 
 
 
   
 
 
Faith Roessel  
President  
Navajo  
5 Jonathan Perry  
Wampanoag  Leadership  
Board of Directors  
 
AAIA is governed by an All -Native Board of Directors representing all regions of Indian  
country.  The collective wealth of knowledge and expertise in diverse areas makes AAIA’s 
Board well suited to develop policies that benefit all Native peoples.  
 
 
 
 
No Picture  
Faith Roessel  
President  Bradford R. Keeler  
Vice President  
Cherokee  Frank Ettawageshik  
Treasurer  
Elke Chenevey  
Omaha  Dee Ann DeRoin, MD  
Nominating Chair  
Ioway  John Echohawk  
Pawnee  
Sarah Kastelic  
Alutiiq  Joy Hanley  
Navajo  Jerry Flute  
Dakotah  
Alfred Ketzler, Sr.  
Secretary  
Cheriena Ben  
Choctaw  6 
Leadership  
Council of Advisors  
 
 
In 2013 AAIA was pleased 
to expand its Advisory 
Board into a Council of 
Advisors.  Based largely in 
New York where AAIA was 
established and 
incorporated, the Council is 
comprised of individuals 
who are interested in 
furthering the work of the 
Association.  They hold a 
wealth of knowledge and 
various interests, and are 
prominent in their own 
fields.  The Council’s main 
initiatives consist of raising 
the profile of the 
Association’s work, 
assisting in planning our 
fundraising events, and 
helping AAIA to network 
with individuals who can 
assist AAIA 
programmatically and 
financially.   
 
Howard B. Teich, Chair  
 
Nadema Agard, Cherokee  
 
Gail Bruce  
 
Kimberly Guerrero, Colville/Salish -Kootenai/Cherokee  
 
John Haworth, Cherokee  
 
Dennis Hirschfelder  
 
Peter Johnson  
 
Alli Joseph, Shinnecock  
 
Hattie Kauffman, Nez Perce  
 
Kerry Kennedy  
 
Dr. Francesca Kress  
 
Mary Kathryn Nagle, Cherokee  
 
Gloria Steinem  
 
Curtis Zunigha, Delaware  
 
 
 
 
  
Furthering 
the work  
of the  
Association  7 Leadership  
Staff & Volunteers  
Staff  
 
Jack F. Trope, Executive Director (through June 2015)  
 
Kimberly Dutcher, Executive Director (beginning in July 2015)  
 
Lisa Wyzlic, Executive Assistant/  
Director of Scholarship Programs, Ottawa  
 
Erisel Cruz, Americorps Vista Member  
Social Media and Internet Development Coordinator; Office Assistant  
 
Mike Jones, Bookkeeper  
 
Benjamin Pachito, Legal Intern,  
Soboba Band of Luiseno  
 
Earl Evans, Development Director,  
Haliwa –Saponi  
 
Honor Keeler, Director of International Repatriation, Cherokee  
 
Dominic Henry, International Repatriation Fellow, Navajo  
 
Although AAIA received very little funding from federal grants in 2015 we have been 
able to obtain valuable staff members through federal programs such as the AmeriCorps 
VISTA  Program and the Federal Work Study Program. We are also very fortunate to 
have  dedicated  volunteers to review applications for our scholarship program and help 
with fundraising events.  
 
Volunteers  
 
Cynthia Rudder  
Robin Wachenfeld  8 EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR’S REPORT  
 
2015 was an exciting year as long -time Executive Director, Jack Trope, left AAIA 
to work with the Casey Family Programs in Colorado. Jack first began his work at 
AAIA in March 1985 as a staff attorney for six years. Jack came back to AAIA in 
2001 as Executive Director. AAIA is grateful for the wonderful programmatic 
work that AAIA accomplished under Jack Trope’s leadership.   AAIA introduced 
Kimberly Dutcher, Navajo, as the new Executive Director in July.   
 
Protecting Sovereignty, Constitutional, Legal and  
Human Rights and Natural Resources  
 
Indian Child Welfare   
 
 Indian Child Welfare Act  
 
On February 25, 2015, the Bureau of Indian Affairs released revised Indian Child Welfare Act 
(ICWA) Guidelines for state courts and agencies effective immediately, and, for the first time, 
proposed binding regulations to implement ICWA.  AAIA played an active role with Tribes and 
other Indian organizations in advocating for and interacting with the Department of Interior in 
regard to the development of the updated and improved Guidelines and in encouraging the BIA 
to issue binding regulations.  
 
The ICWA was enacted in 1978 in response to a crisis affecting Indian children, families and 
Tribes.  AAIA studies revealed that large numbers of Indian children were being separated from 
their parents, extended families, and communities and placed in non -Indian homes.  
Congressional testimony, led by then AAIA Executive Director Bill Byler, documented the 
devastating impact this separation was having upon Indian children, families and Tribes.  As a 
result, Congress enacted mandatory legal requirements in the ICWA to be followed by state 
courts who are adjudicating the rights of Indian children and their families.  
 
The original Guidelines were issued in 1979, shortly after the ICWA was enacted.  The revised 
Guidelines released in February are intended to better reflect the experience of the last thirty -
five years of ICWA implementation.  
  
On March 20, 2015, the Bureau of Indian Affairs released a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking 
(NPRM) for new proposed ICWA regulations. The purpose of the NPRM is to issue a binding 
interpretation of ICWA (unlike Guidelines which are advisory only) and to provide consistency 
in the implementation of ICWA across all states. We have been actively working to encourage 
and assist the Department of Interior in this process. For the first time, the regulations are 
applied to state agencies in addition to state courts.  
 
ICWA, alone, does not mandate the necessary coordination and relationships between state and 
Tribal child welfare offices that are necessary to carry out efforts that support ICWA 
proceedings. To develop the necessary coordination and relationships between Tribes and 
states, ICWA section 1919 (25 U.S.C. § 1919) specifically provides authorization for Tribes 
and states to enter into agreements regarding the care and custody of Indian children. This 
provision of ICWA does not limit Tribes and states, but instead uses broad language to allow a  9 Tribe and state flexibility to best address their mutual needs and unique processes. In 2014 and 
2015, AAIA began development of an Indian Child Welfare Tribal -State Agreement report with 
funding from Casey Family Programs. Throughout 2015, AAIA contacted states and Tribes to 
gather all ICWA Tribal -State Agreements that were currently in effect and began its review of 
those Agreements. A final report is expected in 2016.   
 
 Adoption Project  
 
AAIA has been working with the National Indian Child Welfare Association (NICWA) on a 
project to review practices by the private adoption industry in regards to Indian children. The 
first objective of the Project is to compile state adoption data and laws, policies and practices 
relevant to ICWA and the adoption of Indian children. The final product of this objective is to 
be a published report identifying problematic policies and practices and their impact on ICWA 
compliance. In November of 2015, AAIA contracted with Michigan State University’s 
Indigenous Law & Policy Center to have a law student complete the data analysis (data 
previously gathered by AAIA) and prepare a draft of AAIA’s portion of the report. We 
anticipate completion of the draft report in 2016.  
 
Federal Recognition  
 
By obtaining Federal acknowledgment of their Tribal status, Indian Tribes are able to have 
sovereign, governmental activities recognized by the federal government and become eligible 
for a wide variety of federal programs that are available only to Tribes recognized by the 
federal government.  Because federal recognition strengthens the ability of Indian Tribes and 
their members to survive and thrive in the 21st Century, AAIA has long worked with 
unrecognized Tribes seeking federal acknowledgement.  
 
Tragically, the process by which the federal government determines who should be recognized 
as a “legitimate” Tribe is broken.  AAIA has been advocating for reform of this system to make 
it reasonable, fair and prompt for a number of years and has worked closely with NCAI’s 
Federal Recognition Task Force and the Alliance of Colonial Era Tribes, among others, to 
achieve this goal. AAIA’s Board member, Frank Ettawageshik serves as Chairperson of the 
NCAI Task Force which meets three times per year.  
 
In 2015, several meetings between the Task Force and the Department of Interior were held and 
these consultative efforts resulted in some success with several important revisions to the 
federal acknowledgment regulations.  Among these changes were the following:  
 
 Utilizing 1934 as the date from which petitioning groups must demonstrate community and 
political influence  
 
  Elimination of the requirement that the community show that it has been recognized by 
outside non -Indian sources since 1900  
 
 Providing for “expedited positive and negative findings”  
 
 Allowing for independent review by an administrative law judge  
 
 Clarifying the “reasonable likelihood” standard of proof  10 Juvenile Justice  
  
AAIA continued its work on juvenile justice and Native youth in 2015. AAIA has benefited 
from two funding streams to engage in this work: 1) the Public Welfare Foundation to study the 
efficacy of New Mexico’s notification to Tribes of their Tribal youth involved in juvenile 
justice proceedings, and 2) the Annie E. Casey Foundation to investigate how alternatives to 
incarceration may apply to Tribes and what best practices can be developed in non -Indian 
judicial systems that may encounter Native youth.  
 
In mid -February 2015, AAIA and its partner the NICWA, convened a meeting in New Mexico 
of Tribal officials and judges, state officials and employees and other interested stakeholders. 
The purpose was to share the AAIA/NICWA joint report’s executive summary and 
recommendations regarding New Mexico’s “Tribal notification of juvenile justice proceedings” 
law adopted by the state. In 2014, AAIA convened or participated in a number of meetings of 
stakeholders and interviewed Tribal and state officials, judges and employees.  The main 
conclusion of the study was that the state notice provision that requires Tribes to receive notice 
of all juvenile justice proceedings involving their members is a positive development in state 
law.  The AAIA/NICWA joint report outlines a number of recommendations about how to 
improve the process based on interviews and feedback from affected parties.  A copy of the 
report can be obtained on the AAIA website.  
 
AAIA is deeply committed to the “juvenile detention alternatives initiative” commonly known 
as “JDAI” and funded by the Annie E. Casey Foundation. Building on the work in 2014 in 
developing a Tribal JDAI site at the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, AAIA is working 
with other partners in expanding the Tribal JDAI model to a second Tribe.  The intent of Tribes 
adopting principles of JDAI and modifying as needed, helps Tribes strengthen non -jail 
alternatives that support native youth within their own communities, culture and values. 
Further, AAIA supports the need for a plan to keep juvenile justice issues in Indian country at 
the forefront.  As a follow -up to the December 2014 meeting sponsored by AAIA, NICWA and 
AECF of a cross section of state, Tribal and federal officials and judicial representatives, AAIA 
agreed to work with stakeholders in developing protocols and best practices for all JDAI sites 
across the country as to how they handle native youth. AAIA used the opportunity to welcome 
its new executive director in July with a meeting with AECF staff and outline next steps.  The 
latter half of 2015 was focused on the education of the executive director to JDAI and planning 
ahead on future grant work.  
 
 11 Sustain and Perpetuate Cultures and Languages  
 
 International Repatriation Project  
 
Since 2014, the AAIA, in coordination with its International Repatriation Working Group, has 
worked diligently to address four major immediate steps expressed by members of the Working 
Group on International Repatriation whose members include 4 representatives from across 
Native Nations and other Indigenous Peoples: 1 - Education about international repatriation to 
Tribal, national, and international communities; 2 - Guidance on international repatriation for 
Native Nations and their Peoples; 3 - Bringing together Native Nations to discuss international  
repatriation and develop an outcome document and protocols; and  4 - Developing a database so 
that Native Nations may find their Ancestors and cultural items in international and private 
collections.  
 
 Education About International Repatriation  
 
During 2015, AAIA’s International Repatriation Program (IRP) continued to engage and seek 
broad support across Indian Country and with other organizations and institutions. Within the 
international arena, IRP continued to work with Australian National University (ANU) and the 
Indigenous Peoples of Australia and New Zealand in efforts to identify Indigenous Ancestors 
and cultural items through their grant, “Return, Reconcile, Renew” in which AAIA was named 
a partner investigator. The IRP significantly increased its international Indigenous network 
through this work, and an alert and notification system is underway.  
  
In March of 2015, AAIA’s IRP, Hui Mālama I Nā Kūpuna O Hawai’i Nei, the Hopi Tribe, the 
San Carlos Apache Tribe, the Little Traverse Bay Bands of Odawa Indians, the Sault Ste. Marie 
Tribe of Chippewa Indians, the Pascua Yaqui Tribe, and the International Indian Treaty Council 
submitted a document to the U.N. Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples 
(UNEMRIP) for their cultural heritage study pertaining to Indigenous international repatriation.   
 
Citing the U.N. Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and Operative Paragraph 27 of 
the Outcome Document of the World Conference on Indigenous Issues, Indigenous Peoples 
called for the U.N. to bring Indigenous Peoples together to implement international repatriation 
mechanisms.  Many examples of human rights violations and blatant disregard for the religious 
and cultural beliefs of Indigenous Peoples were outlined, including, inexcusably long 
repatriations of 20 years or more; repatriating with preservation conditions (conditional 
repatriations); the need for international repositories to inventory international collections and 
to centralize finding this information that remains culturally sensitive; the consideration of 
various views of international repatriation by Indigenous Peoples; recognizing that international 
repatriation centers around issues pertaining to free, prior, and informed consent; citing the 
unethical and immoral practices of auction houses; advocating for self -determination of a 
repatriation process; referencing examples of the cultural oppression of museums, auction 
houses, and private collections in retaining and selling Ancestors, sacred items, and other 
cultural items; and affirmatively stating that Indigenous Ancestors and cultural items should not 
be sold.  
 
 
  12 The U.S. at the U.N. Permanent Forum of the Rights of Indigenous Issues, on April 20, 2015, 
committed to develop protocols for international repatriation and recommended “that countries 
consider amending any domestic legislation that inhibits the recovery and repatriation of 
“Native American cultural property”, as well as encouraged the full documentation of cultural 
property” in other countries to facilitate repatriation.  
 
In July of 2015, the IRP, the International Indian Treaty Council and indigenous representatives 
participated in a panel on international repatriation at the UNEMRIP meetings in Geneva, Swit-
zerland.  
 
 Guidance on International Repatriatio n  
 
Over the course of 2015, IRP addressed the need for guidance on the international repatriation 
process and the accessibility to information on news stories and documents that would be help-
ful in the international repatriation claims process.  Several meetings with Tribal organizations 
were held to discuss the IRP and gain support.  Meetings were held with the United South and 
Eastern Tribes (USET), the Wabanaki Confederacy, both the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians 
and the Cherokee Nation, the Western Apache Repatriation Committee and representatives 
from the Zuni, Hopi, and Navajo Nation.  
 
Towards the goal of increasing visibility and guidance about international repatriation to Tribal, 
National, and International communities, the IRP engaged in the following efforts:  
 
1. International Repatriation Exhibit. Working through a Service Learning Grant with the 
Working Group on International Repatriation, AAIA developed an International Repatriation 
exhibit, as well as interviewed and recorded testimonials from Tribal Members about the im-
portance of repatriation to their communities.   
 
2. Video Content. Collaborating with the Working Group on International Repatriation and 
filmmaker Angelo Baca, the IRP developed a series of PSA’s on international repatriation. 
Work on a documentary on international repatriation also continued in 2015.  
 
3. On -going Social Media campaign. The IRP focused on increasing its social media presence 
in 2015, utilizing Facebook and Twitter.  
 
4. Cultural Resources Training. Throughout September and October 2015, the IRP developed  
materials for a four -day training on Cultural Resources Protection called Shifting the Burden, 
which included coverage of four major areas: 1) Traditional Law and Tribal Governments; 2) 
Federal Laws; 3) Repatriation Laws; and 4) International Repatriation.  The goals of Shifting 
the Burden were not only to educate attendees on ways in which to use the current law to pro-
tect sacred sites and repatriate ancestors and cultural items, but also to create a workshop type 
environment of community ideas that would lead to a long -term plan of Cultural Resources Pro-
tection. Training was  conducted at the Wind River Reservation of the Northern Arapaho Tribe.  
 
 
  13 Additional resources for guidance and education on international repatriation for Native Nations 
and their peoples were developed during 2015.  A Guide to International Repatriation: Starting 
and Initiative in Your Community  was completed and released and is now available on the 
AAIA Website. The International Repatriation Blog (http://internationalrepatriation.word 
press.com/)  was revamped and redesigned; and the first International Repatriation newsletter 
was issued in Spring 2015.  In the Fall of 2015, the IRP participated on a panel during the ABA 
International Law Section discussing International Repatriation.  Future collaborations with the 
ABA Culture & Heritage Section and the International Law Section in International Repatria-
tion are planned.   
 
 Bringing together Native Nations to Discuss International Repatriatio n  
 
The first Indigenous International Repatriation Conference was held on November 16 -17 at the 
Artesian Hotel in Sulphur Springs, OK, which is owned by the Chickasaw Nation. The confer-
ence was a great success and was well received by attendees. The conference provided educa-
tion and guidance on international repatriation by Native Nations, and brought together leading 
advocates and experts to discuss best practices. The conference attendees worked together to 
develop a plan on how the IRP should proceed in its efforts to support international repatriation.  
 
 Cases  
 
The IRP is also available to assist Tribes with International repatriation strategy development 
and cases on a limited basis. During 2015, the IRP assisted Tribes with cases in the U.K., Ger-
many, Japan and France.   14 Improve Health, Education, and Community Development  
 
Health  
 
In 2015, AAIA finalized its work under a contract with the ARC to review Fetal Alcohol 
Syndrome Disorder materials that were developed by the ARC, and disseminate those materials 
to medical professionals working in Indian Country. AAIA worked with the ARC in its 
outreach to medical professionals working in the field and in Indian Country as part of their 
needs assessment.  AAIA further provided direct input to the ARC as well to ensure that the 
materials would be culturally -sensitive and useful to people working with Native Americans.  
 
Scholarships  
 
AAIA continued its history of assisting Native American college students reach their 
educational goals by providing scholarships. Scholarships were awarded to students from 
federally recognized tribes as well as to those students from tribes that are not yet included on 
the list of federally recognized tribes.  
 
In 2015, AAIA received 580 scholarship applications. Twenty -three reviewers including prior 
scholarship recipients were enlisted to review the top 50 applications with a final selection of 39 
scholarship recipients. The average scholarship award for the school year was $1,500 and 
$1,000 for emergency aid. 2015 was exceptional because the performance of scholarship 
recipients overall was very high (4.0 GPAs), and most were very responsible about deadlines, 
reporting of grades and keeping AAIA informed.  
 
Youth Summer Camps  
 
AAIA, through the generous support of the Ben Plunknett Trust, was able to fund five Summer 
Camps this year. The summer camps that were funded were:  
 
 The Kamiah Nimiipuu Health Youth Wellness & Culture Camp, which focused on 
supporting youth in health challenges to help them stay on the road to wellness. The camp 
was provided to 30 Native American youth ages 7 -8 years old.  
  San Pasqual Band of Mission Indians Camp in Valley Center, CA provided a day and 
overnight camp for 80 youth ages 7 -17 that focused on diabetes protection, language and 
culture.  
  SUNY -ESF Center for Native Peoples and the Environment provided the Native Earth 
Summer Stewardship Camp in Syracuse, NY. This camp was a day camp and an overnight 
camp for 15 youth ages 14 -18 on diabetes prevention, language, culture and the 
environment.  
  The University of Arizona Foundation for the benefit of Summer Wellness Camp in 
Tucson, AZ provided day and overnight camp experience about diabetes prevention, 
language, culture and wellness for 33 youth ages 10 -15. The Native American 
Advancement Foundation in Oro Valley, AZ provided a day or overnight camp for diabetes 
prevention, language, and cultural education for 60 youth ages K -12.  15  
Public Education  
 
Newsletters  
 
AAIA continued to publish our newsletter Indian Affairs , which highlights the work of the 
Association as well as articles about issues important to the Native community.  Hardcopies are 
available to individual members who make a contribution of $25 or more per year or 
commercially by subscription.  Please contact our Executive Office in Rockville, Maryland for 
subscriptions.   
 
The Spring issue no. 177 highlighted the Bureau of Indian Affairs new guidelines and draft 
regulations for the Indian Child Welfare Act, and that AAIA submitted a document to the UN 
Expert Mechanism to address international repatriation.  
 
 
Annual Membership Meeting  
 
AAIA hosted its 93rd Annual Meeting of Members, which included a Native American Film 
Showcase on Thursday, November 19, 2015 at the National Museum of the American Indian 
(NMAI) Diker Pavilion in New York City.  This time honored and entertaining event was free 
and open to the public.  
 
AAIA’s Native American Indian Showcase included a humorous public service announcement: 
Round Dance (Directed by Steven Paul Judd - Kiowa/Choctaw); and two engaging short films: 
Harold of Orange (Directed by Richard Weise and written by Gerald Vizenor - Ojibwe) and 
Doing the Sheep Good (Directed by Teresa Montoya - Diné), bringing us over an hour of 
entertainment and education.  16 Financial Information  
Current Assets    2015  2014  
Cash and cash equivalents   $   63,067  51,036  
Investments in marketable se-
curities     253,927  
Grants and contracts receiva-
ble   5,600   53,124  
Contributions receivable       125,732  
Other receivables     12,708  
Prepaid expenses     6,528  10,224  
Total current assets    $75,195  $406,751  
Property and Equipment     
Furniture and equipment
   26,371  26,371  
Less accumulated depreciation   (22,394)  (17,556)  
Net Property and equipment   3,977  8,815  
Other Assets     
Investments - endowments
   501,856  652,853  
Security deposits   1,150      1,150  
Total other assets    503,006   654,003  
  $ 582,178  $ 1,069,569  17 Financial Information  
Statement of Financial Position -Assets - December 2015 & December 
2014 and Liabilities & Assets 2015 & 2014  
Current Liabilities      
Accounts payable    $   53,188   37,300  
Accrued wages        3,522   3,473  
Other accruals                    2,675   231 
Accrued vacation    5,088  24,051  
Total current liabilities   64,473  65,055  
Net Assets     
Unrestricted    (179,845)  145,591  
Temporarily restricted   44,727  206,100  
Permanently restricted   652,823  652,823  
Total net assets    517,705  1,004,514  
  $ 582,178  $ 1,069,569  
    18 Financial Information  
Statement of Activities for the year ending 2015  
(with comparative totals for the year ending 2014)  
      2015        
Temporarily Permanently  
         
   
        
  Unrestricted       Restricted  Restricted  Total  2014  
 
Revenues, gains 
&  
other support       
Contributions  
and dues  145,878   - 145,878  123,093  
Legacies  8,970   - 8,970  29,092  
Grants   102,500  - 102,500  381,351  
Consulting  7,500  39,435  - 46,935  82,685  
Investment in-
come  1,729  13,646  - 15,375  18,557  
Media sales  900  - 900 3,569  
Other income  9,274   - 9,274  2,293  
In-kind contribu-
tions    -  29,552  
Realized gains 
(losses) on invest-
ments  7,625  60,175  - 67,800  91,312  
Unrealized gains 
(losses) on  
investments  (79,233)  - - (79,233)  (67,076)  19 How You Can Help  
Consistent financial support helps AAIA continue to fund the programs described in this 
report. AAIA receives financial support through a number of avenues such as member 
contributions, on -line contributions, trusts, bequests, grants and foundations. Your support 
will help us to continue to work for the benefit of Native youth, families and communities 
through our policy and advocacy work and grass roots programming.  
 
 Membership - Your donation of $25 or more per year will assist us in providing programs 
that are vitally important to Native youth, families and communities. You will have the 
opportunity to receive program updates through our newsletter Indian Affairs, which is 
accessible online or as a hardcopy by request. You will also be invited to attend our 
Annual Meeting of the Members (which is open to the public) held in New York City, or 
to vote by proxy.  
 Spread the Word - Follow us on Facebook and Twitter and ask your family and friends to 
do the same and to join in supporting us too. You can also view our language program 
videos on YouTube and see our new language program website at 
www.aaialanguageprogram.org. Sign up for our monthly newsletter by visiting our 
website at www.indian -affairs.org and forward the information to family & friends.  
 On-Line Giving - Make a safe and secure donation on -line through Network for Good on 
our website at www.indian -affairs.org.  
 Monthly Gifts - Consider making a monthly gift to AAIA, which can be easily paid by 
credit card or automatically deducted from your bank account.  
 Matching Gift Program - Many companies offer Matching Gift Programs. Visit your 
Human Resources Department and ask if donations to AAIA can be matched and use 
their Matching Gifts Contribution form.  
 Join your workplace giving program and designate AAIA for your charitable 
contribution.  
 Bequests and Trusts - By remembering AAIA in your will, you can support Native youth, 
families and communities for years to come. Please consider contributions of a specific 
sum, a percentage of your estate or stocks and bonds in a bequest or trust to AAIA.  
 
Protecting Sovereignty  
 
Preserving Culture  
 
Educating Youth  
20 
     AAIA Executive Office   
 
966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 30 -B 
Rockville, MD  20850  
Phone:  240 -314-7155   *   Fax:  240 -314-7159  
E-Mail:  general.aaia@verizon.net  
 
 AAIA Field Office  
P.O. Box 8  
Hollister, NC  27844  
 
International Repatriation Office  
1005 Main Street, Suite 1209  
Pawtucket, RI  02860  
Phone:  401 -727-1400  *  Fax:  401 -727-1403  
E-Mail:  hk.aaia@indian -affairs.org  
 
AAIA  
www.indian -affairs.org  
 
 
 
The Association on American Indian Affairs is a 501 ( c ) (3) 
non-profit,  
publicly supported,  tax exempt corporation.  
 
Donations and contributions to AAIA are tax deductible to the extent 
provided by law.  
AAIA meets all 20 Better 
Business Bureau Wise 
Giving Standards  
AAIA Is a Founding Member of 
the Native Ways Federation.   
AAIA Participtes in the Combined 
Federal Campaign.  CFC #12307  