Applications for Expungement for Adult Survivors of Human Trafficking: Updated Oct. 2018
Who can apply for safe harbor expungement?  
A guide for Ohio ’s human trafficking survivors
+ +The applicant Must  
be a victim of  
human traffickingcrimes must be the  
result of traffickingthe applicant 
must pass the 
interest test
The applicant must have been 
subjected to involuntary servitude or 
compelled to engage in sexual activity 
for hire through “force, fear, duress, 
intimidation, or fraud.” A person can 
be a victim of human trafficking even 
if no one has been convicted for 
victimizing the person.An expungement can only be granted for offenses 
that result from human trafficking. A person can 
apply to expunge ANY record [felony, misdemeanor, 
convictions, or dismissed/ignored non-convictions] 
EXCEPT FOR  aggravated murder, murder, or rape .The court will determine whether 
the interests of the applicant in 
having the record expunged are 
not outweighed by any legitimate 
needs of the government to 
maintain the record.For convictions
To have convictions 
expunged, the applicant 
must have (or have had) 
a conviction of at least 
one of the following: 
soliciting, loitering to 
engage in solicitation, 
or prostitution. These 
offenses do not have to 
be from the same court 
or happen at the same 
time as the convictions 
that are being applied for.For nonconvictions
To have non-convictions 
expunged, the applicant does 
not have to have a conviction 
of soliciting, loitering to engage 
in solicitation, or prostitution, in 
order to apply. Non-convictions 
include “not guilty” findings, 
or dismissed complaints, 
indictments, or information. If 
applying to expunge a dismissal 
without prejudice, the period 
of limitations applicable to the 
offense must have expired.
Document created by:
Disclaimer: This guide is a general source of information about expungement. It is not a 
substitute for individualized legal advice. For answers to specific questions, it is best to 
consult an attorney.Disclaimer: This guide is a general source of information about expungement. It is not a 
substitute for individualized legal advice. For answers to specific questions, it is best to 
consult an attorney.
expungement vs. record sealing
Expungement and record sealing both reduce who has access to 
criminal records. Sealing a record “hides” the record from most people 
but keeps it accessible for certain entities (such as, law enfor cement, 
courts, probation officers, and background checks for some 
employment/licensing purposes.) Expungement completely destroys 
and permanently deletes criminal records, never to be seen by 
anyone in any circumstance.How do I apply?
1. Applications must be filed in the sentencing court for each offense. 
There is a $50 filing fee that can be waived with a poverty affidavit (or “affidavit of 
indigency”).
2. The prosecutor reviews the application and may have objections before 
the hearing.
3. At the hearing, the court will consider the prosecutor’s objections (if any) 
and consider the requirements for Safe Habor Expungement explained 
on the first page.  For expungement of 1st and 2nd degree felonies, there are 
additional factors that the court considers.
4. The court grants or denies the application. If an expungement is granted, 
the court must give notice of the order to relevant public offices/agencies that 
may have an official record pertaining to the case. After that, records related to 
the conviction must be destroyed, deleted, or erased in all physical or electronic 
forms.
Human trafficking is a fast-growing, under-reported form of modern-day 
slavery. Last year, 289 trafficking cases from Ohio were reported to national 
hotlines – a tiny fraction of the actual trafficked population.
When survivors escape, their long criminal records create lifelong barriers 
to employment, housing, education, civic participation, and family 
reunification. In Ohio, over 900 ‘collateral consequences’ limit all aspects of 
life, from jobs to recreation, for people with records.
In June 2012, the Ohio Legislature created a new expungement process 
under the Safe Harbor Law (H.B. 262; R.C. 2953.38). The law recognizes 
that sex trafficking victims are compelled through force, fear, duress, 
intimidation, or fraud to participate in illegal acts. Consequently, survivors 
can erase records of convictions. Then, in 2018, the Ohio Legislature 
clarified the options for trafficking survivors to expunge and seal their 
records (S.B. 4; R.C. 2953.38 and 2953.521).
Expunged records are completely destroyed, so no one can ever see 
them ever again. Expungement opens doors to empowerment, recovery, 
employment, housing, education, family relationships, and successful 
reintegration into the community.Background
we can help
The Ohio Justice & Policy Center is a non-profit law firm serving people in Ohio 
with criminal records. OJPC’s Women’s Project specializes in helping survivors of 
human trafficking, among other marginalized groups of women who face barriers 
to a productive life as a result of a touch with the criminal justice system.
You can contact the Ohio Justice & Policy Center to set up an appointment with 
an attorney:
 
Ohio Justice & Policy Center  
215 East Ninth Street
Cincinnati, OH 45202  
513-421-1108
contact@ohiojpc.orgApplications for Expungement for Adult Survivors of Human Trafficking: Updated Oct. 2018
