 
Physicians for  
Human Rights  
 
February  2014  Impunity in Honduras:  
Torture and  
Ill-Treatment after  the 
Coup d'État  
A Forensic Medical 
Investigation  
 
 
 
physiciansforhumanrights.org  Impunity in Honduras: Torture and Ill -Treatment 
After the Coup d'État  1 About Physicians for  
Human Rights  
 
Since 1986, Physicians for Human Rights (PHR)  has been  using  
medicine and science to document and call attention to mass atrocities and severe human rights violations.  
 
PHR was founded on the idea that health professionals, with their 
specialized skills, ethical duties, and credible voices, are uniquely positioned to stop human rights violations. PHR’s investigations and 
expertise are used to advocate for persecuted health workers, prevent torture, document mass atrocities, and hold those  who violate human 
rights  accountable .  
 PHR has worked in more than 40 countri es, including Afghanistan, 
Bahrain, Burma, Democratic Republic of the Congo, El Salvador, 
Guatemala, Iran, Iraq, Kenya, Libya, Mexico, Sudan, Syria, Turkey,  
and the United States.  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cover: Honduran riot policemen beat protesters during clashes in the surroundings of 
the presidential palace in Tegucigalpa on June 29, 2009.  
Photo: Jose CABEZAS/AFP/Getty Images Acknowledgments  
 
This briefing paper  was written by Alejandro Moreno, M BBS, MPH, 
JD, FACP, FCLM, Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) volunteer  
forensic  advisor , associate professor of medicine  at the University of 
Texas Southwestern Austin Residency Programs; Stefan Schmitt, 
MS, director of PHR’s International Forensic Program; and Nery 
Suyapa Osorio, LLM, LLL , PHR forensic investigator.  
 
Eliza B. Young,  MA, PHR publications coordinator , reviewed, 
edited, and prepared this  briefing paper  for publication . 
 This paper has benefitted from review by PHR leadership and staff, 
including Donna McKay, executive director; Susannah Sirkin, 
director of international policy and partnerships and senior advisor; 
Hans Hogrefe, Washington director and chief policy officer; Dr. 
Vincen t Iacopino, senior medical advisor; Andrea Gittleman, senior 
legislative counsel; and DeDe Dunevant, director of communications. PHR intern s Jacquelyn Gitzes  and Hadley Griffin  
also assisted in editing this paper . 
 This paper  has benefited from external re view by Catherine 
DeAngelis, MD, MPH , PHR board member, University 
Distinguished Service Professor Emeri ta, professor emerita at Johns 
Hopkins  University School of Medicine (Pediatric s) and School of 
Public Health (Health Service Management), and editor -in-chief 
emerita of the Journal of the American Medical Association 
(JAMA); and Michele Heisler, MD, MPA,  PHR volunteer medical 
advisor, PHR board member, professor of internal medicine and health behavior and health education at the University of Michigan Medical School, research scientist at the Ann Arbor VA’s Center for 
Clinical Management Research, co -director of the University of 
Michigan’s Robert Wood Johnson Foundation’s Clinical Scholars Program, and associate director of the University of Michigan 
Medical School’s Global REACH program.  
 
Support for th is investigation and briefing paper was provided by the 
Oak Foundation.  
  
 
 
 
  
 
physiciansforhumanrights.org  
 
©2014 Physicians for Human Rights   
All rights reserved.  
 Library of Congress Control Number : 2014933126 
ISBN 1879707772  
 
physiciansforhumanrights.org  Impunity in Honduras: Torture and Ill -Treatment 
After the Coup d'État  2 Table of Contents  
 
3  Abbreviations  
4  Executive Summary  
5  Introduction  
   Political Background  
   Power Structure  
   Legal Framework and Human  
     Rights Obligations  
   Crimin al Investigation and Procedure  
     in Honduras  
8  Findings of the Forensic Investigations  
   Methodology 
   The Istanbul Protocol  
   First Visit Findings  
   Follow -up Visit Findings  
   Conclusions  
   Recommendations  
13  Appendices  
   Summary of Representative Cases  
   Tables  
18  End Notes   
 
physiciansforhumanrights.org  Impunity in Honduras: Torture and Ill -Treatment 
After the Coup d'État  3 Abbreviations  
 
CAT  
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman  
or Degrading  Treatment or Punishment   
 
CODEH  
Committee for the Defense of Human Rights  
in Honduras ( El Comité para la Defensa de los Derechos 
Humanos en Honduras ) 
 
COFADEH  
Committee of Relatives of the Detained and Disappeared in  
Honduras (El Comité de Familiares de Detenidos -  
Desaparecidos en Honduras ) 
 CPTRT  
Cente r for the Prevention, Treatment and  
Rehabilitation of Victims of Torture and  
their Families  (El Cent ro de Prevención, Tratamiento y 
Rehabilitación de las Víctimas de la Tortura y sus Familiares ) 
 ICC 
International Criminal Court  
 IP 
Istanbul Protocol: Manual on the Effective  
Investigation and Documentation of Torture and  
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment  
or Punishment  
 
MDD  
Major Depressive Disorder  
 NGO  
Nongo vernmental Organization  
 OAG  
Office of the Attorney General  
 
OPCAT  
Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture   
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degradi ng Treatment  
or Punishment  
 
PTSD   
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder  
 SPT 
UN Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture  and Other  
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment   
 
physiciansforhumanrights.org  Impunity in Honduras: Torture and Ill -Treatment 
After the Coup d'État  4 Executive Summary  
 
On June 28, 2009, members of the Honduran armed forces removed 
President José Manuel Zelaya from office after his efforts to alter the 
country’s constitution triggered a political crisis. The Honduran National Congress subsequently named then speaker Roberto 
Micheletti as interim president. On July 1, Michelet ti declared a state 
of exception, ordered a curfew, and suspended several constitutional 
protections in an effort to quell nationwide peaceful public 
demonstrations in support of the deposed president that lasted 
months. Reputable organizations documented human rights abuses in the aftermath of what was considered a coup d’état.
1 The interim 
government used excessive force including live ammunition against the peaceful demonstrators across the nation, with the worst incidents occurring in the capital city o f Tegucigalpa. The government also 
used intimidation tactics, such as taking detainees to the headquarters of the Cobras – an elite police unit that had been associated with the 
torture and disappearances of political figures during the 1980s. State 
author ities also engaged in unlawful detentions, torture, rape, and 
extrajudicial executions of protesters, journalists, human rights 
advocates, and members of the opposition.
2 According to the UN 
Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture  and Other Cruel, Inhuman or  
Degrading Treatment or Punishment  (SPT) , between June and 
October 2009, there were 133 cases of torture and ill -treatment, 21 
cases of life -threatening injuries, and 431 cases of injuries from 
beatings.3 
 
At the request of several Honduran human rights nongovernmental 
organizations (NGOs) –  including the Committee of Relatives of the 
Detained and Disappeared in Honduras ( El Comité de Familiares de 
Detenidos - Desaparecidos en Honduras , COFADEH), the 
Committee for the Defense of Human Rights in Honduras ( El 
Comité para la Defensa de los Derechos Humanos en Honduras , 
CODEH), and the Cente r for the Prevention, Treatment and 
Rehabilitation of Victims of Torture and their Families ( El Centro de 
Prevención, Tratamiento y Rehabilitación de las Víctimas de la Tortu ra y sus Familiares, CPTRT) – Physicians for Human Rights 
(PHR) sent a team of forensic experts to Honduras to investigate cases of alleged torture and ill -treatment by the country’s security 
forces that had occurred in the aftermath of the 2009 coup d’éta t. On 
a visit to Tegucigalpa  between March 20 and March 24, 2010, the 
PHR team –  comprised of Stefan Schmitt, director of PHR’s 
International Forensic Program; Dr. Alejandro Moreno, PHR volunteer forensic advisor; and Nery Osorio, PHR forensic investigator  – conducted 14 forensic medical evaluations in 
accordance with the Istanbul Protocol
 standards .4 The team also held  
a series of non -structured interviews with government officials, 
members of civil society, and journalists. The forensic medical examinations were all conducted by Dr. Moreno.  
 In response to allegations of torture and ill -treatment against 
protesters wh o had been detained, the Honduran Special Prosecutor 
for Human Rights opened criminal investigations into accusations of 
torture and ill -treatment that occurred following the coup d’état. On 
October 20, 2010, the prosecutor brought the first criminal charg es 
against law enforcement personnel who had allegedly been involved in these crimes. These charges implicated police officers accused of 
illegal detention and abuse of 24 people detained on the streets in the 
weeks following the coup d'état; most of the d etentions occurred in 
the vicinity of the National Congress building.
5 The 14 individuals 
Dr. Moreno examined were among the criminal cases brought by the Special Prosecutor for Human Rights against military personnel and law enforcement agents for alleged  torture and ill -treatment that had 
taken place between June and November 2009. None of the interviewed victims had been presented with an arrest warrant prior to detention. Six of the victims examined by PHR were women and 
two were minors. Before the alle ged abuse, all of the victims 
evaluated by PHR were working or studying. However, at the time of 
PHR’s evaluation, nearly nine months after the coup d’état, only two people had resumed his or her prior occupations.  
 
On March 23, 2010, Dr. Moreno was appointed forensic court expert 
by Trial Court Judge Gladis Alejandra Ochoa Sierra of the 
Tegucigalpa Criminal Court. On July 12, 2010, Dr. Moreno submitted forensic torture evaluation reports to the court, 
substantiating the Special Prosecutor’s charges of tort ure and ill -
treatment in each case. On September 10, 2011, PHR again visited 
Tegucigalpa to follow -up on the progress of the legal investigations 
involving the 14 cases. Subsequently, PHR investigators continued to update information on the judicial procee dings in collaboration with 
Honduran human rights NGOs and the Special Prosecutor Office for Human Rights in Honduras.  
 Of the 14 people PHR examined, six cases moved to the intermediate 
judicial stage –  a pretrial stage in front of a court of first instan ce. The 
courts dismissed charges in five  of these six cases, ignoring the 
forensic evidence from both government -employed physicians and 
the PHR team. In the sixth case, o ne court agreed that the prosecutor 
had enough evidence to proceed with a trial, but a statute enacted by Congress in January 2010 granted amnes ty to the alleged 
perpetrators.   
 
physiciansforhumanrights.org  Impunity in Honduras: Torture and Ill -Treatment 
After the Coup d'État  5 In a separate case, the prosecutor closed the investigation due to the 
victim’s unwillingness to cooperate. The lack of judicial process for 
the other seven cases t hat remain in the investigative phase is a direct 
result of the Prosecutor’s Office’s inability to conduct independent 
criminal investigations. Criminal investigations generally fall under 
the jurisdiction of the National Police who interview witnesses and  
collect evidence.   
 
“The application of the 2010 amnesty law removed the possibility 
of prosecuting alleged perpetrators, further undermining the rule 
of law in the country. ” 
 PHR has withheld the publication of the present briefing paper  until 
now to avoid influencing the course of the judicial proceedings, 
given that Dr. Moreno was appointed as a forensic court expert and 
his reports were submitted into evidence. However, t he Honduran 
courts ha ve disregarded the forensic reports provided by PHR 
experts, as well as the expert opinions of local physicians treating these victims. The justice system’s blatant disregard for forensic evidence demonstrates that impunity is the norm in Honduras, rather 
than an exception.  The application of the 20 10 amnesty law removed 
the possibility of prosecuting alleged perpetrators, further 
undermining the rule of law in the country. I n accordance with 
Article 15 of the Rome Statute,
6 PHR is making this paper  available 
to the Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court as 
evidence to be presented within the court’s preliminary examination as to whether the alleged crimes committed in Honduras in the 
aftermath of the 2009 coup d’état constitute crimes against humanity.
7 This paper  is also availa ble for use in proceedings in the 
Inter-American Court of Human Rights as evidence  of Honduras' s 
inability to adjudicate documented human rights violations.  
 
  
Supporters of ousted Honduran President José Manuel Zelaya march in protest  
against  the military coup in Tegucigalpa on July 2, 2009.  
Photo: Jose CABEZAS/AFP/Getty Images   Introduction  
 
Political Background  
Honduras is an impoverished nation in Central America in which military rule, corruption, socio -economic disparities, and human 
rights abuses have played a central role over the past 40 years.
8 
Political and economic interventions in the region by the United States have exacerbated these problems, particularly during the armed conflicts in neighboring countries between the 1970s and the 
1990s.
9 During the past decade, the country’s socio -economic 
inequalities, weak institutions, and prevalence of drug trafficking 
have all contributed to increasing levels of corruption and violence in Honduras.
10 
 
After more than three years in office,  elected President José Manuel 
Zelaya was deposed by the army on June 28, 2009, ending 27 years 
of democratic governance in Honduras. His ouster was triggered by a 
deep political crisis stemming from Zelaya’s efforts to change the 
constitution through a na tional referendum, scheduled to be held 
shortly after Zelaya’s arrest. Changes to the Constitution of Honduras 
can be made through either an act of Congress or national poll. 
However, any constitutional changes to the Honduran system of government, preside ntial term limits, or presidential succession 
requires a two -thirds majority in favor of such reform by two 
consecutive elected Congresses.
11 President Zelaya sought to amend 
the constitutional term limits of office through a popular referendum, ignoring b oth a Supreme Court ruling that declared such a 
referendum unconstitutional and a vote in the National Congress 
rejecting the poll. Both entities ordered that the president halt the 
national poll.
12 
 
Army personnel entered the presidential palace on the mo rning of 
June 28, 2009 after the Supreme Court issued an order for President 
Zelaya’s arrest. The army arrested the president and forced him out 
of the country that same day, flying him into exile in San José, Costa 
Rica. Meanwhile, the Honduran National C ongress convened and 
accepted a letter of resignation allegedly written by President Zelaya. 
The Congress –  controlled by Zelaya’s Liberal Party –  declared the 
complete absence of the president and the vice president and proceeded to elect as interim presi dent Speaker of the Chamber 
Roberto Micheletti, who was next in the succession line according to 
the Constitution.
13 
  
 
 
physiciansforhumanrights.org  Impunity in Honduras: Torture and Ill -Treatment 
After the Coup d'État  6 Interim President Micheletti subsequently declared a state of 
exception, ordered a curfew, and suspended several constitutional 
rights. However, supporters of President Zelaya took to the streets. 
The government responded with force even though many of the 
protests were peaceful. Reputable news and civil society 
organizations documented a pattern of police abuse, political 
persecution, tor ture, extrajudicial killings, and rape in the aftermath 
of the police crackdown on demonstrations.14 Although human rights 
abuses occurred across the nation for several months after the coup d’état, the largest crackdown on peaceful demonstrators, journali sts, 
human rights advocates, and members of the opposition occurred in 
Tegucigalpa between June and September 2009.
15 For instance, on 
August 12, 2009, in actions captured by news crews, military 
personnel and police forces illegally detained, insulted, and beat 24 peaceful protesters who were participating in a protest in the vicinity 
of the National Congress building. On September 22, 2009, soldiers 
and police officers forcefully dispersed a gathering in the Brazilian Embassy, resulting in one death, 26 w ounded, and the detention of 
300 others. On both of these dates, the interim government also used facilities that were not authorized to hold detainees.
16 
 
“Reputable news and civil society organizations documented a pattern of police abuse, political pers ecution, torture, 
extrajudicial killings, and rape in the aftermath of the police crackdown on demonstrations.”  Power Structure  
Honduras has a presidential form of government in which the president is the head of both the state and the government.
17 The 
president is elected by popular vote for a single, four -year term, 
without the option for reelection. The Honduran National Congress is a unicameral body composed of 128 representatives elected to 
renewable four -year terms and led by the speaker or presid ent of 
Congress.
18 The main political parties in Honduras are the National 
Party, Liberal Party, Democratic Unification Party, Democratic 
Christian Party, and Unity and Innovation Party.19 
 
The judiciary is organized into peace courts, courts of first inst ance, 
appellate courts, and a Supreme Court.20 The peace courts have 
limited jurisdiction and generally deal with minor civil or criminal disputes, though in rural areas these courts may preside over major cases; judges on the peace courts are not necessar ily trained lawyers. 
The courts of first instance are divided into courts that oversee the legality of detentions and arrests and courts that deal with the preliminary phases of a trial; they are further divided into family, 
criminal, minors, civil, and em ployment law courts. The sentencing 
courts are courts of first instance in which actual trials occur. 
Appellate courts have geographical jurisdiction, though some of them have specific jurisdiction over issues related to labor and 
administrative law.
21 The Supreme Court has five chambers: 
constitutional, civil, criminal, administrative, and labor.22  
 
physiciansforhumanrights.org  Impunity in Honduras: Torture and Ill -Treatment 
After the Coup d'État  7 Legal Framework and Human Rights Obligations  
Honduran law provides for protection against torture and/or ill -
treatment. Article 68 of the 1982 Constitution clearly states that no 
one may be subjected to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment.
23 The penalty for torture is five to fifteen years 
imprisonment, as well as exclusion from any official government 
service for double the number of years serv ed.24 Article 209 -A of the 
criminal code codifies the crime of torture. However, as noted by the 
UN Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment  (SPT), the 
definition of torture under the Honduran crim inal code deviates from 
the definition of torture adopted by the UN  Convention against 
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or 
Punishment  (CAT). Contrary to CAT, the Honduran statute fails to 
consider intimidation, coercion, or discrimination of the victim as a 
form of torture. In contravention to Article 1 of CAT, which states 
that torture is only excluded when pain and suffering arise from 
lawful sanctions, the Honduran criminal code allows for different punishments depending on the pai n or suffering inflicted.  Lastly, 
CAT takes into account “pain or suffering inflicted by or at the instigation of or with the consent or acquiescence of a public official or other person acting in an official capacity,” while under Honduran 
law, pain or s uffering that occurs at the instigation of a public official 
is not considered torture.
25 
 
Honduras is also bound by various international treaties that outlaw the practice of torture and/or ill -treatment.
26 Specifically, Honduras 
has ratified the Internat ional Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 
the CAT and the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture 
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (OPCAT),
27 and the American Convention on Human Rights.28 In 
December 2008, the Honduran Congress enacted a law creating the National Preventive Mechanism to fulfill its obligations under the OPCAT.
29 The SPT charged with enforcing the OPCAT visited 
Honduras at the end of September 2009 and not only witnessed some 
of the human rights abuses that took place at the time, but also 
corroborated multiple human rights abuses documented by other organizations.
30 
 
Human rights abuses in Honduras reportedly continued to occur. 
Political activists and witnesses are intimidated and sometimes kill ed 
in circumstances reminiscent of the modus operandi of the death 
squads of the 1980s. As documented in this paper , judicial authorities 
appear unwilling to take steps to properly investigate and adjudicate 
allegations of human rights abuses in Honduras.  Criminal  Investigation and Procedure in Honduras  
The Office of the Attorney General (OAG) is in charge of 
prosecuting crimes as an independent agency under the Ministry of 
Interior. Contrary to many other countries, the Honduran OAG is an 
independent gove rnment agency, and is neither part of the executive 
nor the judicial branch. The OAG is comprised of several different 
offices, including the prosecution office, trial division, and nine 
special prosecutor offices, which are divided into organized crime, human rights, corruption, environment, children and disabled, 
consumer protection and the elderly, women, native people and cultural affairs, and constitutional office.
31 Criminal investigations, 
outside of those cases directed by the OAG, are conducted by the 
Honduran National Police and the General Directorate of Criminal Investigations, which fall under the Ministry of Security.  
 In 1996, the government enacted a reform that moved the trial proceedings away from the Napoleonic Code and towards an oral 
justice and open trial system. Articles 263 through 266 of the 
Criminal Procedural Code of Honduras state that there are three stages in a judicial proceeding: an investigative phase, an 
intermediate stage, and a trial phase.
32 The criminal investigative 
phase begins when a person files a complaint with a law enforcement 
agency or a suspect is caught in flagrante (committing a crime) by a 
law enforcement agency. This phase includes gathering evidence and 
witnesses to support formal charges. The actual inves tigation can be 
conducted by the National Police, the General Directorate of 
Criminal Investigation, or the OAG, even though the OAG has no 
criminal investigators. At this stage, the prosecutor may obtain court -
ordered subpoenas and arrest warrants or may also exercise 
discretion and close the matter without filing charges.33 The 
investigative  phase ends once the suspect is brought to a court of first 
instance and informed of his or her rights. During this initial hearing, the judge may order the detention of the defendant until the date of 
the trial or dismiss the charges against the defendant. A provisional 
dismissal of charges can be applied when suspicions of participating 
in a criminal act exist, but further investigation is required.
34  
 
physiciansforhumanrights.org  Impunity in Honduras: Torture and Ill -Treatment 
After the Coup d'État  8 The intermediat e stage (or pre -trial stage) starts once the prosecutor 
files formal charges against a suspect, serving to formalize charges 
against the defendant. The intermediate stage ends when the court of 
first instance orders the case to be referred to a sentencing court for trial.
35 
 
The trial phase encompasses different hearings during which the 
actual trial occurs. The prosecutor and the defense present evidence, examine witnesses, and make arguments to support their cases. The 
defendant has the right to remain si lent during the trial.
36 The 
sentencing judge may amend, dismiss, or add new charges according to the evidence presented during the trial. If the defendant is found guilty, the judge issues a sentence on behalf of the State.
37 
 The OAG generally refers cri me allegations to the National Police 
for investigation. When cases of alleged human rights violations 
involve government authorities, there is little to no cooperation in 
investigating such crimes. As demonstrated by the cases documented by PHR, this flaw ed system results in case dismissals by the judges 
due to lack of evidence. More importantly, the Honduran judiciary lacks the ability to conduct independent investigations, which – 
combined with judges arbitrarily dismissing forensic evidence and 
the 2010  amnesty law
38 – further contributes to a failing judicial 
system.  
 
Soldiers arrest and beat a supporter of ousted Honduran President José Manuel  
Zelaya during a demonstration in San Pedro Sula, Honduras  on July 2, 2009.  
Photo: STR/AFP/Getty Images  Findings of the  
Forensic Investigations  
 
Methodology  
PHR conducted 14 individual forensic medical evaluations at the request of several Honduran human rights nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), including the Committee of Relatives of the 
Detained and Disap peared in Honduras ( El Com ité de Familiares de 
Detenidos - Desaparecidos en Honduras , COFADEH), Committee 
for the Defense of Human Rights in Honduras ( El Comité para la 
Defensa de los Derechos Humanos en Honduras , CODEH), and the 
Centre for the Prevention,  Treatment and Rehabilitation of Victims 
of Torture and their Families ( El Centro de Prevención, Tratamiento 
y Rehabilitación de las Víctimas d e la Tortura y sus Familiares, 
CPTRT). The PHR team was led by Stefan Schmitt, director of 
PHR’s International Forensic Program; Dr. Alejandro Moreno, PHR volunteer forensic advisor; and Nery Osorio, PHR forensic 
investigator. The team contacted Sandra Ponce, the Special Prosecutor for Human Rights  in Honduras, who requested that 
forensic medical torture evaluations be carried out on behalf of the victims represented by the above mentioned NGOs. The PHR team visited Tegucigalpa, Honduras between March 20 and March 24, 
2010, conducting multiple non -structured interviews with 
government officials, journalists, and human rights activists. Schmitt 
and Osorio gathered evidence and records, among other pertinent information, for the forensic investigation. The Honorable Gladis 
Alejandra Ochoa Sierra, Trial  Court Judge of the Tegucigalpa 
Criminal Court, duly appointed Dr. Moreno as expert witness, who subsequently conducted all of the forensic medical evaluations 
according to Istanbul Protocol  (IP) standards. On July 12, 2010, the 
PHR team submitted the fore nsic medical reports to the court. On 
September 10, 2011, PHR revisited Tegucigalpa to follow up on the progress of the legal investigations involving the 14 cases.  
 
While Honduras has not formally adopted or implemented the IP, the 
country is obligated – as a signatory to the American Convention on 
Human Rights –  to follow IP guidelines in any investigation of 
alleged torture and/or ill -treatment. Honduras recognized the 
jurisdiction of the Inter -American Court of Human Rights on 
September 9, 1981, which r uled in the case of Guitierrez Soler vs. 
Colombia that signatories to the American Convention on Human 
Rights must use the IP for any and all alleged torture and/or ill -
treatment investigations.
39 
 
 
 
physiciansforhumanrights.org  Impunity in Honduras: Torture and Ill -Treatment 
After the Coup d'État  9 The Instanbul Protocol  
The Manual on Effective Investigation and Documentation of 
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or 
Punishment, commonly known as the Istanbul Protocol  (IP), outlines 
international legal standards on protection against torture and sets out 
specific guidelines on how effective legal and medical investigations 
into allegations of torture should be conducted.40 PHR led the 
international effort to establish the IP, which was developed by 75 
experts in law, health, and human rights from 40 different organizations in 15 countries and became an official United Nations 
document in 1999.  
 
The IP also outlines minimum standards to ensure the effective investigation and documentation of torture and ill -treatment in its 
Principles on the Effective Document ation of Torture and Other 
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, or “Istanbul Principles.” The Istanbul Principles have been recognized by a 
number of human rights bodies, including the Inter -American 
Human Rights Courts, UN General Assembly , UN Commission on 
Human Rights, UN Committee against Torture, UN Special Rapporteur on Torture, and the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights.  
 
Riot police arrest photographer Mario Amaya as supporters of ousted Honduran President José Manuel Ze laya are dispersed with tear gas during a demonstration  
in San Pedro Sula, Honduras on July 2, 2009.  Photo: AFP/Getty Images  First Visit Findings  
Of the 14 individuals evaluated, six were women. The individuals 
evaluated ranged in age between 7 and 53 y ears. Both of the 
individuals who were younger than 18 years were evaluated with one 
or both parents present. One of the two minors was an adolescent, 
whose level of psychological development and maturity was deemed 
comparable to that of a young adult by t he PHR team; therefore, a 
complete forensic evaluation was conducted. The other minor was a 
seven -year-old child, and the PHR team determined that the forensic 
evaluation should be limited to the physical component given the 
level of psychological developm ent and the apparent fragile 
emotional state of the child. The Court was informed that a child psychologist should conduct the psychological evaluation. Table 1 presents the main demographic characteristics of the individuals 
examined.  
 
All of the individuals evaluated by PHR were working or studying 
prior to the alleged abuse endured following the president’s ouster in 
2009 (see Table 1). However, at the time of PHR’s evaluation, only two individuals had resumed his or her prior occupations. Nine were 
unem ployed and one had retired. The occupation after the alleged 
abuse was unknown in two cases.  
 Twelve of the individuals evaluated by PHR implicated regular 
police agents as the perpetrators. A minority accused members of the intelligence police or the arm y (one case each). The individuals were 
detained at multiple locations. On average, the detentions lasted 62 hours (mean time was 3 hours with a range between 30 minutes and 528 hours). All individuals were initially stopped and detained on the 
streets. So me had been peacefully protesting in the aftermath of the 
coup d’état, while others were journalists detained while reporting on 
the demonstrations. One individual was a tourist who happened to be near a protest when stopped by law enforcement agents. This  
individual, who happened to be a foreign visitor (from a country that condemned the coup d’état), was accused of espionage and providing communist training to the protesters. Following the initial abuse or 
detention in the street, some of the individuals were later transported 
to other places of detention, such as the Congress building, a police station, or the Special Forces base (see Table 2). The street was the 
only place of detention or alleged abuse for five individuals. The 
individuals held in the st reets were all detained for less than half an 
hour.  
 
 
 
physiciansforhumanrights.org  Impunity in Honduras: Torture and Ill -Treatment 
After the Coup d'État  10 Six of the 14 individuals were actively participating in street protests 
when first detained and/or allegedly abused. During the 
demonstrations, they were also exposed to crowd control measures, 
such as  tear gas, which triggered eye and respiratory irritation. 
Although the forensic reports document the symptoms 
accompanying these crowd control measures, they were not 
considered when determining whether or not, from the forensic standpoint, the alleged abuse was consistent with torture and/or ill -
treatment. The most common forms of abuse reported to PHR during its 14 evaluations were blunt force trauma (12 people), threats and insults (11 people), and forced observation of abuse against other 
individuals ( 9 people) (see Table 2).  
 
None of the people evaluated were presented with an arrest warrant, 
and only five were taken before a judge to determine the legality of 
the detention/arrest. These five individuals were detained in the vicinity of the National Co ngress during a peaceful demonstration, 
held temporarily, and subsequently taken to the headquarters of the Special Forces. The initial court hearing to set bail occurred within 24 hours. At this hearing, the five detainees expressed their allegations 
of torture and ill -treatment to the court and identified the alleged 
perpetrators, who –  for the most part –  were present at the hearing. 
The court also considered the testimony of these law enforcement agents when considering whether to grant bail.  
 
 Honduran government forensic experts had examined eight of the 14 
individuals evaluated by PHR prior to PHR’s exams. These eight 
people were examined at the request of the Special Prosecutor for 
Human Rights as part of its criminal investigations. In total , the 
government forensic doctors produced 12 forensic medical reports, as three individuals received two or more forensic evaluations (see 
Table 3). These 12 forensic evaluations took place on average 47.5 
days after the alleged abuse (median: 43.5 days; range: 1 –131 days). 
The findings by government forensic doctors in 11 of the 12 
evaluations were consistent with the allegations of abuse made by the 
examined individuals. The main forensic findings were pain and edema from blunt force trauma, ecchymosis ( bruising) from blunt 
force trauma, fractures, post -traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and 
major depressive disorder (MDD). Eight of the individuals evaluated by government forensic experts had photographic documentation of 
acute physical findings, though the quality of the photos in one 
particular case was poor, making it impossible to offer an independent opinion as to the nature of the findings. In two cases, the 
photographic documentation showed recent surgical wounds, which 
were corroborated by medical r ecords for the individuals. The other 
five cases showed findings consistent with ecchymosis (bruising). 
One individual’s bruising was consistent with classic “tram -line” 
lesions seen after blunt force trauma with instruments, virtually 
diagnostic of police  baton injuries (see p hoto below ). 
 
 
Tram- line lesions on victim from a police baton41 
 
 
 
physiciansforhumanrights.org  Impunity in Honduras: Torture and Ill -Treatment 
After the Coup d'État  11 In addition to the photographic documentation, video documentation 
accompanied one case of alleged abuse. News crews filming the 
protests recorded images of police of ficers abusing one of the 
individuals evaluated, even though she was lying down on the 
ground and was not offering any resistance.42 
 Only five of the individuals evaluated had access to an advocate (lawyer, NGO representative, or the Special Prosecutor for Human 
Rights) while detained. These five were able to call relatives or their 
advocate shortly before having their cell phones confiscated. Six individuals reported further persecution and threats after suffering 
abuse at the hands of military or polic e personnel.  
  
The most common findings during the PHR forensic evaluations were MDD or depressive disorder, PTSD or sub -threshold symptoms 
of PTSD, as well as scars from blunt force trauma lacerations. Only 
three individuals lacked such external evidence to corroborate the 
findings. There were no unexplained inconsistencies or suspicion of 
fabrication in any of the cases.  
 
Based on its forensic evaluations, PHR concluded that 12 of the 14 
individuals had suffered abuse consistent with the allegations of torture and/or ill -treatment. The other two cases suggested that police 
officers either engaged in reckless behavior or intentionally disregarded the safety of the public. In one case, police officers at a checkpoint fired at a vehicle for failing to stop wh en signaled. The 
driver lost control of the vehicle and ran over an individual who was 
standing outside of a store. In the second case, police officers on a motorcycle fired their weapons wounding an individual leaving a 
supermarket with his parents and si blings.  
 Follow -Up Visit  Findings  
Table 4 shows the specific stage and judicial action taken by the 
sentencing court for six of the 14 cases. These six cases received an initial hearing during the preparatory stage of the judicial process, 
and PHR forensi c reports were formally submitted to the court as 
evidence during a pretrial hearing. The trial courts have dismissed 
five of these six cases on different grounds, and these decisions have 
been affirmed by the Appellate Court. In the sixth case, the court agreed that the OAG had enough evidence to proceed with a trial, but granted amnesty to the alleged perpetrators based on a statute enacted 
by Congress in January and published in February 2010.
 43 In one of 
the cases, a trial court opined that the forensi c evaluation lacked 
evidentiary value because it was conducted too late and failed to 
support the victim’s allegations. This same court added that torture 
could not have occurred as alleged by the victim because the victim 
never gave a confession. Another trial court dismissed the case because the OAG could not prove participation by the alleged 
perpetrators. Another court determined that no human rights 
violations had ever occurred. The OAG has continued appealing the dismissals.  
 
“Based on its forensic ev aluations, PHR concluded that 12 of the 
14 individuals had suffered abuse consistent with the allegations 
of torture and/or ill -treatment.”  
 
At the time  this briefing paper  was written, seven cases were still in 
the investigative phase, as the Office of th e Special Prosecutor for 
Human Rights has not been able to identify the specific perpetrator or find evidence corroborating the victim’s testimony implicating the 
alleged perpetrator. The lack of progress in these investigations is 
directly due to the Offi ce of the Special Prosecutor for Human 
Rights’ limited access to independent investigative resources. The office depends on the General Directorate of Criminal Investigation 
or the National Police, both of which are located under the Ministry of Security.  
 
Findings  
In the months following the 2009 coup, Honduran human rights 
organizations reported that the interim government specifically 
targeted students, journalists, members of human rights 
organizations, and individuals affiliated with opposition politic al 
groups or union activism. The abuses occurred on multiple dates and locations across the nation.
44 The largest number of abuses –  
including the use of live ammunition to control peaceful demonstrations, illegal detentions, beatings, and threats against and intimidation of detainees –  occurred in Tegucigalpa during the 
protests that took place on June 29, August 12, and at the end of September 2009.  
  
 
physiciansforhumanrights.org  Impunity in Honduras: Torture and Ill -Treatment 
After the Coup d'État  12 Government -employed forensic physicians conducted 12 forensic 
medical evaluations for eight of the people  examined by Dr. Moreno. 
The findings in 11 of the 12 government forensic medical evaluations 
corroborated the victims’ allegations that police and security officials engaged in torture and ill -treatment, including threats, insults, 
blindfolds, forced witnessing of the abuse of others, beatings, and electric shocks. PHR evaluations found evidence of PTSD and MDD in the majority of the individuals, as well as a significant number of 
scars from blunt force trauma. External evidence –  such as 
photographic documentation, medical records, prior forensic 
evaluations, and video recordings – was also available for the 
majority of cases, further corroborating the victims’ claims.  
 
“The cases for which PHR provided forensic examinations were 
dismissed by the courts of  first instance in Tegucigalpa, blatantly 
disregarding forensic evidence obtained by both government -
employed forensic physicians and the PHR team.”  
 
Conclusions  
The findings of the PHR investigation indicate that the Interim 
Government of Honduras engaged  in the practice of torture and/or 
ill-treatment in an effort to suppress dissent following the overthrow 
of President Zelaya. The most common forms of abuse against the detainees evaluated by PHR’s team were threats and blunt force 
injuries. The most prev alent forensic findings were ecchymosis 
(bruising), scars from blunt force trauma, PTSD, and MDD. The vast 
majority of the cases had external corroborating evidence, such as 
prior forensic medical evaluations, medical records, or photographic/video documentation.  
 Most of the cases either remain in the investigative phase or have been dismissed, with alleged perpetrators cleared of all charges. For those cases in the investigative phase, the Honduran government has 
been unable or unwilling to gather evidenc e linking the alleged 
perpetrators to the victims; the National Police have failed to carry 
out investigations with necessary diligence, while witnesses generally 
fear repercussions for cooperating with investigations. The cases for 
which PHR provided fore nsic examinations were dismissed by the 
courts of first instance in Tegucigalpa, blatantly disregarding forensic 
evidence obtained by both government -employed forensic physicians 
and the PHR team. Such arbitrary dismissals are either the result of biased j udges or a lack of understanding as to what constitutes 
evidence of torture.  
 The lack of progress in the judicial process has eroded any 
confidence that the international community and Hondurans had in the country’s judicial system. It is unlikely that th ese cases will be 
fairly adjudicated, contributing to the overall culture of impunity in the country.  Recommendations  
PHR calls upon the Honduran government to end impunity for torture and ill -treatment and restore respect for the rule of law by:  
 • Creating an independent criminal investigations unit/department under the Attorney General’s Office;  
• Prosecuting torture and ill -treatment cases in a transparent 
manner that reflects internationally -recognized legal standards;  
• Implementing a training p rogram on the medical and legal 
investigation and documentation of torture and ill -treatment for 
judges, prosecutors, defense attorneys, government forensic experts, and law enforcement personnel;  
• Reviewing legal proceedings and judicial outcomes of all torture and ill -treatment cases; and  
• Correcting deficiencies in prior prosecutions of torture and ill -
treatment cases.  
 PHR calls upon the Inter -American Justice System and the 
International Criminal Court (ICC), which – at the time this briefing 
paper  was written –  was conducting its preliminary examination on 
the coup d’état in Honduras, to review the cases in which sentencing 
courts of Honduras failed to give due weight to forensic medical 
evidence and –  as a consequence –  dismissed the cases with 
prejudice, eliminating the possibility of alleged victims obtaining 
redress for the abuses endured. The government of Honduras needs to fully cooperate with the ICC’s preliminary examination and demonstrate its willingness and ability to investigate and prosec ute 
human rights violations.  
   
 
physiciansforhumanrights.org  Impunity in Honduras: Torture and Ill -Treatment 
After the Coup d'État  13 Appendices  
 
Summary of Representative Cases  
1. MRS. A:  
A 44-year-old political activist who was arrested while protesting 
in the streets following the overthrow of President Zelaya. After 
being handcuffed and subdued, the police started hitting Mrs. A 
with batons, kicking, punching, and insulting her. She was then taken to a stadium where many other detainees were held. She 
managed to take some photos of herself and other injured 
detainees before her cellphone was confiscat ed. After several 
hours of detention inside the stadium, the police took Mrs. A to 
the Special Forces base where she was held in inhumane 
conditions, including restricted access to food, toilet, or attorneys; sleep deprivation; and threats. Two forensic me dical evaluations 
and an urgent medical care note documented the presence of recent blunt trauma injuries and a hypertensive crisis within days of the alleged incidents.  
 2. MR. B  
A 26-year-old cameraman who suffered multiple detentions and 
abuses at the h ands of the police because he worked for national 
and international news organizations critical of the interim government. During the first incident, which occurred while Mr. 
B was covering a protest, the police hit him and other journalists with batons to prevent news coverage of the events. The second 
time, Mr. B was detained and taken to a police station where he 
was interrogated, threatened, and insulted. He managed to send a 
text message before having his cell phone confiscated, leading large numbers o f civil society members to come to the police 
station and force his release. The third time, Mr. B and another 
cameraman were arrested, blindfolded, handcuffed, and taken to a 
safe house. Mr. B was repeatedly beaten and threatened, and was forced to touch what he perceived to be a corpse. He and his 
colleague were released in the outskirts of Tegucigalpa with their hands tied and eyes blindfolded. Mr. B and his colleague jumped into a culvert as the unmarked car sped away. Soon after, two 
men riding a motor cycle stopped nearby as if looking for them. 
Mr. B was convinced that these two men had come to kill them, as bodies with their hands tied and eyes covered with tape had 
been found on the same road in the weeks following the coup d’état.
45 The forensic eva luation showed an anxiety disorder and 
a series of dark macular parallel lines (tram -lines) produced from 
the degradation of the hemosiderin of ecchymosis (byproduct from blood degradation as it is reabsorbed by the body).  
 
3. MR. C 
A 24-year-old student w ho protested in support of former 
president José Manuel Zelaya. Mr. C participated in multiple 
street protests until he was detained by several police officers and 
soldiers before reaching his home one day. He was quickly subdued and handcuffed, and endure d multiple beatings with 
police batons from the time he was detained until he reached the police station. The officers taunted him to sing the slogans of the opposition, and threatened and insulted him repeatedly. After the night shift change, a police off icer acquaintance of Mr. C saw 
him in detention and released him. Photos taken three days after the alleged abuse show multiple ecchymosis (bruising) in parallel elongated lines consistent with tram -line lesions. The forensic 
evaluation showed MDD, three s cars from blunt force trauma 
lacerations, and a series of dark macular parallel lines (tram -like 
lines) produced from the degradation of the hemosiderin of 
ecchymosis. The multiple tram -lines seen in the photos taken 
right after the alleged events matched the location and 
characteristics of skin discolorations found during the forensic 
evaluation.  
 
Supporters of ousted Honduran President  José Manuel Zelaya demonstrate during a 
rally in front of the U .S. embassy in Tegucigalpa on July 7, 2009.  
Photo: ELMER MARTINEZ/AFP/Getty Images  
 
 
physiciansforhumanrights.org  Impunity in Honduras: Torture and Ill -Treatment 
After the Coup d'État  14 Tables  
1. Demographics  
Age 
Mean (Median) [Range]      34 (32) [7 –53] 
 
Sex 
Male            8 
Female           6 
 
Marital Status  
Married/Common Law Union          6 
Single/Never Married            4 
Widowed               2 
Separated/Div orced             1 
Not Documented              1 
 Occupation  
Non-professional (i.e. Artisan,               5 
Construction)  
Professional, other than Journalist              5 
Student                4 
Journalist                3 
 
Level of Education  
University                5 
High school          3 
Elementary school             3 
Not documented             3 2. Pattern of Abuse  
Alleged Perpetrator  
Regular Police         12 
Intelligence Police               1  
Army Personnel                1  
 
Prior Involvement in Political  or Union Activism  
None Prior to Coup d’état             9         
 Places of Detention/Alleged Abuse  
Street            14 
Congress Building (Basement)                 4  
Police Station                 3  
Police Headquarters (CORE 7)            3  
Special Forces Base (Cobras)            3  
Unknown Secret Place              3  
Stadium             1 
 Duration of Detention  
Mean Hours (Median) [Range]    62 (3) [0.5 –528] 
 Forms of Abuse  
Blunt Force Trauma             12 
Threats and Insults             11 
Witnessing Other Being Abused                 9  
Blindfolded            3 
Gunshots                  2  
Forced to Touch Dead Body                  2  
Forced Nakedness               1  
Strangulation                 1  
Exposed to Irritants, other than                 1  
 Tear Gas  
Electric Shock           1 
   
 
physiciansforhumanrights.org  Impunity in Honduras: Torture and Ill -Treatment 
After the Coup d'État  15 3. Forensic Documentation  
Forensic Evaluations by Government Personnel  
Total Number of Forensic          12 
Evaluations  
Total Number of Forensic          11 
Evaluations With  at Least  
One Acute Finding  
Total N umber of  Individuals          8 
Who Had Forensic Evaluations  
Average (Mean) [Range] Number   1.5 (1) [1 –3] 
of Forensic Evaluations per Person  
 
Findings of G overnment Forensic Evaluations  
Pain and Edema              6 
Ecchymosis                    6 
Fractures                3 
PTSD                 2 
MDD                2 
 Photographic or Video Documentation  
of the Alleged Abuse  
Photos                 8 
Video                 2 
 Medical Care  
Subsequent to the               7  
Alleged Abuse  
During or Immediately After the                5  
Alleged Abuse  
 
Findings during  Medical Care  
Pain and Edema           5 
Ecchymosis and Abrasions        2 
Pain and Edema                2  
Fractures or Musculoskeletal                  2  
Injuries  
Internal Organ Injury               1  
HTN Urge ncy               1  
Retinal Detachment               1  
 Findings during  PHR’s Forensic Evaluation  
MDD or Depressive Disorder            9  
PTSD or Symptoms of PTSD            8  
Scars Consistent with Blunt Force                5  
Trauma Laceration  
Skin Discolorations Left from            4  
the Hemosiderin of  
the Ecchymosis  
Surgical Scars Related to             2  
Alleged Trauma  
Surgical Scars Unrelated to                  2  
Alleged Trauma  
Scars from Gunshot Wound                  2  
Acute Stress Disorder or                    2  
Anxiety Disorder   
 
physiciansforhumanrights.org  Impunity in Honduras: Torture and Ill -Treatment 
After the Coup d'État  16 4. Judicial Process  
Case   Sex  Age         Pre -Trial Hearing Date   
No. 146     Female         44    September 29, 2010    
 
 
 No. 2
47     Female         53    December 15, 2010  
 
 
  
 
           March 2012  
   
 
 No. 3
48     Female         50    October 24, 2011  
 
 
 
September 15, 2012  
 
  
 
No. 4
49      Male    28    N/A 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
Procedural History  
• Court issued arrest warrants against six police officers charged with abuse of power and torture  
• Illegal detention charge dismissed  
 • Five police officers formally charged with abuse of power, breach of official duty, illegal detention, torture, and ill -treatment  
• Court rejected requests by defendants to dismiss charges based on the allegation that their right to a s peedy trial was violated  
• Defendants appealed and Appellate Court upheld the lower 
court’s decision  
 • Appellate court dismissed all charges, arguing that no human rights violations had occurred and that the detentions were legal, 
discounting any inhumane  and degrading treatment by the 
defendants  
• Prosecutor to appeal dismissal  
 
• The victim did not appear in court for the first hearing, at which time the judge ordered the provisional dismissal of charges and 
the next hearing was scheduled for April 14, 2012 
 • After the victim appeared in court and the prosecution presented its case, the judge resolved that the Prosecutor Office presented 
abundant evidence and the crimes were proven, but granted 
amnesty based on Decree 02 -2010 
 
• Court temporarily dismiss ed the charges b ut allowed the 
prosecutor to re file them in the future with more evidence to 
support the accusations against the defendants  
• Court rejected the forensic evidence of both PHR and government forensic physicians arguing it was collected eight  
months after the fact  
• Court rejected the forensic evidence of both PHR and government forensic physicians arguing the findings were due to 
the defendant’s substance abuse rather than torture  
• All four defendants were police officers  
• The defense appealed the decision , and the Appellate Court 
ordered a final dismissal having found that the evidence did not 
support the charges  
  
 
physiciansforhumanrights.org  Impunity in Honduras: Torture and Ill -Treatment 
After the Coup d'État  17 4. Judicial Process (continued ) 
Case   Sex  Age          Pre -Trial Hearing Date   
No. 550       Male     26     N/A 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
No. 6
51       Male      31    February 10, 2010  
  
 
 March 24, 2011  
  
            
Procedural History  
• Court temporarily dismissed the charges but allowed the 
prosecutor to re file them in the future with more evidence to 
support the accusations against the  defendants  
• Court rejected the forensic evidence of both PHR and government forensic physicians arguing it was collected eight 
months after the fact  
• All four defendants were police officers  
• The defense appealed the decision, and the Appellate Court ordered a final dismissal having found that the evidence did not 
support the charges  
 • Court issued arrest warrants against two police officers  
• Defense appealed and Appellate Court ordered the dismissal with 
prejudice of all charges against the defendant s arguing that the 
crime of torture and abuse of authority were not proven  
 • Appellate Court dismissed the forensic report with evidence 
corroborating the alleged victim’s claims, as it was conducted 
months after the fact  
• Appellate Court also said that  – since no confession was obtained  
– torture could not have occurred  
• Prosecutor appealed decision to the Supreme Court 
 
physiciansforhumanrights.org  Impunity in Honduras: Torture and Ill -Treatment 
After the Coup d'État  18 Endnotes  
 
1 Comisión de la Verdad y la Reconciliación, “Para que los hechos no  
se repitan: Informe de la Comisión de la Verdad y la Reconciliación,” Julio 2011, 
http://www.sjdh.gob.hn/recomendacionesCVR/sites/  
default/files/TOMO -IINAL%20Para%20que%20los%20hechos%20no%  
20se%20repitan%20 -%20Informe%20de%20la%20CVR.pdf;  
Inter-  American Commission on Human Rights, “Honduras: Human Rights an d the 
Coup d'État,” Organization of American States, December 30, 2009, 
http://www.cidh.org/pdf%20files/  
HONDURAS2009ENG.pdf; Human Rights Watch, “After the Coup: Ongoing 
Violence, Intimidation, and Impunity in Honduras,” December 2010, 
http://www.hrw.org/ sites/default/files/reports/  
honduras1210webwcover_0.pdf; Amnesty International,  
“Honduras – Amnesty International Report 2010: Human Rights  
in Republic of Honduras,” http://www.amnesty.org/en/region/honduras/report -2010.  
2 Comisión de la Verdad y la Reconciliación, “Para que los hechos no se repitan”; “Honduras: Human Rights and the Coup d'État”; Human Rights Watch, “After the 
Coup”; Amnesty International, “Honduras –  Amnesty International Report 2010: 
Human Rights in Republic of Honduras.”  
3 United N ations, “Report on the visit of the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture 
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment to Honduras,” 
Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Pun ishment, January 7, 2010, 
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cat/opcat/spt_visits.htm.  
4 V. Iacopino, O. Ozkalipci, C. Schlar, K. Allden, T. Baykal, R. Kirschner, et al. Manual on the Effective Investigation and Documentation of Torture and Other Cruel, 
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (The Istanbul Protocol) , UN Office 
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, 2004, HR/P/PT/8/Rev.1, 
http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/training8Rev1en.pdf.  
5 Comisión de la Verdad y la Reconciliación , “Para que los hechos no se repitan,” 319.  
6 Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, UN General Assembly, July 17, 
1998 (last amended 2010), http://untreaty.un.org/cod/icc/statute/99_corr/cstatute.htm.  
7 International Criminal Court, “Report on Preliminary Examination Activities 2012,” 
Office of the Prosecutor, November 2012, http://www.icc -
cpi.int/NR/rdonlyres/C433C462 -7C4E -4358 -8A72 -
8D99FD00E8CD/285209/OTP2012ReportonPreliminaryExaminations22Nov2012.p
df. 
8 Comisión de la Verdad y la Reconciliac ión, “Para que los hechos no se repitan,” 61 –
76; “Honduras Country Profile,” BBC News , August 20, 2012, 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/country_profiles/1225416.stm; International 
Commission of Jurists, “Honduras: La Administracion de Justicia, la Inde pendencia 
del Poder Judicial y la Profesion Legal,” 2003, 6 –7, http://icj.wpengine.netdna -
cdn.com/wp -content/uploads/2004/02/honduras -administrationofjustice -report -2003 -
spa.pdf.  
9 International Commission of Jurists, “Honduras: La Administracion de Justic ia, La 
Independencia del Poder Judicial y la Profesion Legal,” 5 –7. 
10 Comisión de la Verdad y la Reconciliación, “Para que los hechos no se repitan,” 61 –
76; International Commission of Jurists, “Honduras: La Administracion de Justicia, La 
Independencia de l Poder Judicial y la Profesion Legal,” 5.  
11 “Constitución Política de la República de Honduras,” Asamblea Nacional Constituyente, Decreto Nº 131, Publicada en el diario Oficial la Gaceta, No. 23, 612 del 20 de enero de 1982, Arts. 5, 6, 373, 374, 
http:// www.poderjudicial.gob.hn/institucional/organizacion/dependencias/cedij/Leyes/
Paginas/default.aspx.  12 Malkin, Elisabeth, “Honduran President Is Ousted in Coup,” New York Times , June 
28, 2009, 
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/06/29/world/americas/29honduras.htm l?pagewanted=a
ll; “Honduras Truth Commission Rules Zelaya Removal Was Coup,” BBC News , July 
7, 2011, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world -latin-america -14072148; Comisión de la 
Verdad y la Reconciliación, “Para que los hechos no se repitan,” 131 –166. 
13 Malkin,  “Honduran President is Ousted in Coup”; “Honduras Truth Commission 
Rules Zelaya Removal Was Coup,” BBC News ; Comisión de la Verdad y la 
Reconciliación, “Para que los hechos no se repitan,” 131 –166. 
14 Comisión de la Verdad y la Reconciliación, “Para que l os hechos no se repitan,” 279 –
362. 
15 Comisión de la Verdad y la Reconciliación, “Para que los hechos no se repitan”; Inter - 
American Commission on Human Rights, “Honduras: Human Rights and the Coup d'État,” 19 –25; Human Rights Watch, “After the Coup”; Amn esty International, 
“Honduras – Amnesty International Report 2010: Human Rights in Republic of 
Honduras.”  
16 Inter-  American Commission on Human Rights, “Honduras: Human Rights and the 
Coup d'État,” 19 –25; Comisión de la Verdad y la Reconciliación, “Para q ue los 
hechos no se repitan,” 280 –386. 
17 “Constitución Política de la República de Honduras,” Asamblea Nacional 
Constituyente.  
18 “Honduras,” Freedom in the World 2013, Freedom House, 
http://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom -world/2013/honduras; Internation al 
Commission of Jurists, “Honduras: La Administracion de Justicia, La Independencia 
del Poder Judicial y la Profesion Legal,” 10.  
19 Honduras: Congreso nacional (National Congress), Inter -Parliamentary Union, 
http://www.ipu.org/parline -e/reports/2139_E.h tm. 
20 José Miguel Álvarez and Jessica Ramos, “Guide to Legal Research in Honduras,” Hauser Global Law School Program, New York University School of Law, 
http://www.nyulawglobal.org/globalex/honduras.htm#_3.3_Judicial_Branch.  
21 International Commission of  Jurists, “Honduras: La Administracion de Justicia, La 
Independencia del Poder Judicial y la Profesion Legal,” 11 –12. 
22 Ibid. 
23 “Constitución Política de la República de Honduras,” Art. 68; See also: http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cat/docs/CAT.C.HN D.1.pdf.  
24 Código Penal de Honduras, Decreto Numero 144 –83, 26 de septiembre de 1983, 
http://www.oas.org/dil/esp/Codigo_Penal_Honduras.pdf.  
25 United Nations, “Report on the visit of the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture 
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment to Honduras.”  
26 International Commission of Jurists, “Honduras: La Administracion de Justicia, La 
Independencia del Poder Judicial y la Profesion Legal,” 5.  
27 Honduras ratified CAT in 1996 and the ICCPR in 1997.  
See UN Treaty Collection, 
http://treaties.un.org/Pages/Treaties.aspx?id=4&subid=A&lang=en.  
28 Honduras ratified the American Convention on Human Rights in 1977. See 
http://www.oas.org/dil/esp/tratados_B -
32_Convencion_Americana_sobre_Derechos_Humanos_firmas.htm.   
 
physiciansforhumanrights.org  Impunity in Honduras: Torture and Ill -Treatment 
After the Coup d'État  19 29 National Committee for the Prevention against Torture, “Ley del Mecanismo 
Nacional de Prevención Contra la Tortura y Otros Tratos Crueles, Inhumanos y 
Degradantes,” December 5, 2008, 
http://www.poderjudicial.gob.hn/institucional/organizacion/dependencia s/cedij/Leyes/
Documents/LEY%20DEL%20MECANISMO%20NACIONAL%20DE%20PREV
ENCIÓN%20CONTRA%20LA%20TORTURA%20Y%20OTROS%20TRATOS
%20CRUELES,%20INHUMANOS%20O%20DEGRADANTES%20(08).pdf. Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or 
Punis hment (Convention against Torture), G.A. res. 39/46, [annex, 39 U.N. GAOR 
Supp. (No. 51) at 197, U.N. Doc. A/39/51 (1984)], entered into force June 26, 1987, 
ratified by Honduras December 5, 1996, 
http://www.un.org/documents/ga/res/39/a39r046.htm. The Opti onal Protocol of the 
United Nations Convention against Torture (OPCAT) is an international treaty that 
entered into force in June 2006. OPCAT established the Subcommittee on Prevention 
of Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishmen t (SPT) 
with the mission of preventing torture from occurring through the monitoring of detention and prison facilities. SPT began its work in February 2007. OPCAT also 
calls for State parties to create national preventive mechanisms for the purpose of conducting unrestricted visits to all detention facilities.  
30 United Nations, “Report on the visit of the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment to Honduras.”  
31 Ministerio Publico de Honduras, htt p://www.mp.hn/.  
32 Nuevo Código Procesal Penal, Decreto No. 9 –99E, Febrero 2002,  
El Congreso Nacional, Arts. 263 –266, 
http://www.poderjudicial.gob.hn/juris/Leyes/CODIGO%20PROCESAL%20PENAL.pdf. 
33 Nuevo Código Procesal Penal, Arts. 267 –284. 
34 Nuevo Código Procesal Penal, Arts. 294 –299. 
35 Nuevo Código Procesal Penal, Arts. 300 –303. 
36 Nuevo Código Procesal Penal, Art. 323.  
37 Nuevo Código Procesal Penal, Arts. 304 –345.  
38 Honduran National Congress, Decree No. 2 -2010, February 2, 2010, 
http://scm.oas.org /pdfs/2010/AGSC00258E -14.pdf. This decree grants a general 
amnesty to all those persons who attempted or carried out acts considered as treason, crimes against the government, terrorism, sedition, abuse of authority, and violations of government functionar ies’ responsibilities, among others.  
39 Organization of American States, “Statute of the Inter -American Commission on 
Human Rights,” American Convention of Human Rights, October 1, 1979, O.A.S. Off. Rec. OEA/Ser.P/IX.0.2/80, Vol. 1, 88, 
http://www.cidh.oas .org/basicos/english/Basic4.Amer.Conv.Ratif.htm; Inter -
American Court of Human Rights, Case of Gutiérrez- Soler v. Colombia, September 
12, 2005, http://www.corteidh.or.cr/docs/casos/articulos/seriec_132_ing.pdf.  
40 V. Iacopino, O. Ozkalipci, C. Schlar, K. A llden, T. Baykal, R. Kirschner,  
et al. Manual on the Effective Investigation and Documentation of Torture and Other 
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (The Istanbul Protocol) . 
41 “One Story of Last Night’s Repression,” Honduras Accompanim ent Project, 
September 22, 2009, http://hondurasaccompaniment.wordpress.com/2009/09/23/one -
story-of-last-nights -repression/.  
42 Honduran police using violence against peaceful protestors.  “Policia Agrede a Alba Ochoa,” August 13, 2009, YouTube, available at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v= -1cp6QqSfCY.  
43 “IACHR Expresses Concern About Amnesty Decree in Honduras,”  
Inter- American Human Rights Commission on Human Rights, Organization of 
American States, February 3, 2010, http://www.cidh.org/Comunicados/Engli sh/2010/14 -10eng.htm; Honduran National 
Congress, Decree No. 2 -2010.  
44 Comisión de la Verdad y la Reconciliación, “Para que los hechos no se repitan”; “Honduras: Human Rights and the Coup d'État”; Human Rights Watch, “After the Coup”; Amnesty International, “Honduras –  Amnesty International Report 2010: 
Human Rights in Republic of Honduras.”  
45 Comisión de la Verdad y la Reconciliación, “Para que los hechos no se repitan,” 305 –
310.  
46 Interview with individual, Case No. 01, March 20– 23, 2010, Centro de Prevención, 
Tratamiento y Rehabilitación de Sobrevivientes de la Tortura y sus Familias 
(C.P.T.R.T.), Tegucigalpa, Honduras. 
47 Interview with individual, Case No. 02, March 20– 23, 2010, Centro de Prevención, 
Tratamiento y Rehabilitación de Sobrevivientes de la Tortura y sus Familias (C.P.T.R.T.), Tegucigalpa, Honduras. 
48 Interview with individual, Case No. 03, March 20– 23, 2010, Centro de Prevención, 
Tratamiento y Rehabilitación de Sobre vivientes de la Tortura y sus Familias 
(C.P.T.R.T.), Tegucigalpa, Honduras. 
49 Interview with individual, Case No. 04, March 20– 23, 2010, Centro de Prevención, 
Tratamiento y Rehabilitación de Sobrevivientes de la Tortura y sus Familias (C.P.T.R.T.), Teguci galpa, Honduras.  50 Interview with individual, Case No. 05, March 20– 23, 2010, Centro de Prevención, 
Tratamiento y Rehabilitación de Sobrevivientes de la Tortura y sus Familias 
(C.P.T.R.T.), Tegucigalpa, Honduras. 
51 Interview with individual, Case No. 06,  March 20 –23, 2010, Centro de Prevención, 
Tratamiento y Rehabilitación de Sobrevivientes de la Tortura y sus Familias (C.P.T.R.T.), Tegucigalpa, Honduras. 
 