 
Physicians for  
Human Rights  
 
December  2014  
 Doing Harm:  
Health Professionals’ 
Central Role in the CIA 
Torture Program  
 
Medical and Psychological Analysis of the 
2014 U.S. Senate Select Committee on 
Intelligence Report’s Executive Summary  
 
 
 Acknowledg ments  
 
This analysis was written by:  Scott A. Allen, MD, FACP, 
medical advisor, Physicians for Human Rights; professor 
of medicine, associate dean of academic affairs, 
University of California, Riverside; co-founder and co-
director, Center for Prisoner He alth and Human Rights, 
Brown University; Widney Brown, JD, director of 
programs, Physicians for Human Rights; Sarah M. 
Dougherty, JD, MPH, senior fellow, Anti -Torture 
Program, Physicians for Human Rights; Megan Granski, 
policy and advocacy coordinator, research assistant to 
the director, Bellevue/ NYU Program for Survivors of 
Torture, NYU Center for Health and Human Rights; 
Vincent Iacopino, MD, PhD, senior medical advisor, 
Physicians for Human Rights; adjunct professor of 
medicine, University of Minnesota Medical School; senior 
research fellow, Human Rights Center, University of 
California, Berkeley; Allen S. Keller, MD, medical advisor, 
Physicians for Human Rights; associate professor of 
medicine, NYU School of Medicine; director, 
Bellevue/NYU Program for Survivors of Torture; director, 
NYU School of Medicine Center for Health and Human 
Rights; human rights director , Undergraduate Bioethics 
Education, NYU School of Medicine; Nathaniel A. 
Raymond, research ethics advisor, Physicians for Human 
Rights; directo r, Signal Program on Human Security and 
Technology, Harvard Humanitarian Initiative, Harvard 
School of Public Health; Steven Reisner, PhD, ethics and 
psychology advisor, Physicians for Human Rights; co-
founder, Coalition for an Ethical Psychology; and 
Stephen Soldz, PhD, anti-torture advisor, Physicians for 
Human Rights; professor and director, Center for 
Research, Evaluation, and Program Development, Boston 
Graduate School for Psychoanalysis; co-founder, 
Coalition for an Ethical Psychology.  
 
This analysis was reviewed by PHR leadership and staff 
including Donna McKay, executive director ; DeDe 
Dunevant, director of communication s; Susannah Sirkin, 
director of international policy and partnerships ; 
Kathryn  Striffolino, policy advisor ; and Eliza B. Young, 
MA, publications coordinator.  
 
This analysis was written in consultation with Stephen N. 
Xenakis, MD, Brigadier General (Retired), U.S. Army, 
United States of America; Anti -Torture Advisor, 
Physicians for Human Rights.  
 
Eliza B. Young, MA, PHR publications c oordinator, edited 
and prepared this analysis  for publication . 
 
PHR interns, Sofie Ghitman and Brian Campbell, 
contributed background research and assisted in the 
preparation of this analysis.  
 
 
 
 
 
©2014 Physicians for Human Rights  
All rights reserved.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cover:  Detainees stand during an early morning Islamic prayer at the 
U.S. military prison for 'enemy combatants' at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba.  
John Moore /Getty Images   
 
phr.org  Doing Harm: Health Professionals’ 
Central Role in the CIA Torture Program  Table of Contents 
 
3  Introduction 
3  CIA Torture Program Relied on Health 
  Professionals to a Degree Previously Unknown 
4  Health Professionals May Have Committed War 
Crimes, Crimes against Humanity 
4  Federal Commission Must Investigate Role of 
Health Professionals in CIA Torture Program 
5 SSCI Summary Details at Least Eight Categories of 
Abuse by Health Professionals 
13 Conclusion 
14 Recommendations 
15 Endnotes  Abbreviations 
 
CIA 
Central Intelligence Agency 
 
DoD 
Department of Defense 
 
DoJ 
Department of Justice 
 
EITs 
Enhanced interrogation techniques 
 
KSM 
Khalid Sheikh Mohammed 
 
OLC 
Department of Justice’s Office of Legal Counsel  
 
OIG 
CIA Office of the Inspector General 
 
OMS 
CIA Office of Medical Services 
 
SERE 
Survival, Evasion, Resistance, and Escape 
 
SSCI 
U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence
2
2 
 
phr.org  Doing Harm: Health Professionals’ 
Central Role in the CIA Torture Program  I. Introduction  
 
Health professionals, given their ethical and legal 
obligations to protect the health and welfare of all 
individuals, have historically represented one essential 
barrier to the inhumane treatment of detainees and 
prisoners. The complicity of health professionals 
themselves in such abuse indicates that egregious 
violations of public trust, ethics, and law have taken 
place.  
  
The U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (SSCI) 
publicly released the 500-page executive summary 
(“summary”) of its 6,700 -page Committee Report of the 
Central Intelligence Agency's Detention and 
Interrogation Program  (“report”) on December 9, 2014.1 
The summary confirms that the United States 
systematically tortured Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) 
detainees after September 11, 2001, and that the 
practices were far more brutal than previously 
acknowledged. 
 
Even more disturbingly, the summary reveals the extent 
to which U.S. health professionals2 were involved in 
developing, implementing, and attempting to justify the 
CIA’s il legal torture program – in violation of U.S. and 
international law and fundamental principles of medical 
ethics. 
 
Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) has analyzed the 
summary, building on a decade of the organization’s 
investigation and documentation of the systematic 
torture and ill-treatment of national security detainees 
by the United States. PHR has also documented the 
physical and mental health consequences of these 
practices and the role of U.S. health professionals in 
torture.3 
 
Based on its analysis of the summary,4 PHR finds that 
health professionals played not only a central, but an 
essential role in the CIA torture program – to an extent 
not previously understood. Psychologists designed, 
supervised, and implemented an extensive system of 
torture and ill-treatment, and were paid enormous sums 
for their efforts. Psychologists and physicians monitored 
those being tortured and used their expertise to certify 
detainees’ fitness for torture and worked to enable and 
enhance the pain inflicted. 
 
PHR finds that without the participation of health 
professionals, this illegal program might have been 
prevented.  
 
PHR also concludes that the violations committed by 
health professionals represent not only a gross breach 
of medical and professional ethics, but also violations of 
domestic and international law. (See section III. “Health 
Professionals May Have Committed War Crimes, Crimes 
Against Humanity.”) Given the seriousness of this crime,  
torture is subject to universal jurisdiction and obligates  
 
 the state to prosecute those responsible. Some of the 
crimes detailed in the summary may reach the level of 
war crimes and crimes against humanity, which are also 
subject to universal jurisdiction. PHR calls on the current 
U.S. administration to hold those responsible for torture 
– including physicians, psychologists, and other health 
professionals – legally and ethically accountable for their 
actions.  
 
II. CIA Torture Program 
Relied on Health 
Professionals to a Degree 
Previously Unknown  
 
The SSCI summary confirms that U.S. health 
professionals developed, implemented, and monitored 
the systematic torture and ill-treatment of detainees in 
CIA custody. Their participation in the program was 
used in an attempt to legally justify the crime of torture.  
 
The summary provides critical new information about 
the CIA’s Office of Medical Services (OMS) and how its 
health professionals participated in and otherwise 
facilitated CIA torture. The summary also expands on 
the role of CIA contract psychologists, James Mitchell 
and Bruce Jessen, long recognized as the torture 
program’s architects.  
 
The summary documents at least eight categories of 
acts and omissions by various CIA health professionals5 
that violate their ethical and legal obligations. (See 
section V. “SSCI Summary Detail s at Least Eight 
Categories of Abuse by Health Professionals.”)  
 
Based on a detailed review conducted by PHR, the health 
professionals who participated in the CIA torture 
program violated core ethical principles common to the 
healing professions, including the following obligations:  
 
 To do no harm;  
 To protect the lives and health of patients 
under their care from harm and brutality; 
 To prevent and report torture; 
 To uphold standards of professionalism, be 
honest in professional interactions, and 
report incompetence, fraud, and deception; 
 To never engage in unethical research on 
human subjects;  
 To receive the informed consent of the patient 
before providing medical treatment; 
 To only perform roles consistent with their 
ethics and professional competencies; and 
 To find an ethical resolution when health 
professionals’ obligations to persons under 
their care and to society conflict with the 
agenda of state institutions. 
 
3 
 
phr.org  Doing Harm: Health Professionals’ 
Central Role in the CIA Torture Program  PHR concludes that the CIA relied upon health 
professionals at every step to commit and conceal the 
brutal and systematic torture of national security 
detainees. While the SSCI summary suggests that 
participation began with psychologists, it names three 
health professions acting in several roles throughout 
each stage of the multi-year CIA torture program: 
psychologists, physicians (including psychiatrists), and 
physician assistants. 
 
III. Health Professionals 
May Have Committed War 
Crimes, Crimes against 
Humanity 
 
The SSCI summary details a range of activities by health 
professionals that violate numerous international 
treaties, laws, and ethical codes, including: 
 
 International human rights and humanitarian 
treaties, including the International Covenant 
on Civil and Political Rights,6 the UN 
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, 
Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or 
Punishment,7 and the Geneva Conventions;8 
 U.S. state and federal law, including the War 
Crimes Act of 1996, Federal Policy for the 
Protection of Human Subjects, the federal 
anti-torture statute, and the U.S. 
Constitution;9 
 Ethical codes of the American Medical 
Association, American Psychological 
Association, and American Psychiatric 
Association;10 and 
 International research and medical ethics 
codes, including the Nuremberg Code11 and 
the World Medical Association’s Declarations 
of Helsinki, Tokyo, and Malta.12 
 
While most of the acts detailed in the summary violate 
international human rights and domestic laws 
prohibiting torture, several of these alleged violations 
can also constitute war crimes under domestic and 
international law.13 Furthermore, in certain instances, 
such as in the crime of unethical research on human 
subjects, these alleged crimes may rise to the level of 
crimes against humanity under international law. 
 
 
 
 IV. Federal Commission 
Must Investigate Role of 
Health Professionals in CIA 
Torture Program 
 
PHR is calling for a federal commission to investigate, 
document, and hold accountable all health professionals 
who participated in the CIA torture program. The 
purpose of this commission is to understand what 
happened and how it happened. Ultimately, the 
commission should determine how the United States 
can prevent future torture, including health 
professionals’ participation and complicity.  
 
Given the extensive information on health professionals’ 
breaches of established medical ethics, domestic law, 
and international treaties, a more comprehensive and 
focused investigation into their participation in the CIA’s 
torture program beyond the SSCI investigation is 
necessary. Based on the available evidence, as well as 
the extreme seriousness of the alleged crimes and 
ethical violations committed by CIA health 
professionals, PHR encourages U.S. President Barack 
Obama, in cooperation with the incoming U.S. Congress, 
to authorize a federal commission of inquiry specifically 
into the role of health professionals in designing, 
directing, monitoring, and attempting to provide legal 
justifications for the CIA torture program.  
 
Such a commission must have subpoena powers and 
the authority to refer individuals for criminal 
investigation and prosecution to the U.S. Department of 
Justice (DoJ), as warranted by the evidence. Past 
examples of similar blue ribbon federal commissions 
include the Tower Commission into the Iran-Contra 
Scandal, the Kean-Hamilton Commission into the 9/11 
Attacks, and the Warren Commission into the 
Assassination of President John F. Kennedy. (For more, 
see section VII. “Recommendations.”)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
phr.org  Doing Harm: Health Professionals’ 
Central Role in the CIA Torture Program  V. SSCI Summary Details at 
Least Eight Categories of 
Abuse by Health 
Professionals  
 
The SSCI summary indicates that CIA healt h 
professionals – psychologists, physicians (including 
psychiatrists), and physician assistants – directly 
participated in the CIA’s torture program and were 
central to its development and implementation, as well 
as attempts to justify the use of torture. The SSCI 
summary documents unethical and illegal acts 
perpetrated by CIA health professionals, including:  
 
1) Designing, directing, and profiting from the 
torture program : Psychologists conceptualized 
and designed the CIA torture techniques, then 
helped implement the program, receiving a sole-
source, multi-million dollar CIA contract for 
these services. 
2) Intentionally inflicting harm on detainees : 
Health professionals intentionally inflicted 
and/or threatened to inflict severe harm and 
suffering on detainees in CIA custody. 
3) Enabling DoJ lawyers to create a fiction of 
“safe, legal, and effective” interrogation 
practices : Health professionals participated in 
the DoJ’s Office of Legal Counsel’s spurious legal 
rationale that the techniques would not be 
considered torture so long as health 
professionals certified they were not. 
4) Engaging in potential human subjects research 
to provide legal cover for torture : Health 
professionals collected and analyzed data from 
application of techniques in an effort to 
legitimize torture. OMS officials expressed 
concern that these documentation practices 
could constitute illegal human subjects research. 
Senior CIA officials who were asked to evaluate 
the efficacy of the tactics expressed similar 
concerns. 
5) Monitoring detainee torture and calibrating 
levels of pain : Health professionals monitored, 
documented, and calibrated the intentional 
infliction of harm on detainees.  
6) Evaluating and treating detainees for purposes 
of torture : Health professionals evaluated and 
treated detainees before, during, and after 
torture in order to enable the torture to occur. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7) Conditioning medical care on cooperation with 
interrogators : Health professionals provided 
medical care that was contingent upon whether 
or not detainees were deemed to have 
cooperated with interrogators. 
8) Failing to document physical and/or 
psychological evidence of torture : Health 
professionals did not document the torture 
inflicted on detainees, which served to conceal 
the tactics’ harmful effects.  
 
1. Designing, Directing, and Profiting from the 
Torture Program 
 
The central role that CIA contract psychologists James 
Mitchell and Bruce Jessen played in conceptualizing and 
designing strategies for the direct infliction of a 
combination of physical and psychological harm on 
detainees was well- documented before the summary’s 
release.14 These psychologists – who were given the 
pseudonyms “Grayson Swigert” (Mitchell) and 
“Hammond Dunbar” (Jessen) in the summary –  designed 
the so- called “enhanced interrogation techniques” (EITs) 
in 2002. The regime of physical and psychological 
abuse the psychologists designed is based, in large 
part, on Martin Seligman’s psychological theory of 
“learned helplessness.”15 (19, 21, 26, 32, 71, 463 –464) 
 
Mitchell and Jessen, formerly with the U.S. government's 
Survival, Evasion, Resistance, and Escape (SERE) 
program, reverse-engineered the techniques used to 
train U.S military personnel to withstand torture and 
abuse if captured, according to these reports. The SERE 
training techniques were originally modeled on Chinese 
and North Korean torture techniques applied to U.S. 
service members captured during the Korean War.16 The 
SERE-based techniques that Mitchell and Jessen 
proposed for the CIA to use on detainees include 
waterboarding, stress positions, slapping, isolation, 
sleep deprivation, dietary manipulation, sensory 
deprivation and overload, and sexual humiliation, 
among others. 
 
The summary provides the fullest description to date of 
the scope of Mitchell’s and Jessen’s involvement in the 
CIA torture program. According to the SSCI summary, 
the contractors conceptualized and designed 
techniques, personally applied them to detainees, 
conducted psychological evaluations of detainees whom 
they would torture, trained other interrogators in the 
use of torture, and recommended what techniques 
should be employed on which detainees.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
phr.org  Doing Harm: Health Professionals’ 
Central Role in the CIA Torture Program  The two contractors, who did not report to OMS, were 
operational psychologists (i.e. psychologists involved 
directly in interrogations).17 Various CIA staff voiced 
concerns about professional conflicts of interest arising 
from their activities, including the fact that they were 
serving interrogation and psychological roles; evaluating 
the effectiveness of interrogation activities they had 
conducted themselves; and recommending 
interrogation activities from which they would financially 
benefit.  
 
The summary documents that Jessen traveled in January 
2003 to a CIA black site in Poland,18 where he evaluated 
Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri and recommended the use of 
waterboarding, to be administered by himself with the 
assistance of Mitchell. (71) In June 2003, both Mitchell 
and Jessen went to Poland to interrogate Khalid Sheikh 
Mohammed, whom they subjected to waterboarding 
and other techniques. Subsequently, the two conducted 
a psychological assessment of Mohammed to determine 
if he could withstand additional torture techniques that 
they would then administer. (65)  
 
Mitchell and Jessen did not report to OMS, which 
therefore had no authority over them. OMS staff, among 
others, expressed concerns about their role. For 
example, in a 2003 memorandum for the CIA Inspector 
General, one OMS staff member stated:  
 
OMS concerns about conflict of interest ... were 
nowhere more graphic than in the setting in which 
the same individuals applied an EIT which only they 
were approved to employ, judged both its 
effectiveness and detainee resilience, and implicitly 
proposed continued use of the technique - at a daily 
compensation reported to be $1800/day, or four 
times that of interrogators who could not use the 
technique. (66) 
 
Those CIA staff who expressed concerns in 2003 about 
Mitchell’s and Jessen’s role in detainee interrogations, 
including potential conflicts of interest arising from their 
involvement, were apparently disregarded. (65 –66, 72) 
In 2005, the two psychologists formed Mitchell, Jessen 
& Associates (referred to as Company Y in the 
summary), which “was granted a sole source contract to 
provide operational psychologists, debriefers, and 
security personnel at CIA detention sites.” (168) This 
statement strongly suggests that there were additional 
operational psychologists working for the company 
other than just Mitchell and Jessen. By March 2006, 
approximately 73 percent of the staff working for the 
CIA’s Renditions and Detention Group were contractors , 
with a majority from Mitchell and Jessen’s company. 
(168–169) Mitchell’s and Jessen’s significance to the CIA 
program can be inferred from the fact that the CIA sent 
them to brief then National Security Adviser 
Condoleezza Rice on the program in July 2007. (163) 
 
As the summary also indicates, Mitchell and Jessen were 
well compensated for their work in the CIA torture 
program. The CIA awarded Mitchell, Jessen & Associates 
$81 million, while Mitchell and Jessen each received over $1 million from the CIA. The CIA also provided 
them and their company with legal counsel and an 
indemnity agreement for non-prosecution of potential 
criminal activity. (Findings and Conclusions, 11) 
 
2. Intentionally Inflicting Harm on Detainees 
 
The SSCI summary documents numerous instances in 
which CIA health professionals intentionally inflicted 
harm on detainees, including making adjustments to 
their physical state to permit continued or increased 
harm (for example, adjusting conditions of shackling 
and confinement) and carrying out clinical procedures 
for non-medical reasons. (126, 141) One of the most 
egregious examples of direct medical participation in 
torture is the use of rectal rehydration or rectal feeding 
on at least five detainees: Abu Zubaydah, Abd al-Rahim 
al-Nashiri, Khalid Sheikh Mohammad, Majid Khan, and 
Marwan al-Jabbur. Three others were threatened with 
the procedure: Ramzi bin al-Shibh, Khallad bin Attash, 
and Adnan al-Libi. (100, 114) 
 
An OMS medical officer described the rectal rehydration 
procedure in a Februa ry 27, 2004 email: “[r]egarding the 
rectal tube, if you place it and open up the IV tubing, the 
flow will self regulate, sloshing up the large intestines…. 
[w]hat I infer is that you get a tube up as far as you can, 
then open the IV wide. No need to squeeze the bag – let 
gravity do the work.” (100) While the CIA has defended 
its use of rectal rehydration as a “well acknowledged 
medical technique,” it nevertheless failed to establish or 
document medical necessity. (115)  
 
According to PHR experts:19 
 
Rectal hydration is almost never practiced in 
medicine because there are more effective means, 
such as oral and intravenous fluid administration. It 
is never considered as a first-line form of therapy for 
rehydration or nutritional support. The large colon 
has the capacity to absorb fluids, but has a very 
limited capacity to absorb nutrients with the 
exception of glucose and electrolytes. Pureed food 
and nutritional supplements, such as Ensure, should 
never be administered rectally.  
 
Historically, rectal hydration was used in field 
conditions, particularly during World War II, when 
severe injuries resulted in marked blood loss and oral 
and intravenous administration of fluids were not 
possible. Also, in rare medical circumstances, such as 
terminally ill patients who are unable to take oral 
fluids and in whom intravenous access is not 
possible, rectal hydration has been used.  
 
The use of rectal hydration and feeding, according to 
the SSCI summary, was conducted “without medical 
necessity,” meaning oral and/or IV acc ess was 
possible in these individuals. Moreover, the summary 
indicates that rectal hydration was used to control 
and/or punish the detainees…. Insertion of any 
object into the rectum of an individual without his 
consent constitutes a form of sexual assault.20 
6 
 
phr.org  Doing Harm: Health Professionals’ 
Central Role in the CIA Torture Program  As the summary states, “CIA medical officers discussed 
rectal rehydration as a means of behavior control” and 
carried it out at the order of interrogators. (82 –83, 100, 
483, 488) 
 
For example, during his detention at the Salt Pit in 
Afghanistan, CIA detainee Mohammed was subjected to 
rectal rehydration at least twice in March 2003.21 The 
summary states: “ KSM [Khalid Sheikh Mohammed] was 
subjected to rectal rehydration without a determination 
of medical need, a procedure that KSM interrogator and 
chief of interrogations would later characterize as 
illustrative of the interrogator's ‘total control over the 
detainee.’” (488) A medical officer reflected that 
subjecting Mohammed to rectal rehydration helped 
“clear a person's head” and was “effective in getting  KSM 
to talk,” indicating that medical personnel identified with 
the goals of interrogation over patient care. Subsequent 
medical officers perfected their techniques based on 
these notes. (83, 100, 483) 
 
Medical officers also engaged in the rectal force- feeding 
of three hunger strikers: al-Nashiri, Zubaydah, and 
Khan. The summary states that al-Nashiri was rectally 
“infused” with Ensure,22 while Zubaydah received “rectal 
fluid resuscitation” for “partially refusing liquids.” In an 
email dated February 2004, a medical officer wrote: 
“[w]hile IV infusion is safe and effective, we were 
impressed with the ancillary effectiveness of rectal 
infusion on ending the water refusal in a similar case.” 
(100) This statement reveals that the medical officers 
knew that IV infusion was safer and more effective, but 
instead used rectal feeding for its “ancillary 
effectiveness” as an interrogation method.  
 
The case of Khan, who engaged in hunger strikes 
between March 2004 and his transfer to Guantánamo 
Bay in September 2006, illustrates the arbitrary and 
punitive nature of the procedure. Khan accepted 
nasogastric and IV feeding and was allowed to infuse 
fluids and nutrients himself. Nevertheless, after three 
weeks, the CIA opted to rectally force-feed him with 
Ensure and his own pureed lunch to eliminate 
“unnecessary conversation.” (115) The summary noted 
that according to CIA records, Khan was “very hostile” to 
rectal feeding. (488) 
 
In addition to being contraindicated, such procedures 
can have harmful side effects. They can cause rectal 
trauma and can have additional harmful health 
consequences both physically and emotionally. The 
same is true of rectal exams, which were done routinely 
and conducted with “excessive force” in the case of at 
least two detainees, according to the summary. One of 
the detainees, Mustafa al-Hawsawi, was later diagnosed 
with “chronic hemorrhoids, an anal fissure, and 
symptomatic rectal prolapse.” (100) Rather than reject 
such brutal practices, medical officers appear to have 
modified them to increase pain: “we used the largest 
Ewal [sic] tube we had,” stated one officer in a February 
2004 email. (100) 
 3. Enabling DoJ Lawyers to Create a Fiction of “Safe, 
Legal, and Effective” Interrogation Practices  
 
The SSCI summary confirms what previous analysis of 
the DoJ’s Office of Legal Counsel (OLC) memos revealed: 
health professionals’ monitoring of the CIA torture 
program was a core component of the George W. Bush 
administration’s argument that these tactics did not 
constitute torture.23 The August 1, 2002 OLC memo to 
the CIA (also known as the “Yoo/Bybee Memorandum”) 
stated that a “good faith” argument could be made that 
health professionals’ monitoring of the application of 
the techniques would ensure that they did not cause 
“severe and long lasting” mental a nd physical pain and 
suffering to a degree that would violate U.S. laws 
prohibiting torture.24 
 
In what have become known as the “torture memos,” 
former OLC deputy assistant attorney general, John Yoo, 
and former OLC assistant attorney general, Jay ByBee, 
attempted to redefine torture in a manner that 
precluded recognition and/or liability for the crime. 
They raised the legal thresholds for levels of physical 
and mental pain and created a condition of “specific 
intent” that essentially rendered the definitio n 
meaningless.25  
 
The Convention against Torture, which the United States 
has ratified, defines torture as:  
 
…any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether 
physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a 
person for such purposes as obtaining from him or a 
third person information or a confession, punishing 
him for an act he or a third person has committed or 
is suspected of having committed, or intimidating or 
coercing him or a third person, or for any reason 
based on discrimination of any kind, when such pain 
or suffering is inflicted by or at the instigation of or 
with the consent or acquiescence of a public official 
or other person acting in an official capacity. 26 
 
According to Yoo and Bybee, torture had to result in a 
level of physical pain co nsistent with a “serious physical 
injury, such as organ failure, impairment of bodily 
function or even death.”27 Severe mental pain had to be 
“prolonged” (months and even years) and in response to 
“threats of imminent death; threats of infliction of the 
kind of pain that would amount to physical torture; 
infliction of such physical pain as a means of 
psychological torture; use of drugs or other procedures 
to deeply disrupt the senses, or fundamentally alter and 
individual’s personality....”28  
 
Even if the pain thresholds for torture established by 
Yoo and Bybee were met, the infliction of severe 
physical and mental pain had to be the interrogator’s 
“precise objective” to constitute torture. In order to 
recognize torture, physicians and psychologists would 
need to confirm that the interrogator (in some cases, 
the physicians and psychologists themselves) 
specifically intended to cause physical and mental pain 
as defined by Yoo and Bybee. 
7 
 
phr.org  Doing Harm: Health Professionals’ 
Central Role in the CIA Torture Program  Certain unauthorized interrogation methods, such as 
rectal hydration, mock burials, and threats to family 
members, were not authorized and may be easily 
recognized as torture given their capacity to shock the 
conscience, but the same is true for the authorized EITs 
practiced by the CIA. The EITs included sleep 
deprivation, isolation, and sensory deprivation, and are 
known to cause devastating and lasting effects and 
therefore also must be understood as constituting 
torture. Prior to 2001, the United States recognized each 
of these techniques as torture.29 Moreover, legal 
determinations of torture typically require medical  
evaluations of physical and psychological evidence in 
accordance with international standards,30 but there is 
no indication in the summary that such evaluations ever 
took place. (See section V, subsection 8. “Faili ng to 
Document Physical and/or Psychological Evidence of 
Torture.”) PHR has examined former national security 
detainees alleging torture and provided extensive 
documentation of severe and lasting physical and 
psychological effects of EITs.31  
 
The summary provides additional critical evidence that 
EITs cause severe physical pain and severe and 
prolonged mental pain. It is apparent throughout the 
summary that the intent of the interrogators was to 
break the detainees’ will and create a condition of 
debility, dependency, and dread given the goal and 
outcome of the interrogations. In a cable from Mitchell 
and Jessen addressing the “aggressive phase” of 
Zubaydah’s interrogation, it is stated:  
 
Our goal was to reach the stage where we have 
broken any will or ability of subject to resist or deny 
providing us information (intelligence) to which he 
had access. We additionally sought to bring subject 
to the point that we confidently assess that he does 
not/not possess [sic] undisclosed threat information, 
or intelligence that could prevent a terrorist event. 
(46) 
 
Prolonged deprivation of food, sound, light, and sleep 
(for up to 180 hours); exposure in freezing 
temperatures (resulting in death in one case); diapering; 
being forced to soil one’s self; repeated beatings; and 
multiple near drowning experiences by waterboarding 
to the point of unconsciousness are intentional acts that 
cannot be conducted without inflicting severe physical 
and mental pain. 
 
In fact, according to CIA records, when briefed in April 
2006, then President Bush expressed discomfort with 
the “image of a detainee, chained to the ceiling, clothed  
in a diaper, and forced to go to the bathroom on 
himself.” (25, 40) Yet, physicians and psychologists  
participated in the ongoing monitoring of these 
practices, and – through their silence and inaction – 
aided the CIA and OLC lawyers in creating a fiction of 
“safe, legal, and effective” interrogation practices.  
 
 
 
 Moreover, it appears that this legal farce was and 
continues to be instrumental in attempts to justify a 
policy of systematic torture. 
 
4. Engaging in Potential Human Subjects 
Experimentation to Provide Legal Cover for Torture 
 
The SSCI summary provides new information suggesting 
that OMS collection and analysis of data on 
interrogation practices may constitute human subjects 
experimentation.  
 
One of the key prohibitions regarding medical ethics 
that came out of World War II was the prohibition 
against unethical human subjects experimentation; this 
was based on the recognition of atrocities committed by 
the Nazis. Unethical human subjects research also arose 
in the United States with the now infamous Tuskegee 
experiment, whereby black men were monitored as they 
died of diagnosed, but untreated, syphilis. The 
experiment ended in 1972. To safeguard against such 
abuses, any subject of a study must give informed 
consent. 
 
The summary provides information documenting the 
degree to which the role of OMS personnel in the 
program changed over time. While initially assuming a 
more passive monitoring role in the early phases of the 
program, OMS personnel would eventually become 
active participants in determining, along with DoJ 
lawyers, what techniques would be considered 
authorized for the CIA to employ. (87)  
 
The initial OMS monitoring role included the collection 
of data from detainees as they were being subjected to 
the torture techniques. The 2004 OMS Draft Guidelines 
describe one example of data collection from detainees 
being tortured: 
 
NOTE: In order to best inform future medical 
judgments and recommendations, it is important 
that every application of the waterboard be 
thoroughly documented: how long each application 
(and the entire procedure) lasted, how much water 
was used in the process (realizing that much 
splashes off), how exactly the water was applied, if a 
seal was achieved, if the naso- or oropharynx was 
filled, what sort of volume was expelled, how long 
was the break between applications, and how the 
subject looked between each treatment.32  
 
To determine what tactics could be approved, the OMS 
personnel appear to have analyzed data previously 
collected from the detainees during torture to make 
generalizable conclusions about the techniques. The 
OMS personnel, including physicians, provided this data 
and analysis to OLC attorneys to support the 
reauthorization of activities constituting torture. (415 –
416, 419 –421)  
 
 
 
 
8 
 
phr.org  Doing Harm: Health Professionals’ 
Central Role in the CIA Torture Program  Data collection from detainees by OMS is consistent with 
definitions of human subjects research under U.S. 
federal codes. The National Institutes of Health defines 
this type of human subjects research based on 
obtaining these types of data as follows: 
 
Obtaining means receiving or accessing identifiable 
private information or identifiable specimens for 
research purposes. OHRP [Office of Human Research 
Protections] interprets obtaining to include an 
investigator's use, study, or analysis for research 
purposes of identifiable private information or 
identifiable specimens already in the possession of 
the investigator...  
 
Under the definition of human subject at 45 CFR 
46.102(f), obtaining identifiable private information 
or identifiable specimens for research purposes 
constitutes human subjects research.33  
 
If further investigation establishes that human subjects 
research without consent was performed systematically 
on detainees then such activities are violations of the 
Nuremberg Code34 and could constitute a crime against 
humanity.35  
 
In 2004 and 2005, the illegal and unethical OMS data 
collection and research was used to help the DoJ to 
determine what techniques and applications 
(individually, in combination, etc.) would be legitimate 
under OLC’s interpretation of U.S. laws. (415– 416, 419 –
421) The summary reveals at least two instances in 
which CIA personnel expressed concerns that “studying 
the results of CIA interrogations would amount to 
human experimentation.” (125)  
 
In response to OMS concerns, on January 28, 2005, CIA 
Inspector General John Helgerson replied about his 
suggestion that OMS draw conclusions based on past 
practice, saying:  
 
I fear there was a misunderstanding. OIG did no t 
have in mind doing additional, guinea pig research 
on human beings. What we are recommending is that 
the Agency undertake a careful review of its 
experience to date in using the various techniques 
and that it draw conclusions about their safety, 
effectiveness, etc., that can guide CIA officers as we 
move ahead…. (126)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Several months later, on April 11, 2005, OMS personnel 
again expressed concerns about OMS assuming this 
new role: 
 
[s]imply put, OMS is not in the business of saying 
what is acceptable in causing discomfort to other 
human beings, and will not take on that burden.... 
OMS did not review or vet these techniques prior to 
their introduction, but rather came into this program 
with the understanding of your office and DOJ that 
they were already determined as legal, permitted 
and safe. We see this current iteration [of the OLC 
memorandum] as a reversal of that sequence, and a 
relocation of those decisions to OMS. If this is the 
case, that OMS has now the responsibility for 
determining a procedure's legality through its 
determination of safety, then we will need to review 
all procedures in that light given this new 
responsibility.... (420) 
 
Despite these concerns, evidence shows that OMS 
personnel did, nonetheless, perform this role for the 
CIA. As primary representative of the CIA to the DoJ, 
OMS professionals offered opinions on what harm the 
techniques may cause and the pain associated with their 
application, including the past data OMS had collected. 
(420–421) The 2005 OLC memos (known as the 
Bradbury memos) reveal that these final determinations 
relied heavily on OMS data and analysis.36  
 
Additionally, two senior officers not affiliated with the 
CIA’s Counterterrorism Center were asked to provide an 
independent review of the program. They responded 
that they could not evaluate the efficacy of the program 
because they determined: 
 
... that it would not be possible to assess the 
effectiveness of the CIA's enhanced interrogation 
techniques without violating "Federal Policy for the 
Protection of Human Subjects" regarding human 
experimentation. (13) 
 
Despite these concerns about violating federal policy on 
human subjects research, it appears – based on the 
declassified OLC memos and the SSCI summary – that 
data collection and analysis occurred as a core 
component of the program. Though performed for the 
purposes of indemnifying officials from legal liability for  
torture, this monitoring potentially exposes CIA health 
professionals and other personnel to the other, equally 
grave crime of conducting illegal subjects research in 
violation of the Nuremberg Code. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
phr.org  Doing Harm: Health Professionals’ 
Central Role in the CIA Torture Program  5. Monitoring Detainee Torture and Calibrating the 
Level of Pain 
 
Health professionals played a central role in monitoring 
the torture techniques and calibrating the level of pain, 
to ensure they did not reach “unacceptable” levels. In 
May 2005, the CIA told then Acting Assistant Attorney 
General Steven G. Bradbury that “all pain is subjective, 
not objective”:  
 
Medical officers can monitor for evidence of condition 
or injury that most people would consider painful, 
and can observe the individual for outward displays 
and expressions associated with the experience of 
pain. Medical officer [sic] can and do ask the subject, 
after the interrogation session has concluded, if he is 
in pain, and have and do provide analgesics, such as 
Tylenol and Aleve, to detainees who report headache 
and other discomforts during their interrogations . 
We reiterate, that an interrogation session would be 
stopped if, in the judgment of the interrogators or 
medical personnel, medical attention was required. 
(emphasis added) (419 –420) 
 
In addition, medical officers often documented torture 
techniques that they monitored in meticulous detail, 
demonstrating the medical staff’s profound disconnect 
from core principles of medical ethics prohibiting the 
participation of health professionals in torture. (41 –42, 
44, 86, 493 –494)  
 
The case of Zubaydah, the first detainee subjected to 
the CIA’s new, “enhanced” techniques, is illustrative of 
this and how monitoring served to facilitate torture. (21) 
He was captured in Pakistan and rendered to Thailand in 
March 2002.37 Over the next few months, he was 
subjected to a range of coercive techniques, despite 
having suffered from a gunshot wound, including forced 
nudity, shackling, sleep deprivation, and isolation. (29)  
 
These new torture techniques were discussed in July 
2002 and approved for use on Zubaydah on August 3, 
2002. During this period, on-site CIA officers discussed  
the required preparations should he die during the 
torture. (32 –40) On August 4, Zubaydah was 
waterboarded for the first time, in the presence of 
medical officers. (41)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The summary states, “Over a two -and-a- half-hour 
period, Abu Zubaydah coughed, vomited, and had 
‘involuntary spasms of the t orso and  
extremities’ during waterboarding.” That day, a medical 
officer described Zubaydah’s waterboarding session in 
an email to OMS leadership entitled, “So it begins”:  
 
Abu Zubaydah seems very resistant to the water 
board. Longest time with the cloth over his face so 
far has been 17 seconds. This is sure to increase 
shortly. NO useful information so far .… He did vomit 
a couple of times during the water board with some 
beans and rice. It's been 10 hours since he ate so this 
is surprising and disturbing. We plan to only feed 
Ensure for a while now. (emphasis added) (41 –42)  
 
The latter statement about Zubaydah’s diet being 
changed from solids to liquids suggests that medical 
personnel manipulated his diet to facilitate further 
waterboarding. In 2007, then CIA Director Michael 
Hayden informed the SSCI that Zubaydah’s diet was 
changed because he was recovering from abdominal 
surgery. Yet, if this were the case, it raises the question 
of why an individual recovering from abdominal surgery 
would be subjected to waterboarding, to the point of 
vomiting and losing consciousness. (42, 44, 493)  
 
Zubaydah went on to be waterboarded at least 83 times 
in August 2002 alone.38 The summary states, “Physical 
reactions to waterboarding did not necessarily end when 
the application of water was discontinued, as both Abu 
Zubaydah and KSM vomited after being subjected to the 
waterboard.” (423)  
 
An OMS e-mail dated March 6, 2003 notes that 
Zubaydah “became completely unresponsive, with 
bubbles rising through his open, full mouth ” during one 
waterboarding session. (44) The summary states, 
“According to CIA records, Abu Zubaydah remained 
unresponsive until his interrogators gave him a ‘xyphoid 
thrust,’ at which point he regained consciousness and 
expelled ‘copious amounts of liquid.’” (44) During this 
time, OMS emails reveal that “our medical folks” were 
“edging toward the room,” presumably to deliver 
aggressive medical intervention should Zubaydah fail to 
resume breathing, as OMS guidelines required. (44)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
phr.org  Doing Harm: Health Professionals’ 
Central Role in the CIA Torture Program  The summary also describes examples of OMS 
personnel questioning the effectiveness and safety of 
some techniques, including objections to abuses 
outside their own guidelines. For example, on March 13, 
2003, a medical officer objected when interrogators 
planned Moha mmed’s fourth waterboarding sessions in 
a 24-hour period. On-site personnel eventually received 
an approval email from a CIA National Counterterrorism 
Center lawyer but no formal authorization. While 
awaiting authorization, the chief of base instructed the  
medical officer not to directly contact CIA headquarters 
through the “CIA's classified internal email system, to 
avoid establishing ‘grounds for further legal action,’” 
but to instead clear information through him first. (87) 
The summary notes: 
 
At the end of the day, the medical officer wrote 
[redacted] OMS that “[t]hings are slowly evolving 
form [sic] OMS being viewed as the institutional 
conscience and the limiting factor to the ones who 
are dedicated to maximizing the benefit in a safe 
manner and keeping everyone's butt out of trouble. 
(87)  
 
The failure of health professionals at the highest level of 
the OMS to recognize and address this issue requires 
further investigation. 
 
6. Evaluating and Treating Detainees for Purposes of 
Torture 
 
Torture and ill-treatment are universally and uniformly 
prohibited. No health professionals should ever be 
involved in evaluating the health or resilience of 
detainees, nor sign off on or approve their being 
tortured. Yet the summary confirms that OMS medical 
officers provided clearance for CIA detainees to be 
subjected to torture. Detainees al-Shibh and Mohammed 
underwent psychological and medical assessments 
upon arrival at their respective detention sites, clearing 
them for the proposed plan of interrogations. (77, 84 )  
 
In another case, CIA detainees Abu Hazim and Abd al-
Karim each suffered from a broken foot while trying to 
escape in April 2003. In May, a “CIA regional medical 
officer” recommended that Hazim avoid weight -bearing 
activities due to his injury, and a CIA physician assistant 
recommended he avoid standing for a “couple of 
weeks.” (112) Shortly after, another physician assistant  
determined that Hazim’s and al -Karim’s ankles were 
“sufficiently healed to allow being placed in the standing 
sleep deprivation p rocess.” The physician assistant 
consulted with an OMS medical officer who concurred. 
Subsequently, CIA headquarters expeditiously approved 
sleep deprivation for the two detainees, which began 
soon thereafter. This case appears to illustrate that 
some health professionals acted to limit the infliction of 
pain in some circumstances, (113) but the very presence 
of the health professionals and their failure to take 
remedial action effectively facilitated it. 
 The summary details other cases where health 
professionals cleared and approved detainees with 
serious medical conditions for additional torture.  
 
The following excerpt from CIA records is included in 
the summary: 
 
Abu Ja'far al-Iraqi was subjected to nudity, dietary 
manipulation, insult slaps, abdominal slaps, attention 
grasps, facial holds, walling, stress positions, and 
water dousing with 44 degree Fahrenheit water for 
18 minutes. He was shackled in the standing position 
for 54 hours as part of sleep deprivation, and 
experienced swelling in his lower legs requiring blood 
thinner and spiral ace bandages. He was moved to a 
sitting position, and his sleep deprivation was 
extended to 78 hours. After the swelling subsided, he 
was provided with more blood thinner and was 
returned to the standing position. The sleep 
deprivation was extended to 102 hours. After four 
hours of sleep, Abu Ja'far al-Iraqi was subjected to an 
additional 52 hours of sleep deprivation, after which 
CIA Headquarters informed interrogators that eight 
hours was the minimum rest period between sleep 
deprivation sessions exceeding 48 hours. In addition 
to the swelling, Abu Ja'far al-Iraqi also experienced 
an edema on his head due to walling, abrasions on 
his neck, and blisters on his ankles from shackles. 
(149) 
 
In this case, CIA medical providers used medical 
treatments such as blood thinner medication and ace 
bandages not for therapeutic reasons, but rather as 
means for enabling torture to continue. Similarly, health 
professionals cleared and approved detainees for 
torture, even those with serious medical conditions. 
 
When asked about the possibility that detainees 
subjected to standing sleep deprivation could suffer 
from edema, OMS doctors informed the Department 
of Justice attorneys that it was not a problem as the 
CIA would “adjust shackles  or [the] method of 
applying the technique as necessary to prevent 
edema, as well as any chafing or over-tightness from 
the shackles.” (415)  
 
Similarly, on March 12, 2003, a medical officer 
monitoring Mohammed’s waterboarding sessions 
requested that saline be used, instead of water, for 
future sessions:  
 
During these sessions, KSM ingested a significant 
amount of water. CIA records state that KSM's 
“abdomen was somewhat distended and he expressed 
water when the abdomen was pressed.” KSM's gastric 
contents were so diluted by water that the medical 
officer present was “not concerned about 
regurgitated gastric acid damaging KSM's 
esophagus.” The officer was, however, concerned 
about water intoxication and dilution of electrolytes 
and requested that the interrogators use saline in 
future waterboarding sessions. (86) 
 
11 
 
phr.org  Doing Harm: Health Professionals’ 
Central Role in the CIA Torture Program  This is evidence of the engagement of health 
professionals to facilitate the continuation of the torture 
rather than provide care to the detainee. Water 
intoxication and depletion of electrolytes can lead to 
death. The officer later wrote to OMS that Mohammed 
was “ingesting and aspiration [sic] a LOT of water," and 
that “[i]n the new technique we are basically doing a 
series of near drownings.” (423)  
 
7. Conditioning Medical Care on Cooperation with 
Interrogators 
 
Both medical ethics and human rights and humanitarian 
law require that medical treatment be provided to those 
in need regardless of whether they have committed a 
crime and without any other form of discrimination, 
such as race, ethnicity, etc. Conditioning medical care 
on cooperation or denying medical care based on 
political opinion is unethical and unlawful. 
 
Medical care appears to have been conditioned on 
detainee cooperation with interrogators in certain cases, 
despite the CIA’s denial.  (35, 111, 113, 491) For 
example, before August 2002, when the FBI oversaw 
Zubaydah’s custody, he routinely received necessary 
medical care, including for the gunshot wound he  
sustained during his capture. (315) Once the CIA 
assumed control, however, medical care was withheld, 
despite the risk of wound infection.  
 
CIA headquarters told Zubaydah’s interrogation team, 
“The interrogation process takes precedence over 
preventive medical procedures.” (35) Medical 
intervention, or more specifically, withholding medical 
intervention, itself became a tool of coercion:  
 
... delaying a medical session for 72 hours after the 
start of the new phase of interrogation would convey 
to Abu Zubaydah that his level of medical care was 
contingent upon his cooperation.” (491)   
 
The medical officer at the site acknowledged that 
Zubaydah’s medical condition was likely to decline to an 
“unacceptable level.” Five days later, an email to OMS 
stated: 
 
We are currently providing absolute minimum wound 
care (as evidenced by the steady deterioration of the 
wound), [Zubaydah] has no opportunity to practice 
any form of hygienic self care (he's filthy), the 
physical nature of this phase dictates multiple 
physical stresses (his reaction to today's activity is I 
believe the culprit for the superior edge separation),39 
and nutrition is bare bones (six cans of ensure daily). 
(111) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The summary further states that:  
 
Later, after one of Abu Zubaydah's eyes began to 
deteriorate, CIA officers requested a test of Abu 
Zubaydah's other eye, stating that the request was 
“driven by our intelligence needs vice [sic] 
humanitarian concern for AZ.” The cable relayed, 
“[w]e have a lot riding upon his ability to see, read 
and write.” (111 -112) 
  
CIA detainee Muhammad Umar Abd al-Rahman, also 
known as Asadallah, was one of four detainees tortured 
in 2003 who had foot or leg injuries. The summary 
states: “CIA interrogators shackled each of these 
detainees in the standing position for sleep deprivation 
for extended periods of time until medical personnel 
assessed that they could not maintain the position.” 
(101) Asadallah was placed in standing and kneeling 
stress despite having a sprained ankle. When he 
complained of discomfort, his CIA captors told him that 
he could not sit unless he answered questions truthfully. 
(101, 113) 
 
8. Failing to Document Physical and/or Psychological 
Evidence of Torture   
 
Health professionals who treat or engage with individual 
patients have an obligation to document any evidence of 
injury or illness to facilitate their treatment. Failure to 
note evidence of any harm, illness, injury, or suffering is 
a violation of medical ethics.  
 
There is no indication that OMS health professionals or 
CIA psychologists conducted any meaningful 
assessments of the potential physical and/or 
psychological harms of EITs. This is particularly 
disturbing given the following statement in the 
summary: 
 
Throughout the program, multiple CIA detainees who 
were subjected to the CIA's enhanced interrogation 
techniques and extended isolation exhibited 
psychological and behavioral issues, including 
hallucinations, paranoia, insomnia, and attempts at 
self-harm and self-mutilation. Multiple psychologists 
identified the lack of human contact experienced by 
detainees as a cause of psychiatric problems. (4) 
 
It is not possible to claim that EITs, formerly recognized 
by the U.S. government as torture, were “safe, legal, and 
effective” without assessments of the physical and/or 
psychological harms.40  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
phr.org  Doing Harm: Health Professionals’ 
Central Role in the CIA Torture Program  In addition, CIA medical staff disregarded and/or failed 
to document detainee medical complaints. For example, 
the summary states: 
 
CIA medical records consistently report that CIA 
detainee Ramzi bin al-Shibh had no medical 
complaints. However, CIA interrogation records 
indicate that when bin al-Shibh had previously 
complained of ailments to CIA personnel, he was 
subjected to the CIA's enhanced interrogation 
techniques and told by CIA interrogators that his 
medical condition was not of concern to the CIA. 
(113) 
 
As such, CIA health professionals were likely complicit 
in CIA Director Hayden’s lying to Congress when in April 
2007 he testified that:  
 
The medical section of the ICRC report concludes that 
the association of CIA medical officers with the 
interrogation program is “contrary to international 
standards of medi cal ethics.” That is just wrong. The 
role of CIA medical officers in the detainee program 
is and always has been and always will be to ensure 
the safety and the well-being of the detainee. (113) 
 
Despite numerous examples to the contrary, including 
indications that health professionals failed to document 
harm, as presented in the summary, Director Hayden 
further testified that:  
 
The placement of medical officers during the 
interrogation techniques represents an extra 
measure of caution. Our medical officers do not 
recommend the employment or continuation of any 
procedures or techniques. The allegation in the 
report that a CIA medical officer threatened a 
detainee, stating that medical care was conditional 
on cooperation is blatantly false. Healthcare has 
always been administered based upon detainee 
needs. It's neither policy nor practice to link medical 
care to any other aspect of the detainee program. 
(113) 
 
The summary described this testimony as “incongruent 
with CIA records.” (113)  
 VI. Conclusion 
 
Under the auspices of the Bush administration, the CIA 
systematically tortured suspected terrorist detainees, in 
at least one instance to the point of death. This torture 
program heavily relied on the participation and active 
engagement of health professionals to commit, conceal, 
and attempt to justify these crimes.  
 
The severity of the pain inflicted, which profoundly 
relied on operational support from health professionals, 
can be reasonably expected to have had lasting 
consequences on the physical and mental health of 
detainees subjected to the same or similar torture 
techniques. Medical assessments by PHR experts of 
detainees subjected to these same torture tactics by the 
Department of Defense (DoD) showed severe and often 
long-lasting mental and physical pain and suffering.41  
 
The SSCI summary – just a fraction of the entire, still-
classified report – describes in detail the acts and 
omissions of CIA health professionals who violated their 
professional ethics, undermined the critical bond of 
trust between patients and physicians, and – crucially – 
broke the law. Torture is not just immoral and unethical, 
it is also illegal. The torture program instituted by the 
CIA betrayed U.S. values that are founded on the rule of 
law. 
 
The U.S. government has failed to investigate and 
prosecute those who are responsible for these crimes of 
torture. Having ratified the UN Convention against 
Torture, the U.S. government is obligated to prosecute 
those who authorize, commit, or otherwise enable acts 
of torture and ill-treatment under the color of law.  
 
There is no exception to the prohibition on torture 
under international law, or to the obligation on all 
governments to prosecute it. Governments will always 
claim there are exceptional circumstances that justify 
the use of torture, and – as the SSCI summary reveals – 
these claims will be built on lies. The only way to 
counteract this dangerous fallacy is to ensure that 
torture never goes unpunished. To do otherwise is to 
tacitly allow the “exceptional circumstances” argument, 
and – in so doing – threaten the very safety and security 
it purports to serve. 
 
Those in the healing professions, the psychologists and 
physicians who became part of the CIA’s torture 
machine, must face the detainees they hurt and 
recognize that it is never acceptable to use the skills for 
healing to destroy bodies and minds.  
 
 
13 
 
phr.org  Doing Harm: Health Professionals’ 
Central Role in the CIA Torture Program  VII. Recommendations 
 
All individuals employed or contracted by the CIA, DoD , 
or any other U.S. government agency who have engaged 
in and/or authorized torture and ill-treatment of 
detainees should be held legally responsible for their 
roles. The White House and the SSCI should work 
together to publicly release of the full report so there 
can be a comprehensive accounting of the CIA torture 
program.  
 
The following recommendations from Physicians for 
Human Rights focus on two key outcomes: 1) Ensuring 
the full disclosure of the role health professionals 
played in the CIA or other U.S. government agency 
torture programs, with full legal accountability for those 
that violated U.S. and international law; and 2) changing 
U.S. laws, policies, and practices in order to prevent the 
abuse of detainees and any direct involvement of health 
professionals in future interrogations. 
 
To President Barack Obama and the U.S. Congress:  
I. Create and fully fund a federal commission to 
investigate and document the role that health 
professionals played in CIA, DoD, or other U.S. 
government agency interrogation and 
detention programs; and 
II. Ensure that the commission has subpoena powers 
and appropriate security clearance to do a 
thorough investigation, and – based on its 
findings – has the power to refer cases to the 
DoJ for prosecutions. 
 
To the U.S. Congress:  
  
The U.S. Congress must enact legislation to ensure that 
torture practices (including those previously authorized 
as EITs) are eradicated from U.S. law and practice. 
Specifically, legislation related to detainees must include 
all the protections contained in Common Article 3 of the 
Geneva Conventions. This includes closing all loopholes 
that allowed the CIA to design and oversee a torture 
program in collusion with other government officials 
and health professionals. Such actions should include: 
  
 Directing the DoD to rescind measures in 
Appendix M of the Army Field Manual that 
create operational ambiguity and could allow 
the introduction of torture and ill-treatment, 
such as prolonged isolation, sensory 
deprivation, and sleep manipulation; 
 Adopting a resolution that explicitly prohibits 
health professionals from direct involvement 
in interrogations with all Executive Branch 
agencies; 
 Amending the 2005 Detainee Treatment Act to 
make explicit that CIA personnel and any 
contractors or any other persons acting 
under the color of law must act in a manner 
that is in compliance with domestic and 
international law;   Codifying the Presidential Executive Order 
13491 (“Ensuring Lawful Interrogations”) into 
law; and  
 Strengthening reporting mechanisms of torture 
and ill-treatment by CIA and DoD health 
professionals and government contractors, 
including direct reporting to the U.S. 
Congress. 
  
To President Obama:  
 Publicly and unambiguously state that the U.S. 
government will comply with all its 
obligations under international treaties and 
domestic law to investigate and prosecute 
those who were responsible for engaging in 
torture and cruel, inhuman, and degrading 
treatment of detainees regardless of where 
the crime occurred; 
 Direct the DoJ to initiate these investigations; 
 Act to eradicate all forms of torture practices 
still allowed under U.S. law by rescinding 
those provisions of Appendix M in the Army 
Field Manual that create operational 
ambiguity and could allow the introduction 
of torture and ill-treatment, such as 
prolonged isolation, sensory deprivation, 
and sleep manipulation;  and 
 Authorize the release of the SSCI ’s full 
investigative report. 
 
To National Associations of Health Professionals: 
 
 The American Psychological Association and 
other health professional organizations 
should join the American Medical 
Association and American Psychiatric 
Association in prohibiting members from 
using their skills and expertise to directly 
participate in the interrogation of individuals 
by ensuring that their codes of ethics are 
rigorous and comprehensive; 
 Reaffirm – through public statements and 
continuing education – the ethical obligation 
of health professionals to do no harm and 
the prohibition against using their skills and 
expertise to participate in torture, ill-
treatment, or unethical human subjects 
research; and 
 Advocate for the enactment of state legislation 
that would bar all licensed health 
professionals from participating, directly or 
indirectly, in torture or other abuses 
regardless of their location and provide for 
sanctions against those that do. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14
14 
 
phr.org  Doing Harm: Health Professionals’ 
Central Role in the CIA Torture Program  Endnotes 
 
1 The full report, which is more than 6,700 pages and remains 
classified, documents the torture and ill-treatment of detainees 
in CIA custody by CIA personnel and contractors between the 
inception of the CIA's Detention and Interrogation Program in 
2001 and its termination in 2009; the report also reviews each 
of the CIA program's 119 detainees. (Foreword, 1, 3) 
2 The SSCI summary makes extensive reference to “medical 
personnel” and “medical officers” of the CIA’s Office of Medical 
Services (OMS), both those at the CIA black sites and those at 
OMS headquarters. This might refer to any of the following OMS 
health professionals: physicians (including psychiatrists), 
psychologists, physician assistants, nurses, and nurse 
practitioners. However, the SSCI summary specifies only three 
categories of OMS personnel by their profession: psychologists, 
physicians (including psychiatrists), and physician assistants. It 
also references two contract psychologists, James Mitchell and 
Bruce Jessen, who worked for the CIA but were not within OMS. 
For the purposes of this analysis, PHR refers to the specific 
profession where available, according to the term used by SSCI. 
Where the term is not specified, PHR uses the generic term 
“health professionals” to encompass professionals clearly 
specified and any others not specified. 
3 See Gretchen Borchelt and Jonathan Fine, Break Them Down: 
Systematic Use of Psychological Torture by US Forces , 
Physicians for Human Rights, May 2005, 
http://phr.org/library/reports/us-torture-break-them-down-
2005.html ; Scott Allen, Devon Chaffee, and Farnoosh 
Hashemian, Leave No Marks: Enhanced Interrogation 
Techniques and the Risk of Criminality , Aug. 2007, Physicians 
for Human Rights and Human Rights First, http://phr.org/ 
library/reports/leave- no-marks-report-2007.html ; Farnoosh 
Hashemian, Sondra Crosby, Vincent Iacopino, Allen Keller, et al, 
Broken Laws, Broken Lives: Medical Evidence of Torture by US 
Personnel and Its Impact , Jun. 2008, Physicians for Human 
Rights, http://phr.org/library/reports/broken-laws-torture-
report-2008.html ; Allen Keller, Scott Allen, Steven Reisner, 
Vincent Iacopino, Aiding Torture: Health Professionals' Ethics 
and Human Rights Violations Demonstrated in the May 2004 
CIA Inspector General's Report , Aug. 2009, Physicians for 
Human Rights, http://phr.org/library/reports/aiding-torture-
2009.html#sthash.QVC8Vqra.dpuf ; Nathaniel Raymond, Scott 
Allen, Vincent Iacopino, Allen Keller, et al, Experiments in 
Torture: Evidence of Human Subject Research and 
Experimentation in the "Enhanced" Interrogation Program , Jun. 
2010, http://physiciansforhumanrights.org/library/reports 
/experiments- in-torture-2010.html ; Mike Corradini, Kristine 
Huskey, and Christy Fujio, Buried Alive: Solitary Confinement in 
the US Detention System , Apr. 2003, Physicians for Human 
Rights, http://phr.org/library/reports/buried-alive-solitary-
confinement- in-the-us-detention-system.html . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
4 A detailed review and analysis of the summary was conducted 
by a PHR team with specific expertise in diagnosing and 
treating torture survivors; professional standards of medical 
and psychological ethics; the provision of medical care to 
detainees; medical care in national security settings; and human 
subjects research ethics and law. 
5 The health professionals referenced in this analysis were CIA 
employees or contractors. While most were employed by OMS, 
James Mitchell and Bruce Jessen did not report to OMS, but the 
CIA directly. 
6 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), 
Art. 26, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 UN GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 
52, UN Doc. A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered 
into force March 23, 1976, ratified by the United States on Jun. 
8, 1992, http://www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/ 
pages/ccpr.aspx . 
7 Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or 
Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Convention against 
Torture), UN General Assembly, Res. 39/46, U.N. GAOR. 39th 
Sess. Supp. No. 51, U.N. Doc. A/Res/39/46, entered into force 
Jun. 26, 1987, ratified by the United States on Oct. 21, 1994, 
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ 
ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CAT.aspx.  
8 The Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the 
Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field, incl. Annex 1, 
Aug. 12, 1949, 6 U.S.T. 3114, 75 U.N.T.S. 31; the Convention 
for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded, Sick, and 
Shipwrecked Members of the Armed Forces at Sea, Aug. 12, 
1949, 6 U.S.T. 3217, 75 U.N.T.S. 
9 War Crimes Act of 1996, Pub. L. 104-192, § 2(a), 110 Stat. 
2104, Aug. 21, 1996 (codified as amended at 18 U.S.C. § 2441) 
(2007); Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects, 45 
C.F.R. Part 46 (2009); Torture Convention Implementation Act 
of 1994, 18 U.S.C.A. § 2340 (2004); and U.S. Constitution, 
amendment XIII. 
10 American Medical Association, American Medical 
Association Code of Medical Ethics  (2001),  http://www.ama-
assn.org/ama/pub/physician-resources/medical-
ethics/code-medical-ethics/principles-medical-ethics.page ; 
American Psychological Association , Ethical Principles of 
Psychologists and Code of Conduct: Including 2010 
Amendments  (2010), http://www.apa.org/ethics/code/ ; and 
American Psychiatric Association, The Principles of Medical 
Ethics With Annotations Especially Applicable to Psychiatry  
(2013), http://www.psychiatry.org/practice/ 
ethics/resources-standards . 
11 The Nuremberg Code [from Trials of War Criminals before 
the Nuremberg Military Tribunals under Control Council 
Law No. 10. Nuremberg, October 1946 –April 1949. 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O, 1949 –1953.]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
phr.org  Doing Harm: Health Professionals’ 
Central Role in the CIA Torture Program   
12 World Medical Association, “Declaration of Helsinki: 
Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human 
Subjects,” Doc. 17.C, 1964 (amended in 1975, 1983, 1989, 
1996, and 2000), available at 
http://www.wma.net/en/30publications/10policies/b3/ ; 
World Medical Association, “Declaration of Tokyo: 
Guidelines for Physicians Concerning Torture and other 
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in 
Relation to Detention and Imprisonment,” 1975 (amended 
in 2005 and 2006), available at 
http://www.wma.net/en/30publications/10policies/c18/ind
ex.html ; World Medical Association, “Declaration of Malta 
on Hunger Strikers,” 1991 (amended in 1992 and 2006), 
available at 
http://www.wma.net/en/30publications/10policies/h31/in
dex.html .  
13 Allen, Chaffee, and Hashemian, Leave No Marks ; Raymond, 
Allen, Iacopino, Keller, et al, Experiments in Torture.   
14 Katherine Eban, “Rorschach and Awe,” Vanity Fair , Jul. 17, 
2007, http://www.vanityfair.com/politics/features/ 
2007/07/torture200707 ; Mark Benjamin, “The CIA’s Torture 
Teachers,”  Salon , Jun. 21, 2007, 
http://www.salon.com/2007/06/21/cia_sere/ . 
15 Martin E. P. Seligman, Helplessness: On Depression, 
Development, and Death , (San Francisco: W.H. Freeman & 
Company, 1975). 
16 Senate Armed Services Committee (110th Cong.), “Inquiry 
into the Treatment of Detainees in U.S. Custody ,” [Levin Report]  
Nov. 20, 2008, 20, http://www.armed-services.senate.gov/ 
imo/media/doc/Detainee-Report-Final_April- 22-2009.pdf . 
17 Operational psychologists are those whose role involves 
furthering the operational mission of the CIA (or military) in 
opposition to traditional health provider roles involving 
preventing and treating emotional problems. Jean Maria 
Arrigo, Roy J. Eidelson, and Ray Bennett, "Psychology Under 
Fire: Adversarial Operational Psychology and Psychological 
Ethics," Peace and Conflict: Journal of Peace Psychology  18, 
no. 4 (2012): 384. 
18 Adam Goldman and Julie Tate, “Decoding the Secret Black 
Sites on the Senate’s Report on the CIA Interrogation 
Program,” Washington Post , Dec. 9, 2014, 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/worldviews/wp/20
14/12/09/decoding-the-secret-black-sites- on-the-senates-
report- on-the-cia-interrogation-program . 
19 Physicians for Human Rights, “Medical Professionals 
Denounce ‘Rectal Feeding’ as ‘Sexual Assault Masquerading 
as Medical Treatment,’ Dec . 2014, 
http://physiciansforhumanrights.org/library/other/fact-
sheet-rectal-hydration-and-rectal-feeding.html . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
20 The Inter national Criminal Court defines “rape” as: “The 
perpetrator invaded the body of a person by conduct 
resulting in penetration, however slight, of any part of the 
body of the victim or of the perpetrator with a sexual 
organ, or of the anal or genital opening of the victim with 
any object or any other part of the body. The invasion was 
committed by force, or by the threat of force or coercion, 
such as that caused by fear of violence, duress, detention, 
psychological oppression or abuse of power, against such 
person or another person, or by taking advantage of a 
coercive environment or the invasion was committed 
against a person incapable of giving genuine consent.” 
Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the 
International Criminal Court, 1st Session, U.N. Doc. ICC-
ASP/1/3 , art. 7(1)(g), Sept. 3 –10, 2002, http://legal.un.org/ 
icc/asp/1stsession/report/english/part_ii_b_e.pdf . 
21 Scott Shane, “ Report Portrays a Broken C.I.A. Devoted to a 
Failed Approach,” New York Times , Dec. 9, 2014,  
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/10/world/senate-
torture-repo rt-shows-cia-infighting-over-interrogation-
program.html .  
22 On April 24, 2014, Dr. Sondra Crosby, a PHR medical advisor, 
testified that her examination of al-Nashiri revealed evidence 
consistent with sexual assault: “He suffers from chronic pain. 
He suffers from anal-rectal complaints, and all of these are 
documented in the unclassified records….” “Other red flags in 
Mr. al Nashiri are his persistent and chronic anal-rectal 
complaints, difficulty defecating bleeding, hemorrhoids, pain 
with sitting for prolonged periods of time. This is very common 
in survivors of sexual assault.” Transcript of the United States v. 
Al Nashiri  Motions Hearing Dated Apr. 24, 2014, 
http://www.mc.mil/Portals/0/pdfs/alNashiri2/Al%20Nashiri%20
II%20(TRANS24April2014-AM1).pdf  and 
http://www.mc.mil/Portals/0/pdfs/alNashiri2/Al%20Nashiri%20
II%20%28TRANS24April2014-PM1%29.pdf . 
23 Raymond, Allen, Iacopino, Keller, et al, Experiments in 
Torture.   
24 Jay S. Bybee, “ Memorandum for A. Gonzales: Counsel to 
the President, ” Office of Legal Counsel, Department of 
Justice, Aug. 1, 2002 , http://www.justice.gov/sites/default/ 
files/olc/legacy/2010/08/05/memo-gonzales-aug2002.pdf .  
25 Ibid. 
26 Convention against Torture , UN General Assembly. 
27 Note, in many circumstances, organ failure, impairment 
of bodily function, and death may be painless, illustrating 
the arbitrary nature of the Yoo/Bybee definition of torture. 
For example, kidney and liver failure, septic shock, cardiac 
arrhythmias, and overdoses with sedatives can all cause 
death with little or no pain.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
 
phr.org  Doing Harm: Health Professionals’ 
Central Role in the CIA Torture Program   
28 Bybee, “Memorandum for A. Gonzales: Counsel to the 
President .”  
29 Human Rights Watch, “Appendix: U.S. Criticisms of 
Mistreatment and Torture Practices” in “Enduring Freedom”: 
Abuses by U.S. Forces in Afghanistan  16, no. 3(C), (March 
2004), http://www.hrw.org/reports/ 
2004/afghanistan0304/afghanistan0304.pdf . 
30 International standards for the medical documentation of 
torture have been recognized by the United Nations since 
2001. See: Vincent Iacopino, Önder Ozkalipci, Caroline 
Schlar, Kathleen Allden, et al, Manual on the Effective 
Investigation and Documentation of Torture and Other 
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment 
(The Istanbul Protocol), UN Office of the High Commissioner 
for Human Rights, 2004, HR/P/PT/8/Rev.1,  
http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/training8Re
v1en.pdf.  
31 Hashemian, Crosby, Iacopino, Keller, et al , Broken Laws, 
Broken Lives . 
32 CIA Inspector General, “Special Review: Counterterrorism 
Detention and Interrogation Activities,” Central Intelligence 
Agency, May 7, 2004, at F10, http://graphics8.nytimes.com 
/packages/pdf/politics/20090825-DETAIN/2004CIAIG.pdf . 
33 National Institutes of Health Office of Extramural 
Resear ch, “Frequently Asked Questions From Applicants: 
Human Subjects Research- Definitions,” last modified Feb. 
11, 2010, http://grants.nih.gov/grants/policy/ 
hs/faqs_aps_definitions.htm . 
34 The Nuremberg Code [from Trials of War Criminals before 
the Nuremberg Military Tribunals under Control Council 
Law No. 10. Nuremberg, October 1946 –April 1949. 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O, 1949 –1953.] 
35 From Crimes of War 2.0 : “At the Nuremberg T ribunals 
following World War II, medical experiments were declared 
a crime against humanity. The Geneva Conventions of 1949 
defined medical experiments on POWs and protected 
persons —that is, civilians under the control of an occupying 
force—as a grave breach, and the 1998 Rome Statute of the 
International Criminal Court stated that medical 
experiments are war crimes, whether they occur in an 
international armed conflict or an internal one. It defined 
the crime as: ‘Subjecting persons who are in the power of  
an adverse party to physical mutilation or to medical or 
scientific experiments of any kind which are neither 
justified by the medical, dental or hospital treatment of the 
person concerned nor carried out in his or her interest, and 
which cause death to or seriously endanger the health of 
such person or persons.’” UN General Assembly, Rome 
Statute of the International Criminal Court, Jul. 17, 1998, 
(last amended 2010), available at: http://www.icc-
cpi.int/nr/rdonlyres/ea9aeff7- 5752 -4f84-be94-
0a655eb30e16/0/rome_statute_english.pdf . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
36 Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney 
General, OLC, “Memorandum for John A.  Rizzo, Senior 
Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, Re: 
Application of 18 U.S.C. §§ 2340 –2340A to Certain 
Techniques That May Be Used in the Interrogation of a High 
Value al Qaeda Detainee,” (“Bradbury Combined Techniques 
Memo”), May 10, 20 05, 
http://www.fas.org/irp/agency/doj/olc/techniques.pdf .      
37 Adam Goldman and Julie Tate, “Decoding the Secret Black 
Sites on the Senate’s Report on the CIA Interrogation 
Program,” Washington Post , Dec. 9, 2014, 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/worldviews/wp/20
14/12/09/decoding-the-secret-black-sites- on-the-senates-
report- on-the-cia-interrogation-program . 
38 Open Society Institute, The Report of The Constitution 
Project's Task Force on Detainee Treatment , Apr. 2013, 181 & 
213, http://detaineetaskforce.org/pdf/Full-Report.pdf .  
39 “Superior edge separation” refers to the splitting open of 
Abu Zubaydah’s wound edges.  
40 Iacopino, Ozkalipci, Schlar, Allden, et al, The Istanbul 
Protocol. 
41 Hashemian, Crosby, Iacopino, Keller, et al , Broken Laws, 
Broken Lives . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
 About Physicians for  
Human Rights  
 
Since 1986, Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) has been 
using medicine and science to document and call 
attention to mass atrocities and severe human rights 
violations.  
 
PHR w as founded on the idea that health professionals, 
with their specialized skills, ethical duties, and credible 
voices, are uniquely positioned to stop human rights 
violations. PHR’s investigations and expertise are used 
to advocate for persecuted health wor kers, prevent 
torture, document mass atrocities, and hold those who 
violate human rights accountable.  
 
PHR has worked in more than 60 countries and 
territories, including Afghanistan, Bahrain, Burma, 
Democratic Republic of the Congo, El Salvador, 
Guatemala , Iran, Iraq, Israel, Kenya, Libya, Mexico, 
Palestine, Sudan, Syria, Turkey, and the United States.  
 
 
 
 phr.org
Nobel Peace Prize  
Co-laureateNew York, NY
HeadquartersBoston, MA Washington, DC