The Obama administration has asserted the sweeping 
power to target and kill individuals, including U.S. citizens, far from any armed conflict and without charge, trial, or 
conviction in violation of both Constitution and international 
law. Names of suspected terrorists are being added to “kill lists” maintained by the CIA and a covert unit of the U.S. military called the Joint Special Operations Command (JSOC), following unchecked executive determinations that 
secret criteria are “satisfied.” In August 2010, CCR and the ACLU filed Al-Aulaqi v. Obama , a lawsuit challenging the 
legality of these “targeted killings.”
The suit is brought on behalf of Nasser Al-Aulaqi, whose 
U.S. citizen son Anwar Al-Aulaqi has not been charged  with any crime but was placed on kill lists by the U.S. Executive in early 2010, and is being pursued in Yemen,  a country in which the U.S. is not engaged in armed conflict, and which is almost 2000 miles away from Iraq  and Afghanistan.
Outside of armed conflict, the Constitution and peace-time 
international law applies, and individuals must be tried and convicted for a capital crime before they can be executed 
by the State. The only exception is if lethal force is used as a last resort in the face of a truly imminent threat. When individuals are added to kill lists after a process,  and left for months they clearly do not present an “imminent” threat. 
Nasser Al-Aulaqi is asserting his son’s rights because his son 
is in hiding under threat of death and cannot access counselCCR and the ACLU Join in Lawsuit to Challenge Targeted Killings
continued on page 3
CCR continues to advocate on  
behalf of environmental and animal 
rights activists and to challenge the COINTELPRO-style targeting they are subjected to known as the “green scare.”
CCR is defending activists who face 
criminal prosecution under the little-known Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act (AETA) – which criminalizes a wide range of what the Center believes are clearly protected First Amendment activities, when those activities are directed against businesses that use animals. In U.S. v. Buddenberg, et al., the government sought to prosecute activ-
ists as terrorists for allegedly participat-ing in demonstrations, chanting, chalk-ing, and distributing fliers. In a work of literature, this sort of over-the-top pros-ecution might seem like an obviously exaggerated brush of comic surrealism, 
but here it carries real-life, serious con -
sequences, including up to a decade in prison. In July, a federal judge granted our motion to dismiss the Buddenberg indictments as factually insufficient. This was a major victory in our efforts 
to challenge the AETA. The government will now have to decide whether to re-indict the activists—should they 
choose to do so, we will continue our efforts to defend them and the crucial civil liberties principles at stake. 
We are also advocating against the 
oppressive treatment of environmen-
tal and animal rights activists after conviction. In April, we filed Aref, et al. v. Holder, et al., a federal lawsuit to challenge the placement (without due process) of prisoners into experimental isolation units known as Communica -
tions Management Units (CMUs), 
The New McCarthyism? CCR Challenges the “Green Scare” by  
Standing Up for Environmental and Animal Rights Activists 
continued on page 3Fall/Winter 2010 Newsletter
The U.S. claims authority to kill without charge or hearing targeted 
individuals outside the theater of war.CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org2
By Vince Warren,  
CCR Executive Director
An excellent way to size up any 
organization is to assess how it responds to setbacks – even serious ones. Does it pack up and turn to something else, or does it continue  
to fight? 
While CCR experienced some 
significant legal setbacks this spring,  we continue to fight vigorously. The Supreme Court refused to hear our appeal on the government’s accountability for the torture of Maher Arar. They did hear our case on behalf of The Humanitarian Law Project in which we challenged aspects of the material support statute to defend the First Amendment rights of peaceful activists, but they ruled against us. Finally, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals reversed a lower court opinion in our ACORN case in which we argued against Congress acting as judge, jury and executioner by unilaterally defunding organizations like ACORN.  
These defeats say more about where we are as a country 
than they do about the merits of the legal claims raised by our clients. They tell us that that the courts are still, by and large, reluctant to challenge unconstitutional government assertions of power; that Congress will quickly jump on the right wing band wagon – especially in an election year; and that even with President Obama in the White House, we are still fighting the Bush agenda on terrorism issues.
The fact that we not only continue, but step up our efforts 
in the fight for justice says something about CCR. We remain undaunted and undeterred, because defeat is simply not an option. As difficult and challenging as this work can sometimes be, we know that if we don’t step up, there will be nothing left of our democracy to salvage. We continue to challenge the Bush 
policies; while also challenging the new extensions and expansions of the Bush/Obama agenda including yet another nefarious and resolutely illegal component: the targeted killing program. In August, we filed a lawsuit challenging the government’s asserted authority to carry out targeted killings of individuals, including U.S. citizens, far from any battlefield. 
In another example, as many of you recall, in 2002 CCR filed Turkmen v. Ashcroft a civil rights lawsuit on behalf of men who were swept up by the INS and FBI in a racial profiling dragnet following 9/11. In 2010, under the Obama administration, we filed a new Turkmen v. Ashcroft complaint, with additional plaintiffs, which will push for accountability among the architects of the program that swept up and illegally detained these men under abusive conditions. We are also challenging Obama’s Secure Communities Program which currently operates in 33 states and automatically runs fingerprints through immigration databases for all people arrested to target them for detention and deportation even if their criminal charges are eventually dismissed, or the result of an unlawful arrest.
On the issues we all care about— the ones CCR works on, 
things are not getting better, they’re getting worse. And the worse they become, the harder we must fight. CCR will continue to demand justice from the Courts and Congress and continue to push the administration for accountability for illegal activities of the government past and present. 
Our work is not easy, but it is necessary, it is right, and it’s 
about to go into high gear. Thank you very much for your support and partnership as we continue down the path to  a just and fair society. Defeat is not an Option
CCR Is Grateful to our Foundation Funders for their Support *
The Altschul Foundation • The Atlantic Philanthropies (USA) • The Bardon-Cole Foundation • The Blue Oak Foundation • Caipirinha 
Foundation • The Charles Evans Hughes Memorial Foundation • The David and Katherine Moore Family Foundation, Inc. • David 
Kimmel Foundation • The Firedoll Foundation • The Ford Foundation • The Foundation to Promote Open Society • The Grodzins Fund 
• The Jewish Communal Fund • The Liberty Hill Foundation • The Libra Foundation • The Open Society Institute • The Rockefeller 
Family Fund • Roseben Fund • The Spingold Foundation • The Tides Foundation • The Vanguard Charitable Endowment Program • 
The William B. Wiener, Jr. Foundation
*The foundations listed above provided leadership-level grants of $5,000 or more between April 7, 2010 – October 1, 2010
Photo by Lindsay BeyersteinCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org3
or the courts to assert his own rights without exposing 
himself to a potentially lethal attack by the U.S. Indeed, authorizing the killing of individuals on secret standards, far from any conflict zone, and outside of any legal process not only violates the Constitution (the 4th Amendment right to be free from excessive force and 5th Amendment right to due process), but also international law: Nasser Al-Aulaqi is also bringing an international law claim in his own right to prevent the loss he would suffer if the government were to kill his son extrajudicially. 
Government “kill lists” will inevitably target innocent 
people wrongly suspected of involvement with terrorist activity. The government got it wrong in Guantánamo, where over 550 men initially labeled the “worst of the worst” have been released for lack of evidence that they were anything but in the wrong place at the wrong time. 
Beyond that “targeted” killings also are likely to kill 
innocent people. Indeed, such a “targeted” killing in Yemen in December 2009 killed 41 civilians, mostly women and children. Additionally, the “kill lists” undermine the law and render the entire world a potential battlefield, effectively creating a war without boundaries or end that engenders animosity abroad and threatens our collective safety.
The Obama administration responded by asking the judge 
to dismiss our lawsuit without hearing the merits of the claims, arguing that they are inappropriate for judicial review, and that they cannot be litigated without risking disclosure of “state secrets”. It also asserted that Nasser Al-Aulaqi does not have standing to sue on behalf of his son.
The assertion that courts should have absolutely no role 
in determining the criteria by which the executive branch can kill its own citizens is antithetical to a democracy. The expansive power claimed by the Obama administration seriously undermines the Constitution and the safety of both American citizens and others who are on the receiving end of U.S. belligerence. As such, we will persist in our efforts to end targeted killings outside of armed conflict. 
which have been built within several medium-security federal prisons. In these CMUs, low and medium secu -
rity inmates are segregated from the rest of the population and subjected to uniquely harsh restrictions on family visits and telephone calls.
Our Aref lawsuit was filed on behalf 
environmental activists, and other CMU prisoners and their spouses to challenge the unfair practices in—and the very establishment of—these CMUs, which hold a disproportion-ate number of Muslim men in  addition to environmental and  animal rights activists. 
In June, the Center, CMU prisoners, 
and many concerned friends, family members, and allied groups flooded the Bureau of Prisons with requests to close the experimental units after the Bureau opened up a period for public comment.
Lastly, in July, CCR sent a small delegation to meet with community 
organizers in West Virginia opposing mountaintop removal (MTR) coal mining—a process that is deeply destructive to the environment,  and to the people who live in the  Appalachian mountain valleys where it is taking place. Some activists have chosen to trespass onto company land to bring much needed attention to this critical issue, and these activ-ists are now under attack—facing criminal charges, civil injunctions, and damages by the coal companies who would like nothing better than to silence their voices of dissent. 
CCR is exploring ways to support 
these brave activists who, at great personal risk, are educating the American public about an ecologi-cally devastating practice. 
Mountain-top removal coal mine with signs threatening trespassers with prosecution.Targeted Killings  (continued from cover)  
Green Scare 
(continued from cover)  
Photo by Ian HeadCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org4
For years, CCR has been working with 
the Vulcan Society, the organization of Black firefighters in New York City, to challenge discrimination in the hiring of firefighters. New York City currently has the least diverse fire department of any major city in America. In an extraordinary January 2010 court victory, U.S. District Judge Nicholas G. Garaufis ruled in The Vulcan Society, et al. v City of New York, finding that the Fire Department of New York (FDNY) has engaged in a more than thirty-year pattern of intentional discrimination against Black applicants, in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Constitution’s Equal Protection Clause.  In employment discrimination cases, such rulings of intentional discrimination are exceedingly rare and demonstrate the severity of discrimination in this case. Later, Judge Garaufis ruled that the FDNY’s most recent firefighter exam, given in 2007, was still racially discriminatory and prohibited using its results for hiring purposes. Rather than force the City’s hand, he then identified five potential remedies and gave the choice  of selecting the method it preferred to diversify the FDNY to the City. Unfortunately, they refused to select any of these methods—and instead continued to obstruct any efforts at a collective resolution. On October 19th, Judge Garaufis offered a scathing ruling against the City saying:  “The City’s shifting and contradictory positions have needlessly diverted the parties from the critical work of developing a new examination,” and enjoined the City from hiring off the last exam in any way except for the five non-discriminatory options he had presented in his September 13 decision. CCR will continue to challenge the FDNY’s racially discriminatory hiring practices until the force looks more like the population it protects.CCR is also suing the New York Police Department (NYPD) in Floyd, et al. v. City of New York, et al., a federal class action lawsuit alleging that the NYPD engages in unconstitutional racial profiling and suspicion-less stop-and-frisks of law-abiding City residents. In February 2010, CCR received the NYPD’s own stop-and-frisk data, confirming that 2009 was the worst year for stop-and-frisks on record—575,304 individuals, 87% of whom were Black and Latino New Yorkers were stopped (see graph at left). After receiving this data, CCR commented: “This kind of heavy-
handed policing promotes mistrust, doubt and fear of police officers in communities of color and only serves to make the police’s job more difficult.” Using this data in our ongoing advocacy efforts, CCR has brought increased media attention to this critical civil rights issue. 
In related good legislation news, in 
July, a bill was passed in New York State to protect the identities of the hundreds of thousands of law-abiding New Yorkers who are stopped and frisked every year by the NYPD without being issued a summons or being arrested. This brought further public scrutiny to an ineffective and unlawful NYPD practice.
Through the work of our Education 
and Outreach department, CCR will further advocate for police-reform efforts in New York City in conjunction with the recently named Coalition for Community Safety (CSS). Additionally, CCR is working with local organizations to produce video testimonials about the experience of being stopped-and-frisked and coordinating the sharing of information related to police reform efforts nationwide.
Standing for Racial Justice: CCR’s Latest Victories and Challenges
FrisksStops
Total number of people stopped/frisked in New York City
Total number of Black and Hispanic people stopped/frisked in New York CityStop-and-Frisks by NYPD
www.ccrjustice.org/ourcases/current-
cases/floyd-et-alCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org5
Throughout our history, CCR has 
consistently worked to protect and expand immigrant rights. Since 9/11, this work has become more crucial than ever, as anti-immigrant fervor has reached a fevered pitch. Across the country, immigrants have been subjected to increased scrutiny and racial profiling, and immigrant detention has become the fastest growing form of detention in the U.S. 
As part of our widening efforts to 
counter this trend, CCR is involved in several critical new immigrant justice cases and campaigns. 
CCR, with the National Day Laborer 
Organization (NDLON) and the Kathryn O. Greenberg Immigration Justice Clinic of the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law, recently filed National Day Labor Organizing Network (NDLON) v. US Immigration and Customs Enforcement Agency (ICE) , 
a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit seeking information about ICE’s little-known “Secure Communities” (S-Comm) program. S-Comm makes state and local police central to the enforcement of federal immigration law, creating a racial-profiling dragnet that serves to funnel more people into the mismanaged ICE detention and removal system. This has a significant cost to relations between police and local communities. With our allies, we’ve also launched a website at www.uncoverthetruth.org to shed light on this key issue. 
We are also providing increased legal 
support to organizers and advocates fighting for immigrant justice around the country. In late July, CCR Staff Attorney Sunita Patel was arrested while serving as a legal observer with the National Lawyers Guild during a pivotal protest of Arizona’s controversial and unconstitutional new immigration law, SB 1070. Ms. Patel is challenging her arrest. CCR has been working with Haitian community organizations to develop pro se habeas materials to challenge the legality of immigration detention for Haitians with final orders of removal after the January earthquake. These materials have assisted  
Haitians in south Florida obtain release and NY Times article brought media attention to the issue. 
We were also a co-convener of last 
year’s national criminal justice and immigrant rights retreat in Sonoma, California, which inspired a good deal of follow-up activity around the intersection of criminal law and the immigration removal system. CCR is involved with follow-up efforts— including helping to plan panels at the U.S. Social Forum and Netroots Nation, and to organize national sign-on letters to end the 287(g) program and the merger of the criminal justice and immigration systems. 
In both our litigation and public 
advocacy work, we are proud to be deepening our involvement in one of the most crucial civil rights issues of our time, the struggle for immigrant justice.
Ensuring the Rights of Immigrants: A Critical Battle for Racial Justice 
Images of the SB.1070 protests and CCR attorney, Sunita Patel, who was serving as a  
legal observer.
Read more online at  
www.UncoverTheTruth.orgCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org6
On May 31, 2010, a six-boat flotilla, 
carrying more than 700 civilians from almost 40 countries, was overtaken by Israeli commandos in international waters. The flotilla was seeking to bring desperately needed humanitarian and rebuilding supplies to Gaza, and also to break the illegal Israeli blockade of Gaza. The commandos rappelled onto the upper deck of the flotilla’s largest ship, the Mavi Marmara, and the attack left one Turkish-American and eight Turkish citizens dead. 
“At least a dozen masked and armed 
commandos raided our boat. We were knocked down, pulled, beaten, and stomped on as we tried to put our bodies in the way to prevent them from taking our boat. One of the first things the soldiers went after was our media and communications tools. Cameras, recorders, and phones were all taken from us. This electronic equipment, as well as the evidentiary documentation they contain, still  
has not been returned to us. After  
the commandos managed to violently restrain us and take control of the wheel from the captain, they steered us to the Israeli port of Ashdod where everyone was interrogated  
and imprisoned.”
 -Huwaida Arraf: a 2006 Ella Baker 
Intern at CCR and Chairwoman of 
the Free Gaza Movement, www.freegaza.org and a co-founder of the International Solidarity Movement, www.palsolidarity.org. 
In June, CCR asked the U.S. State 
Department to join other nations in calling for an independent inquiry into the attack by an impartial tribunal, and to demand that Israel immediately release the property it still holds—including cameras, video equipment, cell phones and computers that can help document the assault. And on June 30, CCR filed eight Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests to find out more about what the U.S. government knew, and did, in relation to the attack. 
In late September, a UN Human 
Rights Council fact-finding mission found that Israel’s military response was “disproportionate” and “betrayed an unacceptable level of brutality.” The panel also said that the blockade of the Palestinian territory was unlawful because it constituted “collective punishment” of the  civilian population and because  of the grave humanitarian crisis  in Gaza. 
The full text of Huwaida’s first-hand 
account of her experiences, as well as other documents including our FOIA requests and a legal analysis of the  on-going blockade and flotilla attack, can be found on CCR’s website:  www.ccrjustice.org/gaza-flotilla. 
CCR Seeking Information on Attack on Flotilla  
Bringing Humanitarian Aid to Gaza
Gaza flotilla ship, the Mavi Marmara, displaying a banner that reads: “This is a humanitar -
ian aid ship” in four languages.
Photo courtesy of IHH Humanitarian Relief Foundation
If you are a customer of CREDO Mobile/Working Assets, 
please support CCR in the 2010 Donation Pool by going to this 
link: www.WorkingAssets.com/Voting and registering your 
support for CCR. The more votes we receive, the more funding.  
With just one click you can make a big difference for CCR. 
CCR would like to thank our supporters who are CREDO Mobile/Working Assets 
customers who, with their support, have ensured CCR had a place in the 2010 CREDO 
Mobile/Working Assets Donation Pool. 
We are also tremendously grateful to CREDO Mobile/Working Assets for conducting 
this socially conscious profit-sharing program, AND for consistently partnering with CCR who has benefitted from this program in 5 of the past 6 years! Thank you!
CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.orgThe U.S. government, under both the Bush and Obama 
administrations, has been relying on unprecedented numbers of private military contractors in Iraq and Afghanistan, including to perform functions that traditionally have been reserved for government. This reliance on private contractors has created an “accountability gap” that the Center has been working vigorously to close. Since 2004, CCR has served as  
co-counsel in representing Iraqis in litigation against U.S. contractors that have committed grave human rights abuses—in January 2010 for example, CCR and co-counsel secured a confidential settlement against the notorious private military contractor, Blackwater, whose employees fired on civilians on at least two well-publicized occasions in Baghdad in 2007.  
CCR recently won another major victory on behalf of 
former Iraqi detainees in one of our lawsuits, Al-Quraishi 
v. Nakhla and L-3 , challenging private contractors for their 
complicity in torture in U.S.-run prisons in Iraq. In his ruling, U.S. District Court Judge Peter J. Messitte denied the defendants’ motions to dismiss the Iraqis’ claims. 
“During wartime,” the court wrote, “many things are 
lawful in that season, which would not be permitted in a time of peace. Some actions, however, have been deemed so repulsive to mankind…that they are universally condemned... One such universally recognized rule is  
that torture is prohibited.” 
We are now working to preserve this win in Al-Quarashi 
before the Fourth Circuit. Meanwhile, in our first-filed Iraqi torture case, we just received notice from the U.S. Supreme Court that the Acting Solicitor General has been invited to file a brief on behalf of the United States in Saleh v. Titan in 
response to our petition for certiorari. This is a step towards the Supreme Court deciding to review our clients case, and also marks the first time that the government will share its views on claims brought by hundreds of detainees against 
private military contractors implicated in torture at the infamous Abu Ghraib prison. CCR will continue to ensure that those who commit serious human rights abuses are held accountable, whether they work for the government or for private companies. 7
Progress in Effort to Hold Private Military Contractors  
Accountable for Abuse
Blackwater Security guarding U.S. State Department employees
www.ccrjustice.org/learn-more/faqs/accountability-
torture-private-military-contractors
1. Make a gift by credit card on our website: www.CCRjustice.org/donate. 
2. Sign up for monthly giving online at: www.CCRjustice.org/donate. 
3. Ask friends and family to make gifts to CCR in your honor as your holiday/birthday/anniversary/
no-reason-at-all gift or make gifts to CCR in honor of the folks on YOUR shopping list!
4. Give up on the stock market? Donate stock to CCR. Contact us at 212-614-6489 for stock transfer 
instructions. 
If you have questions, please call 212-614-6489 or email us at development@CCRjustice.org.  Thank you for your support!Top Ways to Support CCR This Holiday Season
Help fuel our work for social justice and human rights!8
At our annual President’s Reception on May 5, CCR honored former Executive Director, long-serving Board 
member, and current Board Chair Greg Finger by announcing the establishment of the Gregory H. Finger Racial Justice Fellowship. With Greg’s lifelong dedication to youth, public service, social justice, and education, not to mention his invaluable role at CCR, it is fitting that the fellowship is named after him.
The fellowship will be offered starting in the summer of 2011 to a second year law or other student with a 
strong commitment to public interest law and/or advocacy, and a demonstrated interest in working on CCR’s broad ranging racial justice docket. The stipend is intended to increase diversity within the fellowship program and support students who would otherwise not be able to participate for financial reasons. Applications from 
people of color and people from low income communities will be particularly encouraged to apply. CCR is honored to celebrate Greg for his commitment to “train the next generation of people’ s lawyers,” also a CCR mandate.
The connection between education and progressive social change has always been clear to me. I 
was able to continue that work at CCR, where the creative use of law for social change is a guiding principle. It is with a great deal of pride that I have watched CCR ‘graduates’ move on, and carrying their CCR ‘lessons’ with them, make an impact on the world. –Greg Finger
On the morning of 9/24, FBI agents raided 8 homes and 
offices of anti-war activists in Minneapolis and Chicago. They confiscated computers, books, documents, cell phones, passports, even children’s drawings. The same day agents subpoenaed 11 activists in Illinois, Minnesota and Michigan to appear before a federal Grand Jury. Harassing visits and calls were paid to others in Wisconsin, California and North Carolina.
Search warrants and subpoenas indicate the government 
was looking for evidence of material support for resistance movements in Palestine and Colombia that the U.S. government has labeled as “terrorist organizations.”  The raided activists deny any wrong-doing. 
Following the U.S. Supreme Court’s decision this year 
in Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project (HLP), which found that speech could constitute “material support,” there is great concern that the government is now seeking to clamp down on people’s right to oppose U.S. foreign policy. These raids constitute a new level of repression and attempted intimidation against the entire progressive movement.
After the raids, demonstrations were held outside Federal 
Buildings and FBI offices in more than 30 cities to demand: 1) a stop the repression against activists; 2) the immediate return of all confiscated materials; and 3) an end the  
Grand Jury proceedings and raids. Further protests were held to coincide with the beginning of Grand Jury hearings on October 5. 
All 14 subpoenaed activists publicly announced their 
refusal to testify before the Grand Jury. As a result, on October 12, the federal prosecutor cancelled the subpoenas though the government could decide to reissue them. Some witnesses could be granted immunity in an effort to force them to testify – which could result in jail time if they refuse. Or the government could drop the case, which is unlikely.
CCR’s recently updated publication, If An Agent Knocks , 
is an important resource for activists to understand and 
protect their rights. The publication can be downloaded  free from CCR’s web site at: www.ccrjustice.org/if-agent-knocks-(-booklet). Copies can also be ordered from CCR. 
CCR will provide updates on this important development 
in the coming weeks and months. You can also visit StopFBI.net for more information. Protect your right to speak out and help others protect their rights! An Agent is Knocking: CCR Responds to Increased FBI Raids of Activists
Protest outside the Federal Building in New York on September 28.
The Gregory H. Finger Racial Justice Fellowship 
Photo by Gregory Butterfield
CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.orgCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org9
CCR is grateful to our donors whose gifts sustain 
our work. We also appreciate those who cannot give financially, but who support the Center by encourag -
ing their communities to be involved.
CCR offers a special thank you to those who joined 
the Founders Circle whose members make lead -
ership gifts totaling $1,000 or more to the Center during the year, and with that, provide critical core support.
    Thelma Newman Society
We also welcome and thank the newest members of the Thelma Newman Planned Giving Society, a group of individuals who decided to include CCR in their estate plans or established annuities with the Center. These gifts build our endowment, ensuring CCR’s progressive legal work for future generations.
Richard Aronson & Joyce Kirschner
Ann Shapiro
Mari Vlastos
If you would like to find out more about joining the Founders Circle or making a planned gift to CCR, contact Sara Beinert at 212-614-6448 or SBeinert@CCRjustice.org
Our donors and supporters make our cutting-edge 
human rights work possible. Thank you so much!
The individuals listed joined between April 7, 2010 – October 1, 2010Sue Bryant
Karen Burkhardt
James T. Campen 
  and Phyllis Ewen
Jeremy Cowan
Larry D. Doores  
and Janet Wolfe
Solveig Eskedahl
Richard M. Goodman
Richard A. GriggJ. William Ingeman
Martin and 
 Carolyn Karcher
Sylvia Law
Ida J. Lewenstein
Alice Miller
Joseph Morton
Rosalind Petchesky
Claire Reed
Natalie Zemon DavisOur Thanks to Our DonorsCCR’s 2010 Ella Baker Program
CCR’s Ella Baker Program was created to honor of the fearless civil rights leader, Ella Baker, who believed in training young leaders involved in social justice movements, to carry on the struggle(s) in future generations. Because of Ella, CCR holds as part of its mandate a duty to: “to train the next generation of constitutional and human rights attorneys” and does so each summer through our Ella Baker Program, a summer internship program for social justice advocates from law schools and universities across the country.
Hundreds apply each year, of which, CCR selects 
twelve or thirteen. The “Ellas” work on active CCR cases, and provide much needed support while learning a great deal. Their work consists of legal research and writing, and more: interns attend weekly discussions with scholars, activists, and clients on such key topics as human rights, racial and economic justice, government misconduct, and corporate accountability.
The newly created Gregory H. Finger Fellowship 
(described elsewhere in this newsletter) will provide a stipend to a student interested in working on Racial Justice issues.
This past summer’s program wound down with the 
annual friendly kickball game against the ACLU’s interns in Brooklyn’s Prospect Park, with CCR winning a close one, 9-8. The event was all in good fun and allowed both groups’ interns to share their summer experiences. We ended the summer with a Farewell Reception, where CCR’s board and staff paid their respects to all of the interns’ exceptional work. Thank you, 2010 Ella Bakers, for all your amazing work!
Two Ella Bakers at CCR’s annual kickball game vs. the ACLU. tk
The Copelon Fund for Gender Justice
Continuing Rhonda’s Vision
In May, the Center lost our dear friend, former staff attorney, long time Board 
member and pioneering human rights advocate, Rhonda Copelon. We are grateful that Rhonda was able to join us to celebrate the creation of her Copelon Fund for Gender Justice. Just weeks before her passing, surrounded by friends, family and former students, Rhonda announced this incredible legacy gift and shared her reasons for establishing it at CCR: her belief that CCR is unique, takes on cases considered too difficult by others, and has a track record of creatively using the law to push for cutting edge social change. 
Rhonda was always challenging those around her. With the Copelon Fund for 
Gender Justice, she left one last challenge to everyone: to join her by building the Fund and continue her work for justice. In order to receive the full amount of her generous bequest, CCR must “match” her gift with funds raised from other sources. She was calling on her community to fulfill her vision.
The Copelon Fund for Gender Justice is dedicated to deepening CCR’ s historic body of intersectional work, building 
upon Rhonda’s lifelong efforts, which will inject a gender perspective, LGBTQ, and a robust class/race analysis into 
our litigation. The Fund will also seek to defend women and gender dissidents who are often the first targets of religious extremism in the U.S. and abroad. With this mandate we have a number of impactful new gender justice cases under development and look forward to keeping our supporters updated on these exciting new efforts.
666 Broadway, 7th Floor, New York, NY 10012 • www.CCRjustice.org
The Center for Constitutional Rights is dedicated to advancing and protecting the rights guaranteed by the United States Constitution and  
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Founded in 1966 by attorneys who represented civil rights movements in the South, CCR is a  
non-profit legal and educational organization committed to the creative use of law as a positive force for social change.1 Targeted Killings
1 Challenging  
 Green Scare
2 Letter from  
 Vince Warren
4 Racial Justice
5 Ensuring Rights  
 of Immigrants
6 Gaza Flotilla 
7 Military Contractors
8 FBI Raids of Activists
8 Greg Finger Foundation
9 Ella Baker Program
9 Thank youInside
Photo by Jim Block