Thanks to your support, our clients 
who have spent more than a decade 
in extreme and unrelenting isolation, 
will be released into the general prison 
population where they will finally be 
allowed to hug their loved ones, talk to their friends, and feel the sun on their 
faces.
On September 1, CCR reached a historic 
settlement with the state of California 
that ends indefinite solitary confinement 
in California state prisons. The New York 
Times editorialized: “meaningful reform 
got a big shove in the right direction. In 
a sweeping, unprecedented class-action 
settlement, California officials have 
agreed to a drastic overhaul of the state’s 
CCR’s expert reports on the impact of longterm solitary confinement were featured 
in an article on the front page of the New York Times science section.
Make justice possible! Donate online at: CCRjustice.org/donateLandmark Agreement Ends Indefinite 
Solitary Confinement in California
continued on page 3
On September 11, CCR filed a reply brief in 
further support of our request for the emergency 
release of our client, Tariq Ba Odah. Imprisoned at 
Guantánamo for 13 years despite being cleared for 
release, Tariq has been on hunger strike to protest 
this injustice for over eight years. He currently weighs 74 pounds and is gravely ill.
After filing our motion in June, the government 
requested multiple extensions before finally 
opposing. In doing so, Guantánamo’s Senior 
Medical Officer conceded that Ba Odah’s condition 
is “dangerous.” Fighting for Life Beyond Guantánamo
continued on page 3
CCR’s Omar Farah outside the courthouse where he urged a 
court to release his client Tariq Ba Odah, who is “on the precipice 
of death.”Join us on the frontlines for social justice WINTER 20152Together we are a force for justice
Thanks to the generosity and political courage of donors like  
you, the Center accomplished a lot of incredible things this 
year (see below for highlights of what you made possible).
These battles were hard fought, against well-resourced  
opposition, and we were only able to prevail because of YOU.When you stand with CCR, you stand for the human and civil 
rights of ALL people and against the powers that be and the status quo. 
THANK YOU for making that choice!
What (Else) You Made 
Possible in 2015!
• A blow against high-level impunity for 
post-9/11 human rights abuses in Turkmen 
v. Ashcroft  when the judge allowed the 
Center’s claims against Ashcroft and other Bush officials to move forward;
• Victory for our clients!  The removal 
of four Muslim American men who 
resisted coercion by the FBI to spy on 
their communities from the “No Fly List,” 
enabling them to freely travel for the first 
time in 5+ years;
• Implementation of numerous reforms to the New York City Police Department’s 
(NYPD) use of stop-and-frisk to comport 
with the U.S. constitution; and
• A huge win in court recognizing that New 
Jersey Muslims who have been subjected 
to the NYPD’s program of blanket, 
suspicionless surveillance stated a valid claim of discrimination on the basis of their religion.Sara Rios, in Memorium
Sara Rios passed 
away in September 
after a long battle 
with ALS. CCR 
was grateful to  
have had Sara 
as a part of our 
community for so 
many years—first as a staff attorney, 
and later as a 
champion at the 
Ford Foundation, where she directed the 
Human Rights and Justice docket from 2005-2011. It was Sara’s championship 
within Ford that got CCR our first-
ever Guantánamo grant, in 2005. This 
grant opened the floodgates for other 
foundations and donors to support this then-controversial work. Without Sara’s 
support, the Center would not have been 
able to lead the GTMO fight for the past 13 years. We will miss Sara’s commitment to 
justice and her love for CCR.
Sara Rios, CCR staff  
member from 1987-1994Vince Warren,  
Executive Director
3Tariq’s attorney, Omar Farah 
said: 
“If the president cannot 
compel the agencies of his own 
administration to stand down in this case in order to pave the 
way for the urgent release of 
a dangerously weak 74-pound man who was cleared for 
release more than six years ago, 
then he will almost certainly 
fail to close the prison in what 
remains of his second term.”
CCR has been doing everything 
within our power to force 
the Obama administration’s 
hand. In July, Rolling Stone  
magazine featured a piece 
about Tariq written by 
Farah. The New York Times Editorial Board excoriated 
the Obama administration for 
its “senseless” opposition to 
Tariq’s motion for release and 
recalcitrance regarding closing the prison. Yet officials are unmoved.
As we press for Tariq’s release, 
CCR continues to represent 
prisoners in hearings before the Periodic Review Board 
(PRB), the outcome of which 
determines their eligibility for 
release. In October, because 
of CCR’s efforts, the PRB cleared our client, Mohammed Kamin. Moving men from the indefinite detention to the cleared category is a necessary 
step for the prison’s closure. 
Thanks to your generous  
support, CCR has taken on 
new clients and visited Guantá -
namo twice in recent months to prepare for these pivotal PRB hearings.Life Beyond Guantánamo (continued)solitary confinement system.”
This tremendous victory would never have 
been possible without your steadfast support. 
We compiled an unprecedented body of expert 
research for this case and spent countless hours in depositions—expenses covered entirely by 
you, our loyal donors. The impact has been 
far ranging, with observers asking if this is the 
beginning of the end of solitary confinement in 
the U.S.
The struggle has been led all along by people in prison and their families. It was incarcerated 
activists who first brought the case that became 
Ashker v. Governor of California  and who 
organized the hunger strikes that made the 
barbaric reality of solitary a political and 
policy issue. Their organizing efforts—in the face of unimaginable obstacles—have been 
extraordinary. 
To watch a video that CCR produced featuring 
our clients, learn more about the settlement terms, or read any of the dozens of articles about the 
settlement, visit: CCRjustice.org/Pelican-Bay .
Solitary Confinement  (continued)
A handwritten note from Mohammed Kamin to his CCR attorney, Shayana Kadidal.Thanks to the generous support of the Bertha 
Foundation, and additional funding from 
the Wallace Action Fund, the Open Society 
Foundations and the David Rockefeller Fund, 
CCR’s Bertha Justice Institute (BJI) is training 
the next generation of movement lawyers on a larger scale than ever before.
This summer over 1,000 participants came 
together to envision radical change and continue 
building the legal arm of the burgeoning 
#BlackLivesMatter movement.
The #Law4BlackLives conference, organized by 
CCR’s BJI together with several co-sponsors, 
took place in Harlem, NYC, on July 31 and Au -
gust 1. The convening was an historic gathering of lawyers, law students, legal workers, activ -
ist, artists and jailhouse lawyers prioritizing the 
voices and leadership of people of color.
Connecting past and present, law and action, 
vision and nuts and bolts, the conference featured 
plenaries, caucuses, workshops, panels, art, 
organizing spaces and more.
#Law4BlackLives explored how legal advocates 
can work collaboratively with activists and 
organizers on a range of issues—from defending 
the civil rights of protesters to drafting 
transformative local and federal policy to 
advancing innovative international human rights advocacy strategies. 
The convening also surfaced current legal needs 
from the ground, identified legal strategies, and 
brought together a community of like-minded 
individuals to build a deeper collective under -
standing of how legal advocates can develop the power of movements.
CCR has played a crucial role in helping build 
legal infrastructure in Ferguson and Baltimore 
in the wake of the local uprisings after the police 
killings of Michael Brown and Freddie Gray. #Law4BlackLives is about continuing and broadening that work by bringing together the 
people who can—and are—making it happen! 
Unable to attend? Watch online at:  
www.law4blacklives.org
4Law for Black Lives
#Law4BlackLives participants build a deeper collective under -
standing of how legal advocates can build the power of move -
ments; CCR’s Vince Warren gives an inspiring RadTalk on “What 
Is Possible When The Legal Community Stands With Black Lives”; Grassroots organizers reflect on the current state of the #Black -
LivesMatter movement at Harlem’s historic Riverside Church.5Upholding Academic Freedom and the 
First Amendment
With your support CCR is 
representing Professor Steven 
Salaita, who, as you may recall, 
was terminated from a tenured 
position at the University of 
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC). The University’s  
reasoning? Personal tweets  
on Salaita’s Twitter account 
criticizing the Israeli govern -
ment’s assault on Gaza in  
2014.
Emails released pursuant to the 
Illinois Freedom of Information 
Act (FOIA) reveal pressure 
from wealthy University donors who threatened to 
withdraw financial support 
if UIUC did not fire Salaita. Such pressure is consistent 
with broader efforts by outside 
groups to silence Palestinian 
human rights activists on 
campuses across the country, as documented by CCR’s 
recent report with Palestine 
Legal, The Palestine Exception to Free Speech: A Movement Under Attack in the U.S.    
In November 2014, CCR’s 
co-counsel filed a successful 
Illinois FOIA case. In January 2015, CCR and co-counsel 
filed a complaint in federal court on behalf of Professor 
Salaita against UIUC and 
its officials for violating his 
constitutional rights to free speech and due process and 
for breach of his employment 
contract. UIUC, not 
surprisingly, moved to dismiss 
the case. 
On August 6, 2015, the motion 
was denied in major part, noting that, “[i]f the Court 
accepted the University’s 
argument, the entire American 
academic hiring process as it 
now operates would cease to exist.” A few hours later, the 
Chancellor of UIUC resigned, 
and a few weeks later, the Provost did as well.
With this case, CCR aims to not 
only represent Professor Salaita 
and seek his reinstatement and 
compensation for the harm done 
to him, but to let universities and others know that they 
cannot get away with punishing 
speech critical of Israel.
Amanda Alexander is the founding director of the Prison & Family Justice Project at University of Michigan Law School. Amanda shares how CCR is critical to developing the next generation of 
lawyers supporting the fight for justice:
 “As an Ella Baker fellow in 2011, CCR taught me how lawyers 
can use the law as a tool to support social justice movements. 
I was thrilled to have been a part of the discussion at CCR’s 
#Law4BlackLives convening, on how the law can bolster the #BlackLivesMatter movement, and to work with CCR at the 
conference to train other legal practitioners so that they too can 
support this important movement.”Where Are They Now? An Update from the Next GenerationDownload CCR and Palestine Legal’s new report online at: CCRjustice.org/the-palestine-exception
The Center for Constitutional Rights is dedicated to advancing and protecting the rights guaranteed by the United States Constitution and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Founded in 1966 
by attorneys who represented civil rights movements in the South, CCR is a non-profit legal and educational organization committed to the creative use of law as a positive force for social change.www.CCRjustice.org 
In This Issue:
Landmark Agreement  
Ends Indefinite Solitary  
Confinement in California
Historic #Law4BlackLives 
Convening In NYC
New Report Documenting  
Efforts to Silence U.S.  
ActivistsFighting for Life Beyond 
Guantánamo
Join us on the frontlines for  
social justice!
CCRjustice.org/donate666 Broadway, 7th Floor, New York, NY 10012 
For 30 years, both as an activist and as a funder, I have 
turned to CCR for work that is commensurate with the 
human rights and constitutional challenges of our time. 
No organization has proven more acutely responsive. They do not always win, at least not right away; but they always raise the most essential issues to the level of public 
and legal attention. And they always raise the bar toward the justice that 
we seek and that oppressed individuals and classes of plaintiffs deserve.  
My gratitude for the staff of CCR is boundless.
 
- Harriet Barlow, CCR Donor and Foundation Supporter (the HKH Foundation)
CCR does not accept corporate or government funding. We rely on your  
dedication and generosity to fuel the fight for justice. Please give today!
“
”Why I support CCR ...