CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookWhen the men at 
Guantánamo Bay went on hunger strike in early Feb-ruary, one of CCR’s clients described the recently-im-
posed, more restrictive and abusive conditions that sparked the strike as going “back to 2006 rules.” In this short description, Ghaleb Al-Bihani summed up a decade-plus of the “War on Terror” started by the Bush Admin-istration. Guantánamo is hardly the only distinguishing mark of this new era. Since the post-9/11 war paradigm began, CCR has been at the vanguard of defending a war on democracy, the rule of law, and human rights; this vital work has continued on several fronts in recent months.  Indefinite detention without charge or trial is increasingly being upstaged by an even worse threat to due process: targeted killing. In February, CCR and the ACLU’s lawsuit, Al-Aulaqi v. Panetta, challenging the killing of three U.S. citizens, including a teenage boy, got an unexpected boost when a White Paper attempting to justify the target-ed killing of Americans was leaked to the press. As with the infamous Bush torture memos, the White Paper insists that the president’s decision to kill U.S. citizens is unreviewable by any court—a dangerous rationale we hope the courts will soon reject once and for all. Then, on the eve of John Brennan’s CIA director confirmation hearings, CCR published a blog about the memo on Counterpunch, “White Paper, Dark Deeds,”condemning Brennan’s role in both the Bush torture program and Obama’s targeted killing program. Government officials should not be rewarded for, or in spite of, their sup-port for immoral and unconstitutional policies.  And CCR Executive Director Vince Warren talked at length about what’s at stake regarding drones, the White Paper, and Brennan’s nomina-tion on Bill Moyers’ show. CCR has also been working with Nation re -
porter Jeremy Scahill to promote his powerful upcoming film and book by the same title, Dirty Wars, which delve deep into America’s global, covert drone wars. Dirty Wars will bring this critical and underreported story of the human impact of these “wars” to a broad audience.After more than 14 years of work by CCR in support of a citywide movement that has made stop and frisk a central issue in New York City politics, Floyd, et al. v. City of New 
York has gone to trial. 
New York’s “trial of the century,” as it has rightly become known, began on March 18th. On the first day of the trial, the courtroom was packed and two additional overflow rooms were opened to accommodate the hundreds of New Yorkers who came to the courthouse to witness history firsthand.
CCR’s first two witnesses took the stand on the first day. 
Devin Almonor, the son of a retired NYC cop who was only 13 when he was first stopped, recounted how he had been handcuffed for over 6 hours and taunted by police who questioned him, “Why are you crying like a girl?” Almonor told the court, “I don’t want anyone else to go through this.” David Floyd spoke openly about his first experience being stopped, “I felt frustrated, humiliated. 
CCR’s Nahal Zamani (far right) has worked with allies and community 
groups to organize rallies and marches outside the courthouse throughout the duration of the trial. Spring 2013
Putting Stop-and-Frisk on Trial
continued on page 3
A New Era in the War on Terror
continued on page 4
Photo by Kevin GayCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookAs I write, CCR is in the middle of what has been 
hailed as an “historic” trial challenging New York City’s stop-and-frisk program as racially discriminatory and unconstitutional, Floyd v. City 
of New York. The courtroom is packed every day; it’s been on the front page of the New York Times and in literally hun-
dreds of articles and newscasts. On the second day of the trial, the New York City Council Speaker Christine Quinn announced her support for a crucial piece of legislative reform addressing the stop-and-frisk problem, the creation of an inspector general for the NYPD. This reform will also address the NYPD’s illegal spying on Muslim communities in New Jersey we are challenging in Hassan v. City of New 
York.
It’s been exciting. But it wasn’t always like this. “This trial is 
14 years in the making,” Darius Charney, our lead counsel in Floyd, told the court on the first day. In 1999, CCR filed 
a lawsuit against the NYPD that led to the dismantling of the infamous Street Crimes Unit. At the time, we didn’t get daily calls from reporters. Nonetheless, it was a milestone for a legal organization to join the communities that had long been fighting abusive and discriminatory policing.   
The same is true for our litigation on behalf of Guantánamo 
detainees. At a time when too many were cowered by the virulent militarism of the so-called War on Terror and the accompanying attack on civil liberties and human rights alike, CCR stepped in to take on indefinite detention. A decade later we are still at the forefront of the Gitmo bar, having established important rights for detainees at the Supreme Court along the way. While many have forgotten about Gitmo, we have not. Just last month we brought the issue to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and helped bring media attention to the ongoing hunger strike there. 
This is the CCR way. We are often the first legal organiza -
tion willing to take on a risky or controversial cause, and no 
matter how long the fight, we never cut and run. That’s why, four years after George Bush left office, we are still doggedly fighting for accountability for the Bush torture team. It’s why we filed a massive petition with the International Criminal Court two years ago seeking for the first time ever to hold Vatican officials responsible for their role in covering up the sex abuse crisis in the church, and why we continue to press the case of survivors in every possible venue. We’ve been so dogged in that effort that before the conclave chose the new Pope a Vatican spokesman huffed, “cardinals can decide themselves without asking SNAP for advice,” refer -
ring to our client, the Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests. 
It’s why we sued to invalidate the federal Animal Enterprise 
Terrorism Act when no one else would, because it violates the First Amendment rights of animal rights activists. And it’s why we will appeal the district court’s ruling last month dismissing the case. 
When I look at the long road we have traveled to get to this 
moment of the Floyd trial, I remember the words that Martin Luther King often said: “The moral arc of the universe is long, but it bends toward justice.” But King also said, “Hu-man progress never rolls in on wheels of inevitability.” It’s up to us do the bending, and that’s just what CCR has been doing and will continue to do. 
—Vincent WarrenLetter from the Executive Director
2CCR is on the ballot to receive funding from CREDO Mobile this year, and we need your vote!  
The more votes we get, the more money we’ll receive from CREDO. Voting is free and a great way  to support our work.
Go to credomobile.com/ballot and vote for us in the roster of progressive groups they support.  
You don’t have to be a CREDO member to vote. Simply follow the instructions on the page to sign a  petition for CREDO Action, and vote for CCR!
Vince Warren in front of the White House at the launch of the Right to 
Heal initiative.CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook
3Putting Stop-and-Frisk on Trial 
continued from cover
It was on my own block. I wasn’t doing anything … I 
was just heading home.” On the second day of the trial, Nicholas Peart, while describing a stop in which he was handcuffed and forced into the back of a police car, broke down into tears before the courtroom.
The Floyd challenge goes to the very heart of the poli -
cies behind the NYPD’s policing tactics and is part of a 
larger citywide movement to end racially discrimina-tory policing and the siege of Black and Latino neigh-borhoods by the NYPD. While resistance to policing practices is long standing, the movement gained new vigor in response to the horrific 1997 shooting of Amadou Diallo, an unarmed Black man standing in his doorway who was gunned down by the NYPD in a hail of 41 bullets. Part of that response was CCR’s landmark case Daniels v. City of New York, filed in 1999 and settled 
in 2003, which led to the disbanding of the infamous NYPD Street Crimes Unit. Daniels also required the city to provide quarterly stop-and-frisk data to CCR, which led to the Floyd case when it became clear the city was not abiding by the settlement and that the number of unconstitutional stops had grown exponentially.
Floyd brings full circle the movement that arose in 1997, 
when thousands of New Yorkers took to the streets chanting, “It’s a wallet, not a gun!”—a reference to Diallo’s fatal attempt to show police officers his ID and an encapsulation of all that is wrong about the racially biased practices of the NYPD.
CCR, Communities United for Police Reform, and 
other allies and partners are seeking a comprehensive, collaborative process that brings all stakeholders to the table—residents, community leaders, church leaders, business owners, police officers, NYC officials, attor -
neys in the case, and others—to hammer out the specific remedies that will work best for all New Yorkers. 
No court case is more important to the future of New 
York City than this one. This trial is about creating a po -
lice department that works for and is accountable to the people and communities it serves. It is about obtaining justice for Amadou Diallo and the many hundreds of thousands of New Yorkers who are stopped and frisked each year. It is about holding the NYPD accountable for years of unreasonable, suspicionless and racially discriminatory stops.
For updates as the Floyd trial progresses, visit: http://CCRjustice.org/floyd-trial-updates 
Darius Charney, CCR attorney and lead counsel in Floyd, at a pre-trial 
press conference.Community members and allies at CCR’s historic Floyd trial.
To raise public awareness of the issues at stake in Floyd, CCR has 
mounted an extensive media campaign. 
Photo by Kevin GayCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookMeanwhile, CCR has kept up our fight 
to shutter the prison at Guantánamo Bay. On January 11, we marched with a broad coalition of human rights groups from the Supreme Court to the White House to protest 11 years of indefinite detention, and we have sup-ported the hunger strikers’ peaceful protest with letters to Congress and Defense Secretary Hagel and multiple press statements demanding that Pres-ident Obama respond to this humani-tarian crisis. In the midst of the hunger strike, CCR participated in a dramatic hearing before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IA-CHR), which was held in response to a request from CCR and our partners. CCR attorney Omar Farah presented at the hearing, complementing our written submissions. The hearing received extensive press coverage, as the Obama administration was unable to answer the IACHR’s two questions: Does the United States still intend to close Guantánamo? And, if so, what steps are currently underway to do so?  And in February, CCR joined filmmak-ers to premier a film about our client, Djamel Ameziane, ISN 310: Djamel Ameziane’s Decade in Guantánamo. As long as Guantánamo remains open for business, CCR will continue to de-mand its closure in every way we can think of.
In recent months, CCR was honored 
to bring the first bit of accountability to survivors of War on Terror-inspired torture. In the fall, in Al-Quraishi v. 
Nakhla and L-3 Inc., CCR reached the first ever settlement against private military contractors for torture, on behalf of 71 survivors. In another first, CCR is slated to go to trial this year in Al Shimari v. CACI, et al. This will 
be the first time torture at Abu Ghraib has been put on trial, and the first trial against a private military contractor for its role in torture. And when Zero 
Dark Thirty, a film suggesting that torture played a role in the success -
ful hunt for Osama bin Laden, was nominated for an Academy Award, CCR spoke up to condemn the re-sulting debate over whether torture “works” and reiterated that the ef -
ficacy of torture is irrelevant. Torture is always wrong. If we are true to this value, there is no place for a debate. Both the leaked White Paper and Zero Dark Thirty, and the resulting debates around them, were unexpected devel -
opments, but CCR acted fast to ensure that our unique and important per -spective was part of those discussions.  
CCR is committed to doing everything 
we can to return to the days before a War on Terror exacerbated U.S. human rights and civil liberties violations; days when we as a nation did not debate whether torture works because we knew it was wrong; days when our government did not publish secret legal memos to justify illegal and dev-astating policies already in practice. 
4A New Era in the War on Terror 
continued from cover
Top left clockwise: CCR attorney Omar Farah testifying at a hearing on Guantánamo at the IACHR; 
16-year-old Abdulrahman Al-Aulaqi, one of three U.S. citizens killed by drones whose unlawful death CCR is challenging; U.S. drone; CCR and allies in Times Square raising awareness of the hunger strike at Gitmo and demanding the prison’s closure.
Jeremy Scahill takes us inside America’s expanding covert wars in Dirty 
Wars: The World Is a Battleﬁeld , released by Nation Books this April.
In June, the documentary feature ﬁlm of the same title will be released 
in the U.S. Dirty Wars is directed by Richard Rowley, written by Jeremy Scahill and David Riker, and produced by Scahill, Anthony Arnove and Brenda Coughlin. The ﬁlm features CCR’s client in Al-Aulaqi v. Panetta 
(see above story).
Glenn Greenwald writes, “[T]he the ﬁlm is one of the most important I’ve seen in years: 
gripping and emotionally affecting in the extreme, with remarkable, news-breaking revelations…”
For more information, including upcoming screenings and events, or to order the book, 
go to: www.dirtywars.org
CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook
5On March 19th, 10 years to the day when the U.S. invaded 
Iraq, CCR launched the Right to Heal initiative alongside Iraq Veterans Against the War, the Organization for Wom-en’s Freedom in Iraq and the Federation of Workers Coun-cils and Unions in Iraq with the support of MADRE, the War Resisters League and Harvard’s International Human Rights Clinic. This new joint project was started to ensure the U.S. takes concrete steps for health care, accountability and reparations, as well as to raise awareness of how the invasion and occupation has affected the lives and health of Iraqi and Afghan communities and U.S. service members—for whom the war is far from over.
Those of us living in war-impacted communities continue 
to be affected by the long-term health and environmental impacts of the war, including post-traumatic stress disor-der, traumatic brain injuries, military sexual trauma, ram-pant birth defects, high cancer rates, suicides, and a new generation of orphaned children. These lasting impacts are the result of the U.S. military’s use of certain munitions; the consequences of the failure to treat the physical and mental injuries suffered by service members; and the prevalence and far reaching consequences of gender-based violence as a weapon and by-product of war.
The initiative launched with a request for a hearing to the 
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, a press conference and reading of testimonies from veterans and Iraqis in front of the White House, a sign-on letter in sup-port of the request, a new website, media appearances, and public events in NYC, D.C. and Boston. 
We are proud to stand side-by-side with those directly im-
pacted by the atrocities of war to hold the U.S. accountable and demand the right to heal.
This is just the beginning. 
For more information about the Right to Heal visit: 
www.righttoheal.orgHealing Iraq—And Iraq War Veterans
CCR’s Amnah Almukhtar reads a testimonial from Haweeja, Iraq, at the 
launch of the Right to Heal initiative.By Omar Farah, CCR Staff Attorney
Tariq Ba Odah was born in Yemen, 
but lived almost of all of his life be-fore his imprisonment in Saudi Ara-bia. He was sent to Guantánamo in February 2002 when he was around 24 years old. His habeas petition is stayed in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia, in part be-cause of his compromised health.
The U.S. Department of Defense 
has been holding Tariq in solitary confinement-like conditions since my last visit to Guantánamo in Decem-ber 2012. Tariq is isolated from other prisoners because he has been on a 6-year, peaceful hunger strike to protest his indefinite detention. He has maintained his hunger strike throughout the years because, in his words, it “is the only peaceful way I can show the magnitude of the injus-tice I suffer.”
Tariq is force-fed daily. He is strapped 
to a restraint chair, a rubber tube is forced down his nose, and a liquid di -
etary supplement is pumped into his stomach. He is only permitted outside of his cell for 2-4 hours per day, but he is often too weak to take advantage of the time he’s given. Tariq has virtually no human contact. No independent medical expert has ever assessed the impact of extended hun -
ger striking on his body, but there can be no doubt that he is need of urgent, sophisticated medical care. Like most other Guantánamo prisoners, Tariq has never been charged with a crime. But as a result of the moratorium on transfers to Yemen, he has no way out of the prison.
Guantánamo Client Proﬁle:  
Tariq Ba Odah
CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookRecognizing the power of having our clients be able to 
confront their opponents in court, CCR quickly organized to bring a delegation of seven Ugandans to a January 7th hearing in Springfield, MA. The court date was set in late November 2012, so we didn’t have much time to figure out all of the details, but with the generous support of a few stalwart funders, we bought plane tickets, secured visas and the group of activists from Uganda arrived in New York less than two days before Scott Lively’s motion to dismiss our case against him. We drove two packed vans to Springfield early in the morning on the day of the hearing so that our clients could face Lively, attend a rally and press conference that CCR organized outside the courthouse and pack the courtroom. Our efforts paid off.
The judge welcomed our clients by acknowledging that 
he had been to Uganda, mentioned that the court opened two overflow rooms because of the tremendous support for the case, and in an uncharacteristic move for any court, acknowledged our clients’ respective gender identities, but said he would use the term “gay” not to be insensitive but as a general matter. On several occasions during the hear-ing, he mentioned that the defendants were making the plaintiffs’ argument for them, and even went so far as to liken Lively’s role as described in the case to a Nazi Minis-ter of Propaganda.
As readers of our newsletter will recall, CCR filed Sexual 
Minorities Uganda (SMUG) v. Lively in March 2012 on behalf of Ugandan activists against Reverend Scott Lively. The suit alleges that Lively conspired to deprive the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex (LGBTI) com-munity in Uganda of their fundamental rights, including through his involvement in creating the “Kill the Gays Bill.”
Pepe Julian Onziema, a member of the delegation and a 
leader of SMUG, perhaps said it best: “Coming face to face with the man who has caused us so much pain is important to me. We want him held accountable for the escalating homophobia and persecution in Uganda. This case is about making it clear to people who have exported their hate agenda to Uganda that their actions have a very real effect on us and they must stop.”While the judge’s decision is expected any day now, this case has already been successful as it has shown Lively and other anti-gay forces that the LGBTI community will not stand idly by while it is attacked and that it will seek to hold its perpetrators accountable. 
For more information visit: www.CCRjustice.org/LGBTUganda. 
6
CCR Takes Anti-Gay Christian Right to Court
Pam Spees, CCR attorney and lead counsel in SMUG v. Lively, addresses 
the media and supporters at a press conference following the hearing.
Pepe Julian Onziema, SMUG Program Director and Advocacy Ofﬁcer, is 
interviewed outside the courthouse in Springﬁeld, MA. 
God Loves Uganda is a powerful exploration of the evangelical campaign to change 
African culture with values imported from America’s Christian Right. Directed by Academy Award winner Roger Ross Williams, it depicts the terrifying climate that CCR’s SMUG v. Lively clients face. Find a local screening of the ﬁlm by visiting: www.godlovesuganda.com. To host a screening yourself, contact: allie@picturemotion.com.
CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook
7By Rachel Meeropol, CCR Senior Staff Attorney
Lawyers at CCR and Joshua Sohn of DLA Piper filed Gulino 
v. Board of Education of the City of New York in 1996 on behalf of a class of African-American and Latino teachers who were required to take an unvalidated licensing test mid-career despite advanced degrees and good evaluations. The test resulted in disproportionately high numbers of people of color losing their certification and benefits. Despite categorizing them as unqualified, the city kept them in the classroom with the same course load and responsibilities, but stripped of union membership, benefits and salary. 
The case went to trial in 2003, a few months after I started 
working at CCR. Straight out of law school, I had never studied Title VII and I didn’t know much about the issues involved, but I hung around a couple of evenings to watch Barbara Olshansky, lead CCR attorney on the case, meet with dozens of concerned NYC teachers at our offices. And I sat with many of these same plaintiffs and class members day after day during the lengthy bench trial, to watch Bar-bara and others painstakingly document the impact years of unvalidated and unfair tests had on teachers of color in the city.
The case was heard by the legendary Constance Baker 
Motley. Judge Motley was a study in firsts: the first African-American woman to argue before the Supreme Court; the first appointed to the federal judiciary; and the first elected to New York State Senate. She was a passionate civil rights advocate and thus her decision against the Gulino plaintiffs after that lengthy trial was a considerable blow. Judge Mot-ley found in favor of the state and the city, holding that the two challenged tests were “job-related.”
An appeal followed. Barbara and other long time CCR staff 
had moved on and a new class of lawyers, legal work-ers, and organizers carried on the work. CCR, DLA Piper and the teachers hung in, and sure enough, in 2006, Judge Motley’s ruling was eventually overruled. Six years after that, a new district court judge found that one of the tests was not job-related and found the city liable. Still, the story is not over. The city has filed another appeal, and CCR, co-counsel, and the teachers who have been standing up to the city on this issue for 17 years continue their fight.Justice Delayed, Not Denied
In 2011, media reports revealed that post 9/11, the NYPD created a secret human mapping and surveillance program targeting Muslim Ameri -
can communities in New York, New Jersey, and beyond, solely on the basis of religion. After more than a decade, the program has produced no leads to terrorist activity.
In late January, CCR joined Has-
san, et al. v. City of New York, a fed-eral lawsuit challenging the NYPD’s discriminatory spying program. The suit was filed by Muslim Advocates in June 2012, on behalf of 11 individu-als, including a decorated Iraq war veteran, current and former Rutgers University students, and the owners and proprietors of a school for Mus -
lim girls, among others. The NYPD’s program contravenes decades of civil rights precedent and challenges bed-rock constitutional principles of equal protection under the law and the First Amendment guarantee of freedom of religion. 
CCR is holding the NYPD 
accountable for similar, race-based discriminatory policing practices in our case, Floyd v. City of New York, currently on trial in federal court in New York.
On Jan. 25, CCR and Muslim Advo -
cates filed our opposition to the city’s 
motion to dismiss the case.
For more information, visit: www.CCRjustice.org/hassan
CCR joins allies in front of 1 Police Plaza to 
protest the NYPD’s unlawful surveillance of Muslim Americans.Challenging NYPD Surveillance and IslamophobiaCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookCCR’s case requesting the International 
Criminal Court at The Hague open an investigation targeting high level Vati-can officials for their role in covering up and allowing rape and sexual violence of children by priests on behalf of the Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests (SNAP) continues despite the resignation of Pope Benedict. Peter Isely, SNAP Midwest Director, was in NYC on a speaking tour related to the resignation while SNAP Executive Director, David Clohessy, was busy in Rome also keeping the spotlight on the selection process and the legacy of the outgoing Pope. While in New York, Peter contributed this letter on the subject of the case and the ongoing struggle for justice:
CCR’s case filed on behalf of SNAP’s 
thousands of survivors of sexual assault by clergy around the world was an absolute tipping point in our struggle for justice, reform, and the rights of children. The historic filing finally addresses clearly and factually the profoundly international nature and scope of this child safety crisis and puts it where it belongs: before a world court of justice. The tens of thousands of pages of evidence submitted by CCR outline the global infrastructure with a clear command and control hierarchy. The evidence is overwhelming: there exists an entrenched pattern and practice in the Catholic church of concealing and transferring known sex offender clergy around the planet – a pattern that originates and is tolerated at the top of the church’s command structure at the Vatican. Yet, there has been no international criminal investigation or prosecution of these crimes and cover ups. Why? Sometimes part of the answer is almost comically simple, “Because no one has asked for it.” Now someone has. 
The new Pope, Francis, was both 
a Jesuit Provincial and a Cardinal Archbishop in Argentina. We have not seen the secret files of the priest abuse cases he must have dealt with, but you can be absolutely assured he had such cases come across his desk. The enor-mous church archives, especially the one at the Vatican containing at least 4,000 of the worst cases of pedophilia from around the world, have not been turned over to any law enforcement officials. The only country for which we have confirmed figures is the U.S., where years of exposure and public pressure, led by SNAP and other vic-tim groups, has led to court-ordered public disclosure of the number (but alarmingly, not the names or case histories) of known offender priests. According to the U.S. bishops’ own statistics, some 6,100 priests to date have been credibly reported to have raped or sexually assaulted children or minors over the past several decades. This likely means hundreds of thou-sands of victims over several genera-tions in the U.S. alone. If you extrapo-late the U.S. numbers, conservatively, there are at least 33,000 identified clerics around the world who have sexually assaulted children. That’s a global child safety crisis befitting the attention of the ICC.  
At the SNAP-CCR press and survivor 
outreach tour in Europe following our historic filing at The Hague in September 2011, we heard repeatedly, “Do you really believe that the Vatican or the Pope will ever be prosecuted?” A fair question. A pragmatic one. But, as a survivor, one gets tired of hearing it. In our last press event in 
Client Corner: New Pope, Same Old Story?
Barbara Blaine, SNAP Founder and President, and Peter Isely at a 2011 press conference in Rome,  
where CCR and SNAP “brought the ICC case to the Pope’s steps.”
8...Yet, there has been no international criminal investigation 
or prosecution of these crimes and cover ups. Why?  Sometimes part of the answer is almost comically simple,  “Because no one has asked for it.” Now someone has. CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookRome, I answered, “In all the cities 
we have visited, we have never had one reporter seriously question our evidence. We all know the crimes have been committed and we all know, more or less, who covered them up. We have the evidence, witnesses and proof. Yet, we are to conclude that nothing can be done because it has never been done? It’s the Vatican – im-possible. Why? In 2010, I stood outside St. Peter’s with SNAP leaders from the U.S. with documents obtained in court cases from Wisconsin, showing that Pope Benedict was directly involved in the cover up of the abuse of what the church concluded was at least 200 deaf children at St. John’s School for the Deaf. Reporters told us then, as the Italian police took us into custody for protesting, that there is not a chance in a million that Italian cases would be investigated. But, in fewer than two years, there are priests being pros-ecuted in Italy, deaf survivors have come forward in Venice, and an Italian survivor’s movement is underway. So, yes, I believe there will be a prosecu-tion if there is a real investigation. If the ICC is not here to protect children, why does it exist?” 
St. Francis of Assisi, the new Pope’s 
namesake, was the single greatest reformer in the history of the Catholic church and famously stood up to the Pope demanding a change in the hi-erarchy of the church. That’s what we survivors and CCR are doing in our filing: we are standing up to the Pope and the injustice built into the very structure of the church that directly led to children being harmed and leaves the door open for generations of children at risk. St. Francis said, “Start by doing what is necessary; then do what’s possible; and suddenly you are doing the impossible.” With people behind us like the dedicated and brilliant human rights attorneys and leaders at CCR, SNAP and CCR are doing what is necessary. Since our filing, hundreds of survivors world -
wide have come forward and we are holding the first SNAP International Conference in Dublin in April. We are truly a global movement for justice seeking to make it safe for children everywhere. Make way for the impossible.
Thank you to the 166 of you who became ﬁrst time donors in December—you helped us reach our goal 
of $50,000 and secure the match pledge!
9If you would like to ﬁnd out more about joining the Founders Circle or making a planned gift to CCR, contact Sara Beinert at 212-614-6448 
or SBeinert@CCRjustice.org. Our donors and supporters make our cutting-edge human rights work possible. Thank you so much!CCR offers a special thank you to those who joined the Founders Circle whose members make  
leadership gifts totaling $1,000 or more to the Center during the year, and so doing, provide  
critical core support. The individuals listed joined between Jun 16, 2012- Feb 15, 2013.
Mark L. Amsterdam
Radhika Balakrishnan  
 and David W. Gillcrist
Bo BarkerCharles and Linda BrainardOwen BrandJudith and Don BroderMichael CahillTim Caro  
 and Monique B. Mulder
Ava CheloffDouglas ColeDavid B. Cone  
 and Kellie Stoddart
Janet M. ConnE. Patrick Curry  
 and Susan B. Campbell
M. Pat DavisAnnette W. DickersonStephanie DidwaniaAlan DonovanMarc FalkoffCatherine FoleyJanet GallagherFelice M. Gelman  
 and Yoram Gelman
Carlos GoodmanLeonard C. GoodmanRev. Judith HanlonMarjorie HeinsMartin HennerEdward and Mary HermanZach Hochstadt  
 and Sadie Honey
Ann HopfenbeckKatya JestinGail K. JohnsonMiranda KaiserJinsoo H. KimDr. Hilda KnoblochJane KristofEmily KunreutherSabyl C. LandrumTimothy J. Lee  
and Eleanor McBride
Pearl A. LindenbaumLorraine LymanRichard and Marilyn MazessC. Victor McTeerSuzy MelkonianMarianne Mosher  
and Thomas Freeman
Wayne OuttenJames Polshek and Ellyn PolshekDavid RhodesStephen Rose  
 and Christina Cerna
Naomi SagerGordon Schiff  
 and Mardge Cohen
Susan ScottElizabeth  
 and Stephen Shafer
Daniel SleatorProf. Stephen S. SmithJoshua SohnBillie Taylor  
 and Timothy N. Taylor
Sue Lee K. TroutmanNajmeh VahidJoan VermeulenEllen YaroshefskyCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook
10Ways You Can Support CCR!
Make an online gift at www.CCRjustice.org/donatetoday.  It’s fast, easy, and secure, and your gift will go to work 
right away. Online gifts are a greener way to give—and reduce mailing expenses and supplies so more of your gift 
goes to programs. 
Consider making your gift recurring. These gifts provide CCR with a reliable, steady source of support making it possible for us to plan better and take on more cases. Sign up for a monthly or quarterly recurring gift on our website: www.CCRjustice.org/donatetoday.
Give the gift of CCR! Ask friends and family to make gifts to CCR in your honor as your holiday gift OR make gifts to CCR in honor of the folks on your shopping list. These gifts will pay tribute to our shared social justice values, while fueling CCR’s efforts to restore the Constitution and protect and extend human rights. Do this online at:  www.CCRjustice.org/giftsinhonor.
Donate stock. If you sell depreciated stock and give the proceeds to CCR, you may be able to claim the loss on your taxes, as well as the charitable deduction. If you donate appreciated securities to CCR, you may avoid capital gains taxes and receive a charitable deduction. Please contact CCR at 212-614-6489 for stock transfer instructions. 
Use social media and share the news. Follow @theCCR on Twitter and retweet us. Like “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook and share our posts. Subscribe to our email list at www.CCRjustice.org and forward our 
newsletters and action alerts to your friends. 
Host a house party to introduce friends and allies to CCR’s work and to fundraise for CCR.
Attend a local event if CCR is in your neighborhood—and bring a friend! If you are on our email list you will  receive invitations, though public events are also listed on our calendar at www.CCRjustice.org/calendar.
CCR Is Grateful to Our Foundation Funders for Their Support *
Anonymous (3) • The 1848 Foundation • The Alfred and Jane Ross Foundation • The Altschul Foundation • The Angelina Fund 
• The Bertha Foundation • The Blue Oak Foundation • The Chicago Community Foundation • The Community Foundation for the National Capital Region • craigslist Charitable Fund • The CS Fund/Warsh-Mott Legacy • Cultures of Resistance Network Foundation • The Epstein Teicher Philanthropies • The FireDoll Foundation • The Ford Foundation • Fowey Light Fund • The Frances and Benjamin Benenson Foundation • Franke Family Charitable Foundation • The Funding Exchange National Com-munity Funds • Gobioff Foundation • HKH Foundation • Institute of International Education • The Jewish Communal Fund • The JKW Foundation • Jon and Katherine Dart Charitable Foundation • The Key Foundation • Lee & Luis Lainer Family Foundation • The Lehman-Stamm Family Fund • The Liberty Hill Foundation • The Libra Foundation • The Lois and Irving Blum Foundation, Inc. • Morgan Stanley Smith Barney Global Impact Fund, Inc. • The Nathan Cummings Foundation, Inc. • The New York Community Trust • The Normandie Foundation • Open Society Foundations • Ralph E. Ogden Foundation, Inc. • Rockefeller Philanthropy Advisors • Samuel Rubin Foundation • The San Francisco Foundation • Schwab Charitable Fund • Silicon Valley Community Foundation • The Stewart R. Mott Foundation • The Summer Fund • The Tides Foundation • The Tom Fund at the National Philanthropic Trust • The Vanguard Charitable Endowment Program • The Vital Projects Fund, Inc. • The Wallace Global Fund
*The foundations listed above provided leadership-level grants of $5,000 or more between Jun 16, 2012- Feb 15, 2013.
CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook
11Aslihan Bulut, a CUNY 
law graduate, was an Ella Baker Fellow during the summer of 2004. No stranger to CCR, Aslihan spent her first year of law school working as a Turkish translator on CCR’s case Turkmen v. 
Ashcroft challenging harsh “drag net” immigration sweeps and long deten-tions immediately after 9/11. Because of the vital service she’d provided to CCR before participating in the summer program, she was awarded the Millspaugh Catlin Founda-tion Fellowship. Though the summer fellowship ended, Aslihan’s commitment to CCR did not; she has continued to volunteer her time to CCR as a Turkish translator, assisting Rachel Meeropol on the current version of the Turkmen case. While she 
chose not to practice law, Aslihan says it would have been “a dream” to work as an attorney at CCR because she is continually impressed by CCR’s courage to take on cases that would other-wise go unnoticed. We are very thankful for the important volunteer time she has contributed to CCR. Aslihan is currently the Program Coordina-tor and Librarian for Foreign Comparative and International Law at Harvard Law School.
For more information on Turkmen v. Ash-croft, visit: http://www.CCRjustice.org/
ourcases/current-cases/turkmen-v.-ashcroft  
Thelma Newman Society
We welcome and thank the newest members of the Thelma Newman Planned Giving Society, a group of individuals who decided to include CCR in their es-tate plans or established annuities with the Center. These gifts build our endowment, ensuring CCR’s progressive legal work for future generations.
Ric MacDowell
Ann E. Reinhart
Our donors and supporters make our cutting-edge human rights work possible. Thank you so much! 
The individuals listed joined between  Jun 16, 2012- Feb 
15, 2013.CCR in Brief….
In January CCR’s Bertha Social Justice Institute marked the 25th an-
niversary of our Ella Baker program and of training the next generation of people’s lawyers. It was great to see the Ella alumni who were able to join us at the reunion and we hope to see more of you this year!
In early March, plaintiffs in Al Shimari had their conspiracy claims 
against CACI PT dismissed, but were granted leave to replead the conspiracy between CACI PT and the U.S. military. Plaintiffs ﬁled an 
amended complaint, which includes signiﬁcant additional details of the conspiracy, in late March. One of the plaintiffs in the case, Salah 
Al-Ejaili, traveled to the U.S. for deposition in March.
CCR received a great ruling on our case challenging CMUs (segre-
gated prison units) which set a good precedent regarding the require-ments for a prisoner to adequately “exhaust” the administrative prison process before pursuing justice in court for prison abuse. We hope this ruling will support the efforts of activists on potentially thousands of 
prison cases!
In December, CCR and partners favorably settled a case, Argueta v. 
ICE, against Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) on behalf of 7 adults and a child, subjected to a series of warrantless and discrimi-natory home raids in clear violation of their constitutional rights.
In March, a federal judge approved a settlement of our long-standing 
lawsuit, NDLON v. ICE, demanding transparency in the controversial Secure Communities program—a major victory for open government and one step closer to curbing this dangerous program.
CCR is disappointed by, and plans to appeal, the judge’s narrow and 
rigid ruling in Blum v. Holder, our case challenging the constitution-ality of the Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act, which failed to address the First Amendment implications of our case.
In April, 22 Latino citizens, lawful permanent residents, and other 
victims of unlawful warrantless home raids by Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) obtained a settlement in Aguilar v. ICE, requiring new national policies for ICE agents conducting warrantless home operations, $1 million in damages and fees, and immigration beneﬁts or resolutions for eight plaintiffs.
On April 11, in light of reports that men detained at Guantánamo are 
participating in a widespread hunger-strike since early February, CCR and allies participated in a day of action to close Guantánamo and end indeﬁnite detention.
In April, a federal judge rejected the State of California’s attempt to 
dismiss CCR’s class action lawsuit challenging prolonged solitary conﬁne -
ment in the notorious Pelican Bay prison. This decision ensures that hun-
dreds of prisoners who have languished under inhumane, torturous and unconstitutional conditions will ﬁnally have their day in court!Update from an Ella: Aslihan Bulut
In February CCR lost an 
ardent and passionate sup-porter. Victor Honig, along with his wife Lorraine, was part of CCR’s Founders Circle family since 1971. Victor was a passionate man of profound integrity. He served in WWII as a radio operator and in 1948 met his wife Lorraine on a 
blind date spent marching in the May Day Parade. Victor was a fierce advocate for social justice, particularly in his commitment to working for low-income housing. He served on the Housing Commission of the San Francisco Human Rights Commission which he quit in a highly publicized controversy with then Mayor Alioto because of the city’s lack of regard for the need to preserve low-income housing. His wife, Lorraine, and their two daughters, Lisa and Emily, continue his legacy of sup-port. CCR will miss Victor’s passion and fierce commit-ment to social change.666 Broadway, 7th Floor, New York, NY 10012 • www.CCRjustice.org
The Center for Constitutional Rights is dedicated to advancing and protecting the rights guaranteed by the United States Constitution and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Founded in 1966 
by attorneys who represented civil rights movements in the South, CCR is a non-profit legal and educational organization committed to the creative use of law as a positive force for social change.Victor Honig
Breaking News:
NYC’s “Trial of the Century”
Demanding the Right to 
Heal for Iraqis and Veterans
CCR Takes Anti-Gay  
Evangelical to CourtWar on Terror Update
Details Inside
CCR mourns the loss of a dear 
friend, Donald Shaffer, who died at the age of 84. Born in Cleveland and raised in Brook-lyn, Don was a graduate of Brooklyn College and NYU Law School. Don’s work as a pro-bono lawyer and his life-long progressive activism were admired by all of us at CCR. He was a regular at our events, and his passion for civil rights and civil liberties was fierce despite the twinkle in his eye. Both Don and his late wife, Doris, were Founders Circle members for more than 20 years and partners of CCR for nearly 30 years. Their longtime commitment to CCR was honored at the 2005 Presi-dent’s Reception. Don and Doris were both extremely devoted to human rights and will be greatly missed by the CCR community.
In Memoriam
Donald Shaffer