JUSTICE TAKES A FIGHTWINTER  2020
1NEWSLETTER
Let’s be clear: popular democracy in the U.S. has been something 
we need to consistently strive for. It is no surprise that an 
electoral college system that was designed to supercharge slave-
holding states and then to submerge the Black vote in those 
states still weighs heavily on the democratic experiment. 
And it is also entirely consistent with this nation’s history that Black-
led social movements are offering the greatest opportunities for this 
nation to realize democratic ideals. Thanks to freedom fighters like 
you, the Center for Constitutional Rights has spent more than half a 
century providing legal support to Black-led movements that call on 
this nation to be the democracy it purports to be, and we are  
not stopping now.  
“We are in the midst of the most 
promising social justice movement  
in a generation.” 
As we navigate the effects of a recent election contested by white 
supremacist forces, we remember that we are in the midst of the 
most promising social justice movement in a generation! Vibrant 
grassroots movements centering the lived experiences of Black, 
Brown, and Indigenous people, women, immigrants, LGBTQIA+ 
people, and others who have borne the brunt of injustice are 
demanding change. 
The Center for Constitutional Rights was founded in 1966, in  
the heart of the civil rights movement. Black organizers and activists 
were putting their lives on the line for liberation. Their demand that 
Black people in the South participate in this nation’s democracy was 
met with violent resistance by the state and by white-supremacist 
vigilante groups. Our founders Arthur Kinoy, Morty Stavis,  Bill Kunstler, and Ben Smith partnered with visionary organizers 
like Fannie Lou Hamer, Ella Baker, and the Mississippi Freedom 
Democratic Party in support of their demand for voting rights. 
Working on the ground with impacted communities awakened  
the attorneys to the power of partnering with people’s movements. 
Following the lead of the activists they served, the founding 
attorneys of the Center for Constitutional Rights devised creative 
legal strategies to bolster and protect the work of those taking bold 
risks for racial justice. For over half a century, this organization  
has carried out their vision of serving as “the people’s lawyers.”  
In this moment – as has been the case throughout U.S. history – 
Black-led grassroots movements are leading the fight for democracy 
and justice. Thanks to you, the Center for Constitutional Rights is  
here and ready to serve as their movement lawyers. We are monitoring 
the post-election situation as it unfolds and to assess where help is 
needed. We are drawing on five decades of experience in ensuring 
that our movement partners are safe and their voices are heard. 
We are excited and grateful that our Board Chair Katherine Franke 
has very generously offered to match up to $333,000 of all NEW 
and INCREASED gifts to the Michael Ratner Campaign for the Next 
Generation (See page 5). Please give today and double the impact  
of your gift!
As we defend democracy and the people whose very lives depend  
on it, we thank you for your unfailing support.  
With gratitude and solidarity,
Vince Warren  
Executive Director
Letter from the Executive Director  
On the eve of our 55th year, the Center for Constitutional Rights is excited to 
continue our unapologetic mission to uplift the vision for the world we want to see 
through strategic legal, advocacy, and communications interventions. Together, we 
are moving toward that world. Justice takes a fight and your generosity keeps our 
fierce staff on the frontlines.
Fannie Lou Hamer, Center for Constitutional Rights client in Hamer v. Campbell; civil rights 
case which she brought against Cecil Campbell, the circuit clerk of Mississippi, for denying 
her and other Black people the right to register and vote in 1965.221960 S
The Center for Constitutional Rights is founded amid 
the civil rights movement. Civil rights, antiwar, and other 
grassroots movements build power and demand justice 
— and for this they are viciously attacked by those who 
want to maintain the status quo. Standing alongside 
movements, the Center for Constitutional Rights  
develops innovative legal strategies to advance  
and defend our rights.  TIMELINE 
1970 S
The U.S. federal government attempts to repress 
movements for peace and racial justice, with tactics 
including illegal spying. Activists, with the legal support  
of the Center for Constitutional Rights, take the fight over 
warrantless wiretaps all the way to the Supreme Court — 
and win. The Center for Constitutional Rights also supports 
the growing women’s movement with novel legal strategies 
and represents leaders of the American Indian Movement. Since our founding in 1966, the Center for Constitutional Rights  
has fought for fair elections and the right to protest.A LEGACY OF DEFENDING 
POPULAR DEMOCRACY 
AND DEMOCRATIC 
PRINCIPLES
We have been fighting for voting rights and 
fair elections for more than half a century.   
In 1966, the Center for Constitutional Rights 
represented the legendary voting rights activist  
Fannie Lou Hamer in a lawsuit she brought against 
Mississippi circuit clerk Cecil Campbell for denying  
her and other Black people the right to register and vote. 
Hamer’s moving testimony about the abuse she suffered 
for fighting for civil rights had been influential in the 
passage of the Voting Rights Act in 1965. A year later, in 
Hamer v. Campbell — one of the Center for Constitutional 
Rights’ earliest cases — the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals 
ruled that Hamer and others were discriminated against by 
being denied the right to register to vote, and overturned 
the racially discriminatory elections.  The Center for Constitutional Rights was involved in several 
landmark cases, including the 1969 Supreme Court case, filed 
on behalf of Rep. Adam Clayton Powell, which concluded  
that the Black elected official was unconstitutionally  
excluded from Congress. Powell v. McCormack underscored 
the fundamental right of the people to have those they elect 
represent them in government. 
In the decades since, we were clear that, in this nation 
marred by structural racism, voting rights were among the 
last to be extended to Black people and among the first to 
be undermined. In fact, the Center for Constitutional Rights 
has consistently fought, alongside our social movement 
partners, to defend and expand these rights. In Dotson v. City 
of Indianola, Mississippi (1981), we represented Black residents 
in a class action suit to compel their city to comply with the 
Voting Rights Act. We have repeatedly challenged racially 
discriminatory elections and districting systems. In 2004, we 
joined an amicus brief urging a California court to investigate 
the integrity of electronic voting, and in 2005, we filed an 
amicus brief to support voting rights for New Yorkers convicted 
of felonies. These are just a few of dozens of cases in which 
we have fought for voting rights and fair elections over the 
past 54 years. Through it all, our role has been to support and 
protect the marginalized communities demanding fairness, 
justice, and full participation in a democracy.
We have fought intimidation and repression  
of activists and movements since the 1960s.  
In fact, we innovated how to give effective  
and strategic legal support to visionary 
grassroots movements. 
21980 S
While the U.S. quietly funds and arms anti-democratic 
militias and dictatorial regimes across the globe, the 
Center for Constitutional Rights fights back against 
torture and other abuses, winning a case that establishes 
the right of non-citizens to sue in U.S. courts for violations 
of their human rights. Domestically, we continue to 
support movements fighting for full implementation  
of the Voting Rights Act. Our work includes continued 
challenges to racially discriminatory elections.   1990 S
Alongside movement partners, the Center for 
Constitutional Rights brings more than a dozen cases 
in the South to ensure electoral redistricting complies 
with the 1965 Voting Rights Act. We continue the fight 
against racially discriminatory voting systems in the 
U.S. and challenge the abuses of dictators and anti-
democratic regimes in different parts of the world. In the case that inspired them to establish the Center 
for Constitutional Rights, our founding attorneys created 
a new tool to protect activists from state repression. 
Dombrowski v. Pfister, filed in 1965, established that state 
intimidation of civil rights activists was unconstitutional 
and had a “chilling effect” on their First Amendment 
rights. By proactively blocking attempted “anti-subversive” 
prosecutions of civil rights activists, Dombrowski 
interrupted the traditional — and time-consuming — 
arrest-defense-appeal pattern and created a valuable 
strategy for lawyers representing activists and organizers. 
“Dombrowski suits” were employed by the Center for 
Constitutional Rights and others in the following years, as 
movement lawyers represented civil rights, antiwar, and 
other progressive and radical activists who were being 
targeted by the state.   THE FIGHT CONTINUES 
This is a challenging time, but we have successfully 
faced many obstacles. In this election season, like 
those past, we know that our social movements will 
lead the fight for meaningful democracy and move  
this nation toward justice. And we will support them.  
From Fannie Lou Hamer to Al and Margaret McSurely  
to the Black-led multi-racial coalition organizing across  
the U.S. today to ensure that Black votes count, the  
Center for Constitutional Rights stands with the people  
on the frontlines.
We are here for our movement partners in this critical 
season. Here’s what we’re doing: 
Rapid Response 
During the remainder of the 2020 election season, we 
are committed to showing up for the people — especially 
Black-led movements that center the defense of Black lives 
and advance Black liberation. 
We will build on our decades of experience innovating 
and implementing legal interventions against authoritarian 
tactics to defend and protect social movements so that 
they can defend and protect our democracy. We are 
here to offer legal and advocacy support to counter state 
repression and vigilante violence; to connect organizers to 
trusted pro-bono movement lawyers, and to advocate in 
support of movement partners. 
Committed to disseminating useful legal information to 
support movements, we have developed a series of tools. 
Protest after killing of George Floyd, Harlem. Taken by Vlad Archin.
34
2000 S
While continuing our work as part of broad, multi-issue 
struggles for justice, the Center for Constitutional Rights 
files an amicus brief in support of voting rights for people 
convicted of felonies and joins an amicus brief urging a 
California court to investigate questions of the integrity 
of electronic voting. The Center for Constitutional Rights 
filed a lawsuit challenging mass arrests during protests  
of the Iraq and Afghanistan wars.2010 S
The Center for Constitutional Rights defends 
environmental and Indigeneous activists against federal 
racketeering lawsuits filed by President Trump’s lawyers 
as part of a broader campaign to silence protests at 
Standing Rock. We continue to fight back against  
the criminalization of dissent, knowing that protest  
is essential to democracy. Toolkit for the Movement
The Center for Constitutional Rights is countering the 
authoritarian playbook with a People’s Playbook. We’ve 
put together an online Toolkit for the Movement — a 
collection of informational resources to support and 
protect our communities. All three toolkit elements  
have been newly updated in 2020.
If An Agent Knocks
Since its original release in 1989, If An Agent Knocks has 
been widely circulated in progressive activist communities 
across the country. Newly updated and drawing on 
decades of experience representing activists and 
communities subject to federal repression, If An Agent 
Knocks offers information and concrete suggestions for 
potential interactions with the FBI or other federal agents, 
how to document them, and how to protect yourself  
and your communities.FOIA Basics for Activists
FOIA Basics for Activists breaks down how activists, 
organizers, and movements can use the Freedom of 
Information Act (FOIA) to expose government and 
corporate actions. The October 2020 update contains 
numerous examples, downloadable resources and 
annotated FOIA requests, and a case study. 
Defend Against Ice Raids and 
Community Arrests Toolkit
Developed with Immigrant Defense Project (IDP), this is the 
first comprehensive guide and organizing resource to fight 
back against the Trump administration’s efforts to criminalize 
communities and deport millions of people. IDP and the 
Center for Constitutional Rights collected key information 
about Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) raids 
and arrests under the Bush and Obama administrations. 
Based on years of community defense experience, litigation, 
and legal research, including hundreds of firsthand accounts 
of ICE raids, our joint toolkit offers social justice advocates, 
lawyers, and community members critical information and 
analysis of our country’s massive detention and deportation 
system, as well as straightforward guidance on how to 
prepare for ICE raids. With data continuously updated, this 
resource is a critical tool for communities. Find all three tookits at  
ccrjustice.org/toolkit-for-the-movement.Meet Katherine 
“It is often said that who you  
walk with says all you need to  
know about who you are.” 
Board Chair Katherine Franke recently said these words, 
reflecting on the Center for Constitutional Rights’ donors, 
movement partners, clients, staff, and board. We could 
not be more proud to walk with Katherine, who has 
served on our board since since 2011, becoming vice 
chair in 2015 and chair in 2016. 
Katherine Franke is the James L. Dohr Professor of Law at 
Columbia University, where she also directs the Center for 
Gender and Sexuality Law and is the faculty director of the 
Law, Rights, and Religion Project. She also serves on the 
Executive Committee of Columbia’s Center for Palestine 
Studies and Institute for Research on Women, Gender 
& Sexuality. She is among the nation’s leading scholars 
writing on law, sexuality, race, and religion drawing from 
feminist, queer, and critical race theory. She is the author 
of Repair: Redeeming the Promise of Abolition (2019) and 
Wedlocked: The Perils of Marriage Equality (2015). BOARD CHAIR  
KATHERINE FRANKE 
Board Chair Katherine 
Franke Announces 
Matching Gift! 
Katherine Franke has pledged a matching gift of 
$333,000 for NEW and INCREASED gifts to the Center 
for Constitutional Rights’ Michael Ratner Campaign for 
the Next Generation.  The Ratner Campaign honors the 
visionary attorney who devoted 45 years to fighting for 
justice and human rights with the Center for Constitutional 
Rights. Michael was “the brain, the heart, the vision, and 
the passion of CCR for a generation,” Franke wrote upon 
his passing in 2016. 
The Michael Ratner Campaign for the Next Generation 
strengthens the ranks of movement lawyers and activists 
who believe, as Michael did, that in full partnership with 
people directly impacted by injustice and oppression the 
Center for Constitutional Rights will sustain the expertise, 
courage, and credibility to remain at the forefront of the 
fight for social justice. This five-year initiative to honor 
Michael Ratner’s spirit and vision was launched in 2016. 
To date, the campaign has raised over $9 million toward 
building the next generation of movement lawyers, serving 
as the “911” for social justice movements, and working 
shoulder-to-shoulder with our movement partners.
Thanks to Katherine Franke’s generous match, you can double the impact of your gift  
as you honor our past, and support our present and future. 
Double the impact of your commitment by making a new or increased gift to the Michael Ratner Campaign for  
the Next Generation at ccrjustice.org/MRC. For more information about the Ratner Campaign, please contact  
our Director of Development Theda Jackson-Mau at tjackson-mau@ccrjustice.org or 212-614-6448.
5THELMA NEWMAN  
PLANNED GIVING SOCIETY
Supporting Justice for Generations to Come
Thelma Newman was not a wealthy woman, yet she made a 
six-figure bequest to the Center for Constitutional Rights to 
support our work into the future. And she hoped to inspire 
others to do the same. 
Newman was the legal assistant to our co-founder  
Morty Stavis at the United Electrical Workers. She knew  
the fight for justice is long, and she wanted to support it 
even beyond her own lifetime. 
The members of our Thelma Newman Planned Giving Society  
have included us in their estate plans. Join them and make 
the struggle for justice an enduring part of your legacy at 
ccrjustice.org/TNS. THANK YOU!
Make a gift at:  
ccrjustice.org/donate  
Online gifts are a quicker and  
greener way to give!
Center for Constitutional Rights
Center for Constitutional Rights
@ccrjustice@theCCR Follow the Center for 
Constitutional Rights  
on social media:
Research and Writing: 
Jessica Hoffmann  
jess@jessicahoffmann.comBy mail to:
Theda Jackson-Mau  
Center for Constitutional Rights  
666 Broadway, 7th Floor  
New York, NY 10012
JUSTICE SUSTAINERS 
Monthly Donors Make Our Work Possible
Thank you, Justice Sustainers!  
The fight for justice never stops — and it makes a huge 
difference to have funding we can count on to sustain 
our work. Recurring monthly gifts allow the Center for 
Constitutional Rights to plan ahead, and to leverage 
resources to respond to challenges and opportunities as 
they arise. That means more hope for our clients, more 
support for grassroots movements, and more justice for all.   
Every amount impacts our capacity to serve vulnerable 
communities and fight for a better world. Don’t forget  
to give by establishing an automatic monthly gift at 
ccrjustice.org/donate. 
If you would like to learn more about: 
• Becoming a Justice Sustainer
• Joining the Thelma Newman Society or
•  Supporting the Michael Ratner Campaign for the  
Next Generation
Please contact our Director of Development Theda  
Jackson-Mau at tjackson-mau@ccrjustice.org or 212-614-6448.
6