November 30, 2016  
 
The Honorable Loretta Lynch  
Attorney General  
United States Department of Justice  
950 Pennsylvania Avenue  NW 
Washington, DC 20530  
 
Dear Attorney General Lynch,  
 
 The Association on American Indian Affairs (AAIA) condemns the 
actions of Morton Count y law enforcement on November 20 , 2016, against the 
Water Protectors opposing the Dakota Access Pipeline. Excess ive force was 
used against protesters, including rubber bullets, mace/pepper spray, water 
cannons in subfreezing temperatures, and tear gas. Law enforcement officers 
were dressed in riot gear, met peaceful Water Protectors with military style 
vehicles, and  violated the First Amendment and other constitutional rights 
afforded to each person assembled there to oppose the Dakota Access Pipeline. 
The horror of these actions played out in living rooms across our country as 
fellow Americans witnessed the violent chaos on their televisions. These 
unarmed Water Protectors have sustained injuries including hypothermia 
from water cannons, blinded and  blackened eyes and swollen extremities from 
rubber bullets, and a woman who suffered severe injuries to her arm from a 
concussion grenade and is undergoing multiple surgeries to prevent 
amputation.  
 
 These actions by law enforcement were inhumane and warrant an 
immediate investigation by the Department of Justice.  The AAIA stands with 
the Water Protectors, traditional an d spiritual leaders, and the Standing Rock 
Sioux Tribe in opposition to this excessive brutality against native people and 
their supporters.  We urge you to exercise your powers as the Attorney General 
of the United States to investigate these outrageous v iolent acts and tactics 
taken by local law enforcement and their blatant attempts to suppress the 
Water Protectors’ First Amendment and other constitutional rights.  
 
 Winter is quickly closing in and AAIA urges that construction be 
halted, all federal per mits be suspended, and that federal and tribal officials 
engage in meaningful consultations pursuant to Executive Order 13175  and 
federal law to ensure that a full environmental and cultural review takes place.     
 
 On behalf of the oldest Indian advocacy  member organization in the 
United States established in 1922, we reiterate that you personally intervene to 
prevent further excessive and unnecessary force being carried out by local law  
AAIA  
Association on American Indian Affairs  
  Executive Office  
966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 30-A 
Rockville, MD  20850  
Phone:  240 -314-7155   *   Fax:  240 -314-7159  
E-Mail:  general.aaia@indian -affairs.org   *   Website:  www.indian -affairs.org  
  
  Kimberly A. Dutcher  
Executive Director  
Navajo  
  
BOARD OF  
DIRECTORS  
  
Faith Roessel  
President  
Navajo  
  
Alfred R. Ketzler, Sr.  
Vice President  
Athabascan  
  
Bradford R. Keeler  
Treasurer  
Cherokee  
  
Frank Ettawageshik  
Secretary  
Odawa  
  
Cheriena Ben  
Choctaw  
  
Elke Chenevey  
Omaha  
  
Dee Ann DeRoin, MD  
Ioway  
  
John Echohawk  
Pawnee  
  
Sarah Kastelic  
Alutiiq  
  
Jonathan Perry  
Wampanoag  
  
  The Honorable Loretta Lynch  
November 30, 2016  
Page 2  
 
 
enforcement  against the Water Protectors, tribal members, religious leaders 
and their supporters.   It is your legal and moral duty to uphold the sacred 
trust relationship between the United States and Indian tribes.     
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 
Faith Roessel, Esq. ( Navajo ) 
President, AAIA  
Board of Directors  
 
 
 
 
cc:  Dave Archambault II, Chairman, Standing Rock Sioux Tribe  
Harold Frazier, Chairman, Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe  
Dave Flute, Chairman, Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate  
 
Sally Jewell, Secretary, U.S. Department of the Interio r 
 
Senator John Barrasso, (R -WY) Chairman, U.S. Senate Committee on Indian Affairs  
Senator Jon Tester, (D -MT), Vice Chairman, U.S. Senate Committee on Indian Affairs  
 
Rep. Tom Cole, (R -OK), Co -Chair, Congressional Native American Caucus  
Rep. Betty McCollum , (D-MN), Co -Chair, Congressional Native American Caucus  
 
Stacey Ecoffey, Commissioner, Administration for Native Americans  
 
Karen Diver, Special Assistant to the President, Native American Affairs  
 
John M. Fowler, Executive Director, Advisory Council on Historic Preservation  
