Recent developments mark a historical shift in
Indian education law and policy by taking thefirst step in accomplishing “educational tribalsovereignty.” The Native American Rights Fund(NARF), other Indian organizations and tribeshave been advocating for systemic changes toAmerican Indian/Alaska Native (AI/AN) educa-tion.  Changes that would increase involvementof tribal governments, educators, parents, andelders in what AI/AN students are taught, howthey are taught, who teaches them, and wherethey learn.  Tribal control of these core issuescan amount to educational tribal sovereignty.  
Motivated by the voices of tribal leaders, edu-
cators and students, the Obama Administrationsigned an Executive Order to support NativeAmerican education and released a report sum-marizing a series of Department of Educationtribal consultations – the first of their kind inhistory.  In addition, both Houses of Congresshave introduced the Native Culture, Language,and Access for Success in Schools Act (NativeCLASS Act), a pro-tribal sovereignty bill thatamends the Elementary and SecondaryEducation Act.  Also, federal appropriations fortribal education departments and agencies(TEDs/TEAs) were appropriated in the FY 2012budget. These actions represent a historical shiftin federal education law and policy that recog-nizes and begins to support educational tribalsovereignty. 
NARF represents the Tribal Education
Departments National Assembly (TEDNA).TEDNA is a national advocacy organization fortribal education departments and agencies(TEDs/TEAs) that works to strengthen the legalrights of tribes to control the formal educationof tribal members.  NARF started TEDNA in 2003with a group of tribal education department
directors from Indian tribes across the Country.Since its inception, NARF has hosted Nationalmeetings with TEDNA to 1) identify obstaclesimpeding educational tribal sovereignty, 2) develop policy initiatives to address suchobstacles, and 3) advocate and provide 
VOLUME 36, NO. 2                                                            SUMMER/FALL 2011Stars Align for American Indian/Alaska Native Education:
“Educational Tribal Sovereignty” on the HorizonNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Young Indian graduates waiting for their 
recognition.
Stars Align for American Indian/Alaska Native
Education “Educational Tribal Sovereignty” on theHorizon............................................................page 1
CASE UPDATES.............................................. page 7- Important Victory for the Klamath Tribes in the
Klamath Basin Water Rights Adjudication
National Indian Law Library.......................... page 9CALLING TRIBES TO ACTION! .................. page 10NARF ............................................................ page 11technical assistance on such policy initiatives.  
With this experience, NARF and TEDNA were
prepared when the U.S. Department ofEducation approached TEDNA for policy recom-mendations in early 2008.  NARF and TEDNAbegan working with the National IndianEducation Association and the NationalCongress of American Indians to educate theDepartment of Education, Congress, and theWhite House about critical policy changes.Perhaps most importantly, the need to increasethe role of tribal governments and TEDs/TEAs inAI/AN education.  
The past three years of TEDNA and NARF’s
work has been to advocate for many of the policygoals accomplished by the Executive Order andthe Native CLASS Act.  NARF and TEDNA’s advocacy strategy artfully merged the larger policy goal of increasing tribal sovereignty ineducation with technical recommendationsabout how to do so.   NARFs technical expertisein the area of Indian law significantly con-tributed to this movement as it is one of the onlylaw firms in the Country working in AI/AN edu-cation law and policy.  The following article is anupdate on NARF’s work  in AI/AN education lawand policy that includes discussion of the reau-thorization of the Elementary and SecondaryEducation Act, the Indian Education ExecutiveOrder, and the Department of Education Reportsummarizing tribal consultations from the pasttwo years. 
Tribal Education Departments/Agencies
Federal Funding
After over 20 years of work, NARF and TEDNA
secured federal funding for TEDs/TEAs in theLabor, Health, and Human Services Fiscal Year2012 Appropriations Bill for the first time in history. The funding will go to the Departmentof Education to be distributed to TEDs/TEAs toparticipate in a pilot project that allowsTEDs/TEAs to operate federal education programs in schools (public and Bureau ofIndian education) located on Indian reservations.
The Elementary and Secondary Education Act
In 2008 Congress and the Administration
began work on the reauthorization of theElementary and Secondary Education Act
(ESEA).  TEDNA’s ESEA recommendations weresubmitted to the Obama Administration andCongress and meetings began immediately todiscuss their incorporation into the reauthoriza-tion.  Quinton Roman Nose, member of theCheyenne-Arapaho Tribes, TEDNA foundingfather and longtime President, explained thatthis was the first time in history meetings wereheld in the White House on TEDs/TEAs.Possibly this was also the first time themes suchas tribal control over education and how toincorporate such control into the fabric of edu-cation law and policy was held at such a highlevel of the federal government. 
TEDNA’s ESEA recommendations encom-
passed all titles of the ESEA and generally, recommended ways to increase the role of tribalgovernments, TEDs/TEAs, Indian parents andelders into programs authorized in each title.The ESEA is the largest federal education billand is the most important federal law thatapplies to AI/AN students.  The current versionof the ESEA, the No Child Left Behind Act has10 Titles with multiple programs.  Some aregeneral programs, like the Title I ImprovingBasic Programs, and some are specific to AI/ANstudents, like the Title VII Indian Education Actprograms.  AI/AN students, whether they attendBureau of Indian Education (BIE) or state public schools, are served by all of the ESEA programs.  Unfortunately, ESEA programs arenot working for AI/AN students and the statisticsprove it.
Nationwide, AI/AN students perform lower on
standardized tests than any other student group.The national AI/AN high school dropout rate isover 65%, which is higher than any other group.The high dropout rate is linked to unemploy-ment, drug and alcohol abuse, teen pregnancies,and other social issues.  Previous reauthorizationsof the ESEA have tried to address these matters,but the problems have persisted.  Indian educa-tors knew this, and knew that a new approachwas called for – one that firmly recognizes andsupports the role of tribal governments as sovereigns in addressing these problems.  
Currently, the ESEA authorizes billions of 
dollars to state education agencies (SEAs) and
PAGE 2                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 3NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDlocal education agencies (LEAs) for education
and excludes tribes from eligibility for this funding, and as a result, from the implementa-tion of programs supported by the funding.  Allof the ESEA programs could do more to helpAI/AN students by recognizing a role, or byenhancing the role or roles, including in publicschool education, of tribal governments as sovereign nations.  Tribal governments are amajor untapped resource in education that canhelp improve AI/AN student performance, andthis ESEA reauthorization needs to change that.  
Through the now well-established federal 
policies of Indian self-determination, tribal self-governance, and economic development, tribes have vastly increased their governance,managerial and technical capacities andresources.  Tribes operate their own health clinics, provide social services, and manage avariety of natural resources.  It is time to includeeducation among the vital services provided andresources managed by tribes.  
The Obama Administration became particularly
interested in one of TEDNA’s ESEA recommen-dations, a pilot project for TEAs/TEDs.  The pilotproject takes dramatic steps toward accomplish-ing educational tribal sovereignty by authorizingtribes to be eligible to receive federal educationfunding and operate such programs in both public and federal schools located on Indianreservations.  (Tribes have been operating federal programs in other areas since the 1970s,but currently aren’t eligible for federal educa-tion funding.)  TEDNA provided the Departmentof Education with technical assistance in devel-oping this project and met with the Departmentseveral times to ensure the project moved forward.  We were successful.  The Departmentincluded the pilot project in the ObamaAdministration’s recommendations for theESEA reauthorization. 
Even with the Obama Administration’s sup-
port, critical AI/AN provisions were not includedin the ESEA reauthorization bill introduced inthe Senate Committee on Health, Education,Labor, and Pensions (HELP Committee). InOctober, the HELP Committee passed out ofCommittee the reauthorization of theElementary and Secondary Education Act of2011 (ESEA Act of 2011).  The ESEA Act of 2011
does not include adequate support for AI/AN students and tribal governments, nor does it further the federal policy of Indian self-determination.  The Act fails to include criticalprovisions Indian Country requested and in fact,only cuts funding available to support AI/AN students.  The ESEA Act of 2011 waits for theconsideration of the full Senate, which is unlikelyto occur in this Congressional session. 
The Native Culture, Language, and Access for
Success in Schools Act
In preparation for the ESEA reauthorization,
in June of 2011 the Senate Committee on IndianAffairs introduced the Native Culture, Language,and Access for Success in Schools Act (Native
Young Indian graduate receiving an 
eagle feather.CLASS Act).  The Act amends the current ver-
sion of the ESEA, the No Child Left Behind Actin very meaningful ways that will support AI/ANstudents.  The Act was passed out of Committeein October. Most recently the Act was introducedin the U.S. House of Representatives,Committee on Education and the Workforce.The Act is the most pro-tribal sovereignty education bill ever introduced in Congress. Itincludes many of the provisions Indian Countryrequested be included in the ESEA, but which,the ESEA Act of 2011 failed to do. 
NARF and TEDNA were heavily involved in the
development of this Act.  TEDNA drafted muchof the legislative language in the Native CLASSAct.  It worked closely with various congressionaloffices to answer questions necessary to gain theoffices’ support.  It also coordinated congres-sional briefings on TEDs/TEAs during which thework of TEDs/TEAs was explained by TED/TEAdirectors.  NARF also coordinated visits withCongressional members of its membership todiscuss the importance of the Native CLASS Act. 
The Native CLASS Act’s key areas are language
and culture based education, tribal control ofeducation, support for Native American teachers,juvenile justice, and many other key provisions.The Act amends the No Child Left Behind Act bymaking tribes eligible for and to operate federaleducation grants and programs and by addingnew programs to support AI/AN students.Indian Country had requested that the Act beincluded in the ESEA Act of 2011 but the HELPCommittee declined to do so.  As a result, theNative CLASS Act has proceeded through thelegislative process independently from the ESEAreauthorization; a positive strategy consideringthe political hang ups delaying the ESEA reauthorization. 
The No Child Left Behind Act authorizes 
billions of dollars annually to SEAs and LEAs,but hardly any funding to TEDs/TEAs and tribalgovernments for education. The enormousmissed opportunity to invest in TEDs/TEAs andtribes, for the sake of AI/AN students must beseized.  The Native CLASS Act does this. It alignsfederal law with what is already happening andwith what needs to happen. The Act carefullyallocates new funding and authorizationsbetween already high capacity TEDs/TEAs and
developing capacity TEDs/TEAs. This soundstructure supports TEDs/TEAs of all abilities andtribes of all sizes in their efforts to contribute atappropriate levels to AI/AN student success.
The Act allows for some shifts of funding at the
Secretary of Education’s discretion, to tribes andTEDs/TEAs in limited instances.  Such shifts donot divert any funding from students served. Inthis sense, the Act puts education funding on apar with many other pots of federal money thattribes and states share such as TemporaryAssistance to Needy Families or environmentalresources management funding.  As in theseareas, adding tribes as eligible grantees willimprove programs and service delivery at thelocal level.  Conversely, continuing to leave out tribes will likely maintain the status quo,including AI/AN students’ persistent highdropout rates and low academic performance.
Additionally, the Act has new funding autho-
rizations for AI/AN students.  The new moneywill increase local control of education by bring-ing tribal governments, tribal communities, andIndian parents into the schools.  It will increasecommunication and collaboration among tribes,LEAs, and SEAs.  It will empower TEDs/TEAs totake the lead in developing culturally relevantcurriculum, teacher training, and tribal educa-tion goals and policies.  The result will be education systems with rigorous academic stan-dards and tribal language and culture supportedand directed by the community.  
The Act includes TEDNA’s TEA pilot project
described above.  Indian Tribes have beenrequesting statutory authorization for this typeof  project for decades but have been thus farunsuccessful.  The Native CLASS Act’s inclusionof the TEA pilot project is a historical step inaccomplishing educational tribal sovereignty. 
The Act also includes an amendment to the
Family Education Rights and Privacy Act(FERPA) clarifying that TEDs/TEAs are amongthe education agencies, authorities, and officialsto which protected student records and infor-mation can be released without the advanceconsent of parents or students.  This amend-ment will empower TEDs/TEAs to collect, coordinate, and analyze data on AI/AN students
PAGE 4                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 5NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDthat is generated by various and sometimes 
multiple sources, including federal educationprograms, public school systems, states, andBIE-funded schools.  For AI/AN students, thisnever has happened before; right now we canonly imagine accurate and current tribe-wide,statewide, or nationwide data-based reports onAI/AN students. This amendment will allowTEDs/TEAs, other agencies and legislatures ofall governments to make data-driven decisionsregarding AI/AN students as they implementeducation law and policy. 
In July of 2011 the Senate Committee on
Indian Affairs held a hearing on the NativeCLASS Act and invited NARF to testify.  AmyBowers, NARF staff attorney, testified on behalfof NARF on the importance of the Native CLASSAct.  She stressed the importance of supportingeducational tribal sovereignty in federal law as ameans to increase graduation rates and testscores of AI/AN students.  In October, the SenateCommittee on Indian Affairs passed the NativeCLASS Act out of Committee.  The Act waits forfull consideration by the Senate and to be passedout of the House Committee on Education andthe Workforce.  
Indian Education Executive Order 
On December 2, 2011 President Obama signed
the Executive Order, Improving AmericanIndian and Alaska Native EducationalOpportunities and Strengthening TribalColleges and Universities.  The Executive Orderstates it is the policy of the ObamaAdministration to support activities thatimprove educational outcomes for AI/AN stu-dents and to provide an opportunity to learnnative languages and histories, and improveeducational opportunities at tribal colleges anduniversities. 
NARF and TEDNA worked on the policies sup-
ported in the Executive Order since theDepartment first contacted NARF in 2008.Indeed, the Executive Order’s support for capac-ity building for TEDs/TEAs and increased part-nerships with TEDs/TEAs is a direct result ofTEDNA and NARF’s persistent advocacy. In addition, its support for culture and languagebased education is an answer to TEDNA’s mem-berships constant requests to the Department. 
The Executive Order establishes a White
House Initiative (Initiative) on AI/AN educationthat will work to expand opportunities for AI/ANstudents to learn Native languages, cultures,and histories, and receive complete and compet-itive educations preparing them for college andcareers.  The Initiative will be overseen by anexecutive director who will serve as a senior-level, Department of Education official, who willalso be the Secretary of Education’s senior policy advisor on federal policies affecting AI/ANeducation. 
The mission and functions of the Initiative are
to coordinate development and implementationof federal education policy across federal agencieson AI/AN students, report on such policies, further tribal sovereignty by building the capacity of TEDs/TEAs and tribal colleges anduniversities, support partnerships withTEDs/TEAs, and public and private sectors,develop data resources on AI/AN students, andcreate a network to share best practices of AI/ANeducation. The Initiative will also support Nativelanguage immersion programs, educationreform, increase the number of excellent teachersand leaders serving AI/AN students, reduce theAI/AN dropout rate, and support AI/AN studentsobtaining vocational and college degrees. 
Importantly, the Executive Order creates an
interagency working group that will includerepresentatives from Departments of Justice,Agriculture, Labor, Health and Human Services,Energy, Environmental Protection Agency, andthe White House Domestic Policy Council.  Eachagency in the working group is required todevelop and implement a two-part, 4 year planfor the agency’s efforts to advance the missionand functions of the Executive Order. 
The Executive Order institutionalizes much of
the policy work NARF and TEDNA have donewith this Administration.  It demonstrates theAdministration’s commitment to support AI/ANstudents.  
Department of Education Report on Tribal
Consultations
Also in December, the U.S. Department of
Education released Tribal Leaders Speak: The State of Indian Education, 2010.  The report
summarizes six consultations with tribal leadersand educators in Indian country completed by theDepartment of Education. These consultations werethe first ever held by the Department of Education. 
Similarly, the report is the first of its kind. Itincludes the main points from the consulta-
tions, including quotes from tribal leaders andeducators provided at the consultations.  Beloware the major themes and points that emergedfrom the consultations organized by challengesand solutions identified by the participants. 
PAGE 6                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDCHALLENGES
• Failure to fulfill historic trust responsibility 
• Lack of tribal input and inappropriate standards, assessments,
and curricula
• Disconnect between federal, state, and local governments on
AI/AN student needs and programs 
• Lack of educational authority at the highest level of government• Lack of federal, state, and local accountability to tribal 
governments and AI/AN students
• Insufficient funding for education• Lack of direct funding to tribes • Lack of tribal grant-writing capacity• Subpar facilities and transportation because lack of funding • Instructional materials and access to technology severely 
inadequate
• Lack of parental support services and training• Lack of access to early learning programs • High dropout rates perpetuating cycle of limited opportunitySOLUTIONS
• Increase tribal control over 
education
• Increase regular government-to-
government consultation
• Recruit and retain highly 
effective teachers and leaders
• Support AI/AN students as future
leaders and teachers
• Collect and analyze AI/AN 
student data 
• Need for comprehensive student
support to address impact ofpoverty
• Need for seamless cradle-to-
career pipeline 
Tribal leaders and educators expressed “out-
rage at what they described as the failure of thefederal government to fulfill the moral obliga-tion of the highest responsibility and trust totribes by failing to educate AI/AN students.”  TheDepartment’s Report acknowledges what triballeaders and individuals have known for genera-tions: the education system, despite policyreforms, is not serving AI/AN students.  Triballeaders identified increased tribal control, or atminimum tribal consultation regarding the useof, the funding sources, systems, and otherresources in education will help AI/AN studentssucceed. 
NARF and TEDNA relied on its extensive net-
work of tribal leaders, education departmentdirectors, and educators to ensure it was repre-sented at each consultation.  NARF preparedwritten and oral statements for each consulta-
tion.  Many of its comments were included inthe report. 
Conclusion
These policy developments are monumental
steps in the direction of accomplishing educa-tional tribal sovereignty.  Certainly, the Reporton Tribal Consultations is an arrow in the quiverof AI/AN education advocates to use as evidenceto support our efforts.  NARF and TEDNA intendto ensure that tribes gain the legal control overeducation that they deserve as sovereign gov-ernments and that they must have for AI/AN stu-dent success, and to finally achieve educationaltribal sovereignty. ❂Main Points from Department of Education Tribal ConsultationsNARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 7NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDCASE UPDATES
The culture and way of life of many indigenous
peoples are inextricably tied to their aboriginalhabitat. For those Tribes that still maintain traditional ties to the natural world, suitablehabitat is required in order to exercise theirtreaty-protected hunting, fishing, gathering,and trapping rights.  The Klamath Tribes ofOregon hold reserved Indian water rights in theKlamath River Basin to support their treatyhunting, fishing, gathering and trapping rightswith a time immemorial priority date. 
After more than 35 years of litigation the
Klamath Tribes’ time-immemorial water rightsto support their treaty-reserved hunting, fish-ing, trapping, and gathering rights on the for-mer Klamath Reservation have finally beenquantified in the Klamath Basin Adjudication(KBA), for six of the Tribes’ eight claimed watersources – the Williamson River, the Sycan River,the Sprague River, the Wood River, the Klamath
Marsh, and some 140 seeps and springs through-out the former Reservation.  The journey beganin 1975 with the filing of the Adair litigation, afederal court case which declared the existenceof the Tribes’ water rights but deferred quantifi-cation of those rights to the KBA.  On December1, 2011, the Oregon Office of AdministrativeHearings issued Proposed Orders (POs) in thesix cases quantifying the Tribal water rightsclaims in the amounts claimed by the Tribes andthe United States, Bureau of Indian Affairs, astrustee for the Tribes (Claimants).  The POs werea resounding victory for the Claimants, as theyadopted, across-the-board, the flow amounts orwater levels in each case sought by the Tribes,
Important Victory for the Klamath Tribes in the
Klamath Basin Water Rights Adjudication
“These rulings emphasize the need for Basin water interests to work together to find ways
to share the water, share the pain of drought, and share the bounty of our waterways. TheTribes are committed to restoring fisheries and water bodies in the Basin, and we believethat agricultural and other water dependent communities can be restored at the same time.That is what the KBRA can do.”  — (Klamath Tribal Vice-Chairman Don Gentry)“These rulings emphasize the need for Basin water interests to work together to find waysto share the water, share the pain of drought, and share the bounty of our waterways. TheTribes are committed to restoring fisheries and water bodies in the Basin, and we believethat agricultural and other water dependent communities can be restored at the same time.That is what the KBRA can do.”  — (Klamath Tribal Vice-Chairman Don Gentry)
Headwaters of the Wood River, OregonPAGE 8                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDand confirmed, once again, that the
Tribal water rights are the mostsenior in the Basin.  Rulings quanti-fying the Tribes’ rights in the remain-ing two water sources, the KlamathRiver and Upper Klamath Lake, areexpected in April 2012.
The POs were issued by Senior
Administrative Law Judge Joe L.Allen.  Judge Allen ruled that theamounts of water claimed by theClaimants are the amounts necessaryto establish and maintain a healthyand productive habitat for treatyspecies that will enable the Tribes toexercise their treaty protected hunt-ing, fishing, trapping, and gatheringrights.  Significantly, Judge Allenruled that the Tribal water rightclaims may extend to off-reservationwater sources where necessary to sup-port the Tribes’ on-reservation treatyharvest rights.  Judge Allen reasonedthat the Tribes’ off-reservation claimsare necessary “to protect spawning and othercritical habitat necessary for the exercise of [theTribes’] treaty rights.”  Judge Allen also con-firmed that the waters of the eight-mile portionof the former Klamath Reservation boundarydescribed in the Klamath Tribes’ 1864 Treaty asrunning “up” the Wood River extends into thestream, such that this portion of the Wood Riveris located within the boundaries of the formerReservation.
Those contesting the Tribal water rights
claims put forth an array of arguments as to whythe claims should fail and one-by-one JudgeAllen dismissed them all, declaring that theContestants failed to rebut Claimants’ evidence.For instance, Judge Allen held that equitableconsiderations or the impact that the rulingsmay have upon junior water users are notapplicable in determining reserved water rights.Judge Allen noted that unlike the Oneida IndianNation in the City of Sherrill v. Oneida IndianNation land case, the Klamath Tribes neverrelinquished or abandoned their treaty rights.
Accordingly the circumstances that allowed forthe balancing of equitable considerations inSherrill were unsuitable here.
Under Oregon’s general stream adjudication
process, the POs are not final rulings, but ratherthey are Judge Allen’s proposals to the OregonWater Resources Department’s Adjudicator.  Inabout a year from now the Adjudicator will issuea Final Order that will define not only the waterrights of the Tribes, but the rights of all waterclaimants in the KBA.  Upon its issuance thewater rights decreed in the Final Order becomeenforceable.  Next, the Klamath Tribes will facea sequence of challenges in Klamath CountyCircuit Court and possibly subsequent appealscourts.  Nevertheless, Judge Allen’s rulings inthe POs mark a very significant victory for theClaimants, one that puts the Tribes and the BIAin the best position possible for the next stagesof the Adjudication. ❂
Bud Ullman, Klamath Water Adjudication Project attorney;
Perry Chocktoot, Jr., Director of the Klamath Tribes Cultureand Heritage Department; Walter Echo-Hawk, NARF attorney (Ret.); and Sue Noe, Klamath Water AdjudicationProject attorney on the Sprague River, Oregon.NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNational Indian Law Library
The National Indian Law Library
(NILL) is the only law library in theUnited States devoted to Indian law. Thelibrary serves both NARF and membersof the public. Since it was started as aNARF project in 1972, NILL has collectednearly 9,000 resource materials thatrelate to federal Indian and tribal law.The Library’s holdings include thelargest collection of tribal codes, ordinances, and constitutions; legalpleadings from major Indian cases; andoften hard to find reports and historicallegal information. In addition to makingits catalog and extensive collection available to the public, NILL provides reference
and research assistance relating to Indian law andtribal law and its professional staff answers over2,000 questions each year. In addition, theLibrary has created and maintains a huge web sitethat provides access to thousands of full-textsources to help the researcher.
The National Indian Law Library is currently
undergoing a new push to increase the tribal lawcontent available at NILL and online through itsTribal Law Gateway. NILL's Access to Tribal LawProject (ATLP) currently has over 230 tribes par-ticipating by providing tribal codes, constitutionsand other tribal legal materials for NILL ’s collection.In an effort to foster increased communica tions
between tribes and the library, NILL recentlysurveyed over ninety tribal judges, tribal leaders,law librarians, students, tribal members andother practitioners of Indian Law on the impor-tance of having access to tribal law materials. Thelast few months also saw the creation of theAccess to Tribal Law Project Support Committee,composed of leaders in Indian law from across thenation. The Support Committee oversees the
Project’s goal of providing reliable access to current tribal law, assists in recruiting new tribesto join the ATLP and encourages participatingtribes to provide updates.
NILL has recently debuted two new, helpful 
features on its website to assist researcherssearching for tribal law materials: a sleeker, consolidated version of the library’s Tribal LawGateway (www.narf.org/nill/triballaw/index.htm)and the Access to Tribal Law Project Homepage(www.narf.org/nill/atlp.htm). The Gateway nowhosts the code and constitution of each tribe inone, easy-to-use location and is updated frequently. The ATLP Homepage provides moreinformation about tribal law access through NILLand guides tribes through the process of gettinginvolved with the project, step-by-step. For anytribal leaders or tribal attorneys interested inlearning more about Access to Tribal Law at NILL or ready to add your tribe’s code and/or constitution to our growing collection, call David Selden at (303) 447-8760 ext. 106 or emailat dselden@narf.org. ❂
Justice Through Knowledge!
Jenny Monet
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 9PAGE 10                                                                          NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
• Chickasaw Nation
• Citizen Potawatomi Nation• Confederated Tribes 
of Siletz Indians
• Cow Creek Band 
of Umpqua Indians
• First Nations Development
Institute
• Fond du Lac Band of Lake
Superior Chippewa
• Fort McDowell 
Yavapai Nation
• Iowa Tribe of Oklahoma• Keweenaw Bay Indian
Community
• Lummi Indian Business
Council
• Menominee Indian Tribe 
of Wisconsin• Mescalero Apache Tribe
• Miami Tribe of Oklahoma• Mississippi Band 
of Choctaw Indian
• Muckleshoot Tribe• Nez Perce Tribe• Pauma Band of Mission
Indians
• Poarch Band of Creek
Indians
• Pokagon Band of
Potawatomi Indians
• Potlatch Fund• Saginaw Chippewa Indian
Tribe of Michigan
• San Manuel Band 
of Mission Indians
• San Pasqual Band 
of Mission Indians• Seminole Tribe of Florida
• Seventh Generation Fund• Shakopee Mdewakanton
Sioux Community
• Stillaguamish Tribe of Indians• Stockbridge-Munsee Tribe• Sycuan Band of Kumeyaay• Tulalip Tribes• Wildhorse Foundation/
Umatilla Tribes
• Yavapai-Prescott Indian Tribe• Yoche Dehe Wintun NationIt has been made abundantly clear that non-
Indian philanthropy can no longer sustainNARF’s work.  Federal funds for specific projectshave also been reduced.  Our ability to providelegal advocacy in a wide variety of areas such asreligious freedom, the Tribal Supreme CourtProject, tribal recognition, human rights, trustresponsibility, tribal water rights, Indian ChildWelfare Act, and on Alaska tribal sovereigntyissues has been compromised.  NARF is nowturning to the tribes to provide this crucialfunding to continue our legal advocacy onbehalf of Indian Country.  It is an honor to listthose Tribes and Native organizations who havechosen to share their good fortunes with theNative American Rights Fund and the thousandsof Indian clients we have served.  The generosity
of Tribes is crucial in NARF’s struggle to ensurethe future of all Native Americans.
The generosity of tribes is crucial in NARF’s
struggle to ensure the freedoms and rights of allNative Americans. Contributions from thesetribes should be an example for every NativeAmerican Tribe and organization. We encourageother Tribes to become contributors and partnerswith NARF in fighting for justice for our peopleand in keeping the vision of our ancestors alive.We thank the following tribes and Native organizations for their generous support ofNARF for our 2011 fiscal year – October 1, 2010to September 30, 2011:
CALLING TRIBES TO ACTION!NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 11NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDTHE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF Annual Report: This is NARF's major report on its programs
and activities.  The Annual Report is distributed to foundations, majorcontributors, certain federal and state agencies, tribal clients, NativeAmerican organizations, and to others upon request.  Ray RamirezEditor, ramirez@narf.org.  
The NARF Legal Review is published biannually by the Native
American Rights Fund.  Third class postage paid at Boulder, Colorado.Ray Ramirez, Editor, ramirez@narf.org.  There is no charge for sub-scriptions, however, contributions are appreciated.
Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund is a nonprofit, charitable
organization incorporated in 1971 under the laws of the District ofColumbia.  NARF is exempt from federal income tax under the provisionsof Section 501 C (3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and contributionsto NARF are tax deductible.  The Internal Revenue Service has ruled
that NARF is not a "private foundation" as defined in Section 509(a)of the Internal Revenue Code.
Main Office: Native American Rights Fund, 1506 Broadway, Boulder,
Colorado  80302 (303-447-8760) (FAX 303-443-7776).http://www.narf.org 
Washington, D.C. Office: Native American Rights Fund, 1514 P Street,
NW (Rear) Suite D, Washington, D.C. 20005 (202-785-4166) (FAX202-822-0068).
Alaska Office: Native American Rights Fund, 801 B Street, Suite 401,
Anchorage, Alaska 99501 (907-276-0680) (FAX 907-276-2466).Looking back at the past forty-one years of the Native
American Rights Fund’s (NARF) existence, it is almost impossi-ble to comprehensively document the impact that NARF has hadin Indian country. Before NARF’s existence, there were not manyattorneys working for Indians. Most of them were handling con-tingency-fee cases since few tribes could afford tribal counsel.“Indian law” was neither developed, nor defined, let alone beingtaught in law schools.
Today, the delivery of responsible, comprehensive legal repre-
sentation to Indian tribes, organizations and individuals hasbeen institutionalized as an integral part of America’s justice sys-tem. Private practitioners, tribal attorneys, legal services officesand other non-profit organizations like NARF together are pro-viding representation to Indians, using our country’s justice andlegislative systems to assure that Indian rights are upheld. 
Native advocates were almost invincible during the 1970's and
into the 1980's, especially in the U.S. Supreme Court. Beginningin the mid-1980's, Supreme Court decisions started shiftingagainst tribal interests. This negative shift continues today as themajority of the Supreme Court seems intent on limiting tribalsovereignty.
After the modern day tribal sovereignty movement, the field of
Indian law is no longer considered an esoteric subject aboutancient history. Due in part to NARF’s existence – its tremen-dous successes in the courts as well as continued representationover the years in thousands of cases – the rights of America’sIndians are now judiciously and routinely being advocatedbefore the courts, administrative hearings, state legislatures andCongress. Officials and bureaucrats who either chose to ignoreor had no information on the specific rights of America’s Indiansin the past are today held accountable for decisions relating toNative Americans, partly because of the rights defined andupheld in NARF’s courtroom and legislative victories.
The initial goal for NARF’s Indian law practitioners was to rep-
resent Native Americans in cases of major significance to a greatnumber of Indian people. For the first time, Indian people wereassured that a sustained, highly-trained Indian advocacy groupwas available to them to clarify treaty and constitutional rightsguaranteed them – regardless of their ability to pay. NARF wasdirectly involved as either counsel or co-counsel in practically allof the early precedent-setting cases of the 1970's. 
The Native American Rights Fund has been at the forefront on
advocating many of the major acts and reviews potentially affect-ing all Native Americans including the American IndianReligious Freedom Act, the Indian Child Welfare Act, theAmerican Indian Policy Review Commission, the Native
American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act, the VotingRights Act, the Indian Self-Determination Act, the Maine IndianLand Claims Settlement Act, the Religious Freedom RestorationAct and many others. NARF has also been instrumental in assist-ing vital new Indian organizations including the AmericanIndian Higher Education Consortium, the Tribal EducationDepartments National Assembly, the Council on EnergyResource Tribes, the National Tribal Environmental Council andthe Native Hawaiian Legal Corporation. 
As an Indian-controlled organization, NARF’s leadership has
provided as many opportunities as possible to develop youngIndian law graduates and students in the area of Indian law. Anaverage of eight law interns and/or clerks are employed annual-ly by NARF , most of them being Native American.
NARF’s existence would not be possible without the efforts of
the thousands of individuals who have offered their knowledge,courage and vision to help guide NARF on its quest.  Of equalimportance, NARF’s financial contributors have graciously pro-vided the resources to give our efforts life.  Contributors such asthe Ford Foundation have been with NARF since its inception.The Open Society Institute, the Bay and Paul Foundations andthe Unger Foundation have also made long term funding com-mitments.  Finally, the positive effects of NARF’s work arereflected in the financial contributions by a growing number oftribal governments like the Yocha Dehe Wintun Nation, theSeminole Tribe of Florida, the Chickasaw Nation, the SanManuel Band of Mission Indians, the Muckleshoot Tribe, theMississippi Band of Choctaw Indians and the Poarch Band ofCreek Indians.  United, these financial, moral, and intellectualgifts provide the framework for NARF to fulfill its goal of secur-ing the right to self-determination to which all Native Americanpeoples are entitled. 
NARF strives to protect the most important rights of Indian
people within the limit of available resources.  To achieve thisgoal, NARF's Board of Directors defined five priority areas forNARF's work:  (1) the preservation of tribal existence; (2) theprotection of tribal natural resources; (3) the promotion ofhuman rights; (4) the accountability of governments to NativeAmericans; and (5) the development of Indian law and educatingthe public about Indian rights, laws, and issues.
Requests for legal assistance should be addressed to the
Litigation Management Committee at NARF's main office, 1506Broadway, Boulder, Colorado 80302.  NARF’s clients are expectedto pay whatever they can toward the costs of legal representation.NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Gerald Danforth, Chairman ....................................................................................Wisconsin Oneida
Richard Luarkie, Vice-Chairman ............................................................................Pueblo of LagunaMarshall McKay, Treasurer  ....................................................................Yocha Dehe Wintun NationVirginia Cross  ........................................................................................................Muckles hoot Tribe
Moses Haia ..................................................................................................................Nat ive Hawaiian
Ron His Horse Is Thunder ................................................................................Standing Rock SiouxMark Macarro ..............................................................................Pechanga Band of Luiseño IndiansJulie Roberts ..................................................................................................Native Village of Tanana
Buford Rolin ........................................................................................Poarch Band of Creek India ns
Natasha Singh ..............................................................................................Native Village of S tevens 
Barbara Anne Smith ................................................................................................Chickasaw Na tion
Executive Director: John E. Echohawk ..................................................................................Pawnee
NARF LEGAL REVIEW • VOLUME 36, NO. 2 • SUMMER/FALL 2011Native American Rights Fund
1506 Broadway
Boulder, CO 80302Non-Profit Org.
U.S. Postage
PPAAIIDD
Boulder, Colorado
Permit No. 589
PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER
