A.  Introduction
Three decades of worldwide effort by indige-
nous peoples resulted in an historic victory in
the United Nations General Assembly onSeptember 13, 2007, when that body adopted theDeclaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples(Declaration) by an overwhelming majority.
1 
143 Yes, 4 No, 11 Abstaining.  The four countries
who voted against the Declaration were the
United States, Canada, New Zealand, andAustralia.   One by one the dissenting countrieshave reversed their votes.  The United States wasthe last country to do so, on December 16, 2010.That means that there is no country in the worldthat now opposes the Declaration.  In addition,two of the abstaining countries have nowendorsed the Declaration.
2
The Declaration affirms the collective rights of
Indigenous Peoples as human rights across abroad range of areas including self-determination,spirituality, land rights, and rights to intellectualproperty; thereby providing some balance to aninternational rights framework based largely on individual rights. Since 1999, senior staff attorney Kim Gottschalk of the Native AmericanRights Fund (NARF) has worked with our client,
the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI),and indigenous peoples worldwide, in the process
of elaborating and supporting the Declaration. 
VOLUME 36, NO. 1                                                            WINTER/SPRING 2011United States Finally Endorses Historic United
Nation’s Declaration On The Rights Of IndigenousPeoples ................................................................ page 1
CASE UPDATES .................................................. page 9- State high court empowers tribes’ child custody
decisions- NARF receives ACLU honor- Tribal Supreme Court Project Update- Cases Recently Decided By The Supreme CourtNational Indian Law Library ............................ page 13CALLING TRIBES TO ACTION! ...................... page 14NARF ................................................................ page 15United States Finally Endorses Historic United Nation’s
Declaration On The Rights Of Indigenous PeoplesNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
“….the United States is lending its support to
this declaration. The aspirations it affirms –including the respect for the institutions andrich cultures of Native peoples – are ones wemust always seek to fulfill...But I want to beclear: What matters far more than words –what matters far more than any resolution ordeclaration – are actions to match thosewords.” — President Barack Obama
1 Three decades is a somewhat arbitrary starting point.  It refers back to a 1977 meeting at the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland concerning
discrimination against Indigenous peoples in the Americas.  However, indigenous efforts in the international arena go back much further in time.In the 1920s, Deskaheh, speaker of the Council of the Iroquois Confederacy, attempted to bring a dispute with Canada before the League of Nations.The League did not address the issue, viewing it as a domestic matter between Canada and the Iroquois.
2 Along with one country that indicated that its positive vote had not been registered, that brings the number of countries endorsing the Declarationto 150.The Declaration is not a perfect document but
it contains much language and many ideas and
concepts supplied by the indigenous peoplesthemselves, thereby establishing “...the minimumstandards for the survival, dignity and well-being of the indigenous peoples of the world.”Art. 43.
B.  Background to the Declaration Process
In 1977, a group of indigenous representatives
met in Geneva, Switzerland for the
International Non-Governmental OrganizationConference on Discrimination againstIndigenous Populations in the Americas, organized by the NGO Sub-Committee onRacism, Racial Discrimination, Apartheid andColonialism.  In 1982, based in part on recom-mendations from this Conference, the UNWorking Group on Indigenous Populations wasformed within the Sub-Commission on thePromotion and Protection of Human Rights,(then known as the Sub Commission on thePrevention of Discrimination and Protection ofMinorities).  This Working Group was composedof independent experts.  In 1988, the workinggroup chair completed a draft declaration on therights of indigenous peoples, based largely ontheir input, and in 1994, the Sub-Commissionadopted a Draft Declaration on the Rights ofIndigenous Peoples.
3
This Draft Declaration was forwarded to the
Human Rights Commission.  The Human RightsCommission established an intersessionalWorking Group on the Draft Declaration(WGDD) charged with elaborating a declarationon the rights of indigenous peoples “taking into account” the Draft approved by the Sub-Commission. The WGDD was initiallyauthorized for ten years, and then extended foran additional year. Thus, for eleven years,nations and indigenous peoples met in Geneva,generally for two weeks a year, to elaborate adraft declaration.
By the end of the eleven year period, agreementhad been reached on numerous, but not all, provisions of the Draft Declaration.  At the sametime, for reasons unrelated to the draft declara-tion, the Human Rights Commission cameunder fire at the United Nations and wasreplaced by the Human Rights Council – eventsthat placed the process of finishing the declara-tion in doubt.  In the midst of this confusion, theChair of the WGDD, Peruvian Ambassador LuisChavez, took the provisions upon which agreement had been reached, and, drafted acompromise text for those provisions on whichagreement had not yet been reached. This compromise text was based on the years of discussion that had occurred in the WGDD. He submitted the draft declaration to theHuman Rights Commission which, as one of itsfinal acts, forwarded it to the newly createdHuman Rights Council. The Human RightsCouncil met for the first time in June of 2006and on June 29, 2006, by a vote of thirty in favor,two opposed (Canada and Russia),  and twelveabstaining, approved the Declaration and for-warded it to the General Assembly for adoption.
In the General Assembly, a group of African
Nations garnered sufficient votes to defer consideration of the Draft Declaration to allowtime for further consultation. The AfricanGroup initially proposed numerous unaccept-able amendments, which it later withdrew infavor of nine amendments with which mostindigenous peoples could live. As noted, thisprocess culminated on September 13, 2007,when the Declaration was adopted overwhelm-ingly by the General Assembly of the UnitedNations. 
C. United States Endorsement 
Of The Declaration
On December 16, 2010, President Obama
“announce[d] that the United States is lending
its support to this declaration. The aspirations itaffirms – including the respect for the institu-tions and rich cultures of Native peoples – are
PAGE 2                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
3 See discussion in S. JAMES ANAYA, INDIGENOUS PEOPLES IN INTERNATIONAL LAW, (2d ed. 2004) p. 57.NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 3NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
ones we must always seek to fulfill...But I want
to be clear: What matters far more than words –what matters far more than any resolution ordeclaration – are actions to match those words.”This announcement was greeted by a standingovation by the roomful of tribal leaders assem-bled for second annual White House TribalNations Conference in Washington, D.C.  
Indigenous peoples had urged the United
States to endorse the Declaration uncondition-ally.  Unfortunately, the United States issued alengthy explanation of its interpretation of keyelements of the Declaration – an interpretationat odds with that of most indigenous peoples.http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/153223.pdf The areas in which explanationswere given correspond with those matters whichthe prior Administration identified as causingthem to vote against the Declaration in 2007.http://www.archive.usun.state.gov/press _releases/20070913_204.html  
While it is unfortunate that the United States
felt compelled to issue a lengthy explanation ofits vote, nevertheless, the endorsement is ofgreat importance.  By implication, the Obamaendorsement approves without condition thoseareas for which no explanation was provided andthe Declaration will take on a life of its own,with its meaning developing in context over theyears – very likely in ways that go beyond theinterpretations given by the United States.  Withstrategic use of the Declaration, indigenous peoples can help guide its development in theright direction.  
This article provides a brief overview of expla-
nations given by the United States in connectionwith its endorsement of the Declaration andmakes some preliminary observations on thoseobjections. It closes with a brief discussion ofpossible uses of the Declaration in the future.
1. Overview of United States’ Explanation 
of Its Endorsement
a. Binding Nature of the Declaration
The United States’ explanation states:  “The
United States supports the Declaration, which –
while not legally binding or a statement of cur-rent international law – has both moral andpolitical force….[I]t expresses aspirations of theUnited States, aspirations that this countryseeks to achieve within the structure of the U.S.Constitution, laws, and international obliga-tions, while also seeking , where appropriate, to
“The United States argues that it is
doing its part in protecting Indian
land rights by supporting Indiantribes in these cases.  That is ironicsince the cases represent majorlosses in the court system, demon-strating the inadequacy of our lawwhen measured against theDeclaration.”improve our laws and policies.” 4Compare this
statement with the following question and
answer from the frequently asked questions section at the United Nations Permanent Forumon Indigenous Issues website:  
Is the Declaration legally binding?UN Declarations… represent the dynamicdevelopment of international legal norms andreflect the commitment of states to move incertain directions, abiding by certain princi-ples. The Declaration, however, is widelyviewed as not creating new rights. Rather, itprovides a detailing or interpretation of thehuman rights enshrined in other internationalhuman rights instruments of universal resonance – as these apply to indigenous peoples and indigenous individuals. http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/faq_drips_en.pdfThe position of the United States that no part
of the Declaration is expressive of internationallaw is clearly overstated, and that is likely to beproved out in the course of time.  In the mean-time, there is nothing to prevent courts fromusing the Declaration to help reach decisions inmatters involving indigenous peoples. TheSupreme Court has looked to international standards as “evolving standards of decency thatmark the progress of a maturing society...”  andthus relevant to consider in making decisions of great import.  Graham v. Florida, 130 S. Ct.
2011, 2020 (2010). It will require careful consideration by attorneys as to when and howto use the Declaration in court proceedings, butimportant building blocks can be laid if onecourt relies on it to reach a decision, thenanother and another.
PAGE 4                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
4 This is an attempt by the United States to lay the ground for later use of a doctrine known as the "persistent objector" doctrine to prevent the
development of customary international law.  It has been questioned whether this doctrine ever had validity, and even if at one time it did havevalidity, whether it still does. In a United Nations with 192 members, can a handful of countries prevent a principle from becoming customaryinternational law?  See e.g. ANTONIO CASSESE, INTERNATIONAL LAW (2d ed. 2005) p. 162.  In this context it is worth noting that the
Declaration has already been cited by the Supreme Court of Belize in a decision upholding land rights of the Mayan villages of Conejo and SantaCruz.  The court referred to Art. 26 of the Declaration, dealing with land rights as “reflecting … the growing consensus and the general principlesof international law on indigenous people and their lands and resources.” Par. 131.  The full text of the Supreme Court ruling can be found athttp://www.law.arizona.edu/depts/iplp/advocacy/maya_belize/documents/ClaimsNos171and172of2007.pdf. 
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 5NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDb. Collective Rights as Human Rights  
The Declaration acknowledges collective
human rights, and thereby provides a correctiveto the western human rights framework, whichis heavily weighted toward individual humanrights.
5Indigenous peoples have typically not
been at the table when international rights documents such as the Universal Declaration ofHuman Rights (UDHR) have been elaborated.As a result, their collective human rights havenot been adequately taken into account.
6
Indigenous peoples therefore were adamant thatthe Declaration focus on their collective humanrights. In this they were successful, as the document recognizes a broad range of collectivehuman rights.
7
The explanation of its vote indicates that the
United States does not share the view that collective rights of indigenous peoples arehuman rights.  “Moreover, the United States iscommitted to serving as a model in the interna-tional community in promoting and protectingthe collective rights of indigenous peoples aswell as the human rights of all individuals…indigenous individuals are entitled withoutdiscrimination to all human rights recognizedin international law, and … indigenous peoplespossess certain additional, collective rights.  TheUnited States reads all of the provisions of the Declaration in light of this understanding of human rights and collective rights.” 
8
The US statement is inconsistent with the
Declaration itself.  The Declaration states inArticle 1:  “Indigenous peoples have the right to the full enjoyment, as a collective or as individuals, of all human rights and fundamentalfreedoms as recognized in the Charter of theUnited Nations, the Universal Declaration ofHuman Rights and international human rightslaw.” The explanation is not even in harmonywith the law of the United States.  Normally onlya right of equal or greater value can overrideanother right and US law has recognized thatthe collective rights of tribes can override individual human rights. Mississippi Band of
Choctaw Indians v. Holyfield, 490 U.S. 30
(1989)(collective interest of tribes in member-ship of their children overrides the right of parents to, in all cases, place a child with theadoptive parents it chooses or to proceed inwhatever court they desire.) 
c. Specific Rights
i.  Self-Determination
Self determination is at the heart of the
Declaration and is the one group right that allcountries acknowledge as a human right.Without this right, the Declaration would havebeen unacceptable to indigenous peoples.Therefore, it is upsetting that the United Stateshas interpreted the right to self-determinationby indigenous peoples in a restrictive manner.“The United States is therefore pleased to support the Declaration’s call to promote thedevelopment of a new and distinct internationalconcept of self-determination specific to indige-nous peoples….a concept that is different fromthe existing right to self-determination in inter-national law... For the United States, theDeclaration’s concept of self-determination isconsistent with the United States’ existingrecognition of, and relationship with, federallyrecognized tribes as political entities that haveinherent sovereign powers of self-governance.”
5 For a discussion of the differences in thinking underlying notions of individual and collective rights, and the necessity for protection of indigenous
collective human rights, see, Robert N. Clinton, The Rights of Indigenous Peoples as Collective Group Rights, 32 ARIZ. L. REV. 739 (1990).
6 As to the western bias in international human rights in general, see, Richard Falk, Think Again: Human Rights, FOREIGN POLICY, (March/April
2004).
7 See e.g. Art. 3 (self-determination); Art. 8 (right to freedom from assimilation or destruction of their culture); Art. 10 (right to remain on theirlands); Arts. 11 and 12 (right to their maintain their cultures, customs, traditions, etc.); Art. 23 (right to traditional medicines); Art. 31 (right totheir cultural heritage, traditional knowledge, etc.); Art. 37 (right to respect for their treaties, agreements and other constructive arrangements).
8 Some other countries agree with the United States.  The United Kingdom explained that they were voting for the document with the understandingthat the only collective human right in the document is the right to self-determination.  According to the UK, other collective rights recognized inthe Declaration are not human rights, since, in their view, human rights belong to all people and many of the rights in the Declaration pertainonly to indigenous peoples.  (Oral statement on September 13, 2007).This position will not withstand analysis.
Two international covenants, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and the
International Covenant on Economic, Socialand Cultural Rights, provide in their commonArticles 1 that:  “All peoples have the right ofself-determination.  By virtue of that right theyfreely determine their political status and freelypursue their economic, social and culturaldevelopment.”
9Article 3 of the Declaration
tracks this language precisely – substituting“Indigenous peoples” for “All peoples.”   The useof the same language is evidence of an intent todescribe the same right.  Cf.  Gustafson v. AlloydCo., 513 U.S. 561, 570  (1995).  Furthermore,the general rule is that if language is broadenough to encompass a situation not contem-plated, it covers the situation absent proof itwould have been excluded had it been contem-plated.  Diamond v. Chakrabarty, 447 U.S. 303
(1980)(patent language broad enough to coverliving life forms even though not contemplatedat the time the legislation passed).  Not only isthere no proof that the right to self-determina-tion of indigenous peoples would have beendiminished had it been contemplated, there is“legislative history” here to the contrary.Attempts were made by some countries for yearsto add limiting language to the self-determina-tion provision and those attempts failed.
Moreover, additional language in the 
UN Declaration confirms that Article 3 fallswithin the scope of the international right.  Thepreamble provides as follows in two separateparagraphs:
Acknowledging that the Charter of the United
Nations, the International Covenant onEconomic, Social and Cultural Rights and theInternational Covenant on Civil and PoliticalRights, as well as the Vienna Declaration andProgramme of Action, affirm the fundamentalimportance of the right to self-determination of all peoples, by virtue of which they freelydetermine their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and culturaldevelopment.
Bearing in mind that nothing in this
Declaration may be used to deny any peoplestheir right to self-determination, exercised inconformity with international law. 
These paragraphs combine with Article 2 to
make the matter clear:
Article 2 – Indigenous peoples and individuals
are free and equal to all other peoples and individuals and have the right to be free fromany kind of discrimination, in the exercise oftheir rights, in particular that based on theirindigenous origin or identity.
In addition, the Human Rights Council, in its
Resolution 5/1 of June 18, 2007 adopted the“United Nations Human Rights Council:Institution – Building” text which under its“Framework for the programme of work” initem 3 enumerates “Rights of peoples...”, thusviewing these rights as falling under the rubricof human rights.
These considerations indicate that the self-
determination right in Article 3 of theDeclaration is the same as that in internationallaw generally.
ii. Lands, territories and natural resources
The Declaration has broad provisions concerning
rights to lands, territories and naturalresources. Article 25 starts with the right ofindigenous peoples to “maintain and strengthentheir distinctive spiritual relationship with theirtraditionally owned or otherwise occupied andused lands, territories, waters and coastal seasand other resources.” Article 26.1 provides that“Indigenous peoples have the right to the lands,territories and resources which they have traditionally owned, occupied or otherwise usedor acquired.” Article 26.2 refers to the right to“own, use, develop and control the lands, terri-tories and resources that they possess by reasonof traditional ownership or other traditionaloccupation or use, as well as those which they
PAGE 6                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
9 See General Assembly Resolution 2200 (XXI) of 16 December 16, 1966.NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 7NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
have otherwise acquired.” Article 27 requires
the establishment of a system to “recognize andadjudicate the rights of indigenous peoples pertaining to their lands, territories andresources...”  Article 28.1 provides for redress forlands “which have been confiscated, taken,occupied, used or damaged without their free,prior and informed consent.”  Compensation isto take the form of “lands, territories andresources equal in quality, size and legal statusor of monetary compensation or other appropriateredress.”  Article 28.2.  
As to these provisions of the Declaration, the
United States’ explanation states that, “...theUnited States intends to continue to work sothat the laws and mechanisms it has put in
place to recognize existing, and accommodate
the acquisition of additional, land territory, andnatural resource rights under U.S. law functionproperly and to facilitate, as appropriate, accessby indigenous peoples to the traditional lands,territories and natural resources in which theyhave an interest... The United States will inter-pret the redress provisions of the Declaration tobe consistent with the existing system for legal
redress in the United States, while working toensure that appropriate redress is in fact providedunder U.S. law.” pp 6-8 (emphasis supplied).The United States makes this statement eventhough:  under US law, aboriginal title is notrecognized as compensable; Tee-Hit-Ton v.United States, 348 U.S. 272 (1955);  under US
law, long standing Executive Order Reservationsare not recognized as compensable even thoughonly Congress can change their boundaries;Karuk Tribe v. Ammon, 209 F .3d 1366 (Fed. Cir.2000)  cert. den. 121 S.Ct. 1402 (2001);  underU.S. law, it is becoming difficult, if not impossible,for tribes to get redress for loss of their aboriginalterritory based on the passage of time.  Sherrillv. Oneida Indian Nation, 544 U.S. 197 (2005);
Cayuga Indian Nation of New York v. Pataki,413 F .3d 266 (2d Cir. 2005);  Oneida Indian
Nation v. County of Oneida, 617 F .3d 114 (2d
Cir. 2010). In addition, land cannot be taken intotrust for Indian tribes not recognized or underfederal jurisdiction in 1934.  Carcieri v. Salazar,129 S.Ct. 1058 (2009). The United States arguesthat it is doing its part in protecting Indian landrights by supporting Indian tribes in these cases.That is ironic since the cases represent majorlosses in the court system, demonstrating theinadequacy of our law when measured againstthe Declaration.
iii.  Free, Prior and Informed Consent
Article 19 of the Declaration provides that
“States shall consult and cooperate in good faithwith the indigenous peoples concerned throughtheir own representative institutions in order toobtain their free, prior and informed consentbefore adopting and implementing legislative oradministrative measures that may affect them.”The explanation of the US vote once againwaters this down. “In this regard, the UnitedStates recognizes the significance of theDeclaration’s provisions on free, prior andinformed consent, which the United Statesunderstands to call for a process of meaningfulconsultation with tribal leaders, but not neces-sarily the agreement of those leaders, before the
actions addressed in those consultations are
taken... The United States intends to consult 
and cooperate in good faith with federally recognized tribes and, as applicable, NativeHawaiians, on policies that directly and substantially affect them, and to improve our
cooperation and consultation processes, inaccordance with federal law and President
Obama’s call for better implementation ofExecutive Order 13175.”  (emphasis supplied) p. 5.  Article 19 refers to efforts to obtain free,prior and informed consent of indigenous peoples for measures that “may affect” while the US explanation refers to “meaningful consultation” only in matters which “directlyand substantially affect them”, a substantiallymodified standard. In addition, the concept of“meaningful consultation”  is a far cry from“States shall consult and cooperate in good faithwith the indigenous peoples concerned throughtheir own indigenous institutions in order toobtain their free, prior and informed consent...”Finally the reference to “in accordance with federal law” defeats the very purpose ofinternational standard setting.  If all countriescontinue applying their own internal law, nothing has been accomplished.
d.  Conclusion
Though the United States’ explanation of its
vote is disappointing, the Declaration can still beused strategically at all levels of governmentfrom local to international.  As pointed out, theSupreme Court has recently looked to interna-tional standards for guidance.  There are numer-ous areas where the Declaration can be used inlitigation. For example, the fact that 150 Nationsrecognize the right of self-determination completely undermines that version of the plenary power doctrine which describes congressional power over tribes as virtuallyunlimited.  Santa Clara Pueblo v. Martinez , 436
U.S. 49, 56 (1978) (“…Congress has plenaryauthority to limit, modify or eliminate the powers of local self-government which the tribesotherwise possess.”) Likewise, such worldwiderecognition is totally inconsistent with theSupreme Court opinion in Washington v.
Confederated Bands and Tribes of the YakimaIndian Reservation, 439 U.S. 463 (1979) whichrefused to recognize the right of the tribe to self-government as a fundamental right for purposesof equal protection analysis.  The US statementacknowledges that the Declaration identifiesareas where the US needs to improve its lawsand policies. Those areas to which the US hasappended explanations are certainly areas calling for such improvement. Thus, theDeclaration can be used as a roadmap to thereform of federal Indian law.  It can be used innegotiations with federal agencies and in thedevelopment and implementation of regula-tions.  The Declaration already has been used onthe ground at the local level to convince a boardof education of the right of indigenous studentsto receive language instruction from nativespeakers not formally certified by the State andin using free, prior and informed consent innegotiating with mining companies.
10Article 42
of the Declaration can be used to demand an enhanced status in UN processes, not as non-governmental organizations - ngos.  That isprecisely what tribes are not.  Additionally, theunanimity which now exists in the internationalcommunity lays the foundation for the furtherdevelopment of customary international law, USprotestations to the contrary notwithstanding.There is virtually no end to the uses to which theDeclaration can be put, as long as indigenouspeoples use it wisely.
The Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples is an historic milestone in the long strug-gle by indigenous peoples for due recognition inthe world. The United States’ endorsement isimportant because of the leadership role thecountry plays in the world.  Indigenous peoplesmust keep the United States’ feet to the fire inensuring, as President Obama stated, that actionsmatch the words of the Declaration.=
PAGE 8                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
10Oral communication from Andrea Carmen, International Indian Treaty Council.NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 9NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDCASE UPDATES
State high court empowers tribes' child 
custody decisions
On March 4, 2011, the Alaska Supreme Court
issued a broad affirmation of inherent tribalauthority. In State of Alaska v. Tanana, theCourt ruled that tribal courts have authority toinitiate and adjudicate children’s cases withoutgoing through state courts.
The case was brought in 2004 on behalf of the
Villages of Tanana, Nulato, Akiak, Kalskag,Lower Kalskag and Kenaitze along with Theresaand Dan Schwietert. The case was brought afterGovernor Murkowsi’s administration, on theadvice of former Attorney General Greg Renkes,abruptly stopped recognizing tribal courtdecrees in cases that did not originate in statecourt. Renkes argued that only state courtscould initiate children’s cases and if they chose,transfer those cases to tribal courts. He alsoinstructed state employees to stop recognizingor enforcing tribal court decrees. The case wasbrought to overturn Renkes’ opinion and toforce the State, its agencies and officials to formally recognize valid tribal court decreeswithout regard to any state court involvement.
State services frequently do not reach village
Alaska. Tribal courts must therefore handlemost cases involving the welfare of village children. State recognition of those tribal courtproceedings is therefore critical to assure thatproceedings which occur in tribal court are thenrespected by other state agencies. Otherwise,adoptive parents may not be able to participatein state funded assistance programs, secure substitute birth certificates necessary to travelout of state, to enroll children in school, or tosecure medical care.
The Schwieterts faced just such a dilemma.
After adopting a special needs child in Tananatribal court, they had difficulty accessing healthcare. They were also frustrated in their plans totravel out of state when they were told that theycould not acquire a substitute birth certificatefor their adoptive child since the child had beenadopted in a tribal rather than state court proceeding.
NARF attorney Heather Kendall Miller called
on Governor Parnell and Attorney GeneralBurns to rescind the Renkes Opinion andinstead take this opportunity to work with tribesand tribal courts to ensure the protection of allchildren, no matter which court their case is in.She sounded on a positive note: “now that theCourt has reaffirmed tribal authority in this areaI look forward to working with Attorney GeneralBurns to better coordinate tribal and state services in village Alaska.”
NARF receives ACLU honor
On January 22, 2011, the Alaska Office of the
Native American Rights Fund was named one of
the 40 Heroes of Constitutional Rights by theAmerican Civil Liberties Union of Alaska.  In celebration of its 40th anniversary, the Alaskaoffice of the ACLU honored the 40 people andorganizations that it considered to be heroes ofconstitutional rights.  NARF was honored for itslong history of commitment to upholding therights of Alaska Native people as described in thefollowing excerpt from the event program:
PAGE 10                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND“The Alaska Office is responsible for many of
the major subsistence decisions in Alaska inthe past 25 years, such as the milestone KatieJohn case. . . The Alaska Office has also prior-itized the protection of tribal sovereignty andhas successfully litigated numerous casesaffirming the governmental status of AlaskaTribes as possessing inherent authority overtheir members.”
The ACLU also noted that it has partnered with
the NARF Alaska Office in two critical casesupholding the rights of indigenous people to usetheir Native languages:
“The first case successfully challenged the‘English Only’ law that required individuals tospeak only English when engaged in govern-ment business, such as at the DMV or incourt. In the second case, NARF and the ACLUof Alaska sued the State of Alaska for violationof the Voting Rights Act by failing to providelanguage assistance to thousands of Alaska’sYup’ik-speaking voters.  Following a prelimi-nary injunction, a comprehensive agreementwas reached which includes translation and interpretation assistance for all Yup’ikspeaking voters throughout the registrationand voting process.”
NARF is honored to be named one of the
ACLU’s 40 Heroes.  For more information on theAlaska Office or its recent court victories pleasego to www.narf.org.
Tribal Supreme Court Project Update
The Tribal Supreme Court Project is part of
the Tribal Sovereignty Protection Initiative andis staffed by the National Congress of American
Indians (NCAI) and the Native American RightsFund. The Project was formed in 2001 inresponse to a series of U.S. Supreme Court casesthat negatively affected tribal sovereignty. Thepurpose of the Project is to promote greatercoordination and to improve strategy on litiga-tion that may affect the rights of all Indiantribes. We encourage Indian tribes and theirattorneys to contact the Project in our effort tocoordinate resources, develop strategy and prepare briefs, especially at the time of the petition for a writ of certiorari, prior to theSupreme Court accepting a case for review. 
At present, two important Indian trust cases
are pending on the merits before the Court.First, the Tribal Supreme Court Project finalizedthe preparation of amicus briefs in support ofthe Tribe in United States v. Jicarilla ApacheNation which was argued before the Court on
April 20, 2011. In this case, the United States ischallenging the Federal Circuit’s ruling that thefederal government “cannot deny an Indiantribe’s request to discover communicationsbetween the United States and its attorneysbased on the attorney-client privilege whenthose communications concern the manage-ment of an Indian trust.” Second, the Projectcontinues to wait for the Court to issue its decision in United States v. Tohono O’odhamNation which was argued on November 1, 2010.
The delay in issuing an opinion may indicate alack of consensus on the Court regarding thebroad rule requested by the United States whichwould preclude any Indian tribe from bringing
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 11NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDmoney damages claims in the Court of Federal
Claims if they have filed a “related” tribal trustmismanagement case in another court eventhough it seeks different (e.g. equitable andinjunctive) relief. 
The Court has called for the views of the
Solicitor General in three other Indian lawcases: Osage Nation v. Irby (reservation disestab-
lishment); Brown (formerly Schwarzenegger) v.
Rincon Band (IGRA “revenue” sharing); and
Miccosukee Tribe v. Kraus-Anderson (enforce-
ment of tribal court judgments). More than likely,the Solicitor General will not file his briefs untilafter the Court’s April 2011 oral argument session,but the petitions will likely be considered inconference before the Court adjourns for itssummer recess at the end of June 2011. 
Cases Recently Decided By 
The Supreme Court
Madison County V. Oneida Nation Of New
York (No. 10-72) – On January 10, 2011, the
Court issued an order vacating and remandingthe case to the U.S. Court of Appeals for theSecond Circuit. In a per curiam opinion, theCourt stated: We granted certiorari on the questions “whethertribal sovereign immunity from suit, to theextent it should continue to be recognized, barstaxing authorities from foreclosing to collectlawfully imposed property taxes” and “whetherthe ancient Oneida reservation in New York was disestablished or diminished.” Counsel forrespondent Oneida Indian Nation advised theCourt through a letter on November 30, 2010,that the Nation had, on November 29, 2010,passed a tribal declaration and ordinance waiving“its sovereign immunity to enforcement of realproperty taxation through foreclosure by state,
county and local governments within andthroughout the United States.” PetitionersMadison and Oneida Counties responded in aDecember 1, 2010 letter, questioning the validity,scope, and permanence of that waiver; theNation addressed those concerns in a December 2,2010 letter.We vacate the judgment and remand the case
to the United States Court of Appeals for theSecond Circuit. That court should address, inthe first instance, whether to revisit its rulingon sovereign immunity in light of this newfactual development, and—if necessary— proceed to address other questions in the caseconsistent with its sovereign immunity ruling. [Citations omitted].
This ruling is a victory for the Oneida Indian
Nation and for all of Indian country. In MadisonCounty, the Second Circuit had held that the
Oneida Indian Nation is immune from suit, butin a terse concurring opinion written by JudgeCabranes, two of the three judges on the panelmade clear that although they were bound bySupreme Court precedent upholding tribal sovereign immunity, the decision “defies common sense” and “is so anomalous that itcalls out for the Supreme Court to revisit Kiowaand Potawatomi.” For the present, the Court
will not be revisiting its well-settled precedent.
PAGE 12                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDPetitions For Writ Of Certiorari Granted
Currently, a writ of certiorari has been granted
in two Indian law cases: United States V. Jicarilla
Apache Nation (No. 10-382) – On January 7,
2011, the Court granted review of a decision bythe U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuitwhich held that the federal government “cannotdeny an Indian tribe’s request to discover communications between the United States and its attorneys based on the attorney-clientprivilege when those communications concernthe management of an Indian trust and theUnited States has not claimed that the govern-ment or its attorneys considered a specific com-peting interest in those communications.” TheFederal Circuit adopted the fiduciary exceptionto the attorney-client privilege in tribal trustcases which permits a beneficiary to discoverinformation relating to fiduciary matters(including trust management). Oral argumentwas heard on April 20, 2011. 
United States V. Tohono O’odham Nation (No.
09-846) – On November 1, 2010, the U.S.Supreme Court heard oral argument in UnitedStates v. Tohono O’odham Nation, a case in
which the U.S. Court of Appeals for the FederalCircuit found that 28 U.S.C. § 1500 does not pre-clude jurisdiction in the Court of Federal Claimswhen a Indian tribe has also filed an action inFederal District Court seeking different relief(e.g. money damages versus historical accounting).The question presented for the Court’s review is:Whether 28 U.S.C. 1500 deprives the CFC ofjurisdiction over a claim seeking monetary relieffor the government’s alleged violation of fiduciaryobligations if the plaintiff has another suit pendingin federal district court based on substantiallythe same operative facts, especially when theplaintiff seeks monetary relief or other over- lapping relief in the two suits. 
During oral argument, the Justices appeared
to struggle with the positions of both parties andthe practical implications resulting from a rulingfor either side. In particular, the Court appearedhesitant to adopt the broad rule sought by theUnited States—a rule precluding jurisdiction inthe Court of Federal Claims in which a “related”case is pending in another court even if it seeksdifferent relief. A number of Indian tribes havefiled identical claims for breach of fiduciaryduties in both the Court of Federal Claims andthe Federal District Court seeking separaterelief. Unlike prior Indian law cases, the Justicesdid not appear as hostile to the tribal position.Four amicus briefs in support of the TohonoO’odham Nation were filed by the U.S. Chamberof Commerce, the National Association of HomeBuilders, the Colorado River Indian Tribes andNational Congress of American Indians, and the Osage Nation. Justice Kagan is recused inthis case.=
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 13National Indian Law Library
The National Indian Law Library
(NILL) is the only law library in the
United States devoted to Indian law. Thelibrary serves both NARF and membersof the public. Since it was started as aNARF project in 1972, NILL has collectednearly 9,000 resource materials thatrelate to federal Indian and tribal law. The Library’s holdings include the largest collection of tribal codes,ordinances, and constitutions; legalpleadings from major Indian cases; andoften hard to find reports and historicallegal information. In addition to makingits catalog and extensive collection available to the public, NILL provides referenceand research assistance relating to Indian law andtribal law and its professional staff answers over2,000 questions each year. In addition, theLibrary has created and maintains a huge web sitethat provides access to thousands of full-textsources to help the researcher.
The National Indian Law Library is currently
undergoing a new push to increase the tribal lawcontent available at NILL and online through itsTribal Law Gateway. NILL ’s Access to Tribal LawProject (ATLP) currently has over 230 tribes par-ticipating by providing tribal codes, constitutionsand other tribal legal materials for NILL ’s collec-tion. In an effort to foster increased communica-tions between tribes and the library, NILL recentlysurveyed over ninety tribal judges, tribal leaders,law librarians, students, tribal members andother practitioners of Indian Law on the impor-tance of having access to tribal law materials. Thelast few months also saw the creation of theAccess to Tribal Law Project Support Committee,composed of leaders in Indian law from across thenation. The Support Committee oversees theProject’s goal of providing reliable access to current tribal law, assists in recruiting new tribesto join the ATLP and encourages participatingtribes to provide updates.
NILL has recently debuted two new, helpful 
features on its website to assist researcherssearching for tribal law materials: a sleeker, consolidated version of the library’s Tribal LawGateway (www.narf.org/nill/triballaw/index.htm)and the Access to Tribal Law Project Homepage(www.narf.org/nill/atlp.htm). The Gateway nowhosts the code and constitution of each tribe in one, easy-to-use location and is updated frequently. The ATLP Homepage provides moreinformation about tribal law access through NILLand guides tribes through the process of gettinginvolved with the project, step-by-step. For anytribal leaders or tribal attorneys interested inlearning more about Access to Tribal Law at NILLor ready to add your tribe’s code and/or constitution to our growing collection, call JamesBryant at (303) 447-8760 ext. 139 or email atjbryant@narf.org. =
Justice Through Knowledge!PAGE 14                                                                          NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
• Bristol Bay Native
Corporation
• Chickasaw Nation
• Citizen Potawatomi Nation• Fond du Lac Band of Lake
Superior Chippewa
• Iowa Tribe of Oklahoma• Menominee Indian Tribe 
of Wisconsin
• Mississippi Band 
of Choctaw Indian• Pauma Band of Mission
Indians
• Poarch Band 
of Creek Indians
• Pokagon Band of
Potawatomi Indians
• Saginaw Chippewa Indian
Tribe of Michigan
• San Manuel Band 
of Mission Indians
• Shakopee Mdewakanton
Sioux Community• Stillaguamish Tribe 
of Indians
• Tanana Chiefs Conference• Wildhorse Foundation• Yoche Dehe Wintun NationIt has been made abundantly clear that non-
Indian philanthropy can no longer sustain
NARF’s work.  Federal funds for specific projectshave also been reduced.  Our ability to providelegal advocacy in a wide variety of areas such asreligious freedom, the Tribal Supreme CourtProject, tribal recognition, human rights, trustresponsibility, tribal water rights, Indian ChildWelfare Act, and on Alaska tribal sovereigntyissues has been compromised. NARF is nowturning to the tribes to provide this crucialfunding to continue our legal advocacy onbehalf of Indian Country.  It is an honor to listthose Tribes and Native organizations who havechosen to share their good fortunes with theNative American Rights Fund and the thousandsof Indian clients we have served.  The generosityof Tribes is crucial in NARF’s struggle to ensurethe future of all Native Americans.
The generosity of tribes is crucial in NARF’s
struggle to ensure the freedoms and rights of allNative Americans. Contributions from thesetribes should be an example for every NativeAmerican Tribe and organization. We encourageother Tribes to become contributors and partners with NARF in fighting for justice forour people and in keeping the vision of ourancestors alive. We thank the following tribesand Native organizations for their generous support of NARF thus far for our 2011 fiscal year– October 1, 2010 to September 30, 2011:
CALLING TRIBES TO ACTION!NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 15NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDTHE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF Annual Report: This is NARF's major report on its programs
and activities.  The Annual Report is distributed to foundations, major
contributors, certain federal and state agencies, tribal clients, NativeAmerican organizations, and to others upon request.  Ray RamirezEditor, ramirez@narf.org.  
The NARF Legal Review is published biannually by the Native
American Rights Fund.  Third class postage paid at Boulder, Colorado.
Ray Ramirez, Editor, ramirez@narf.org.  There is no charge for sub-scriptions, however, contributions are appreciated.
Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund is a nonprofit, charitable
organization incorporated in 1971 under the laws of the District of Columbia.  NARF is exempt from federal income tax under the provisions of Section 501 C (3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and contributions to NARF are tax deductible.  The Internal RevenueService has ruled that NARF is not a "private foundation" as defined inSection 509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Main Office: Native American Rights Fund, 1506 Broadway, Boulder,
Colorado  80302 (303-447-8760) (FAX 303-443-7776).  http://www.narf.orgWashington, D.C. Office: Native American Rights Fund, 1514 P Street,
NW (Rear) Suite D, Washington, D.C. 20005 (202-785-4166) 
(FAX 202-822-0068).
Alaska Office: Native American Rights Fund, 801 B Street, Suite 401,
Anchorage, Alaska 99501 (907-276-0680) (FAX 907-276-2466).Looking back at the past forty years of the Native American
Rights Fund’s (NARF) existence, it is almost impossible to com-
prehensively document the impact that NARF has had in Indiancountry. Before NARF’s existence, there were not many attorneys
working for Indians. Most of them were handling contingency-feecases since few tribes could afford tribal counsel. “Indian law” wasneither developed, nor defined, let alone being taught in law schools.
Today, the delivery of responsible, comprehensive legal repre-
sentation to Indian tribes, organizations and individuals hasbeen institutionalized as an integral part of America’s justice sys-tem. Private practitioners, tribal attorneys, legal services officesand other non-profit organizations like NARF together are providing representation to Indians, using our country’s justiceand legislative systems to assure that Indian rights are upheld. 
Native advocates were almost invincible during the 1970’s and
into the 1980’s, especially in the U.S. Supreme Court. Beginningin the mid-1980’s, Supreme Court decisions started shiftingagainst tribal interests. This negative shift continues today as themajority of the Supreme Court seems intent on limiting tribalsovereignty.
After the modern day tribal sovereignty movement, the field of
Indian law is no longer considered an esoteric subject aboutancient history. Due in part to NARF’s existence – its tremendoussuccesses in the courts as well as continued representation overthe years in thousands of cases – the rights of America’s Indiansare now judiciously and routinely being advocated before thecourts, administrative hearings, state legislatures and Congress.Officials and bureaucrats who either chose to ignore or had noinformation on the specific rights of America’s Indians in thepast are today held accountable for decisions relating to NativeAmericans, partly because of the rights defined and upheld inNARF’s courtroom and legislative victories.
The initial goal for NARF’s Indian law practitioners was to 
represent Native Americans in cases of major significance to agreat number of Indian people. For the first time, Indian peoplewere assured that a sustained, highly-trained Indian advocacygroup was available to them to clarify treaty and constitutionalrights guaranteed them – regardless of their ability to pay. NARFwas directly involved as either counsel or co-counsel in practi-cally all of the early precedent-setting cases of the 1970’s. 
The Native American Rights Fund has been at the forefront on
advocating many of the major acts and reviews potentially affectingall Native Americans including the American Indian ReligiousFreedom Act, the Indian Child Welfare Act, the American IndianPolicy Review Commission, the Native American GravesProtection and Repatriation Act, the Voting Rights Act, theIndian Self-Determination Act, the Maine Indian Land ClaimsSettlement Act, the Religious Freedom Restoration Act andmany others. NARF has also been instrumental in assisting vitalnew Indian organizations including the American Indian HigherEducation Consortium, the Tribal Education DepartmentsNational Assembly, the Council on Energy Resource Tribes, theNational Tribal Environmental Council and the Native HawaiianLegal Corporation. 
As an Indian-controlled organization, NARF’s leadership has
provided as many opportunities as possible to develop youngIndian law graduates and students in the area of Indian law. Anaverage of eight law interns and/or clerks are employed annuallyby NARF , most of them being Native American.
NARF’s existence would not be possible without the efforts of
the thousands of individuals who have offered their knowledge,courage and vision to help guide NARF on its quest.  Of equalimportance, NARF’s financial contributors have graciously provided the resources to give our efforts life.  Contributors suchas the Ford Foundation have been with NARF since its inception.The Open Society Institute, the Bay and Paul Foundations andthe Unger Foundation have also made long term funding commitments.  Finally, the positive effects of NARF’s work arereflected in the financial contributions by a growing number oftribal governments like the Yocha Dehe Wintun Nation, theSeminole Tribe of Florida, the Chickasaw Nation, the SanManuel Band of Mission Indians, the Muckleshoot Tribe, theMississippi Band of Choctaw Indians and the Poarch Band ofCreek Indians.  United, these financial, moral, and intellectualgifts provide the framework for NARF to fulfill its goal of securing the right to self-determination to which all NativeAmerican peoples are entitled. 
NARF strives to protect the most important rights of Indian
people within the limit of available resources.  To achieve thisgoal, NARF’s Board of Directors defined five priority areas forNARF’s work:  (1) the preservation of tribal existence; (2) theprotection of tribal natural resources; (3) the promotion ofhuman rights; (4) the accountability of governments to NativeAmericans; and (5) the development of Indian law and educatingthe public about Indian rights, laws, and issues.
Requests for legal assistance should be addressed to the
Litigation Management Committee at NARF’s main office, 1506 Broadway, Boulder, Colorado 80302.  NARF’s clients areexpected to pay whatever they can toward the costs of legal representation.NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Gerald Danforth, Chairman .................................................................................. Wisconsin Oneida
Kunani Nihipali , Vice-Chairman ............................................................................ Native HawaiianVirginia Cross  ...................................................................................................... Muckleshoot TribeBeasley Denson ........................................................................ Mississippi Band of Choctaw IndiansRichard Luarkie ........................................................................................................Pueblo of LagunaMark Macarro .............................................................................. Pechanga Band of Luiseño IndiansMarshall McKay  ...................................................................................... Yocha Dehe Wintun NationBuford Rolin ........................................................................................ Poarch Band of Creek India ns
Natasha Singh .............................................................................................. Native Village of S tevens 
Barbara Anne Smith .............................................................................................. Chickasaw Nati on
Ron His Horse Is Thunder ................................................................................ Standing Rock SiouxExecutive Director: John E. Echohawk .................................................................................. Pawnee
NARF LEGAL REVIEW • VOLUME 36, NO. 1 • WINTER/SPRING 2011Native American Rights Fund
1506 Broadway
Boulder, CO 80302Non-Profit Org.
U.S. Postage
PAID
Boulder, Colorado
Permit No. 589
PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER
