Introduction
On June 14, 2006, the Native American Rights
Fund (NARF), on behalf of the Kickapoo Tribe inKansas, filed a federal lawsuit in the U.S. DistrictCourt in Kansas City in an effort to enforceexpress promises made to the Tribe to build thePlum Creek Reservoir Project in the UpperDelaware and Tributaries ( “Delaware” or “UDT”)watershed in northeast Kansas.  The Nemaha-Brown Watershed Joint Board # 7, the NaturalResources Conservation Service (NRCS) of theUnited States Department of Agriculture, andthe State of Kansas made these promises to theTribe over a decade ago.  In the intervening yearsthese parties have been actively developing thewater resources of the watershed, resulting inthe near depletion of what should be recognizedas the Tribe’s senior federal water rights in the drainage.
In the federal litigation the Tribe is seeking a
declaration that the Tribe and its members holdthe senior water rights in the Delaware watersystem in Kansas, as a matter of federal and state
law, and seeking declaratory and injunctive reliefagainst the defendants to prevent the continuedexpenditure of state and federal funding of projects on private land in the watershed.  Theseprojects are destroying the Tribe’s access tolong-term and sufficiently dependable waterquantities, of sufficient quality.  
This action also seeks enforcement of promises
made by the United States, the State of Kansas,and those named districts to provide meaningfulaccess to water for the Kickapoo people. 
VOLUME 31, NO.2                                                          SUMMER/FALL 2006Native American Rights FundNative American Rights FundNative American Rights Fund
Kickapoo Tribe in Kansas 
files lawsuit in federal court to end  30-year era of systematic 
deprivation of the Tribe’s 
water rights 
............................................page 1CASE UPDATES
- NARF’s National Indian Law
Library wins national award
........................................ page 7
- Voting Rights Act
Reauthorization 2006 .... page 7- Historic United Nations vote on
indigenous rights ............ page 8
CALLING TRIBES TO ACTION!
............................................ page 9
Indian Law Library .......... page 10Kickapoo Tribe in Kansas
files lawsuit in federalcourt to end 30-year era of systematic deprivation of the Tribe’s water rights
Angie Cadue, Kickapoo Tribe in KansasThe Tribe seeks specific performance of express
promises made to the Kickapoo Tribe in the1994 UDT Agreement, executed by the parties tothis lawsuit. Because of the systematic actions ofthe defendants, and the refusal of the Bureau ofIndian Affairs to take affirmative protectiveaction, the Tribe has been systematicallydeprived of the water to which it is legally entitled for more than a generation.
For far too long the Kickapoo people have
waited patiently for their state and federalneighbors and partners to act honorably and ingood faith.  The Kickapoo people now seek toreceive justice from the courts of the UnitedStates for promises repeatedly delayed, deniedand broken.
The Issue
Water is life to the Kickapoo people.  Since
aboriginal times in the Great Lakes region theKickapoo people have managed water to sustainlife.  Many traditional stories and practices of theKickapoo people revolve around the mystery andsanctity of water.  The Kickapoo Tribe has manyhistorical, social, and religious ties to water.The selection by the Tribe of the lands whichbecame its present reservation in Kansas wasmade in part due to the proximity to and abun-dance of water sources.  Water is vital to makethe Tribe’s Reservation homeland in BrownCounty, Kansas a liveable and economicallyviable place for the Tribe and its members, as well as other non-tribal members who live on the reservation and depend on the samewater supply.  
For over 30 years the Tribe has been seeking a
way to secure a long-term, dependable source ofwater for its homeland and its Tribal members.It has been working in good faith with Nemaha
Brown and its Board, and the NRCS, since 1983– a period of 23 years – to secure the multi-purpose Plum Creek project as part of the largerUDT Watershed Agreement.  In 1994, the Tribeand the defendants in the lawsuit signed a federalcontract to develop 21 water storage projects inthe watershed under the federal P .L. 83-566Small Watersheds Program administered byNRCS.  The Plum Creek Project was the largest,
and focal point, of the entire UDT Agreement.Congress approved the project in 1998, andauthorized NRCS and the parties to proceed.  
The Nemaha Brown Watershed District is a
party to the agreement in large part, from theTribe’s perspective, for its authority to condemnfee lands within the Plum Creek project bound-aries as well as for the 20 smaller dam projects.The Tribe does not have the authority under federal law to condemn fee lands.  At no timeprior to 2003, when the Nemaha Brown Board ofDirectors first evinced its intent not to performits obligations under the Watershed Agreementby indefinitely tabling the vote to condemn 
private lands within the Plum Creek project
boundaries, has there been any indication to theTribe that Nemaha Brown or its Board had anychange of heart concerning its obligationsunder the Agreement.  The Tribe has beenbetrayed by the Nemaha Brown Board’s refusalto proceed with the promised condemnation of the lands necessary for the Plum Creek multi-use project.
PAGE 2                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Angie Cadue describes the depleted and unreliable supply
of water from the Delaware River.NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                       PAGE 3NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
As a direct consequence of the activities of 
the defendants, the Delaware River and its tributaries, flowing through the KickapooReservation, are choked with so many dams,ponds, terraces, waterways and relatedimpoundments that the river system currentlycannot produce sufficient water quantity flowsof adequate quality, to meet the homeland rightsof the Kickapoo Tribe and the Kickapoo people.The Tribe’s water quality treatment plant, adjacent to its tribal offices in Horton, Kansas, ispresently under a federal EnvironmentalProtection Agency notice of violation of the federal Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974, and hasbeen continuously since January of 2004.
According to the EPA, the water quality on the
reservation is so poor it is harmful to humanhealth, unsuitable for human consumption, andis in violation of the Safe Drinking Water Act of
1974. As a result the Kickapoo people are unableto safely drink, bathe or cook with tap water.
The denial of the relief requested by the Tribe,
namely the denial by the NRCS to cease fundingactivities in the UDT watershed, and the denialby the BIA to intervene and assist the Tribe inprotecting its land and water resources are, incontravention of the United States’ obligationsto the Tribe under federal treaty, statutory andcommon law.
Under Supreme Court precedent, the Tribe has
a fundamental right to sufficient water fromwater sources flowing over and through its landreservation, to ensure a viable homeland for the Kickapoo people, for present and future purposes, including domestic, industrial, com-mercial, municipal, agricultural and other 
cultural purposes.
The Supreme Court established in Winters v.
United States , (1908) and re-affirmed in Arizona
v. California , (1963) and in numerous subse-
quent federal and state court decisions, the Tribeand its members have reserved federal waterrights, called “ Winters rights,” sufficient to 
fulfill the purposes of the creation of itsReservation, first established in Kansas in 1832.The Tribe’s Winter’s rights and those of its 
members are the senior rights on the UpperDelaware River and its tributaries. Under bothfederal and state law, the water impoundmentprojects of junior users – and associated statelaw based water rights – cannot be approved,funded and constructed if they harm the rights ofa senior right holder such as the Tribe.  The PlumCreek project is crucial to ensuring the seniorrights of the Tribe are not adversely affected.
The Plum Creek project has been viewed by
the Tribe for over three decades as the primarymeans by which it would secure the long-term,
dependable and ultimately decreed rights towater to which the Tribe and its members areentitled as a matter of federal law.
In times of natural drought such as that expe-
rienced in the Summer of 2003, the combinedeffect of the drought and the man-madeimpoundments in the UDT watershed cause theUpper Delaware River to run dry for long periodsof time.  A generation ago the watershed was farmore reliable for meeting the Tribe’s needs, butupriver development has altered it radically.
PAGE 4                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Left to right; Damon Williams, Tribal General Counsel;
Amelia Holmes, Tribal Staff Attorney; Lester Randall,Tribal Vice-Chairman; Amy Bowers, NARF Law Clerk;Steve Cadue, Tribal Chairman; Bobbie Dornall, TribalCouncil; Steve Moore, NARF Attorney — Filing suit at thefederal courthouse.NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 5NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDDuring the drought of 2003 the Delaware
River, and its upstream tributaries, were com-pletely without flow for over sixty days due tothe severe weather conditions in the Midwestand Western states, as well as the adverse effectsof upstream impoundments developed by thedefendants. The Tribe was forced to severelyration water and truck over 7,000,000 gallons ofdrinking water to the Reservation.  The Tribe’scommercial operations as well as individualsand families were forced to cut water consump-tion by almost 60%.
Sadly, these climate extremes are not new,
unknown, or an unexpected part of living innortheast Kansas, where the Tribe was forciblyrelocated in the 19th Century, unlike in theTribe’s original homeland in the Lower GreatLakes. Thus the Kickapoo Reservation faces off-again – on-again drought conditions resultingin a continual crisis in obtaining an adequateand reliable water source to meet the basichealth and sanitary needs of the Kickapoo people.
As a direct and foreseeable consequence of the
water resource development activities undertakenby the defendants, the natural drought fluctua-tions and resulting water shortages which havebeset the Upper Delaware River and theKickapoo Tribe have been badly exacerbated.This result could and should have been foreseenby the United States and its State partners, whocollectively have a fiduciary obligation to theKickapoo Tribe and its people to protect theirland and water resources – their homeland, andwho have a contractual obligation pursuant tothe UDT Agreement to assist the Tribe in thedevelopment of the Plum Creek project so as notto interfere with its water rights.
The NRCS, the BIA, and the State of Kansas
have known for decades of the fragile and pre-carious nature of the Upper Delaware andTributaries Watershed, of the Tribe’s dependenceupon that watershed, and thus of the fragile andprecarious nature of the Tribe’s water situation.Given the trust obligation to protect the trust assets of the Tribe, it is therefore uncon-scionable that these entities would spend millions of dollars to develop the non-Indianwater resources in the watershed in violation of
and interference with the Winters rights of the
Tribe and its members.
The Kickapoo Tribe
The Tribe has a tragic history in the settlement
of the Great Lakes and Midwest regions of whatis now the United States.  It has been forciblymoved at least five times by the United States,pursuant to ten treaties spanning a fifty-yearperiod between 1809 and 1862. Those treatiesgenerally promised the protection of the federalgovernment of the Tribe’s reservation as anexclusive homeland for the Kickapoo people.Time and again the United States failed to fulfillthe promises it made to the Kickapoo Tribe andpeople; time and again their reservation landswere taken from them and they were moved –first from the Fox River Valley in Wisconsin toIllinois, and then to Missouri and finally to Kansas.
The Tribe has occupied its present territory in
Kansas since the 1832 Treaty of Castor Hill,twenty-nine years prior to the Kansas StatehoodAct of 1861.  In the Treaty of 1854, the KickapooTribe ceded over 600,000 acres of land to theU.S. Government, but retained approximately150,000 acres of land within its originalReservation boundaries. In 1862, the Tribeceded the remaining lands to the U.S.Government, except the current five (5) by six(6) mile Reservation, also within the originalboundaries. These treaties and other federallaws and court decisions confer on the UnitedStates and its departments of government anexpress and enforceable fiduciary obligation to protect the land and natural resources of the Tribe.
The Tribe presently holds equitable title 
to approximately 3,800 acres, and fee title toanother 600 acres of land within its Reservationboundaries.  Tribal members own equitable titleto another 3,100 acres of allotted land.  Underfederal law the underlying legal title to this landis held in trust for the Tribe and its members bythe United States.
In the mid-1970s, the Tribe constructed its
own water treatment and supply system withfinancial assistance from the U.S. Economic
Development Administration.  The Tribe alsoestablished a Tribal Environmental Office sup-ported by the U.S. Environmental ProtectionAgency.  The Tribal water system includes a lowwater impoundment dam on the Delaware River,an intake and raw water pump station, watertreatment plant, and distribution system.  TheTribal water treatment plant was constructed inaccordance with federal drinking water qualitystandards.  The low water impoundment damwas developed merely as a temporary supplymeasure to serve the Tribe until a permanentupstream reservoir on Plum Creek could bedeveloped.
The Kickapoo Water Treatment Plant currently
supplies water to both Indian members and non-Indians alike who live within the Reservationboundaries. The Tribe operates its own TribalSchool – grades K through 12 – and would liketo supply water to this facility, but they areunable to supply the school with water fromtheir own water supply.  Several economic devel-opment opportunities for the Kickapoo peoplehave been lost over time because the KickapooTribe could not ensure that the Tribe’s waterworks could meet their water needs.  The lack ofwater is restricting the economic growth anddevelopment of the Kickapoo people.
The Tribe also provides basic fire protection to
all Reservation residents, both Kickapoo tribalmembers and non-Indians alike, under mutualaid agreements executed with neighboring juris-dictions.  The Tribe’s ability to do so, however, isseverely impaired by the lack of water.Reservation residents and numerous Tribalstructures are in constant danger.  In March of2005, an arsonist set a large fire on Kickapoolands, destroying 1,500 acres.  Without the aid ofneighboring communities, a larger land area,including homes and other structures, wouldlikely have been destroyed due to the shortage of water.
The water hauling expenses incurred in the
drought of 2003 were covered in part by the federal Bureau of Indian Affairs and Bureau ofReclamation, in recognition of their trustresponsibility to provide safe drinking water toIndian people; indeed a cruel irony, given that
the Winters rights of the Tribe to water are the
most senior on the Upper Delaware River system.  The United States has an affirmativeobligation to protect the Tribe’s Winters rights
in the UDT watershed, not to deliberately permittheir depletion, and then haul water to the Tribeand its members under emergency conditionspartly of its own making.
Conclusion
Through the litigation the Tribe intends to
secure its water rights in the Upper DelawareRiver watershed, for the full range of uses towhich Indian tribes are entitled to water underthe Winters doctrine.  The Tribe has stressed
that litigation was a last resort, however, a nec-essary one in order to convince the other majorplayers in northeast Kansas of the seriousness ofits position.  There may be possibilities for turningthe litigation into a successful Indian waterrights settlement, as has happened in otherparts of the United States primarily in the west, but only time and the cooperation of theother sovereign governments and the NemahaBrown Watershed Board and its members will tell. ❂
PAGE 6                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Steve Cadue, Chairman, Kickapoo Tribe of KansasNARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 7NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
When the Native American Rights Fund (NARF)
was founded in 1970, it immediately determinedthat in order to promote justice for NativeAmericans, it needed to provide legal researchassistance to the public. Without access to theright information, it would be difficult for peopleto understand the unique relationship betweenAmerican Indian nations and the United Statesgovernment. It would be difficult for people tofight for the rights of America’s indigenous peoples. As a result, NARF established the NationalIndian Law Library (NILL) two years after itsfounding.
Today NILL, provides research and information
support to both NARF and the public. Each year,NILL provides personal assistance to over a thou-sand tribal attorneys, tribal governments, students, educators, Indian law clinics and legalsupport centers, prisoners, the media, and others.Countless people have been helped by accessinginformation from the library’s web site also at:http://www.narf.org/nill/index.htm. Recently, the library was awarded the American
Association of Law Libraries “Public Access toGovernment Information” award for its effort inmaking tribal laws and other valuable Indian lawinformation accessible. Another renowned serviceof NILL which keeps gaining in popularity are theIndian Law Bulletins. (See: http://www.narf.org/nill/bulletins/ilb.htm) This free service makesavailable summaries of the most recent andimportant Indian law cases, news, regulatoryinformation and articles. “Subscribers” to theBulletins receive email alerts as soon as new information is published. 
The National Indian Law Library, unlike most
public libraries, does not receive funding fromlocal or federal tax levies. It is supported almostsolely by individual contributions, yet its missionis to be open to all.  But NILL is especially proudto assist tribal governments.  Think of NILL asyour law library.  Information professionals David
Selden and Monica Martens are ready to help withyour next Indian law-related research project.
CASE UPDATES
NARF’s National Indian Law Library wins national award
In 2006, NARF partnered with the Leadership
Conference on Civil Rights to encourage Congressto renew the Voting Rights Act (VRA) which wasset to expire in 2007.  As part of this effort, NARFauthored a report – the first of its kind – on theimpact of the VRA in Alaska. NARF was then askedto support this with Congressional testimonybefore the Senate Committee on the Judiciary. We are delighted that the VRA has been renewedwith overwhelming support and was signed intolaw for another 25 years on July 27, 2006.  Whilemany people associate the VRA with the African-American population and southern states, the VRAhas also had a profound impact on the voting rights
of American Indians and Alaska Natives.  
Two sections of the VRA critical to Indian
Country were up for reauthorization: the minoritylanguage provisions and preclearance.  The former,which are found in Section 203, mandate that if
more than 5% of the voting age population in acertain jurisdiction are members of a single lan-guage “minority” and have limited proficiency inEnglish, then that jurisdiction must provide oraland written assistance in the minority language.(Jurisdictions may also find themselves subject tothe minority language provisions under section4(f)(4) of the VRA if they employed a “test ordevice” such as a literacy test in previous elections.)More specifically, this means that everything fromregistration forms to actual ballots and even thesigns posted at the polling place must be in theminority language, in addition to having transla-tors available at every poll. Section 203 essentiallyprovides that in jurisdictions where more than 5%speak a Native language, the elections have to beconducted in English and the Native language.
Voting Rights Act Reauthorization 2006PAGE 8                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
On June 29, 2006, in an historic vote, the new
United Nations’ Human Rights Council over-whelmingly approved the United Nations’ DraftDeclaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.The vote was thirty in favor, two opposed, and 12abstaining. The only two countries voting againstthe Declaration were Russia and Canada. TheDeclaration approved was a combination of provisions agreed upon by indigenous peoplesworldwide and states, and a compromise text ofthose provisions upon which consensus had notbeen reached. This compromise text was devel-oped by the Chair of the Working Group on theDraft Declaration. Thus, while the Declaration asapproved was not a consensus document, it wasendorsed by most indigenous peoples worldwideas a major step forward in a process that has beengoing on since the 1970s.
The Declaration recognizes that indigenous 
peoples have important collective rights in a multitude of areas, including self-determination,spirituality, lands, territories, and naturalresources. Indigenous peoples and most statesconsider these rights to be human rights just asthe individual human rights recognized by western notions of human rights. The positivevote by the Human Rights Council means that theDeclaration will be forwarded to the GeneralAssembly of the United Nations for vote later this year.
NARF has participated in the process of the 
draft declaration for several years on behalf of its client, the National Congress of AmericanIndians. 
❂Historic United Nations vote on indigenous rightsNationally, more than 400 jurisdictions are cov-ered by Section 203, including most of Alaska.The other critical provision of the VRA, preclear-ance, provides that jurisdictions with a history ofdiscrimination must submit all election lawchanges to the U.S. Department of Justice forreview before that change is implemented.  Thisprevents jurisdictions from enacting laws thatwould impair or interfere with the right to vote,such as forbidding the use of tribal identificationcards or requiring state-issued driver licenses.These two sections form the centerpiece of the VRA.
Alaska was central to NARF’s study of the impact
of the VRA in Indian Country because many AlaskaNatives still speak primarily their Native language.This is particularly true of Central and SiberianYup’ik people in the western part of the State andthe Inupiat people in the north and northwest.  Inthe Yup’ik-speaking Bethel area for example, theconservative estimate for those with limitedEnglish proficiency is 21%.  That means morethan one-fifth of the population speaks Yup’ikinstead of English.  But the Yup’ik do not have tolearn English to vote – the VRA requires that theelections learn Yup’ik! Therefore, it can be said
that the VRA is absolutely vital to maintaining the right to vote among non-English speaking Alaska Natives.
However, the fact that the VRA has been reau-
thorized with these two important provisions doesnot mean the end of NARF’s commitment.  NARF’sreport on the impact of the VRA in Alaska revealedthat Section 203 has not been fully implementedin Alaska.  Many non-English speaking AlaskaNatives who are entitled to oral and written assis-tance receive little to no help.  There are no writtenmaterials of any kind in any Native language andvoters report only inconsistent oral assistance bypeople who they claim are not trained translators.As a result, many Alaska Natives report havingvoted in a way they did not intend.  In general,many non-English speaking Alaska Natives, eldersin particular, find voting an intimidating and con-fusing process and some do not vote at all becausethey simply do not understand.  That is a tragedy.The full impact of the VRA can only be realized ifit is fully implemented.  NARF is committed tomonitoring and encouraging compliance with thislaw in Alaska and around the United States.NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 9NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
• Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians
• Barona Band of Mission Indians• Colusa Indian Casino & Bingo• Coquille Indian Tribe• Cow Creek Band of Umpqua Tribe of Indians• Denver Indian Family Resource Center• Grand Traverse Band of Ottawa & Chippewa Indians• Hopi Tribe• Keweenaw Bay Indian Community• Little Traverse Bay Band of Odawa Indians• Mashantucket Pequot• Mohegan Sun Casino• Morongo Band of Mission Indians
• Native Village of Nunapitchuk (IRA)• Oneida Tribe of Indians of Wisconsin• Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe of Michigan• Saint Regis Mohawk Tribe• San Manuel Band of Mission Indians• Seminole Tribe of Florida• Shakopee Mdewakantan Sioux Community• Twenty Nine Palms Band of Mission Indians• Viejas Band of Kumeyaay Indians• White Mountain Apache TribeIt has been made abundantly clear that non-
Indian philanthropy can no longer sustainNARF’s work.  Federal funds for specific projectsare also being reduced at drastic rates.  NARF isnow facing severe budget shortfalls.  Our abilityto provide legal advocacy in a wide variety ofareas such as religious freedom, the TribalSupreme Court Project, tribal recognition,human rights, trust responsibility, tribal waterrights, Indian Child Welfare Act, and on Alaskasovereignty issues has been compromised.NARF is now turning to the tribes to provide thiscrucial funding to continue our legal advocacyon behalf of Indian Country.  It is an honor to list
those Tribes and Native organizations who havechosen to share their good fortunes with theNative American Rights Fund and the thousandsof Indian clients we have served.  The generosityof Tribes is crucial in NARF’s struggle to ensurethe future of all Native Americans.  We encour-age other Tribes to become contributors andpartners with NARF in fighting for justice for ourpeople and in keeping the vision of our ancestorsalive.  We thank the following tribes and Nativeorganizations for their recent support sinceOctober 1, 2005: 
CALLING TRIBES TO ACTION!PAGE 10                                                                          NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNational Indian Law Library
About the Library
The National Indian Law Library (NILL) located
at the Native American Rights Fund in Boulder,Colorado is a national public library serving peopleacross the United States. Over the past thirty-threeyears NILL has collected nearly 9,000 resourcematerials that relate to federal Indian and triballaw. The Library’s holdings include the largest collection of tribal codes, ordinances and constitu-tions in the United States; legal pleadings frommajor American Indian cases; law review articleson Indian law topics; handbooks; conference materials; and government documents.  
Library Services
Information access and delivery: Library
users can access the searchable catalog whichincludes bibliographic descriptions of the libraryholdings by going directly to: http://www.narf.org/nill/index.htm or by accessing the catalogthrough the National Indian Law Library/Catalog link on the Native American RightsFund website at www.narf.org. Once relevantmaterials are identified, library patrons can thenchoose to request copies or borrow materialsthrough interlibrary loan for a nominal fee.
Research assistance: In addition to making its
catalog and extensive collection available to thepublic, the National Indian Law Library providesreference and research assistance relating toIndian law and tribal law. The library offers freeassistance as well as customized research for anominal fee. 
Keep up with changes in Indian law with
NILL’s Indian Law Bulletins: The Indian Law
Bulletins are published by NILL in an effort keepNARF and the public informed about Indian lawdevelopments. NILL publishes timely bulletinscovering new Indian law cases, U.S. regulatoryaction, law review articles, and news on its website. (See: http://www.narf.org/nill/bulletins/ilb.htm) New bulletins are published on a regular basis, usually every week and olderinformation is moved to the bulletin archivepages. When new information is published,NILL sends out brief announcements and a link
to the newly revised bulletin page via e-mail.Send an e-mail to David Selden atdselden@narf.org if you would like to subscribeto the Indian Law Bulletin service. The service isfree of charge!
Support the Library: The National Indian Law
Library is unique in that it serves the public butis notsupported by local or federal tax revenue.
NILL is a project of the Native American RightsFund and relies on private contributions frompeople like you. For information on how you cansupport the library or become a sponsor of a special project, please contact David Selden, theLaw Librarian at 303-447-8760 or dselden@narf.org For more information about NILL,visit: http://www.narf.org/nill/index.htm Localpatrons can visit the library at 1522 Broadway,Boulder, Colorado. ❂
Your Information Partner!NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 11NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDTHE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF Annual Report. This is NARF’s major report on
its programs and activities.  The Annual Report is distributed to foundations, major contributors, certainfederal and state agencies, tribal clients, NativeAmerican organizations, and to others upon request.Ray Ramirez Editor, ramir
ez@nar f.org.  
The NARF Legal Review is published biannually by the
Native American Rights Fund. Third class postage paid at Boulder, Colorado.  Ray Ramirez, Editor,ramir
ez@nar f.org.  There is no charge for subscriptions,
however, contributions are appreciated.
Tax Status .  The Native American Rights Fund is a non-
profit, charitable organization incorporated in 1971under the laws of the District of Columbia.  NARF isexempt from federal income tax under the provisions ofSection 501 C (3) of the Internal Revenue Code, andcontributions to NARF are tax deductible.  The InternalRevenue Service has ruled that NARF is not a “private
foundation” as defined in Section 509(a) of the InternalRevenue Code.
Main Office:
Native American Rights Fund, 1506 Broadway, Boulder, Colorado  80302 (303-447-8760) (FAX 303-443-7776).http://www
.narf.org
Washington, D.C. Office:Native American Rights Fund, 1712 N Street, NW,Washington, D.C. 20036 (202-785-4166) (FAX 202-822-0068).
Alaska Office:
Native American Rights Fund, 420 L Street, Suite 505,Anchorage, Alaska 99501 (907-276-0680) (FAX 907-276-2466).The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) was
founded in 1970 to address the need for legal assistance on the major issues facing Indian country.The critical Indian issues of survival of the tribes andNative American people are not new, but are thesame issues of survival that have merely evolved overthe centuries.  As NARF is in its thirty-sixth year ofexistence, it can be acknowledged that many of thegains achieved in Indian country over those years aredirectly attributable to the efforts and commitmentof the present and past clients and members ofNARF’s Board and staff.  However, no matter howmany gains have been achieved, NARF is stilladdressing the same basic issues that caused NARFto be founded originally.  Since the inception of thisNation, there has been a systematic attack on tribalrights that continues to this day.  For every victory, anew challenge to tribal sovereignty arises from stateand local governments, Congress, or the courts.  Thecontinuing lack of understanding, and in some caseslack of respect, for the sovereign attributes of Indiannations has made it necessary for NARF to continuefighting.NARF strives to protect the most important rights
of Indian people within the limit of availableresources.  To achieve this goal, NARF’s Board ofDirectors defined five priority areas for NARF’s work:(1) the preservation of tribal existence; (2) the protection of tribal natural resources; (3) the promotion of human rights; (4) the accountability ofgovernments to Native Americans; and (5) the development of Indian law and educating the publicabout Indian rights, laws, and issues. Requests forlegal assistance should be addressed to NARF’s main office at 1506 Broadway, Boulder, Colorado80302. NARF’s clients are expected to pay whateverthey can toward the costs of legal representation.
NARF’s success could not have been achieved 
without the financial support that we have receivedfrom throughout the nation. Your participationmakes a big difference in our ability to continue tomeet ever-increasing needs of impoverished Indiantribes, groups and individuals. The support neededto sustain our nationwide program requires your continued assistance.NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND BOARD OF DIRECTORS
John Gonzales, Chairman . . . . . . . . . . ..............................................................San Ildefonso Pueblo
Jaime Barrientoz, Vice-Chairman ............................................................................Ottawa/ChippewaAndrew J. Bowers, Jr. ..................................................................................Seminole Tribe of Flori da
Delia Carlyle ............................................................................................Ak Chin Indian Commun ity
Elbridge Coochise .............................................................................................................. ............Hopi
Billy Frank ................................................................................................................... ...........Nisqually
Jim Gray ...................................................................................................................... ................Osage
Karlene Hunter ..............................................................................................................Og lala Lakota
Kunani Nihipali ..........................................................................................................Nativ e Hawaiian
Paul Ninham ............................................................................................................Wiscons in Oneida
Lydia Olympic ................................................................................................................. ...Yupik/Aleut
Anthony Pico ..................................................................................Viejas Band of Kumeyaay IndiansWoody Widmark ................................................................................................................. .Sitka Tribe
Executive Director: John E. Echohawk ..................................................................................Pawnee
NARF LEGAL REVIEW • VOLUME 31, NO.2 • SUMMER/FALL 2006
NARF Legal Review
1506 Broadway
Boulder, CO 80302Non-Profit Org.
U.S. Postage
PAID
Boulder, Colorado
Permit No. 589
PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER