In the world of tribal water rights there has
long been a distinction between “paper water”and “wet water.” For the Klamath Tribes ofOregon this has been particularly true becausetheir Treaty-protected rights to water have beenrecognized by the courts at least since the United
States v. Adair decisions in 1979 and 1984, but
the rights have remained unquantified and unen-forced. However, with the Oregon WaterResources Department’s March 7, 2013 issuanceof the Final Order of Determination (FOD) in theKlamath Basin Adjudication, that situation hasfinally changed.  Under Oregon statutory law theTribal water rights as confirmed and quantified inthe FOD are now enforceable, meaning that wateruse by junior water rights holders may be curtailedwhere necessary to fulfill the Tribes’ senior waterrights.  Yet the struggle for the Tribes is not over.The battleground now shifts from the administra-tive to the judicial arena, with the FOD determi-nations facing challenge by the Tribes’ opponentsin the state courts.
The road leading to quantification and enforce-
ment of the Tribes’ water rights has been a longone.  The journey began with the 1975 filing ofthe Adair litigation, in which the federal courtsconfirmed the Tribes have reserved Indian water
rights in the Klamath Basin to support the Tribes’treaty hunting, fishing, trapping and gatheringrights with a time immemorial priority date, as well as water rights needed to satisfy the agri-cultural purposes of the Klamath Reservationestablished in the Tribes’ 1864 treaty with theUnited States.  But the federal courts left to laterstate proceedings the question of “how much”water the Tribes reserved for those purposes.  In1997, the Tribes and the United States as trusteefor the Tribes filed claims for quantification of
VOLUME 38, NO. 1 WINTER/SPRING 2013NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Victory in the Klamath Basin!
Klamath Marsh
Victory in the Klamath Basin .......... page 1
The adoption industry’s ugly side.... page 3CASE UPDATES................................ page 5
- Tribal Supreme Court Project
- Curtail Offensive “Redskin” Trademark- Trust Land Acquisitions For Alaska NativesNational Indian Law Library.......... page 13NEW NARF ATTORNEYS .............. page 10CALLING TRIBES TO ACTION! .... page 14NARF .............................................. page 15the Tribal water rights in the State of Oregon’s
Klamath Basin Adjudication.  The Adjudicationwas initiated by the State in 1975 as a generalstream adjudication to determine all state lawwater rights in the Klamath Basin predatingenactment of Oregon’s Water Code in 1909, aswell as the federal reserved water rights of theUnited States and the Tribes.  After 38 years,issuance of the FOD represents the conclusion of the first, “administrative,” phase of theAdjudication and commencement of the second,“judicial” phase.  In the FOD the StateAdministration, in the form of the Oregon WaterResources Department, has quantified the Tribal rights and also determined the claims ofhundreds of other claimants in the Adjudication.  
The FOD represents an emphatic victory for the
Tribes, but not a complete one.  In December2011 and April 2012, Administrative Law JudgeJoe L. Allen of the Oregon Office of AdministrativeHearings, who presided over the hearings of theTribal water right cases in the administrativephase, issued Proposed Orders recommending tothe Department that the Tribal water rights bequantified, across the board, in the amountssought by the Tribes.  While the FOD generallyconfirms the Tribes’ earlier successes beforeJudge Allen, significant changes include theDepartment’s denial of the Tribes’ rights to waterin “off-reservation” water sources, that is, watersources located entirely outside, and not bordering,the boundaries of the former Klamath
Reservation.  Still, overall the FOD is overwhelm-ingly positive for the Tribes, and will require aserious change in water management in theBasin now that Tribal water rights can and mustbe recognized.  And the Tribes will have theopportunity to challenge the Department’s denialof the Tribes’ off-reservation water rights duringthe judicial review of the FOD in the state courts.
As required by Oregon statutory law, the
Oregon Water Resources Department has filedthe FOD with the Klamath County Circuit Courtfor judicial review, thus initiating the “judicial”phase of the Adjudication. During this phase, parties who dispute the Department’s determina-tions in the FOD will have an opportunity to fileexceptions to the FOD with the court.  Followinga hearing on the exceptions, the court will issuea water rights decree, affirming, denying or mod-ifying the FOD’s determinations.  Although noschedule has been set at this time, judicial reviewof the FOD is likely to be a lengthy process.  
Pending the circuit court’s review of the FOD,
the Oregon statutes provide that the FOD isenforceable.  That is, the water rights recognizedin the FOD, including those of the Tribes, willnow be enforced in accordance with Oregon’s“first in time, first in right” priority system.  Witha priority date of “time immemorial,” the Tribalwater rights to support hunting, fishing, trap-ping, and gathering are the most senior rights in
PAGE 2                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
C’waam on spawning groundNARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 3NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDthe Basin.  Enforcement of the Tribal water rights
will help to ensure that species of importance tothe Tribes, including for example the endangeredc’waam and kuptu, often called by non-Indiansthe Lost River and shortnose suckers, finally haveaccess to sufficient water to become healthy andproductive.  
One possible hitch in enforcement is that under
the statutes a party may seek a stay of enforce-ment of the FOD, in whole or in part, providedthat the party posts a sufficient bond, and conditioned that the party will pay all damagesresulting from the stay if the stayed rights areultimately upheld by the court.  To date, no partyhas requested a stay of enforcement of the Tribalwater rights.  Presumably the amount of anybond for staying enforcement of the Tribal waterrights would be substantial.   
It is anticipated that the Tribes’ victory in the
FOD may serve to foster broader support for theKlamath Basin Restoration Agreement (KBRA)which was drafted by many Basin water interests
to address water and other resource dilemmas inthe Basin.  Upon learning of the FOD’s results,the Tribes called for renewed attention to begiven to the KBRA.  Don Gentry, Vice-Chairmanof the Klamath Tribes expressed the view thatthat “[w]hatever the outcome of the FOD, theKBRA still represents the Basin’s best opportuni-ty for resolving water issues.”  Gentry explainedthat the KBRA can be used to assist junior waterusers in transition from unregulated, overdevel-oped irrigation to more appropriate, balancedand sustainable water management, and statedthat the Tribes “will continue to work with peopleof good will in the Basin to use the KBRA to resolve these issues in an effective, peacefulmanner.”  
NARF has represented the Klamath Tribes on
treaty resource issues since 1970 with the workon the Klamath Basin Adjudication being one ofNARF’s oldest cases. 
❂
The Supreme Court heard arguments on April
16, 2013 in the case of Adoptive Couple v. Baby
Girl.  The facts of the case are straightforward:  
A South Carolina couple is seeking to forceDusten Brown, an Iraq war veteran and memberof the Cherokee Tribe, to give his daughterVeronica up for adoption.  Brown, who is nowraising Veronica at his home in Oklahoma, hasprevailed so far in every court that has consideredthis matter, including after a full, four-day trial by the South Carolina Family Court and in a deci-sion by the South Carolina Supreme Court.
Poke beneath the basic facts, though, and you
will find the ugly underbelly of the Americanadoption business.  All across this country – butespecially in states that are home to multipleNative American Tribes – unethical adoptionattorneys are purposely circumventing the federallaw that is meant to protect Native Americanchildren.  Even worse are the continuingattempts by some adoption lawyers to take advan-tage of active duty service members in theprocess of being deployed to combat, or in activedeployments.Brown’s case is a sad example of both of these
disturbing trends.  At its very heart, this case isabout a father’s deep desire to raise his daughter,named Veronica.  Veronica’s mother and Brownwere engaged when she was conceived, but hermother broke off the engagement while Brownwas serving in the Army and stationed at FortSill, Okla.  Unbeknownst to Brown, his fiancébegan the process of placing her child up foradoption.The adoption industry’s ugly side
In the final months of pregnancy, the mother
cut off all communication with Brown andworked closely with an agency and attorney toplace the child with a non-Indian couple fromSouth Carolina, the Capobiancos.  Brown was notinformed of Veronica’s birth on September 15,2009.  Instead, Veronica was placed with theCapobiancos three days after her birth inOklahoma, and they relocated her to SouthCarolina shortly thereafter.
Four months later, the day before Brown’s
scheduled deployment to Iraq, the couple’slawyer (who was also the lawyer for the adoptionagency) finally served Brown with notice of theirintent to adopt Veronica.  The notice was servedto Brown in the parking lot of a mall.
Immediately, Brown went to court to request a
stay of the adoption until after his deployment(which, because of his military status, is providedfor by federal law).  He also began the legal stepsto establish paternity and gain custody.  He wasthen deployed to Iraq.  Because the Capobiancoswaited until just days before Brown was deployed,the adoption hearing was not completed until hereturned home.
At this hearing, the South Carolina Family
Court denied the Capobiancos’ petition to adoptand ordered Veronica’s transfer to her father.  Thecourt found that federal Indian Child Welfare Act(ICWA) applied in this case, that Brown hadacknowledged and established paternity, and thatan exception to ICWA called the “Existing IndianFamily Exception” (EIFE) was inapplicable.  Mostdecisively, it found that Brown had not voluntar-ily consented to the termination of his parentalrights or the adoption.
The Capobiancos appealed to the South
Carolina Court of Appeals to stay the transfer ofcustody, where they lost.  They then appealed tothe South Carolina Supreme Court, whichupheld the family court’s decision.  Last October,they asked the U.S. Supreme Court to review thecase.  In early January, the U.S. Supreme Courtaccepted review.
The tragedy of this case is the failure of some of
the adoption lawyers involved in that process –failures that have caused great heartache for all ofthe families involved.  Had the adoption lawyersdone their jobs from the start, the child wouldnever have left Oklahoma.The adoption lawyers knew from the outset that
the father was Native American and that, once helearned of their plans, he intended to fight themto be able to raise his daughter.  The adoptionlawyers also knew from the start that ICWA wouldprotect the rights of the father and the child.
Nonetheless, the lawyers forged ahead, ignoring
the law, providing inaccurate information toOklahoma authorities, and removing the childfrom the Cherokee Nation prematurely.
Brown’s cause is supported in briefs filed with
the Supreme Court by U.S. Solicitor GeneralDonald Verrilli on behalf of the United States ofAmerica, 19 state attorneys general, current andformer members of Congress, and a wide array ofother groups.  Many of the briefs highlight thefindings of the South Carolina Family Court,which found that “the birth father is a fit andproper person to have custody of his child” who“has convinced [the Court] of his unwaveringlove for this child,” – findings upheld by theSouth Carolina Supreme Court.
Unfortunately, though, Brown’s case is not
unique, and other fathers in his position – partic-ularly those serving in the military – are not ableto battle the adoption system in the way he has.It is time for the Congress to hold hearings andexpose for all to see the tactics of lawyers who arecontinuing to evade the federal law designed toprotect Native American families.
John Echohawk, Executive Director, Native
American Rights Fund; Jacqueline Pata,Executive Director, National Congress ofAmerican Indians; and Terry Cross, ExecutiveDirector, National Indian Child WelfareAssociation.
❂
PAGE 4                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 5NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDCASE UPDATES
The Tribal Supreme Court Project is part of the
Tribal Sovereignty Protection Initiative and isstaffed by the National Congress of AmericanIndians (NCAI) and the Native American RightsFund (NARF). The Project was formed in 2001 inresponse to a series of U.S. Supreme Court casesthat negatively affected tribal sovereignty. Thepurpose of the Project is to promote greater coor-dination and to improve strategy on litigationthat may affect the rights of all Indian tribes. Weencourage Indian tribes and their attorneys tocontact the Project in our effort to coordinateresources, develop strategy and prepare briefs,especially at the time of the petition for a writ ofcertiorari, prior to the Supreme Court acceptinga case for review. 
The Supreme Court of the United States grant-
ed review in Adoptive Couple v. Baby Girl, Birth
Father and Cherokee Nation , a troubling case
which involves a challenge to provisions withinthe Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) protectingthe rights of Indian parents, families and tribes inrelation to Indian children.  The case was fullybriefed and oral argument was held on April 16,2013.
In response to the Adoptive Couple’s and their
amici’s assault on ICWA, the Tribal SupremeCourt Project fully mobilized its resources incoordination with the attorneys for the Fatherand the Cherokee Nation to broaden support forthe protections provided under ICWA to Indianchildren, Indian families and Indian tribes.  In all,24 amicus briefs in support of the Father and theCherokee Nation have now been filed.  One keyamicus brief was submitted by the U.S. SolicitorGeneral which emphasizes the importance ofICWA and states: “the United States has a sub-stantial interest in the case because Congressenacted ICWA in furtherance of ‘the special rela-tionship between the United States and theIndian tribes and their members and the Federalresponsibility to Indian people.’’’ The brief further defends the constitutionality of ICWA,arguing that “ICWA, which is predicated onCongress’s considered judgment that applicationof its protections serves the best interests of
Indian children and protects vital interests oftheir parents and Tribes, does not violate any sub-stantive due process protections.”  It concludesthat “[t]he South Carolina courts properly awarded custody of Baby Girl to Father.”
A second key brief was filed by Arizona Attorney
General Tom Horne, who was joined by attorneysgeneral from 17 other states—Alaska, California,Colorado, Connecticut, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois,Maine, Michigan, Mississippi, Montana, NewMexico, New York, North Dakota, Oregon,Washington, and Wisconsin—and argued againstinterference in the relationship between statesand tribes in matters regarding ICWA.  The mes-sage of the brief is that “States and tribes havecollaborated to ensure that the mandates andspirit of ICWA are fulfilled…. Early and completecompliance with ICWA ensures the security andstability of adoptive families as well as tribes andIndian families.”  And it is important to note thatnot one state submitted a brief in support ofAdoptive Couple. 
In another brief, 17 current and former mem-
bers of Congress joined together to educate theCourt about the circumstances and evidence thatled to the enactment of ICWA in 1978.  The mem-bers included nearly every Chair of the SenateCommittee on Indian Affairs who reminded theCourt that Congress has exclusive power to legis-late with respect to Indian tribes:
Tribal Supreme Court Project
“In 1978, Congress enacted ICWA in direct
response to state adoption policies that weredraining Indian tribes of their future citizens.  Such practices threatened the veryexistence of Indian tribes.  Without childrento grow up as their citizens, tribes would beleft with no one to speak their language,carry on their traditions and culture, or par-ticipate in their tribal governments…Ultimately, any decision limiting Congress’sauthority to pass legislation like ICWA…would effectively preclude Congress fromexercising its plenary authority in Indianaffairs, and render Congress unable to fulfillits historic duties as trustee to the Indiantribes.
And in a brief of filed by the Casey Family
Programs and 17 leading child welfare organiza-tions, the Court was informed that ICWA repre-sents the “best practices” for all child custodydeterminations: 
“No one understands the human toll 
custody disputes can take more than amici,18 child welfare organizations who havededicated literally scores of years to the on-the-ground development and imple-mentation of best practices and policies forchild placement decision making.  Amicihave seen up close what works, and whatdoes not.  In amici’s collective judgment,ICWA works very well and, in fact, is amodel for child welfare and placement deci-sion making that should be extended to allchildren.  Much forward progress in thechild welfare area would be damaged byrolling the law back.
To complement these and other powerful ami-
cus briefs from non-Indian governments andorganizations, two national tribal amicus briefswere submitted along with six state-specific tribalamicus briefs.  The first national tribal amicusbrief focused on the legislative history and impor-tance of ICWA and was submitted on behalf of theAssociation on American Indian Affairs, theNational Congress of American Indians and theNational Indian Child Welfare Association, whowere joined by 30 Indian tribes and five Indianorganizations.  The second national tribal amicusbrief addressed the constitutional issues raised bythe petitioners and also includes over 70 tribesfrom across the nation who filed individually or
as members of regional tribal organizations. 
A decision by the Court is expected before
the end of the term in June 2013. 
United States v. Samish Indian Nation (No. 11-
1448) – On October 9, 2012, the Court issued anorder granting the petition of the United States,vacating the judgment with respect to all mattersrelating to the Samish Tribe’s Revenue SharingAct claim and remanding the case to the U.S.Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit withinstructions to dismiss that claim as moot. Thiscase arose from a series of suits brought by theSamish Tribe to obtain treaty rights and statutorybenefits from the United States as a result of itsefforts to be a “federally recognized” Indian tribewhich began in 1972. The U.S. had sought reviewby the Court of a decision by the Federal Circuitwhich held that the Samish Tribe may pursue itsclaims for money damages under the State andLocal Fiscal Assistance Act of 1972 (RevenueSharing Act). The Federal Circuit had held thatthe Revenue Sharing Act is a “money mandatingstatute” and is not limited by operation of theAnti-Deficiency Act, 31 U.S.C.§ 1341. 
Petitions For A Writ Of Certiorari Pending 
Currently, several petitions for a writ of certio-
rari have been filed in Indian law and Indian law-related cases and are pending before the Court: 
Native Village of Kivalina v. Exxon Mobile
Corporation (No. 12-1072) – On February 25,
2013, petitioners Native Village of Kivalina andthe City of Kivalina, a federally-recognized tribeand an Alaskan municipality, filed a petition seeking review of a decision by the U.S. Court ofAppeals for the Ninth Circuit which affirmed the district court’s dismissal of their claims fordamages for lack of subject matter jurisdiction,holding that the Clean Air Act displaces their federal common law claims. Petitioners are thegoverning bodies of an Inupiat village located onan Arctic barrier island that is being destroyed byglobal warming. Petitioners allege that green-house gases have caused the Earth’s temperatureto rise, especially in the Arctic, which has meltedthe land-fast sea ice that protects the village from
PAGE 6                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 7NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDpowerful oceanic storms. As a result, Kivalina is
now exposed to erosion and flooding from the seaand must relocate or face imminent destruction.Petitioners make clear that they seek damages -not injunctive relief - from the largest U.S.sources of greenhouses gases under the federalcommon law of public nuisance. The questionpresented is: “Whether the Clean Air Act, whichprovides no damages remedy to persons harmedby greenhouse gas emissions, displaces federalcommon-law claims for damages.” 
Rude v. Cook Inlet Region, Inc. (No. 12-988) –
On February 6, 2013, former shareholders andboard members of the Cook Inlet Region, Inc.(“CIRI”), an Alaska Native Regional Corporationformed under the Alaska Native ClaimsSettlement Act (“ANCSA”), filed a petition seek-ing review of a decision of the U.S. Court ofAppeals for the Ninth Circuit which affirmed thedistrict court’s finding of federal question juris-diction over claims brought by CIRI against peti-tioners for violations of certain provisions ofANSCA regarding petitions to lift alienabilityrestrictions. 
Native Village of Eyak v. Blank (No. 12-668) –
On November 28, 2012, the Native Village of Eyakfiled a petition seeking review of an en banc deci-sion of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the NinthCircuit which held that the Native Villages ofEyak, Tatitlek, Chenega, Nanwalek, and PortGraham do not possess aboriginal hunting andfishing rights in the areas of the OuterContinental Shelf they traditionally used. Thequestion presented in the petition is: “The NinthCircuit agreed with the district court’s findingsthat at the time of first contact with Europeans,the Chugach were a culturally, ethnically and lin-guistically related people who had made actualand continuous use and occupancy of an area ofthe Outer Continental Shelf for a long time. Thecourts also agreed there was no evidence thatothers used the area, except for the periphery.Based on these showings by the Chugach, did theNinth Circuit err in concluding that the exclusiveuse required to establish aboriginal title wasdefeated by a failure to demonstrate an ability toexpel a hypothetical invader, by other groups’ useof the periphery of the Chugach territory, and bythe fact that the Chugach villages were politicallyindependent?”  Madison County v. Oneida Indian Nation of
New York (No. 12-604) – On November 12, 2004,
Madison County and Oneida County filed a peti-tion seeking review of a decision by the U.S.Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit whichaffirmed the district court’s dismissal of theircounterclaim that the Oneidas’ reservation wasdisestablished. The question presented in thepetition is: “Does the 300,000-acre ancientOneida reservation in New York still exist, neitherdisestablished nor diminished, despite (1) thefederal government’s actions taken in further-ance of disestablishment (including, but not lim-ited to, the 1838 Treaty of Buffalo Creek); (2) thisCourt’s holding in City of Sherrill v. OneidaIndian Nation of New York, 544 U.S. 197, 214(2005) (“Sherrill”) that the Oneida Indian Nationof New York cannot exercise sovereignty overlands it purchases in the ancient reservation area;and (3) this Court’s finding in that case that landin the ancient reservation area has not beentreated as an Indian reservation by the federal,state or local governments for nearly two cen-turies?” Three amicus briefs in support of thepetition have been filed by: the State of New York;Cayuga and Seneca Counties; and, the CitizensEqual Rights Foundation. The Tribe’s brief inopposition was filed on January 16, 2012, and thepetition was scheduled for conference onFebruary 15, 2013. On February 19, 2013, theCourt issued a CVSG, inviting the SolicitorGeneral to file a brief expressing the views of theUnited States. 
Michigan v. Bay Mills Indian Community (No.
12-505) – On October 23, 2012, the State ofMichigan filed a petition seeking review of a deci-sion by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the SixthCircuit which held that federal courts lack juris-diction to adjudicate their IGRA claims to theextent those claims are based on an allegationthat the Tribe’s casino is not on Indian lands andthat such claims are also barred by the doctrine oftribal sovereign immunity. The Tribe filed its briefin opposition on November 26, 2012, and the peti-tion was scheduled for conference on January 4,2013. On January 7, 2013, the Court issued aCVSG, inviting the Solicitor General to file a briefexpressing the views of the United States. 
Young v. Fitzpatrick (No. 11-1485) – On June 4,
2012, Mr. Young, as representative of the estate ofhis brother, filed a petition seeking review of an
unpublished decision by the Washington StateCourt of Appeals which held that, based on thedoctrine of tribal sovereign immunity, statecourts do not have subject matter jurisdictionover claims against tribal police officers acting intheir official capacity on tribal lands. The tribalpolice officers filed their brief in opposition onJuly 9, 2012, and the petition was scheduled for
conference on September 24, 2012. On October1, 2012, the court issued a CVSG, inviting theSolicitor General to file a brief expressing theviews of the United States.
You can find copies of briefs and opinions on
the major cases we track on the NARF website(www.narf.org/sct/index.html). 
❂
PAGE 8                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDThe Native American Rights Fund (NARF) fully
supports the introduction of H.R. 1278, a newlandmark bill in the U.S. House ofRepresentatives that would amend the TrademarkAct of 1946 regarding the disparagement ofNative Americans through marks that use theterm “redskin.”
NARF commends Rep. Faleomavaega and all
the original sponsors of this important bill,which sends a clear signal that some members ofCongress do not take anti-Native stereotypingand discrimination lightly.  TheseRepresentatives now join Native Americannations, organizations and people who have lostpatience with the intransigence of theWashington pro football franchise in holding onto the indefensible – a racial epithet masquerad-ing as a team name.
NARF also commends all those individuals in
the on-going Harjo and Blackhorse proceedings
in federal agencies and courts for their tirelessadvocacy attempting in righting this wrong.While these cases have yet to succeed, they haveprovided the springboard for legislative effortslike the new bill.
For over 20 years NARF has been involved in
the cases, attempting to accomplish what thisbill, if enacted, would do.  NARF represented theNational Congress of American Indians (NCAI),the National Indian Education Association(NIEA), the National Indian Youth Council(NIYC)), and the Tulsa Indian Coalition AgainstRacism (TICAR) as amici curiae in Harjo et al v.Pro Football, Inc.  NARF also organized amicibriefs in support of the Native petition forSupreme Court review, including one by a broadrange of Native nations and organizations, andothers by law professors, psychology professors
and social justice advocacy groups.
NARF , NCAI, NIEA NIYC, TICAR and other
major Native American organizations all haveraised concerns regarding race-based stereotyp-ing and behaviors in sports,, particularly theracially derogatory name and logo of the"Washington Redskins" professional footballorganization. Such concerns have been expressedthrough numerous communications, publicstatements, and meetings, including a 1972meeting with then Washington Redskins presi-dent Edward Bennett Williams, after which noteam owner ever met with Native people oppos-ing the name. 
The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office regis-
tered six trademarks between 1967 and 1990 thatconsist of racially derogatory and disparagingmaterial, which opens Native Americans to con-tempt and public ridicule in violation of Section2(a) of the Lanham Act, 15 U.S.c. § 1052(a).While there is enormous uplifting good in thehuman spirit, racism is the dark side of humani-ty that has caused much suffering among ourdiverse human family.  Section 1052(a) wiselyrecognizes that one basic manifestation of preju-dice, discrimination, or racism is the use ofracially derogatory names, caricatures, or stereo-types that disparage peoples and persons and holdthem up to contempt and ridicule; and thisstatute safeguards citizens through the registra-tion of  such trademarks.
In ruling unanimously in the Harjo case to can-
cel the “Redskins” trademarks, the PTOTrademark Trial and Appeal Board (TTAB) admit-ted that the six existing trademark licensesshould not have been approved. That ruling was
NARF Applauds Sponsors Of Proposed Legislation To
Curtail Offensive “Redskin” TrademarkNARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 9NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDoverturned on a technicality, laches, which was
interpreted to mean that the plaintiffs waited toolong after turning 18 to file suit. The currentBlackhorse case is identical, except that theplaintiffs filed when they were 18 to 24. In arecent hearing before the PTO TTAB, theWashington franchise argued that even theseyoung plaintiffs waited too long and should havefiled on the day they turned 18. In addition to thisongoing trademark cancelation case, Native peo-ple have filed Letters of Protest with the PTO tostop new requests for trademark licenses for thesame disparaging name.
Should this legislation be enacted, it would
provide justice to the plaintiffs and protestors inthese cases, would free the PTO to automaticallydeny federal protection for this disparagement,and would spare present and future NativeAmerican peoples and persons from sufferingpublic humiliation and discrimination from thename of the team in the nation’s capitol.Native nations and citizens have a treaty, trust
and special relationship with the United States,and rely on the federal government more thanany other segment of society to make certain thatits actions do no harm. Because of the duty ofcare owed to Indian tribes and people by theDepartment of Commerce, it is incumbent uponthem to strictly enforce the provisions of 15U.S.C. § 1052(a), in order to safeguard Indiantribes and citizens from racially or culturally dis-paraging federal trademarks.  They are requiredby law to assess the issues in light of its federalIndian trust relationship and associated fiduciaryduties to protect Indians and Indian culture fromdegrading federal trademark registrations.  Thattrust relationship encompasses an affirmativeduty on behalf of the Department of Commerceand the PTO TTAB to protect tribal culture andsafeguard Native Americans from racism insports conducted under color of federal law. 
❂
On March 31, 2013, the U.S. District Court for
the District of Columbia issued an important rul-ing in Akiachak Native Community, et al. v.Salazar, that affirms the ability of the U.S.Secretary of Interior to take land into trust onbehalf of Alaska Tribes and also acknowledges therights of Alaska Tribes to be treated the same asall other federally recognized Tribes.
In 2006, four Tribes and one Native individ-
ual—the Akiachak Native Community,Chalkyitsik Village, Chilkoot Indian Association,Tuluksak Native Community (IRA), and AliceKavairlook—brought suit to challenge theSecretary of the Interior’s decision to leave inplace a regulation that treats Alaska Natives dif-ferently from other Native peoples. On behalf ofour clients, NARF and co-counsel Alaska LegalServices Corporation sought judicial review of 25C.F .R. § 151 as it pertains to federally recognizedTribes in Alaska. This federal regulation governsthe procedures used by Indian Tribes and individuals when requesting the Secretary of the
Interior to acquire title to land in trust on theirbehalf. The regulation bars the acquisition ofland in trust in Alaska other than for theMetlakatla Indian Community or its members.Plaintiffs argued that this exclusion of AlaskaNatives—and only Alaska Natives—from the landinto trust application process is void under 25U.S.C. § 476(g), which nullifies regulations thatdiscriminate among Indian Tribes. The State ofAlaska intervened to argue that the differentialtreatment is required by the Alaska Native ClaimsSettlement Act (ANCSA).
This decision is a victory for all Alaska Tribes.
The ruling will allow Alaska Tribes to petition theSecretary to have non-ANCSA lands placed intotrust and the opportunity to enhance their abili-ty to regulate alcohol, respond to domestic vio-lence, and generally protect the health, safety,and welfare of tribal members. 
❂Federal Court Holds Interior Secretary Retains Authority
To Make Trust Land Acquisitions For Alaska NativesMatt Campbell joined the Native American Rights Fund as a staff
attorney in March of 2013. Prior to joining NARF , Matt was anattorney with Cuddy & McCarthy, LLP , in New Mexico, focusinghis practice on Indian law, education, water law, and general civillitigation.  Prior to that, Matt clerked for the Arizona Court ofAppeals, Division One, with now retired Judge Patrick Irvine. 
Matt received his J.D. from the Sandra Day O’Connor College of
Law at Arizona State University.  While attending law school, Mattworked with the Indian Legal Clinic and also clerked for Bledsoe-Downs and Rosier, PC.  Matt received his B.A. from Fort LewisCollege.  In 2005, Matt attended the Pre-Law Summer Institute forAmerican Indians and Alaska Natives (“PLSI”), and in 2006, Matt was a tutor for PLSI. 
Matt is admitted to practice before the state courts of New
Mexico and Colorado, the United States District Court for New Mexico, and the Pueblo of Isleta.  
Matt is an enrolled member of the Native Village of Gambell on
the Saint Lawrence Island in Alaska.
PAGE 10                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNEW NARF ATTORNEYS
Sue Noe is an experienced water rights attorney and brings over
twelve years water rights litigation experience to the NARF waterteam.  She specializes in large, complex litigation.  While in private practice Sue teamed up with NARF and worked on behalfof the Nez Perce Tribe in the Snake River Basin Adjudication inIdaho and the Klamath Tribes in the Klamath Basin Adjudicationin Oregon, achieving success in both adjudications the first endingin a Congressionally-approved settlement and the latter securingresounding victories before Oregon’s Office of AdministrativeHearings.  In addition to her work on behalf of Native Americantribes, Sue has substantial international experience.  
Sue received her J.D. from the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, graduating with high honors, and earned an LL.M. inNatural Resources and Environmental Law and Policy from theUniversity of Denver College of Law, where she received severalawards for Scholastic Excellence.  Along with her former law pro-fessor, George (Rock) Pring, Sue has co-authored two book chap-ters on natural resource issues in international law published byOxford University Press. She is licensed to practice law in Coloradoand New York.  Sue began work for NARF on December 1.
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 11NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDMatthew Newman grew up in Fairbanks, Alaska.  He graduated
cum laude from the University of Alaska Fairbanks with a B.A. inPolitical Science.  He received his J.D. from the University ofMontana School of Law in 2012.  During law school, Matt was anofficer in UM’s NALSA branch and the Managing Editor for thePublic Land and Resources Law Review.   At graduation, hereceived the Eddie McClure Service Award from Indian LawSection of the Montana State Bar for his work as a student attor-ney for the Indian Law Clinic.  
During law school Matt clerked for the U.S. Attorney’s Office in
Helena, Montana, where he worked on Major Crimes Act prosecu-tions pending before Montana federal District Courts and theNinth Circuit Court of Appeals. After graduation, he served as lawclerk for Superior Court Judge Carl J.D. Bauman in Kenai, Alaska.
Brett Lee Shelton is a member of the Oglala Sioux Tribe and also
has Itazipco Lakota and Cheyenne ancestors. His work at NARFwill focus on the Indigenous Peacemaking Initiative, BoardingSchools, and Sacred Places.
Brett has extensive experience representing and advising tribal
governments, agencies, and enterprises in general governmental,health and human services, employment, natural resources, construction, and economic and business development matters, aswell as contributing legal advice and litigation support for variousprivate individuals, businesses, and development initiatives.
This is Brett’s third round at NARF . He previously worked as a
research attorney, and was a Summer Clerk during law school.  He has also worked as a policy analyst for the National IndianHealth Board, as a grassroots organizer for international indige-nous peoples in biotechnology evaluation, and assisting domesticviolence victims in civil court for a nonprofit based on his homeReservation, the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota andNebraska,
He received his law degree from Stanford University, and a Master of Arts from the University of
Kansas.  While at Stanford Law School, he was honored by the Foundation of the State Bar of Californiawith an Exceptional Merit Award for Public Service Leadership, and he received the Rocky MountainMineral Law Foundation Award and Scholarship, the John Milton Oskison award for best graduate student paper, and was named Indian Graduate Student of the Year.  He is currently licensed to practicelaw in various courts including California, Colorado, South Dakota, the Oglala Sioux Tribe, and theCheyenne River Sioux Tribe, as well as several United States courts.
PAGE 12                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDHeather Whiteman Runs Him (Crow) comes to NARF from the
Crow Tribe  Office of Executive Counsel where she served as JointLead Counsel for the Tribe since July of 2009, and as DeputyExecutive Counsel from 2006 - 2009.  Heather was responsible fora wide variety of work, overseeing tribal prosecution and IndianChild Welfare attorneys; responsibility for legal issues pertainingto intergovernmental relations, tribal land management, waterrights, elections, health, law enforcement, economic develop-ment, and general litigation issues.  She also consulted on renew-able energy development.  Prior to working with the Crow Tribe,Heather practiced in New Mexico as an Assistant Public Defenderin the Albuquerque Metro Division, worked as an AssociateAttorney with Sonosky Chambers Sachse Endreson & Mielke,LLP and with Nordhaus Haltom Taylor Taradash & Bladh, LLP ,serving tribal governmental clients on a wide variety of issues.
Heather received her B.A.F .A. with honors in Art History, and
Studio Art from the University of New Mexico in 1999 and gradu-ated from Harvard Law School in 2002.  She received her A.F .A.from the Institute of American Indian Arts in 1999.  She islicensed to practice law before the State Bar of New Mexico, theDistrict of New Mexico, and the Crow Tribal Bar.  
Joel Williams , a citizen of the Cherokee Nation, grew up in Little
Rock, Arkansas. He obtained degrees in Psychology and ReligiousStudies from Naropa University. At Naropa, he was awarded thePresident’s Leadership Scholarship and his senior project in thereligious studies department focused on Cherokee history andreligion. Joel attended Widener University School of Law, wherehe was a student attorney at the environmental law clinic and rep-resented citizen groups pursuing lawsuits under the Clean Air Act,Clean Water Act, and Administrative Procedures Act. He was alsoawarded a certificate of achievement by Joseph R. Biden. 
After graduating from law school, Joel was an Assistant Counsel
with the Pennsylvania Governor’s Office of General Counsel,where he represented the executive branch as a trial and appellateattorney.
Joel is currently an LLM Environmental Law candidate at
Vermont Law School. Immediately before joining NARF , Joel wasSenior Legislative Officer with Cherokee Nation and director ofthe tribe's Washington, DC office.
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNational Indian Law Library
The National Indian Law Library needs
your financial support
You probably are familiar with the
great work NARF does in court roomsand the halls of Congress relating totribal recognition, treaty enforcement,trust fund settlements, NAGPRA, andmore.  Did you know that NARF also isthe go-to resource for legal research inIndian law?
Advance Justice through Knowledge!
Support the National Indian LawLibrary!
Historically, Indian people and advo-
cates fighting for indigenous rightshave found themselves limited bytheir ability to access relevant federal, state, andtribal Indian law resources. In direct response tothis challenge, the National Indian Law Library(NILL) was established over forty years ago as acore part of the Native American Rights Fund(NARF).  Today the library continues to serve asan essential resource for those working toadvance Native American justice.  As the onlypublic library devoted to Indian law, we supplymuch-needed access to Indian law research,news updates, and tribal law documents.  Toextend the tradition of free public access tothese services we ask for your financial support. 
Each year, NILL responds to more than 1,000
individual research requests and receives severalhundred thousand visits to its online resources.Whether it’s through updates to the onlineGuide to Indian Child Welfare or additions to theextensive tribal law collection, NILL is committedto providing visitors with resources that are notavailable anywhere else!  Additionally, ourIndian Law Bulletins and news blog delivertimely updates about developments in Indianlaw and ensure that you have the informationyou need to fight for indigenous rights.However, we are not resting on our laurels; we
are constantly improving our online resourcesand access to tribal law materials.  With yoursupport we plan to develop an innovative andvaluable community based wiki-source forIndian law information and greatly broaden thescope of the Tribal Law gateway.   
The bulletins, research resources, extensive
catalog, and personal one-on-one librarian assis-tance can only exist with your help. The NationalIndian Law Library operates on an annual budgetof $190,000—primarily from the donations ofconcerned and motivated individuals, firms,businesses, and tribes who recognize NARF andNILL as indispensable resources for NativeAmerican justice.  
By donating, you stand with the National Indian
Law Library in its effort to fight injustice throughaccess to knowledge.  You help ensure that thelibrary continues to supply free access to Indianlaw resources and that it has the financial meansnecessary to pursue innovative and groundbreakingprojects to serve you better. Please visit www.narf.org/nill/donate now for more information on howyou can support this mission. ❂
Justice Through Knowledge!
Jenny Monet
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 13PAGE 14                                                                          NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
• Amerind Risk 
Management Corporation
• Bois Forte Reservation
Tribal Council
• Colorado River Indian Tribes• Confederated Salish &
Kootenai Tribes
• Forest County Potawatomi
Foundation
• Kaibab Paiute Tribe• Lac Courte Oreilles Band 
of Ojibwe• National Indian Gaming
Association
• Native Village of Eyak• Native Village of Port Lions• Pawnee Nation• Pueblo of Zia• Qawalangin Tribe 
of Unalaska
• San Manuel Band 
of Mission Indians
• Sault Ste. Marie Tribe 
of Chippewa• Spirit Lake Dakotah Nation
• Suquamish Indian Tribe• Tanana Chiefs Conference• Tlingit and Haida Indian
Tribes of Alaska
• Yavapai-Prescott 
Indian Tribe
• Yoche Dehe 
Wintun Nation
• Yurok TribeIt has been made abundantly clear that non-
Indian philanthropy can no longer sustainNARF’s work.  Federal funds for specific projectshave also been reduced.  Our ability to providelegal advocacy in a wide variety of areas such asreligious freedom, the Tribal Supreme CourtProject, tribal recognition, human rights, trustresponsibility, tribal water rights, Indian ChildWelfare Act, and on Alaska tribal sovereigntyissues has been compromised.  NARF is nowturning to the tribes to provide this crucialfunding to continue our legal advocacy onbehalf of Indian Country.  It is an honor to listthose Tribes and Native organizations who havechosen to share their good fortunes with theNative American Rights Fund and the thousandsof Indian clients we have served.  The generosity
of Tribes is crucial in NARF’s struggle to ensurethe future of all Native Americans.
The generosity of tribes is crucial in NARF’s
struggle to ensure the freedoms and rights of all Native Americans. Contributions from thesetribes should be an example for every NativeAmerican Tribe and organization. We encourageother Tribes to become contributors and part-ners with NARF in fighting for justice for ourpeople and in keeping the vision of our ances-tors alive. We thank the following tribes andNative organizations for their generous supportof NARF for our 2013 fiscal year – October 1,2012 to September 30, 2013:
CALLING TRIBES TO ACTION!NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 15NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDTHE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF Annual Report: This is NARF's major report on its programs and
activities.  The Annual Report is distributed to foundations, major con-tributors, certain federal and state agencies, tribal clients, NativeAmerican organizations, and to others upon request.  Ray RamirezEditor, ramirez@narf.org.  
The NARF Legal Review is published biannually by the Native American
Rights Fund. Third class postage paid at Boulder, Colorado. Ray Ramirez,Editor, ramirez@narf.org.  There is no charge for subscriptions, however,contributions are appreciated.
Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund is a nonprofit, charitable
organization incorporated in 1971 under the laws of the District ofColumbia.  NARF is exempt from federal income tax under the provisions of Section 501 C (3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and contributions to NARF are tax deductible.  The Internal Revenue Servicehas ruled that NARF is not a "private foundation" as defined in Section509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Main Office: Native American Rights Fund, 1506 Broadway, Boulder,
Colorado 80302 (303-447-8760) (FAX 303-443-7776). http://www.narf.org 
Washington, D.C. Office: Native American Rights Fund, 1514 P Street,
NW (Rear) Suite D, Washington, D.C. 20005 (202-785-4166) (FAX 202-822-0068).
Alaska Office: Native American Rights Fund, 801 B Street, Suite 401,
Anchorage, Alaska 99501 (907-276-0680) (FAX 907-276-2466).
Workplace Campaigns: NARF is a member of America’s Charities, a
national workplace giving federation. Giving through your workplace isas easy as checking off NARF’s box, #10350 on the Combined FederalCampaign (CFC) pledge form authorizing automatic payroll deduction.NARF is also a member of Community Shares of Colorado (CSC), member#5037.The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is the oldest and
largest nonprofit national Indian rights organization in the coun-try devoting all its efforts to defending and promoting the legalrights of Indian people on issues essential to their tribal sover-eignty, their natural resources and their human rights. NARFbelieves in empowering individuals and communities whoserights, economic self-sufficiency, and political participation havebeen systematically or systemically eroded or undermined. 
Native Americans have been subjugated and dominated.
Having been stripped of their land, resources and dignity, tribestoday are controlled by a myriad of federal treaties, statutes, andcase law. Yet it is within these laws that Native Americans placetheir hope and faith for justice and the protection of their way oflife. With NARF’s help, Native people can go on to provide leadership in their communities and serve as catalysts for justpolicies and practices towards Native peoples nationwide. Froma historical standpoint Native Americans have, for numerousreasons, been targets of discriminatory practices.
For the past 43 years, NARF has represented over 250 Tribes
in 31 states in such areas as tribal jurisdiction and recognition,land claims,  hunting and fishing rights, the protection of Indianreligious freedom, and many others. In addition to the greatstrides NARF has made in achieving justice on behalf of NativeAmerican people, perhaps NARF’s greatest distinguishingattribute has been its ability to bring excellent, highly ethicallegal representation to dispossessed tribes. NARF has been suc-cessful in representing Indian tribes and individuals in cases thathave encompassed every area and issue in the field of Indian law.The accomplishments and growth of NARF over the years con-firmed the great need for Indian legal representation on anational basis. This legal advocacy on behalf of Native Americanscontinues to play a vital role in the survival of tribes and theirway of life. NARF strives to protect the most important rights ofIndian people within the limit of available resources. 
One of the initial responsibilities of NARF’s first Board of
Directors was to develop priorities that would guide the NativeAmerican Rights Fund in its mission to preserve and enforce thelegal rights of Native Americans.  The Committee developed fivepriorities that continue to lead NARF today:
• Preservation of tribal existence
• Protection of tribal natural resources• Promotion of Native American human rights• Accountability of governments to Native Americans• Development of Indian law and educating the public about
Indian rights, laws, and issuesUnder the priority of the preservation of tribal existence,
NARF works to construct the foundations that are necessary toempower tribes so that they can continue to live according totheir Native traditions, to enforce their treaty rights, to insuretheir independence on reservations and to protect their sovereignty. 
Throughout the process of European conquest and coloniza-
tion of North America, Indian tribes experienced a steady dimin-ishment of their land base to a mere 2.3 percent of its originalsize. Currently, there are approximately 55 million acres ofIndian-controlled land in the continental United States andabout 44 million acres of Native-owned land in Alaska. An adequate land base and control over natural resources are central components of economic self-sufficiency and self-deter-mination, and as such, are vital to the very existence of tribes.Thus, much of NARF’s work involves the protection of tribal natural resources.  
Although basic human rights are considered a universal and
inalienable entitlement, Native Americans face an ongoingthreat of having their rights undermined by the United Statesgovernment, states, and others who seek to limit these rights.Under the priority of the promotion of human rights, NARFstrives to enforce and strengthen laws which are designed toprotect the rights of Native Americans to practice their tradi-tional religion, to use their own language, and to enjoy their culture. Contained within the unique trust relationship betweenthe United States and Indian nations is the inherent duty for alllevels of government to recognize and responsibly enforce themany laws and regulations applicable to Indian peoples.  Becausesuch laws impact virtually every aspect of tribal life, NARF maintains its involvement in the legal matters pertaining toaccountability of governments to Native Americans.
The coordinated development of Indian law and educating the
public about Indian rights, laws, and issues is essential for thecontinued protection of Indian rights.  This primarily involvesestablishing favorable court precedents, distributing informa-tion and law materials, encouraging and fostering Indian legaleducation, and forming alliances with Indian law practitionersand other Indian organizations. 
Requests for legal assistance should be addressed to the
Litigation Management Committee at NARF's main office, 1506 Broadway, Boulder, Colorado 80302.  NARF’s clients areexpected to pay whatever they can toward the costs of legal representation.NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Gerald Danforth, Chairman .................................................................................. Wisconsin Oneida
Natasha Singh, Vice-Chairman .................................................................. Native Village of StevensMarshall McKay, Treasurer  .................................................................... Yocha Dehe Wintun NationVirginia Cross  ...................................................................................................... Mucklesho ot Tribe
Moses Haia.................................................................................................................. Nat ive Hawaiian
Gary Hayes ………………………………………………………………. Ute Mountain Ute TribeJulie Roberts-Hyslop …………………………………………………… Native Village of TananaStephen Lewis ……………………………………………………... Gila River Indian Community Mark Macarro .............................................................................. Pechanga Band of Luiseño IndiansPeter Pino ………………………………………………………………………………. Zia PuebloBuford Rolin ........................................................................................ Poarch Band of Creek India ns
Barbara Anne Smith .............................................................................................. Chickasaw Nati on
Executive Director: John E. Echohawk .................................................................................. Pawnee
NARF LEGAL REVIEW • VOLUME 38, NO. 1 • WINTER/SPRING 2013Native American Rights Fund
1506 Broadway
Boulder, CO 80302Non-Profit Org.
U.S. Postage
PPAAIIDD
Boulder, Colorado
Permit No. 589
PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER
