Pembina Chippewa Settlement
Case UpdatesNational Indian Law LibraryCall to ActionNARFNARF BoardPage 1Page 5Page 9Page 10Page 11Page 12Legal Review
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Pembina Chippewa Tribes and Individuals to 
Receive Long Overdue Settlement Payments
On June 23, 2021, the U.S. District Court for 
the District of  Columbia gave final approval to a $59 million negotiated settlement between Pembina Chippewa Indians and the United States of  America in the case Peltier, et al., v. Haaland, 
et al. Four Pembina Tribes: the Turtle Mountain 
Band of  Chippewa Indians of  North Dakota; the Chippewa Cree Indians of  the Rocky Boy’s Reservation, Montana; the White Earth Band of  the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe, Minnesota; and the Little Shell Band of  Chippewa Indians of  Montana will share in the settlement along with 39,003 individual Pembinas.
Settlement distribution will close a twenty-nine-
year-old lawsuit against the U.S. government alleging mismanagement of  Pembina funds held in trust by the U.S. since 1964. “This victory is long overdue,” said lead plaintiff  representative Leslie Wilkie Peltier (Turtle Mountain Chippewa).
The funds held in trust derive from a treaty and 
an agreement by which the U.S. purchased lands from the Pembinas that became part of  North Dakota and Minnesota. In the 1863 Treaty, as amended, the U.S. purchased about 2.5 million acres from the Pembinas for about 8 cents an acre. “The government told us how much they would pay us when we negotiated the 1863 Treaty. They told us how it would be paid out, when, and to whom and how long payments would last,” said Peltier. “And, like it told most tribes, the government told us it would not ask us for more.”
But the U.S. wanted more land, and gave the 
Pembinas few options as it demanded a second sale. “The federal government tried to force us to relocate from North Dakota by issuing our treaty-negotiated rations in Minnesota. We’d have to travel 300 miles one way to get food. Some of  us tried but many never returned,” said Peltier, who has taught the history, treaties, and culture of  her people at the Turtle Mountain Community 
Volume 46 No. 2 | SUMMER/FALL 2021Turtle Mountain Chippewa Tribe honored Pembina Chippewa 
Treaty Committee members at the 1994 Little Shell Pow Wow. From left to right: Elma Wilkie, Mary Cornelius, Francis Cree, and Ernest Patnaude. Not pictured: Leo Wilkie.
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
PAGE 2NARF LEGAL REVIEWCollege for over 30 years. Under extreme duress, 
the Pembinas sold (through the 1892 McCumber Agreement) an additional 10 million acres in North Dakota to the U.S. for about 10 cents an acre.
When Congress admitted the dishonorable 
nature of  hundreds of  treaties that the U.S. had forged with tribes and established the Indian Claims Commission (ICC) in 1946, the Pembinas submitted claims. “The ICC was a remarkable official admission by the U.S. that it had cheated tribes in their treaties,” said Native American Rights Fund (NARF) Staff  Attorney Melody McCoy, who has represented the Pembinas since 1996. “The ICC could not restore land to tribes, but it could award additional monetary compensation to them.”
In 1964, the ICC awarded the Pembinas an 
additional $227,642 for their 1863 Treaty lands. In 1980, the ICC awarded the Pembinas an additional $53 million for the McCumber Agreement lands. “That was a very large award,” said McCoy, “probably the second or third largest award ever made by the ICC.”
Instead of  immediately paying ICC awards 
directly to individuals and tribal governments, following historic and paternalistic law and policy, the U.S. government held the awards in trust unless and until it distributed them. In 1971, Congress approved distribution of  the 1964 ICC award to all Pembina individuals determined by the U.S. Department of  the Interior to be eligible to share in the award. It took the Interior 13 years to determine that 21,268 individuals each were eligible to receive about $44. In 1984, the Interior began those distributions. 
In 1982, Congress approved distribution of  the 
1980 ICC award. In 1988, Interior determined that 33,584 individuals were eligible to share in the award for about $1,200 to $2,400 per individual. The Interior made these distributions in 1988 and 1994. Peltier recalled the reaction on the Turtle Mountain Reservation. “My mom taught me that you can sometimes best educate people with humor. After the first 1980 award payments began, she went to the bank in this old truck she had, got rolls of  dimes, and had t-shirts made. She decorated the truck for us to drive as a float in the St. Anne’s Turtle Mountain Days parade, with signs on each side that said: “‘Attention area farmers: we will buy your drought-stricken lands for 10 cents an acre. Payment in 100 years, without interest.’ We threw the dimes out to the crowd, yelling, ‘This is what your treaty got for you.’” 
On a more serious note, Peltier remembers, 
“My family were members of  the Pembina Treaty Committee of  volunteers, who worked to understand the ICC awards and help convey what was going on to the Pembina people. My parents helped with research. Joe and Emma Great Walker, an elder couple who were fluent in Ojibwemowin, translated to our communities who did not speak English. I grew up listening to these elders, these leaders, talk about what the 
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
PAGE 3VOLUME 46 NO. 2
government did to us. It was only natural that, as 
these elders passed away, I and others from the next generations took up this work.”
Though pleased to begin receiving the ICC 
awards in 1984 and 1988, elected Pembina tribal leaders also had questions. The government had held their awards in trust for decades, and by law, the U.S. is charged as the trustee with investing the awards until distribution. How much had they earned? How much should they have 
earned? When efforts to get this information from the government failed, the Turtle Mountain Chippewa Band hired a private accounting firm to investigate. The accounting firm advised the Band to seek legal counsel. 
The Pembina tribal governments secured 
assistance from NARF in 1991, and in 1992 NARF filed a U.S. Court of  Federal Claims lawsuit against the government on behalf  of  all Pembina beneficiaries, alleging failure to account for and mismanagement of  the Pembina awards, and seeking money damages for breaches of  trust. The Pembinas refused to accept a partial accounting transaction report produced by a government contractor in 1996 as the full and accurate fiduciary accounting to which Pembina trust beneficiaries are entitled by law. Bit by bit–and sometimes only in response to court order–over several years the government produced thousands of  accounting records to the Pembinas. NARF used these records in 2005 to outline the Pembinas’ first settlement proposal, which the U.S. rejected. Instead, the U.S. filed a motion to have the lawsuit dismissed or drastically reduced.
The court denied the government’s motion in 
2006. The court held that the Pembinas’ claims could proceed to determine whether the U.S. was liable for breaches of  trust, and, if  so, what damages were owed. At that point, the government and the Pembinas embarked on what would become a decade-long process of  negotiating a settlement of  the Pembinas’ claims.
At the court’s insistence, all Pembinas had to 
be fully represented in this case, meaning all four Pembina tribes and fifteen subgroups of  the Pembina individuals, including the heirs of  deceased original Pembina individual beneficiaries. Ultimately, 85 individuals have served as named or class representatives for the Pembina individuals, since, under the act of  Congress providing for the distribution of  the 1980 ICC award, the individuals are entitled to over 80% of  any recovery in the case.
“I was with my Mom when we first met Melody 
as court-approved named representatives for our people. This was a critical moment. Many tribal members had given up and told us we were wasting our time, fair compensation would never happen,” said Peltier. “We had no idea what to expect. Melody spoke eloquently about how NARF believes in winning cases like this. She knew our history and the details of  our treaties. After years without assistance or hope, it was a relief  and an honor to hear someone from the outside take up our case, complexities and all, and outline the many, many steps we would have to take to proceed and succeed.”
Settlement negotiations and meetings for 
the Pembinas bounced back and forth from North Dakota and Montana to Washington, D.C. In March 2010, Peltier and other named representatives attended a negotiations session in Washington, D.C. “We joined in a circle in front 
Leslie Wilkie Peltier (Turtle Mountain Chippewa) at the TMCC 
Pow Wow in 2008.NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDof  the National Courts building across from the 
White House, and we smudged down before we went in. That really helped us to bond together, all the Pembina delegates from Turtle Mountain, Chippewa Cree, Little Shell, White Earth, and many other places, to be of  one mind and hope: that the settlement judge would listen. During the proceedings, there were so many lawyers sitting at the other table. At our table, there was just Melody and her assistant, yet Melody stumped them. The judge did listen.”
In July 2015, the parties reached agreement on 
a monetary amount for a potential settlement. In March 2018, the parties reached agreement on the non-monetary components of  a potential settlement. In December 2020, the U.S. government gave final federal approval to the settlement. Part of  the settlement involved filing the claims of  the Pembina individuals in the U.S. District Court, as opposed to the Court of  Federal Claims, where the benefits of  federal court class action rules could lead to the needed finality for the settlement to work.
When the District Court granted final approval of  
the settlement in June 2021, both parties anxiously waited for the appeal time to end in September 2021. No appeals were filed, and the parties have moved on to payment of  and distribution of  the 
PAGE 4settlement proceeds. Payment has begun, and distributions should begin in early 2022 and likely will run through much of  2023. 
The Chippewa Cree Tribe will receive $1,027,939; 
the Turtle Mountain Band will receive $6,853,350; the Little Shell Chippewa Tribe will receive $563,986; and the White Earth Band will receive $341,646. The 39,003 Pembina individuals collectively will receive $42,650,600, with individual amounts ranging from $50to $1,550. The settlement proceeds allocations are based solely on the acts of  Congress that distributed the 1964 and 1980 ICC awards to the Pembinas. “It’s simply more money for everyone who already got money,” said McCoy. “Unfortunately, about one-third of  the original Pembina individual beneficiaries have passed on. The Court ruled 
that their shares in this case pass to their heirs, which will add to the time it takes to complete the distributions.
Beyond financial compensation, in resolving 
this lawsuit, the Pembinas remained true to the teachings of  their elders and ancestors to be persistent and patient in holding the U.S. government accountable to Indians. “One of  the milestones of  my career will be the decades I spent working with the Pembina Tribes and individuals in this case,” said McCoy. “It rectifies a series of  injustices for which payment was long, long overdue.” 

For more information on Peltier v. Haaland settlement Pembina Chippewa class-action
awardees can visit www.pembinasettlement.com  or call 1-833-999-9915.PAGE 5NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDCase Updates
Tribes Respo nd to 
Keystone XL Termina tion
On June 9, 2021, TransCanada (TC Energy) 
announced that it is terminating its Keystone XL 
(KXL) pipeline project. Rosebud Sioux Tribe 
President Rodney M. Bordeaux responded to the 
announcement, “This is great news for the Tribes 
who have been fighting to protect our people and 
our lands. The treaties and laws guarantee us 
protections, and we are committed to see that 
those laws are upheld.”
Fort Belknap Indian Community President 
Andy Werk also commented, “The TransCanada 
announcement is a relief to those of us who 
stood in the pipeline’s path. We were not willing 
to sacrifice our water or safety for the financial 
benefit of a trans-national corporation. We are 
thrilled that the project has been canceled.”
The Rosebud Sioux Tribe (Sicangu Lakota 
Oyate) and the Fort Belknap Indian Community 
(Assiniboine (Nakoda) and Gros Ventre (Aaniiih) 
Tribes) in coordination with their counsel, the 
Native American Rights Fund, sued the Trump 
Administration for numerous violations of the 
law in the Keystone XL pipeline permitting 
process. On January 20, 2021, President Biden 
signed an Executive Order revoking the Keystone 
XL pipeline permit issued by the Trump 
administration.
VOLUME 46 NO. 2Montana Parents and Tribes 
Demand State Supports
Indian Education For All Mandate 
In July 2021, multiple Montana parents along 
with the Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes of  the Fort Peck Reservation, Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes of  the Flathead Reservation, Fort Belknap Indian Community, Little Shell Tribe of  Chippewa Indians of  Montana, and Northern Cheyenne Tribe filed Yellow Kidney, et al., v. Montana 
Office of  Public Instruction, et al., in Montana District Court a class action lawsuit to ensure that all Montana public school students learn in school about Indigenous peoples as required by Montana’s constitution and statutes.
“Montana citizens approved their Constitution 
in 1972 and in 1999 the Montana Legislature passed the Indian Education for All Act (IEFA) to ensure that every state public school student —Indian and non-Indian—has the opportunity to gain a basic understanding of  the history and current status of  the American Indian tribes in this region,” said Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes Chairwoman Shelly R. Fyant. “We need state education administrators at the top level to create a system of  accountability down to every classroom to ensure that every educator teaches this information in every subject area in a way that preserves American Indians’ cultural integrity and ensures that the money PAGE 6 NARF LEGAL REVIEW
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Montanans voted to invest in IEFA benefits every 
student. Now, more than ever, quality education is needed in our state.”
The State agencies’ failure to effectively 
implement and monitor IEFA means that the vast majority of  Montana public school students are not getting any meaningful education about American Indians. “We want the children in our public schools to grow together with as much effort put towards understanding one another as possible,” said plaintiff  and parent Amber Lamb (Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes of  the Fort Peck Indian Reservation). “It is important to building a strong community for the future to be educated about historical elements that built the culture we are living in today.”
The Native American Rights Fund (NARF), 
American Civil Liberties Union of  Montana, and the American Civil Liberties Union represent the five Montana tribes and eighteen Indian and non-Indian Montana public school students and their guardians against the Montana Office of  Public Instruction (MPOI) and the Montana Board of  Public Education (MBPE) for failing to implement IEFA. Every year since 2007, taxpayers have provided over $3 million for school districts to provide IEFA instruction, yet there is little evidence that MOPI and MBPE are holding districts accountable statewide for whether and how IEFA funding is spent.  Nor are MOPI and MBPE requiring schools and staff  to work with tribes in achieving the constitutional and statutory IEFA guarantees and requirements.
“Montana is the first and to date only state to 
constitutionally require the teaching of  Indian education to all students in its public schools,” said NARF Staff  Attorney Melody McCoy, who has worked in Indian education for over 30 years. “That is a stunning testament to the people of  Montana who are not getting what they voted for and what their public money is being allocated for. If  we succeed in this lawsuit, going forward, that will change and the state agencies and officials charged with implementing the law finally will have to implement the law correctly and fully.” 
PAGE 7 VOLUME 46 NO. 2
Tribal Supreme 
Court Project
The Tribal Supreme Court Project is part of  the 
Tribal Sovereignty Protection Initiative and is staffed by the National Congress of  American Indians and the Native American Rights Fund. The Project was formed in 2001 in response to a series of  US Supreme Court cases that negatively affected tribal sovereignty. The purpose of  the Project is to promote greater coordination and to improve strategy on litigation that may affect the rights of  all Indian tribes. We encourage Indian tribes and their attorneys to contact the Project to coordinate resources, develop strategy and prepare briefs, especially at the time of  the petition for a writ of  certiorari , prior to the Supreme 
Court accepting a case for review. You can find copies of  briefs and opinions on the major cases we track on the NARF website (https://sct.narf.
org). 
October 4, 2021, was the first day of  the October 
Term 2021. With many high-profile issues on the Court’s docket, court watchers anticipate that this will be a significant Supreme Court term. For Indian law, two petitions have been granted so far: Ysleta del Sur Pueblo v. Texas (20-493) (Indian 
gaming) and Denezpi v. United States (20-7622) 
(double jeopardy). Also, we are closely watching Brackeen v. Haaland (21-380), and related petitions, 
which raise issues about the Indian Child Welfare Act. In addition, the State of  Oklahoma as filed a series of  petitions encouraging the Court to reverse its holding in McGirt v. Oklahoma. PETITIONS FOR A WRIT OF 
CERTIORARI GRANTED
The Court has granted review in the following 
cases:
DENEZPI V. UNITED STATESDENEZPI V. UNITED STATES (20-7622): Petitioner Merle Denezpi is a Navajo Nation citizen and was convicted of  a tribal law assault-and-battery charge by the Court of  Indian Offenses of  the Ute Mountain Ute Agency and served 140 days of  imprisonment. Six months later, a federal grand jury indicted him on one count of  aggravated sexual abuse in Indian Country. He moved to dismiss the indictment, claiming that it violated the double jeopardy clause because he was convicted of  the same offense in the Court of  Indian Offenses. The district court denied the motion to dismiss and he was convicted after a trial. The Tenth Circuit affirmed, holding that the double jeopardy clause was not violated because the “ultimate source” of  Mr. Denezpi’s prosecution in the Court of  Indian Offenses was the tribe’s inherent sovereignty. The court reasoned that Congress’s creation of  the court provided a forum through which the tribe could exercise its power of  self-governance.  
YSLETA DEL SUR PUEBLO V. TEXAS YSLETA DEL SUR PUEBLO V. TEXAS (20-493): The State of  Texas sued the Ysleta del Sur Pueblo (“Pueblo”), seeking to enjoin it from engaging in certain gaming as a violation of  Texas law. In 1987, Congress passed an act restoring federal recognition of  the Pueblo, which provided that the Pueblo may not conduct gaming that is prohibited under Texas law. Congress subsequently passed the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act (“IGRA”), which is more permissive of  tribal gaming operations than the Pueblo’s restoration act. Texas and the 
PAGE 8 NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Pueblo have disagreed ever since about whether 
the restoration act or IGRA control the Pueblo’s gaming operations. In 1993, the Fifth Circuit sided with Texas and held that the restoration act controlled. In the instant lawsuit, Texas argued that the Pueblo’s games violated Texas law. Relying on its 1993 case, the Fifth Circuit agreed and held that “the Restoration Act ‘govern[s] the determination of  whether gaming activities proposed by the [ ] Pueblo are allowed under Texas law, which functions as surrogate federal law.’” 
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE TRIBAL 
SUPREME COURT PROJECT
NCAI and NARF welcome contributions to 
the Tribal Supreme Court Project.  Please send any contributions to:
NCAI, attn: Accounting
1516 P Street, NWWashington, DC  20005
Please contact us if  you have any 
questions or if  we can be of  assistance: 
Joel West Williams
NARF Senior Staff  Attorney202-785-4166williams@narf.org
Esther Labrado
NCAI Legal Manager202-466-7767 x. 201 elabrado@ncai.org VOLUME 46 NO. 2 PAGE 9
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNational Indian Law Library (NILL)
screen to request a copy. The request form will 
automatically include information about the item in the catalog, but the requestor can add additional information such as chapter number or topic of  interest to help the NILL librarians locate the relevant information.
AskNILL for Research Assistance
While the NILL catalog is a good place to start with your research, please do not hesitate to contact us for research assistance. NILL is the only library serving the public with extensive expertise and resources relating to Indian law, providing services that other libraries are unable to provide. If  you need assistance with Indian law or tribal law research, please contact us via our website ( www.narf.org/nill/asknill.html).
Support the National Indian Law LibraryYour contributions help ensure that the library can continue to supply unique and free access to Indian law resources and that it has the financial means necessary to pursue innovative and groundbreaking projects to serve you better. We are not tax-supported and rely on individual contributions to fund our services. Please visit www.narf.org/nill/donate for more information on how you can support this mission. 
Researchers around the world have access to the resources of  the National Indian Law Library through online access to our library catalog (https://nill.softlinkliberty.net/liberty ). The 
catalog contains information on over 18,000 titles held in the NILL collection. Copies of  most resources can be delivered to researchers in a timely way and many catalog records provide links to free resources that are available on the internet. 
Locate Items in the NILL collection
At the top of  the catalog homepage, use the dropdown list to choose the “Advanced Search” option. This will allow you to search by title, author, subject, etc. You can also choose the type of  material you would like to see, such as Article, Book, or Tribal Code. Or, if  you prefer, you can use the “Basic Search” and enter a keyword in the large box at the top of  the screen. NILL’s collection includes catalog records for approximately 7,000 articles, 4,500 books, and 1400 tribal law resources. Many of  these items are freely available online and are easily accessed via a link in the catalog record.
Request Resources
NILL does not loan books from our collection, but we can usually provide a copy of  an article, book chapter, tribal code, or other item via email. When you’ve located the catalog record for an item of  interest, simply click on the “Request” icon on the right hand side of  the Using the NILL Catalog to Find Indian Law Information You NeedPAGE 10 NARF LEGAL REVIEW
AMERIND Risk
Chickasaw NationConfederated Tribes of Siletz IndiansCow Creek Band of Umpqua Tribe of IndiansJamestown S’klallam TribeMohegan Sun CasinoMuckleshoot Indian TribeNational Indian Gaming AssociationPoarch Band of Creek IndiansSan Manuel Band of Mission IndiansSanta Ynez Band of Chumash Mission IndiansSeminole Tribe of FloridaShoalwater Bay Indian TribeTulalip Tribes of WashingtonUnited Tribes of Bristol BayYavapai-Prescott TribeYocha Dehe Wintun NationIt has been made abundantly clear that non-Indian 
philanthropy cannot sustain NARF’s work. Federal funds for specific projects also have been reduced. To provide legal advocacy in a wide variety of  areas such as religious freedom, the Tribal Supreme Court Project, tribal recognition, human rights, trust respon-sibility, voting rights, tribal water rights, Indian Child Welfare Act, and tribal sovereignty issues, NARF looks to the tribes to provide the needed funding. It is an honor to list those tribes and Native organizations who have chosen to share their good fortunes with the Native American Rights Fund and the thousands of  Indian clients that we serve. 
We encourage other tribes and organizations to be-
come contributors and partners with NARF in fight-ing for justice for our people and in keeping the vision of  our ancestors alive. We thank the following tribes and Native organizations for their generous support of  NARF in the 2021 fiscal year (October 1, 2020 to September 30, 2021):
CALL TO ACTION
To join these tribes and organizations and support the fight for Native rights 
and tribal sovereignty, contact Don Ragona at ragona@narf.orgPAGE 11 VOLUME 46 NO. 2
CALL TO ACTIONinsure their independence on reservations, and protect 
their sovereignty. An adequate land base and control over natural resources are central components of  economic self-sufficiency and and self-determination, and are vital to the very existence of  tribes. Thus, much of  NARF’s work involves protecting tribal natural resources. Although basic human rights are considered a universal and inalienable entitlement, Native Americans face the ongoing threat of  having their rights undermined by the United States government, states, and others who seek to limit these rights. Under the priority of  promoting human rights, NARF strives to enforce and strengthen laws that protect the rights of  Native Americans to practice their traditional religion, use their languages, and enjoy their culture. 
Contained within the unique trust relationship between 
the United States and Indian nations is the inherent duty for all levels of  government to recognize and responsibly enforce the laws and regulations applicable to Indian peoples. Because such laws impact virtually every aspect of  tribal life, NARF is committed to holding governments accountable to Native Americans. Developing Indian law and educating the public about Indian rights, laws, and issues is essential for the continued protection of  Indian rights. This primarily involves establishing favorable court precedents, distributing information and law materials, encouraging and fostering Indian legal education, and forming alliances with Indian law practitioners and other 
Indian organizations. 
Requests for legal assistance should be addressed to 
NARF’s main office at 1506 Broadway, Boulder, CO 80302. NARF’s clients are expected to pay what they can toward the costs of  legal representation.The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is the oldest and largest nonprofit legal organization defending and promoting the legal rights of  Indian people on issues essential to their tribal sovereignty, natural resources, and human rights. 
Since 1970, we have provided specialized legal advice and 
representation to Native American tribes and organizations on issues of  major importance. Our early work was instrumental in establishing the field of  Indian law. NARF—when very few would—steadfastly took stands for Indian religious freedom and sacred places, subsistence hunting and fishing rights, as well as basic human and civil rights. We continue to take on complex, time-consuming cases that others avoid, such as government accountability, voting rights, climate change, and the education of  our children. We have assisted more than 300 tribal nations with critical issues that go to the heart of  who we are as sovereign nations.
NARF’s first Board of  Directors developed priorities to 
guide the organization in its mission to preserve and enforce the legal rights of  Native Americans. Those five priorities continue to lead NARF today:
•
 Preser
ve tribal existence
•
 Protect tribal natural resources
•
 Promote Nati
ve American human rights
•
 Hold g
overnments accountable to Native Americans
•
 Dev
elop Indian law and educate the public about 
Indian rights, laws, and issues
Under preserving tribal existence, NARF works to 
construct the foundations that empower tribes to live according to their traditions, enforce their treaty rights, The Native American Rights Fund
NARF Annual Report: This is NARF’s major report on its 
programs and activities. The Annual Report is distributed to foundations, major contributors, certain federal and state agencies, tribal clients, Native American organizations, and to others upon request. 
NARF Legal Review is published biannually by the Native 
American Rights Fund. There is no charge for subscriptions, 
however, contributions are appreciated.
Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund is a nonprofit, 
charitable organization incorporated in 1971 under the laws of  
the District of  Columbia. NARF is exempt from federal income tax under the provisions of  Section 501(c)(3) of  the Internal Revenue Code, and contributions to NARF are tax deductible. The Internal Revenue Service has ruled that NARF is not a “private foundation” as defined in Section 509(a) of  the Internal Revenue Code.www.narf.org
Boulder, CO (Main)
1506 BroadwayBoulder, CO 80302-6217(303) 447-8760; FAX (303) 443-7776 
Washington, DC
1514 P Street, NW (Rear) Suite DWashington, DC 20005-1910(202) 785-4166; FAX (202) 822-0068
Anchorage, AK
745 W . 4th Avenue, Suite 502Anchorage, AK 99501-1736(907) 276-0680; FAX (907) 276-2466Lacey A. Horn, Chair........................................................................................................Cherokee Nation
Kenneth Kahn, Vice-Chair.........................................................Santa Ynez Band of Chumash IndiansDerek Valdo......................................................................................................................Pueblo of AcomaRebecca Miles....................................................................................................................Nez Per ce Tribe
Camille K. Kalama............................................................................................................Native HawaiianJamie Azure.....................................................................................Turtle Mountain Band of ChippewaRebecca Crooks-Stratton...............................................Shakopee Mdewakanton Sioux CommunityStephanie A. Bryan...................................................................................P oarch Band of Creek Indians
Gayla Hoseth......................................................................................................... Curyung Tribal Council
Robert Miguel.................................................................................................Ak-Chin Indian CommunityAnita Mitchell.....................................................................................................Muckleshoot Indian TribeMichael Petoskey..............................................................................................................................OttawaRhonda Pitka..............................................................................................................A thabascan/InupiaqBoard of Directors
NARF LEGAL REVIEW | VOLUME 46, NO. 2 | SUMMER/FALL 2021NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
1506 BROADWAYBOULDER, CO 80302
PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPERNon-Profit Org.
U.S. Postage
PAID
Boulder, Colorado
Permit No. 589
