   
 
 
 
JUVENILE DETENTION ALTERNATIVES INITIATIVE  
Examining How JDAI Sites Interact with 
Native Youth and Tribes  
 
 
Association on American Indian Affairs   
November  2018  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
JUVENILE DETENTION A LTERNATIVES INITIATI VE  
Examining How JDAI Sites Interact with Native Youth and Tribes  
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements  
 
The Association on American Indian Affairs is the oldest non -profit serving Indian Country 
protecting sovereignty, preserving culture, educating youth and building capacity. The 
Association was formed in 1922 to change the destructive path of federal policy from 
assimilation, termination and allotment, to sovereignty, self -determination and self -sufficiency. 
Throughout its 96 -year history, the Association has provided national adv ocacy on watershed 
issues that support sovereignty and culture, while working on the ground at a grassroots level 
with Tribes to support the implementation of programs that affect lives on the ground.  The 
Association is governed by an all -Native American  Board of Directors from all regions of Indian 
Country that works in close cooperation with Native Americans, Trib al governments  and other 
organizations with similar missions.  
  
The Annie E. Casey Foundation provided the funding for this report . The Annie E. Casey 
Foundation is a private philanthropy that  works to  create a brighter future for the nation’s 
children by developing solutions to strengthen families, build paths to economic opportunity and 
transform struggling communities into safer and hea lthier places to live, work and grow.  Since 
1948, the Annie E. Casey Foundation’s  efforts have translated into more informed policies and 
practices that have  yielded  positive results for youth  and families.  
  
The Association on American Indian Affairs woul d like to thank Kimberly Dutcher , Navajo , 
Faith Roessel , Navajo , Katherine James and Camille Henderson  for their work during the early 
part of this project to  obtain the data necessary to review JDAI site interaction with Native youth 
and Tribes  and make i nitial findings . Special thanks to Cinda Hughes , a citizen of the Kiowa 
Nation,  who spent many hours drafting and redrafting this report  together with Shannon Keller 
O’Loughlin, Executive Director of the Association  on American Indian Affairs  and citizen of the 
Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma.  Jessica Lee, a member of the Wichita and Affiliated Tribes and 
Cultural Sovereignty Fellow of the Association , provided the final touches to the report; and 
artist Lilia Shahbandeh , Chickasaw , provided the poignant artwork.  This research  could not have 
been accomplished without the many people who cooperated in its development , primarily David 
Brown of the Annie E. Casey Foundation. Additional  thanks to colleagues in the non -profit a nd 
juvenile justice  communities who work on a day -to-day basis to support the healing of  our 
Native youth.    
   
 
 
 Executive Summary  
 
Studies have shown that incarceration of youth does not reduce recidivism and often 
grooms youth to commit further crime.  In fact, juvenile incarceration provides no overall benefit 
to public safety, wastes vast sums of taxpayer dollars, and exposes youth to alarming levels of 
violence and abus e.1 The Juvenile Detention Alternatives Initiative® developed by the Annie E. 
Casey Foundation is a widely replicated and comprehensive detention reform effort that utilizes 
collaborative and data -driven approaches to reduce reliance on juvenile incarcerat ion to create a 
fairer, more effective juvenile system that gives youth opportunities to develop into healthy, 
productive adults.2  
 
This report – Juvenile Detention Alternatives Initiative: Examining How JDAI Sites 
Interact with Native Youth and Tribe s – analyzes how Juvenile Detention Alternatives Initiative 
(JDAI) sites interact with Native youth and Tribes. The Association on American Indian Affairs 
(AAIA) developed a survey instrument, as well as targeted in terviews to address how these JDAI 
sites identify Native youth, and whether the sites collaborate with Tribal governments and Tribal 
juvenile justice staff to provide culturally appropriate  alternatives to detention and other  
opportunities for connections with Tribal communities.  
 
Native America n youth are the children of 573 federally recognized American Indian and 
Alaska Native Tribes and more than 200 other state recognized and non -recognized  Tribal  
communities. The study and its findings are significant considering  that the numbers of Native 
youth in detention are disproportionally higher compared to any other group. In 2013, Native 
youth had the highest rate of detainment for status offenses (19.5 per 100,000 youth) and drug 
offenses (19.2 per 100,000), as well as for technical violations (42 .4 per 100,000) among all 
youth categories.3 In addition, Native youth are at a higher risk of school discipline and 
suspension from school, abuse of alcohol and drugs, as well as attempting suicide. Native youth 
are more likely to be suspended or expelled  from high school than any other racial group, 
excluding African Americans.4 Up to 20% of Native youth ages 10 -24 report attempting suicide 
each year – that is 2.5 times greater the national rate.5 
 
                                                        
1 “Juvenile Detention Alternatives Initiative 2014 Progress Report,” The Annie E. Casey Foundation, p. 4, accessed 
October 27, 2018, https://www.aecf.org/m/resourcedoc/aecf -2014JDAIProgressReport -2014.pdf.  
2 “Juvenile Detention Alternatives Initiative,” The Annie E. Casey Foundation, accessed October 26, 2018, 
https://w ww.aecf.org/work/ juvenile -justice/jdai/ . 
3 “Stemming the Rising Tide: Racial & Ethnic Disparities in Youth Incarceration and Strategies for Change,” Burns 
Institute, accessed October 27, 2018, https://www.burnsinstitute.org/wp -content/uploads/2016/05/Stemming -the-
Rising -Tide_FINAL.pdf . 
4 Daniel Losen, Cheri Hodson, Michael A. Keith II, Katrina Morrison and Shakti Belway,  “Are We Closing the 
School Discipline Gap?” University of Central Los Angeles, accessed October 27, 2018, 
https://www.civilrightsproject.ucla.edu/resources/projects/center -for-civil-rights -remedies/school -to-prison -folder/ 
federal -reports/are -we-closing -the-school -discipline -gap/AreWeClosingTheSchoolDisciplineGap_FINAL221.pdf . 
5 “Fast Facts: Native American Youth and Indian Country,” Center for Native American Youth at the Aspen Ce nter, 
accessed October 26, 20 18, http://www.cnay.org/resource -hub/fast -facts . 
    
 
 
 Some scholars suggest that these disproportionate rates could be linked to inherent  
institutional racism toward these students, coupled with historic trauma, which arises out of 200 
years of federal policies  that worked  to terminate, assimilate and disposs ess Indian people from 
their lands, languages and cultures. Indian Tribes’ relationships with the U.S. are unique and 
based upon centuries of treaties and federal laws. However, early federal law and policy declared 
Tribes and Native people as inferior, an d federal policies reflected that by developing law s and 
policies that worked to destroy Native American land holdings and cultures through assimilation 
and taking away homelands. For example, as a primary assimilation tactic, the U.S. established 
hundreds  of federal boarding and day schools located on and off Indian reservations, and even, to 
take away Indian children from their families and place them through adoption in non -Indian 
households. The goal was to “ kill the Indian and save the man.”6 
 
Changes in federal Indian law and policy shifted in the late 1960s, eventually leading to 
the passage of two significant pieces of legislation. First, the Indian Self -Determination and 
Education Assistance Act of 1975 gave back  Tribal control and self -determinatio n of Indian 
schools  by allowing Tribes to utilize federal dollars to run Tribal schools themselves .7 Second, 
the Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978 (ICWA) was passed to protect against the removal of 
Native children away from their families and cultures. Tod ay, ICWA is being challenged by 
groups such as the Goldwater Institute and a few state governments who continue to believe that 
Indian families and Tribes are not the best placement for Native children , though the facts show 
that it is state child welfare and juvenile justice systems that have failed Native youth .8  
 
Even though some law s have changed, the current legal structure is burdensome, 
subjecting Native youth to three jurisdictions  – federal, state and Tribal – and diverse juvenile 
justice systems for punishment. Tribal governments maintain criminal jurisdiction over some 
cases that occur within the boundaries of their lands and reservations when the defendant is 
Native. However, federal courts retain jurisdiction for certain major crimes, and state s have 
jurisdiction over Native youth outside the reservation. In some cases, more than one of those 
jurisdictions may have concurrent jurisdiction over a youth who has allegedly committed a 
crime.  
 
With this context in mind, this report was built on uncovering how JDAI sites work with 
Native youth and Tribes  to support appropriate cultural alternatives to detention . The study 
identified two significant findings. First, the majority of JDAI sites who responded to the survey 
had not developed a reliable  process for identifying and collecting data on Native youth. The 
majority  of JDAI  sites left it to the Native youth to self-identify  as Native American  or relied on 
the unilateral determination of a juvenile justice case worker to identify a youth as Nati ve 
American. This is problematic as many Native youth do not want to alert their Tribal 
                                                        
6 Capt. Richard H. Pratt, “‘Kill the Indian, and Save the Man’: Capt. Richard H. Pratt on the Education of Native 
Americans,” History Matters, accessed October 27, 2018, http://historymatters.gmu.edu/d/4929.  
7 25 U.S.C. § 450.  
8 Rebecca Clarren, “ A Right -Wing Think Tank Is Trying to Bring Down the Indian Child Welfare Act. Why?  Native 
Americans say the law protects their children. The Goldwater Institute claims it does the opposite. ” The Nation, 
April 26, 2017, https://www.thenation.com/article/a -right -wing -think -tank-is-trying -to-bring -down -the-indian -child -
welfare -act-why/ .    
 
 
 communities because of concerns about anonymity and feelings of embarrassment or shame. 
Moreover, a caseworker may misunderstand that Native Americans vary widely in ap pearance, 
and may mistake a Native youth for Hispanic, black or white.  
 
Second, the study revealed that the majority of JDAI sites surveyed were not reaching out 
to the youth’s family or to the youth’s Tribe  to collect information on a youth’s status as a  citizen 
or member of a Tribe , were not providing notice to the Tribe of the youth’s offenses, nor 
determining whether there were culturally appropriate services available to Native youth. Tribes 
are sovereign nations, often with their own culturally appro priate services, including alternatives 
to incarceration, to protect their youth. The Indian Child Welfare Act also mandates that, at least 
within a child custody proceeding where a status offense is involved, the Tribe must be notified 
and may have rights  to transfer such a proceeding to the Tribal court. Thus, ICWA should 
provide a process by which states can work with Tribes to expand the resources available for 
Tribal youth. Tribal collaboration can only strengthen a JDAI site’s opportunity to find 
alternatives to incarceration and achieve the important goals of JDAI.   
 
Finally, the study identified emerging best practices within some JDAI sites in Arizona, 
Montana, New Mexico and Washington. These JDAI sites have developed programs that 
promote collabor ation with Tribes, including changes to state laws and policies, procedures that 
require information sharing, juvenile code development, at -risk and former offender 
identification processes, culturally -relevant community service programming and even cultur al 
awareness training for court staff and community partners.  
 
Considering the historic trauma that Indian Country has experienced through the loss of 
lands , loss of control over their inherent sovereignty,  destruction of their diverse culture s, and the 
violent taking of their children  – which has manifested into alarming statistics of Native youth in 
trouble  – AAIA has made six recommendations for JDAI sites to improve their work with Native 
American youth a nd Tribes:  
 
Recommendation 1:   Develop uniform and consistent protocols for identifying Native youth by 
Tribal affiliation, in collaboration with Tribes, that are not dependent on the youth’s self -
identification or a unilateral assessment based on physical  characteristics. These protocols should 
include contact with the youth’s family and building relationships with Tribes in the state.  
 
Recommendation 2:  Develop consistent data points to be collected regarding Native youth that 
includes Tribal affiliation,  and base decision -making on the responsible collection of this data, in 
collaboration with  families and  Tribes . 
  
Recommendation 3:  Establish notification protocols, in collaboration with Tribes, for informing 
Tribes when a Native youth enters the juvenile justice system. The notification process 
developed as part of New Mexico law requires the state to notify Tribes when a Native yout h is 
involved in a juvenile justice matter. ICWA legal standards for notification are much narrower 
but can be utilized and expanded to support a consistent notification process where Native youth 
appear before state courts including juvenile justice matte rs, not just child custody proceedings.   
     
 
 
 Recommendation 4:  JDAI sites that regularly interact with Native youth populations should 
receive concentrated education and training to develop a deeper level of understanding about the 
circumstances, issues and needs of Native youth involved in the juvenile justice system, in 
partnership with Tribes and Tribal programs.   Other JDAI sites should receive basic universal 
education about Native American youth and opportunities to support those Native youth.   
  
Recomm endation 5:  States and Tribes should execute Memoranda of Understanding for all child 
welfare and juvenile justice matters. State court and juvenile justice staff should enter into 
process -driven agreements with Tribal juvenile justice staff and Tribal cou rts that include 
provisions regarding how to transfer Native youth to Tribal courts or to Tribal juvenile justice 
programs; how to identify Native youth; and how to access applicable programming and funding 
that supports Tribal cultures and traditions.   
  
Recommendation 6:  Explore the availability of relevant cultural programs and detention 
alternatives based on Tribal juvenile justice programs, as well as Tribal traditions and practices.   
  
AAIA’s report demonstrates that Native youth are subject to discri mination and are often 
inappropriately and excessively detained, mostly by state and local governmental services . It is 
imperative that JDAI sites reevaluate their understanding s, as well as processes, about  Native 
American youth to reduce instances of you th incarceration where the re is little risk to public 
safety. This will require JDAI sites to develop effective methods of identifying Native youth and 
collecting information, in partnership with Tribes, and dramatically increase their collaboration 
with T ribal governments. We must work together to do better for our Native youth and our future 
generations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 Table of C ontents  
 
I. INTRODUCTION :  AMERICAN INDIAN A ND ALASKA NATIVE YOU TH AND 
JUVENILE JUSTICE …………………………………………………… …………… ...…1 
 
II.    UNIQUE STATUS OF AMERICAN INDIANS AND ALASKA NATIVES ..........4 
 
III.   ADDRESSING JDAI SITE EFFORTS WITH AMERICAN INDIAN AND    
         ALASKA NATIVE YOUTH AND TRIBES ...………………………… …………… .13 
 
 A.     Survey Methodology and Results …..……………………………… ...….…..13 
 
  1. Processes for Identification of Native Youth…………………………. 14 
 
  2. JDAI Site Collaboration with Tribes ..………… ...………………… .…. 16 
 
 B.     Targeted Interviews Methodology and Results………… ...…………… .….16 
 
  1. Arizona .………………………………………………… ...…………… …....18 
 
  2. Montana .…………………………………………………… ...………… .….19 
 
  3. New Mexico………………………………………………… ……… .……. .19 
 
  4. Washington .…………………………………………………… …….…….. 21 
 
IV.    CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS .……………………………… ....22 
 
APPENDIX :  List of JDAI Sites Responding to the Survey  Including States, Counties 
and County Consortiums, Tribes and State Courts  
 
    
 
1 
 I. INTRODUCTION:  AMERICAN INDIAN AND ALASKA 
NATIVE YOUTH AND JUVENILE JUSTICE  
 
The purpose of this report is to examine how Juvenile Detention Alternatives Initiative ® 
(JDAI) sites9 interact with Native American10 youth as well as how those sites collaborate with 
Tribal governments and Tribal juvenile justice programs. The report  gives critical information 
concerning  the results of a survey and targeted interviews performed by the Association on 
American Indian Affair s with JDAI sites across the country. The survey and targeted interviews 
address  how these  JDAI s ites identify Native  youth, whether the sites provide culturally  
appropriate services to them, and whether the sites collaborate with Tribal governments  and 
Tribal juvenile justice staff . 
  
Started in 1922, t he Association on American Indian Affairs (AAIA  or the Association ) is 
the oldest Native American policy  and advocacy non -profit in the country  whose goals are 
focused on protecting  Tribal  sovereignty, preserving culture , educating youth  and building 
capacity . AAIA  is chartered to develop culturally appropriate resolutions that build capacity to 
support cultural sovereignty and Tribal self -determination. AAIA is involved in national policy -
making and provides training and technical assistance at a grassroots level, in partnership wi th 
Tribes throughout Indian Country , to strengthen the inherent sovereign rights  central to the  
success of American Indian and Alaska Native  people s. 
 
The Association has worked actively on Native  child ren and youth issues for more than 
six decades. Tribal populations are composed of mainly  young people  with 42% under the age of 
24; more than 2.1 million of the total Native population  of 5.2 million .11 Thus, t he strength of the 
Native youth population is ine xtricably connected to the continuing cultural vitality  and 
sovereignty  of Native Nations and Tribes.  If we do not protect our youth , Tribes will not be able 
to protect their diverse cultures and sovereignty.  
 
In 2012, the AAIA partnered with the National Indian Child Welfare Association 
(NICWA) and approached the Annie E. Casey Foundation (Casey) to explore strategies that 
address the treatment of Native American youth in juvenile justice systems. That same yea r, 
“think -tank” sessions were held with juvenile justice experts, Tribal leaders and government 
entities, yielding recommendations for tackling this issue in Tribal and non -Tribal settings. One 
of the key recommendations that arose from those meetings incl uded supporting the “Tribal Law 
and Order Act (TLOA) Long Term Plan to Build and Enhance Tribal Justice Systems ” by 
                                                        
9 “Juvenile Detention Alternatives Initiative,” The Annie E. Casey Foundation , see note 2 . 
10 The term “Native” is used in this report to include Indians and Alaska Natives that are from federally recognized 
Tribes as well as Native  American s that are from Tribes or Nations not recognized by the federal government. There 
are 573 federally recognized Tribes or Nations; there are appr oximately 200 Native groups in the U.S. that are not 
federally recognized.  
11 Paula L. Vines, Tina Norris, Elizabeth M. Hoeffel, Tina Norris, “2010 Census Briefs: The American Indian and 
Alaska Native Population,” United States Census Bureau, accessed Octo ber 27, 2018 , https://www.census. 
gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br -10.pdf .     
 
2 
 expanding the Casey’s Juvenile Detention Alternatives Initiative (JDAI) to Indian Country.12 As 
a result, Casey, in partnership with AAIA and  the W. Haywood Burns Institute, is in the process 
of supporting the first Tribal JDAI site with the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians near 
Philadelphia, Mississippi. A second site has begun development in 2016 at the Pueblo of Isleta 
near Albuquerque, N ew Mexico.   
 
JDAI is a widely replicated and comprehensive detention reform effort that utilizes 
collaborative and data -driven approaches to reduce reliance on juvenile incarceration to create a 
fairer, more effective juvenile system. JDAI was developed t o support Casey’s vision that all 
youth involved in the juvenile justice system should have opportunities to develop into healthy, 
productive adults. JDAI is not a program per se, but a process whose goal is to ensure that 
detention is used only when a you th presents a significant risk to public safety or a threat to not 
appear in court. JDAI focuses on the juvenile detention component of the juvenile justice system 
because youth are often unnecessarily or inappropriately detained at great expense, with lon g-
lasting negative consequences for both public safety and youth development. Casey research 
finds that heavy reliance on juvenile incarceration will not reduce youth recidivism. Juvenile 
incarceration provides no overall benefit to public safety, wastes v ast sums of taxpayer dollars, 
and exposes youth to alarming levels of violence and abuse.13 
 
In summary, the objectives of JDAI are to influence policies, practices and programmatic 
changes that will:  
 
• Eliminate the inappropriate or unnecessary use of secu re detention;  
• Minimize re -arrest and failure -to-appear rates pending adjudication;  
• Ensure appropriate conditions of confinement in secure facilities;  
• Redirect public finances to sustain successful reforms; and  
• Achieve fair and equitable outcomes for all y outh.  
 
Since its inception in 1992, JDAI has become one of the nation’s most effective, 
influential, and widespread juvenile justice system reform initiatives. As of 2017, JDAI was 
present in 39 states and the District of Columbia with 197 JDAI sites curre ntly representing 300 
jurisdictions.14 These JDAI sites pursue eight interrelated core strategies to accomplish JDAI’s 
objectives:  
 
✓ Promote collaboration between juvenile court officials, probation agencies, prosecutors, 
                                                        
12 “Tribal Law and Order Act (TLOA) Long Term Plan to Build and Enhance Tribal Justice Systems,”  accessed 
October 27, 2018, https://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/tribal/legacy/2014/02/06/tloa -tsp-aug2011.pdf . See also 
“Indian Alcohol and Substance Abuse Interdepartmenta l Coordinating Committee: FY 2015 Annual Progress 
Report ,” United States Department of Health and Human Services, Department of the Interior, and the Department 
of Justice, accessed October 28, 2018 https://www.samhsa.gov/sites/default/  files/programs_campaigns/underage_  
drinking/iasa -coordinating -committee -annual -report -fy15.pdf . 
13 “Juvenile Detention Alternatives Initiative: 2014 Progress Report,” The Annie E. Casey Foundation , see note 1.  
14 “JDAI at 25: Insights from the Annual Results Reports,” The Annie E. Casey Foundation, accessed October 27, 
2018, http://www.aecf.org/resources/jdai -at-25/. 
    
 
3 
 defense attorneys, schools, communit y organizations and advocates;  
✓ Use rigorous data collection and analysis to guide decision -making;  
✓ Utilize objective admissions criteria and risk -assessment instruments to replace 
subjective decision -making processes to determine whether youth should be pl aced into 
secure detention facilities;  
✓ Implement new or expanded alternatives to detention programs – such as day and 
evening reporting centers, home confinement and shelter care – that can be used in lieu of 
locked detention;  
✓ Institute case processing ref orms to expedite the flow of cases through the system;  
✓ Reduce the number of youth detained for probation rule violations or failing to appear in 
court, and the number held in detention awaiting transfer to a residential facility;  
✓ Combat racial and ethnic d isparities by examining data to identify policies and practices 
that may disadvantage youth of color at various stages of the process, and pursue 
strategies to ensure a more level playing field for youth regardless of race or ethnicity; 
and 
✓ Monitor and imp rove conditions of confinement in detention facilities.  
 
Casey, with AAIA, seeks to address the unique needs of Native youth in the justice 
system; Native youth continue to be the recipients of actions and policies that create barriers to 
opportunity and success. The purpose of this report is to examine how curr ent JDAI sites interact 
with Native youth as well as how those sites collaborate with Tribes. The report will review the 
results of a survey and targeted interviews with JDAI sites across the country concerning their 
interactions with Native youth and Tribes. The survey and targeted interviews address how these 
sites identify Native youth, whether the s ites provide culturally -appropriate services to them, and 
whether the sites collaborate with Tribal governments or Tribal juvenile justice staff. Thus, this 
report is the beginning of an investigation to explore recommendations  on how JDAI may better 
suppo rt Native youth.  
 
However, before turning to the analysis of JDAI site interactions with Native youth and 
Tribes, it is important to understand the context of federal Indian law and policy generally, as 
well as how federal Indian law and policy has shaped Native youth programs – as well as 
statistics concerning Nation youth – today. Unlike other ethnic and racial minorities, American 
Indians and Alaska Natives have a unique political status in U .S. law and policy. In addition, it is 
important to understand current issues facing Native youth, and the present and histor ical trauma 
that Native youth face . 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
4 
 II. UNIQUE STATUS OF AME RICAN INDIANS AND 
ALASKA NATIVES  
 
The complexity and context of the U.S.-Tribal relationship  is important to understand 
when address ing any issue concerning Native youth. Treaties and other federal law s serve as 
formal expressions of the government -to-government relationship  between Tribes and the U .S. 
government . From the earliest days of the country, the federal government has recognized a 
fiduciary  responsibility toward s Tribes and their citizens  based on treaties and other federal laws . 
In the 1820 s and 30s, Chief Justice John Marshall authored three watershed  U.S. Supreme Court 
opinions that established foundational principles of the federal relationship in Indian affairs .15 
Justice Marshall ’s legal opinions recognized  important Tribal rights, including inherent Tribal  
sovereignty and the right to self-governance ; while at the same time those opinions called out the 
inferiority of Native American  people s.16 
 
The goal of early federal Indian policy was to strip Tribes of their communally held lands 
and assimilate Tribal peoples. During early federal I ndian policy development f rom the 1800s 
through the 1920s, federal law stripped control of education from Tribes and transferred primary 
control of Indian education to the federal government. The federal government establis hed 
hundreds of federal boarding and day schools located on and off Indian reservations  to “kill the 
Indian and save the man .”17 Federal boarding schools tore families apart and stripped Tribal 
languages and cultures from Native youth. In 1928, the Meriam Repo rt, funded by the 
Rockefeller Foundation, found that the U .S. implementation of Indian boarding schools was a 
failure. The federal government, over a period of time between the 1920 -1970s, transferred 
control of many Native schools  to churches and later to  state public school  systems  in attempt s to 
better Indian education .  
 
In 1969, the Kennedy Report titled “Indian Education: A National Tragedy, and National 
Challenge,” gave a stinging critique of federal and state polic ies regarding Indian education and 
called for sweeping reforms in Indian education. The passage of the  Indian Self -Determination 
and Education Assistance Act  of 1975  was the first piece of legislation that recognized the 
importance of Tribal control and self -determination .18 Today, the Self -Determination Act  has 
allowed  Tribal governments to  achieve greater control over education  of Native youth  allowing 
Tribes to utilize federal dollars to run Tribal schools themselves.  Federal laws also require  equal 
access and equal resources for all Native students, irrespective of whether they attend school on 
or off the reservation.19 Federal resources that are available specifically to Native  students 
                                                        
15 Philip J. Prygoski, “From Marshall to Marshall: The Supreme Court's Changing Stance on Tribal Sovereignty,” 
The Compleat Lawyer, Vol. 12, No. 4 (Fall 1995), pp. 14 -17. 
16 Ibid. 
17 Capt. Richard H. Pratt, “‘Kill the Indian, and Save the Man’: Capt. Richard H . Pratt on the Education of Native 
Americans ,” see note 6.  
18 25 U.S.C. § 450.  
19 Stan Juneau, “A History and Foundation of American Indian Education Policy,” Montana Office of Public 
Instruction, accessed October 27, 2018, http://opi.mt.gov/Portals/182/Page%20Files/Indian%20Education/ Indian%     
 
5 
 include tutoring, counseling, cultural programming, school supplies, and school lunches . 
 
The Bureau of Indian Education  currently  oversees a total of 183 e lementary and 
secondary schools  located on 64 reservations in 23 states.20 Of these, 53 are operated by the 
Bureau of Indian Education and  130 are operated by Tribes under Self -Determination Act 
contracts .21 The Bureau also funds or operates off -reservation boarding schools and peripheral 
dormitories near reservations for students attending public schools . Of more than 600,000 Native 
students ,22 41,051 attend Bureau of Indian Education day and boarding schools.23 
 
 However, Bureau of Indian Education Schools have been reported as failing Native youth 
and Tribes:  
 
For over a century, the federal government has proven that attempting to control 
and oversee a nationwide network of schools leads to an ineffective and 
disheartening system of education that fails to address the cultural, linguistic, and 
overall learning needs of American Indian children. If the BIE ’s record of failure 
reflected on any other group of students, there would be a national outcry.24 
 
In 2014, the General Acc ounting Office reported that the performance of students in Bureau of 
Indian Education schools  “has been consistently below that of public school students, including 
other Indian students .”25 The report also stated that  about one -third of BIE schools were in poor 
condition and would require $1.3  billion to be made acceptable  and another $1 billion would be 
needed to deal with the BIE’s backlog of maintenance and repair issues.26   
 
Tribal schools  (some of which are BIE schools), on the other hand,  are more likely to 
incorporate Native culture s and languages  into curriculums and school policies and therefore 
likely  benefit Native students more than public schools  that are absent of culturally relev ant 
values and topics .27 Moreover, s chool performance among Native  youth is positively influenc ed 
by local knowledge, language  and culture , as well as community involvement .28  
                                                        
20Education%20101/History_FoundationAmindianEd.pdf.  
20 “Schools,” Bureau of Indian Education, accessed October 27, 2018, https://www.bie.edu/Schools/index.htm.  
21  Ibid.  
22 “The Federal Trust Responsibility to Native Education,” National Indian Education Association, accessed October 
27, 2018,  http://www.niea. org/wp -content/uploads/2016/03/NIEA -FY-2018 -Budget -Updated -Sept-12-17.pdf.  
23 “Parents and Student,” Bureau of Indian Education, accessed October 27, 2018, https://www.bie.edu/Parents  
Students/.  
24 Denise Juneau, “ The Bureau of Indian Education is Broken,” Education Week 37, no. 19 (2018), 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4159099/ . 
25 “Indian Affairs: Bureau of Indian Education Needs to Improve Oversight of School Spending,” United States 
Government Accountability Office, accessed October 27, 2018, https://www.gao.gov/products/gao -15-121. 
26 Ibid.  
27 Devan M Crawford et al. “Tribal vs. Public Schools: Perceived Discrimination and School Adjustment among 
Indigenous Children from Early to Mid -Adolescence,”  Journal of American Indi an Education 49, (2010)  
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4159099/ . 
28 William Demmert, “ Improving Academic Performance among Native Ameri can Students: A Review of the    
 
6 
 Another  holdover of historic failed federal policies  and failing BIE school infrastructure 
is the removal of Native  children from their families  and communities and placement into non -
Indian homes  through the foster care and state adoption systems . Tribal  famil ies have been  
devastated by state and locally sa nctioned child welfare and adoption agencies that have  
remov ed children from their homes at an alarming and disproportionate rate.  AAIA  completed 
two studies in 1969 and 1974  that exposed  as many as 25-35% of all Indian children had been 
separated from their families and placed in foster homes, adoptive homes , or institutions , and  
90% of those placements were in non -Indian homes  – even when fit and willing relatives were 
available .29 
 
As a result  of AAIA’s  research  and 
legislative drafting , as well as 
persistent Tribal advocacy  and 
many hours of congressional 
hearings,  the Indian Child Welfare 
Act (ICWA) was p assed in 1978  
recognizing the federal 
government’s special fiduciary 
relationship to protect Indian 
children : “Congress, through 
statutes, treaties, and the general 
course of dealing with Indian tribes, 
has assumed the responsibility for 
the protection and preservation of 
Indian tribes and their resources. … 
[T]here is no resource that is more 
vital to the exist ence and integrity 
of Indian tribes than their children. ”30  ICWA recognizes the inherent exclusive Tribal 
jurisdiction over Indian  children domiciled on the reservation , Tribal jurisdiction concurrent with 
a state where the Indian child lives outside of the reservation , and the Tribal right to intervene in 
child custody proceedings . In addition, the Act requires state courts to work with Tribes to 
determine whether a child is an “Indian child .”31  
 
A keystone of ICWA is  Tribal involvement  in chi ld custody proceedings involving Indian 
children , which may include i ssues of juvenile delinquenc y.32 ICWA  applies to a juvenile justice 
matter if a status offense is involved  and placement of the child is required . A status offense is an 
offense  that would not be considered criminal if committed by an adult and is prohibited only 
                                                        
Research Literature,” ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Educational and Small Schools, accessed October 27, 2018, 
https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED463917.  
29 H.R. Rep. No. 95 -1386, 1978 , accessed on October 28, 2018 https://narf.org/nill/do cuments/icwa/print/app1.pdf .  
30 25 U.S.C. § 1901.  
31 25 U.S.C. § 1903(4); see also 25 C.F.R. § 23.2.  
32 Stacie Polashuk, “Following the Lead of the Indian Child Welfare Act: Expanding Tribal Court Jurisdiction over 
Native American Juvenile Delinquents,” Southern California Law Review , no. 69 (1996).  
   
 
7 
 because of a person’s status as a minor (such as  possession of alcohol,  truancy or incorrigibility) . 
If a proceeding includes a status offense and “ any part of the proce eding results in the need for 
out-of-home placement of the child, including a foster -care, pre -adoptive, or adoptive placement, 
or termination of parental rights ,” then ICWA will apply and the Tribe must be notified.33 The 
Tribe will have concurrent jurisdi ction with the state court or can utilize its right to intervene  in a 
state court child custody proceeding  at any time during the  juvenile  justice process for status  
offenses.  However, ICWA does not enumerate Tribal intervention in the justice process for more 
serious charges that can be added on by the state , though inherent Tribal sovereignty dictates that 
it should.  
 
The U.S. Attorney General’s Advisory Committee on A merican Indian an d Alaska 
Native  Children Exposed to Violence found that “unfortunately, many states do not comply with 
the letter or spirit of ICWA.”34 Recent research suggests  that in practice, this non -compliance 
comes in the form of state courts failure to partner with Tribes to identify the “Indian child” and 
to notify Tribes.35 Fewer than half of states have passed laws that automatically trigger ICWA 
protections for status offenders, parents, and Tribes.36 Only about 6 .5% of all Tribes have a 
Tribal -State Agreement pursuant to ICWA that supports  ICWA processes.37 Non-compliance by 
state courts deprives Tribes of the right and ability to provide culturally relevant placements and  
services to their youth , and continues the inherent discrimination that has resulted in so many of 
the problems Native youth face . 
 
Native youth continue to face a myriad of social, economic, and educational problems 
that are rooted in historical trauma  brought on by centuries of failed federal laws and policies  – 
and continued ignorance from state and local agencies that work with Native youth . Moreover, 
the struggl es that Native youth face often go unmentioned in our nation’s discussions about 
America’s children. Unfortunately, when the needs of youth go unmet, those youth can develop 
behaviors that disrupt their development at home, in school and within their commu nities.  For 
Native youth, negative behaviors (that may be the normal part of adolescent development) may 
turn into juvenile offenses that lead to incarceration at a higher rate than any other group.38  
 
In 2013, Native youth had the highest rate of commitme nt for status offenses (19.5 per 
                                                        
33 U.S. Department of the Interior, Guidelines for Implemen ting the Indian Child Welfare Act , December 2016 , pp. 
12-14, https://www.bia.gov/sites/bia.gov/files/assets/bia/ois/pdf/idc2 -056831.pdf . 
34 “Ending Violence So Children Can Thrive,” US Department of Justice, accessed October 27, 2018, 
https://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/defendingchildhood/pages/attachments/2015/03/23/ending_violence_so_c
hildren_can_thrive.pdf.  
35 Ibid. 
36 Thalia González, “Reclaiming the Promise of the Indian Child Welfare Act: A Study of State Incorporation and 
Adoption of Legal Protections for Indian Status Offenders,” New Mexico Law Review , no. 42 (2012), https://ssrn. 
com/abstract=2658499 . 
37 Shannon Keller O’Loughlin, “A Survey and Analysis of Tribal -State Indian Child Welfare Act Agreements 
Including Promising Practices,” Association on American Indian Affairs, accessed October 27, 2018, 
https://www.indian -affairs.org/ uploads/8/7/3/8/873803 58/icwa_tribal -state_agreements_report.pdf.   
38 Addie C. Rolnick, “Untangling the Web: Juvenile Justice in Indian Country,” Legislation and Public Policy 19 , 
no. 49 (2016).     
 
8 
 100,000 youth) and drug offenses (19.2 per 100,000), as well as for technical violations (42.4 per 
100,000) among all youth categories.39 Native youth rates for out -of-home placements for these 
offenses increased, though the  rates for other youth decreased.40 There are several reasons for the 
overrepresentation of Native youth in the justice system:  
 
(1) Native youth have a higher incidence of risky 
activity than other youth; (2) harsh school 
discipline impacts Native students 
disproportionately; (3) racial disparities of the 
juvenile justice system result in more Native youth 
arrests, referrals, and detentions; and  (4) multiple 
jurisdictions with authority over Native youth may 
create burdens on youth recovery.  
 
Research shows that Native youth have a higher 
incidence of risky behaviors such as drug an d 
alcohol use compared to non -Native youth, and Native youth begin using drugs and alcohol at an 
earlier age than non -Native youth.41 Adolescent Natives have death rates 2 to 5 times the rate of 
whites in the same age group, resulting from a variety of risk y behaviors.42 Studies show that 
these risky behaviors and vulnerability also lead to gang involvement.43 Violence, including 
intentional injuries, homicide and suicide, accounts for 75% of deaths for Native youth aged 12 
to 20.44 Suicide is the second leadin g cause of death for Native youth in the 15 to 24 age group.45 
in the U .S., up to 20% of Native youth report attempting suicide each year; suicide is the second  
                                                        
39 “Stemming the Rising Tide: Racial & Ethnic Disparities in Youth Incarceration and  Strategies for Change,” Burns 
Institute , see note 3.  
40 Ibid. 
41 “Substance Use in American Indian Youth is Worse than We  Thought,” National Institute of Health, accessed 
October 27, 2018 , https://www.drugabuse.gov/about -nida/noras -blog/2014/09/substance -use-in-american -indian -
youth -worse -than-we-thought . 
42 “Fast Facts: Native American Youth and Indian Country,” Center for Native American Youth at the Aspen 
Center , see note 5.  
43 Dawn McDaniel, “Risk and Protective Factors Associated with Gang Affiliation among High -risk Youth: A 
Public Health Approach,” Injury Prevention: Journal of the International Society for Child and Adolescent Injury 
Prevention  18, no 4 (2012), 253 -8, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3406611/ .  
44 “Fast Fac ts: Native American Youth and Indian Country,” Center for Native American Youth at the Aspen 
Center , see note 5.  
45 “Suicide Among Racial/Ethnic Populations in the US: American Indians and Alaska Natives,” Suicide Prevention 
Resource Center, accessed October 27, 2018, https://www.samhsa.gov/capt/sites/default/files/resources/suicide -
ethnic -populations.pdf.  
Native youth are 
detained more than 
any other category 
of youth.   
Suicide is the second leading cause of death among Native youth.      
 
9 
 leading cause of death among Native youth ages 10 to 24 – 2.5 times greater the national rate.46  
 
In addition to the higher incidence of risky behavior and suicide, inherent bias results in 
Native students being disciplined more harshly in school. Between 90% and 95% of Native 
children are educated in public schools.47 Yet, according to a 2017 report by the National Center 
for Education Statistics, Native graduation rates of approximately 72% remain the lowest of any 
racial/ethnic demographic group.48 It is a known fact that minority children in public schools are 
genera lly subjected to harsher, more frequent disciplinary measures than white students.49 Native 
youth are more likely to be suspended or expelled from high school than any other racial group, 
excluding African Americans.50 These students miss valuable instructio n time, making it hard to 
catch up even when they do return to school. Even more detrimental to their development is that 
suspensions and expulsions increase the likelihood that a student will soon become involved in 
the juvenile justice system.51 
 
The disproportionate contact that Native 
youth have with the juvenile justice system 
reflects th e broader national trend that shows 
these children are funneled out of public 
schools and into the juvenile and criminal 
justice systems.52 Native youth are therefore 
being punished for negative behaviors 
developed due to poor social and economic 
conditions , which are the product of historic 
injustices faced by Native people and are 
beyond their control.53 These circumstances 
disproportionately push poorly served Native youth into the justice system where they are more 
likely to be subject to biases and harsh er discipline  than their non -Native peers .  
 
                                                        
46 Ibid. 
47 “Status and Trends in the Education of American Indians and Alaska Natives: 2008,” National Center of 
Education Statistics, accessed October 27, 2018, https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2008/2008084_1.pdf . 
48 “Status and Trends in the Education of Raci al and Ethnic Groups 2016,” US Department of Education, accessed 
October 27, 2018, https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2016/2016007.pdf.  
49 “Civil Rights Data Collection Data Snapshot: School Discipline,” US Department of Edu cation, accessed October 
27, 2018, https://ww2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/crdc -discipline -snapshot.pdf.  
50 Daniel Losen, “Are We Closing the School Discipline Gap?”  see note 4.  
51 Sarah E. Redfield and Jason P. Nance, “ The American  Bar Association  Joint Task  Force  on Reversing  the School -
to-Prison  Pipeline  Preliminary  Report,”  American Bar Association, accessed October 27, 2018, 
https://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/administrative/diversity_pipeline/stp_preliminary_report_final.authc
heckdam.pdf.  
52 Ibid. 
53 Francine Sherman and  Annie Balck, “ Gender Injustice: System -Level Juvenile Justice Reforms for Girl ,” National 
Crittenton Foundation, accessed October 27, 2018, http://www.nationalcrittenton.org/wp -
content/uploads/2015/09/Gender_Injustice_Report .pdf. 
Native graduation rates 
remain the lowest of any 
racial  or ethnic 
demographic group .    
 
10 
 In addition to historical injustices, Native youth also have a high rate of physical and 
mental disabilities. Professor  of Public Policy at the City University of New York in Brooklyn, 
Byron Price, believes, “Among the most prevalent underlying issues are that many Native youth 
have learning disabilities, or histories of poverty, and would benefit from additional education al 
and counseling services.”54 At 17%, the percentage of children and youth with physical, 
emotional, or learning disabilities was highest for Native youth in the 2013 -14 school year, 
according to the National Center for Education Statistics.55 Students of color, students with 
physical, intellectual, and learning disabilities, and students of color with disabilities experience 
disproportionate and harmful discipline at school.56 
According to data from the U .S. Department of Education’s Civil Righ ts Data Collection, 
Native students with physical and learning disabilities are more than twice as likely to receive 
out of school suspensions compared to students without disabilities.57 Among children with 
disabilities Native boys were more than twice as likely to receive one or more out -of-school 
suspensions, in comparison to white boys with disabilities. Native girls with disabilities were 
suspended around three times as often as white girls with disabilities.58 
 
Suspending Native youth disproportionately  reinforces and propagates historic 
inequalities for communities of color, low -income, and those living with disabilities. The result 
of this overuse of punishment is the overrepresentation of these same groups in the criminal 
justice system. Students who are forced out of the education system because of out -of-school 
suspensions or expulsions are up to ten times more likely to drop out, which significantly 
increases the likelihood of future incarcerations.59  
                                                        
54 Byron E. Price, “Humanizing Schools: Breaking Down the School -to-Prison Pipeline,” Huffington Post Blog, 
accessed October 27, 2018,  https://www.huffingtonpost.com/byron -e-price/humanizing -schools -
breaki_b_2766834.html . 
55 “Indicator 8: Students with  Disabilities,” National Center for Educational Statistics, accessed on October 28, 
2018, https://nces.ed.gov/programs/raceindicators/indicator_rbd.asp . 
56 “2013 -2014 Civil Rights Data Collection: A First Look,” U.S. Department of Education Office of Civil Rights, 
pp. 3 -5, accessed October 28, 2018, https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/2013 -14-first-look.pdf . 
57 “Civil Rights Data Collection Data Snapshot: School Discipline,” Unites States Department of Education , see note 
49. 
58 “2013 -2014 Ci vil Rights Data Collection: A First Look,” U.S. Department of Education Office of Civil Rights, 
see note 56.  
59 “From School to Prison: Missouri's Pipeline of Injustice ,” ACLU Missouri, accessed October 27, 2018, 
https://www.aclu -mo.org/en/missouris -pipelin e-injustice -school -prison.  
Native youth have the highest rates of physical, emotional and 
learning disabilities, and are more than twice as likely to 
receive out of school suspensions.     
 
11 
 Most young people are allowed to 
grow out of these behaviors without 
getting entangled in the juvenile 
justice system. Yet, Native youth 
are more likely to be arrested and 
incarcerated fo r these behaviors 
than their white peers. Native youth 
are arrested at a rate of three times 
the national average, and 79% of 
youth in the Federal Bureau of 
Prison’s custody are Native.60  
 
In 2003, Native youth were 2.5 
times as likely as white youth to be  
committed . By 2013, that ratio increased by nearly 50% to 3.7; in other words , Native youth are 
nearly four times as likely as white youth to be committed .61 While Native students comprise less 
than 1% of the total public -school  population, they make up 2% of school arrests and 3% of 
referrals to law enforcement.62  
One in four Native students in public school that are referred to law enforcement and 
subjected to school -related arrests have physical and learning disabilities.63 Finally, once Native 
juveniles are arrested, they are referred to the courts at a much higher rate than white youth.64 
Thus, the perpetuation of inequality against Native youth and Native youth with disabilities 
makes it harder for them to get out of the juvenile justice system.  
 
In addition to the disparities Native youth encounter, they also may be subjected to three 
jurisdictions for punishment – federal, state and tribal jurisdictions. Tribal governments maintain 
criminal jurisdiction over cases that occur within the boundaries  of their reservations when the 
                                                        
60 Fast Facts: Native American Youth and Indian Country,” Center for Native American Youth at the Aspen Center , 
see note 5 . 
61 Joshua Rovner, “Racial Disparities in Youth Commitments and Arrests,” Sentencing  Project , accessed October 
27, 2018, https://www. sentencingproject.org/publications/racial -disparities -in-youth -commitments -and-arrests . 
62 “Civil Rights Data Collection Data Snapshot: School Discipline,” Unites States Department of Education , see no te 
49. 
63 “National Disproportionate Minority Contact Databook,”  Office of Juvenile Justice, accessed October 27, 2018, 
https://www.ojjdp.gov/ojstatbb/dmcdb/.  
64 Ibid. 
While most young people are 
allowed to grow out of  
behavioral problems, Native 
youth are more likely to be 
arrested and detained than 
their white peers.  
Native youth are more likely to be arrested and referred to courts – 
and are four times as likely as white youth to be detained.     
 
12 
 defendant is Native. However, federal courts retain jurisdiction for certain major crimes within 
federal jurisdictions, which includes Tribal reservations and other federal and public lands. 
Outside Tribal and federal jurisd iction, state courts have jurisdiction over Native youth outside 
Tribal lands. In some cases, more than one  jurisdiction may have concurrent jurisdiction when a 
youth has allegedly committed a crime.65  
 
It is likely that the majority of Native youth intera ct with state jurisdictions more than 
federal or Tribal courts, since over 71% of the Native population lives off -reservation in urban 
areas. Often state courts and juvenile justice programs do not collaborate with Tribal 
communities nor do they  utilize culturally appropriate programs that could help support Native 
youth. State and federal jurisdictions often fail to notify Tribal governments when a Native youth 
enters the juvenile justice system.  
 
There is no aspect of Tribal sovereignty more i mportant than protecting the well -being of 
children and youth. Current federal law offers some opportunities for state and local programs to 
connect with Tribes to determine whether culturally appropriate services, placements and 
funding may be available t o assist Native youth in the juvenile justice system. The survey and 
targeted interviews discussed below provide information on the current scope of local and state 
efforts  – through the JDAI initiative – to connect with Native youth and Tribal communities . 
 
  
                                                        
65 18 U.S.C. § 1162 and 28 U.S.C. § 1360.  
   
 
13 
 III. ADDRESS ING JDAI SITE EFFORTS WITH AMERIC AN 
INDIAN AND ALASKA NA TIVE YOUTH  AND TRIBES  
 
Outreach to JDAI sites around the nation  began in the summer of 2016 . AAIA developed a 
JDAI site survey and targeted interviews  to determine the extent to which JDAI sites were 
interacting with Native youth and Tribes . Generally, the survey and interviews found that many 
JDAI sites do not collect information about whether they interact with Native youth and do not 
interact with Tr ibal governments. Of those JDAI sites that did show any interaction s, most allow 
the youth to self -identify, or the juvenile intake staff makes a unilateral determination of race or 
ethnicity. In addition, th e majority of JDAI sites do not provide for any special needs or 
culturally appropriate services for Native youth  towards better outcomes , nor do they  reflect 
current federal Indian policy , as well as child welfare policy  support ing the connection of the 
Native youth to his or her commun ity to increase the youth’s successful transition out of  
detention . 
 
A. SURVEY METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS  
 
 The survey was designed to ascertain  both the extent to which each  JDAI  site was 
tracking its involvement with  Native youth and whether  JDAI sites were  collaborating with 
Tribal governments or Tribal juvenile justice staff . The seven survey questions used to obtain 
this information were the following : 
 
1. What local jurisdiction do you represent?  
2. To your knowledge, are Native American youth referred to your juvenile justice 
system for detention?  
3. Does your jurisdiction count the number of Native American youth that come i n 
contact with the juvenile justice system?  
4. If yes, how does your jurisdiction determine if the youth is Native American?  
5. In your last calendar year, what percentage of your juvenile justice system 
intakes/arrests are Native American/Tribal Youth?  
6. Has your jurisdiction developed any specific policies, protocols, practices or 
programs to explicitly address issues pertaining to N ative American youth or Tribal 
governments?  
7. Please describe the nature of the interactions with Tribal governments and their 
representatives with regard to Native American youth.  
 
The survey was emailed via a third -party web -based provider to JDAI s ite representatives 
for all 197 JDAI sites representing 300 jurisdictions  throughout the country . While p articipation 
in the survey  by the sites was completely voluntary , a senior representative from the Casey  JDAI 
Juvenile Justice Strategy Group did include an introduction in the email that encourag ed the 
survey’s completion. The survey was initially opened in August 2016 and held open for a two -
week period.  
 
Fifty-five JDAI s ites responded to the survey in the initial two -week period. Following    
 
14 
 that initial two -week period, a targeted list of sites that had not yet responded to the survey was 
developed . This targeted list was  based on  JDAI s ite proximity to areas with high Native 
population s. The survey was reopened  and the sites on th e targeted  list were contacted 
individually  by AAIA.  The survey  then received an additional nine responses during  that second 
open period.  Therefore, a  total of 64 respondents  returned  the survey .66  
 
 JDAI site respondents represented various  types of juris dictions , including  states, state 
probation agencies, judicial district courts, county courts,  county consortiums, city courts  and 
Tribal courts . This mix of geographic and political jurisdictions has presented obstacles in 
providing a clear, defined picture of what JDAI sites may be interacting with Native American 
youth and Tribes.  In addition, s ome survey form s were not fully completed; however,  those 
forms  contained enough information to be useful f or this report. Several  survey forms were 
completed  by multiple JDAI sites within one form . Thus, the 64 respondents may not coincide 
with 64 separate  JDAI sites, and include state, county  and judicial districts . Respondents  were  
from 28 of the 39 states where JDAI is present . The Appendix to this Report lists the various 
jurisdictions that responded.  
 
The reason for multiple jurisdictions within a JDAI site is that about ten years ago, Casey  
shifted to a state focused strateg y. Before the shift to states, JDAI was replicated in just a few 
counties or judicial districts  within a state . Under the new strategy,  new sites are state 
jurisdictions  that select counties to be engaged in JDA I. This ne w strategy has resulted in  JDAI  
being implemented and replicated in nearly every c ounty or judicial district  within a particular 
state. However, the mix of geographic and political jurisdictions has present ed obstacles in 
providing  a clear, defined picture of which  JDAI sites within a state are  interacting with Native 
American youth and Tribes . 
 
It is important to note that four Tribes responded , in addition to the state of Hawaii  with 
information on  their efforts with Native Hawaiian youth . It should be noted that t hree of the 
Tribal jurisdictions that responded are in Arizona  where the  Tribes  have juvenile courts but are 
not designated as Tribal JDAI Sites by Casey . Further detail about these Tribal respondents are 
provided  in the targeted interviews section regarding Arizona , below . 
 
 In summary, t he survey results strongly indica te that  most  JDAI  sites should better 
understand how to identify Native youth, and how to work with Trib al governments  and Tribal 
communities to understand the presence of Native youth in the juvenile justice system. On the 
other hand, out of the 64 respondents,  12 of the JDAI  sites demonstrate d promising strategies for 
identifying Na tive youth , including  adherence to ICW A Tribal notification standards  (for status 
offenses) and maintaining contact with Tribes . 
 
1. Processes for Identification of Native Youth  
 
 Interestingly, 13 jurisdictions indicated that they did not serve any Native youth. These 
JDAI sites represented 6 states, 6 counties or parishes and 1 city jurisdiction. These  counties or 
                                                        
66 The list of 64 JDAI Sites responding to the sur vey is described in the attached appendix.     
 
15 
 states do have Tribes located within or nearby those jurisdictions. However, there is no data to 
understand how ma ny Native youth may reside near these JDAI sites . However,  several sites  that 
stated they did not serve Native youth , including Massachusetts and Mississippi , have strong 
Native populations with defined  reservations and communities .   
 
When asked how the sites determine whether they maintain statistics about the number of 
Native youth referred to their juvenile justice system, t he majority  indicate d a reliance on self -
identification by Native youth . Only two sites  requested  or obtained  a Tribal identification  and 
one of those was a Tribal JDAI site. Only a handful of respondents  contacted Tribal social 
workers , courts or other Tribal staff to determine whether a youth was N ative.  None of the sites 
stated that they discussed the youth’s background with his or her  family .   
 
• 42 respondents indicated that they rely on self -identification by the Native youth;  
• 3 of those re spondents stated that they relied on self -identification and one other 
form of identification such as physic al appearance or residence ; 
• One respondent indicated that they relied on self -identification to a police officer;   
• 3 respondents determined identification solely on physical appearance;  
• The Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians determines identity based on residence, 
Tribal enrollment or use of Tribal services ; 
• 14 respondents stated that there were no Native youth served, though there was at 
least one Tribe in each respondent’s county or state.  
 
It is surprising that 42 respondents 
relied on Native youth to self-identif y 
and did not have a developed process 
for identification and data collection , 
considering that Native Americans are 
overrepresented in the juvenile justice 
system .67 The identity of Native youth 
should not be left to the youth  to self -
identify , or to a unilateral decision of 
the non -Indian social service or 
juvenile justice staff.  Many Native 
youth do not want to alert their Tribal 
community because of concern about 
anonymity and feelings of 
embarrassment  or shame . In addition, 
non-Indian staf f may misunderstand what a Native youth looks like, and may mistake a Native 
youth for Hispanic, black or white. JDAI relies on data order to carry out effective programming.  
 
The respondents did not provide any information about contact with the families  of a 
youth and whether questions of identity, culture, racial or ethnic background were discussed. 
                                                        
67 Rolnick, “Untangling the Web: Juvenile Justice in Indian Country ,” see note 38.  
   
 
16 
 This is likely the first place juvenile justice staff could best understand the connection of a youth 
to a Tribal community and where additional alternative s to incarceration may be found.  
 
Furthermore, most  respondents stated that their JDAI site did not have any  programs, 
practices or policies specifically addressing the needs of Native youth. This is the case even in 
counties with exceptionally high percentages of Native youth. These counties include Minnehaha 
County and Pennington County, South Dakota, both of which indicate that more than 20% of the 
youth in their program are Native.  
 
However, 13 JDAI sites did state that they utilized  Native -specific policies or programs . 
Specifically, a few of those 13 , including JDAI  sites from Orange County , California , Bernalillo 
County, New Mexico , and Clark County, Nevada , reported that they  adhere to ICWA Tribal 
notification laws for Native youth status offenses. Status offenses are misbehaviors that are only 
illegal due to a person’s age, such as running away, underage drinking, and truancy , and Native 
youth rates of status offenses are higher than any other group .68 Since n otification to the Tribe of 
a Native youth status offense is a legal requirement of ICWA  when  the status offense is part of a 
child cus tody proceeding , all jurisdictions must  include Tribal notification for these status 
offenses  according to federal law .  
 
But to truly su pport Native youth, once a Native youth is properly identified, Tribal 
notification should be done for all offenses, regardless of whether ICWA mandates it ; inherent 
Tribal sovereignty over their citizens should mandate notification to Tribes when any Native 
youth is in the state court system.  Without such partnership with Tribes and Tribal Courts, a 
JDAI site will not be able to effectively address the Native youth they work with, potentially 
feeding into the historic harm of the past.  
 
2. JDAI Site Collaboration with Tribes  
 
Of the 64 respondents , 20 stated that they have some type of process to work with Tribal 
governments .  
 
• 20 respondents indicate d that they have programs or procedures for working with 
Tribes or include Tribal representatives in advisory roles ; and 
• 12 of those 20 respondents indicated that their collaboration with Tribes was limited 
only to formal notifications, communication, or interaction in arranging custody and 
transfer . 
• 6 respondents indicated that they are not collaborating with Tribes whatsoever; and  
• 27 respondents  gave no response regarding their level of Tribal collaboration.  
 
There are a few examples from the targeted interviews, discussed below, that describe the 
collaborative interactions between JDAI sites and Tribal governments, including JDAI sites in 
Monta na and counties in Oregon. As stated previously, ICWA requires notification to Tribes 
                                                        
68 Sarah Hockenberry and Charles Puzzanchera, “Juvenile Court Statistics  2014,” National Center for Juvenile 
Justice, accessed Octob er 27, 2018, https://www.ojjdp.gov/ojstatbb/njcda/pdf/jcs2014.pdf.     
 
17 
 when an “Indian child” is part of a child custody proceeding for a status offense.  Though not 
mandated by law in all juvenile justice matters, ICWA’s notice  requirement could provide an 
already -developed  process  for notification between state  jurisdictions and  Tribes when a JDAI 
site is working with Native youth.  
 
Providing broad notice to a Tribe whenever a local or state program is working with 
Native youth  is an example of best practices in child welfare and is supportive of productive 
outcomes for Native youth . Broad notification that the JDAI site is interacting with Native youth 
will not only support that young person , the relationship  with a Tribe  could also make available 
significant culturally appropriate services  and funding that the JDAI site may not have . Tribal 
collaboration can strengthen  Native youth  and the JDAI site’s opportunity to find alternatives to 
incarceration . 
 
B. TARGETED  INTERVIEW S METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS  
 
Twelve targeted JDAI sites were requested to participate in interviews. These 12 sites were 
targeted because of their geographic proximity to Tribal communities with a relatively high 
Tribal population. The interviews sou ght to gain additional detail of challenges and opportunities 
the JDAI sites may experience in the identification of Native youth and interacting with Tribes. 
The interview process also included a request to submit additional site -specific data . 
 
Since eac h site targeted for an interview is part of state -led JDAI efforts, outreach 
initially occurred  with state JDAI coordinators. State coordinators have knowledge about 
multiple in -state jurisdictions that participate in JDAI . They provided insights regarding state 
policies and practices , helped streamline responses to information requests , and identified  the 
most useful information from l ocal sites that have  promising approaches to reduc ing the 
overrepresentation of Native youth in their system.  
 
Altogether, four states were t argeted:  
  
• Arizona (specific focus on Pima, Maricopa and Gila Counties ); 
• Montana (specific focus on Cascade, Missoula, and Yellowstone Counties) ; 
• New Mexico (specific focus on San Juan and Bernalillo  Counties ); and  
• Washington (specific focus on Snohomish County).  
 
JDAI coordinators in each of the targeted sites were asked to share the following site-
specific quantitative information:  
 
1. Number of referrals of Native youth, preferably disaggregated by type of offense  (probation, 
delinquent v ersus  non-delinquent, felony v ersus  misdemeanor, status offense,  etc.);  
2. Percentage of the detention population that consists of Native youth;  
3. Length of stay for Native youth (possibly compared with other racial and ethnic  groups);  
4. Percentage of Native youth on probation; and  
5. Any other disag gregated data for Native youth and/or specific Tribe.   
    
 
18 
 Additionally, the targeted requests sought to gather qualitative  information about 
strategies, policies, programs, initiatives and agreements that are specifically focused on Native 
youth and Tribal governments . As with the surveys, the information submitted by the targeted 
JDAI sites was not always complete. However, t he sites with the most complete and useful 
information are included here. Data from the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency 
Prevention was used for those sites with little or no statistics  submitted.69    
 
1. Arizona  
 
The Pima County , Arizona JDAI site indicate s that there is an ongoing  partner ship called  
the Native American Youth Collaborative , which works to address the needs of Tribal youth 
before the Pima County Court . The Collaborative consists of three Tribes in or near the County : 
the Gila River  Indian Community , the Tohono O’odham  Nation , and the Pascua Yaqui  Tribe .  
 
The Collaborative has written guidance regarding how the County system should handle 
identification when a Native youth is arrested for the first time. Specific  questions are  asked 
about the youth’s Tribal affiliation to parents or guardians . A Tribal representative confirms 
whether the identified youth is a Tribal member. That information is documented in a database. 
For those youth s who are already known  to the justice system  as Native , the County shares a list 
of the identified youth with Tribes.  
 
The Collaborativ e works together to share information. The three  Tribe s periodically 
share information  on existing Tribal programs and procedures to the Pima C ounty Court. 
Representatives from the Trib es also attend meetings, including probation sub -committee 
meetings where representatives from the Arizona Department of Children’s Services, attorneys, 
probation staff , behavioral health personnel, and others  are present. Tribes are therefore able to 
inform the County and State social services  about culturally appropriate services  available 
through the Tribes , and protocols for coordinating with the Tribes.  
 
Through the Pima County JDAI Site, the Tribes handle mostly status offenses , and avoid 
large numbers of their youth being detained in the County . In 2016, the three most common 
referrals of Native youth  were status offenses (29.9%), drug -related offenses (21.9%), and 
Disturbance of the Public Peace (17.1%).70 The average daily number of Native youth among the 
total detained population in 2017 was 7.54%, which is up from 4.2% in 2016.  Finally, in  2016 
the average length of stay for Native youth in detention was 21 days compared with a total 
average of 24 days for white youth.   
 
                                                        
69 This data was accessed through a website tool of the W. Haywood Burns Institute for Justice, Fairness, and 
Equity. It is an organization dedicated to using data to reduce racial and ethnic disparities in juvenile justice. Their 
interactive map shows disparities in detention and incarceration rates among youths of different racial and ethnic 
groups for 2015 . http://data.burnsinstitute.org/#comparison=2&placement=1&races=2,3,4,5,6&offenses= 5,2,8,1,9, 
11,10&year=2015&view=map .  
70 “Juvenile Detention Alternatives Initiative,” Arizona Judicial Branch, accessed October 26, 2018, 
http://www.azcourts.gov/jjsd/Operations -Budget/JDAI . 
    
 
19 
 2. Montana  
 
There are three JDAI sites in Montana:  Yellowstone, Cascade, and Missoula Counties . 
Each  site has a youth court with detention facilities. The sites state that Tribal collaboration 
occurs th rough t he Montana Board of Crime Control . This Board  oversees  the State’s  JDAI sites 
and h as a committee called the  Youth Justice Advisory Council. This Advisory Council includes 
three individual Tribal representatives .  
 
The Advisory Council has worked  with Tribes to develop juvenile codes  to regulat e 
status offenses of Native youth. However, at this time none of the 12 federally recognized Tribes 
in Montana  have adopted  juvenile  codes.  The federally recognized Tribes in Montana include  the 
Crow Tribe, Confederated  Salish and Kootenai Tribes of the Flathead Reservation, the Blackfeet 
Nation, Chippewa Cree Tribe , Fort Belknap Assiniboine and Gros Ventre Tribes, Fort Peck 
Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes, Little Shell Chippewa Tribe  and Northern Cheyenne Tribe.  The 
Advisory Council is also looking into  restorative justice practice s in all district courts starting 
with Yellowstone County.  Restorative justice practices  are non-adversarial approach es to 
justice .  
 
Despite the work of the Advisory Council, the statistics  provided by these Montana JDAI 
sites demonstrate racial inequalities in the number  of arrests and detentions  of Native youth . In 
2014 in  Cascade County , 351 per 1,000 of total juvenile justice referrals were Native  youth while  
54 were white yout h. That  is nearly 6.5 times  higher than white youth.  In Missoula County, 111 
per 1,000 of total referrals were Native  youth and 53 were white , which is  over 2 times higher . In 
Yellowstone County, 11 2 per 1,000 of total referrals were Native  and 36 were white , which is  3 
times  higher .  
 
Statistics for Native youth in detention are even higher. In Cascade County , 175 per 
1,000 of  total referrals were Native, 23 were white youth : 7.6 times higher. In Missoula County, 
41 per 1,000 of total referrals were Native, 23 were white ; and in Yellowstone County, 44 per 
1,000 of total referrals were Native, 12 were white , or at a 3.6 times higher rate than white youth.   
 
3. New Mexico  
 
There are 23 Tribes  and Pueblos  located within New Mexico. The state of New Mexico is 
the only state requiring Tribal notification  in all juvenile justice proceedings where a youth may 
be detained .71 This State law provides a higher standard tha n ICWA and  is the only state  that 
AAIA is aware of , that provides this level of notification . Specifically, the New Mexico law 
requires the identification of “ an Indian child for the purpose of contacting the Indian child ’s 
tribe in delinquency cases ” and that the state juvenile justice staff must “ contact an Indian child ’s 
tribe to consult and exchange informat ion for the purpose of preparing a predisposition report 
when commitment or placement of an Indian child is contemplated or has been ordered and 
indicate in the report the name of the person contacted in the Indian child ’s tribe and the results 
                                                        
71 N.M. Stat. § 32A -2-5, as amended by New Mexico Laws 1993, Chapter 77, Section 34.     
 
20 
 of the cont act.”72   
 
In 2015, AAIA and NICWA  drafted a report  titled  “New Mexico Juvenile Justice Tribal 
Notification Policy Research Project .”73 This report discussed , among other things,  the impetus 
for the New Mexico law. Even with high Native populations, it was unclear what Tribes were 
interact ing with New Mexico  JDAI sites. The lack of information on Tribal interaction with 
these sites has been  an obstacle to any clarity on notification processes. New notification 
requir ements were written with the collaboration of a task force and in consultation with  Tribal 
governmen ts. 
 
However, despite this collaboration  to develop the notification requirements , the Tribal 
notification process es for each county detention center in New Mexico have been  applied 
inconsistently . For example, in Bernalillo County, there appears to be no protocol for notification 
to a Tribe regarding a Native youth’s involvement at the County at the time of detention, though 
the Tribe is notified at the time of arrest if Tribal affiliation is indicated in the law enforcement 
records.  
 
In other counties, n otification processes may be  initiated if a youth appears to be Native. 
In San Juan County,  Native identification is  through self -identification or if the youth has already 
been recognized as a Native youth within the system . If a youth is not  determined to be Native 
by appearance, self -identification or from previous contact , then identity may be  established 
through case meetings or inquiries to Tribal judges. Once Tribal affiliation is confirmed, the 
youth’s identity  with a particular Tribe is entered into the juvenile justice system database.   
 
Further collaboration takes place  at the State level  with Tribes through Tribal 
representation on  state governing bodies , such as the New Mexico Tribal -State Judicial 
Consortium.  Equal numbers of Tribal and State judges represent the various Pueblos, Tribes, and 
New Mexico Courts  in the Consortium . The Consortium works on many issues with c ross-
jurisdiction al matters  as the focus . The Consortium has a JDAI subcommittee that is developing  
a Tribal JDAI Model that can be incorporated into the overall JDAI Sites throughout the State of 
New Mexico.   
 
The statistics for Native youth in the State of New Mexico  demonstrate that there are  a 
decreasing number of  Native youth entering into the juvenile justice system. In 2014 in 
Bernalillo County , 31 per 1,000 of total referrals were Native  and 17 were white .  In San Juan 
County, 22 per 1,000 of total referrals were Native  and 20 were white . The numbers of Native 
youth in detention in Bernalillo County  were  22 per 1,000 , and 16 were white , and i n San Juan 
County, 17 per 1,000 of total referrals were Native  and 20 were white . 
 
 
                                                        
72 N.M. Stat. § 32A -2-5(8) and (9).  
73 “New Mexico Juvenile Justice Tribal Notification Policy Research Project: Final Report ,” The National Indian 
Child Welfare Association,  accessed October 27, 2018,  
https://www.nicwa.org/wp -content/uploads/2016/11/NM_JuvJustice_TribalNotificationPolicy_FinalReport.pdf     
 
21 
 4. Washington  
 
Snohomish County, Washington is a suburb of Seattle  and a JDAI site. The Sauk -
Suiattle, Stillaguamish, and Tulalip federated Tribes are located north of the County. This JDAI 
site has taken steps to establish collaborative relationships regarding Native youth who are at -
risk or are already in contact with the justice system. However, there is no formal notification 
protocol with Tribes.  
 
The relationship between the County JDAI site and the Tulalip Tribe centers on the local 
public -school system : the public high school , Heritage High,  is located within reservation 
boundaries. A pproximately 65% of Heritage High students are  Native . There was a long -
standing truancy issue (which is a status offense) among Native youth attending the high school. 
To address this issue and to assist at -risk Native youth, the Tribe has work ed with the County 
juvenile justice system through community progr amming on Tribal lands.  The County has 
programs  to help high school age  youth , including Native youth, obtain  a GED . Additionally, the 
Tribe offers art and cultural programs  to their youth .  
 
The County and Stillaguamish Nation  work together to develop  community service 
program s that can serve as alternatives to detention, while maintaining culturally -relevant 
connections. Both the Nation and the County  also work together to assist  Native youth  that must  
navigat e the system of fines and fees associated with delinquent acts and justice system 
involvement.   
 
Finally, Snohomish County has established c ultural awareness training for its court staff 
and community partners.  Given its close proximity to Tribal land s, this JDAI site recognizes that 
collaboration with Tribes is to be expected  to provide appropriate services . However, t hough 
Native parents  or guardians are notified when youth come in to contact with the system, there is 
no formal Tribal notification protocol.  
 
In Snohomish County in 2014, 87 per 1,000 of total referrals were Native , while 43  were 
white youth , and there was an increase of Native youth being referred to the juvenile justice 
system in 2015 and 2016 . Domestic violence,  truancy and at -risk youth charges filed (which are 
typically parent driven) accounted for 16% of the detention facility admissions who were Native 
youth ( though only 1 -2% of total population).   Moreover, i n Snohomish County in 2016, Native 
youth are 4 -5 times more likely to be admitted to detention facilities compared to their white 
counterparts.  
 
 
 
     
 
22 
 IV. CONCLUSIONS  AND RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
The purpose of this report is to share findings and make recommendations about the 
scope of interactions between JDAI sites , Native youth  and Tribal governments . The surveys and 
interviews conducted show that the majority of JDAI sites responding have not been  collecting 
data on Native American youth, were not collecting data regarding Tribal aff iliation, and were 
either relying on youth to self -identify as Native, or that juvenile justice staff made unilateral 
determinations on whether a youth was Native. Considering that JDAI relies on robust data 
collection to support the direction of alternati ves to detention , these findings are problematic .  
 
This report points to the need for JDAI sites, as well as the broader juvenile justice 
system, to understand how to identify Native youth . The first place to confirm a youth’s identity 
is with his or her family. JDAI site s should also have valuable and consistent outreach with 
Tribes  to understand  culturally appropriate services, and better support the youth.  Consistent 
collection of data over all JDAI sites would support the objectives of JDAI. Access to culturally -
appropriate services as alternatives to detention further supports  the objectives of JDAI and the 
juvenile justice system, as well as the goals of Tribal governments and Tribal families.  
 
The socio -economic, physical, psychological a nd 
emotional issues facing Native youth are significant 
and pressing. The history of federal and Tribal 
relations, coupled with the negative impacts of 
continuous systemic, discriminatory practices and 
policies of public educational institutions and non -
Tribal justice systems contribute to the 
disproportionate detainment rates of Native youth 
today. Failure to take an assertive and comprehensive 
approach to fully understand Native youth 
populations and obtain accurate data on those 
populations will only car ry forward the wrongs of the 
past – jeopardizing the future of Native American 
populations.  
 
JDAI sites and Tribes can work together within their regions  to determine appropriate 
methods for collaboration and supporting Native youth. Based on the information collected by 
the survey and targeted interviews and  considering the historic and reoccurring trauma Native 
youth experience, the Association on Americ an Indian Affairs provides the following 
recommendations that will strengthen JDAI site involvement with Native youth and Tribes to 
change the destructive course of trauma, discrimination and detention, to culturally appropriate 
alternatives and healing.  JDAI sites must:  
 
Recommendation 1:   Develop uniform and consistent protocols for identifying Native youth by 
Tribal affiliation, in collaboration with Tribes, that are not dependent on the youth’s self -
identification or a unilateral assessment based on ph ysical characteristics. These protocol s should 
include contact with the youth’s family and building relationships with Tribes in the state.  
   
 
23 
 Recommendation 2:  Develop consistent data points to be collected regarding Native youth that 
includes Tribal affiliation, and base decision -making on the responsible collection of this data, in 
collaboration with  families and  Tribes . 
 
Recommendation 3:  Establish notification protocols, in collaboration with Tribes, for informing 
Tribes when a Native youth enters the juvenile justice system. The notification process 
developed as part of New Mexico law requires the state to notify Tribes when a Native youth is 
involved in a juvenile justice matter. ICWA legal standards for notification are much narrower 
but can be utilized and expanded to support a consistent notification process where Native youth 
appear before state courts including juvenile justice matters, not just child custody proceedings.  
 
Recommendation 4:  JDAI sites that regularly interact with Native youth populations should 
receive concentrated education and training to develop a deeper level of understanding about the 
circumstances, issues and needs of Native youth involved in the juvenile justice system, in 
partnership with Tribes and Tribal programs.  Other JDAI sites should receive basic universal 
education about Native American youth and opportunities to support those Native youth.  
 
Recommendation 5:  States and Tribes should execute Memoranda of Understanding for all child 
welfare and juven ile justice matters. State court and juvenile justice staff should enter into 
process -driven agreements with Tribal juvenile justice staff and Tribal courts that include 
provisions regarding how to transfer Native youth to Tribal courts or to Tribal juveni le justice 
programs; how to identify Native youth; and how to access applicable programming and funding 
that supports Tribal cultures and traditions.  
 
Recommendation 6:  Explore the availability of relevant cultural programs and detention 
alternatives based  on Tribal juvenile justice programs, as well as Tribal traditions and practices.  
 
AAIA’s report demonstrates that Native youth are subject to discrimination and are often 
inappropriately and excessively incarcerated. It is imperative that JDAI sites reeva luate their 
understanding s, as well as processes, about  Native American youth to reduce instances of youth 
detention  where the re is little risk to public safety. This will require JDAI sites to develop 
effective methods of identifying Native youth and coll ecting information, in partnership with 
Tribes, and dramatically increase their collaboration with Tribal governments. We must work 
together to do better for our Native youth and our future generations.  
    
 
1 
 APPENDIX  
 
List of JDAI Sites Responding to the Survey  Including  
States, Counties and County Consortiums, Tribes and State  Courts  
 
A.  STATES 
1. Arizona  
2. Arkansas : responded as  having no interaction with Native youth. There are no federal or 
state recognized Tribes in this state  and no statistics on the number of Native youth in this 
state. 
3. Delaware : responded as currently having no interaction with Native youth . There are 
Tribal  groups  in the state, but no statistics on the number of Native youth in this state . 
4. Georgia  
5. Hawaii  
6. Louis iana 
7. Massachusetts : responded as  having no interaction with Native youth . Ther e are two 
federally recognized Tribes  and six state recognized Tribes  in the state .  
8. Minnesota  
9. Nebraska  
10. New Jersey : responded as having no interaction with Native youth.  There is one state 
recognized Tribe  but no statistics on the number of Native youth in this state . 
11. New Mexico  
12. New York  
13. Maine  
14. Minnesota  
15. Mississippi : responded as  having no interaction with Native youth . The Mississippi Band 
of Choctaw Indians  is a federally recognized Tribe located in and around Philadelphia, 
Mississippi  and is the first Tribal JDA I site. However, juvenile justice experts involved 
with the Tribe state that no Native youth have ever been transferred to Tribal jurisdiction 
from the state .  
16. Missouri  
17. Montana  
18. Ohio : responded as having no  interaction with  Native youth . There are two state 
recognized Tribes , however there are no statistics on the number of Native youth in this 
state. 
19. Rhode Island  
20. Washington  
21. Wyoming  
 
B. COUNTIES  
1. Arizona, Cochise County  
2. Arizona, Gila County  
3. Arizona, Maricopa County  
4. Arizona, Pima County  
5. Arizona, Yuma County     
 
2 
 6. California, Orange County  
7. California, Santa Cruz County : responded as currently having no interaction with Native 
youth . Native youth population is not known for Santa Cruz County.  
8. Georgia, Clayton  County : responded as  having no  interaction with  Native youth.  There 
are three state recognized Tribes  in the state, but Native youth population in Clayton 
County is unknown . 
9. Iowa, Woodbury County  
10. Louisiana, Caddo Parish  
11. Louisiana , Calcasieu Parish : responded as having no Native youth interaction . There are 
four federally recognized Tribes in the state and 11 state recognized Tribes . However , 
Native youth population within this Parish is unknown.  
12. Louisiana, Jefferson Parish : responded as  having no Native youth interaction . There are 
four federally recognized Tribes  in the state and 11 state recognized Tribes. However, 
Native youth population within this Parish is unknown . 
13. Louisiana, Terrebonne Parish  
14. Minnesota, Rice County  
15. Montana, Mineral County  
16. Montana, Missoula County  
17. Nevada, Clark County  
18. Nevada, Washoe County  
19. New Mexico, Bernalillo County  
20. Oregon, Central and Eastern Oregon Juvenile Justice Consortium  (17 count y consortium ) 
21. Oregon, Multnomah County  
22. Oregon, Northern Oregon Regional Correctional Juvenile Detention  (four count y 
consortium ) 
23. Oregon, Wasco  County  
24. South Dakota, Minnehaha  County  
25. South Dakota, Pennington County  
26. Texas, Harris County : responded as  having no Native youth interaction . This county 
encompasses the city of Houston. There is a large urban Native population  in this 
Houston.  However, Native youth population is unknown.  
27. Washington, King  County  
28. Washington, Pierce County : responded as having no Native youth interaction . There are 
29 federally recognized Tribes in the state with 1 Tribe having headquarters within the 
count y. Statistics of Native youth in the county , or Tribal programs for Native youth , are 
not known.  
29. Washington, Snohomish  County  
  
C. Tribes  
1. Arizona, Ak -Chin Indian Community  
2. Arizona, Gila River Indian Community  
3. Arizona, Tohono O’Odham Nation  
4. Mississippi, Mississippi Band of Choctaw  
 
    
 
3 
 D. Agencies  and Courts  
1. Arizona, Juvenile Probation Department  
2. Idaho , 4th Judicial District Court  
3. Iowa, 3rd Judicial District Court  
4. Louisiana , 32nd Judicial District Court  
5. Louisiana, Houma City Court  
6. Louisiana, Lake Charles City 
7. Louisiana, New Orleans City : responded as  currently  having no Native youth presen t in 
their Site. Though there are four federally recognized Tribes in the state and 11 state 
recognized Tribes , it is unclear whether there is any interaction with Tribes.  
8. Montana, 13th Judicial District Youth Court  
9. Nebraska State Probation Administration  
10. South Dakota State Court Services, 2nd Judicial Circuit    
 
 
Association on American Indian Affairs  
Protecting Sovereignty ◦ Preserving Culture   
Educating Youth ◦ Building Capacity  
Since 1922  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 30A  
Rockville, MD 20850  
(240) 314 -7155  
www.indian -affairs.org  
 AAIA is a not -for-profit 501(c)(3) publicly supported organization.  
 
 
 
