May 2011   
The Influence of the Private  Prison Industry 
in the Immigration Detention Business  
Since the late 1990’s, the number of people held in immigration detention has exploded. On any 
given day, ICE detains over 33,000 immigrants; this is more than triple the number of beds since 
1996. In the last 5 years alone, the annual number of immigrants detained and the costs of 
detaining them has doubled: In 2010 , approximately 3 92,000  immigrants were detained, costing 
taxpayers $1.77 billion at an average of $122 a day  per bed.  Nearly 2.5 million individuals have 
passed through immigration detention facilities since 2003.  
 
Private Prisons and Immigration Detention  
For immigrants, this expansion has meant weeks, months, and sometimes years in jails often under 
inhuman e conditions, with little or no access to counsel, to family, or to the outside world. For 
private prison corporations, this expansion has meant big profits.  The states with the highest 
average daily populations in private facilities in 2009 were Texas (6, 115), Georgia 
(1,804) and Arizona (1,779). The three largest corporations invested in immigration detention 
today are Corrections Corporation of America, the GEO Group, Inc., and the Management and 
Training Corporation (MTC). In 2009, an average of 6,199 i mmigrants were held in CCA detention 
beds, 4,948 in GEO beds, and 2,244 in MTC beds.  In 2010, CCA and GEO reported annual 
revenues of 1.69 billion and 1.17 billion respectively. Toget her these three corporations manage  
more than a third of immigration det ention beds for Immigrations and Customs Enforcement 
(ICE) within the Department of Homeland Security. In total, private corporations administer 49% 
of beds.  
May 2011  
 
Although all immigration detention facilities fall well below basic human rights standards, the re 
are particular problems with privately run facilities. The incentive to maximize profit leads private 
corrections groups to cut expenses by, among other things, keeping facilities chronically 
understaffed, leading to higher rates of civil rights violati ons and violence. Private contractors are 
also exempt from the requirement to comply with Freedom of Information Act requests, and are 
protected in litigation by complex contractor immunity doctrines, all of which leads to a glaring 
lack of transparency an d accountability. CCA and GEO have a long track record of abuse and 
mismanagement at their facilities which have led to terminations of contracts in a few recent cases.  
The Private Prison Lobby  
 
With the exponential increase in government expenditure on i mmigration enforcement since 2001, 
the private prison industry accurately views immigration detention as a growth industry, and 
corporations have increasingly devoted their resources to lobbying for policies and programs that May 2011 will increase their opportunities to do business with the government. 
Among the five corporations with ICE contracts for which official 
federal lobbying records are currently available, the total expenditure 
on lobbying for 1999- 2009  was $20,432,000.   The biggest spenders 
were CCA ($18,002,000), and GEO ($2,065,000). Lobbying efforts 
targeted a wide spectrum of government entities, indicating a 
comprehensive strategy for influencing policy and legislation.  
Entities lobbied include: 
Immigrations and Customs Enforcement (ICE) 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) 
Department of Justice 
Bureau of Prisons 
Office of Management and Budget 
Both houses of Congress 
Department of Labor  
Department of Interior  
Bureau of Indian Affairs  
Administration for Families and Children 
The private prison industry has been very explicit about its intention 
to influence immigration detention policy and practice in accordance 
with its own profit motive. As recent news reports have indicated, 
this is true not only at the federal level but at the state level as well. 
Most notably, a series of stories from several media outlets in 2010 
described the private prison industry’s involvement in the drafting 
and passage of Arizona's controversial SB 1070, detailing 
relationships between powerful state officials (including Senator 
Russell Pearce and Governor Jan Brewer) and various political 
players, including the American Legislation Exchange Council 
(ALEC), a group of million-dollar corporations and legislators with 
CCA as a member of its Public Safety and Elections Task Force. 
These deep connections between corporate and government actors 
raises concerns about the extent to which private industry is 
dictating policy in an area where the lives, liberty and basic rights of 
hundreds of thousands of people are at stake. More research is 
necessary to quantify and analyze the ways in which these 
corporations influence both national and local policy around 
immigration enforcement and detention. 
This research was conducted in partnership with Grassroots 
Leadership and Sarah V. Carswell. The Industry Speaks  
"It is cle ar that since 
September 11 there’s a 
heightened focus on 
detention…  more people are 
gonna get caught … So I 
would say that’s positive. 
The federal b usiness is the 
best business for us and 
September 11 is increasing 
that business".  
-- Steve Logan, Chairman o f 
the Cornell Corrections, in a 
Third Quarter 2001 conference 
call with analysts . 
“We do not believe we will 
see a decline in the need for 
detention beds particularly 
in an economy with rising 
unemployment among 
American workers.”  
-- James Hyman, preside nt of 
Cornell Companies, when 
asked by an investment 
company representative about 
a possible downturn in 
detained immigrants . 
“We are dependent on 
government 
appropriations… The 
demand for our facilities 
and services could be 
adversely affected by the 
relaxation of enforcement 
efforts or through the 
decriminalization of certain 
activities that are currently 
proscribed by our criminal 
laws.”  
-- CCA 2007 SEC Filing  
"The federal market is being 
driven for the most part as 
we've been discussing by the 
need for criminal alien 
detention beds. That's being 
consistently funded."  
-- George Zoley, GEO Group 
Chairman on a Nov. 2008  call 
with investors.  