For	  more	  information,	  please	  contact	  Carol	  Wu,	  cwu@detentionwatchnetwork.org	  
	  
NUMBER	  OF	  BEDS
TIMELINEExpansion	  of	  Family	  Detention	  2013-­‐15	  	  	  BACKGROUND	  What	  is	  family	  detention?	  	  • In	  2009,	  the	  US	  stopped	  using	  large-­‐scale	  family	  detention	  in	  response	  to	  public	  opposition	  and	  a	  lawsuit	  highlighting	  conditions	  that	  were	  entirely	  inappropriate	  for	  children	  and	  families	  at	  the	  T.	  Don	  Hutto	  facility	  in	  Texas.	  	  • Rather	  than	  learn	  from	  this	  lesson,	  the	  US	  has	  instead	  dramatically	  expanded	  family	  detention	  in	  the	  last	  year	  as	  large	  numbers	  of	  children	  and	  families,	  escaping	  violence	  in	  El	  Salvador,	  Guatemala,	  and	  Honduras,	  arrived	  at	  the	  US	  southern	  border.	  Data	  from	  both	  UNHCR	  and	  the	  US	  government	  show	  that	  the	  vast	  majority	  of	  these	  children	  and	  families	  are	  likely	  eligible	  for	  asylum	  in	  the	  US.	  	  • Despite	  this,	  the	  Administration	  claimed	  that	  the	  arriving	  women	  and	  children	  were	  a	  national	  security	  threat	  and	  needed	  to	  be	  detained	  in	  order	  to	  deter	  other	  migrating	  families.	  An	  accompanying	  no-­‐release	  policy	  allowed	  for	  the	  rapid	  deportation	  of	  many	  detained	  refugee	  families.	  • In	  February	  2015,	  a	  federal	  district	  court	  ordered	  DHS	  to	  stop	  using	  deterrence	  as	  a	  justification	  for	  the	  detention	  of	  families	  (RILR	  v.	  Johnson).	  While	  this	  is	  an	  important	  step	  toward	  righting	  this	  broken	  policy,	  the	  large-­‐scale	  detention	  of	  families	  continues	  under	  other	  false	  justifications.	  	  • By	  Spring	  2015,	  the	  mega-­‐facility	  in	  Dilley,	  TX	  is	  expected	  to	  have	  2,400	  beds	  and	  the	  facility	  in	  Karnes,	  TX	  will	  have	  an	  anticipated	  1,100	  beds.	  Both	  of	  these	  facilities	  are	  run	  by	  private	  prison	  corporations:	  Dilley	  by	  Corrections	  Corporation	  of	  America	  (CCA)	  and	  Karnes	  by	  GEO	  Group.	  	  What	  is	  the	  impact	  of	  family	  detention?	  • In	  2014,	  Artesia	  was	  the	  first	  large-­‐scale	  facility	  to	  be	  opened	  since	  Hutto.	  It	  was	  infamously	  known	  as	  a	  “deportation	  mill”	  and	  was	  the	  subject	  of	  a	  lawsuit	  and	  multiple	  reports	  of	  abuse	  and	  lack	  of	  due	  process,	  which	  led	  to	  its	  closure	  in	  December	  2014.	  Sadly,	  many	  families	  were	  simply	  transferred	  to	  a	  larger	  CCA-­‐run	  facility	  in	  Dilley..	  • Family	  detention	  facilities	  have	  been	  plagued	  by	  reports	  of	  subpar	  conditions	  and	  abuse,	  including:	  inadequate	  medical	  and	  mental	  health	  care,	  children	  losing	  weight,	  inappropriate	  disciplinary	  tactics	  including	  threats	  to	  separate	  families	  if	  children	  misbehave,	  and	  fundamentally	  broken	  due	  process	  with	  little	  or	  no	  access	  to	  attorneys.	  • Detention	  is	  psychologically	  damaging	  and	  completely	  inappropriate	  for	  children.	  Numerous	  studies	  demonstrate	  that	  detention	  poses	  a	  serious	  threat	  to	  individuals’	  psychological	  health	  and	  further	  aggravates	  isolation,	  depression,	  and	  mental	  health	  problems	  associated	  with	  past	  trauma.	  These	  impacts	  are	  even	  more	  severe	  for	  young	  children	  whose	  development	  can	  be	  severely	  compromised.	  	  	  Family	  detention	  violates	  legal	  obligations	  and	  Congressional	  intent	  • DHS	  is	  legally	  mandated	  to	  place	  families	  with	  children	  in	  the	  least	  restrictive	  setting	  possible	  by	  the	  1997	  settlement	  in	  Flores	  v.	  Reno.	  Family	  detention	  violates	  this	  settlement	  and	  other	  legal	  precedents	  which	  demand	  that	  the	  government	  actively	  and	  continuously	  seek	  the	  release	  of	  each	  child	  in	  custody.	  	  o On	  February	  2,	  2015,	  Flores	  attorneys	  filed	  a	  motion	  to	  enforce	  the	  original	  agreement	  on	  behalf	  of	  the	  Central	  American	  children	  and	  families	  currently	  detained	  under	  a	  “no	  release”	  policy.	  	  o The	  government’s	  record	  of	  failing	  to	  comply	  with	  legal	  obligations	  makes	  clear	  that	  family	  detention	  is	  not	  a	  viable	  option.	  Expanding	  family	  detention	  is	  also	  inconsistent	  with	  our	  international	  obligations	  to	  protect	  the	  rights	  of	  vulnerable	  migrants	  and	  to	  avoid	  using	  detention	  as	  a	  deterrent	  for	  migration.	  FAMILY	  DETENTION	  	  For	  more	  information,	  please	  contact	  Carol	  Wu,	  cwu@detentionwatchnetwork.org	  
	  
	  • Congress	  has	  already	  indicated	  a	  desire	  to	  end,	  not	  expand,	  family	  detention.	  Prior	  to	  opening	  the	  T.	  Don	  Hutto,	  ICE	  separated	  families	  who	  were	  apprehended	  together	  by	  sending	  children	  to	  ORR	  shelters	  and	  adults	  to	  detention.1	  This	  resulted	  in	  the	  forced	  separation	  of	  parents	  from	  their	  children,	  which	  unlawfully	  rendered	  the	  children	  unaccompanied.	  After	  learning	  about	  this	  practice,	  Congress	  directed	  DHS	  to	  stop	  separating	  migrant	  families.2	  In	  response,	  DHS	  expanded	  family	  detention	  and	  opened	  Hutto	  in	  2006.	  However,	  the	  practice	  of	  detaining	  families	  in	  jail-­‐like	  settings	  is	  contrary	  to	  Congressional	  intent,	  which	  indicates	  a	  desire	  to	  end,	  not	  expand,	  family	  detention.	  Congress	  reaffirmed	  its	  intent	  in	  2007,	  expressing	  alarm	  over	  the	  use	  of	  family	  detention.3	  	  TALKING	  POINTS	  DETENTION	  • Detention	  facilities	  lack	  oversight,	  accountability,	  and	  transparency.	  o 144	  immigrants	  have	  died	  in	  detention	  since	  2003.	  o There	  are	  no	  binding,	  uniform	  detention	  standards	  to	  ensure	  humane	  treatment.	  	  Detention	  standards	  are	  not	  codified,	  meaning	  standards	  do	  not	  have	  the	  force	  of	  law	  and	  the	  violation	  of	  a	  standard	  does	  not	  confer	  a	  cause	  of	  action	  in	  court.	  	  Facilities	  are	  not	  subject	  to	  independent	  oversight.	  • 84%	  of	  detained	  immigrants	  go	  through	  the	  system	  without	  a	  lawyer.	  Unlike	  in	  the	  criminal	  justice	  system,	  immigrants	  are	  not	  provided	  lawyers	  to	  navigate	  complicated	  immigration	  laws.	  	  • Our	  current	  system	  reflects	  a	  “one	  size	  fits	  all	  policy”	  and	  violates	  due	  process	  because	  of	  mandatory	  detention	  laws.	  	  Approximately	  70%	  of	  immigrants	  are	  subject	  to	  mandatory	  detention,	  which	  requires	  their	  incarceration	  without	  the	  right	  to	  a	  bond	  hearing	  before	  an	  immigration	  judge	  and	  strips	  them	  of	  the	  right	  to	  due	  process.	  	  	  FAMILY	  DETENTION	  • Detention	  runs	  contrary	  to	  our	  values	  of	  basic	  dignity,	  due	  process,	  and	  human	  rights.	  Detained	  families	  are	  seeking	  protection	  from	  sexual	  assault,	  trafficking,	  and	  violence;	  our	  default	  should	  not	  be	  to	  put	  children	  in	  prison.	  • Children	  and	  families	  require	  specialized	  medical,	  educational,	  and	  legal	  support,	  all	  of	  which	  are	  severely	  impeded	  by	  detention.	  	  • DHS	  is	  legally	  mandated	  to	  place	  families	  with	  children	  in	  the	  least	  restrictive	  setting	  possible	  by	  the	  1997	  settlement	  in	  Flores	  v.	  Reno.	  Family	  detention	  violates	  this	  settlement	  and	  other	  legal	  precedents	  which	  demand	  that	  the	  government	  actively	  and	  continuously	  seek	  the	  release	  of	  each	  child	  in	  custody.	  	  • Family	  detention	  is	  a	  wasteful	  use	  of	  resources	  at	  $343	  per	  family	  member	  per	  day.	  During	  a	  fiscal	  crisis,	  it	  is	  unacceptable	  to	  be	  spending	  billions	  of	  taxpayer	  dollars	  to	  needlessly	  detain	  refugee	  families.	  	  	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  1 For	  more	  details	  and	  the	  history	  of	  family	  detention,	  please	  see	  Locking	  Up	  Family	  Values:	  The	  Detention	  of	  Immigrant	  Families,	  an	  extensive	  2007	  report	  by	  the	  Women’s	  Refugee	  Commission	  and	  Lutheran	  Immigration	  and	  Refugee	  Service. 2	  House	  Committee	  on	  Appropriations,	  Department	  of	  Homeland	  Security	  appropriations	  bill,	  2006:	  report	  together	  with	  additional	  views	  (to	  accompany	  H.R.	  2360),	  109th	  Cong.,	  1st	  Session,	  2005,	  H.	  Rep.	  109-­‐79.	  3	  House	  Committee	  on	  Appropriations,	  Department	  of	  Homeland	  Security	  appropriations	  bill,	  2007:	  report	  together	  with	  additional	  views	  (to	  accompany	  H.R.	  5441),	  109th	  Cong.,	  2d	  Session,	  2006,	  H.	  Rep.	  109-­‐476.	   We	  are	  asking	  Members	  of	  Congress	  to	  oppose	  funding	  for	  family	  detention	  in	  FY	  2016	  and	  to	  speak	  out	  publicly	  against	  the	  use	  of	  family	  detention	  and	  in	  favor	  of	  closing	  both	  the	  Dilley	  and	  Karnes	  facilities.	  	  