t o Communities Not Cages
F I R S T
T E N
Detention Watch Network is a national coalition of organizations and individuals building
power through collective advocacy, grassroots organizing, and strategic communications to
abolish immigration detention in the United States. Founded in 1997 by immigrant rights
groups, DWN brings together advocates to unify strategy and build partnerships on a local and
national level.About Detention Watch Network
1Acknowledgements
This report was authored by Setareh Ghandehari, Luis Suarez, and Gabriela Viera of Detention
Watch Network (DWN) with support from Liz Castillo, Marcela Hernandez, Stacy Suh, and Silky
Shah. Additional review and edits were provided by the following DWN members and partners:
Adelante Alabama Worker Center, AVID in the Chihuahuan Desert, California Immigrant Youth
Justice Alliance, Centro Legal de la Raza, Grassroots Leadership, Haitian Bridge Alliance, Inland
Coalition for Immigrant Justice, La ColectiVA, Project South, RAICES Texas, Sanctuary DMV,
Shut Down Berks Coalition, Shut Down Etowah, and Tsuru for Solidarity.
Copyright 2021
Cover Image: Fernando Lopez
Design: Carly Pérez Fernández
Translation was provided by Gabriela Márquez-Benítez of DWN with support from Bárbara
Suarez Galeano, Irene Alba-Hernández, Félix Acuna and María Alejandra Salas-Baltuano.
DWN launched the Communities Not Cages campaign in 2018 as a vehicle to support
local organizing and coordinate a national strategy to shut down detention centers,
stop the expansion and construction of new facilities and ultimately abolish
immigration detention in its entirety. Currently, there are 23 ongoing local shut down or
anti-expansion campaigns that are part of the national Communities Not Cages effort.About the Communities Not Cages Campaign
About First Ten to Communities Not Cages
"First Ten to Communities Not Cages" is the next phase of DWN’s national Communities
Not Cages Campaign demanding the shut down of 10 immigration detention facilities
in the first year of the Biden administration. The ‘First Ten’ detention centers are
emblematic of how the immigration detention system as a whole is inherently abusive,
unjust and fatally flawed beyond repair. The Biden administration must shut down
detention centers immediately and end detention contracts. The ‘first ten’ detention
centers provide a roadmap of where to start.The United States operates the world's largest immigration detention system with a network of
over 200 detention centers across the country. The system, run by Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE), has always been cruel, inhumane and deadly as shown by an extensive and
well documented history of abuse and neglect. The facts are undeniable. People in detention,
their loved ones and communities have been sounding the alarm and organizing to shut down
detention centers across the country. Today thanks to this tireless work of directly impacted
communities, organizers and advocates more people than ever before are demanding that the
inherently flawed immigration detention system be abolished.
Detention Watch Network (DWN) members have been organizing for years to achieve this vision
by bringing attention to the abuses inside detention centers locally, amplifying the voices of
detained people demanding their freedom, calling for the shutdown of individual facilities and
halting ICE’s efforts to expand the detention system in their communities. In October 2018
communities across the country came together with DWN to form the Communities Not Cages
campaign to amplify these local demands. Despite many wins stopping construction of new
facilities, the detention system continued to balloon under the Trump administration with over
50,000 people detained at its height in the summer of 2019.
The situation deteriorated further the following year. Fiscal Year 2020 was the deadliest year for
those in ICE detention since 2005, with 21 lives tragically lost. As the COVID-19 pandemic took
hold in the United States in 2020, conditions inside ICE detention became even more dire.
Advocates and medical professionals called for the release of all people from detention amid the
pandemic. And despite facing retaliation, a growing number of people inside detention are
bravely speaking out to bring attention to their situation, releasing videos, writing letters, and
participating in hunger strikes and labor strikes. One of the official responses to the pandemic
was the Title 42 border closure, which led to a massive drop in the number of people in ICE
detention, currently hovering around 14,000. That summer, the country experienced the largest
racial justice protest in history sparked by the police killing of George Floyd. Together these
events led many in the immigrant rights movement to more closely examine immigration
detention, its links to the criminal punishment system, and the disproportionate impact the
system has on Black migrants. More groups began to recognize that immigration detention is
fundamentally incompatible with a just immigration system. Today with fewer people in
detention than before, there is an opportunity to shut down individual detention centers with
little harm to those currently detained to build momentum towards real transformation.
As President Biden begins to undo four years of racist and xenophobic immigration policies, it is
important to remember that the problem is bigger than Trump’s executive orders. These
policies are the continuation of a framework created long before the Trump administration took
office, including an unjust and immoral detention system that was already plagued by
egregious conditions. We demand not only a rollback, but decisive and bold action to end
immigration detention, beginning with shutting down the following ten facilities that are
emblematic of a system that is rotten to the core:I n t r o d u c t i o n
2Adelanto Detention Facility
Berks County Family Residential Center
South Texas Family Residential Center (Dilley)
Etowah County Jail
Farmville Detention CenterT. Don Hutto Residential Facility (Hutto)
Irwin County Detention Center
Karnes County Family Residential Center
Mesa Verde Detention Center
Otero County Processing Center0 1
0 2
0 3
0 4
0 50 6
0 7
0 8
0 9
1 0The facilities on this list exemplify everything that is wrong with ICE’s detention system. Irwin
County Detention Center (Irwin) in Georgia exhibits some of the most severe cases of abuse
characteristic of facilities across the country, including most recently reports of gynecological
procedures being performed without informed consent on the women detained there. Irwin,
along with Etowah County Jail in Alabama, represent facilities throughout the system that are
located in rural areas where people are detained far from community with little access to legal
support in horrific conditions, including inadequate food and lack of outdoor recreation.
In addition to sharing the same systemic abuses noted above, Farmville Detention Center in
Virginia and Otero County Detention Center have experienced some of the worst COVID-19
outbreaks in ICE detention because of ICE’s continued practice of transfers and failure to release
people during the pandemic, demonstrating the agency’s disregard for the health of people in
its custody.
Across the country local communities have long pushed for closure of detention facilities, like at
Adelanto Detention Facility and Mesa Verde Detention Center in California, and T. Don Hutto
Residential Facility in Texas, which have extensive and well documented histories of sexual,
physical and mental abuse and medical neglect. But ICE circumvented these community efforts
by engaging in dubious contracting practices to lock in long term contracts despite local
opposition.
Finally, we highlight all three of the family detention centers in the U.S. detention system where
the same types of systemic abuses are reported, Berks County Family Residential Center in
Pennsylvania, and Karnes County Family Residential Center and South Texas Family Residential
Center (also known as Dilley) in Texas. The current family detention program is the largest since
the mass incarceration of Japanese Americans in the 1940s. No one should spend a single
minute in detention, but the effects are particularly devastating for children.
These ten facilities represent every facility across the country where medical neglect is
common, physical and sexual abuse are widely reported, basic necessities are lacking, food is
rotten, access to counsel and support is restricted, and immigrants needlessly suffer. This list
represents a beginning, a first ten to communities not cages.
3
Photo: Fernando LopezThe Adelanto Detention Facility (Adelanto) is an example of the
perverse financial incentives at play in the Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE) detention system. The facility has been detaining
people since 2011 when the City of Adelanto entered into a contract
with ICE and the GEO Group Inc (GEO) to detain 975 people. At the
time, the City of Adelanto was suffering from budget shortfalls and
saw the contract with ICE as an economic opportunity. However, like
other local governments, the city found that the contract for ICE
detention did not generate long-term revenue, keeping it at the brink
of bankruptcy. Since then, ICE has expanded the facility to detain 2,690
people, making the Adelanto Detention Facility the largest ICE
detention center in the United States.About Adelanto
History of Abuse at AdelantoF I R S T
T E N
0 1Shut Down the Adelanto
Detention Facilityt o Communities Not Cages
Communities across the country are uniting to protect immigrant family members,
friends, coworkers, and neighbors by calling to shut down ICE detention centers. The
Adelanto Detention Facility is emblematic of how the detention system is fatally flawed
beyond repair. Simply put, people navigating their immigration case should be able to
do so with their families and in community — not behind bars in immigration detention.
4
Advocates, the California Department of Justice, and the Department of Homeland Security’s Office
of Inspector General have documented the long list of human rights abuses at Adelanto, including
inadequate health care, sexual assault, use of solitary confinement, and mistreatment. These abuses
are not unique to Adelanto, though between 2010 and 2016, the facility was in the top five facilities
with the most complaints to ICE’s reporting line for sexual and physical abuse. Alarmingly, seven
immigrants have died at the facility since it opened. In 2017, three people died within three months,
including Osmar Epifanio Gonzalez-Gabda, Sergio Alonso Lopez, and Vicente Caceres Madariaga.
There have been at least seven attempted suicides at the facility underscoring the severity of
conditions.
Most recently, in a failed attempt to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, the facility staff confirmed
using a toxic chemical disinfectant inside the facility, causing people to develop bloody noses,
burning eyes, and persistent cough.
Photo: Alonso Yáñez/La OpiniónQuick StatsQuick Stats
Capacity:
2,690 people
Operator:
The GEO Group
Location:
10250 Rancho Rd,
Adelanto, CA 92301
ICE Field Office: 
Los Angeles, CA
Congressional
District: CA-08I write a request to see doctor every day,
but I haven’t been able to see one for six
weeks. I’ve asked for medicine, but the only
thing they have given me is ibuprofen.Organizing to Shut Down Adelanto
The Biden administration must immediately shut down Adelanto— Jibirine Yaro Amadou,
Cameroonian detained at Adelanto
5For more than nine years, the Inland Coalition for Immigrant Justice, the Shut Down Adelanto
Coalition and local community members have advocated to shut down the facility and to stop
proposed expansions. Local organizations including Inland Coalition for Immigrant Justice,
California Youth Immigrant Justice Alliance, Immigrant Legal Resource Center, and Freedom for
Immigrants successfully fought for passage of state legislation to curb detention in California. State
bill AB32, which passed in October 2019 would have phased out the Adelanto contract. In response,
ICE circumvented the new state law by entering into a 15-year contract with the GEO Group to
continue detaining immigrants at Adelanto before the bill went into effect in January 2020.
Adelanto has a long history of people detained bravely organizing for their freedom and demanding
the shut down of the facility through hunger strikes and sit-ins. ICE and GEO guards have violently
retaliated with physical abuse, the use of rubber bullets, toxic chemicals, solitary confinement and
transfers. These instances of inside organizing have been impactful in advocating for state
legislation, encouraging intervention by members of Congress and shedding light on the abuses at
this facility.
The Adelanto Detention Facility exemplifies the egregiously poor conditions and culture of violence
that plague the entirety of ICE detention resulting in system-wide abuses, including death. ICE has
been jailing immigrants at Adelanto for ten years now and during that time ICE and the GEO Group
have capitalized on the city’s economic instability to expand the hazardous detention center to one
of the largest in the country. However, ICE’s immigration detention system does not need to exist
and communities across the country are organizing to end it and build a better future.
We demand the immediate closure of Adelanto, as a first step towards the abolition of the
inherently cruel and unjust immigration detention system.
For more information and calls to action related to this facility, visit:
Inland Coalition for Immigration Justice.Photo: Inland Coalition for Immigrant JusticeThe Berks County Family Residential Center (Berks) is one of three
family detention centers in the United States. Berks has been in
operation for well over a decade through a contract between
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and Berks County.
Despite President Obama ending the practice of family detention at
the Hutto Detention Center in Texas in 2009, Berks remained open and
families continued to be detained. The current family detention
program is the largest since the mass incarceration of Japanese
Americans in the 1940s with a combined capacity for over 3,000
people. The system disproportionately targets Black families. Family
detention, like all immigration detention, is on the wrong side of
history.About the Berks County Family Residential Center
History of Abuse at BerksF I R S T
T E N
0 2Shut Down the Berks County
Family Residential Centert o Communities Not Cages
Communities across the country are uniting to protect immigrant family members,
friends, coworkers, and neighbors by calling to shut down ICE detention centers. The
Adelanto Detention Facility is emblematic of how the detention system is fatally flawed
beyond repair. Simply put, people navigating their immigration case should be able to
do so with their families and in community — not behind bars in immigration detention.
6
Family detention centers have a well-documented history of negligence and abuse, including
inadequate medical and mental health care, children losing weight, inappropriate disciplinary
tactics including threats to separate families if children misbehave. The Shut Down Berks Coalition
has documented Berks’ history of abuse which includes verbal and sexual abuse and extreme
medical neglect, including guards ignoring instances of fever, vomiting, skin rashes, and respiratory
illnesses. In 2014, a guard at Berks pleaded guilty to sexually abusing a 19-year-old mother and
asylum applicant.
Numerous studies have shown the psychologically damaging effects of family detention; medical
and child welfare professionals have noted again and again that it is especially harmful to children,
leading to post-traumatic stress disorder, emotional and mental health issues, including depression
and anxiety, and weight loss among other physical, emotional and behavioral health problems.Quick StatsQuick Stats
Capacity:
96 people
Operator:
Berks County
Location:
1040 Berks Rd,
Leesport, PA 19533
ICE Field Office: 
Philadelphia, PA
Congressional
District: PA-09
Photo: Shut Down Berks CoalitionWe left our homes in Central America to
escape corruption, threats, and violence.
We thought this country would help us,
but now we are locked up with our children
in a place where we feel threatened,
including by some of the medical
personnel, leaving us with no one to trust.Organizing to Shut Down Berks
The Biden administration must immediately shut down Berks— Letter from 22 mothers held
at Berks in 2016
7People have been organizing to shutdown Berks since 2015 when groups successfully prevented the
facility from nearly doubling its capacity. Since then, the Shut Down Berks Coalition has demanded
the federal government end all family detention and has pressured Pennsylvania Governor Tom Wolf
to issue an emergency order to shut Berks down. The families held inside have also been organizing
to demand their freedom. In 2015 mothers participated in a work stoppage to demand freedom for
their children and closure of Berks. In 2016 mothers launched hunger strikes that garnered national
attention and inspired parents detained in other family detention facilities. The children detained at
Berks have also engaged in various efforts, including a powerful 2016 school strike, to fight for
liberation.
The Adelanto Detention Facility exemplifies the egregiously poor conditions and culture of violence
that plague the entirety of ICE detention resulting in system-wide abuses, including death. ICE has
been jailing immigrants at Adelanto for ten years now and during that time ICE and the GEO Group
have capitalized on the city’s economic instability to expand the hazardous detention center to one
of the largest in the country. However, ICE’s immigration detention system does not need to exist
and communities across the country are organizing to end it and build a better future.
We demand the immediate closure of Adelanto, as a first step towards the abolition of the
inherently cruel and unjust immigration detention system.
For more information and calls to action related to this facility, visit: Shut Down Berks Coalition.Photo: Shut Down Berks CoalitionThe South Texas Family Residential Center, also referred to as Dilley, is
one of three family detention centers currently operating in the United
States. It was opened in 2014 when President Obama dramatically
expanded family detention, after initially reducing it in his first term.
To circumvent any opposition and to build the facility quickly,
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) added a rider onto their
agreement with Eloy County to run the Eloy Detention Center in
Arizona (900 miles from Dilley). Eloy County subcontracted out
operations for Eloy and Dilley to CoreCivic. In 2018 a 19-month old girl,
Mariee, died after being held at Dilley. When her mother filed a $40
million lawsuit against Eloy County given their role in the contract, the
county quickly ended the ICE agreement for Dilley. Rather than close
the facility due to the concerns raised about treatment of children, ICE
signed a new agreement with Frio County, where Dilley is located, to
detain immigrant families in removal proceedings. Frio County in turn
immediately contracted operations of the facility to CoreCivic. The
current family detention program is the largest since the mass
incarceration of Japanese Americans in the 1940s with a combined
capacity for over 3,000 people. The system disproportionately targets
Black families. Family detention, like all immigration detention, is on
the wrong side of history.About DilleyF I R S T
T E N
0 3Shut Down the South Texas
Family Residential Center (Dilley)t o Communities Not Cages
Communities across the country are uniting to protect immigrant family members,
friends, coworkers, and neighbors by calling to shut down ICE detention centers. The
Adelanto Detention Facility is emblematic of how the detention system is fatally flawed
beyond repair. Simply put, people navigating their immigration case should be able to
do so with their families and in community — not behind bars in immigration detention.
8History of Abuse at Dilley
Like all ICE detention, family detention centers have a well-documented history of negligence and
abuse, including inadequate medical and mental health care, children losing weight, inappropriate
disciplinary tactics including threats to separate families if children misbehave. At Dilley, there have
been reports of foul water and negligent medical treatment, with hospitals confirming that children
are consistently released from Dilley with health issues they dubbed “Dilley-ish.” As mentioned, in
2018 one girl, Mariee, tragically died after leaving the facility. In 2019 a guard was accused of
physically assaulting a 5-year-old at Dilley.
Numerous studies have shown the psychologically damaging effects of family detention; medical
and child welfare professionals have noted again and again that it is especially harmful to children,
leading to post-traumatic stress disorder, emotional and mental health issues, including depression
and anxiety, and weight loss among other physical, emotional and behavioral health problems.Quick StatsQuick Stats
Capacity:
2,400 people
Operator:
CoreCivic
Location:
300 El Rancho Way
Dilley, TX 78017
ICE Field Office: 
San Antonio, TX
Congressional
District: TX-23
Photo: Mike IshiiAfter 62 days of not knowing anything of my
son I saw him and they gave him back to me
and then transferred us to Dilley together. We
have been here for 30 days and we continue to
suffer without being able to enjoy our
freedom or be with our family.Organizing to Shut Down Dilley
The Biden administration must immediately shut down Dilley
9Families held inside Dilley have been bravely speaking up about their treatment. In 2018, mothers
who had been separated from their children and later reunified to be detained together at Dilley
wrote public letters detailing their experiences.
Dilley is located about 40 miles from the site of the Crystal City Internment Camp, where Japanese
American families were held indefinitely during World War II. In 2019, Grassroots Leadership and
Japanese American civil liberties groups, which later became Tsuru for Solidarity, took action in
solidarity with the families being held at Dilley recognizing the pattern of history repeating itself.
Japanese American survivors who were incarcerated at Crystal City returned to the site of the camp
on a pilgrimage and then went to Dilley where they hung 30,000 origami cranes, a Japanese symbol
for transformation, healing and nonviolence, around the fences at Dilley. Tsuru for Solidarity,
Grassroots Leadership, RAICES Texas and others continue to call for the shutdown of Dilley.
The South Texas Family Residential Center (Dilley) exemplifies the egregiously poor conditions and
culture of violence that plague the entirety of ICE detention resulting in system-wide abuses,
including death. Dilley is entering its seventh year of detaining immigrant families. It is one of three
detention centers in the United States jailing families navigating their immigration cases. The
system does not need to exist and communities across the country are organizing to end it and
build a better future. The only just solution that truly centers the wellbeing of children and their
families is to allow people to navigate their cases outside of detention in the community.
We demand the immediate closure of Dilley, as part of a first step towards the abolition of this
country’s inherently cruel and unjust immigration detention system.
For more information and calls to action related to this facility, visit:
Tsuru for Solidarity and RAICES Texas.— Letter from mother held at
Dilley in 2018
Photo: Steve PaveyThe Etowah County Sheriff’s Office began detaining immigrants at the
Etowah County Jail (Etowah) in 1997. The conditions at this remote
facility are widely known to be among the worst in the country with
the longest average length of stay for people detained there.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) itself looked to end the
Etowah contract in 2010, but politicians intervened to block this move
in the interest of local revenue, despite the facility’s chronic issues. Six
years later, in its first “super recommendation” memo, the civil rights
office of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) called on ICE
again to close the facility to no avail. Often transferred hundreds of
miles to the isolated facility, people continue to be jailed indefinitely
at Etowah, far from loved ones and any legal services to support them
in attaining their freedom.About EtowahF I R S T
T E N
0 4Shut Down the Etowah
County Jailt o Communities Not Cages
Communities across the country are uniting to protect immigrant family members,
friends, coworkers, and neighbors by calling to shut down ICE detention centers. The
Adelanto Detention Facility is emblematic of how the detention system is fatally flawed
beyond repair. Simply put, people navigating their immigration case should be able to
do so with their families and in community — not behind bars in immigration detention.
10History of Abuse at Etowah
Etowah demonstrates some of the most egregious systemic inadequacies that plague the detention
system. Its remote location is compounded by limited phone access and “video visitation” policies.
One person detained at Etowah told advocates that after his wife spent hundreds of dollars and 15
hours traveling to visit him, a guard denied the visit. He was then put in solitary confinement for
over 20 days for subsequently yelling at the guard. Etowah also offers zero access to outdoor
recreation while indoor recreation consists mostly of access to a cement room referred to as “the
sweatbox.” Despite the obvious threats to the mental wellbeing of people in custody, multiple
reports from the DHS emphasize the limited and ill-equipped mental health services available at
the facility.
One of the most common grievances for people in ICE detention is the quantity and quality of the
food served, and these complaints are almost universal at Etowah. It’s particularly striking in this
instance given the notoriety of a case involving the county sheriff in 2018, who was discovered to
have pocketed $750,000 over three years under a state law that permits sheriffs to keep “surplus”
food funds. While the sheriff helped himself to three-quarters of a million dollars in alleged surplus,
and potentially millions overall, immigrants at Etowah were left with meager servings of often
rotting food, while sometimes waiting up to 13 hours for their next meal.Quick Stats
Capacity:
357 people
Operator:
Etowah County
Sheriff's Office
Location:
827 Forrest Ave,
Gadsden, AL 35901
ICE Field Office:
New Orleans, LA
Congressional
District: AL-04
Photo: Fernando LopezThe hard part is that you get exhausted after
those hunger strikes. You just hope that
somehow authorities and people are going
to finally listen or understand that these are
not animals living in those quarters, they’re
people. But what comes after is silence and
the crackdown on inmates.Organizing to Shut Down Etowah
The Biden administration must immediately shut down Etowah
11Community organizers and the people detained at Etowah have protested the longstanding human
rights abuses at the facility for years. Since its launch, the Shut Down Etowah campaign has held
regular vigils, tribunals, and other direct actions outside the facility, centering the loved ones of the
people detained and often coordinating with protests already happening on the inside, including
ongoing hunger strikes. This desperation for freedom peaked when at the onset of the COVID-19
pandemic in March 2020, three individuals with flu-like symptoms were transferred to the facility. In
a livestreamed video, a group of men threatened to commit suicide due to ICE’s continue disregard
for their health and safety amid a pandemic.
In typical ICE fashion, the agency response to this activism has been retaliatory suppression. After
the video of the protest in March was released, the facility was placed on lockdown, meaning the
people inside were only allowed to leave their cells ten at a time for one hour each day. Several
months before this incident, ICE had suspended Etowah’s already limited visitation program
indefinitely in response to a community rally at the facility. This kind of retaliation that cuts off even
the smallest lifelines for people in detention exposes ICE’s inherent cruelty and severe incapability
of caring for the people in its custody.
Etowah County Jail exemplifies the egregiously poor conditions and culture of violence that plague
the entirety of ICE detention resulting in system-wide abuses, including death. In 2015, DHS
leadership wrote a memo lamenting ICE’s neglect to address the serious deficiencies found at
Etowah during on-site visits. ICE continued to insist through internal inspections that the facility
complied with “rigorous detention standards.” Etowah is a prime example that regardless of the
amount of oversight conducted, complaints filed, and recommendations made, ICE is rotten to its
core and incapable of improvement. Its immigration detention system does not need to exist and
communities across the country are organizing to end it and build a better future.
We demand the immediate closure of Etowah, as part of a first step towards the abolition of this
country’s inherently cruel and unjust immigration detention system.
For more information and calls to action related to this facility, visit: Shut Down Etowah.Photo: Fernando Lopez— Person formerly detained at
EtowahThe Farmville Detention Center (Farmville) first opened in 2010, two
years after Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) reached an
agreement with the town of Farmville and the private prison
corporation, Immigration Centers of America (ICA). The expansion was
a response to an increase in the detained population due to President
Obama’s draconian Secure Communities program. Previously
dependent on the disappearing manufacturing industry, Farmville
entered into the contract with ICE to boost its economy, despite
protests from people across the state marching on Town Hall to
oppose construction plans. Ultimately, profits from the facility make
up only two percent of the town’s budget and its true legacy has been
countless lawsuits and investigations filled with rampant abuse
allegations.About FarmvilleQuick Stats
Capacity:
722 people
Operator:
Immigration
Centers of America
Location:
508 Waterworks Rd,
Farmville, VA 23901
ICE Field Office:
Washington DC
Congressional
District: VA-05F I R S T
T E N
0 5Shut Down the Farmville
Detention Centert o Communities Not Cages
Communities across the country are uniting to protect immigrant family members,
friends, coworkers, and neighbors by calling to shut down ICE detention centers. The
Adelanto Detention Facility is emblematic of how the detention system is fatally flawed
beyond repair. Simply put, people navigating their immigration case should be able to
do so with their families and in community — not behind bars in immigration detention.
12History of Abuse at Farmville
Due to ICA’s keenness to turn a profit without regard for the health and safety of the people it
detains, the Farmville facility has experienced some of the most severe consequences from the
overcrowding that plagues ICE’s detention system. Even before the facility was officially in use, ICA
successfully lobbied to detain 300 more people at a time than was originally planned to maximize
its early profits. Moreover, while the facility self-reports a capacity of 722 people, accounts of
overcrowding have recorded the population sometimes nearing 800 people with many sleeping in
four-stack bunk beds or on unfixed cots and mattresses stationed in living quarters—exacerbating
an environment already vulnerable to disease outbreaks.
In June 2019, a mumps outbreak that ultimately infected hundreds of immigrants in ICE detention
across nearly 60 facilities overtook Farmville—a foretelling of how COVID-19 would ravage the facility
just a year later. In both cases, ICE and ICA aggravated the propagation of disease through practices
widely known to cause the spread in order to increase profits. At the height of the pandemic, the
agency transferred 74 people to Farmville from facilities in states that were epicenters for the virus.
These transfers happened in part to facilitate the travel of ICE agents who were deployed in
Washington, D.C. to suppress the racial justice uprisings of 2020. Immediately after, Farmville
experienced the largest COVID-19 outbreak in the entire detention system, and the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention issued a scathing report about the facility. By mid-July, 93
percent of the people inside Farmville had tested positive for COVID-19, including James Hill, a
Canadian immigrant, who tragically died less than a month later.People’s rights basically disappear when they enter the
ICA-Farmville Detention Center in ICE custody. Their
main focus is filling beds in the dorm and earning
money. Detainees are just a source of income for ICA.
As someone who was previously detained at ICA-
Farmville, I want to share my story about the suffering I
lived at Farmville. I can help speak up for those who
cannot speak up while they are still being detained
and still suffering racism, violence, mental abuse,
oppression, poor health conditions, and hunger.Organizing to Shut Down Farmville
The Biden administration must immediately shut down Farmville
13During the mumps outbreak in 2019, immigrants inside Farmville organized a hunger strike to
protest for their freedom. Guards responded by attacking strikers with pepper spray and placing
them in solitary confinement for extended periods of time, resulting in a lawsuit against ICE and
ICA. Another hunger strike formed less than a year later at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic with
nearly 100 people demanding release from Farmville. They met the same torturous fate of pepper
spray, rubber bullets, and solitary at the hands of facility guards.
A coalition of advocates in the state—Free Them All VA—formed to amplify demands for release
from immigrants detained at Farmville. The coalition campaigned for months and succeeded in
persuading federal representatives to call for the release of everyone from the facility. However,
advocates experienced suppression as well, facing arrests and receiving a broad search warrant for
their communications to indict people who participated in protests outside the homes of
government officials. This violence and suppression in coordination with private corporations and
other law enforcement entities expose the lengths to which ICE will go to continue its abusive
incarceration of immigrants.
The Farmville Detention Center exemplifies the egregiously poor conditions and culture of violence
that plague the entirety of ICE detention resulting in system-wide abuses, including death. ICA
promotes this system for profit and is aggressively seeking to expand its role in it, hiring 34
lobbyists over six years to market its cause. However, ICE’s immigration detention system does not
need to exist and communities across the country are organizing to end it and build a better future.
We demand the immediate closure of Farmville, as part of a first step towards the abolition of this
country’s inherently cruel and unjust immigration detention system.
For more information and calls to action related to this facility, visit: La ColectiVA, Sanctuary
DMV, and Free Them All VA Coalition.— Alex, formerly detained at Farmville
Photo: La ColectiVAThe T. Don Hutto Residential Facility (Hutto) opened as a family
detention center for Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) in
2006 through an agreement with Williamson County, Texas where the
facility is located. Three years later it was converted into an adult
detention center for women. Since then, the facility has operated in
open contention with the surrounding community, leading ICE to use
dubious contracting practices to keep the facility open. In 2020, ICE
awarded a new 10-year contract to CoreCivic, the private prison
corporation that had been operating the facility and was at the center
of its extensive history of abuse, to ensure its continued operation for
yet another decade.About HuttoQuick Stats
Capacity:
512 people
Operator:
CoreCivic
Location:
1001 Welch St.
Taylor, TX 76574
ICE Field Office:
San Antonio, TX
Congressional
District: TX-31F I R S T
T E N
0 6Shut Down the T. Don Hutto
Residential Facilityt o Communities Not Cages
Communities across the country are uniting to protect immigrant family members,
friends, coworkers, and neighbors by calling to shut down ICE detention centers. The
Adelanto Detention Facility is emblematic of how the detention system is fatally flawed
beyond repair. Simply put, people navigating their immigration case should be able to
do so with their families and in community — not behind bars in immigration detention.
14History of Abuse at Hutto
Advocates have long documented widespread abuse at Hutto, including a serious pattern of sexual
assault and harassment by facility guards. Many women have come forward with testimonies
detailing abuse they suffered while detained at Hutto, contributing to the more than 1,200 sexual
abuse complaints filed by adults in ICE detention between 2010 and 2017. One guard at Hutto was
convicted for the sexual assault of at least eight women. The facility has also faced litigation for
allegations of forced labor after it was found that women were doing facility upkeep for $2 an hour
as part of a cost-cutting strategy—an iteration of prison labor commonly practiced at ICE facilities.
Interviews with women detained at Hutto have revealed severe retaliatory practices, at times for
“offenses” as innocuous as playing cards or hugging. Women have been transferred without notice
or placed in solitary confinement for extended time as a “disciplinary” response. A hunger striker in
2015 was isolated for more than 36 hours for engaging in protest. The facility justified the decision
by claiming it was for medical purposes, but she received no medical attention during that time.
Photo: Grassroots LeadershipThe medical department is very rude to us,
they tell us we’re pretending to be sick
even when someone is in serious pain, they
laugh and mock at your medical condition,
they give wrong medication to patients
and they don’t attend to you when you
really need medical attention.Organizing to Shut Down Hutto
The Biden administration must immediately shut down Hutto
15For nearly 15 years, community organizations like Grassroots Leadership have been organizing to
uplift the stories of those detained at Hutto and shut it down. In 2018 formerly detained women,
advocates, and county residents led a months-long campaign calling for its closure, including a
march joined by hundreds which forced the Williamson County Commissioners Court to vote on
whether to renew the county’s facility contract with ICE. The county voted almost unanimously
against renewal and no longer contracts with ICE. However, instead of closing the detention center,
ICE circumvented the community’s win by immediately entering into a direct contract with
CoreCivic to keep the facility open. The terms of the contract, including its length, were kept secret
from the community.
The women inside Hutto have also relentlessly organized for their release over the years, from
hunger strikes to letter-writing campaigns led by mothers who had been separated from their
children. In 2020 as the threat of the COVID-19 pandemic loomed large, over 100 Cameroonian
women at the facility staged a sit-in in front of Hutto’s medical clinic to protest the medical neglect
throughout their prolonged detention. Immediately following the demonstration, dozens of the
women that participated were transferred to another facility, further confirming the threat of
transfers away from legal services and community support as a retaliation practice by ICE. Still the
women at Hutto continue to organize for their freedom.
The T. Don Hutto Residential Facility exemplifies the egregiously poor conditions and culture of
violence that plague the entirety of ICE detention resulting in system-wide abuses, including death.
ICE has been jailing immigrants at Hutto for 15 years now, despite years of opposition from
community members and the extra-legal tactics it’s taken to keep the facility open. These devious
and purposely opaque practices are status quo for ICE operations, motivated only by the continued
incarceration of immigrants. However, ICE’s immigration detention system does not need to exist
and communities across the country are organizing to end it and build a better future.
We demand the immediate closure of Hutto, as a first step towards the abolition of the inherently
cruel and unjust immigration detention system.
For more information and calls to action related to this facility, visit: Grassroots Leadership.— letter from Cameroonian
immigrants detained at Hutto
Photo: Grassroots LeadershipThe Irwin County Detention Center (Irwin) is a 1,201-bed for-profit jail
in rural Georgia that began detaining immigrants for Immigration and
Customs Enforcement (ICE) in December 2010. It is operated and
staffed by the private prison corporation, LaSalle Corrections, which
runs seven other immigration detention facilities throughout the
South. Irwin is one of four detention centers in the state and exhibits
some of the most acute cases of the immigrant abuse characteristic of
ICE’s detention system in Georgia and throughout the country. Despite
passing its last two internal ICE inspections, Irwin has been the
subject of multiple reports condemning the state of affairs at the
detention center over the last several years and is currently
undergoing federal investigation and litigation for a variety of reported
human rights abuses.About IrwinQuick Stats
Capacity:
694 people
Operator:
LaSalle Corrections
Location:
132 Cotton Dr,
Ocilla, GA 31774
ICE Field Office:
Atlanta, GA
Congressional
District: GA-08F I R S T
T E N
0 7Shut Down the Irwin County
Detention Centert o Communities Not Cages
Communities across the country are uniting to protect immigrant family members,
friends, coworkers, and neighbors by calling to shut down ICE detention centers. The
Adelanto Detention Facility is emblematic of how the detention system is fatally flawed
beyond repair. Simply put, people navigating their immigration case should be able to
do so with their families and in community — not behind bars in immigration detention.
16History of Abuse at Irwin
Irwin displays many of the severe deficiencies that plague detention facilities located in rural areas,
including extremely restricted access to phone services for communication with loved ones or legal
and political contacts to help with their case. Meanwhile, food servings are meager and often rotten,
with consistent accounts of foreign objects like hair, rocks, or even nails found in the food. To
compensate and afford extra minutes on the phone or overpriced food in the commissary, many
immigrants participate in Irwin’s “work program,” which pays them only $1 per full day of work. ICE
and LaSalle are exploiting the labor of the people they detain to perform the duties necessary for
the facility to function, while subsequently charging them inflated prices in the commissary for
basic needs.
Irwin has recently gained national attention after Project South, Georgia Detention Watch, Georgia
Latino Alliance for Human Rights, and South Georgia Immigrant Support Network filed a federal
complaint with the Office of the Inspector General (OIG). It included accounts from whistleblower,
Ms. Dawn Wooten, and immigrants detained at Irwin regarding the rampant human rights abuses at
the facility, including lack of COVID-19 precautions and non-consensual invasive gynecological
procedures on detained immigrant women. These efforts resulted in a federal investigation and a
class action lawsuit involving 40 women against both ICE and the contracted gynecologist accused
of conducting unwanted or unnecessary procedures. The women who spoke out faced retaliation
from ICE, some receiving removal orders shortly after—a repeated tactic employed by ICE to deport
or attempt to deport immigrants involved in active cases against them.
We are all recording this video with fear
that they will retaliate against us, isolate
us, that they cut all communication with
our families…we are scared. We are doing
everything possible for ourselves, making
masks out of socks, but we know that this
is not enough. We need someone to listen
to us please. We are only asking for help.
We are only fighting for our lives.Organizing to Shut Down Irwin
The Biden administration must immediately shut down Irwin
17Georgia has a powerful history of resistance against deportations and detention. Across the state,
advocates have been fighting for years for the dignity of immigrant communities and the closure of
detention centers in Georgia. These efforts included supporting and advocating alongside detained
immigrants inside Irwin, organizing direct actions, publishing reports of human rights abuses,
several letters to the Georgia Congressional Delegates, class action lawsuits, and advocacy with the
United Nations and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.
Detained people have also engaged in mass organizing against the state’s immigration detention
facilities. In April 2020, about a month into the coronavirus pandemic, people detained in both the
men’s and women’s units at Irwin staged a hunger and work strike to protest its unsafe conditions
and to demand people be released. That month women detained at Irwin also released a powerful
video documenting conditions inside the facility and expressing their demands. Just a few months
later, advocacy groups on the local, state, and national levels all mobilized behind the demand to
close the Irwin facility in response to the OIG complaint. The impact of the years-long campaign to
shut down Irwin is undeniable—even Members of Congress risked traveling during the pandemic to
conduct an on-site visit, after which several echoed the demand for closure.
The Irwin County Detention Center exemplifies the egregiously poor conditions and culture of
violence that plague the entirety of ICE detention resulting in system-wide abuses, including death.
Following the powerful organizing for the closure of Irwin, local advocates learned that the Stewart
Detention Center, an “all-male” facility two hours away that is currently one of the deadliest
detention centers in the country, is now detaining women. The closure of Irwin is necessary, but it
must result in the release of people detained there—not their transfer to other ICE facilities in the
state--and should serve to open the door for the closure of all the detention centers in Georgia and
across the country. ICE’s immigration detention system does not need to exist and communities
across the country are organizing to end it and build a better future.
We demand the immediate closure of Irwin, as part of a first step towards the abolition of this
country’s inherently cruel and unjust immigration detention system.
For more information and calls to action related to this facility, follow the organizing toolkit
and visit: Georgia Detention Watch, Georgia Latino Alliance for Human Rights, Project South,
and the South Georgia Immigrant Support Network.— Women detained at Irwin in 2020
Photo: Georgia Detention WatchThe Karnes Family Residential Center (Karnes), which began operating
in 2011 as an adult only detention facility, is one of three family
detention centers currently operating in the United States. Initially,
the Obama administration opened Karnes, which is operated by the
GEO Group, to showcase what “humane detention” could be. The
practice of incarcerating families mostly ended in 2009 only to be
revived in 2014 under President Obama, when Karnes was converted
into a family detention center to detain immigrant families in removal
proceedings. The current family detention program is the largest since
the mass incarceration of Japanese Americans in the 1940s with a
combined capacity for over 3,000 people. The system
disproportionately targets Black families. Family detention, like all
immigration detention, is on the wrong side of history.About KarnesQuick Stats
Capacity:
830 people
Operator:
The GEO Group
Location:
409 FM 1144,
Karnes City, TX
78118
ICE Field Office:
San Antonio, TX
Congressional
District: TX-15F I R S T
T E N
0 8Shut Down the Karnes County
Family Residential Centert o Communities Not Cages
Communities across the country are uniting to protect immigrant family members,
friends, coworkers, and neighbors by calling to shut down ICE detention centers. The
Adelanto Detention Facility is emblematic of how the detention system is fatally flawed
beyond repair. Simply put, people navigating their immigration case should be able to
do so with their families and in community — not behind bars in immigration detention.
18History of Abuse at Karnes
Like all ICE detention, family detention centers have a well-documented history of negligence and
abuse, including inadequate medical and mental health care, children losing weight, inappropriate
disciplinary tactics including threats to separate families if children misbehave. In particular at
Karnes there have been reports of sexual abuse, extortion and harassment, and rancid food.
Numerous studies have shown the psychologically damaging effects of family detention; medical
and child welfare professionals have noted again and again that it is especially harmful to children,
leading to post-traumatic stress disorder, emotional and mental health issues, including depression
and anxiety, and weight loss among other physical, emotional and behavioral health problems.
My son cries every day, he doesn’t
want to eat, he’s very worried and
he’s only 6 years old...What worries
me is that we are restrained from
our freedom as human beings.
Our children are crying.Organizing to Shut Down Karnes
The Biden administration must immediately shut down Karnes
19Families held inside Karnes have been bravely speaking out about their treatment. In 2015 mothers
at Karnes staged two hunger strikes demanding their release. In 2018 dozens of fathers who had just
been reunited with their children after being separated at the border peacefully requested
information about their cases. Instead of providing that information, armed agents stormed into the
parents’ rooms and once again forcefully separated sixteen fathers from their children, despite a
nationwide federal court injunction prohibiting separations. In doing so, the parents and children
were told they would never see each other again. This is not the first time that violence has been
wrought upon families in detention and it is likely not to be the last. It is emblematic of why the
entire detention system must be abolished.
The Karnes County Residential Center exemplifies the egregiously poor conditions and culture of
violence that plague the entirety of ICE detention resulting in system-wide abuses, including death.
Karnes is entering its seventh year of detaining immigrant families. It is one of three detention
centers in the United States jailing families navigating their immigration cases. The system does not
need to exist and communities across the country are organizing to end it and build a better future.
The only just solution that truly centers the wellbeing of children and their families is to allow
people to navigate their cases outside of detention in the community.
We demand the immediate closure of Karnes, as part of a first step towards the abolition of this
country’s inherently cruel and unjust immigration detention system.
For more information and calls to action related to this facility, visit: Haitian Bridge Alliance
and RAICES Texas.— Father participating in
hunger strike at Karnes in 2018The Mesa Verde Detention Facility (Mesa Verde)
opened in 2015 when the City of McFarland
contracted with Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE) and The GEO Group (GEO) to
detain 400 people. Since then McFarland
community members have opposed the city’s
commitment to detention profits over the safety
and wellbeing of the region’s grape field and dairy
farmers, many of whom are targeted by ICE and
detained at Mesa Verde. In 2020, the McFarland City
Council approved the expansion of two former state
detention centers for use by ICE, adding an
additional 1,400 beds. The Golden State Modified
Community Correctional Facility and the Central
Valley Community Correctional Facility are now
annexed to the Mesa Verde facility contract.About Mesa VerdeF I R S T
T E N
0 9Shut Down the Mesa Verde
Detention Facilityt o Communities Not Cages
Communities across the country are uniting to protect immigrant family members,
friends, coworkers, and neighbors by calling to shut down ICE detention centers. The
Adelanto Detention Facility is emblematic of how the detention system is fatally flawed
beyond repair. Simply put, people navigating their immigration case should be able to
do so with their families and in community — not behind bars in immigration detention.
20History of Abuse at Mesa Verde
Mesa Verde exemplifies the systemic abuse that plagues the detention system. The California
Department of Justice and ICE Office of Detention Oversight inspectors have found instances of
sexual abuse and assault, use of force and restraints, and inadequate access to legal counsel.
Mesa Verde’s human rights abuses have led people at the facility to stage numerous protests,
including hunger and labor strikes and sit-ins. ICE has tried to discredit hunger strikers by
attempting to cover up dangerous conditions at the facility. In response to ICE and GEO’s
mishandling of the COVID-19 pandemic, 200 people detained at Mesa Verde launched a hunger
strike in April 2020 with a petition titled “Detention into Death Sentence.” Immigrants detained in
the facility shared their fear of dying due to COVID-19 because of their own medical vulnerabilities,
the restrictive environment, and the failure of facility staff to use personal protective equipment. A
month later, Choung Woohn Ahn, a 74-year-old man who was at great risk of COVID-19
complications due to lung disease and heart-related issues died by suicide while in solitary
confinement. Although ICE was aware that Mr. Ahn was at risk of suicide, they violated their own
standards by failing to continuously monitor him. In 2019 Sofia Bahena, a 64 -year-old grandmother,
was detained by ICE while on her way to work. Although ICE was actually targeting another
passenger in the car, Sofia was a “collateral arrest.” She spent six months at Mesa Verde, including
during the COVID-19 pandemic, despite her attorney’s request that she be released due to her age
and underlying medical conditions that make her vulnerable to the virus. During her time at Mesa
Verde, ICE refused proper medical care, including much needed medication for her eyes. In 2020 she
joined a lawsuit against ICE detention centers in California for their failure to adequately respond to
the COVID-19 pandemic and was subsequently released without explanation. Also last year, ICE kept
Alton Edmondson, a Black immigrant from Jamaica, in solitary confinement for three weeks, and for
one of those weeks, deprived him of a bed. Although ICE claimed Mr. Edmondson was in solitary
confinement under quarantine, he repeatedly tested negative for COVID-19.Quick Stats
Capacity:
1,800 people, including annexed
Golden State and Central Valley
Facilities
Operator:
The GEO Group
Location:
-Mesa Verde: 425 Golden State
Ave, Bakersfield, CA 93301
-Golden State Annex: 611 Frontage
Rd, McFarland, CA 93250
-Central Valley Annex: 254 Taylor
Ave, McFarland, CA 93250
ICE Field Office:
San Francisco, CA
Congressional
CA-23We have been kidnapped by ICE and detained
in four dorms of the Mesa Verde Detention
Facility in Bakersfield, California. Since the
outbreak of COVID-19, we have been sounding
the alarm about the dangerous conditions
inside this facility. We have written letters,
recorded videos, and even gone on hunger
strike. Unfortunately, nothing has changed. We
are still in danger and still afraid for our lives.Organizing to Shut Down Mesa Verde
The Biden administration must immediately shut down Mesa Verde
21The people detained at Mesa Verde and the California Immigrant Youth Justice Alliance along with
Centro Legal De La Raza, Pangea Legal Services, Estamos Unidos, Kern Welcoming and Extending
Solidarity to Immigrants, and Kern Youth Abolitionists have been organizing to call attention to the
abuses inside the facility, demanding shutdown and the release of all people detained. In June 2020
dozens of immigrants detained at Mesa Verde launched a hunger strike in solidarity with the Black
Lives Matter Movement, uplifting the disproportionate detention and deportation of Black
immigrants. Several hunger and labor strikes have taken place since the beginning of the COVID-19
pandemic by people detained inside Mesa Verde to bring awareness to their conditions and demand
release. The negligence on behalf of GEO resulted in in a severe COVID-19 outbreak at the facility.
The Mesa Verde Detention Facility exemplifies the egregiously poor conditions and culture of
violence that plague the entirety of ICE detention resulting in system-wide abuses, including death.
ICE has been jailing immigrants at Mesa Verde for six years, despite years of opposition from the
local immigrant farmworker community. ICE’s actions to rapidly expand the Mesa Verde Detention
Facility despite an ongoing global pandemic are another example of the agency’s callousness.
However, ICE’s immigration detention system does not need to exist and communities across the
country are organizing to end it and build a better future.
We demand the immediate closure of the Mesa Verde Detention Facility as part of a first step
towards the abolition of this country’s inherently cruel and unjust immigration detention system.
For more information and calls to action related to this facility, visit:
California Immigrant Youth Justice Alliance.— Letter from Hunger strikers in Dorms A,
B, C and D at Mesa VerdeThe Otero County Processing Center (Otero) opened as an Immigration
and Customs Enforcement (ICE) detention center in 2008. The facility
is owned by Otero County and operated by the private prison
corporation, Management and Training Corporation (MTC). It is located
in the rural border community of Chaparral and is one of two facilities
managed by MTC in a joint complex with the Otero County Prison
Facility, which detains people for the U.S. Marshals Service, New
Mexico Corrections Department, and in county custody. Most recently
during the COVID-19 pandemic, MTC shamefully attempted to
renegotiate its contract to manage Otero by threatening to terminate
their agreement if the county did not find avenues to increase the
number of people in detention.About OteroQuick Stats
Capacity:
1,089 people
Operator:
Management
Training Corporation
Location:
26 McGregor Range
Rd, Chaparral, NM
88081
ICE Field Office:
El Paso, TX
Congressional
District: NM-02F I R S T
T E N
1 0Shut Down the Otero County
Processing Centert o Communities Not Cages
Communities across the country are uniting to protect immigrant family members,
friends, coworkers, and neighbors by calling to shut down ICE detention centers. The
Adelanto Detention Facility is emblematic of how the detention system is fatally flawed
beyond repair. Simply put, people navigating their immigration case should be able to
do so with their families and in community — not behind bars in immigration detention.
22History of Abuse at Otero
Otero has a long history of using disciplinary solitary confinement and hostile treatment of
detained people by staff. Reports of racial slurs and degrading language are common. There are
numerous instances of staff harassing and humiliating LGBT individuals detained at the facility. In a
2018 report by Detained Migrant Solidarity Committee and Freedom for Immigrants, documenting
over 200 complaints of abuse made between 2015 and 2018, four critical issues emerged: unhealthy
living conditions; abuse and exploitation; social isolation and mental anguish; barriers to justice and
legal access.
Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, Otero has been one of the ICE facilities with the most
confirmed COVID-19 cases. The propagation of the virus was linked to transfers of people in and out
of the facility, MTC’s unwillingness to work with the New Mexico Department of Health, and lack of
testing. In a facility with well-documented evidence of inadequate medical care, people detained
fear for their lives. Unannounced inspections by the Office of the Inspector General and interviews
by ICE’s Office of Detention Oversight have found daily medical records missing, denials or delays
for medical attention, and continuous outbreaks of chickenpox. At least five people have died due to
complications arising from medical neglect at Otero.
Photo: Jordyn RozenskyWe denounce … the constant threat by the
officials of the center to punish us in individual
cells of punishment with the goal of repressing
us and psychologically torturing us with the
objective of making us have fear and making us
deport ourselves to our country of origin from
which we fled for the danger our lives were in,
we denounce the racial discrimination …
because we are Latinos. We have looked for
help with the ICE officials and they do not
resolve our problems on the contrary, they
reveal themselves as racist, xenophobic and
bullies just like the officials of this center.Organizing to Shut Down Otero
The Biden administration must immediately shut down Otero
23Community organizations and people detained at Otero have been organizing for years to shut
down the facility. Advocate Visitors with Immigrants in Detention in the Chihuahuan Desert (AVID),
with volunteers in Las Cruces, El Paso and surrounding communities have been leading a program
for detained immigrants and advocating alongside people detained for their rights and freedom.
People inside Otero have organized numerous hunger strikes and been met by violent retaliation
including physical abuse, the use of prolonged solitary confinement, and transfers to the nearby El
Paso Service Processing Center to be force-fed.
The Otero County Processing Center exemplifies the egregiously poor conditions and culture of
violence that plague the entirety of ICE detention resulting in system-wide abuses, including death.
ICE has been jailing immigrants at Otero for 12 years, despite opposition from the local community
in Chaparral. MTC’s demands for the county to guarantee the facility remains at capacity exposes
the perverse financial incentives that exist throughout the system. However, ICE’s immigration
detention system does not need to exist and communities across the country are organizing to end
it and build a better future.
We demand the immediate closure of the Otero County Processing Center as part of a first step
towards the abolition of this country’s inherently cruel and unjust immigration detention system.
For more information and calls to action related to this facility, visit:
Avid in the Chihuahuan Desert.— Protest letter from detained people
held at Otero in 2019 Photo: Jordyn Rozensky
