F A T A L 
NEGLECT
How ICE Ignores Deaths in Detention
2 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in DetentionAmerican Civil Liberties Union
For nearly 100 years, the ACLU has been our nation’s 
guardian of liberty, working in courts, legislatures, and 
communities to defend and preserve the individual 
rights and liberties that the Constitution and the laws of 
the United States guarantee everyone in this country. 
aclu.org
Detention Watch Network
Detention Watch Network (DWN) works through the 
collective strength and diversity of its members to 
expose and challenge injustices of the U.S. immigration 
detention and deportation system and advocate for 
profound change that promotes the rights and dignity 
of all persons.
detentionwatchnetwork.org 
National Immigrant Justice Center
With offices in Chicago, Indiana, and Washington, D.C., 
Heartland Alliance’s National Immigrant Justice Center 
(NIJC) is a nongovernmental organization dedicated 
to ensuring human rights protections and access to 
justice for all immigrants, refugees, and asylum seekers 
through a unique combination of direct services, policy 
reform, impact litigation, and public education.
immigrantjustice.org  This report was a collaborative effort of the ACLU, DWN, 
and NIJC. Primary contributors were: Carl Takei of the 
ACLU; Mary Small and Carol Wu of DWN; and Jennifer 
Chan of NIJC.
Other staff and interns also contributed crucial research 
and editing, including David Fathi, Joanne Lin, Judy 
Rabinovitz, and Chris Rickerd of ACLU; Carly Perez, Ana 
Carrion and Silky Shah of DWN; Tara Tidwell Cullen, 
Mary Meg McCarthy, Royce Bernstein Murray, Ross 
Noecker, and Katherine Rivera of NIJC.
Design by: Strictly District, LLC.
Translation by: Eleana Gómez
Cover Image: Alonso Yáñez/La Opinión
© February 2016 American Civil Liberties Union, 
Detention Watch Network, and Heartland Alliance’s 
National Immigrant Justice CenterAcknowledgements
3 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in DetentionDespite the Obama administration’s stated commitment to reform the U.S. 
immigration detention system, driven in part by outrage over the high number of 
deaths in custody,1 failure to provide adequate medical care has continued to result 
in unnecessary deaths. The New York Times  2010 investigative report on deaths in 
immigration detention found evidence of a “culture of secrecy” and a failure to address 
fatal flaws at detention centers.2 According to an analysis of newly public government 
death reviews, these problems persist and poor medical care contributes to the death 
of immigrants in federal immigration custody with alarming frequency. 
This report examines egregious violations of U.S. Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement’s (ICE) own medical care standards that played a significant role in 
eight in-custody deaths from 2010 to 2012. An American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), 
Detention Watch Network (DWN), and National Immigrant Justice Center (NIJC) review 
of ICE death investigations and facility inspection reports reveals that even though 
ICE’s own death reviews identified violations of ICE medical standards as contributing 
factors in these deaths, ICE detention facility inspections conducted before and after 
these deaths failed to acknowledge—or sometimes dismissed—the critical flaws 
identified in the death reviews. The findings underscore how ICE’s deficient inspections 
system, first exposed by DWN and NIJC in the October 2015 report Lives in Peril, exacts 
a tragic human toll.3
The ACLU obtained ICE Office of Detention Oversight (ODO) Detainee Death Review 
documents summarizing investigations into detention-center deaths through a 
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request. These requests followed up on the ACLU’s 
2007-2009 FOIA requests on deaths in ICE detention, which formed the basis for an 
investigative series by The New York Times  that, along with widespread NGO advocacy, 
pushed the Obama administration to adopt its 2009 detention reforms.4 The death 
reviews are a component of these 2009 reforms, and are carried out by a centralized 
team of ICE personnel and subject-matter experts who interview local personnel 
and review medical and custody records to evaluate the medical care related to 
the death. The ACLU’s updated FOIA request sought the ODO reviews of 24 deaths 
that occurred in ICE custody from January 2010 through May 2012. In response, ICE 
produced documents regarding 17 deaths, but did not provide investigations for seven 
individuals. Of these seven outstanding cases, four remained under investigation at 
the time of ICE’s final document production, more than 400 days after these deaths 
occurred. In the remaining three deaths, ICE did not conduct its own detainee death 
review; in two cases, this was because the Office of Inspector General (OIG) in the 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) conducted the investigation, and in one case 
(discussed below), it is not clear if anyone conducted an investigation.5 In nearly half of 
the death reviews produced by ICE, the documentation suggests that failure to comply 
with ICE medical standards contributed to deaths.Introduction
Methodology
The ACLU, DWN, and NIJC 
analyzed 24 ICE death reviews 
that the ACLU received through 
its FOIA request. The eight cases 
discussed in this report were 
identified based on whether 
ICE investigators found that 
detention centers were non-
compliant with ICE detention 
standards for medical care. 
The case summaries for these 
deaths provide a summary of 
the evidence provided in the 
death reviews as well as ICE’s 
own findings on facility lack of 
compliance with ICE detention 
standards.Pablo
Gracida-Conte
Pablo Gracida-Conte died at 
the Eloy Detention Center--the 
deadliest detention center in 
the nation--after four months 
of worsening, untreated 
medical problems including 
vomiting after every meal. A 
doctor concluded that Mr. 
Gracida’s death could have been 
prevented. Remarkably, the 
ODO inspection claimed that 
Mr. Gracida’s death was the first 
death “to ever occur” at Eloy 
when, in fact, it was the 10th 
death at the facility.4 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in DetentionIn addition to creating the death review process, ICE instituted 
other reforms intended to reduce the number of in-custody 
deaths. These included the creation of a new detention facility 
inspection process under ODO that was intended to provide 
a more rigorous review of detention standards compliance 
than the routine Enforcement and Removal Operations (ERO) 
inspections6, centralization of healthcare under the ICE Health 
Service Corps (IHSC), and the introduction of a more robust set 
of detention standards, the 2011 Performance-Based National 
Detention Standards (PBNDS 2011).7
The PBNDS 2011, which were not in operation at the time of 
the deaths examined in this report, are the most thorough 
standards promulgated by ICE. Even these standards, 
however, fall short in significant respects compared to the 
National Commission on Correctional Health Care (NCCHC) 
standards for medical care in prison and jail settings.8 And 
although PBNDS 2011 are an improvement over ICE’s earlier 
standards, ICE’s adoption of them has been slow; as of 
January 2014, 139 facilities holding 44 percent of detained 
immigrants still operated under other, outdated standards 
that were promulgated as early as 2008 or even in 2000, prior 
to the creation of ICE.9 Further, as of January 2014, ICE held 
19 percent of detained immigrants in facilities where ICE did 
not directly contract with the facility and instead contracted 
through the U.S. Marshals Service (USMS). As two death 
reviews from such USMS facilities noted, ICE did not have 
contracts requiring those facilities to comply with any ICE 
detention standards.10 This is of particular concern since most 
USMS contracts are indefinite in duration, and may not be 
easily modified.11
Congress also instituted an important reform in 2009. Since 
then, congressional appropriations have included a provision 
that ICE cannot expend funds to immigration detention 
facilities that fail two consecutive ERO inspections.12 Although 
the number of deaths in ICE custody has decreased in recent 
years,13 comparison of the death reviews from 2010-2012 
with ODO and ERO inspections conducted at facilities before 
and after deaths occurred demonstrates that the inspection 
reforms have failed to hold detention facilities accountable for 
providing adequate medical care. The ACLU, DWN, and NIJC 
call on ICE to take immediate action to improve the detention-
center inspections process and the quality of medical care.Contract Types
•	 Contract 	Detention 	Facilities 	(CDFs)	are owned and 
operated by private corporations that contract directly with IC E. 
•	 Service 	Processing 	Centers	(SPCs)	are owned and 
operated by ICE. However, ICE hires contractors to handle 
many services within the facilities, such as transportation 
and guard services.
•	 Intergovernmental 	Service	Agreements 	(IGSAs)	are 
owned and operated by local governmental entities, 
typically county or city governments. Many local 
governments subcontract to private corporations to 
administer the facilities and/or to provide other services.
•	 U.S.	Marshals 	Service	(USMS)	Intergovernmental 	
Agreements 	(IGAs)	are under contract with the 
Department of Justice’s U.S. Marshals Service. Many of 
these contracts pre-date the 2003 creation of DHS and 
frequently do not reference clear applicable standards for 
detaining immigrants. Further, the majority of the USMS 
IGA contract terms are indefinite, meaning that there 
is no clear opportunity to renegotiate facility contracts, 
upgrade them to the most recent detention standards, or 
contractually address other concerns.
Photo: Alonso Yáñez/La Opinión5 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in DetentionKey Findings
There have been 56 deaths in ICE custody 
during the Obama administration, including 
six suicides14 and at least one death after an 
attempted suicide.15 This report focuses on 
the eight deaths where ODO identified non-
compliance with ICE medical standards as 
contributing causes; the ODO identified four 
of these deaths as preventable. However, this 
focus should not excuse several other cases 
in which ODO identified similar violations 
of ICE medical standards without drawing 
causal links between these violations and 
the deaths.16 The risks posed by substandard 
medical care will continue to endanger 
people detained in these facilities until the 
violations are corrected. Indeed, forcing such 
corrections is perhaps the most important 
reason to conduct death reviews in the 
first place. In hospitals, for example, it is 
a common practice to conduct root cause 
analyses of serious adverse events (such as 
death, permanent harm, or severe temporary 
harm) to identify changes to culture, 
systems, and processes that could reduce 
the probability of such events in the future.17 
Our investigation shows that in ICE detention 
facilities, this process is broken; even in 
the eight cases where ODO death reviews 
concluded that violations of ICE medical 
standards contributed to people’s deaths, 
ICE’s deficient inspections system essentially 
swept those findings under the rug.
Moreover, not all deaths are reviewed. In 
one case, ICE claimed that it did not have 
responsibility to review the death because 
the individual had been in ICE custody for 
less than six hours in a short-term hold 
facility, and had not yet been transferred to a 
detention facility designated for stays longer 
than 72 hours.18 This response raises the Facility TypeDeaths 
Attributable  
to Substandard 
Care  
Jan. 2010–  
May 2012Total 
Deaths
Jan. 2010–  
May 2012
Intergovernmental Service Agreement (IGSA) 3 10
Adelanto Detention Facility (CA) 1 1
Clinton County Correctional Facility (PA) 0 1
Columbia Regional Care Center (SC) 0 1
Eloy Detention Center (AZ) 1 1
Immigration Centers of America – Farmville (VA) 1 1
Mira Loma Detention Center (CA) 0 1
North Georgia Detention Center (GA) 0 1
Orleans Parish Prison (LA) 0 1
Theo Lacy Facility (CA) 0 1
York County Prison (PA) 0 1
Contract Detention Facility (CDF) 2 4
Denver CDF (CO) 1 1
Elizabeth Detention Center (NJ) 1 1
Houston CDF (TX) 0 2
Service Processing Center (SPC) 1 3
El Paso Processing Center (TX) 1 1
ICE ERO Processing Center (NV) 0 1
Krome SPC (FL) 0 1
U.S. Marshals Service (USMS) IGSA 2 2
Weber County Correctional Facility (UT) 1 1
Albany County Corrections Facility (NY) 1 1
Bureau of Prisons (BOP) 0 3
Oakdale Federal Detention Center (LA) 0 2
Butner Federal Correctional Institute (NC) 0 1
Hold Facility 0 1
San Bernardino Hold Room (CA) 0 1
Staging Area 0 1
Broadview Service Staging Area (IL) 0 1There have been 56 deaths in 
ICE custody during the Obama 
administration, including six 
suicides and at least one death 
after an attempted suicide.DEATHS6 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in DetentionThe ODO death review documents that indicate 
violations of ICE medical standards reveal a failure to:
1. Meet health care needs in a timely manner
2. Refer individuals to higher-level medical care 
providers, including transfer to external services 
such as emergency services
3. Adequately staff medical personnel
4. Communicate critically important information 
about individuals’ medical conditions between staff 
and especially during transfers
5. Adequately screen individuals for illnesses
6. Proactively identify and rectify concerns about 
medical care during ERO and ODO facility 
inspectionsThe ERO and ODO inspections should have detected gaps 
and flawed protocols that ICE or other facility operators 
should have fixed. Instead, in some inspections, inspectors 
failed even to mention deaths that had occurred at the 
facilities under investigation. Also, for all but one of the 
eight deaths described in this report, ICE ERO inspectors 
gave facilities passing ratings prior to and following deaths 
related to egregiously substandard medical care, even 
where ODO inspections found facilities failed to meet 
medical care standards, and even where ODO death 
reviews explicitly identified the deaths as preventable.
Overall, the systems designed to provide health care and 
hold facilities accountable failed these eight individuals, 
and may well have cost them their lives.Failures in Medical Care Cost Livesquestion of who is responsible for the care of individuals 
in ICE’s short-term detention facilities, and whether such 
gaps in responsibility are endangering other lives.
Three of the eight deaths profiled here—Fernando 
Dominguez-Valdivia (also written as Valivia in many ICE 
documents and some media reports), Irene Bamenga, and 
Amra Miletic—led to wrongful death lawsuits by surviving 
family members.19 However, not only are wrongful death 
lawsuits an insufficient resolution for families who must 
still live with the loss of their loved ones, they do not 
resolve the systemic problems highlighted in this report. 
As described in further detail below, ICE must take 
effective measures to improve delivery of medical care 
in detention and overhaul the inspections process so 
that both can function to stop more people from dying preventable deaths in ICE custody.
In addition, six out of the eight deaths involving 
substandard medical care occurred at privately run 
facilities.20 The highest number of deaths during the 
period covered by the death reviews occurred at facilities 
in which ICE contracted with local governments through 
Intergovernmental Service Agreements (IGSA), and the 
local governments then subcontracted with private, for-
profit prison companies to run the facilities. Private prison 
companies like Corrections Corporation of America (CCA) 
and the GEO Group, which operate eight of the 10 largest 
immigration detention centers,21 have long been criticized 
by advocacy organizations, government agencies, and the 
press for inadequate medical care, understaffing, violence, 
and other issues.22 7 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in DetentionEvalin-Ali Mandza, a 46-year-old citizen of Gabon, died of a 
heart attack after receiving inexcusably delayed emergency 
care on April 12, 2012, after 171 days in custody at the 
Denver Contract Detention Facility (DCDF) in Aurora, 
Colorado. DCDF is operated by GEO Group. 
On April 12, 2012, a code-blue emergency was 
activated at DCDF at approximately 5:24 a.m. when 
other detained individuals got an officer’s attention 
to report that Mr. Mandza was experiencing chest 
pain.23 At approximately 5:50 a.m., a doctor was finally 
alerted to the situation, determined that Mr. Mandza 
needed to go to the emergency room, and directed a 
nurse to call 911.24 However, the call was not placed 
to 911 until approximately 6:20 a.m., nearly one hour 
after the activation of the code-blue emergency.25 This 
unconscionably long delay clearly violated ICE PBNDS 
2008, which requires “detainees who need health care 
beyond facility resources to be transferred in a timely 
manner to an appropriate facility where care is available.”26 Multiple other failures beyond the delays also occurred 
within that hour. Despite the fact that GEO’s nursing 
protocol for chest pain27 requires vital signs to be taken 
every five minutes, Mr. Mandza’s vital signs were taken at 
5:28 a.m. and then not again until 6:20 a.m.28 Also, during 
this time an electrocardiogram (EKG) was performed, 
but the nurse performing the test was initially unable 
to get a reading because she was unfamiliar with the 
machine.29 Then she performed the wrong test.30 Once she 
performed the correct test, she was unable to interpret 
the results because she was not trained on the use of an 
EKG or in the interpretation of EKG test results.31 Instead, When Substandard Medical Care Can Kill
Death #1:  
Evalin-Ali Mandza
Age 46
Country of Origin Gabon
Cause of DeathHeart attack after egregious delays in calling 911and referring Mr. Mandza to a higher-
level provider.
Date of Death April 12, 2012
Detention Standards PBNDS 2008
Non-Compliance with
Detention Standards for
Medical CareSection (II)(2):  Meet healthcare needs in a timely and efficient manner;
Section (II)(7):  Timely transfe r to an appropriate facility where care is available for 
individuals whose healthcare needs are beyond facility resources;
Section (V)(O):  Medical and safety equipment is available and maintained, and staff is 
trained in proper use of equipment.
Length of Detention 171 days
Detention Facility Denver Contract Detention Facility, Aurora, CO
Facility Operator GEO Group
Facility Contract Type CDF
The call to 911 also was delayed 
because medical staff prioritized 
filling out transfer paperwork 
rather than placing the call.8 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in Detentionthe nurse reports relying on her “gut instinct” to send 
Mr. Mandza to the hospital.32 These are violations of ICE 
PBNDS requirements that medical and safety equipment 
be available and maintained, and that staff be trained in 
proper use of the equipment.  The call to 911 also was 
delayed because medical staff prioritized filling out transfer 
paperwork rather than placing the call.33
The death review conducted by ODO contractor Creative 
Corrections found that DCDF medical staff were unfamiliar 
with the institution’s Chest Pain Protocol, that appropriate 
cardiac medication was not administered, and that there 
was a delay in transporting the patient to a higher-level care 
facility, “all of which may have been contributing factors to 
Mr. Mandza’s death.”34 An IHSC review, included in the death 
review, similarly found that Mr. Mandza “did not have access to appropriate medical care while detained in the DCDF.”35
Despite these documented failings, DCDF passed its ERO 
inspections immediately before and after Mr. Mandza’s 
death, including the medical standards with which the 
facility is found non-compliant in the death review. In 
the 2012 ERO inspection, there are two descriptions of 
Mr. Mandza’s death. These summaries are worryingly 
inaccurate, describing Mr. Mandza as being from Ghana 
rather than Gabon and failing to mention any concerns. 
Instead, inspectors state, “He received a timely and 
comprehensive medical and mental health screening and 
physical assessment, reported no significant past medical 
history and denied any significant risk factors for heart 
disease,”36 effectively whitewashing the quality of  
medical care. 
Death #2:  
Amra Miletic
Age 47
Country of Origin Bosnia-Herzegovina
Cause of DeathComplications of chronic bowel inflammation and heart arrhythmia after nearly two 
months of substandard care that failed to address Ms. Miletic’s rectal bleeding, vomiting, 
abdominal pain, and nausea.
Date of Death March 20, 2011
Detention Standards NDS
Non-Compliance with
Detention Standards for
Medical CareSection (II)(2):  Facilities will provide its detained population with initial medical 
screening, cost-effective primary medical care, and emergency care;
Section (III)(D):  All new arrivals shall receive initial medical and mental health screening 
immediately upon arrival by a healthcare provider or an officer 
trained to perform this function, and health appraisals and physical 
examinations will occur within 14 days of arrival in accordance with 
NCCHC and JCAHO standards.
Length of Detention 47 days
Detention Facility Weber County Correctional Facility, Ogden, UT
Facility Operator Weber County Sheriff’s Office
Facility Contract Type USMS IGA
While detained for nearly two months, Ms. Miletic suffered 
from rectal bleeding, vomiting, abdominal pain, rapid 
weight loss, and nausea—conditions that ought to raise 
alarms even if experienced for a much shorter period of time. Ms. Miletic, originally from Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
passed away on March 20, 2011, at the McKay Dee Hospital 
in Ogden, Utah, from “complications of chronic colitis 
and atrial fibrillation,”37 or chronic bowel inflammation 9 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in Detentionand heart arrhythmia, after 47 days in ICE 
custody while detained at the Weber County 
Correctional Facility (WCCF). Colitis is an 
inflammation of the lining of the colon; it 
should not be fatal if treated properly. The 
review completed after her death concluded 
that “the WCCF was not in compliance with 
the ICE NDS Medical Care Standard,”38 citing 
various egregious violations including failure 
to provide Ms. Miletic with immediate “off-site 
specialty care for her medical condition” after 
serious documented complaints of “rectal 
bleeding, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea”39 
as well as failure to document missed meals 
(even while Ms. Miletic was on medical watch) 
or to note missed medication.40
Despite arriving with seven different 
medications and complaints of feeling sick 
and vomiting, Ms. Miletic was not given a full 
medical and mental health screening.41 Within 
her first month at WCCF, Ms. Miletic also 
submitted three sick call slips (February 8, 21, 
and 26) with complaints of feeling sick, finding 
blood in her stool, lower abdominal pain, and 
a persistent fever.42 In response, the medical 
staff prescribed Metamucil, hemorrhoidal 
suppositories, and Tylenol.43 Although Ms. 
Miletic was becoming visibly sicker and 
thinner (losing 15 pounds in nine days)44 and 
other detained women complained about 
her hygiene and smell due to her medical 
condition, the medical staff delayed placing 
Ms. Miletic under observation.45 Even then, 
because there was no room in the medical 
segregation unit, Ms. Miletic was placed in a 
separate housing unit where no one noticed 
that she was unresponsive for almost 45 
minutes,46 clearly delaying her transfer to the 
hospital where she ultimately died.
Ms. Miletic had rectal bleeding for almost two 
months and yet she did not see a physician 
until 37 days after her arrival and lab tests 
FEb. 1 FEb. 8 FEb. 11 FEb. 23 MAR. 9 MAR. 20 MAR. 18Ms. Miletic is taken into ICE custody with complaints 
of nausea, vomiting, fever, and diarrhea.47 She is not 
given a full medical and mental health screening.48
 
Ms. Miletic submits a sick slip saying that she is 
sick, cold, that her stomach has been bleeding, and 
that she is in pain.49 She is scheduled for a medical 
appointment two days later. Medical staff do not 
record her weight (despite complaints of weight loss) 
and do not order lab tests.50
 
Ms. Miletic has a urinalysis and three stool tests. 
According to the facility, Ms. Miletic submits one stool 
sample which tests positive for blood.51 
The doctor refuses to see Ms. Miletic in the 
evening because she had not come for an earlier 
appointment.52
Ms. Miletic is seen by the medical unit 10 days after 
submitting a sick slip, with complaints of diarrhea 
and abdominal cramping.53 Her stool is described 
as “bloody, bright red and has some clots.” 54 She 
weighs 134 pounds. Her first lab test is ordered after 
five weeks in detention. This is also the first record of 
the facility attempting to obtain Ms. Miletic’s medical 
records.
 
Multiple times throughout the day, Ms. Miletic 
reports feeling like she is dying. She weighs 119 
pounds, a 15 pound weight loss in nine days, yet a 
chart notes that “[Ms. Miletic’s] vitals do not reflect 
her distress.”55 When Ms. Miletic requests new 
underwear because she is bleeding rectally, she is 
asked to place the dirtied underwear outside of her 
cell and a deputy is asked “to visualize [the] amount 
of blood.”56
Ms. Miletic states that she has not eaten for seven 
days and is bleeding heavily with severe abdominal 
pains. There is no documentation of the facility staff 
informing medical that Ms. Miletic was not eating. 
According to video surveillance, Ms. Miletic shows 
signs of distress at 6:25 p.m. Four minutes later, she 
displays her last movement. At	both	6:39	and	6:49	
p.m.,	two	deputies 	walk	by	her	cell.	At	7:13	p.m.,	
a	nurse	discovers 	Ms.	Miletic,	unresponsive.Fatal Timeline: Amra Miletic10 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in DetentionDeath #3:  
Pablo Gracida-Conte
Age 54
Country of Origin Mexico
Cause of DeathMr. Gracida succumbed to cardiomyopathy, a treatable disease of the heart muscle. He 
died after four months of persistent requests for medical treatment that were ignored.
Date of Death October 30, 2011
Detention Standards PBNDS 2008
Non-Compliance with
Detention Standards for
Medical CareSection (II)(2):  Meet healthcare needs in a timely and efficient manner;
Section (II)(7):  Timely transfer t o an appropriate facility where care is available for 
individuals whose healthcare needs are beyond facility resources.
Length of Detention 142 days
Detention Facility Eloy Detention Center, Eloy, AZ
Facility Operator Corrections Corporation of America (CCA)
Facility Contract Type IGSA with the City of Eloy, AZwere not ordered until 11 days before she died. Despite a 
rapid, substantial weight loss and visual evidence that she 
was sick, WCCF’s medical staff repeatedly failed to respond 
appropriately to the signs that Ms. Miletic’s condition was 
deteriorating. Even while she was ostensibly under their 
observation, they failed to notice she was unresponsive for 
45 minutes. 
According to the doctor who was hired to conduct the 
mortality review as part of the death review, “this was a 
death that was preventable.”57 The consultant criticized the 
qualifications of WCCF’s medical staff, writing  
“[c]ompetence in the practice of contemporary medicine and nursing must be questioned. The nursing staff, 
based on documentation, appears to be working outside 
the scope of nursing practice. There is a general lack of 
knowledge and application of the nursing triage process. 
…The physician’s lack of understanding of the urgency 
of colonoscopy and referral to emergency care begs to 
question his competency.”58 ERO and ODO inspections are 
not available for review.
Mr. Gracida died of heart disease after repeated failures 
to provide him with timely and efficient care. After four 
months of worsening, untreated medical problems, Mr. 
Gracida died on October 30, 2011, at the University of 
Arizona’s University Medical Center in Tucson, Arizona. He 
became the 10th person since October 2003 to die while 
incarcerated at the 1,550-bed, CCA-run Eloy Detention 
Center in Eloy, Arizona.59 The autopsy report states the 
cause of death for the 54-year-old as cardiomyopathy, a 
treatable disease of the heart muscle.60 During Mr. Gracida’s 142 days in detention, he complained 
of ongoing health issues such as vomiting after every 
meal and extreme upper abdominal pain. Eloy staff had 
difficulty communicating with Mr. Gracida, who spoke 
Mixteco. Although the facility has access to telephonic 
interpreters and had ample time to find an interpreter, 
it never obtained one.61 Mr. Gracida’s long list of sick 
call requests reads as a desperate, repeated cry for help 
that was ignored until it was too late. [See timeline on the 
following page]No one noticed that she was 
unresponsive for almost 45 minutes.11 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in DetentionICE detains Mr. Gracida at Eloy.
Mr. Gracida visits the medical clinic for vomiting and profuse sweating. 
Mr. Gracida reports decreased appetite and is examined by a reg istered nurse (RN) on August 12.
An RN examines Mr. Gracida for complaints of nausea/vomiting, upper abdominal pain, and 
bloating. 
Mr. Gracida reports a 10 out of 10 pain level,62 burning abdominal pain, and daily vomiting. 
Medical staff schedule laboratory tests which occur on October 11 and tell him to eat  
a bland diet.
Mr. Gracida complains of headache, nausea, and vomiting. He reports an eight-out-of-10 
pain level and that upper abdominal pain has kept him from sleeping for one month. An RN 
refers Mr. Gracida to a nurse practitioner (NP). 
Mr. Gracida reports that his nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea has subsided.
Mr. Gracida appears at the medical unit with shortness of breath and reports an increased 
level of pain during meals, pain while lying down, and difficulty sleeping. When the licensed 
practical nurse (LPN) asks the NP to see Mr. Gracida because of his shortness of breath, the 
NP refuses. The LPN seeks assistance from an RN.63 Later, Mr. Gracida refuses to receive his 
evening medications.
Mr. Gracida requests to discontinue his medications because they make him feel ill and 
dizzy, and give him heartburn. He again refuses to take his medication.
An RN examines Mr. Gracida and finds that he has an irregular heart rate, rapid respiratory 
rate, low blood pressure, and a weight gain of five pounds within six days. He complains 
of abdominal pain after taking his medications resulting in insomnia, poor appetite, and 
persistent weakness and dizziness. In addition, he discloses that he had a heart attack in 
2000. The NP conducts an electrocardiogram (EKG), which is abnormal. Instead of referring 
Mr. Gracida to higher-level care, the NP schedules a follow-up visit for the next day after his 
court hearing, noting that he would be referred to cardiology if he remained in custody.64
Mr. Gracida is unable to complete a sentence without stopping to breathe. He has a second 
abnormal EKG and the facility finally refers him to the Casa Grande Regional Medical Center 
(CGRMC) Emergency Room. CGRMC diagnoses Mr. Gracida with severe cardiomyopathy and 
possible pneumonia. 
A CGRMC doctor notes that Mr. Gracida is ailing from complex cardiac issues and 
recommends transfer to the University Medical Center in Tucson (UMC).
Mr. Gracida is admitted to UMC on October 28 and dies after transfer to the hospital’s 
intensive care unit on October 30. JUN. 10
JUL. 19
AUG. 10
OCT. 5
OCT. 8
OCT. 14
OCT. 18
OCT. 22
OCT. 23
OCT. 24
OCT. 25
OCT. 27
OCT. 28-30Fatal Timeline: Pablo Gracida-Conte12 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in DetentionAfter Mr. Gracida’s death, the ODO conducted a 
death review in December 2011 and concluded that:  
1. Eloy failed to provide medical care in accordance with 
PBNDS 2008. 
2. Eloy’s medical provider had failed to provide him with 
timely and efficient care. A doctor who participated  
in the ODO’s death review concluded that  
“[Mr.] Gracida’s death might have been prevented  
if the providers, including the physician at [Eloy],  
had provided the appropriate medical treatment  
in a timely manner.”65 
3. Eloy failed to send Mr. Gracida to the emergency room. 
In the ODO’s investigation, a doctor stated that Mr. 
Gracida’s condition on October 24 “should have been 
considered urgent, and he should have been referred to 
a cardiologist.”66 
4. Communication with Mr. Gracida happened only 
at a “very basic level.” Although Spanish-speaking 
staff documented that Mr. Gracida spoke “very little 
Spanish,” they never obtained a Mixteco interpreter.67
5. Language and cultural barriers were contributing 
factors in the failure to address Mr. Gracida’s medical 
needs. 
Despite these concerns, the ODO death investigator 
chose not to cite Eloy as non-compliant with ICE PBNDS 
standards related to interpretation assistance.68 In 
addition, the ODO investigation uncovered evidence that 
Eloy staff were well aware of Mr. Gracida’s deteriorating 
condition, revealing that a guard reported that Mr. Gracida 
had been vomiting after every meal.69 The ODO death 
investigator expressed concern that at the time of review, 
Eloy did not have a clinical director, noting that an Eloy 
doctor stated that the clinic is understaffed and she  
“badly needs help.”70 In its investigation, the ODO states 
that Eloy had been without a clinical director for four of 
the five years it had been open; however, in its 2012 facility 
inspection, the ODO states that Eloy opened in 1994.71 It 
is unclear how long the facility has been without a clinical 
director based on these documents.
Eloy passed its 2011 ERO and ODO inspections before Mr. 
Gracida’s death.72 Both the January 2012 ERO inspection and July 2012 ODO inspection mention his death, but do 
not identify any problems at Eloy. ODO inspectors claim 
that people at Eloy are seen for sick call in a timely manner 
and sick call slips are effectively and expediently triaged. 
They conclude that medical staffing is adequate; however, 
they also encourage Eloy to fill the clinical director position, 
which they claim had been vacant since May 2009, as soon 
as possible.73 This assertion contradicts the ODO’s state -
ment that Eloy had been without a clinical director for the 
past four years. Remarkably, the ODO inspection claims 
that Mr. Gracida’s death was the first death “to ever occur” 
at Eloy when, in fact, it was the 10th death at the facility.74 
Today, Eloy is known as the deadliest immigration deten -
tion center in the nation. Four years after Mr. Gracida’s 
death, the facility still does not have a doctor on staff.75 
Recent deaths at the facility led Rep. Raúl Grijalva (D-AZ) 
to write a letter to DHS Secretary Jeh Johnson express -
ing alarm and calling for greater transparency of facility 
operations.76 If ODO and ERO inspectors held Eloy to ICE 
detention standards for medical care, Mr. Gracida’s death 
and possibly four other deaths since 2011 could have been 
prevented.77
Photo: Diane Ovalle of PuenteRemarkably, the ODO inspection 
claims that Mr. Gracida’s death  
was the first death “to ever occur” 
at Eloy when, in fact, it was the 10th 
death at the facility.13 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in DetentionDeath #4:  
Anibal Ramirez-Ramirez
Age 35
Country of Origin El Salvador
Cause of DeathLiver failure following failure to communicate critically important information, 
inadequate medical screenings, and inexcusable delays in referral to higher-level care.
Date of Death October 2, 2011
Detention Standards PBNDS 2008
Non-Compliance with
Detention Standards for
Medical CareSection (II)(2):  Meet healthcare needs in a timely and efficient manner;
Section (II)(28) and (V)(B):  Clinical decisions are the sole province of the clinical medical 
authority and in no event should clinical decisions be made by 
non-clinicians;
Section (V)(I):  Assessment of pain required;
Section (V)(O):  Medical personnel must be immediately notified when 
emergency care may be required;
Section (V)(C):  Facilities required to develop written procedures governing 
management of administrative segregation units consistent 
with detention standards. 
Length of Detention 5 days (Mr. Ramirez-Ramirez was in ICE custody 2 days prior to his placement at ICAF) 
Detention Facility Immigration Centers of America – Farmville (ICAF), VA
Facility Operator Immigration Centers of America, LLC
Facility Contract Type IGSA
Failure to communicate critically important information, 
negligent medical screenings, and inexcusable delays in 
referral to higher-level care could have been contributing 
factors78 to Anibal Ramirez-Ramirez’s death at the age 
of 35. Originally from El Salvador, Mr. Ramirez-Ramirez 
passed away from liver failure on October 2, 2011, seven 
days after entering ICE custody and five days after being 
processed into the privately operated Immigration Centers 
of America in Farmville, Virginia (ICAF).79
The narrative of the last week of Mr. Ramirez-Ramirez’s 
life is a chronicle of medical symptoms ignored or 
misinterpreted as non-cooperative behavior. The Virginia 
state troopers who initially took Mr. Ramirez-Ramirez into 
custody,80 the magistrate before whom he appeared,81 
officers at the Prince William-Manassas Regional Adult 
Detention Center (PWMRAD),82 and the officers who 
transported Mr. Ramirez-Ramirez to ICAF83 all had evidence 
that something was very wrong. A state trooper report 
stated that Mr. Ramirez-Ramirez “dropped to the ground and picked himself up on several occasions” and vomited 
at least three times in the patrol car.84 While appearing 
before a magistrate, he defecated on himself and 
acted oddly enough that the judge made a note that he 
appeared ill.85 At PWMRAD, Mr. Ramirez-Ramirez defecated 
on himself again and facility staff had to support him to 
keep him from falling when being taken to the shower.86 
During his transfer to ICAF, a driver reported hearing 
Mr. Ramirez-Ramirez dry heaving, and Mr. Ramirez-
Ramirez repeatedly lay across the laps of other men being 
transferred.87 None of this was relayed to staff at ICAF, a 
failure which was then compounded by inadequate care 
upon arrival there. 
In its comprehensive review as part of the death review, 
ICE contractor Creative Corrections found that in addition 
to information about Mr. Ramirez-Ramirez’s vomiting, 
involuntary bowel movements, and extreme disorientation 
not being communicated upon transfer between facilities, 
the intake screening at ICAF was inadequate, and when 14 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in Detentionthe nurses checked on Mr. Ramirez-Ramirez, they failed to 
take his vital signs.88 They also concluded that the multiple 
delays in referring him to higher-level care may have 
contributed to Mr. Ramirez-Ramirez’s death,89 violating 
medical-care standards which require detainees’ medical 
needs to be met in a timely manner.90 
The ICE Health Services Corp (IHSC) investigation, also 
included in the death review, similarly lists several 
concerns about Mr. Ramirez-Ramirez’s time at ICAF, 
including that he was placed on suicide watch for non-
cooperative behavior during transfer early in the morning 
of September 29 but he was not scheduled to see a 
doctor until the afternoon of October 1,91 despite several 
nurses raising concerns, including one nurse reporting 
her belief that Mr. Ramirez-Ramirez’s behavior was not 
due to a “psychological issue but a medical issue.”92 IHSC 
investigators also note that he was monitored every two 
hours instead of every 15 minutes while on suicide watch.
Even more concerning, Creative Corrections inspectors 
document allegations that non-medical facility staff 
interfered with medical recommendations from nurses93 
violating standards which require clinical decisions to be 
the sole province of the clinical medical authority and 
never made by non-clinicians.94 On October 1, a nurse 
requested access to Mr. Ramirez-Ramirez’s cell in order to 
take his vital signs, but facility staff told her to wait since 
he was already scheduled to see a doctor 15 hours later.95 
When she insisted, she was told to take his vital signs 
through the slot in the solitary confinement cell door. She 
further insisted that he required a “higher level of medical 
care, including intravenous hydration and laboratory 
tests.”96 When she was finally allowed to take his vital signs, 
she discovered that he had a “perilously high” heart rate 
and recommended that he be transferred to emergency 
care. Instead, corrections staff decided to wait for the 
doctor’s appointment 14 hours later. Mr. Ramirez-Ramirez 
never made this appointment; three hours later nurses 
called 911 after finding him lying on the ground with blood 
coming out of his mouth.97
Ultimately, after being transferred to the community 
hospital and then quickly airlifted to a larger regional hospital, Mr. Ramirez-Ramirez died at 3:10 p.m., 10 
minutes after his scheduled appointment with a 
psychiatrist, who would have been the first doctor ever to 
see him at ICAF. 
The inspection which preceded Mr. Ramirez-Ramirez’s 
death indicates that ICE was aware of the problems 
at ICAF. The ODO’s April 2011 inspection found seven 
deficiencies, which included failing a mandatory 
component regarding staff responsiveness to medical 
emergencies.98 ICE has not made ERO inspections prior to 
Mr. Ramirez-Ramirez’s death publicly available; however, 
the October 2011 ERO inspection two days after  
Mr. Ramirez-Ramirez’s death concluded that the facility 
did not meet standards,99 though it did give ICAF a 
passing rating on its medical care. If these failings had 
been addressed during the six months between the ODO 
inspection and Mr. Ramirez-Ramirez’s death, then Mr. 
Ramirez-Ramirez would likely have received the care he 
critically needed in a timely manner. 
Photo: Diane Ovalle of Puente15 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in DetentionDeath #5:  
Irene Bamenga
Age 29
Country of Origin France
Cause of DeathMs. Bamenga died after being given the incorrect dosages of medication. Although the 
death certificate indicates that cardiomyopathy was the immediate cause of death, a 
doctor reviewing Ms. Bamenga’s death questioned this conclusion.
Date of Death July 27, 2011
Detention Standards NDS
Non-Compliance with
Detention Standards for
Medical CareSection (I):  Access to med ical services that promote detainee health and general 
well-being;
Section (III)(D):  all new arrivals shall receive tuberculosis screening;
Section (III)(F):  healthcare pro vider shall review request slips and determine when 
detainees will be seen.
Length of Detention 12 days
Detention Facility Albany County Corrections Facility, Albany, NY
Facility Operator Albany County Sheriff’s Office
Facility Contract Type USMS IGA
Ms. Bamenga’s case—which is currently the subject of 
a wrongful death lawsuit filed by her widower100 —is 
painfully straightforward. After only 12 days in ICE custody, 
the French citizen died after being given the incorrect 
dosages of medication. She passed away on July 27, 
2011,101 at the Albany Memorial Hospital in Albany, New 
York.102 The certificate of death lists the immediate cause 
of death as cardiomyopathy103 although the mortality 
review report conducted by a doctor104 as part of the death 
review questions this conclusion.105 The August 2011 death 
investigation following Ms. Bamenga’s death revealed 
“the [Allegany County Jail] (ACJ) and the [Albany County 
Correctional Facility] (ACCF) were not in compliance with 
the ICE NDS, Medical Care [Standard],”106 including specific 
complaints that the ACCF and ACJ “failed to dispense 
ordered medications, delayed in starting medications, 
failed to verify medications, and provided incorrect dosing 
of medications.”107
Ms. Bamenga was consecutively held at two different 
facilities— first at the ACJ in Belmont, New York, for five days 
and then ACCF in Albany, New York, for the remaining seven 
days. ODO identified substandard care in both facilities. Ms. Bamenga did not begin receiving medication at ACJ 
until her fourth day in detention.108 Despite Ms. Bamenga 
submitting two health-services request forms at ACCF in 
the days preceding her death,109 the ACCF medical staff 
did not take steps to address Ms. Bamenga’s concerns 
or deteriorating condition.110 The first request on July 25, 
2011, stated: “I am not being given the full dosage of my 
medications. Two of the six different meds are meant to 
be take [sic] twice a day and so far I have only be[en] given 
1 dosage in the morning.” The second request reported       
“[s]hortness of breath at night especially when laying down, 
palpitations when laying down. Dizziness upon standing up 
when palpitation and shortness of breath occur.” This was 
exacerbated by ACCF medical staff administering incorrect 
medicine dosages—both in missed and excessive dosages—
which contributed directly to Ms. Bamenga’s death.111 In 
fact, on the morning of July 27, 2011, before Ms. Bamenga 
was found unresponsive in her jail cell, an ACCF nurse 
practitioner gave Ms. Bamenga a physical assessment and 
found nothing wrong even though Ms. Bamenga insisted 
that she was receiving incorrect medicine dosages.112
Upon reviewing the symptoms noted in Ms. Bamenga’s 
medical file, a doctor participating in the death review 16 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in Detentionstates that Ms. Bamenga’s death could have resulted 
from a cardiac arrhythmia brought on by “digoxin toxicity 
and alterations in potassium levels” due to incorrectly 
prescribed high dosages of her medications.113 According 
to the doctor, “missed medication dosing as well as 
incorrect medication dosing were significant factors that 
contributed to the decompensation of [Ms. Bamenga’s] 
congestive heart failure.”114 Regardless, the doctor 
concludes that, even if “this patient’s death was indeed 
[caused by] cardiomyopathy due to congestive heart 
failure, then this death could have been prevented if the 
appropriate steps were taken to determine the severity 
of her congestive heart failure followed by an appropriate treatment plan to control her cardiac condition.”115
ERO and ODO inspections were not available for 
either facility around the time of Ms. Bamenga’s death. 
Administering untimely and incorrect dosages of 
medication, especially for life-threatening conditions like 
congestive heart failure, is an obvious violation of even  
the outdated detention standards that ICE applied to 
ACCF.116 Ms. Bamenga’s death is a clear failure by ACJ and 
ACCF medical staff to treat Ms. Bamenga’s worsening 
condition and to appropriately medicate her for a  
known medical condition.
Death #6:  
Fernando Dominguez-Valdivia117
Age 58
Country of Origin Mexico
Cause of DeathPneumonia, a preventable and treatable illness, following facility failures to perform 
proper physical examinations and provide timely and appropriate access to off-site 
treatments.
Date of Death March 4, 2012
Detention Standards PBNDS 2008
Non-Compliance with
Detention Standards for
Medical Care“Failure to perform proper physical examinations in response to symptoms and 
complaints, failure to pursue any records critical to continuity of care, and failure to 
facilitate timely and appropriate access to off-site treatments”118 (specific standards not 
cited within ODO inspection).
Length of Detention 82 days
Detention Facility Adelanto Detention Facility, Adelanto, CA
Facility Operator GEO Group
Facility Contract Type IGSA
Mr. Dominguez-Valdivia contracted pneumonia—a 
preventable and treatable illness—during his 82 days in 
immigration detention, but died from it after receiving 
what ODO described as an “unacceptable level of medical 
care.”119 He passed away on March 4, 2012, at the Victor 
Valley Community Hospital in Victorville, California. 
Originally from Mexico, Mr. Dominguez was 58 years old at 
the time and had been detained at the Adelanto Detention 
Facility (ADF) in Adelanto, California, since November 26, 2011. The autopsy report, according to the 2012 ERO 
inspection of ADF, lists the cause of death as “multi-organ 
failure due to sepsis, due to bronchopneumonia and 
chronic alcoholic liver disease.”120
In the three months leading up to his death, Mr. 
Dominguez-Valdivia was taken to the hospital twice with 
“complaints of dizziness.” He was subsequently given a 
“stress test and an echocardiogram” but there was “no 17 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in Detentiondefinitive diagnosis.”121 On the morning of February 16, 
2012, a nurse administering medications observed Mr. 
Dominguez in the housing unit. It is unclear what she 
observed, but Mr. Dominguez was taken to the medical 
department with complaints of “dizziness, tiredness and 
weakness.”122 He was later admitted to the emergency 
room at the Victor Valley Community Hospital where he died. 
According to the 2012 ODO inspection of ADF, a death 
review was conducted after Mr. Dominguez’s death. 
The death review is not publicly available; it was one of 
four that remained incomplete at the time of ACLU’s 
FOIA request. The ACLU submitted a follow-up request 
for these reviews, but ICE denied the organization’s 
request for expedited processing, claiming that there is 
no “urgency to inform your limited audience about past 
ICE actions” and that the information in Mr. Dominguez’ 
death review would not “have a bearing on immediate or 
resultant future situations.” Because it is not clear when 
ICE will produce the full death review, report authors 
have instead relied on a summary of the death review in 
the 2012 ODO inspection. The review found that ACF123 
medical staff failed to provide adequate health care to [Mr. 
Dominguez], and failed to comply with the requirements of the ICE PBNDS 2008. The death review disclosed several 
egregious errors committed by ACF medical staff in Mr. 
Dominguez’s case, including “failure to perform proper 
physical examinations in response to symptoms and 
complaints, failure to pursue any records critical to continuity 
of care, and failure to facilitate timely and appropriate 
access to off-site treatments.”124 The death review summary 
concludes that Mr. Dominguez’s death “could have been 
prevented and that [he] received an unacceptable level of 
medical care while detained at ACF.”125 
Despite this unambiguous finding of medical neglect by 
ODO, ADF passed its October 2012 ERO inspection later 
that year following Mr. Dominguez’s death. However, 
ADF had failed the 2011 ERO inspection prior to Mr. 
Dominguez’s death126 because of a deficient mandatory 
medical standard component. The component required 
health appraisals and physical examinations to be 
performed within 14 days of arrival, and review of 
25 medical records showed that this was not being 
done.127 The summary of Mr. Dominguez’s death review 
demonstrates that this and other fatal deficiencies 
persisted, making it even more troubling that ADF passed 
its 2012 inspection. 
Photo: Christina Fialho18 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in DetentionDeath #7:  
Victor Ramirez-Reyes
Age 56
Country of Origin Ecuador
Cause of DeathHeart disease after health care providers failed to monitor and control Mr. Ramirez’s 
blood pressure.
Date of Death September 26, 2011
Detention Standards PBNDS 2008
Non-Compliance with
Detention Standards for
Medical CareSection (V)(F):  Accountability for administering or distributing medications in a timely 
manner and according to licensed provider orders;
Section (II)(5):  Timely follow-up to healthcare requests
Length of Detention 20 days
Detention Facility Elizabeth Detention Center, Elizabeth, NJ
Facility Operator CCA
Facility Contract Type CDF
Victor Ramirez-Reyes died of heart disease—a treatable 
condition—after health care providers delivered grossly 
substandard care by failing to monitor and control Mr. 
Ramirez’s blood pressure. The 56-year-old Ecuadorian died 
on September 26, 2011, at Trinitas Hospital in Elizabeth, 
New Jersey, following 20 days in ICE custody at the CCA-run 
Elizabeth Detention Center in New Jersey. According to the 
New York State Medical Examiner, the immediate cause of 
death was hypertensive and atherosclerotic cardiovascular 
disease, or heart problems related to high blood pressure 
and plaque buildup of the arteries.128
 
Despite Mr. Ramirez’s disclosure at his initial interviews 
with ICE and subsequent interview with Elizabeth medical 
staff that he had a medical history of high blood pressure, 
medical staff did not properly monitor his vital signs to 
ensure his blood pressure was under control. Mr. Ramirez 
received double doses of his medications on a daily basis 
because medical staff did not follow proper protocols.129 A 
sick call slip submitted by Mr. Ramirez was not forwarded 
to medical staff scheduled to see him. Consequently, 
medical staff failed to address the symptoms documented 
on the slip, including trouble breathing.130 On the morning 
of Mr. Ramirez’s death, he collapsed after receiving his 
medication. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation and use of an automated external defibrillator machine did not begin 
until emergency medical technicians arrived approximately 
10 minutes later.131 A doctor declared Mr. Ramirez dead 
nearly an hour later, after he arrived at the hospital.
The ERO and ODO inspections after Mr. Ramirez’s death 
draw mutually inconsistent conclusions about the quality 
of care at Elizabeth. ERO’s October 2011 inspection 
occurred 22 days after Mr. Ramirez’s death. The inspection 
notes his death, but does not flag any areas of concern 
about the quality of medical care. In fact, the ERO 
inspectors found the facility in compliance with all 66 
medical standards reviewed. The inspectors note that the 
health services unit is “appropriately” staffed and provides 
coverage 24 hours a day, seven days a week.132 At the time 
of inspection, the facility was in the process of expanding, 
making it even more critical to identify and address 
existing deficiencies.133 It is troubling that Elizabeth’s 
November 2011 expansion was allowed to continue given 
Mr. Ramirez’s death and the clear failure to improve the 
quality of medical care.134Medical staff did not properly 
monitor Mr. Ramirez’s vital signs.19 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in Detention
Photo: American Friends Service Committee Immigrant Rights Program
In contrast, the January 2012 ODO inspection found 22 
deficiencies. Four of the deficiencies are for failure to meet 
PBNDS medical care standards related to inadequate 
medical staffing and failure to provide timely and 
appropriate medical care.135 ODO notes that staffing levels 
are “inadequate to address the health care needs of the 
detainee population” and that the staff vacancy rate is 
particularly concerning given that the facility does not have 
an on-site physician or weekend provider coverage.136 
The ODO inspection does not mention Mr. Ramirez’s 
death, but it does identify a case very similar to Mr. 
Ramirez’s in which an individual also reported a history of hypertension and was not given appropriate care. 
Although this second case occurred less than one month 
after Mr. Ramirez’s death, the facility made the same 
mistakes that led to Mr. Ramirez’s death. For instance, 
healthcare providers did not refer the individual to higher-
level care or to an external provider despite the person’s 
having a “dangerously” high blood pressure for more than 
24 hours.137 Although this second individual was released, 
it is deeply concerning that Elizabeth had not made 
changes to its medical procedures to address the flaws 
that led to Mr. Ramirez’s death. It is unclear whether ICE 
has addressed all medical-care deficiencies because ICE 
has not publicly released more recent inspections. 20 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in DetentionDeath #8:  
Mauro Rivera Romero
Age 43
Country of Origin El Salvador
Cause of DeathDisseminated cryptococcosis, an infection associated with immune-suppressed 
individuals, following inadequate medical screenings, failure to transfer critical medical 
information, and failure to timely address Mr. Rivera’s medical issues and refer him to a 
higher-level provider.
Date of Death October 5, 2011
Detention Standards PBNDS 2008
Non-Compliance with
Detention Standards for
Medical CareSection (II)(2):  Meet healthcare needs in a timely and efficient manner
Length of Detention 3 days 
Detention Facility El Paso Processing Center, El Paso, TX
Facility Operator ICE, Doyon-Akal JV oversees the detained population.138 
Facility Contract Type SPC
Negligent medical screening and failure to transfer critical 
medical information led to Mauro Rivera Romero’s death 
from an infection at the age of 43. Mr. Rivera, a Salvadoran 
citizen, died on October 5, 2011, at the Del Sol Medical 
Center in El Paso, Texas, following three days in detention 
at the El Paso Processing Center (EPC). The County of El 
Paso Office of the Medical Examiner found that the cause 
of death was disseminated cryptococcosis, an infection 
associated with immune-suppressed individuals.139
The ODO investigation of Mr. Rivera’s death found that 
medical personnel at EPC failed to review information 
in Mr. Rivera’s medical record, and should have referred 
Mr. Rivera to a higher-level medical care provider. The 
ODO also found that important medical information was 
not transferred from U.S. Border Patrol when Mr. Rivera 
was taken into ICE custody, and that EPC medical staff 
consistently failed to properly document his medical 
encounters.140 The ODO notes that Mr. Rivera’s death 
could have been prevented if he had accepted medical 
care from Border Patrol or disclosed earlier that he 
was HIV positive.141 However, individuals with HIV are 
typically hesitant to disclose their status due to the stigma 
associated with the disease. Though the ODO death review does not examine this possibility, a thorough and private 
screening process sensitive to this dynamic may have been 
able to induce Mr. Rivera to disclose his HIV status during 
his initial screening. Regardless, the ODO found that EPC 
failed to provide adequate care in several instances. [See 
timeline on the following page]
The ODO concluded that EPC failed to comply with PBNDS 
requiring healthcare needs to be met in a timely and 
efficient manner. Although the ODO does not cite failure 
to follow up with Mr. Rivera’s doctor following his October 
2 screening as a technical deficiency, it acknowledges 
that such lack of action compromised Mr. Rivera’s initial 
medical screening and missed “an opportunity to obtain 
more accurate medical history critical to his care.”142
The inspections process failed to meaningfully address 
inadequate medical care beforehand or account for 
failure to provide adequate care afterwards. For example, 
the 2010 ODO inspection cites interviews with people in 
detention who complained about the facility’s medical 
care, specifically that “the wait to receive medical care 
after submitting a sick call request is too long, that medical 
personnel complain about detainees having medical 21 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in Detentionproblems, and that there is a lack of attention 
to detainee complaints about pain.”143 The 
September 2011 ERO inspection gave EPC 
passing ratings on medical care, although it 
found one deficiency related to dental care.144 
EPC passed its September 2012 ERO 
inspection.145 Similar to the 2011 ERO 
inspection, it finds no deficiencies with 
EPC’s medical care. In addition to the ERO 
inspections, ODO inspected EPC in March 
2012 – just five months after Mr. Rivera’s 
death – but failed to mention his death 
in the report and did not identify any 
deficiencies with medical care. If ODO and 
ERO inspections properly documented and 
investigated medical care failures at detention 
facilities, Mr. Rivera’s death may well have 
been prevented.
Photo: Diane Ovalle of PuenteFatal Timeline: Mauro Rivera Romero
OCT. 1
OCT. 2
OCT. 3
OCT. 5OCT. 3-4Border Patrol apprehends Mr. Rivera aboard a 
Greyhound bus at a checkpoint in Texas. Mr. Rivera 
reports experiencing stomach pains and nausea 
and states that he had been diagnosed with a 
stomach infection and released from a hospital on 
Sept. 29. He declines Border Patrol medical care 
and is transferred to EPC.
Mr. Rivera discloses at his initial medical screening 
that he had been hospitalized in 2011for gastritis 
(related to stomach inflammation), but could not 
remember the medication he was prescribed for  
his condition. 
During Mr. Rivera’s first sick visit to the medical 
unit, a registered nurse (RN) finds that he has an 
elevated pulse of 129, but fails to refer Mr. Rivera 
for review by a higher-level provider.146 
Mr. Rivera submits written complaints on three 
separate occasions regarding his ailments, 
including abdominal discomfort and his inability to 
walk. Despite the seriousness of these complaints, 
approximately 24 hours pass between Mr. Rivera’s 
first complaint and when he was first seen  
for treatment.147
Mr. Rivera dies.22 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in Detention1. Immediately reduce immigration detention.
a. Release people with serious medical and mental 
health needs, particularly when individuals require 
higher-level care.
b. Immediately terminate contracts for facilities with 
repeated preventable deaths, such as the Eloy 
Detention Center in Arizona.
c. Shift current funding for detention to community-
based alternatives, which will allow people to seek 
medical attention and receive support from family, 
legal counsel, and community.
d. Apply current ICE detention standards to all 
facilities used by ICE and discontinue contracts 
where current standards are not being met. 
2. Improve delivery of medical care in detention.
a. Revise PBNDS 2011 to require that medical care 
providers be held responsible for meeting the 
health care needs of individuals in ICE custody  
as opposed to simply providing “access” to  
health care.
b. Revise PBNDS 2011 medical care standards to  
meet or exceed all analogous NCCHC standards  
for prison and jail health care.
c. End the use of private for-profit detention facilities 
and for-profit medical care sub-contractors. 
Instead, ensure that IHSC is the direct health care 
provider at all immigration detention facilities.
d. Remove IHSC from ICE supervision to maintain 
clinical independence and independent oversight.
e. Ensure all detention facilities have appropriate 
clinical staffing plans, and include whether or not 
positions are filled as a compliance component 
during ERO and ODO inspections. 3. Ensure inspections provide meaningful oversight.
a. Improve the inspections process by ensuring  
that inspections are more effectively used to hold 
facilities accountable, as set forth in the appendix.
b. Require ERO and ODO inspectors to read the death 
review documents for all deaths that have occurred 
at a given facility under inspection, and explicitly 
and publicly report on whether the issues raised  
in the death reviews have been addressed.
c. In response to each death where an ODO death 
review identifies violations of ICE standards, 
concludes the death was preventable, or identifies 
other areas of concern, require ERO and IHSC 
to develop a corrective action plan with clear 
deadlines to reduce the risk of future deaths or 
other significant events, and to provide those 
corrective action plans to ODO.
4. Increase transparency of inspections, deaths, and 
serious medical incidents in detention.
a. Make the inspections process more transparent 
by making ERO inspections, ODO inspections, and 
ODO death reviews available to the public within 
three months of being finalized, and by providing 
regular public and congressional reporting on the 
frequency and circumstances of sentinel events  
(as defined by the Joint Commission148) in detention.
b. Require ICE to publish all death reviews that occur, 
including by the Office of Inspector General and 
Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties.
c. Create an independent medical advisory committee 
to investigate deaths that occur in detention.Conclusion
Deaths in detention are the most egregious and permanent consequence of an unaccountable and negligent immigration 
detention system. DWN, NIJC, and ACLU’s review of deaths that occurred from 2010 to 2012 provide new evidence that ICE 
inspections fail to hold detention centers accountable. The difficulties that the ACLU has experienced in obtaining additional 
deaths reviews demonstrate that DHS’s culture of secrecy persists. Based on the findings in this report, the ACLU, DWN, and 
NIJC call on DHS and ICE to:23 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in DetentionIn addition to the recommendations provided in the conclusion, inspections recommendations from DWN and NIJC’s 
inspections report, Lives in Peril are included below, recognizing the need for meaningful, robust reforms to ICE’s  
inspections system:149
1. Increase Transparency and Oversight of the Inspections Process
a. Make ERO and ODO inspections available to the public in a timely manner. To date, ICE has released its inspections 
to the public only as a result of FOIA requests. FOIA requests are unnecessarily time-consuming and expensive 
obstacles to accessing information about how the federal government treats thousands of people in its custody and 
spends billions of taxpayer dollars. Instead, this information should be freely available.
b. Provide public reporting on suicide attempts, hunger strikes, work program stoppages, use of solitary confinement, 
use of force, and other significant events at detention centers.
c. Submit quarterly reporting to Congress on inspection and oversight activities of detention facilities, which should be 
made publicly available.
2. Improve the Quality of Inspections
a. Establish a DHS ombudsman outside of ICE to conduct unannounced inspections of immigration detention facilities 
at least once per year, with complete findings made available to the public. These third-party inspections should 
examine compliance with applicable detention standards and determine whether contracts will be renewed in 
accordance with congressional appropriations requirements.
b. Prohibit facilities from taking an “à la carte” approach to compliance and make all detention standards provisions 
mandatory during inspections. ICE must stop permitting some facilities to opt out of detention standards they have 
been contracted to apply. If a facility cannot abide by detention standards in their entirety then it should not be 
permitted to enter into or continue a contract with ICE.
c. Ensure that inspections involve more than checklists. Inspectors must rely on more than assurances by jail 
administrators of compliance with detention standards and instead seek and document proof of their effective 
implementation.
d. Engage detained immigrants during inspections, as well as other stakeholders such as legal service providers 
and those who regularly conduct visitation, in order to capture the range of concerns at a facility that may not be 
reported through formal institutional channels. Inspectors should document the content of those interviews.
3. Institute Consequences for Failed Inspections
a. Place detention facilities on probation and subject them to more intensive inspections after the first finding of 
substantial non-compliance.
b. Terminate contracts within 60 days for those facilities with repeat findings of substantial non-compliance, including 
inadequate or less than the equivalent median score in two consecutive inspections.Appendix24 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in Detention1. Nina Bernstein, “Officials Hid Truth of Immigrant Deaths in Jail,” The 
New York Times,  Jan. 9, 2010, available at: http://www.nytimes.
com/2010/01/10/us/10detain.html ; Dana Priest & Amy Goldstein, 
“System of Neglect,” The Washington Post , May 11, 2008, available at: 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/nation/specials/immigration/
cwc_d1p1.html . 
2. Id.
3. Detention Watch Network and National Immigrant Justice Center, Lives 
in Peril: How Ineffective Inspections Make ICE Complicit in Immigration 
Detention Abuse,  Oct. 2015, available at: http://immigrantjustice.org/
sites/immigrantjustice.org/files/THR-Inspections-FOIA-Report-October-
2015-FINAL.pdf  [hereinafter “Lives in Peril”].
4. The New York Times, In Custody Deaths,  available at: http://topics.
nytimes.com/top/reference/timestopics/subjects/i/immigration_
detention_us/incustody_deaths/index.html  (collecting reporting 
on deaths); Nina Bernstein, “U.S. to Reform Policy on Detention of 
Immigrants,” The New York Times , at A1, Aug. 5, 2009, available at: 
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/08/06/us/politics/06detain.html .
5. Since then, the ACLU has issued two FOIA requests seeking additional 
death reviews, including the four investigations that were still in 
progress at the time of the original FOIA request. ICE has not yet 
produced documents in response to either of the new FOIA requests, 
and responded to each by claiming, among other things, that the 
ACLU had not established “why you feel there is an urgency to 
inform your limited audience about past ICE actions [i.e., deaths in 
ICE custody],” concluding that the FOIA request would not make a 
“significant” contribution to public understanding of government 
operations or activities, and further concluding that the FOIA request 
was “primarily in the commercial interest” of the ACLU. The ACLU has 
filed an administrative appeal with the ICE Office of the Principal Legal 
Advisor and is awaiting the results of this appeal.
6. For more information about the creation of the ODO, see U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Written testimony of U.S. 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement Office of Detention Policy and 
Planning Assistant Director Kevin Landy for a House Committee on 
the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Immigration Policy and Enforcement 
hearing on Performance-Based National Detention Standards 
(PBNDS) 2011 (Mar. 27, 2012), available at: http://www.dhs.gov/
news/2012/03/27/written-testimony-us-immigration-and-customs-
enforcement-house-judiciary . 
7. U.S. Immigration & Customs Enforcement (ICE), 2011 Operations 
Manual ICE Performance-Based National Detention Standards,  
available at: https://www.ice.gov/detention-standards/2011 . 
8. ACLU, Written Statement of the American Civil Liberties Union, Holiday 
on ICE: The U.S. Department of Homeland Security’s New Immigration 
Detention Standards: Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Immigration Policy 
and Enforcement of the H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 112th Congress  
(Mar. 28, 2012), available at: https://www.aclu.org/files/assets/aclu_
detention_standards_hearing_statement_final_2.pdf .
9. Gov’t Accountability Office, Immigration Detention: Additional Actions 
Needed to Strengthen Management and Oversight of Facility Costs 
and Standards , at 30-32 (Oct. 10, 2014), available at: http://gao.gov/
assets/670/666467.pdf . 
10. DHS, Death Investigation for Irene Bamenga, Jan. 12, 2012 , available 
at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695498-Bamenga-
Irene.html#document/p21/a272801 , p. 21 [hereinafter “Bamenga”]; 
DHS, Death Investigation for Amra Miletic, Aug. 17, 2011, available at: 
https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695509-Miletic-Amra.
html #document/p29/a272804 , p. 29 [hereinafter “Miletic.”]11. National Immigrant Justice Center, Freedom of Information Act Litigation 
Reveals Systemic Lack of Accountability in Immigration Detention 
Contracting, Aug. 2015 , available at: http://immigrantjustice.org/sites/
immigrantjustice.org/files/images/NIJC%20Transparency%20and%20
Human%20Rights%20Project%20August%202015%20Report%20
FINAL3.pdf , p. 6.
12. Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2010, H.R. 
2892, P.L. 111-83, 111th Cong., available at: https://www.gpo.gov/
fdsys/pkg/PLAW-111publ83/pdf/PLAW-111publ83.pdf , p. 9. 
13. Megan Granski, Allen Keller & Homer Venters, Death Rates among 
Detained Immigrants in the United States,  International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health , Nov. 2015.
14. According to ICE’s 2016 list of deaths in custody, there were five 
suicides during the Obama Administration. The authors counted Jose 
Nelson Reyes-Zelaya’s July 2010 death as the sixth suicide because 
initial reports from ICE and news outlets indicate that the death was a 
suicide. The 2012 ICE list of deaths in custody indicates Mr. Reyes-
Zelaya’s death was due to asphyxia, but ICE changed the cause of 
death in more recent lists to “Cancer.” ICE, List of Deaths in ICE Custody: 
October 2003-January 25, 2016 , Accessed Jan. 26, 2016, available at: 
https://www.ice.gov/sites/default/files/documents/Report/2016/
DetaineeDeaths2003Jan2016.pdf  [hereinafter “ICE Deaths List 2016”]; 
ICE, List of Deaths in ICE Custody, October 2003-December 6, 2012 , 
available at: http://immigrantjustice.org/sites/immigrantjustice.org/
files/Detainee%20Deaths%20in%20ICE%20Custody%202003-2012.pdf ; 
Seth Freed Wessler, Salvadoran Man Commits Suicide in Immigration 
Detention, Colorlines,  Jul. 21, 2010, http://www.colorlines.com/articles/
salvadoran-man-commits-suicide-immigration-detention ; Man Held 
on Immigration Charges Dies in Orleans Prison, The Times-Picayne , Jul. 
18, 2010, available at: http://www.nola.com/crime/index.ssf/2010/07/
man_held_on_immigration_charge.html . 
15. Nina Bernstein, Officials Say Detainee Fatalities Were Missed, The 
New York Times , Aug. 17, 2009, available at: http://www.nytimes.
com/2009/08/18/us/18immig.html?_r=0  (describes Huluf Negusse’s 
death following a suicide attempt). 
16. Qi Gen Guo (died 2/23/2011, detained at Clinton County Correctional 
Facility, Pennsylvania): The ODO concluded that the facility was in 
compliance with ICE NDS; however, the ODO noted that the facility did 
not meet NDS standards related to intake screening, communication 
during medical evaluation and examinations, completion of thorough 
physical examination, medical visits in Special Management Unit, and 
documentation of refusal of medications. DHS, Death Investigation 
for Qi Gen Guo , Jun. 16, 2011, https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2698743-Guo-Qi-Gen.html , pp. 12-13. Jose Aguilar-
Espinoza (died 1/31/2011, detained at Theo Lacy Facility, California): 
The ODO found that the facility was not compliant with PBNDS on 
medical care, specifically the initial screening form was incomplete, 
consent forms were not adequately documented, and a physical 
exam was not completed. DHS, Death Investigation for Jose Aguilar-
Espinoza, Mar. 6, 2012 , available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2698802-Aguilar-Espinoza-Jose.html , pp. 11-12. Ricardo 
Rojas-Martinez (died 12/19/2011, detained at Houston Contract 
Detention Facility, Texas): The ODO identified issues with clinical 
processes that require improvement. DHS, Death Investigation for 
Ricardo Rojas-Martinez , Aug. 16, 2012, available at: https://www.
documentcloud.org/documents/2698740-Rojas-Martinez-Ricardo.
html , pp. 147-148.Endnotes25 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in Detention17. The Joint Commission, Sentinel Events Policy,  available at: http://www.
jointcommission.org/assets/1/6/CAMH_24_SE_all_CURRENT.pdf . 
18. DHS, Death Investigation for Miguel Angel Sarabia-Ortega,  Oct. 1, 2012, 
available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2698741-
Sarabia-Miguel.html#document/p8/a273595 , p. 8.
19. Shea Johnson, Wrongful Death Suit Headed to Mediation, Hesperia 
Star,  Dec. 1, 2014, available at: http://www.hesperiastar.com/
article/20141201/NEWS/141209983 ; Milton J. Valencia, Lawsuit Over 
Death of Lynn Woman Allowed to go to Jury,  The Boston Globe , Sept. 15, 
2015, available at: https://www.bostonglobe.com/metro/2015/09/15/
lawsuit-over-death-lynn-woman-who-was-detained-immigration-
violations-allowed-jury/CON7Q7jUPmHT12rDFBRTiO/story.html  
[hereinafter “Valencia”]; Roxana Orellana, Family of Woman Who Died in 
Jail Files Federal Lawsuit,  Salt Lake City Tribune , June 21, 2012, available 
at http://archive.sltrib.com/story.php?ref=/54350757 .
20. Two deaths occurred at: GEO Group-run detention centers: Adelanto 
Correctional Facility (IGSA) and Denver (CDF); two at Corrections 
Corporation of America (CCA)-run detention centers: Eloy Detention 
Center (IGSA) and Elizabeth Detention Center (CDF); one at a service 
processing center (SPC) operated by Doyon-Akal JV: El Paso SPC; and 
one at a facility operated by Immigration Centers of America, LLC: 
Immigration Centers of America - Farmville (IGSA).
21. Grassroots Leadership, Payoff: How Congress Ensures Private Prison 
Profit with an Immigrant Detention Quota,  Apr. 2015, available at: http://
grassrootsleadership.org/reports/payoff -how-congress-ensures-
private-prison-profit-immigrant-detention-quota#1 . 
22. ACLU, Warehoused and Forgotten: Immigrants Trapped in Our Shadow 
Private Prison System,  Jun. 2014, available at: https://www.aclu.org/
sites/default/files/assets/060614-aclu-car-reportonline.pdf ; Grassroots 
Leadership, The Dirty Thirty: Nothing to Celebrate About 30 Years of 
Corrections Corporation of America,  Jun. 2013, available at: http://
grassrootsleadership.org/sites/default/files/uploads/GRL_Dirty_
Thirty_formatted_for_web.pdf  ; Detention Watch Network & CIVIC, 
Abuse in Adelanto: An Investigation Into a California Town’s Immigration 
Jail, Oct. 2015, available at: http://www.detentionwatchnetwork.org/
sites/detentionwatchnetwork.org/files/civicdwn_adelanto_report.pdf ; 
Grassroots Leadership, For-Profit Family Detention: Meet the Private 
Prison Corporations Making Millions by Locking Up Refugee Families, 
Oct. 2014,  available at: http://grassrootsleadership.org/sites/default/
files/uploads/For-Profit%20Family%20Detention.pdf ; Civil Rights 
Division, U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Investigation of the Walnut Grove Youth 
Correctional Facility,  Mar. 20, 2012, available at: http://www.justice.
gov/sites/default/files/crt/legacy/2012/04/09/walnutgrovefl.pdf ; 
Inspector General, U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Audit of the Federal Bureau 
of Prisons Contract No. DJB1PC007 Awarded to Reeves County, Texas to 
Operate the Reeves County Detention Center I/II,Pecos, Texas,  Apr. 2015, 
available at: https://oig.justice.gov/reports/2015/a1515.pdf; Brendan 
Fischer , Violence, Abuse, and Death at For-Profit Prisons: A GEO Group 
Rap Sheet, PR Watch , Nov. 10, 2015, available at: http://www.prwatch.
org/news/2013/09/12255/violence-abuse-and-death-profit-prisons-
geo-group-rap-sheet ; Jerry Mitchell, Private Prisons Face Suits, Federal 
Probes, The Clarion-Ledger , Oct. 15, 2014, available at:  
http://www.clarionledger.com/story/news/2014/10/11/private-prisons-
face-suits-federal-probes/17122977 ;. 
23. DHS, Death Investigation for Evalin-Ali Mandza,  Oct. 2012, available 
at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695514-Mandza-
Evalin-Ali.html , pp. 153-164 (describes timeline of events) [hereinafter 
“Mandza.”]
24. Mandza, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695514-Mandza-Evalin-Ali.html#document/p156/a273085 , p. 156.
25. Non-compliance with ICE PBNDS, Medical Care, Section (II)(7); Mandza, 
available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695514-
Mandza-Evalin-Ali.html#document/p18/a273086 , p. 18.
26. Mandza, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695514-Mandza-Evalin-Ali.html#document/p156/
a273085 , p. 156.
27. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695514-
Mandza-Evalin-Ali.html#document/p19/a273177 , p. 19.
28. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695514-
Mandza-Evalin-Ali.html#document/p155/a273178 , p. 155.
29. Non-compliance with ICE PBNDS, Medical Care, Section (V)(O); Mandza, 
available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695514-
Mandza-Evalin-Ali.html#document/p12/a273179 , p. 12.
30. Mandza, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695514-Mandza-Evalin-Ali.html#document/p155/
a273196 , p. 155.
31. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695514-
Mandza-Evalin-Ali.html#document/p12/a273179 , p. 12.
32. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695514-
Mandza-Evalin-Ali.html#document/p19/a273180 , p. 19.
33. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695514-
Mandza-Evalin-Ali.html #document/p13/a273193 , p. 13.
34. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695514-
Mandza-Evalin-Ali.html#document/p16/a273194 , p. 16.
35. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695514-
Mandza-Evalin-Ali.html#document/p15/a273195 , p. 15.
36. 2012 Denver Contract Detention Facility ODO Inspection, availab le at: 
https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/1699764-denver-county-jail-
geo-group-2012-ero-inspection.html#document/p105/a271519 , p. 105.
37. Miletic, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695509-Miletic-Amra.html#document/p134/a273127 , 
p. 134 (State of Utah, Department of Health, Office of the Medical 
Examiner Report).
38. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695509-
Miletic-Amra.html#document/p26/a273128 , p. 26.
39. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695509-
Miletic-Amra.html#document/p27/a273129 , p. 27. 
40. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695509-
Miletic-Amra.html#document/p28/a273131 , p. 28.
41. Non-compliance with ICE NDS, Medical Care, section (III)(D), 
Medical Screening (New Arrivals); Miletic, available at: https://
www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695509-Miletic-Amra.
html#document/p149/a273141 , p. 149.
42. Miletic, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695509-Miletic-Amra.html , pp.75-77.
43. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695509-
Miletic-Amra.html #document/p9/a273145 , p. 9. 
44. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695509-
Miletic-Amra.html#document/p28/a273146 , p. 28.
45. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695509-
Miletic-Amra.html#document/p16/a273600 , p. 16. 
46. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695509-
Miletic-Amra.html#document/p22/a273147 , p. 22.
47. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695509-Miletic-Amra.html , pp. 148-149.
48. Non-compliance with ICE NDS, Medical Care, section (III)(D); Miletic, 
available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695509-
Miletic-Amra.html#document/p149/a273141 , p. 149.Endnotes cont.26 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in Detention49. Miletic, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695509-Miletic-Amra.html#document/p75 , p. 75.
50. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695509-Miletic-Amra.html , pp.150-151.
51. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695509-
Miletic-Amra.html#document/p151/a273152 , p. 151.
52. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695509-
Miletic-Amra.html#document/p153/a273156 , p. 153.
53. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695509-
Miletic-Amra.html#document/p154 , p. 154.
54. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695509-
Miletic-Amra.html#document/p154/a273159 , p. 154.
55. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695509-
Miletic-Amra.html#document/p162/a273603 , p. 162.
56. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695509-
Miletic-Amra.html#document/p162/a273164 , p. 162.
57. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695509-
Miletic-Amra.html#document/p176/a273170 , p. 176.
58. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695509-
Miletic-Amra.html#document/p177/a273171 , p. 177.
59. ICE Deaths List 2016.
60. DHS, Death Investigation for Pablo Gracida-Conte,  Aug. 15, 2012, 
available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695513-
Gracida-Conte-Pablo.html#document/p1/a272669 , p. 1 [hereinafter 
“Gracida.”]
61. Non-compliance with PBNDS 2008, Medical Care, section (II)(37) or 
section (V)(I), require translation assistance for non-English speaking 
detainees; Gracida, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695513-Gracida-Conte-Pablo.html#document/p14/
a272707 , p. 14.
62. Health professionals use this pain scale as a way to measure pain.  
Ten describes the worst pain the person has ever known.
63. Non-compliance with PBNDS 2008, Medical Care, section (II)(2) 
requiring that health care needs be met in a timely and efficient 
manner; Gracida, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695513-Gracida-Conte-Pablo.html#document/p13/
a272770 , p. 13.
64. Non-compliance with PBNDS 2008, Medical Care, section (II)(7), 
available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695513-
Gracida-Conte-Pablo.html#document/p13/a272773 , p. 13.
65. Gracida, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695513-Gracida-Conte-Pablo.html#document/p12/
a272776 , p. 12.
66. Non-compliance with PBNDS 2008, Medical Care, section (II)(7) 
requiring that “A detainee who needs health care beyond facility 
resources will be transferred in a timely manner to an appropriate 
facility where care is available.” Gracida, available at:  
https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695513-Gracida-Conte-
Pablo.html#document/p9/a272777 , p. 9.
67. Gracida, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695513-Gracida-Conte-Pablo.html#document/p6/
a272778 , p. 6; Gracida, available at: https://www.documentcloud.
org/documents/2695513-Gracida-Conte-Pablo.html#document/p14/
a272707 , p. 14.
68. Non-compliance with PBNDS 2008, Medical Care, section (II)(37) or 
section (V)(I), require translation assistance for non-English speaking 
detainees; Gracida, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695513-Gracida-Conte-Pablo.html#document/p14/
a272707 , p. 14.69. Gracida, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695513-Gracida-Conte-Pablo.html#document/p6/
a272760 , p. 6.
70. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695513-
Gracida-Conte-Pablo.html#document/p13/a272779 , p. 13.
71. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695513-Gracida-Conte-Pablo.html#document/p14/
a272780 , p. 14; 2012 Eloy Inspection, available at: https://www.
documentcloud.org/documents/2644422-Eloy.html , p. 1.
72. 2011 Eloy ODO Inspection, available at: https://www.documentcloud.
org/documents/1865603-eloy-az-2011-odo-inspection.html , p. 16.
73. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2644422-Eloy.html#document/p3/a266239 , p. 3.
74. 2012 Eloy ODO Inspection, available at: https://www.documentcloud.
org/documents/2644422-Eloy.html#document/p4/a266241 , p. 4; ICE 
Deaths List 2016. 
75. Megan Jula & Daniel González, Eloy Detention Center: Why so many 
suicides?, The Arizona Republic,  Jul. 29, 2015, available at: http://www.
azcentral.com/story/news/arizona/investigations/2015/07/28/eloy-
detention-center-immigrant-suicides/30760545  [hereinafter “Jula & 
González”].
76. Letter from Raúl Grijalva, Representative, Arizona’s 3rd District, to Jeh 
Johnson, Secretary, U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Jul. 14, 
2015, available at: http://grijalva.house.gov/uploads/2015_7_14EloyDe
tentionLetter.pdf ; Jula & González.
77. ICE Deaths List 2016.
78. DHS, Death Investigation for Anibal Ramirez-Ramirez,  May 31, 2012, 
available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695511-
Ramirez-Ramirez-Anibal.html#document/p26/a273198 , p. 26 
[hereinafter “Ramirez-Ramirez.”]
79. ICAF is owned by a group of investors and run by Immigration Centers 
of America, LLC.
80. Ramirez-Ramirez, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695511-Ramirez-Ramirez-Anibal.html , pp. 3-4 (describes 
apprehension of Mr. Ramirez-Ramirez by Virginia State Police).
81. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695511-
Ramirez-Ramirez-Anibal.html#document/p4/a5 , p. 4.
82. Ramirez-Ramirez, pp. 5-7 (describes interactions between PWMRADC 
staff and Mr. Ramirez-Ramirez).
83. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695511-Ramirez-Ramirez-Anibal.html#document/p10/
a273301 , pp. 10-11.
84. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695511-
Ramirez-Ramirez-Anibal.html#document/p3/a273307 , pp. 3-4.
85. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695511-
Ramirez-Ramirez-Anibal.html#document/p4/a273220 , p. 4.
86. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695511-
Ramirez-Ramirez-Anibal.html#document/p5/a273221 , p. 5.
87. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695511-
Ramirez-Ramirez-Anibal.html#document/p10/a273301 , pp. 10-11.
88. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695511-
Ramirez-Ramirez-Anibal.html#document/p119/a273314 , p. 119
89. Id., https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695511-Ramirez-
Ramirez-Anibal.html#document/p120/a273318 , p. 120.
90. Non-compliance with ICE PBNDS 2008 Medical Care, section (II)(2), 
Ramirez-Ramirez, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695511-Ramirez-Ramirez-Anibal.html#document/p27/
a273319 , pp. 27-28.Endnotes cont.27 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in Detention91. Ramirez-Ramirez, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695511-Ramirez-Ramirez-Anibal.html#document/p114/
a273320 , pp. 114-115.
92. Id., https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695511-Ramirez-
Ramirez-Anibal.html#document/p19/a273322 , p. 19.
93. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695511-
Ramirez-Ramirez-Anibal.html#document/p114/a273320 , pp. 114-115.
94. Non-compliance with ICE PBNDS, Medical Care, sections (II)(28) and (V)
(B), Ramirez-Ramirez, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695511-Ramirez-Ramirez-Anibal.html#document/p28/
a273327 , p. 28.
95. Ramirez-Ramirez, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695511-Ramirez-Ramirez-Anibal.html#document/p19/
a273322 , p. 19.
96. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695511-
Ramirez-Ramirez-Anibal.html#document/p19/a273333 , p. 19.
97. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695511-
Ramirez-Ramirez-Anibal.html#document/p21/a273334 , p. 21.
98. 2011 Immigration Center of America – Farmville (ICAF) ODO 
Inspection, available at: http://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2388774-ica-farmville-va-2011-odo-inspection.html  
99. 2011 ICAF ERO Inspection, available at: https://www.documentcloud.
org/documents/2388770-ica-farmville-va-2011-ero-inspection.
html#document/p166/a267849 , p. 166.
100.  Valencia. 
101.  Bamenga, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695498-Bamenga-Irene.html , pp. 14-15 (Although the 
Certificate of Death lists time of death at 1:17 a.m., the emergency 
room physician announced it at 1:15 a.m. as stated in ODO’s DDR 
narrative).
102.  Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695498-
Bamenga-Irene.html#document/p2/a273341 , pp. 1-2.
103. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695498-
Bamenga-Irene.html#document/p120/a273285 , p. 120 (Certificate of 
Death).
104. This doctor’s name was redacted under (b)(6), (b)(7)c exemptions.
105. Bamenga, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695498-Bamenga-Irene.html#document/p137/a273344 , 
pp. 136-138.
106.  Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695498-
Bamenga-Irene.html#document/p20/a272807 , p. 19; “INS Detention 
Standard, Medical Care,” available at:  
https://www.ice.gov/doclib/dro/detention-standards/pdf/medical.pdf .
107.  Bamenga, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695498-Bamenga-Irene.html#document/p20/a273346 , 
p. 20.
108.  Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695498-
Bamenga-Irene.html#document/p10/a273421 , p. 10.
109.  On July 25, 2011, Ms. Bamenga submitted two health services request 
forms. The first stated that, “I am not being given the full dosage 
of my medications. Two of the six different meds are meant to be 
take [sic] twice a day and so far I have only be given 1 dosage in the 
morning.” The second stated that the problem was “[s]hortness of 
breath at night especially when laying down, palpitations when laying 
down. Dizziness upon standing up when palpitation and shortness of 
breath occur.” Bamenga, available at: https://www.documentcloud.
org/documents/2695498-Bamenga-Irene.html#document/p77/
a273348 , p. 77; Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695498-Bamenga-Irene.html#document/p78/a273349 , 
p. 78.110.  Non-compliance with ICE NDS, Medical Care, section (III)(F), Sick 
Call; Bamenga, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695498-Bamenga-Irene.html#document/p131/a273422 , 
p. 131. 
111.  Non-compliance with ICE NDS, Medical Care, section (III)(I), Delivery 
of Medication; Bamenga, available at: https://www.documentcloud.
org/documents/2695498-Bamenga-Irene.html , pp. 127, 130-132; Id., 
available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695498-
Bamenga-Irene.html#document/p135 , p. 135. Id., available at:  
https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695498-Bamenga-
Irene.html#document/p139 , p. 139.
112.  Bamenga, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695498-Bamenga-Irene.html#document/p132/a273426 , 
p. 132.
113. The results of digoxin toxicity and alterations in potassium levels 
would not have been detectable in an autopsy. Regardless, results 
of the autopsy were withheld from DHS due to New York privacy 
laws. Bamenga, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695498-Bamenga-Irene.html#document/p138/
a273432 , p. 138; Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695498-Bamenga-Irene.html#document/p122 , p. 122.
114. Bamenga, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695498-Bamenga-Irene.html#document/p139/a273434 , 
p. 139.
115. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695498-
Bamenga-Irene.html#document/p139/a273436 , p. 139.
116.  Non-compliance with NDS, Medical Care, Section (I), Policy, indicates 
all detainees shall have access to medical services that promote 
detainee health and general well-being; Bamenga, available at: https://
www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695498-Bamenga-Irene.
html#document/p19/a273447 , p. 19.
117.  The results of Mr. Dominguez-Valdivia’s death review have not been 
released yet. The account of his death in this report is based on ODO 
inspection reports.
118.  2012 Adelanto ODO Inspection, available at: https://www.
documentcloud.org/documents/2644420-2012-09-18-Adelanto.
html#document/p4/a266231 , p. 4
119.  Mr. Dominguez-Valdivia arrived at ADF on November 26, 2011 and 
although the 2012 ERO inspection notes are vague, it is believed 
that he was transferred to the hospital on February 16, 2012; 
2012 Adelanto East ERO Inspection, available at: https://www.
documentcloud.org/documents/1692931-adelanto-east-2012-ero-
inspection.html#document/p110/a237926 , p. 111.
120.  2012 Adelanto East ERO Inspection, available at: https://www.
documentcloud.org/documents/1692931-adelanto-east-2012-ero-
inspection.html#document/p110/a237926 , p. 111.
121.  Id.
122.  Id.
123. The Adelanto Detention Facility (ADF) is also referred to as the 
Adelanto Correctional Facility (ACF).
124. 2012 Adelanto ODO Inspection, available at: https://www.
documentcloud.org/documents/2644420-2012-09-18-Adelanto.
html#document/p4/a266231 , p. 4.
125. Id.
126.  Although the facility was marked as not having met standards at the 
end of the review, this was changed to having met standards in the 
final memo to the Los Angeles Field Office Director. 2011 Adelanto 
East ERO Inspection, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/1692930-adelanto-2011-ero-inspection.html#document/
p161/a248078 , p. 161; Id, available at: https://www.documentcloud.Endnotes cont.28 Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in Detentionorg/documents/1692930-adelanto-2011-ero-inspection.
html#document/p162/a248079 , p. 162.
127.  2011 Adelanto East ERO Inspection, available at: https://www.
documentcloud.org/documents/1692930-adelanto-2011-ero-
inspection.html#document/p91/a248080 , p. 91.
128.  Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease was also listed as a 
contributing factor in Mr. Ramirez’s death, although it was not 
considered an underlying cause; DHS, Death Investigation for 
Victor Ramirez-Reyes, Feb. 29, 2012, available at: https://www.
documentcloud.org/documents/2695510-Ramirez-Reyes-Victor.
html#document/p1/a272787 , p. 1 [hereinafter “Ramirez-Reyes.”]
129.  Non-compliance with PBNDS, Medical Care, section (V)(F) which 
requires “[a]ccountability for administering or distributing medications 
in a timely manner and according to licensed provider orders;” 
Ramirez-Reyes, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695510-Ramirez-Reyes-Victor.html#document/p12/
a272788 , p. 12.
130. Non-compliance with PBNDS, Medical Care, section (II)(5), which 
requires timely follow-up to health care requests; Ramirez-Reyes, 
available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695510-
Ramirez-Reyes-Victor.html#document/p12/a272790 , p. 12.
131. ODO did not name these as deficiencies, but expressed concern 
that the staff nurse was unaware of 2010 guidelines for basic life 
support and failing to respond to the situation by using an AED 
machine; Ramirez-Reyes, available at: https://www.documentcloud.
org/documents/2695510-Ramirez-Reyes-Victor.html#document/p13/
a272792 , p. 13.
132. 2011 Elizabeth ERO Inspection, available at: https://www.
documentcloud.org/documents/1735436-elizabeth-nj-2011-ero-
inspection.html#document/p117/a267558 , p. 117. 
133. Id., available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/1735436-
elizabeth-nj-2011-ero-inspection.html#document/p117/a267555, p. 
117.
134. Id, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/1735436-
elizabeth-nj-2011-ero-inspection.html#document/p117/a267555 . 
135. 2012 Elizabeth ODO Inspection, available at: https://www.
documentcloud.org/documents/2647144-2012-ODO-Inspection-
Elizabeth-NJ.html#document/p20/a267550 . 
136. Id, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2647144-
2012-ODO-Inspection-Elizabeth-NJ.html#document/p5/a267552 . 
137. Id, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2647144-
2012-ODO-Inspection-Elizabeth-NJ.html#document/p19/a267551 . 
138. 2012 El Paso SPC ODO Inspection, available at: https://www.
documentcloud.org/documents/2644418-El-Paso-SPC-TX-2012-ODO-
Inspection.html .
139. DHS, Death Investigation for Mauro Rivera-Romero, 2011, available at: 
https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695515-Rivera-Romero-
Mauro.html#document/p4/a272643 , p.4 [hereinafter “Rivera.”]140. U.S. Border Patrol apprehended Mr. Rivera on October 1, 2011 at a 
checkpoint in Arizona. At the time, Mr. Rivera disclosed that he had 
recently been discharged from the Los Angeles County Medical Center 
in California and had been diagnosed with a stomach infection. In 
addition, he complained of stomach pains and nausea for which he 
refused medical attention. This is documented in his Form I-213, 
Record of Deportable/Inadmissible Alien; however, no documented 
proof exists demonstrating that this information was relayed to EPC 
upon his transfer on October 2 to await removal proceedings.
141. Rivera, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695515-Rivera-Romero-Mauro.html#document/p12/
a272698 , p. 13. 
142. Rivera, available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/2695515-Rivera-Romero-Mauro.html#document/p45/
a272664 , p. 45.
143. 2010 El Paso Service Processing Center ODO Inspection, available at: 
https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/1865586-el-paso-spc-tx-
2010-odo-inspection.html#document/p9/a263165 , p. 5.
144. 2011 El Paso Service Processing Center ERO Inspection, available at: 
https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/1865569-el-paso-spc-tx-
2011-ero-inspection.html#document/p83/a263156 , p. 83.
145. 2012 El Paso Service Processing Center ERO Inspection, available at: 
https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/1865570-el-paso-spc-tx-
2012-ero-inspection.html#document/p102/a263147 , p. 102.
146. Non-compliance with PBNDS, Medical Care, section (II)(2) requiring 
that health care needs be met in a timely and efficient manner; Rivera, 
available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695515-
Rivera-Romero-Mauro.html#document/p13/a272700 , p. 13.
147. Non-compliance with PBNDS, Medical Care, section (II)(2) requiring 
that health care needs be met in a timely and efficient manner; Rivera, 
available at: https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2695515-
Rivera-Romero-Mauro.html#document/p13/a272701 , p. 13.
148. The Joint Commission, Sentinel Events Policy, available at: http://
www.jointcommission.org/assets/1/6/CAMH_24_SE_all_CURRENT.
pdf (defining a sentinel event as a patient safety event, not primarily 
related to the natural course of the patient’s illness or underlying 
condition, that reaches a patient and results in death, permanent 
harm, severe temporary harm, or certain other specified harms).
149. Lives in Peril.Endnotes cont.