		
	The	Department	of	Justice	is	stepping	up	its	involvement	in	the	detention	and	deportation	machine.	On	March	30th,	Attorney	General	Sessions	announced	an	expansion	of	the	Institutional	Hearing	Program.	On	April	11,	he	announced	plans	to	devote	even	more	resources	to	criminally	prosecuting	people	for	immigration-related	offenses.	Both	are	part	of	a	larger	effort	to	criminalize	immigrants	and	the	fight	for	immigrant	rights—to	create	concrete	policies	to	match	Trump’s	nativist	anti-immigrant	rhetoric.		Increased	Prosecutions:	This	week,	AG	Sessions	directed	federal	prosecutors	to	“increase	[their]	efforts”	to	prosecute	people	for	several	categories	of	offenses	including:	harboring	and	transporting	immigrants,	improper	entry	and	re-entry,	identity	theft,	document	fraud	or	“assaulting,	resisting	or	impeding	officers”	doing	immigration	enforcement.		Things	to	know:		• This	is	on	top	of	already	astoundingly	high	numbers	of	prosecutions—in	2016,	52%	of	all	federal	criminal	prosecutions	were	for	immigration-related	offenses.	• Most	of	the	improper	entry	and	reentry	prosecutions	are	completely	devoid	of	due	process.	For	example,	in	Operation	Streamline,	people	appear	before	a	judge	as	a	group	without	a	chance	to	consult	with	an	attorney	ahead	of	time.		• “Border	Security”	goes	national:	Every	single	District,	regardless	of	its	proximity	to	an	actual	border,	is	directed	to	name	a	Border	Security	Coordinator	• The	specific	attention	on	“harboring	and	transporting	immigrants”,	and	on	“impeding”	officers	conducting	immigrant	enforcement	is	likely	meant	to	have	a	chilling	effect	on	growing	community	defense	efforts.		Institutional	Hearing	Program	(IHP):	IHP	moves	someone’s	removal	proceedings	forward	while	they	are	still	serving	a	criminal	sentence,	in	order	to	deport	them	more	quickly.	AG	Sessions	has	been	explicit	about	this;	he	does	not	describe	the	program	as	expediting	someone’s	immigration	proceedings,	but	rather	as	expediting	their	deportation.		Things	to	know:		• Many	people	processed	through	IHP	will	have	viable	claims	for	relief	from	deportation;	this	number	will	increase	as	more	and	more	people	(including	asylum-seekers)	serve	time	for	improper	entry.		• But	winning	the	relief	is,	by	design,	almost	impossible.	Only	9%	of	immigrants	in	IHP	had	legal	representation,	compared	to	37%	of	all	adults	facing	deportation.				• Transparency	is	going	to	be	an	even	bigger	problem	than	it	was	already.	So	far,	DOJ	has	refused	to	name	the	20	facilities	to	which	the	program	is	being	expanded.		How	increased	prosecutions	and	IHP	work	together:	In	order	to	justify	violent	and	unconstitutional	immigrant	enforcement	tactics,	suppress	dissent	and	score	political	points,	the	Trump	Administration	is	telling	the	American	public	that	immigrants	are	criminals.	Then,	they	are	pursuing	criminal	prosecutions	against	those	individuals	in	order	to	manufacture	statistics	out	of	thin	air	to	support	their	claims.	After	being	convicted	in	speedy,	due-process-free	proceedings,	immigrants	will	undergo	removal	proceedings	while	they	are	serving	their	criminal	sentence		through	IHP	in	order	to	meet	the	Administration’s	other	goal	of	deporting	as	many	people	as	quickly	as	possible.	In	this	way,	each	recent	DOJ	announcement	deepens	the	impact	of	the	other.	
