One  
Year  
Later
“ICE’s detention 
system is not a 
model of humane 
incarceration. 
It’s a ramshackle network of 
private and public lockups, 
prone to 
abuses and 
lacking legally 
enforceable 
standards for 
how detainees 
are treated.” 
The New York Times 
Editorial Board April 1, 2013
CLOSE EXPOSE
I. IntrOductIOn expOse and cLOse,  
One Year Later:  the absence of accountability in Immigration detention
While the debate over immigration reform 
rages in the halls of Congress, the moral and human rights crisis caused by the mass incarceration of immigrants has been largely ignored. Although it is commonly unknown, the United States has built and maintains the largest immigration detention infrastruc-ture in the world. In 2003 Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) declared its intention to round up all deportable individ-uals
1 and over the succeeding decade the 
annual number of immigrants detained and deported has climbed precipitously. Under President Obama the U.S. immigration system has taken a decidedly punitive turn, nearing two million deportations under his tenure while over 429,000 immigrants were detained in 2011 alone.
The U.S. has made detention mandatory for 
certain immigrants, requiring ICE to incar -
cerate them without a bond hearing or other opportunity to be considered for release. Mandatory detention has created a system so massive and mismanaged that ICE is incapable of overseeing it. Instead, ICE has resorted to outsourcing operations to pred-atory private prison companies and rural jails seeking to supplement their incomes. Since 2007 the detention system has oper -
ated on a congressionally mandated quota, which arbitrarily requires 34,000 people be detained daily. The bed quota has undoubt-edly led to prolonged detention for individu-als who could have been released. 
With a network of over 250 prisons oper -
ated by federal, state, and local govern-
ments, as well as by private corporations, the detention system exacts a grim emo-tional, physical and financial toll on immi-grant communities at taxpayers’ expense. Immigrants in detention are denied basic needs, such as contact with lawyers and loved ones, adequate food and hygiene, and access to fresh air and sunlight. They endure racial slurs and discriminatory treat-ment by prison staff. They are subject to sub-standard medical care and denial of specialty care, resulting in prolonged injury, sickness and/or death. 
There is no accountability for those who 
suffer needlessly behind bars. Immigrants in ICE custody are in civil detention, mean-ing that they are locked up to ensure their appearance at and compliance with immi-gration courts. Anyone who is a non-citizen 
November 2013
expOse & cLOse One Year Later  2 
Facilities ReFeReNceD iN the RepoR t
etowah county Detention center (alabama)
eloy Detention center (arizona)
pinal county adult Detention center (arizona)
adelanto Detention Facility (california)theo lacy Detention Facility (california)Baker county Facility (Florida)
Glades county Detention center (Florida)irwin county Detention center (Georgia)
stewart Detention center (Georgia)
tri-county Detention center (illinois)
henderson Detention Facility (Nevada)
hudson county correctional Facility (New Jersey)York county prison (pennsylvania)
polk county adult Detention center (t exas)can be detained, including asylum seekers, 
legal permanent residents, visa holders and undocumented immigrants. As immigrants continue to be heavily criminalized and profiled, even the pettiest of crimes, such as shoplifting or minor drug possession, can lead to detention and deportation, despite having already paid their debt to society.
In 2009 after extensive reports of abuses and 
deaths of immigrants in ICE custody, ICE announced ambitious plans for reform. Three years later Detention Watch Network (DWN) released its “Expose and Close” report, which documented abuses and inhumane conditions at ten immigrant detention facilities across the country, each of which is emblematic of the serious problems throughout the system. After the release of the “Expose and Close” report ICE responded by promising to send in assessment teams (including medical profes-sionals), which, to our knowledge, never hap-pened. Instead, ICE simply claimed that the 10 facilities in question were in compliance with appropriate standards. 
The following report documents the current 
state of the immigration detention system, which continues to be plagued by deaths and suicides, subpar medical and mental health expOse & cLOse One Year Later  3 
II. cOncernscare, inedible food, and arbitrary restrictions 
on visitation and access to legal resources. The information in this report is based on written and oral testimonies gathered over the last year by a number of non-profit organiza-tions, including through visits to the facilities and interviews with present and formerly detained individuals and detention staff.
dangerOus and sub-
standard MedIcaL and MentaL HeaLtH care
Access to medical and mental health care 
remains a serious—even life-threatening—concern at a number of detention facilities. In the last decade, there have been 141 deaths in immigration detention facilities.
2 There 
continue to be well-documented delays in accessing necessary specialty medical care, due to a lack of resources and delays in ICE approval of referrals to specialists. Many immigrants have suffered severe health con-sequences as a result of these practices. 
DWN members received numerous letters 
from immigrants detained at Irwin (GA), indi-cating serious grievances regarding lack of immediate and basic medical care. One immi-grant complained of worsening health with no assistance, “In July 2012, I fell off the bunk bed where I sleep here in the detention center, since then I have been very ill. I have a lump in my throat that is affecting different parts of my body… everyday my health worsens, and the pain is expanding to the rest of my body, I ask for medicine in my medical requests and they don’t assist me.” Another individual reported improper care due to punitive treatment and policies, “I got so alarmingly sick that I was transferred to a hospital with shackles on my hands and ankles. They even pulled my hair when I was taken to the hospital... The doctor asked ICE to take off my shackles so the doc-tor could check me better, but they refused to take them off.”
At Henderson (NV), detained immigrants 
conveyed similar problems with inadequate healthcare. One immigrant showed the inter -
viewer a protruding bump on his finger with a laceration stretching along his entire arm. The medical staff provided him only with Tylenol. Another detained immigrant was provided with common allergy medication after com-plaining of a throat ache, but was told by the nurse to consider removing his tonsils when he left the detention center. The allergy medi-cine did nothing to relieve his throat pain.
In other cases, immigrants in detention 
repeatedly demanded health services before any action was taken. For instance, an attor -
ney for an immigrant detained at Hudson (NJ) reported that her client had gastritis and was in severe pain from poor nutrition and the stress of being in detention. He repeat-edly asked detention staff to see a doctor and was ignored and given Gatorade instead. After multiple demands, he was finally seen by a doctor and given medication for his pain. At Polk (TX) several of the immigrants inter -
viewed were sick, waiting up to three days or more to receive medical attention. At this facility, as many as 24 men share the same small cell, leaving them vulnerable to con-tagious illnesses. At Glades (FL) immigrants have reported waiting weeks to see a doctor and that for almost every medical issue, they are only provided with Tylenol or ibuprofen. 
Immigrants interviewed at Henderson repeat-
edly reported significant delays in the wait time to see a doctor, with wait times lagging anywhere from three weeks to five months after putting in a request for an appointment. One individual stated, “People have to be very sick or almost to the point of passing 
“The entire month 
of March 2013 
I have been very ill. I have sent numerous requests to be seen by a doc-
tor and have not 
been seen. On March 15, 2013 I got paralysis on half of my face, on my neck and one of my arms. I also got a lump on my neck, and again I asked to be seen by a doc-tor and nothing. 
One morning 
I woke up with my face and arm swollen, and again the staff ignored my med-ical request.” 
Immigrant detained 
at Irwin County Detention Center
expOse & cLOse One Year Later  4 
out to get prompt attention.” Another com-
mon problem at Henderson was that detained immigrants could not obtain simple over-the-counter medication without seeing a doctor. Immigrants would be forced to purchase medication from the commissary, leaving indigent immigrants or those with rare access to the commissary to endure their illness until the doctor could finally see them.
At Etowah (AL) several individuals interviewed 
by the delegation reported that after the on-site physician referred them to a specialty provider, they were unable to receive timely specialty care because of significant delays in ICE approval of their referrals. One immigrant detained at Etowah for nearly a year reported that one of his eyes steadily became cloudier and began to block his vision. The medical staff assured him they would test it, but at the time of the delegation visit, he had yet to be seen because ICE had not yet approved the request to be seen by a specialist. Another immigrant stated that he was seen by three different doctors for a skin condition, and all recommended a referral to a dermatologist. ICE took another six months to approve the referral and schedule an appointment. 
Detained immigrants with mental disabilities 
are often ignored or subject to abuse. At Adelanto (CA) straitjackets and solitary con-finement were used to punish and deter immi-grants from reporting mental health issues. A staff psychiatrist for Adelanto reported that immigrants at risk for suicide were ordered to strip and placed in a suicide watch room. In his opinion, Adelanto was not adequately equipped to handle severe mental health cases, but his recommendation to refer those cases to a hospital was often trumped by a GEO Group staff member.
3 At least once, the 
explanation to the staff psychiatrist for deny-ing referrals was, “These people are just going to be deported and referral out is costly.” The GEO Group provides mental health services via videoconferencing to keep its costs for mental health care low. Immigrants in deten-immiGRatioN DeteNtioN statistics
Number of immigrants detained daily  34,000
Number of immigrants detained in 
Fiscal Year 2011 429,247
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of facilities 257
  
 
 
Cost of detention, yearly $1.84 billion
Average cost per day per bed $159 
  
  
Number of deaths  
in detention since 2003:141
Number of deaths  
in detention in 2013 to date:9
 Source: Department of Homeland SecurityexpOse & cLOse One Year Later  5 
tion are connected by video to a psychiatrist 
located outside the facility, sometimes even in another country. 
A doctor at the facility and visitors to Adelanto 
report that there is a relatively high turnover rate of medical staff at Adelanto. For 1,300 detained immigrants, there was only one psychiatric doctor. The GEO Group fired at least two psychiatrists and two medical directors in six months. When medical staff members were fired, they were notified in the morning and escorted off the property. Since these staff members were not replaced the day they were ordered to leave, Adelanto did not always have enough medical staff on duty, medication was not promptly made available, and medical orders were often processed incorrectly. The staff psychiatrist we inter -
viewed reported all of these problems to ICE pursuant to its Whistleblower Policy, but was never informed of the results of any subse-quent investigation. 
Lack of mental health care in detention has 
also been associated with suicide, most recently in the case of Tiombe Carlos, who was held at York (PA). Ms. Carlos was diag-nosed with paranoid schizophrenia at the age of 15. Physicians for Human Rights in 2011 confirmed the diagnosis while she was in detention and recommended intensive medical treatment. The group also suggested that Ms. Carlos be released into the care of her family.  In 2012, she underwent a psychi-atric evaluation that would have determined her continued detention. The findings of that evaluation were not received until 11 months after it was conducted. Her attorney and fam-ily persistently called on ICE to release her, yet ICE kept Ms. Carlos in detention, which her attorney described as “horrific, punitive, and inhumane.” ICE was well aware of her medi-cal needs, as documented in letters of appeal from her attorney and had ample authority to exercise discretion to release her. In October 2013, Ms. Carlos committed suicide after being held in detention for nearly three years. She was 35 years old. 
defIcIent access tO LegaL aId
Unlike in the criminal justice system immi-grants in detention are not guaranteed access to counsel. In fact, 84 percent of detained immigrants go through the immigration sys-tem without a lawyer
4, leaving them with little 
hope of a positive outcome. Most immigrants simply cannot afford to hire legal counsel and are therefore compelled to navigate compli-cated immigration laws by themselves to fight their case.
Numerous challenges to accessing legal aid 
were found in nearly every facility visited by advocates. While legal orientation programs provided by non-profits or pro bono law-yers are a tremendous help, many facili-ties, including Etowah (AL), Polk (TX), and Irwin (GA) continue to lack access to these services because of their remote locations and insufficient government funding. At Polk, almost none of the men recently visited had access to or knew how to access lawyers. Legal advocates at Tri-County (IL) report that immigrants detained continue to face difficulties in calling pro bono legal service providers and instead have been forced to use their own calling cards. The facility also continues to be unreliable in delivering faxes, which is a routine way for attorneys to com-municate with their clients. At Baker (FL), staff informed an attorney visiting a client “These men are 
being removed 
bunches at a 
time and I am 
almost certain 
that if they had 
attorneys to 
represent them, 
some or most of 
them would be 
able to remain 
in the United 
States with 
their beloved families.”
Immigrant detained 
at Theo-Lacy Detention FacilitysuiciDes iN DeteNtioN  
In 2013 to date nine immigrants 
have died in detention. At least three were suicides. In May at Eloy (AZ) a 
Corrections Corporation of America 
facility, two Guatemalan nationals, elsa Guadalupe-Gonzales, 24, and 
Jorge Garcia-mejia, 40, committed suicide within one week of each other. 
The facility has had nine other known 
fatalities since 2004 and was oper -
ating under outdated 2008 deten-tion standards. In October tiombe carlos, 35, committed suicide at York (PA) after being held in detention for 
nearly three years despite her well-
documented severe mental disability and repeated pleas by her lawyer for her release.expOse & cLOse One Year Later  6 
that all video visits and calls have the poten-
tial to be monitored, which is a tremendous violation of attorney-client privilege. 
ICE has created numerous technical and 
retaliatory hurdles for attorneys seeking to represent clients in detention facilities. Legal representatives have been told in at least three different states—California, Washing-ton, and Georgia—that they cannot visit with clients if they participate in vigils outside of detention facilities or do regular community visits. For example, in August 2013, a Califor -
nia attorney was prohibited from conducting a consultation with a prospective client at the Adelanto (CA) after she confirmed her partici-pation in a peaceful vigil outside the facility before her legal visit. Attorneys in other states have confirmed the existence of similar bar -
riers to meeting with clients, for instance at Hudson in New Jersey. 
For individuals who are unrepresented, 
adequate access to up-to-date legal materi-als is critical. At Baker (FL) individuals are allowed to use an outdated LexisNexis CD for case research, but the law library does not provide internet access to obtain cur -
rent resources. At Henderson (NV) women detained at the facility stated that they are allowed to use the law library from midnight to 7 a.m., but are generally taken to use the library around 3 a.m. This is in clear violation of an ICE standard that requires law library hours be scheduled such that they do not interfere with regularly scheduled activities—in this case, sleep. 
Widespread obstruction of legal paperwork 
is another serious problem. Officers at Tri-County (IL) have repeatedly failed to deliver or have lost paperwork. Similarly, at Henderson, one immigrant representing himself reported that his legal brief was lost instead of mailed by the authorities and that he had yet to receive an important status letter that he was told would be arriving from the immigration court three months earlier. Equally troubling are the reports that officers at Henderson tamper with legal mail, removing pages or mangling contents. 
IntentIOnaL IsOLatIOn frOM faMILY 
and cOMMunItY suppOrt
ICE continues to make it more and more dif-
ficult and costly for individuals in detention to have personal contact with their family and loved ones. Limited and/or impeded visita-tion is a continuing concern at all facilities. In many instances, immigrants are moved to detention facilities hundreds of miles away from their families and attorneys, making vis-
expOse & cLOse One Year Later  7 
its expensive, time-consuming, and extraor -
dinarily difficult. On the rare occasion that 
families can make the journey to visit their loved ones, many encounter no opportunity for in-person communication and are left with only video contact. 
It is disturbing and unacceptable that ICE 
continues to expand video “visitation.” This type of visitation policy fails to consider the often long drive and high gas expenses fami-lies incur to reach remote facilities like Etowah (AL) and Tri-County (IL), hoping to see their loved ones in person. At Etowah one immi-grant’s wife traveled a considerable distance, but the video was not working, so she had to leave without ever even seeing him on video. Additionally, video conferencing should not come at a significant cost to families or without the option to also have a contact, in-person visit. For example, Tri-County, which operates video conferencing similar to Skype, charges $.50 per minute and there is a $.50 processing fee for any purchase. These fees are exorbitant when compared to regular Skype rates: $.023 per minute or $2.99 for unlimited calls per month. It is apparent that detention centers are profiting from video conferencing rates, at the expense of immi-grant families.
We also continue to learn of inconsistent 
visiting schedules and misinformation regard-ing visitation policies. The staff at Polk (TX) claimed visitation hours had been increased, but signs on the outside of the facility did not show the updated times. Immigrants at Polk and Stewart (GA) also reported that there is no contact visitation or the ability to touch or hug their visitors. Instead, visits are conducted through a speaker system and Plexiglas. The ICE website for Adelanto (CA) lists incorrect visitation hours and no information regarding dress code. Families have reported driving for over three hours to be turned away for non-compliance—wearing a tank top—when there is no information regarding the dress code unless one actually enters the facility. In addi-tion, families and friends who visit on the east side of Adelanto are forced to wait outside in the desert, with no shade. Visitors report rude staff, denied visits, being given misinforma-tion, and cases in which GEO staff required “clearance” to visit, despite there being no official requirements. At Hudson (NJ) detained immigrants are limited to 30-minute visits and contact vis-its only on Saturday afternoons. Immigrants report that it is extremely difficult for their families to travel to Hudson. One detained man relayed to his attorney that detention officers delayed his U.S. citizen fiancée by 15 minutes, cutting the visit itself to 15 minutes. When his fiancée began crying and hugged him, the officers yelled at him, “Stop cry-ing! Stop hugging!” His fiancée had travelled for several hours from Queens, New York to Hudson to see her fiancé for a 15-minute visit and felt so traumatized from the harassment by the officers that she was discouraged from making another visit. The rest of his fam-ily is undocumented and was afraid to visit the detention facility. Immigrants detained at Hudson are also forced to undergo humiliat-ing strip searches after contact visits. For detained immigrants at Hudson who want to call their loved ones, the cost is $5 for less than a 10-minute phone call.
Finally, ICE continues to fail to abide by its 
own policies for requesting a facility tour and visitation. Cases have been documented in which ICE has denied entire groups of com-munity members from touring detention facilities and interviewing people in detention, even though visitors followed ICE’s policies. Additionally, at recent visits to a number of immigration detention facilities, including Irwin (GA) and Theo Lacy (CA), ICE failed to post the sign-up sheets for immigrants to sign up and talk to the delegations touring and visiting the facilities. Furthermore, ICE has tried to deter community groups from submitting a request to tour a detention facility by telling them that ICE will be releasing video tours of the facilities, which will take the place of in person tours.
ICE also arbitrarily suspended community 
visitation programs at Adelanto (CA) and two 
expOse & cLOse One Year Later  8 
other detention facilities in the Los Angeles 
area affiliated with Community Initiatives for Visiting Immigrants in Confinement (CIVIC) in July and August of 2013. This is not the first time that ICE and/or its contract facilities have denied visitation privileges to commu-nity members and family members who also monitor and advocate against the immigra-tion detention system. We also continue to be disturbed by the refusal of Theo Lacy (CA) to allow CIVIC and its members to start a con-sistent community visitation program.
MaggOt- and WOrM-Infested fOOd
ICE claims that detention facilities provide “healthy and palatable” meals, but testimo-nies of people in detention indicate that the food being served is anything but healthy or palatable. In facilities including Etowah (AL), Hudson (NJ), Baker (FL), Glades (FL), Irwin (GA), Polk (TX), Adelanto (CA), Stewart (GA) and Eloy (AZ), individuals continue to send complaints about the quality and quantity of food provided. They report lengthy periods between meals, small portions, and food quality so poor that worm- and maggot-infested food has been served.
At Etowah detained individuals almost univer -
sally complained that the food was served in 
insufficient quantities and that its quality was worse than at other facilities where they had previously been detained. One immigrant who has been in multiple facilities over a 20-month period described the food at Etowah as “the worst I’ve seen.” Another described it as “disgusting.” An immigrant who had been transferred to at least three facilities stated that he had “never experienced anything [as] degrading as the treatment here at Etowah” and remarked that dinner was served around 4:30 pm and breakfast was nearly 12 to 13 hours later, with meager portions. He pointed out that most people detained in the facility couldn’t afford extra food from the commis-sary and end up going to bed hungry. He also noted that Etowah, unlike other facilities, fails to provide a nightly snack for diabetic immigrants, instead forcing them to take insulin and pills on an empty stomach. Lend-ing credence to these complaints, the officer supervising the kitchen and his assistant gave inconsistent answers when asked how serv-ers ensure that each tray contains the portion listed in the printed menu. 
At Adelanto there have been complaints that 
the food served is spoiled and has worms and maggots in it. “The kitchen staff is care-less to say the least. We have been given in our food trays expired juices, apples with worms in them, Jell-O that tastes like soap, left overs cooked differently up to three times in one week, but the worst was on August 18, 2013, for dinner we were served ground turkey meat, but the meat was so 
“The vegetables 
they serve us 
here have worms 
in them, and the 
fruit is spoiled, 
the water has a 
bad smell and 
sometimes it 
comes out yel-
low and when we 
drink it it tastes 
like urine.”
Immigrant detained 
at Irwin County Detention CenteroutDooR RecReatioN
Access to outdoor recreation continues to be a serious problem at Etowah (AL), Adel-
anto (CA), Baker (FL), Irwin (GA), Polk (TX), Stewart (GA), and Hudson (NJ). Immigrants detained at Baker continue to have absolutely no access to the outdoors at any time. 
They are kept inside twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week. At Polk, there is no 
true access to outdoors or adequate recreation. The men are in their cells for up to 23 hours per day. They are denied access to outdoor recreation and only can use small “open-air” recreation rooms with table-tennis boards, three or four times a week. At Hudson, detained immigrants report there is still little recreation space and they are rarely 
allowed outside. Immigrants in Adelanto’s east facility do not get to go “outside” but 
have a small concrete opening between the buildings to conduct recreation. Although ICE had previously stated that ground would soon be broken on outdoor recreation facilities at both Etowah and Baker, this has never occurred. During a follow-up visit to Etowah, county officials confirmed that funds had not yet been allocated to construct such a facility.expOse & cLOse One Year Later  9 
badly spoiled, a very foul smell spread all 
over the dorm. It was so bad, some gagged at the smell, others almost threw up when they noticed maggots in the meat,” said an immigrant detained at Adelanto. At Irwin DWN members have received numerous grievances about food that is spoiled and water that tastes like urine. An immigrant detained at Irwin stated, “On March 29, 2013 I found worms in my food. I told the officials and they said I had to file a request for the kitchen. I don’t know how they can give us rotten food; I don’t think they would give this to animals.” At Glades immigrants have complained of bugs and roaches in their food trays. One individual at Glades even found a large stone in his dinner, which resulted in a broken tooth. 
Additionally, religious dietary restrictions are 
frequently not followed, particularly Halal and Kosher meals for detained individuals of the Muslim and Jewish faiths. Individuals also report that medical dietary issues are regularly ignored, leaving affected individuals to either go without a meal or eat food that may aggravate existing health conditions.
sOLItarY cOnfIneMent
Immigrants in solitary confinement are in physical and social isolation in an enclosed space for approximately 22 to 24 hours a day, with little or no human contact. At Etowah (AL), for example, the segregation unit con-sists of 12 cells with steel doors, with a tray slot and a small glass window looking into the unit.  The “recreation area” for immigrants in solitary confinement consists of a small, low-ceilinged room in which the only access to outside light or air is a 3'x5' grille-covered window.
In 2012, 300 people on average were held in 
solitary confinement in detention per day, 11 percent of whom had mental health issues.
6 
The United Nations Special Rapporteur on Torture has stated that solitary confinement of 15 days or more can amount to torture, “Considering  
the severe  
mental pain  
or suffering 
solitary 
confinement 
may cause . . . 
it can amount 
to torture or 
cruel, inhuman 
or degrading 
treatment or 
punishment.” 
Juan E. Méndez, 
United Nations Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, August 2011
5DiscRimiNatoRY tReatmeNt BY DeteNtioN staFF
Cultural competency and treatment by detention staff continues to be an issue. At 
Hudson (NJ) non-English speakers are frequently alienated. With English speakers 
staff appears to take claims or requests more seriously. When non-English speakers 
attempt to communicate in limited English, they are often ignored. One immigrant who asked whether they can get married inside the prison was told no by three officers, even though ICE has a procedure to make such a request. At Henderson (NV), immigrants in the facility shared that non-English speakers are yelled at more frequently and placed into solitary confinement because they cannot understand the officers and thus fail 
to follow instructions. At Adelanto (CA) there have been reports of fights and verbal 
abuse by guards and detained immigrants are given dull and reused razors that lead to cuts. A woman detained at Irwin (GA) relayed, “The day we arrived at [the facility] they had us without clothes, naked for two days, officials would enter the room and they would laugh at us.”
expOse & cLOse One Year Later  10 
due to the risk of permanent psychologi-
cal damage from such extended periods of isolation. On September 4, 2013—after years of NGO opposition to the practice and fol-lowing recent media coverage and Congres-sional attention to the issue—ICE issued policy guidelines regarding its use of solitary confinement, promising more oversight. The policy creates mechanisms for centrally tracking the use of solitary confinement across ICE’s detention system, discourages extended solitary confinement, and requires heightened justifications for placing vulnerable individuals in solitary confinement. However, this measure is not in line with UN guidance or the standards in the proposed Senate immigration bill (S. 744) passed this summer. The policy does not prohibit the use of solitary confinement, nor does it set specific limits on the length of solitary confinement, even for individuals with mental illnesses, who are the most harmed by long periods of segregation. Despite the heightened justifications men-tioned above, the new guidelines continue to allow the alarming use of solitary confinement as a kind of “protective custody” for vulner -
able individuals (such as victims of sexual assault, gay, lesbian, or transgender immi-grants, elderly individuals, pregnant or nursing women, and individuals with mental illness or those at risk of suicide). Moreover, the guide-lines are not legally enforceable and do not provide for effective remedial action against facilities that violate them.
We continue to learn of individuals spending 
significant periods in solitary confinement, sometimes for “disciplinary” reasons and sometimes as retaliation for complaints they filed against officers or reporting detention center conditions. One immigrant interviewed at Etowah told a delegate that he spent more than 20 days in segregation for yelling at a guard who refused to allow him to see his wife, after she spent hundreds of dollars and 15 hours traveling to visit him in deten-tion. Another man detained at Etowah, who was diagnosed as schizophrenic, reported being held in solitary confinement for mul-tiple three-day stints as an attempt to contain the “disruptive outbursts” that resulted from denial of his medication. A father of three at the same facility, who broke down into tears during his interview, described how he was put into solitary confinement after he went on hunger strike to protest the injustice of his incarceration. After he developed gastroin-testinal bleeding, the jail staff told him that he would not be released from solitary and that he would be denied medical care unless he agreed to end his hunger strike. 
Immigrants subject to solitary confinement 
suffer punishment beyond isolation; they lose access to lawyers, phones and out-door recreation time. At Hudson (NJ), an attorney reported that her client was put in solitary confinement for two days because he requested to finish a cup of coffee when the guard ordered him to go to bed at 10 p.m. Her client was given a “ticket” that stated he assaulted the guard because he refused to lie down on his bed and wanted to finish his coffee. His calling and visitation privileges were also taken away, and he was not able to communicate with his family. At Pinal (AZ), an immigrant was sent to soli-tary for nearly three months after allegedly arguing with a guard. Officers at the facility denied his request for a video review of the situation before sentencing him to solitary confinement.
7 An immigrant detained at York 
(PA) stated that people in solitary have no access to recreation, can only shower every other day, and can only use the law library extremely early in the morning. Immigrants in solitary are also prohibited from making phone calls unless they have been subject to isolation for more than 30 days. 
The use of solitary confinement isolates 
immigrants and, in many cases, encourages them to give up on their legal cases, forgoing claims for asylum or other relief. Immigrants in solitary face a terrible dilemma: to continue to endure torture in the form of solitary confine-ment or to accept deportation, tearing them away from their families and livelihoods.
expOse & cLOse One Year Later  11 
In February 2013  
over 2,000 immi-
grants were released 
from detention centers across the country during sequestration. This action by ICE confirms the arbitrary nature of immigration detention and raises the question of whether detention should be used at all. While the express purpose of detention is to ensure immigrants appear at immigration hearings, the system has instead become a harsh and punitive limbo for immigrants who are in the process of determining their status. 
The U.S. government should move towards 
permanently terminating its immigration detention system. ICE can and must take the following immediate steps: uTerminate contracts with the facilities highlighted in this report and with all other facilities that do not comply with ICE’s current detention standards. 
 uEnd the use of solitary confinement.
 uRelease all individuals that are not required to be in custody by law.
 uRelease mandatorily detained immigrants into more humane community-based alternative programs.
 uSuspend all detentions until the passage of meaningful immigration reform. 
 uUrge Congress to prioritize eliminating the detention bed quota and repealing mandatory detention.
III. recOMMendatIOns
Photo: Kung LiexpOse & cLOse One Year Later  12 
IV. cOncLusIOn
Except where a publication is cited, the information reported here is based solely on claims made by detained individuals without 
independent corroboration.ENDNOTES
1 U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, ENDGAME, Office of Detention and 
Removal Strategic Plan, 2003—2012: Detention and Removal Strategy for a Secure Homeland, August 2003.
2 Division of Immigration Health Services, Lists of Deaths in ICE Custody, October 2003 - November 8, 2010. Supplemented by more 
current documentation on file with DWN.
3 The GEO Group is a private prison company headquartered in Boca Raton, FL. 
4  Mark Noferi, “Immigrants Who Are Detained Should Have the Right to a Lawyer,” Slate, 15 May 2013. Available at: http://www.slate.
com/articles/news_and_politics/jurisprudence/2013/05/the_immigration_bill_should_include_the_right_to_a_lawyer.html
5 U.N. General Assembly, Interim report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on torture and other cruel, inhuman or 
degrading treatment or punishment, August 2011.
6 Ian Urbina and Catherine Rentz, “Immigrants Held In Solitary Confinement,” New York Times, 23 March 2013. Available at: http://
www.nytimes.com/2013/03/24/us/immigrants-held-in-solitary-cells-often-for-weeks.html
7 Ibid.to read last year's report, please go to detentionwatchnetwork.org/exposeandcloseOne year after the original Expose and Close report, ICE has 
yet to enact meaningful reform. Instead, the system has only grown larger while conditions of confinement have continued to deterio-rate. The abuses and human rights violations occurring in detention are a moral stain on the United States and ICE. We therefore call on ICE, the Obama administration and Congress to imple-ment the recommen-dations offered here in order to rectify this situation and to begin to alleviate the needless suffering caused by the immigration detention system.
Photo: Stephen Pavey