A TOXIC RELATIONSHIP:
PRIVATE PRISONS AND 
U.S. IMMIGRATION 
DETENTIONA Toxic Relationship: Private Prisons and U.S. Immigration Detention1ACKNOWLEGEMENTS
The primary author of this report was Mary Small, 
with staff contributions by Dawy Rkasnuam and 
Silky Shah.
About Detention Watch Network
Detention Watch Network (DWN) is a national 
coalition of organizations and individuals 
working to expose and challenge the injustices 
of the United States’ immigration detention and 
deportation system and advocate for profound 
change that promotes the rights and dignity of 
all persons. Founded in 1997 by immigrant rights 
groups, DWN brings together advocates to unify 
strategy and build partnerships on a local and 
national level to end immigration detention. 
Visit detentionwatchnetwork.org
Design by: Maria C. Schultz
Translation by: Eleana Gómez
Cover Image by: Steve Pavey 
© December 2016 Detention Watch NetworkA Toxic Relationship: Private Prisons and U.S. Immigration Detention2INTRODUCTION
The U.S. immigration detention system is the 
largest in the world, with Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement (ICE) under the Department 
of Homeland Security (DHS) holding hundreds 
of thousands of people each year in a sprawling 
network of over 200 detention facilities. However, 
in addition to being remarkable for its size, the 
U.S. immigration detention system is an outlier 
for the degree to which it has been privatized. As 
of August 2016, 73 percent of immigrants held in 
ICE custody were in facilities operated by private 
prison companies,1 and the remaining facilities 
often contract with other private companies for 
services such as food, guards, and even medical 
care. The relationship between ICE and private 
contractors has been disastrous for immigrants, 
as well as for American taxpayers, who pay more 
than $2 billion each year to maintain the detention 
system.2  Although a lack of due process, 
inhumane and sometimes fatally inadequate 
conditions, and a woeful lack of both oversight 
and transparency are endemic to the entire 
system, privatization has exacerbated each of 
these problems.
The immigration detention system has not been 
alone in exploring partnerships with private 
prison companies. In 1996 the Bureau of Prisons 
under the Department of Justice (DOJ) also 
began contracting with private prison companies, 
specifically specifically Corrections Corporation 
of America (CCA) who are currently attempting 
a re-brand to CoreCivic, The GEO Group, Inc. 
(GEO) and Management and Training Corporation 
(MTC), to run a network of segregated immigrant-
only prisons that eventually grew to include 13 
facilities in seven states.3  However, in August 2016, 
the DOJ announced that it would begin phasing 
out these contracts and ending its reliance on 
privately-run prisons.4  The announcement was the combined result of a decrease in the number 
of people incarcerated in federal facilities, a 
critical report by the DOJ Office of Inspector 
General,5 damning investigative reporting on 
deaths as the result of medical neglect and other 
serious deficiencies,6  years of careful research 
and advocacy by non-profit organizations,7  
and organizing and resistance by the people 
incarcerated in the facilities.8  
In the aftermath of this announcement, the 
spotlight quickly turned on ICE, which contracts 
with the exact same companies, as well as a few 
other smaller ones, to run the vast majority of its 
detention centers. In fact, ICE’s entanglement 
is even more convoluted; while ICE contracts 
directly with private prison companies for some 
detention facilities, many are sub-contracted 
to a private prison company through a local 
government acting as a contracting middleman. 
Not surprisingly, whether directly or indirectly 
contracted, nearly identical complaints have been 
lodged against these companies’ facilities within 
the immigration detention system, including fatal 
medical neglect, abusive solitary confinement, 
and other misconduct and mismanagement. 
In the wake of the DOJ announcement, it was 
clear that DHS should promptly follow DOJ’s 
lead in disentangling itself from its private prison 
contractors. On August 29, 2016, DHS Secretary 
Jeh Johnson announced that a subcommittee of 
the Homeland Security Advisory Council (HSAC 
Subcommittee) had been tasked with reviewing 
whether DHS should also begin severing ties with 
private prison companies, with the final report due 
by November 30, 2016.9
In response, Detention Watch Network (DWN), 
along with many other organizations and people 
directly affected by the current immigration 
detention regime, submitted a mountain of A Toxic Relationship: Private Prisons and U.S. Immigration Detention3evidence about the problems with a detention 
system driven by profiteering to the HSAC 
Subcommittee. This report seeks to synthesize 
and make public that information. The report 
details four fundamental problems with the use 
of privately-run detention centers, as our research 
indicates that private contractors: 
• Seek to maximize profits by cutting costs −and 
subsequently critical services −at the expense of 
people’s health, safety, and overall well-being;
• Are not accountable, and often do not bear any 
consequences when they fail to meet the terms 
of their contracts;
• Exert undue influence over government 
officials, and push to maintain and expand the 
immigration detention system;
• Are not transparent, and in fact, fight hard 
to obscure the details of their contracts and 
operations from the American public. 
The privatization of immigration detention 
creates perverse incentives for incarceration. 
DHS must take steps to end all profiteering in the 
immigration detention system by reducing reliance 
on immigration detention and ending direct and 
indirect contracts with private companies. 
Specifically, DHS should :
1. Immediately cease its current expansion of the 
immigration detention system. ICE must not 
sign any new contracts, including with private 
prison companies; 
2. Decline to award any contract renewals or 
rebids for existing facilities to private detention 
operators;
3. Immediately modify all contracts without end 
dates to include an end date no later than one 
year after modification;
4. Not replace phased out contracts with 
additional county jail contracts, but rather take immediate and aggressive action to reduce 
the number of people held in immigration 
detention. DHS should start by ending 
family detention; ending the detention of 
asylum-seekers, providing a bond hearing 
for all detained individuals, and narrowing its 
interpretation of mandatory detention.10  
INHUMANE CONDITIONS
Detention Watch Network, in collaboration with 
the American Immigration Lawyers Association, 
the CARA Family Detention Pro Bono Project, 
Community Initiatives for Visiting Immigrants in 
Confinement (CIVIC), Grassroots Leadership, and 
the National Immigrant Justice Center submitted 
declarations and complaints reflecting the 
experiences of 42 individuals who were or are held 
in privately run detention facilities to the HSAC 
Subcommittee.11  The experiences of these 42 
individuals are a small sample of the egregious 
conditions and violations that we hear about 
regularly, but powerfully illustrate the degree to 
which private prison contractors fail to ensure 
the safety and dignity of the immigrants held in 
their facilities. Key themes from their testimonies 
include inadequate medical care, mistreatment 
and abuse in its many forms, poor quality of food 
and sanitation, language access concerns, and 
lack of accountability for problems at the facilities.
Of the 42 individuals represented in these 
declarations, 76 percent expressed complaints 
regarding medical care. Several of these 
complaints involved extensive delays in being 
seen by the medical unit. Another frequent 
complaint was being told to drink water to treat 
various medical conditions, including earaches, 
knee pain, post-surgery fever and vomiting, and 
a broken finger. Multiple complaints involved 
basic medical incompetence, such as an individual 
detained at the CCA-operated Otay Mesa 
Detention Facility in San Diego, CA who stated A Toxic Relationship: Private Prisons and U.S. Immigration Detention4that the facility mixed up his medicine with 
the medication of someone else with a similar 
name at least six times.12  Another individual was 
told to submit a request—which routinely took 
two days for processing—in order to request a 
bandage for an open burn wound.13  A woman 
detained at CCA’s South Texas Family Residential 
Center in Dilley, TX stated that two medical 
personnel pricked her with a needle seven times 
in an attempt to provide her with intravenous 
fluids and laughed each time they were unable 
to locate a vein, despite her crying out in pain. 
Though they finally inserted a tube after finding 
a vein in her other hand, an Emergency Medical 
Technician later removed the tube and showed 
her that the needle was bent, and that the medical 
personnel did not know how to insert the tube.14  
At least one complaint points to the potentially 
fatal consequences of inadequate medical care, 
including an individual detained at the GEO-
operated Adelanto Detention Facility in Adelanto, 
CA who reported that facility staff refused to transfer her to the hospital after she experienced 
heart-related symptoms that caused her to lose 
consciousness.15 
The frequency and consistency of medical 
complaints are particularly alarming in light of 
evidence that failures to refer individuals to higher 
level care contributed to multiple recent deaths in 
detention.16  Among these are: Evalin-Ali Mandza 
who died after staff at a GEO facility in Colorado 
waited nearly an hour to call 911 after he began 
experiencing chest pain17 and Manuel Cota-
Domingo who died after an eight hour delay in 
transferring him to the emergency room by staff at 
CCA’s Eloy facility in Arizona.18 
These findings are further echoed in a new 
report about detention in the Deep South, which 
included interviews with immigrants detained at 
three privately-run detention facilities, including 
the LaSalle Detention Facility where three people 
died in the first half of 2016.19  Interviews from 
photo: Steve PaveyA Toxic Relationship: Private Prisons and U.S. Immigration Detention5all three facilities uncovered significant and life-
threatening delays or denials of medical and 
mental health care.20  Providing further clarity 
about potentially fatal indifference at LaSalle, an 
interviewee reported that “one detainee tried to 
hang himself in the dorm. The code was called but 
no administrators came.”21
Thirty-one percent of the individuals represented 
in the declarations submitted to the HSAC 
Subcommittee reported mistreatment and abuse 
in various forms, including verbal abuse, employee 
theft, retaliation, abusive solitary confinement, 
and sexual harassment and assault. An individual 
detained at the GEO-operated Karnes Family 
Residential Center in Karnes City, TX stated in her 
declaration that her daughter had been touched 
inappropriately by an employee at the facility’s day 
care center twice, and that this had also happened 
to two other children detained at the facility.22 
In another example, an 18-year-old detained at 
the LaSalle Corrections-operated Irwin County 
Detention Center in Ocilla, GA stated that she was 
placed in solitary confinement for three days after 
reporting that she had been verbally harassed 
by other detained people on account of her 
perceived sexual orientation. The experience in 
solitary confinement was especially traumatizing to 
her as a survivor of rape and domestic violence.23  
In an example of employee theft, an individual 
detained at the CCA-operated Otay Mesa 
Detention Facility stated that officers at the facility 
had been caught stealing money from envelopes 
that family members had sent to detained people 
for their commissary accounts.24 
These trends are repeated in other compilations 
of interviews and testimony. The use of solitary 
confinement, both due to overcrowding and as 
inappropriate or disproportionate punishment, is 
particularly consistent. For example, several individuals held at the LaSalle Corrections-
operated Irwin Detention Facility in Georgia 
reported that they were placed in administrative 
segregation upon arrival for several days until 
there were spaces available in the housing 
units, with one person reporting that he was in 
segregation for 10 days when he first arrived at 
Irwin.25  A transgender woman detained at Eloy 
in a housing unit with 250 men reported that 
the guards and men would watch trans women 
shower, and they were written up when they tried 
to put up curtains. She was sexually harassed by 
a man in the housing unit and when she reported 
it she was told to deal with it because there was 
no space to move her to; when she contested 
this decision, she was sent to solitary confinement 
for two days and then returned to the same 
housing unit where she was being harassed. The 
man who had harassed her then physically and 
sexually assaulted her in retaliation for reporting 
the harassment in the first place. After being 
taken to the hospital, she was placed in solitary 
confinement for a week and faced bullying by 
guards and other detained people.26 
Food and sanitation were also common concerns 
and present in 17 percent of the declarations 
submitted to the HSAC Subcommittee. An 
individual detained at the GEO-operated 
Adelanto Detention Facility in Adelanto, CA 
stated that the facility provides expired food; 
for example, a pizza served two weeks after the 
expiration date on the box.27  Another individual Evalin-Ali Mandza died after staff at a GEO 
facility in Colorado waited nearly an hour to call 
911 after he began experiencing chest pain and 
Manuel Cota-Domingo died after an eight hour 
delay in transferring him to the emergency room 
by staff at CCA’s Eloy facility in Arizona.A Toxic Relationship: Private Prisons and U.S. Immigration Detention6detained at the GEO-operated Karnes Family 
Residential Center stated that there were 
sometimes worms in the beans and rice, swarms  
of flies in the kitchen and no disinfectant to clean 
the tables.28 
Although the declarations submitted to the HSAC 
Subcommittee point to inhumane conditions, the 
degree to which cost-cutting is a driver is perhaps 
best shown by a series of sexual assaults by a CCA 
guard at the Hutto Detention Facility in Texas 
between 2009 and 2010, who serially assaulted 
women during unscheduled stops on the way 
to the airport. This abusive and criminal activity 
continued undetected because, in violation of the 
contract between CCA and ICE, the guard was not 
required to have another guard in the transport 
van with him.29  
Cost-cutting is also visible in the medical staffing 
decisions these companies make. Although CCA 
and GEO have gone to great lengths  to hide 
information about their medical staffing,30 the 
limited information available does indicate that 
there are frequent and long-term vacancies for contractually-required positions,31  creating a 
dangerous administrative limbo which allows 
facilities to pass inspection while also saving 
money on personnel costs.
These concerns of inadequate medical care, 
mistreatment, and poor sanitation and food quality 
are compounded by the absence of meaningful 
oversight of private detention contractors, 
explored in more detail in a later section of this 
report. Ten percent of the individuals represented 
in the declarations raised concerns about 
transparency, with three individuals stating that 
facility staff make cosmetic fixes in preparation 
for inspections and visits from members of 
Congress. One individual detained at the GEO-
operated Karnes Family Residential Center stated 
that facility staff were notified in advance of an 
inspection, so guards gave detained women and 
children stuffed animals, provided them with more 
coffee and food, and placed covers on tables to 
prepare for the inspectors’ visit. She stated that 
after the inspectors left, the guards took all the 
stuffed animals back from the children.32
A transgender woman detained at Eloy in a 
male housing unit was sexually harassed by a 
man in her unit. When she reported it, she was 
sent to solitary confinement for two days and 
then returned to the same housing unit. The 
man who had harassed her then physically and 
sexually assaulted her in retaliation. After being 
taken to the hospital, she was placed in solitary 
confinement for a week and faced bullying by 
guards and other detained people.
photo: photo: Alonso Yáñez/La OpiniónA Toxic Relationship: Private Prisons and U.S. Immigration Detention7CONTRACTING AND OVERSIGHT
As concerning as the conditions inside privately 
operated detention facilities described above are, 
the fact that they continue unimpeded is perhaps 
even more alarming. ICE’s inability or unwillingness 
to address these serious problems has several 
causes, including poor contracting practices and a 
woefully inadequate inspections process.
Recent litigation and research regarding nearly 
100 detention facility contracts by the National 
Immigrant Justice Center has revealed the details 
of ICE’s convoluted contracting system.33  Among 
other important findings, researchers uncovered 
widespread indirect contracting, a lack of clarity 
about which detention standards govern many 
facilities, and a shocking number of indefinite 
contracts. 
ICE contracts directly with private prison 
companies for fewer than 10 detention facilities.34  
The majority of privately-run detention facilities are 
contracted indirectly with either local governments 
or the U.S. Marshals Service (USMS) acting as 
a middleman. This contracting model creates 
additional barriers to both accountability and 
transparency, but also allowed private 
companies to avoid open competition for the 
contracts. Even though the ultimate beneficiary 
is a private company, ICE is able to circumvent 
open competition requirements by taking 
advantage of special processes for agreements 
between governmental entities. Forty percent of 
CCA’s contracts were obtained through a non-
competitive process; 30 percent through this 
indirect contracting model.35  
In addition to often allowing an end-run around 
competitive bidding, numerous ICE contracts 
don’t indicate which of the three versions of 
detention standards36 currently in use are in place at the facility.37  The versions include: the National 
Detention Standards (NDS) from 2000 which are 
the lowest level and least comprehensive, the 
Performance Based National Detention Standards 
from 2008 (PBNDS 2008) or the Performance 
Based National Detention Standards from 2011 
(PBNDS 2011). Although the newer standards 
contain more robust protections, including sexual 
assault prevention guidelines and more detailed 
standards governing solitary confinement and 
hunger strikes, they are still derived from prison 
standards, and therefore replicate many of the 
deplorable conditions and troubling human rights 
failings endemic to the criminal justice system. 
Furthermore, they are not codified and are 
therefore not easily enforceable. Despite these 
deficiencies, the level of standard included in 
a contract still conveys important information 
about ICE’s ability and willingness to manage a 
contractor-run detention system. 
Both ICE and the private prison companies 
frequently point to the fact that all directly 
contracted private facilities are theoretically 
compliant with either PBNDS 2008 or PBNDS 
2011. However, this doesn’t account for the effect 
of indirect contracting; at least 14 indirectly 
contracted private facilities are only contracted to 
meet the bare minimum of detention standards.38  
Regardless of which level of standards are 
included in the contract, the vast majority of Facility staff were notified in advance of an 
inspection, so guards gave detained women 
and children stuffed animals, provided them 
with more coffee and food, and placed covers 
on tables to prepare for the inspectors’ visit. 
After the inspectors left, the guards took all the 
stuffed animals back from the children. A Toxic Relationship: Private Prisons and U.S. Immigration Detention8contracts do not include robust penalty provisions 
to help ensure that the standards are met, and 
a significant number, including those for at least 
nine privately-run facilities, don’t include a contract 
end date.39  ICE has rarely elected to terminate a 
contract during its term. Instead, if ICE engages 
to demand improvements at all, it does so during 
contract renewals and rebids, essentially giving a 
free pass to these nine facilities.  
Finally, ICE contracts, particularly those with 
private prison companies, are also plagued by the 
inclusion of guaranteed minimums. Guaranteed 
minimums are contractual provisions which 
obligate ICE to pay for a specified number of 
beds, regardless of whether or not those beds 
are being used at any given time. Often, ICE then 
receives a “discount” for any people detained 
above the guaranteed minimum number, 
incentivizing even higher levels of detention 
disguised as a more efficient use of government resources. Ninety-three percent of known 
guaranteed minimums benefit a private prison 
company.40  At least 20 contracts with private 
companies contain a guaranteed minimum,41  
affecting at least 11,936 people. 
The inclusion of guaranteed minimums, which 
essentially act as taxpayer funded profit insurance 
for detention contractors, is no accident. In 
2005, CCA noted in its Security and Exchange 
Commission filing that its inability to control 
occupancy rates at its facilities was a risk for its 
revenue and profitability.42  Guaranteed minimums 
are the contractual solution to this problem. While 
guaranteed minimums may not technically control 
occupancy rates, they financially incentivize stable 
or increased detention numbers, and provide 
guaranteed minimum revenue for the company, 
protecting it against any shifts in immigration 
policy or movement toward decarceration.
 Ice Detention Contracts By Number Of Facilities And Average Daily Population, Fy16
*Data obtained from an ICE facilities matrix dated December 8, 2015 and does not include new ICE facilities (Kankakee County 
Jail, Torrance County Detention Center, Prairieland Detention Center, Nevada Southern Detention Center , and Allen Parish Public 
Safety Complex) or significant expansion in the number of detention beds at Charleston County Detention Center, Coastal Bend 
Detention Facility, Denver Contract Detention Facility, Florence Correctional Center,  Glades County Detention Center, Immigration 
Centers of America-Farmville, Johnson County Law Enforcement Center , La Salle County Regional Detention Center, Jena/LaSalle 
Detention Facility , Pine Prairie Correctional Center, Western Tennessee Detention Facility, Willacy County Regional Detention 
Center , and Yakima County Jail. Privately-operated facilities are italicized.ICE DETENTION 
FACILITIES
Contract Detention  
Facilities 
(all privately operated)
7 facilitie s
5,962 peopl e Service 
Processing 
Centers
5 facilitie s
3,340 peopl eInter governmental  
Service 
Agreement s
102 facilitie s
17,907 peopl e
Publicly 
Operated
83 facilitie s
4,926 peopl ePrivately 
Operated
19 facilitie s
12,981 peopl ePublicly 
Operated
83 facilitie s
2,393 peopl ePrivately 
Operated
16 facilitie s
2,281 peopl eU.S. Marshals 
Service 
Inter governmental  
Agreements
99 facilitie s
4,674 peopl eA Toxic Relationship: Private Prisons and U.S. Immigration Detention9In addition to poor contracting practices, 
extensive research into ICE’s inspections process 
has also shown that ICE does not provide 
effective oversight over its contractors. Instead, 
ICE’s inspections process allows the numerous 
failings of the detention system to fall through 
the cracks, while avoiding consequences, 
independent oversight, and transparency. Failing 
the most basic of requirements for an adequate 
oversight process, ICE’s inspections are not 
independent. Rather than having an independent 
agency conduct inspections of its detention 
facilities, ICE’s inspections are done internally 
or by contractors hired and paid by ICE, raising 
concerns about impartiality.43 Those concerns are 
further heightened by the fact that inspection 
reports may be edited before they are finalized 
and submitted to ICE’s Detention Monitoring Unit 
by the inspections contractor.44  These edits are 
not tracked, and ICE officials report not knowing 
the frequency or types of edits that occur between 
an initial inspection and when the inspections 
contractor submits the inspection report.
However, beyond independence, ICE’s inspections 
are of poor quality and seem designed to allow 
facilities to pass. By announcing its inspections 
in advance, ICE gives facilities the opportunity 
to make cursory changes to conceal serious 
problems.45  Moreover, inspectors check for the 
existence of policies and often take facility staff at 
their word without evaluating the implementation 
of critical functions such as medical care and 
grievance procedures, or even checking easily 
verified safety infrastructure such as fire alarms. 
As most inspections don’t include interviews 
with detained people, their perspective is not 
incorporated into the inspections findings either.46  
Taken together, these create a checklist culture in 
which inspectors are ticking items off a long list 
rather than fully and comprehensively examining the lived reality of people detained at the facility. 
The effects of the checklist culture are perhaps 
best demonstrated by the repeat finding that 
indoor rooms with windows count as providing 
outdoor recreation because air from the outside 
can enter the room.
Moreover, indirect contracting—in which a local 
government or the USMS hold a contract with 
ICE and then turn around to sub-contract with 
a private prison company—has allowed private 
companies to exploit an inspections loophole. 
Within the detention standards, many individual 
requirements are italicized, meaning that 
facilities contracted through intergovernmental 
service agreements (again, those where a local 
government or the USMS hold the contract with 
ICE) do not have to meet the requirement, but 
rather the spirit of the requirement. When a 
private prison company is sub-contracted to run 
one of these facilities, they retain the ability to 
meet the spirit of the requirement as opposed 
to the requirement itself. This loophole is further 
stretched by a lack of awareness or attention to 
detail on the part of the inspectors. In numerous 
instances, rather than indicating how a facility met 
the intent of an italicized standard, the inspector 
simply wrote “N/A.” 
Given these findings, it is not surprising that ICE’s 
inspections fail to uncover serious problems 
at detention facilities. At least seven facilities 
implicated in medically negligent deaths received 
passing ratings from ICE inspections, both before 
and after the deaths occurred, even when the 
death investigation found facilities failed to meet 
medical care standards and explicitly identified 
the deaths as preventable.47  Even when severe 
deficiencies are discovered and named in an 
inspection or death review, ICE has not terminated 
contracts or used available penalties, but rather A Toxic Relationship: Private Prisons and U.S. Immigration Detention10continued to send immigrants to be held in 
unsafe conditions. Former ICE senior officials have 
also expressed concern about the relationship 
between the companies and ICE, and the quality 
of privately-run facilities.48
Evidence of ICE’s unwillingness to cut ties, even 
in the face of well documented and egregious 
failings at a facility, are clearly demonstrated in the 
case of Eloy. Eloy is, by far, the deadliest detention 
facility in the system, with 14 documented deaths 
since 2003, including numerous suicides.49  As 
early as 2012, and potentially earlier, inspectors 
flagged concerns about suicide prevention at 
Eloy.50  Then in 2013, Elsa Guadalupe-Gonzalez 
committed suicide at Eloy; two days later, Jorge 
Garcia Mejia also committed suicide in a different 
housing unit. Death reviews conducted after the 
two suicides found that confusion about who 
should call 911 lead to delays in the placing the 
call after both suicides, and that Eloy didn’t have a suicide prevention plan, among other serious 
shortcomings.51  In 2015, José de Jesús Deniz 
Sahagun also committed suicide at the facility. 
Horrifyingly, but unsurprisingly, the subsequent 
death review found that Eloy still did not have a 
suicide prevention plan at the time of his death.52  
It’s difficult to imagine what additional information 
would be required to trigger a contract 
termination, and yet, at the time of writing, over a 
thousand immigrants continue to be held at this 
dangerous facility.      
INFLUENCE PEDDLING  
AND A REVOLVING DOOR
While conditions, oversight, and contracting 
deficiencies are not limited to privately-run 
detention facilities, the private sector does have its 
own methods of exerting influence over decision-
makers. These include campaign contributions, 
massive lobbying expenditures, and revolving 
door politics. In 2008 CCA and GEO received 
photo: Steve PaveyA Toxic Relationship: Private Prisons and U.S. Immigration Detention11$307 million combined in revenue for running 
immigration detention facilities. By 2015 it had 
more than doubled to $765 million.53
  
Although the final numbers for the 2016 election 
cycle are not yet available, by the end of June, 
GEO had contributed $464,000 and CCA had 
contributed $210,000 to the 2016 congressional 
and presidential races.54  During each of the 
2006, 2008, 2010, 2012, and 2014 cycles, CCA 
and GEO contributed at least $500,000 to federal 
elections combined,55  and in some cases, much 
more. During the 2014 cycle, CCA contributed 
to 23 senators and 25 representatives, and 
GEO Group contributed to 10 senators and 28 
representatives.56 
 
Digging into specific contributions provides more 
insight into the influence these companies exert. 
This is perhaps most clear as it relates to the 
detention bed quota, which has been included 
in DHS’s budget since 2009 and requires that ICE 
maintain an average of 34,000 detention beds.57  
This provision has been a key driver of increased 
immigration detention over the last eight years 
and, as an increasing percentage of immigration 
detention has been privatized (from 25 percent 
in 200558  to 49 percent in 200959  to 73 percent 
in 201660), a key driver of private prison profits as 
well. Engagement by private prison companies 
specifically on the detention bed quota indicates 
that they are not just influencing which entities 
get detention facility contracts, but are actively 
shaping policy decisions about the scope of the 
detention system overall.
 
For GEO, the detention bed quota seems to drive 
at least some campaign contributions. In the 2014 
election cycle, GEO was Representative Cuellar’s 
(D-TX) biggest contributor giving $15,550.61  As of 
mid-September 2016, GEO was again slated to be Rep. Cuellar’s largest donor, having already 
contributed $15,090.62  This is significant 
because Rep. Cuellar is on the Homeland Security 
Appropriations Subcommittee, which continues 
to insert the immigration detention quota in 
the budget and shapes the way in which it is 
interpreted. CCA has also sought to maintain the 
detention bed quota. Between 2006 and 2015, 
CCA spent $8.7 million and GEO spent $1.3 
million in quarters where they directly lobbied the 
DHS Appropriations Subcommittee.63  
CCA and GEO have both invested in federal 
lobbying beyond their specific focus on 
supporting the detention bed quota. In addition 
to lobbying on appropriations, in 2015, CCA 
lobbied against the Justice Is Not For Sale 
Act, which would have banned private prisons 
at the federal, state, and local levels, and the 
Private Prison Information Act which would have 
removed the exemption that allows private prison 
companies to avoid disclosing the details of its 
contracts or information about what goes on 
inside its facilities.64  
In 2015 alone, the two companies hired 20 
lobbyists in DC at $1.6 million65.  In October 
2016, GEO dramatically expanded its lobbying 
capacity, hiring three new firms, including 
David Stewart and Ryan Robichaux of Bradley 
Arant Boult Cummings,66  both of whom are 
former staff of Senator Jeff Sessions and will be 
focused on federal contracts with private prisons. 
Seventy percent of CCA and GEO lobbyists have 
previously worked on the Hill.672008 CCA and GEO received $307 million 
combined in revenue for running immigration 
detention facilities. By 2015 it had more than 
doubled to $765 million. A Toxic Relationship: Private Prisons and U.S. Immigration Detention12The revolving door also exists between the 
federal agencies issuing contracts and private 
prison companies. David Venturella, former 
Assistant Director of ICE, is now the Executive Vice 
President for Corporate Development at GEO, 
and Julie Myers Wood, a former DHS Assistant 
Secretary for ICE, is now on GEO’s board.68  Mary 
Loiselle, formerly of ICE, is the Program Director 
for GEO’s new alternative to detention program 
for immigrant families.69  Both CCA and GEO 
have had numerous additional people in senior 
leadership positions who were formerly high level 
government officials, including multiple Directors 
of the Bureau of Prisons, General Counsel for DHS, 
Director of the U.S. Marshals Service, and more.70Beyond these pay to play schemes, ICE’s ability 
and willingness to hold its contractors to even 
the most minimal of standards is completely 
undermined by the depth of its reliance on 
them. Especially coupled with the requirements 
of the detention bed quota, any leverage ICE 
has is significantly weakened. With 73 percent 
of detention facilities operated by private prison 
companies, and the remaining facilities sub-
contracting out for services like food, guards, and 
medical care, any threat of significant financial 
penalties or large scale termination is undermined 
by the companies’ awareness of how much ICE—
at least given its current way of operating—needs 
them. FY16 Immigration Detention ADP , Private vs. Public Operators
*This data was obtained from 
an ICE facilities matrix dated 
December 8, 2015 and does not 
include new ICE facilities (Kankakee 
County Jail, Torrance County 
Detention Center, Prairieland 
Detention Center, Nevada 
Southern Detention Center, 
and Allen Parish Public Safety 
Complex) or significant expansion 
in the number of detention beds 
at Charleston County Detention 
Center, Coastal Bend Detention 
Facility, Denver Contract Detention 
Facility, Florence Correctional 
Center, Glades County Detention 
Center, Immigration Centers of 
America-Farmville, Johnson County 
Law Enforcement Center, La Salle 
County Regional Detention Center, 
Jena/LaSalle Detention Facility, 
Pine Prairie Correctional Center, 
Western Tennessee Detention 
Facility, Willacy County Regional 
Detention Center, and Yakima 
County Jail. Privately-operated 
facilities are italicized.25000
20000
15000
10000
5000
0
PRIVA TE PUBLI CICA 
587LaSalle
472Emerald
1,016CEC
857MTC
1,518GEO
10,025CCA
6,794County/City
7,319A Toxic Relationship: Private Prisons and U.S. Immigration Detention13TRANSPARENCY
The entire detention system is plagued by a lack 
of transparency. ICE does not proactively disclose 
most of its facility inspections, contracts, death 
reviews, or even basic statistics to the public.  Nor 
is vital information about suicide attempts, hunger 
strikes, work program stoppages, use of solitary 
confinement, use of force, or other significant 
information readily available. In fact, to date these 
documents have only been available through 
slow-moving and resource intensive Freedom of 
Information Act (FOIA) requests and litigation.71
Within a broader culture of secrecy, private prison 
contractors have been particularly effective at 
avoiding scrutiny. As detailed above, ICE relies 
heavily on indirect contracting, which allows 
private companies to operate detention facilities 
while on the surface ICE contracts with a public 
entity—either a local government or USMS.72  
Private companies have typically been able to 
take advantage of a FOIA loophole, Exemption 
4, meant to protect commercial trade secrets to 
persuade the government to hide many of the 
terms of their contracts, leaving the public in the 
dark about the costs and staffing plans for these 
facilities.
ICE’s fundamental opposition to transparency, 
spurred on by its top contractors, is perhaps 
best illustrated by DWN and the Center for 
Constitutional Rights’ (CCR) current FOIA 
litigation73  in which the government essentially 
acted as free counsel for its private detention 
contractors. After refusing to respond to a FOIA 
request until ordered to do so by a judge, ICE 
began producing documents, but heavily redacted 
all detention facility contracts, claiming that they 
could withhold pricing information and staffing 
plans under FOIA Exemption 4.When DWN and CCR filed a motion challenging 
these redactions, ICE justified them based on 
the contractors’ position that release of the 
information could cause them “substantial 
competitive harm.” Notably, ICE’s legal position 
depended heavily on the opinions and arguments 
of private contractors themselves, four of the 
largest of whom submitted sworn declarations 
attesting to the need for secrecy and the perils 
of public awareness of terms in government 
contracts. In GEO’s case, David Venturella, a 
former ICE official who is now the Senior Vice 
President of Business Development at GEO, 
submitted a declaration claiming that public view 
of the lucrative contract terms between GEO 
and the government would harm the “detention 
market,” as if protecting private prison profits 
was the role of the courts. Relying on these 
declarations, ICE adopted the position of its 
private contractors as its own throughout the 
litigation.
In July 2015, the Federal Court in DWN v. ICE  
ruled that the details of government contracts with 
private detention companies, specifically the per 
diem payments and staffing plans associated with 
each contract, are not exempt from public release 
under FOIA. ICE chose not to appeal and the 
issue, which ICE should never have defended in 
the first place, was on the cusp of resolution, with 
ICE preparing to disclose the improperly-redacted 
information.Private contractors are openly proclaiming what 
we’ve long known: that they are actively seeking 
to shape government detention policy and the 
scope of government secrecy, protecting their 
own interests and profits at the expense of 
immigrant communities and the  
American public. A Toxic Relationship: Private Prisons and U.S. Immigration Detention14Instead, GEO and CCA filed a motion to intervene 
in the case, which was granted in September 
2016, and are appealing the lower court’s ruling 
to the Second Circuit Court of Appeals. This 
has now created a rather remarkable situation. 
Private contractors are challenging the district 
court’s interpretation of the federal government’s 
obligations under FOIA, even though the federal 
government is not. In doing so, the private 
contractors are openly proclaiming what we’ve 
long known: that they are actively seeking to 
shape government detention policy and the scope 
of government secrecy, protecting their own 
interests and profits at the expense of immigrant 
communities and the American public.
CONCLUSION
The problems within the immigration detention 
system, and the degree to which they are 
exacerbated by ICE’s entanglement with private 
prison companies is clear. Throughout the 
system, we see evidence that these companies 
seek to maximize their profits by cutting costs at 
the expense of people’s health, safety and well-
being; are not accountable and don’t experience 
consequences for even severe deficiencies; exert 
undue influence over government officials and 
immigration policy; and fight tooth and nail to 
avoid even minimal transparency. These are not 
problems that can be addressed through reform, but only through completely ending the U.S. 
government’s relationship with and reliance on 
private prison companies.
 
The privatization of immigration detention 
creates perverse incentives for incarceration. 
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) 
should take steps to end all profiteering in the 
immigration detention system by reducing reliance 
on immigration detention and ending direct and 
indirect contracts with private companies.
 
Specifically, DHS should :
1. Immediately cease its current expansion of the 
immigration detention system. ICE must not 
sign any new contracts, including with private 
prison companies; 
2. Decline to award any contract renewals or 
rebids for existing facilities to private detention 
operators;
3. Immediately modify all contracts without end 
dates to include an end date no later than one 
year after modification;
4. Not replace phased out contracts with 
additional county jail contracts, but rather take 
immediate and aggressive action to reduce 
the number of people held in immigration 
detention. DHS should start by ending 
family detention; ending the detention of 
asylum-seekers, providing a bond hearing 
for all detained individuals, and narrowing its 
interpretation of mandatory detention.74
Terminating these contracts will not fix all the 
problems within the United States’ massive 
immigration detention system, but it is an 
important first step. It is simply unacceptable to 
put profit over people, especially when it comes to 
the deprivation of liberty.
photo: Community Initiatives for Visiting Immigrants in Confinement 
(CIVIC)A Toxic Relationship: Private Prisons and U.S. Immigration Detention151. Steven Nelson, “Private Prison Companies, Punched in 
the Gut, Will Keep Most Federal Business.” U.S. News 
& World Report , August 18, 2016, http://www.usnews.
com/news/articles/2016-08-18/private-prison-companies-
punched-in-the-gut-will-keep-most-federal-business . 
2. Department of Homeland Security, Homeland Security 
Budget-in-Brief Fiscal Year 2016, https://www.dhs.gov/
sites/default/files/publications/FY_2016_DHS_Budget_in_
Brief.pdf  
3. American Civil Liberties Union, Warehoused and 
Forgotten: Immigrants Trapped in Our Shadow Private 
Prison System, June 2014, https://www.aclu.org/sites/
default/files/assets/060614-aclu-car-reportonline.pdf  
4. Deputy Attorney General Sally Yates, Reducing our Use 
of Private Prisons Memo, August 18, 2016, https://www.
justice.gov/opa/file/886311/download  
5. Department of Justice Office of Inspector General, Review 
of the Federal Bureau of Prisons’ Monitoring of Contract 
Prisons, August 2016, https://oig.justice.gov/reports/2016/
e1606.pdf . 
6. Seth Freed Wessler, “The 25 Men Whose Lives Ended 
Under Questionable Circumstances.” The Nation , January 
28, 2016, https://www.thenation.com/article/25-deaths-
in-contract-facilities/  and Shane Bauer, “My four months 
as a private prison guard.” Mother Jones , July/August 
2016, http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2016/06/
cca-private-prisons-corrections-corporation-inmates-
investigation-bauer .  
7. American Civil Liberties Union, Warehoused and 
Forgotten: Immigrants Trapped in Our Shadow Private 
Prison System, June 2014, https://www.aclu.org/sites/
default/files/assets/060614-aclu-car-reportonline.pdf  
8. Seth Freed Wessler, “The True Story of a Texas Prison 
Riot.” The Nation , June 23, 2015, https://www.thenation.
com/article/the-true-story-of-a-texas-prison-riot/ . 
9. Statement by Secretary Jeh C. Johnson on Establishing a 
Review Of Privatized Immigration Detention, August 28, 
2016, https://www.dhs.gov/news/2016/08/29/statement-
secretary-jeh-c-johnson-establishing-review-privatized-
immigration .10. For more detail on specific policy changes to achieve 
these goals, see: American Civil Liberties Union, Shutting 
Down the Profiteers: Why and How the Department of 
Homeland Security Should Stop Using Private Prisons, 
September 2016, https://www.aclu.org/sites/default/
files/field_document/white_paper_09-30-16_released_
for_web-v1-opt.pdf . 
11. Compiled declarations and complaints are available at: 
bit.ly/DWNdeclarations
12. Detention Watch Network Sworn Declarations, collected 
October 2016, Anonymous Declaration #3, page 13, bit.
ly/DWNdeclarations  
13. Ibid., Muhammad Nazry Mustakim Declaration, page 11.
14. Ibid., Lillian* Declaration, page 60.
15. Ibid., Richard Wheeler on behalf of Petra Albrecht,  
  page 85.
16. American Civil Liberties Union, Detention Watch 
Network & National Immigrant Justice Center, Fatal 
Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in Detention, 
February 2016, http://immigrantjustice.org/publications/
FatalNeglect  and Human Rights Watch, US: Deaths in 
Immigration Detention, July 2016, https://www.hrw.org/
news/2016/07/07/us-deaths-immigration-detention . 
17. American Civil Liberties Union, Detention Watch Network 
& National Immigrant Justice Center, Fatal Neglect: How 
ICE Ignores Deaths in Detention, February 2016, http://
immigrantjustice.org/publications/FatalNeglect . 
18. Human Rights Watch, US: Deaths in Immigration 
Detention, July 2016, https://www.hrw.org/
news/2016/07/07/us-deathsimmigration-detention . 
19. Adelante Alabama Workers Center, National Immigration 
Project of the National Lawyers Guild, Southern Poverty 
Law Center, Shadow Prisons: Immigrant Detention in 
the South, November 2016, https://www.splcenter.org/
sites/default/files/leg_ijp_shadow_prisons_immigrant_
detention_report.pdf .
20. Ibid., page Ibid.
21. Ibid., page 32.
22. Detention Watch Network Sworn Declarations, collected 
October 2016, Anonymous Declaration #8, page 77, bit.
ly/DWNdeclarations .ENDNOTESA Toxic Relationship: Private Prisons and U.S. Immigration Detention1623. Ibid., Anonymous Declaration #2, page 3.
24. Ibid., Anonymous Declaration #3, page 16.
25. Adelante Alabama Workers Center, National Immigration 
Project of the National Lawyers Guild, Southern Poverty 
Law Center, Shadow Prisons: Immigrant Detention in 
the South, November 2016, https://www.splcenter.org/
sites/default/files/leg_ijp_shadow_prisons_immigrant_
detention_report.pdf .
26. Grassroots Leadership, Payoff: How Congress Ensures 
Private Prison Profit with an Immigrant Detention Quota, 
page 15-16, April 2015, http://grassrootsleadership.org/
reports/payoff-how-congress-ensures-private-prison-
profit-immigrant-detention-quota#1 . 
27. Detention Watch Network Sworn Declarations, 
collected October 2016, Daria Voronina, page 88, bit.ly/
DWNdeclarations .
28. Ibid., Hilda Ramirez, pages 21-23.
29. American Civil Liberties Union, Shutting Down the 
Profiteers: Why and How the Department of Homeland 
Security Should Stop Using Private Prisons, September 
2016, https://www.aclu.org/sites/default/files/field_
document/white_paper_09-30-16_released_for_web-v1-
opt.pdf . 
30. See Section 4: Transparency of this report and Detention 
Watch Network, Center for Constitutional Rights v. 
United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement, 
Department of Homeland Security (2015) at https://
ccrjustice.org/home/what-we-do/our-cases/detention-
watch-network-dwn-v-immigration-customs-and-
enforcement-ice-and . 
31. Detention Watch Network and National Immigrant 
Justice Center, Lives in Peril: How Ineffective Inspections 
Make ICE Complicit in Immigration Detention 
Abuse, page 25-26, October 2015, http://www.
detentionwatchnetwork.org/sites/default/files/reports/
Lives%20in%20Peril_NIJC%2C%20DWN.pdf .  
32. Detention Watch Network Sworn Declarations, collected 
October 2016, Hilda Ramirez, pages 21-23, bit.ly/
DWNdeclarations .33. National Immigrant Justice Center, NIJC Freedom Of 
Information Act Litigation Reveals Systemic Lack Of 
Accountability In Immigration Detention Contracting, 
August 2015, http://www.immigrantjustice.org/
immigration-detention-transparency-and-human-rights-
project-august-2015-report . 
34. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, ERO Custody 
Management Division Authorized DMCP Facilities, FY 
2016, http://www.detentionwatchnetwork.org/sites/
default/files/2015IceDetentionFacilityListing.xlsx  and 
information about four facilities (Berks, Dilley, Hutto, 
Karnes) under the Family Residential Standards on file 
with author. 
35. Detention Watch Network, Center for Constitutional 
Rights v. United States Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement, Department of Homeland Security (2015), 
75 14-CV-583 91, United States District Court, Southern 
District of New York, page 2. Available at https://
ccrjustice.org/sites/default/files/attach/2015/12/Dkt%20
91.Verhulst%20CCA%20Declaration.pdf .
36. This does not count a separate set of standards specific 
to family detention. 
37. National Immigrant Justice Center, NIJC Freedom Of 
Information Act Litigation Reveals Systemic Lack Of 
Accountability In Immigration Detention Contracting, 
August 2015, http://www.immigrantjustice.org/
immigration-detention-transparency-and-human-rights-
project-august-2015-report .
38. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, ERO Custody 
Management Division Authorized DMCP Facilities, FY 
2016, http://www.detentionwatchnetwork.org/sites/
default/files/2015IceDetentionFacilityListing.xlsx  and 
information about four facilities (Berks, Dilley, Hutto, 
Karnes) under the Family Residential Standards on file 
with author. 
39. National Immigrant Justice Center, NIJC Freedom Of 
Information Act Litigation Reveals Systemic Lack Of 
Accountability In Immigration Detention Contracting, 
August 2015, http://www.immigrantjustice.org/
immigration-detention-transparency-and-human-rights-
project-august-2015-report .A Toxic Relationship: Private Prisons and U.S. Immigration Detention1740. Detention Watch Network, Banking on Detention 
2016 Update, page 3, June 2016, https://www.
detentionwatchnetwork.org/sites/default/files/reports/
Banking%20on%20Detention%202016%20Update_
DWN%2C%20CCR.pdf .
41. Ibid., page 4. 
42. Center for American Progress, How For-Profit Companies 
are Driving Immigration Detention Policies, December 
2015, pages 2-3, https://cdn.americanprogress.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/12/17121556/ForProfitDetention-
briefDec.pdf .
43. Detention Watch Network and National Immigrant 
Justice Center, Lives in Peril: How Ineffective 
Inspections Make ICE Complicit in Immigration 
Detention Abuse, page 11, October 2015, http://www.
detentionwatchnetwork.org/sites/default/files/reports/
Lives%20in%20Peril_NIJC%2C%20DWN.pdf . 
44. Ibid., page 15.
45. Ibid., page 11. 
46. Ibid., page 15-16.
47. American Civil Liberties Union, Detention Watch Network 
& National Immigrant Justice Center, Fatal Neglect: How 
ICE Ignores Deaths in Detention, page 6, February 2016, 
http://immigrantjustice.org/publications/FatalNeglect .
48. Brian Bennett, “White House considers ending for-profit 
immigrant detainee centers, but critics say it could add 
billions to the cost.” Los Angeles Times , September 6, 
2016, http://www.latimes.com/nation/la-na-immigration-
detention-20160906-snap-story.html
49. American Civil Liberties Union, Shutting Down the 
Profiteers: Why and How the Department of Homeland 
Security Should Stop Using Private Prisons, September 
2016, pages 12-13, https://www.aclu.org/sites/default/
files/field_document/white_paper_09-30-16_released_
for_web-v1-opt.pdf .
50. Ibid.
51. Ibid.
52. Ibid.
53. Ibid., page 10. 54. In The Public Interest, Buying Influence: How Private 
Prison Companies Expand Their Control of America’s 
Criminal Justice System, October 2016, page 5, https://
www.inthepublicinterest.org/buying-influence-how-
private-prison-companies-expand-their-control-of-
americas-criminal-justice-system/ . 
55. Ibid., page 6. 
56. Ibid. 
57. Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act 
of  2010, October 2009,  http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/
PLAW-111publ83/pdf/PLAW-111publ83.pdf . 
58. Center for American Progress, How For-Profit Companies 
are Driving Immigration Detention Policies, December 
2015, page 3, https://cdn.americanprogress.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/12/17121556/ForProfitDetention-
briefDec.pdf . 
59. Grassroots Leadership, Payoff: How Congress Ensures 
Private Prison Profit with an Immigrant Detention Quota, 
page 3, April 2015, http://grassrootsleadership.org/
reports/payoff-how-congress-ensures-private-prison-
profit-immigrant-detention-quota#1 . 
60. Steven Nelson, “Private Prison Companies, Punched in 
the Gut, Will Keep Most Federal Business.” U.S. News & 
World Report , August 18, 2016, http://www.usnews.com/
news/articles/2016-08-18/private-prison-companies-
punched-in-the-gut-will-keep-most-federal-business .
61. In The Public Interest, Buying Influence: How Private 
Prison Companies Expand Their Control of America’s 
Criminal Justice System, October 2016, page 6, https://
www.inthepublicinterest.org/buying-influence-how-
private-prison-companies-expand-their-control-of-
americas-criminal-justice-system/ .
62. Ibid.
63. Center for American Progress, How For-Profit Companies 
are Driving Immigration Detention Policies, December 
2015, page 3, https://cdn.americanprogress.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/12/17121556/ForProfitDetention-
briefDec.pdf . 
64. Ibid.A Toxic Relationship: Private Prisons and U.S. Immigration Detention1865. In The Public Interest, Buying Influence: How Private 
Prison Companies Expand Their Control of America’s 
Criminal Justice System, October 2016, page 3, https://
www.inthepublicinterest.org/buying-influence-how-
private-prison-companies-expand-their-control-of-
americas-criminal-justice-system/ .
66. Isaac Arnsdorf, “Private prison company GEO hires three 
firms,” Politico , October 12, 2016, http://www.politico.
com/tipsheets/politico-influence/2016/10/private-prison-
company-geo-hires-three-firms-216823 . 
67. In The Public Interest, Buying Influence: How Private 
Prison Companies Expand Their Control of America’s 
Criminal Justice System, October 2016, page 3, https://
www.inthepublicinterest.org/buying-influence-how-
private-prison-companies-expand-their-control-of-
americas-criminal-justice-system/ .
68. American Civil Liberties Union, Shutting Down the 
Profiteers: Why and How the Department of Homeland 
Security Should Stop Using Private Prisons, September 
2016, page 11, https://www.aclu.org/sites/default/files/
field_document/white_paper_09-30-16_released_for_
web-v1-opt.pdf .
69. Mary F. Loiselle, “GEO Care’s New Family Case 
Management Program.” GEO World: A GEO Publication 
for GEO Employees and their Families, Second Quarter 
2016, “ http://www.geogroup.com/userfiles/1de79aa6-
2ff2-4615-a997-7869142237bd.pdf . 
70. Cristina Costantini and Jorge Rivas, “Shadow Prisons: 
A Private and Profitable Corner of the Federal Prison 
System Thrives After a Long-Ignored Offense Is 
Prosecuted” Fusion , February 4, 2015,  http://interactive.
fusion.net/shadow-prisons/ . 
  71. American Civil Liberties Union, Detention Watch Network 
& National Immigrant Justice Center, Fatal Neglect: 
How ICE Ignores Deaths in Detention, Feb. 2016, http://
immigrantjustice.org/publications/FatalNeglect  and 
Detention Watch Network and National Immigrant 
Justice Center, Lives in Peril: How Ineffective Inspections 
Make ICE Complicit in Immigration Detention 
Abuse, page 25-26, October 2015, http://www.
detentionwatchnetwork.org/sites/default/files/reports/
Lives%20in%20Peril_NIJC%2C%20DWN.pdf .  
72. National Immigrant Justice Center, NIJC Freedom Of 
Information Act Litigation Reveals Systemic Lack Of 
Accountability In Immigration Detention Contracting, 
August 2015, http://www.immigrantjustice.org/
immigration-detention-transparency-and-human-rights-
project-august-2015-report .
73. All case documents for Detention Watch Network, 
Center for Constitutional Rights v. United States 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Department of 
Homeland Security (2015), 75 14-CV-583 are available 
here: http://ccrjustice.org/home/what-we-do/our-cases/
detention-watch-network-dwn-v-immigration-customs-
and-enforcement-ice-and .
74. For more detail on specific policy changes to achieve 
this goals, see: American Civil Liberties Union, Shutting 
Down the Profiteers: Why and How the Department of 
Homeland Security Should Stop Using Private Prisons, 
September 2016, https://www.aclu.org/sites/default/
files/field_document/white_paper_09-30-16_released_
for_web-v1-opt.pdf . 