NOTES   FIELD
THE CHILDREN’S RIGHTS NEWSLETTER
Children of the Opioid Crisis:  
A Growing NumberIN FOCUS:
Stephanie’s adopted children are survivors of the opioid crisis
No matter what you’ve been through, 
when you walk in our door, you’re 
family .”
 For Stephanie Anuszewski, unconditional 
love is key to caring for her 11 children, 
including four children adopted out of foster 
care. One of those children, David, was born 
addicted to opioids.
 Stephanie, of Scranton, Pennsylvania, 
adopted David in 2013. Now 7 years old, 
David was born with telltale signs of opiate 
withdrawal including respiratory issues and 
difficulty with motor skills. His baby teeth 
grew in damaged and prone to cavities, which 
his dentist ascribed to prenatal drug use. All four of Stephanie’s adopted children 
are biological siblings. Their birth mother 
lost custody of her children when she over -
dosed in public on prescription pain meds 
and other substances. Police found her on 
the side of the road, with David in a baby 
carriage next to her.
 Across the country , thousands of children 
like David and his siblings are entering foster 
care because one or both parents are addicted 
to opioids. The numbers paint a startling 
portrait: Between 2012 and 2016, the number 
of children in foster care increased by over 
10 percent – bringing the total number of 
children in care to nearly half a million. This FROM
THE
SPRING 2018
#RideForKids: Our 
first-ever Children’s 
Rights Champion 
Ride was a rolling 
success!
INSIDE:
50,000+ signatures 
& counting! Stop 
separating children 
from their families  
at the U.S. border.
Continued on page 6
KEEP THEM 
TOGETHER“W e deserved to get a lawsuit … we’re better off for it, the kids are better off 
and I think the taxpayers are better off.”
That’s what Jim Henry , Deputy to the T ennessee Governor and former 
Commissioner of the child welfare agency , said about the state’s remarkable 
transformation of its child welfare system.
It’s a revealing recognition from a former defendant in our case. Indeed, 
hundreds of thousands of kids in this country are better off thanks to 
Children’s Rights’ aggressive grassroots advocacy , dogged determination and 
steely resolve.
Sadly , the need for our work—both in the core area of child welfare and 
beyond—has only increased as policies and practices at the federal and state 
levels continue to place vulnerable children and their families in harm’s way .
In the ongoing immigration crackdown, for example, a 7-year-old girl was 
separated from her mother. Originally from the Congo, they came to the 
U.S. seeking asylum; instead, the little girl was sent to a detention center in 
Chicago, while her mother was detained in an immigration center 2,000 
miles away in San Diego. 
Children’s Rights was proud to support the ACLU in their lawsuit against 
the government on the family’s behalf, which finally led to their reunion 
months later. 
W e are also proud  to advocate for young victims of sex trafficking, children 
in juvenile justice facilities held in solitary confinement and denied mental 
health care, and LGBTQ youth discriminated against in the very systems 
meant to protect them. W e are fighting for our country’s most vulnerable 
children, speaking out when government policies fail them.
T o continue to do so, we need you. There are many ways to lend your voice. 
Y ou can help amplify our message on social media. Y ou can tell your friends 
about our work. And you can attend one of our fundraising events or become 
a donor. Every new supporter, every mind changed, every dollar raised counts.
With limited resources, we can’t fight every battle in every place, but we 
must do all we can to protect even more children and families in these 
perilous times. W e must make sure that children all around our country have 
the stability , support and care they so richly deserve.
Sandy Santana
Executive DirectorON THE FRONTLINES
FROM CR’S EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
What inspired you to get involved 
with Children’s Rights?
Children’s Rights moves the needle 
to protect vulnerable children like no 
other organization. As a former Assis -
tant District Attorney for four years, I 
handled many child abuse cases where 
we saw the critical need for protection 
and services. As a legislator, we passed 
significant laws and appropriations to 
protect children, but we were devastated 
when the following years some of these 
measures were rolled back or removed. 
Children’s Rights is exactly the kind of 
organization that we wanted to work 
with to create lasting change.
How does being a father affect 
your outlook on child welfare?
My wife and I are the adoptive parents of two girls who were placed in foster care at 
birth. W e understand the trauma children 
suffer in a system where they are torn 
away from their homes and moved contin -
ually from one place to the next with little 
to no mental healthcare services.
Why should Children’s Rights 
have a strong presence in the 
Southeastern region? 
There is a real opportunity here to make a 
difference for children in need. The South 
is a dynamic region of the country with 
tremendous growth, resources, and people 
who care. W e have to make sure that legis -
latures in the South and the rest of the 
country are responsive to the needs of our 
country’s children, which is why we are so 
excited about Children’s Rights estab -
lishing a southeastern base in Atlanta.CR INSIDER: GREG HECHT
With more than 30 years of practice, Greg Hecht is the Principal Attorney at Hecht Walker, 
P.C. He has an accomplished history of advocating for children, both as State Senator and 
State Representative in the Georgia General Assembly where he authored numerous child 
abuse prevention laws, and on the board of Families First, a shelter and counseling provider 
to abused and neglected children and families. Greg and his wife Cheri are the proud 
adoptive parents of two girls who started their lives in foster care. Instrumental in helping 
expand Children’s Rights’ presence in Atlanta and the Southeast, Greg combines visionary 
ideals with pragmatic know-how when it comes to using the law to protect children.
Bring HOPE wherever you go with 
this golden pin designed by Ronald 
Draper, renowned artist and 
member of the Children’s Rights Y oung 
Professional Leadership Council.
 Formerly in foster care himself, 
Ronald now aims to inspire with his 
art. “I wanted to show that positivity 
is very possible and something that we 
need to continue to hope and aim for,” 
he says. “ Art allows for understanding 
and compassion in a way that transcends 
language. I believe in the power of using 
art to create impossible change.”
 Ronald is generously donating  
all proceeds from the “hope” pin to  
Children’s Rights’ legal work for 
neglected and abused children across 
America. Purchase yours today at  
www .ronalddraperart.com/hope.
Got Hope?Your vision for Children’s Rights 
in the Southeast:
W e need to safeguard our children so 
they have the critical mental and physical 
healthcare services they desperately 
need. W e need to protect children from 
abuse, whether they are in the juvenile 
justice system, foster care, or under other 
state supervision. And finally , we need to 
make sure that children are not discrimi -
nated against or bullied for any reason, 
and that they are protected by the law .
We’re delighted to  
introduce you to our  
new logo, Hope!
Hope is Resilience.  
Hope is Protection.  
Hope is Children’s Rights!P.S.Join us at the Children’s Rights  
Atlanta Inspiration Awards  
on November 9, 2018! RSVP:  
childrensrights.org/atlantaOn Sunday , May 6th, cyclists from the NYC area gathered for 
a morning ride and fundraiser for Children’s Rights. This 
fi  rst-time event raised over $25,000 to help advance our new 
legal action campaigns on behalf of children in state foster care, 
education, immigration and juvenile justice systems. Please email 
us at development@childrensrights.org to join the mailing list 
for our 2019 event or fi  nd out how to bring this event to your 
community . Special thanks to our sponsors, event partners and 
donors for making this inaugural event such a success.
Photos: Children’s Rights Champion Ride 2018, NYC. 
Photos courtesy of Unit Nutrition by Marco Quezada 
www.marcoquezada.com.
A hearty thanks to our Cycling Network International 
volunteers for keeping us safe!Children’s Rights Champion Ride 
#RideForKids
upsurge disrupted a decade-long downward trend. In the 
last eight years, the number of child removals in which 
substance abuse is a factor has nearly quadrupled, particu -
larly in regions with higher levels of opioid prescribing 
and opioid deaths.
 In Indiana, one of the states with the biggest 
increases in their foster care population, experts attri-
bute the sudden influx to the opioid epidemic.
 “This isn’t a trickle. This isn’t a wave. It’s a tsunami,” 
Indianapolis Judge Marilyn Moores said in an interview 
with NBC. “It seems like there’s a whole generation of 
people disappearing.”
 The result? In many states, an overburdened child 
welfare system ill-equipped to meet the rising need. 
As children flood the foster care system, budgets are 
stretched, caseworkers are overloaded, and safe homes 
that can meet kids’ needs are limited.
 “My foster home is closed currently because I’m at 
capacity ,” Stephanie says. Since 2008, she has fostered 
more than 20 children. But across the country , the 
demand for suitable homes far outpaces the availability .
 Congress has recognized the urgent need for reform, 
particularly by directing resources toward prevention 
services for parents and families so that children do not have to enter foster care in the first place. In February , 
the Family First Prevention Services Act was signed 
into law , providing funds for preventive services such as 
in-home training, family therapy , and substance abuse 
programs. In March, Congress raised the funding level 
for Child Abuse Prevention and T reatment Act state 
grants from $25 million to $85 million. Partly in response 
to the opioid crisis, the funds will help states protect 
infants exposed to controlled substances.
 These measures are only a start. States must invest 
in evidence-based drug treatment, mental health, and 
counseling programs that help keep families together. 
For kids who must depend on out-of-home care, leaders 
have to re-engineer foster care systems so that they actu-
ally provide the stability young people need.
 “Every child deserves to know that someone loves 
them and will get them where they need to be,” Steph -
anie says. W e need to create a future where that kind of 
support is available to every child.
In April, Children’s Rights launched a petition against 
the T rump Administration’s policy of separating 
children and their families at the U.S. border. Since 
October 2017, more than 700 children have been 
separated along the southwest border from adults 
claiming to be their parents, including 100 children 
under the age of 4, the New Y ork Times reports.
 Lead Counsel Christina Wilson Remlin denounced 
the cruel policy on CNN en Español, and Executive 
Director Sandy Santana was quoted in the Daily Beast: 
“Needlessly ripping kids, toddlers, babies away from their 
parents is inhumane, barbaric and unconstitutional ... An 
administration that purports to uphold family values is 
callously inflicting devastating trauma on children and 
families in service of its punitive immigration policies.”
 All signatures will be delivered to Department of 
Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen. So far, we’ve gathered more than 50,000 signatures — and 
that count keeps growing! Now more than ever, we need 
your voice too. Add your name today:
childrensrights.org/KeepThemT ogetherStop separating children from their 
families at the U.S. border.SIGN OUR PETITION(continued from page 1)Children of the Opioid Crisis:  
A Growing NumberIN FOCUS:
P.S. We’re hosting Children of the Opioid Epidemic,  
a breakfast briefing & panel on June 19, 2018.  
Learn more: childrensrights.org/opioid-panelFighting for Children in 
Florida Calling to 
the Stage: 
Broadway’s 
Jordan RothWhy am I good enough for one 
week, but not good enough to 
stay?”
 That’s what L.T ., a 16-year-old 
girl in foster care in South Florida, 
asked after being repeatedly shuffled 
from one placement to the next. In 
her more than four years in Florida 
Department of Children and Fami-
lies (DCF) custody , she had at least 
17 placements and 25 placement 
moves, some lasting no more than 
several hours.
 Unfortunately , the instability 
L.T . experienced is all too common. 
There is a widespread shortage of 
foster homes in Miami-Dade and 
Monroe Counties, putting children 
at risk of harm as their develop-
mental and educational needs are 
cast aside and their mental health 
needs go unmet.
 In February , Children’s Rights 
and international law firm Baker 
McKenzie filed H.G. v. Carroll, a 
federal class-action lawsuit on behalf 
of the approximately 2,000 children 
in foster care in Florida’s “Southern 
Region.”
 The lawsuit charges that the state 
has long failed to address this known 
drastic shortage of foster homes—
with dangerous results. In at least 
two documented cases, children 
in state care tragically committed 
suicide after experiencing unsafe 
and unstable living conditions, 
including sexual abuse. Additionally , 
infants and toddlers are warehoused 
in emergency shelters and group 
homes, robbing them of the family 
environment they desperately need.
 Kids are placed wherever there 
is a bed or a slot and not matched 
with families that can meet their 
needs. Children like L.T . experience 
a staggering number of placement 
moves. According to the state’s own 
data, of the children who spent time in Miami-Dade and Monroe County 
foster care between January 2016 
and June 2017, 435 kids lived in 10 or 
more places; 187 kids lived in 20 or 
more places; 54 children lived in at 
least 50 places; and 27 children were 
bounced around between 80 and 140 
placements during their total time in 
state care.
 “There is long-term harm when 
kids are treated like ping pong balls, 
or when infants are warehoused in 
shelters and group homes,” added 
Ira Lustbader, litigation director for 
Children’s Rights. “Extreme insta-
bility and unnecessary institutional-
ization can physically damage chil-
dren’s developing brains, impacting 
their learning and behavior. Y ou 
might as well say , ‘W e’re not giving 
you a fair shot in life’.”
 An immediate effort by DCF 
to have the case dismissed was 
swiftly rejected by the federal court 
in T allahassee. The state said the 
plaintiff children failed to assert 
clearly enough that the Depart -
ment has policies or customs that 
put all children at risk of harm. 
The Court found “the complaint 
alleges in unmistakable clarity that 
the Department routinely treats 
children this way .” 
 W riting in the Miami Herald, 
local attorneys Bernard Perlmutter, 
Robert Latham, and Stewart 
Cooke—who represent kids in 
foster care with special needs—
voiced the urgent need for this 
action: “ Any parent can tell you that 
this is no way to treat a child. As 
local attorneys representing young 
people in DCF’s care, we have a legal 
and moral obligation to act.”
 Through this lawsuit, Children’s 
Rights seeks system-wide changes 
that will prevent ongoing harms to 
foster children in DCF custody .“
Jordan Roth, Broadway 
producer and emcee 
extraordinaire, will host 
Children’s Rights 2018 
Benefit & Inspiration Awards! 
Children’s Rights couldn’t be 
prouder to have Jordan as an 
ally . As the owner of Jujamcyn 
Theaters, Jorda n was recently 
recognized for his work on 
four T ony Award-nominated 
Broadway shows, including 
Angels in America, Frozen, 
Mean Girls, and Springsteen on 
Broadway. Our 2018 Benefit 
& Inspiration Awards is one 
performance you don’t want to 
miss! Save the date: October 16, 
2018. See back page for more details.Children’s Rights
88 Pine Street, Suite 800
New York, NY 10005
To make a gift to Children’s Rights, visit www.childrensrights.org and click “Donate Now.”www.childrensrights.org@ChildrensRights
facebook.com/childrensrights
@childrensrights
SAVE THE DATE!All proceeds from our events sponsor advocacy and action 
for children who suﬀ  er in America’s broken state systems.
Protecting
Kids.
Providing
Hope.
From moving personal stories to beautiful 
waterfront views, this year’s Beneﬁ  t & Inspiration 
Awards on October 16, 2018 at the Chelsea 
Lighthouse will take your breath 
away! Stay tuned for information 
about our honorees. To reserve tickets 
and tables, contact Megan Lewis at 
mlewis@childrensrights.org or visit 
childrensrights.org/inspiration.2018 Children’s Rights
Beneﬁ  t &
Inspiration Awards
OCT 16
NYC
Children’s Rights is establishing a strong 
presence in the Southeastern region. Join us 
for the inaugural Children’s Rights Atlanta 
Inspiration Awards on November 
9, 2018 at the Cherokee Town and 
Country Club. To reserve tickets and 
tables, contact Kathleen Rivera at 
krivera@childrensrights.org or visit 
childrensrights.org/atlanta.2018 Children’s Rights
Atlanta Inspiration 
Awards
NOV 9
ATL