T exas Update
S t o p  P r i s o n e r  R a p e  •  T e x a s  U p d a t e  •  M a r c h  2 0 0 8by Stop Prisoner RapeStop Prisoner 
Rape:  A Brief 
Background
Stop Prisoner 
Rape (SPR), an 
international human 
rights organization, 
seeks to end sexual 
abuse in all forms of 
detention. SPR has 
three core goals: to 
ensure government 
accountability for 
prisoner rape; to 
transform negative 
stereotypes about 
inmates and their right 
to be free from sexual 
abuse; and to promote 
access to resources 
for those who have 
survived this form  
of violence. 
SPR was instrumental 
in securing passage 
of the Prison Rape 
Elimination Act 
(PREA), the first 
federal legislation 
addressing sexual 
violence in detention. 
Since PREA was 
signed into law in 
2003, SPR has led the 
call for its meaningful 
implementation. 
SPR provides expert 
analysis, survivor 
accounts, training, and 
technical assistance 
to federal agencies 
with mandates 
under the law, and 
to policymakers and 
corrections officials at 
the federal, state, and 
county levels.
SPR’s work takes place 
within the framework 
of international 
human rights law and 
norms. The sexual 
assault of prisoners, 
whether perpetrated 
by corrections officials 
or by inmates with 
the acquiescence 
of staff, is a crime 
and is recognized 
internationally as a 
form of torture.T exas State Prisons Plagued by Sexual Abuse
(Abuse,  cont’d. on Page 2)Of the more than 900 letters Stop 
Prisoner Rape (SPR) has received 
from survivors of sexual abuse 
in detention nationwide in recent years, 
an alarming 20 percent have come from 
inmates at prisons run 
by the Texas Depart -
ment of Criminal Jus -
tice (TDCJ). In their 
letters, inmates speak of 
shocking abuses. Each 
story is unique; all are 
devastating. When read 
together, they lay bare 
serious systemic failures 
of the TDCJ to uphold 
its absolute responsibility 
to protect the safety of its 
inmates. 
Against the backdrop of 
those survivor letters, it 
was not surprising that 
the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics (BJS), in its first-ever inmate sur -
vey on sexual abuse (see sidebar on page 2) 
found that five out of the ten prisons with 
the highest reported levels of sexual abuse 
are run by the TDCJ. 
At each of the five TDCJ facilities, between 
9.3 and 15.7 percent of inmates reported 
that they had been sexually abused in the 
previous 12 months alone; the national 
average was 4.5 percent. The facility with the highest prevalence of sexual assault in the 
country was the Estelle Unit in Huntsville, 
followed by the Clements Unit in Amarillo. 
The other three Texas facilities were the 
Allred Unit in Iowa Park, the Coffield Unit 
in Tennessee Colony, and 
the Mountain View Unit 
in Gatesville—a women’s 
prison. 
The BJS inmate survey 
tracks staff-on-inmate 
and inmate-on-inmate 
abuses separately. Alarm -
ingly, TDCJ inmates at 
the five worst facilities 
reported significantly 
higher rates of sexual 
abuse by staff than did 
those surveyed elsewhere. 
Nearly 12 percent of in -
mates at the Clements 
Unit reported abuse by 
staff, as did nearly 8 per -
cent of inmates at the Estelle Unit, and 
more than 5 percent at both the Coffield 
and Allred Units. 
Numerous prisoners who have written to 
SPR from TDCJ facilities describe inmate 
classification policies and practices that fail 
to ensure the physical safety of vulnerable 
inmates. Many have also highlighted homo -
phobic and dismissive staff attitudes, which 
effectively set vulnerable inmates up to be 
Photo by: Phil MorleyP  a  g  e  2   •   S  t  o  p   P  r  i  s  o  n  e  r   R  a  p  e   •   T  e  x  a  s   U  p  d  a  t  e   •   M  a  r  c  h   2  0  0  8BJS Surveys 
Prisoners 
About 
Sexual 
Abuse
The Prison Rape Elimina -
tion Act (PREA) charges 
the Bureau of Justice Sta -
tistics (BJS) with examining 
the prevalence of sexual 
violence in detention. As 
part of that mandate, the 
BJS has begun conducting 
annual nationwide con -
fidential surveys directly 
with inmates. 
In December 2007, the BJS 
released the results of its 
first such survey, in “Sexual 
Victimization in State and 
Federal Prisons Reported 
by Inmates, 2007.” This 
report confirmed the 
pervasive nature of sexual 
abuse in detention: 4.5 
percent of inmates held in 
state and federal prisons 
reported having been 
sexually abused during the 
previous 12 months alone. 
As a follow-up to the an -
nual BJS inmate surveys, 
the federal Review Panel 
on Prison Rape is respon -
sible for holding hearings 
with the facilities with the 
highest and the lowest lev -
els of sexual violence. The 
Review Panel is scheduled 
to hold one such hear -
ing in Houston, T exas, 
on March 27-28, 2008, 
highlighting the five T exas 
facilities that were among 
the ten prisons with the 
highest rates of reported 
abuse nationwide. SPR 
prepared this Texas Update  
in anticipation of that 
hearing.victimized. In addition, survivors regularly 
emphasize the failure of TDCJ prison of -
ficials to respond swiftly and fully in the 
aftermath of a sexual assault, leading inves -
tigations to fail and rendering victims unable 
to access even basic healthcare services.
Classification and Housing 
“I am now 20 years old. Right now I am in 
TDCJ and I am trying to get put in safe -
keeping. I have been being sexually harassed 
on every unit I’ve been on I am on Allred 
Unit on Life Endangerment cause I was 
sexually assaulted. It ain’t the first time ei -
ther but TDCJ keeps putting me in [general 
population] where I keep getting assaulted 
sexually…TDCJ will not help me so could 
you help me some way somehow in getting 
put in safekeeping.”
One of the most important tools for pre -
venting sexual abuse in detention is an in -
mate classification system that ensures that 
prisoners who are vulnerable to sexual abuse 
and inmates who are predatory are housed 
separately. In order to protect vulnerable 
inmates, classification policies must take 
into account—from the moment an inmate 
enters prison for the first time—basic fac -
tors that are known to increase the risk for 
sexual abuse. Such factors include whether 
someone is young, nonviolent, small, trans -
gender, gay, or perceived to be gay. Housing 
decisions must also be revisited as soon as 
an inmate reports sexual violence, or threats 
of abuse.A number of survivors in TDCJ facilities 
have told SPR that their cellmates sexually 
assaulted them. In several of these cases, the 
victims had expressed fears for their safety to 
prison officials before the assaults took place, 
to no avail. An inmate at the Hughes Unit 
told SPR that it took officials two weeks to 
transfer a cellmate who was manipulating 
him into having sex. A prisoner at the Mi -
chael Unit writes that he was left with preda -
tory cellmates despite making it known to 
prison staff that he was being threatened:
“I told the rank that I was being threaten by 
Crip gang members but they still place me in 
a cell with 2 of them…they force me to have 
anal sex then put there hands on me…this 
happen twice by gang members Crips.”
The stark failure of the TDCJ to keep its 
vulnerable inmates safe from sexual abuse 
is particularly disturbing considering the 
existence of its Safe Prisons Program, which 
expressly aims to protect such inmates from 
sexual victimization. At the order of the 
Texas Legislature, the TDCJ began imple -
menting the Safe Prisons Program in 2003, 
and it has since become one of the TDCJ’s 
flagship initiatives.
As part of the Safe Prisons Program and 
related classification policies aimed at 
protecting vulnerable prisoners, the TDCJ 
must provide safe housing alternatives, 
such as single cells or special non-punitive 
units, to inmates whom staff are unable to 
keep safe in general population. Through 
this program, the TDCJ has created a 
“Safekeeping”  classification category for, Note on survivor quotes : The quotes that appear in this T exas Update  are drawn 
from letters SPR has received between 2004 and 2008 from inmates held at Texas 
state prisons. The words of the survivors have been preserved, including grammatical 
mistakes and spelling errors. Where necessary for reader comprehension, SPR has 
added words within square brackets. In order to protect the confidentiality of the 
survivors, identifying information has been removed.
(Abuse,  cont’d. from Page 1)
(Abuse,  cont’d. on Page 3)The U.S. incarcerates a larger pro -
portion of its population than 
any other country in the world, 
holding almost 2.4 million people—or 
well over 1 in 100 adults—in custody. 
Of these inmates, a staggering number 
experience sexual abuse. 
According to the best available research, 
one in five men experiences sexual abuse 
at some point during his incarceration. 
At women’s facilities, the levels of vic -
timization vary considerably, with one 
in four women suffering sexual abuse 
at the worst ones. A recent nationwide 
inmate survey, conducted by the federal 
Bureau of Justice Statistics, found that 
4.5 percent of inmates held at state and 
federal prisons had been victimized in 
the previous 12 months alone.
With little or no institutional protection, 
victims of sexual abuse are left beaten 
and bloodied, are impregnated against 
their will, contract HIV, and suffer 
severe psychological harm. Survivors of 
sexual violence are frequently marked as 
targets for further attacks. T reated like the property of perpetrators, many are 
forced into prostitution arrangements 
with other prisoners. 
In most women’s facilities, male officials 
are allowed to watch female inmates 
when they dress, shower, and use the toi -
let. Some engage in verbal degradation of 
prisoners under their supervision, while 
others abuse their authority by offering 
privileges for sexual favors, coercing 
vulnerable inmates into having sex, or 
raping prisoners whose safety they are 
charged with protecting.
While anyone can become a victim of 
sexual abuse in detention, some inmates 
are at especially high risk. Male victims 
are typically nonviolent, small, shy or 
gender non-conforming, and often in 
prison for the first time. Among women, 
mentally ill inmates and those new to 
prison life are particularly vulnerable. 
Youth are at high risk for abuse, espe -
cially when incarcerated with adults. 
Gay and transgender inmates, or those 
who are perceived to be gay, are also 
disproportionately victimized. A Nationwide Human Rights Crisis“offenders identified as being more vulner -
able than the average general population 
offender.” Under the Safe Prisons Program, 
these inmates are to be housed separately 
but allowed to access the same programming 
and privileges as the general population. 
Unfortunately, since the creation of the 
program, SPR has received numerous letters 
from rape survivors who were not placed 
in single cells and who were denied access 
to safekeeping yards, despite their obvious 
vulnerability to sexual abuse. Worse still, 
several inmates who succeeded in securing 
a bed in a safekeeping unit have reported 
being victimized while there. SPR believes that the Safe Prisons Program 
is an important initiative that has the 
potential to become an effective tool for 
preventing and addressing sexual abuse, 
and the organization has agreed to serve on 
the TDCJ’s Safe Prisons Program Advisory 
(Abuse,  cont’d. on Page 4)(Abuse,  cont’d. from Page 2)
S  t  o  p   P  r  i  s  o  n  e  r   R  a  p  e   •   T  e  x  a  s   U  p  d  a  t  e   •   M  a  r  c  h   2  0  0  8   •   P  a  g  e  3
Photo by: Eliza SnowCouncil, which monitors the implemen -
tation of the program. Based on inmate 
accounts, however, SPR believes that the 
TDCJ must redouble its efforts to classify 
inmates appropriately upon entry into its 
prisons and to grant vulnerable inmates 
swift transfers into the protective housing 
that they need. In addition, the TDCJ must 
continue to monitor the safety of these in -
mates throughout their incarceration, ensur -
ing that the Safe Prisons Program does not 
set vulnerable prisoners up for precisely the 
kind of abuse from which they purportedly 
are being protected.
Staff Attitudes
“I’ve been made to feel that as an openly gay 
male, I somehow brought this on myself.”
Rape is not an inevitable part of prison life. 
On the contrary, when effective policies are in place and fully implemented, sexual 
violence can be prevented. Unfortunately, 
SPR regularly receives reports from inmates 
nationwide describing an engrained staff ac -
ceptance of predatory behavior by inmates, 
paired with a powerful ‘code of silence’ in 
the face of staff sexual misconduct. Such 
attitudes on the part of prison officials 
contribute significantly to an environment 
in which sexual abuse thrives. 
Within TDCJ facilities, vulnerable inmates 
report being set up for sexual violence by 
staff who treat reports of abuse—or threats 
thereof—with derision or callousness. In 
particular, LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
and transgender) prisoners describe being 
treated dismissively by staff. According to 
numerous survivor letters, TDCJ officials 
tend to conflate homosexuality and trans -
gender status with consent to rape, and 
as a result fail to take appropriate action 
when these inmates request assistance. A 
prisoner at the Telford Unit describes being 
“Calvin,” an inmate who has been raped in several T exas prisons, 
including the Clements Unit, writes:  
“The first two times I did not [file a grievance], I did not know what a grievance 
was and at the time I could not read or write. The 3th time I was raped I did and 
I was ship off the unit. The 4th time I was raped I was not ship. I was put right 
back in my housing area and I was attack by the same man and almost raped 
again. The trouble I have had is not being taken serious…I was put in Safekeep -
ing only to be raped 2 more times. It’s like the officials put me in Safekeeping and I 
should accept being raped, and they do not want to hear about it anymore.
TDCJ need to know that what they’re doing is not working...The Safe Prisons Pro -
gram is not being used to protect inmates, it’s being used as a tool by the officers and 
other inmates to harass and retaliate against inmates. The inmates that are raping 
other inmates are not being prosecuted. In my case, I have been raped 4 times and 
no one has been prosecuted.”
P  a  g  e  4   •   S  t  o  p   P  r  i  s  o  n  e  r   R  a  p  e   •   T  e  x  a  s   U  p  d  a  t  e   •   M  a  r  c  h   2  0  0  8(Abuse,  cont’d. on Page 5)(Abuse,  cont’d. from Page 3)told, when asking for protection, “You’re an 
admitted homosexual, you can’t be raped. 
We’re denying you. You learn how to defend 
yourself .” 
Another inmate, who was raped at the 
Connally Unit, writes that, after repeatedly 
requesting protection, he was told:
“If you file one more life endangerment, 
we will physically put you in a cell with 
someone who will beat your ass…” The 
inmate goes on to say,  “I was told by 
[another] lieutenant that I needed to find 
someone to hang out with who could protect 
me. He was telling me I had to ride [enter 
into a coercive relationship with a stronger 
inmate].”
In addition to the TDCJ’s failure to take 
seriously reports of sexual abuse by other 
prisoners, SPR regularly receives letters 
from survivors who have been assaulted by 
TDCJ staff. Most of these inmates did not 
file formal complaints reporting the abuse, 
for fear of retaliation or shame, or because 
they simply did not expect such reports to 
be taken seriously by staff—who, as survi -
vors often describe them, were likely to be 
colleagues of the perpetrator. SPR considers 
the staff ‘code of silence’ described by TDCJ 
survivors alarming, leaving inmates who 
have been subjected to staff sexual miscon -
duct with nowhere to turn. 
When survivors do report sexual miscon -
duct by prison staff, they often face retalia -
tion, are transferred to punitive conditions 
in a segregated housing unit, or are simply 
ignored. An inmate who was sexually as -
saulted by an officer at the Stiles Unit 
explains what happened to him after he 
reported the incident: 
“Since this has happened, I have been 
literally laughed at by a captain on the 
staff about the situation. Some officers and 
inmates have ridiculed me and even say I’m 
snitching…It’s hard to believe that after all this, the only step the administration has 
taken is to place this officer in [a different 
part of the unit].”
While SPR recognizes that the majority 
of TDCJ staff take seriously their duty to 
protect the safety of inmates under their 
supervision, the organization is deeply 
concerned by the dismissive staff attitudes 
described by prisoner rape survivors, espe -
cially toward inmates whom officials appear 
to consider less worthy of protection, such 
as LGBT prisoners.
SPR believes that the TDCJ must make 
an explicit effort, as a matter of urgency, 
to shift staff attitudes toward greater rec -
ognition of every human being’s inherent 
and inalienable right to be free from sexual 
abuse. In-depth sexual violence awareness 
training is an essential tool for fostering 
such a shift, especially if paired with regular 
testing of policy awareness, performance 
reviews, and the tying of staff responses to 
incidents of sexual abuse to promotions and 
salary increases. 
S  t  o  p   P  r  i  s  o  n  e  r   R  a  p  e   •   T  e  x  a  s   U  p  d  a  t  e   •   M  a  r  c  h   2  0  0  8   •   P  a  g  e  5(Abuse,  cont’d. on Page 7)(Abuse,  cont’d. from Page 4)
Photo by:  Andrew Johnson“Crystal” is a small-framed transgender woman held at one of the 
five T exas prisons with the highest reported prevalence of sexual 
victimization. She describes the abuse she has endured: 
“This is my first time in real prison. I have been in the TDCJ for almost two years 
now and I have found it extremely difficult to live in general population. Here in 
T exas there is something called safekeeping which is a set-up for inmates that are 
vulnerable because they are gay, weak, scared, ex-gang members, or some other reason. 
I found out about safekeeping after I had already run across many safety issues. Once 
I did find out that there was a place where I could feel safer, I repeatedly requested a 
transfer, but my attempts to get into safekeeping have been ignored. I believe that it is 
evident to the officers that I am having major problems in my current unit, but still 
they refuse to classify me into safekeeping.
Because officers are not doing anything to protect me, I get into trouble so that I 
can be placed in solitary confinement where I don’t have to deal with the general 
population inmates. In general population, I have been extorted, I have been forced to 
ride with a gang in order to be protected from another, 
more violent gang, and I have had to do sexual favors 
for gang members. I have also had to do other favors 
such as hold contraband, transfer contraband to other 
inmates, and wash laundry, clean, and cook for gang 
members. I am an artist so in order to pay for my 
protection I have drawn and sold portraits. I am tired 
of being scared and of having to do things against my 
will because I am scared. I just can’t seem to get help 
from anyone. I did spend two months in safekeeping 
at a different unit, and I felt much safer, but then I was transferred and once again 
placed in general population where the cycle of extortion and sexual assault continues.
I’m tired and I’m scared and I no longer want to be anybody’s property or have to pay 
money so that I won’t be hurt. I have written to several offices of the TDCJ, including 
the Office of the Inspector General and the State Classification Committee, but I 
have not received a response or any information. It is as if my safety doesn’t matter 
to anybody and that’s why I do whatever these inmates tell me to do. I don’t want to 
contract HIV or any other STD, but I’m worried that if things don’t change I will 
eventually be infected with something.”
P  a  g  e  6   •   S  t  o  p   P  r  i  s  o  n  e  r   R  a  p  e   •   T  e  x  a  s   U  p  d  a  t  e   •   M  a  r  c  h   2  0  0  8
Photo by: Jonathan ParryResponses to Abuse
“Getting raped destroys you from the inside 
out, and it takes a part of you and puts it 
where you can’t reach it.”
The horror of prisoner rape does not end 
with the assault. Faced with few options, 
incarcerated survivors of sexual abuse tend 
to suffer in silence, unable to access basic 
mental health counseling and medical care. 
In the short term, survivors often experience 
shock, disbelief, panic, and fear. Long-term 
psychological problems include post-trau -
matic stress disorder (PTSD), anxiety, 
depression, exacerbation of pre-existing 
psychiatric disorders, drug and alcohol 
addictions, and suicidal feelings. To make 
matters worse, most inmates choose not to 
file formal complaints after being sexually 
abused, for fear of retaliation or because they 
are unable to navigate the prison grievance 
system. 
In letters to SPR, TDCJ inmates describe 
the intense sense of isolation they experience after being sexually assaulted, especially 
when their requests for assistance have been 
ignored or trivialized. One inmate who 
wrote to SPR nine months after being raped 
at the Coffield Unit says: “I’ve been trying 
to get counseling here on my prison unit 
but I have not gotten any responses from 
the mental health staff. ”Another prisoner, 
a young man who was transferred to the 
Estelle Unit after being raped at another 
facility, describes his emotional condition 
in the aftermath of a sexual assault:
“I have tried to receive help from the Psy -
chiatric Department [of the Estelle Unit] 
for my depression and stress. But they won’t 
help me. [A family member]has tried several 
times to get them to. I need medication at 
the very least. I am unable to even function 
some days. I now suffer from frequent panic 
attacks that I have never had before. I need to be able to let this out somehow.  I have kept 
it all bottled-up inside for too long.” 
Other survivors report that, when they are 
offered the opportunity to see a counselor, 
the meeting is neither confidential nor safe. 
“Derek” has been raped repeatedly during his time at a TDCJ 
facility. He writes:
“I am an inmate here in a T exas prison…and I am a known homosexual and 
target of rape and extortion that officials are aware of, yet [they] refuse to allow 
me the privilege to do my sentence [with other homosexual inmates]. I am 
repeatedly placed in harm’s way, and set upon by gang members and thug guards 
before the unit will even attempt to help me. TDCJ refuses to help me.
I have been repeatedly raped, extorted, and jumped on and placed back in the 
same housing location, at least ten different times from unit to unit! Never once 
allowing me to reach the safekeeping that TDCJ preaches to the public they have. 
I have never been given this chance at safety and I fear for my life and well-
being as I awake everyday in general population.”(Abuse,  cont’d. on Page 8)(Abuse,  cont’d. from Page 5)
S  t  o  p   P  r  i  s  o  n  e  r   R  a  p  e   •   T  e  x  a  s   U  p  d  a  t  e   •   M  a  r  c  h   2  0  0  8   •   P  a  g  e  7STOP PRISONER RAPE
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
On the contrary, counseling sessions often 
occur in view or within earshot of correc-
tions officials and other inmates, who may 
have participated in the assault. Even worse, 
some inmates describe a shocking lack of 
professionalism and expertise regarding 
the issue of sexual violence among TDCJ 
counselors. A survivor who suffers from 
severe PTSD reports that a counselor said 
to him, “This is prison, stuff like that hap -
pens here .”
In addition to the lack of basic healthcare 
services in the aftermath of a sexual assault, 
many TDCJ inmates who did wish to make 
formal complaints have described having 
difficulty navigating the prison grievance 
process. A survivor of rape at the Hughes 
Unit wrote to the Office of the Inspector 
General for the TDCJ that, “I am being 
restricted in my access to the grievance pro -
cedure by not being able to obtain grievance 
forms and to access of information concern -
ing TDCJ rules and policy. ” 
When formal complaints of sexual violence 
are not met with appropriate responses, 
survivors become less likely to report their 
abuse. This trend is evidenced not only in 
the volume of letters SPR receives from 
survivors who never filed official reports, but 
also by comparing administrative reports 
of sexual violence to the levels of abuse 
reported confidentially in the Bureau of Jus -
tice Statistics 2007 national inmate survey. 
Rates of abuse reported by TDCJ inmates 
in the national survey were 13 times higher 
than what TDCJ correctional authorities 
officially reported in the year 2006.
In recent years, TDCJ officials have empha -
sized the importance of filing formal reports 
in the aftermath of sexual abuse, enabling the system to protect victims and to hold 
perpetrators accountable. However, inmates 
describe to SPR a disjuncture between this 
zero-tolerance policy and the reality faced by 
survivors, whose reports of abuse are often ig -
nored. An inmate who was sexually assaulted 
by an officer at the Estelle Unit explains: 
“We are constantly told to report any 
attempts at sexual assault…but when we 
do, the reports are ignored…Even when 
we demand polygraph tests to shore up our 
allegations, we are still ignored…There is 
so much sexual violence in this system; it’s a 
wonder someone hasn’t spoken up sooner…
Something has to be done.”
Each case of sexual assault in prison consti -
tutes a failure on the part of the facility at 
which it occurs. Survivors who are treated 
with professionalism and respect following 
sexual abuse describe to SPR how such treat -
ment has helped them begin their healing 
process.
However, at many TDCJ prisons, the dev -
astation of sexual violence is further aggra -
vated by the poor responses to this type of 
violence on the part of officials. By leaving 
victims to suffer in isolation, and by allow -
ing impunity for sexual abuse to thrive, the 
TDCJ has created a vicious circle.
SPR urges the TDCJ to ensure that all survi -
vors of sexual abuse are offered confidential 
rape crisis counseling, preferably by an out -
side counselor, and medical care comparable 
to that available in the community. In ad -
dition, SPR believes that the TDCJ must 
translate its zero-tolerance policy toward 
sexual abuse into an environment where 
inmates who have been sexually abused are 
able to file formal complaints without fear 
of retaliation and further abuse.
T el:  (213) 384-1400
Fax: (213) 384-1411
info@spr.org
www.spr.org(Abuse,  cont’d. from Page 7)
S t o p  P r i s o n e r  R a p e  •  T e x a s  U p d a t e  •  M a r c h  2 0 0 8