GUANTÁNAMO DETAINEES AND 
GOVERNMENT LAWYERS FILE 
BRIEFS IN SUPREME COURT CASE DETERMINING DETAINEES’ RIGHTS 
TO BRING SUITS IN FEDERAL 
COURT 
 The U.S. Supreme Court will hear a consoli-dated case this term that will once again 
decide the issue of Guantánamo detainees’ 
right to challenge thei r detention in federal 
court. This case combines Al Odah v. United 
States and Boumediene v. Bush . Al Odah  
consists of the first 11 habeas corpus peti-
tions filed after the landmark Supreme Court 
decision in Rasul v. Bush in 2004; Boumedi-
ene is on behalf of six humanitarian workers 
taken to Guantánamo after the Bosnian courts ordered local authorities to release 
them. 
 On August 27, 2007, the Center for Consti-tutional Rights and co-c ounsel filed briefs in 
the case, arguing that detainees held in U.S. 
custody possess fundamental constitutional 
rights, and that the processes which exist are insufficient to vindicate their rights. On Octo-ber 9, 2007, the government filed its oppo-sition brief in the case.  
 
Al Odah  revisits many of the fundamental 
issues previously decided by the Supreme Court in CCR’s case Rasul v. Bush  in 2004, 
when the high court determined that detain-
ees have a right to access the federal courts 
to challenge their detention. Since Rasul , the 
government has argued that, despite the ability of detainees to bring cases, they h a v e  n o  r i g h t s  t o  b e  v i n d i c a t e d  i n  U . S .   
courts.  Moreover, since Rasul , Congress 
has passed two laws which attempt to re-move the right of de tainees to challenge 
their detention through habeas corpus – the Detainee Treatment Act in 2005, and the 
Military Commissions Act in 2006.  
 
COURT OF APPEALS HEARING “DTA 
PETITIONS”; GOVERNMENT  CONSIDERING NEW COMBATANT 
STATUS REVIEW TRIBUNALS  
 
In the Detainee Treatment Act and the Mili-tary Commissions Act, the U.S. Congress 
limited the rights of Guantánamo detainees 
to file habeas petitions to challenge the legality of their detention, and provided an inadequate alternative remedy which law-yers are currently challenging in court.  The alternative remedy – a “DTA petition” – 
provides that detainees can file a petition to 
challenge their “enemy combatant” determi-nations in the Court of  Appeals of the D.C. 
Circuit.  The enemy combatant determina-tions resulted from Combatant Status Review 
Tribunals (CSRTs) in 2004.   
 In the early petitions,  the Court of Appeals 
has demonstrated the inadequacy of this remedy. On July 20, the Court of Appeals 
held that the government would be com-
pelled to provide the complete record of a detainee – all the “government information” – to both the judge and the detainee’s law-yer; yet this July ruling also imposed severe 
limitations on the communication between 
attorneys and detainees.  The government strongly challenged this ruling, citing the disruption that would be caused by the need to gather and provide all government 
information. On Octobe r 3, the Circuit Court 
refused to rehear this issue.  In response to the government’s concerns about the diffi-culty of compiling all government informa-tion for individual peti tioners, the court sug-
gested that the government could resolve 
this problem by convening new CSRTs.   On October 9, the U.S. mi litary stated that it 
was considering the possibility of reconven-
ing CSRTs for some or all detainees. Re-
cently, two military officers who had sat on prior CSRTs in 2004 expressed strong criti-cism of the inadequacy of these processes.  One of these men, Lt. Col. Stephen Abra-
ham, also voiced strong opposition to the 
convening of new CSRTs.  Said Abraham:   "Ultimately, conducting new CSRTs — even 
discussing the possibili ty — repudiates every 
prior assertion that the original CSRTs were 
valid acts, They are, in essence, both a hypocritical act as well as an act of moral cowardice." 
 
CCR ATTORNEYS TO VISIT FORMER 
“GHOST” DETAINEE   
On September 28, 2007, attorneys with the Center for Constitution al Rights (CCR) filed 
a visit request with the Defense Department 
to see their client, Majid Khan, who was 
transferred one year ago from secret CIA 
detention to Guantánamo. Mr. Khan and 13 other detainees were transferred from CIA detention where they were held in se-
cret and subjected to coercive interrogation 
for years without official acknowledgement t h a t  t h e y  w e r e  e v e n  i n  U S  c u s t o d y .  T w o  attorneys from the Center expect to finally meet their client after a year of fighting for 
access. This visit will mark the first visit by 
civilian attorneys to Guantánamo to meet with any of the former ghost detainees des-ignated by the U.S. government to be “high-value detainees” and imprisoned in a sepa-rate facility from the other detainees. 
 
In September, most of the former “ghost” detainees currently at Guantánamo were provided a form by the U.S.  Department of Defense notifying them of their right to an 
attorney. In most cases, detainees had been 
held for years prior to being offered access to counsel. None has yet visited with coun-
sel.  
LAWYERS SEEK TO PREVENT THE TRANSFER OF SOME DETAINEES TO 
COUNTRIES IN WHICH THEY WILL 
BE TORTURED  
Lawyers, in consultation  with their clients, 
have worked to protect the small number of refugees at Guantána mo from being trans-
ferred to countries in which they will be sub-
guantánamo  global justice initiative  
news briefing center for 
constitutional  
rights 
november  2007 
legal updates...  
(continued on page 2) 
Center for Constitution al Rights         www.ccrjustice.org  jected to torture. A relatively small number 
of detainees – approximately 50 – are at 
risk of grave human rights abuses if they 
are repatriated to their home countries. In the last two months, there have been at least two important developments in the efforts to protect Guantánamo’s refugees.  
 
On September 24, 2007, CCR submitted a petition to the US Supreme Court ask-ing it to intervene in the case of a Libyan 
Guantánamo client and prevent his trans-
fer to Libya, where he would likely be 
tortured and possibly killed. The client’s detention at Guantánamo – and the U.S. government’s false and unsubstantiated allegations that he was associated with a 
group hostile to the Qadhafi regime – put 
him at grave risk of indefinite detention, torture, and death if forcibly returned to Libya. The petition asks the Supreme Court to issue an injunction in his case to 
prevent his transfer to Libya. In December 
2006 and again in February 2007, the U.S. government declared its intention to transfer the detainee to Libya, notwith-
standing his fears of severe persecution if 
he were forcibly returned. The U.S. State 
Department reports that, in Libya, “security personnel routinely tortured prisoners during interrogation or as punishment” and that suspected political opponents 
and religious Muslims face brutal repres-
sion by Libyan authorities.   In another related development, a district court judge granted a preliminary injunc-
tion on behalf of Tunisian Guantánamo 
detainee blocking his transfer to Tunisia, where he feared that he would be sub-jected to persecution and torture if re-turned. The Tunisian prisoner was alleg-
edly captured for a bounty and was 
cleared for release in 2005; however, he was tried in absentia in Tunisia and sen-
tenced to 20 years in prison. He ex-pressed to his lawyers that he did not want to be repatriated  to Tunisia because 
of the risks he would face if returned. On 
October 2, 2007, a district court judge held that “it would be  a profound miscar-
riage of justice” if the court allowed the government to transfer the man to Tunisia 
despite the grave risks to his life and 
safety.  
FEDERAL DISTRICT COURT JUDGE 
REVERSES DISMISSALS OF  
DETAINEES’ CASES On Friday, October 5, District Court 
Judge Ricardo Urbina reinstated 16 law-
suits filed by detainees at Guantánamo 
Bay challenging their detention at the U.S. naval base there. Urbina had dis-missed the petitions in September despite the pending Al Odah/Boumediene  cases, 
which will determine the future of all of 
the petitions for habeas corpus filed by Guantánamo detainees. Following Ur-bina’s dismissals, the Department of Jus-tice warned detainees’ attorneys – includ-
ing CCR attorneys and volunteer habeas 
counsel – that they would be barred from visiting their clients unless they filed new 
cases under the Detainee Treatment Act and agreed to far more restrictive pa-
rameters for legal visits and letters. 
 Detainees’ attorneys quickly filed a mo-tion for reconsideration, which Urbina granted on October 5, noting his concern 
about the actions of the Department of 
Justice. "This court expresses no small concern over the Department of Justice precipitously disrupting petitioners' access to their counsel," Urbina wrote. 
 
The 16 cases now return to their prior status – on hold, pending the Supreme Court’s decision in Al Odah v. United 
States  and Boumediene v. Bush . 
 
COURT OF APPEALS HEARS CASE 
BY FORMER DETAINEES 
 On September 14, 2007, CCR co-counsel argued the appeal of the first 
case filed by Guantánamo detainees 
seeking to hold U.S. officials accountable for the physical, psychological, and reli-gious torture and abuse at Guantánamo. The civil case – Rasul v. Rumsfeld  – was 
filed by the Center for Constitutional 
Rights along with co -counsel in October 
2004 on behalf of four British citizens who were unjustly held for more than three years.  
 
Rasul v. Rumsfeld  was filed in October 
2004 in D.C. Circuit Court on behalf of British citizens Shafiq  Rasul, Asif Iqbal,  
Rhuhel Ahmed and Jamal al-Harith. While 
at Guantánamo, they were subject to 
repeated beatings, sleep deprivation, extremes of hot and cold, forced nudity, death threats, interrogations at gunpoint, menacing with unmuzzled dogs, religious 
abuse, and racial harassment. None of the four had ever been a member of a 
terrorist group or taken up arms against 
the United States. The suit charges then-
Secretary of State Do nald Rumsfeld and 
the Pentagon chain of command with approving interrogation methods that they knew were in violation of U.S. and inter-
national law.  
 CCR and co-counsel's appeal before the D.C. Circuit Court of  Appeals seeks to 
overturn a February 2006 D.C. district 
court decision that di smissed the plaintiffs' 
constitutional, Alien Tort Statute (ATS), and Geneva Convention claims and found that the defendants were entitled to qualified immunity as they were acting 
within the scope of their employment in 
authorizing or condoning "aggressive interrogation techniques." However, in a May 2006 decision, D.C. District Court Judge Ricardo Urbina upheld the plain-
tiffs' right to claims of religious abuse 
under the Religious Freedom Restoration 
Act, a law that was passed with over-whelming congressional support. 
update on releases... 
 Nine detainees were recently transferred 
from Guantánamo.  On September 27th 
one Mauritanian detainee, Mohamed 
Lemine Ould Sidi Mohamed, was trans-ferred home to Mauritania and has since been freed.   
On September 29th six Afghans, one 
Yemeni, and one Libyan were transferred out of Guantánamo to their home coun-tries.  In the past, those transferred to Afghanistan have been held in custody 
of the Afghan government for a short 
amount of time and th en released shortly 
thereafter. We also recently learned that the Yemeni government has released the four Yemeni detainees who were trans-
ferred out of Guantánamo in July of 
2007.    In total, there are approximately 330 detainees in Guantánamo.  A total of 
approximately 785 detainees, overall, 
have been held at Guantánamo since 2002.  There have been 445 detainees transferred from Guantánamo to their home countries or countries of resettle-
ment in the last six years.  (continued from page 1) 
Center for Constitution al Rights         www.ccrjustice.org  MEMBERS OF EUROPEAN  
PARLIAMENT SUPPORT  
RESETTLEMENT FOR GUANTÁNAMO’S REFUGEES 
 On September 26, 2007, at a press con-ference held at the European Parliament in Strasbourg, 68 members of the Euro-
pean Parliament supported a call by CCR 
and the International Federation for Hu-man Rights (FIDH) for European Union countries to resettle Guantánamo detain-ees at risk of being tr ansferred to countries 
where they are likely to face persecution 
or torture.   EU leaders have condemned the lawless-ness of the Guantánamo detentions on 
numerous occasions. Yet, to date, only 
Albania - one of the poorest countries in Europe - has accepted a small number of Guantánamo's refugees who could not safely be returned to their home country. 
In early August, in a landmark policy 
change, the British government also called for the release of five non-nationals and their resettlement in the UK. Four of these men had previously applied for or been granted asylum due to fears of persecu-
tion in their home countries.  
 FIDH, CCR, and a multiparty coalition of European Members of Parliament called upon all EU member States to intervene 
and ask the U.S. authorities to resettle in 
EU countries Guantánamo detainees who are either trapped at Guantánamo be-cause they have nowhere to go, or who will be returned to torture or persecution in 
their home countries.  
 
MAJORITY OF SENATORS  
SUPPORT HABEAS CORPUS  
DESPITE REPUBLICAN FILIBUSTER 
  
On September 19, 2007, the U.S. Senate voted on an amendment to restore the 
right to habeas corpus for Guantánamo 
and other detainees, introduced by Sena-tors Arlen Specter, Patrick Leahy and Christopher Dodd as an amendment to the Defense Authorization Bill.  
 
The 56-43 vote signaled the support of a majority of Senators for the ancient right of habeas corpus, suspended by the Military Commissions Act of 2006.  However, that 
majority vote failed to reach the votes 
necessary to defeat a Republican filibuster 
against the amendment. In the U.S. Con-gress, a filibuster can prevent the closure of debate if there is  not the support of 60 
Senators.  
 
The Center for Consti tutional Rights re-
leased the following statement following the vote:   
“The Center for Cons titutional Rights, 
which represents many of the detainees at Guantánamo Bay and coordinates the work of more than 500 pro bono attor-neys working on the detainee cases, ap-
plauds the principled decision of 56 sena-
tors today to support the restoration of the 
right of habeas corpus to detainees held in U.S. custody.   
“We saw today that a majority of our 
senators realize that stripping away a basic right such as habeas corpus from anybody means that everyone's rights are at stake.  
 
“This is but one small step that Congress must take to restore the Constitution after  the passage of last year's damaging Mili-tary Commissions Act, and to ensure that 
justice is served for the detainees at 
Guantánamo Bay. While this was not enough support to overcome a Republi-can filibuster, it is an important sign that there is increasing support for restoring the 
rule of law. We must preserve an individ-
ual's right to challenge an executive de-tention. In a democracy, no President should have the right to label someone, lock them up and throw away the key.“ 
 
YEMENI PRESIDENT CALLS FOR 
RELEASE OF YEMENI DETAINEES 
 During a visit to the United States, Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh called for the 
release and repatriation of all remaining 
Yemeni detainees held at Guantánamo Bay. Ninety-four Yemeni detainees remain at the U.S. naval base’s detention facility.   
In other news, Yemeni authorities have 
released four former Guantánamo detain-ees after more than three months in prison since their return to Yemen. The released 
detainees were identified as Fawazi No-
aman Hamoud, Ali Muhsen Saleh Nas-
ser, Sadeq Mohammad Saeed Isameel and Hani Abdu Musleh Shulan. Amnesty International has appealed to President Ali Abdullah Saleh to release Guantánamo 
returnees who are being held in Yemeni 
prisons without charges or trial.  
NEW YORK TIMES REPORTS ON 
SECRET TORTURE MEMOS 
 
On October 4, 2007, The New York 
Times  reported that the U.S. government is 
still holding people at CIA black sites after 
purporting to end the program a year 
ago, and is generating secret memos to propagate a program of so-called "enhanced interrogation techniques" that in reality qualify as torture and cruel, inhu-
man and degrading treatment. 
According to the report, in 2005, despite 
previous public stat ements declaring tor-
ture to be “abhorrent both to American 
law and values and international norms,” the Justice Department drafted two internal memos providing a legal justification for 
brutal interrogation methods. 
The first of these secret memos was alleg-
edly approved personally by then-Attorney General Alberto Gonzales over 
the objections of then-Deputy Attorney 
General James Comey. It provided ex-plicit authorization to barrage terror sus-
pects with a combination of painful physi-cal and psychological tactics, including 
head-slapping, simulated drowning and frigid temperatures,” the Times report said. 
In a second secret memo produced in the 
summer of 2005, the De parment of Justice 
argued that CIA interrogation methods did 
not violate pending legislation that would 
prohibit “cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.”  Prior memos from the Justice Department authorizing “enhanced interro-
gation techniques” had previously come 
to light; however, these new memos were produced following the exposure of the abuse of prisoners at Abu Ghraib, the resulting scandal, and the Bush administra-
tion’s disavowal of torture. advocacy  updates...  
Center for Constitution al Rights         www.ccrjustice.org  NEW CHARGES FILED AGAINST 
DETAINEE UNDER MILITARY  
COMMISSIONS ACT 
 On October 11, 2007, military prosecu-
tors filed charges against Mohammad 
Jawad, a Pakistani detainee who was living in Afghanistan at the time he was picked up and taken into U.S. custody. Jawad is accused of attempted murder, for his alleged involvement in throwing a 
hand grenade at a U.S. military jeep car-
rying military personnel in Afghanistan in 2002.  Jawad is the fourth detainee to be 
charged under the Military Commissions 
Act of 2006, the law that created the current military commissions procedure as well as containing a host of other provi-sions affecting detainees’ rights to access 
the courts and obtain a hearing. In un-
sealed portions of Jawad’s Combatant Status Review Tribunal (CSRT) held at Guantánamo, he alleges that he con-fessed to participating in the grenade 
attack after torture by Afghan police and 
guards.   To date, no full military commissions have yet taken place. The first detainee to be 
charged, David Hicks, arranged for a 
plea agreement in which he pled guilty to several charges in exchange for a 9-month sentence, after which he was re-turned home to Australia; he served this 
sentence after five ye ars of imprisonment 
without trial. The next two detainees to be charged, Salim Hamdan and Omar Khadr, had the charges against them dis-missed by a military juge; however, these 
charges were recently reinstated by an 
appeals panel. (See below.)   Military commissions under the MCA do not satisfy fundamental due process re-
quirements, and their procedures differ 
markedly from criminal trials and courts-martial under milirary law. Evidence ob-tained through coercion may be used against defendants, and secret evidence 
is allowed against defendants. Crimes not 
considered war crimes may be tried by military commission. In addition, there is no right to a speedy trial nor is the accused 
required to be info rmed of the charges 
against him or her within any particular 
time frame.   
CHIEF MILITARY PROSECUTOR 
RESIGNS AFTER REPORTS OF  
DISPUTES WITH OFFICIALS  
On October 5, 2007, chief military prose-cutor Col. Morris Davis resigned his posi-tion immediately following reports of inter-nal Pentagon debates about the military 
commissions and charging detainees.  
 According to press reports, forces within the Pentagon were pressuring Col. Davis and his staff of prosecutors to produce 
new charges against detainees quickly, 
and to include bold terrorism accusations that would draw positi ve public attention 
to the military commissions process, which has been widely criticized by the legal 
community, the press and the public.  
 Col. Davis asserted that attempts by supe-riors to exert control over the types of charges filed damaged the integrity of the process. Davis' statements indicate that 
the level of influence exerted by military 
officials over the prosecutions is high, as well as the potential influence of political concerns on the military commissions.   
The dispute within the Pentagon about the 
military commissions illustrates the fragility and complications of the military commis-sions process, a process that circumvents many legal protections and rights detain-
ees would receive in federal criminal 
courts, and with far more expansive charg-ing authority than courts-martial under military law, and indicates that disputes within the government about the future of 
the military commissions process continue.  
 
MILITARY CHARGES REINSTATED 
AGAINST KHADR AND HAMDAN; 
APPEALS TO FOLLOW  
 On September 24, 2007, the new Court of Military Commissions Review ruled that 
a military judge must reinstate the charges against 20-year-old Canadian 
Guantánamo detainee Omar Khadr, 
which he had dismissed in a June ruling 
due to a fundamental procedural flaw in the Guantánamo military commission proc-ess.   
Khadr, like all other detainees at 
Guantánamo, was designated an “enemy combatant’” however, his Combatant Status Review Tribunal made no determi-nation as to whether he was an “unlawful” 
combatant, a distinction necessary for 
prosecution under the Military Commis-sions Act. However, the review court’s ruling allows the military commission itself to rule on a defendant’s combatant status 
before proceeding to a commission.  
 The review court’s decision reinstates the charges against Khadr, who was picked up in Afghanistan when he was 15 years 
old, and Salim Hamdan, another detainee 
whose case was dismissed, and opens the door for the filing of new military com-missions charges. Khadr’s attorneys have filed an appeal with the U.S. Court of 
Appeals, seeking to overturn the Court of 
Military Commissions Review’s decision.  
military commissions  updates...  
about the news briefing.. 
This news briefing is produced monthly by 
the Center for Consti tutional Rights, the 
New York City-based non-profit legal and 
educational organization dedicated to 
protecting and advancing the rights guar-anteed by the U.S. Constitution and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. CCR coordinates the representation of 
detainees at Guantánamo Bay with a 
network of over 500 pro bono habeas counsel. It is transl ated into Arabic and 
available online at  
http://www.ccrjustice.org/
reports/Guantanamo-newsletter 
If you would like to re ceive this newsletter, 
send us more information, or get in con-tact: 
Center for Constitutional Rights 
666 Broadway, 7th Floor 
New York, NY 10012 
http://www.ccrjustice.org/ 
(212) 614-6443 
LKates@ccrjustice.org 
Center for Constitution al Rights         www.ccrjustice.org 