CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookIn Geneva, Switzerland, on January 16th, the Vatican was 
called before the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) to respond to tough questions on the long-standing global crisis of sexual violence commit -
ted by Catholic clergy against children and vulnerable adults. High-level representatives from the Vatican were faced with specific questions related to credible allegations that the Holy See enabled and perpetuated the violence by transferring pedophile priests to different parishes, cover -
ing up their crimes and failing to cooperate with national authorities.The UNCRC questioned the Vatican before a room over -
flowing with press and observers, including survivors from around the world who traveled thousands of miles to participate in and witness this historic event. Represen-tatives from CCR and our client, the Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests (SNAP), were present at the hearing, which was the first opportunity for international public accountability ever. CCR and SNAP had presented two reports to the UNCRC in advance of the hearing.Since our last newsletter, there have been a number of important develop-ments in CCR’s landmark stop-and-frisk class action lawsuit, Floyd v. City of New York. From October to January, the Bloomberg administration made a determined effort to undermine the trial court’s historic decision find -
ing the New York Police Department (NYPD) liable for its unconstitutional and racially discriminatory practices. The City’s efforts were aided by a series of troubling rulings by the court of appeals, which required remarkable litigation and advocacy efforts to keep the case alive and ensure the court-ordered reforms would move forward. The Floyd case crystalized so much of 
the City’s frustration over the Bloom-berg administration’s policing prac-tices that discussions about the Floydappeal became a centerpiece of the transition period for Mayor-elect Bill de Blasio—pushing the new mayor to promise to drop the City’s appeal and work toward reforms. CCR worked alongside its allies to ensure the mayor would keep this commitment. Numer -ous state, local and federal elected officials, as well as organizers and community groups, made specific de -
mands to the new mayor that he drop the appeal and embrace reform.
On January 30th, CCR was thrilled 
to announce—at a press conference alongside Mayor de Blasio in a recre-ation center in the Brownsville sec-tion of Brooklyn that had the highest concentration of stop-and-frisks—that the parties reached an agreement for the City to drop the appeal in Floyd. 
The agreement clears the way for the important work of identifying and implementing lasting reforms to the NYPD’s stop-and-frisk practices and holding the NYPD accountable 
Mayor Bill de Blasio announces that the City has agreed to drop the appeal in CCR’s stop-and-frisk case, 
alongside CCR client Nicholas Peart and CCR Executive Director Vince Warren.SPRING 2014
Stop-and-Frisk Update:  
Moving Forward to Real Reform
continued on page 3
continued on page 4In Historic First, Vatican Forced to Answer to the  
UN on its Record of Rape and Sexual ViolenceCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookOn February 24, Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni 
signed the notorious Anti-Homosexuality Bill into law, in-stantly criminalizing the very existence of our client Sexual Minorities Uganda (SMUG) and outlawing LGBTI people’s ability to advocate for their lives and their rights. Such a fundamental denial of rights to an entire class of people is illegal under international law as well as the Ugandan constitution and it demonstrates precisely why SMUG and CCR’s fight to hold Scott Lively accountable for his role in engineering this persecution is so important.
Just three days earlier Lively stood in the National Press 
Club and proudly announced that he was forming a new group to fight the global LGBTI rights movement. The move came less than a week after a mob and police offi -
cers viciously beat a group of gay men in Nigeria, part of a wave of violence that has followed that country’s enact-ment of a draconian anti-LGBTI law in January; and three days after Gambian President Yahya Jammeh called gay people “vermin” and vowed their eradication “the same way we are fighting malaria-causing mosquitoes, if not more aggressively.” With the international spotlight on Russia’s anti-gay law, arrests and vigilante violence thanks to the Sochi Olympics, Lively also took the opportunity to praise President Putin for signing the law and reminded people that he has been to Russia several times. 
A human rights crisis is brewing for LGBTI people in these 
and other countries, and if there is a silver lining to this terrible situation it is that by advertising his role in feeding the crisis, Scott Lively has helped U.S. activists raise aware-ness in our country of the connection between U.S. extrem-ists and global developments. That connection, of course, is the heart of SMUG and CCR’s case against Lively: he is a persecution consultant, flying around the world to advise religious and governmental authorities on what to say and what to do in order to strip LGBTI people of their funda-mental rights and criminalize their existence. 
Lively decries the lawsuit as an attack on his “religious lib-
erty.” That Orwellian fiction comes from the same playbook as those who in the U.S. are trying to pass Jim Crow-like laws that allow businesses to deny service to LGBTQ cus-tomers. The Kansas and Arizona bills briefly made head -
lines this winter but there are 14 other states where similar laws have been proposed. Their proponents claim that their religious liberty is infringed if they are not allowed to discriminate against people they don’t like—because the reasons they don’t like them are religious. Note also that right-wing Christian organizations make the same argu-ment in objecting to anti-bullying laws and policies—that requiring children not to torment their classmates infringes on religious liberty if those children think homosexuality is a sin, a fact that angers me considering that 83% of U.S. LGBTQ youth report being verbally harassed at school, 33% report being physically harassed, and queer youth face four times the risk of suicide than straight kids. 
But as even many Republicans understand, the U.S. Consti-
tution does not recognize a right to discriminate or bully in the guise of religion. And, thanks to your support of CCR, Scott Lively’s days of roaming the globe to whip up anti-gay hate are numbered, too. Lively has filed three separate last-ditch attempts to prevent our lawsuit from moving forward since the judge tossed out his motion to dismiss in August. All three have been promptly dismissed. The day that we begin discovery in this case, and start unearthing all the details of his persecutory pursuits is drawing closer and I thank you for helping to make this important work possible. 
—Vincent WarrenLetter from the Executive Director
2
CCR Executive Director Vince Warren
Thelma Newman Society
We welcome and thank the newest members of the Thelma 
Newman Planned Giving Society, a group of individuals who decided to include CCR in their estate plans or established annuities with the Center. These gifts build our endowment, ensuring CCR’s progressive legal work for future generations.
Margaret L. Eberbach • Chandra Hauptman  
Zella Luria • Severo M. Ornstein • Pamela A. Rogers 
Mary B. Strauss • Diana Dunn Walker  
Henry Werner • Emerald Young
Our donors and supporters make our cutting-edge human rights work possible. Thank you so much! 
The individuals listed joined between Jun 16, 2013- Feb 15, 2014.CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook
3Stop-and-Frisk Update  (continued from cover)
to ensure these reforms happen. The 
press conference was packed with journalists, elected officials, commu -
nity members, plaintiffs and attorneys. CCR Executive Director Vince Warren gave moving remarks about the 1999 murder of Amadou Diallo in a hail of 41 shots by NYPD officers, and CCR’s 14-year struggle, alongside activists and affected communities, to achieve meaningful police accountability for confrontational and discriminatory policing. He also stressed that: “the legal questions have been settled; now we begin the work to bring real, lasting and concrete change to the NYPD and to the City of New York.”
Under the agreement that CCR 
reached, the City has agreed to accept the findings of the Floyd trial court detailing the NYPD’s illegal practices, and to implement in full the remedial process ordered by the district court, including the court-appointed moni-tor, Peter Zimroth, and a joint remedial process facilitated by Vera Institute Executive Director, Nicholas Turner, which will bring all relevant stake -
holders and community groups to the same table as the NYPD. In exchange, CCR agreed to limit the duration of the monitor to three years, if the City is in compliance with the court’s orders. The City and CCR asked—and the court of appeals recently agreed—to send the case back to the district court to finalize this agreement and to deal with attempts by the police unions to intervene in the case and block poten-tial reforms. We are hopeful that the police unions’ attempt to intervene will not be accepted by the court and we can move forward with the full and ambitious court-ordered reform process.  
It has taken decades to reach this point. 
From successfully litigating our first case, Daniels v. City of New York, which 
required the NYPD to collect the data on which our Floyd claims were based, and now as lead counsel in the reform process, the Center is excited for this moment. It presents an unprecedented opportunity to create positive change within the NYPD, which will have implications on policing nationally and internationally as well. The finding by the district court of systematic 4th and 14th Amendment violations, and the breadth of the reform process, have created a groundbreaking moment for civil rights and criminal justice reform. As Vince said in the joint press confer -
ence with the City, “this is where the real work begins.”
In March, CCR traveled to Geneva to 
highlight the issue of stop-and-frisk before the United Nations in light of the review of the U.S. government’s compliance with its international civil and political rights obligations. 
For more updates on the latest developments in Floyd, visit: 
www.CCRjustice.org/floyd 
To read Vince’s remarks in full, go to:  
huff.to/1fDUIAq 
CCR client Nicholas Peart speaks to press following 
Floyd press conference.
CCR Is Grateful to Our Foundation Funders for Their Support *
Anonymous (7) • The 1848 Foundation • The Alfred and Jane Ross Foundation • The Altschul Foundation • The Angelina Fund • Arkay 
Foundation • The Atlantic Philanthropies (USA) • Bertha Foundation • The Blue Oak Foundation • The Charles Schwab Corporation Founda -
tion • The Common Counsel Foundation • craigslist Charitable Fund • The CS Fund/Warsh-Mott Legacy • David Kimmel Foundation • The Epstein Teicher Philanthropies • The Firedoll Foundation • The Ford Foundation • Fowey Light Fund • The Frances and Benjamin Benenson Foundation • The Funding Exchange National Community Funds • Gobioff Foundation • The Grodzins Fund • The Herb Block Foundation • Horizons Foundation • The Jewish Communal Fund • Jewish Federation of Cleveland • The JKW Foundation • Jon and Katherine Dart Charitable Foundation • The Key Foundation • The Kurz Family Foundation • Landau Family Foundation • Lee & Luis Lainer Family Founda -
tion • The Lehman-Stamm Family Fund • The Liberty Hill Foundation • The Libra Foundation • The Lois and Irving Blum Foundation, Inc. • Maximum Difference Foundation • The Nathan Cummings Foundation, Inc. • The New York Community Trust • The Normandie Foundation • The Oak Foundation • Ralph E. Ogden Foundation, Inc. • Open Society Foundations • Roseben Fund • Samuel Rubin Foundation • The San Francisco Foundation • The Scherman Foundation, Inc. • Schwab Charitable Fund • The Seed Foundation • Seymour & Sylvia Rothchild Family 2004 Charitable Foundation • Shirley and Al Evenitsky Fund for Social Justice • The Spingold Foundation • The David Rockefeller Fund, Inc. • The Tides Foundation • The Vanguard Charitable Endowment Program • The Vital Projects Fund, Inc. • The Wallace Global Fund • Whuffie Fund, LLC • The William and Salome Scanlan Foundation • The William B. Wiener, Jr. Foundation
*The foundations listed above provided leadership-level grants of $5,000 or more between Jun 16, 2013- Feb 15, 2014.CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookThe success of the hearing was a result of the strong part -
nership between SNAP and CCR, which began around the 
filing of a case at the International Criminal Court (ICC). In September 2011, SNAP and CCR presented the ICC with a criminal complaint that set out the responsibility of high-level Vatican officials for the widespread violence and pre-sented evidence of the decades-long, systematic and global nature of the crimes. The revelations in the ICC complaint, along with tireless follow-up work, created a sea change in the worldwide perception of the crisis and afforded new energy to a now global movement to end rape and sexual violence by clergy and hold the Vatican accountable. 
CCR and survivors were not disappointed in the results 
of the UNCRC hearing. This February, the UNCRC is -
sued a watershed report finding that the “Holy See has consistently placed the preservation of the reputation of the Church and the protection of the perpetrators above children’s best interests.” Among its many recommenda-tions, the Committee called on the Vatican to “immediately remove all known and suspected child sexual abusers from assignment and refer the matter to the relevant law enforcement authorities for investigation and prosecution purposes.” While these recommendations are nonbind-ing, the Vatican, as a State Party to the Convention, has a responsibility to meet these obligations and report back by 2017.
Megan Peterson, a SNAP leader and survivor, who was in 
Geneva for the hearing, perhaps said it best: “I feel like a door to justice and transparency has been opened.”
CCR and SNAP will also be submitting a report to a second UN body, the Committee Against Torture (CAT). 
In April, that Committee will question the Vatican for the first time on its compliance with the Convention Against Torture, which has long addressed rape and sexual vio-lence as forms of torture and cruel, inhuman and degrad-ing treatment. Once again, CCR and SNAP will be there to bear witness and pursue accountability for Vatican officials involved in cover-ups and perpetuating ongoing sexual violence.
To learn more, go to: www.CCRjustice.org/snap 
CCR and SNAP team at the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child hearing in 
Geneva.
4Vatican Forced to Answer to the UN  (continued from cover)
Donor Spotlight: Bryan Kutner
When CCR and our client, Sexual Minorities Uganda, launched our “Stop Scott Lively” 
crowdfunding campaign, Bryan Kutner, a global public health trainer who’s pursuing a PhD in psychology at the University of Washington, immediately took action.
“I support CCR because of its progressive politics and defense of human rights, from its 
work with Guantánamo to stop-and-frisk. When I learned about CCR’s precedent-setting case to protect LGBTQ rights worldwide and stop the right-wing extremist behind the anti-gay laws in Russia and Uganda, I had to make a gift to support the cause. Scott Lively needs to be held accountable for persecution.”
CCR’s campaign began in early February when there were indications that Uganda’s Anti-
Homosexuality Bill (AHB) might be signed into law. Unfortunately, it was signed on Febru -
ary 24, making Bryan’s gift even more timely. The AHB makes LGBTI Ugandans’ advocacy, relationships, and very existence illegal and punishable by life in prison. To learn more about the case against Scott Lively and the persecution in Uganda, visit: www.CCRjustice.org/smug 
CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook
5GTMO: 12 Years and Still Fighting
January 11, 2014 marked the somber 
12th anniversary of the first prisoners arriving at Guantánamo. While the fact that President Obama released a total of 11 men between August and December 2013 is positive—excluding the two who were callously sent to Algeria against their will—the fact re -
mains that Guantánamo is increasing-ly becoming an internment camp for Yemeni men. More than two-thirds of the remaining detainees are Yemeni, including most of CCR’s remaining clients. The 2014 National Defense Authorization Act signed into law in December 2013 eased legislative restrictions that President Obama maintained complicated the admin -
istration’s efforts to release detained men and close the camp. Now that Obama has the flexibility he said he needed from Congress, he must act.
Longtime CCR client Djamel Ame-
ziane was one of the two men repatriated to Algeria against their will on December 5, 2013. Djamel had been at Guantánamo for more than 10 years without charge or trial, and cleared for transfer since 2008. Despite his well-founded fear of persecution in his home country, and in violation of international law including the Convention against Torture, and without the opportunity to register protest or stop the pro-cess (as he had been able to in 2008), Djamel was sent to Algeria and held in secret detention for about a week before being released to his family, a very ill man. CCR’s representation of Djamel will continue in the years ahead as he may face eventual crimi-nal prosecution in Algeria, which is when he would face the greatest risk of persecution. CCR held an emer-gency protest in front of the Algerian Embassy on December 5, demanding they set Djamel free.
While the remaining 155 men’s 
stories differ, all endure the crush-ing torment that comes with being indefinitely detained for more than 12 years without charge or trial. Our client Fahd Ghazy was only 17 years old when he was rendered to Guan-tánamo and is one of the last remain-ing men to have been detained as a juvenile. He was cleared for transfer in 2007 and again in 2009. CCR is putting the finishing touches on a mini-documentary about Fahd, his life, and his family and community in Yemen where he hopes to return when he is finally released. The film will be available on our website later this year. Our legal team is also currently preparing for an adminis-trative hearing in early April, when President Obama’s new Periodic Review Board will review our cli-ent Ghaleb Al-Bihani’s status and either approve him for transfer or for continued and indefinite detention. Ghaleb is one of approximately 70 men the Obama administration has not yet cleared but has no plans to charge. Another client, Majid Khan, was charged by military commission in February 2012 and ultimately pled guilty in exchange for the chance to be released as early as 2016, but no later than 17 years from now. CCR continues to demand transparency and accountability from the U.S. gov-ernment for Majid’s torture through the sentencing phase of his military commission case.
In his January State of the Union ad-
dress, President Obama committed, once again, to closing the prison. On all fronts, CCR will continue our coor -
dination of habeas counsel, continue international advocacy, ramp up our public advocacy, develop new pos-sible litigation strategies, and advo-cate for the Obama administration to release all the men it does not intend to try in a fair court, as we have tire -
lessly done for the last 12 years.  
Watch videos about  
our Gitmo work at  
www.CCRjustice.org/gitmoOn November 5, 2013, CCR launched a direct challenge to the military commissions system itself. Along with co-counsel, we filed an appeal on behalf of David Hicks, the Australian detainee repatriated in 2007 following his conviction in the military commissions for “providing material support for terrorism,” a charge to which he’d pled guilty in order to escape continuing abuse and indefinite detention at Guantánamo. He was the first prisoner to be con-victed in a military commission and was a party in the historic Supreme Court ruling in Rasul v. Bush. 
The appeal follows a decision by a federal court that material support is not and has never been an inter -
national war crime triable by mili-tary commission. It also asserts that Hicks’ guilty plea was involuntary because he was tortured. Faced with no defense on the merits of Hicks’ appeal, the U.S. is attempt-ing to delay as long as possible and convince the court to reject it on novel procedural grounds. A second detainee, Omar Khadr, has also appealed his conviction. If success -
ful, these appeals will demonstrate, yet again, what CCR has been saying from the beginning about military commissions—that they are courts whose verdicts will never carry real weight or validity. 
David Hicks speaking in 2012.CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook
6Too often, litigation is too far removed 
from movements for change. CCR’s goal is exactly the opposite: to use our legal work to support and further social justice efforts. A recent court date in Blum v. Holder, CCR’s case chal -
lenging the Animal Enterprise Terror -
ism Act (AETA), is an example of this intention at its best. The AETA pun -
ishes causing lost property or profits to a business that uses or sells animals or animal products. On February 3, CCR actively pushed back against the AETA’s chilling effect.
The day began with supporters from 
near and far packing a standing-room-only court in Boston to hear CCR Senior Staff Attorney Rachel Meeropol urge the First Circuit Court of Appeals to strike down the AETA as a violation of the First Amendment. Al Jazeera, the National Law Journal, RT, Animal Voices Radio, and Occupy.com covered the argument. 
Meanwhile, a small social media storm 
was circulating our words. Plaintiff Ryan Shapiro published a Truthout blog, describing the experiences that led him to join the lawsuit along with his academic work tracing the history of repression against animal rights activ -
ists. Rachel Meeropol wrote a blog on the Huffington Post, called “Activists Are Fighting to Speak. Are You Will -
ing To Listen?”, which accompanied “Today, I’m Speaking Out”—a video featuring the Blum plaintiffs explaining 
why they believe animal rights is part of the struggle for justice. The video received over 1,000 views in less than 24 hours. With this video, CCR promot-ed the voices of those who have been chilled, actively combatting the AETA’s repression. As Rachel wrote in her blog, “[l]egal cases are one way to fight the effort to silence these activists. Another way is to promote their voices and to listen to what they are saying. [T]o consider that, maybe, these activists have something important to say.”  
The day ended with “From Terrorism 
to Activism: Moving from the Green Scare to Animal Rights,” a Suffolk Law School panel featuring Rachel, Blumplaintiff and CCR Communications Associate Lauren Gazzola, and Phi-losophy Professor John Sanbonmatsu, discussing connections between the defense of activists and the substantive issue of animal rights.
This was CCR’s movement support at 
its finest—marching into court de-manding justice, and marching right back out to join arms with those fight-ing for it.
Watch the “Today I’m Speaking Out” video at: www.CCRjustice.org/aeta
Update: On March 7, the appellate court affirmed the district court’s dismissal of Blum. CCR is currently 
considering options for next steps.
Promoting First Amendment Rights of Activists
Thanks to the generous support of the Bertha Foundation, dozens of young law-yers and activists from the Bertha Be Just Network traveled from around the world to build connections, compare work, and learn from each other and from the local activists in India at the Global Alliance for Justice Education conference. Representatives from CCR were Bertha Social Justice Institute Director Purvi Shah, and CCR Bertha Be Just Fellows Jessica Lee, Susan Hu, and Chauniqua Young. From issues ranging from global LGBT struggles to local chal-lenges in the form of government oppres-sion under the Armed Forces Special Powers Act; from the court room to the street; from meetings with activists who risk their lives and liberty to fight for justice; and so much more, the participants were moved by what they saw and vowed to bring this experience home to deepen their own work.
Bertha SJI in IndiaCCR legal team and plaintiffs in Blum v. Holder , along with animal rights activists, after February 3 argument 
in Boston.CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook
7• In February, after an 18-year battle, a federal appeals court 
upheld a lower court ruling in CCR’s class action lawsuit, Gulino v. 
The Board of Education of the City of New York. The court ruled that the state could be held liable under federal civil rights law for using a teacher certiﬁcation test that was unrelated to job require-ments, but had a racially disparate impact on Black and Latino test-takers. Though stripped of union membership, pensions and various beneﬁts, many of the “unqualiﬁed” teachers were nonethe-less returned to the classroom as substitute and temporary hires; not surprisingly, with far lower salaries and no union protections. This victory clears the way for ending the use of the discriminatory tests and awarding back pay and beneﬁts to hundreds of clients. 
• On February 5, CCR released a seven-page educational comic, 
The Case Against Scott Lively, outlining and making accessible the persecution framework that underlies CCR’s Sexual Minori-ties Uganda v. Scott Lively case. We published it on Hufﬁngton  
Post and other blogs and have begun print distribution at confer-
ences and to groups and activists around the world. It can be found along with other new materials about the case on our website at: CCRjustice.org/SMUG
• After a rigorous campaign by CCR and its allies, the New York 
State legislation intended to limit academic groups’ protests against Israel was abruptly withdrawn from consideration by the State Assembly on February 3. CCR, educators and other groups denounced the bills as an outright assault on academic free-dom. Thank you to all our supporters who took this action— you 
made a difference!  
• In January, CCR ﬁled a cert petition with the U.S. Supreme Court to 
review our case, CCR v. Obama, challenging surveillance by the NSA, particularly in light of Edward Snowden’s June 2013 revela-tions about the true extent of the spying program. First ﬁled in 2006, CCR v. Obama originally sought an end to the warrantless NSA spying that began under the Bush administration. The case now seeks destruction of documents or recordings from that program, which operated with no judicial oversight or congressional approval. The Obama administration has refused to take any position on whether or not the Bush-era NSA program was legal.
• In November, CCR and the Detention Watch Network ﬁled a FOIA 
requesting the expedited release of documents regarding the detention bed quota, which Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) has interpreted as a requirement to detain 34,000 non-citizens per day, and mandates billions of dollars to private prison corporations and local and state jails to provide civil immigration detention beds. This quota is unprecedented and is inextricably linked to the Obama administration’s record-breaking number of deportations (nearing a staggering two million). The Depart-ment of Homeland Security (DHS) and ICE failed to respond, so in January we ﬁled a complaint in the Southern District of New York. Our motion for a preliminary injunction ordering DHS and ICE to produce the documents immediately is currently pending.
If you would like to ﬁnd out more about joining the Founders Circle or making a planned gift to CCR, contact Sara Beinert at 212-614-6448 
or SBeinert@CCRjustice.org. Our donors and supporters make our cutting-edge human rights work possible. Thank you so much!CCR offers a special thank you to those who joined the Founders Circle whose members make  
leadership gifts totaling $1,000 or more to the Center during the year, and so doing, provide  
critical core support. The individuals listed joined between Jun 16, 2013- Feb 15, 2014.
H.R. AND D.L. A L-ALUSI
ROBERT  AND SARAH  ALSDORF
MICHAEL  AMIN AND SHIRIN  AMIN
WILLIAM  AND KENDALL  ANTHONY
BARBARA  M. A RMENTO  AND  
 A LESSANDRO  ARMENTO
RADHIKA  BALAKRISHNAN  AND  
  D AVID W. G ILLCRIST
WILLIAM  BARNICKLE
AMY BASHITI
MEREDITH  A. B LAU AND BILL BLAU
JERRY COHEN
DOUGLAS  COLE
JEREMY  COWAN
GERALD  DICKINSON
MARGARET  L. E BERBACH
JEAN M. E NTINEMARTIN  R. F EINMAN
STEPHEN  GOCKLEY  AND   
 E LLEN POSEL
PETER J. G OLLON
RODERICK  A. G ORNEY  AND  
 C AROL  A. S OBEL
DAVID HALPERIN
PETER HANAUER
DICK S. H EISER
CRAIG KAPLAN  AND ANNE H. H ESS
BRIGITTE  JAENSCH
ARTHUR  KENNEDY
MICHAEL  KIESCHNICK
MICHAEL  KRINSKY
BRENDA  MCCUMBER
C. V ICTOR  MCTEER
ELIZABETH  MELAMIDANN CHUNG  AND  
 B ENJAMIN  MELLMAN
MELISSA  D. M IZEL
NORMAN  OSLIK AND  
MADELEINE  GOLDE
JONATHAN  PERLOW
TIM PLENK AND  
JANET  AXELROD
ALBERT  RATNER
CHARLES  RATNER  AND  
 I LANA  HOROWITZ -RATNER
JAMES  RATNER  AND SUSAN  RATNER
MARK AND NANCY  RATNER
RONALD  RATNER  AND  
 D EBORAH  B. R ATNER
VANESSA  REDGRAVE
PAUL W. R EHM AND  
KATJA SANDER -REHMDAVID RHODES
JOYCE  L. R ICHARDSON
NAOMI  SAGER
JOHN M. S CANLAN
RENATA  M. S CHWEBEL
JOEL A. S HUFRO  AND  
 E THEL H. S HUFRO
ROY SINGHAM  AND 
 P ERNILLE  IRONSIDE
PAUL SLAGLE
ERWIN  AND PEARL STALLER
MICHAEL  C. T HIELMANN
NANCY  W ASSERMAN
DAVID W ILSON
SHERRI  H. W OLF
ELLEN YAROSHEFSKY
MICHAEL  D. Y OKELLCCR in Brief….666 Broadway, 7th Floor, New York, NY 10012 • www.CCRjustice.org
The Center for Constitutional Rights is dedicated to advancing and protecting the rights guaranteed by the United States Constitution and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Founded in 1966 
by attorneys who represented civil rights movements in the South, CCR is a non-profit legal and educational organization committed to the creative use of law as a positive force for social change.Breaking News:
Stop and Frisk Update
Vatican Forced to  
Answer to UNGTMO: 12 Years and  
Still FightingAETA: 1st Amendment 
Rights of Activists
For even more information on these 
cases and all of CCR’s work check out our 2013 Annual Report at:  CCRjustice.org/annual-report
My first year of law school taught me 
that I didn’t want to be a lawyer. I didn’t like the competition, the emphasis on individual work, the anonymous grading system, or the rule-based memorization game that we all play as 1Ls. I told myself that if I didn’t find myself practicing law the way I had imagined I would, dur -
ing my first summer internship, then I wouldn’t go back to law school. Fortu-nately my first internship was with CCR as an Ella Baker Fellow working at the Community Justice Project (CJP) site in Miami. This intern-ship is the reason that I stuck with law school and am so excited to practice community and movement lawyering.
Through my fellowship placement, I learned that lawyering 
could be different from what I experienced at school. At CJP (one of the four Ella Baker sites) Chuck Elsesser and Meena Jagannath emphasized the CCR model of collaboration, encouraging interns to share and bounce ideas off of each other, as well as with them. In our trainings with CCR prior to beginning our placement we learned how to be inten -tional in our work, in our relationships with our clients and in our relationships to movements. 
At CJP , like at CCR, the clients are center-
stage: they made the decisions, did the talking, were at the forefront of their cases and we, as lawyers and fellows, were there to support them. 
With CCR and at CJP , I worked on a 
wide variety of cases, my favorite being 
advocacy and research to support the Dream Defenders and Power U who were organizing to dismantle the school-to-prison pipeline, end racial profiling and implement restor -
ative justice. It was such a full summer, there was never a day that I didn’t learn something new and never a day that I didn’t challenge myself, push myself to push against the status quo. I learned that change comes from not only winning, but losing and the importance of strong solidarity among movements. Lawyers are just another tool in a much bigger movement, and we must humble ourselves to that.
Update from an Ella: Jasmina Nogo
