This May, we lost one of the 
great social justice warriors 
of our time. Michael Ratner 
had been ill for almost a year, 
fighting his disease in the same 
manner as he did all of the 
injustices he encountered: with 
clarity, tenacity, good cheer, the 
support of his loving family and 
friends, and hope for the best 
possible outcome against the 
odds. Sadly, this was one fight 
that he wasn’t able to win.
While a law student at Columbia 
University in 1968, Michael was 
pushed to the ground and beaten 
by police during student protests 
against the Vietnam War. It was 
this moment that he knew he 
would always stand on the side of the oppressed and against the 
oppressor. A law student was 
pushed down; a radical rose 
up. In his words, “[E]vents like 
this created the activists of the 
generation and I never looked 
back; I declared that I was going 
to spend my life on the side of 
justice and non-violence.” And 
this is exactly what Michael did 
until his last breath.
Michael was the bridge 
between the work of CCR’s 
founders, from whom he learned 
how to litigate boldly and work 
with social movements, and our 
current generation of lawyers 
and advocates whom he taught 
how to carry that work forward. 
CCR Executive Director Vince Warren remembers meeting 
Michael for the first time as 
an Ella Baker Intern over two 
decades ago. “I saw someone 
who lived the vision for how a 
radical people’s lawyer could 
shift the world for the most 
Transform power, fight for justice! Donate now: CCRjustice.org/donateThe Loss of a Hero
Remembering Michael Ratner50 years on the front lines for social justice 1966-2016
Michael Ratner in front of the U.S. Supreme 
Court in 2006.
Photo: Jonathan McIntosh, CC-BY-2.5
continued on page 5
For the past five decades, CCR has been a part 
of virtually every movement for civil and human 
rights. Because of you, we are dismantling 
institutionalized power and building the power  
of movements and people.
We are profoundly grateful to have your
partnership in our mission to transform the social, 
cultural, legal, economic and political systems 
that support and maintain institutional racism, 
patriarchy, oppressive economic structures,  
and oppressive state power.
Together we have fought and continue to fight on behalf of countless individuals and communities 
at the margins. There are few people like you who 
are committed to supporting those with the least 
access to justice. Thank you!
The need for an even stronger CCR with the 
vision, expertise, courage and credibility to 
remain at the forefront is deeply important. You 
have been and continue to be vital to us tackling 
some of the world’s most egregious human rights 
abuses. 
As we embark on our next 50 years, we are 
fortunate to have you by our side.With You By Our Side: CCR at 5022016 Founders’ Award 
Honoring Jules Lobel
Beyond being the title of Jules Lobel’s  
groundbreaking book, Success Without  
Victory  is an animating vision for CCR, one 
that allows us to fight as hard as we can for 
what we believe in—to take political risks to 
speak truth to power.
At our annual President’s Reception, I had the 
honor of presenting Jules with the 2016 CCR 
Founders’ Award. A distinguished litigator,  
legal scholar, author and former CCR 
President, he has been a CCR cooperating 
attorney for 20 years and served on the Board 
for three decades. Whether working with 
prisoners in solitary confinement or defending 
protesters, Jules finds the way forward to 
support the rights of people over institutions. 
While it is true that there is success without 
victory, it is also true that there is no 
victory without vision, and there is no more important vision than a political vision in the 
work that we do. Thank you for making this 
vision a reality.
1966-2016“ A more compassionate friend  
with whom to sue the United  
States would be hard to find.”
 – Michael Ratner on Jules Lobel
Vince Warren, Executive Director
2016 President’s Reception
CCR’s Annual President’s Reception 
celebrates our generous benefactors 
and allies who are indispensable 
partners in protecting and advancing 
fundamental rights for all. Thank You!
Photos: Heidi SolanderPhoto: Douglas Gorenstein3Obama’s Guantánamo: Stories from an Enduring Prison
The following is an excerpt from the essay “Storytelling #Guantánamo” by CCR’s Aliya Hana  
Hussain in the newly released collection of essays, which examine Obama’s failure to close  
Guantánamo:  “There’s no doubt in my mind that if the public could sit across from Fahd, Tariq, 
Ghaleb, and Mohammed as I have, and hear the compassion in their voices, learn about their 
families, and see how they struggle every day to prevent the prison from claiming them, others 
would be closer to understanding the human cost of Guantánamo as acutely as my colleagues 
and I do.”
Copies of Obama’s Guantánamo , which includes contributions from five CCR attorneys and advocates, 
can be purchased online at nyupress.org.
“I have been waiting a lifetime just to start my 
life again,” CCR client Fahd Ghazy once wrote. 
That day finally came for Fahd. In January, he 
was resettled in Oman. 
“There was never much doubt that Fahd’s  
imprisonment was unnecessary—he was cleared 
for release nearly a decade ago—yet he grew 
up at Guantánamo waiting for successive 
presidents to correct a glaring injustice,” said 
Fahd’s attorney, CCR’s Omar Farah. “While 
Fahd and his family look to the future, I cannot 
help but reflect on how cruel his detention was 
and marvel at how Fahd preserved his humanity 
throughout.”
In the months since his release, Fahd has moved 
into his own apartment and, after over a decade 
apart, he has finally been reunited with his 
mother, wife, daughter, and brothers. 
In April, two more CCR clients, Tariq Ba Odah 
and Mohammed Al-Hamiri, were transferred 
to Saudi Arabia, where their families embraced 
them upon arrival.
Tariq had been on hunger strike for more than 
nine years to protest his indefinite detention. His 
case received worldwide attention as his weight 
hovered at just 74 pounds, half of his ideal body weight, during this past year. Now that Tariq is  
finally free, we’re hopeful that he will receive the 
sophisticated medical care he desperately needs.
“When people are released we think about those 
who remain. It’ll be hard not to think of the other 
brothers,” Mohammed said to Omar when he 
heard the news of his release. “God willing, this 
place will close with the help of your hands.”
After spending 14 years without charge at 
Guantánamo, Fahd, Tariq, and Mohammed are 
now looking to the future and rebuilding their 
lives. Each of them expressed deep gratitude 
to all of you who refused to forget their plight 
and who courageously shared their stories and 
dreams for a life of freedom.
After Guantánamo, a New Beginning
CCR Clients Express Gratitude to Those Who Campaigned for Their Freedom
Activists from Witness Against Torture hold a painting depicting 
recently released CCR client Fahd Ghazy in Guantánamo Bay.
Photo: Justin Norman / Witness Against Torture 4In July, CCR and ColorOfChange filed a 
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request 
with the FBI and Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS) seeking information on the 
surveillance and monitoring of Black-led 
protests.
The FOIA request was filed in response to 
revelations of numerous instances of military 
and counter-terror resources being used to 
surveil Black Lives Matter protests and activists 
nationwide since the murder of Mike Brown 
in Ferguson, Missouri, two years ago. It’s 
clear from both media publications and activist 
reports that federal and local authorities have 
been coordinating to track the movements of 
Freddie Grey activists in Washington, D.C.,  
and to monitor cultural events and prayer vigils 
in predominantly Black neighborhoods around 
the country.
We hope that our work with ColorofChange 
will illuminate law enforcement authorities’ 
suppression of First Amendment activity and 
provide activists with important tools to further 
the movement.
In October, the court issued a stirring decision  
in Hassan v. City of New York , reversing  
a district court ruling dismissing the case,  
and recognizing that New Jersey Muslims  
who have been subjected to the NYPD’s  
suspicionless surveillance stated a valid claim  
of discrimination on the basis of their religion.
CCR’s Legal Director, Baher Azmy, responded: 
“The court reaffirmed the elementary principle 
that law enforcement cannot spy on and harass individuals for no other reason than their 
religion and the equally important principle 
that courts cannot simply accept untested 
claims about national security to justify a gross 
stereotype about Muslims. There is no Muslim 
exception to the Constitution.”
In March, the federal court in Floyd v. City of 
New York  approved the new version of the stop 
report that NYPD officers will now use to record 
the stops-and-frisks they conduct. Gone from 
the new form are the infamous checkboxes used 
to stop hundreds of thousands of New Yorkers 
—“furtive movement,” “suspicious bulge,” and 
“high crime area.” 
None of these explanations for the stops satisfied 
the legal requirement of reasonable suspicion 
and instead served as an excuse for harassing 
Black and Brown people. The new form also 
requires officers to explain in their own words 
the specific reasons why they stopped someone.
Black and Brown Communities  
Under Siege
CCR and ColorOfChange are seeking information related to the 
surveillance of Black Lives Matter protests and activists around 
the country.1966-2016
Photo: Fibonacci BlueBeing Black is Not a Crime
No Muslim Exception to the  
ConstitutionChanges to How the NYPD  
Documents Stops5precarious in our society, by 
shaking the ground under the 
most powerful. Hearing his 
stories of representing clients 
and political movements from 
every corner of the globe, 
Michael inspired me to see how 
I could use my law degree for 
something extraordinary and 
eternal.”
Michael had the vision to 
see things on the distant 
horizon—things that others 
barely glimpsed or discounted 
entirely. From his work 
challenging U.S. imperialism 
in Central America, Iraq and 
at home, Michael stood for 
accountability for the inevitable 
abuse that accompanies the 
use of force. He never shied 
away from a fight, no matter 
the odds; indeed, it is likely he 
specifically selected the cases 
with the longest odds. After all, 
the clients involved in those 
cases were most in need of a 
legal ally. Michael dedicated his life to the 
most important justice causes 
of the last half century. He was 
CCR’s first Legal Director, a 
longtime Board Member and 
Board President, and helped 
shape the course of the work for 
four decades. He is survived by 
the legacy he created at CCR. 
We were fortunate to have had 
so much of Michael’s vision, 
time and leadership over these 
many years. Michael said of 
his decision to spend his career 
in partnership with CCR: “I 
believed then that it is the place that will change the world. I 
am as excited to walk into the 
Center today as I was that first 
day. And I still believe it is 
the place that will change the 
world.”
We close with Michael’s 
words: 
All of us in the CCR  
community will keep the  
light lit for you, Michael. Remembering Michael Ratner (continued from cover)
Banking on Detention 
In June, CCR and Detention 
Watch Network released a report 
on “local lockup quotas,” the 
payments to prison contractors for 
detaining a “guaranteed minimum” 
number of immigrants. A sequel 
to our 2015 report, which drew on materials 
obtained through FOIA litigation, our new report 
documented the existence of quotas for families, 
and found that 93% of “guaranteed” beds are 
promised to private contractors. Read the full 
report online: bit.ly/bankingondetention2016
Michael Ratner testifies before Congress in 
1987 on the surveillance and harassment 
of those opposed to U.S. policies  
in Central America.
Thank You, Betsy Landis!
A longtime CCR donor, 
Betsy was also a member 
of the Thelma Newman 
Planned Giving Society, 
generously leaving CCR  
in her estate plans. 
If you would like to leave a social 
justice legacy like Betsy, please 
contact Theda Jackson-Mau at 
212.614.6448 or tjackson-mau@
ccrjustice.org to learn more about  
your options.
“There is not the same 
sense of strength in 
struggle that you can 
change things, not as 
there was in the ‘60s 
and ‘70s.You get to the 
point where you have 
a very conservative 
government and you 
feel like you are only  
a flickering light. But  
we have to keep the 
light lit.”The Center for Constitutional Rights is dedicated to advancing and protecting the rights guaranteed by the United States Constitution and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Founded in 1966 
by attorneys who represented civil rights movements in the South, CCR is a non-profit legal and educational organization committed to the creative use of law as a positive force for social change.666 Broadway, 7th Floor, New York, NY 10012 • CCRjustice.org
CCR does not accept corporate or government funding. We rely on your dedication  
and generosity to fuel the fight for justice. Please give today!1966-2016
Soon after you received our last 
newsletter, Steven Salaita, a 
Palestinian-American professor 
fired from his tenured position 
at the University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign over personal 
tweets criticizing the Israeli 
government’s assault on Gaza 
in 2014, reached a significant 
agreement with university 
officials to settle his claims 
against them.
Salaita’s firing is part of a 
broad crackdown on Palestinian 
rights activism that includes 
event cancellations, baseless legal complaints challenging 
the boycotting of Israeli goods, 
administrative disciplinary 
actions, and false and 
inflammatory accusations of 
terrorism and anti-Semitism.
 
“This settlement is a vindication 
for me, but more importantly, 
it is a victory for academic 
freedom and the First Amend-
ment,” said Salaita. “The 
petitions, demonstrations, and 
investigations, as well as the 
legal case, have reinvigorated 
American higher education  
as a place of critical thinking  and rigorous debate, and I am 
deeply grateful to all who have 
spoken out.”Victory for Palestinian Solidarity Movement
Salaita’s firing became a flashpoint for debates 
over academic freedom, free speech, and the 
repression of Palestinian rights advocacy.
Photo: Jeffrey Putney
Staff Spotlight:
Theda Jackson-Mau,  
Associate Director of Development
Earlier this year, on Theda 
Jackson-Mau’s third day at 
CCR, we learned that our  
client Fahd Ghazy had been  
released from Guantánamo 
where he had been imprisoned 
without charge for 14 years.  
“It was a transformative moment for me  
because I saw first-hand the power and  
courage of this critically important organization.” 
During her career, Theda has headed  
development programs in support of civil rights,  
civil liberties, the arts, land conservation, and  
social services in New York and Seattle. Please 
view Theda’s full bio on our website.
For more information or to register, please go to: CCRjustice.org/50Years
