Many CCR supporters are familiar with the controversial 
“Secure Communities” (S-Comm) program, an Immigration 
and Customs Enforcement (ICE) program that puts local 
police on the front lines of immigration law enforcement. 
Under this program, local law enforcement is required to 
send the fingerprints of every person booked by police to 
federal immigration databases to be checked for immigration 
violations. Advocates criticize the program as an ill-advised 
delegation of resources, as increasing the risk of racial 
profiling, and for driving a wedge between the community 
and the police.
As readers know, CCR, in partnership with the National 
Day Laborer Organizing Network and the Immigration 
Clinic at the Benjamin Cardozo School of Law, filed Freedom 
of Information Act (FOIA) requests to uncover more 
information about this S-Comm. Our FOIA requests have 
resulted in the release of thousands  of pages of documents 
that demonstrate how poorly planned and misguided this 
program truly is. Based on these documents, reports have 
been put together and distributed to advocates nationwide  
—empowering them to build an organized opposition  
to S-Comm.
On June 17, 2011, ICE announced a set of adjustments to 
the program. These adjustments come on the heels of a 
number of states and municipalities opting out of S-Comm, 
and the aforementioned growing national opposition to its 
implementation: Between May and June 2011, Governor Pat 
Quinn of Illinois announced that his state would withdraw 
from S-Comm, followed quickly by New York’s Governor Andrew Cuomo, followed in early June by Deval Patrick of 
Massachusetts deciding not to join the program. In addition 
to these powerful Democratic governors moving against the 
President’s program; the Congressional Hispanic Caucus 
has asked the administration to halt S-Comm completely, 
and Rep. Zoe Lofgren from California has called for the 
Department of Homeland Security Office of Inspector 
General (OIG) to investigate the S-Comm program. The  
OIG plans to begin its review this summer. Resisting “Secure” Communities
continued on page 3
Good News in CCR’s “Crimes Against Nature” CaseSummer 2011 Newsletter
Protestors convene outside Governor Cuomo’s NYC Office on July 1.
In February 2011, CCR filed our New Orleans case, Doe v. 
Jindal , to challenge an archaic Louisiana statute that requires 
those convicted of soliciting a “crime against nature” to 
register publicly as sex offenders. In the law, “crime against 
nature” was defined as “unnatural carnal copulation”—
interpreted as anal or oral sex—and the statute has had the 
practical effect of unfairly discriminating against women, 
including transgender women, and men who have sex with 
men. CCR is thrilled to be able to report several positive, 
recent developments stemming from this case. On June 6, 
the Louisiana House of Representatives approved a bill that 
would remove the sex-offender registry requirement from 
the statute. On June 20, the Louisiana Senate voted to remove 
the “Crime Against Nature by Solicitation” statute from the list of offenses requiring sex-offender registration. And on 
June 29, 2011, Governor Jindal signed the bill! This bill would 
never have been introduced without the tireless advocacy of 
our local partner, Women with a Vision (and its allies) and 
without the added public and media scrutiny that our case 
has brought to the issue. It is important, however, to note 
that the law is not retroactive, so Doe v. Jindal  will remain 
in place on behalf of our clients who have been previously 
convicted and made to comply with this discriminatory 
provision over the last two decades.
Read more online at  
http://www.ccrjustice.org/crime-against-nature
Po t o b y Na h a l  Za m a NiCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook2
CCR has an exciting update for those that have been following the case against one of 
our attorneys, Sunita Patel, who was arrested in Arizona in June 2010, whilst serving 
as a legal observer, during protests against the controversial Arizona immigration 
law, SB1070. Nearly a year after her arrest (and the arrest of two other attorneys) who 
were monitoring the police response to protestors opposing the controversial Arizona 
immigration law (viewed by many human rights and immigration activists as a tool to 
racially profile and harass immigrants), a judge signed an order to dismiss the remaining 
two cases following a motion filed by the Maricopa County Attorneys’ office in June. 
The reason stated was “in the interest of justice.” This is a crucial win for the First 
Amendment rights of protestors everywhere. Legal observers attend such protests to 
ensure that the trampling of constitutional rights does not happen, and that protestors are 
not intimidated by the presence of law enforcement. Their role, and the role of press and 
protesters, is critical to a functioning democracy.George W. Bush began the first decade 
of the 21st century by shredding the 
Constitution. President Barack Obama 
ended it by refusing to close Guantánamo; 
end unlawful, targeted killings; cease 
isolating political activists and Muslims 
in special prisons; or hold virtually 
anyone accountable for the many serious 
international human rights violations 
committed in the name of national 
security. As we approach the 10th 
anniversary of 9/11, and the detention 
of Guantánamo prisoners, CCR continues to forcefully 
demand that President Obama keep to his pledge to close 
Guantánamo with justice and move towards compliance 
with constitutional and human rights obligations. 
CCR represents many individuals who, even years later, 
have received no justice for the abuses they have suffered. 
The victims include hundreds of men and women held at 
Abu Ghraib; men held indefinitely, tortured and abused at 
Guantánamo and in black sites around the world; Muslim, 
Arab and South Asian men rounded up and illegally 
detained in the US; and Maher Arar, the Canadian citizen 
who was rendered to Syria by the U.S. for a year of torture 
and detention. It is unacceptable that these victims are 
expected to forego legal redress simply because the courts 
accede to the demands of the most powerful executive 
branch in U.S. history and a complicit congress.
Although George W. Bush marched us into two illegal 
wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, President Obama has almost 
tripled the number of fronts on which the U.S. military 
is deployed. Hundreds of thousands of civilians have been killed in Afghanistan, Iraq 
and Pakistan alone, and millions 
have been displaced. Over 6,000 
U.S. military service members have 
been killed, and more than 50,000 
wounded in wars that have cost the 
American people trillions of dollars. 
It’s not just where these wars are 
being waged, but also how. Drone 
strikes in Pakistan, Libya, and Yemen 
(countries on which Congress has not 
declared war) kill thousands. To the 
extent that Bush and his advisors ignored the law to justify 
torture, Obama and his advisors have ignored the law to 
justify warfare. Currently, Obama’s advisors are going 
so far as to argue that the President can bypass the War 
Powers Resolution’s restrictions on unilateral, executive 
war making simply by using high-tech weaponry like 
drones, which limit the presence of troops on the ground.
After a decade, more detainees have died in Guantánamo 
than have been charged with a crime, more illegal wars 
are being fought today than under Bush, more laws 
are subverted in the name of national security, and the 
executive branch has seized more power than it’s ever 
had. Nonetheless, CCR ends the decade with the same 
convictions as when it began. We deeply reject that the 
U.S. president can declare war on anyone in the world to 
combat terrorism. We demand that the 171 men who remain 
in Guantánamo are either tried or released; that torture is 
denounced and officials are held accountable; that illegal 
wars are ended; and that the national security state be 
dismantled. Nothing less than justice is acceptable—  
no matter who the President is.Ten Years After 9/11 the Fight for Justice Continues
Case Against CCR Staff-Attorney Sunita Patel DISMISSED
Photo by Lindsay Beyerstein
CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook3
CCR and other advocates believe these 
adjustments are inadequate in that they 
do not address the fundamental issue of 
whether a state or municipality has the 
option to NOT participate in S-Comm; 
how collaborations between police and 
ICE funnel people into an unjust detention 
and deportation system; the need for 
restrictions and guidelines on who is 
and is not deportable; and assurances 
that the program does NOT undermine 
community policing efforts. Most 
importantly, the adjustments did NOT 
address the decisions of counties across  
the country and states refusing to 
participate because of these afore 
mentioned serious problems. 
Resistance to S-Comm is growing stronger 
and more united each day as a result of the 
records released through NDLON v. ICE 
and the ongoing education and advocacy 
work by CCR and our allies. In addition, 
the votes of “no confidence” by powerful 
(Democratic) governors send a critical 
message to President Obama: Secure 
Communities should be terminated.Resisting “Secure”  
Communities  (cont. from cover)  The Fight for Justice and  
Accountability at GTMO Continues 
This month marks the fifth year since three men—who were never 
charged with any crime—died in U.S. custody at Guantánamo 
under circumstances that remain unexplained and that were never 
independently investigated. On June 13, 2011, CCR filed an appeal in 
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit on behalf of the families 
of two of the deceased, Yasser Al-Zahrani of Saudi Arabia and Salah 
Ali Abdullah Ahmed Al-Salami of Yemen. The military has persistently 
maintained that their deaths were suicides by hanging. Rear Admiral 
Harry Harris, commander of Guantánamo at the time, shamefully 
called them “ acts of asymmetrical warfare waged against us, ” while a  
State Department official characterized them as a “ good PR move. ”
However, as investigative journalist Scott Horton revealed in his 
award-winning article in Harper’s Magazine  last year, eye-witness 
accounts from four soldiers stationed at the Base at the time strongly 
suggest that the government covered up the actual cause and 
circumstances of the deaths, and that the men did not die in their  
own cells by their own hands, but at the hands of government  
officials at a secret site in Guantánamo. 
Last autumn the district court in D.C. dismissed the lawsuit now  
being appealed, Al-Zahrani v. Rumsfeld . Obama administration 
lawyers, like the Department of Justice under President Bush,  
argued that no court should even review the evidence and facts of 
the case, but should instead dismiss it given that responsible officials 
would have immunity even if they had committed the alleged  
abuses and caused the three men’s deaths. Government attorneys  
also cited national security considerations as a basis for dismissing  
the case and further argued that, under the Military Commissions  
Act, federal courts lack legal jurisdiction over the claims of torture  
of any foreigners in U.S. military custody designated as “enemy  
combatants.” In the context of this case, this position effectively  
grants the government the power to unilaterally label a foreign  
citizen as an “enemy combatant,” torture and kill that individual,  
and then cover it up, without any legal accountability whatsoever. 
It should continue to stun people—and inspire protest and resistance—
that U.S. courts have so far accepted the government’s position with 
regard to this particular case. And more broadly, that the courts have 
consistently relied on “special factors,” “state secrets,” “qualified 
immunity,” and “political question” doctrines to dismiss cases like this 
brought before them about U.S. torture and abuse. Not once in the past 
decade has a court decided to evaluate the actual facts of a case alleging 
torture, or rule on the legality of torturing individuals in offshore detention.
For more information: http://ccrjustice.org/zahraniFor more information go to:  
http://ccrjustice.org/secure-communities 
CCR is excited to announce that civil 
rights and constitutional law professor, 
Baher Azmy, will be our next Legal 
Director, beginning this fall! Baher will 
replace Bill Quigley, who returned to 
New Orleans in May, and continues 
his involvement with CCR as Associate 
Legal Director. We will be providing 
additional information in the coming 
months but in the meantime, you can 
read more about Baher by going to: 
http://ccrjustice.org/new-legal-director-
baher-azmyCCR Welcomes
Baher Azmy
*This short article is derived from a longer article originally published on jadaliyya.com
CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook4
Since the June 2009 military coup that 
ousted Honduran President Manuel 
Zelaya, CCR has been involved in 
advocacy aiming to address systemic 
human rights violations in Honduras 
and challenge the U.S. government’s 
policies toward the post-coup regime. 
CCR is actively working in solidarity 
with the National Front of Popular 
Resistance (FNRP) and in support of 
the efforts of the True Commission 
established by the Honduran Human 
Rights Platform.
On June 23, 2011, nearly two years 
after the Honduran coup that 
ousted President Zelaya, CCR filed a 
complaint on behalf of David Murillo 
and Silvia Mencías, the parents of 
19-year-old Isis Murillo who was 
shot and killed by Honduran military 
forces during a peaceful demonstration 
against the coup. The complaint 
was filed against Roberto Micheletti, 
former president of the Honduran 
National Congress who assumed the 
role of de facto head of government 
immediately following the coup. The 
complaint details extrajudicial killing, 
crimes against humanity of murder 
and persecution and other gross 
human rights violations that occurred 
under his authority and/or direction. 
In building the case, CCR worked 
closely with its partner organization, 
El Comité de Familiares de Detenidos Desaparecidos en Honduras 
(COFADEH – Committee of Relatives 
of Detained and Disappeared in 
Honduras). CCR also filed a Freedom 
of Information Act (FOIA) request for 
materials from the U.S. government 
concerning the events in Honduras and 
to assist the True Commission’s efforts 
to clarify the historical record. 
A month before filing the lawsuit, 
on May 22, 2011, CCR applauded 
President Manuel Zelaya’s safe 
return from exile as a testament to the strength and perseverance of the 
national resistance movement that 
formed after his ouster. However, the 
Center remains extremely concerned 
about the systemic human rights 
violations against the resistance 
movement. CCR continues to call 
for genuine efforts toward real 
accountability for the illegal coup and 
ongoing human rights violations. 
Accountability in Honduras
I feel confident that having been afforded the rare opportunity to serve as an Ella Baker Fellow will prepare me with a 
critical and creative approach to movement-based legal advocacy work in ongoing human rights work here in the U.S. as 
well as abroad. —Joanna Cuevas Ingram, Ella Baker Fellow, Summer 2011
CCR’s Ella Baker Internship Program, a 20-year-old program for law school students looking to become “people’s lawyers” 
is expanding this summer! Instead of the 12 “Ellas” we have had in New York City in recent years, this summer we will have 
17. We are also very excited to pilot two satellite Ella Baker programs outside New York; in New Orleans, where students 
will work with former CCR Legal Director Bill Quigley and the Loyola Law Clinic for Social Justice, and in Port-au-Prince 
where students will work with the Institute for Justice & Democracy in Haiti. W e are thrilled to expand this key program 
enabling us to support more students each summer and to offer new and wide-ranging experiences in CCR’s ongoing 
mission to help train the next generation of people’s lawyers.  CCR staff member Liz Bradley with children in the besieged Bajo Aguán region of Honduras.
Ella Baker Program Expands
Po t o b y Na h a l  Za m a Ni
For more information go to: 
http://www.ccrjustice.org/
honduras-coup CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookAs readers of our newsletter 
know, in March 2010, CCR 
filed Aref v. Holder  to challenge 
constitutional rights violations, 
including the right to due process 
at two federal prison units called 
Communications Management 
Units (CMUs) located in Terre 
Haute, Indiana and Marion, 
Illinois. These CMUs are primarily 
being used to limit, monitor and 
control the communications of 
Muslim prisoners and prisoners 
with unpopular political beliefs 
and to isolate them from other 
prisoners and the outside world. 
Between 65 and 72 percent of 
CMU prisoners are Muslim 
men. CCR’s five plaintiffs were 
designated to the CMUs despite 
having relatively or totally clean 
disciplinary histories. None 
of the plaintiffs has received 
any communications-related 
disciplinary infractions in the  
last decade. 
CMU prisoners are completely segregated from the rest of 
the population at the facility and given extremely limited 
access to the outside world. Opportunities to participate in 
rehabilitation programs and work are virtually nonexistent, 
and their ability to call and visit with family and friends 
is heavily restricted. The CMU allows no physical contact 
with children or spouses or other family members. To 
add insult to injury, the Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) 
provides no means to challenge the CMU designation either before or after it happens, 
and the prisoners are given neither 
access to the reasons for their 
transfer nor instruction on how to 
earn return to the relative freedom 
of general population.
On March 30, 2011, the District 
Court of D.C. ruled that our  
lawsuit may proceed. With this 
victory, CMU prisoners and their 
spouses will have their day in court 
to challenge the violation of their 
constitutional rights, including  
the right to due process and  
against retaliatory punishment. 
While the BOP sought to have it 
dismissed, CCR is confident that 
the case will proceed and raise 
critical constitutional and civil 
rights issues.
Increased public pressure and 
awareness of these prisons within 
prisons has already had an impact. 
Not a single prisoner was transferred out of the CMU 
to less onerous conditions in the first three years of the 
CMU’s existence for a non-disciplinary or non-medical 
reason. Since the filing of CCR’s lawsuit, however, the 
BOP has begun a series of transfers of prisoners out of the 
unit, including three of CCR’s clients: Royal Jones, Daniel 
McGowan and Yassin Aref. Daniel McGowan has since 
been returned to the CMU, however, without explanation. Challenge to CMUs Advances
Rachel Meerpool and Nahal Zamani of CCR with  
Members of Client’s (Jayyousi) Family.
CCR Challenges Unconstitutional New Law in Michigan
On June 22, 2011, the Center, in 
coalition with the Sugar Law Center 
for Economic and Social Justice, the 
Sanders Law Firm, Miller Cohen 
PLC and Goodman & Hurwitz 
PC filed a law suit challenging 
Michigan’s emergency manager 
law on behalf of the Michigan 
National Lawyers Guild and 28 
citizens from across the state. The 
lawsuit claims the controversial 
law is an unconstitutional power grab that effectively eliminates the 
democratically formed governments 
in cities and towns across the state.
Emergency managers have nearly 
unlimited and unchecked authority, 
from making and changing all local 
laws to selling off public assets and 
saddling local taxpayers with debt 
without their approval and laying 
off workers and repealing collective 
bargaining contracts. CCR believes the law to be an abuse of state-level 
executive power and another way in 
which working class people and poor 
communities of color (in particular) 
are bearing the burden of the national 
economic downturn. This emergency 
manager law also deprives politically 
and economically disenfranchised 
communities of fundamental political 
rights like the right to elect their local 
governments. Read more online at http://ccrjustice.org/cmu5Teresa Holder and Bert Stover first heard of CCR’s work in 
news articles concerning habeas corpus and imprisonment 
conditions at Guantánamo. They decided to support 
CCR while tracking the unlawful actions of the Bush 
administration around torture and “enemy combatants.”
The U.S. government’s blatant disregard for the 
Constitution and the unjust treatment of immigrants 
greatly increased their concern and motivated them to 
become recurring monthly donors to CCR. 
“Donating on a regular basis provides a way for us to 
support CCR’s work in the courts and voice in the media, 
especially when it contrasts sharply with current popular 
opinion. Knowing that torture, wrongful imprisonment, 
and intolerance will be important topics for years to come, 
a single donation did not seem to fit the situation. 
Responding to the actions of the state is overwhelming on a 
personal level; CCR provides a vehicle for us to take some 
constructive action.” 
Bert currently works in occupational health and safety and international health services research. Teresa is a medical 
social worker who focuses on memory disorders and works 
in the women’s clinic at a local hospital. They live in Seattle 
with their 14-year-old son and their dog. 
666 Broadway, 7th Floor, New York, NY 10012 • www.CCRjustice.org
The Center for Constitutional Rights is dedicated to advancing and protecting the rights guaranteed by the United States Constitution and the Universal Declaration of  
Human Rights. Founded in 1966 by attorneys who represented civil rights movements in the South, CCR is a non-profit legal and educational organization committed to the  
creative use of law as a positive force for social change.Exciting New Cases 
and Developments 
Inside!
CCR Donor Spotlight   Teresa Holder and Bert Stover
“At that time, it seemed like no group but CCR 
was coming out vocally for the rights of these 
hidden victims of American foreign policy.” 
—Teresa Holder and Bert Stover