INSIDE 
2Letter from the Executive Director 
3Remembering a Young Torture Survivor 
4At Every Border, #Families Belong Together The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
VOLUME 29, ISSUE 1 •WWW.CVT.ORG 
Restoring 
the Dignity of 
the Human Spirit 
THE sto rycloth 
NOVEMBER 2018 
A Milestone in Healing—CVT’s Tenth 
Year Caring for Survivors in Jordan 
This year marks the tenth year
the Center for Victims of
Torture (CVT) has extended 
rehabilitative care to thousands of
refugee survivors of torture and 
war in Jordan. Established in 2008 
to help severely traumatized Iraqi
refugees reclaim their lives, the 
program expanded over the years
as conflicts and crises emerged in 
the region, especially as the Syrian 
conflict began and continues to 
devastate communities today.
CVT Jordan has steadily worked 
over the last decade to meet
increasing demand for holistic,
rehabilitative care for refugee 
torture survivors, while also training 
local mental health, physiotherapy 
and social service providers to 
serve survivors of torture and other
gross human rights violations.
Since CVT’s doors first opened in 
Jordan, we’ve rebuilt the lives and 
restored the hope of nearly 7,500 
survivors and 30,000 family 
members.
From its locations in Jordan 
today, CVT’s healing centers arehelping individual survivors and 
families from seven countries facing 
crises, including Eritrea, Iraq,
Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan,
Syria and Yemen. Our staff are 
also partnering with and providing 
training for other organizations 
to increase understanding of the
effects of torture and war trauma 
and the benefits of holistic rehabili-
tative care. “CVT’s work over the past 10 
years in Jordan has had an incredi-
ble impact on the lives of so many 
people, including my own,” said 
Simone van der Kaaden, longtime
country director for CVT Jordan.
“To see the profound changes in 
the lives of our clients, how CVT 
Jordan team members have grown 
professionally and how CVT has 
(see page 3) 
Infographic by Amanda Scheid 2Letter from the Executive Director 
Dear Friends,
With this final newsletter of 2018, I’m pleased to report positive 
news in the fight to prevent psychologists from participating in torture 
and coercive interrogations. Several months ago, CVT and our partners 
at Physicians for Human Rights mobilized the human rights community  
in support of concerned members of the American Psychological Association 
(APA), to defeat a proposal to roll back APA rules that protect psychologists from 
complicity in torture and unethical medical care. The proposal was soundly defeated.
There is also some positive news on the appropriations front. Congress has approved 
an increase in the domestic appropriation for torture survivor rehabilitation centers from 
$10.73 million to $14 million—the first funding increase for U.S. programs since the early 
2000s. It’s still far too low, but it’s progress.
Of course there is negative news, as President Trump continues to eviscerate the U.S.
Refugee Admissions Program. The President will limit refugee admissions to only 30,000 this
year—down from 110,000 in the year before he took office. And the 30,000 figure is a ceiling;
last fiscal year, despite a ceiling of 45,000, less than 23,000 refugees were actually admitted. We’ll
continue to work with coalition partners for a much more robust refugee admissions program.
The Administration is also continuing its assault on the political asylum system. The majority 
of torture survivors at our domestic centers and programs are asylum seekers, and we know that
just as is the case with refugees, the prevalence of torture among asylum seekers is extremely high.
We’re hiring a new position in our Washington office to lead advocacy on asylum related issues
and help to put an end to family separation and other cruel policies.
The need for CVT’s voice in Washington has never been greater. And the demand for our
healing care in the U.S. and around the world remains extraordinary. Our Board of Directors
recently approved the largest budget in CVT’s history. At $23 million, it will continue expanding 
our global impact—but it will require a continuing commitment by our generous community of
supporters. I’m hopeful we’ll hit the $1.75 million target for contributions by year’s end that will
make possible our ambitious agenda.
Please know that I’m deeply grateful for your partnership, your generosity and your compas-
sion. I’ll keep you up to date on our work in these most uncertain times. And as always, if you 
have questions or want additional information, please don’t hesitate to contact me.  
Best regards,
Curt Goering 
Executive Director......................................................
Curt Goering 
In 1993, I met a young man I will
call Ahmed. He had escaped to the
United States after being impris-
oned and tortured in not one,but
two, countries in the Middle East. 
I remember he told me he cameto 
the U.S. because “this is the only 
place where I can live as a free 
person, where people have rights.” 
Ahmed had been tortured on 
account of his perceived political
beliefs, and as a result he had a 
metal plate and four screws in his
arm where the bones had been 
shattered. He had scars on his wrists
and toenails that hadn’t grown 
back properly. He couldn’t sleep 
and worried constantly that there
was something wrong with him internally because of the dirty water
and rotten food he had been made
to eat. 
I met Ahmed when I was doing 
pro bono asylum cases while working 
as a litigator in Atlanta. I helped 
him get medical attention, find 
work and pursue his legal case, but
back then, before I began working 
with CVT, I didn’t appreciate the
psychological wounds that he had 
suffered or know how to get him 
the help he needed. Although I
understand that Ahmed is doing 
well now, I regret that he never
received the mental health care 
that could have eased his pain.
Today, as head of external 
relations for CVT Atlanta, I understand the
great benefits of
psychological
care and 
counselling 
for torture 
survivors like 
Ahmed. This 
care provides survivors with the
tools they need to combat the night-
mares, anxiety, depression and other
hardships that torture leaves behind,
and I’ve personally witnessed the way 
survivors rebuild their lives after
accessing rehabilitative care. And,
knowing that as high as 44 percent
of refugeesliving in the U.S.have
survived torture, I’m grateful that
care is available.  
3Remembering a Young Torture Survivor 
By Darlene Lynch, head of external relations, CVT Atlanta 
Darlene Lynch 
(from page 1) 
been part of building a local cadre of trauma rehabili-
tation specialists in Jordan and beyond is incredible.
CVT’s work and partner network continue to expand in 
the Middle East, and that growth is a strong motivator
to continue to strengthen the network of professionals,
create opportunities to share experiences and increase
access to rehabilitation services in Jordan and the
region.” 
“The occasion of this milestone is the right time to 
remind the world that we continue to bear witness to the
immense suffering and scale of human rights atrocities
still committed today in Syria and parts of Iraq,” said 
Neal Porter, CVT director of international services.
“CVT will continue to do what we can to restore hope,
trust, dignity and purpose to our clients in Jordan, for
as long as we can, because we know healing is possible
for survivors even under the worst of circumstances.” 
Original article by Sabrina Crews, marketing communications 
specialist. 
Funding for CVT’s work in Jordan is provided by the United 
States Department of State’s Bureau of Population, Refugees 
and Migration and the United Nations Voluntary Fund for 
Victims of Torture. 10 Years of Healing, 
10 Years of Firsts for CVT 
The history of the CVT Jordan program also marks several
notable firsts for the organization as a whole. 
•It was CVT’s first international direct services program 
outside of Africa. 
•CVT Jordan was the first international program to 
integrate physiotherapy with counseling and social 
services. 
•CVT Jordan was the first international program to work 
in an urban setting (as opposed to refugee camps). 
•CVT Jordan was the first international project to help 
such a large number of children—In 2016-17, nearly 
30 percent of the survivors in our care were children. 
At its inception, the CVT Jordan team included a small
team of expatriates and national Jordanian staff on-site, in 
addition to staff based at CVT’s Minnesota headquarters.
Today, under the leadership of our Jordanian colleagues,
CVT Jordan employs about 70 staff members on-site, 
with an emphasis on professional development and 
growth opportunities for all members of the Jordan team.A Milestone in Healing 2356 University Avenue W, Suite 430 
St. Paul, MN 55114 
www.cvt.org 
© 20 18 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it. 19-NA5 The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE Make a Difference in the Life of a Survivor 
Your generous support brings healing to torture survivors 
worldwide. CVT welcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for ongoing planning and 
delivery of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your legacy of support . 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors while offering tax 
benefits to donors.•In-Kind Donations of specific items improve the lives of 
survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a check to 2356 University 
Avenue W, Suite 430, St. Paul, MN 55114, or call 612.436.4808 
for other ways to give. Thank you for your ongoing commitment 
to healing the wounds of torture.At Every Border, 
#Families Belong Together 
The pain of family separation 
affects children across the globe.
Jana, a 10-year-old Syrian girl,
endured forced separation from her
family and imprisonment before
crossing the Syrian-Jordanian border
for safety. She’d been detained in a 
dark dungeon, underground, with 
other children for nearly a month 
so her father would turn himself 
in. He did, and he was murdered.
Separating children like Jana 
from their families is a violation 
of human rights. Article 9 of the
United Nation’s Convention on 
the Rights of a Child declares that
states in power “shall ensure that 
a child shall not be separated from 
his or her parents against their will.” Tyrannical governments under-
stand the power of family. CVT 
regularly hears from survivors
about corrupt regimes coercing 
their families. Despots use the love
between family members to get
what they want, threatening to 
throw mothers and wives into 
prison or to use violence against
other loved ones.
Outrageously, forced family 
separation has also been happening 
here, in the United States, as a cruel
form of coercion against asylum 
seekers seeking safe haven at our
southern border. 
CVT continues to champion 
sensible, humane options for
addressing the plight of the world’s most vulnerable people.
And we continue to push for family 
reunification. We know it’s possible.
We’ve seen it happen and the impact
it has. After receiving rehabilitative
care from CVT, a survivor named 
David told us, “Today, my life is
different—CVT stood by me until 
I was reunited with my family.” 
And just like with David, CVT 
will continue to stand with every 
survivor, across every border,
because #FamiliesBelongTogether.
According to survivors in 
CVT’s care, separation is 
rarely voluntary. At our 
St. Paul Healing Center, 
where we see survivors 
from around the world, 
67% have been separated 
from their families. Illustration by Amanda Scheid 