In the late 1980s, a group of rebels
began a reign of terror in northernUganda. The Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA) initially targeted government troops but soon begantormenting civilians to intimidatethe community. Throughout thisaggression, the LRA murdered,mutilated and tortured individuals.Children, in particular, were at riskof being abducted from their homesand schools and forced into sexualservitude or to join the rebel forces.More than 2,000,000 Ugandanswere internally displaced from theirhomes.
The region is now calmer, yet
many individuals suffer deep emotional and psychological wounds
as a result of the LRA’s horrific violence against children, womenand men. A number of organizationsprovide economic, medical andbasic needs assistance. But few offerthe therapeutic care needed to over-come the debilitating effects of torture, like depression, anxiety and posttraumatic stress disorder. 
“The need for mental health 
services is enormous in Uganda,”said CVT psychologist and trainer,Gabriele Marini, who has beenworking in the region for over a year.But through CVT’s training project,local Ugandans are learning thecounseling skills needed to providemental health care to survivors of
the LRA’s torturous activities.
Understanding Trauma
Ugandans and staff from the
local partner organizations initiallyexpressed doubts that survivorscould benefit from counseling. Butas community members began tosee others change during and aftercounseling, they have come to acknowledge that mental healthservices are necessary so individualsand communities can heal from torture and violence. “The localcounselors were surprised andamazed to see how the clients canbenefit without receiving any 
March/April 2011, Volume 21, Issue 2    A Publication of the Center for Victims of Torture    www.cvt.org       
INSIDE
2Letter from the Executive Director
4A New Look for CVT 
4Join the Circle of Hope!Our mission: To heal the wounds of 
torture on individuals, their families 
and their communities, and to 
stop torture worldwide.PHOTO © EDIE LEWISONSee page 3
Mal Warwick Associates/MD, Inc. Form: Newsletter Draft: FINAL
Job #: CVT11 NB Size: 11 x 17” flat  4pp, 1sh Stock: 70# white offset, recycled Fold: half, then half again
Date: 03/14/11 Ink: 4/4, 4cp Bleeds: 4Building a Foundation for Healing 
in Northern Uganda
AVSI staff members Agnes Lanyero and Joyce Laker at
a training workshop in November 2009.
As part of CVT’s training project in northern Uganda,
AVSI counselors are learning new skills and techniquesto provide mental health services to survivors of tortureinflicted by the Lord’s Resistance Army. The project isfunded by the International Criminal Court’s Trust Fundfor Victims.
2Letter from the Executive Director
The start of the 112th Congress presents both opportunities and 
challenges for CVT.  
The new Congress includes many first-term members who have not yet
made public statements or taken a position on issues such as funding for torture survivor rehabilitation programs and stopping torture worldwide.
CVT’s Washington Office is scheduling meetings to acquaint these new members with our 
work and the issues. Our nonpartisan approach is an asset during these meetings as we share ourknowledge about the effects of torture with them and seek common ground.
The recovering-but-still-slow economy poses a challenge for funding the authorized and 
appropriated Torture Victims Relief Act. Many new members of Congress pledged to spend less,making budget cuts inevitable. Any cuts to torture survivor rehabilitation will make it harder toextend care to refugees and asylum seekers struggling to rebuild their lives in the U.S. How farthose cuts go and what programs might be spared is still unknown, but we will keep you informedin the coming months.
In our efforts to end torture, CVT, along with our colleagues at Human Rights First and other
human rights institutions, is working with respected policy advisors to develop a national climate in which torture is never considered acceptable, even in the face of national security concerns.Developing a durable national consensus against torture is a focus of our work with retired leadersfrom the military, national security and foreign policy sectors. 
President Obama has indicated the nation should look forward and not backward. However,
we continue to press Congress and the administration for greater transparency for our government’sdetention and interrogation policies post-9/11.
Getting to the facts can help us better understand what went wrong so we can work for safeguards
to prevent future use of torture and cruel treatment by U.S. personnel. 
Our work in Washington is made possible by the generous contributions of people like you.
Thank you for your support—you are helping us give voice to survivors purposefully silenced bytorture. 
Sincerely,
Douglas A. Johnson
Executive DirectorDouglas A. Johnson
C
ROur work in Washington,
D.C., gives voice to peoplewho were purposefullysilenced by the perpetratorsof torture and supports funding for healing servicesto survivors in the UnitedStates and abroad.
PHOTO © JAY PREMACK /wwwjaypremack.compractical items, but only by talking. 
They didn’t know it was possible,”explained Gabriele. 
Community members now also
understand that organizations provide unique services and arereferring traumatized people tothose with psychological counseling.One director of a partner organiza-tion said, “We are getting manyreferrals from health centers, AIDSorganizations and former clients—not the land disputes and domesticcases we used to get, but now theyare [sending us] trauma-relatedcases.”
Strengthening Local Organizations
In November 2009, CVT began
working with partner organizationsof the International CriminalCourt’s (ICC) Trust Fund forVictims (TFV) in northern Uganda.Gabriele regularly traveled fromNairobi, Kenya, to Uganda to train,mentor and supervise the counselors.With the unique roles of imple-menting both Court-ordered reparations and general rehabilitationassistance to victims of crimesunder the ICC’s jurisdiction, theTrust Fund for Victims offers key
3From page 1 advantages for promoting lasting
peace, reconciliation, and well-beingin war-torn societies. Additionalfunding from TFV allows us toexpand this training project. 
Gabriele recently relocated to
northern Uganda to provide moreintensive training to local counselorsfrom seven organizations. He is nowconducting side-by-side co-therapywith the counselors so they canlearn new techniques first-hand.This regular contact gives the coun-selors the feedback and mentoringthey need to provide more effectivecare. “Some of the counselors started[their work] with very little train-ing,” explained Gabriele. “Someothers who had experience had tochange from giving advice to a newapproach that empowers the client.”
“The counselors have found it
valuable to learn new skills, differentapproaches and new techniqueswhich enable them to have greaterimpact in counseling,” said Gabriele.“They are learning to adapt theo-retical information to the Ugandanreality and to the existing economicand social resources.”
In addition to training individual
mental health counselors, Gabrieleis training Kizito Wamala, a psych-ologist with the African Centre forthe Treatment and Rehabilitationof Torture Victims to become atrainer and counseling supervisor.“Any contribution [to providingmental health services] by anyone,in any form, especially trainingsome interested local people toempower them to help their own communities, is very appropriate,” said Kizito. “Many agencies have ended their activities here with few Building a Foundation for Healing in Northern Uganda
Psychologist and
trainer GabrieleMarini is based innorthern Uganda. Heis rotating betweenthree Ugandan communities to provide training, clinical supervisionand co-counselingwith local counselors.
PHOTO © C.C. STROM
CVT is working with local organizations in Lira, Kitgum and Gulu, Uganda to
strengthen local counselors’ skills and develop the region’s mental health resources. Soroti
KampalaGulu
Lira
JinjaMukono
MbararaKaseseMbaleKitgum
MasakaEntebbeArua
KabaleKoboko
Tororo Iganga
Mityana BusiaFort PortalHoimaNebbi
PallisaMasindiAdjumani
Kaberamaido
LuweroPaidhaPakwach
IbandaKotidoCongo,
DRCKenya
RwandaSudan
TanzaniaUgandafootmarks left behind them. This
project is the best way to go at thistime to ensure sustainability.”
After Gabriele’s work in northern
Uganda ends, counselors like Kizitowill be able to continue to strengthenthe mental health resources and helpindividuals and communities heal.
The United States and interna-
tional community have recognizedthe atrocities and torture caused by the LRA and are beginning toprovide support to northern Uganda.The U.S. Congress unanimouslypassed the Lord’s Resistance Army
Disarmament and Northern UgandaRecovery Act to support humani-
tarian relief and reconstruction inthe country, and the InternationalCriminal Court has issued warrantsagainst leaders of the LRA. 
While political policies and legal
cases are built, we are strengtheningUgandans and their communities byfostering local mental health servicesthat will be available now and inthe future.
For more information, visit
www.trustfundforvictims.org. After 25 years, most things need
refreshing. That includes theCVT logo. During the next few
months we’ll be rolling out a fresh,new look on our print materialsand Web site.
Over time, as CVT grew into 
an international organization, werecognized the limitations of the
current eclipse logo. The image ofthe eclipse has different meanings in different cultures. The new logoacknowledges our past, while moving forward with hope.
Craig Johnson, graphic designer
and owner of Agency F, designedthe new logo based on images of afull eclipse in which the sun contin-ues to radiate light even when themoon is blocking it from view. 
“The circles are meant to suggest
the healing that CVT brings to torture survivors,” said Craig. “Thethree colors signify hope, dignityand respect that
are essential torebuilding thelives of torturesurvivors whileadvocatingagainst the use of torture.”
Craig is an award-winning
designer with a deep interest in sustainability and fair trade issues.He led CVT staff through a series ofconversations about the importanceof a versatile, updated image to represent hope and healing beforedesigning this new logo.
A New Look for CVT
Restoring the dignity of the human spirit
649 DAYTON A VENUE    www .cvt.org     
ST. PAUL, MN 55104 cvt@cvt.orgToll Free 1-877-265-8775    © 2011 Center for Victims of Torture
All rights reserved. Please contact CVT for permissionto reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.
11-NB5You have made a real difference
in the lives of torture survivors,their families, and their commu-
nities—and we are deeply gratefulfor your generosity and your com-passion.
Many of us have cut back on
our spending over the past severalyears, and we’re hearing from manydonors who are looking for newand creative ways to continuebringing hope and healing to thou-sands of torture survivors aroundthe world.
We invite you to join with our
300 dedicated supporters who,through their monthly sustaininggifts, make up CVT’s Circle of Hope.
These faithful donors provide aconsistent stream of support whilealso helping us reduce paper andadministrative costs.
Your monthly gift of $10, $15
or $25 will have a big impact onthe lives of torture survivors world-wide. For the same cost as a fewcups of coffee a month, you canhelp change a life. Monthly giftscan be made with automatic creditcard charges or via electronic fundtransfers. 
To join the Circle of Hope ,
please contact Ashley at 1-877-265-8775 or agotreau@cvt.org, or setup your credit card gift online atwww.cvt.org. It’s easy and conve-nient, and you may change or stopyour monthly contributions at anytime. Thank you for your continuedcommitment to CVT’s mission ofhope and healing.
Join the Circle of Hope!Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Your generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVTwelcomes all types of donations.
Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery of healing services.
Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
In-Kind Donations of specific items
improve the lives of survivors.
Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775 forother ways to give. Thank you for yourongoing commitment to healing thewounds of torture.Craig Johnson
PHOTO © STEVE MARTH