The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
In a garden outside of a small
office building in Zarqa, Jordan,Iraqi children play safely, chasing
each other and creating imaginaryworlds. Older children keep an eyeon their younger siblings. Inside, theparents receive the individual andgroup counseling they need to healfrom their devastating experiences.Bringing healing to Iraqi refugees in Zarqa is possible because of anewly-created mobile unit and ourcommitment to working in the communities where torture survivorslive.In 2008 we opened our office in
Amman, Jordan, caring for Iraqisurvivors who fled their country forsafety. Refugees living in Zarqa, a
30-minute drive from Amman, alsoneeded help, but public transporta-tion between the two cities is limitedand cost prohibitive. For women,cultural traditions also make it difficult for them to be away fromhome for an extended period of time.
Since December, CVT psycho-
therapist Angela Keller and a fewpsychosocial counselors have traveledby van from Amman to Zarqa threeor four days a week to bring healingto the Iraqis living there. They spenda full day doing assessments andproviding both group and individualcounseling. 
Local organizations that are also
working with refugees have allowedus to use their space so we didn’tneed to find office space. Angelaand the counselors bring posters,drawings, group guidelines, assess-ment materials and other supplieson each trip.
In the first four months, the
mobile unit was able to help 45Iraqis begin to heal from their tortured pasts. “The staff is really
busy and is planning the next roundof counseling,” said Paul Orieny,CVT international services clinicaladvisor. “Wit hout the mobile unit,
many people would continue tostruggle by themselves.”
Kenya
Working in the refugee camps
outside of Dadaab, Kenya, is partic-ularly challenging because of thedesert landscape and safety concerns.Yet the staff is finding unique ways toreach the survivors who are in needof care to heal from their tortureand war trauma experiences.
The local counselors we have
hired and trained have been reachingout to survivors within the camp.Through meetings with communityleaders, the counselors are helpingthe leaders identify men and womenwho might be suffering and needextra care. In presentations to largergroups of refugees, the counselorsexplain the effects of torture andhow the refugees can help them-selves. The counselors, who are primarily refugees themselves, useCVT-purchased bicycles to travel to the CVT clinic on the edge of the
See page 3Bringing healing to survivors where they liveVOLUME 22, ISSUE 2 •WWW.CVT.ORG
INSIDE
2 Letter from the Board Chair, Patti Andreini Arnold
4 Donor Profile: Kristine Hutchens Believes in Moving Mountains
4 Join Our Circle of Hope!
Restoring 
the Dignity of the Human SpiritINSIDE   
CVT Jordan staff travel by van from
the Amman office to Zarqa wheremany Iraqi refugees live.       
PHOTO © CVT
THEstory cloth
MAY 20122Letter from the Board Chair
This month CVT welcomed Curt Goering as CVT’s next 
executive director. 
Curt comes to us after a nearly 30-year career at Amnesty
International USA, most recently as its Chief Operating Officer. As COO, he managed the largest branch of this global human rights organization, significantly expanding its advocacy programs, membership and offices. 
In addition to directing the day-to-day operations, he was involved in strategy development,
public policy and planning, financial oversight and external relations. He chaired a global policy team based on five continents, leading to new research and advocacy policies. His experience has given him deep knowledge of international human rights and humanitarianissues.
During our search for a new executive director, Curt immediately impressed us as an
accomplished and effective senior executive in a large international organization. He continuedto impress us with his intelligence, passion and knowledge of the human rights movement. 
Over his professional career, Curt led a dozen Amnesty International missions including
Afghanistan, Bosnia, Egypt, Israel, Lebanon, Iraq, Jordan, Taiwan, Turkey, and Tanzania. 
In addition to his positions with Amnesty as a researcher, advocacy director for Europe
and the Middle East, Senior Deputy Executive  Director and Chief Ope rating Officer, he has
assumed other assignments. For example, in 2009 he was asked to serve as an interim Head of the Gaza office for the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights.
We are thrilled that Curt will be leading CVT. Please join us in welcoming Curt this month.And as always, thank you so much for your confidence and your investment in our work.Sincerely,
Patti Andreini Arnold
CVT Board Chair......................................................
Patti Andreini Arnold
Stay on top of what CVT is doing by
signing up for our e-mail alerts atwww.cvt.org, connecting with us onFacebook or following us on Twitter.
3From page 1Bringing healing to survivors where they live
camp. By foot, walking though the
camp can take more than an hour,so traveling by bicycle makes it easierfor the counselors to reach out tosurvivors in need of help.
Consistent access to the camp
has been challenging for all non-governmental organizations,including CVT. But our ex-patriotpsychotherapists have been able toparticipate in the counseling groupsthrough speaker phones. While thepsychotherapists are now able totravel into the camp more regularly,they are continuing the mobilephone supervision so survivors canreceive the help they so desperatelyneed. 
Minnesota
In the Minneapolis-St. Paul
region, survivors live scatteredthroughout the 1,000 square milearea. By creating community-basedcollaborations with refugee groupswe can reach survivors where theylive and help more men and womenthan our clinic allows.
Through the Healing in
Partnership (HIP) project we’reworking directly with Somali,Bhutanese, Oromo and Karenrefugees by partnering with localclinics and refugee-led groups toprovide psycho-education groups.The groups are held in the St. Paulthe villages may be a few hoursaway, making it unfeasible for people to join a counseling group. 
Erin Morgan is an international
services clinical advisor who alsoworked in the DRC. Traveling onthe rugged roads is “physicallyexhausting,” she said. “Your musclesand bones ache.” But to help peopleheal, a psychotherapist and severallocal counselors will crowd in theToyota Land Cruiser and travel tovarious villages to lead counselinggroups and provide individualcounseling to those who need it.“You’re reaching people whocouldn’t leave their fields or childrento receive the help they need,” said Erin. 
Out in the communities, coun sel-
ing groups may meet in classroomsor in CVT-built huts. “When wehave groups in classrooms, we haveto take breaks. It gets so hot thatit’s hard to concentrate,” said Erin.Traveling to smaller communitiesrequires that the staff bring supplieswith them. For some groups held in classrooms, this means bringingplastic chairs so everyone can bemore comfortable. “There’s a realbenefit to healing happening wherepeople live,” said Erin. “It restoresnot just individuals, but familiesand communities.”communities where the refugeeslive, making it easier for survivorsto attend. Through the process,refugees are learning the effects oftorture and connecting with mentalhealth professionals if they needmore personal care.
Uganda
Our work in Uganda trains and
collaborates with local organizationscaring directly for torture survivors.CVT psychologist Gabriele Mariniworks with three groups, coachingthe staff on effective strategies forhealing survivors. Gabriele travels toeach center to mentor the Ugandancounselors side-by-side as they leadtherapy sessions.
The Democratic Republic of Congo
In the Democratic Republic of
Congo (DRC) we’re based in Mobain the southeastern part of thecountry that was a battle zone duringthe war. Many of the survivors,though, live in even more remoterural areas. Because no one has carsand very few people have bicycles,we travel to the villages to bringhealing to the survivors in theirown communities.
In the DRC, though, this
means traveling 30-60 minutes one-way on rutted, dirt roads that flood during the rainy season. By foot, 
Driver Sebastien unloads
chairs off the CVT vehicle aftera group session in a remotearea of the DemocraticRepublic of Congo
.
In Dadaab, Kenya, localcounselors travel severalkilometers by bicycle toreach out to survivors who need care. 
PHOTO © SHIRLEY GILLAN PHOTO © SARA FELDMANt
tyears: “A man
moves a mountainby first carryingsmall stones.” The quote inspiresher to tackle large issues with incremental actions such as makingmodest, monthly contributions toCVT. “Faithfulness over time has apowerful effect,” she explained.
Kristine works with a nonprofit
organization that monitors the bulkelectrical grid, but finds her passionin social activism, songwriting,traveling and her faith. She’s lookingforward to contributing not just hermoney to CVT, but also her time asshe finds ways to volunteer.
................................................................Kristine Hutchens first stumbledacross CVT on the internet afew years ago. But when she 
visited the new Web site again earlythis year and read the invitation totour the St. Paul Healing Center,she was impressed. “The Web site is great, so I jumped in right away,”she said. Kristine toured the restoredVictorian home not once, but twice.This gave her more time to under-stand our local and internationalwork and cemented her interest insupporting CVT.
Shortly thereafter, Kristinedecided to become a monthly donor.
“The tour confirmed what I readon the Web site,” said Kristine,who learned about our work withsurvivors in Minnesota, our inter-national projects and the advocacyinitiatives in Washington, D.C. “I find it rare for an organizationto do both healing and advocacy,”said Kristine. 
Kristine’s interest in becoming a
monthly donor harkens back to adaily planner she had many yearsago. The planner had a quotationthat has stuck with her over the
649 Dayton Avenue
St. Paul, MN  55104www.cvt.org
© 2012 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.12-NB5Through your ongoing support,
you have made a significant difference in our ability to heal
the wounds of torture—in torturesurvivors, their families and theircommunities—and we are gratefulfor your compassion and generosity.
Today we invite you to help
CVT, and bring hope and healing to thousands of torture survivorsworldwide in a very special way—by becoming a member of CVT’sCircle of Hope.
In the first four months of 2012,
over forty new CVT supporters—donors like Kristine Hutchens pro-filed above—have stepped forwardto join our Circle of Hope. By 
making a gift to CVT each month,Kristine has joined nearly 300 othercommitted supporters providing asteady stream of sustainer support.
Our Circle of Hope program is
growing because people like youare able to make a modest gift of$10, $15 or $20 each month. Forless than a dollar a day, you canmake an enormous difference in thelife of a torture survivor and help to stop the use of torture. Monthlygifts can be made with an automaticcredit card charge or via electronicfund transfers (EFT). 
If you’re able to join the Circle
of Hope, please contact Ashley at
612-436-4892 or agotreau@cvt.orgright away. It’s easy and convenient,and you can change or stop yourmonthly contribution at any time.Thank you for your continued commitment to CVT’s mission ofhope and healing.
Join Our Circle of Hope!
PHOTO © CVT
Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Y our generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVTwelcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
•In-Kind Donations of specific
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775 forother ways to give. Thank you for yourongoing commitment to healing thewounds of torture.Monthly Donor Kristine Hutchens
Believes in Moving Mountains
The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
..................................