Prakash came to the United
States as a refugee. He had beenimprisoned and tortured in his
home country in Southeast Asia for several years. After his release,and over a decade of displacement,he continues to grieve the loss ofhis native land. PsychotherapistAmirthini Keefe is working withPrakash, and they are slowly writinghis life story as part of his therapy.“Prakash comes from an oral tradition so it’s important to helphim tell his story in a way that ismeaningful to him,” said Amirthini.When she learned how muchPrakash enjoys the music of his culture, she suggested they record it as part of his therapy.
“Prakash uses singing to help
cope with his trauma. Some of thesongs are tied to difficult times andsome he sang while imprisoned tofind, as he often says, ‘peace withinhimself,’” explained Amirthini.“Besides being therapeutic forPrakash, it’s a way for him to preserve the past and share animportant tradition with futuregenerations in his family.” Prakashwill also record a song he wroteabout his gratitude to the United
States.
Using music and other customs
in the healing process is routine for the clinical staff at CVT. Earlyon we learned the importance ofintegrating a survivor’s cultural heritage and traditions into theirhealing. This requires both a formalresearch approach to understandwhat it means to be healthy in different cultures and informalinteractions to learn about societalnorms. In our healing work weconsider word choice, religion, cultural norms, traditional practices,values and economics.
Our work is based on the use of
psychotherapy—or talk therapy—to help survivors take control oftheir lives, respond to their pastsand develop healthy coping skills.While it is Western in origin andpractice, psychotherapy is consistentwith the universal value of telling a story which is itself a ritual ofhealing. 
To understand survivors’ 
traditions and learn how differentgroups of people communicate, wework with community members.
Nov./Dec. 2011, Volume 21, Issue 6 A Publication of the Center for Victims of Torture www.cvt.org
INSIDE
2Letter from the Executive Director
4T om Flynn, Volunteer  
4Please Consider a Y ear-End Gift Our mission: T o heal the wounds of 
torture on individuals, their families 
and their communities, and to 
stop torture worldwide.Healing Across Cultures
This ensures that our care is 
consistent with the values of thesurvivors. “What is a problem forIraqi refugees living in Jordan isn’tnecessarily a problem for Congoleseliving in a rural area,” explainedJon Hubbard, CVT director ofresearch. “With each internationalproject, we learn from the localcommunity members about the stories, songs, poems and metaphorsthat are embedded in the culture. Itmakes our work much more mean-ingful to the survivors,” said Jon.
See page 3
In our work in West Africa, songs,
drums and music were integral inconnecting with survivors andbringing healing to communities.Thompson Thomas was a Liberianrefugee who worked as a CVTcounselor in Guinea.
PHOTO © EDIE LEWISON
Client’s name has been changed to protect his identity.2Letter from the Executive Director
This last letter to you is a bittersweet moment. As I reflect on what 
I have learned over the last 23 years, I am keenly aware that CVT wouldnot have accomplished half of what it has without your support. You arethe reason CVT has made significant contributions to strengthen what is now a global movement to heal torture survivors and stop torture.
When I first joined CVT I noticed how many of the survivors were leaders in their 
communities. It was clear torture was used to eliminate leaders and instill fear in their families,friends and followers. I learned how torture’s destruction reverberates down generations,shaping societies through fear, and that it is truly the most effective weapon against democracy.
One cannot work in this field without witnessing great suffering. But I’ve also seen the
incredible resilience, strength and hope of torture survivors.
Torture is such an ugly subject that most of us would rather not think about it. While
many people are discouraged from thinking about what to do to end it, you are not. Knowingthat we can end suffering allows people to think about torture and begin to generate new ideasand deep commitments to ending this horrific practice. As donors, volunteers and advocates,you helped CVT bring a message of hope not only to survivors, but to the broader public. 
With your support, we contributed research and knowledge about effective treatment 
for torture survivors to the torture rehabilitation movement. With your support, leaders inCongress recognized that healing survivors was in our national interest. With your support,we contributed new ways to confront human rights violations.
None of this would be possible without people like you. We thank you for your faithful
commitment and the message it sends to men and women around the world. As I leave CVT, I trust that your support will not waver and that we will continue to rebuild lives and restorehope.
Sincerely,
Douglas A. Johnson......................................................
Douglas A. Johnson
Douglas A. Johnson speaking at the
Restoring Hope breakfast. Over 350people attended to support CVT’swork healing survivors of torture.
PHOTO © JEFFREY AUSTIN / WWW.JAUSTINPHOTO.COM3From page 1Healing Across Cultures
In the early 1990s, Jon Hubbard, director of research, and
Andrea Northwood, director of client services, conductedresearch with Cambodian refugee children who continued to feelthe effects of the Khmer Rouge regime. “To help calm the childrenwhile measuring their stress responses we showed them a moviewith small, furry animals such as puppies and kittens,” said Jon.“When we asked if they found the movie relaxing the childrensaid that it was okay but asked ‘Why aren’t there any elephants or monkeys?’ because those were the animals prominent in their culture. Twenty years later, we now automatically think about the cultures of our clients and routinely adapt our work to reflecttheir experiences.”
Psychotherapist Abbey Weiss counsels survivors at our St. Paul
Healing Center and leads psychoeducation groups for Bhutanese andKaren refugees. “Our community partnerships and interpreters areessential at helping us understand the cultures of the people we’reworking with,” said Abbey. “Interpreters are our cultural brokers.They help us find the words to communicate a concept. The nativelanguage of one woman I worked with did not differentiate between
thinking and feeling so the interpreter and I workedtogether to find words to communicate more effectivelyand continue on the healing process.”
Working with community organizations like the Karen
Organization of Minnesota helps clinicians understand theculture of survivors in a more personal way and identifythose who need care. Chong B. Vang is the ExecutiveDirector of KOM and a partner with CVT.PHOTO © C.C. STROM
Y oung children 
working inCambodia. 
Psychotherapist and trainer
Josephine Anthoine-Milhomme
was reminded how easily a 
cultural faux-pas can happenwhen working in our Ammanproject. “In one of our therapyrooms we have toys to use withchildren. One day a Barbie-likedoll was accidentally left out inthe open half-dressed. When thenext client came into the room,he was extremely shocked to seethe doll half-dressed becausenudity is contrary to his socialnorms,” shared Josephine. “Ofcourse we never want to upsetour clients, so we’re always particularly careful and tactfulwhen it comes to discussing orrevealing bodies—either humansor dolls.”
CVT’s July/August newsletter about our work in Dadaab, Kenya, neglected to 
mention that this work was made possible with the generous support of the U.S.State Department Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration. We regret the error.
PHOTO © CAROL WHITE“In West Africa it is a widespread
and well-known practice to sharekola nuts when you have guests.The practice differs between communities and countries, but the significance of the nuts is widespread,” said Maki Katoh, the Democratic Republic of Congocountry director and former coun-try director for the Guinea, SierraLeone and Liberia projects. “Whenwe worked with the refugee commu-nities in Guinea, we provided kolanuts at community and groupevents. It was a simple gesture toshow our respect for the local culture and to promote goodwill.It was the first step in helping individuals and communities healfrom torture.”Volunteer and Fulbright scholar
Tom Flynn first encounteredCVT while studying Arabic in
Syria. Through a friend, he met theDirector of International Serviceswho was traveling in Syria.
When Tom returned to the
United States, he began volunteer-ing by translating finance docu-ments for the Jordan project fromArabic into English. But when hewas awarded a Fulbright scholar-ship, Tom returned to Amman andchose CVT for his research project.
From January through August of
this year Tom studied how theJordan project is enacting CVT’smission to “stop torture world-
wide.” He interviewed staff tounderstand how they engage theAmman community to advocateagainst torture. “What was mostmeaningful about the experiencewas the personal connections. It’s a fantastic group of people,” saidTom. “Everyone brings a positiveattitude to their job, and that’sinspiring.” 
Tom also conducted English
classes for the Jordan staff. “Theywere very well received and havebrought a new side of some staffinto the picture,” said JordanCountry Director Simone van derKaaden. “It is fantas-
tic to see how withina few weeks staff whohardly spoke Englishare now able to havesmall talk because ofTom’s work.”
After a month
back in the UnitedStates, Tom returnedto Jordan in early October to workwith a business consulting group ashe finishes up his Fulbright project.His conclusions will give CVTinsight into how we can continue toadvocate internationally against theuse of torture.
Volunteer T om Flynn: From Minnesota to Jordan
© 2011 Center for Victims of Torture
All rights reserved. Please contact CVT for permissionto reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.
11-NF5The final weeks of the year are a
time when we ask our supportersto make tax-deductible contribu-
tions to sustain our vital work:healing torture survivors in theU.S., Africa and the Middle East;strengthening colleague organiza-tions in the U.S. and abroadthrough technical assistance andtraining, and by securing federalfunds to support their efforts; andworking for an end to torture—no matter who commits it.
If you haven’t had a chance to
send a gift to CVT this year, pleasetake a moment and make a contri-bution today. If you’ve already madea gift this year, but you’re in a posi-tion to make another contribution,we’ll be doubly grateful. You canmake your gift by check or creditcard, through the mail or online at www.cvt.org.Again this year we’re offering
our supporters the opportunity togive Gifts of Hope. When you give
a 
Gift of Hope , we’ll mail you spe-
cial cards that you can send tofriends and family letting themknow you’ve made a gift in theirhonor. Gifts of Hope contributions
can be made through our Web siteor by calling Ashley Gotreau tollfree at 877-265-8775. Ashley canalso help you with gifts of stockand bequest gifts, as well as contributions via credit card.
Thank you so much for your
generosity and your compassion.Your financial support extends ahand of hope and healing to peoplewho’ve suffered in ways that arescarcely imaginable. You are helpingrebuild lives and restore hope forthousands of torture survivors theworld over.Please Consider a Y ear-End Gift
The CENTER for 
VICTIMS of TORTURE
Restoring the Dignity of the Human Spirit
649 Dayton Avenue   St. Paul, MN  55104
www.cvt.org............................
PHOTO © CVT
.................................................................................................
Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Y our generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVTwelcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
•In-Kind Donations of specific
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775 forother ways to give. Thank you for yourongoing commitment to healing thewounds of torture.