The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
In May, psychotherapist Jesus
Perez Cazorla moved to SierraLeone for a year. A native of the
Canary Islands, Jesus is a psycho-therapist experienced in workingwith survivors of torture and othertraumatic experiences. 
In Sierra Leone, Jesus is working
with the Community Associationfor Psychosocial Services (CAPS),one of the partners in our Partnersin Trauma Healing (PATH) project,to train, mentor and support theclinical staff. The placement of Jesuswith CAPS “is excellent becauseafter his observations at both ourlocations, he has been able toexplore the skills of the counselorsand develop intervention modelsbased on the needs of the clients,”said Edward Bockarie, executivedirector of CAPS. “Now the clinicalsupervisors are getting support.Now they have someone to debriefwith and to help them greatly
improve their skills.”
Launched in late 2010, PATH is
providing professional, intellectual
and emotional support to ten torture
rehabilitation centers to help them
grow and develop. “Working in 
torture rehabilitation is hard, lonely, and emotionally draining
work,” said Pamela Kriege Santoso,PATH project manager. “We’rehelping the ten centers becomestronger organizations, both clinicallyand administratively, so they canhelp more torture survivors healand rebuild their lives.” 
Each center will have a psycho-
therapist/trainer like Jesus for oneyear to train, mentor and supportthe clinical staff. Depending on thecenter’s needs, this work mightinclude expanding therapeutic skills, furthering staff knowledge of clinical approaches, addressingprofessional ethics or developingsystems for supervision, in-take andfollow-up. Each psychotherapist/trainer will work with their organi-zation and the PATH staff to definethe projects and priorities for theyear. 
Pubudu Senaratne is the psycho-
therapist/trainer working withSurvivors Associated in Sri Lanka.She and the staff clinicians aredeveloping a training plan to build up the skills of the counselors. “The presence of a psychotherapisthelps fill the gaps in our presentcounseling work,” said Survivors
Strengthening T orture Rehabilitation PartnersVOLUME 23, ISSUE 3 •WWW.CVT.ORG
INSIDE
2 Letter from the Executive Director, Curt Goering
4 Donor Profile: Jane O’Brien, International English T utor  
4 Our Matching Gift Challenge Will Double Y our Contribution
Restoring 
the Dignity of 
the Human SpiritINSIDE   
THEstory cloth
AUGUST 2013
Associated CEO Vithanage
Muthurajah. “Our counseling stafffeels that Pubudu can help them to address a variety of issues thatunderlie the mental health difficultiesof our clients.”
Each center’s clinical approach
to healing and operations is influ-enced by the history and culture ofthe country where it is located.Depending on the center, the survivors receiving care may becommunity members who were tortured during a war or armed 
See page 3Staff members of the Liberia Association
of Psychosocial Services practice theirfundraising pitch.             
PHOTO © KRISTI RENDAHL2Letter from the Executive Director
This is a crucial and promising time for the torture rehabilitation
movement and the larger effort to stop torture worldwide. 
Since its inception three decades ago, the movement has grown 
significantly in the United States and abroad by extending an array of rehabilitative services to more survivors and developing strategic 
initiatives to stop torture.
It is within this framework that CVT recently completed work on a three-year strategic
plan that will guide us through 2016. With feedback from a broad range of stakeholders both
within and beyond CVT, we’ve developed an ambitious plan. 
CVT will expand, build on and strengthen many aspects of our current operations. We
will launch a number of new initiatives as we continue to grow as a global organization. Andwe will double the number of survivors who receive our rehabilitative care each year.
For the first time, our planning acknowledges that CVT extends care to people who
endured severe war-related atrocities in addition to those who meet the United Nations and
United States definitions of torture. 
Survivors of war atrocities are often just as symptomatic as torture survivors. Our 
professional and ethical obligations to survivors require that we not make too fine a 
distinction between torture and war survivors when determining eligibility for care. And in our international projects it is simply impractical and impossible to make these distinctions.
Torture continues to be practiced on an alarming scale. According to the United Nations
special investigator on torture, torture is committed in over half the countries in the world and
in many of those countries, is widespread and systematic. 
Governments practice torture across the political spectrum, as do rebel groups and 
militias, in part through targeting of leaders and during the chaos of civil conflict.
While the movement has restored hope and dignity to hundreds of thousands of individuals,
the challenge ahead—to rebuild more lives and prevent torture from happening in the first
place—remains as large as ever. 
Recently, a survivor told us, “Telling stories of the past helps me remember my human
spirit.” 
We are grateful you are with us as we launch this ambitious—and
hopeful—plan. Your support allows us to help survivors remember—
indeed, strengthen—their human spirit, and their stories of pain andjoy.
Sincerely, 
Curt Goering
Executive Director......................................................
Curt Goering
Kibrab Gebregzabher, a guard
with the new Ethiopia project,
spoke out on June 26, UNInternational Day in Support
of Victims of Torture.
PHOTO © SARA FELDMAN3Strengthening T orture Rehabilitation Partners
From page 1
conflict, or they may be newcomers
to the community from a post-conflict region. The PATH staffrespects the individuality of eachcenter by working within its historicaland cultural context. While all centers have staff committed tohealing, the education levels andtrauma experience varies greatly.
An annual week-long conference
brings together representatives fromeach center for in-depth, in-personlearning. The conference requires asophisticated professional system of interpreters and technology soeveryone can engage, whether theyspeak English, French, Bosnian,Moldovan or Tamil. Throughoutthe year, PATH participants connectwith each other and access trainingmaterials to share with their colleagues through an onlineportal. Both in-person and onlineactivities strengthen professional andpersonal connections, minimizingthe isolation that the center staffmay feel.
In conjunction with strengthening
the clinical skills and programs,we’re working with each center todevelop monitoring and evaluationsystems. This includes assessmentand tracking methods so the centersknow they are being effective intheir work. “The monitoring andevaluation work starts with theclinical work,” explained Pamela.“The centers must define their clinical work to determine whatthey need to measure and evaluate.For example, one center is workingwith children and youth, so thestaff needs to find age-appropriateways to measure improvement inthe mental health of an adolescent.Our staff is consulting with thepartners to help them develop theappropriate measures, but the partners are also helping each otherby sharing their tools and explainingtheir processes.”
Developing Sustainable
Organizations
To help partners build sustain-
able programs and systems, we’reproviding organizational develop-ment support, as well. Based on an initial assessment and ongoingplanning, we’re working with eachcenter to understand and addresstheir challenges, which may behuman resources, fundraising,strategic planning or governance.“For example, some partners needhelp in developing fundraising skillsacross the staff, so we’ve given proposal development workshops,and we’ve provided training on creating elevator pitches and keymessages for different audiences,”said Kristi Rendahl, the PATHorganizational development advisor.
Overall strategy and leadership
are important aspects of this support.“We have provided strategic planningfacilitation for a number of partners,
CVT clinical advisor David Gangsei and 
Pravilla Naicker with the Center for theStudy of Violence and Reconciliation role
playing at the 2012 PATH conference.    
Program managerPamela Kriege
Santoso and clinical
advisor AnnWillhoite at anassessment meetingwith TPO Cambodia.    
PHOTO © TPO CAMBODIAPartners in
T rauma Healingis made possiblethrough the financial support of the United StatesAgency for International Development and theAmerican peoples’ support.
and several executive directors and
other staff members completed avirtual personal leadership develop-ment program to identify ways toimprove their own leadership andmanagement practices. The range of competing demands for theattention of executive directorsmakes it difficult for them to stepback to look at the big picture andevaluate how to better leverageboard members, staff members,donors, and their own leadership.The organizational developmentcomponent of this project createsthat space.”
“It’s exciting to see how these
centers are growing and developing,”said Pamela. “All of the executivedirectors of our partners are passionate about healing torturesurvivors, but it’s more than that.The PATH partners are committedto developing a greater understand-ing of mental health and helpingmen and women so they can build—or rebuild—their communitiesand countries.”
PHOTO © EDIE LEWISONdon’t speak that
often,” said Jane,who works as theAssociate Directorfor the Center forTeaching andLearning at the University of Minnesota.“They’re amazing, and I’m learning alot. I guess I’m also of the generationwhere talking with someone on theother side of the world with a com-puter and a camera is pretty fun.” 
“It’s a great way to volunteer,”
said Jane. However, most importantly,Violeta and Svetlana are feeling morecomfortable with their English skills,which will help them communicatewith other torture treatment providersaround the world.
.....................................................................................................Since Jane O’Brien first connectedwith CVT through her Unitarianchurch more than five years ago,
she has worked face-to-face as abefriender to several torture survivors.But in her current volunteer role, she’s
using technology to communicatearound the world.
Jane is a conversation partner 
and English tutor to two staff membersof RCTV Memoria, a torture rehabili-tation center in Moldova. RCTVMemoria is one of the partners inCVT’s Partners in Trauma Healing(PATH) project. (Read about thePATH project in the lead article onpage 1.) 
Three or four times a week, 
Jane uses the internet video serviceSkype to talk with staff psychother-apist Svetlana Visatu and psychologist
Violeta Rebeja, who both want toimprove their professional English.Typically Jane emails a link to a newsarticle related to their work to starttheir conversation. After discussingthe article via Skype, the women segueinto more casual topics. Sometimes,Jane will black out words in the article, and the Moldovans must usethe sentence context to determine the missing word. The activity canchallenge both vocabulary and listeningcomprehension skills.
“The women in Moldova are so
dedicated. We usually talk at what’s nine or ten in the evening for themafter a long day of what I’m sure mustbe difficult work. And on top of thatthey’re switching to a language they
649 Dayton Avenue
St. Paul, MN  55104www.cvt.org
© 2013 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.13-NC5Each summer, many of our key 
supporters step forward to helpCVT in a very special way—by 
participating in our Matching GiftChallenge. 
The first $50,000 given by generous
individuals like you before August 31will be matched, dollar-for-dollar, bytwo longstanding donors. That meansyour support will have twice the impact.
This Matching Gift initiative
couldn’t come at a better time.Donations often slow during the summer, even while more and more
survivors seek our help. At our Jordan
project, there are now more than 500
Syrians on the waiting list. Here’s a
recent note from our country director:
Large numbers of walk-ins of
Syrian refugees—often in very worri-
some conditions—untreated wounds,
pregnant women who are about to
deliver w/out any place to go, individ-uals walking on the street near the
venue seeking CVT’s help, highly distressed individuals—unstoppablesobbing—totally out of control—individuals who disclose without anyrestrictions their horrific stories andoften want to demonstrate this to ouroutreach and counselling staff byshowing pictures of killings, electro-cutions in front of their eyes, childrenas young as 12 years old who havebeen imprisoned and tortured….
This Matching Gift campaign 
provides an extra $100,000 in urgentfunding for healing survivors, trainingothers and advocating for an end totorture. 
Please give as generously as you
can before August 31, and know thatyour gift will be matched, dollar-for-dollar. For more information, pleasecontact Steven at 1-877-265-8775 orby e-mail at cvt@cvt.org.Our Matching Gift Challenge 
Will Double Y our Contribution Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Y our generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVTwelcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
•In-Kind Donations of specific
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,
MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775 forother ways to give. Thank you for yourongoing commitment to healing thewounds of torture.Jane O’Brien: International English T utor
The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
PHOTO © C.C. STROM