I N S I D E 
2President Obama’s Last Actions on Torture 
3‘I just want to go where my children will be safest’
4Notes from the Field on Balance and Healing for Survivors 
4The Circle of Hope  The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
VOLUME 27, ISSUE 1 •WWW.CVT.ORG 
Restoring 
the Dignity of 
the Human Spirit 
THE sto rycloth 
FEBRUARY 2017 
Letter from the Executive Director 
CVT Stands with Refugees 
President Trump’ s recent Executive Order on refugee resettlement suspends the entire U.S. refugee 
resettlement program for 120 days, bans the arrival of Syrian refugees and slashes the number of 
refugees admitted from 110,000 to 50,000. 
This is not who we are as a country.  
CVT will continue to stand with refugees—for whom resettlement is often the only, and last, 
chance to reach safe haven after surviving the horrors of torture, war and displacement. 
We know from our research that as many as 44 percent of refugees living in the U.S. have survived 
torture. CVT ’s expertise in torture rehabilitation is needed more than ever, and the U.S. must not 
shut its doors to refugees. 
Another Executive Order under consideration could: clear the way for the CIA to reopen “ black 
site ” prisons like those post-9/11 where detainees were held and tortured; call for a review of the 
Army Field Manual that could potentially lead to the inclusion of so-called “enhanced interrogation 
techniques,” a euphemism for torture; and, keep the prison at Guantanamo Bay open, as the president 
has previously pledged to “load it up.” 
All of these orders go against who we are as a nation. We must fiercely resist the erosion of our 
human rights values and continue the country ’s proud tradition of being a leader in refugee protection 
and a beacon of hope to refugees around the world. 
In the days ahead, as refugee survivors make their way to us in profound need of healing, I am 
truly grateful for your partnership and generous support. For thousands of survivors who will 
rebuild their lives and reclaim a capacity for hope and joy again, thank you. 
Warm regards, 
Curt Goering, Executive Director 
2One of CVT’s top priorities 
before President Obama left 
office was to ensure the preser- 
vation of the Senate Intelligence 
Committee’s full report on the 
CIA’s torture program in the 
aftermath of 9/11. 
With a coalition of human 
rights advocacy groups, CVT 
worked diligently to ensure the 
preservation of the 6,700-page 
CIA Torture Report in President 
Obama’s presidential archive so it 
cannot be destroyed. Its destruc -
tion was a real danger with the 
change in administrations. 
Survivors of torture deserve 
accountability. They deserve to 
know the truth behind the United 
States’ torture program, and this 
action is an essential step down the path to justice and healing for 
survivors. As citizens, we, too, 
have a right to know about the 
torture that was carried out by 
our government. 
President Obama also spoke 
out strongly against torture in 
December in his speech to U.S. 
service members and their families 
at the MacDill Airforce Base in 
Tampa, Florida. 
“A country that rejects torture 
is a country that demonstrates 
respect for the rule of law and for 
the very concepts of human rights 
and respect for human dignity,” 
the President said, and the audience 
applauded. He emphasized that 
“the rule of law is not a weakness; 
in the long term, it is our greatest 
strength.” He reminded Americans President Obama’s 
Last Actions on Torture 
that the United States’ prohibition 
of torture is a great strength and 
a powerful validation of our 
country’s integrity. The audience 
applauded again as he remarked 
that lawful interrogations have 
resulted in our obtaining good 
intelligence from suspects while 
allowing our country to remain 
true to our values. 
In a statement about the 
President’s speech, CVT Executive 
Director Curt Goering said, 
“Those values broadcast who we 
are to the world. The U.S. must 
be a leader in rejecting the use of 
all forms of torture, especially in 
times when we fear violent acts by 
extremists. The U.S. Government 
must never be driven by fear to 
See page 3 
“A country that rejects 
torture is a country 
that demonstrates 
respect for the rule of 
law and for the very 
concepts of human 
rights and respect for 
human dignity.” 
— President Obama 
PHOTO © BETSY BROWN 3“I just want to go where my children will be safest.” 
Regime forces stormed Bushra* 
and her family’s home in the 
middle of the night while she 
and her family were sleeping. They 
arrested her husband and sons 
and took them along with other 
children from the neighborhood, 
some as young as 13 years old. 
None of them had participated 
in protests or the revolution in 
Syria—they were just taken. 
After four months, Bushra’s 
husband and sons were finally 
released when she paid a bribe. 
Her husband returned home with 
his teeth broken and thumbs 
fractured. Today he suffers from 
knee problems because he was 
forced to kneel in a small, crowded room for extended periods of time. 
Together, the family fled to 
Jordan where they live today as 
refugees. After living through the 
unimaginable, Bushra came to 
CVT Jordan in order to begin 
rebuilding her life. As part of her 
healing journey, Bushra wants 
to speak out about what was 
done to her family. She said that 
regardless of what she’s lost, 
she just wants to go where her 
children will be safest. 
Your support of CVT helps 
torture survivors like Bushra and 
her family heal, regain hope and 
rebuild their lives. We remain 
deeply grateful. 
From page 2 
take actions that compromise our 
ideals and allow adversaries to 
leverage resulting weaknesses in 
our international reputation. As 
President Obama said, ‘Terrorists 
want us to turn on one another.’ 
At CVT, we applaud the prohibi -
tions against torture set during 
President Obama’s time in office, 
including the strong bi-partisan 
steps taken by Congress last year 
when it passed the McCain- 
Feinstein anti-torture amendment.” 
Under President Trump, the 
progress we made with President Obama is at risk. With your 
continued support, CVT will be 
unyielding in aggressively resisting 
proposals to re-establish a torture 
program, prevent funding cuts for torture survivor rehabilitation, 
and stop plans to limit the ability 
of refugees fleeing prosecution, 
war and torture to find safety in 
the United States. President Obama’s Last Actions on Torture *Name and some details have been changed for safety and to protect confidentiality. CVT’s activities in Jordan are funded by 
the United States Department of State’s 
Bureau of Population, Refugees, and 
Migration. 
PHOTO © DREAMSTIME 
“Those values broadcast who we are to the world.
The U.S. must be a leader in rejecting the use of all
forms of torture, especially in times when we fear 
violent acts by extremists.” 
— CVT Executive Director Curt Goering 2356 University Avenue W, Suite 430 
St. Paul, MN 55114 
www.cvt.org 
© 20 17 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it. 17-NB5 The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE The Circle of Hope 
The easiest, most cost-effective 
way to help survivors all year long! 
Every gift to CVT makes a 
tremendous difference in helping 
survivors of torture find hope and 
rebuild their lives. With monthly 
gifts, Circle of Hope members help 
decrease CVT’s administrative 
costs and ensure more funding 
helps torture survivors directly. 
Monthly contributions are 
automatically charged to a credit 
card or debited from a checking 
account, ensuring ongoing, dependable support for CVT and 
hassle-free giving for Circle of 
Hope members—but best of all 
they bring continuous hope and 
healing to thousands of torture 
survivors worldwide. 
Circle of Hope members are 
free to change, suspend or cancel 
their giving at any time with a 
phone call or email. To join the 
Circle of Hope , please contact 
CVT at giving@cvt.org or 
612.436.4808. Early in our 10-week counseling 
cycle, we ask clients to remember 
and share a moment of joy with 
the group. We ask them for a simple 
story from the past, perhaps a 
memory from childhood, maybe 
something playful that happened 
on the playground. For survivors of 
torture and traumatic experiences, 
this type of speaking is not always 
comfortable. Some clients cannot 
participate. When that happens, 
we meet individually. I explain that 
this is one technique for processing 
trauma. It is a beginning for healing. 
In working with clients through 
the rehabilitative process, we help 
them understand their strength, identify the resources around them 
and process their trauma, and we 
work to create balance. We incor -
porate the moment of joy early in 
the cycle because it would be over -
whelming for people to jump into 
speaking about the difficult 
moments they have survived. We 
start with this positive memory to 
help bring balance and help people 
practice regulating their emotions. 
During the 4th session, we do an 
exercise called the “river of life.” 
This exercise gives clients a chance 
to put both difficult and joyful 
moments in chronological order, 
noting the time they occurred in 
their lives. Showing the positive Notes from the Field on Balance 
and Healing for Survivors 
moments along with the difficult 
times gives people who have been 
suffering from trauma the under -
standing and reminder that they were 
happy people. They get to see a 
more complete picture of their life. 
CVT is supporting people, sur -
vivors of trauma and torture. This 
is a good thing in the camp. If we 
try to heal people, we are bringing 
a bright thing, a hopeful thing in 
this refugee camp. From Haftay Hindeya Reda, a counselor at CVT Ethiopia, Mai Tsebri
CVT’s work with Eritrean 
refugees in Ethiopia is 
funded by a grant from 
the U.S. State Department’s Bureau of 
Population, Refugees, and Migration. 
Haftay Hindeya Reda 