The Struggle to Rebuild 
After Surviving Atrocities 
CVT has had a small growing 
presence in Gulu, Uganda, for 
nine years now. Over the last 
year, we have begun working with 
individuals and families victimized 
by the notorious Lord’s Resistance 
Army (LRA) in the 1990s and 
2000s. 
The LRA is infamous for horrific 
human rights violations, including 
forcing abducted children to 
become child soldiers or “wives” 
of fighters. Sometimes children 
were forced to kill their own family 
members—or be killed themselves. 
The individual and collective pain in the stories our staff has heard 
from thousands of survivors defies 
description. But with CVT’s help 
these survivors are picking up the 
pieces and rebuilding their lives 
under circumstances that few of 
us can begin to comprehend. 
CVT’s role in Uganda is 
becoming even more critical, 
because the country is also home 
to the world’s fastest growing 
refugee crisis. Violence in South 
Sudan and the looming threat of 
famine is driving a mass exodus of 
refugees into already overwhelmed 
camps in Uganda. Last year CVT sent a team to 
assess the situation in the area. As 
we traveled to different camps, 
we heard many stories of torture, 
horrific journeys to reach the 
camps, and ongoing stressors that 
confirmed an urgent need for 
CVT’s healing care. 
We are fortunate to be able to 
expand our work in this area at 
this time as individuals, families 
and entire communities struggle 
to move forward, determined to 
rebuild lives filled with potential, 
promise and hope. 
2Letter from the Executive Director 
3Mary T.’s Lifelong Commitment to Care 
4Clearing the Path for Torture Survivors So They Can Focus on Healing INSIDE 
RESTORING 
THE DIGNITY OF 
THE HUMAN SPIRIT 
Refugee settlement, Bidi Bidi, Uganda   VOLUME 28, ISSUE 3 •WWW.CVT.ORG The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
THE sto rycloth 
JULY 2018 
PHOTO BY NEAL PORTER t2Letter from the Executive Director 
Dear Friends, 
In a severe blow to torture survivors in the United States and 
around the world, the Senate voted to confirm a torturer as director 
of the Central Intelligence Agency. 
The Senate could have taken an important step to acknowledge the horrible mistake the 
U.S. made when it decided to use torture post 9/11.They could have begun to reignite the light 
of hope we once carried around the world. They could have sent a clear message that the 
U.S. does not give promotions to torturers, that we are far above the sickening practice 
employed by despotic regimes and dictators. 
Instead, the U.S. Senate chose to reward Gina Haspel, who had an important role in the 
CIA torture program and was a significant figure in one of our nation’s darkest chapters. 
However, this is not an ending—this is a beginning. 
Gina Haspel was confirmed only after she admitted that the CIA torture program was 
wrong and should never have been implemented at all. She admitted that the torture program 
damaged the reputation of the United States. And she declared that the torture program 
should never again be resuscitated. These admissions are powerful evidence of the influence 
of thousands of you who stood together and raised your voices to reject torture. 
Even with her admissions, CVT will be watching to ensure Haspel holds true to her 
words, and we will speak truth to power whenever torture is even hinted at. 
With your generosity, CVT will never stop fighting to bring an end to torture. We will 
never stop raising our voices when torturers like Haspel are rewarded. And we will never 
cease being the moral beacon the United States so badly needs. Your partnership in our 
life-affirming mission is invaluable and we are so grateful for your support. 
With my thanks , 
Curt Goering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Curt Goering 
“I can take care of myself better now,
and I’m less afraid.”      
— a survivor of torture 
See page 4 for news 
from CVT’s healing 
center in Atlanta, Georgia.3Mary T . ’s Lifelong Commitment to Care 
Mary M. Tjosvold founded 
Mary T. Inc. in 1976 to make 
a difference in people’s lives, 
with programs and services for 
seniors, people with traumatic 
brain injuries, children and adults 
who are medically fragile, individuals 
with physical and developmental 
disabilities, and those who need 
accessible housing. 
As a humanitarian and philan -
thropist, Mary T. has long been 
passionate about CVT’s work. She 
first visited CVT in West Africa 
in early 2000, and our work in 
the refugee camps made a strong 
impression on her mind and heart, 
she says. 
Most recently, Mary T. travelled 
to Kenya and Uganda where she 
visited with CVT staff and survivors 
at our healing center in Gulu. 
“The stories are heartbreaking 
and legendary, of the cruelty of 
the LRA forced on the people of 
Gulu,” Mary T. reflected. She was moved by what survivors shared 
and by the music a CVT psycho- 
therapist/field representative named 
Gabriele played on a string 
instrument that lay at the front of 
the church where the group met. 
“It was a transformational moment 
for all of us, a way to connect,” she said. 
Mary T. was impressed to see 
how CVT counselors handle hearing 
sur vivors’ stories and seeing their 
pain. It reminded her of something 
she saw hanging on the wall next 
to a counselor’s desk at CVT’s 
healing center in Kenya—a hand 
with “grounded” written on the 
palm, and on the five fingers the 
words “trust,” “motivated,” 
“happy,” “hopeful” and “calm.” 
If you ask Mary T. what she 
finds most meaningful and inspiring 
about CVT’s work and why she so 
generously supports it, she’ll tell 
you, “talking with the beneficiaries 
and learning how their lives have 
been transformed—and that is the 
word, transformed .” CVT is 
deeply grateful to Mary T. and all 
of our supporters who make our 
life-changing healing care possible. 
“The stories are 
heartbreaking 
and legendary,
of the cruelty of 
the LRA forced 
on the people 
of Gulu.” 
—Mary T.  
PHOTO BY FAWN BERNHARDT-NORVELL 2356 University Avenue W, Suite 430 
St. Paul, MN 55114 
www.cvt.org 
© 20 18 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.18-ND5B The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE Torture survivors coming to CVT’s healing center in Atlanta embrace 
our holistic model that incorporates psychotherapy, clinical case 
management and professional interpretation—an important 
approach since our clients have such widely diverse backgrounds. 
CVT also works on advocacy initiatives that will support human 
rights and the lives of refugees and asylum seekers in the state of Georgia. 
We’re here to help clear the path for survivors of torture so they can 
focus on their healing. 
CVT Atlanta has also referred clients to numerous additional services, 
including legal representation, medical care and other community 
resources that go far beyond mental health care. Clearing the Path for T orture Survivors 
So They Can Focus on Healing 
“Clients said that after 
coming to CVT, they were 
no longer overwhelmed 
with feelings. They don’t 
feel lost.” 
— CVT Client Services 
Director Andrea Northwood,
Ph.D., LP Survivors at CVT’s healing center in Atlanta come from 15 different countries 
of origin. They represent 13 different ethnicities and speak 20 languages. CVT 
is caring for 32 primary victims of torture and 27 secondary victims of torture 
with interdisciplinary psychotherapy and intensive case management services.
Survivors’ Reported 
Social Improvements Survivors’ Reported Improvements 
in Post-Trauma Symptoms 