INSIDE   The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
Bereket lives in a refugee camp in 
the northern part of Ethiopia. He 
is one of 45,000 Eritrean refugees 
living in this camp outside of Shire, 
a city of 50,000. 
While serving in the Eritrean 
military, officials claimed Bereket 
was a traitor because of how he 
acted during a skirmish with the 
Ethiopian military. As a result, he 
was tortured in an underground cell 
for years. Only when he became sick 
and a doctor prescribed sunlight 
was he allowed out of his cell. After 
five years, Bereket returned to his 
unit stationed near the Eritrean- 
Ethiopian border. Soon after, he fled 
his post on foot and made his way 
to the refugee camp in Ethiopia. 
Fleeing an Oppressive Regime 
Since gaining independence from 
Ethiopia in 1993, the government 
of Eritrea has carried out systematic 
human rights abuses, including 
arbitrary arrest and detention, 
torture, forced labor and military 
conscription, severe restrictions on 
freedom of movement and expres -sion, and religious persecution.  
Torture at the hands of the Eritrean 
government includes beatings, 
burnings, detention, rape and lack 
of food, water or medical care. 
About 70 percent of the refugees 
in the camps are men like Bereket 
who are trying to escape a life of 
indefinite military service. The men 
who flee face incredible risks: 
capture, imprisonment, torture and 
death are all real threats. Or, they 
might fall into the hands of human 
traffickers. After collecting their fee, 
the traffickers may return the men 
to Eritrea where they are again at 
the mercy of the government. 
Life in the Shire refugee camps is 
challenging. The camps lack basic 
education and employment services 
offered in many other larger refugee 
camps. The refugees themselves are 
living without a community. While 
women may have a few children with 
them, the young men are socially 
isolated. Without family or friends, 
and having fled an oppressive 
government that encourages inform- 
ants, the refugee survivors have a 
difficult time developing trust with 
each other. This lack of trust and 
community leads many refugees to Healing for Eritreans VOLUME 24, ISSUE 3 •WWW.CVT.ORG 
2Letter from the Executive Director, Curt Goering 
4Sarah’s ...an Oasis for Women  
4A Creative Way to Help Heal Torture Survivors 
Restoring 
the Dignity of 
the Human Spirit 
TH E sto rycloth 
AUGUST 20 14 
CVT counselor, Abeba, performed a 
traditional coffee ceremony at the 
opening event for our counseling 
huts (tukuls) in the Mai-Aini camp 
in January.    PHOTO © SARA FELDMAN 
leave the camps, resulting in a high 
rate of transiency. Some people move 
between camps. Others attempt to 
find their way to Libya, Egypt or 
Israel, with hopes of ultimately 
landing in Europe.  
Finding Hope in the Camps 
Despite these challenges, survivors 
are beginning to experience healing. 
See page 3 Client’s name has been changed 
to protect his identity. 2Letter from the Executive Director 
Each year in conjunction with International Day in Support of 
Victims of Torture, we present the Eclipse Award to an individual or 
organization for extraordinary efforts to prevent torture or support care 
for torture survivors. This year, at a special event in Washington, D.C., 
I was honored to name Professor David Crane as the 2014 recipient of 
the Center for Victims of Torture’s Eclipse Award. 
Professor Crane, who teaches at Syracuse University College of Law, is the founding Chief 
Prosecutor of the Special Court for Sierra Leone. He is also founder of Impunity Watch, an 
interactive website that operates as both a law review and a news reporting site on impunity issues. 
In 2011, he founded the Syracuse University College of Law Syrian Accountability Project, 
a cooperative effort between activists, nongovernmental organizations, students, and others to 
document war crimes and crimes against humanity in the Syrian crisis. 
Professor Crane co-authored the Chautauqua Blueprint, also known as the “discussion draft” 
of a Statute for a Syrian Extraordinary Tribunal to Prosecute Atrocity Crimes. The blueprint was 
signed last year during a meeting attended by several chief prosecutors of various international 
criminal tribunals. 
Earlier this year, he served on a panel of experts who reviewed and verified the accuracy of 
the 55,000 photographs documenting systematic torture, starvation and murder that were smuggled 
out of Syria. The panel’s report is consistent with what CVT is documenting at our healing 
initiative in Jordan. 
Throughout Professor Crane’s remarkable career, he has made ending impunity a centerpiece 
of his efforts, and in doing so, distinguished himself as a global leader seeking accountability and 
justice for crimes against humanity. 
You can read an interview with Professor Crane on our blog, Healing & Human Rights , at 
www.blog.cvt.org (posted on June 23). And be sure to read the hopeful and heartfelt messages to 
torture survivors at www.cvt.org/June26 . We gathered messages from supporters like you and 
shared these with survivors at our healing sites in Minnesota, Africa and the Middle East. 
Thank you for your ongoing 
support of our work to stop torture 
and to rebuild the lives of all survivors. 
Sincerely, 
Curt Goering 
Executive Director . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Curt Goering 
For June 26, supporters sent us messages 
of hope to share with survivors. Rose wrote: 
“Do not despair.  You are remembered by 
thousands and loved for your sacrifices. 
Rebuild yourself with this knowledge 
and grow into the person that you were 
meant to be.” Read more messages at 
www.cvt.org/June26. 3Healing for Eritreans 
From page 1 
Earlier this spring, we completed 
our first cycle of counseling groups. 
In the counseling groups, survivors 
learn about the effects of torture 
and have an opportunity to process 
their experi ences. Together, group 
members learn new ways of 
managing their overwhelming 
feelings and traumatic situations. 
Developing trust between group 
members is particularly challenging 
in Ethiopia. Psychotherapist and 
trainer Sara Feldman, who worked 
with CVT in the Democratic 
Republic of Congo, had each group 
member pledge “I agree to preserve 
the confidentiality of this group” 
to emphasize the importance of 
privacy and trust. “It helped those 
individuals struggling with trust 
to move forward and develop 
relationships within the group,” 
said Sara. 
Many of the women living in 
the camp have small children with 
them. To ensure that these mothers 
receive the care they need while the 
young children are sheltered from 
the emotional tension that arises 
during counseling, we provide 
childcare for toddlers during the 
group meetings. The children are 
able to play safely in sight of their 
mothers, yet not be affected by the 
stories and emotional state of the 
group. 
As we have with other interna -
tional projects, we are building 
capacity within the Eritrean refugee 
community by training refugees to 
work as psychosocial counselors. 
They have completed extensive 
training and are currently observing 
experienced psychotherapists lead 
the counseling groups as part of 
their ongoing, experiential training. 
CVT staff are also launching workshops to reach survivors who 
are unable to commit to a ten-week 
group. For a few hours each week, 
refugees learn basic coping skills to 
help them manage the effects of 
torture and similar traumatic 
experiences. 
We’re also continuing to lead 
community sensitization events 
in the camps to promote CVT’s 
work. These events are often with 
community and religious leaders, 
as well as more publicly within the 
camp zones. For those who are 
homebound, counselors go door- 
to-door to identify survivors most These tukuls in the Adi Harush camp provide shelter and privacy for the 
counseling groups.                                                                      PHOTO © SARA FELDMAN 
For a few hours each week, refugees learn basic 
coping skills to help them manage the effects 
of torture and similar traumatic experiences. in need of counseling. 
“Our work is beginning to get 
noticed within the camps and is 
making a difference,” said Sara. 
“The survivors shared that they 
benefitted from telling their stories 
and the support system within the 
group. One group of men plans to 
continue meeting monthly. And 
during the final session, one woman 
said, ‘I am in love with this group!’” 
CVT’s activities in Ethiopia are 
financed by the United States 
Department of State’s Bureau of 
Population, Refugees and Migration. are jointly helping women move 
towards whole, healthy, confident 
and fulfilling lives .
GSarah’s is a privately funded 
organization, funded in part by the 
Sisters of St. Joseph of Carondelet 
(CSJ), St. Paul Province, and 
CSJ Ministry Foundation. Visit 
www.sarahsoasis.org for more 
information. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Just a few miles from our St. Paul 
Healing Center is Sarah’s ... an 
Oasis for Women. Sarah’s is home 
to a diverse community of women 
who are restarting their lives. 
For nearly 20 years CVT and 
Sarah’s have worked together to 
support women escaping danger 
and seeking safety. Today, one third 
of Sarah’s residents are receiving 
care at CVT. On average, women 
live at Sarah’s for 18 months. They 
each have a fully furnished private 
room, with access to common 
spaces, including a dining room, 
kitchen, community room, outdoor 
gardens and chapel. 
“For our clients who are asylum seekers, there are few resources in 
the community to meet their basic 
needs, including housing,” said 
Casie Iwata, CVT social worker and 
case manager. “Sarah’s provides a 
unique opportunity for women to 
live in a community where they can 
build lasting relationships and have 
peer support. Many women who 
have lived at Sarah’s say that it feels 
like home to them because they are 
surrounded by people who care 
for them.” 
Because Sarah’s is a home, 
residents connect with off-site 
service providers such as CVT. This 
ensures the women receive the help 
and care they need. Together, we 
649 Dayton Avenue 
St. Paul, MN  551 04
www .cv t.org 
© 20 14 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.14-NC5 Your support has already made a 
huge impact in helping the Center 
for Victims of Torture heal the 
wounds of torture — including 
bringing hope and healing to Syrians 
who have survived unimaginable 
war-related atrocities — and who 
continue to stream into our healing 
center in Jordan.   
We are grateful for your compas -
sion and your commitment. 
We want to share with you a 
creative way that some of our 
donors are supporting our mission 
of healing survivors and helping to 
underwrite CVT’s critical work of 
stopping torture worldwide. 
An increasing number of donors 
are establishing a Charitable Gift 
Annuity (CGA) for CVT — a planned gift that has advantages 
for both the donor and the organi -
zation. In return for a transfer of 
cash, marketable securities or other 
assets to CVT, donors receive a 
guaranteed lifetime income. CGAs 
can be set up for immediate income 
or for deferred payments until a 
certain age.  
The income is based on the donor’s 
age and is especially favorable to 
older individuals. For example, the 
annual annuity rate for an individual 
age 70 is about 7%; for individuals 
age 80, it can it can be as high as 10%. 
If you’d like to learn more about 
Charitable Gift Annuities or other 
planned giving options, please 
contact Michelle Woster at 1-877- 
265-8775 or mwoster@cvt.org. A Creative Way to Help 
Heal Torture Survivors Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor 
Your generous support brings healing 
to torture survivors worldwide. CVT 
welcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery 
of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your 
legacy of support . 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors 
while offering tax benefits to 
donors.
•In-Kind Donations of specific 
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or 
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a 
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,
MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775 for 
other ways to give. Thank you for your 
ongoing commitment to healing the 
wounds of torture.Sarah’s ...an Oasis for Women 
The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
