Cultivating Fear: The Vulnerability of Immigrant Farmworkers in the US to Sexual Violence and Sexual Harassment | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportSearchDonate NowSearchDownloadsDownload the full reportMay 15, 2012Cultivating FearThe Vulnerability of Immigrant Farmworkers in the US to Sexual Violence and Sexual HarassmentAvailable InEnglishEspañolA group of farmworkers makes their way across a field, hoeing weeds out of the rows, in the early morning on July 11, 2011.© 2011 AP Photo/Ed ReinkeCultivating Fear:The Vulnerability of Immigrant Farmworkers in the US toSexual Violence and Sexual HarassmentPatriciaM.’s StorySummaryKeyRecommendationsTo theUnited States CongressTo the USDepartment of Homeland SecurityTo the USDepartment of Labor and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration(OSHA)To All StateGovernmentsTo Local LawEnforcement AgenciesToAgricultural EmployersMethodologyDefinitionsI.BackgroundImmigrantFarmworkers: A Vulnerable WorkforceStructure ofAgricultural WorkII. Types ofWorkplace Sexual Violence and Sexual Harassment Experienced by FarmworkersRape andOther Forms of Coercive Sexual ConductUnwantedTouching, Verbal Abuse, and ExhibitionismLong-TermHarassmentIII. UniqueVulnerabilitiesSexualRelations as a Supervisor’s “Perk”Girls andYoung WomenRecentImmigrantsSingle WomenIndigenousWorkersLGBT WorkersIV. TheLasting Impact of Workplace Sexual Violence and Sexual HarassmentPhysicalInjury, Psychological Trauma, Social Ostracism, and Disruption of Family LifeLimitedAccess to Necessary Social ServicesTerminationand Other Forms of RetaliationV. ADysfunctional Immigration SystemLimitationsof the Current Immigration SystemTheGovernment’s Competing Interests: Immigration Enforcement versus WorkerProtectionLimitationsof U VisasVI.Inadequate Civil Law Protections for Agricultural WorkersExclusion ofFarmworkers from Worker Protection LawsInadequate Enforcementof Existing Worker Protection Laws by DOL and Other Federal and State Agenciesin Agricultural WorkplacesParticularBarriers for Unauthorized ImmigrantsThe EEOC:Positive Efforts but Limited ResourcesVII.Obstacles to Enforcement of Applicable Criminal LawFears ofPolice Fueled by Police Involvement in Immigration EnforcementFailure toInvestigate Sexual AssaultVIII.Employer Failure to Address Sexual Violence and HarassmentTakingAdvantage of the Dysfunctional Immigration SystemInadequateSexual Harassment Trainings and PoliciesIX.International Legal ObligationsSexualViolence and Sexual Harassment as Human Rights ViolationsHuman RightsStandards on Immigrant Workers,  Including Unauthorized WorkersX.RecommendationsTo theUnited States CongressTo the USDepartment of Homeland SecurityTo the USEqual Employment Opportunity CommissionTo the USDepartment of Labor (DOL) and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration(OSHA)To All StateGovernmentsTo Local LawEnforcement AgenciesToAgricultural EmployersTo AgenciesProviding Services for Victims of Sexual Violence and HarassmentAcknowledgmentsPatricia M.’sStoryPatricia M. was 21 years old when she first came to theUnited States from Mexico about six years ago. Like most immigrantfarmworkers in the US, Patricia did not have a work visa, but she was able toget work. About four years ago, she got a job harvesting almonds. The foremanwould pick workers up and then drop them off at the end of the day at a localgas station. She said he repeatedly offered her food and drink, which“bothered [her] a lot,” because she felt he was not offeringthese things innocently. He insinuated that he could help her, saying,“Listen to me, I’m the foreman, and you’ll have ajob.”On the third day, he dropped off all the workers at thegas station except her. He told the rest of the workers he was going to pickup the water cooler, but instead, he took Patricia to a remote field.“From there, he didn’t say anything, he juststared at me. I was wearing a hat and a bandanna [that covered my face], andhe said, ‘What do you have there? An animal?’ And I knew hewanted to do something to me.”Patricia described him as “fat, very big.” Shereported that he got on top of her and tied her hands with her bandanna tothe hand grip above the truck door. Then, she said, “He took off myclothes and he raped me…. He hurt me badly.”Patricia did not tellanyone. She said, “I felt very sad and very alone.” She had nofamily in the US, and she did not want to tell her family in Mexico what hadhappened.After the rape, Patriciacontinued to work at the same farm. She could not leave the job because therewas no other work available. The abuse continued. “He kept raping me andI let him because I didn’t want him to hit me. I didn’t want tofeel pain.” Eventually, Patricia found out she was pregnant. She heardthat she could apply for disability benefits and went to a social serviceagency where the employees asked her whether she had a partner. That questionprompted her to tell them everything, and the agency helped her file a policereport.Patricia credits the agency for providing crucial support.She still has not told her family in Mexico what happened. Although she toldher mother she was pregnant, she didn’t tell her about the rape,“because I don’t want her to be sick.” Without thecounselors at the agency, she knows she would never have filed the policereport: “I was afraid they would put me in jail; I was afraid [they’d]send me to Mexico because I was illegal.”Patricia stated that theforeman was not prosecuted and sentenced for the crime. Instead, afterarresting him, the police seem to have contacted immigration authorities, ashe was soon deported. Unfortunately, this does not mean he is completely outof Patricia’s life. She has heard reports from his family that he isplanning to come back to the US and see the child. The rape continues toaffect her in other ways as well. Patricia is now married, and her daughteris “so beautiful,” despite the painful memories of how she becamepregnant. Yet she reports, “Sometimes, I remember and I can’t beintimate with my husband.” She also worries because, “Idon’t know what to tell my daughter when she gets older.”[1]SummaryHundreds of thousands of women and girls in the UnitedStates today work in fields, packing houses, and other agricultural workplaceswhere they face a real and significant risk of sexual violence and sexualharassment.[2]While the exact prevalence of workplace sexual violence and harassment amongfarmworkers is difficult to determine due to the challenges of surveying aseasonal, migrant, and often unauthorized population, the problem is serious.[3]In researching this report,Human Rights Watch interviewed 160 farmworkers, growers, law enforcementofficials, attorneys, service providers, and other agricultural workplaceexperts in eight states; almost without exception, they identified sexualviolence and harassment as an important concern. Victims[4] of sexual violenceand harassment are often reluctant to describe these experiences, yet nearlyall of the 52 workers we interviewed, including many not specificallyidentified in advance as having been victims of such abuses, said they hadexperienced sexual violence or harassment or knew other workers who had.Sexual violence andharassment in the agricultural workplace are fostered by a severe imbalance ofpower between employers and supervisors and their low-wage, immigrant workers.Victims often then face systemic barriers—exacerbated by their status asfarmworkers and often as unauthorized workers—to reporting these abusesand bringing perpetrators to justice. To meet its human rights obligations tothese farmworkers suffering sexual violence and harassment, the US governmentand agricultural employers must take steps to reduce and eliminate thesebarriers. This report documents the experience of immigrant farmworker womenand girls with workplace sexual violence and harassment—with particularattention to unauthorized immigrants—and sets forth detailedrecommendations for improving their working conditions and access to servicesand legal remedies.Several farmworkers like Patricia M. (whose story isrecounted above) reported being survivors of rape and other forms of coercivesexual conduct. Angela G., a single mother in California, told Human RightsWatch that she was raped by a supervisor who threatened her daily afterward.[5]  An18-year-old indigenous woman from Oaxaca, Mexico, who spoke no English andpractically no Spanish, reported her rape to a local farmworker women’sorganization but left the area before the organization was able to help herseek justice. She reportedly told the young woman who tried to help her,“I would like to speak as you speak, but I can’t defendmyself.”[6]Many more farmworkers reported incidents of humiliating,debilitating harassment in the form of unwanted touching, pressure to engage insexual relations, and verbal harassment. A woman in New York stated that she hadpicked potatoes and onions with a supervisor who touched all the women’sbodies, and if they tried to resist, he would threaten to call immigration orfire them. Women packing cauliflower in California described working with asupervisor who exposed himself and made comments like, “[That woman]needs to be fucked!”[7]Knowing that they are likely to be viewed as “sexual objects,”women often choose to wear clothes that obscure their faces and their bodies.Susana J., a farmworker who cut broccoli, stated, “Women can’tdress normally…. You think, ‘Oh my goodness, if I wear this, whatwill happen?’ And in that way, the harassers affect you every day.”[8]Such violence and harassment are rarely singular events;many women reported that perpetrators had harassed and abused multiple victimsover a period of time. Human Rights Watch’s investigation found that, inmost cases, perpetrators are foremen, supervisors, farm labor contractors,company owners, and anyone else who has the power to hire and fire workers aswell as confer certain benefits, such as better hours or permission to takebreaks. Farmworkers frequently depend on employers for housing andtransportation, creating more opportunities for those who seek to takeadvantage of vulnerable workers. Co-workers are also perpetrators, enabled, inpart, by an environment that can seem tolerant of abuses. In interviews withHuman Rights Watch, farmworkers noted that certain workers are much morepowerless and more likely to be victimized than others, including girls andyoung women, recent immigrants, single women working alone, and indigenousworkers.The impact of such violence and harassment can bedevastating. Survivors of sexual violence experience various responses to thetrauma, including depression, physical pain, and damaged relationships withtheir partners and families. Although many of the farmworkers who reportedabuse stated they did so after interacting with a rape crisis center or othersimilar agency providing assistance to victims of sexual assault, fewfarmworkers have access to such agencies. Even where such agencies are presentin rural communities, they are not always able to provide adequate services tolimited-English-proficient immigrant victims.Farmworkers who push back against the abuse, or reportincidents to management, say they suffer retaliation, getting fewer hours, moreabusive treatment, or, worst of all, losing their jobs altogether. Because manyfarmworkers work with family members, retaliation can mean the victim is firedalong with her family, resulting in loss of income to the entire household.Those who live in employer-provided housing can even find themselves homeless.Some farmworkers who had filed sexual harassment lawsuits reported they were“blackballed” and shut out of jobs at other farms.In general, survivors of sexual assault and harassment inthe US struggle to report the assault or pursue justice. Nearly one in fivewomen in the US has been raped at some point in her life.[9] Yet despite theprevalence of sexual violence and decades of legal reform meant to holdperpetrators accountable, in 2008 only 41 percent of victims of rape or sexualassault reported the crimes to the police,[10] and in 2010 less than a quarter ofreported forcible rapes resulted in an arrest.[11] Similarly, a 2011 Washington Post-ABCNews poll found that one in four women and one in ten men have experiencedworkplace sexual harassment; only 41 percent of women who had experiencedharassment said they had reported it to their employers.[12]Farmworker survivors ofworkplace sexual violence face the challenges all survivors face, but on top ofthat, they face particular challenges as farmworkers and as migrants. Theagricultural industry has long been treated differently than other industriesunder US labor law. Agricultural workers are excluded from such basicprotections as overtime pay and the right to collective bargaining. The lawsthat do exist are not adequately enforced, and several studies, includingprevious Human Rights Watch reports, have found that wage theft, child labor,and pesticide exposure occur with troubling frequency. In such an environment,farmworkers are unlikely to have faith in the ability of authorities to rectifyabuses.The agricultural industry relies heavily on unauthorized immigrants,who make up about 50 percent of the workforce, if not more. Although growersand farmworkers agree that the current situation is unsustainable, the USCongress has failed to pass legislation that would enable farmworkers alreadyhere to gain legal status and would reform the existing guestworker system foragricultural workers. Even many immigrants with work authorization lack Englishproficiency and education, and those with guestworker visas are dependent ontheir employer to remain in legal status, which can discourage workers fromreporting workplace abuses.The lack of any immediateprospect for gaining legal status affects the ability of unauthorizedfarmworkers to report sexual violence, sexual harassment, and other workplaceabuses in myriad ways. Although US law entitles unauthorized workers toworkplace protections and labor enforcement agencies assert that broadapplication of the law best protects the rights of all workers, the USgovernment’s interest in protecting unauthorized workers from abuseconflicts with its interest in deporting them. These competing interests affectunauthorized workers’ ability to exercise their rights in several keyways.Unauthorized workers often struggle to find legalrepresentation, since federally funded legal services organizations areprohibited (with some exceptions) from representing unauthorized immigrants.Moreover, in a 2002 decision, the US Supreme Court in Hoffman Plastic v.National Labor Relations Board held that an unauthorized worker fired fromhis job for organizing does not have the right to receive compensation for lostwork under the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA). This decision has raisedquestions about whether unauthorized workers are entitled to the same remediesfor workplace abuse as authorized workers. The US government and workeradvocates maintain that the decision is limited strictly to a specificprovision of the National Labor Relations Act and does not affect theapplicability of other labor laws, but the decision forces lawyers to becautious in the remedies they seek while also emboldening unscrupulousemployers who may feel they have less to lose in mistreating unauthorizedworkers, including tolerating workplace sexual harassment.The availability of the U visa—a special non-immigrantvisa for victims of certain crimes who cooperate ininvestigations—provides some relief, but the usefulness of the visa islimited by inconsistent certification of victim cooperation by law enforcementagencies and the unavailability of such visas for most witnesses.And while police are supposed to vigorously investigatecrimes against all victims, regardless of immigration status, the increasinginvolvement of local police in federal immigration enforcement has fueledimmigrants’ fear of the police and their desire to avoid contact with thepolice, even to report crimes. State governments’ efforts to get involvedin immigration enforcement, through laws like Arizona’s SB 1070 orAlabama’s HB 56, have further fueled fears of the police and discouragedreporting of crimes in immigrant communities.Some employers have also failed to meet their obligation toprotect their employees from sexual harassment. Few of the farmworkers we spokewith said they received training on sexual harassment or information on how toreport harassment. Where farmworkers did report the abuses to employers, manysupervisors and employers ignored their complaints or retaliated against them,including with threats of deportation.Both international human rights law and US law state thatall workers, regardless of immigration status, have the right to protectionfrom sexual harassment and other workplace abuses, as well as the right toredress when such abuses occur. The International Covenant on Civil and PoliticalRights (ICCPR), ratified by the US in 1992, declares, “Everyone has theright to liberty and security of person.” The ICCPR further prohibitsdiscrimination on “any ground such as race, colour, sex, language,religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property,birth or other status.” US law specifically prohibits workplace sexualharassment as a form of employment discrimination under Title VII of the CivilRights Act of 1964, and criminal laws prohibiting sexual violence are meant toprotect all victims, including unauthorized immigrants. But it is not enoughfor these laws simply to exist. The ICCPR also requires states parties to“ensure … an effective remedy” when these rights areviolated. The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights has similarly foundthat the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man requires theUnited States to take due diligence to prevent, punish, and provide remediesfor acts of violence, by private parties as well as state actors.Sexual violence and harassment in the agricultural workplaceis a complex problem which should be addressed in a comprehensive way. The USgovernment and agricultural employers should take steps to ensure thatfarmworkers, including unauthorized farmworkers, are able to access “aneffective remedy” and gain meaningful protection under these laws.Key RecommendationsTo the United States CongressPass the Senate version of the Violence Against Women Act(VAWA) reauthorization bill (S. 1925) or similar legislation thatstrengthens the U visa and other protection for immigrant victims ofsexual violence, including farmworker women and girls.Enact immigration legislation that would reduce theincidence of serious abuses of immigrant workers’ rights, includingreform of the existing agricultural guestworker program and enactment of aprogram of earned legalization for unauthorized farmworkers already in theUS.Enact legislation to ensure equality of remedies for allworkers who suffer workplace violations or seek to enforce workers’rights, regardless of immigration status, and thereby rectify the SupremeCourt’s decision in Hoffman Plastic.Eliminate the exclusion of farmworkers from importantlabor protections like the National Labor Relations Act and the Fair LaborStandards Act.To the US Department of Homeland SecurityRepeal programs such as Secure Communities which requireor encourage local police to enforce federal immigration laws.Screen immigrants arrested in enforcement actions foreligibility for U and T visas and ensure that appropriate prosecutorialdiscretion policies, as outlined in Immigration and Customs Enforcementmemoranda, are applied to them.To the US Department of Labor and the Occupational Safetyand Health Administration (OSHA)Increase agricultural workplace inspections and the civiland criminal penalties imposed on employers, within the limits allowed bylaw, to improve their compliance with relevant laws.To All State GovernmentsEnsure that state laws fill gaps in federal laborprotections for agricultural workers and provide alternatives to federalavenues for seeking redress for sexual harassment and other workplaceabuses.To Local LawEnforcement AgenciesTake all necessary and appropriate steps to assureimmigrant communities that unauthorized immigrants who report crimes willnot be reported to immigration authorities.To Agricultural EmployersCreate and enforce clearworkplace policies prohibiting sexual violence and harassment, and createaccessible channels by which employees can safely report violations.Investigate every reported instance of sexual violence orharassment and take prompt corrective action to remedy the problem.MethodologyThis report is based primarily on 160 in-person andtelephone interviews conducted by a Human Rights Watch researcher withfarmworkers, attorneys, members of the agricultural industry, serviceproviders, law enforcement officials, and other experts in California, NewYork, North Carolina, Florida, Texas, Colorado, Ohio, Arizona, Pennsylvania, Tennessee,and the state of Washington, from March to August 2011.We spent the longest time in California because it has thelargest number of farmworkers—both authorized and unauthorized—inthe United States, as well as a large number of farm labor contractors.Human Rights Watch alsoreviewed press reports, reports by nongovernmental organizations, and publicrecords of civil litigation involving allegations of sexual harassment inagricultural workplaces, identified primarily through a search of news andlegal databases and through consultations with legal service providersrepresenting farmworkers.We interviewed 50 workerswith experience in the agriculture industry, one with experience in poultryprocessing, and one with experience in both agriculture and poultry processing,or 52 workers in total. The interviewees included 47 women (including severalwho described experiences they had as girls), two girls under 18, and 3 men.Their experiences included working with a wide range of crops in both fieldsand packing houses. The crops included fruit (table grapes, oranges,strawberries, figs, blueberries, apples, cherries, and melons), vegetables(tomatoes, cauliflower, broccoli, lettuce, spinach, mixed greens, asparagus,garlic, onions, green beans, sweet potatoes, hot peppers, bell peppers,cucumbers, and cabbage), nuts (pistachios and almonds), and non-food productslike cotton and tobacco.We identified most interviewees with the assistance of rurallegal service organizations, sexual assault survivor advocates, and othersocial service and advocacy organizations serving farmworkers. Theseinterviewees are likely less isolated and less vulnerable on average than thosewho have no contact with such organizations. Given the sensitive nature of the subjectand individuals’ fears about their employment and immigration status,many organizations reported knowing or having met victims who were not (orwould not be) willing to be interviewed by Human Rights Watch. About 25interviewees were referred to Human Rights Watch as having been survivors ofsexual violence and/or sexual harassment. The majority of the remaininginterviewees were not known by the referring agencies to be victims, but werewomen who had consented to being interviewed by us about their experiences asfemale farmworkers. Although both male and female farmworkers can be victims ofsexual violence and sexual harassment, this report focuses on women and girls,for whom the prevalence of abuses is reportedly higher.In addition to farmworkers, we interviewed lawyersrepresenting farmworkers in sexual harassment cases, sexual assault survivoradvocates, union representatives, social service providers, growers,agricultural industry representatives, regulatory agency staff, and local law enforcementofficials in several localities. In total, as noted above, we interviewed morethan 160 people.Most interviews with farmworkers were conducted in Spanish,with the assistance of an interpreter. Some interviews were conducted inEnglish or a mixture of English and Spanish, at the preference of theinterviewee. Some individuals interviewed in Spanish were also native speakersof indigenous languages.Most of the farmworker interviews were done individually,except in a few cases where interviewees preferred to speak in small groups.All but two of the 52 interviews were conducted in person in theinterviewees’ homes, in agency offices, or in other settings where theinterviewee felt private and secure; the remaining two were done by telephone.Interviews ranged from 10 to 90 minutes in length. All participants wereinformed of the purpose of the interview and consented orally. Care was takennot to re-traumatize any survivors of sexual violence and harassment, and allinterviewees were advised that they could decline to answer questions orterminate the interview at any time. Where appropriate, Human Rights Watchprovided contact information for organizations offering legal, counseling, orsocial services.No interviewee received compensation for providinginformation. Two individuals were reimbursed for expenses incurred in travelingto the interview location.Given the sensitive nature ofthe topic and unauthorized legal status of many interviewees, Human RightsWatch assured all farmworker interviewees that their identities would remainconfidential. Therefore, all farmworkers’ names have been replaced withpseudonyms, and identifying details, such as the precise date and location ofinterview, have been withheld.DefinitionsSexual Violence and Sexual HarassmentSexual violence and sexual harassment are used inconjunction in this report for several reasons, the most important being thatneither term alone, as used colloquially, fully captures the nature of abusesdescribed by farmworkers.Sexual violence is defined by the Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention, an agency within the US Department of Health and HumanServices, as “any sexual act that is perpetrated against someone’swill,” including rape, attempted rape, abusive sexual contact (such asunwanted touching), and non-contact sexual abuse (such as threatened sexualviolence, exhibitionism, and verbal sexual harassment).[13]Sexual harassment, as defined by the Equal EmploymentOpportunity Commission, a US agency charged with enforcing federalanti-discrimination laws in the workplace, can include unwelcome sexualadvances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal and physical harassmentof a sexual nature, as well as rape and attempted rape. Under US law, workplaceharassment is illegal when it is so frequent or severe that it creates ahostile or offensive work environment, or when it results in an adverseemployment decision. The harasser need not be the victim’s supervisor,but may also be a co-worker or customer.[14]Most of the incidents described by farmworkers interviewedby Human Rights Watch qualify under these definitions as both workplace sexualviolence and sexual harassment. Given this fact and the sometimes narrowcolloquial understanding of these terms, both terms are used throughout thereport to accurately impart the significance of these abuses.It is not within the scope of this report, however, to makelegal determinations as to whether specific incidents described by intervieweeswould constitute actionable claims under US law. We gave the farmworkers weinterviewed the opportunity to raise any and all concerns they had aboutworkplace sexual harassment and did not limit our interviews solely toinstances of sexual harassment that would form the basis for a lawsuit.FarmworkerAlthough the type of work most commonly associated withagriculture is planting and harvesting crops, agricultural labor includes amuch broader range of tasks, including packing, canning, and working in treefarms and nurseries. Under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA),“‘Agriculture’ includes farming in all its branches and amongother things includes the cultivation and tillage of the soil, dairying, theproduction, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any agricultural orhorticultural commodities …, the raising of livestock, bees, fur-bearinganimals, or poultry, and any practices (including any forestry or lumberingoperations) performed by a farmer or on a farm as an incident to or inconjunction with such farming operations, including preparation for market,delivery to storage or to market or to carriers for transportation tomarket.”[15]The workers interviewed in this report have experience working in a wide rangeof these tasks.As noted in the methodology section above, two testimoniescome from workers with experiences in poultry processing and some of thesecondary accounts and published cases discuss sexual violence and sexualharassment in meat production and dairy and egg production workplaces. Thesewere included because the immigrant workers in these environments face similarchallenges to those faced by workers in forms of employment more commonlylabeled “agricultural.”Unauthorized ImmigrantThis report uses the term “unauthorized” todescribe individuals in the United States who lack authorization to live andwork in the US. Some in this group came to the US with a visa but stayed pasttheir visa expiration date or otherwise violated the terms of admission. Otherscame to the US without a visa. Some in this latter group have filed papersseeking legal status but are waiting, and likely will have to wait for yearsmore, to obtain it due to the limited availability of immigrant visas. The term“unauthorized,” rather than “undocumented” or “illegal,”best captures the diversity of situations in this population.I. BackgroundImmigrant Farmworkers: A Vulnerable WorkforceThere are an estimated 1.4 million crop workers in theUnited States, with an additional 429,000 livestock workers.[16]The vast majority offarmworkers in the United States are believed to be foreign-born. According tothe National Agricultural Workers Survey (NAWS), which surveys crop workers,about 72 percent of farmworkers in 2007-2009 reported they were foreign-born;68 percent reported they were born in Mexico.[17] Although most are Latino, there areother immigrant groups as well; one sexual harassment lawsuit filed by theEqual Employment Opportunity Commission against a Florida vegetable and fruitwholesale was brought on behalf of five Haitian women.[18]The proportion of farmworkers who are unauthorized is closeto 50 percent and has held steady at that number since 2001.[19] Many believe thepercentage of unauthorized workers may be even higher, as the methodology usedby the NAWS relies on employers who agree to allow their workers to beinterviewed.[20]Manuel Cunha, president of the Nisei Farmers League, a major growersassociation, believes 90 percent of farmworkers in California have questionabledocuments and that across the nation, 75 to 80 percent are unauthorized.[21]Not included in the NAWS are about 68,000 foreign-bornfarmworkers who have work authorization under the H-2A temporary foreignagricultural worker program, a very small portion of the entire agriculturalworkforce.[22]But these workers’ visas are tied to their employers, and the worker isentirely dependent upon his or her employer for permission to remain in theUnited States. Thus, their work authorization provides little protection fromabuse and retaliation.[23]The native language of the vast majority of farmworkers isSpanish, and only 30 percent report speaking English “well.”[24] Mosthave had little formal education; the average highest grade completed is eighthgrade.[25]According to the NAWS 2009-2010 data, about 24 percent offarmworkers are estimated to be female.[26] About three percent are under 18 andmany of these children are girls.[27]Some women work with their husbands, but others are single mothers who, unableto support their children in their home countries, migrated to the US in searchof work.Women face particular difficulties in farm work. They arevulnerable to sexual violence and harassment and other forms of genderdiscrimination, and they face the significant challenge of taking care ofchildren while working in an industry in which benefits like sick leave andpaid vacation are extremely rare. Analysis of NAWS data from 2004-2006 by theSouthern Poverty Law Center found that the average personal yearly income offemale crop workers was $11,250, significantly lower than the average income of$16,250 for male crop workers.[28]The Indigenous Community Survey, while cautioning that its sample size wassmall, found that indigenous farmworker women work in worse conditions and earnlower wages than indigenous farmworker men.[29]Among the fastest growing populations of farmworkers inCalifornia, and possibly the US in general, are migrants from indigenouscommunities in Mexico and Central America. A 2010 study of indigenousfarmworkers in California identified 23 different languages spoken by theseworkers, the most common being Zapoteco, Mixteco, and Triqui.[30] These workersfrequently speak little or no Spanish, which isolates them even further fromgovernment and community services.[31]It is difficult to quantify exactly how many farmworkers are indigenous, as itis believed many report Spanish as their native language in their responses onthe NAWS survey regardless of their actual mother tongue, but 15 percentreported being indigenous on the 2007-2009 NAWS.[32]In California, researchersestimate that 20 percent of farmworkers, or approximately 128,000 farmworkers,may be indigenous.[33]Indigenous workers tend to be younger, more recently arrived, and poorer thanother immigrant farmworkers, with less education and less English-speaking ability.They are frequently discriminated against in their home country, and continueto suffer discrimination at the hands of non-indigenous or mestizo immigrantswhen they come to the US. Social service agencies are often unaware that theseworkers speak a different language and have a different cultural backgroundthan other Latino immigrants. Thus, indigenous workers face additional barriersto reporting abuses and violations.[34]Farmworkers’ vulnerability is exacerbated by low wagesand poverty. National surveys of farmworker wages represent mainly skilled andpermanent employees and often exclude workers who are unauthorized or paid bycontractors.[35]Even so, the reported annual incomes are very low. Average annual income forcrop workers from 2007-2009 ranged from $15,000 to $17,499; average totalfamily income ranged from $17,500 to $19,999.[36]Farmworkers are paid an hourly or daily wage or a piecerate. When a worker is paid a piece rate, the day’s wages are calculatedbased on how many containers of fruit or vegetables are picked or packed. Withsome exceptions, however, the workers must be paid at least the minimum wage.As found in a previous Human Rights Watch study of child labor in USagriculture, Fields of Peril, however, workers who are paid a piece rateare often under extreme pressure not to take breaks, whether to go to thebathroom, drink water, or stand up from stressful, stooped positions.[37] Thereport also found that workers who are paid a piece rate who do not pick enoughto meet the minimum wage are often not paid the difference as required by law.[38] For thisreport, a woman in North Carolina reported she had just worked an eight ornine-hour day and been paid only $34, well below North Carolina’s minimumwage of $7.25 per hour.[39]Should farmworkers lose their jobs, only 39 percent areeligible for unemployment insurance; should workers lose their jobs because ofinjury, less than 50 percent are eligible for workers’ compensation.Unauthorized workers are not eligible for unemployment insurance even whentheir employers pay into the system. Twenty-one percent live in housingsupplied by the employer, meaning the loss of a job would also result in lossof housing.[40]Farmworkers simply cannot afford to lose their jobs, and they often have fewoptions for other employment if farm work is not available.In keeping with national trends, immigrant farmworkersincreasingly have lived in the US for long periods of time and live in“mixed status” families, where some members are US citizens or havework authorization while others are unauthorized. In 2007-2009, 55 percent offoreign born-workers reported having been in the US for at least 10 years; 29percent reported having been in the US for more than 20 years. In 1992-1994,only three percent of all farmworkers were in mixed status families, but by2007-2009, that number had increased to 12 percent.[41] This is significant,as some advocates told Human Rights Watch that the fear of separation from UScitizen family due to deportation was a significant factor infarmworkers’ reluctance to report sexual violence and other abuses.[42]Structure of Agricultural WorkSeasonal and Temporary WorkSome farms employ full-timeworkers year-round, but most farm work is by nature temporary and seasonal,which creates working conditions that are very different from those experiencedby workers in most other industries. Because it is so difficult to find stable,year-round work, farmworkers have a strong interest in keeping the jobs theyhave.[43]Most farmworkers, oftencalled “settled” farmworkers, live and work in the same areayear-round, such as in California, where the growing season is longer. Othersare classified as “migrants,” defined in the NAWS as those whotravel at least 75 miles within a 12-month period to obtain a job. Some“shuttle” between the US and a foreign country to work each year,while others migrate within the US for work; for example, workers Human RightsWatch met in North Carolina had also worked in New Jersey, Michigan, and Florida.Newcomers to the US are most likely to be migrant workers,[44] and as migrants,they are less likely to know about the communities in which they livetemporarily and to have access to social services.Farm Labor ContractorsFarmworkers may be employed directly by growers or by farmlabor contractors, who recruit and hire workers for multiple growers. Althoughthe NAWS indicates that only 12 percent of farmworkers were employed nationwideby a contractor in 2007-2009,[45]the use of contractors varies significantly by state. One study using NAWS datafrom 2003-2004 found that while 18 percent were employed by contractorsnationwide, 37 percent were employed by contractors in California.[46] Althoughfarm labor contractors are required to be licensed by the US Department of Laborand are regulated by the Migrant Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act,there are many small, unlicensed contractors operating outside of theregulatory framework.[47]Growers may choose to use a contractor for a variety ofreasons. Contractors are often second-generation or long-term immigrants whospeak better English as well as Spanish and are better able to communicate withworkers than growers are. Some farms that employ a small, year-round workforcefind it convenient to use a contractor for the few months each season when theyneed more workers. And given the increase in the use of contractors after theenactment of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 (IRCA), there isevidence that some farmers seek to avoid IRCA-related paperwork and sanctionson employers for hiring unauthorized workers.[48] One farmer told Human Rights Watchthat one reason he uses a contractor to hire his seasonal workforce is thatsome of his most valued employees are unauthorized, and he hopes using acontractor for new hires will help reduce the likelihood of an audit of hispermanent workforce.[49]The increase in the use of contractors is significant forseveral reasons. Contract workers tend to be paid less than directly-hiredworkers and are unemployed for longer periods during the year.[50] A study focusing onindigenous farmworkers found that contract workers receive the same wages butare more commonly mistreated, such as through charges or overcharges forequipment, food, rides, and other services by foremen.[51] Although not allcontractors violate labor laws, farmworker advocates have raised particularconcerns about farm labor contractors, in part because some of the mostegregious and well-publicized incidents of violations in an agriculturalsetting have involved contractors.[52]The role of contractors perhaps most warrants scrutinybecause when violations occur under contractors, growers often argue that theyshould not be held liable because the contractors, not they, are theworkers’ employers.[53]Many farmworker advocates believe that some growers take advantage of thegrower-contractor relationship to distance themselves from abusive workingconditions and wages set by some contractors.Swanton Berry Farm, a majororganic strawberry producer in California, does not use contractors because theowners believe the primary motivation for using a contractor is“externalizing the risk of being an employer,” and“that’s not something we’re interested in.”[54] Otherfarmers echoed similar concerns and stated that when they do employ acontractor, they either work with a contractor they know and trust or ensurethat the workers under the contractor receive the same training as their ownpermanent employees.[55]One farmworker who has worked in North Carolina, Georgia,and Florida expressed strongly her belief that growers who directly employworkers and do not rely on contractors often feel more responsibility for theworkers’ working conditions:Right now, we’re working directly for a grower andit’s very different…. He knows us personally…. When we wentto work on Friday, he asked for a meeting with all of us. He said he wanted ajob well done, work slow, that he didn’t want anyone to get sick. He saidit’s going to be really hot, wants to make sure there’s water, letwomen use the bathroom, water on both sides…. He explained to us, ifthere’s lightning, don’t wait for him to say so, just note the timeand go home. With a contractor, you just keep working.[56]Although some farm labor contractors are large companieswith millions of dollars in annual sales and hundreds of employees,[57] many aresmall, mom-and-pop operations with limited assets, which can affect the damagesavailable to workers seeking remedies. If certain conditions are met, such asgrower involvement in training or supervision of workers, workers can arguethat the grower should be considered a joint employer. As a grower associationrepresentative noted, “A grower cannot interfere with acontractor’s business because if anything goes wrong, then there’llbe joint liability,” illustrating the incentive for growers to distancethemselves from contactor-run farm operations.[58]Supervisors and Others in Positions of PowerEven growers who do not usecontractors to find workers frequently relinquish oversight and responsibilityto employees such as supervisors and foremen (frequently called crewleaders or mayordomo).The foreman may, in addition to recruiting and hiring workers, also help findhousing, provide transportation to work (usually for a fee), and help newcomersadjust to life in the US. A foreman can have significant authority because heinforms workers which fields they should report to and is typically responsiblefor determining pay.Some contractors chargeemployees for transportation, food, and/or housing, either charging themdirectly or deducting these expenses from their paychecks, reducing theiralready meager pay. Those who are newcomers and more vulnerable tend to feelobligated to pay for a service like a ride from a raitero, a worker whoprovides transportation to the worksite.[59] Because many farmworkers do not havecars or other ways to get to work, the raitero has the power to takesomeone to work and to determine the conditions of transportation.A punchadora is the person who is assigned the taskof counting containers, boxes, or buckets for those who are paid by piece rate.Although it is not a supervisory position, it can be a coveted position becausethe work is somewhat less strenuous. Because the punchadora’sactions set wages for the day, it can also be a position of power.II. Types of WorkplaceSexual Violence and Sexual Harassment Experienced by FarmworkersFor a woman alone, there is much danger…. A man cancatch you in the fields where the plants are taller than you.—Rosario E. (pseudonym), North Carolina farmworker,July 2011.Nearly every worker interviewed by Human Rights Watchreported that they had either personally experienced some form of workplacesexual violence or harassment or personally knew someone who had experienced it.Our research confirms what farmworker advocates across the country believe:sexual violence and sexual harassment experienced by farmworkers is commonenough that some farmworker women see these abuses as an unavoidable conditionof agricultural work.As one rural legal aid lawyerput it, sexual harassment is a “recurring, day in and day out,significant problem for women farmworkers…. It’s not a made-upissue, it’s real.”[60]A 2010 survey of 150 farmworker women in California’s Central Valleyfound that 80 percent had experienced some form of sexual harassment,[61] while areport by the Southern Poverty Law Center found that a majority of their 150interviewees had also experienced sexual harassment.[62] In 1995 the EqualEmployment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), the federal agency in charge ofenforcing anti-discrimination laws, began specifically conducting education andoutreach on sexual harassment of farmworkers. This initiative followed ameeting in which farmworkers and advocates told the agency that sexual assaultand harassment were serious problems, with one worker referring to onecompany’s field as the “field de calzon,” or“field of panties,” because of the number of rapes that hadoccurred there.[63]As described below, farmworkers reported experiencing a widerange of unwanted sexual violence and harassment.Rape and Other Forms of Coercive Sexual ConductRape and other forms of coercive sexual conduct are the mostegregious forms of sexual violence and harassment experienced by farmworkers.Several women interviewed by Human Rights Watch reported they had been raped bya supervisor or co-worker.Angela G.’s StoryAngela G., like most farmworkers, came to the US about 12to 13 years ago for “a better life.” What she found, however, wasthat to survive in the US she had to work “from sun-up tosun-down.” When she first began cutting and packing lettuce, the painin her hands was excruciating, but she managed to continue and has worked inlettuce for the past 12 years.In her experience, women ingeneral were not valued by the supervisors and the foremen, but Angelareported that because she did not have a partner, she was singled out forabuse. “I was called a dyke; they said I was a lesbian…. [Thesupervisor] and the foreman would laugh.” She was afraid to sayanything because others who had complained of sexual harassment had beenfired immediately. But to listen in silence day after day caused her a greatdeal of pain: “There was no one to help me…. When I got home, allI could do was cry. And then I had to wake up the next morning and go to work[to survive].”“All the supervisors were the same…. Even inthose cases [where a supervisor was different], if they heard something, theyjust stayed quiet.”Angela stayed on, however, because she wanted to getpromoted, earn a higher salary, and be better able to support her family. Andthen one day, a supervisor asked her to come over to his house to pick upsome boxes. Angela reported that after she entered the house, he raped her.Angela said she felt powerless: “For me, it feltlike an eternity. I wanted to scream but I couldn’t. Afterward, he saidI should remember that it’s because of him that I have this job, and ifI say anything, I’ll lose my job…. I was afraid to call thepolice, to do anything. I didn’t know what to do. My mind wascompletely blocked off.”Angela explained that she withdrew into herself and becamedeeply depressed: “When someone lays a hand on you, you feel like youcan’t go on.” With no family near her other than her daughter,she said she would talk “in silence” to her deceased father,which “allowed me to release a lot of what I was feeling.” Butshe reported that the perpetrator continued to threaten her on a daily basis,even telling other co-workers what he had done, to show that he was incontrol. Angela came to feel that even if she lost her job, she had to dosomething. “I didn’t have any willpower to continue with my life,but to think this could happen to someone else, that’s when I realizedI had no other options [but to report it].” She first reported the rapeto the company, but when nothing happened, she spoke with a lawyer, whohelped her file a sexual harassment claim against the company.Angela’s ordeal, however, did not end there. Herimmigration status was another serious factor, as she was deported in themiddle of her lawsuit, and she wondered if her employer had reported her toimmigration. She felt everybody in her small community knew what had happenedand were talking about her. She sought therapy, but found that it was tooexpensive and to go to a session would require her to miss work and lose evenmore income. Although free care was available in her area, the wait list wasvery long. Yet Angela found support from her attorney, and she began to feelshe could regain some of what she had lost.In Angela’s experience, companies fail to complywith laws that are meant to protect workers. She described how she has seenmanagement at one workplace call a meeting and pass a piece of paper for theworkers to sign, even though the workers had no idea what the meeting wasabout or what the paper said. They were then told that if anyone asked ifthey received any training, they were supposed to say, “Yes.”For Angela, it is important that her experience help otherworkers: “My goal is that all their eyes are open to all theabuses.”[64]Farmworkers who had not been raped were well aware of therisk. A male farmworker who picks cabbages in New York said a female co-workerhad told him in 2009 that the “American bosses” had approached herfor sexual favors, and that she had accepted for fear of being fired.[65] TeresaG., a woman in North Carolina who works in tobacco, said that in 2011 asupervisor told two of her co-workers they had to have sex with him in order toget the job. When Teresa found one of the women crying, she asked why she haddone it, and she replied, “My husband doesn’t have work. Idon’t have work.” Teresa confronted the supervisor and told him,“You’re a fucking pig,” but he simply smiled.[66]Rape was similarly reportedto farmworker advocates in Texas, California, Arizona, and Florida. Several ofthe sexual harassment lawsuits brought by the Equal Employment OpportunityCommission have alleged rape as well as other forms of workplace harassment. InEEOC v. Harris Farms—a landmark case because it was the first andthus far only farmworker sexual harassment case to go to a jurytrial—Olivia Tamayo, a Mexican immigrant who had worked for more than 15years at Harris Farms, one of the largest agribusinesses in the country, won adamages award of almost $1 million in 2005 after testifying that her supervisorforcibly raped her several times, sometimes at knife or gun point.[67] Othersuits alleging sexual assault have involved a tree farm in Oregon[68] and anegg farm in Iowa.[69]In many cases, moreover, relationships that appearconsensual may be the product of psychological coercion or desperate economiccircumstances. Veronica Z., a woman who has worked with onions and cotton inCalifornia, explained why she ended up in a sexual relationship with hersupervisor:My son broke a leg riding a bike when someone ran him over.I arrived at work late, and the foreman fired me. I returned to work because[the perpetrator] was able to get me a job, only because we had relations. Ineeded the job for my children.[70]Although they were not in a relationship, she reported thathe continued to coerce her to have sexual relations with him for years.Veronica said when she tried to end it, he threatened her with a gun and beganharassing her at work. When she eventually filed a lawsuit against the companyhe worked for, the company argued that she had been in a consensualrelationship with him.[71]A farmworker advocate in North Carolina stated bluntly,“It has to do with survival—nothing to do with free will or choice.I’ve seen 50-year-old men with 16-year-old girls who refuse to complainor discuss the relationship.”[72]A counselor at a domestic violence and sexual assault crisis center in Fresno,California, agreed that vulnerable women often end up in relationships withperpetrators of the abuse, especially if they get pregnant: “You’rehaving a child, you build a relationship with the perpetrator…,you’re getting financial support. [It] becomes normal to them.”[73]Unwanted Touching, Verbal Abuse, and ExhibitionismThe forms of sexual violence and harassment most commonlyreported to Human Rights Watch were unwanted touching, verbal abuse, andexhibitionism.Many women described how supervisors and co-workers withmore workplace authority than they have would aggressively ask them out ondates. Juliana T. reported that when she was working in lettuce three years agowith her boyfriend, the foreman would say to her, “Leave your boyfriendbecause I have papers.” Although she never accepted, he repeatedlyinvited her to restaurants and casinos, asking almost three to four times aweek, to the point that she “didn’t know what to say or do. I wasscared.”[74]Some women were openly propositioned. Monica V., who has worked in North Carolinaand New York, described how when she was working in tobacco, the contractorwould offer her a ride, more hours, and more money in exchange for sex.[75] MercedesLorduy, an attorney with VIDA Legal Assistance in Florida, reported that one ofher clients was stalked by a nursery owner to the point that she had to get arestraining order against him.[76]Several women reported that supervisors would touch them asthey stooped or bent over to plant or harvest crops. Mercedes A., for example,who picked potatoes and onions two years ago in New York, said her supervisorwould touch women’s bottoms and breasts as they worked.[77]Women also reported verbal harassment and gestures that wereobscene and humiliating:BiancaH.described working for years withmen who would touch themselves, simulate sex with each other, and makecomments like, “Last night, I dreamed about you; if you only knewhow I dreamed about you! How many things I did to you!”[78]Claudia L.,while working in grapes last year, reported she had a supervisor who madeobscene and vulgar statements. “One time, my zipper was down, and hetold me to zip it because he could see my vagina and he would want it ifhe saw it.” Although she tried to ignore him, she was frightenedwhen he saw her working alone, ahead of the others. “He said therewere coyotes who would eat me, but he said, ‘I’m going to eatyou instead.’”[79]Four womenwho worked together in a cauliflower packing house from the end of 2010 tothe beginning of 2011 reported being abused by a supervisor who every dayshouted things like, “Women, move your hands like youfuck!”  “You guys are fucking all day! Youidiots!”  “This is dick! You guys are worth a piece ofdick!”[80]Ana D. remembered, “He was all powerful. He’d say,‘Nobody does shit to me! Everybody can suck my dick!’….He would say to the men [because I don’t have a husband], ‘Ananeeds to be fucked!’”[81] Women were not theonly ones who had to suffer his abuse, as he would also take his penis outof his pants and shake it at all of his workers.[82]Unwanted touching, stalking, and verbal harassment exist ona spectrum with sexual assault. Cindy Marroquin at the California CoalitionAgainst Sexual Assault (CALCASA) explained, “Many times it’s aprogression; it’s not that they’re assaulted just one time. Usuallyit starts with verbal comments or verbal threats, what they would considerproviding a compliment … just putting [the victims] in a place to say,‘I could do this to you if I wanted to.’”[83] Patricia M. (whosestory begins this report) reported she was verbally harassed before she wasraped,[84]and Victoria Mesa, an attorney with Florida Rural Legal Services, reported thatone of her clients endured constant harassment by her supervisor who tried totouch her, made lewd remarks, and showed his penis to her before he eventuallyraped her.[85]An EEOC lawsuit against Willamette Tree Wholesale alleged that the samesupervisor who sexually assaulted one woman also harassed her sister withgraphic sexual comments, propositions, and groping.[86]Long-Term HarassmentFor farmworkers, sexualviolence and harassment are not generally limited to a single isolatedincident. Harassment often lasts for months, even years, and perpetrators oftenvictimize multiple workers, regardless of whether complaints are made to companymanagement.Bianca H. reported that she packed spring mix and spinachfor a greens company that did nothing to stop men from making obscene commentsand gestures, despite complaints from Bianca and her female co-workers. Sheworked in this environment 12 hours a day over a seven-month season, day in andday out, for four years. Bianca cried as she remembered: “I felthorrible. Every day, you feel they are just using you…. It makes you feellike you’re worth nothing.”[87]Marcela V. reported that she had been a forewoman for 11years where “[e]very season, there were women who complained to me,sometimes two or three women.”[88]Although she made complaints, nothing ever happened. Eventually she andVeronica Z., who was directly harassed, filed a lawsuit alleging sexualharassment and retaliation after they lost their jobs in 2005. During thehearing, she was devastated to discover for the first time that her adultdaughter had also been harassed. “We were just machines doing the workfor them because they didn’t even take us seriously.”[89]Lorena U. reported that in September 2010, she waspropositioned for sex by a supervisor at a garlic farm. She consulted with acaseworker at a local agency for domestic violence survivors, who advised herto report the incident to the owner of the farm. According to Lorena, the ownersaid several people had complained about this supervisor, but he had neverbelieved them.[90]The caseworker told Human Rights Watch that three different women hadseparately reported problems with this particular supervisor.[91]Many of the sexual harassmentlawsuits brought by the EEOC on behalf of agricultural workers have beenbrought on behalf of multiple survivors, often as a class action. In recentyears, the EEOC has brought sexual harassment lawsuits involving multipleplaintiffs against:EvansFruitin Washington State, on behalfof three individuals and a class of women;[92]Cyma Orchidsin California, on behalf of four women;[93]Spud Sellerin Colorado, on behalf of several female employees;[94]WillametteTree Wholesalein Oregon, on behalfof two female employees and two male relatives, also employees, on chargesof severe sexual harassment and retaliation;[95]HolidaySpecialtrees in Oregon, on behalf of two male victims of same-sexharassment and racial discrimination;[96]Knouse Foodsin Pennsylvania, on behalf of a class of female employees who sufferedharassment on the basis of sex and national origin;[97]DiMare, a large tomato farm in Florida, on behalf of atleast three female employees.[98]Four of the companies have settled with the EEOC—CymaOrchids, Willamette Tree, Holiday Specialtree, and Knouse Foods—and intheir settlement agreements agreed to broad, company-wide changes including oneor more of the following: new policies and procedures to address unlawfuldiscrimination, new trainings for managers, supervisors, and employees, andEEOC monitoring.[99]The other cases remain pending.III. UniqueVulnerabilitiesThe foreman is the law.— Santiago I. (pseudonym), California farmworker, June2011.Immigrant women and girls in agricultural work face uniquevulnerabilities to sexual violence and harassment. Contractors, supervisors,foremen, growers, and others with connections and authority wield tremendouspower. William Tamayo, a regional attorney at the EEOC who has litigatedseveral farmworker sexual harassment cases, described a pattern he has seenrepeatedly in the cases on which he has worked:The owners of the majorfarms tend to be white, English speaking longtime family members who turn overoperations of the farm to “Jose,” a longtime employee who isbilingual and who is expected to maintain the operations and keep laborproblems to a minimum—you know, “out of sight, out of mind.”The workers are geographically isolated from community services, have fewoptions in life and are in desperate poverty.  They are dependent on Joseto navigate the English-speaking world for them. If Jose is a predator and/orhis supervisors below him are predators, it is the ideal situation for sexualharassment to occur—unfettered, unpunished, and unstopped.[100]Although anyone can be avictim, members of some groups may be more vulnerable than others. Unauthorizedworkers are particularly likely to be fearful of reporting abuses, and girlsand young women, single women, and indigenous workers are particularly likelyto be targeted, as well as unlikely to report inappropriate sexual speech orconduct.Sexual Relations as a Supervisor’s“Perk”Several farmworkers, including those who had worked assupervisors and foremen, told Human Rights Watch that some supervisors andforemen view the possibility of sexual relations with workers simply “asa perk of the job.”[101]Roberta C., a young woman who had done farm work as a teenager, reported thather father had recently been promoted to foreman and her mother was extremelyanxious because she could not help but wonder, “If that’s whatforemen do, is that what he’s going to do, too?”[102] This idea of accessto sex as a perk of the job was echoed by farmworker advocates.[103]Juanita Ontiveros, a long-time community advocate with California Rural LegalAssistance Foundation, reported that the “perk” is considered morelikely when there is less work available and more competition for jobs:“[Women] are approached even by crewleaders, anybody who has a little bitof control or power … who say, ‘I can get you a better job, I canget you in if you put out.’”[104]The idea that workers whoagree to a sexual relationship with the foreman or supervisor get preferentialtreatment is so widely held that some workers believe that whenever a woman isbeing treated better than others—for example, being assigned lessstrenuous or better paying work—she must be providing something inexchange.[105]A poultry processing worker who suffered sexual harassment and then retaliationwhile working from 2005 to 2007 recounted:[Another woman is] splitting up with her husband becausethe same supervisor [who harassed me] caused problems…. She received apromotion. People think she did something. They [assume] when he retaliates,it’s because they won’t let him [have sexual relations]. When hepromotes someone, they [assume] she said yes.[106]Some perpetrators are co-workers without formal supervisorypower. Some, however, have connections to the contractor or foreman that maymake them feel invincible. Maria A., for example, believed the man who rapedher was close friends with the contractor,[107] while 16-year-old Ana I. wasverbally harassed by the contractor’s son in the summer of 2009.[108]Sexual harassment by co-workers also occurs in environments where such behaviorby supervisors is openly tolerated.[109]Girls and Young WomenHundreds of thousands ofchildren under 18 work in agriculture in the United States, at far youngerages, for longer hours, and under more hazardous conditions than all otherworking children.[110]They are among the least likely to be able to “defend” themselvesfrom sexual violence and harassment because “they don’t quite knowwhat’s going on, they don’t know how to deal with it,” anattorney familiar with sexual harassment cases explained.[111] Despite theparticular risks of sexual harassment in agriculture—including isolationin the fields—for young teenage girls, agriculture is often the onlyavailable work. While the minimum age for work in other industries is 16, witha few exceptions, there is no minimum age for children working on small farmsas long as they have their parents’ permission, and once they are 14,they can work on any farm even without their parents’ permission.[112]Young women, many of whom are recent arrivals to the US, arealso at risk for similar reasons. An attorney who has worked on many sexualharassment cases involving farmworkers observed, “There’s no hardand fast rule, but frequently [women who report are] older, in their late30’s and 40’s, [who] are more sure of their rights…. A lot ofyounger women never make it into the office.”[113]Several farmworkers who areteenagers or who had worked as teenagers told Human Rights Watch theyexperienced or witnessed harassment and said those most at risk included notonly children but those working alone, without their parents.[114]  One19-year-old woman, who had started working in tobacco when she was 14,remembered her mother was always extremely protective—“[She] neverleft us alone,”[115]—whileanother who had worked from when she was in eighth grade until she startedcollege (from about 13 to 18 years old) said she “would just cling to[her] parents,” believing “[i]t’s going to be okay as long asI’m close to them.”[116]Paz B., an 18-year-old who has been doing farm work sinceshe was 16, first came to the US with her sisters. But since her sisters weredeported, she has been forced to work alone with a contractor who says thingslike, “This woman has a good ass. What she needs is a good man,”and who tells other co-workers that Paz would “sleep with any guy.”[117]There can be added pressure for girls and young women who are struggling tokeep up with other workers. If a young female worker is not able to finish herrow as quickly as others, her parents can help her, but if she is working alonewith no family to “back [her] up,” she may be told, eitherimplicitly or explicitly, that if she has a relationship with the foreman,“it would be okay if she were a little behind [in her work].”[118]Girls and young women workingwith family members are not immune from predation, as perpetrators can takesteps to separate them from their protectors. Cristina N. was a little over 18when she was raped 12 years ago by a supervisor, who took her to a garden toseparate her from her mother.[119]A farmworker advocate in Texas reported that, in one case, a contractor sent ayoung woman’s mother to another field so the contractor could haveunhindered access to her daughter.[120]Similarly, one of the farmworkers in the EEOC lawsuit against Evans Fruit, amajor Washington apple grower, described in the EEOC’s press release“how the ranch manager refused to let her work on the same crew as her15-year-old daughter, who he then targeted with unwelcome verbal and physical sexualattention.”[121]Girls and young women working with their families must alsodeal with the risk that, should they reject advances, they may be risking notonly their own jobs, but also those of their family members. Ana I., a16-year-old girl in North Carolina whose case is mentioned above, told us shewas working in tobacco two years earlier when the contractor’s son beganto try to hold her hand and talk to her. When she rebuffed his advances, she,her mother, and her mother’s boyfriend were all fired. She wasdevastated: “Because of that, we couldn’t pay our rent or lightbill or anything. It was terrible. I thought if I had never said no, wewouldn’t have ended up like this.”[122] Community workersat Centro Binacional para el Desarollo Indigena Oaxaqueno (CBDIO), aCalifornia-based organization, described the case of a young Oaxacan girl, 15or 16 years old, who had been raped by her foreman. They said the girl did nottell anyone because she was afraid he would fire her father, who was workingwith her. She eventually told her family only when she got pregnant, went tothe hospital to give birth, and was questioned because she was a minor.[123]Recent ImmigrantsAbusers recognize that youngwomen who have just arrived in the US and who “don’t know manythings” are particularly vulnerable.[124] A sexual assault survivor advocatein Fresno described a case in which the man who raped and impregnated herclient was known to prey on the “new girls.”[125] Natalia B. said shewas 20 years old and had just arrived in the US with a work visa in 2010, whenshe found herself the target of sexual harassment at a cauliflower packinghouse. The supervisor was abusive to everyone in the workplace, but shereported he had targeted her, touching her and asking her almost every day, “Areyou going to give me booty, yes or no?” Although Natalia was good friendswith some older women at work—who ultimately defended her and were firedalong with her—she was only able to tell them about the full extent ofthe abuse when they were no longer working at the packing house.[126]Single WomenAlthough women now make upabout 24 percent of the agricultural workforce in the US, they are still aminority in an overwhelmingly male industry. While many work with theirhusbands, there are also many single women, particularly single mothers who aredesperate to keep jobs to support their children. Several farmworkers, as wellas farmworker advocates, agreed that a single woman working in agriculturefaced risks that a married woman would not.[127]Marta L., a migrantfarmworker who has worked in several states, including North Carolina, NewJersey, Michigan, and Florida, found that when she worked without her husbandat her side, she “heard bad words, they lacked respect for [her].”[128]It was only when her husband came and said, “Be quiet,” that theystopped. She noted that the risks are particularly high for migrant womenworkers because “there is the question of where she will sleep, bathe,use the bathroom in labor camps.” At one point, when she was separatedfrom her husband and working alone, she found herself in a group of migrantswith just one other woman. Marta made sure to share a room with that woman, asshe wanted to avoid what had happened to a woman she knew, who was raped whenshe slept among men in a labor camp in New Jersey.[129]Angela G., whose rape by a supervisor is discussed above,also suffered verbal harassment from another supervisor who saw she was singleand called her a “dyke” and a lesbian every day. She said,“When I got home, all I could do was cry, and then I had to wake up thenext morning and go to work for food to eat.”[130] Magdalena C. wassimilarly singled out for abuse for not having a husband. She explained thatthe supervisor at the cauliflower packing shed would shout, “Magdalenaneeds to be fucked.”[131]Indigenous WorkersIndigenous farmworkers are particularly vulnerable toworkplace abuses, including sexual violence and harassment, for a multitude ofreasons. They are subject to discrimination in their home countries, then cometo the US only to find that non-indigenous or mestizo immigrants continue todiscriminate against them. As one farmworker reported, they are mocked for notspeaking Spanish well: “They say obscene words to them, and when theydon’t understand, they laugh more.”[132] Luz S., an olderwoman who had worked in agriculture for many years, agreed: “They aretreated like they have no value … like they’re not normalpeople.”[133]She further noted that people who speak Spanish defend themselves, butindigenous people do not.[134]One farmworker, who is herself indigenous but speaks Spanish well, agreed:“People scream at them and they let them. They don’t know how todefend themselves. They stay quiet; they don’t even stop to drinkwater.”[135]Indigenous women in particular tend to speak little or no Spanish because theyare less likely than men to have received much formal education.[136]Many indigenous workers arefrom the Oaxaca region, and the discrimination against them extends tostereotypes about Oaxacan women and their sexuality. One male farmworker whohas been a supervisor and a foreman casually stated, “All the supervisorsand foremen believe that Oaxacan women like men more…. They like itbecause they don’t say anything about it.”[137]Several of the most egregiousincidents of sexual violence and harassment reported to Human Rights Watchinvolved indigenous women and girls. The teenage rape survivor assisted bycommunity workers at CBDIO, whose case is described above, was more vulnerableboth because of her age and because her primary language is Zapoteco.[138]Ines R., a young farmworker and a member of Lideres Campesinas, a farmworkerwomen advocacy organization, is fluent in Mixteco, and she recounted the storyof a young Mixteco farmworker she had tried to help about two years ago. Thiswoman told her she had been raped by a man who then stopped at a gas station.She dialed 911, the only number she knew, but when the police came, they spokeonly English and Spanish, and interviewed her with the perpetrator in the sameroom. Because she was afraid and unable to communicate, she said she had notbeen raped. She later reported to Ines, “I felt like nothing, nothing, noheart, no feeling.” Ines said, “I read [the police report], and itsaid they couldn’t do anything because the girl doesn’t know how tospeak Spanish.” Ines hoped to help her follow up on the police report,but soon afterward, the young woman left the area.[139]The largest numbers of indigenous workers are in California,but they can be found all over the US. Victoria Mesa, a legal services lawyerin Florida, reported that one of her clients, a woman from Chiapas, wassexually harassed by a supervisor in a nursery “to the point he almostraped her.” When her client reported the supervisor to management, shewas fired.[140]The EEOC recently settled a case against a tree farm in Oregon in which twomale workers alleged both same-sex harassment and ethnic harassment due totheir identification as Mixtecos, an indigenous group from Oaxaca, Mexico.[141]The vast majority ofindigenous workers, however, are extremely reluctant to report any kind ofabuse. Sexual harassment is a particularly sensitive subject and difficult todiscuss openly in indigenous communities.[142] Jeff Ponting, an attorney anddirector of the Indigenous Farmworker Program at California Rural LegalAssistance (CRLA), believes that because indigenous peoples typically haveexperienced discrimination in their home countries, they distrust governmentsand authorities even more than other unauthorized workers.[143] Although they areone of the fastest growing farmworker populations, growers, regulatoryagencies, and social service agencies have made little effort to acknowledgethe particular linguistic and cultural needs of this group. California law, forexample, requires trainings to be provided only in Spanish and English, with norequirement that the workers understand. Ponting reports that a Californiaagency only hired its first indigenous outreach worker after concerted advocacyby CRLA.[144]For Ponting, indigenous-focused outreach will pay dividends because thecommunities are tight-knit and well-organized, and those within the communitieswho do assert their rights can be “fierce advocates.”[145]LGBT WorkersThe lesbian, gay, bisexual,and transgender (LGBT) farmworker population faces its own particularchallenges with regard to both sexual harassment and other forms ofdiscrimination.CRLA and the National Center for Lesbian Rights discoveredthere was a serious need for improved legal services for LGBT people in ruralCalifornia communities and created Proyecto Poderoso (Project Powerful) in2007.[146]Dan Torres, director of the program, told Human Rights Watch that the anti-LGBTanimus is so strong that the comments and actions that create a hostile workenvironment for LGBT workers can also hurt those who are notLGBT or even perceived to be LGBT. The stigma alsodiscourages victims from reporting.[147]Belen F., a transgender woman who said she had experienceddiscrimination in Mexico and had hoped life in the US would be different,reported she was sexually harassed and her partner was assaulted at anasparagus packing plant in California four or five years ago. Belen had beenworking at the same packing plant for several years when she was promoted toforeman. She said she then began to hear the owner of the plant calling her“joto or faggot,” and they repeatedly reduced her wages tothe point that she was making less than her assistant.[148]Legal services providers elsewhere in California and inother states also report encountering cases of same-sex sexual harassment, bothagainst workers who identify as LGBT and against those who do not,[149]and at least one EEOC case has involved an allegation of same-sex harassmentagainst two indigenous male workers.[150]IV. The Lasting Impact of Workplace Sexual Violence and Sexual HarassmentEven after workplace sexual violence or harassment ends,survivors continue to suffer the consequences of the abuses. They may havephysical injuries and psychological trauma. The abuses sometimes destroy relationshipswith family members, particularly husbands and partners. And many farmworkersface significant challenges obtaining necessary medical treatment for theirphysical injuries and mental trauma. Survivors who report abuses to companymanagement or rebuff advances risk getting fired and experiencing other formsof retaliation, including being reported to immigration authorities.Physical Injury, Psychological Trauma, Social Ostracism,and Disruption of Family LifeSeveral survivors of workplace sexual violence andharassment told Human Rights Watch they suffered serious physical andpsychological trauma as a result of the abuse:Maria A.said she was initially scared to report her rape in the summer of 2010,but when she found herself still in pain three months later, she soughtmedical treatment in a hospital, which then referred her to a socialservices agency. Now, she said, “I try to be strong….Sometimes when I am sad, I begin to cry. I ask God not to let this happento me again and protect me from bad people. I am going to see a doctorbecause every time I have intercourse with my boyfriend, it hurts and Ibleed. I think something was hurt or damaged.[151]PatriciaM. (whose story begins this report)reported that she still feels pain resulting from physical assault andrape. She feels lucky to be in a good relationship now, but“sometimes, I remember [being raped] and I can’t be intimatewith my husband.”[152]VeronicaZ., who reported being coerced intoa sexual relationship with a supervisor, became deeply depressed,according to her caseworker: “She used to come see me every day, sodepressed. She would clench her teeth because of the pressure.”[153]In an EEOC sexual harassmentcase against a tree farm, an Oregon federal court ruled that the lawsuit shouldmove forward even though one of the women who alleged rape did not file herclaim within the 300-day time limit prescribed by law. The court concluded thatthe psychological damage suffered by the survivor—includingpost-traumatic stress disorder, severe depression, suicidal ideation, socialisolation, and panic attacks—justified her delay.[154]Verbal harassment can be debilitating as well. Four yearsafter leaving the job where she was harassed, Lucia A. was brought to tears asshe recounted her story. For over 10 years, she said, she endured dailyharassment while packing broccoli: “Every time I went to the bathroom,[my supervisor] would make comments about my bottom and say vulgarthings…. I feel a lot of pain remembering this.” Although she wasinterested in talking to a professional therapist, she believed she could notafford it.[155]Several farmworker survivors of sexual violence andharassment, as well as farmworker advocates, reported to Human Rights Watchthat they suffered from adverse community and family reactions to revelationsthat they had been abused. It is difficult to discuss sexual violence andharassment in any culture, but it can be particularly difficult in communitieswhere it is commonly assumed the victims are at fault. One male farmworker whohas been a supervisor and a foreman declared, “Women are to blame for itas well. I see that they are alone, single, not married. I see that they likebeing told these things.”[156]Farmworker women, such as Carolina M., agreed that “men think it’sour fault; they think you smiled at them; they never believe us.”[157]Rosana C., a farmworker inNew York, reported seeing immediate damage to her relationship with her husbandwhen she became a victim of sexual violence and harassment. She was raped by aco-worker about five years ago, and more recently she has been subject to dailyharassment by a co-worker who sends her text messages multiple times a day.Rosana’s pain is exacerbated by her husband’s reaction:“He’s machisto…. He blames me; he thinks I provoked [therapist]. And now I’m telling him this man is harassing me at this job but[he won’t do] anything to protect me.”[158]Irma Luna, a community worker at California Rural LegalAssistance, has encountered victims who similarly were blamed by theirhusbands. “We had a female working in a packing house with her husband inthe Arvin/Lamont area. She was harassed by the foreman…. She triedtelling her husband; it went pretty ugly. She kind of got discouraged anddisappeared.”[159]Limited Access to Necessary Social ServicesSeveral farmworker survivors of severe workplace sexualharassment and sexual violence reported that they had sought therapy and othermental health services. A few were able to get some counseling and emotionalsupport, but the vast majority were unable to access these often crucialservices. Some thought it would be too expensive, not realizing free care wasavailable. Those who were offered free care found that the wait-list was verylong or the free care was inadequate.[160] Rosana C. was offered services, butwhen she tried to call a shelter number, she found no one spoke Spanish.[161]Many victim advocates agree and say there is a desperateneed for more mental health and support services, including transportation totherapy sessions. Spanish-speaking private counselors are extremely rare inrural areas, and even where they exist they are often hours away from thecommunities that need them.[162]As one attorney stated, “For a woman experiencing trauma, dealing withwork and family, to travel two hours to speak with a therapist is not going tohappen.”[163]When free individualcounseling is available for undocumented and uninsured workers, it is oftenlimited to survivors of rape who are willing to assist prosecutors or are inneed of emergency services. Survivors of less severe forms of sexual violenceor harassment, who are not eligible for state-funded victim services, generallycannot access the care that they need.[164]The experience of the women we spoke with most likely doesnot convey the full extent of the problem, as they at least made contact atsome point with a social service agency. Many farmworker survivors of sexualviolence and harassment most likely are never in touch with agencies. LideresCampesinas, an organization that has been working to improve services forfarmworker women throughout California, told Human Rights Watch that theculture of rape crisis centers and hotlines can be“incomprehensible” to farmworkers: “When women call into anumber, it asks them to call another number. Or the numbers have letters [inEnglish] like ‘GET HELP.’”[165]In cases where workers we spoke to did report crimes, theymost often did so because social and legal service organizations had conductedextensive outreach until “someone in the community said, ‘Go tothem, you can trust these people.’”[166] Such trusttypically cannot be gained simply through traditional outreach. For example,agencies serving survivors of domestic violence and sexual assault frequentlycreate support groups for survivors, but these subjects are taboo in manyfarmworker communities. According to Cindy Marroquin at CALCASA, “whatworks best is just having groups in general where people get together….It’s just hanging out with your neighbor, and there’s no specificagenda.”[167]Amparo Yebra, director of an agency with a strong presence in its small CentralValley, California, community concurred, saying their approach is to convenesupport groups every Friday with speakers on topics as varied as nutrition andbudgeting information. Her agency’s clients “stay here for years,even though their problems [are] solved, they still come back if they have aletter in English they don’t understand, with bills…. Anything thatthey need, they can come into our office.”[168] The AllianceAgainst Family Violence and Sexual Assault, an agency in Bakersfield that hasslowly built support groups in the smaller towns around Bakersfield, noted they“[had] to really pound the pavement,” and consistently convenesupport meetings, even if no one showed up, in order to build trust.[169]Developing the capacity to serve farmworkers who do notspeak English is obviously a major challenge, particularly in states wherethere are few bilingual Spanish speakers, let alone speakers of other relevantlanguages. In upstate New York, a community worker found that when she lookedat websites of local agencies, “[they’re] not in Spanish or HaitianCreole; they don’t have advocates or interpreters.”[170]Although increasing access to therapy and similar serviceswill initially require financial investments—a difficult proposition whengovernment budgets are tight—such services can make a tremendousdifference for survivors of sexual violence and harassment. As recounted in thebeginning of this report, Patricia M. reported that she first came to an agencybecause she hoped to file for disability insurance due to her inability to workwhile pregnant. The workers she met there were the first people who heard whathappened to her, and the agency helped her file a report with the police,something she says she could never have done without them. “For a wholeyear, I came all the time. They gave me the strength to move on with mychild.”[171]And greater outreach and prevention services may ultimately reduce the economiccosts associated with sexual violence.[172]Termination and Other Forms of RetaliationMany of the cases described to Human Rights Watch involvedvictims who were fired, either for reporting abuse or for rebuffing advances.Monica V., for example, said she was propositioned repeatedly by a contractorwhen she was working in tobacco. When she said no, “I want to earn mymoney with the sweat of my brow,” he would not allow her to take bathroombreaks or even short breaks to stand up from stooping. When she was in so muchpain that she had to stand up and rest, “he said there was no job forme.”[173]For Natalia B., refusing her supervisor’s advances eventually led totermination, she reported, not just for her, but also for her co-workers andfriends who tried to defend her. The harassment intensified until one day, shebroke down and began to cry. Her co-worker Ana D. comforted her and told thesupervisor, “You’ve gone overboard.” He responded,“Anyone who doesn’t like it, get the fuck out of here.” Hefired Natalia, Ana, and two other co-workers who had defended her.[174]Many farmworkers work withother family members, and termination not only threatens the livelihood of oneperson, but of the entire household. As previously recounted, Ana I., a16-year-old working in tobacco in North Carolina, reported she was fired twice,along with her mother and her mother’s partner, for refusing advances.[175]Similarly, Sergio Guzman, Secretary-Treasurer at United Farm Workers, recountedmeeting a young woman from Oaxaca who cried as she told him the foreman wasrepeatedly asking her to have sex with him, and she did not know what to dobecause the last time she had refused advances, the supervisor had fired herentire family, so that five people were left without income.[176] Several EEOClawsuits have involved families where one person was alleged to have beentargeted for sexual harassment, but the entire family was retaliated againstwhen he or she reported it.[177]Termination as retaliation is often challenging to provebecause farm work is seasonal. In some cases, a farmworker is not terminatedright away but simply is not rehired the following season when work startsagain. Lucia A. reported she had been working for about 17 years at the samecompany packing broccoli and cauliflower during the season, normally fromNovember to March, when she finally decided to report harassment she had beenenduring for over 10 years. The next November, she was not rehired.[178]Marcela V. similarly reported she had been a forewoman at an onion packingplant for 11 years when she tried to help Veronica Z. report ongoing sexualharassment to company management. Both women were not rehired the followingseason.[179]Many farmworkers live in employer-provided housing, andunlawful termination for reporting harassment can also lead to unlawfuleviction and loss of shelter. The sexual harassment lawsuit against GiumarraVineyards, one of the largest grape growers in the country, includesallegations that after a teenage girl was sexually harassed, all those whodefended her, including members of her family, were terminated one day aftercomplaints were made and forced to immediately vacate their employer-providedhousing. The case remains pending.[180]Mark Heller, an attorney in Ohio, described a similar sexual harassment casewhere the woman first came to him reporting she had been evicted after she washarassed and then fired.[181]Some farmworkers expressed fear that if they were to reportthe abuse, they would not only lose their jobs, but also be blacklisted byother employers. Since bringing a complaint against an onion packing plant in2005, Veronica Z. reported she has had difficulty finding steady work:“Every packing shed where I get a job, I start for a couple of days, andthen I get laid off. I think they’re checking my record. My son and Iapplied to work at a tomato cannery, and my son was hired but not me.”[182]Even when workers are not fired, their harassers can makelife difficult for them. Workers can be kept from taking breaks or from goingto the bathroom, or they can see their hours or pay cut. Guadalupe F., apoultry processing worker, said that when she reported her supervisor’sharassment to the company, he began to make her life even more difficult. Shewas assigned to tasks near liquids to which she was allergic, he refused to lether take days off when she needed to take care of her children, and hethreatened to go to the office and tell them she was working under someoneelse’s papers.[183]Similarly, Belen F., who was harassed for being transgender, reported beingdemoted from being a foreman to a line worker, with corresponding cuts to herpay.[184]V. A DysfunctionalImmigration SystemInternational human rights law requires that basic rightsprotections apply to all persons in a state’s territory, includingauthorized and unauthorized non-citizens. This is critical to protecting UScitizen workers, as well as non-citizen workers, because it minimizesemployers’ incentives to hire easily exploitable immigrant workers.[185]Yet when immigrant farmworkers experience sexual violenceand harassment, many choose not to report these abuses under either civil orcriminal law. Many factors discourage farmworkers from reporting abuses,including the desperation that comes from poverty and lack of communitysupport, but one of the most significant is their immigration status. Whetherthey are working without authorization or with guestworker visas, immigrantfarmworkers live with a constant fear of deportation.Several farmworkers weinterviewed reported that fear of deportation was a major reason they chose notto report sexual violence, sexual harassment, or other workplace abuses.[186]Even some farmworkers with work authorization who had filed sexual harassmentclaims said they would not have done so had they been unauthorized.[187]Some attorneys pointed out that fear of deportation is particularly acute forwomen with children, as they fear separation from their US citizen children andloss of ability to support their families.[188]Another legal serviceslawyer noted that fear of deportation can also affect the willingness ofwitnesses to participate in investigations.[189] Blanca Rodriguez, an attorneyrepresenting farmworkers in a sexual harassment lawsuit, reported that theforeman in the case had worked at the company in question for more than 40years and had sexually harassed women the whole time, but the women had notreported it because they were unauthorized and afraid.[190]Uncertain immigration status both increases workervulnerability to exploitation and diminishes their willingness to interact withgovernment officials. Although reporting employees to immigration authoritiesfor asserting workplace rights constitutes illegal retaliation, workers stillhave reason to fear that employers may do so. The increasing involvement oflocal law enforcement in immigration enforcement further fuels worker fearsthat contact with the police could lead to deportation. Should theynevertheless decide to file a civil claim, unauthorized workers face a systemthat treats them differently from other workers, from more limited access tolegal services to limited remedies. The US government, instead of directlyaddressing the problem, continues to delay much-needed immigration reform andenables the industry’s reliance on a vulnerable workforce.Limitations of the Current Immigration SystemWhen people ask about food justice, I tell them you have togo contact your congressman about immigration.—Sandy Brown, HumanResources, Swanton Berry Farm, California, July 21, 2011.Currently, the only way to migrate legally to the US foragricultural work is through the H-2A temporary agricultural worker program.[191]In 2011 there were about 68,000 H-2A guestworkers in the US, only a smallpercentage of the total agricultural workforce.[192] Advocacyorganizations such as Farmworker Justice and the Southern Poverty Law Centerhave criticized the H-2A program for permitting age and gender discrimination.[193]None of the farmworker women interviewed for this report stated they were H-2Aworkers.The H-2A program is unpopular with both employers andfarmworker advocates. Employers argue that the program is too limited andcomplicated to meet their labor needs. When applying for H-2A visas forworkers, employers must certify that they are unable to find domestic workersand that bringing in guestworkers will not adversely affect the wages andworking conditions of US workers.[194]H-2A visa holders are allowed in the US for a limited period of time, generallyless than 10 months, and then are required to go back to their home countriesbefore they may return.Farmworker advocates criticize the program for failing toprotect workers’ rights and for encouraging employers to prefervulnerable guestworkers over US workers. H-2A visa-holders are dependent ontheir employers to remain in the US, as they are not allowed to transfer thevisa to other employers.[195]There is no way for an H-2A guestworker to become a permanent resident, andunauthorized workers already in the US cannot regularize their status throughthe H-2A program. The H-2A program contains some requirements regarding wages,housing, and transportation that are intended to protect guestworkers fromworkplace abuses. But guestworkers are also explicitly excluded from protectionunder the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (AWPA),meaning they have no right under the AWPA to sue in federal court for lostwages, housing benefits, and other requirements of the H-2A contract.[196]Like other agricultural workers, they also have no right to collectivebargaining.[197]In view of these limitations,some farmworker advocates believe that, despite their legal status, H-2Aworkers can sometimes be even more vulnerable to workplace abuses thanunauthorized immigrant workers. Some of the most egregious cases of forcedlabor in the US have involved H-2A workers whose employers held them in virtualslavery.[198]Jenifer Rodriguez, a legal services lawyer, has found that “[H-2Aworkers] have no power…. They’re so isolated, too. They don’thave the local support…. They’ll tell me horrendous stories ofpropositions [a grower] makes, but they’ll never want to do anythingabout it.”[199]One lawsuit filed in August 2011 in Louisiana alleges that Mexican femaleworkers who came on H-2A visas to work in a crawfish processing plant weresubject to sexual propositions by the employers, as well as threats ofviolence, nonpayment of wages, forced labor, and racial discrimination.[200]The lawsuit further alleges that the employer requested that the local policedepartment detain two of the plaintiffs, and that they were then detainedunlawfully.[201]Given the limitations of theH-2A program, farmworker advocates, as well as employers, have pushed forlegislation that would both revise the H-2A program and create a program ofearned legalization for unauthorized farmworkers already in the US. TheAgricultural Job Opportunities, Benefits, and Security Act, or AgJOBS, wasnegotiated by farmworker advocates, led by the United Farm Workers, and majoragricultural employers, and it initially enjoyed broad, bipartisan support.[202]Now, almost 10 years later, it is no closer to passing than it was when it wasfirst introduced in 2003. It was last included in a comprehensive immigrationreform bill in 2011, but the current political climate makes it unlikely thatany comprehensive immigration reform bill will pass Congress in the nearfuture.[203]In response, Congress has recently debated several differentbills proposing revisions to the H-2A guestworker program.[204] While theprecarious immigration status of many farmworkers can only be fully addressedthrough comprehensive reform, reforming the H-2A program to be more protectiveof workers’ rights would help to ensure greater workplace safety forfarmworkers, including prevention of sexual violence and harassment.The Government’s Competing Interests: ImmigrationEnforcement versus Worker ProtectionIn recent years, the federalgovernment has ramped up enforcement of immigration laws, and the Obamaadministration has presided over a record number of deportations.[205]According to a 2009 report by the National Employment Law Project (NELP), theseimmigration enforcement actions have had serious repercussions on efforts toprotect workers’ rights.[206]US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) has conducted high-profileworkplace raids where worker’s rights investigations are ongoing; ICEagents have even masqueraded as Occupational Safety and Health Administration(OSHA) agents and held information sessions where they then arrested theattendees; and local police have arrested workers at employers’ requestsand then turned them over to immigration authorities.[207] One farmworkerinterviewed by Human Rights Watch was deported while her sexual harassmentlawsuit against her employer was pending, and she feared her employer hadreported her to immigration to intimidate her.[208]There is a fundamental conflict between the priorities ofICE and the priorities of worker protection agencies such as the Department ofLabor (DOL), the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), and others.ICE has taken some important steps to address the conflict, but they do notfully address the scope of the problem.The DOL recently updated its Memorandum of Understanding(MOU) with ICE to provide greater protection to unauthorized workers. Theupdated memorandum states in part, “ICE agrees to refrain from engagingin civil worksite enforcement activities at a worksite that is the subject ofan existing DOL investigation of a labor dispute during the pendency of the DOLinvestigation and any related proceeding.”[209] However, no similaragreements have been made with other agencies that enforce workplacerights—such as the EEOC, which would most likely handle sexual harassmentclaims—or with state labor agencies. It is thus unlikely that ICE wouldbe on notice of a worker whose claim is being investigated by other federal orstate agencies.[210]A recent ICE memorandum alsosets out guidelines for how prosecutorial discretion should be exercised incases involving victims and witnesses of crimes and individuals seeking toprotect their civil and labor rights. It states, “Absent specialcircumstances or aggravating factors, it is against ICE policy to initiateremoval proceedings against an individual known to be the immediate victim orwitness to a crime.”[211]The memorandum, however, does not set out a policy of screening immigrants todetermine if they would qualify for an exercise of prosecutorial discretionunder this memorandum, and immigrants would have to affirmatively provide thisinformation to ICE agents. Although attorneys who know about the prosecutorialdiscretion memorandum might provide this information to ICE, immigrants inremoval proceedings do not have a right to court-appointed counsel, and thusmany who would qualify for an exercise of prosecutorial discretion may never beidentified as such.The Department of Homeland Security’s OperatingInstruction 287.3 also requires ICE agents to determine whether information concerning theemployment of undocumented individuals was provided to ICE in an effort tointerfere with the rights of employees to “form, join or assist labororganizations or to exercise their rights not to do so; to be paid minimumwages and overtime; to have safe work places; to receive compensation for workrelated injuries; to be free from discrimination based on race, gender, age,national origin, religion, handicap; or to retaliate against employees forseeking to vindicate these rights.”[212] Advocates in at least one case havesuccessfully used the Operating Instruction, as they were able to persuade ICEagents and local police officers who had been called by the employer to leave adeposition during a wage claim dispute,[213] but other incidents described toNELP by advocates around the country indicate that agents have not been trainedon the Operating Instruction.[214]As important as it is for ICE to enact MOUs and follow itsown memoranda and operating instructions, these policies can only be applied ifworkers report workplace abuses. All too often, unauthorized immigrant workersare too afraid to report abuses altogether, and these policies are nottriggered.Limitations of U VisasCertain provisions of US immigration law recognize that fearof deportation may intimidate victims from reporting crimes. Where sexualviolence or harassment includes rape, trafficking, sexual assault, or certainother violent crimes, the victim may be eligible for a U visa, a temporary visathat allows the victim to gain legal status in the US and, in some cases,eventually apply for permanent resident status.[215] The visa is notavailable for survivors of sexual abuses that are not among the listed crimes.U visas are currently capped at 10,000 per year; that cap was met in fiscalyears 2010 and 2011, only a few years after the visa was first made available.[216]Several farmworkers we interviewed had applied or were inthe process of applying for U visas. Legal services organizations funded by thefederal Legal Services Corporation are generally barred from representingunauthorized immigrants but are permitted to represent those who are eligiblefor U visas, and so the availability of the visa has been critical in enablingsome farmworkers to get legal representation.[217]However, several law enforcement representatives andsurvivor advocates expressed concern and frustration with the U visaapplication process, particularly the requirement of certification by a lawenforcement official or judge that the victim “has been helpful, is beinghelpful or is likely to be helpful to a certifying agency in the investigationor prosecution” of a crime.[218]Survivor advocates report that certifying agencies have interpreted thisprovision in varying and inconsistent ways across jurisdictions. IleanaHerrera, a survivor advocate in Fresno, California, says some police complainthey are signing certifications for “green cards” and accusevictims of “using [crimes] to get an immigration visa.”[219]They also sometimes interpret “cooperation” narrowly andarbitrarily. In one case, an advocate complained that the police refused tocertify that a victim had cooperated because they had not been able to reachher, though she had been in a shelter.[220] Ana Vallejo, a legal services lawyerin Florida, described a case in which a survivor of domestic violence hadcalled the police, who then came and arrested everyone in the household andnever investigated the allegation of domestic violence. The woman, although avictim of a crime, is now in immigration proceedings with no documentation thatan investigation was ever conducted, and thus no ability to apply for a U visa.[221]Interpretation can be inconsistent even between agencies inthe same locality. While the Riverside County District Attorney recentlyimplemented a new policy that allows for certification of a wide range ofcases, based on a literal interpretation of the regulations,[222] a victim advocatereported that the Riverside County Sheriff’s Department refuses tocertify any U visa applications.[223]From the perspective of some law enforcement officials, thefederal government has not provided enough guidance on what is required forcertification. Rachel Sorratos at the Salinas Police Department stated,“There was nothing, no assistance. I did my research online. Idon’t even know who to call.”[224] Pamela Patterson at Victim Servicesat the Monterey County District Attorney’s Office agreed that there iswidespread misunderstanding about what the U visa is.[225]The EEOC and the DOL alsohave the authority to certify U visa applications, but advocates have beendisappointed with the DOL’s decision to limit certification to only fivecrimes it detects in the course of wage and hour investigations: involuntaryservitude, peonage, trafficking, obstruction of justice, and witness tampering;[226]advocates had hoped it would certify crimes of physical violence and perjury aswell. With regard to the EEOC, one attorney reported that the process iscumbersome and slow, and “it daily undermines the protective function ofthe visa while the worker is making critical decisions to go forward.”[227]Another major limitation of the U visa is that it providesno protection for unauthorized witnesses who are not direct or indirect victimsof the crime.[228]Even if the victim is willing to go forward, the threat of deportation canhinder the investigation by keeping witnesses from testifying. Attorney JeniferRodriguez explained that she has seen that fear at work in her own legal work,with witnesses in one case claiming they forgot what had happened. As sheexplained of one of the witnesses, “[H]e was trying to lay low and notdraw attention to himself in a small community.”[229]VI. Inadequate CivilLaw Protections for Agricultural WorkersUS law in theory protects all workers, includingunauthorized workers, from sexual violence and sexual harassment. Title VII ofthe federal Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits discrimination on the basis ofrace, color, religion, national origin, or sex. The law also prohibitsretaliation, including threats to report a worker to immigration authorities,against people who report discrimination. Sexual harassment is a form of sexdiscrimination prohibited under Title VII.[230]But many survivors of workplace sexual violence andharassment find it difficult to gain meaningful protection under these laws.Several of the farmworkers identified for this report had filed claims forsexual harassment under Title VII or similar state law, but the vast majorityhad never filed a claim for sexual harassment or for any other workplaceviolation they had experienced.Exclusion of Farmworkers from Worker Protection LawsHistorically, US labor law has excluded agricultural workersfrom federal protections that apply to workers in nearly every other industry.Agricultural workers do not have collective bargainingrights under the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA).[231] Agriculturalworkers are also excluded from many of the protections of the Fair LaborStandards Act (FLSA). As a result, agricultural workers are not entitled underfederal law to overtime pay, rest periods, or meal periods during the workday.They are also exempt from minimum wage requirements if they work on smallfarms.[232]The child labor provisions of the FLSA treat agricultural work differently fromwork in other industries. While the minimum age to work in most industries is16, the standard minimum age for agriculture is 14; on small farms, there is nominimum age for children to work outside of school hours with theirparents’ permission.[233]Although agricultural work includes some of the most dangerous work in thecountry,[234]the Occupational Health and Safety Administration (OSHA) does not enforcefederal workplace health and safety standards on farms with fewer than 11employees, effectively excluding a third of all farmworkers.[235] Similarly,agricultural employers may require or allow 16- and 17-year-olds to work inparticularly hazardous occupations, while in nonagricultural occupations, theminimum age for particularly hazardous work is 18.[236]State worker protection legislation varies considerably.California provides collective bargaining rights for farmworkers excluded underthe NLRA,[237]but no other state has such a law. California, Oregon, and Washington includefarmworkers in state wage and hour, as well as rest and meal period,protections;[238]in other states, agricultural employers are subject only to the minimal federalrequirements. California has no agricultural exemptions for workers’compensation, but most other states do, excluding small farms or migrant andseasonal farmworkers altogether.[239]Agriculture is one of the most hazardous industries, with workersfacing a higher risk of fatal and nonfatal injuries than workers in most otherindustries. In 2010 the injury rate for agricultural workers was over 20percent higher than the rate for all workers; the fatality rate for farmworkerswas over 7 times higher than for all workers.[240] Although severalstates require employers to provide clean drinking water, toilets, and otherequipment to ensure sanitation and protection from heat stress, manyfarmworkers reported to Human Rights Watch that they had worked for employerswho violated these rules. Employers must also abide by certain health andsafety standards when applying pesticides, but again, farmworkers told us theyhad to work in areas that were still being sprayed or had been recentlysprayed.[241]Inadequate Enforcement of Existing Worker Protection Lawsby DOL and Other Federal and State Agencies in Agricultural WorkplacesI would like to see the Department of Labor come. Theyshould not announce their visits; they should show up without warning.—Mercedes A., New York farmworker, August 2011.Although farmworkers are highly vulnerable to a wide rangeof workplace abuses, the federal and state agencies charged with enforcing lawsthat do apply to farmworkers are seriously understaffed and unable to addressthe full scope of violations.The Department of Labor (DOL) is charged with investigatingviolations under the Fair Labor Standards Act and the Agricultural WorkerProtection Act (AWPA). Although surveys indicate that low-wage workers,particularly immigrant workers, experience high rates of wage theft,[242]from 2002 to 2008, DOL investigations of farms under the FLSA declined from 229investigations to 110 investigations. During that same period, DOLinvestigations of farms under the AWPA declined from 1,849 investigations to1,499, although the percentage of employers found to be violating the law heldsteady at 60 percent.[243]The penalties imposed are also very low. From 2002 to 2008, the average penaltyassessed for a violation of the AWPA was only $342.[244] DOL’senforcement of child labor laws is equally spotty. Child labor violations inagriculture decreased from 36 cases (involving 109 children) in 2009 to 31cases (involving 49 children) in 2010; overall civil monetary penaltiesassessed DOL for child labor decreased by almost half from 2009 to 2010.[245]Enforcement by state agencies varies, but is rarely better.Some states exempt farmworkers from their state worker protection laws. Otherstates inadequately enforce laws that on paper should protect such workers.According to Nathan Dollar, director of a farmworker health program in NorthCarolina, when reports of violations are actually investigated and fines arelevied, the fines are often negotiated down by the grower and end up not beingpaid at all.[246]North Carolina Legal Aid recently filed a complaint in November 2011 againstthe North Carolina Department of Labor for failing to ensure safe working andhousing conditions for farmworkers in North Carolina.[247]Many farmworkers interviewed by Human Rights Watch reportedhaving worked at some point with an employer who violated wage and hour laws oroccupational health and safety laws. This is significant because, as DanielaDwyer, a legal services attorney in Florida, stated, there is a “broken windows”problem: “You can have all the workplace rights posters that you want,[but] if two out of three requirements are not being met, it gives people lessconfidence in their ability to act on their rights.”[248]The same supervisor who sexually harassed several women at acauliflower packing plant in California had also created a dangerous andabusive workplace. The women reported that when another woman was seriouslyinjured at work, she was not taken to the hospital. And while workers were toldto gather at 6 a.m., the work would not start until 9 a.m., and they were notpaid for the hours they spent waiting. Workers were never given lunch breaks orother breaks, and the bathroom was placed far away, further than allowed underCalifornia law. Magdalena C. said that when she complained about the bathroomsbeing far away, the supervisor lifted his middle finger, “as if he weresticking it inside [my vagina],” and said, “Now where are thebathrooms?”[249]Attorneys representing women in sexual harassment cases saidtheir clients reported seeing other violations at work. Many of their clientsinitially came in with questions about other issues or were represented inother matters, and as the clients came to trust them, they revealed that theyhad also been victims of sexual violence and harassment at work.[250]For example, one community worker had a client initially come with a questionabout unpaid wages. When she questioned her further about why she had not beenpaid, the client broke down and said the foreman had claimed the check was inhis truck, had taken her to an isolated field, and had raped her. She reported,“She was just a vulnerable person…. She still wasn’t givenher check.[251]In 2002 the EEOC reached a $1.5 million settlement withDeCoster,[252]an egg farm in Iowa that had a long history of being charged with otherworkplace violations, including child labor, failure to pay overtime, failureto comply with previous orders to install safety guards, and employingundocumented workers.[253]Some seemingly unrelated workplaceviolations directly make women more vulnerable to sexual violence andharassment. For example, if bathrooms are not provided, as required by law, aman might be able to relieve himself discretely, but a woman might have to gofar from the fields into woods or other secluded areas where she can moreeasily be assaulted.[254]California’s Unique Positionin AgricultureCalifornia annually generates $37.5 billion in revenuefrom agriculture, more than any other state in the US.[255] Themajor crops of fruits, vegetables, and nuts are particularly dependent onhuman labor. Thirty-six percent of all farmworkers in the US work inCalifornia; the next closest state is Washington, with only 8 percent.[256]California also has a higher proportion of unauthorized farmworkers, a higherpercentage of workers employed by farm labor contractors, and a more rapidlyincreasing population of indigenous workers than other states.[257]California also has some ofthe best legal protections for farmworkers, stronger in many cases thanfederal law.[258]The base of Cesar Chavez and the United Farm Workers, California has a longhistory of farmworker organizing and advocacy, and state law explicitlyprotects farmworkers’ right to form unions.[259] Thereare more bilingual Spanish speakers working at social service agencies, lawenforcement agencies, and regulatory agencies in California than in stateswhere the Latino population is newer, such as North Carolina. Although thereis still a serious lack of resources available to indigenous languagespeakers, California Rural Legal Assistance employs more indigenous languagespeakers than the US federal government.[260]California law requires that employers with 50 or moreemployees provide sexual harassment training to their supervisors and managersonce every two years.[261]The San Francisco Division of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission(EEOC) was the first within the EEOC to investigate and conduct outreachregarding sexual harassment among low-income immigrant women, includingfarmworkers. As the EEOC’s William Tamayo explained, “The $1.855million verdict against the largest lettuce grower, Tanimura & Antle, wasan earthquake in Monterey County. The bigger growers are aware of theEEOC.”[262]Michael Meuter, an attorney at California Rural LegalAssistance, noted, “Success breeds success and interest.”[263]California also has its own state law prohibiting sexual harassment, aprovision of which gives California workers up to 300 days after theprohibited conduct to file charges with the EEOC, not 180 days as in stateswithout this provision. California workers may also seek damage awards higherthan those available under Title VII.Our research does not allow us to draw firm conclusions onthis point, but California farmworkers interviewed by Human Rights Watchseemed to have more awareness of their legal rights than farmworkersinterviewed by the organization in less-regulated states, including New Yorkand North Carolina. All but one of the farmworkers we spoke with who reportedreceiving sexual harassment training at work was in California (the exceptionwas a poultry processing worker in North Carolina), although many of themnoted that the training was performed perfunctorily or not taken seriously.Organizations like Lideres Campesinas also provide Know-Your-Rights trainingsfor many farmworker women in California, and several of its members believethese trainings have made a difference.Several California farmworkers we spoke with said theirwork conditions had improved, at least a little, over the years.[264]Ines R., an 18-year-old who performs agricultural work during the summerswhen she is not in college, told us her farmworker parents had“nothing, no water” at their first workplaces in California,while she works with a supervisor who “really takes care ofpeople.”[265]Several of the sexual harassment cases in California involved farmworkers whohad previously asserted their rights in other matters or who came seekingassistance in another matter. Lucia A. knew where she could go for helpbecause she had previously filed a claim for unemployment.[266] Themother of the teenager who filed a sexual harassment lawsuit at GiumarraVineyards had also previously been represented by California Rural LegalAssistance in a housing habitability case.[267] In California, workers who arepregnant can get disability benefits, and that is what first brought PatriciaM. to the social service agency that helped her report her rape to thepolice.[268]All of these farmworkers were careful to note, however,that abuses still occur.  And the most marginalized ofCalifornia’s farmworkers, who are often young, recent arrivals, orindigenous workers, still face formidable barriers to accessing services andreporting abuses. As several cases in this report illustrate, even when asurvivor is able to make contact with services, such contact does notguarantee that she will be able to seek or obtain redress.[269]The experience of California farmworkers suggests thatstrong labor laws can help improve working conditions. The continuedpersistence of workplace abuses, however, demonstrates that morecomprehensive changes—including federal immigration reform—areneeded to transform an industry that has relied for too long on anunauthorized, marginalized workforce.Particular Barriers for Unauthorized ImmigrantsIn the rare instances in which unauthorized farmworkersdecide to bring claims under civil sexual harassment law, they face significantbarriers. Legal services organizations that receive federal funding through theLegal Services Corporation (LSC) are prohibited, with some exceptions, fromrepresenting unauthorized immigrants,[270] and in many rural areas, LSC-fundedorganizations are the only legal service organizations that exist.Furthermore, although US lawis clear that Title VII and its provisions prohibiting sexual harassment applyto unauthorized workers, the Supreme Court’s 2002 decision in HoffmanPlasticv. National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) has raisedquestions about which remedies are available to unauthorized workers. In HoffmanPlastic, the Supreme Court ruled that the NLRB had erred in awarding backpay (as defined under the NLRA) to an unauthorized worker wrongfully terminatedfor participating in a union organizing campaign.[271]This decision has led some employers to argue thatunauthorized workers are not entitled to other remedies beyond the specificremedy at issue in Hoffman Plastic, including those under Title VII,which prohibits sexual harassment. The decision has also emboldened employersto argue that inquiries into immigration status are relevant duringdiscovery.  For example, in Rivera v. Nibco, where immigrantworkers brought claims of national origin discrimination under Title VII, theemployer sought to inquire into their immigration status.[272] In a decision inthe case, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals noted, “[T]he overridingnational policy against discrimination would seem likely to outweigh any baragainst the payment of back wages to unlawful immigrants in Title VII cases.Thus, we seriously doubt that Hoffman applies in such actions.”[273]Although the court ultimately declined to decide this question, it did holdthat the harm to employees would outweigh benefit to the employer if discoveryinto immigration status were allowed.[274] Other courts have similarly declinedto extend Hoffman to analogous cases,[275] and the EEOC has sought and wonprotective orders prohibiting inquiries into immigration status.[276]The issue, however, has notbeen decisively settled. A federal court in Washington held in 2010 thatimmigration status is relevant to determination of actual damages, although thecourt bifurcated the liability and statutory damages determinations to limitthe chilling effect of the decision. Liz Chacko, a farmworker attorney inPennsylvania, stated that even though she believes Hoffman Plastic doesnot apply to remedies under Title VII, in practice, “we can’tguarantee [unauthorized workers] that the employer won’t try to inquireinto immigration status.”Out of caution, she sometimeschooses not to seek certain remedies.[277]Chacko further noted that ifsexual harassment is severe, she can seek compensatory damages based onemotional distress to make up for the remedies she is not claiming. But thisstrategy does not work for clients who suffer less severe, though real, sexualharassment.  Limited remedies not only reduce compensation for thesurvivor, of course, but also weaken the deterrent effect of the law onemployers who engage in unlawful practices.The EEOC: Positive Efforts but Limited ResourcesEEOC investigators and attorneys display a wide range ofunderstanding and sensitivity about different forms ofdiscrimination—some truly do not understand the unique challenges facedby farmworkers and particularly indigenous farmworkers. As a result ofthis combination of factors, the EEOC process is cumbersome, inefficient, andoften causes repeated re-traumatization and/or loss of interest among clients.Put bluntly, the administrative process, handled incorrectly, can sometimes beworse for complainants than if they had made no complaint at all.—Megan Beaman, Attorney, California Rural LegalAssistance, May 1, 2011.The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) ischarged with enforcing Title VII, along with other anti-discrimination laws, inthe workplace. An employee who wants to bring a claim under Title VII mustfirst file a complaint, or “charge of discrimination,” with theEEOC. In general, the charge must be filed within 180 days of the last act ofdiscrimination, a time period extended to 300 days if a state or local agencyenforces a law that prohibits employment discrimination on the same basis.[278]Some cases are sent to mediation; others go directly to an investigator. If aninvestigator finds evidence of illegal discrimination, the EEOC seeks to reacha settlement with the employer. If the EEOC does not reach a settlement, theagency may bring a lawsuit on behalf of the employee. In deciding whether ornot to bring a lawsuit, the EEOC considers such factors as the seriousness of theviolation, the type of legal issues in the case, and the potential impact alawsuit could have on workplace discrimination in general.[279]If the investigator does not find evidence of illegaldiscrimination, or the EEOC decides not to bring a lawsuit, the employee isgiven a Right to Sue letter, and he or she may still personally sue theemployer but must do so within 90 days.[280] The EEOC must issue a Right to Sueletter when 180 days have passed since the charge was first filed.[281]In 1999 the EEOC began to prioritize assisting low-wageworkers, including immigrant workers.[282] The EEOC has since taken significantsteps toward addressing sexual harassment of low-income immigrantworkers—including unauthorized workers—with some positive results,including in the two dozen sexual harassment lawsuits it has brought againstagricultural and food industry employers. Several have resulted in significantsettlements, while the one case that went to trial resulted in a verdict ofover $1 million in favor of the farmworker.[283] These cases have generated somepublicity, which increases the likelihood that farmworker survivors willdiscover they have a right to redress. Attorneys at several rural legalservices organizations praised the EEOC for its efforts to reach farmworkercommunities and noted that the increased outreach seems to have led to morefarmworkers being willing to bring lawsuits against their employers.[284]The EEOC process also sometimes allows farmworkers to bringclaims anonymously. In the lawsuit against Evans Fruit in Washington, the EEOCfiled a “Jane Doe” complaint.[285] In the lawsuit against Knouse Foodsin Pennsylvania, the lawsuit was brought as a Commissioner’s Charge, sothat the farmworkers who initially brought the claim to the EEOC did not haveto be named.[286]The attorney who brought this case stated, “It afforded a level ofprotection that [the workers] wouldn’t otherwise have had, especially tothe worker who was still at the employer.”[287]At the same time, however, several farmworker advocatesexpressed some frustration with the EEOC and the way it processes andinvestigates claims. The basic steps required for filing a complaint underTitle VII were clearly not designed for a rural and often isolated andmigratory workforce. Given the distrust many farmworkers have of governmentauthorities, as well as the fear many have of deportation, it can be difficultfor a farmworker to even enter a federal building to file a charge with theEEOC. One woman stated, “I wanted to complain to an agency, but Idon’t have documents. They always want to see your ID.”[288]Other than the office in Fresno, California, EEOC offices tend to be located inmajor urban areas nationwide. Farmworkers without cars can find it difficult toreach these offices, let alone take time away from work. William Tamayo,Regional Attorney with the EEOC, acknowledged that the location of EEOC officesis a problem and stated that if the agency had more funding, it would locatemore offices in rural areas.[289]Antonio Flores, a community worker for the Indigenous Farmworker Program atCalifornia Rural Legal Assistance, further noted that EEOC staff cannot simplysit in their offices, because “indigenous people will not go knock ontheir doors.”[290]Should a farmworker overcome all the barriers to filing acharge, she will encounter a system for processing charges that can lastseveral years. Survivors often find it difficult to understand the EEOC’senforcement capabilities. An attorney described how one client was frustratedand wondered, “Why aren’t they putting him in jail? Whyaren’t they acting faster?”[291] The EEOC generally will not issue aRight to Sue letter before 180 days after the charge is filed. If the EEOCdecides to investigate a case, it generally takes at least six months for aninvestigator to be assigned to the case, and that is the best case scenario forexpedited cases. The investigation itself can take anywhere from six months toseveral years. One attorney acknowledged that the EEOC has a tremendousworkload, but felt that the length of time it takes to complete aninvestigation is “terrible,” especially for migrant workers,stating further, “We lose track of our clients, they lose faith in thesystem, they think, ‘What’s the point of staying in touch?’It’s a big, big problem.”[292] The delays can also adversely affectthe viability of a class action in situations where many workers suffer sexualharassment, as it makes it more difficult to locate witnesses and claimants,and memories fade.[293]The quality of investigations also ranges widely. While someattorneys felt investigations had been carried out rigorously, others reportedencountering investigators who lacked sensitivity, with regard to both thecultural background of the survivors (especially with indigenous workers) andthe sensitive subject at issue. One woman who had been traumatized by thesexual harassment she experienced reported that the investigation had been“very stressful” and that the investigator had only interviewed herby telephone.[294]Telephone interviews are particularly difficult for survivors of rape.Attorneys further reported that some investigators are not sensitive to theunique challenges farmworkers face. In one case, an investigator tried to dointerviews of witnesses at the workplace. Not surprisingly, “when sheapproached people at work, they said, ‘I don’t know anything,I’m not a witness.’”[295] That same investigator resisteddoing interviews outside of work hours from nine to five, even thoughfarmworkers are more available before 7 a.m. and after 7 p.m., their typicalwork day.[296]Some attorneys reported that supposedly bilingual Spanish-speakinginvestigators did not speak Spanish fluently and had even less capacity tointerview indigenous workers with limited Spanish proficiency. In one case, aninvestigator grew so frustrated with an indigenous farmworker that hereportedly began pushing the client, declaring, “You’recontradicting yourself! This doesn’t make any sense!”[297]When settlement offers aremade, “the pressure to settle low and early is intense.”[298] Oneattorney expressed concern that when cases settle at the mediation stage of theEEOC process, it adversely affects the rights of other workers who mightpotentially have formed a class for a class action. The settlement offers arealso often extremely low: “What she was offered was a joke; itdidn’t even pay for a week’s work.”[299] But given thefinancial precariousness of a farmworker’s life, many “end uptaking the first $1,000 offered to them.”[300]The damages available to farmworkers are also statutorilylimited. Title VII places caps on compensatory and punitive damages at $50,000for employers with 101 employees or fewer, a figure that has been unchangedsince 1991.[301]These caps can affect how seriously employers take these charges.[302]A worker who brings a claim under state and federal law can often seek greaterdamages, but there are several states, including four in the south, that do nothave state laws prohibiting sexual harassment.[303] In some states,like Pennsylvania, the law specifically exempts agricultural workers.[304]The Terra Linda case is a good example of how longand difficult a civil harassment claim can be and how contractors cancomplicate the issue of liability. In 2006 two women filed claims against TerraLinda Farms, a grower, and Green Valley Ag, Inc., a farm labor contractor, withthe California Department of Fair Employment and Housing (DFEH), allegingsexual harassment and retaliation by a supervisor working for Terra LindaFarms. In 2008 the Department of Fair Employment and Housing Commission(Commission) issued a decision, after a three-day evidentiary hearing, orderingTerra Linda Farms to pay $110,000, deciding that although the women wereemployees of Green Valley, Terra Linda Farms was a joint employer. Terra LindaFarms appealed, and in 2009 a California superior court affirmed the Commissiondecision. Terra Linda Farms appealed again, and in January 2012 the FifthAppellate District Court of California issued a decision upholding the superiorcourt decision.[305]In all, it took almost six years before the women received this decision, andas this report went to publication, they had yet to receive the money awardedto them.[306]VII. Obstacles toEnforcement of Applicable Criminal LawBetter that I not call the police, better that I not sayanything.—Marisol Z., New York farmworker, August 2011.If I had called the police,they wouldn’t have helped me because I’m undocumented.—Monica V., New York farmworker, August 2011.Many of the acts of sexual violence and sexual harassmentexperienced by farmworkers can also be classified as crimes and are prohibitedby criminal law. But in most of the cases we investigated, the workers did notreport the crimes to police or did so only after making contact with a socialservice agency that actively encouraged and supported them. Human Rights Watchdid not do extensive interviews in any particular jurisdiction, and due toconfidentiality concerns, we were unable to follow up with police departmentsabout specific cases. While we thus can reach no conclusions about the adequacyof efforts of any particular police department or other law enforcement agency,the incidents described show that law enforcement agencies can and should domore to investigate and prosecute sexual violence against farmworkers.Fears of Police Fueled by Police Involvement inImmigration EnforcementNumerous immigrants and advocates reported that unauthorizedimmigrants are often reluctant to report any crimes to the police. LourdesCarrillo, who heads a Latino community organization in North Carolina, stated,“I know victims of domestic violence who don’t report [to thepolice]…. I know three women … they’re afraid police willdeport them.”[307]Police officers also acknowledged that fear of deportation is a major barrier.Sergeant Kevin Smith at the Fresno County Sheriff’s Department statedthat when reports of crimes do come in, “Some of the reporting issecond-hand. Families are afraid they’ll get deported…. [They are]not coming immediately to the police, not initially.”[308]As noted above, theincreasing cooperation of local law enforcement agencies with Immigration andCustoms Enforcement (ICE) has only exacerbated immigrant farmworkers’fears. Over the last several years, ICE has pushed the adoption of programslike the Criminal Alien Program, 287(g), and Secure Communities. Through theseprograms, unauthorized immigrants who come into contact with law enforcement,often through incidents as minor as traffic stops, have been checked against animmigration database and then referred to ICE for removal proceedings.[309]ICE claims that the vast majority of immigrants deported under these programshave been dangerous criminals, but ICE’s own data state that as of April30, 2011, a third of the individuals administratively arrested or booked intoICE custody through the Secure Communities program had no criminal convictions.[310]Local law enforcementagencies have also increasingly become identified with immigration agents asstate governments pass laws that require local law enforcement involvement inimmigration enforcement. Arizona, Alabama, South Carolina, Georgia, and Utahhave all passed laws that require or authorize law enforcement agencies tocheck the immigration status of individuals during any lawful stop or arrest.[311]Alabama is the only state thus far in which such provisions were notimmediately enjoined by courts, and Human Rights Watch subsequently receivedreports of incidents in Alabama in which, due to the new law, victims of crimeswere unwilling to report them to the police.[312]The Importance of Police Outreachin Developing Community TrustIt can make a significant difference when a lawenforcement agency takes steps to overcome an immigrant community’sdistrust and assures them it is working to protect all residents from crime,regardless of their immigration status.Sergeant Dave Shaw of theSalinas Police Department in Salinas, California, stated, “If they arevictims, we don’t care about their status.”[313] Tocommunicate that message, the police department has conducted extensiveoutreach, with presentations on radio and television, articles in newspapers,and appearances at Latino churches by the police chief. When Sergeant Shawfirst started in 1987, such outreach was nonexistent. Since then, however, hebelieves the outreach has led to more victims coming forward, includingvictims of sexual assault.Sergeant Shaw remembered one case in particular where hehad encountered a man and a woman in a vehicle and interrupted what he laterlearned was an attempted rape. At the time, the woman pretended they were ina relationship, but the next day, she came in and reported the assault.Sergeant Shaw stated, “I honestly believe our efforts over the yearsled to that woman reporting the assault. When I first started, she would havebeen more afraid of the police than of him.”[314]Sergeant Shaw, however, is aware that all the work thedepartment has done could be undone easily: “You have to back up whatyou say. It may take 10 years to build up trust, and then one incident can betraythat trust.”[315]Farmworkers and farmworkeradvocates across the country reported that police behavior varied greatlyfrom jurisdiction to jurisdiction. But where the police are active inreporting unauthorized immigrants they encounter to immigration, farmworkersare well-aware that even a routine traffic stop[316] or aphone call reporting domestic violence[317] can lead to deportationproceedings. In California and North Carolina, two states Human Rights Watchvisited, Secure Communities is now active in every county.[318]In New York, SecureCommunities was activated in half of the counties, including many of thecounties engaged in agriculture, but New York suspended its participation inSecure Communities statewide in June 2011.[319] Even after the suspension, farmworkeradvocates in New York report that local police continue to call Border Patrolfor interpretation assistance, leading to situations in which, for example, aSpanish-speaking victim who calls the police for help will see immigrationauthorities, with the power to deport her, arrive on the scene to interpret.[320]They further reported that police and Border Patrol officers often sitoutside churches, laundromats, and other places where Latino immigrantscongregate.[321]In one small town in California’s Central Valley,several farmworkers said they distrusted the police because they felt policehad “arrested and deported [people] for no reason” or foroffenses like driving without a driver’s license,[322] andthat a particular police officer “helps ICE” and “doesn’tlike Mexicans.”[323]In Kern County, California, a majoragricultural area, a sheriff’s deputy was convicted in 2011 of pullingover unauthorized immigrants and stealing money from them.[324] InJackson County, North Carolina, a farmworker advocate reported that he hasheard rumors of one particular deputy, nicknamed “El Gordo,” who“puts his hands on people and says ugly things to them.”[325]The Department of Justice recently concluded that illegal racial profiling bylocal law enforcement has occurred in Maricopa County, Arizona, and EastHaven, Connecticut.[326]The perception that unauthorized workers can be stopped by police anddeported “for no reason” is a powerful deterrent to reportingcrimes.Although no one reported incidents to us in whichfarmworker survivors of sexual violence or harassment were turned over toimmigration authorities after reporting crimes to police, several peoplereported incidents in which minor interactions with police, such as a phonecall to report domestic violence, had led to inquiries into thevictim’s immigration status and, in some cases, deportationproceedings.[327]Several farmworkers and farmworker advocates stated that such stories raisethe level of fear in immigrant communities.[328]Failure to Investigate Sexual AssaultSurvivors of sexual assault in the US—regardless ofethnicity, occupation, or legal status—face significant barriers tojustice, including police departments that fail to adequately investigate theircomplaints.[329]According to the Centers for Disease Control, nearly one infive women in the US, and one in 71 men, has been raped in his or her lifetime.[330]Reporting rates for sexual assault in the general population are low. Accordingto the Bureau of Justice Statistics, in 2008 only 41 percent of victims of rapeor sexual assault reported the incidents to the police.[331] In 2010, accordingto the Federal Bureau of Investigation, only 24 percent of forcible rapesreported to police resulted in an arrest.[332]The rate of reporting is even lower in the Latino community.According to a recent survey of sexual assault among Latinas, only 6.6 percentof Latinas who had experienced sexual victimization (defined to include sexualassault, attempted sexual assault, and fondling/forced touch) reported thatthey had contacted the police, and only 21 percent reported that they hadsought formal help of any kind (defined as medical care, police involvement,social service agency involvement, restraining order, or criminal charges).[333]The study surveyed women in high-density Latino areas; the numbers are likelyeven starker for Latina farmworkers, let alone unauthorized Latina farmworkers.[334]Even when rapes are reported,US law enforcement agencies often fail to adequately investigate them. HumanRights Watch has previously documented the failure of Illinois and Los AngelesCounty authorities to test rape kits (the results of medical examinationsintended to collect DNA evidence),[335]while a recent investigation by the Baltimore Sun uncovered serious andpervasive problems with Baltimore police response to allegations of sexualassault, including an unusually high rate of classification of such allegationsas “unfounded” (meaning the police did not believe a crime hadoccurred) and aggressive and rude questioning of victims by police.[336]Some farmworkers told us thatpolice seemed indifferent when they reported other crimes or did not fullyunderstand them because of language gaps.[337] Lideres Campesinas, a farmworkerwomen’s advocacy organization, reported that when a police departmentonly has one Spanish-speaking officer, that person is often“pigeon-holed” and “gets burnt out.”[338] When LideresCampesinas has offered to do outreach with local police departments, they havenot been interested, showing little “institutional commitment to providingservices.”[339]Maria A., who reported that she was raped, also reported that she called thepolice about harassing phone calls she was getting before the rape, but theyshowed no interested in helping her.[340]After two farmworkers indifferent states reported rapes to local law enforcement, they reported theperpetrators were deported but not criminally prosecuted. Rosana C. stated thepolice never followed up with her complaint and never arrested the perpetratoras they had promised after she gave them his name and other information.Rather, she found out through others that he had been deported: “When hereturns to Mexico, he’s going to make me pay back. What is the point ofasking for justice when there is no justice? They should have put him injail.”[341]Patricia M. was less visibly outraged, but she expressed concern that arelative of her rapist told her that he was planning to return to visit her andher child.[342]Police and prosecutors mayopt not to pursue investigations and prosecutions for a variety of reasons.Jeff Ponting, an attorney with California Rural Legal Assistance, believesinaction is more likely given pervasive prejudice against and misconceptions ofunauthorized immigrants.[343]Kern County District Attorney Lisa Green emphasized other problems, includingthe loss of evidence that results when sexual assault is not reportedimmediately and difficulties getting juries to connect with Spanish speakersand understand why survivors of workplace sexual assault would go back to workin the same place.[344]VIII. Employer Failureto Address Sexual Violence and HarassmentThere are a lot of businesses that benefit from a cheap,docile labor supply that won’t cause any problems because theydon’t want any attention. It’s why nothing happens; the status quoworks economically.—Rick Rominger, California farmer, September 9, 2011.When I tell a lot of workers what their rights are, theysay, “Could you tell the grower?”—Daniela Dwyer, Attorney, Florida Legal Services,Migrant Farmworker Justice Project, May 12, 2011.Some employers work hard to keep their workers safe fromsexual harassment and comply fully with worker safety laws. One Californiafarmworker who reported suffering harassment from a supervisor had also workedfor companies who did things differently: “I’ve seen companies thattake care of their workers. Where they provide bathrooms, have you wash [your]hands, have everything ready.”[345]Unfortunately, some do not. Some are ignorant of, or choosenot to see, what is happening at their workplace, while others retaliateagainst employees who try to report violations and abuses. Some are evenactively belligerent toward those who seek to provide farmworkers withinformation about their rights.Taking Advantage of the Dysfunctional Immigration SystemEvery grower and industry representative we interviewedexpressed frustration with the current US immigration system. Althoughagricultural labor is often seen as unskilled work, several farmers stated thatthey value their employees for their experience and their skills. Phil Foster,a farmer in California, described his farm as a “complex operation”where it is “key to have people who’ve worked on the farm foryears.” For Foster, “we rely on people with agrarian skills who arevaluable employees and valuable members of the community. If they are notlegal, then we should work towards fixing that.”[346] Manuel Cunha,president of the Nisei Growers League, and Rob Roy, president and generalcounsel of the Ventura County Agricultural Association, both stated that theirorganizations have worked to reform immigration and guestworker laws forfarmworkers. For Roy, it is important that they “take care of people whoare here, who have built families and are very skilled.”[347]Despite industry interest in reforming immigration, thereare unscrupulous employers who take advantage of their workers’unauthorized status. As discussed above, the ever-present fear of deportationhelps to create a workplace where workers will put up with abuses rather thanreport them. The threat of an employer calling ICE does not have to be statedexplicitly for it to silence workers, but some supervisors and employers gofurther and explicitly use workers’ unauthorized status to intimidatethem.As noted previously, Mercedes A. reported that thesupervisor who touched her and her co-workers on their bottoms and breaststhreatened to call immigration when they protested.[348] Angela G., afarmworker who brought a sexual harassment lawsuit against her company, wasdeported while the lawsuit was pending, and she believes the company may havecalled immigration authorities to silence her.[349] Similarly, MercedesLorduy, a legal services attorney in Florida, reported that one of her clientswas told by her rapist, “Who do you think is going to believe you?You’re illegal, you don’t have any papers.”[350] Monica V., whosestory is recounted in greater detail below, tried to discuss what the companycould do about a workplace injury, but the employer reminded her that she wasunauthorized and threatened to call the police.[351]Monica V.’s StoryMonica V. has six childrenin Guatemala. She reported that she came to the US 12 years ago because thefather of her children left her, and she could no longer take care of herchildren. Her family was eating only one meal a day, consisting of a tortillawith salt.When Monica first arrivedin the United States, she began working in sanitation at a turkey processingplant in Georgia. About three years after she started, she was injured whenthe hose she used to spray the machines hit her eye. The company clinic toldher she was fine and she could keep working, but her eye continued to bleed.The company then brought her into the office and asked her for “goodpapers,” even though she had already been working at the company forthree years. Because she was unauthorized, they fired her.She had been working two shifts a day, from 10 pm to 7 am,and then from noon to 6 pm. She then took on another two hours injectingturkeys from 6 to 8 pm. Monica only slept three hours a night and had to haveher friend bring her coffee and her uniform between shifts. “But when Ihad the accident,” she says, “they started to disregard me. I wasno longer good for them.”She reported that her lack of immigration status was usedagainst her again when she was injured after seven years of work at a chickenprocessing plant. Monica’s hand had been injured so badly, she said,that two of her fingers still have no feeling. The company called her intothe office and asked, “Do you want us to call the police or do you wantto leave on your own?” She said, “Why would you want to call thepolice?” and they responded, “Because the papers are not good.You have to leave or I’ll call the police.” Her supervisor askedher where she lived; he was “very clear what he was looking for.”If Monica had sex with him, she could have her job back. Monica says,“I cried so bitterly, why God, why so many things? And theydidn’t give me back my job.”After 12 years in the US and numerous injuries, Monicasaid, “I feel so sad in this country…. Does the president notknow how much we do? How much we sacrifice? And now we are criminals?”[352]Inadequate Sexual Harassment Trainings and PoliciesSome growers and employers take a strong stance on sexualharassment, and some farmworkers reported that they were able to report abusesto their employers and have the problems dealt with immediately andeffectively. For example, Santiago I. stated that he had once worked with aforeman who would harass women and who even went to one woman’s house.Santiago told his employer, and the foreman was fired.[353] Lorena U. reportedthat she when she told the owner of the farm where she worked that the foremanhad sexually harassed her, the owner fired him.[354]In both of these examples, the workers fully understoodtheir rights. Santiago declared that although other unauthorized immigrantsmight not call the police if victimized, he would, “because I haverights.”[355]Lorena similarly stated, “I knew it was an abuse of my rights. It was afailure to respect me as a person.”[356] And in Lorena’s case, sheapproached the employer with a caseworker at a local agency who encouraged her.She said the employer told her he had previously received complaints from otheremployees, and he regretted not believing the other women.[357]Unfortunately, 0ther farmworkers reported that theiremployers are ignorant of, or choose to ignore, what is happening to theirworkers. Jimena H., who has worked in North Carolina and Georgia, stated,“In some places, the boss is good, but the manager is very mean andabusive.”[358]Angela G., whose report of rape is recounted above, stated, “I know thereare a lot of laws, but the problem is [with] the company and the supervisors,and they don’t enforce these laws because they have their ownagenda.”[359]Bianca H. concurred: “[The owners] only know production; they don’tknow what’s going on, it doesn’t matter to them if people areexploited…. When they hurt with money, they will care.”[360]Ana I., a 16-year-old who described sexual harassment by a contractor,emphasized, “Ranchers should go out and see how workers are beingtreated.”[361]In cases where they tried to report abuses, farmworkers andattorneys reported that their complaints were not fully investigated, abuseswere tolerated, and they suffered retaliation, including reduced hours, lessdesirable work, and termination.[362]Veronica Z. stated that when she reported being raped by her supervisor tocompany management, they gave her an English-language document that they saidconfirmed she would not lose her job and that they would stop the abuse; theyalso pressured her to sign the document. When she brought the paper to acounselor at a social services agency, however, the counselor discovered thatit actually said she would not sue the company.[363]Few farmworkers interviewed by Human Rights Watch had everreceived training on workplace safety, including sexual harassment. At most,they received brief instructions on how to do their tasks, such as how to cutplants when harvesting crops. Mercedes A. reported that “sometimes… we get a video saying we have a right to water, etc.,” but suchtrainings are perfunctory and the workers “still do not receivewater.”[364]In California, state law specifically requires employerswith at least 50 employees to provide trainings on sexual harassment tosupervisors and managers once every two years. They must also createanti-harassment policies, provide information on these policies to allemployees, and post a copy of the Department of Fair Employment and Housing’santi-harassment poster.[365]Several grower associations based in California expressedtheir commitment to ensuring their members obey the law. Jim Bogart, counselfor the Grower-Shipper Association, stated, “We take [sexual harassment]very, very seriously.”[366]The association conducts educational workshops, assists members in draftingpolicies prohibiting sexual harassment, ensures that posting requirements arebeing met, and conduct audits. He believes the current requirements are“fair and sufficient” and that the steps they are taking areworking because he has not been called on to defend any sexual harassmentclaims against members.[367]Rob Roy of the Ventura County Agricultural Association described similarpolicies to assist members in complying with the law, though he felt it was nota big issue in his county and had not seen any rise or decline in claimsbecause of the law.[368]Manuel Cunha, president of the Nisei Growers League, stated that theassociation takes sexual harassment seriously and interviews growers and laborcontractors before accepting them as members. He did, however, also expresssome skepticism of sexual harassment claims and believes that although someclaims have merit, others involve employees who have been dating but then have afalling out, or “problems within people’s own culture,”resulting in a “flurry of false claims for money.”[369]Some farmers in California told us they realize that sexualharassment happens and they address it. Rick Rominger stated, “Like anylarge operation, we’ve had some complaints and we’ve dealt with[them].”[370]Larry Jacobs has fired an employee for sexual harassment, and he feelsemployers should be able to address the issue: “Sexual harassment iseasy—just fire [him]…. When you hire someone, go over the policy,explain it to them … in written and oral form.”[371]Some farmworkers in California say that companies seem to beimproving. Rosa O. stated, “It helps when companies take it seriously;they talk about it, do trainings.”[372] Luz S. was more measured, but noted,“With training, it’s better, more or less. There are somesupervisors who’ve been paying attention, [though] some don’t doanything at all.”[373]However, some farmworkers reported incidents in whichemployers failed to meet their obligations to address sexual harassmentcomplaints, even as they instituted sexual harassment policies and trainings.Eva P. worked with a co-worker who would make derogatory statements aboutwomen. Although she had been required to watch a video and been given a bookleton sexual harassment when she began, when her co-worker made these statements,the foreman did nothing to stop him.[374] When Laura G., a poultry processingworker, reported sexual harassment to company officials, they simply showed herand her harasser the same video they had shown her when she started and took nofurther steps to stop the harassment.[375]Training materials aresometimes poorly translated from English to Spanish. Michael Marsh, an attorneywith California Rural Legal Assistance, found in one case that a majormultinational agricultural company had a Spanish-language policy filled withnonsensical phrases and errors. In one place, the policy stated in Spanish,“If you complain about sexual harassment, you will be retaliated against,”the key word “not” having been left out.[376] He stated that inanother case he had seen a piece of paper signed by employees to indicate theyhad received sexual harassment training, but the signatures had clearly beenforged.[377]Some farmworker organizations and employers have createdspecial mechanisms for protecting workers from sexual harassment. The Coalitionof Immokalee Workers in Florida has pushed both growers and large corporatebuyers of tomatoes to raise wages and improve working conditions for tomatofarmworkers. As a result, supermarket and fast food companies have agreed to apenny-per-pound increase in payments for tomatoes and now require growerssupplying the tomatoes to abide by a code of conduct that includes trainingsand complaint procedures for sexual harassment, as well as protection fromretaliation.[378]The Farm Labor Organizing Committee has similarly pressed corporate buyers oftobacco and pickle cucumbers to take responsibility for abuses in the supplychain.[379]Where United Farm Workers has a collective bargaining agreement with a grower,any complaint of sexual harassment is covered by the grievance procedure.[380]These organizations, however, represent only a tinypercentage of farmworkers in the US.IX. International Legal ObligationsSexual Violence and Sexual Harassment as Human RightsViolationsHuman rights law imposes anobligation on states to take measures to protect all persons against humanrights violations—including sexual violence and sexual harassmentperpetrated by private actors—and also to provide a remedy wherefundamental protections, such as those relating to the right to life and bodilyintegrity, have been violated.The International Covenant onCivil and Political Rights (ICCPR), ratified by the US in 1992, declares,“Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person.”[381]This right has been interpreted to protect an individual’s security ofperson even when the threat arises from a private actor. The ICCPR alsoprohibits discrimination on “any ground such as race, colour, sex,language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin,property, birth or other status.”[382] Both the Convention against Tortureand Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment(“Convention against Torture”) and article 7 of the ICCPR guaranteethe right to be free from torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment.[383]International tribunals and other bodies have established that rape is coveredby these prohibitions on torture.[384]The United Nations HumanRights Committee (HRC) has made clear that states parties to the ICCPR andother conventions are in violation of their obligations not only when stateactors are responsible for violation of treaty provisions, but also when thestate fails to take necessary steps to prevent violations caused by privateactors. The HRC’s General Comment 31 to the ICCPR notes that statesparties must “take appropriate measures … or exercise duediligence to prevent, punish, investigate or redress the harm caused by suchacts by private persons or entities.[385]The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms ofDiscrimination against Women (CEDAW) obligates states party to combatdiscrimination against women.[386]Although the US has not yet ratified CEDAW, as a signatory, it is obliged torefrain from acts that would defeat the treaty’s object and purpose.[387]The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, the treatybody that interprets and monitors compliance with CEDAW, has affirmed thatviolence against women is a form of discrimination against women and thatstates parties should have effective legal, preventive, and protective measuresin place to provide justice for victims, hold offenders accountable, andprotect society from future acts of sexual violence.[388] CEDAW requiresstates parties to take into account the particular problems faced by ruralwomen, and the Committee has made specific recommendations for provision oflegal aid, training for police and others working with victims of violence, andcounseling services in rural areas.[389]Article 11 of CEDAW specifically protects the “rightto protection of health and to safety in working conditions.”[390]The Committee has issued two statements specifically on sexual harassment:Recommendation No. 12 identifies the prevention of sexual harassment as anobligation undertaken by state parties, and Recommendation No. 19 notes thatsexual harassment seriously impairs equality in the workplace.[391]The United States has similarly signed but not ratified theConvention on the Rights of the Child (CRC).[392] As a signatory to the CRC, theUnited States is obliged to refrain from acts that would defeat thetreaty’s object and purpose.[393]The CRC sets out the minimum protections to which children—defined aspersons under age 18—are entitled. Article 32 of the CRC providesspecifically that children have a right “to be protected from economicexploitation and from performing any work that is likely to be hazardous or tointerfere with the child’s education, or to be harmful to the child’shealth or physical, mental, spiritual, moral or social development,”[394]while article 34 requires that states parties “undertake to protect thechild from all forms of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse.”[395]The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) has alsoruled that under the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man, astate can be held responsible for acts perpetrated by private actors in certaincircumstances. Specifically, the IACHR has recognized that “gender-basedviolence is one of the most extreme and pervasive forms of discrimination,severely impairing and nullifying the enforcement of women’srights,” and that “a State’s failure to act with duediligence to protect women from violence constitutes a form of discriminationand denies women their right to equality before the law.”[396]Human Rights Standards on Immigrant Workers, Including Unauthorized WorkersThe protections of the Universal Declaration of Human Rightsand the ICCPR apply to “all persons,” including immigrant workers,regardless of legal status. The International Convention on the Elimination ofAll Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD) further affirms the equality of allpersons before the law and prohibits governments from discriminating in policyor practice on ethnic grounds.[397]The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, which monitors statecompliance with the ICERD, has interpreted the convention to prohibit laws andpolicies that have “an unjustifiable disparate impact” on racialand ethnic minorities.[398]In the US, the burden of weaker labor law protections for agricultural workersfalls disproportionately on Latino citizens and immigrants.X. RecommendationsTo the United States CongressReform federal laws to better protect unauthorized immigrant farmworkersfrom sexual violence and harassment:Pass the Senate version of the Violence Against Women Act(VAWA) reauthorization bill (S. 1925) or similar legislation thatstrengthens the U visa and other protections for immigrant victims ofdomestic and sexual violence, including farmworker women and girls.However, because more protections are needed, also pass legislation that:Removes the arbitrary caps on the number of U and T visasavailable for immigrant victims of serious crimes. Allows immigrant victims to present secondary evidencethat they have been helpful in the investigation of the crimes againstthem, in lieu of law enforcement certification, for U visas. Allows immigrant witnesses who are helpful in theinvestigation of serious crimes, such as sexual violence, to be eligiblefor legal status similar to that conferred by the U visa.Reform immigration law to reduce the vulnerability of farmworkers to sexualviolence and sexual harassment, as well as other abuses:Enact legislation that creates a program of earnedlegalization for the unauthorized farmworkers already in the US.Enact reforms that better protect migrant workers enteringthe US on guestworker visas from workplace abuses:Eliminate worker dependency on abusive employers bymaking visas portable between employers, with a grace period in whichworkers can find new employment if their current job ends for any reason.Protect guestworkers from discrimination during recruitment on the basis ofrace, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, and disability, inaccordance with anti-discrimination laws applied to other workers in theUS.Include guestworkers inprotections under the Seasonal and Migrant Agricultural Worker ProtectionAct, as well as the National Labor Relations Act.Create a path to permanent resident status forguestworkers and family members who have been in the US for a set periodof time.Reform or repeal federal laws that dissuade agricultural workers, bothauthorized and unauthorized, from reporting workplace sexual violence, sexual harassment,and other abuses:Enact legislation to ensure equality of remedies for allworkers who suffer workplace violations or seek to enforce workers’rights, regardless of immigration status, and thereby rectify the SupremeCourt’s decision in Hoffman Plastic.Revise the caps on damages available under Title VII ofthe Civil Rights Act of 1964 to keep pace with inflation and to provide asufficient deterrent to unscrupulous or irresponsible employers.Eliminate the exclusion offarmworkers from the National Labor Relations Act and acknowledge that,like all other workers, they have the right to collective bargaining.Amend the Fair Labor Standards Act to:Give agricultural workers the right to overtime pay,ensure payment of the minimum wage, and cover small farms, in keepingwith the protections available to workers in most other industries;Apply the same age and hour requirements to childrenworking for hire in agriculture as already apply to all other workingchildren; Set or raise the minimum age for agricultural work to atleast 14, with the sole exception being children working on farms ownedand operated by their parents.Halt yearly approval of a rider exempting almost all farmswith 10 or fewer employees from the jurisdiction of OSHA.Eliminate restrictions on the ability of organizationsfunded by the Legal Services Corporation to represent unauthorized farmworkers.To the US Department of Homeland SecurityRepeal programs such as Secure Communities which requireor encourage local police to enforce federal immigration laws.Screen immigrants arrested in enforcement actions foreligibility for U and T visas, and ensure that appropriate prosecutorialdiscretion policies, as outlined in Immigration and Customs Enforcement(ICE) memoranda, are applied to them.Ensure consistent, accurateapplication of U visa laws and regulations by local law enforcementagencies by disseminating information on the specific legal requirementsfor U visa certification and the role played by certifying law enforcementagencies.Issue a directive to allICE field offices to abide by the terms of Operating Instruction 287.3,which requires agents to determine whether employers or others havesupplied information about unauthorized workers in an effort to interferewith their workplace rights, and ensure all agents and local lawenforcement agents involved in immigration enforcement are trained on theuse of the Operating Instruction.To the US Equal Employment Opportunity CommissionContinue outreach and prioritization of services tolow-income immigrant victims of sexual violence and sexual harassment,including those in rural areas.Eliminate unnecessary delays in processing claims, andensure investigators are trained to work with victims of sexual violence,are aware of and responsive to cultural differences, and, whereverpossible, have appropriate language capacity.To the US Department of Labor (DOL) and the OccupationalSafety and Health Administration (OSHA)Increase agricultural workplace inspections, particularlythose targeting child labor and minimum wage violations, and increasecivil money and criminal penalties within the limits allowed by law toimprove compliance with relevant laws.Make referrals to the appropriate agencies when evidenceof sexual harassment is encountered during an investigation, andpromulgate regulations and remedies related to sexual harassment as anoccupational health and safety issue.Make use of the joint-employer concept under the Migrantand Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (AWPA) and the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) to hold growersresponsible along with farm labor contractors for providing farmworkersprotections under the AWPA.Make use of the “hot-goods” provision of theFair Labor Standards Act to allow courts to issue emergency orders barringcompanies from shipping or selling goods produced by improperly paidworkers.Vigorously enforce OSHA’s Field Sanitation Standard,which requires employers to provide workers with drinking water, toilets,and hand-washing facilities.To All State GovernmentsEnsure that state laws provide farmworkers adequateprotection from sexual harassment and other workplace abuses where federallegislation fails to accomplish this.Enact comprehensive anti-sexual harassment laws if no suchlaws currently exist, and, if they do exist, eliminate exemptions foragricultural workers and ensure broader coverage of employers withprovision for remedies sufficient to deter employers from violating theselaws.Ensure that victim services, including services to addressthe short- and long-term physical and psychological consequences of sexualviolence, are available and accessible for all victims, regardless ofimmigration status, and that farmworker communities are made aware ofthese services.Assess the linguistic needs of farmworker populations inthe state and, wherever possible, take steps to increase the capacity ofstate labor agency staff to provide effective assistance to immigrantfarmworkers, including indigenous farmworkers who cannot communicateeffectively in English or Spanish.Refrain from passing immigration legislation similar toArizona’s SB 1070 or Alabama’s HB 56, which increase fears ofpolice and discourage reporting of crimes in immigrant communities.To Local Law Enforcement AgenciesInvestigate vigorously all complaints of sexual violenceby immigrants, regardless of immigration status.Hire bilingual and culturally sensitive staff; do not callupon federal immigration officers as interpreters.Take all necessary andappropriate steps to assure immigrant communities that unauthorizedimmigrants who report crimes will not be reported to immigrationauthorities.Undertake outreach to buildrelationships with farmworker and immigrant communities.Ensure that the agency’s U visa certificationprocess is transparent and accessible to eligible immigrant victims ofcrime.To Agricultural EmployersCreate and enforce clear policies prohibiting sexualharassment and abuse and accessible channels by which employees can safelyreport sexual harassment and other workplace violations.Provide culturally and linguistically appropriatetrainings on sexual harassment and abuse, and, where possible, work withfarmworker advocacy organizations to create materials and conducttrainings.Investigate every reported instance of sexual violence orharassment and take prompt, corrective action to remedy the problem.Contract only with licensed contractors who candemonstrate that they are able to comply with worker protection laws andcreate and enforce policies prohibiting sexual harassment.To Agencies Providing Services for Victims of SexualViolence and HarassmentConduct culturally sensitive and linguisticallyappropriate outreach to immigrant workers, including, wherever possible,indigenous farmworkers who cannot communicate effectively in English orSpanish.Advocate for additional resources to increase access byrural immigrant workers to bilingual therapists.AcknowledgmentsThis report was researched and written by Grace Meng,researcher in the US Program, with research assistance from Zama Coursen-Neff,Children’s Rights Division deputy director. It was edited by AlisonParker, US Program director; Clive Baldwin, senior legal advisor; and JosephSaunders, deputy program director. Chris Albin-Lackey, Zama Coursen-Neff, RashaMoumneh, and Meghan Rhoad also reviewed and commented on the report.Vikram Shah and Elena Vanko, US Program associates, providedimportant research, editing, and production assistance, as did US Programinterns Elana Bildner, Sarah Efronson, Megan Kordenbrock, Jocelyn Wolf, andMegan Worman. Gabriela Haymes translated the report into Spanish; Xabay Spinka,senior web editor, reviewed the Spanish-language version. Grace Choi,publications director, Kathy Mills, publications specialist, and FitzroyHepkins, administrative manager, provided production assistance.We thank the many legalservices and farmworker advocacy organizations that assisted us with thisreport, as well as the farmers, industry representatives, and governmentalauthorities who were willing to be interviewed. We are particularly grateful toAlina Diaz, Monica Ramirez, California Rural Legal Assistance, LideresCampesinas, NC Field, Farmworker Justice, Vecinos, Western North Carolina Workers Center, WestsideFamily Preservation Services Network, and others who do not wish to be named.Most of all, we thank the farmworkers who shared their experiences with sexualviolence, sexual harassment, and other workplace abuses in the hope that, bydoing so, they will help prevent these abuses from happening to others.[1]HumanRights Watch interview with Patricia M. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[2]The terms “sexual violence” and “sexual harassment” areused in conjunction in this report because neither term alone, as usedcolloquially, fully captures the nature of abuses described by farmworkers (seeDefinitions, p. 12).[3]A 2010survey of 150 farmworker women in California’s Central Valley found that80 percent had experienced some form of sexual harassment, while a report bythe Southern Poverty Law Center found that a majority of their 150 intervieweeshad also experienced sexual harassment. Irma Morales Waugh, “Examiningthe Sexual Harassment Experiences of Mexican Immigrant FarmworkingWomen,” Violence Against Women, January 2010; Southern Poverty LawCenter, “Injustice On Our Plates: Immigrant Women in the U.S. FoodIndustry,” November 2010,http://www.splcenter.org/get-informed/publications/injustice-on-our-plates(accessed April 7, 2012).[4]The terms “victim” and “survivor” are usedinterchangeably in this report.[5]Human Rights Watch interview with Angela G. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[6]Human Rights Watch interview with Ines R. (pseudonym), California, August 2011.[7]Human Rights Watch interview with Natalia B., Magdalena C., Ana D., and SoledadE. (pseudonyms), California, April 2011.[8]Human Rights Watch interview with Susana J. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[9]US Department of Healthand Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “NationalIntimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey: 2010 Summary Report,”November 2011.[10]US Department ofJustice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, “National Crime VictimizationSurvey, 2008.”[11]US Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Crime in theUnited States 2010.”[12]Gary Langer, “One in Four U.S. Women Reports Workplace Harassment,”ABC News, November 15, 2011.[13]US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control andPrevention, “Sexual Violence: Definitions,” page last updatedNovember 9, 2009, http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/sexualviolence/definitions.html(accessed January 9, 2012).[14]USEqual Employment Opportunity Commission, “Sexual Harassment,”http://www.eeoc.gov/laws/types/sexual_harassment.cfm (accessed January 9,2012).[15]Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), Section 3(f), 29 US Code Sections 203.[16]Measuring the number of people doing agricultural work in the US today ischallenging for many reasons, including the migratory nature of the population,the seasonal nature of agricultural work, and the varying definitions of“agricultural work.” This widely cited figure of about 1.8 millionagricultural workers is derived by dividing crop and livestock laborexpenditures of farmers in each state by the average hourly earnings offarmworkers in that state, based on data from both the US Department ofAgriculture National Agriculture Statistics Service (NASS) and the USDepartment of Labor National Agricultural Workers Survey (NAWS). Philip Martin,“California Hired Farm Labor 1960-2010: Change and Continuity,” MigrationDialogue, University of California-Davis, April 30, 2011,http://migration.ucdavis.edu/cf/files/2011-may/martin-california-hired-farm-labor.pdf(accessed March 12, 2012).Other estimates of the US farmworker population rangefrom about 1 million to over 3 million. US Department of Agriculture EconomicResearch Service, “Rural labor and Education: Farm Labor,” updatedJuly 11, 2011, http://www.ers.usda.gov/Briefing/LaborAndEducation/FarmLabor.htm(accessed March 5, 2012); and National Center for Farmworker Health,“Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker Demographics,” 2009,http://www.ncfh.org/docs/fs-Migrant%20Demographics.pdf (accessed March 5,2012).[17]Daniel Carroll, Annie Georges, and Russell Saltz, “ChangingCharacteristics of US Farm Workers: 21 Years of Findings from the NationalAgricultural Workers Survey,” Immigration Reform and AgricultureConference: Implications for Farmers, Farm Workers, and Communities, Universityof California, Washington, D.C. Campus, May 12, 2011, http://migration.ucdavis.edu/cf/files/2011-may/carroll-changing-characteristics.pdf(accessed March 12, 2012) .[18]SouthernPoverty Law Center, US EEOC et al. v. Gargiulo, Inc., Case Docket,http://www.splcenter.org/get-informed/case-docket/-us-eeoc-et-al-v-gargiulo-inc(accessed April 7, 2012).[19]Carroll et al., “Changing Characteristics of US Farm Workers,”Immigration Reform and Agriculture Conference, May 12, 2011.[20]US Department of Labor, “The National Agricultural Workers Survey: SurveyDocumentation—Statistical Methods of the National Agricultural WorkersSurvey,” updated January 5, 2011, http://www.doleta.gov/agworker/naws.cfm(accessed January 24, 2012).[21]Human Rights Watch interview with Manuel Cunha, President, Nisei FarmersLeague, Fresno, California, August 12, 2011.[22]US Department of Labor, “H-2A Temporary Agricultural Visa Program, FY2011 Select Statistics,”http://www.foreignlaborcert.doleta.gov/pdf/h_2a_selected_statistics.pdf(accessed February 23, 2012).[23]See Farmworker Justice, “Litany of Abuses: More – Not Fewer –Labor Protections Needed in the H-2A Guestworker Program,” December2008,http://www.fwjustice.org/images/stories/imm_labor_files/LitanyofAbuseReport_Dec2008_FINAL.pdf(accessed January 30,2012); Southern Poverty Law Center, “Close to Slavery:Guestworker Programs in the United States,” March 2007,http://www.splcenter.org/get-informed/publications/close-to-slavery-guestworker-programs-in-the-united-states(accessed January 30, 2012).[24]Carroll et al., “Changing Characteristics of US Farm Workers,”Immigration Reform and Agriculture Conference, May 12, 2011. The most recentDepartment of Labor report of data from 2001-2002 states that 81 percent ofcrop workers reported their native language is Spanish; 77 percent wereforeign-born. US Department of Labor, Office of the Assistant Secretary forPolicy, Office of Programmatic Policy, “Findings from the NationalAgricultural Workers Survey (NAWS) 2001-2002,” March 2005.[25]Ibid.[26]Emailcommunication from Daniel Carroll, US Department of Labor, Office of PolicyDevelopment and Research, Employment and Training Administration, to HumanRights Watch, March 13, 2012.[27]Carrollet al., “Changing Characteristics of US Farm Workers,” ImmigrationReform and Agriculture Conference, May 12, 2011.[28]Southern Poverty Law Center, “Injustice on Our Plates,” November2010.[29]RichardMines, Sandra Nichols, and David Runsten, and California Rural LegalAssistance, “California’s Indigenous Farmworkers,” January2010, http://indigenousfarmworkers.org/ (accessed January 30, 2012).[30]Ibid.[31]Ibid.[32]AguirreInternational, “The California Farm Labor Force: Overview and Trends fromthe National Agricultural Workers Survey,” June 2005,http://agcenter.ucdavis.edu/AgDoc/CalifFarmLaborForceNAWS.pdf (accessed January30, 2012).[33]Ibid.[34]Mineset al., “California’s Indigenous Farmworkers,” January 2010.[35]Mines et al., “California’s Indigenous Farmworkers,” January2010.[36]Carroll et al., “Changing Characteristics of US Farm Workers,”Immigration Reform and Agriculture Conference, May 12, 2011.[37]HumanRights Watch, Fields of Peril: Child Labor in US Agriculture, May 5,2010, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2010/05/05/fields-peril-0.[38]Ibid.[39]Human Rights Watch interview with Jimena H. (pseudonym), North Carolina, August2011. Her experience was confirmed by other farmworkers and by Nathan Dollar,executive director of Vecinos, a farmworker health organization, who hasrepeatedly met farmworkers being paid by piece rate for tomatoes andstrawberries who are not making $7.25 per hour. Human Rights Watch telephoneinterview with Nathan Dollar, Executive Director, Vecinos, July 17, 2011.[40]Bon Appetit Management Company and United Farm Workers, “Inventory ofFarmworker Issues and Protections in the United States,” March 2011,http://www.bamco.com/sustainable-food-service/farmworker-inventory (accessedApril 23, 2012).[41]Carroll et al., “Changing Characteristics of US Farm Workers,”Immigration Reform and Agriculture Conference, May 12, 2011.[42]Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with Daniela Dwyer, Staff Attorney,Florida Legal Services, Migrant Farmworker Justice Project, May 12, 2011; andMercedes Lorduy, Attorney, VIDA Legal Assistance, May 18, 2011.[43]According to the NAWS from 2000-2001, crop workers are employed on US farms anaverage of 34.5 weeks a year, and in non-farm activities for a little more than5 weeks a year. US Department of Labor, “National Agricultural WorkersSurvey (NAWS) 2001-2002,” March 2005.[44]AguirreInternational, “The California Farm Labor Force,” June 2005.[45]USDepartment of Labor, “National Agricultural Workers Survey (NAWS)2001-2002,” March 2005.[46]AguirreInternational, “The California Farm Labor Force,” June 2005.[47]BonAppetit Management Company and United Farm Workers, “Inventory ofFarmworker Issues and Protections in the United States,” March 2011.[48]Philip Martin, “California Hired Farm Labor 1960-2010,” April 30,2011; Philip L. Martin and Gregory P. Miller, “Farmers increase hiringthrough labor contractors,” California Agriculture, vol. 47, no.4, July-August 1993,http://ucanr.org/repository/cao/landingpage.cfm?article=ca.v047n04p20&fulltext=yes(accessed March 11, 2012), p. 20-23.[49]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with California farmer, July 2011.[50]Bon Appetit Management Company and United Farm Workers, “Inventory ofFarmworker Issues and Protections in the United States,” March 2011; seealso Philip Martin, “California Hired Farm Labor 1960-2010,” April30, 2011.[51]Mines et al., “California’s Indigenous Farmworkers,” January2010.[52]“EEOC Files Its Largest Farm Worker Human Trafficking Suit Against GlobalHorizons, Farms,” US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission pressrelease, April 20, 2011, http://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/newsroom/release/4-20-11b.cfm(accessed March 12, 2012) (describing trafficking lawsuits brought in separatecases against farm labor contractors). See also Southern Poverty Law Center,“Under Siege: Life for Low-Income Latinos in the South,” April 2009http://www.splcenter.org/get-informed/publications/under-siege-life-for-low-income-latinos-in-the-south(accessed March 12, 2012) (describing a lawsuit against a large grower forunpaid wages, where the company argued the workers were actually employees ofan independent contractor, although the workers lived in company labor camps,used company equipment, and were supervised by company employees).[53]Ibid.[54]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Sandy Brown, Human Resources, SwantonBerry Farm, July 21, 2011.[55]HumanRights Watch telephone interviews with Phil Foster, California farmer, July 1,2011; and Larry Jacobs, California farmer, July 1, 2011.[56]Human Rights Watch interview with Juana J. (pseudonym), North Carolina, July11, 2011.[57]Bon Appetit Management Company and United Farm Workers, “Inventory ofFarmworker Issues and Protections in the United States,” March 2011.[58]HumanRights Watch interview with Manuel Cunha, August 12, 2011; see also USDepartment of Labor, Wage and Hour Division, “Fact Sheet #35: JointEmployment and Independent Contractors Under the Migrant Seasonal AgriculturalWorker Protection Act,” revised July 2008,http://www.dol.gov/whd/regs/compliance/whdfs35.htm (accessed January 31, 2012).[59]Mines et al., “California’s Indigenous Farmworkers,” January2010. The study found only 5 percent of non-indigenous workers with 9 or moreyears in this country will pay for rides.[60]HumanRights Watch interview with Michael Meuter, Director of Litigation Advocacy& Training, California Rural Legal Assistance, Migrant Farmworker Project,Salinas, California, April 5, 2011.[61]Irma Morales Waugh, “Examining the Sexual Harassment Experiences ofMexican Immigrant Farmworking Women,” Violence Against Women,January 2010.[62]SouthernPoverty Law Center, “Injustice On Our Plates: Immigrant Women in the U.S.Food Industry,” November 2010.[63]WilliamR. Tamayo, “The Role of the EEOC in Protecting the Civil Rights of FarmWorkers,” UC Davis Law Review, vol. 33, Summer 2000, p. 1075.[64]HumanRights Watch interview with Angela G. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[65]Human Rights Watch interview with Carlos U. (pseudonym), New York, August 2011.[66]HumanRights Watch interview with Teresa G. (pseudonym), North Carolina, July 2011.[67]“JuryOrders Harris Farms to Pay $994,000 in Sexual Harassment Suit by EEOC,”US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission press release, January 21, 2005,http://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/newsroom/release/1-21-05.cfm (accessed March 5, 2012).The verdict was upheld by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in EEOC v.Harris Farms, 274 Fed. Appx. 511, 2008 WL 1776532 (9th Cir. 2008).[68]“Oregon Tree Farm Settles EEOC Lawsuit Over Sexual Harassment andRetaliation,” US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission press release,April 21, 2011, http://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/newsroom/release/4-21-11.cfm (accessedMarch 5, 2012).[69]“EEOC and DeCoster Farms Settle Complaint for $1,525,000,” US EqualEmployment Opportunity Commission press release, September 30, 2002,http://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/newsroom/release/9-30-02-b.cfm (accessed March 5,2012).[70]Human Rights Watch interview with Veronica Z. (pseudonym), California, June2011.[71]Human Rights Watch interview with Veronica Z. (pseudonym), California, June2011.[72]Email communication from farmworker advocate with NC Field to Human RightsWatch, April 21, 2011.[73]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Rosie Lopez, Victim Advocate,Marjaree Mason Center, July 22, 2011.[74]Human Rights Watch interview with Juliana T. (pseudonym), California, June2011.[75]Human Rights Watch interview with Monica V. (pseudonym), New York, August 2011.[76]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Mercedes Lorduy, Attorney, VIDALegal Assistance, May 18, 2011.[77]Human Rights Watch interviews with Mercedes A. (pseudonym), New York, August2011; Susana J. (pseudonym), California, June 2011; and Leticia N. (pseudonym),California, June 2011.[78]Human Rights Watch interview with Bianca H. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[79]Human Rights Watch interview with Claudia L. (pseudonym), California, June2011.[80]Human Rights Watch interview with Natalia B., Magdalena C., Ana D., and SoledadE., California, April 2011.[81]Human Rights Watch interview with Natalia B., Magdalena C., Ana D., and SoledadE., California, April 2011.[82]Ibid.[83]Human Rights Watch interview with Cindy Marroquin, Advocacy ServicesCoordinator, California Coalition Against Sexual Assault (CALCASA), Sacramento,California, April 4, 2011.[84]Human Rights Watch interview with Patricia M. (pseudonym), California, June2011.[85]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Victoria Mesa, Attorney, FloridaRural Legal Services, August 2, 2011.[86]“Oregon Tree Farm Settles EEOC Lawsuit Over Sexual Harassment andRetaliation,” US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission press release,April 21, 2011.[87]HumanRights Watch interview with Bianca H. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[88]Human Rights Watch interview with Marcela V. (pseudonym), California, June2011.[89]Ibid.[90]Human Rights Watch interview with Lorena U. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[91]Human Rights Watch interview with caseworker (name withheld), California, June2011.[92]“MajorWashington Apple Grower Hit with Preliminary Injunction,” US EqualEmployment Opportunity Commission press release, November 3, 2010,http://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/newsroom/release/11-3-10.cfm (accessed March 5, 2012).[93]“EEOC Sues Cyma Orchids for Sex and National Origin Discrimination,Retaliation,” US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission press release,September 30, 2010, http://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/newsroom/release/9-30-10c.cfm(accessed March 5, 2012).[94]“EEOC Sues Spud Seller, Inc. for Alleged Sex Harassment bySupervisor,” US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission press release,September 30, 2010, http://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/newsroom/release/9-30-10o.cfm(accessed March 5, 2012).[95]“Oregon Tree Farm Settles EEOC Lawsuit Over Sexual Harassment andRetaliation,” US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission press release,April 21, 2011, http://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/newsroom/release/4-21-11.cfm (accessedMarch 5, 2012).[96]“EEOC Sues Tree Farm for Sexual and Ethnic Harassment,” US EqualEmployment Opportunity Commission press release, September 29, 2010,http://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/newsroom/release/9-29-10n.cfm (accessed March 5,2012).[97]“Knouse Foods Sued by EEOC for Sexual and National Origin Harassment andRetaliation,” US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission press release,September 22, 2009,http://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/newsroom/release/archive/9-22-09a.html (accessed March5, 2012).[98]“Immokalee Farming Operation Committed Sexual Harassment Against Women,EEOC Charges,” US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission press release,March 23, 2011, http://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/newsroom/release/3-23-11.cfm (accessedApril 7, 2012).[99]“Cyma& Taean Orchids to Pay $240,000 for Harassment, Discrimination AgainstLatina Farm Workers,” US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission pressrelease, November 29, 2011, http://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/newsroom/release/11-29-11b.cfm(accessed Marcy 5, 2012); “Oregon Tree Farm Settles EEOC Lawsuit OverSexual Harassment and Retaliation,” US Equal Employment OpportunityCommission press release, April 21, 2011; “Woodburn Tree Farm SettlesEEOC Lawsuit for Sexual and Ethnic Harassment,” US Equal EmploymentOpportunity Commission press release, September 13, 2011,http://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/newsroom/release/9-13-11c.cfm (accessed March 5,2012); “Knouse Foods Agrees to Pay $300,000 to Settle EEOC Harassment andRetaliation Lawsuit,” Friends of Farmworkers, Inc. press release, July28, 2010, http://www.palegalaid.net/news/palawhelporg-news/knouse-foods-agrees-pay-300000-settle-eeoc-harassment-and-retaliation-lawsuit(accessed March 5, 2012).[100]William Tamayo, “Rape, Other Egregious Harassment, Threats of PhysicalHarm to Deter Reporting, and Retaliation,” American Bar Association,Fifth Annual Labor and Employment Law Conference, Seattle, Washington, November2011,http://www.asianlawcaucus.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/10/Discrimination-Against-Asian-Americans-in-the-Workplace-Bill-Tamayo-ABA.Many-Faces.pdf(accessed February 2, 2012).[101]Human Rights Watch interview with Roberta C. (pseudonym), California, June2011.[102]Human Rights Watch interview with Roberta C. (pseudonym), California, June2011.[103]Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with Juanita Ontiveros, CommunityEducation and Outreach Advocate, California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation,July 7, 2011; and Julia Perkins, spokesperson, Coalition of Immokalee Workers,May 20, 2011.[104]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Juanita Ontiveros, July 7, 2011.[105]Human Rights Watch interviews with Barbara L. (pseudonym), California, August2011; Esperanza P. (pseudonym), California, June 2011; and Roberta C.(pseudonym), California, June 2011.[106]Human Rights Watch interview with Guadalupe F. (pseudonym), North Carolina,August 2011.[107]HumanRights Watch interview with Maria A. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[108]Human Rights Watch interview with Ana I. (pseudonym), North Carolina, July2011.[109]Human Rights Watch interviews with Barbara L. (pseudonym), California, August2011; and Bianca H. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[110]Human Rights Watch, Fields of Peril: Child Labor in US Agriculture, May5, 2010, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2010/05/05/fields-peril-0.[111]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Laura Contreras, Attorney, ColumbiaLegal Services, and Blanca Rodriguez, Attorney, Northwest Justice Project,March 17, 2011.[112]Human Rights Watch, Fields of Peril, May 5, 2010.[113]Human Rights Watch interview with Michael Marsh, Directing Attorney, CaliforniaRural Legal Assistance, Salinas, California, April 26, 2011.[114]Human Rights Watch interviews with Mariana T. (pseudonym), California, August2011; Talia F. (pseudonym), North Carolina, July 2011; Rosario E. (pseudonym),North Carolina, July 2011; Marisol Z. (pseudonym), New York, August 2011; JuanaJ. (pseudonym), North Carolina, July 2011;  Paola B. (pseudonym),California, June 2011; and Roberta C. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[115]Human Rights Watch interview with Isabel H. (pseudonym), North Carolina, July2011.[116]Human Rights Watch interview with Roberta C. (pseudonym), California, June2011.[117]Human Rights Watch interview with Paz B. (pseudonym), New York, August 2011.[118]HumanRights Watch interview with Roberta C. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[119]Human Rights Watch interview with Cristina N. (pseudonym), California, August2011.[120]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Roman Ramos, Paralegal, Texas RioGrande Legal Aid, April 25, 2011.[121]“MajorWashington Apple Grower Sued for Sexual Harassment,” Equal EmploymentOpportunity Commission press release, June 25, 2010.[122]Human Rights Watch interview with Ana I. (pseudonym), North Carolina, July2011.[123]HumanRights Watch interview with Fidelina Espinoza and Oralia Maceda, CommunityWorkers, Centro Binacional para el Desarollo Indigena Oaxaqueno (CBDIO),Fresno, California, June 20, 2011.[124]Human Rights Watch interview with Juliana T. (pseudonym), California, June2011.[125]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Ileana Herrera, Project Advocate,Marjaree Mason Center, July 22, 2011.[126]Human Rights Watch interview with Natalia B., Magdalena C., Ana D., and SoledadE. (pseudonyms), California, April 2011.[127]Human Rights Watch interviews with Marisol Z. (pseudonym), New York, July 2011;Roberta C. (pseudonym), California, June 2011; Pilar D. (pseudonym), NorthCarolina, July 2011; Rosario E. (pseudonym), North Carolina, July 2011; andMarta L. (pseudonym), North Carolina, August 2011.[128]Human Rights Watch interview with Marta L. (pseudonym), North Carolina, August2011.[129]HumanRights Watch interview with Marta L. (pseudonym), North Carolina, August 2011.[130]HumanRights Watch interview with Angela G. (pseudonym), California, April 2011.[131]Human Rights Watch interview with Natalia B., Magdalena C., Ana D., and SoledadE. (pseudonyms), California, April 2011.[132]Human Rights Watch interviews with Santiago I. (pseudonym), California, June2011; and Juliana T. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[133]Human Rights Watch interview with Luz S. (pseudonym), California, August 2011.[134]Ibid.[135]HumanRights Watch interview with Patricia M. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[136]Human Rights Watch interview with Jeff Ponting, Director, Indigenous FarmworkerProgram, California Rural Legal Assistance, Oxnard, California, June 29, 2011.[137]Human Rights Watch interview with Emilio R. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[138]Human Rights Watch interview with Fidelina Espinoza and Oralia Maceda, June 20,2011.[139]Human Rights Watch interview with Ines R. (pseudonym), California, August 2011.[140]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Victoria Mesa, Staff Attorney,Florida Rural Legal Services, Migrant Farmworker Justice Project, August 2,2011.[141]“WoodburnTree Farm Settles EEOC Lawsuit for Sexual and Ethnic Harassment,” USEqual Employment Opportunity Commission press release, September 13, 2011.[142]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Leoncio Vasquez, ExecutiveDirector, Centro Binacional para el Desarollo Indigena Oaxaqueno, April 21,2011.[143]HumanRights Watch interview with Jeff Ponting, June 29, 2011.[144]Ibid.[145]Ibid.[146]“NCLR Launches New Project Combating Discrimination against LGBT PeopleLiving in Rural California,” National Center for Lesbian Rights pressrelease, December 17, 2007,http://www.nclrights.org/site/PageServer?pagename=press_proyectopoderoso (accessedMarch 13, 2012).[147]HumanRights Watch interview with Dan Torres, Proyecto Poderoso Director andAttorney, California Rural Legal Assistance, San Francisco, California, April7, 2011.[148]Human Rights Watch interview with Belen F. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[149]Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with Victoria Mesa, August 2, 2011;Jenifer Rodriguez, Attorney, Colorado Legal Services, August 5, 2011; LauraContreras, Attorney, Columbia Legal Services, and Blanca Rodriguez, Attorney,Northwest Justice Project, March 17, 2011; and Cheryl Gee, Community Worker,Farmworker Legal Services of New York, May 5, 2011.[150]“Woodburn Tree Farm Settles EEOC Lawsuit for Sexual and EthnicHarassment,” US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission press release,September 13, 2011. In this case, two male workers alleged the supervisor andother workers would expose themselves while making sexual comments, andco-workers would grab the men’s buttock and chest area or grab them andsimulate anal sex.[151]HumanRights Watch interview with Maria A. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[152]HumanRights Watch interview with Patricia M. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[153]Human Rights Watch interview with caseworker (name withheld), California, June2011.[154]“OregonTree Farm Settles EEOC Lawsuit Over Sexual Harassment and Retaliation,”US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission press release, April 21, 2011; seealso EEOC v. Willamette Tree Wholesale, Inc., cv-09-690-pk, 2011 U.S.Dist. LEXIS 25464 (D. Or. 2011).[155]HumanRights Watch interview with Lucia A. (pseudonym), California, April 2011.[156]Human Rights Watch interview with Emilio R. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[157]Human Rights Watch interview with Carolina M. (pseudonym), California, August2011.[158]Human Rights Watch interview with Rosana C., New York, August 2011. AnotherMexican immigrant low-wage worker, who was a victim of rape by an acquaintanceoutside the workplace, reported that her husband had separated from her afterhearing about the rape. Human Rights Watch interview with Tricia B.(pseudonym), California, August 2011.[159]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Irma Luna, Community Worker,Indigenous Farmworker Program, California Rural Legal Assistance, July 22,2011. Similar stories were recounted by other farmworker advocates. HumanRights Watch telephone interviews with Victoria Mesa, Attorney, Florida RuralLegal Services, August 2, 2011; and Juanita Ontiveros, Community Education andOutreach Advocate, California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation, July 7, 2011.[160]Human Rights Watch interviews with Angela G. (pseudonym), California, June2011; Lucia A. (pseudonym), California, April 2011; and Miriam G. (pseudonym),California, August 2011. Miriam G. is not a farmworker, but as an unauthorizedimmigrant, her experience seeking services after being raped was similar to theexperiences of farmworkers.[161]Human Rights Watch interview with Rosana C. (pseudonym), New York, August 2011.[162]HumanRights Watch telephone interviews with Jenifer Rodriguez, Attorney, ColoradoLegal Services, August 5, 2011; and Liz Chacko, Attorney, Friends ofFarmworkers, July 29, 2011. Human Rights Watch interviews with Amparo Yebra,Executive Director, Westside Family Preservation Services Network, Huron,California, June 17, 2011; Raye Bugnosen, Clinical Services Manager, AllianceAgainst Family Violence and Sexual Assault, Bakersfield, California, June 27,2011; and Lorena Reyes, Peer Counselor, Alliance Against Family Violence andSexual Assault, Bakersfield, California, June 27, 2011.[163]HumanRights Watch interview with Michael Meuter, Director of Litigation Advocacy& Training, California Rural Legal Assistance, Migrant Farmworker Project,April 5, 2011.[164]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Laura Contreras, Attorney, Columbia LegalServices, and Blanca Rodriguez, Attorney, Northwest Justice Project, March 17,2011.[165]HumanRights Watch interview with Daniela Ramirez, then-Executive Director, SuguetLopez, then-Director of Programs and current Executive Director, and RamonaFelix, Statewide Coordinator of Sexual Assault, Harassment, and TraffickingPrograms, Lideres Campesinas, Oxnard, California, June 29, 2011.[166]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Laura Contreras and Blanca Rodriguez,March 17, 2011.[167]Human Rights Watch interview with Cindy Marroquin, Advocacy ServicesCoordinator, California Coalition Against Sexual Assault (CALCASA), Sacramento,California, April 4, 2011.[168]HumanRights Watch interview with Amparo Yebra, Executive Director, Westside FamilyPreservation Services Network, Huron, California, June 17, 2011.[169]Human Rights Watch interview with Raye Bugnosen, Clinical Services Manager,Alliance Against Family Violence and Sexual Assault, Bakersfield, California,June 27, 2011.[170]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Lew Papenfuse, Executive Director,and Cheryl Gee, Community Worker, Farmworker Legal Services of New York (nowmerged with Workers’ Rights Law Center as Worker Justice Center of NewYork), May 5, 2011.[171]HumanRights Watch interview with Patricia M. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[172]Formore on the economic impact of rape, focusing specifically on intimate partnerviolence, see US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention, National Center for Injury Prevention and Control,“Costs of Intimate Partner Violence Against Women in the UnitedStates,” March 2003.[173]HumanRights Watch interview with Monica V. (pseudonym), New York, August 2011.[174]Human Rights Watch interview with Natalia B., Magdalena C., Ana D., and SoledadE. (pseudonyms), California, April 2011.[175]HumanRights Watch interview with Ana I. (pseudonym), North Carolina, July 2011.[176]Human Rights Watch interview with Sergio Guzman, Secretary-Treasurer, UnitedFarm Workers, Salinas, California, June 30, 2011.[177]“Oregon Tree Farm Settles EEOC Lawsuit Over Sexual Harassment andRetaliation,” US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission press release,April 21, 2011; “Giumarra Vineyards Sued by EEOC for Sexual Harassmentand Retaliation Against Farm Workers,” US Equal Employment OpportunityCommission press release, January 13, 2010, http://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/newsroom/release/1-13-10.cfm(accessed April 3, 2012); see also EEOC v. Giumarra Vineyards Corporation,Complaint, Case No. 1:09-cv-02255 (E.D. Calif. 2009).[178]HumanRights Watch interview with Lucia A. (pseudonym), California, April 2011.[179]HumanRights Watch interview with Marcela V. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[180]EEOC v. Giumarra Vineyards Corporation, Case No. 1:09-cv-02255 (E.D.Calif. 2009); Human Rights Watch interview with Megan Beaman, Attorney, MigrantFarmworker Project, California Rural Legal Assistance, April 27, 2011.[181]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Mark Heller, Managing Attorney,Migrant Farmworker and Immigration Program, Advocates for Basic Legal Equality,Inc., August 29, 2011.[182]HumanRights Watch interview with Veronica Z. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[183]Human Rights Watch interview with Guadalupe F. (pseudonym), North Carolina,August 2011.[184]Human Rights Watch interview with Belen F. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[185]The US Supreme Court stated in De Canas v. Bica, 424 US 351, 356-57(1976), “[A]cceptance by illegal aliens of jobs on substandard terms asto wages and working conditions can seriously depress wage scales and workingconditions of citizens and legally admitted aliens.”[186]Human Rights Watch interviews with Claudia L. (pseudonym), California, June2011; Maria A. (pseudonym), California, June 2011; Marisol Z. (pseudonym), NewYork, August 2011; and Mercedes A. (pseudonym), New York, August 2011.[187]Human Rights Watch interviews with Lucia A. (pseudonym), California, April2011; and Natalia B., Magdalena C., Ana D., and Soledad E. (pseudonyms),California, April 2011.[188]Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with Daniela Dwyer, Staff Attorney,Florida Legal Services, Migrant Farmworker Justice Project, May 12, 2011; andMercedes Lorduy, Attorney, VIDA Legal Assistance, May 18, 2011.[189]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Jenifer Rodriguez, Staff Attorney,Colorado Legal Services, August 5, 2011.[190]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Laura Contreras, Attorney, ColumbiaLegal Services, and Blanca Rodriguez, Attorney, Northwest Justice Project,March 17, 2011.[191]8 US Code Section 1101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(a); 20 Code of Federal RegulationsSections 655 et seq.[192]US Department of Labor, “H-2A Temporary Agricultural Visa Program, FY2011 Select Statistics,” http://www.foreignlaborcert.doleta.gov/pdf/h_2a_selected_statistics.pdf(accessed February 23, 2012).[193]FarmworkerJustice, “No Way to Treat a Guest: Why the H-2A Agricultural Visa ProgramFails U.S. and Foreign Workers,” September 2011, http://farmworkerjustice.org/images/stories/eBook/pages/fwj.pdf(accessed March 6, 2012); Southern Poverty Law Center, “SystematicDiscrimination,” in “Close to Slavery: Guestworker Programs in theUnited States,” April 2007, http://www.splcenter.org/get-informed/publications/close-to-slavery-guestworker-programs-in-the-united-states(accessed March 5, 2012).[194]US Department of Labor, Wage and Hour Division, “Fact Sheet #26: SectionH-2A of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA),” February 2010,http://www.dol.gov/whd/regs/compliance/whdfs26.htm (accessed February 24,2012).[195]Farmworker Justice, “Fact Sheet: The H-2A Temporary AgriculturalGuestworker Program,”http://farmworkerjustice.org/var/www/html/files/H-2AFactSheet.pdf (accessedFebruary 24, 2012).[196]Migrantand Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (AWPA), 29 US Code 1801-1872.See also Farmworker Justice, “No Way to Treat a Guest,” September2011.[197]National Labor Relations Act Section 2(3), 29 US Code Section 152(3).[198]For example, the H-2A recruitment company Global Horizons Manpower, Inc. iscurrently being prosecuted for human trafficking and enslavement. US v.Orian et al., Indictment, No. 1:10-CR-576 (Dist. Hi., filed September 1,2010). See also Farmworker Justice, “No Way to Treat a Guest,”September 2011.[199]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Jenifer Rodriguez, Staff Attorney,Colorado Legal Services, August 5, 2011.[200]Huertaet al. v. L.T. West, Inc., et al., Complaint and Jury Demand (W.D. La.August 31, 2011), Case 6:11-cv-01589.[201]Huerta et al. v. L.T. West, Inc., et al., Complaint and Jury Demand(W.D. La. August 31, 2011), Case 6:11-cv-01589.[202]Agricultural Jobs, Opportunity, Benefits and Security Act of 2003 (AgJOBS),H.R. 3142 and S. 1645.[203]Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act of 2011, S. 1258.[204]HelpingAgriculture Receive Verifiable Employees Securely and Temporarily (HARVEST) Actof 2011, S. 1384; American Specialty Agriculture Act of 2011, H.R. 2847; LegalAgricultural Workforce Act of 2011, H.R. 2895.[205]BrianBennett, “Obama administration reports record number ofdeportations,” Los Angeles Times, October 18, 2011,http://articles.latimes.com/2011/oct/18/news/la-pn-deportation-ice-20111018(accessed April 3, 2012).[206]National Employment Law Project, AFL-CIO, and American Rights at Work EducationFund, “ICED OUT: How Immigration Enforcement Has Interfered withWorkers’ Rights,” October 2009,http://nelp.3cdn.net/75a43e6ae48f67216a_w2m6bp1ak.pdf (accessed February 29,2012).[207]National Employment Law Project et al., “ICED OUT: How ImmigrationEnforcement Has Interfered with Workers’ Rights,” October 2009.[208]Human Rights Watch interview with Angela G. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[209]US Department of Labor and Immigration and Customs Enforcement, “RevisedMemorandum of Understanding Between Departments of Homeland Security and LaborConcerning Enforcement Activities at Worksites,” December 7, 2011,http://www.dol.gov/asp/media/reports/DHS-DOL-MOU.pdf (accessed February 5,2012).[210]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Eunice Cho, Skadden Fellow, NationalEmployment Law Project,April 5, 2012.[211]USDepartment of Homeland Security, US Immigration and Customs Enforcement,“Prosecutorial Discretion: Certain Victims, Witnesses, andPlaintiffs,” June 17, 2011, http://www.ice.gov/doclib/secure-communities/pdf/domestic-violence.pdf(accessed April 6, 2012).[212]Departmentof Homeland Security Operating Instruction 287.3, “Questioning PersonsDuring Labor Disputes,” http://www.uscis.gov/ilink/docView/SLB/HTML/SLB/0-0-0-1/0-0-0-53690/0-0-0-61072/0-0-0-61097.html(accessed April 7, 2012).[213]National Employment Law Project et al., “ICED OUT: How ImmigrationEnforcement Has Interfered with Workers’ Rights,” October 2009,[214]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Eunice Cho, April 5, 2012.[215]Immigrationand Nationality Act Section 101(a)(15)(U), 8 US Code Section 1101(a)(15)(U)(i).[216]“USCIS Reaches Milestone: 10,000 U Visas Approved in Fiscal Year2010,” US Citizenship and Immigration Services news release, July 15,2010, http://www.uscis.gov/portal/site/uscis/menuitem.5af9bb95919f35e66f614176543f6d1a/?vgnextoid=5d5d58a734cd9210VgnVCM100000082ca60aRCRD&vgnextchannel=68439c7755cb9010VgnVCM10000045f3d6a1RCRD(accessed March 7, 2012); “Relief Provided to Thousands of Victims ofCrimes,” US Citizenship and Immigration Services news release, September19, 2011,http://www.uscis.gov/portal/site/uscis/menuitem.5af9bb95919f35e66f614176543f6d1a/?vgnextoid=ea0c39d112b72310VgnVCM100000082ca60aRCRD&vgnextchannel=68439c7755cb9010VgnVCM10000045f3d6a1RCRD(accessed March 7, 2012).[217]Omnibus Consolidated Rescissions and Appropriations Act of 1996, Pub. L. No.104-134, Sec. 504 (11), 100 Stat. 1321.[218]8 Code of Federal Regulations Section 214.4(b)(2).[219]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Ileana Herrera, Project Advocate,Marjaree Mason Center, July 22, 2011; follow-up to in-person interview, Fresno,California, April 8, 2011.[220]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Ileana Herrera, April 8, 2011.[221]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Ana Vallejo, Attorney, VIDA LegalAssistance, May 6, 2011.[222]Human Rights Watch interview with Lachelle Crivello, Victim Services AssistantDirector, Riverside County District Attorney’s Office, Riverside,California, August 9, 2011.[223]HumanRights Watch interview with victim advocate (name withheld), Riverside,California, August 2011. The Riverside County Sheriff’s Department statedin a subsequent email communication, “The Riverside Sheriff’sDepartment receives and reviews all certification of U Visa applications submitted.They are reviewed by the area commander in which the application wasrequested.  Each request is taken into consideration in the applicants[sic] eligibility for U Visa certification.” Email communication fromDeputy Alberto Martinez, Public Information Officer, Riverside CountySheriff’s Department, to Human Rights Watch, April 11, 2012. Human RightsWatch asked how many U visa certifications had been granted in the past 5years. As of the date of publication, the Sheriff’s Office had not respondedto this query.[224]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Rachel Sorratos, Salinas PoliceDepartment, June 20, 2011.[225]Human Rights Watch interview with Pamela Patterson, Victim Witness AssistanceProgram Manager, Monterey County District Attorney’s Office, California,June 16, 2011.[226]USDepartment of Labor, Wage and Hour Division, “Field Assistance BulletinNo. 2011-1: Certification of Supplement B Forms of U Nonimmigrant VisaApplications,” April 28, 2011,http://www.dol.gov/whd/FieldBulletins/fab2011_1.htm (accessed February 23,2012); National Employment Law Project, “Protection for Immigrant Victimsof Workplace Crimes: United States Department of Labor Protocol for U VisaCertification,” May 3, 2011,  http://www.nelp.org/page/-/Justice/2011/ProtectionforImmigrantVictimsofWorkplaceCrimes-Uvisas.pdf?nocdn=1(accessed February 23, 2012).[227]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with legal services attorney (namewithheld), April 29, 2011.[228]Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with Jenifer Rodriguez, August 5, 2011;and Ana Vallejo, May 6, 2011. The “S” visa is available in alimited way to non-citizens who cooperate in investigations of criminal orterrorist organizations. 8 US Code Section 1184(k)(1).[229]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Jenifer Rodriguez, August 5, 2011.[230]Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Pub. L. 88-352), Section 701 etseq., 42 US Code, 2000e et seq., amended by the Civil Rights Act of 1991 (Pub.L. 102-166) and the Lily Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009 (Pub. L. 111-2). Seealso Contreras v. Corinthian Vigor Ins. Co., 25 F. Supp. 2d 1053 (N.D.Cal. 1998); Singh v. Jutla & C.D. & R.’s Oil, Inc., 214 F.Supp. 2d 1056 (N.D. Cal. 2002) (finding that employer threats to turn workersin to immigration authorities violate the anti-retaliation provisions of theFLSA).[231]National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) Section 2(3), 29 US Code Section 152(3).[232]Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), 29 US Code Sections 201 et seq. See also USDepartment of Labor, Wage and Hour Division, “Fact Sheet #12:Agricultural Employers Under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA),”revised July 2008, http://www.dol.gov/whd/regs/compliance/whdfs12.htm (accessedJanuary 26, 2012).[233]Fair Labor Standards Act. See also US Department of Labor, Wage and HourDivision, “Fact Sheet #40: Federal Youth Employment Laws in FarmJobs,” revised July 2008,http://www.dol.gov/whd/regs/compliance/whdfs40.htm (accessed January 26, 2012).[234]US Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Census of FatalOccupational Injuries,” http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshcfoi1.htm (accessedJanuary 26, 2012).[235]Bon Appetit Management Company and United Farm Workers, “Inventory ofFarmworker Issues and Protections in the United States,” March 2011.[236]29 US Code Section 213(c).[237]California Agricultural Labor Relations Act, California Labor Code, Division 2,Part 3.5, Section 1140.2.[238]California Labor Code Section 1171 and California Industrial WelfareCommission, Order No. 14-2001, Regulating Wages, Hours and Working Conditionsin the Agricultural Occupations; Oregon Revised Statutes Sections 653.020,653.022, 653.025, 653.261, and Oregon Administrative Rules Sections839-020-0010, 839-020-0004(4), 839-020-0135, 839-020-0050; Washington MinimumWage Act, Revised Code of Washington Section 49.46, Washington AdministrativeCode Section 296-131-020.[239]Bon Appetit Management Company and United Farm Workers, “Inventory ofFarmworker Issues and Protections in the United States,” March 2011.[240]US Department of Labor, Occupational Health and Safety Administration,“Agricultural Operations,”http://www.osha.gov/SLTC/agriculturaloperations/ (accessed February 23, 2012).[241]Similar reports were documented by Human Rights Watch in Fields of Peril.Human Rights Watch, Fields of Peril: Child Labor in US Agriculture, May5, 2010, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2010/05/05/fields-peril-0.[242]FarmworkerJustice and Oxfam America, “Weeding out abuses: Recommendations for alaw-abiding farm labor system,” 2010,http://www.fwjustice.org/files/reports/Farmworker_Justice-lowres-spreads.pdf(accessed January 31, 2011). A report by the Southern Poverty Law Centersimilarly found 41 percent of Latino immigrants surveyed in the South hadexperienced wage theft. Southern Poverty Law Center, “Under Siege: Lifefor Low-Income Latinos in the South,” April 2009,http://www.splcenter.org/get-informed/publications/under-siege-life-for-low-income-latinos-in-the-south(accessed April 23, 2012).[243]Ibid.[244]Ibid.[245]Letter from Human Rights Watch to Secretary of Labor Hilda Solis on ChildFarmworkers, August 6, 2011,http://www.hrw.org/news/2011/08/05/letter-secretary-labor-hilda-solis-child-farmworkers(accessed March 12, 2012).[246]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Nathan Dollar, Executive Director,Vecinos, July 17, 2011.[247]Chris Liu-Beers, “NC Dept. of Labor Neglects to Enforce Laws that ProtectFarmworker Health and Safety,” post to untitled blog, North CarolinaFarmworker Advocacy Network, ncfan.org, October 12, 2011,http://www.ncfan.org/blog/2011/10/12/nc-dept-of-labor-neglects-to-enforce-laws-that-protect-farmw.html#.T1jK18CvJ8E(accessed March 8, 2012).[248]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Daniela Dwyer, Staff Attorney,Florida Legal Services, Migrant Farmworker Justice Project, May 12, 2011.[249]Human Rights Watch interview with Natalia B., Magdalena C., Ana D., and SoledadE. (pseudonyms), California, April 2011.[250]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Mercedes Lorduy, Attorney, VIDALegal Assistance, May 18, 2011; Human Rights Watch interviews with Michael Marsh,Directing Attorney, California Rural Legal Assistance, Salinas, California,April 26, 2011; and Megan Beaman, Attorney, Migrant Farmworker Project,California Rural Legal Assistance, April 27, 2011.[251]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Irma Luna, Community Worker,California Rural Legal Assistance, July 22, 2011.[252]“EEOC and DeCoster Farms Settle Complaint for $1,525,000,” US EqualEmployment Opportunity Commission press release, September 30, 2002.[253]Institute for Women’s Policy Research, Ending Sex and RaceDiscrimination in the Workplace, March 2011,http://www.iwpr./org/initiatives/pay-equity-and-discrimination (accessed March12, 2012).[254]Human Rights Watch interview with Adrienne Dervartanian and Virginia Ruiz,Senior Attorneys, Farmworker Justice, Washington, DC, March 23, 2011.[255]CaliforniaDepartment of Food and Agriculture, “California Agricultural ProductionStatistics,” http://www.cdfa.ca.gov/statistics/ (accessed February 5,2012).[256]Aguirre International, “The California Farm Labor Force: Overview andTrends from the National Agricultural Workers Survey,” June 2005,http://agcenter.ucdavis.edu/AgDoc/CalifFarmLaborForceNAWS.pdf (accessed March7, 2012).[257]Ibid.[258]Bon Appetit Management Company and United Farm Workers, “Inventory of FarmworkerIssues and Protections in the United States,” March 2011.[259]California Agricultural Labor Relations Act, California Labor Code, Division 2,Part 3.5, Section 1140 et seq.[260]HumanRights Watch interview with Jeff Ponting, Director, Indigenous FarmworkerProgram, California Rural Legal Assistance, Oxnard, California, June 29, 2011.[261]AssemblyBill 1825, California Government Code 12950.1.[262]HumanRights Watch interview with William Tamayo, Regional Attorney, US EqualEmployment Opportunity Commission, San Francisco, California, April 7, 2011.[263]Human Rights Watch interview with Michael Meuter, Director of LitigationAdvocacy & Training, California Rural Legal Assistance, Migrant FarmworkerProject, April 5, 2011.[264]HumanRights Watch interviews with Luz S. (pseudonym), California, August 2011; andRosa O. (pseudonym), California, August 2011.[265]HumanRights Watch interview with Ines R. (pseudonym), California, August 2011.[266]HumanRights Watch interview with Lucia A. (pseudonym), California, April 2011.[267]Emailcommunication from Megan Beaman, Attorney, California Rural Legal Assistance toHuman Rights Watch, May 1, 2011.[268]Human Rights Watch interview with Patricia M. (pseudonym), California, June2011.[269]Human Rights Watch interviews with Fidelina Espinoza and Oralia Maceda,Community Workers, Centro Binacional para el Desarollo Indigena Oaxaqueno(CBDIO), Fresno, California, June 20, 2011; and  Ines R. (pseudonym),California, August 2011.[270]Omnibus Consolidated Rescissions and Appropriations Act of 1996, Pub. L. No.104-134, Sec. 504 (11), 100 Stat. 1321.[271]Hoffman Plastic Compounds v. NLRB,  535 U.S. 137, 122 S.Ct. 1275,152 L.Ed.2d 271 (2002)[272]Rivera v. Nibco, Inc., 364 F.3d 1057 (9th Cir. 2004).[273]Ibid. at 1069.[274]Ibid. at 1070.[275]Cano v. Mallory Mgmt., 195 Misc. 2d 666, 760 N.Y.S.2d 816, 818 (N.Y.Sup.Ct. 2003); De La Rosa v. N. Harvest Furniture, 210 F.R.D. 237, 238-39(C.D.Ill. 2002); Escobar v. Spartan Sec. Serv., 281 F. Supp. 2d 895, 897(S.D. Tex. 2003); Flores v. Amigon, 233 F. Supp. 2d 462, 464-65(E.D.N.Y. 2002); Zeng Liu v. Donna Karan Int’l, Inc., 207 F. Supp.2d 191, 192-93 (S.D.N.Y. 2002).[276]EEOC v. First Wireless, 225 F.R.D. 404 (E.D.N.Y. 2004); EEOC v. Cityof Joliet, 239 F.R.D. 490 (N.D. ill. 2006).[277]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Liz Chacko, Friends of Farmworkers,July 29, 2011.[278]US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, “Time Limits for Filing aCharge,” http://www.eeoc.gov/employees/timeliness.cfm (accessed February5, 2012).[279]USEqual Employment Opportunity Commission, “Filing a Lawsuit,”http://www.eeoc.gov/employees/lawsuit.cfm (accessed February 5, 2012).[280]US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, “Filing a Charge ofDiscrimination,” http://www.eeoc.gov/employees/charge.cfm (accessedFebruary 5, 2012).[281]USEqual Employment Opportunity Commission, “Filing a Lawsuit.”[282]William R. Tamayo, “The EEOC and Immigrant Workers,” Universityof San Francisco Law Review, vol. 44, Fall 2009, p. 253.[283]“SexualHarassment Verdict Upheld in Favor of EEOC Against Ag Industry Giant HarrisFarms,” US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission press release, April25, 2008, http://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/newsroom/release/4-25-08.cfm (accessed March7, 2012).[284]Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with Jenifer Rodriguez, Attorney,Colorado Legal Services, August 5, 2011; Joe Morrison, Attorney, Columbia LegalServices, March 1, 2011; and Victoria Mesa, Attorney, Florida Rural LegalServices, August 2, 2011.[285]EEOC v. Evans Fruit Co. Inc., No. CV-10-3033-LRS, Complaint, June 17,2010.[286]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Liz Chacko, July 29, 2011.[287]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Liz Chacko, July 29, 2011.[288]HumanRights Watch interview with Guadalupe F. (pseudonym), North Carolina, August2011.[289]HumanRights Watch interview with William Tamayo, April 7, 2011.[290]Human Rights Watch interview with Antonio Flores, Community Worker, IndigenousWorkers Project, California Rural Legal Assistance, Oxnard, California, June29, 2011.[291]HumanRights Watch interview with Jenifer Rodriguez, August 5, 2011.[292]Human Rights Watch interview with Michael Meuter, April 5, 2011.[293]HumanRights Watch interview with Michael Marsh, April 26, 2011.[294]Human Rights Watch interview with Lucia A. (pseudonym), California, April 2011.[295]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Victoria Mesa, August 2, 2011.[296]Ibid.[297]Ibid.[298]Email communication from Megan Beaman, May 1, 2011.[299]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Victoria Mesa, August 2, 2011.[300]Ibid.[301]42 US Code Section 1981A(b)(3)(A).[302]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Liz Chacko, July 29, 2011.[303]Human Rights Watch interview with William Tamayo, April 7, 2011.[304]Pennsylvania Human Relations Act, 43 Pa. Cons Stat. Ann. Section 954(c); LizChacko, an attorney with Friends of Farmworkers, noted that at least withworkers in packing or processing houses, they can categorize them as not beingagricultural workers. Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Liz Chacko,July 29, 2011.[305]Terra Linda Farms v. California Fair Employment and Housing Commission, 2012Cal. App. Unpub. LEXIS 395, January 19, 2012.[306]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Anthony Seferian, AssistantAttorney General, California Office of the Attorney General, April 13, 2012.[307]Human Rights Watch interview with Lourdes Carrillo, Director, HOLA, Wilkesboro,North Carolina, August 24, 2011.[308]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Sergeant Kevin Smith, Fresno CountySheriff’s Department, July 25, 2011.[309]American Immigration Lawyers Association, “Immigration Enforcement OffTarget: Minor Offenses with Major Consequences,” August 2011,http://www.aila.org/content/fileviewer.aspx?docid=36646&linkid=236762(accessed April 13, 2012).[310]US Department of Homeland Security, Immigration and Customs Enforcement,“Secure Communities: IDENT/IAFIS Interoperability Monthly Statisticsthrough April 30, 2011,” May 23, 2011,http://www.ice.gov/doclib/foia/sc-stats/nationwide_interoperability_stats-fy2011-feb28.pdf(accessed March 5, 2012). An additional 38 percent had non-“aggravatedfelony” convictions.[311]American Civil Liberties Union, Immigrants’ Rights Project, “SB1070-Type Legislation,” updated November 1, 2011,http://www.law.nyu.edu/ecm_dlv1/groups/public/@nyu_law_website__centers__bickel_brewer_latino_institute_for_human_rights/documents/documents/ecm_pro_070426.pdf(accessed February 29, 2012).[312]Human Rights Watch, United States—No Way to Live: Alabama’sImmigrant Law, December 14, 2011,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2011/12/14/no-way-live.[313]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Sergeant Dave Shaw, CommunityServices Unit, Salinas Police Department, June 22, 2011.[314]Ibid.[315]Ibid.[316]Mayor Thomas Menino of Boston sent a letter to the Department of HomelandSecurity in July 2011 seeking to withdraw from Secure Communities in partbecause many immigrants had been detained and arrested by ICE after beingstopped for traffic violations. Julia Preston, “Resistance Widens toObama Initiative on Criminal Immigrants,” The New York Times,August 13, 2011, http://www.nytimes.com/2011/08/13/us/politics/13secure.html?pagewanted=all(accessed March 6, 2012).[317]Maria Bolanos, an unauthorized immigrant in Maryland, was identified by SecureCommunities as unauthorized after she called the police to report a domestic disputeand was arrested for illegally selling a phone card, a charge that waseventually dropped. Shankar Vendantam, “Call for help leads to possibledeportation for Hyattsville mother,” The Washington Post, November1, 2010, http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/story/2010/11/01/ST2010110106818.html?sid=ST2010110106818(accessed March 6, 2012).[318]US Immigration and Customs Enforcement, “Activated Jurisdictions,”updated March 6, 2012,http://www.ice.gov/doclib/secure-communities/pdf/sc-activated.pdf (accessedMarch 6, 2012).[319]Letter from Governor Andrew M. Cuomo to John Sandweg, Counselor to theSecretary, US Department of Homeland Security, June 1, 2011,http://www.governor.ny.gov/assets/Secure%20Communities.pdf (accessed March 6,2012). Other states have also expressed reluctance to participate in SecureCommunities, but it is unclear whether New York will be permitted to continueto opt-out. Although Secure Communities was originally described by ICE as avoluntary program, ICE released a memorandum in response to a Freedom ofInformation Act request indicating that it plans to make Secure Communitiesmandatory by 2013. US Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Memorandum to BethN. Gibson, Assistant Deputy Director, “Secure Communities—Mandatoryin 2013,” October 2, 2010,http://images.politico.com/global/2012/01/icefoiaoptoutdocs.pdf (accessed March6, 2012).[320]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Lew Papenfuse, Director, and Cheryl Gee,Community Worker, Farmworker Legal Services of New York (now Worker JusticeCenter of New York), May 5, 2011. The same practice was reported in Ohio. HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Mark Heller, Managing Attorney, MigrantFarmworker and Immigration Program, Advocates for Basic Legal Equality, August29, 2011.[321]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Lew Papenfuse and Cheryl Gee, May5, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with Alina Diaz, farmworker advocate,Rochester, New York, August 20, 2011. Human Rights Watch has contacted Customsand Border Patrol for comment, but as of the date of publication, we had notreceived a response.[322]Human Rights Watch interviews with Lupe S. (pseudonym), California, June 2011;Juliana T. (pseudonym), California, June 2011; and Lorena U. (pseudonym),California, June 2011.[323]HumanRights Watch interviews with Emilio R. (pseudonym), California, June 2011; anddirector of social service agency (name withheld), California, June 2011. HumanRights Watch calls to the police department in this town were not returned.[324]JasonKotowski, “Some local law enforcement have fallen on wrong side of thelaw,” The Bakersfield Californian, April 4, 2011,http://www.bakersfield.com/news/local/x529880740/Some-local-law-enforcement-have-fallen-on-wrong-side-of-the-law(accessed February 5, 2012). Police across the country have been arrested forextorting money from unauthorized immigrants. See Cynthia Roldan,“Lantana cop charged with robbery for allegedly pulling over, shakingdown Hispanic men,” Palm Beach Post News, June 29, 2011, http://www.palmbeachpost.com/news/crime/lantana-cop-charged-with-robbery-for-allegedly-pulling-1484923.html?cxntcid=breaking_news(accessed February 5, 2012).[325]HumanRights Watch interview with farmworker advocate (name withheld), NorthCarolina, August 25, 2011. When asked for a response, Major Shannon Queen ofthe Jackson County Sheriff’s Office stated that they had not received anycomplaints of such misconduct. Human Rights Watch telephone interview withMajor Shannon Queen, Jackson County Sheriff’s Office, March 21, 2012.[326]Letterfrom US Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division, to Bill Montgomery,County Attorney, Maricopa County, Arizona, December 15, 2011,http://www.justice.gov/crt/about/spl/documents/mcso_findletter_12-15-11.pdf(accessed March 6, 2012); Letter from US Department of Justice, Civil RightsDivision, to Mayor Joseph Maturo, Jr., East Haven, Connecticut, December 19,2011,http://www.justice.gov/crt/about/spl/documents/easthaven_findletter_12-19-11.pdf(accessed Marcy 7, 2012).[327]Human Rights Watch interviews with Alejandro Celorio, Consul de Proteccion,Mexican Consulate, Sacramento, California, April 4, 2011; community leader(name withheld), North Carolina, August 2011; Paz B. (pseudonym), New York,August 2011; and Carlos U. (pseudonym), New York, August 2011.[328]HumanRights Watch interviews with Ana I. (pseudonym), North Carolina, July 2011;Marisol Z. (pseudonym), New York, August 2011; and Barbara L. (pseudonym),California, August 2011. Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with LeoncioVasquez, Director, Centro Binacional para el Desarollo Indigena Oaxaquena,April 21, 2011; Lew Papenfuse and Cheryl Gee, May 5, 2011; Laura Contreras,Attorney, Columbia Legal Services, and Blanca Rodriguez, Attorney, NorthwestJustice Project, March 17, 2011; and Lourdes Carrillo, August 2011.[329]Human Rights Watch, United States—“I Used to Think the Law WouldProtect Me:” Illinois’s Failure to Test Rape Kits,July7, 2010, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2010/07/07/i-used-think-law-would-protect-me-0;Human Rights Watch, United States—Testing Justice: The Rape KitBacklog in Los Angeles City and County, March 31, 2009,http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2009/03/31/testing-justice-0.[330]USDepartment of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control andPrevention, National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, “NationalIntimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey: 2010 Summary Report,”November 2011,  http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/nisvs/index.html(accessed January 4, 2012).[331]US Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), “NationalCrime Victimization Survey, 2008,”http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/pdf/cvus0805.pdf(accessed April 24, 2012), Table 91. Estimates of the reporting rate forrape and other sexual assault vary considerably. For example, the BJS surveyshows that in 2008, 64 percent of rapes and 36 percent of sexual assaults werereported to the police, while a 2007 study found that only 16 percent of rapeswere reported to law enforcement. Dean G. Kilpatrick et. al.,“Drug-facilitated, Incapacitated, and Forcible Rape: A NationalStudy,” NCJ 219181, July 2007,https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/219181.pdf (accessed April 24,2012).[332]US Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Crime in theUnited States 2010,”http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the-u.s/2010/crime-in-the-u.s.-2010(accessed March 13, 2012).The FBI recently expanded its definition of rapebeyond “forcible rape,” to be more in keeping with state lawdefinitions, but this new definition has not yet been incorporated into FBIstatistics. “Attorney General Eric Holder Announces Revisions to theUniform Crime Report’s Definition of Rape,” Federal Bureau ofInvestigation press release, January 6, 2012, http://www.fbi.gov/news/pressrel/press-releases/attorney-general-eric-holder-announces-revisions-to-the-uniform-crime-reports-definition-of-rape(accessed March 13, 2012).[333]Carlos A. Cuevas and Chiara Sabina, Sexual Assault Among Latinas (SALAS)Study, April 2010, https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/230445.pdf(accessed March 27, 2012).[334]USDepartment of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, “National CrimeVictimization Survey, 2005.” Seventy-three percent of female victims ofrape or sexual assault reported being assaulted by a nonstranger. The SALASstudy found similar high rates of victimization by a nonstranger: 44.1 percentof victims of sexual violence reported the perpetrator was a partner or spouse;48.7 percent reported it was someone else known to the victim. The study alsofound that immigrants reported sexual victimization to the survey at lowerrates than US-born Latinas and those with greater acculturation to the US. Thestudy did not provide a conclusion as to why this would be true, but posited,among other explanations, that American-born Latino women may be more likely todisclose victimization in response to a phone survey than foreign-born Latinowomen. Carlos A. Cuevas and Chiara Sabina, Sexual Assault Among Latinas(SALAS) Study, April 2010.[335]Human Rights Watch, “I Used to Think the Law Would Protect Me,”July 2010; Human Rights Watch, Testing Justice, March 2009.[336]Justin Fenton, “City rape statistics, investigations draw concern,”The Baltimore Sun, June 27, 2010, http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/bs-md-ci-rapes-20100519,0,5338041.story(accessed March 13, 2012). A Philadelphia Inquirer investigation in 1999found similar problems with the investigation of rape by Philadelphia police.Mark Fazlollah, Michael Matza, Craig R. McCoy, and Clea Benson, “Womenvictimized twice in police game of numbers,” Philadelphia Inquirer,October 17, 1999, http://inquirer.philly.com/packages/crime/html/sch101799.asp(accessed March 13, 2012).[337]Human Rights Watch interviews with Belen F. (pseudonym), California, June 2011;Santiago I. (pseudonym), California, June 2011; Pilar D. (pseudonym), NorthCarolina, July 2011; Isabel H. (pseudonym), North Carolina, July 2011; andCristina N. (pseudonym), California, August 2011.[338]Human Rights Watch interview with Daniela Ramirez, then-Executive Director,Suguet Lopez, then-Director of Programs and current Executive Director, andRamona Felix, Statewide Coordinator of Sexual Assault, Harassment, andTrafficking Programs, Lideres Campesinas, Oxnard, California, June 29, 2011.[339]Ibid.[340]HumanRights Watch interview with Maria A. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[341]Human Rights Watch interview with Rosana C. (pseudonym), New York, August 2011.[342]HumanRights Watch interview with Patricia M. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.Human Rights Watch did not contact the police departments in these cases, toprotect the identities of Rosana C. and Patricia M.[343]HumanRights Watch interview with Jeff Ponting, Director, Indigenous FarmworkerProgram, California Rural Legal Assistance, Oxnard, California, June 29, 2011.[344]HumanRights Watch interview with Lisa Green, Kern County District Attorney,Bakersfield, California, June 28, 2011.[345]Human Rights Watch interview with Natalia B., Magdalena C., Ana D., and SoledadE. (pseudonyms), California, April 2011.[346]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Phil Foster, California farmer,July 1, 2011.[347]Human Rights Watch interview with Rob Roy, President and General Counsel,Ventura County Agricultural Association, Camarillo, California, August 10,2011.[348]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Mercedes A. (pseudonym), August2011.[349]HumanRights Watch interview with Angela G. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[350]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Mercedes Lorduy, Attorney, VIDA LegalAssistance, May 18, 2011.[351]Human Rights Watch interview with Monica V. (pseudonym), New York, August 2011.[352]HumanRights Watch interview with Monica V. (pseudonym), New York, August 2011.[353]Human Rights Watch interview with Santiago I. (pseudonym), California, June2011.[354]Human Rights Watch interview with Lorena U. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[355]Human Rights Watch interview with Santiago I. (pseudonym), June 2011.[356]Human Rights Watch interview with Lorena U. (pseudonym), June 2011.[357]Ibid.[358]Human Rights Watch interview with Jimena H. (pseudonym), North Carolina, August2011.[359]Human Rights Watch interview with Angela G. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[360]Human Rights Watch interview with Bianca H. (pseudonym), California, June 2011.[361]Human Rights Watch interview with Ana I. (pseudonym), North Carolina, July2011.[362]For more information, see p. 44 of this report, “Termination and OtherForms of Retaliation,” in “IV. The Lasting Impact of WorkplaceSexual Violence and Sexual Harassment.”[363]Human Rights Watch interviews with Veronica Z. (pseudonym), California, June2011; and counselor (name withheld), California, June 2011.[364]HumanRights Watch interview with Mercedes A. (pseudonym), New York, August 2011.[365]AB 1825, California Government Code 12950.1.[366]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Jim Bogart, Grower-ShipperAssociation (Salinas, California), June 30, 2011.[367]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Jim Bogart, June 30, 2011.[368]Human Rights Watch interview with Rob Roy, August 10, 2011.[369]Human Rights Watch interview with Manuel Cunha, President, Nisei FarmersLeague, Fresno, California, August 12, 2011.[370]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Rick Rominger, California farmer,September 9, 2011.[371]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Larry Jacobs, Jacob’s Farm,July 1, 2011.[372]Human Rights Watch interview with Rosa O. (pseudonym), California, August 2011.[373]Human Rights Watch interview with Luz S. (pseudonym), California, August 2011.[374]HumanRights Watch interview with Eva P. (pseudonym), California, August 2011.[375]Human Rights Watch interview with Laura G. (pseudonym), North Carolina, August2011.[376]HumanRights Watch interview with Michael Marsh, Directing Attorney, California RuralLegal Assistance, Salinas, California, April 26, 2011.[377]Ibid.[378]Kristofer Rios, “After Long Fight, Farmworkers in Florida Win an Increasein Pay,” The New York Times, January 18, 2011,http://www.nytimes.com/2011/01/19/us/19farm.html (accessed March 9, 2012);Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with Steve Hitov, General Counsel,Coalition of Immokalee Workers, March 14, 2011; and Julia Perkins,spokesperson, Coalition of Immokalee Workers, May 20, 2011.[379]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Justin Flores, Organizer, FarmLabor Organizing Committee, June 20, 2011.[380]Human Rights Watch interview with Sergio Guzman, Secretary-Treasurer, UnitedFarm Workers, Salinas, California, June 30, 2011.[381]International Covenant onCivil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adopted December 16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A(XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S.171, entered into force March 23, 1976, ratified by the United States on June8, 1992.[382]Ibid, art. 26.[383]Ibid., art. 7; and Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman orDegrading Treatment or Punishment (Convention against Torture), adoptedDecember 10, 1984, G.A. Res. 39/46, annex, 39 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 51) at 197,U.N. Doc. A/39/51 (1984), entered into force June 26, 1987, ratified by theUnited States on October 21, 1994.[384]See, for example, European Court of Human Rights (ECHR), Aydin v. Turkey,judgment of 25 September 1997, 25 EHRR 251, paras. 62-88; and ECHR, Prosecutorv. Furudnija, ICTY, judgment of 10 December 1998, Case No. IT-95-17/1-T,paras. 163-86.[385]UN Human Rights Committee (HRC), General Comment No. 31, “Nature of thegeneral legal obligation on states parties to the Covenant,” U.N. Doc.CCPR/C/21/Rev. 1/Add.13 (2004), para. 9.[386]Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women(CEDAW), adopted December 18, 1979, G.A. res. 34/180, 34 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No.46) at 193, U.N. Doc. A/34/46, entered into force September 3, 1981. The UnitedStates signed CEDAW in 1980 but has not ratified.[387]SeeVienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, concluded May 23, 1969, 1155 U.N.T.S.331, entered into force January 27, 1980, art. 18.[388]UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAWCommittee), General Recommendation No. 19, “Violence againstWomen,” UN Doc. A/47/38 at 1 (1993), para. 24 (t).[389]CEDAW Committee, “Concluding Observations: Germany,” U.N. Doc.CEDAW/C/DEU/CO/6, February 10, 2009; CEDAW Committee, “ConcludingComments: Czech Republic,” U.N. Doc. CEDAW/C/CZE/CO/3, August 25, 2006; CEDAWCommittee, “Concluding Observations: Bangladesh,” U.N. Doc.CEDAW/C/BGD/CO/7, February 4, 2011.[390] CEDAW,art. 11.[391]CEDAW Committee, General Recommendation No. 12, “Violence againstWomen,” U.N. Doc. A/44/38 at 75 (1989); CEDAW Committee, General RecommendationNo. 19, “Violence against Women,” UN Doc. A/47/38 at 1 (1993).[392]Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), G.A. res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N.GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered into forceSeptember 2, 1990. The United States signed the CRC in 1995 but has notratified.[393]See Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, art. 18.[394]CRC, art. 32.[395]CRC, art. 34.[396]Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, Report no. 80/11, Jessica Lenahan(Gonzales) et al. (United States), July 21, 2011, paras. 110-111.[397]International Convention on the Elimination of AllForms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD), adopted December 21, 1965, G.A. Res.2106 (XX), annex, 20 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 14) at 47, U.N. Doc. A/6014 (1966),660 U.N.T.S. 195, entered into force January 4, 1969, ratified by the UnitedStates on November 20, 1994.[398]UNCommittee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, General RecommendationNo. 14, “Definition of discrimination” (Forty-second session,1993), Compilation of General Comments and General Recommendations Adopted byHuman Rights Treaty Bodies, UN Doc. HRI\GEN\1\Rev.1 (1994), p. 277.Related ContentMay 15, 2012News ReleaseUS: Sexual Violence, Harassment of Immigrant FarmworkersProtect Immigrants Through Violence Against Women Act, Other LawsMay 15, 2012News ReleaseUS: Sexual Violence, Harassment of Immigrant FarmworkersRegion / CountryAmericas,United States,ImmigrationProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch