Responding to the 
COVID-19 Pandemic by Supporting Indigenous Leadership and Grassroots E ﬀ orts
 by 
s 
2020Annual ReportCultural Survival / 2020 Annual Report
 2 Cultural Survival /2020 Annual Report
3 Cultural Survival / 2020 Annual ReportA MESSAGE FROM OUR EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
Dear Cultural Survival Community, 
2020 proved to be a dif ﬁ cult year for so many, and we also experienced many challenges at Cultural Survival too. 
Despite navigating the hardships that come with a global pandemic, our team was able to accomplish so much! Our 
success is intertwined with the commitment, generosity, and deep love that you, our community, shows us.  
2020 has caused unprecedented health, political, and economic crises across the globe, and the pandemic has deeply 
affected many Indigenous communities, causing an immediate threat to our well being and survival. Cultural Survival, without missing a beat, pivoted to supporting our partner communities and their self-determined responses to the virus. 
We are fortunate to have 28 staff members based in 10 countries and have deep connections to Indigenous 
communities across the world, so transitioning to this virtual world was smooth. I am extremely proud of the work our team has accomplished. In addition to our COVID-19 response work, we started an inclusive and participatory strategic planning process and hosted our ﬁ rst virtual Bazaar and launched an e-commerce site to help facilitate the 
sales of our Indigenous artisans. It hasn’t been easy, though. Our team has experienced personal challenges, with some staff addressing childcare and partners’ loss of income, while others directly battled COVID-19 and suffered the loss of loved ones. 
This pandemic has taught us many lessons, and through deep inquiry, introspection, deep listening, grief, adaptation, 
analysis, and making proactive choices, we remain strong and resilient. In addition to our regular programming, our COVID-19 response features a holistic, multilayered approach including redistributing ﬁ nancial resources and 
developing, distributing, and translating life  saving information.
• We made 47 impactful grants to 30 communities and 21 radio stations in 16 countries.
• We helped bridge the digital divide by developing and sharing nearly 500 informative and life saving
materials in over 130 Indigenous languages, keeping Indigenous communities healthy and safe.
Our accomplishment is a function of our community. We are able to do this work thanks to all the people who believe 
in us, support our work, and uphold our vision. However, the need in Indigenous communities persists, and more needs to be done. We hope we can count on you to join us in the second phase of our COVID-19 response. We need our allies, our relatives, to stand with us more than ever. Indigenous rights are being threatened under the cover of the pandemic. Our Indigenous leaders are being murdered for protecting their lands and resources that keep communities safe and healthy. 
While so much remains uncertain during a global pandemic, we remain 
committed to advocating for Indigenous rights and supporting Indigenous communities’ self-determination, cultures, and political resilience. We are deeply grateful for your partnership and look forward to another great year ahead! 
In Solidarity and Gratitude,Galina Angarova (Buryat)Executive Director
Cultural Survival / 2020 Annual Report
Our COVID-19 response features a holistic, multi-layered approach, including:
Redistributing Financial Resources
• Our K eepers of the Earth Fund has launched an emergency grantmaking process that provides small,
direct grants for urgent, community-centered projects that help our Indigenous partners respond to the
crisis in their local communities using Indigenous, place-based solutions. As of March 2020, 30 grantshave been made to help ensure that our partners’ communities in 16 countries remain healthy andstrong during this pandemic. Through these grants, our partners are mobilizing, building on existinginitiatives and networks, and establishing new projects in pursuit of food sovereignty, water security,locally developed communications strategies, mutual aid, and healthy communities.
• Our  Community Media Grants Project recently provided grants to 21 radio stations that are urgently
creating and distributing radio programs about COVID-19 prevention, food sovereignty, communityhealth, social aid, economy, and entrepreneurship. The radio program topics addressing COVID-19 andrelated topics were selected by the radioes themselves and were bilingual (Indigenous language andsettler’s language).
64 Cultural Survival /2020 Annual Report
5 Cultural Survival / 2020 Annual Report
Developing, Distributing, and Translating Life Saving Information and 
Materials
• Through our Indigenous Rights Radio program we have sourced, produced, disseminated, and
tr
anslated 433 Public Service Announcements  for preventative measures against COVID-19 into more
than 130 Indigenous languages and distributed through more than 1,200 radio stations globally.
• We launched a Prevention Manual  and Emergency Response Toolkit to support the essential activities
of radio stations, including general guidelines for good communication that goes beyond prevention.Currently, it is available in English, Portuguese, Spanish, and 86 Indigenous languages.
Cultural Survival / 2020 Annual Report
Mapping
• Curation of the ﬁ rst global monitoring system for COVID-19 for Indigenous communities using Google
Maps technology  to document COVID-19 cases and related human rights violations. Public health
data focuses on cities and majority groups, not rural Indigenous communities. Increasing Indigenous
Peoples access to resources will support and empower them to respond accordingly. This technologywill also enable Indigenous Peoples to share their own data, rather than it being suppressed andcontrolled by governments and other institutions, and bring awareness to the human rights violationsoccurring with concerning frequency amid the global pandemic.
86 Cultural Survival /2020 Annual Report
Cultural Survival / 2020 Annual Report
FROM OUR PARTNERS: 
People were unaware of the Forest Rights Act completely. Through 
Cultural Survival’s support, we could reach the ground level community to provoke them to think and become awakened to their land rights. ” 
— Sobha Madhan, secretary, Gudalur Block NPVTG Federation, India.
With a Keepers of the Earth Fund grant, NPVTG Federation is
conducting an awareness-raising campaign about the Forest Rights
Act to secure community forest rights of 10 Adivasi villages.
The support provided by Cultural Survival has been very important to continue our work of gathering knowledge within my territory. I am also grateful to meet youth from different places and learn about how they are defending and protecting their knowledge. ” 
— Carolina Trayen Rain Ancan (Mapuche), Chile, Indigenous Community Media Youth Fellow
37
373737373737373777373737377Cultural Survival /2020 Annual ReportCultural Survival / 2020 Annual Report
On behalf of the Maya Kaqchikel Community Council of Radio Naköj, 
we want to thank you deeply for the support to execute our project: a radio campaign for the prevention of COVID-19 and to ensure our food sovereignty and community economic strengthening. ” 
— Radio Naköj Council, Santo Domingo Xenacoj, Sacatepéquez, Guatemala, Indigenous Community 
Media Fund grant partner 
Our sincere thanks [to Cultural Survival] for the support provided to our communities. This help was a breath of hope. ” 
— Center for Environmental and Human Development (CENDAH), Panama. 
Keepers of the Earth Fund supported CENDAH in their project on 
the cultivation of food and medicinal plants.    
8 Cultural Survival /2020 Annual Report
9 Cultural Survival / 2020 Annual Report2020 IN NUMBERS  
35 community media
pr
ojects funded in 
8 countries totalling
$214,0008 Webinars
hosted, reaching 
over 15,000
people11 Youth Fellows
supported  in 
community media46 Indigenous
women tr
ained in 
radio production and 
journalism
Submitted 8 reports
to UN Treaty Bodies 
on human rights 
issuesSupported  31 communities
in 16 countries in their
self-determined  CO
VID-19 
responsesSupported 21 radio
stations in 8 countries in
their CO
VID -19 response in 
Indigenous languages
Released 433+ radio programs
on COVID-19 prevention in 130+ 
Indigenous languages Supported 33 Indigenous artists
through our virtual Cultural 
Survival BazaarsCultural Survival / 2020 Annual Report
 10 Cultural Survival /2020 Annual Report
11 Cultural Survival / 2020 Annual ReportIncome2020 FINANCIALS
TOTAL REVENUES
$2,572,118$427,168
Other, Bazaar Sales, 
Booth Fees, Entry fees, donations at event, Grants, & Sponsorships$970,310
Unrestricted Income
$1,174,640
Restricted Income12 Cultural Survival / 2020 Annual ReportExpenses
TOTAL EXPENSES
$2,273,730$584,233
Community Media 
Program
$319,249
Bazaar Program: sales 
generated for Indigenous 
artisans
$197,134
Bazaar Program expenses$244,721
Communications and 
Public Education$197,226
Keepers of the Earth Grantmaking Project$161,214
Advocacy$120,546
Indigenous Rights Radio$77,079
Other Programs$127,079
General & Administrative$244,925
Fundraising
Note: Audited ﬁ  nancials from ﬁ scal year 2020. September 1st, 2019 to August 31st, 2020.Cultural Survival / 2020 Annual ReportGalina Angarova (Buryat),  Executive Director
Mark Camp, Deputy Executive Director
Daisee Francour  (Oneida) , Director of Strategic Partnerships and Communications 
Yesmi Ajanel  (Maya K’iche’),  Program Assistant (through March 2021)
Jessie Cherofsky, Bazaar Program Manager
Avexnim Cojti (Maya K’iche’),  Community Media Program Manager
Danielle DeLuca, Advocacy and Development Manager
Shaldon Ferris (KhoiSan), Indigenous Rights Radio Coordinator
Soﬁ a Flynn, Accounting and Of ﬁ ce Manager
Nati Garcia  (Maya Mam),  Indigenous Youth Community Media Fellowship Coordinator
Cesar Gomez (Maya Pocomam), Community Media Program Coordinator
Adriana Hernández, (Maya K’iche’), Executive Assistant
Dev Kumar Sunuwar  (Koĩts-Sunuwar), Community Media Grants Project Assistant
Danae Laura, Bazaar Program Manager
Bia’ni Madsa’ Juárez López (Mixe/Ayuuk ja’ay and Zapotec/Binnizá), Keepers of the Earth Fund 
Project Manager
Jamie Malcolm-Brown, Communications and Information Technology ManagerTeresita Orozco Mendoza,  Community Media Training Coordinator
Cat Monzón  (Maya K’iche’), Executive Assistant
Diana Pastor, (Maya K’iche’), Central América Media Coordinator
Agnes Portalewska, Communications ManagerAngelica Rao, Human Resources Coordinator
María del Rosario “Rosy” Sul González  (Kaqchiquel Maya), Indigenous Rights Radio Coordinator
Sócrates Vásquez García (Ayuujk Jääy, Pueblo Ayuujk), Community Media Grants Coordinator
Miranda Vitello, Development AssociateStaﬀ OUR TEAM
5313 Cultural Survival /2020 Annual ReportCultural Survival / 2020 Annual ReportArianna Adirim-Lanza
Erica Bel ﬁ 
Eileen Calub
Alexandra Carraher-Kang
Pablo Cordon
Augusta Davis
Samantha Freedman
Jonathan Gomez-Pereira
Kiara Hernandez
Jacklyn Janeksela
Somaya Jimenez-Haham
Karianne Laird
Elisabeth LualdiInterns and Volunteers
Kiara Maher
Dejah Morales
Laura Navitsky
Jesús Nazario
Ariel Iannone Román 
Phillippa Pitts
Mariana Sanborn
Laura Simpson Reeves
Carolyn Smith-Morris
Tristan Suarez
Milagro Ventura
Laura Xu
Kaimana Barcarse (Kanaka Hawai’i), Chair
John King II,  Vice Chair
Steven Heim,  Treasurer
Nicole Friederichs, Clerk
Evelyn Arce Erickson (Muisca)
Valine Brown (Haida)
Duane Champagne (Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa)
Laura R. Graham
Stephen P . Marks
Tui Shortland  (Māori)
Jannie Staffansson (Saami)
Stella Tamang (Tamang)Board of Directors
14 Cultural Survival /2020 Annual Report56 Cultural Survival / 2020 Annual Report
2067 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02140
617-441-5400
www.cs.org @culturalsurvival @CSORG @culturalsurvival
