annual report 2011 39 
years Celebrating My first year as executive director of Cultural Survival has been both challenging and rewarding. 
In 2011, Cultural Survival continued to provide advocacy and support to Indigenous communi -
ties throughout the world, using the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples as our 
guide. As we honed and focused our organizational capacity, we never lost sight of our mission 
to partner with Indigenous people to defend their rights and protect their lands, languages, and 
cultures. The issues often seem insurmountable when we learn that countries such as Kenya, 
Cambodia, and Ethiopia continue to grant land concessions on Indigenous people's lands with -
out their consultation, or countries, like Guatemala, continue to draft legislation that impacts 
Indigenous Peoples without including them in the decision-making process. Yet, we also cele -
brate victories such as the 2011 Ecuadorian court ruling that found the US company Chevron 
guilty of the environmental and social destruction of the Ecuadorian Amazon following its 26 
years of operations in the region. 
In 2011, our Global Response Program launched four major advocacy campaigns in Bangladesh, 
Honduras, China/Russia, and Cambodia to support Indigenous people in their fight to protect 
natural resources and land, and assert their rights of free, prior and informed consent. 
Indigeous communities finds themselves in similar situations all over the globe. The 
China/Russia campaign with the Telengit people to stop construction of a natural gas pipeline 
that would cross the border between China and Russia harkens back to the Keystone XL 
pipeline construction in the US and Canada. We joined with the Indigenous Environmental 
Network and the Lubicon Lake Nation to stop the Keystone XL effort. 
Our work to promote Indigenous voices through radio in Guatemala is helping to build a local 
network of community radio stations to implement “the right of Indigenous Peoples to maintain 
their own forms of communication, freedom of expressions, access to technology, and to estab -
lish mechanisms to defend against criminalization of community radio stations” (UN Declaration 
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples). Our Community Radio Program in Guatemala includes 
over 80 community-owned, volunteer-run radio stations that broadcast to over 1.5 million lis -
teners. During the past year, our staffs in the US and Guatemala worked hard to develop, grow, 
and sustain radio programming that’s vital to the communities we serve. At the same time, we 
have partnered with organizations to advocate for legislation in Guatemala that would legalize 
community radio. This strategy of working directly with Indigenous communities and advocating 
for Indigenous rights through policy and legal channels characterizes our work both nationally 
and internationally. 
Over the past year, I travelled across the country visiting Native language programs and was 
reminded of their funding needs. I was humbled by the dedication and effort in these communi -
CULTURAL SURVIVAL AMESSAgE FROM ThE ExECUTivE diRECTOR 
2ANNUAL REPORT 2011 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
2-3 MESSAgE FROM ThE 
ExECUTivE diRECTOR 
4-5       O UR MiSSiON 
6-15 PROgRAMS & A CTiviTiES 
16-18 BOARd OF diRECTORS & S TAFF 
19        iNTERN PROgRAM 
20-24 SUPPORTERS 
25 FiNANCiAL REPORT 
26-27 gETTiNg OUR MESSAgE OUT 
COvER PhOTO :
Miskitu youth help their father (who is off camera 
to the right) deliver bananas and plantains from 
their farm to their village along the Patuca River,
honduras. A proposed dam upriver threatens 
their way of life. Photo by Sara Santiago.
This report covers the period from January 1, 2011 
to december 31, 2011 and financial information for 
September 1, 2010 to August 31, 2011.
Copyright © 2011 Cultural Survival
Cultural Survival 
Main Office: 
215 Prospect Street     
Cambridge, MA  02139 USA    
t: 617.441.5400    
f: 617.441.5417 
culturalsurvival@cs.org 
www.cs.org ties, where in some cases only a few elderly speakers remained. Our Endangered Languages Program continues to support 
five Native American language partners—the Wampanoag, the Euchee, Northern Arapaho, Sac and Fox, and Alutiiq—in 
their community-based language revitalization efforts. We successfully raised funds for summer camp language immersion 
programs, after-school programs, curriculum development, and other needed materials. We recognize that language revi -
talization is multigenerational, so we seek to support a variety of educational settings in these communities. At the national 
level, we worked with other organizations to raise awareness and educate policymakers about language revitalization. This 
advocacy work helps strengthen federal and philanthropic funding for language work. 
Our bazaars continue to successfully support artists and cooperatives from around the world in selling traditional and con -
temporary crafts, which in turn generates income for Indigenous communities. Eight bazaars were held in New England and 
featured Indigenous artists as part of an educational campaign to promote an understanding of the relationships between 
art, land, and culture. While we provide an opportunity for artists to sell their goods and build sustainable livelihoods, the 
proceeds also financially support Indigenous communities in their struggles to defend their lands and rights. This rich 
exchange through artisans and cultural art is a cornerstone of our public education. 
You may have noticed some of the recent changes we have made in the Cultural Survival Quarterly and on our website 
(www.cs.org). We have begun to share more stories from the field about the people we work with and those impacted by 
our programs. We want to introduce you to the extraordinary people who risk their lives every day to make a difference in 
the world by fighting for the rights of Indigenous Peoples. We have also been using social media to get our message out 
and stay connected to supporters. 
Funding our programs and organization in 2011 was challenging in the aftermath of an economic downturn. Like many 
small nonprofits, we are strategically figuring out how to achieve our mission and carry on the work that is critically impor -
tant to the Indigenous communities we support and partner with. Advancing our agenda while preserving our financial via -
bility will require new models and methods even as the issues that define Indigenous Peoples’ struggles remain the same, if 
not increase. For this reason, I am deeply committed to Cultural Survival’s mission and goals, and to the Indigenous people 
we serve. Cultural Survival remains an internationally recognized organization that is dedicated to human rights. 
I want to extend deep appreciation to all of you who contribute your voices, your passion, and your financial support to 
make Cultural Survival’s work possible. 
In spirit we work together for the benefit of the people and Mother Earth, 
Suzanne Benally 
(Navajo and Santa Clara Tewa) 
ANNUAL REPORT 2011 3
ANNUAL REPORT 2011 OUR MiSSiON 
Called Tribal Peoples, First Peoples, Native Peoples, Indigenous Peoples 
constitute over 5 percent of the world’s population. There are over 370 
million Indigenous people, belonging to 5,000 different groups, living in 70 
countries worldwide. 
Cultural Survival partners with Indigenous Peoples to defend their lands, 
languages, and cultures. 
Our vision:
Cultural Survival works toward a world in which Indigenous Peoples speak their 
languages, live on their land, control their resources, maintain thriving cultures, 
and participate in broader society on equal footing with other peoples.    
Our Mission:
Cultural Survival supports Indigenous Peoples’ actions to secure their rights to their 
lands, languages, cultures, and environments. The majority of Indigenous Peoples live 
in the world’s last biodiverse regions and speak the majority of the world’s endangered 
languages. Indigenous communities continue to stand up for their rights in the face of 
endless and grave human rights violations from governments and corporations. We 
provide advocacy and capacity-building to make sure their voices are heard and sup -
port their efforts to strengthen their communities. Our work is predicated on the UN 
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. 
5“The river is our life.  Any threat to the Patuca is a threat to four 
Indigenous Peoples—the  T awahka, Pech, Miskitu, and Garifuna— 
and we will fight to the death to protect it.” 
— Lorenzo Tinglas, president of the Tawahka people’s governing council. 
In May 2011, Cultural Survival launched an advocacy campaign with the Tawahka, Peach, Miskitu, and Garifuna  people who live 
along the Patuca River in Honduras to stop a Chinese dam project that threatens Central America's largest tropical rainforest 
and Indigenous lifeways. The Moskitia (mos-KEE-tya) is the largest, most magnificent expanse of tropical wilderness north of the 
Amazon. 
Above: Don Francisco, who farms along the Patuca River, Honduras. Photo by Danielle DeLuca. Bangladesh: In collaboration with the National 
Indigenous Union (Jatiya Adivasi Parishad), we worked 
to stop construction of an open-pit coal mine in 
Phulbari, which could displace and affect over 50,000 
Indigenous villagers and farmers. Our campaign called 
upon the prime minister to reject the mining project 
promoted by London-based Global Coal Management 
Resources, recognize the rights of Indigenous Peoples, 
and develop energy resources that do not contribute 
to global warming. 
Honduras: In collaboration with the Tawahka, Pech, 
Miskitu, and Garifuna peoples, we launched a cam -
paign to halt construction of dams on the Patuca 
River. The dams, scheduled to be built by the Chinese 
company Sinohydro, threaten Indigenous communities 
downstream that rely on the river as their only means 
of transportation and communication through the vast 
Moskitia wilderness. Our campaign demanded that 
the Honduras government and the Inter-American 
Development Bank recognize and implement 
Indigenous Peoples’ right to free, prior and informed 
consent for dam construction on the Patuca River. 
China/Russia: In collaboration with the Telengit peo -
ple of Russia’s Altai Republic, we launched a campaign 
to stop construction of a pipeline that would transport 
natural gas from Siberia to China, crossing the Ukok Plateau through an ecologically fragile region. The 
plateau, which is sacred to the Telengit people, is a 
natural park and a UNESCO World Heritage site. The 
project also threatened nearby Kanas National Park on 
the Chinese side of the border.  Our letters pressed 
Russian and Chinese leaders to reroute the pipeline to 
prevent environmental destruction and desecration of 
a region sacred to the Telengit people. 
USA/Canada: At the request of the Indigenous 
Environmental Network and the Lubicon Lake Nation 
of Canada, we joined the campaign to stop construc -
tion of the Keystone XL pipeline, which would carry 
crude oil from the Tar Sands of Alberta, Canada, 
across many Native American lands to the Gulf Coast. 
Cambodia: In collaboration with Kuy people and the 
Prey Lang Community Network, our campaign aimed 
to persuade the Cambodian government to halt 
destruction of the Prey Lang forest by mining and 
agro-industrial companies. Some 200,000 Kuy people 
depend on the resources of this primary forest, the 
last of its kind on the Indochinese peninsula. Our cam -
paign called upon the government to cancel and ban 
land concessions for mining and industrial agriculture 
in and around Prey Lang, and to officially authorize 
the Prey Lang Community Network to manage the for -
est sustainably as they have done for centuries. PROgRAMS : gLOBAL RESPONSE 
ANNUAL REPORT 2011 7dEFENdiNg iNdigENOUS PEOPLES ’ RighTS , LANdS , ANd NATURAL RESOURCES 
The Global Response Program advocates for Indigenous communities in their efforts to protect their environ -
ment and to exercise their right to free, prior and informed consent, as defined in the UN Declaration on the 
Rights of Indigenous Peoples. When corporations or governments violate this right and impose environmental -
ly destructive “development” projects in Indigenous territories against their will, or fail to comply with agree -
ments reached through a process of free, prior and informed consent, Indigenous communities may seek our 
support. In 2011, we carried out these campaigns: 
We celebrated successes in several past Global Response campaigns. In Panama, the National Assembly 
overturned laws that would have facilitated mining in Ngöbe territories. In Papua New Guinea, the parlia -
ment revoked amendments to the environmental law that had denied Indigenous landowners the right to 
sue corporations for damages to their properties or livelihoods. In the Philippines, a mining company’s law 
suit against Indigenous anti-mine organizers in Didipio was dropped. Success! “One time I said to my friend,  ‘Hey,  it's not cool that this guy is 
treating us this way.  He's violating our rights as women!’ At first my 
friend thought I was crazy.   But when I explained it to her ,  she started 
to understand.   I'm always trying to make sure that we,  as women, 
are able to fulfill our rights.   And that’s something I’ve learned at 
these community radio workshops. ” 
— Brenda Sucely Garcia (Tz'utujil), age 19, from San Pedro La Laguna, Solola, explaining her experience attending 
Cultural Survival workshops. 
Above: Radio volunteers attend a radio content production workshop on HIV/AIDS in Quetzaltenango, Guatemala. 
CULTURAL SURVIVAL Five-Year Anniversary 
This year marked the five-year anniversary of the 
Community Radio Program in Guatemala. Our 
Guatemala-based team, led by manager Anselmo Xunic 
(Kaqchiquel), is building capacity in select radio stations 
that have emerged as leaders within the broader 
movement.  These “pilot” stations are geared to 
become hubs for information sharing and training for 
emerging stations in their geographic and linguistic areas .  
Capacity-Building 
In 2011, we held  five workshops for 18 pilot radio sta -
tions, covering topics such as audio production, video 
production, community radio goals and principles, citi -
zen participation, and reproductive health. By partner -
ing with local organizations, we produced and broad -
cast 155 programs in seven languages, including Mam, 
Kaqchiquel, Q’eqchi’, K’iche’, Poqomam, Garifuna, and 
Spanish. Programs covered topics such as reproductive 
health, voter registration for Indigenous women, the 
environment, and community radio movement’s efforts 
for legalization. In May 2011, Guatemala Radio Project 
content production and training coordinator Cesar 
Gomez (Pocomam) traveled to New York City to partici -
pate in the 10th session of the United Nations 
Permanent Forum for Indigenous Issues. He presented 
at a side event hosted by Cultural Survival titled 
"Creating community dialogue on United Nations 
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples 
through the use of community-controlled media." 
Right to Indigenous Media 
In August, we celebrated the International Day of the 
World’s Indigenous People by holding a two-day 
national conference to promote the right of Indigenous 
Peoples to maintain their own forms of communica -tion, freedom of expression, access to technology, and 
to establish mechanisms to defend against criminaliza -
tion of community radio stations. Forty-three commu -
nity radio stations, 29 social organizations, and two 
congressmen participated. Conference panelists includ -
ed Andres Sanchez from the UN High Commission for 
the Human Rights in Guatemala, Oscar Perez; vice-pres -
ident of the Latin American branch of the World 
Association of Community Radio Broadcasters 
(AMARC); Frank La Rue, UN Special Rapporteur on 
Freedom of Expression; and Nery Rodenas, director of 
the Archbishop’s Office for Human Rights in Guatemala; 
and Mark Camp, Community Radio Program director. 
The conference was made possible by a consortium of 
organizations dedicated to the legalization of communi -
ty radio in Guatemala, including COMG, SERJUS, CENAP , 
and CODISRA. 
Fight for Legalization Continues 
During the 143rd regular session of the Inter-American 
Commission on Human Rights, an ally in  the communi -
ty radio movement named CONIC (Coordinadora 
Nacional Indígena y Campesina) declared the systemat -
ic disregard for Indigenous interests, including the ille -
gal status of community radio, as unconstitutional. A 
bill to legalize community radio in Guatemala, Bill 4087, 
remained stagnant on  Guatemala’s congressional agen -
da in 2011. This bill, which would grant FM frequencies 
to nonprofit community radio stations, received a posi -
tive recommendation from a congressional committee 
on January 14, 2010. The bill still needs to be debated 
by the full congress. Cultural Survival continues to sup -
port the efforts of our radio partners in Guatemala to 
secure their rights to legalized community radio. 
9ANNUAL REPORT 2011 PROgRAMS : COMMUNiTy RAdiO PROgRAM 
PROMOTiNg iNdigENOUS vOiCES iN gUATEMALA “When tribal children are given the opportunity to learn their 
language, they are happier, healthier human beings. It doesn’t 
mean their lives are easier. It does mean that their identities are 
stronger and that they are better prepared to face the challenges 
of being an Indigenous person in the modern world.” 
— Jacob Manatowa-Bailey, director of the Sac and Fox Nation of Oklahoma’s Sauk Language Department 
Above: Sauk Language Department: (L-R) Orvena Gregory, Christine Williamson, Katie Grant, and Mosiah Bluecloud.  
Cultural Survival’s three-year grant supported 20 hours a week for their master apprentice team. Making a Difference in the Classroom 
Since 2008 our Endangered Languages Program has col -
laborated on local fundraising and advocacy priorities 
with our grassroots language program partners at the 
Euchee Language Project, the Northern Arapaho 
Language Lodge, Qik'rtarmiut Alutiit Language Program, 
the Sauk Language Department of the Sac and Fox 
Nation, and the Wôpanâak Language Reclamation 
Project. Local language project directors, in turn, serve 
as advisers to our work. Cultural Survival supports our 
partners in writing proposals and organizing outreach 
events—efforts that have generated over $1 million 
since the start of the program. Grants from private, cor -
porate, foundation, and federal donors have supported 
Native language immersion education activities, such as 
master-apprentice teams, and provided materials such 
as preschool and kindergarten classroom equipment 
and furniture, language grammars, teaching books, cur -
riculum development, afterschool programs, and sum -
mer camps. 
Getting Washington to Listen 
At the national level, Cultural Survival again co-spon -
sored the June 2011 National Native Language 
Revitalization Summit with the National Alliance to Save 
Native Languages in Washington, D.C. The effort 
enabled Indigenous language advocates, teachers, and 
speakers to share model program approaches for teach -
ing new generations of speakers of Native languages. 
The event also allowed attendees to share personal sto -
ries about the value of Native languages to the US 
Senate and House of Representatives Appropriations 
Committees, which authorize annual federal discre -
tionary funding for tribal language programs through -
out the United States. In addition to enjoying a day of 
language films and discussions at the Library of 
Congress, summit participants visited nearly a third of 
all appropriators the following day on Capitol Hill. Cultural Survival also helped the National Alliance to 
Save Native Languages craft a proposed executive order 
on Indigenous language revitalization. With cooperation 
from the National Indian Education Association, 
National Congress of American Indians, and nearly a 
dozen other educational and cultural organizations, we 
urged President Obama to mandate extensive federal 
interagency collaboration and support for tribal lan -
guage programs. While he did not adopt our proposal, 
the president signed an executive order in December 
that called for improving education for American 
Indians, citing Native language instruction in schools 
and tribal colleges as critical to student success. 
ai Stlnn Llvi Hiri: Âs Nutâyuie 
We Still Live Here: Âs Nutayuneân , a film directed by 
Anne Makepeace and produced with our Endangered 
Languages Program manager Jennifer Weston, had its 
public premiere in January 2011 at the Santa Barbara 
International Film Festival, and continued its journey to 
film festivals internationally before its November 2011 
broadcast on PBS. We Still Live Here tells an extraordi -
nary story of language recovery among the 
Wampanoag Nation of southeastern Massachusetts, 
and stars Cultural Survival’s partners from the 
Wôpanâak Language Reclamation Project. In October, 
Weston and Makepeace joined the Corporation for 
Public Broadcasting, Interactive Knowledge, the 
Independent Television Service, and 12 tribal language 
programs to launch a companion website to the film, 
OurMotherTongues.org. Visitors to 
OurMotherTongues.org can send e-postcards in five 
Indigenous languages, navigate an interactive map, and 
watch videos highlighting songs, stories, and personal 
reflections on the foundational role languages play in 
reinforcing tribal identity, self-determination, sovereign -
ty, and religious and ceremonial practices. PROgRAMS : ENdANgEREd LANgUAgES 
11 ANNUAL REPORT 2011 REviTALiziNg NATivE LANgUAgES 
          
        
           
          
        
              
               
             “Participating in the bazaars has helped us continue our art and culture. The proceeds from bazaar sales have gone directly to Indigenous artisans.  We villagers work as a collective. Sixty percent of our annual sales come from the bazaars. This money saves us,  as we are continously marginalized and stripped of our territories because of the natural resources that lie beneath.” 
—Aymara weaver Felicia Huarsaya Vellasante from Peru, pictured left, speaking to Cultural Survival Bazaar attendees in 
Amherst, MA 
The Cultural Survival Bazaars are a series of cultural 
festivals that work to strengthen Indigenous cultures 
by providing a venue for the sale of art and crafts 
made by Indigenous artisans throughout the world. 
The sale of crafts perpetuates the artistic traditions 
which are culturally significant to many Indigenous 
communities, provides capital to Indigenous commu -
nities, and provides sustainable income to individual 
artisans and their families.   
In 2011, we hosted eight bazaars in Cambridge, 
Boston, Falmouth, and Amherst in Massachusetts; in 
Tiverton, Rhode Island; and in New York City. 
Indigenous artists displayed their work as part of an 
educational campaign to promote an understanding of 
the relationship between art, land, and culture. 
We hosted 56 vendors and artisans, and attracted 
over 30,000 people. The sales at the eight bazaars 
totaled $461,117 for Native artisans and cooperatives, 
as well as fair trade companies and nonprofit organi -
zations working with Indigenous artisans. 
A Few Examples of the Bazaars’ Impact 
A Thread of Hope participated in four winter bazaars, 
sponsoring Maya waver Maria Xoch as a guest from 
Guatemala. They raised $13,497 for Asociacion Maya 
de Desarrollo. Asociacion Maya de Desarrollo is a 
worker cooperative of 180 women in the highlands of 
Solola, Guatemala. The cooperative strengthens the 
economic position of rural Mayan women, creating a greater sense of well-being and security. As part of the 
cooperatives, the women earn two to four times what 
they would earn weaving for their local markets. 
Felicia Huarsaya Villasante, an Aymara artisan from 
Peru, made $5,971 at three bazaars. 
Cilau Valadez, a Wixarika (Huichol) yarn painter from 
Mexico, participated in two winter shows and had the 
opportunity to speak to bazaar attendees not only 
about his beautiful artwork, but also his advocacy 
against a Canadian silver company threatening to 
destroy his people’s sacred sites. Cilau made $6,636 
for his community and their battle to stop the silver 
mine. Cilau reports: “There was a gathering up in the 
Sierra Madre mountains, quite big, and a lot of the 
different communities were present. My family went 
and we were able to take two buses of community 
members, one that was funded thanks to my partici -
pation at the bazaars. Our delegation had 90 people 
representing Nayarit.” 
Kenya Aid and Relief Effort (KARE) raised $3,486 in 
two events for the Samburu through the sale of crafts 
from their communities.  “This greatly helped the 
Samburu Women's Craft Cooperative, who were rais -
ing funds for famine relief, and also assisted the 
Samburu Legal Fund to pay for our legal battle with 
the African Wildlife Foundation and the Kenya Wildlife 
Service after being forcibly evicted from our lands,” a 
representative from the group said. PROgRAMS : CULTURAL SURvivAL BAzAARS 
13 ANNUAL REPORT 2011                                                            
               
  “The Cultural Survival Bazaars provide Indigenous artists [an opportunity] not only to 
market their art to a receptive audience that understands the value of hand-made 
crafts, but it allows us to share our cultures and continue our traditions.” 
—Porfirio Gutierrez, Zapotec weaver from Mexico PROMOTiNg iNdigENOUS ARTS ANd CULTURES “At the International Funders for Indigenous Peoples conference, Cultural Survival had the opportunity to share with philanthropists and Indigenous people from around the world the work that it is carrying out with community radio in Guatemala, revitalizing the use of the Native languages and traditional music, and strengthening the understanding of Indigenous people's rights.” 
— Cesar Gomez, Content Production & Training Coordinator 
Anank NuninkNunkai (left), a Shuar representative, speaks with Cultural Survival staffer Cesar Gomez (Pocomam Maya) at 
the IFIP conference. Photo by Mark Cherrington. Cultural Survival at the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues 
On May 20, 2011, at the 10th session of the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues in New 
York, Cultural Survival hosted an official side event titled "Creating community dialogue on the UN Declaration 
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP) through the use of community-controlled media." Moderated by 
Suzanne Benally, executive director of Cultural Survival, panelists included Cultural Survival staff member Cesar 
Gomez (Pocomam) of Guatemala, Cultural Survival board member Les Malezer (Gabi Gabi) of Australia, and 
Kenneth Deer (Mohawk) of Canada. Cesar spoke about how the Community Radio Project reflects many of the 
rights stated in the declaration, including the right of self-expression and the right to maintain Indigenous 
languages, cultures, and traditions. He also explained how community radio stations inform their listeners of 
these rights, through programming produced by Cultural Survival and through the training of station volunteers. 
Cesar ended his presentation with one urgent request from the Indigenous community of Guatemala: That in 
accordance with the rights laid out in the declaration, the radio spectrum should be recognized as the 
communal property of communities, and not the private property of the elite.  Watch the session at 
vimeo.com/ 25113119. 
Cultural Survival at International Funders for Indigenous Peoples 
In June 2011, International Funders for Indigenous Peoples held its 10th annual conference in Oneida, New 
York. Cultural Survival organized two sessions on Grassroots Indigenous Language Revitalization and Free, Prior, 
and Informed Consent. In addition to being a participant, Cultural Survival also played a major role as the official 
media partner for the conference, interviewing participants and documenting the event through video and 
photography. Major foundations, including the Swift Foundation, the Joshua Mailman Foundation, and the 
Christensen Fund—to name only a few—sat down with Indigenous organizations from all over the world to 
discuss priorities, common interests, and goals for the future. You can see footage of keynote speakers, panel 
discussions, plenary sessions, interviews, and a series of three-minute pitches for fundable projects by 
Indigenous organizations at vimeo.com/culturalsurvival/videos. And read Cultural Survival’s interview with 
IFIP’s executive director, Evelyn Arce here: goo.gl/fjz6a. OThER CULTURAL SURvivAL ACCOMPLiShMENTS 
ANNUAL REPORT 2011 15 
                                                 
       
               
      Cultural Survival is governed by a board of directors that serves as the organization's legal accountability mechanism and bears all the 
responsibilities of boards of directors in the United States and in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. The board works through 
committees, including an Executive Committee, a Finance Committee, a Fundraising Committee, and a Nominating Committee. 
A unique feature of our board is our Program Council, a committee predominantly made up of Indigenous board members who possess 
the knowledge, experience, and skills to assist the organization to evaluate current programs, set policy on complex program-related 
issues, and identify potential new programs and opportunities for growth. gOvERNANCE 
BOARd OF diRECTORS 
PRESIDENT AND CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD 
Sarah Fuller is the executive chairman of Millennium Prevention Inc., which combines serious science with web-enabled platforms and 
apps that link consumers and providers to improve health and wellness outcomes. She is also president emeritus of Decision Resources 
Inc., a leading research and advisory firm focusing in health care. Previously, she was a Vice President at Arthur D. Little, Inc. She is a 
member of the Board of Trustees and of the Board of Overseers at the School of Arts and Sciences at the University of Pennsylvania. In 
addition, she participates in the Huntsman and the Life Sciences Management Advisory Boards. She is also on the board of Cytel 
Corporation and the Forbes Consulting Group. Ms. Fuller holds a B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania and an A.M. from Harvard 
University. 
VICE CHAIR 
Vincent O. Nmehielle, Ikwerre from the Niger Delta region of Nigeria, is an associate professor of law at the University of the 
Witwatersrand Law School in Johannesburg, South Africa. He was the former principal defender for Liberian president Charles Taylor at 
the Special Court for Sierra Leone in The Hague. He holds a doctorate in international and comparative law from George Washington 
University. 
TREASURER 
Jeff Wallace is founder of North Star, a firm that manages and develops commercial buildings in Boston. He holds a degree from Huxley 
College of the Environment in Bellingham, Washington, and an MBA. He worked for a venture capital firm and an architect/developer 
before founding his company. 
CLERK 
Jean Jackson is a professor of anthropology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Her books, articles, and teaching focus on med -
ical anthropology, social and ethnic identity, gender issues, and Indigenous mobilization in Colombia. She received her doctorate in 
anthropology from Stanford University. 
Karmen Ramírez Boscán, Wayuu, is an international Indigenous Peoples’ rights activist with a lifetime of experience working with Wayuu 
communities in Colombia as well as national organizations such as Sütsüin Jiyeyu Wayuu—Strength of Women Wayuu, the National 
Indigenous Organization of Colombia, and the Andean Coordinator of Indigenous Organizations. She has advocated for Indigenous issues 
internationally as a consultant for the International Labor Organization, the Indigenous Peoples and Minorities Unit at the Office of the 
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Organization of American States, and the UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. She 
has a background in social communication and journalism. 
Marcus Briggs-Cloud is Miccosukee of the Great Maskoke Nation of Florida, and is a son of the Wind Clan people and grandson of the 
Bird Clan people. He recently worked as a Maskoke language instructor at the University of Oklahoma and as a high school student coun- 
selor for the Indian Education Office in Norman, Oklahoma. Marcus earned a master’s degree in theological studies at the Harvard 
Divinity School. 
16 CULTURAL SURVIVAL BOARd OF diRECTORS (CONTiNUEd )
Westy A. Egmont of Egmont Associates, was the president of the International Institute of Boston for nine years. He previously 
served as the director of the Greater Boston Food Bank and hosted and produced a public television program. He holds a doctor -
ate of divinity from Andover Newton Theological School. 
Nicole Friederichs is a practitioner-in-residence at Suffolk University Law School in Boston,  where she teaches the Indian Law and 
Indigenous Peoples Clinic. Prior to joining Suffolk, she practiced federal Indian law and international human rights law, working on 
a range of cases, including jurisdictional cases between Native American tribes and New England states, and Indigenous Peoples’ 
land rights cases before international and regional human rights bodies. She holds a master of laws degree in Indigenous Peoples 
Law and Policy from the University of Arizona, a law degree from Suffolk University Law School, and is a graduate of Mount 
Holyoke College and the London School of Economics. 
Laura R. Graham is a professor of anthropology at the University of Iowa. Her work focuses on lowland South American Indigenous 
Peoples’ activities in national and international arenas, especially the Xavante of central Brazil (Ge) and the Wayúu (Arawak, also 
known as Guajiro) of Venezuela and Colombia. She is past chair of the American Anthropological Association’s Committee for 
Human Rights and chairs their Task Group on Language and Social Justice.  From 1994 to 2005 she directed the Xavante Education 
Fund, a Cultural Survival special project. She now coordinates the Xavante Warã Association's projects with Cultural Survival.   
Richard A. Grounds is Euchee (Yuchi) and the director of the Euchee Language Project and served as co-chair of Cultural Survival’s 
Program Council. He received his doctorate in history of religions from Princeton Theological Seminary and is a research professor 
of anthropology at the University of Tulsa. 
James Howe is a professor of anthropology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. A specialist on the Kuna of Panama, his 
research focuses on political and historical anthropology, Indigenous-state relations, and the impact of missionaries. He received 
his doctorate in anthropology from the University of Pennsylvania. 
Edward John, Tl’azt’en, is a prominent First Nations political leader in Canada. He has served as an elected councilor and chief of 
the Tl'azt'en Nation. He also served as chief of the Carrier Sekani Tribal Council. For his service to Tl'azt'en Nation, he was awarded 
the title of Grand Chief of Tl'azt'en Nation. A fluent speaker of Carrier and one of the few people considered eloquent public 
speakers in Carrier, John was the founding president of the Yinka Dene Language Institute. He helped to create the First Nations 
Summit, the organization representing the British Columbia First Nations involved in treaty negotiations with Canada and British 
Columbia. In June 2010, John was elected to his ninth term on the Task Group of the First Nations Summit. He is also Chief Treaty 
Negotiator for the Carrier Sekani Tribal Council. In January 2011, he began a three year term as the North American 
Representative to the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. 
Cecilia Lenk , is town councilor in Watertown, Massachusetts. She consults on technology, health care, and education; and is a 
member of Launchpad. She has developed numerous national and international Internet initiatives in the areas of science, health, 
and science education. She received her doctorate in biology at Harvard University and her undergraduate degree from Johns 
Hopkins. She is currently chair of the Society of Engineering Alumni at Johns Hopkins. 
Pia Maybury-Lewis is co-founder of Cultural Survival. She was a member of the staff until 2009, managing the intern and bazaar 
programs. 
Les Malezer, Native Australian of the Gabi Gabi Community, is the general manager for the Foundation for Aboriginal and Islander 
Research Action  (FAIRA) based in Woolloongabba, Australia. He is also the chairperson for the international Indigenous Peoples’ 
Caucus. He was instrumental in lobbying governments to support the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous 
Peoples with the caucus. 
17 ANNUAL REPORT 2011 BOARD OF DIRECTORS (continued) 
P. Ranganath Nayak is the chief executive officer of Cytel Inc.. He has more than 24 years of senior-level management experience in 
technology and management consulting, and holds a doctorate in mechanical engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. 
Ramona L. Peters , Mashpee Wampanoag (Nosapocket of the Bear Clan), lives and works in Cape Cod, Massachusetts, and is a nation- 
ally known artist who has revived her tribe’s traditional pottery-making techniques. She is a visual historian of her culture, fulfilling 
this role through various undertakings as a teacher, spokesperson, curator, interpreter, consultant, and Indigenous rights activist. 
Stella Tamang, Tamang tribe from Nepal, was chairman of the International Indigenous Womens Caucus at the third session of the UN 
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues and is currently the chairman of the South Asia Indigenous Women’s Forum, and an advisor to 
the Nepal Tamang Women Ghedung. She founded Bikalpa Gyan Kendra, and organization in Nepal that contributes to students’ educa -
tion and livelihoods by combining academic learning with practical training. 
Roy Young established Nature’s Own, a wholesale and retail mineral and fossil business that imports handcrafts from Pakistan and 
Brazil. He has a deep commitment to environmental conservation, and has started numerous environmental nonprofit organizations, 
including Global Response, Environmental and Cultural Organization Systems (ECOS), Northern Ohio Recycling Project, Eco-Cycle, Rocky 
Flats Truth Force, Global Greengrants Fund, and the Trust for Land Restoration. He holds a bachelor’s degree in geology from Duke 
University. 
PROGRAM ADVISORS 
jessie little doe baird (Wampanoag) 
Theodore Macdonald, Jr. 
18 CULTURAL SURVIVAL Suzanne Benally (Navajo and Santa Clara Tewa) , Executive Director 
Mark Camp, Deputy Executive Director 
Mark Cherrington, Director of Communications (no longer on staff) 
Danielle DeLuca, Program Associate 
David Michael Favreau, Bazaar Program Manager 
Sofia Flynn, Accounting & Office Manager 
Cesar Gomez (Pocomam) , Content Production & Training Coordinator, Community Radio Program 
Polly Laurelchild-Hertig, Director of Program Resources (no longer on staff) 
Jamie Malcolm-Brown, Communications & Information Technology Manager 
Paula Palmer, Director of Global Response Program (no longer on staff) 
Agnes Portalewska, Communications Manager 
Rosendo Pablo Ramirez (Mam) , Program Associate, Community Radio Program 
Alberto ‘Tino’ Recinos (Mam) , Citizen Participation Coordinator, Community Radio Program 
Patrick Schaefer, Director of Development 
Miranda Vitello, Development Assistant 
Jennifer Weston (Hunkpapa Lakota) , Endangered Languages Program Manager 
Ancelmo Xunic (Kachikel) , Community Radio Program Manager STAFF 19 “As my first internship in college, my time at Cultural 
Survival was extremely beneficial and formative. While I 
knew I was interested in the nonprofit sector, I wasn't 
sure in what aspect I would follow this path. At Cultural 
Survival I was able to assist in several capacities, which 
helped me determine what I was most interested in. The 
staff was also extremely helpful and approachable which 
made what could have been an easily intimidating experi -
ence nothing but positive. I felt instantly welcomed and 
able to explore my interests —a key factor in making my 
first internship so positive.” 
—Derek Smallwood summer 2011 intern (right) 
“It was an amazing experience for me to be able to learn 
about human rights and Indigenous issues, and also 
to better understand how a nonprofit organization works. 
As part of my internship I visited an Indigenous commu -
nity in my home country, Costa Rica, and wrote an article 
for the CSQ magazine, a one-time opportunity!” 
—Ana Lucía Fariña,  2011-2012 intern iNTERN PROgRAM 
Cultural Survival’s work could not be accomplished without our 
interns. Interns are involved in all areas of the organization’s 
work and play a vital role in day-to-day operations at Cultural 
Survival. This year we hosted 22 interns from universities around 
the country. 
Guatemala Radio Project: Interns assisted in evaluating all the 
radio program episodes, helped write quarterly reports and grant 
applications, and  set up speaking engagements about the proj -
ect for station representatives. 
Endangered Languages : Interns helped organize materials for 
hundreds of Native American language advocates attending 
the National Native Language Revitalization Summit. Interns 
also assisted with fundraising, helping research foundations 
and develop donor files for potential funders for Native American language programs. Interns and graduate volun -
teers helped organize outreach calls and interviews with 
dozens of tribal language programs across the United States. 
Fundraising and Events : Interns contributed to the success of 
our expanded bazaars program by educating the public about 
Indigenous issues and fair trade, setting up and breaking 
down the bazaars, maintaining security, encouraging atten -
dees to join Cultural Survival, assisting vendors and perform -
ers, selling rugs and crafts, handing out flyers, and directing 
traffic. 
Publications and Research: Interns wrote or contributed to 
articles that were published in the Cultural Survival Quarterly 
and wrote features and urgent appeals for the website. 
ANNUAL REPORT 2011 20 giviNg TO CULTURAL SURvivAL 
CULTURAL SURVIVAL Supporters of Cultural Survival continue to make all our work possible, by volunteering, writing letters to govern -
ments and corporations,offering ideas, and providing the financial resources needed to carry out our mission. In 
2011 we increased the number of supporters by 420. Thank you for your support of our work. 
Why I Wholeheartedly Support Cultural Survival 
Mary Anne Saul 
“If there were only one organization to which I could give my time and 
resources, my choice would be Cultural Survival. Its mission of working with 
Indigenous Peoples to fight for their rights and to make their own choices is 
absolutely crucial right now. 
I first learned about Cultural Survival over 35 years ago when I took my high 
school social studies classes into the Peabody Museum of Anthropology at 
Harvard in Cambridge, Massachusetts and found Pia Maybury-Lewis, one of the 
founders of Cultural Survival, eager to talk with us about the challenges 
Indigenous Peoples faced. I was hooked and joined the effort.” 
Why Cultural Survival is Important to Me 
Desmond T .W. Patterson 
“Supporting the work of Cultural Survival dovetails with my social justice 
vision where all people in the world have honor and have their rights respect -
ed. Cultural Survival has a worldwide focus on Indigenous rights, sovereignty, 
and self-determination that arms my life purpose to serve the needs of all 
precious souls of our world. Cultural Survival has been a vital component in 
building advocacy for me and for a world in need of more agency for the voic -
es of those who are not forgotten and have endured continuity in a changing 
global community. My ability to serve in this organization has brought me a 
deeper sense of love for human rights.” 
BENEFACTOR 
Administration for Native Americans 
Anonymous 
Gary and Kathleen Bahlkow 
Jessie L. Baird 
Jan and Mark Balcom 
Barona Band of Mission Indians 
The Bay and Paul Foundation 
Bruce and Judith Billings 
Jane Bunin 
Carolyn Byerly and Kay McGraw 
Elizabeth Cabot 
Caipirinha Foundation/Cultures of Resistance Network 
Mary Ann Camp 
Donna L. Ching and Richard F. Leman 
Cynda Collins Arsenault and Marcel Arsenault 
Cottonwood Foundation 
The Crawford Foundation 
William and Francine Crawford 
Patrick and Lynn De Freitas 
Sharon Doll 
Virginia Drywater- Whitekiller 
Westy and Susan Egmont 
Elliott Badgley Foundation 
Wendy Emrich 
Equal Exchange 
Evergreen Lutheran Church 
Sarah and William Fuller 
Phil and Lydia Furber 
Grace Jones Richardson Trust 
Laura R. Graham and T. M. Scruggs 
Lisa Graustein 
William and Jeanie Graustein 
Harvard Community Relations 
Bruce Harvey 
Karin Holser 
James and June N. Howe 
Institute of International Education 
The International Foundation Jean E. Jackson 
Carl and Marcia Keil 
Charles M. and Angeliki V. Keil 
Keweenaw Bay Indian Community 
Thomas F. King and Patricia L. Parker 
Barbara H. and S. J. Levy 
Hal Litoff 
Makepeace LLC 
Jesse W. Markow 
Pia Maybury-Lewis 
Mildred M. Simmons Charitable Lead Annuity Trust 
Olivia Mutombo 
Native Languages of the Americas 
P . Ranganath and Sandra Nayak 
Thomas J. Nerger 
New England Biolabs Foundation 
Jill E. and Thomas Newhouse 
Nancy S. Nordhoff 
Open Society Foundations 
Susanna and David Place 
Quitiplas Foundation 
Naomi R. Roht-Arriaza 
David Rosenstein 
Andrew P . Saito 
San Francisco Foundation 
Ukumbwa Sauti 
George F. Schnack 
Scola 
Peter L. Sheldon 
Kathryn Sikkink 
Kristina Simmons and Michael Sheridan 
Teresa M. and Anthony Smith 
The Sociedad San Martin De Porres 
Mary Gay Sprague and William T. Hassler 
Nancy Stetson 
Terry and Melissa Stuart 
Swift Foundation 
Thai Link 
The Pentera Trust 
Theo Chocolate 
Tides Foundation 
Martha Claire Tompkins Jeff and Elizabeth Wallace 
Winky Foundation 
Philip D. Young 
Roy Young and Rosa Venezia 
PATRON 
Advocates for Indigenous California Language Survival 
Janet K. Amighi 
Barbara Appel Irrevocable Living Trust 
Hanne Beck 
William Bernthal 
Stephan Beyer 
Boulder Meeting of the Religious Society of Friends 
Bridgewater State College 
Anne Cadenasso 
John P . Camp, Jr. 
Cindy Carlisle 
Victoria J. Carter 
Martin and June Cobin 
Joseph De Rivera 
Documentary Educational Resources 
Kirk and Karen Endicott 
Fit Perfect Windows 
Foundation for Shamanic Studies 
Beebe Frazer 
G Allen Andreas & Co LP 
Walter W. Haines and Mary Lou Peck 
Doris Hass 
Nance Hikes 
Embry Howell 
Jantz Morgan LLC 
Baine Kerr 
Walter Kingsbery 
Samuel C. Kinser 
Patricia and David Kirouac 
Karina Kloos 
Louise Lamphere 
Cecilia Lenk 
Larry Lewarton 
George Martin 
Janet U. McAlpin 
The Middle Passage Foundation 
New Hope International Ministries, Inc. Carol Newell 
Elaine Nonneman 
Pete and Patricia Palmer 
Carmen Perez 
Kit and Evelyn Pilgrim 
Shayne Robinson 
Barbara Rogoff 
Maria Sauzier 
Susan Sherman 
Chris Simpson 
Anne St. Goar 
Jessica E. Straus 
Tufts University 
Whole Foods 
SUSTAINER 
Louise T. Ambler 
ARC Thrift Stores 
Julene Bair 
Richard Bauman 
Whitney Beals and Pamela Esty 
Robert Bernthal 
Wilmar and Lorna Bernthal 
Linda C. Black 
Shirley and Tim Blancke 
Frances Boler 
Boston Area Spanish Exchange 
The Boston Foundation 
Elizabeth M. Brumfiel 
WS Brundage 
Louise M. Burkhart 
Jerry D. Busch 
Robert C. and Ann Buxbaum 
Jim Campen and Phyllis Ewen 
Jay T. Caturia 
Duane Champagne 
Fay Chandler 
Richard and Carolyn Clemmer-Smith 
Mark E. Crosby 
Anne Deruyttere 
Christopher Donahue 
John and Deborah A. Dorsey 
Carol L. Ellis 
Bryan and Lois Feuer 
Nancy E. Fleischer Anne Forsyth 
Nicole B. Friederichs 
John Fries 
Gabriel P . and Sara Frommer 
Helen W. Gjessing 
Global Diversity Fund 
Byron and Mary J. Good 
Roger Gray 
H. S. Halperin 
Laura Halvorson 
Francie Lynne Hansen 
Susan J. Herlin 
Cornelia Herzfeld 
Donald Hindley 
Leanne Hinton 
Christine Hubert 
Louis Kampf 
Navina Khanna 
Sue Ellen Kingsley 
Seena and Danny Kohl 
David F. Kremen 
Catherine and Colleen Kunkel 
Wilma Leinonen and Richard Hogue 
Donna Long 
Joanne Lyman 
Herbert A. Masters 
John L. Matthews 
Mariana M. McClanahan 
Mela Restaurant 
Christian Militeau 
William Moninger 
Nicola Moscufo and Kristin K. Leader 
Rosemary Mudd 
Connie and Robert Mutel 
Randy Muth 
Gilbert G. Nichols 
Dennis O'Reilly 
Sandra J. Occhipinti 
Felicia Oldfather 
Charles Oliver 
On the Avenue Marketing Group LLC 
Angus Parker 
Augustin H. Parker 
Charlie and Shirley Paterson 
Michael Perloff 
Petersen Family Fund 
Robert Petersen ThANk yOU FOR yOUR gENEROSiTy 
*  Benefactor - ($1,000.00 + )     Patron - ($500-$999)    Sustainer ($250-$499)    Sponsor ($100-$249) 
21 ANNUAL REPORT 2011 CULTURAL SURVIVAL Katharine M. Preston and John Bingham 
Xavid W. Pretzer 
Raymond James Charitable Endowment Fund 
Penelope Rich 
Steven Rock 
Tiffany and Jeff Sandholm 
Sara Blair Winter Foundation 
Lou Scharpf 
Allegra Snyder 
Jane M. Starkey 
Nathan Stephenson 
Harry A. Strunk 
Gayatri Thampy 
Kathryn S. Tholin 
Terry Vogt 
Ann von Mehren 
Kirsten Waerstad and Dharmesh Shah 
John F. Walker 
Bertie J. Weddell 
Richard Weinberg 
White Mountain Creamery 
Catherine M. Williams 
Evelyn Wolfson 
Karen Yust 
Steven Zuckerman and Paula Gorlitz 
SPONSOR 
Tom P . and Ruth Abeles 
Benjamin Abrams 
Kenneth Adkisson 
Joelle Adlerblum 
Shuaib Ahmad 
Hilary M. Ainger 
Sharon Albrecht 
Alchemy Foundation 
Graham and Jean D. Alvord 
Elias Amidon 
Ann Anderson 
Neal Anderson and Janice Stutts 
Richard and Elaine Andrews 
Frederique Apffel-Marglin 
George Appenzeller 
Susan Arnott 
Arntz Family Foundation 
Asbury Theological Seminary Elizabeth Atkins 
Keith Ball and Diana Morabito 
Ofer and Daniella Bar-Yosef 
Bradford C. Barber 
Thomas J. Barfield and Donna Wilker 
Barbara J. Barnard 
David Barvenik 
Kevin D. Batt 
Jeri Bayer 
Dinah Bear 
John Becker 
Barbara Bennett and Michael Chapman 
Richard and Made Berg 
Ruth J. Berkheiser 
Howard B. and Deborah J. Bernstein 
Carol Bernthal and Byron Rot 
Johanna Biebesheimer 
Michael Blackmore 
Susan Bomalaski 
Nancy Bonvillain 
Judith B Boucher 
Clare L. Boulanger 
Erika E. Bourguignon 
Helen Bourne 
Markley H. Boyer and Barbara Millen 
Susan L. Bradford 
Ann L. Bragdon 
Bonnie Bright 
Arik and Sally Brissenden 
Sherry P . Broder 
Alan R. Bromberg 
Lisa D. Brooks 
Delaine Brown 
Rebecca Buchanan 
John and Agnes Burke 
Kathy Burke 
Martha Bushnell 
Jerry S. and Barbara Buttrey 
Judy Butzine 
Gordon G. Campbell 
Jim Carlstedt 
John B. Carman 
Kyle Carney 
Juliet Carpenter 
Winston Cavert and Carol Witte Janet R. Celick 
Cengage Learning 
Deborah Challis 
Norman M. Chapin 
Murray and Linley Chapman 
Ira Chernus 
Nicholas Clinch 
Clemency Coggins 
Elizabeth H. Coker 
Barbara Collier 
Pom and Rita Collins 
E Colson 
Mariella Colvin and Will Toor 
Don Conway-Long 
Cynthia C. Cook 
William J. Coughlin and Ronald Bedard 
Asho Craine 
E. P . Creehan 
Douglas and Christina L. Crist 
Alma Cristina 
William H. and Jean G. Crocker 
Sean Cronin 
Malcolm A. Cross 
Carolyn A. Cunningham 
Judith Curby and Gayle Smalley 
Scott David 
Alison E. Davis 
Deidre Dawson 
Jennifer Dawson 
Larry L. Dekker 
Benjamin DeTroy 
Cyndra Dietz 
Joseph Difillippo 
Nick K. DiMatteo 
Estelle Disch 
Michael Dittmar 
William A. Doebele 
Mary Ann Donegan and Timothy Gray 
Michael Donham and Louise McMurray 
Mary and Jim Downton 
Serge Dreyer 
John Dunkelberger 
Adrian Durbin 
William and Katy Durham 
Timothy Earle David Eck 
Regina M. Edmonds 
Susan Enowitz 
Naomi and Alan Epstein 
Jane Fajans and Terence S. Turner 
Sigo Falk 
James Fall 
Brenda Farnell 
William and Barbara L. Fash 
Seymour Fass 
Cynthia K. Fischer 
Michael M. and Susann L. Fischer 
Margaret Fitzpatrick 
Flowers and Bones 
Beth Fluke 
John and Diane Forsdale 
Ron and Mary Forthofer 
Jeremy and Angela Foster 
Laurie Fox 
Samuel Freilich 
Robert French 
Michael Frome 
Douglas P . Fry 
Daniel Furst 
William A. Galison 
Brigette Gallet 
Israel N. Garcia 
Robert and Judith Gass 
Ronald Geatz 
Generations Family Health Center 
Helen C. Gildred 
William and Laura Glasner 
Richard Gnaedinger 
Peter D. Goldberg 
Felipe Gonzales 
Robert Goodland 
Ellen Goodman and Robert L. Levey 
James H. Goulder 
Deborah Grant 
Linda Greenhouse 
Edward and Brita B. Grover 
John A. and Mercedes Guarnaccia 
Steinthor V. Gudmundsson 
Greg Guirard 
James Hagen 
Andreas Halbach Thomas D. Hall 
Patrick Handley 
Martha S. Hansen 
Sean J. Hartzell 
Carol Hayman 
Wolfhart Heinrichs 
Eva Hersh 
Josiah M. Heyman 
Sue Hilton 
Susan Hinshon 
Dennis L. Holeman and Jeanette Sill-Holeman 
Jean Holmblad 
Michael H. Horn 
Richard A. Horvitz 
David Howenstein 
Luanne and Greg Hudson 
Roger Hunka 
John Hunt 
Carl and Lorena Hyde 
Joan A. Hyra 
Judith T. Irvine 
Anderson Isaacs 
David Ives 
Margaret Jackson 
Doranne and Jerome Jacobson 
Karin A. Jacobson and Robert Seeman 
Nora Jacquez 
Cheri and Keith Jameson 
Denise and Ervin Jindrich 
Willene Johnson 
Zanette Johnson 
Dawn Jones 
Graham Jones 
Brian Joseph 
Kate Judd and Robert Miller 
Stephen Jurovics 
Wendy C. Kaas 
Lawrence and Lucille N. Kaplan 
Michael Karathanos 
Patricia Karney and Sandra Bromer 
Ann R. Karnovsky 
Peter Kassebaum 
Dennis I. Kellogg 
Doris Kennedy 
Rita Kimber 
Gary W. King 
22 *  Benefactor - ($1,000.00 + )     Patron - ($500-$999)    Sustainer ($250-$499)    Sponsor ($100-$249) ANNUAL REPORT 2011 Kenneth Knop 
Margery C. Knott 
Marjorie and Ralph Koldinger 
Lawrence Koplik 
Debra Koppman 
Malcolm Kottler 
Elliott Krefetz 
Nancy Kricorian and James Schamus 
Joseph B. and Rachel Kruskal 
Catherine Kubitschek 
Atsushi Kurokawa 
Kurt Kutay 
Onawa Lacy 
Carl E. Lantz 
Katharine W. Larsen 
Gail A. Lauzzana 
Judith and Joseph Leader 
John Lennie 
Lydia Leon 
Jim Leonard 
Jean LeRoy 
Richard M. Leventhal 
Sherman L. and Alison Lewis 
Mark and Helena Licalzi 
Yehudit Lieberman 
The Lifshutz Foundation 
Olga F. Linares 
Jacqueline Lindenfeld 
Christopher Lish 
Peter Lomhoff 
George Lovejoy 
Mary Lunt 
Nancy Lurie 
Lush Cosmetics 
Jason J. and Becca Macy- Moore 
Eric and Janet Madsen 
John Maher and Ellen Sarkisian 
Lauren M. Malcolm 
Eda Malenky 
Alan Mallach 
Chris and Carolynn Maltas 
Sarojam K. Mankau 
Allen Maret 
Peter Masters 
Jenny Masur 
Marilyn Matelski 
Lisa Matthews Margaret S. Maurin 
Nelson Max 
Raymond A. Mayer 
Robert Mayer 
Marcella Mazzarelli 
Steven and Ursula Mcallister 
Valerie S. McBride 
Joe E. McCrea 
Julia McGaharan 
Daniel P . and Tammy McKanan 
Graham McKean 
Rachelle Mckenzie 
Richard and Deyne Meadow 
Nelder and Mariagnes Medrud 
Betty J. Meggers 
Isa-Kae Meksin 
Michael Merrifield 
Jane Meyerding 
Marie Meyers-Lloyd 
Melva L. Mills 
Stefania Minervino 
Helaine Minkus 
William P . Mitchell 
Michael and Lillian S. Moats 
Ellen G. Moot 
Joan L. Muellner 
Elizabeth Musicant 
Salomon Nahmad 
Amy Neel 
Jan Nespor 
Sarah Neusius 
Carol Newell 
Janice E. Newman 
Barbara P . Norfleet 
Joan K. O'Donnell 
Stephen J. O'Donnell 
Joseph M. O'Neal 
Rollin Odell 
Phyllis Odiseos 
Suzanne Olbricht 
Sutti Ortiz Koch 
Yasuyuki Owada 
Abigail L. Paine 
Charles Palmer 
Eva Patten 
Henry Paulus 
Neenah E. Payne 
James and Florence F. Peacock 
Anne Perls 
Paul D. Peterhans and Mary de Rosas 
Emily Peters 
Pauline E. and Mark Peters 
Barbara Peterson 
William O. Pick 
Sylvia Pigors 
Nora S. Plesofsky 
Jean Polgar 
John R. Pollard 
Jonathan Pool 
James H. and Karla Powell 
Joseph M. Prince 
Perry Prince 
Laura G. Putsche 
William B. Radcliffe 
Joelle Raichle 
Joanna Rankin 
Eleanor and Harmon Rasnow 
Claire Reinelt 
Joel Resnick 
Dave G. Rich 
Caralee and Fred Roberts 
Joyce and Steven D. Robinson 
Jo Raine Rodgers 
John P . Rogers 
Elizabeth A. Rose 
R. Thomas Rosin 
Barbara Rottier 
Dorothy Rupert 
Russell's Garden Center Charitable Foundation 
Jane and Morley Safer 
Sonya and Myron Salamon 
Samburu Legal Fund 
Manojkumar Saranathan 
Howard and Inge Sargent 
Mary Anne and Albert M. Saul 
Carl Schachter 
Michael and Barbara Schaefer 
Peggy Schear 
Norry Schneider 
Gail and Jonathan Schorsch 
Ann Schultz 
Tristan Scremin 
Thayer and Mary Scudder Edwin and Marcia Segal 
Thomas K. Seligman 
Sayre P . Sheldon 
Catherine N. Shelton 
John Sherry 
Daniel B. and Sybil M. Silver 
David Silver and Darlene Lorrain 
Adam Singerman 
David Slater 
Ruth Slater 
Katherine J. Smith 
D. N. Snarr 
John M. Snead 
Sappo Hill Soapworks 
Neal W. Sobania 
Mike Sowerby 
Pauline Spiegel and Peter Z. Grossman 
Miriam Stampfer 
Paul Stanley 
Linda Stanton 
Peter Stark-Tenny 
Burton Steck 
Jeri Steele 
Henry and Pamela Steiner 
Lynn Stephen 
David Stephenson and Lynn Musgraves 
Phillips Stevens 
William T. Stewart 
Andrew Stone 
John R. and Jeanne B. Stratford 
George and Helene E. Strauss 
Donald D. Stull 
Shigeki Takeo 
Barbara and Dennis Tedlock 
Barbara Thomas 
Richmond H. and Sarah Thomason 
Kris Thompson 
Amy Thomson 
Patricia K. Townsend 
Steve Trimble 
Paul Tripathi 
John and Suzanne Trostle 
Tyrell Learning Resources Center 
University of Notre Dame Anthropology Department Detlev and Dorothy Vagts 
Cornelia H. van der Ziel 
Alyssa Vass 
Charles C. Verharen 
Philip J. Vilardo 
Suzanne H. Vogel 
Michi Vojta 
Richard W. Von Korff 
C. M. Waag 
Randall Wade 
Charles Wagner 
Terri L. Waite 
Margaret Wallace 
Dana Walrath 
Gwen W. Wasicuna 
Paul Wehr 
Gene Weinstein 
Susan Weir 
Tom S. and Suzan Weisner 
Emily Wells 
Dolores Welty 
Alex and Margaret Wertheimer 
Doug Whalen 
Gretchen Whisenand 
Warner and Janet White 
Norman and Dorothea Whitten 
Kathy Widmer and Michael Zimmerman 
Robert Wild 
Steve Wiley 
Richard Wilk 
Yvonne Willemse 
Karen A. Willyoung 
Fiona Wilmot 
Barbara J. Wilson 
Andrew Windsor 
Matthew Wolf 
Edward Wolpow 
Carolyn Wood 
Graham S. Wood 
William Wood 
David Wyckoff 
Yoshiko Yamamoto 
Fred R. York 
Louise Young 
Susan E. Zarutskie 
David Ziemann 
Martin Zitnansky                                    
*  Benefactor - ($1,000.00 + )     Patron - ($500-$999)    Sustainer ($250-$499)    Sponsor ($100-$249) 
23 CULTURAL SURVIVAL SUPPORTiNg FUTURE gENERATiONS 
24 You can build the foundation of Cultural Survival and leave an important legacy for future genera -
tions. A gift from your estate, through a variety of estate planning vehicles such as wills, trusts, life 
insurance, and retirement assets, supports our mission while offering tax advantages to you and 
your family. 
The following supporters have included Cultural Survival in their estate plans. We sincerely thank all 
of them for making such a significant gift to support the mission of Cultural Survival. Thank you! 
Cultural Survival Legacy Society Members 
James A. Baldwin 
Sharon Doll 
Louis Gecenok 
Dennis L. Holeman and Jeanette Sill-Holeman 
Stephen R. Judge 
Joan Lester 
Joseph M. O'Neal 
Jerome C. and Janet Regier Sharon Doll 
When Sharon Doll of Lincoln, Nebraska first heard in the news about the threats 
to Indigenous People she thought, “It was tragic to lose these cultures since we 
have a lot to learn from their knowledge.” After searching for non-profits working 
with Indigenous communities, Sharon came across Cultural Survival and liked 
what she saw.  T wenty years later Sharon is still supporting Cultural Survival! 
Recently, Sharon decided to take her support to the next step and included 
Cultural Survival in her estate plans. She says, “It is important to give back to your 
community.” 
We are so grateful to Sharon and others like her who have decided to support 
Cultural Survival through gifts from their estates. With their help, Cultural Survival 
will continue our mission to partner with Indigenous Peoples defending their lands, 
languages, and cultures. 
25 ANNUAL REPORT 2011 Fiscal Year 2011 
expenses Fiscal Year 2011 
income 
General Contributions  
& Subscriptions 
Investment 
Grant Revenue 
Bazaar Program  
Communications   
& Publications 
Other Income 
Total $775,553 
$307 
$340,185 
$465,768 
$15,109 
$24,104 
$1,620,007 48% 
21% 
29% 
1% 
1% 
Communications & Publications 1% 
General Contributions  
& Subscriptions 
48% Bazaar Program  
29% 
Audited  Grant Revenue 
21% Other Income  
1% 
Fundraising 
General Administration 
Endangered Languages  
Program 
Communications   
& Publications 
Community Radio  
Program 
Bazaar Program 
Global Response  
Program 
Total $129,867 
$105,634 
$ 240,913  
$363,163 
$ 160,275  
$ 451,572  
$ 161,334  
$1,612,758 8% 
7% 
15% 
23% 
10% 
27% 
10% 
Fundraising 
8% 
Bazaar Program 
27% 
Communications  
& Publications  
23% 
Audited Global 
Response 
Program 
10% 
Endangered 
Languages 
Program 
15% 
Community 
Radio 
Program 
10% General 
Administration 
7% FiNANCiAL iNFORMATiON This report covers financial information for 
September 1, 2010 to August 31, 2011. CULTURAL SURVIVAL 
27 Getting the message out about Indigenous Peoples’ 
rights, struggles, and achievements and initiating a 
dialog around these issues is an essential part of 
Cultural Survival’s work. 
Over the past year, Cultural Survival has reassessed its 
communications effectiveness and strategy, and has 
redefined its goals and objectives. All of our 
communications vehicles continue to provide timely 
information about Indigenous Peoples' struggles and 
achievements, highlighting the implementation of the 
UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. 
However, we have decided to showcase Cultural 
Survival’s programmatic work and the work of our 
partners much more prominently. At the same time, it 
is also important to promote the Cultural Survival 
brand and raise the organization’s profile through 
social networking, new technology, and media 
outreach. The current objectives of communications 
reflect these shifts in strategy. 
Website 
Our website (www.cs.org) continues to be a major 
focus of our communications efforts. Over the past 
year it has seen constant revision and improvement, 
with a new home page design and new structural 
changes to make navigation easier for site visitors. We 
also have added much more video and multimedia to 
the site as well as the ability to share content via 
social networking. The website continues to receive 
over 1.5 million visitors per year. Social Networking 
We also have become much more connected to our 
donors and supporters through social media sites like 
Facebook and Twitter, where we are building up our 
following. We have decided to engage much more 
with our donors by highlighting their stories about 
why they support our organization as part of our 
communications strategy. We also regularly share 
insider information about our campaigns and 
programs. Please follow us on Facebook and Twitter 
(facebook.com/culturalsurvival and @CSORG) to learn 
about current international Indigenous stories and 
trends. 
E-newsletter 
Our monthly e-newsletter now reaches about 20,000 
readers, carrying updates on our various advocacy 
campaigns, news from the wider world of Indigenous 
rights, and information about Cultural Survival 
programs and events. 
Cunturân Survlvân Quârtirny Magazine 
The Cultural Survival Quarterly also underwent some 
significant changes at the end of this year. We have 
refocused the magazine to highlight Cultural Survival's 
direct work with Indigenous communities and to 
familiarize our supporters with the everyday struggles, 
efforts, and successes of our Indigenous partners. We 
want to share information about the people we are 
working with, and showcase how our supporters' 
donations impact the daily lives of Indigenous people. gETTiNg OUR MESSAgE OUT 
ANNUAL REPORT 2011 “Cultural Survival brings insight and social justice together beautifully. By supporting 
the rights of Indigenous Peoples, Cultural Survival is not only doing the right thing, but 
supporting the survival of all people. Humanity needs the wisdom of our diverse 
cultures in order to survive and thrive.” —Jeanne Grossetti, Cultural Survival supporter Cultural Survival 
Main Office: 
215 Prospect Street     
Cambridge, MA  02139 USA    
t: 617.441.5400    
f: 617.441.5417 
culturalsurvival@cs.org 
www.cs.org 
Cultural Survival is a 501(c)(3) 
federal tax-exempt organization. 