Public deserves to know what's in CIA torture report: Guest opinion - oregonlive.comSkip to ArticleSet weatherBack To Main MenuCloseCustomize Your WeatherSet Your Location:Enter City and State or Zip CodeSubmitSubscribeNews never stops. Neither do we. Support OregonLive.OpinionPublic deserves to know what's in CIA torture report: Guest opinionUpdated: Jul. 15, 2013, 10:00 a.m.|Published: Jul. 15, 2013, 9:00 a.m.NEW!By Guest Columnist | The OregonianBy David Leslie and Richard KillmerYes, America, we tortured. And there is a step that Oregonians can take now to help ensure that U.S.-sponsored torture never happens again.The torture in which our government engaged was illegal, abhorrent and cruel. Detainees died as a result of American torture, and former President George W. Bush, Vice President Dick Cheney and Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld knew about it and were involved in authorizing it.It wasn't just the White House, Department of Defense and CIA that were engaged in torture, but also institutions that have traditionally held longstanding commitments to integrity. Our Justice Department "repeatedly gave erroneous legal sanction and misrepresented facts," according to theConstitution Project, which recently published a two-year, 500-page study describing in detail American torture as egregious. Furthermore, the U.S. Army modified its manual to incorporate acts of torture. And even the medical community violated its "above all, do no harm" creed.So, where do we go from here? President Barack Obama's approach is to put this matter quietly behind us. But democracy and torture cannot peacefully coexist in the same body politic. For there to be a catalyst for change, we call on the government to take several important steps.Guantanamo must be shuttered forever, and officials there must stop force-feeding detainees. The United States must be sure to refrain from transferring detainees to countries where they will be subjected to further torture. And U.S. officials must cease to invoke "state-secrets privilege" to deflect lawsuits. The public deserves the truth.It's time for our government to disclose all information related to U.S. government-sponsored torture to the American people. For this to happen, it is crucial that the Senate Intelligence Committee share its report on CIA torture with the public. It was adopted by the committee in December, but months later, it remains hidden from public view. Our ownSen. Ron Wyden, as a member of the Intelligence Committee, has an important role. He should urge his colleagues to vote for the report's public release.While its findings are a difficult pill to swallow, let us not look at the Constitution Project's report as a harsh condemnation of who we are as a nation, but rather as a catalyst for reflection and a chance for a renewed commitment to the United States' refusal to use torture -- a position held by faith communities throughout our country.According to the report, "Task Force members believe that having as thorough as possible understanding of what occurred ... and a willingness to acknowledge any shortcomings -- strengthens the nation and equips us to better cope with the next crisis and ones after that."We must know the truth so that we do not allow history to repeat itself. We have a moral obligation to learn from our mistakes and to make better decisions in the future.The Senate Intelligence Committee should follow this lead. By releasing its report, its members can demonstrate their commitment to pick up the ball and finish the work of once again becoming a nation that lives out its founders' dedication to transparency and democracy. Sen. Wyden can be a leader in this effort.David Leslie is executive director of Ecumenical Ministries of Oregon and a board member of the National Religious Campaign Against Torture. The Rev. Richard Killmer is executive director of NRCAT.If you purchase a product or register for an account through one of the links on our site, we may receive compensation.DisclaimerRegistration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of ourUser Agreement,Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement,and Your California Privacy Rights(User Agreement updated 1/1/21. Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement updated 7/1/2022).Cookie Settings© 2022 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us). The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.Ad Choices