November 18, 2013 
 The Honorable Harry Reid Senate Majority Leader 522 Hart Senate Office Bldg Washington, DC 20510 The Honorable Mitch McConnell Senate Minority Leader 317 Russell Senate Office Bldg Washington, DC 20510 
 cc: Members of the U.S. Senate 
 
Dear Senator, 
 
The undersigned leaders of various faith bac kgrounds ask you to support sections 1031, 1032, 
and 1033 of the Senate Armed Services Committ ee’s version of S. 1197 (the Fiscal Year 2014 
National Defense Authorization Act).  These provis ions, while still restri ctive, would allow our 
government to take practical st eps toward drawing dow n the prisoner population in Guantanamo 
Bay and eventually closi ng the detention center.  
 
Although we are of many faiths, we share common convictions which lead us to support closing 
Guantanamo.  First, we believe that torture is  morally wrong.  Second, both as people of faith 
and as Americans, we believe that  indefinite detention without charge or trial is contrary to the 
founding values of our country.  Guantanamo is a place where prisoners were tortured and where the vast majority of the detainees  continue to be held indefinite ly without charge or trial.  
Closing it is the right thing to do.    
More than half of the prisoners in Guantanamo  have been held there for years despite having 
been cleared for transfer.  Section 1031 would s implify the process of tr ansferring detainees if 
they are not a threat to the United St ates or if their transfer is in the national security interest of 
the United States.  It also provi des a process for transferring pr isoners who, in the future, are 
determined to no longer pose any threat to the United States.  These are reasonable changes and 
should be supported.  
Many of the detainees in Guantanamo face serious threats to their health.  Section 1032 allows 
for temporary transfers for medical treatment when  that treatment is necessary to prevent death 
or imminent significant injury or harm, and it would be excessively costly to treat the detainee in 
Guantanamo.  This is an important humanitarian provision that will also save our country money 
and should be supported. 
 
The right to a trial is a core American value.  Many of the detainees in Guantanamo have been 
there for over a decade, yet still have no real prospect  of facing trial or justice.  So far, military 
commissions have encountered se emingly endless delays and have  produced seven convictions 
at a cost of nearly $600 million.  Section 1033 gives the government the option of trying 
detainees in federal courts when doing so is in th e national security interest of the United States.  
- 1 of 4 -  This is a reasonable provision that may finally lead to the trial of many Guantanamo detainees.  
It should be supported. 
 
Though limited, these are practical, common sens e provisions which place our great nation on 
the path toward solving the seemingly intractable  problems posed by Guantanamo.  In an era of 
austerity, they also provide good st ewardship of taxpayer dollars by helping to eliminate wasteful 
spending.  More importantly, they begin to addr ess a serious moral dilemma – our nation cannot 
be a beacon of liberty and justice while cont inuing to operate an offshore prison which 
disregards the rule of law.  It is ti me for us to end this moral crisis.   
 
Please support Sections 1031, 1032, and 1033 of the Senate Armed Services Committee version 
of S. 1197.    
Sincerely, 
 
The Most Rev. Katharine Jefferts Schori 
Presiding Bishop and Primate The Episcopal Church   The Rev. Elizabeth Eaton Presiding Bishop Evangelical Lutheran Church in America  Rev. Dr. A. Roy Medley General Secretary American Baptist Churches USA  Archbishop Vicken Aykazian Legate Armenian Church of America  Rev. Joel Boot Executive Director Christian Reformed Church in North America  Stanley J. Noffsinger General Secretary Church of the Brethren  Rabbi Jill Jacobs Executive Director T’ruah: The Rabbinic Call for Human Rights Rev. Gradye Parsons Stated Clerk of the General Assembly The Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.)  Bishop Rosemarie Wenner President, The Council of Bishops The United Methodist Church  Kavneet Singh General Secretary World Sikh Council - America Region  Rev. Dr. Sharon E. Watkins General Minister and President Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)  Rev. Peter Morales President Unitarian Universalist Association of Congregations  Rev. Dr. Tom De Vries General Secretary Reformed Church in America  Dr. Sayyid M. Syeed National Director of Interfaith & Community Alliances Islamic Society of North America  
- 2 of 4 -  Rev. Dr. William F. Schulz 
President and CEO Unitarian Universalist Service Committee  Diane Randall Executive Secretary Friends Committee on National Legislation  Rev. Richard Killmer Executive Director National Religious Campaign Against Torture  Sandy Sorensen Director of Washington Office United Church of Christ, Justice and Witness Ministries  Sr. Patricia J. Chappell Executive Director Pax Christi USA  Rabbi Robert Dobrusin Co-Chair, T’ruah: The Rabbinic Call for Human Rights  
Patrick Carolan 
Executive Director Franciscan Action Network  Rev. Laura Everett Executive Director Massachusetts Council of Churches  Rev. Steve Copley Director Arkansas Interfaith Alliance  Adrian Miller Executive Director Colorado Council of Churches  Rev. Scott Anderson Executive Director Wisconsin Council of Churches   Jim Winkler General Secretary, United Methodist General Board of Church and Society  Barbara Weinstein Director Commission on Social Action of Reform Judaism  Sr. Simone Campbell Executive Director NETWORK: A Catholic Social Justice Lobby  Shan Cretin General Secretary American Friends Service Committee  Very Rev. John Edmunds, S.T. President Conference of Major Superiors of Men  Dr. Craig M. Watts Co-Moderator Disciples Peace Fellowship  
Gerry Lee 
Director Maryknoll Office for Global Concerns  Rev. J. George Reed Executive Director North Carolina Council of Churches  David Leslie Executive Director Ecumenical Ministries of Oregon  Rev. Dr. Russ Meyer Executive Director Florida Council of Churches  Linda Lee Snyder Interim Executive Director New Hampshire Council of Churches   
- 3 of 4 -  - 4 of 4 -  Rev. William Barter 
Executive Director Maine Council of Churches  Joan Diefenbach Executive Director New Jersey Council of Churches  Rev. Brian McLaren Author/Speaker  Rev. Dr. Jerry D. Campbell President Claremont Lincoln University Rev. Sandra L. Strauss Director of Public Advocacy Pennsylvania Council of Churches  Rev. Canon Peg Chemberlin Executive Director Minnesota Council of Churches  Rabbi Nancy Fuchs-Kreimer Reconstructionist Rabbinical College  
 