  By James Ridgeway and Jean Casella  
“Dear America,” reads a letter from An-
thony Gay, who is being held in solitary 
confinement in Tamms supermax prison 
in Illinois, “It is like this place is designed 
to psychologically kill you. How could 
America be so cruel to its own people?” 
As reported in the Belleville News -
Democrat , Gay’s lawyers claim that a 
seven -year term in round -the-clock isola-
tion damaged their client’s mind so deep-
ly that he routinely mutilates himself, and 
at one point cut off a piece of his genitals 
and hung it from a string on his cell door. 
Originally sentenced to seven years for 
robbery and assault, Gay is now serving 
99 years for throwing his feces at guards.  
Anthony Gay’s case is extreme, but far 
from unique. Across the United States, 
countless numbers of inmates with men-
tal illness are being held 23 - to 24 -hour 
solitary confinement. With state psychi-
atric hospitals closed and community 
mental health funds cut to the bone, pris-
ons and jails are now our largest inpa-
tient facilities for the mentally ill --and 
solitary confinement cells, in particular, 
have become America’s new asylums.  
While there are no national statistics to 
indicate how many prisoners with mental 
illness end up in solitary, a 2003 report 
from Human Rights Watch found that, 
based on available data from states 
around the country, one -third to one -half 
of prisoners held in “secure housing 
units” (SHUs), and “special management 
units” (SMUs) suffered from mental ill-
ness. Since the total population of in-
mates in solitary confinement is thought 
to number 70,000 or more, tens of thou-
sands of prisoners with mental illness 
may be in isolation on any given day.  
The Human Rights Watch report con-
cluded that “persons with mental illness 
often have difficulty complying with strict 
prison rules, particularly when there is 
scant assistance to help them manage 
their disorders….Eventually accumulat-
ing substantial histories of disciplinary 
infractions, they land for prolonged peri-ods in disciplinary or administrative seg-
regation.” In other words, they are placed 
in solitary precisely because they display 
the symptoms of untreated mental ill-
ness. Given that isolation has been shown 
to cause severe psychological trauma 
even in prisoners without preexisting 
psychiatric conditions, it would be diffi-
cult to imagine a more damaging place to 
incarcerate the mentally ill. As another 
Tamms prisoner suggested, "Lock your-
self in your bathroom for the next 10 
years and tell me how it will affect your 
mind."  
At the all -solitary Colorado State Peniten-
tiary, Troy Anderson has spent the last 10 
years in isolation, never seeing the sun or 
the surrounding mountains. Anderson 
has been diagnosed with ADHD, bipolar 
disorder, intermittent explosive disorder, 
anti-social personality disorder, cognitive 
disorders, a seizure disorder and sub-
stance dependence, and he has attempted 
suicide many times, starting at the age of 
10. His mental health treatment in prison 
has consisted largely of intermittent and 
inappropriate medications and scant 
therapy, most of it conducted through a 
slot in his solid steel cell door. By Colora-
do's own estimate, 37 per cent of the pris-
oners in its isolation units suffer from 
mental illness.  
Other prisoners with mental illness do 
not survive their time in solitary confine-
ment. Studies of prison suicides in New 
York and California found a vastly dis-
proportionate number of them took place 
in isolation cells.  
Terry Kupers, a professor at the Wright 
Institute in Berkley and a nationally rec-
ognized expert on the psychological ef-
fects of solitary confinement, testified in a 
Wisconsin case that “confinement of pris-
oners suffering from serious mental ill-
nesses, or who are prone to serious men-
tal illness or suicide, is an extreme hazard 
to their mental health and wellbeing. It 
causes irreparable emotional damage and 
psychiatric disability as well an extreme 
mental anguish and suffering, and in 
some cases presents a risk of death by suicide.” A California judge put it some-
what differently: In a case concerning 
Pelican Bay State Prison, he said that 
placing prisoners with mental illness in 
solitary confinement was “the mental 
equivalent of putting an asthmatic in a 
place with little air.”  
Research indicates that even for prison-
ers without underlying mental health 
problems, long -term solitary confine-
ment can alter neural and therefore psy-
chological states. Wilbert Rideau, a re-
nowned prison journalist (and now a free 
man), describes in his recent memoir In 
the Place of Justice the "bone -cold loneli-
ness" of life in solitary confinement on 
Angola's death row —“removed from fam-
ily or anything resembling a friend, and 
just being there, with no purpose or 
meaning to my life, cramped in a cage 
smaller than an American bathroom. The 
lonesomeness was only increased by the 
constant cacophony of men in adjacent 
cells hurling shouted insults, curses, and 
arguments —not to mention the occasion-
al urine or faeces concoction. Deprivation 
of both physical exercise and meaningful 
social interaction were so severe...that 
some men went mad while others feigned 
lunacy in order to get transferred to the 
hospital for the criminally insane."  
In recent years, lawsuits and grassroots 
movements in California, Illinois, Maine, 
New York, and elsewhere have spurred 
new policies or legislation limiting the 
use of solitary confinement on prisoners 
with serious mental illness. These chang-
es represent an important step toward 
more humane treatment. Yet until a ma-
jor shift in thinking and policymaking 
takes place, we will continue to see thou-
sands of inmates with mental illness suf-
fering in solitary.  
A version of this article is forthcoming in  
Fortune News , the publication of the For-
tune Society. The mission of the New 
York -based Fortune Society “is to sup-
port successful reentry from prison and 
promote alternatives to incarceration, 
thus strengthening the fabric of our com-
munities.” See www.fortunesociety.org.  
Suffering in Solitary: The Plight of Prisoners with Mental Illness  News from a Nation in Lockdown  
www.solitarywatch.com  
Print Edition, Fall/Winter 2011  2 About Solitary Watch  
Solitary Watch is a web -based project aimed at bringing solitary confinement out of the shadows and into the light of the 
public square. Our mission is to provide the public —as well as practicing attorneys, legal scholars, law enforcement and 
corrections officers, policymakers, educators, advocates, and prisoners –with the first centralized source for background 
research, unfolding developments, and original reporting on solitary confinement in the United States.  
Solitary Watch produces a daily blog, as well as longer investigative articles and fact sheets on various aspects of solitary  
confinement, and maintains a comprehensive library of resources on solitary confinement. It also publishes “Voices from 
Solitary” —firsthand writing and video testimonies that give a human face to the facts and figures, and to a subset of in-
mates that is even more invisible than the prison population at large.  
Solitary Watch is on the web at  www.solitarywatch.com . 
The print edition of Solitary Watch is produced quarterly, and includes a small selection of pieces from the site. It is 
available free of charge to current and former prisoners, to prisoners’ families and advocates, and to non -profit organiza-
tions. To receive a copy, send a request to the address or email below.  
We also welcome accounts of life in solitary confinement, as well as stories, poems, essays, and artwork by inmates who 
have served time in isolation. Please send contributions to “Voices from Solitary” at the address below.  
PO Box 11374, Washington, DC 20008 / solitarywatchnews@gmail.com  
 
Santa Was in Prison and Jesus Got the Death Penalty  
By Jean Casella and James Ridgeway  
As Christmas is celebrated in Incarcer-
ation Nation, it’s worth remembering 
certain things about the two figures 
who dominate this holiday.  
As more than 3,000 Americans sit on 
death row, we revere the birth of a god-
ly man who was arrested, “tried,” sen-
tenced, and put to death by the state. 
The Passion is the story of an execu-
tion, and the Stations of the Cross trace 
the path of a Dead Man Walking.  
Less well known is the fact that Saint 
Nicholas, the early Christian saint who 
inspired Santa Claus, was once a pris-
oner, like one in every 100 Americans 
today. Though he was beloved for his 
kindness and generosity, Nicholas ac-
quired sainthood not only by giving 
alms, but in part by performing a mira-
cle that more or less amounted to a 
prison break.  
Nicholas was the 4th -century Greek 
Bishop of Myra (in present -day Tur-
key). Under the Roman emperor Dio-
cletian, who persecuted Christians, 
Nicholas spent some five years in pris-
on–and according to some accounts, in 
solitary confinement.  
Under Constantine, the first Christian emperor, Nicholas fared better until 
the Council of Nicaea, in 325 A.D. 
There, after having a serious theologi-
cal argument with another powerful 
bishop, Nicholas became so enraged 
that he walked across the room and 
slapped the man.  
It was illegal for one bishop to strike 
another. According to an account pro-
vided by the St. Nicholas Center: “The 
bishops stripped Nicholas of his bish-
op’s garments, chained him, and threw 
him into jail. That would keep Nicholas 
away from the meeting. When the 
Council ended a final decision would 
be made about his future.”  
 Nicholas spent the night praying for 
guidance, and was visited by Jesus and 
Mary. “When the jailer came in the 
morning, he found the chains loose on 
the floor and Nicholas dressed in bish-
op’s robes, quietly reading the Scrip-
tures.” It was determined that no one 
could have visited or helped him dur-
ing the night. Constantine ordered 
Nicholas freed and reinstated as the 
Bishop of Myra, and his feat would 
later be declared one of many miracles 
performed by the saint.  
Saint Nicholas lived on to serve the 
poor during the devastating famine 
that hit his part of Turkey in 342 AD. 
He is reported to have anonymously 
visited starving families at night and 
distributed gold coins to help them buy 
scarce food.  
But here in the United States two thou-
sand years later, Christians go to 
church to worship an executed savior 
and shop to commemorate an incar-
cerated saint. And most Americans 
give little thought to their 2 million 
countrymen who are spending this 
Christmas behind bars.  
To all those spending the holidays 
alone in a cell, we send wishes for 
peace and strength.   
3  By Joseph Dole  
Editor’s Note: Joseph Dole is serving 
a life sentence without parole. For the 
past eight years he has been in soli-
tary confinement at Tamms super-
max in Illinois. His writing has been 
honored by the PEN Prison Writing 
Contest and appears in the book 
Lockdown Prison Heart. The follow-
ing is excerpted from a longer essay.  
Rarely am I asked what it’s like to 
serve a life -without -parole sentence. 
Arguing for a death sentence for my 
first felony conviction, the State’s At-
torney implored the judge not to allow 
me to spend the rest of my life on a 
virtual “vacation” in prison. I can une-
quivocally state that it is not vacation.  
A life -without -parole sentence means 
a million things, because, as its name 
suggests, it encompasses a person’s 
entire remaining life.  
It means enduring being reduced to a 
second -class citizen in the eyes of 
most people. It means decades of dis-
crimination from the courts and pub-
lic. “Prisoner’” “inmate,” or “convict” 
each have a strictly pejorative use in 
the media or pop culture. Those terms 
become the sole defining characteris-
tic of a man’s entire character.  
It means that courts will turn a blind 
eye to any act against you unless it 
causes “atypical and significant hard-
ship.”...So when you’re stripped naked 
and left in a concrete box with nothing 
but a toilet for four days without 
cause, as a prisoner you have no re-
course in the courts. When you’re 
beaten to a bloody mess while hand-
cuffed, as a prisoner you’re more likely 
to encounter a jury that will conclude 
you deserved what you got, regardless 
of the circumstances.  
It means that after being “spared” the 
death penalty and receiving your life -
without -parole sentence, you lack all 
the procedural safeguards against a 
wrongful conviction that a death sen-
tence would have entailed, solely be-
cause you were found undeserving of 
immediate death. How ironic it is that 
the worse you are deemed to be, the 
better chance of proving your inno-
cence and regaining your freedom.  It means a lifetime of censorship, 
where you’re told what books and 
magazines you can read, what movies 
can watch, even what hairstyles you 
can sport, and where every letter com-
ing in or going out is subject to inspec-
tion.  
It means a complete lack of privacy 
forever, and a complete indifference to 
your physical and medical health until 
someone fears being sued. It means a 
constant, heightened risk of catching a 
deadly disease…  
It means three meals a day of the 
poorest quality food that the least 
amount of money can buy without 
killing the inmate population.  
It means you’re constantly being told 
that you aren’t worth rehabilitation 
and thus are ineligible for nearly every 
educational or vocational program. 
Your life sentence disqualifies you 
from any state or federal grants to 
pursue an education and even the In-
mate Scholarship Fund (founded by a 
prisoner) has no qualms about telling 
you that you’re ineligible for a scholar-
ship because you’re never going to get 
out and contribute to society.  
It means convincing yourself daily 
that your life has value even when the 
rest of the world tells you you’re 
worthless. It’s a lifetime spent won-
dering what your true potential really 
is, and yearning for the chance to find 
out…  
It means that you’re especially vulner-
able to incomprehensible punish-
ments, such as a lifetime of discipli-
nary segregation. I was given indeter-
minate disciplinary segregation after 
being found guilty of my sole discipli-
nary infraction. That was 8 years ago, 
yet here I remain. I’ve been told (on 
more than one occasion) that I will 
never be allowed out of indeterminate 
disciplinary segregation. So I will con-
tinue to endure conditions for the rest 
of my life which are known to cause 
mental illness after just 3 months.  
It means that I will never taste anoth-
er Hostess cake. Nor play softball or 
any group activity ever again. More 
importantly, it means that I will never 
have physical contact with another human being for the rest of my life, 
including my 11 - and 12 -year -old 
daughters.  
It means being incapable of taking 
care of your grandparents and parents 
as they reach their final years. It 
means missing out on every important 
event in your children’s lives, unable 
to raise them; impotent to protect 
them or assist them in any meaningful 
way. It means they’ll grow up resent-
ing you for the thousands of times 
they needed you and you weren’t 
there.  
A life -without -parole sentence means 
constant contemplation of a wasted 
life. A continual despair as to your ina-
bility to accomplish anything signifi-
cant with your remaining years. A life 
spent watching as each of your family 
members and friends slowly drift away 
from you leaving you in a vacuum, 
devoid of any enduring relationships.  
It’s a persistent dashing of hopes as 
appeal after appeal is arbitrarily de-
nied. It is a permanent experiment in 
self-delusion as you strive to convince 
yourself that there is still hope. It’s a 
compounding of second upon second, 
minute upon minute, hour upon hour, 
of wasted existence, and decade upon 
decade of mental and emotional tor-
ture culminating in a final sentence of 
death by incarceration.  
These, though, are simply futile at-
tempts to describe the indescribable. 
It’s like trying to describe a broken 
heart or communicate what it feels 
like to mourn the death of your soul 
mate. The words to convey the pain do 
not exist. When you’re serving a life -
without -parole sentence it’s as if 
you’re experiencing the broken heart 
of knowing you’ll never love or be 
loved again in any normal sense of the 
word, while simultaneously mourning 
the death of the man you could have 
and should have been. The only differ-
ence is that you never recover, and can 
move on from neither the heart break 
nor the death because the pain is re-
newed each morning you wake up to 
realize that you’re still here, sentenced 
to life -without -parole. It’s a fresh day 
of utter despair, lived over and over 
for an entire lifetime.  Voices from Solitary: The Meaning of “Life”  4 On October 18, the UN’s chief torture 
investigator called on UN members 
nations to ban nearly all uses of soli-
tary confinement in prisons. Juan 
Mendez, the UN Special Rapporteur 
on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and 
Degrading Treatment, warned that 
solitary confinement causes serious 
mental and physical harm and often 
amounts to torture.  
Mendez presented a written report on 
solitary confinement to the UN Gen-
eral Assembly’s Human Rights Com-
mittee, which singled out for criticism 
the routine use of supermax isolation 
in the United States. He also partici-
pated in a forum on the “dangerous 
overuse” of solitary confinement in 
U.S. prison and jails, along with Amer-
ican civil rights and human rights 
groups that included the American 
Civil Liberties Union, Human Rights 
Watch, and National Religious Cam-
paign Against Torture.  
Mendez stated that solitary confine-
ment “‘can amount to torture or cruel, 
inhuman and degrading treatment or 
punishment when used as a punish-
ment, during pretrial detention, indefi-nitely or for a prolonged period, for 
persons with mental disabilities or ju-
veniles.’” He continued, “‘Segregation, 
isolation, separation, cellular, lock-
down, supermax, the hole, secure 
housing unit…whatever the name, soli-
tary confinement should be banned by 
states as a punishment or extortion [of 
information] technique.’”  
Mendez was precise in defining soli-
tary confinement, and in outlining the 
limitations that should be placed on its 
use. He stated:  
“I am of the view that juveniles, 
given their physical and mental 
immaturity, should never be sub-
jected to solitary confinement. 
Equally, in order not to exacer-
bate a previously existing mental 
condition, individuals with men-
tal disabilities should be provid-
ed with proper medical or psy-
chiatric care and under no cir-
cumstances should they ever be 
subjected to solitary confine-
ment. My recommendations are, 
first, to see if we can have a com-
plete ban on prolonged or indefi-
nite solitary confinement. And I more or less arbitrarily defined 
that as anything beyond 15 days 
of solitary confinement, meaning 
someone being confined to a cell 
for at least 22 hours a day.”  
As Reuters reports, “Mendez told re-
porters he conceded that short -term 
solitary confinement was admissible 
under certain circumstances, such as 
the protection of lesbian, gay or bisex-
ual detainees or people who had fallen 
foul of prison gangs. But he said there 
was ‘no justification for using it as a 
penalty, because that’s an inhumane 
penalty.’” Mendez also made reference 
to the case of accused WikiLeaker 
Bradley Manning, who spent over 
eight months in solitary at a military 
brig in Virginia before being moved to 
general population to await court -
martial. Mendez said he “planned to 
issue a report on Manning and other 
cases in the next few weeks.”  
At a press conference, Mendez told 
reporters that he himself had spent 
three days in solitary in the 1970s in 
his native Argentina, then under mili-
tary dictatorship, and they were “the 
three longest days in my life.”  UN Torture Investigator Calls for Ban on Solitary Confinement  
 On November 6, the New York Times 
featured an op -ed titled “Tortured by 
Solitude.” The author of the piece is 
Sarah Shourd, one of three Americans 
who were imprisoned in Iran begin-
ning in the summer of 2009, after they 
were arrested and charged with espio-
nage while hiking on the border with 
Iraqi Kurdistan. Her two male com-
panions were jailed together, but 
Shourd was placed in solitary confine-
ment in a 10 -by-14-foot cell in Iran’s 
notorious Evin Prison, and held there 
for more than a year.  
”It’s impossible to exaggerate how 
much the company of another human 
being means when you’ve been cut off 
from the world and stripped of your 
rights and freedom,” Shourd writes. 
“After two months with next to no hu-
man contact, my mind began to slip. 
Some days, I heard phantom footsteps 
coming down the hall. I spent large 
portions of my days crouched down on 
all fours by a small slit in the door, lis-tening. In the periphery of my vision, I 
began to see flashing lights, only to 
jerk my head around to find that noth-
ing was there. More than once, I beat 
at the walls until my knuckles bled and 
cried myself into a state of exhaustion. 
At one point, I heard someone scream-
ing, and it wasn’t until I felt the hands 
of one of the friendlier guards on my 
face, trying to revive me, that I realized 
the screams were my own.”  
After describing the devastating psy-
chological effects of isolation, Shourd 
decries its widespread use in the Unit-
ed States, which has “the most prison-
ers in solitary confinement in the 
world.”  
“Of the 14 and a half months, or 9,840 
hours, I was held as a political hostage 
at Evin prison in Tehran, I spent 9,495 
of them in solitary confinement,” 
Shourd writes. “When I was released 
just over a year ago, I was shocked to 
find out that the United Nations Con-vention Against Torture, one of the few 
conventions the United States has rati-
fied, does not mention solitary con-
finement. I learned that there are un-
told numbers of prisoners around the 
world in solitary, including an estimat-
ed 20,000 to 25,000 in the United 
States.” (The number is actually con-
siderably higher.)  
Shourd concludes: “You don’t have to 
beat someone to inflict pain and suf-
fering; the psychological torture of 
prolonged solitary confinement leaves 
no marks, but its effects are severe and 
long -lasting…It’s wonderful to begin 
my life again, and every day I feel more 
free, but I can’t help thinking about the 
thousands of others who are alone 
right now. I believe the excessive use of 
solitary confinement constitutes cruel 
and unusual punishment — that it is 
torture. The United Nations should 
proscribe this inhumane practice, and 
the United States should take the lead 
role in its eradication.”  Freed from an Iranian Prison, American Speaks Out Against Solitary  