  By Carol Schaeffer  
Dolores Canales can ’t seem to find her 
way around like she used to. She has 
spent her whole life in Anaheim, Califor-
nia, yet says she gets lost even in her 
hometown. She feels that her 20 years in 
prison, and the 18 months she spent in 
solitary confinement, has resulted in a 
permanent change to her sense of space 
and direction.  
Research indicates that extended isola-
tion can not only significantly alter the 
structure of the brain, adding to research 
that has long indicated the extensive psy-
chological damage caused by solitary 
confinement. At a panel discussion last 
month at the University of Pittsburgh 
School of Law, part of a  two-day confer-
ence on solitary confinement, neurosci-
entists testified to the degenerative neu-
rological effects of isolation.  
“The brain is comprised of 100 billion 
cells, 500 trillion connections, ” said Dr. 
Huda Akil, distinguished professor of 
neurosciences at the University of Michi-
gan. “It is an organ of social function. The 
brain needs to interact in the world. ” 
Akil is a specialist in the effects of emo-
tions on brain structure, particularly the 
effects of stress hormones. According to 
Akil, stress hormones can make dramatic 
changes to the hippocampus, the 
“concierge of the brain. ” The hippocam-
pus controls how our senses are translat-
ed to the rest of our brain, and is in 
charge of our relation to outside space.  
Stress hormones have been shown to 
“rewrite your DNA program, ” and rewire 
the brain, said Akil. These hormonal ef-
fects on the hippocampus change space 
perception and directional positioning. 
The “internal GPS ” of the brain is dis-
turbed, depth perception is altered and where the body lies in relation to other 
objects in space is uncalibrated.  
For Canales, an activist and leader of 
California Families Against Solitary Con-
finement, this rings particularly true. She 
says her sense of space is permanently 
altered. “You should see my apartment. 
When I first moved in, I couldn ’t stand not 
being able to see the door. ” To this day, 
she says, friends tell her that her small 
apartment is set up like a prison cell.  
Canales was confined to her cell twenty -
two hours a day. “There, I had a window. 
The guards would take me out to the 
yard every day. I ’d get to go out to the 
yard with other people, ” she recalled. 
Canales knows that she escaped the 
even harsher conditions suffered by peo-
ple in supermax prisons such as Pelican 
Bay, where her son, John Martinez, was 
confined for more than a decade. But 
being in solitary confinement still took its 
toll. “I would wake up in the middle of the 
night, my heart pounding, ” she described. 
“I’m not just saying that so people think I 
was suffering. There ’s a real anxiety. ” 
Other survivors of solitary confinement 
attest to similar feelings. Robert King, one 
of the so -called Angola 3, was held in 
solitary in Louisiana for 29 years, living in 
a box measuring just 6 by 9 feet for 23 
hours a day, until he was released in 
2001. He told the BBC in 2014, ”It is off to 
the point where I get lost even when I am 
walking just around the corner from 
where I live. ” The disorientation he and 
Canales both describe is consistent with 
damage to the hippocampus.  
Albert Woodfox, another member of the 
Angola 3, was held in solitary confine-
ment for 43 years and was released Feb-
ruary, 2016. He has a hard time knowing 
what is a product of solitary confinement 
and what is a natural part of aging, and his transition has in many ways been too 
recent to accurately observe.  
Yet Woodfox contends that there is a 
clear shift in readjusting to a world of so-
cial interaction, that has deep physical 
impacts. “Physically …I’ve found there is 
a different rhythm to being free than be-
ing in prison, ” he said in an interview. 
“The way you walk, the way you con-
verse with other people, your awareness 
of your senses. It ’s so much more intense 
than when you ’re in prison. I had to learn 
how to pace myself because I was burn-
ing way more energy in society than I 
was in the prison cell. ” 
Akil is quick to note that brain imaging 
studies of people in prison are lacking. 
The history of abusive experimentation 
on prisoners has led to current bans on 
using them in medical studies. So the 
data is, in some sense, limited. But she 
insists, “What we do know about the 
brain suggests that there is a definite 
change from solitary confinement. ” 
According to Dr. Michael J. Zigmond, 
University of Pittsburgh professor of neu-
rology, studies of solitary confinement in 
mice indicated that overall there was a 
measurable difference consisting of sim-
pler neurons, fewer connections between 
those neurons, and fewer synapses in 
the brain compared to socialized mice.  
At the conference, Zigmond described 
the experiment, which separated some 
laboratory mice into “shoebox ” housing 
and others into an “enriched environ-
ment ” where they were able to interact 
with other mice and were given freer 
range of movement and exercise equip-
ment.  
“This model of an ‘enriched environment ’ 
is of course nothing like what would be 
actually enriching [to an animal], ” he said. 
 
2 “But it is a marked difference in the 
small, cramped and isolated shoebox 
containers. “The way the housing is 
set up is very much like many solitary 
housing arrangements, ” he said, with 
stacks of small containers each con-
taining a mouse. They may be able to 
sense each other ’s presence, but can-
not see or interact in any way. Mean-
while, the larger box where the mice 
are free to interact suggests a model 
for representing general population in 
prison settings.  
But in order to conduct these experi-
ments, Zigmond has to get special 
permission from animal care boards, 
as extended isolation is carefully regu-
lated in animal experiments as cruel 
conditions. “It is clear to animal care 
boards that solitary housing is unac-
ceptable under express circumstanc-
es.” 
Studies on humans and primates are 
rare, largely because they are consid-
ered inhumane by most major re-
search groups and universities. There 
are examples of research from the 
middle of the 20th century, which 
prompted many reforms in experimen-
tation ethics.  As an example, in 1951 researchers at 
McGill University paid a group of male 
graduate students to stay in small 
chambers equipped with only a bed for 
an experiment on sensory deprivation. 
Students were to be observed for six 
weeks, but not one lasted more than 
seven days. Students dropped out of 
the experiment after being unable “to 
think clearly about anything for any 
length of time, ” while others reported 
hallucinations.  
In another notorious experiment from 
the 1950s, University of Wisconsin 
psychologist Harry Harlow placed rhe-
sus monkeys inside a solitary cham-
ber. Harlow found that monkeys kept 
in isolation wound up “profoundly dis-
turbed, given to staring blankly and 
rocking in place for long periods, cir-
cling their cages repetitively, and muti-
lating themselves. ” Most readjusted 
eventually, but not those that had 
been caged the longest. “Twelve 
months of isolation almost obliterated 
the animals socially, ” he wrote.  
Akil notes that the power of social con-
tact helps remodel the brain and re-
lieves stress. But the stress hormones 
never really go away, never leveling 
out entirely. “The longer [people] are kept isolated, the worse it gets, ” she 
says.  
“Isolation devastates the brain. There 
is no question about that, ” said Zig-
mond. “Without air, we will live 
minutes. Without water, we will live 
days. Without nutrition, we live weeks. 
Without physical activity, our lives are 
decreased by years. Social interaction 
is part of these basic elements of life. ” 
Canales and other advocates at the 
conference expressed hope that the 
growing body of the evidence on 
the neurological damage caused by 
isolation  will provide new ammunition 
in  the battle to end solitary confine-
ment. She has no doubt as to the last-
ing effects of solitary, based on her 
son’s experiences and her 
own.  “There is an intensity that I can 
still describe to this day. I get over-
whelmed if it rains. Everything is inten-
sified. ” she says. “I could be walking 
and think about what it ’s like to be in 
that space where you can ’t even see 
color. I get overwhelmed thinking 
about all the people that can ’t feel the 
rain, or the sun. That are stuck in 
there. ” 
Solitary Watch, PO Box 11374, Washington, DC 20008                                           Email: info@solitarywatch.com  
Founded in 2009, Solitary Watch ( www.solitarywatch.com) is a national watchdog group that investigates, reports on, 
and disseminates information on the use of solitary confinement in U.S. prisons and jails. In the past six years, the 
work of Solitary Watch has significantly expanded public awareness and understanding of a once -invisible domestic 
human rights issue, in which some 80,000 to 100,000 people live in complete isolation and sensory deprivation for 
months, years, and even decades. It has also stimulated mainstream media coverage, spurred and supported national 
and local advocacy campaigns, and informed government policymaking.  
The print edition of Solitary Watch is produced quarterly and is available free of charge to currently and formerly incar-
cerated people and their families and advocates. To receive future copies, please send a request to the address or 
email above.  
We also welcome accounts of life in solitary confinement, as well as stories, poems, essays, and artwork by people 
who have served time in isolation. Please send contributions to “Voices from Solitary ” at the address above, and tell 
us whether you would like us to use your name or would prefer to remain anonymous.  
Note: We regret that we cannot  offer legal assistance or advice and cannot respond to requests for this type of 
help. Legal materials sent to us cannot be returned to the sender. We also cannot forward mail to others. 
Thank you for your cooperation.  3  
By Jean Casella & James Ridgeway  
On February 19, 2016, Albert Wood-
fox walked out of the local jail in West 
Feliciana Parish, Louisiana, a free 
man. He had spent nearly five dec-
ades in prison and 43 years and 10 
months in solitary confinement —
believed to be the longest time on rec-
ord for a living human being.  
Woodfox was placed in isolation at the 
Louisiana State Penitentiary in 1972, 
along with Herman Wallace and Rob-
ert King, following the death of correc-
tional officer Brent Miller. After his 
conviction for Miller ’s murder was 
overturned by the second time on the 
basis of discrimination 
in the jury pool, Wood-
fox chose to plead “no 
contest ” to a lesser 
charge in exchange for 
time served, rather than 
face a third trial. But he 
maintains his inno-
cence, saying that he 
was targeted for the 
murder charge —and 
held in isolation —
because he, like King 
and Wallace, was 
known to be a Black Panther who was 
organizing against conditions at Ango-
la. (King was released after his convic-
tion was overturned in 2001, and Wal-
lace died of cancer just days after his 
release in 2013.)  
Woodfox spent the bulk of his 43 
years in solitary at Louisiana ’s notori-
ous plantation prison, in “closed cell 
restriction ”, or CCR, in a cell measur-
ing 6 x 9 feet, with one hour a day to 
exercise —in shackles —in a small, 
concrete -walled yard. Unlike many 
solitary cells, however, Woodfox ’s cell 
had bars on the front rather than a 
solid steel door, which allowed him 
some limited interaction with the other 
incarcerated men on his tier.  In his first interview following release, 
with Ed Pilkington of The Guardian , 
Woodfox said that when he was 
placed in isolation in 1972, he re-
solved that he would survive. He and 
Wallace and King “made a conscious 
decision that we would never become 
institutionalized, ” he said. “As the 
years went by, we made efforts to im-
prove and motivate ourselves. ” 
“We made sure we always remained 
concerned about what was going on in 
society – that way we knew that we 
would never give up. I promised my-
self that I would not let them break 
me, not let them drive me insane. ” 
Woodfox acknowledges that he had 
resources not available to all individu-
als—including his faith in his political 
beliefs, the ability to read and write, a 
loving family, and supporters on the 
outside who grew to number in the 
thousands as the case of the “Angola 
3” became widely publicized in the last 
decade. Others around him, he told 
The Guardian, were not so lucky.  
“Some of the guys found the pressure 
so great that they just laid down in a 
fetal position and stopped communi-
cating with anybody. I ’ve seen other 
guys who just want to talk and make 
noise, guys who want to scream. 
Breaking up manifests itself in any number of ways in individuals. ” 
Still, Woodfox says he often suffered 
from claustrophobia and panic at-
tacks. “The panic attacks started with 
sweating. You sweat and you can ’t 
stop. You become soaking wet – you 
are asleep in your bunk and every-
thing is soaking wet. Then when the 
claustrophobia starts it feels like the 
atmosphere is pressing down on you. 
That was hard. I used to talk to myself 
to convince myself I was strong 
enough to survive, just to hold on to 
my sanity until the feeling went away. ” 
Woodfox told The Guardian  that his 
lowest moments came with the death 
of Herman Wallace and 
of his mother. He was 
not permitted to attend 
her funeral. That, he 
says, “was the closest I 
came to cracking, ” he 
said. “All my strength I 
inherited from my 
mom. ” His first act, up-
on his release, was to 
visit his mother ’s 
gravesite.  
Woodfox, who turned 
69 on the day of his 
release, has a host of health prob-
lems, many of them exacerbated by 
his time in isolation. But he told The 
Guardian that now that he is free, he 
is determined to be a “voice for those 
who have no voice, be a shield for 
those who can ’t protect themselves ”.  
Like Robert King, Woodfox is already 
using his freedom to speak out 
against solitary confinement. “It’s an 
evil,” he said. “Solitary confinement is 
the most torturous experience a hu-
man being can be put through in pris-
on. It ’s punishment without ending. 
We have got to stop this, and having 
been a victim of it for so long myself, 
that’s what I ’m going to do. ” 
4 FLORIDA  — In March, human rights 
advocates sent a letter to the U.S. De-
partment of Justice Civil Rights Divi-
sion calling for an investigation into the 
nature of solitary confinement in Flori-
da. The letter claimed that solitary was 
overused, discriminatorily implement-
ed, and abusive. The authors believe 
that Florida ’s usage of solitary confine-
ment violates the Civil Rights of Insti-
tutionalized Persons Act, noting that 
one of every eight incarcerated individ-
uals is held in isolation, over three 
times the national average. Additional-
ly, black men, black women and peo-
ple with mental illness are overrepre-
sented in solitary by 10, 20 and 22.5 
percent respectively. The letter is par-
tially in response to the 2012 death of 
Darren Rainey, after correctional offic-
ers locked him in a 180 -degree scald-
ing shower. The Department of Justice 
has yet to respond.  
CALIFORNIA  — Ongoing lawsuits are 
challenging conditions in San Quentin 
State Prison ’s “Adjustment Center, ” 
where condemned men await execu-
tion in solitary confinement. Although 
California routinely sentences people 
to death, no one is has been executed 
in nearly a decade. On average, the 
condemned spend over 16 years on 
death row. The conditions in the Ad-
justment Center are especially harsh: 
individuals spend 21 -24 hours a day in 
a cell smaller than a standard parking 
space for years on end. In 2011 and 
2013, individuals in solitary participat-
ed in peaceful hunger strikes, but the 
California Department of Corrections 
and Rehabilitation ignored their de-
mands and disciplined them for partici-
pation.  
ALABAMA  — On May 1st, members 
of the Free Alabama Movement —a 
network of incarcerated men —began 
a labor strike across the state. Despite 
being held in solitary confinement, the 
movement ’s leaders continued to or-
ganize the 30 -day work stoppage, 
which aims to reform prison conditions 
and the prison labor system. Prison 
administrations retaliated in different 
ways, from reducing meal portions to placing entire prison populations in 
solitary confinement. The labor strike 
was a peaceful protest against the 
prison labor system that is often un-
paid, profiting the state and private, for
-profit companies. Incarcerated indi-
viduals compare the system to slav-
ery. The strikers were also protesting 
unhygienic conditions in solitary con-
finement, negligence, and unsafe 
drinking water. The Free Alabama 
Movement hopes for legal change in 
Montgomery.  
OHIO  — In June, the American Civil 
Liberties Union of Ohio and Disability 
Rights Ohio released a collaborative 
review of solitary confinement and 
mental illness in Ohio prisons, con-
cluding that the state prison system is 
desperately in need of reform. The 
report found that Ohio ’s prisons house 
10 times more individuals with mental 
illness than state psychiatric hospitals.  
Those with mental illness are dispro-
portionally represented in solitary con-
finement, a practice that both exacer-
bates and creates mental illness. The 
report recommends the state reduce 
its reliance on solitary, reduce the du-
ration of time individuals spend in iso-
lation, and implement transitional units 
following time in solitary. The report 
especially urges the state to eliminate 
solitary confinement for those with 
mental illness.  
NEW YORK — In June, the Correc-
tional Association of New York re-
leased a report on the brutality follow-
ing the escape of two men from Clin-
ton Correctional Facility a year earlier. 
According to the report, some incar-
cerated individuals were severely 
beaten, and abuse included choking 
or suffocation. Other incarcerated men 
were placed in solitary confinement for 
minor offenses or on false disciplinary 
charges. Reports of the abuse were 
ignored. The report emphasized a ra-
cial divide that likely contributed to the 
violence: 75 percent of those incarcer-
ated at Clinton are Black or Latino compared to .05 percent of the correc-
tional officers. Those suffering from 
language barriers and special needs 
are likely to endure further punish-
ment. The report calls for immediate 
reform.  
WISCONSIN  — On June 10th, individ-
uals incarcerated at Waupun and Co-
lumbia Correctional institutions began 
a hunger strike to protest torturous 
prison conditions, especially indefinite 
solitary confinement in administrative 
segregation units. Among their griev-
ances, strikers requested increased 
access to mental health care and inde-
pendent oversight over the use of soli-
tary. Prior to 1990, Wisconsin prisons 
required evidence of “recent violence ” 
to place an individual in solitary. Cur-
rently, any “history of violence ” is suffi-
cient. After two and a half weeks of 
protest, the state began force -feeding 
the hunger strikers, a practice that has 
been condemned by the ACLU, the 
American Medical Association, and 
the United Nations.  
SOUTH CAROLINA  — On May 31, 
2016, a settlement was released in the 
longstanding class -action lawsuit be-
tween the group Protection and Advo-
cacy for People with Disabilities Inc. 
(P&A) and the South Carolina Depart-
ment of Corrections. The settlement 
promises to benefit the approximately 
3,500 individuals with mental illness 
incarcerated in South Carolina. P&A 
and SCDC jointly released a remedial 
plan that would bring an end to a law-
suit that began in 2005 when P&A 
filed suit against SCDC for its negli-
gence in mental health treatment be-
hind bars, which has led to document-
ed suffering and even death. Individu-
als with mental illness spend an aver-
age of 647 days in solitary in South 
Carolina ’s prisons, in conditions that 
have been ruled unconstitutional. The 
details of the settlement include sui-
cide prevention measures and a ban 
on solitary for individuals suffering 
from mental health crises.  
 
News Briefs by Sarah Blatt -Herold  
 