Federal Court Rules that Bagram 
Prisoners May Challenge Detention 
 
On April 2, 2009, federal judge John D. 
Bates ruled that three prisoners held at Ba-
gram Air Force Base by the U.S. military in 
Afghanistan have a constitutional right to 
challenge their detention in U.S. federal 
courts – the right to habeas corpus. 
 
Judge Bates stated in his ruling that the three 
detainees challenging their detention in the 
lawsuit are “virtually identical” to detainees 
held at the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base. 
Guantanamo detainees’ right to habeas 
corpus was secured in June 2008, when the 
U.S. Supreme Court held in Boumediene v. 
Bush  that they have a constitutional right to 
challenge their detention. 
 
The Bush administration had argued that 
because Bagram detainees were held in an 
active combat zone they should have no 
right to review in the federal courts. The 
Obama administration was given an oppor-
tunity to change its position and renounce 
those arguments, but declined to do so. In 
issuing this ruling, Judge Bates rejected 
those arguments. The three detainees whose 
cases will be allowed to go forward are not 
Afghan citizens and were captured outside 
Afghanistan and brought to Bagram by the 
United States. (For a fourth detainee, an 
Afghan citizen detained outside Afghani-
stan, the judge ordered additional briefing, 
and his case will not be allowed to proceed 
immediately.) The three men have been held 
for over six years without trial or charge. The 
opinion held that the military should not be 
allowed to hide detainees from the courts 
by bringing them from elsewhere into a 
combat zone for detention. 
 
The ruling is the first extension of Boumedi-
ene  to another overseas detention facility 
run by the United States military. The opinion 
states that the rights of detainees in such 
facilities will be determined on a case-by-
case basis, considering factors such as 
whether the detainee is a citizen of the 
country in which the prison is located, the 
extent of U.S. control over the prison, the 
location of capture, and the length of deten-tion. 
 
Spanish Judge Initiates Criminal 
Investigation into Bush Administra-
tion Lawyers 
 
Spanish judge Baltazar Garzon initiated an 
investigation of torture and war crimes by six 
U.S. officials on March 28, 2009, request-
ing that a prosecutor examine a complaint 
filed by Spanish attorneys against the U.S. 
officials. 
 
The U.S. officials named in the complaint 
are former Attorney General Alberto Gon-
zales, John Yoo, the author of the infamous 
“torture memos” authorizing circumvention of 
the Geneva Conventions; Douglas Feith, 
former undersecretary of defense; William 
Haynes II, former general counsel for the 
Department of Defense; Jay Bybee, former 
director of the Office of Legal Counsel; and 
David Addington, chief of staff of former 
Vice President Dick Cheney. 
 
The prosecutor must issue recommendations 
regarding whether a case should be 
opened and the jurisdiction of the court, and 
is expected to respond within the coming 
month. 
 
Garzon in the past launched a prosecution 
of former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet, 
who was arrested in Britain as a result of an 
arrest warrant filed in the Spanish prosecu-
tion of him for his crimes. 
 
Federal Judge Orders Detainee 
Released in Habeas Corpus Hear-
ing 
Guantanamo detainee Yasin Muhammed 
Basardh, a Yemeni man, was ordered re-
leased on March 31, 2009 by U.S. federal 
judge Ellen Segal Huvelle. A one-page 
judgment ordering Basardh’s release was 
issued, in which the judge stated that her 
reasoning for the decision (which remains 
classified) was explained in a closed hear-
ing earlier in the day. 
 
The ruling in Basardh’s case brings the total 
to 24 Guantanamo detainees who have 
been ordered released in habeas corpus hearings. Of this 24, 21 remain in Guan-
tanamo and have neither been repatriated 
nor resettled in a safe third country. 29 ha-
beas cases have been heard to date, and 
over 200 have been filed in total. 
 
Government Review Clears Guan-
tanamo Detainee for Transfer 
 
On March 30, 2009, the Department of 
Justice and the attorneys representing Yem-
eni Guantanamo detainee Aymen Saeed 
Batarfi agreed to stay his habeas corpus 
case, as he has been cleared for transfer by 
the inter-agency review of Guantanamo 
detainees ordered by the Obama admini-
stration. If he is not transferred within 30 
days, he may resume his habeas corpus 
case. 
 
Earlier in the year, the federal judge hearing 
Batarfi’s petition, Judge Emmet Sullivan, 
denounced the government’s conduct in the 
case, noting that numerous classified docu-
ments regarding Batarfi had been withheld 
from the court. 
 
Confidential Red Cross Report Re-
veals Torture in Secret CIA “Black 
Sites” 
 
A secret report prepared by the Interna-
tional Committee of the Red Cross con-
cluded that the CIA practiced torture and 
cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment 
against the men covertly held in “ghost” 
detention in its secret “black sites.” 
 
The report was produced in 2007 and re-
mained confidential until a copy was ob-
tained by journalist Mark Danner, who de-
scribed its contents in a lengthy article in the 
New York Review of Books. The article, 
published on March 15, 2009, detailed the 
report’s revelations regarding the torture of 
CIA detainee Abu Zubaydah, among oth-
ers. 
 
The ICRC report had been submitted to the 
CIA and top Bush administration officials but 
was barred from public release. Danner did 
not state how he obtained the report. The 
ICRC did not disavow its authenticity, but 
guantánamo global justice initiative 
news briefing center for 
constitutional 
rights 
april 2009 
Center for Constitutional Rights         www.ccrjus tice.org  (continued on  pg. 2) condemned the leak.  The report con-
tained detailed descriptions of extensive 
torture at the hands of CIA interrogators, 
utilizing interviews conducted after the 
CIA prisoners were moved to Guan-
tanamo Bay in September 2006. 
 
Obama Administration Files First 
Claimed Definition of Detention 
Authority 
 
On March 13, 2009, the Obama admini-
stration filed its first definition of its claimed 
authority to detain men at Guantanamo 
Bay. The filing ended the use of the term 
“enemy combatant” as a mechanism to 
describe those who it claimed the ability to 
detain. It also abandoned the most contro-
versial claims to power to detain made by 
the Bush administration, which had argued 
that the president had the power as com-
mander-in-chief of the armed forces to 
detain prisoners militarily even without any 
approval from Congress. 
 
The Obama administration claims that its 
authority to detain comes from Congress’ 
post-9/11 Authorization to Use Military 
Force (AUMF) rather than from any inher-
ent presidential authority. The new defini-
tion proposed to the Court by the Obama 
administration suggests that individuals 
who were part of or “substantially sup-
ported” Taliban and Al Qaeda forces may 
be detained, as well as anyone “directly” 
supporting hostilities against U.S. forces. In 
both instances, the quoted terms represent 
a narrowing of the Bush administration 
definitions. Moreover, the new filing em-
phasizes that “unwitting or insignificant 
support” will not qualify as “substantial” 
support for purposes of justifying detention. 
 
Attorneys representing Guantanamo de-
tainees challenged the new definition in a 
filing on March 27, 2009, noting that the 
AUMF states nothing explicit about deten-
tion powers and does not expand presi-
dential authority to detain beyond the 
traditional boundaries of the law of war, 
under which most detainees still at Guan-
tanamo would be considered civilians and 
not subject to detention without charge. 
 
Ireland and Brazil indicate will-
ingness to accept Guantanamo 
refugees 
 
On March 20, 2009, Ireland indicated 
that it was joining Lithuania, France, Portu-gal, Germany, Finland, Switzerland and 
Sweden among European countries indi-
cating their willingness to accept former 
Guantanamo detainees. European officials 
have also, in recent weeks, stated that they 
need additional information from the 
United States before assuming responsibil-
ity for resettlement, and indicated that the 
U.S. should also accept some of the men 
for resettlement. Also, on March 4, Brazil’s 
top human rights official stated that Brazil 
is also potentially willing to resettle Guan-
tanamo detainees needing humanitarian 
protection.  
 
On March 11, the Obama administration 
appointed Daniel Fried, a senior diplomat 
and the former assistant secretary of state 
for European affairs as a special envoy on 
Guantanamo. He is expected to focus on 
resettlement issues. 
 
Approximately 60 of the detainees cur-
rently held in Guantánamo cannot lawfully 
be sent back to their countries of origin 
because they face a risk of persecution or 
torture. They come from countries including 
Algeria, China, Libya, Russia, Syria, Tajiki-
stan, Tunisia, and Uzbekistan.  Others are 
stateless and have no country to which 
they can return. 
 
Thus far, only Albania has accepted refu-
gees from Guantánamo, accepting eight 
men in 2006. The U.S. has claimed that it 
is unable to find other safe third countries 
to accept the Guantánamo detainees at 
risk for persecution, and has resisted efforts 
to resettle detainees in the U.S., despite a 
federal judge’s order to do so in the case 
of seventeen Uighurs (a Muslim ethnic 
minority from China) who are classified as 
non-enemy combatants. 
 
Rights Groups Submit Allegations 
Against NATO Supreme Com-
mander General Craddock Re-
garding Force Feeding in Guan-
tanamo  
On April 2, 2009, human rights groups 
submitted a formal communication to 
United Nations Special Rapporteurs nam-
ing U.S. Army General Bantz John 
Craddock, NATO Supreme Allied Com-
mander Europe, responsible for the unlaw-
ful and unethical force-feeding of detain-
ees on hunger strike at the Guantanamo 
Bay prison. President Obama recently 
nominated a successor to Craddock who is awaiting confirmation. 
 
As USSOUTHCOM Commander, Gen-
eral Craddock oversaw the Guantanamo 
detention center where torture, prolonged 
arbitrary detention, and other abuses oc-
curred. In particular, General Craddock 
approved and had command responsibil-
ity over the unlawful and unethical force-
feeding of detainees on hunger strike. 
 
Guantanamo hunger strikers protesting 
their abusive detention conditions and lack 
of rights were and continue to be brutally 
force-fed through abnormally large nasal 
tubes while strapped into a six-point re-
straint chair. In 2006, General Craddock 
suggested that the restraint chair method 
served as an “effective deterrent” to hun-
ger striking, and went so far as to joke that 
at least hunger strikers got to choose the 
flavor of the lozenges used to soothe irrita-
tion caused by the feeding tubes. 
 
While General Craddock’s replacement 
has been announced by the Obama ad-
ministration, the groups note that the com-
mander replacing him, U.S. Admiral James 
Stavridis, is the current commander that 
replaced Craddock in 2006. In that ca-
pacity, he has authority over Guantanamo 
and is responsible for having allowed and 
continuing to allow unlawful force-feeding 
to take place. 
Center for Constitutional Rights         www.ccrjus tice.org  about the news briefing.. 
This news briefing is produced monthly 
by the Center for Constitutional Rights, 
which coordinates the representation 
of detainees at Guantánamo Bay with 
a network of over 500 pro bono ha-
beas counsel. It is translated into Ara-
bic and Dari and is available online at  
 
http://www.ccrjustice.org/ 
learn-more/reports/ 
Guantanamo-newsletter 
 
Center for Constitutional Rights 
666 Broadway, 7th Floor 
New York, NY 10012 
http://www.ccrjustice.org/ 
(212) 614-6443  
 LKates@ccrjustice.org 