On March 14, 2012, CCR filed a landmark Alien Tort Statute 
(ATS) claim against Scott Lively, a notorious evangelical from Springfield, Massachusetts, on behalf of our client and partner, Sexual Minorities Uganda (SMUG), for persecution on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity.
The so-called “Kill the Gays” bill, harsh legislation introduced 
in 2009 in the Ugandan parliament, brought to light the role U.S.-based evangelicals have played in spreading hate and homophobia in Uganda, and elsewhere in Africa, as part of a broader plan of attack against LGBT persons. The Ugandan legislation potentially carries the death penalty for certain offenses, including a second conviction of consensual sex between adults of the same gender; criminalizes persons, including family members, clergy, counselors and others, who fail to turn in or report persons they know or suspect of being LGBT; criminalizes advocacy or promotion of LGBT rights; and voids the applicability of existing human rights law contained in treaties ratified by Uganda that are deemed inconsistent with the goals of the legislation.
Since 2002, Lively has been partnering with key leaders of 
the anti-gay campaign in Uganda. Lively has long advocated stripping LGBT people of their fundamental rights to freedom of expression, assembly and association. He played a crucial role in the campaign leading up to this legislation, traveling to Uganda and speaking at a momentous anti-gay conference in March 2009, where he lectured about the dangers of homosexuality and its purported threats to children, and advised anti-gay politicians on strategy as well as legislation. CCR’s complaint alleges that Lively’s conduct in Uganda amounts to persecution, a “crime against humanity” under international law defined as the severe deprivation of fundamental rights on the basis of the identity of a group or collectivity. The complaint contends that Lively—through his direct efforts to criminalize advocacy, his involvement with and consultation to key anti-gay Exporting Hate:  CCR Files Landmark Case Against  
U.S. Evangelical for Persecution in Uganda
continued on page 4
CCR Takes on the Animal Enterprise Terrorism ActPepe Julian Onziema and Leader of SMUG, Frank MugishaSpring 2012
Lauren Gazzola, CCR  
Communications staff and SHAC 7 member convicted of “animal enterprise terrorism.”
Photo by Liv-Randi Lind and Oddmund Lunde
As a longtime animal rights  
activist, I have been a defen-
dant more than a few times. I’ve been arrested at demon-strations, sued by those I was protesting, and dragged away in flexi-cuffs after blockading the doors of fur stores—the typical headaches of politi-cal activism. But in 2004, I got a great big migraine: I was indicted on federal domestic terrorism charges.Since 2001, I had worked with a handful of activists to publish a website that advocated and reported on protest activity against the notorious animal testing lab, Huntingdon Life Sciences. The global Stop Huntingdon Animal Cruelty (SHAC) campaign had driven the lab to the brink of bank -
ruptcy multiple times. In May 2004, I was charged with “ani-mal enterprise terrorism.”  I wasn’t accused of hurting anyone or damaging any property, only with “conspir -
ing” to publish the website and thereby “physically disrupt” the lab. I was convicted and served 40 months in federal prison.   
Now I am a plaintiff in a new 
CCR lawsuit, Blum v. Holder, asking a federal court to strike 
continued on page 4CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookA key part of CCR’s mission is to train the next 
generation of human rights lawyers. We now have an exceptional opportunity to take this work to the next level. I’m very proud to announce that, with the generous support and partnership of the Bertha Foundation, CCR is launching the Social Justice Institute (SJI). Building upon our Ella Baker summer fellowship program, the SJI will train and support a new generation of people’s lawyers—fearless and creative innovators for social change.
Change is in the air. A year ago, no one could have predicted the mobilizations of Occupy Wall Street or the Arab Spring. Ordinary people, especially younger generations, are taking to the streets in staggering numbers, committed to deep, meaningful change. Campus activism is growing around issues of civil and human rights, environmental security, and boycott, divestment and sanctions campaigns. Led by young people, Muslim, South Asian and Arab communities are joining forces with activists to protest post-9/11 policies and out-of-control police spying. The immigration movement has been rejuvenated by those most affected and with the most to lose by standing up.
In this time of change, more social justice lawyers are needed. However, 
while the demand is increasing, opportunities for young social justice lawyers have decreased. With the Bertha Foundation, CCR will help fill that gap. We have expanded the Ella Baker program by doubling the number of students and adding two additional sites, in New Orleans and Haiti. These sites have provided the opportunity for hands-on experience for law students to help people and movements with a critical need for legal support. In the future we hope to expand to other sites as well.  
Another exciting element of the SJI is its continuing education, trainings and 
workshops to promising lawyers early in their careers. The inaugural conference, entitled the People’s Law Conference, was held in New Orleans in March with 100 participants from across the south and Haiti. The conference focused on the struggles of communities who are neglected and criminalized in casebooks and law classrooms, including communities of color, immigrants and LGBTQ communities. A similar conference is being planned for New York City in June. 
The scarcity of jobs in the social justice sector, coupled with crushing law school 
debt, often drives committed people away from this important work. This year, with the Bertha Foundation, CCR has created three post-grad fellowship positions for lawyers. We will immerse them in CCR—helping them become the leaders in this field we need.
Our ultimate goal is to nurture, support and grow the cadre of lawyers who, like 
us at CCR, want to create meaningful change by working with communities, movements and those who have the least access to justice. On the next page you’ll see some of the amazing ways our Ella Baker alumni are actively engaged in social change.
The demand for social justice does not wane in a lagging economy. In fact, the 
opposite is true. Because of our partnership with the Bertha Foundation, CCR is able to take fuller advantage of this moment to live up to our mission to train the next generation in using law creatively for social change.Letter from the Executive Director
Photo by Lindsay BeyersteinI was an Ella Baker in 2000. My experience at CCR confirmed my desire to do civil rights litigation. The CCR lawyers were intense, smart, politically committed and fun. I researched constitutional issues in a case challenging the exorbitant rates charged for phone calls by inmates in the NY State prison system. I also worked on CCR’s original class action against the NYPD for racially discriminatory stop-and-frisks, Daniels 
v. City of New York. I remember going through boxes of files produced by the city and feeling thrilled every time I found a juicy piece of evidence.
My time at CCR led to my first 
job after clerking—a small civil rights firm co-founded by former CCR Legal Director, Bill Goodman. Years later, I live in Cambridge, and work at the Law Offices of Howard Friedman. Our two-person firm does almost exclusively police misconduct, prisoners’ rights and First Amendment litigation. A recent success was Glik v. Cunniffe, in which 
the First Circuit strongly affirmed that the First Amendment protects the right to record police officers performing their duties in public. My client had been arrested and charged with illegal wiretapping for using his cellphone to record Boston police officers making an arrest on Boston Common. CCR filed an amicus in the case on behalf of numerous copwatch groups nationwide on why filming the police is a critical tool in the fight against police misconduct. I am also local counsel for CCR in its constitutional challenge to the Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act, recently filed in Boston. It is an honor to continue to work with an organization whose forceful advocacy for social justice has been an inspiration to me since law school.Update from an Ella:  
David Milton
2CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookFrom the Real Frontlines: Former Ella Bakers Deported from  
Bahrain for Taking Part in Pro-Democracy Demonstrations
On the morning of February 12, 2012, 
my colleague Radhika Sainath, a NY-based civil rights attorney, and I were handcuffed behind our backs, strapped into seats on a Gulf Air flight and deported out of the Kingdom of Bahrain. We had been arrested the previous day on the streets of the capital, Manama, interrogated, stripped of our electronic equipment and tried in the middle of the night. Our crime? “Engaging in activities outside the scope of our tourist visas” by accompanying a pro-democracy demonstration to document possible government violence against unarmed protesters. The day before our arrest we launched Witness Bahrain, an independent initiative to place international observers on the ground, in the hope that an international presence might mitigate the violence of security forces against protesters, and to help disseminate information about what was happening in Bahrain.
We conceived of the initiative in 
discussion with Bahraini human rights activists, who were concerned that their pro-democracy movement and the government’s repression of it were not being covered by the international media. Furthermore, reports that visas had been denied to a number of prominent journalists and human rights organizations raised fears that the government was planning to escalate its crackdown on protesters in the lead up to the one-year anniversary of the opposition uprising. Partly inspired by Arab Spring revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt, thousands of Bahrainis had taken to the streets on February 14, 2011, to demand reform. The response of the government was brutal, attacking protesters with tear gas, rubber bullets, bird shot and sound grenades, killing over 60 and wounding hundreds. In addition, hundreds of people had been fired from their jobs and protesters, identified leaders and doctors had been arrested, tortured and prosecuted. Yet the protests continue.
We quickly contacted a few people 
who we knew had experience in regions of conflict and in dealing with violent situations, primarily those we knew from our efforts with the International Solidarity Movement in the occupied Palestinian territory. A few weeks later, a small group of us arrived in Bahrain. 
I was only in Bahrain for five 
days before being arrested and deported. Two days later, six more of my colleagues were arrested and deported. The following day, another three. Our treatment at the hands of the Bahraini authorities was mild compared to what happens to Bahraini activists. The most upsetting aspect of our detention was the seizure of our electronic equipment; our cameras, laptops and phones contained interviews with people who had been abused and tortured, footage of demonstrations and phone numbers of activists. Our concern was that the authorities would use this material to target democracy activists; thus we refused to hand them over, making an appeal to the U.S. vice consul in Bahrain to take measures to ensure that our material would not be used in retaliation, but our repeated requests were ignored. The vice consul told us that the authorities had a right to confiscate our equipment and we had taken the risk by filming activists in the first place.
Our deportation is testament to the 
fact that the Bahraini regime does not want international witnesses to their crackdown, making it all the more important that we keep our eyes on Bahrain. As Americans, we should urge the Obama administration to cancel its planned $53 million arms deal with Bahrain as well as to use its influence on the island kingdom to support the demands of the democracy movement and defend human rights.
“I was only in Bahrain for ﬁve days before being arrested  
and deported. Two days later, six more of my colleagues  were arrested and deported.”
Huwaida Arraf ﬁlming police in Bahrain on day she was arrested.
3CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook3
political and religious leaders as well 
as parliamentarians and government ministers— assisted, induced, aided and 
conspired to carry out and further the persecution of LGBT people in Uganda. 
Lively is the author of a revisionist 
book about the Holocaust, “The Pink Swastika: Homosexuality in the Nazi Party,” in which he argues that the rise of Nazism was fueled and driven by the German gay rights movement. He also suggested in Uganda that violent and fascist gays were probably responsible for the Rwandan genocide. Lively has described the “global gay movement” as “evil,” a “highly organized army of social engineers with a single purpose,” and “the most dangerous social and political movement of our time.”
Shortly after the Ugandan bill was reintroduced in February, 
the Minister of Ethics and Integrity, Simon Lokodo, and Ugandan police raided a secret conference of LGBT groups. Lokodo announced that the advocacy and promotion of homosexuality is illegal and ordered the arrest of LGBT activist Kasha Jacqueline, who managed to escape. 
While international pressure has thus far prevented the 
bill from becoming law, and even if that pressure results in the removal of the death penalty, the remaining provisions would still be astonishingly broad and cruel. At the same time, an anti-gay bill, which would prevent any speech or advocacy around LGBT rights, was signed into law in St. Petersburg, Russia on March 7, 2012. Here too, Lively has worked with his counterparts in Russia, Latvia and Moldova to explicitly encourage legislation criminalizing advocacy.
In this work, we are partnering closely 
with, and following the lead of, our client: 
Sexual Minorities Uganda (SMUG). Readers of our newsletter will remember that the last edition highlighted Frank Mugisha, the leader of SMUG, who was awarded the Robert F. Kennedy Human 
Rights Award for his work.
In bringing this case, CCR is also standing in solidarity 
with local groups around the U.S. who have been protesting anti-gay evangelicals in their hometowns for the homophobia they are spreading both at home and abroad. On the day we filed the case, a march and protest was held in Springfield, MA—where Scott Lively lives and has started a campaign to transform Springfield into a Christian “Redemption Zone”—and where the vibrant Stop the Hate and Homophobia Coalition of various local organizations and progressive faith leaders has been organizing. Solidarity protests were also held in Kansas City, MO and Sacramento, CA. 
For additional information about this case, go to: CCRjustice.org/LGBTUganda/ 
Exporting Hate (continued from cover)  
down the Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act (AETA) as a violation of the First Amendment. The case argues that the AETA criminalizes protected speech and casts a chill over the animal rights movement and all activists who want to protest, for any reason, against an “animal enterprise.”
The AETA punishes, with up to 20 
years in prison, anyone found to have caused a loss of property or profits to a business or institution that uses or sells animals, or that has any relation-ship with an animal enterprise. This is unsurprising, considering those who lobbied for the AETA include the Fur Commission USA, the National Cattle-men’s Beef Association and several pharmaceutical companies. Lost profits are exactly what animal rights activists intend for these businesses.
Lost profits are also the very purpose 
of boycotts and much other political protest. As in the civil rights boycotts and the divestment campaigns against South African apartheid, activists have routinely sought to make injustice unprofitable. The AETA makes this traditional, nonviolent protest tactic a terrorist offense.
Make no mistake—while the AETA 
unconstitutionally singles out animal rights activists, it is also a harbinger for any social movement that powerful interests perceive as vulnerable to re -pression. Already, labor activists could be prosecuted under the AETA for a successful boycott of Walmart because the company sells animal products, and Occupy Wall Street protesters could be subject to an AETA prosecu-tion for protesting banks that invest in animal testing labs.
History is riddled with governmental 
silencing of controversial and effective advocacy. Fortunately, the core of our modern free speech tradition has been courts striking down these attempts. CCR’s case challenging the Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act is another opportunity for a court to declare, in no uncertain terms, that free speech cannot be criminalized.
Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act  (continued from cover)  
4
Scott Lively, President of Abiding Truth 
Ministries, and the Defendant in  SMUG v. Scott Lively.CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookCCR continues to lend its expertise in support of Occupy 
Wall Street (OWS). On December 1, 2011, CCR attorney Sunita Patel organized a training with the Immigrant Defense Project (IDP) and the National Lawyers Guild to provide support to attorneys representing OWS clients with possible immigration consequences. Sunita co-led the training with Joshua Epstein from IDP . In addition, CCR and the National Immigration Project released a two-page flier summarizing the legal risks for noncitizens participating in OWS. The flier is available online at: CCRjustice.org/noncitizens-ows.
Additionally, CCR has been involved in the coalition of 
lawyers, coordinated by the National Lawyers Guild, providing individual representation of protestors arrested in OWS actions. CCR currently represents one of the individuals arrested on October 1, 2011, on the Brooklyn Bridge. CCR moved to dismiss the charges in that client’s case, and obtained dismissals on behalf of two other clients. We may take on other cases as time and resources (as well as necessity) allow.
CCR was also involved in the development of federal 
litigation challenging the restrictions imposed on OWS space at Zuccotti Park. The need for such litigation became somewhat obviated when, on January 9, 2011, CCR joined the New York Civil Liberties Union and the National Lawyers Guild in sending a letter to the NYC Department of Buildings, arguing that the barricading of Zuccotti Park and police searches at the entrance to the park violated local building ordinances. Remarkably, the following day the city removed the barricades and ended the searches of entrants to the park.
In the meantime, CCR continues to offer its conference 
room space on a weekly basis to the Communications Working Group of OWS for strategy meetings. We are also providing space (as we are able to) for other members of various working groups. In addition, CCR is working in partnership with OWS to build OccupyOurOffice.org, a website that will help facilitate the connection between activists, groups such as OWS, and organizations in order to provide much needed space and technical assistance. The creator of the website, Rafael Shimunov, said, “OccupyOurOffice.org is poetic justice. Greed by banks brought us to a situation where offices throughout the city have extra space where employees once were. Those are the same empty spaces we’re using to help OWS hold those same banks accountable.” Stay tuned for the official launch of the website!Support of Occupy Wall Street
CCR is proud to be a key member of Communities 
United for Police Reform (CPR), an unprecedented citywide campaign to end discriminatory policing practices, including stop and frisks, in New York, bringing together a movement of community mem-bers, lawyers, researchers and activists to work for change. The nearly 30 partner organizations in this campaign come from all five boroughs, from all walks of life and represent many of those unfairly targeted by the NYPD.
The work of CPR echoes the work that CCR has been 
engaged in since the 90s—ending bias-based polic-ing in New York City. CPR will have a visible, lasting presence on the streets of neighborhoods citywide. We will be on the streets, educating people about their rights; in the courts challenging the policies; and on the steps of City Hall and the state capitol demanding change and accountability in the NYPD.
The campaign officially launched on February 29 with 
a press conference at City Hall. Despite the late winter rain, more than 100 people (and 30 allied groups) gathered to call for measures including (among other items) City Council legislation that would: prohibit stop and frisk practices and other related discrimi-natory policing, protect New Yorkers from unlaw -
ful searches, and require NYPD officers to identify themselves and explain the reasons for their activities.  These measures are critical first steps towards justice.
For more information about CPR, and to get involved, visit: changethenypd.org. To learn 
more about CCR’s advocacy work around stop and frisk, visit: CCRjustice.org/stopandfrisk.CCR and Allies Launch 
Communities United for  Police Reform
Hundreds launch new Communities United for Police Reform 
Campaign on steps of City Hall
5CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook5
December 31, 2011, was a bad 
day for human rights and our continued, collective effort to put an end to indefinite detention, close Guantánamo and resettle the innocent detainees who remain imprisoned. President Obama rang in the New Year by signing the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA), a bill that he had initially threatened to veto if provisions allowing for indefinite detention were not removed. This language, however, was not removed, and President Obama signed it regardless. Despite President Obama’s claims to have “signed this bill despite having serious reservations with certain provisions that regulate the detention, interrogation and prosecution of suspected terrorists,” his signature essentially codifies the president’s authority to detain terror suspects indefinitely in military custody, an authority that could possibly be extended to American citizens. 
A central issue with the NDAA is 
that it was poorly drafted and a great deal of confusion still remains as to what it means, who it covers and just how far it might reach. However, a few provisions are quite clear. The law prohibits the president from transferring detainees to the U.S. for trial or from moving detainees who have been cleared for release to their home countries or third countries willing to resettle them, unless the Defense Department elects to “waive” that congressional restriction based on a firm conclusion that the detainee will not commit wrongdoing upon his release—an obviously difficult standard to meet. This poses a substantial obstacle to the full release or resettlement of detainees, even those who have been cleared for release. Nevertheless, CCR will continue to vigorously advocate for the president to employ the transfer waivers and resettle or release detainees.
When President Obama signed 
the NDAA into law, he included a “signing statement” promising that his administration would not authorize the indefinite military detention of American citizens and would work with Congress to “mitigate” concerns with the detainee provisions in the legislation, “oppose” attempts to expand those provisions in the future, and “seek the repeal” of those provisions. However, this statement is not legally binding and has no impact or influence on the courts. Even if President Obama holds up his end of the bargain, he will not be president forever and this statement does not bind his successors. 
President Obama Impedes Efforts to End Indeﬁnite Detention
January 11, 2012, marked 10 years since the first 20 detainees arrived in Guantánamo Bay. Since then, 779 have passed through, including boys as young as 12 and men as old as 89. On this grim 
“anniversary,” some 171 men (89 of whom have been cleared for release) remain. From its beginning, Guantánamo was built upon injustice and lies. And regrettably, the nightmare continues today. Despite promises to close the base and reverse the illegal policies of the Bush administration, President Obama has attempted to legitimize them. He has signed an executive order formalizing indefinite detentions at Guantánamo, resumed illegitimate military commissions, and refused to hold U.S. officials accountable for torture. On this shameful anniversary, CCR and numerous ally groups gathered in Washington, D.C., across from the White House, to protest the prison and demand its closure. Despite the weather, hundreds gathered to protest. The photos show the human chain between the White House and the Capitol and the numerous CCR staff who attended and spoke.
Photos by Sarah K. HogarthArt by Zina Saunders 
6GTMO at 10CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook9Victory in Washington State!  
Judge Dismisses Lawsuit Filed  
Over Boycott of Israeli Goods
During the last week of February, CCR obtained a victory 
in a lawsuit brought against current and former members of the Olympia Food Co-op board of directors for their decision to boycott Israeli goods. A Washington State court dismissed the case, calling it a SLAPP—Strategic Litiga -
tion Against Public Participation—and said that it would award the defendants attorneys’ fees, costs and sanctions. The judge also upheld the constitutionality of Washington State’s anti-SLAPP law, which the plaintiffs had challenged. SLAPPs are lawsuits that target the constitutional rights of free speech and petition in connection with an issue of public concern. 
Defending against a SLAPP requires substantial money, 
time and legal resources and can divert attention away from the issue and chill public debate. CCR senior staff attorney Maria LaHood said in response to the ruling, “We are pleased the court found this case to be what it is—an attempt to chill free speech on a matter of public concern. This sends a message to those trying to silence support of Palestinian human rights to think twice before they bring a lawsuit.” The boycott is part of a global Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) movement against Israel for violations of international law and the denial of Palestinian human rights.
Additional information about this case is available online: CCRjustice.org/ourcases/current-cases/davis-v-cox 
Connect with us Online!
CCR’s online community has been a critical component 
in advancing our social justice work. Social networking has organized, strengthened and connected move-ments around the world. Join our network, take action and stay up-to-date on CCR’s work:
• Like the “Center for Constitutional  
 Rights” on Facebook
• Follow @theCCR on Twitter
• Subscribe to CCRmedia  
 on YouTube
Thanks to 
you, CCR exceeded our December 
online goal!
In December, the Center 
for Constitutional Rights challenged our supporters to help us reach our $120,000 online goal. Because of your incredible support, along with a generous matching gift from an anonymous donor, we were  able to raise more than $200,000! 
Your contributions online in December allowed 
CCR to start the New Year with a big impact. CCR was able to coordinate widespread advocacy around the 10th anniversary of Guantánamo’s opening, including events, rallies, and an online campaign to demand the closure of the prison. Your partnership enables CCR staff to continue pursuing justice for our clients and supporting social justice movements both domestically and abroad—so thank you!
Photo courtesy of Olympia BDS
7
Olympia co-op members and supporters rally outside courthouse before 
case hearing. CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook6
Without Accountability There Can Be No Justice
Pursuing Private  
Military Contractors for Torture at  Abu Ghraib
Al-Quraishi v. Nakhla and L-3; and Al Shimari v. CACI, et al., CCR’s two cases seeking to hold private military contractors accountable for torture committed while providing interrogation and translation services at facilities in Iraq, including the notorious Abu Ghraib prison, were recently granted a re-hearing en banc following 2-1 decisions dismissing the cases in September 2011. This was a positive sign, and oral argument was held on January 27, 2012, before 14 members of the Fourth Circuit. In a second positive development, the U.S. government, though not a party to the suit, submitted that the cases should be allowed to proceed when asked for its opinion by the court. This was the first time the government has said that victims of Abu Ghraib should be allowed to make their case and sue contractors for damages. The government carved this out as a narrow exception allowing these particular cases to proceed because of the very serious allegations of torture, but was careful to include language in the brief that would continue to protect U.S. officials from civil damages. Despite the limitations, the government has not blocked the plaintiffs from having their day in court—at least at this stage of the proceedings—and that is a victory. We expect the Fourth Circuit to rule in the coming months.CCR believes that without accountability there can be no justice. That tenet resonates throughout all of the Center’s work. 
Whether we are pursuing accountability for torture committed by private military contractors or designed and authorized by the highest officials within the Bush administration; accountability for the sexual violence tolerated and ignored by the highest officials within the Catholic Church; or accountability for politically motivated violence and repression by dictators like former Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh, CCR’s push for accountability on all fronts continues apace. Below are updates on a few of these accountability efforts and the various methods we are using to achieve our goals.
Spain Investigates Bush Ofﬁcials 
for Torture at GTMO
In February 2012, in one of CCR’s “Spanish” 
cases seeking accountability for torture of four former Guantánamo detainees using the principle of Universal Jurisdiction, we submitted a declaration on behalf of our client, Mohammed al Qahtani, outlining the torture he suffered. The declaration supports a January 2011 submission from CCR and our partner, the European Center for Constitutional and Human Rights (ECCHR), on Geoffrey Miller, the former commander at Guantánamo who later oversaw Abu Ghraib in Iraq, setting out the factual and legal basis for the Spanish judge to call Miller to testify. Mr. al Qahtani is perhaps the best known victim of the United States torture program—the first individual subjected to the “First Special Interrogation Plan,” a regime of aggressive interrogation techniques amounting to torture personally authorized by former Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld. Mr. al Qahtani is also the only prisoner held at Guantánamo Bay who the U.S. has admitted to torturing. The declaration identifies Miller as responsible for both authorizing and implementing the interrogation techniques used on Mr. al Qahtani that led to his torture. 
In related news, CCR and ECCHR filed a formal complaint to 
the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Independence of Judges and Lawyers on January 19, 2012, submitting evidence from U.S.-Madrid embassy cables obtained through WikiLeaks that show that senior U.S. and Spanish officials sought to interfere with the Spanish judicial process in order to shield Americans from criminal prosecution for torture and unlawful killing. On the same day, we joined with other international human rights groups in issuing a statement in support of Judge Baltasar Garzón, in response to charges stemming from his investigation into alleged crimes against humanity arising from the disappearance, torture and execution of nearly 115,000 people during the Spanish Civil War and the subsequent Franco regime. Judge Garzón was tried— and acquitted—in relation to his investigation of these crimes. CCR and other human rights organizations continue to support Judge Garzón, as he seeks to overturn his suspension from the bench due to another politically motivated trial against him.
8CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookLike many in the Arab world, Yemenis 
have been peacefully protesting—calling for human rights and an end to a 33-year dictatorship—for more than a year. The protests have been met with violent repression by the security forces of former President Ali Abdullah Saleh. According to 
a CCR allied human rights group in Yemen (HOOD), security forces, including snipers, have savagely murdered and injured nearly 29,000 Yemeni civilians.
The Yemeni American Coalition for Change (YACC) and 
CCR have been closely following the developments in Yemen. On January 28, 2012, when Saleh arrived in New York City for medical treatment, YACC issued a statement strongly condemning the U.S.’ decision to grant Saleh a visa and welcome one of the world’s most notorious dictators. YACC mobilized the Yemeni American community to form a network of solidarity groups, including CCR. One of the leaders of YACC, Ibrahim Qatabi, is also a Legal Worker in the Guantánamo Project at CCR, making collaboration and solidarity an easy reality. Despite the secrecy shrouding Saleh’s whereabouts while in New York, YACC was able to figure out where he was staying and, with CCR’s support, held press conferences and ongoing protests in front of the Ritz-Carlton Hotel on Central Park South. These activities resulted in coverage by local, national and international media—increasing awareness of both the human rights issues in Yemen and of Saleh’s presence in the U.S.
CCR also helped publicize the “March for Justice,” the longest 
march in Yemeni American history. Yemeni Americans, supported by other rights and solidarity groups, marched from downtown Brooklyn to New York City Hall via the Brooklyn Bridge, demanding that city and U.S. officials stand up for justice, investigate Saleh, and not welcome a dictator and criminal in our city.
Finally, CCR called on the U.S. Department of Justice to 
investigate Saleh’s crimes against his own people and open an immediate criminal investigation into claims of torture committed under his rule. This is believed to be the first formal complaint and request to investigate Saleh. 
On February 27, 2012, Saleh stepped down as president and 
formally transitioned power to his vice president, Abd Rabbuh Mansur al-Hadi.
Read CCR’s letter to the DOJ on our website at:  
CCRjustice.org/saleh-request 7
Since the last newsletter the Center staff have participated in a number of public education events in support of our complaint before the International Criminal Court (ICC) in The Hague urging 
an investigation and ultimately prosecution of the Pope and other high-level Vatican officials for enabling and facilitating the widespread and systematic rape and sexual violence by priests and others associated with the Catholic Church around the world.  In December, we partnered with the NYC based Culture Project in a performance of “James X”—a powerful one-man show directed by Gabriel Byrne and written and performed by Gerard Mannix Flynn. In a commanding performance, Flynn portrays a man awaiting his chance to offer testimony before an Irish government tribunal of inquiry into church-run institutions responsible for sexual violence and cruel and inhumane treatment of children. Following the show, there was a talk-back featuring Flynn, Byrne, Vince Warren, CCR’s Executive Director, Pam Spees, the lead CCR attorney working on the case, and Mary Caplan from the Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests (SNAP)—our clients in the complaint before the ICC. Also in December, the Center held a panel at the Society for Ethical Culture entitled, “The Case Against the Pope: International Accountability for Rape and Sexual Violence.” In February, Pam Spees, SNAP founder and president Barbara Blaine, and Professor Benjamin Davis spoke about the case at Harvard Law School on a panel entitled, “Sexual Violence against Children by Clergy: Is the Vatican Legally Accountable?” Lastly, in March, Pam Spees spoke at an invitation only event in The Hague about efforts toward accountability for clergy sexual violence to a group of allies and supporters.
For more information about 
this case, go to: CCRjustice.org/ICCVaticanProsecutionBuilding the Case against 
Vatican Ofﬁcials
Accountability for Yemeni  
Dictator Saleh
9666 Broadway, 7th Floor, New York, NY 10012 • www.CCRjustice.org
The Center for Constitutional Rights is dedicated to advancing and protecting the rights guaranteed by the United States Constitution and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Founded in 1966 
by attorneys who represented civil rights movements in the South, CCR is a non-proﬁt legal and educational organization committed to the creative use of law as a positive force for social change.Breaking News:
Environmental  
Activism = Terrorism?
Introducing the Social 
Justice Institute
CCR Takes on  
Notorious Evangelical,  
Scott Lively
Details Inside
Though he’s been a member of CCR’s Development Department 
since July 2004, in 2011, Jeremy Rye became the youngest member  
of CCR’s Thelma Newman Planned Giving Society.
Jeremy says: “Yes, I’m in my 30s and don’t have a family of my 
own. But as I have parents and an older disabled brother who I will need to care for in the future, I decided it was time to start making arrangements for their benefit just in case something ever happened to me. 
“And in thinking about my family, of course I had to include 
CCR! I thought about all our clients, my friends/coworkers, board members and even the donors I’ve been honored to work with.  
I wanted to do something to take care of them too, because I’ve seen firsthand the tangible and positive difference the CCR family makes in the world. 
“Since joining CCR in 2004, it’s been my job to ﬁnd the ﬁnancial resources for CCR  
to continue to do its work. That’s why I made CCR one beneﬁciary of my 401(k).  I may not have much, but this gift will ensure that the work I’m deeply committed  to and the CCR community will continue on, strong, long after I am gone.”Jeremy Rye CCR Donor Spotlight
To join Jeremy and make a donation to CCR please visit www.CCRjustice.org/donate