Barack Obama wins U.S. Presi-
dential election, says will close 
Guantánamo 
 
Barack Obama, the Democratic candi-
date for president of the United States, 
was victorious in the U.S. elections on 
November 4, 2008 over John McCain, 
the Republican contender. Obama has 
pledged to close Guantánamo, has 
supported habeas corpus and has de-
nounced torture in the past.  President-
Elect Obama has indicated that closing 
the prison camp at Guantánamo Bay 
will be a priority for his administration. 
 
Obama, who will take office on January 
20, 2009, is the first Black president of 
the United States. He pledged during 
the campaign to oppose many of the 
abuses of the Bush administration. Advo-
cacy groups are calling upon him to act 
quickly to sign executive orders closing 
Guantánamo and ending torture. 
 
5 of 6 detainees in Boumediene 
case ordered released in court 
hearing; 3 already returned to 
Bosnia; other releases from 
Guantánamo in November and 
December 
 
On November 20, 2008, a federal 
judge, Richard Leon, ordered the re-
lease of 5 of 6 petitioners in Boumedi-
ene v. Bush . The Boumediene petition-
ers’ case is the one that reached the 
United States Supreme Court, prompting 
its June ruling that Guantánamo Bay 
detainees have a constitutional right to 
challenge their detention in a court of 
law. 
 
Leon, a judge appointed by President 
George W. Bush, ruled that the govern-
ment had insufficient evidence to detain 
5 of the 6 men, Bosnians originally from 
Algeria.  Judge Leon ordered their re-lease. The six men were arrested by the 
Bosnian government at the behest of the 
U.S., then exonerated by the Bosnian 
high court in 2002. Instead of being 
released, however, the men were turned 
over to the U.S. and sent to 
Guantánamo. They were never charged 
with a crime by either the Bosnian or 
U.S. governments. 
 
Three of the men, Mustafa Ait Idir, Hadj 
Boudella, and Mohamed Nechla, were 
returned to Sarajevo, Bosnia, on De-
cember 16, 2008. The two other men 
ordered released, Saber Lahmar and 
Lakhdar Boumediene, remain at 
Guantánamo. 
 
Most of the over 200 habeas chal-
lenges filed by the men at Guantánamo 
are currently now proceeding before 
different judges.  The Boumediene case 
proceeded quickly as it was filed early 
and was before one of two judges who 
proceeded independently without coor-
dination after the June Supreme Court 
decision. Of the 23 Guantánamo pris-
oners to have received a ruling in their 
habeas case, 22 have been ordered 
released. 
 
Also in November and December 
2008, several other men were released 
from Guantánamo, including [1 Tajik, 2 
Algerians?, ????]. 
 
Countries indicate increasing 
willingness to accept 
Guantánamo refugees 
 
In a significant breakthrough for the ap-
proximately 50 men held at 
Guantánamo who cannot return to their 
home countries due to fears of persecu-
tion or torture, or because they do not 
have countries of nationality, several 
countries have demonstrated an increas-
ing willingness to consider accepting them into their borders. 
 
On December 11, 2008, Portuguese 
Foreign Minister Luis Amado said that 
Portugal is willing to accept 
Guantánamo detainees who cannot 
return to their home countries and urged 
other European Union countries to fol-
low suit. Subsequently other countries 
have announced their renewed consid-
eration of the request to accept the 
stranded Guantánamo detainees. These 
countries include Switzerland, France, 
Germany, Sweden and Australia. 
 
Thus far, only Albania has accepted 
refugees from Guantánamo, accepting 
eight men in 2006. The United States 
has thus far resisted an October 2008 
judicial order that the seventeen 
Uighurs, men of a Muslim ethnic minority 
from China, still imprisoned as non-
enemy combatants in Guantánamo, be 
released into the United States. The U.S. 
government has also claimed that it can-
not find other safe third countries to ac-
cept the Guantánamo detainees at risk 
for persecution. 
 
Senate Armed Services Commit-
tee report indicates responsibil-
ity of U.S. government officials 
for torture 
 
On December 11, 2008, the Senate 
Armed Services Committee released a 
bipartisan report on the abuse of detain-
ees in U.S. custody. The report affirmed 
that high-ranking Bush administration 
officials, including former Secretary of 
Defense Donald Rumsfeld, were directly 
responsible for the abuse and torture of 
detainees in Guantánamo, Iraq, and 
Afghanistan. The report also docu-
mented military lawyers’ opposition to 
torture and cruel, inhuman and degrad-
ing treatment during interrogation as 
unethical and ineffective.  
guantánamo global justice initiative 
news briefing center for 
constitutional 
rights 
January 2009 
Center for Constitutional Rights         www.ccrjus tice.org  (continued on  pg. 2)  
The report was also highly critical of 
the information obtained from interro-
gation under torture, noting that these 
tactics have been used to extract 
false confessions. 
 
Lawsuit challenging condi-
tions at Guantánamo rein-
stated by Supreme Court 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court on Decem-
ber 12 directed the Circuit Court to 
review its prior decision dismissing the 
first lawsuit challenging torture and 
violations of religious freedom at 
Guantánamo. The Supreme Court 
ordered a federal appeals court to 
reconsider its previous decision dis-
missing the case of Rasul v. Myers  in 
light of the Supreme Court’s June 
2008 decision in Boumediene v. 
Bush . The Boumediene  decision rec-
ognized the constitutional right of 
Guantánamo detainees to challenge 
their detention in a federal court.  
 
Rasul v. Myers , filed on behalf of four 
British former Guantánamo detainees, 
challenges their wrongful detention 
and the abuses to which they were 
subjected. The men, who were nei-
ther accused of terrorism nor desig-
nated “enemy combatants,” were 
systematically beaten, threatened 
with unmuzzled dogs, subjected to 
extremes of hot and cold and har-
assed in their practice of religion, 
including having their Korans thrown 
in filthy toilet buckets and having ear-
splitting music played during prayer 
time.  
 
The appeals court which heard their 
case issued a troubling decision in 
January 2008.  The appellate court’s 
decision held that Guantánamo de-
tainees had no rights under the Con-
stitution clearly established at the time 
the abuses were committed, and that 
torture was foreseeable in the context 
of interrogation and detention and 
within the scope of employment of government officials. The court also 
ruled that the detainees were not 
entitled to protection under Religious 
Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA), 
which protects all “persons” in the 
exercise of their religion because 
Guantanamo detainees are not 
“persons” as defined by RFRA.  
 
Report released following up 
on released detainees 
A new report details the effect of de-
tention and abuse at Guantánamo 
upon the lives of 62 released detain-
ees. The report, Guantánamo and Its 
Aftermath: U.S. Detention and Interro-
gation Practices and Their Impact on 
Detainees, was released in Novem-
ber 2008 by human rights experts at 
the University of California, Berkeley 
in partnership with the Center for 
Constitutional Rights (CCR). 
 
The report is based on a two-year 
study. Researchers conducted inter-
views with released detainees in nine 
countries. Almost two-thirds of the 
former detainees interviewed re-
ported having psychological prob-
lems since leaving Guantánamo. 
Over half of the study respondents 
who discussed their interrogation ses-
sions at Guantánamo characterized 
them as “abusive.” Detainees re-
ported being subjected to short 
shackling, stress positions, prolonged 
solitary confinement, and exposure to 
extreme temperatures, loud music, 
and strobe lights for extended peri-
ods—often simultaneously. 
 
Of the more than 770 detainees who 
have endured Guantánamo since it 
opened in 2002, over 500 have 
been released without charge or trial. 
So far, of the 250 or more who re-
main in detention, only 23 have been 
charged with a crime. In nearly seven 
years, only three men have been con-
victed including one who pled guilty. 
The first two men convicted have 
been released and are now free. 
 Military Commissions Up-
dates 
The Department of Defense filed mili-
tary commissions charges on Decem-
ber 16, 2008 against two men, 
Noor Uthman Muhammed and Tariq 
Mahmoud Ahmed al-Sawah. Mu-
hammed is accused of conspiracy 
and providing support for terrorism 
and al-Sawah is charged with provid-
ing support for terrorism and conspir-
ing against U.S. and coalition forces. 
In addition, on December 20, the 
Defense Department announced that 
it planned to proceed with capital 
charges against Abdel Rahim al-
Nashiri, who is accused of participat-
ing in the bombing of the USS Cole 
warship in 2000. 
 
Many human rights advocates have 
called upon the Defense Department 
to cease military commissions pro-
ceedings before the inauguration of 
President-Elect Obama. Obama’s 
transition team has indicated opposi-
tion to the military commissions, and 
human rights advocates see these 
charges filed in the last days of the 
Bush administration as an attempt to 
keep the commission system alive 
despite the incoming administration’s 
opposition. 
 
Center for Constitutional Rights         www.ccrjus tice.org  about the news briefing.. 
This news briefing is produced 
monthly by the Center for Consti-
tutional Rights, which coordinates 
the representation of detainees at 
Guantánamo Bay with a network 
of over 500 pro bono habeas 
counsel. It is translated into Arabic 
and Dari and is available online 
at  
http://www.ccrjustice.org/ 
learn-more/reports/ 
Guantanamo-newsletter 
 
Center for Constitutional Rights 
666 Broadway, 7th Floor 
New York, NY 10012 
http://www.ccrjustice.org/ 
(212) 614-6443  
 LKates@ccrjustice.org 