 
 
 
870 Market Street, Suite 688  San Francisco, CA 94102  tel 415 544 0444  fax 415 544 0456  info@cja.org  cja.org  
 PRESS RELEASE  
 
October 5, 2001   
Contact: Joshua Sondheimer, Litigation Director, (415) 544-0444   
U.S. Court Holds Indonesian Ge neral Liable for $66 Million  
for East Timor Abuses   
SAN FRANCISCO -- San Francisco's Center  for Justice & Accountability (CJA) 
announced Friday, Oct. 5 a $66 million federal court judgment against former Indonesian 
Army Chief of Staff Jo hny Lumintang for his role in wi despread human rights abuses in 
East Timor.General Lumintang received noti ce Friday of the ruling by United States 
Magistrate Judge Alan Kay of the federa l district court in Washington, D.C.  
 Plaintiffs in the suit included six civilian victims of the violen ce that followed East 
Timor’s overwhelming vote for independen ce from Indonesia in a 1999 U.N.-sponsored 
referendum.They filed suit against General Lu mintang in March 2000 under federal laws 
permitting victims of grave human rights violations abroad to sue perpetrators of such violations who enter the United States.Luminta ng was served with court papers during a 
visit to Washington, D.C. 
 
In March of this year, Judge Kay heard thre e days of testimony from the four surviving 
plaintiffs and several expert witnesses in a Washington, D.C. federal courtroom.Two of 
the victims were killed during the post-r eferendum violence.The  plaintiffs were 
represented by CJA, a San Francisco human rights law organization, New York’s Center 
for Constitutional Rights (CCR), and the Wash ington, D.C. law firm Patton Boggs, LLP.  
The plaintiffs’ suit focused on Lumintang’s ro le in what the cour t called a “coordinated 
program of massive destruction” unleashe d by the Indonesian military following the 
overwhelming popular vote for independen ce from Indonesia in a 1999 U.N.-sponsored 
referendum. 
The court found that Lumintang, as Army Vice Ch ief of Staff at the time, was responsible 
for scrutinizing army operations, strategic pla nning, and military discipline.The court also 
noted that Lumintang issued a telegram to Army troops viewed as signaling the campaign 
of violence, and that he signe d a training manual distributed to  troops in East Timor that 
included instructions in abducti on, killing, kidnapping, and terror.  
"It has been established . . . that Luminta ng has responsibility for the actions against 
plaintiffs and a larger pattern of gross human rights violations," wrote Judge Kay."[H]e - along with other high-ranking members of the Indonesian military - planned, ordered, and  2 of 3 
 
instigated acts carried out by subordinates to terrorize a nd displace the East Timorese 
population ... and to destroy East Timor' s infrastructure following the vote for 
independence."  
East Timor, formerly a Portuguese colony, was occupied by the Indonesian military in 
1975.The United States and the international community refused to recognize Indonesian 
rule over the island nation, which occupies half of  the island of Timor, north of Australia.  
The violence by the Indonesian military and related militia was widely viewed as an 
effort to overturn the results  of the independence referendum , and to discourage popular 
independence movements in other Indonesian  provinces.In what the court called a 
“coordinated program of massive destruction”  by these forces, over 2,000 East Timorese 
lost their lives, and 70-80 pe rcent of the country’s infrastructure was destroyed.Some 
240,000 persons, one third of the population, fled  from their homes and were forcibly 
relocated to the Indonesian province of West Timor.  
CJA hailed the court’s ruling as an important  victory for the people of East Timor and 
sends an important message to human right s violators around the world."The tragic 
events of September 11 have reminded us all of the horror of  attacks on innocent 
civilians.The court reaffirmed that defendant bears responsibility under U.S. and international law for his role in such attacks against civilians in East Timor," said CJA’s Joshua Sondheimer, an attorney for the plain tiffs."The court's ruling sends a message that 
if those responsible for attacks against civilian s wish to enter the United States, they will 
be held accountable in our courts."  
The court’s decision comes on the heels of th e first independent pa rliamentary elections 
in East Timor on August 30, 2001, and a state visit to Washington, D.C. weeks ago by 
new Indonesian President Megawati Sukarnoputri.  
The case against Lumintang is the only one br ought in any country or jurisdiction against 
an Indonesian commander for the systematic destruction and violence that followed the 
independence referendum.General Lumintang, w ho was served with court papers during 
a visit to the Washington, D.C. area, chose not  to defend himself in court.After he failed 
to respond to plaintiffs’ claims, which incl uded charges of crimes against humanity, 
summary execution and torture, a judge declared Lumintang in default.  
While there has been a moveme nt to establish an internat ional tribunal to judge human 
rights crimes committed in East Timor on the model of the tribunals established for 
Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, the U.N.  has yet to authorize such a court.The 
Indonesian government recently issued a d ecree establishing a special Human Rights 
Court for East Timor in Indonesia.However, hum an rights groups say the effort falls far 
short of addressing the Indonesian military’s responsibility for the violence in East Timor, as it allows review of events only from August and September 1999 in 3 out of 13 
districts.  
Plaintiffs who traveled to Washington to testify in the proceedings included:   3 of 3 
 
--a 30-year-old man who was shot by Indonesian soldiers and subsequently needed to 
have his foot amputated;  
--a 27-year old who was threatened with d eath after being abducted by the military, and 
whose brother was killed and father in jured in post-elec tion attacks; and  
--a mother whose son was killed and whose home was destroyed by In donesian soldiers.  
In 1992, a judgment for $14 million was issued  in a similar case against Indonesian 
General Sintong Panjaitan for his involvem ent in the November 12, 1991, massacre of 
over 270 East Timorese during a funeral at th e Santa Cruz cemetery in East Timor.  
The Lumintang lawsuit, like the Panjaitan case, is based on two U.S. laws, known as the 
Alien Tort Claims Act and the Torture Victim Protection Act, that allow victims of grave human rights violations committed abroad to  bring suit in federal court against the 
perpetrators or commanders responsible.Lawsu its can only go forward if the defendant is 
served legal papers while in the United States. 
 