 
 
 
870 Market Street, Suite 688  San Francisco, CA 94102  tel 415 544 0444  fax 415 544 0456  info@cja.org  cja.org  
 For Immediate Release November 7, 2006  Contact: Elizabeth Chertoff  Media Coordinator      (415) 544-0444 ext.303 
echertoff@cja.org   
Defendants in genocide case  arrested in Guatemala   
EXTRADITION TO SPAIN IMMINENT       
Guatemala City, Guatemala, November 7, 2006 : In an unprecedented move, Guatemalan 
authorities arrested earlier today at least two of the ei ght named defendants in the 
Guatemalan Genocide Case that is pending before the Spanish National Court (SNC). Guatemalan Judge Morelia Rios, Presiden t of Criminal Sentencing Court No. 5, 
courageously authorized the arrests in respons e to the international arrest warrants issued 
earlier this year by Spanish judge Santiago Pedraz. Attorneys with the San Francisco-
based Center for Justice & Accountability (C JA) represent victims of the Guatemalan 
genocide and applaud the arrests.  
Former Minister of Defense Ángel Aníbal Guevara Rodriguez and former Director of the National Police Colonel German Chupina Ba rahona were taken into police custody 
earlier today. Also, police have secured th e area around the home of former president 
General Oscar Humberto Mejias Victores, but he appears to be on the run. They each will 
face extradition to Spain. Judge Rios has aut horized the arrests of the other individuals 
named in the Spanish arrest orders with the exception of former di ctator Efraín Rios 
Montt. 
CJA International Attorney Almudena Bernab eu explains, “We are extremely encouraged 
by the news of these historical arrests made  today in Guatemala. These men have blood 
on their hands from the tens of thousands who died in the Guatemalan genocide of the 1980s. We hope that Rios Montt will also be brought into custody as soon as possible and 
we are inquiring as to why his ar rest has not yet been ordered.” 
The other defendants named on the arrest wa rrants are former President Romeo Lucas 
Garcia, former Minister of Interior Donaldo Álvarez Ruiz, former Police Commander 
Pedro Garcia Arredondo, and former Chief of the Armed Forces General Staff Benedicto 
Lucas Garcia. 
Judge Pedraz issued the intern ational arrest warrants after he traveled, along with CJA 
attorney Bernabeu and public prosecutor Jesús Alonso, to Guatemala City to take 
testimony from the defendants. Upon their arrival, lawyers for the defendants filed 
several appeals forcing the Guatemalan Cons titutional Court to indefinitely suspend the 
proceedings. Upon returning to Spain, on July 7, 2006, Judge Pedraz issued arrest  2 of 2 
 
warrants for the eight defendants named in th e case. Judge Pedraz said his decision was 
based on the “obstructionist attitude of th e defendants and because there is sufficient 
evidence that the crimes of genocide, terrorism , torture, murder and illegal detention were 
committed by the defendants.”  
CJA played a key role in presenting evidence to Judge Pedraz and pushing for the arrest 
warrants. CJA also assisted in directing the arrest warrants to proceed under the 
appropriate diplomatic channels prescribed by Guatemalan law.  
The case began in 1999 when Nobel laureate  Rigoberta Menchú Tum and other victims 
filed a criminal complaint in the SNC agains t the senior Guatemalan government officials 
charging them with terrorism, genocide and systematic torture. CJA joined the complaint 
in 2004 on behalf of two victims. The case, known as the Guatemalan Genocide Case, is 
modeled on the Pinochet case which wa s also brought before the SNC. 
CJA is a San Francisco-based non-profit orga nization which works to deter torture and 
other severe human rights abuses through im pact litigation, educa tion and outreach. CJA 
is the only U.S. based human rights legal or ganization solely devoted  to seeking justice 
and accountability on behalf of torture survivor s against their perpetra tors in the courts. 
 