 
 
 
870 Market Street, Suite 688  San Francisco, CA 94102  tel 415 544 0444  fax 415 544 0456  info@cja.org  cja.org  
 For Immediate Release                                                      
November 11, 2004                                                                                                     
Contacts:  
Center for Justice & Account ability (San Francisco, CA):
        Helene Silverberg, Atto rney, (415) 544-0444 x308, hsilverberg@cja.org 
        Sandra Coliver, Executive Director, (415) 544- 0444 x305, cell: (202) 422-4837 
Cooley Godward LLP (Reston, VA):
       Bob Vieth, Partner, (703) 456-8082 
FORMER SOMALI PRIME MINISTER AND 
MILITARY OFFICER FACE LAWSUITS IN U.S. 
COURT FOR TORTURE, MURDER, CRIMES 
AGAINST HUMANITY   
ACCUSED SOMALI WAR CRIMINALS LIVE IN VIRGINIA  
Fairfax County, Virginia; Nov. 11, 2004.  Mohamed Ali Samatar and Yusuf Abdi Ali 
(a.k.a. Tokeh), both residents of Virginia, we re served within th e last 24 hours with 
lawsuits accusing them of responsibility fo r war crimes and other human rights abuses 
committed in Somalia in the 1980s during the brutal military regime of Somali dictator Siad Barré.  The suits were filed by the Cent er for Justice and Accountability (CJA) and 
Cooley Godward, LLP on behalf of several indi viduals who survived to rture or lost loved 
ones under the regime.  Ali Samatar was Mini ster of Defense of Somalia from 1980 to 
1986 and Prime Minister from 1987 to 1990.  He wa s served with the lawsuit at his home 
in Fairfax, Virginia.  Tokeh was a commande r of a Somali Army battalion from 1984 to 
1989.  He now lives and works in Alexandria, Virginia.  The lawsuits were filed in 
Alexandria, in the U.S. District Court fo r the Eastern District of Virginia.   
During the 1980s, the Somali Armed Forces committed egregious human rights abuses 
against civilians, most of them members of the Isaaq clan, who were perceived as 
potential opponents of the Barré government.  No person – in Somalia or elsewhere – has 
ever been held legally responsible for the abuses committed by the military government.   
Both defendants are being sued under the internationally-recognized doctrine of 
“command responsibility” whereby a military  commander may be held responsible for  2 of 3 
 
human rights abuses committed by subordinate s if the commander knew, or should have 
known, about the abuses and failed to take all reasonable measures to prevent them or to 
punish the offenders.  The defendants are also accused of conspiring with and aiding and 
abetting subordinates in abuses. 
Lead attorney for the plaintiffs, Bob Vieth of the Reston, Virginia, office of Cooley 
Godward, LLP, stated, "We are committed to achieving justice for our clients who 
suffered so severely at the hands of these two individuals.  These men should not be 
permitted to live in impunity in the United States."  
Sandra Coliver, Executive Director of the Center for Justice & Accountability, which 
launched the lawsuit, stated, “It is outrageous  that war criminals like these two men can 
live in the United States, just a few mile s from the nation’s capitol.  Although the 
plaintiffs in these actions are from the Isaaq clan, we are not simply seeking justice for 
this clan, but for all people who have suffered severe repression under the military regime 
of Siad Barré. We hope that survivors from other clans will come forward.”  
Ali Samatar is accused of overseeing widespread and systematic use of torture, rape, 
prolonged arbitrary detention in solitary confinement,  and indiscriminate mass 
executions.    
Among the plaintiffs who filed suit against him is Bashe Abdi Yousuf.  Bashe was a young businessman in 1981 when he was arrested by Somali security forces.  He was charged with high treason, a crime that carri ed a mandatory death sentence by hanging, 
for his participation in a group seeking to improve conditions at  a local hospital.  He was 
severely tortured and tried before a kangar oo court, then spent nearly seven years in 
solitary confinement in a small prison cell approximately 6 feet by 6 feet.   
Bashe is now a U.S. citizen living in Atlanta, Ge orgia.  He had this to say about filing this 
historic lawsuit: "I was fortunate to survive,  but many others did not.  I hope with this 
lawsuit to give voice to the many people who suffered and the many people who died 
because of these men. I hope the lawsuit also sends a message that perpetrators of human rights will be held accountable for their crim es.  The United States should not provide a 
safe haven to individuals who have co mmitted gross human rights abuses around the 
world." 
Other plaintiffs against the fo rmer Prime Minister include: 
• A farmer arrested with his two brothers  by Somali Army soldiers while tending the 
family’s camels. Although he narrowly escaped execution, his brothers were murdered.   
• A woman arrested when she was just a high school student , who was tortured and raped 
at regional Army headquarters.  She was held  in solitary confinement for 3½ years.    3 of 3 
 
• A noncommissioned officer in the Somali Ar my who was rounded up with other Isaaq 
officers and shot by a firing squad.  He r eceived only a flesh wound and hid himself 
under the bodies of his dead friends until the so ldiers left and he was able to escape.  
• A college student who was also shot and le ft for dead by Army soldiers and security 
forces. He was buried in the sand on a beach near the Somali city of Jezira, where he 
remained until the soldiers left the beach and he was able to escape. 
• A man whose four brothers were murd ered during the Jezira Beach massacre. 
Tokeh was a notoriously brutal military leader in the Gebiley region of northern 
Somalia.  Soldiers under his direct command routinely tort ured and murdered alleged 
opponents of the government, killed and looted livestock, blew up water reservoirs and 
destroyed homes.   He personally ordered the torture and murder of civilians he claimed were helping the political opposition to the Barré govern ment. In 1986, he graduated 
from a training program for foreign military  officers at the U.S. Army Command and 
General Staff College in Fort Leavenworth, Kansas. 
Two Somali farmers have filed the suit agains t Tokeh. Both were detained by soldiers 
under Tokeh’s command, and both were tortured  by these soldiers as well as by Tokeh 
himself. One, a woman, was four months pregnant in 1984 when she was detained. She lost her fetus as a re sult of the beatings she endured.  She spent six years in a crowded 
prison cell with no window and only a single toilet.  The second plaintiff was detained in 
December 1987 and severely tortured numerous times, often with Tokeh present.  On one 
occasion, Tokeh shot him several times and ordered his bodyguards to bury the man.    
The lawsuits were filed by the Center fo r Justice & Accountabili ty (CJA) and the law 
firm of Cooley Godward, LLP (www.cooley.com).  CJA, based in San Francisco, has 
obtained favorable jury verdicts in simila r cases involving a total of six human rights 
abusers from Bosnia, El Salvador, Chile, and Indonesia who had come to live in the US.  
Cooley Godward LLP,  is an internationally respected law firm that joins CJA in this 
action as part of its award-winning pro bono practice.   
A photo of Ali Samatar is available upon reque st.  For additional information about the 
case, please see CJA’s website: http://www.cja.org/ .  
  
 