 
 
 
870 Market Street, Suite 688  San Francisco, CA 94102  tel 415 544 0444  fax 415 544 0456  info@cja.org  cja.org  
 For Immediate Release  
February 5, 2008       
  
Contact: Moira Feeney, Esq., Media Coordinator 
415-544-0444 x302; mfeeney@cja.org
 
PERUVIAN WAR CRIMINAL TO FA CE JUSTICE IN MIAMI  
 
SURVIVORS OF ACCOMARCA MASSACRE TO CONFRONT PERPETRATOR 
TELMO HURTADO HURTAD O IN FEDERAL COURT 
 
What : A trial on damages will be held against former  Peruvian Major Telmo Hurtado Hurtado for his 
role in the infamous Accomarca Massacre of 1985 in Pe ru.   The two plaintiffs in the case, Teófila Ochoa 
Lizarbe and Cirila Pulido Baldeón, were only girls wh en Major Hurtado slaughtered their families in front 
of them.  They have won a default judgment against Major Hurtado and will present testimony on the trauma, pain and suffering they experienced in the af termath of the massacre in which 69 villagers were 
killed.   Major Hurtado, who is currently in immi gration detention, will be  ordered to appear.   
 
Where: U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Florida, 301 N. Miami Ave., Miami, Florida, 
Courtroom 8.   Judge Adelberto Jordon presiding. 
 
When: Monday, February 11, 2008, 9:00 a.m.  
 
Who:  The defendant, Major Telmo Hurtado Hurtado, and his soldiers went house to house on the 
morning of August 14, 1985, in an area near Acco marca, in the Ayacucho region of Peru, forcibly 
removing villagers from their homes.  The soldiers then attacked and raped many of the women in the community.  The troops forced scores of people, including several pregnant women and elderly residents, into two buildings.  Major Hurtado threw a grenade at  one of the buildings and ordered his troops to open 
fire. The buildings burnt to the ground.   69 people we re killed.  Major Hurtado came to the U.S. in 2002 
after an amnesty law protecting him from prosecution in Peru was nullified.   
 
The plaintiffs, Teófila Ochoa Lizarbe and Cirila Pulido Baldeón, were 12 years old at the time and 
survived by hiding from the soldiers.  Despite Ms. Ochoa Lizarbe’s own escape, her mother, four brothers 
and a sister were killed.  Soldiers murdered Ms. Pulid o Baldeón’s mother and brother.  The plaintiffs are 
both members of the Association of Relatives of the Victims of Political Violence in Accomarca which was formed by the survivors of the massacre.   
 
The plaintiffs are represented by The Center for Justice and Accountability (CJA), a San Francisco-based human rights organization dedicated to ending tort ure and other severe human rights abuses around the 
world and advancing the rights of survivors to seek tr uth, justice and redress.  CJA uses litigation to hold 
perpetrators individually accountable for human ri ghts abuses, develop human rights law and advance the 
rule of law in countries transitioning from periods of abuse.  
www.cja.org .   
 
Why : CJA International Attorney Almudena Bernabeu explains, “After waiting more than 20 years, our 
clients will finally have their day in court.  Hurtado has managed to evade justice until now.  This hearing 
in a U.S. federal court in conjunction with the hi storic trial against Fujimori for human rights abuses currently underway in Peru, demonstrates that the tide is changing for accountability efforts in Peru and 
the U.S.  Impunity can no longer be an option.” 
 
The Accomarca Massacre was committed during the ci vil war between the government of Peru and 
insurgent groups, including Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path).  Throughout that time, the Peruvian Army 
and other government forces were responsible for wi despread and systematic human rights abuses against 
the civilian population.  According to Peru’s Comm ission for Truth and Reconc iliation, 26,259 civilians 
died or disappeared in the area surrounding Accomarca during the civil war.  
 
CJA also represents Ms. Ochoa Lizar be and Ms. Pulido Baldeón in a similar action against Juan Rivera 
Rondón in federal court in Maryland.  These are the fi rst human rights cases to be filed in the U.S. for 
atrocities committed against the civilian population in Peru during the civil war.  The defendants are 
charged with extrajudicial killing, torture, war crimes and crimes against humanity. 
 
For more information and background on the case, please visit http://www.cja.org/cases/hurtado.shtml . 
 
 
### 
 
 
 
 