Looking Forward:
A Comprehensive Plan 
for Criminal Justice 
Reform in Ohio
March 2016
Looking Forward: 
A Comprehensive Plan for Criminal Justice Reform in Ohio
American Civil Liberties Union of Ohio
Ohio Justice & Policy Center
March 2016
Table of Contents
Introduction 1
Executive Summary 2
I. Limit Harsh Automatic Punishment 4
II. Prioritize Rehabilitation 7
III. Release Innocent People from Jail 9
IV. Decriminalize Poverty 11
V. Limit Collateral Consequences 14
VI. Reform Community Control 15
Conclusion 21
End Notes and Citations 231
A Comprehensive Plan for Criminal Justice Reform in Ohio Ohio has a mass incarceration crisis. There are currently 50,600 Ohioans in prisons designed to hold 
38,600; that’s at least 12,000 too many of our neighbors and fellow citizens in cages. And beyond these 
inhumane numbers, there is a fundamental misuse of criminal-justice tools to attack social and health 
problems. We have responded to poverty, drug and alcohol addiction, mental illness, or an overall lack 
of opportunities with punishment. 
Instead of treating people with mental illness, we criminalize them and block access to the care they 
so desperately need. We allow low-income people to be victimized by steep fines and costs, with many 
languishing in local jails because they cannot afford to pay a court fine or make bond. People who have a 
small amount of drugs are not given treatment for their addiction, but instead offered prison sentences 
and a felony conviction. Those who try to re-enter society have the door slammed shut by mounting 
collateral sanctions that prevent them from getting a job, housing, education, reliable transportation, 
and more.
The result is a system that is costing our state in every sense of the word. Ohio has the sixth largest 
prison population in the nation. In the last decade, the prison population has increased 12 percent 
despite the fact that the violent crime rate has reached a 30-year low. In 2014, taxpayers spent over 
$1.7 billion to operate the state prison system alone. Every dollar spent on prisons is a dollar not spent 
on crime-survivor services, schools, addiction treatment, mental healthcare and other services that 
enrich our communities and that keep people out of the criminal justice system in the first place. 
Nowhere are the negative effects of mass incarceration felt more than in communities of color. African 
Americans account for nearly half the state’s prison population but only a little more than a tenth of the 
total state population. Mass incarceration has decimated neighborhoods, leaving many communities 
of color with countless people unable to find employment and cycling in and out of the justice system.
State leaders have begun to recognize that mass incarceration is simply not working and must be 
dismantled. In 2011, a bi-partisan group of legislators, along with advocates and activists, passed House 
Bill 86 (HB 86). This legislation was part of the federal Justice Reinvestment Initiative that sought to 
reform state criminal justice systems and provide resources for strategies that depopulate prisons and 
jails. While HB 86 promised modest reforms, it was never fully implemented or funded, and despite a 
short plateau, Ohio’s prison population is growing.
The time for modest, incremental steps is over. We must challenge ourselves to imagine a fundamentally 
different justice system that is truly just, and not merely focused on punishment. We must usher in an 
era of being smart on crime, not just tough on crime, where accountability does not mean punishment 
for punishment’s sake. We can create forms of accountability that restore the law-breaker to being a 
productive member of society while also offering more robust healing and restoration to crime victims. 
Currently, the Ohio General Assembly has created a Criminal Justice Recodification Committee that 
is tasked with rewriting our criminal laws. Once again, state leaders have invited members of that 
committee to use this opportunity to change our justice system. However, the problem does not begin 
or end simply with the contents of Ohio’s criminal code, nor does the solution reside solely with the 
Committee. Their work represents a meaningful opportunity to bring about substantive reform—that 
opportunity must not be squandered on narrow, technical edits to statutory language. Now is the chance 
for the legislature to precisely identify and fundamentally change the policies that drive excessive 
incarceration. It is with this approach that we can perhaps finally begin looking forward to a new justice 
system that makes our communities stronger and lifts up the people of Ohio, rather than keeping them 
down.Introduction2
Looking ForwardSimplification of the Ohio criminal code is no small task and the Criminal Justice Recodification 
Committee has an important opportunity to propose changes to reduce our overcrowded jails and 
prisons. Our report offers recommendations that are a blueprint for long-term criminal justice reform in 
Ohio. We advocate that all of the following proposed changes apply retroactively. The following synopsis 
highlights six broad categories that are ripe for reform:
1. Limit Harsh, Automatic Punishments:  “One-size fits all” does not work for our criminal justice 
system. Instead, criminal laws must address society’s specific needs and strategies that 
emphasize rehabilitation should be the priority rather than resorting to incarceration as the 
fallback position. Each case is different, and our laws need to reflect these differences. To break 
the cycle and begin to rebuild our broken communities, Ohio must:
• Eliminate mandatory minimum sentences, which remove judicial discretion and 
individualized review;
• Reclassify low level felonies to reduce the collateral consequences associated with certain 
convictions;
• Plug the Statehouse-to-Prison Pipeline, which sends too many people to jails and prisons 
for too long; and
• Invest in meaningful alternatives to incarceration to relieve our overextended prison 
system.
2. Prioritize Rehabilitation:  Ohio’s mass incarceration system can no longer function as the state’s 
largest mental health provider. We must determine the root cause of problems that result in 
criminal charges and utilize rehabilitative programs rather than incarceration. Investing in 
rehabilitation can decrease the prison population and preserve public safety. To achieve these 
goals, we recommend:
• Increasing mental health resources so that more people are treated in their communities 
and not in our criminal justice system; and
• Increasing and expanding the use of earned credit so that people have an incentive to fully 
participate in programs and earn early release back into their communities.
3. Release Innocent People from Jail:  Too many people languish in our jails for low level offenses 
rather than being cited and released or because they cannot afford cash bail. These practices 
are expensive, unjust, and have a significant disparate racial impact. To reduce the burden on our 
overcrowded jails and create a more just system, Ohio must:
• Use tickets over arrests for those accused of lower level and nonviolent misdemeanor 
offenses; and
• Reform the bond system to decrease reliance on cash bail when viable alternatives exist 
and to ensure that judicial discretion does not lead to inconsistency between jurisdictions 
and create racial disparity. 
4. Decriminalize Poverty:  Steep financial sanctions and court fees, criminalizing innocuous 
behavior, and punishing debt with more debt contributes to the cycle of debt and incarceration 
and criminalizes being poor. Ohio needs to end these practices and decriminalize poverty by:Executive Summary3
A Comprehensive Plan for Criminal Justice Reform in Ohio • Dismantling debtors’ prisons and pay-to-stay fees, which ruin lives and cost communities;
• Not locking people up for failure to pay child support due to a genuine inability to pay; and
• Reducing financial sanctions and mandatory fines, and eliminating administrative fees 
for payment plans.
5. Limit Collateral Consequences:  In order to prioritize rehabilitation and decrease our prison 
population, Ohio needs to reduce burdensome collateral consequences. These lasting penalties 
create barriers to reentry and keep people in poverty once they are released into the community. 
To allow people to fully exit the criminal justice system and reintegrate into their communities, 
Ohio must:
• Limit post-release conditions that hinder people from fully reentering their communities, 
including those which have no rational relationship to the crime, or create permanent 
bars to employment or housing; and
• Reform record sealing laws to allow people to achieve self-sufficiency through employment.
6. Reform Community Control:  Community control can often be an effective alternative to 
incarceration. It allows people to remain in their communities while also relieving our overextended 
jails and prisons. Ohio should prioritize using forms of community control to reduce jail terms, 
as well as granting parole to those who have shown genuine signs of rehabilitation. To achieve 
these goals, Ohio needs to address two problem areas:
• Implement a unified, statewide community control system, and reduce the use of 
incarceration for community control violations; and
• Create more transparency in setting parole, stop relying on the “seriousness of the offense” 
as a parole factor, stabilize or increase parole release rates, and mandate presumptive 
release.
4
Looking Forward 
Our criminal justice system will never be effective unless we prioritize strategies that emphasize 
rehabilitation rather than incarceration alone.  Mandating harsh, automatic criminal penalties obstructs 
judges’ ability to individualize sentences and punishments. Every case is different, and our laws need 
to accommodate these differences. Too often, there is no adequate alternative to incarceration, leaving 
jails and prisons as the only places to care for individuals who are better suited for more rehabilitative 
settings. To address these concerns, the Ohio legislature should (1) eliminate mandatory minimum 
sentences; (2) reclassify low-level felonies; (3) plug the statehouse-to-prison pipeline; and (4) invest in 
meaningful alternatives to incarceration.
Recommendation 1 – Eliminate Mandatory Minimum Sentences
When mandatory minimums were first introduced, they were touted as a way to reduce gross racial 
disparities in sentencing sustained by broad judicial discretion. Decades later, one only has to look at 
the racial makeup of Ohio’s prisons to see that mandatory minimums have not solved this problem. 
Black people are incarcerated at 6 times the rate of white people in Ohio. 45 percent of the state’s prison 
population is African American, while African Americans only account for 12 percent of the state’s total 
population.1 Yet, African Americans account for over 25% of all arrests in the state.2 
It is clear that mandatory minimums have not solved racial injustice within our mass incarceration 
system, and there are serious questions as to whether they have actually made it worse. Very few 
studies exist in this area; however, the current studies indicate that after mandatory sentencing was 
introduced racial disparities in sentencing increased.3
Chapter 29 of the Ohio Revised Code is brimming with mandatory minimums with the bulk occurring in 
§ 2925: drug offenses.4 In total, there are 105 mandatory minimum sentences for people charged with 
levels 3-5 felony offenses.5 Out of the 105 mandatory minimums, 77 percent relate to drug crimes.6 
It is no secret that the federal War on Drugs has been used to control and devastate communities of 
color and has largely failed at its stated goal of reducing drug use and making communities safer. 
Unfortunately, Ohio is no different. 1 in 4 of all people newly admitted to prison in Ohio are there for 
a drug offense, and 1 in 8 are there specifically for drug possession.7 These individuals may be better 
served by rehabilitation and social interventions than incarceration, yet Ohio’s outdated and ineffective 
mandatory minimums require that these individuals go to 
prison. Given the racial disparities in our prison population and 
the historical knowledge around biased drug law enforcement, 
it is reasonable to assume that this also drives the incarceration 
of African Americans in Ohio. For example, black Ohioans are 
4.1 times more likely to be arrested for marijuana possession 
than whites, even though they use marijuana at roughly the 
same rates.8
Mandatory minimums were intended to reduce discretion in sentencing to ensure that punishments 
were impartial. In practice, however, mandatory minimums have merely shifted the discretion from 
judges to prosecutors, who now have far greater powers to decide who goes to prison and for how long. 
Prosecutors control decisions with what crime a person is charged, plea agreements, and sentencing 
recommendations. Judges are intended to be an independent arbiter and will sentence an individual 
once she is found guilty, while taking into consideration multiple factors including the person’s criminal 
history, the nature of her offense, and other pertinent information. Shifting discretion results in 
prosecutors using mandatory minimums as a powerful stick to threaten individuals to plead guilty to 1 in 4 of all people newly 
admitted to prison in Ohio are 
there for a drug offense, and 
1 in 8 are there specifically for 
drug possession. I.  Limit Harsh, Automatic Punishments5
A Comprehensive Plan for Criminal Justice Reform in Ohio crimes they would otherwise not plead to in order to avoid sentencing enhancements.9 If a prosecutor 
decides to charge a defendant with a crime that includes a mandatory minimum, and if the defendant 
is found guilty, the judge has few options beyond incarceration and generally must sentence the person 
to prison. 
Rather than impose suggested guidelines, these mandatory sentences tie judges’ hands completely. 
While the legislature can make laws to address social ills, our judiciary is responsible for imposing 
punishments for breaking these laws and also for seeking ways to rehabilitate people. Mandatory 
minimums tie the hands of judges but also inappropriately place discretion into the hands of prosecutors. 
While first and second degree felony offenses are by nature more serious, drug crimes still 
account for a significant portion of the mandatory minimums—30 percent of the 20 level 1-2 
felony offense mandatory minimums.10 
The Recodification Committee should eliminate mandatory minimums for all levels of offenses, 
particularly for drug crimes. Mandatory minimums take away judges’ ability to individualize sentencing 
based on specific circumstances. They also unjustifiably bar considering extenuating circumstances 
that may call for a shorter sentence, or placing the person into rehabilitation instead of incarceration, 
which may have a greater benefit for both the convicted person and society as a whole. 
For even the most heinous offenses, there are wide variations in behavior and circumstance. By giving 
judges more latitude to consider these variations and reduce sentences, we can prevent over-punishing 
without compromising the seriousness of the crime.
Recommendation 2 – Reclassify Low Level Felonies
Designating a crime as a felony versus a misdemeanor has significant consequences. A felony, as 
opposed to a misdemeanor,  can affect everything from the ability to vote, to own a firearm, to obtain 
certain employment, or to serve on a jury.  By reclassifying low level felony offenses to misdemeanors, 
we reduce collateral consequences associated with felony convictions.  Lower level felonies generally 
include nonviolent offenses that do not necessarily have any bearing on public safety. Examples include 
forgery, theft, receiving stolen property, or failure to pay child support. While these are certainly still 
matters of public concern, saddling a person with a felony conviction over not paying child support will 
only grow our mass incarceration system. 
Incarcerating a person for a fifth degree felony in state prison is rarely effective—largely because 
they spend relatively little time in prison, usually a year or less. Given the tremendous strain on our 
prison system’s resources, this often means that these individuals receive little to no rehabilitative 
programming because they are simply not in prison long enough.
We favor reclassifying all fifth degree felonies to first degree misdemeanors and funneling those 
individuals into local rehabilitative and education programs. House Bill 86 (HB 86), the result of Ohio’s 
Justice Reinvestment Act Initiative, opened the door for this reform to happen. However, many of the 
alternatives to incarceration made possible by HB 86 remain unfunded and have not been implemented. 
In 2015, fifth degree felonies constituted 25 percent of all new state prison admissions.11 Ohio would 
greatly benefit from fully funding HB 86’s alternatives to incarceration by reducing the prison population. 
Reducing fifth degree felonies to misdemeanors will effectively reduce prison overpopulation and will 
reduce collateral consequences that stem from felony convictions and drive prison overpopulation.6
Looking ForwardRecommendation 3 – Plug the Statehouse-to-Prison Pipeline
By June 2015, 1 in 8 bills in the Ohio House enhanced, created or expanded criminal penalties, and 
1 in 11 bills in the Senate did so as well.12 Legislators may be well-intentioned, but the old “crime 
and punishment” mentality has gotten our state to where it is today. The ACLU of Ohio’s 2015 report, 
“Ohio’s Statehouse-to-Prison Pipeline,” illustrates the connection between passing laws with minor 
increases in criminal sanctions and prison overcrowding. Taken out of context, these increases may 
seem inconsequential. But in the aggregate, these laws collectively create costly burdens on our 
criminal justice system.   
One area that needs significant reform is enhanced penalties. Often, laws will increase the penalty for 
a crime depending on the circumstances surrounding it. For example, the same crime might have an 
increased penalty depending on whether the defendant carried a weapon, or whether the victim was 
a member of a certain profession or demographic. Enhanced penalties should always be justified by 
demonstrating that there is a heightened (1) societal need and/or (2) deterrent effect. Enhancements 
that are not justified by one or both of these purposes only serve to increase our prison population 
without providing any clear benefit to our community.
It is important to remember that the existing range of sentences for crimes are already quite punitive. 
These ranges are created to allow judges to consider aspects like the harm to or vulnerability of the 
victim, the full nature of the crime, and the criminal history of the defendant. Any further punishment 
should be justified by demonstrating that the range of sentencing options available to the judge are not 
adequate to protect public safety.
Not all enhancements are created equal; many are arbitrary or redundant. 
Arbitrary and redundant sentencing enhancements do little to nothing to ensure the safety of our 
communities, and instead, add to our bloated prison system. Because our prisons are functioning at 
130 percent capacity, every increase in criminal penalties is a step in the wrong direction. Until we 
eliminate the statehouse-to-prison pipeline, any scale-backs in sentencing will be counteracted by 
increased penalties.
Recommendation 4 – Invest in Meaningful Alternatives to Incarceration
Instead of continuing to send more people to an already overburdened prison system, we should seek 
to solve the problem at its source. Two simple ways to move forward are to (1) give additional chances 
to people accused of offenses that are non-violent or do not pose a significant public safety risk, and (2) 
ensure that there are adequate resources to treat individuals in the community, rather than in prison 
or jail.
Jail time is but one of many available sentencing mechanisms to ensure public safety and deter 
law-breaking.  When a low-level offense has occurred, we need to look for alternatives to short jail 
sentences that needlessly overpopulate jails and clog up the criminal justice system, such as community 
service and diversion programs. These programs benefit the government by reducing jail populations 
and thereby saving money. They also benefit defendants by giving them the opportunity to maintain 
employment and housing while they receive sanctions, which can lead to more adequate rehabilitation 
without defendants incurring collateral consequences.
HB 86 allowed leniency for people convicted of first-time drug offenses, the rationale being that these 
individuals should not be in prison. Unfortunately, these programs were not fully implemented or 
funded by the state of Ohio. As a result, there are still numerous people in our prison system who would 
be better served in rehabilitative environments, and more than half of the people in Ohio prisons are7
A Comprehensive Plan for Criminal Justice Reform in Ohio A doctor treating a patient with an allergic reaction does not simply give the patient Benadryl and 
consider the analysis over. A good doctor would investigate the reason for the allergy in order to 
prevent future reactions. Much the same, a punishment that addresses a bad act without addressing 
its underlying cause will not be effective in preventing future bad acts. Whether it’s diminished mental 
health, economic hardship, or addiction, the root of the problem must be addressed. Rehabilitation 
should be a higher priority in our criminal justice system.
For example, perpetual theft as a result of mental illness is not going to be stopped by solitary confinement. 
Just like different underlying medical conditions can trigger the same result, different behaviors and 
circumstances can trigger the same criminal behavior. We propose the following recommendations to 
increase access to mental health resources and expand opportunities for people to earn credit against 
their prison sentences through rehabilitative programs.
Recommendation 1 – Increase Mental Health Resources
Our criminal justice system has become the largest mental healthcare provider in the state. Due to 
large-scale cuts in community mental health and addiction services, many individuals are unable to get 
the care they need. Once criminalized, they are funneled into an overcrowded and underfunded prison 
system that is ill-equipped to truly help individuals with mental illness and addiction issues. 
A 2014 intake study highlighted that 33 percent of all state prisoners from the sample had a 
history of mental illness, while 90 percent reported a history of drug abuse and 70 percent 
had a history of alcohol abuse.13 
Mental health resources are vital for the health of incarcerated people and their eventual successful re-
entry into the community. We recommend that jail and prison resources focus on stabilizing the mental 
health of incarcerated people by ensuring adequate access to mental health treatment in the facilities, 
and it is crucial that medicine and other treatment continue once individuals are released back into the 
community. 
We advocate for increasing the number of social workers available for those released; increasing 
supportive community services, including proper treatment facilities and housing; and giving more 
discretion to judges to investigate circumstances surrounding the commission of crimes and divert 
those with a mental illness to treatment instead of to jail or prison.
Recommendation 2 – Increase  and Expand the Use of Earned Credit
Ohio Revised Code § 2967.193 provides a tool for certain prisoners to reduce their sentence by 
participating in programs approved by the Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and Corrections (ODRC). 
This is called “earned credit.” ODRC is responsible for administering this program and is authorized 
to revoke previously earned credit or prohibit prisoners from acquiring credits for violating prison II. Prioritize Rehabilitationincarcerated for the first time. We support the initiative HB 86 was intended to create and propose the 
expansion of this principle to apply to all people convicted of first-time, non-violent offenses.8
Looking Forwardrules. Additionally, there are complex guidelines for eligibility. While earned credit is a useful way to 
rehabilitate people and reduce prison populations, Ohio’s earned credit structure suffers from several 
shortcomings.
 i. Expand the Use of Earned Credit
HB 86 expanded the use of earned credit—a welcome reform to Ohio’s criminal justice system—but 
the use of earned credit is still far too narrow. Many individuals are simply unable to earn credit for 
participating in rehabilitative programming because the statute disqualifies those convicted of certain 
offenses.
Further limiting the potential positive impact of earned credit, prisoners can only earn credit toward 
8 percent of their total sentence length. Placing a cap on the amount of earned credit a person can 
obtain does not aid in maintaining security or ensuring public safety once the prisoner re-enters 
society. Instead, this limitation undermines a prisoner’s ability to reform himself, potentially hindering 
successful re-entry into society. We advocate for expanding the eligibility for and use of earned credit,as 
well as removing the low cap on the amount of earned credit available.
 ii. Require that Prisoners are Informed about Earned Credit
Ohio Revised Code § 2967.193 does not contain a notice requirement, meaning many prisoners may not 
know they are eligible to earn credit toward an early release. There have been a number of unsuccessful 
lawsuits related to sentences delivered without providing notice of earned credit eligibility.14 Courts have 
consistently held that since the law does not include a required notice provision, they are not required 
to inform people of their eligibility. This is troubling, and may also lead to misguided hopes of an early 
release for those who do not qualify.15 Either way, not providing notice about earned credit at sentencing 
deprives individuals of their ability to fully comprehend the true conditions of their punishment and 
length of incarceration. We strongly recommend that the statute be amended to include a notice 
provision that requires courts to inform defendants of their earned credit eligibility status.
 iii. Eliminate Potential for Unequal Access to Program Participation
A major shortcoming of the current law regarding earned credit is the potential for unequal access. 
In fact, it is completely silent on the issue of accessibility.16 Without some legal guarantee of access to 
these programs, arbitrary factors could ultimately determine a prisoner’s ability to earn credit toward 
an early release. For example, prisoners in a private prison might have more limited opportunities to 
participate in credit-earning programs than prisoners at a state-owned prison. Similarly, if a prisoner 
is assigned to an overcrowded prison, she would likely have fewer opportunities for earned credit than 
a prisoner at a less crowded institution. This disparity would be the result of nothing more than an 
unfortunate prison assignment. Creating disparate opportunities for early release among individuals 
who are convicted of the same crime contradicts the tenet of consistent sentencing simply based on 
which prison they are placed or the resources available in a given prison. In addition to guaranteeing 
access to these programs, the law should require equal opportunity among all eligible prisoners to 
earn credit and this must be complemented by the legislature providing significant funding to ensure 
that substantial rehabilitative programming is available to all prisoners, regardless of their institution 
or the security level they are assigned.9
A Comprehensive Plan for Criminal Justice Reform in Ohio One of our nation’s foundational principles is the concept of innocent until proven guilty.  The criminal 
justice system is supposed to protect individuals from unfair treatment by providing standards for 
admissible evidence, burdens of proof, and the unbiased administration of justice. These intentionally 
high standards are meant to protect individuals from unjustified deprivations of liberty prior to conviction 
of a crime and ensure a just result. But many people in our jails are there simply because they cannot 
afford bail. Locking low-income people away in jail with little hope of release before trial has become 
commonplace in Ohio, and it is time to reverse this trend. Systematically incarcerating individuals prior 
to conviction is unjust, impractical, and expensive.
Jail populations have grown steadily since the 1990’s, putting a strain on county and local governments. 
Nationally, about 70 percent of people in jail have not been convicted of a crime; they are either awaiting 
trial or being processed after an arrest.17 To reduce jail populations, we should target those who should 
not be in jail in the first place—people who are not granted pre-trial release and those arrested rather 
than ticketed for a crime. 
Nationally, pretrial incarceration has become a topic of public interest, pushed into the spotlight after 
the introduction by Congress of the “No More Money Bail Act of 2016” which proposes to eliminate the 
use of cash bail.
Ohio is no exception to national trends. In Ohio, jails house 
individuals who are being processed or were sentenced to six 
months or less. Between 2005 and 2008, the vast majority of 
all individuals in Ohio jails were un-sentenced.18 In 2008, Ohio’s 
jails held over 20,000 people each day, and on average, exceeded 
recommended daily capacity.19 On average, it costs more than 
$60 per day to house a single individual in a local jail—costing 
Ohio taxpayers at least $438 million per year to incarcerate 
these individuals.20 This is an extreme financial burden on Ohio’s 
cities and counties. 
Not only does this take a severe toll on taxpayers, it is also devastating for the people incarcerated and 
their families. Even just a few days of incarceration means that a person will likely lose employment, 
sending families deeper into poverty. If a person is held before trial for weeks or even months, that is 
significant time that families must also endure without the incarcerated person contributing to their 
household.
Needless incarceration of low-risk individuals is a strain on our economy and results in an overflowing 
jail population with untenable conditions. We should aim to keep people out of jail in general, especially 
while they await trial. This requires (1) favoring the use of citations rather than arrests for low-level 
offenses, and (2) reforming the bond system by using fair standards for setting bail, reducing the use 
of cash bail, and lowering the cost of bail overall. Additionally, we should support alternatives to the 
bond-jail structure. 
Recommendation 1 – Use Tickets Over Arrests
Arrests contribute heavily to jail overpopulation and do little to serve the general public. Instead of 
arresting those accused of lower level and nonviolent misdemeanor offenses, we should increase the 
use of ticketing as a common sense way of relieving jail overpopulation. On average, it costs more than 
$60 per day to house a single 
individual in a local jail—costing 
Ohio taxpayers at least $438 
million per year to incarcerate 
these individuals.III. Release Innocent People from Jail10
Looking ForwardMisdemeanor offenses such as possession of nearly any amounts of marijuana, hashish, or drug 
paraphernalia should be reclassified as minor misdemeanors. Very small amounts of these items are 
already classified as minor misdemeanors, but we believe that possession of nearly all amounts should 
be reclassified. Other examples of fourth degree misdemeanors that should be reclassified as minor 
misdemeanors include:
• Failure to disperse;
• Disrupting a lawful meeting;
• Various tax-related offenses; and,
• Minor traffic violations, such as wrongfully displaying POW or firefighter license plates.
Other offenses, such as those related to donating or selling contaminated blood, should be removed 
from the criminal code altogether because they do not reflect current science or best practices in public 
health. Generally, we believe nearly all misdemeanor offenses should be examined and when able, 
reclassified at least one degree lower, and if there is no good public interest in arresting an individual, 
they should be reclassified to minor misdemeanors that can be addressed by a simple ticket.
In addition to changing Ohio law to make more offenses ticket-able, local judges and leaders should 
work with prosecutors and law enforcement to implement practices that de-emphasize arrest for low-
level misdemeanors. A significant amount of jail space is wasted processing unnecessary arrests. 
Where possible, law enforcement should use tickets for misdemeanor offenses rather than arrests.
Recommendation 2 – Reform the Bond System
The general rationale for setting bail to keep people in jail while they await trial is to (1) ensure that people 
appear for their court date and (2) prevent accused individuals from posing a danger to the community. 
But studies show that keeping people in jail as they await trial does not necessarily accomplish either 
objective, and it is certainly less effective than alternative methods of pretrial release.21 
Accordingly, the American Bar Association’s guidelines urge not only citations or summonses instead 
of arrest in the first instance, but pretrial release under “least restrictive conditions” in all cases, and 
release on one’s own recognizance whenever possible.22 These guidelines urge that pretrial detention 
become the “exception,” though in most jurisdictions—including Ohio—it is the rule.23 Several specific 
mechanisms are keeping innocent Ohioans in jails as they await trial. 
i. Ensure Judicial Discretion Does Not Lead to Inconsistency
Ohio’s criminal code grants significant judicial discretion in setting bail, which invites inconsistency 
and fails to account for important realities. For example, the imposition of bail, even at a seemingly low 
amount, can make it impossible for people with low income to post bond.24 As a result, when judges do 
not consider income, cash bail can keep someone jailed for being poor, regardless of the level of danger 
they may pose to their community.25 This is compounded by a lack of consistency between jurisdictions 
and judges, as different local court rules establish different bail guidelines. 
Generally, Ohio’s bail-setting guidelines correspond to offenses rather than to individualized 
assessments of a person’s risk of flight or violence; this assumes someone’s guilt for whatever they 
were initially accused of. As with most issues in the criminal justice system, people of color bear the 
brunt of these bad policies. According to the Pretrial Release Center, African American men receive 
a 35 percent higher bond than white men. Additionally, African Americans are twice as likely to be 
detained for a non-violent drug arrest as whites.2611
A Comprehensive Plan for Criminal Justice Reform in Ohio Disparities are not just limited to race, as the average length of stay for people with mental health 
issues is 60 percent longer than for those without mental health issues.27 Individuals who were jailed 
before trial were much more likely to receive prison and jail sentences—and longer sentences— than 
those given pretrial release.27 Given the stark racial, economic, and mental health disparities, it is clear 
that our current bail system over-criminalizes the most vulnerable.
To reduce these disparities, Ohio law should uniformly consider the income level of arrestees when 
setting bail; establish a lower ceiling on bail in general; and use more accurate risk-assessment data 
when evaluating what an individual’s bail should be.  
ii. Decrease Reliance on Cash Bail
Ohio courts currently favor setting cash bail over allowing individuals out on their own recognizance 
or using non-cash pretrial release. Ohio law allows the use of secured bonds—requiring individuals to 
post some money percentage of their set bail in order to be released before trial. This exacerbates the 
inconsistencies and inequities discussed above. Viable alternatives exist to the secured bond system,29 
such as the use of unsecured bonds, or allowing individuals out completely on their own recognizance.30 
Unsecured bonds require some type of financial liability, e.g., a debt, but no actual cash posted, and 
personal recognizance allows individuals to await trial outside of jail with no financial obligation. 
Still other forms of pretrial release include electronic monitoring or supervised release with restrictions 
on travel or other privileges. Ohio law allows these alternatives in certain circumstances. For example, a 
person can surrender their driver’s license as an alternative to a cash bond for certain minor offenses.31 
The law should expand the use of non-financial alternatives and unsecured bonds, and discourage the 
use of secured bonds. However, electronic monitoring should not be used as another method to prey 
upon low-income people. Many electronic monitoring services charge steep fees for their use, making 
freedom from jail nearly impossible for many trapped in local jails.  
In general, we should reduce bail amounts overall; reform bail-setting guidelines to be functions of the 
accused’s actual risk and income level; and reduce the use of bonds in favor of pretrial release. 
While it is technically not illegal to be poor, it often seems like it might as well be.  With excessive financial 
sanctions, court fees, criminal penalties for debt, and laws that target impoverished communities, we 
have effectively created a criminal justice system that punishes poverty with jail-time, a criminal record, 
and more debt.
Recommendation 1 – Dismantle Debtors’ Prisons
The ACLU of Ohio has taken a strong stance against the use of debtors’ prison and pay-to-stay fees.  
Our reports, “In For a Penny: The Rise of America’s New Debtors’ Prisons,” “The Outskirts of Hope: 
How Ohio’s Debtor’s Prisons are Ruining Lives and Costing Communities,” “Adding it up: The Financial 
Realities of Ohio’s Pay-to-Stay Jail Policies,” and “In Jail & In Debt: Ohio’s Pay-to-Stay Fees,” all examine 
the cruel realities of excessive costs of the criminal justice system on defendants’ lives and wallets.32  IV. Decriminalize Poverty12
Looking ForwardRecommendation 2 – Do Not Lock Up People for Failure to Pay Child Support
It is incredibly important for parents to pay child support to ensure the stability of families and that 
children will be provided the resources they need. However, for a vast number of Ohioans, unexpected 
problems may arise that cause them to fall behind on their payments. Unfortunately, the courts’ current 
treatment of child support cases does not account for these realities; instead, it often results in parents 
falling even further behind. 
Non-support cases unnecessarily clog up our jails and prisons. They begin with the excessive use of 
contempt sentences of 30, 60, and 90 days in juvenile and domestic relations court. Though relatively 
short, these jail terms are both humiliating and destructive to peoples’ ability to find and keep jobs. The 
punitiveness gets far worse when defendants are charged with felony non-support. Frequently, a failure 
to pay child support results from a genuine inability to pay because of joblessness or incarceration. 
Yet judges routinely presume that all people who owe child support “could be flipping hamburgers 
somewhere ”—with no evidence of the local availability of jobs, much less jobs that would allow the 
person to maintain even the most basic food and shelter. Criminalization and incarceration does nothing 
to improve the conditions for the children who are supposed to be benefitting from this system. Rather 
than cause these debts to pile up, Ohio law should allow debts to be retroactively reduced based on a 
showing of current employment status. Additionally, there should not be criminal or other non-financial 
sanctions for nonpayment, particularly driver’s license suspension.  
Recommendation 3 – Reduce Financial Sanctions
Ohio Revised Code §§2929.18 and 2929.28 outline financial sanctions for felonies and misdemeanors. 
Though these statutes involve different financial sanctions, they are structurally similar. Mandatory 
fines, however, are only imposed on felonies of the first, second and third degree. We urge judges to 
take individuals’ income level into account when assessing fines and fees.
i. Reduce Felony Financial Sanctions
Courts are given broad discretion when fining individuals. Additionally, the court may require a person 
to pay a fee for the cost of community sanctions, confinement, or the cost of an immobilizing device 
such as an ankle monitor.33 If the court orders the individual to pay a fine, the court will base the amount 
of that fine “on a standard percentage of the offender’s daily income over a period of time determined 
by the court and based upon the seriousness of the offense.”34 Typically, the fine cannot exceed the 
“maximum conventional fine amount.”35
Maximum Felony Fine Amount36
Felony of the First Degree $20,000
Felony of the Second Degree $15,000
Felony of the Third Degree $10,000
Felony of the Fourth Degree $5,000
Felony of the Fifth Degree $2,500
The court must impose a mandatory fine for first, second and third degree felonies that does not exceed 
the maximum fine amount, but is no less than half of the maximum fine amount.37 This is problematic 
for low-income individuals, as even a fine half the amount of the maximum can still be steep. For 
example, the mandatory fine for a first degree felony is between $10,000 and $20,000. However, courts 
are supposed to determine if the person is indigent, and if so, the court should not impose the fine.38 It 
is unclear whether indigence is actually taken into account on a regular basis. 13
A Comprehensive Plan for Criminal Justice Reform in Ohio In addition to mandatory fines and discretionary court-imposed fines, individuals are subject to a third 
set of fines that are specific to drug trafficking convictions under R.C. 2925.03.39 Money collected from 
drug trafficking fines is transferred to “community addiction services.”40 The amount that the court may 
impose in drug trafficking fines depends on the person’s financial interest in the property relating to the 
offense. If the court determines that the person had an interest in the property relating to the offense, 
then the court imposing this additional fine may not exceed the value of that property.41 Notably, this 
allows the court to impose a fine that is greater than the maximum fine amount. 
Ohio law allows a court to suspend a financial sanction when the individual has successfully met all 
other sanctions imposed.42 We support and urge courts to use their ability to suspend financial sanctions 
for low income individuals. 
ii. Reduce Misdemeanor Financial Sanctions
Unlike felonies, misdemeanor offenses do not have mandatory fines.43 However, there are maximum 
fine amounts for misdemeanors.44
Maximum Misdemeanor Fine Amount
Misdemeanors of the first degree $1,000
Misdemeanors of the second degree $700
Misdemeanors of the third degree $500
Misdemeanors of the fourth degree $200
Minor Misdemeanors $50
Similar to felony financial sanctions, a court may charge a person for the cost of community sanctions, 
confinement or the cost of an immobilizing device, such as an ankle monitor, used on the person.45 
However, the fees may not exceed “the actual cost of the sanctions.”46
Additionally, courts are not supposed to impose fines on indigent people convicted of a misdemeanor.47 
Instead, courts should consider community service instead of fines.48 Likewise, if someone fails to pay 
a fine, the court may replace the fine with community service.49 Notably, this alternative is not available 
for indigent people convicted of a felony. Instead, the court simply will not impose the mandatory fine. 
Unfortunately, it is doubtful that judges are actually taking indigence into account when determining 
fines and opting not to impose them. For example, throughout the course of the ACLU of Ohio’s debtors’ 
prison investigation, we met numerous indigent individuals who had incurred steep fines and fees for 
low level offenses.50 
We firmly advise courts to consider a person’s ability to pay when assessing fines and fees and to use 
alternatives to monetary payment. 
iii. Eliminate Administrative Fees for Payment Plans
Courts may allow people to pay fines and fees in installments.51 If so, the court may charge a fee to cover 
the administrative costs.52 But people who elect to pay off their fines and fees by using a payment plan 
are likely doing so because they cannot afford to pay in full. Charging an administrative fee to use this 
option disproportionately affects low income people who cannot afford large payments upfront. This 
creates a two-tiered system of justice where those who are poor end up paying more than their wealthy 
counterparts for the same offense.14
Looking ForwardCollateral consequences are lasting penalties attached to criminal convictions that exist beyond 
incarceration, including driver’s license suspension and bars to certain employment and professional 
licensure. These added sanctions increase recidivism rates and keep people in poverty once they are 
released into the community. We support removing collateral sanctions, which are unrelated to safety 
or rehabilitation and present barriers to reentry. To further aid successful reentry, current record 
sealing laws should be strengthened to ensure that people can truly start fresh. These changes will 
help people fully exit the criminal justice system and reintegrate into their communities. 
Recommendation 1 – Limit Post-release Conditions
Generally, the overarching goals of our criminal justice system are to (1) protect the public, (2) punish 
lawbreakers, (3) reform law-breaking behavior, and (4) deter future crime.  Unfortunately, many 
collateral sanctions do not serve any of these functions, but instead, create lasting, damaging limitations 
on convicted persons after they’ve served their sentence.
Collateral consequences are extremely wide-ranging. The Ohio Justice and Policy Center developed the 
Civil Impacts of Criminal Convictions (CIVICC) database, which allows users to search for any offense in 
the criminal code and provides cross-references for all related collateral consequences. 
Meanwhile, in 2012, Senate Bill 337 introduced a large collection of collateral sanctions reforms, some 
of which related to earlier recommendations from ODRC.  Among other important reforms, S.B. 337: 1) 
created a certificate of qualification for employment (CQE) which removes many collateral sanctions for 
individuals with criminal records, without sealing their record; 2) expanded the record sealing statute so 
more individuals are eligible, including juveniles; and 3) limited prohibitions on professional licensure 
to a narrower class of criminal convictions. 
S.B. 337 represents a starting place for reforming the criminal code to manage the negative impacts of 
collateral sanctions. We should build on these ideas and go further.
Recommendation 2 – Remove Unrelated Post-Release Conditions
But many consequences bear no rational relationship  to the crime, much less a rehabilitative or 
community safety rationale, e.g., suspension of a driver’s license for failure to pay child support.  That 
particular crime-sanction relationship is actually counter-productive: it can keep someone from getting 
to work, even when that person is having in financial trouble.
We strongly recommend that all collateral consequences that bear no relationship to the underlying 
crime be eliminated.
Recommendation 3 – Reduce Employment and Housing Restrictions
The ACLU and OJPC have worked across Ohio for many years to dismantle the prejudice against those 
with criminal records by creating “ban the box” programming and educating the public about the 
harm of these prejudices. Barriers to employment are among the most counterproductive collateral 
sanctions that stem from criminal convictions. The inability to find employment prevents rehabilitation 
and decreases the likelihood of successful reentry into communities. We successfully promoted both 
a state administrative reform and House Bill 56 which removed the criminal-record checkbox from all V. Limit Collateral Consequences15
A Comprehensive Plan for Criminal Justice Reform in Ohio public-employment job applications in Ohio. The legislature should  extend this same requirement to any 
vendor or contractor bidding for public contracts in Ohio.53
Recommendation 4 – Reform Record Sealing Laws
We support transparency, but until our employment and housing discrimination policies better serve 
vulnerable communities, we also support more expansive record sealing laws.
Ohio’s record sealing statute is undermined by realities of the plea bargain system and should give 
judges more discretion to appropriately evaluate individual needs. The prejudice against people who 
have been convicted of a crime is harsh. This bias harms society as a whole by preventing those who 
are properly rehabilitated from gaining employment and housing. We advocate for changing our record 
sealing laws to allow better reintegration into society by expanding eligibility based on the circumstances 
surrounding individual offenses. Judges should have more discretion to decide whether a person is a 
good candidate for record sealing, regardless of their crimes, and the list of crimes eligible for record 
sealing should be expanded.
Community control can often be a useful alternative to incarceration—allowing individuals to remain 
in their communities while lessening the burden on our overcrowded jails and prisons.  Ohio should 
ensure that community control practices are not overly difficult to comply with and are also fair and 
uniform. To achieve this, we should aim for a statewide, standardized community control system, with 
consistent rules for all jurisdictions that consolidate reporting requirements for individuals who must 
report for community control in multiple jurisdictions. Additionally, we should limit which probation and 
parole violations result in incarceration, and increase transparency and fairness in the parole process.54 
These reforms will decrease the strain on our prison system while promoting efficiency and fairness.
Address the Problems with Ohio’s Community Control System
“Community control” includes a variety of supervised release systems, which are often imposed prior 
to trial through a diversion program, instead of incarceration, or as a form of early release.55 A common 
form of community control is probation, but it can also include up to six months in a treatment facility 
or halfway house, or other conditions like electronic monitoring or submitting to drug tests.56 In some 
cases, judges may be able to impose community control instead of incarceration, such as for those 
convicted of first-time, non-violent and low-level felony offenses, but not in others, including higher-
level felonies with mandatory prison terms.57 While community control is ideally used to lessen reliance 
on incarceration, 35 percent of all state prison admissions are related to minor community control 
violations.58
Ohio’s community control system is flawed in two ways: 
1. There is no statewide uniform system or set of rules for community control; and 
2. State law excessively allows incarceration as punishment for violating community control. VI. Reform Community Control16
Looking ForwardThese flaws directly contradict a primary benefit of using community control—keeping people 
out of prisons and jails—by increasing the likelihood of recidivism. We propose the following two 
recommendations to fix our broken community control system.
Recommendation 1 – Implement a Unified, Statewide Community Control System
Many states have unified, statewide community control systems.59 This uniformity helps individuals who 
are on community control, especially in multiple jurisdictions, by streamlining the rules and reporting 
requirements.60 For example, if someone is serving probation for two different offenses in two different 
jurisdictions, that person should not have to abide by two completely separate and sometimes very 
different sets of rules. 
Ohio does not have a unified state system for community control. Instead, Ohio has county probation 
offices, with some state-level oversight.61 This has led to a proliferation of probation offices— over 180 
statewide, making Ohio the state with the most probation offices.62 Generally, common pleas courts 
supervise probation offices, working with the Adult Parole Authority and the ODRC, which takes a 
stronger role in more rural areas. Similarly, for juveniles, each county works with the sentencing juvenile 
judge and a county-level probation officer. The community control rules and authority vary widely county 
by county. For example, probation officers in different counties have a different enforcement authority, 
including whether they carry firearms.63 This makes it harder for people to comply with the terms of 
their community control because it is difficult to learn and comply with such inconsistent systems. We 
strongly recommend that Ohio implements a state-controlled probation office with uniform rules. 
Recommendation 2 – Reduce the Use of Incarceration for Community Control 
Violations
Ohio law includes sentencing guidelines for determining community control, and it includes a five 
year maximum sentence for community control. However, judges still have significant discretion in 
sentencing.64 For example, any violation, even a technical one, except failure to pay a fine if the person 
is indigent, can be grounds for revoking community control and imposing incarceration.65 Additionally, 
community control violations have a lower standard of proof than criminal convictions—meaning it 
is easier to find someone guilty of the violation. This further expands the discretion individual judges 
and probation officers have to revoke community control in favor of harsher punishment.66 Ohio 
should reform the laws related to community control violations by removing broad judicial discretion, 
eliminating technical and minor violations as reasons for revoking community control, and using a 
warning system prior to revocation. 
Address the Problems with Ohio’s Parole Processes
“The fact of a crime never changes, but the person who commits it can, and often does. This is 
the basic principle of parole—that while people must be punished for their wrongdoing, most are 
capable of growing, changing and rejoining society before the end of their sentence.”
—New York Times  editorial, Feb. 16, 201467
The Ohio Parole Board has broad discretion in deciding whether to release parole-eligible prisoners.  
The Board may feel pressure to act when community members, especially victims, ask them to extend 
a prisoner’s punishment. At the same time, parole boards exist because we see value in giving second 
chances and do not want those who have been rehabilitated to languish in prison. It is crucial that 17
A Comprehensive Plan for Criminal Justice Reform in Ohio we enable people to reenter society as productive and law-abiding citizens to improve public safety, 
promote healing and rehabilitation for both victim and prisoner, and practice forgiveness.
Each year, over one thousand Ohio prisoners are considered for parole.68 As a result, the Board has 
an important role in determining the size and composition of the prison population. Parole release 
decisions impact the allocation of scarce state funds. Supervising a parolee costs about one-tenth the 
cost to keep that person in prison, and prison healthcare costs rise as prisoners get older.69 70 In recent 
years the Board has released only a miniscule percentage of the parole-eligible population.  The reasons 
for these decisions are often unclear and provide no guidance about how prisoners can increase their 
chances of being paroled.
To reform Ohio’s inefficient and unjust parole system, we propose the following three recommendations: 
(1) create more transparency in parole decisions; (2) put less weight on the seriousness of the offense, 
and (3) reverse declining release rates.
Recommendation 1 – Create More Transparency in the Parole Process
The Board has broad discretion in determining parole and needs to become far more transparent in 
how it makes its decisions.71 This includes providing information about the evidence considered and the 
specific justification for each parole decision.  Aside from being good policy, increasing transparency 
in parole processes will likely also increase a parole candidate’s chances of successfully petitioning for 
parole in the future.
i. Eligibility
Chapter 2967 of the Ohio Revised Code broadly lays out parole eligibility requirements, stating that 
the Board may allow early release if there is reason to believe it is in the interest of justice.72 The only 
other statute governing the Board’s decision-making process was created by House Bill 86. This law 
requires all criminal justice agencies to use a “single validated risk assessment tool.”73 As a result, 
Ohio developed the Ohio Risk Assessment System (ORAS).74  
Additionally, ODRC regulations list 18 factors the Board “shall” consider when determining parole. 
Factors include the person’s prison reports and criminal record; presentence or post-sentence 
reports; medical reports; a statement from the prisoner; evidence of the prisoner’s post-release plans 
and community support; the prisoner’s work and educational history; and a catch-all category for                       
“[a]ny other factors which the board determines to be relevant.”75 However, the Board does not need to 
expressly address any of the factors when determining parole.76
ii. Parole Decisions
Every parole candidate receives a written parole decision. However, by many accounts, the decision 
letters regularly do not expressly address any of the 18 factors or otherwise meaningfully expand on 
the reasons for the decision.  Each decision letter must cite one or more reasons for denial listed in 
Ohio Administrative Code § 5120:1-1-07(A). Commonly, box “B” is the only item checked.  Box “B” 
corresponds to § 5120:1-1-07(A)(2), which reads:77
There is substantial reason to believe that due to the serious nature of the crime , the release of 
the inmate into society would create undue risk to public safety, or that due to the serious nature 
of the crime , the release of the inmate would not further the interest of justice nor be consistent 
with the welfare and security of society. [Emphasis added.]
Generally, the Board also writes a few sentences related to its decision but simply repeats the language 
of box “B.”78 Instead, the Board should produce detailed written explanations for its decisions—clearly 18
Looking Forwardexplaining what factors influenced their decision so the candidate knows how they can improve future 
chances for parole. 
Additionally, Board decisions can be based on statements by victims or other individuals that the 
candidate has no opportunity to dispute or explain, or they can simply be based on the seriousness of 
the offense. Unfortunately, many parole candidates who are denied parole never truly know why, due 
to the lack of transparency and explanation during the parole process. All candidates for parole should 
have the opportunity to learn what evidence the Board considered so they can challenge it.
Recommendation 2 – Stop Relying on the “Seriousness of the Offense”
The “seriousness of the offense” should not ever be the sole factor that results in a parole denial. 
Research has repeatedly found that parolees who committed what most people would consider the 
most serious offenses—murder, kidnapping, sex crimes—are the least likely to reoffend. For example, 
a 2002 Bureau of Justice Statistics study covering fifteen states, including Ohio, found that the parolees 
least likely to offend were those originally convicted of homicide or rape.79 In New York, from 1985 to 
2009, just 2.2 percent of parolees who were originally convicted of murder returned to prison for a new 
conviction, the lowest recommitment rate of any offense.80 
Additionally, our criminal justice system already takes into account the seriousness of the offense. The 
legislature, the jury, and the judge, all assign punishments related to the seriousness of the offense. By 
the time a person is sentenced for a crime, that person’s fellow citizens have already expressed their 
beliefs about the seriousness of the crime through their participation in the legislature and the courts. 
They have expressed their belief that X years of imprisonment is sufficient punishment for X crime, and 
that if that person proves they have been rehabilitated after X years, they should be released.
When the Board—an appointed body with no meaningful oversight—considers the “seriousness of the 
offense” and denies parole to someone who has provided evidence that they have changed, it is simply 
resentencing the person. Instead, the Board should conduct a holistic review, including the person’s 
steps toward rehabilitation.
Recommendation 3 – Reverse Declining Parole Release Rates and Mandate 
Presumptive Release
Ohio should intervene to stop the sharp decline in parole releases. In 2004, more than 50 percent of 
inmates eligible for parole were released.  By 2014, only 4.8 percent were released.
This extreme shift is partially explained by changes in Ohio’s sentencing framework.  In 1996, Ohio 
enacted Senate Bill 2 (SB2), which largely replaced indeterminate sentencing (e.g., a sentence of 6 to 
12 years with parole eligibility after 6 and mandatory release at 12) with determinate sentencing (e.g., 
a sentence of 8 years, period). 
In 2004, more than 50 percent of inmates eligible for parole were 
released.  By 2014, only 4.8 percent were released.19
A Comprehensive Plan for Criminal Justice Reform in Ohio Table 1. Ohio parole release rates81
Calendar 
YearTotal 
HearingsTotal 
Releases Release 
Rate 
2004 13,900 7,039 50.6%
2005 11,658 5,540 34.9%
2006 11,405 5,502 34.6%
2007 6,888 3,272 35.9%
2008 4,656 1,670 39.2%
2009 3,028 700 25.1%
2010 2,121 423 20.1%
2011 1,918 133 6.9%
2012 1,486 226 15.3%
2013 1,479 62 4.2%
2014 1,284 62 4.8%
However, the Board continues to hold hearings for people given indeterminate sentences before S.B. 2 
passed. Additionally, indeterminate sentencing is still used for several offenses including aggravated 
murder, murder, human trafficking, and certain sex/sexually-motivated offenses.82  
Officials argue that parole release rates have plummeted because the parole-eligible population (about 
7,000 prisoners) has increasingly consisted of people convicted of murder or other violent crimes and 
sex offenses. There is no question that SB2 changed the makeup of Ohio’s parole-eligible population, 
but this rationale is unfounded.
20
Looking ForwardTable 2. Profile of parole-eligible inmates as of summer 201483
Sentence Number Percentage of DRC’s 
total population 
(50,378)
Pre-SB2 (“old law inmates”)
Life 1,571 3.1%
F1 1,391 2.8%
F2 69 < .01%
F3 and F4 3 < .01%
Indefinite sentence, have had first parole 
hearing (denied) — TOTAL3,034 6.0%
Life 742 1.5%
F1 120 .02%
F2 16 < .01%
F3 and F4 0 —
Indefinite sentence, have had no parole 
hearing — TOTAL878 1.7%
Old law indefinite sentence — TOTAL 3,912 7.8%
Post-SB2 (“new law inmates”)
Post-SB2 but pre-HB-86 indefinite 
sentence3,480 6.9%
Post-HB-86 indefinite sentence 167 0.3%
Approximate number of new law inmates 
either on death row or LWOP (DRC counts 
these as indefinite sentences even though 
they’ll never get parole) – 560 1.1%
New law indefinite sentence — TOTAL 3,087 6.1%
TOTAL indefinite sentence — i.e., total 
number of DRC inmates who are either 
eligible for parole or will be at some point6,999 13.9%
In 2005, a spokesperson for ODRC explained that hundreds of inmates had been denied parole because 
they were the “worst of the worst.” However, Ohio’s courts ruled that 174 prisoners had been unlawfully 
denied “meaningful consideration,” and the Board released 14—apparently with no catastrophe.84 85 
Additionally, SB2 did not completely remove indefinite life sentences. About 45 percent of prisoners with 
“X-to-life” sentences were sentenced after the implementation of SB2, so the pre-SB2 “worst of the 
worst” population should be making up an ever-smaller proportion of the parole candidates the Board 
sees. 
To help reverse the declining parole rate, Ohio should revise the law to allow for automatic release when 
a prisoner’s minimum sentence expires, except when their behavior has demonstrated a risk to public 
safety.  If the Board wants to keep a person in prison longer than the minimum sentence, it should 
have compelling evidence to demonstrate that the person would pose a threat to public safety.  The 
presumption for release should increase with each parole hearing, requiring a detailed explanation of 
the reasons for keeping the candidate in prison.21
A Comprehensive Plan for Criminal Justice Reform in Ohio Locking people up indefinitely with no reasonable expectation of release is not Ohio’s only option.  Other 
states have reformed their parole processes to both release more inmates and to ensure public safety by 
reducing recidivism.
Michigan’s Multi-Factored Approach to Parole
For years, Michigan locked up a disproportionate number of people for its population, and the parole 
board directly contributed to the problem. In fact, at one point, it released just 0.2 percent of those 
serving parole-eligible life sentences. As a result, in 2002–2003, Michigan ranked fourth among all 
states in the number of people with life sentences it imprisoned.
Around this time, the Department of Corrections launched the Michigan Prisoner Reentry Initiative 
(MPRI), primarily to increase parole rates. Major elements of the MPRI included,
(1) Expanding resources available for released inmates; 
(2) Better preparing prisoners for parole hearings; 
(3) Immersing the Parole Board in academic and statistical research; and 
(4) Focusing resources on parolees with mental illness.
MPRI has been a remarkable success: 3,000 more prisoners were paroled in 2009 than in 2006, and 
parole increased for those convicted of violent offenses from 35 to 55 percent and for those convicted of 
sex offenses from 10 to 50 percent.86 
Since launching the MPRI in 2003, recidivism dropped 27 percent, violent crime continues to decline, 
Michigan’s prison population decreased by 8,434 prisoners, and the state shut down twenty-one 
correctional facilities.87
Ohio is in a mass incarceration crisis, but we can make positive changes to our criminal justice system. 
The Criminal Justice Recodification Committee has a profound opportunity to change Ohio’s criminal 
code. Our legislators must incorporate the substantive reforms presented by the Committee and also 
address underlying policies that fuel mass incarceration. Our report provides a comprehensive plan to 
achieve lasting criminal justice reform in Ohio. It is our sincere hope that these recommendations will 
help Ohio reexamine our mass incarceration system and replace laws and policies that feed the cycle 
of incarceration.
Conclusion22
Looking Forward23
A Comprehensive Plan for Criminal Justice Reform in Ohio 1. See generally Prison Policy Initiative, “Overrepresentation of Black in Ohio” (May 2014) available at http://
www.prisonpolicy.org/graphs/2010percent/OH_Blacks_2010.html.
2. Kirwan Institute, “Crime and Criminal Justice Among Black Ohioans (Mar. 2010) available at http://kirwa -
ninstitute.osu.edu/docs/sobo/state_of_black_oh_march2010_section10.pdf.
3. John Wooldredge et al., (Un)anticipated Effects of Sentencing Reform on the Disparate Treatment of Defen -
dants, 39 Law & Soc’y Rev. 835, 860-64 (2005).
4. Ohio Rev. Code §2925.
5. See generally Ohio Rev. Code §§2925-2971.
6. Ohio Rev. Code §2925.
7. Research conducted by the Urban Institute for the ACLU of Ohio, December 2015.
8. See generally American Civil Liberties Union, “The War on Marijuana in Black and White” (June 2013) avail -
able at https://www.aclu.org/report/war-marijuana-black-and-white.
9. Testimony of Anthony Benedetti, Committee for Public Counsel Services (June 9, 2015), available at http://
famm.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/CPCS-Testimony-man-min-hearing-6-9-15.pdf.
10. See generally Ohio Rev. Code §§2901-2981.
11. See supra note 7.
12. ACLU of Ohio, “Ohio’s Statehouse-to-Prison Pipeline” (Oct 2015).
13. See supra note 7. See also Ohio Dept. of Rehabilitation and Correction, 2014 Intake Study (Aug. 2015) avail -
able at http://www.drc.ohio.gov/web/Reports/intake/Intake%202014.pdf.
14. See, for example, State v. Haywood, 2014-Ohio-2801, ¶ 17; State v. Graham, 2014-Ohio-1024, ¶ 9; State v. 
Finnell, 2015-Ohio-4842, ¶ 61.
15. State v. Setty, 2014-Ohio-2340, ¶ 125.
16. See, State v. Caputo, 2015-Ohio-4829, ¶ 10 holding that the court could not guarantee and eligible prisoner 
access to credit-earning opportunities.
17. Of the remaining 30 percent—those convicted of a crime and actually sentenced to jail—only about 20 
percent are there for violent crimes. Peter Wagner and Bernadette Radbuy, “Mass Incarceration: The 
Whole Pie 2015,” The Prison Policy Initiative (Dec. 8, 2015) available at http://www.prisonpolicy.org/reports/
pie2015.html.
18. Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and Correction, Bureau of Adult Detention Annual Jail Report 2008 at 3 
available at http://www.drc.ohio.gov/web/reports/BAD/Annual%20Report%202008.pdf.
19. Id. at 2.
20. Ohio Department of Public Safety Office of Criminal Justice Services, Ohio Criminal Justice Statistics, 58 
(2010) available at http://www.publicsafety.ohio.gov/links/ocjs_Statistics.pdf. 
21. See White House, Council of Economic Advisers Issue Brief, “Fines, Fees, and Bail,”7-8 (Dec. 2015) avail -
able at https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/page/files/1215_cea_fine_fee_bail_issue_brief.
pdf (citing Christopher T. Lowenkamp, et al., Investigating the Impact of Pretrial Detention on Sentencing 
Outcomes (Nov. 2013)).
22. American Bar Association, Criminal Justice Section Standards of Pretrial Release, “Part I: General Prin -
ciples” (2007) (accessed Jan. 21, 2016) available at http://www.americanbar.org/publications/criminal_jus -
tice_section_archive/crimjust_standards_pretrialrelease_toc.html.
23. Id. 
24. See supra note 21 at 6 (citing, among other studies, a 2010 New York City census finding only 21 percent of 
arrestees able to make bail amounts under just $500).  End Notes & Citations24
Looking Forward25. Id. 
26. Pretrial Justice Institute, The Pretrial Racial Justice Initiative, “Race & Bail in America” (accessed Mar. 7, 
2016).
27. WLWT, Associated Press, “Study: Mentally Ill Inmates Stay Longer in Central Ohio Jail” (May 17, 2015) avail -
able at http://www.wlwt.com/news/Study-mentally-ill-inmates-stay-longer-in-central-Ohio-jail/33070038.
28. See supra note 26.
29. See Ohio Rev. Code §2937.22.
30. See generally Pretrial Justice Institute, Unsecured Bonds: The As-Effective and Most Efficient Pretrial Re -
lease Option (Oct. 2013) available at http://www.pretrial.org/download/research/Unsecured+Bonds,+The+A
s+Effective+and+Most+Efficient+Pretrial+Release+Option+-+Jones+2013.pdf. 
31. Ohio Rev. Code §2937.221
32. See, “Reform Cannot Wait” (Aug. 2010); “In for a Penny” (Oct. 2010); “The Outskirts of Hope” (Apr. 2013); 
“Adding it Up” (June 2013); “In Jail & In Debt: Ohio’s Pay-to-stay fees” (Fall 2015).
33. Ohio Rev. Code §2929.18(C).
34. Ohio Rev. Code §§ 2929.18(A)(2).
35. Id.
36. Ohio Rev. Code § 2929.18(A)(3).
37. Ohio Rev. Code §2929.18(B)(1).
38. Id.
39. Ohio Rev. Code §2929.18(B)(4).
40. Ohio Rev. Code §2925.03(H)
41. Ohio Rev. Code §2929.18(B)(4)(a).
42. Ohio Rev. Code §2929.18(G).
43. Ohio Rev. Code §2929.28(A)(2).
44. Ohio Rev. Code §2929.28(A)(2)(a).
45. Ohio Rev. Code § 2929.28(A)(3)(a).
46. Id. 
47. Ohio Rev. Code § 2929.28(B).
48. Id.
49. Id. 
50. ACLU of Ohio, “The Outskirts of Hope” (Apr. 2013).
51. Ohio Rev. Code §§2929.28(F)(2).
52. Ohio Rev. Code §§ 2929.28(F)(3).
53. H.B. 86 (passed 2011).
54. See Ohio Rev. Code §2951, §§2951.01-.13, §2967, §§2967.13-.28; and §2929.
55. See Ohio Rev. Code §§2929.15(A)(1), .25(A)(1) (probation in lieu of conviction when prison term is not man -
datory); see also Ohio Rev. Code §2935.36 (diversion). 
56. Ohio Rev. Code §§2929.16, .26. This framework was largely created in the 1980s, when H.B. 1000 (the Com -
munity Corrections Act) expanded community sanctions and provided support for diversion programs., See 
Ohio Dep’t of Rehabilitation and Corr., Bureau of Community Sanctions, 2014 Annual Report 5-6 (2014), 
available at http://www.drc.ohio.gov/web/Reports/Annual/Annual%20Report%202014.pdf.
57. In 2011, the State passed H.B. 86, which relaxed sentencing guidelines to favor community control over 
incarceration in these circumstances. See Ohio Rev. Code § 2929.13(B)(1)(a).25
A Comprehensive Plan for Criminal Justice Reform in Ohio 58. Alison Lawrence, Probation and Parole Violations: State Responses at 1 (National Conference of State Leg -
islatures (Nov. 2008) available at http://www.ncsl.org/print/cj/violationsreport.pdf.
59. See generally note 58. 
60. See Probation Association of New Jersey, “Probation vs. Parole, State by State Comparison” (accessed Jan. 
29, 2015) available at http://www.panj.org/pdf/ProbationvsParolecomparison.pdf.
61. Ohio Rev. Code §§2929.15(A)(2)(a) and .25(C)(1).
62. Jona Ison Gannett Ohio, Newark Advocate, “Ohio doesn’t know who it has on probation” (Feb. 28, 2016) 
available at http://www.newarkadvocate.com/story/news/local/2016/02/28/ohio-know-probation/81001230/.
63. Id. 
64. See generally Ohio Rev. Code Chapter 2929; see also Ohio Rev. Code §2951.021 (requiring convicted individ -
uals to financially contribute to their supervision through fees, in some cases). The Adult Probation Author -
ity also provides guidelines for officers in making recommendations and addressing violations. See Ohio 
Dep’t Rehabilitation and Corr., APA Policy 100-14 (Sept. 1, 2015), available at http://www.drc.ohio.gov/web/
drc_policies/documents/100-APA-14.pdf.
65. Ohio Rev. Code §§2929.15, 25; see also Robina Institute, Probation in Ohio (2015), available at http://www.
robinainstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/Ohio.pdf.
66. Id. (citing State v. Ohly, 166 Ohio.App.3d 303, 2006-Ohio-2353, 853 N.E.2d 675, at ¶18 (6th Dist.).
67. Editorial, “New York’s Broken Parole System,” New York Times (Feb. 16, 2014) available at http://www.
nytimes.com/2014/02/17/opinion/new-yorks-broken-parole-system.html.
68. See Table 1.
69. The Impact of Parole in New Jersey, The Pew Charitable Trusts, Nov. 2013, available at http://www.
pewtrusts.org/~/media/legacy/uploadedfiles/pcs_assets/2013/PSPPNJParoleBriefpdf.pdf.
70. See Managing Prison Healthcare Spending, Pew Charitable Trusts, Oct. 2013, available at http://www.
pewtrusts.org/~/media/legacy/uploadedfiles/pcs_assets/2014/PCTCorrectionsHealthcareBrief050814pdf.
pdf.
71. The term “parole” covers at least three different stages of a prisoner’s release: a parole board must first 
decide who to release (parole release decision-making), then a state or local agency must supervise the pa -
rolee (parole supervision). Meanwhile, the parole board retains the authority to revoke parole if the parolee 
slips up (parole revocation). This paper’s principal purpose is to discuss parole release decision-making.
72. Ohio Rev. Code § 2967.03. [Stating in part, “The authority may . . . grant a parole to any prisoner for whom 
parole is authorized, if in its judgment there is reasonable ground to believe that . . . paroling the prisoner 
would further the interests of justice and be consistent with the welfare and security of society.”]
73. Ohio Rev. Code § 5120.114.
74. Ohio Risk Assessment System, more information at http://www.drc.ohio.gov/web/oras.htm
75. Ohio Admin. Code § 5120:1-1-07(B).
76. Ohio Admin. Code § 5120:1-1-07(C).
77. Research conducted by the Ohio Justice and Policy Center, June 2014.
78. Id.
79. Patrick A. Langan & David J. Levin, Recidivism of Prisoners Released in 1994, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 
Jun. 2002, available at http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/rpr94.pdf.
80. 2009 Inmates Releases, State of New York Department of Corrections and Community Supervision, Apr. 
2013, available at http://www.doccs.ny.gov/Research/Reports/2013/2009_releases_3yr_out.pdf.
81. Note, data on Table 1 does not take transitional control into account.
82. See David J. Diroll, “Felony Sentencing 6-Page Quick Reference Guide,” Ohio Criminal Sentencing Commis -
sion, effective Sep. 30, 2011, available at https://www.supremecourt.ohio.gov/Boards/Sentencing/resourc -
es/summaries/felonyQuickRef.pdf.26
Looking Forward83. Data provided by ODRC officials via email.
84. See Ankrom v. Hageman, 10th Dist. Franklin No. 04AP–984, 2005-Ohio-1546 (2005).
85. Barbara Carmen, Columbus Dispatch, “Ankrom ruling opens old hurts” (Aug. 1, 2005) available at http://
www.findmissingkids.com/Media/Stories/Ankromrulingopens.htm.
86. Luke Mogelson, Washington Monthly, “Prison Break: How Michigan managed to empty its penitentia -
ries while lowering its crime rate” (Dec. 2010) available at http://www.washingtonmonthly.com/fea -
tures/2010/1011.mogelson.html.
87. Elizabeth Dwoskin, Business Week, “Michigan Lets Prisoners Go—and Saves a Bundle” (Dec. 1, 2011) 
available at http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/michigan-lets-prisoners-goand-saves-a-bun -
dle-12012011.html.27
A Comprehensive Plan for Criminal Justice Reform in Ohio We gratefully acknowledge the contributions of the 
following people:
For the ACLU of Ohio
Christine Link Executive Director
Elizabeth Bonham  Research Attorney
Mike Brickner  Senior Policy Director
Maria Bruno Policy Associate
Tim Cable  Legal Assistant
Gary Daniels Chief Lobbyist
Steve David  Communications Manager
Christopher Geggie  Campaign Manager
Jocelyn Rosnick Assistant Policy Director
Lisa Wurm Policy Manager
For the Ohio Justice and Policy Center:
David Singleton  Executive Director
Stephen JohnsonGrove Deputy Director
Ngozi Ndule  Staff Attorney
The authors also wish to thank Ryan King and Leah Sakala from the Urban 
Institute, and Alison Holcomb and John Cutler from the ACLU’s Campaign for 
Smart Justice for their assistance in providing data and feedback for this report.Looking Forward:
A Comprehensive Plan 
for Criminal Justice 
Reform in Ohio
For more information, contact the ACLU of Ohio
4506 Chester Ave., Cleveland OH 44103
Phone: (216) 472-2200
Fax: (216) 472-2210
Email: contact@acluohio.org
www.acluohio.org
 www.ohiojpc.org