“The Earth is the source of life.  She gives birth.  Her children continue the life of the Earth. 
The People must be responsible to her.  This is the way that all life continues.”Native American Rights Fund
2004 annual report
— (Excerpt from “The People Shall Continue” by Simon Ortiz, Acoma Pueblo)Introduction ........................................................ 3
Chairman’s Message ............................................ 5Executive Director’s Report .................................. 7The Board of Directors ........................................ 9The National Support Committee ........................ 9The Preservation of Tribal Existence .................. 10The Protection of Tribal Natural Resources ...... 16The Promotion of Human Rights ...................... 26The Accountability of Governments .................... 33The Development of Indian Law ........................ 37Treasurer’s Report ............................................ 39Contributors ...................................................... 40NARF Staff .......................................................... 48
2     annual report
contents
Main Office
Native American Rights Fund1506 BroadwayBoulder, CO 80302303-447-8760http://www.narf.org
Alaska Office
Native American Rights Fund420 L Street, Suite 505Anchorage, Alaska 99501907-276-0680Washington, D.C. Office
Native American Rights Fund1712 N Street, NWWashington, D.C. 20036202-785-4166
This issue is dedicated to the children, our most 
precious resource.Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is a nonprofit,
charitable organization incorporated in 1971 under the laws of theDistrict of Columbia.  NARF is exempt from federal income tax underthe provisions of Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue code.Contributions to NARF are tax deductible. The Internal Revenue Servicehas ruled that NARF is not a "private foundation" as defined in Section509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code. NARF was founded in 1970 andincorporated in 1971 in Washington, D.C.
Photographs by Ray Ramirez. Board and staff 
photographs by Sundance PhotographyThe attorneys, support staff and the Board of
Directors at the Native American Rights Fund, thenational Indian legal defense fund, form a modern-day warrior society. For these dedicated people,the Indian wars never ended, they merelychanged venue. Law books replaced the chiseledarrow and the historical battlegrounds have been transported to courtrooms near and far,including the highest court in the land, from theirBoulder, Colorado base. But the will to fight, andthe reasons, remain unchanged. The survival andthe strengthened sovereignty of the nation’s 562federally recognized tribes of over 2.5 millionNative Americans are due, in no small measure,to the battles waged and won by the NativeAmerican Rights Fund.
Looking back over the past 35 years, NARF has
represented over 200 tribes in 31 states in suchareas as tribal restoration and recognition, juris-diction, land claims, water rights, hunting andfishing rights, the protection of Indian religiousfreedom, and many others. In addition to thegreat strides that we have made in achieving justice on behalf of Native American people, perhaps NARF’s greatest distinguishing attribute
has been its abili ty to bring excellent, highly 
ethical legal representation to tribes.
History of NARF
In the 1960s the United States government
adopted new policies and programs in a wide-spread effort to address some of the social illsaffecting the country. As part of the “War onPoverty,” the Office of Economic Opportunitylaunched government-funded legal services programs throughout the nation to provide legalrepresentation to the disadvantaged. Those programswhich were set up on or near Indian reservationsand large Indian communities came to realizethat the legal problems being brought forth bytheir Indian clients were, for the most part, governed and controlled by a little known area of
law – “Indian Law” – that was driven by treaties,court decisions, federal statutes, regulations andadministrative rulings. They also found that fewattorneys outside of the legal services systemwere willing to represent Indians, and those whodid generally worked on a contingency basis,only handling cases with anticipated monetarysettlements.
During this same period the Ford Foundation,
which had already assisted in the development ofthe NAACP Legal Defense Fund and the MexicanAmerican Legal Defense Fund, began meetingwith California Indian Legal Services (CILS) todiscuss the possibility of creating a similar project
dedicated to serving the nation’s indigenous people.
CILS had already established somewhat of a repu-tation for taking on Indian legal cases. As a resultof those meetings, the Ford Foundation awardedCILS a planning grant in 1970 and start-up fundingto launch the Native American Rights Fund in 1971.
As a pilot project of CILS in 1970, NARF attorneys
traveled throughout the country to find out firsthand from the Indian communitieswhat the legal issues were. Theyalso began a search for a permanent location for theproject which was initially being housed aCILS’s main office inBerkeley, California. Thesite needed to be centrallylocated and not associatedwith any tribe. In 1971, NARFselected its new home and relocated to Boulder, Colorado.
An eleven member, all-Indian Steering
Committee (now a 13 member Board ofDirectors) was selected by the CILS Board of
annual report  3Native American Rights Fund
IntroductionTrustees to govern the Fund’s activities. Individuals
were chosen (as they continue to be today)based on their involvement and knowledge ofIndian affairs and issues, as well as their tribal affiliation, to ensure a comprehensive geographicalrepresentation.
NARF continued to grow at a rapid pace over
the next several years. In 1971, the project incor-porated in the District of Columbia and openedits first satellite office in Washington, D.C. Anoffice close to the center of government wouldprove critical in future interaction with Congressand federal administrative agencies. The CarnegieCorporation of New York awarded NARF start-upfunding for the creation of the National IndianLaw Library, a national repository for Indian legalmaterials and resources in 1972. Over ten yearslater in 1984, NARF established its second branchoffice in Anchorage, Alaska to take on the AlaskaNative issues of tribal sovereignty and subsistencehunting and fishing rights.
The Mission
One of the initial responsibilities of NARF’s first
Steering Committee was to develop priorities thatwould guide the Native American Rights Fund inits mission to preserve and enforce the status oftribes as sovereign, self-governing bodies. TheCommittee developed five priorities that continueto lead NARF today.
• Preservation of tribal existence• Protection of tribal natural resources• Promotion of Native American human rights• Accountability of governments to 
Native Americans
• Development of Indian law and educating the
public about Indian rights, laws, and issuesAs this battle continues, NARF strives to protect
the legal and sovereign rights of tribes and Nativepeople within the American legal system. Thiseffort certainly could not exist without the contri-bution of the thousands of individuals who haveoffered their knowledge, courage, and vision tohelp guide NARF on its quest. Of equal importance,NARF’s financial contributors have graciously provided the resources to make these efforts possible. Contributors such as the Ford Foundationhave been with NARF since its inception. TheRockefeller Foundation, the General ServiceFoundation, the John D. & Catherine T. MacArthurFoundation, and the W. K. Kellogg Foundationhave also made consistent contributions over theyears.  Federal funding from the Administrationfor Native Americans enables NARF to carry on itsgovernance, economic, and social developmentefforts in Indian country. Finally, the effects ofNARF’s work are reflective in the financial contri-butions by a growing number of tribal governments.United, these financial, moral, and intellectualgifts provide the framework for NARF to fulfill its
mission: the securing of sovereignty and right to
self-determination to which all Native American peoples are entitled.
4     annual report
Aloha, Aloha ke Akua, na ‘aumakua a me na
Kupuna:
This year, 2005, we celebrate the 35th anniversary
of the Native American Rights Fund (NARF). 
Last year, in my annual address I wrote about
the power of traditional teachings and listening tothe voice of our ancestors who guide each of us.As I enter the final months of my term as NARF’schairwoman, I extend a big aloha and mahalo to those who have been with NARF since itsinception... mahalo for all your years of dedication.  
Mahalo also to those who have made financial
contributions to NARF so that we have been ableto carry out our very important work these past35 years…and please continue to include NARFin your financial planning – as you know, advance-ment towards peace and justice and freedom is
very costly. NARF success is, and will continue tobe, determined by our diligence, patience, andpersistence in pursuing sustainable solutions to the complex issues that define our reality.
Mahalo to all of you who contributed to the
passing of a strong National Congress of theAmerican Indian (NCAI) resolution calling forchange in the governmental administration of theNational Park Service NAGPRA program whichhistorically has been fraught with conflicts ofinterest that interfered with fair and effectiveenforcement of the statute.  Although the programwas not separated from the National Park Serviceas the resolution called for, the conflicts wereacknowledged and immediate changes weremade in staffing of the National NAGPRA programand review committee memberships wererestored.  We are hopeful that this will lead toimprovements in compliance with NAGPRA.  We are also extremely pleased with what appearsto be a renewed commitment to NAGPRA imple-mentation, and will continue our work to achievecompliance through general collaboration
(including through individual contacts and conferences) and consultations on specific areasof concern.
I am privileged to have served on the NARF
board for almost six years, and as its chairwomanfor the last few years.  In this last message aschairwoman of NARF, I urge Onipa’a!Remain Steadfast!
My kupuna, the only real queen to have
reigned on “American soil”, Queen Lili’uokalani,remained steadfast during the alleged 1893“overthrow” of her Kingdom Nation ofHawai’i by the United States military,throughout her trials and tribu-lations, imprisonment andthrough the illegal annexationof Hawai’i. Her knowledge,understanding and accom-plishments were attributedto her natural intelligence,observant ways and love forher ‘aina (land) and her people.  Like her, we must useour knowledge and understandingand our love for our ‘aina and our people
to help sustain us through our discouragements
and to uplift us in our successes.
annual report  5Native American Rights Fund
CHAIRWOMAN’S MESSAGE 
¯ ¯
¯
¯
¯
¯This is the spirit of Aloha I offer you all.  In
terms of landmass, Hawai’i is but a tiny speck inthe middle of the Pacific yet we Hawaiians havemade, and continue to make, an impact on theworld over through our spirit of Aloha.   
Today our survival depends on the emergence
of new Native leaders who embody traditionalismas a personal identity and at the same time have theknowledge and skills required to bring traditionalobjectives forward as the basic agenda of thepolitical and social institutions they work within.Promotion of traditional perspectives on power,justice and relationships is essential to the survivalof indigenous peoples. To defend our nationhoodagainst co-optation it is essential to redirect ourenergies and resources towards education forour young people and the development of a newindigenous intelligentsia rooted in tradition andcommitted to preserving traditions and creatingconditions for harmonious coexistence with others.
In our relations with others, we need to engage
society as a whole in a dialogue that will bring realchanges in political practice and convince othersto join us in challenging the state’s oppression ofindigenous peoples.  This will require broad-based intellectual and political movement awayfrom prevailing beliefs and structures.
In the 35 years since it was established, NARF
has made a difference in the lives of many nativecommunities. We all need for NARF to continuefor another 35 years and to ensure that they arefinancially strong and able to help native peoplesdeal with the inevitable issues that will continueto challenge us. We have made great progress –but we still have a long way to go.  
Institutionalized racism is still entrenched in
the governmental and private systems that havefar-reaching consequences for our lives.  WhenNARF was founded 35 years ago could we havepredicted many of the challenges they have
helped us face?  I, for one, would not like toimagine where we would be today if NARF hadnot been founded and staffed by the many dedicated individuals and supported by the many individuals and institutions that have beeninvaluable to its protection and advancement ofour interests.  
Although we can predict many of the types of
issues that will arise, the future is unpredictable.I am confident that NARF, with the help of all ofus, will Onipa’a (remain steadfast).  I am proudto be part of this organization and look forwardto working with them for many years.  I urge you to Onipa’a and to continue to build the financial strength and influence of this invaluableorganization.  
I ka noho pu ana a ‘ike I ke aloha.  It is living
together that teaches the meaning of Love.
Elizabeth Ann Ho`oipo Kalaena’auao Pa,
Chairwoman
6     annual report
The Native American Rights Fund enters its
35th year of providing litigation and advocacy onbehalf of Native Americans on significant nationalNative issues in 2005.  We are proud of our manyaccomplishments on behalf of Native Americansover those 35 years and pleased to be of continuingservice to Native America.  During 2004, our legalassistance once again resulted in several importantdevelopments affecting Native Americans.
In United States v. Lara , the United States
Supreme Court held that tribal courts do havejurisdiction over non-member Indians who commitmisdemeanor crimes on reservations.  In its ruling,the Supreme Court upheld the authority ofCongress to recognize the sovereignty of a tribeto exercise such jurisdiction after the SupremeCourt had held that tribal power to be non-existentin a previous case.  Through the Tribal SupremeCourt Project operated by NARF and the NationalCongress of American Indians, amicus curiae
briefs were coordinated and filed in support of thetribal position in this important tribal sovereignty case. 
In another impressive example of the Tribal
Supreme Court Project in action, the U.S.Supreme Court refused the State of SouthDakota’s request to review South Dakota v.
Cummings . As a result, a very good decision by
the South Dakota Supreme Court refusing toextend state criminal jurisdiction onto the reser-vations was preserved.  The State was assertingsuch jurisdiction under a prior U.S. SupremeCourt decision in Nevada v. Hicks , but the
Project assisted in successfully opposing theState’s request for U.S. Supreme Court review ofthe South Dakota Supreme Court decision.
Once again, NARF assisted the Gwich’in
Steering Committee in their efforts to protect theArctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR) in Alaskafrom oil development and successfully workedwith a coalition of environmental groups to stop
the U.S. Senate in 2004 from approving oildrilling in ANWR.  7,000 Gwich’in people live onor near the migratory route of the Porcupinecaribou herd and rely on the caribou for food,clothing, tools and a source of respect and spiritualguidance.  The calving grounds of the caribou lieinside ANWR and will be disturbed by any oildrilling.
NARF has assisted the Nez Perce Tribe of Idaho
with the assertion and protection of the Tribe’swater rights for many years and helped the Tribeachieve a Congressional settlement of its waterrights claims in 2004.  The Snake River WaterRights Act of 2004 recognizes the Tribe’s right to50,000 acre-feet of water for consumptive useson reservation lands; recognizes Nez Perce accessand use rights to water from springs on federallands within the Tribe’s original 1855 reservationboundaries; transfers $7 million worth of federallands within its current reservation boundaries tothe Tribe; establishes three trust funds for theTribe – a $60.1 million water and fisheries man-agement fund, a $23 million water and sewerimprovement fund, and a $38 million habitattrust fund, one-third of which will becontrolled by the Tribe; directsagreements for Nez Perce management of the KooskiaNational Fish Hatchery andco-management of theDworshak National FishHatchery; and directs anagreement for the use of200,000 acre-feet of waterfrom the Dworshak Project onthe North Fork Clearwater Riveras part of an improved flow augmen-tation plan for the salmon.  Formal approvalof the settlement by the Idaho Legislature and theNez Perce Tribe is in process.
annual report  7Native American Rights Fund
Executive Director’s reportIn Wyoming Sawmills v. United States and
Medicine Wheel Coalition, a federal appeals courtupheld a lower court decision dismissing a chal-lenge by a private timber company to the legalityof a U.S. Forest Service plan for managing theMedicine Wheel National Historic Landmark.The Medicine Wheel is considered sacred to tribesindigenous to the area and the Forest Service planexplicitly recognizes that the cultural and historicimportance of the Medicine Wheel is an elementof many Native Americans’ religious traditions.NARF had filed an amicus curiae brief on behalfon the National Congress of American Indiansaddressing the accommodation of Native religions,but the dismissal was based on lack of standing.
Through the efforts of NARF, the Tribal
Education Departments National Assembly andother Native organizations, President George W.Bush signed an Executive Order on AmericanIndian and Alaska Native Education.  The newExecutive Order clarifies that the mandates of the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 shall beimplemented in a manner consistent with tribaltraditions, cultures and languages.  NARF alsoassisted the National Congress of AmericanIndians in hosting a tribal consultation on implementation of the new Executive Order.
In Cobell v. Norton , the widely publicized 
class action case on behalf of 500,000 individualIndian trust account holders filed in 1996, NARF and private co-counsel were successful intwo decisions by a federal appeals court turningback a government argument that the districtcourt lacked jurisdiction over information technology security matters and reaffirming thatthe district court has broad jurisdiction andauthority to remedy the century old trust mis-management.  In an unexpected but welcomeholding, the court of appeals also made clear that interest would be available to the individualIndian account holders for monies held in trust.     
NARF was awarded a grant of $1,987,000 by
the Department of Justice to fund Indian legalservices programs throughout the country.  The grant will be utilized to support thirty Indianlegal services programs for civil and criminalrepresentation in tribal courts and to developtribal court projects on a host of areas in justiceadministration.  Funding will also be provided fortraining and technical assistance to train legalservices personnel and the tribal court personnelwith whom they will be working.
In these cases and activities and hundreds of
others over the last 35 years, the Native AmericanRights Fund has provided access to justice forNative American people across the country onsome of the most important Native issues of ourtime and has proven that the legal system canwork for Indian people.  We could not haveachieved this success without the financial supportprovided by our contributors throughout thenation.  We thank all of you who have assisted usand encourage you to maintain your support sothat we may continue to make progress on behalfof Native American people.
John E. Echohawk, Executive Director
8     annual report
The Native American Rights Fund has a governing board
composed of Native American leaders from across thecountry – wise and distinguished people who are respectedby Native Americans nationwide. Individual Board membersare chosen based on their involvement and knowledge ofIndian issues and affairs, as well as their tribal affiliation,to ensure a comprehensive geographical representation.The NARF Board of Directors, whose members serve amaximum of six years, provide NARF with leadership andcredibility, and the vision of its members is essential to NARF’seffectiveness in representing its Native American clients.
NARF’s Board of Directors: (Bottom row left to right)
James Roan Gray (Osage Nation – Oklahoma); LaNada War
Jack (former Board member); Nora McDowell (Fort Mojave –
California); Elbridge Coochise (Hopi – Arizona); Karlene
Hunter (Oglala Lakota – South Dakota);  E. Ho’oipo Pa ,
Chairwoman (Native Hawaiian – Hawaii); Vernita Herdman
(Inupiaq – Alaska); (Top row left to right) Paul Ninham
(Oneida Nation of Wisconsin); John Gonzales (San Ildefonso
Pueblo - New Mexico);   Jaime Barrientoz , Vice-Chairman(Grande Traverse Band of Ottawa & Chippewa Indians –
Michigan); Billy Frank (Nisqually Tribe – Washington); Woody
Widmark (Sitka Tribe – Alaska). (Not Pictured) Mark Brown
(The Mohegan Tribe – Connecticut); Anthony Pico (Viejas Band
of Kumeyaay Indians – California).
annual report  9Native American Rights Fund
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
The National Support Committee (NSC) assists NARF
with its fund raising and public relations efforts nationwide.Some of the individuals on the Committee are prominent inthe field of business, entertainment and the arts.  Othersare known advocates for the rights of the underserved.  All of the 52 volunteers on the Committee are committed to upholding the rights of Native Americans.
Owanah Anderson, Choctaw
Edward AsnerKatrina McCormick BarnesJohn BevanDavid BrubeckU.S. Senator Ben Nighthorse Campbell,  Northern Cheyenne
Wallace Coffey, Comanche
Ada Deer, Menominee
Harvey A. DennenbergMichael J. DriverRichard DysartLucille A. Echohawk, Pawnee
Louise Erdrich, Turtle Mountain Chippewa
Jane FondaJames GarnerSy GombergCarol Hayward, Fond Du Lac Chippewa
Richard Hayward, Mashantucket Pequot
John HellerEmilie Heller-RhysAlvin M. Josephy, Jr.Charles R. KlewinNancy A. Klewin
Wilma Mankiller, Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma
Chris E. McNeil Jr., Tlingit-Nisga’a
Billy Mills, Oglala Sioux
N. Scott Momaday, Kiowa
Clinton Pattea, Ft. McDowell Yavapai
Amado Pena Jr., Yaqui/Chicano
David Risling Jr., Hoopa
Pernell RobertsWalter S. Rosenberry, IIIMarc RudickPam RudickLeslie Marmon Silko, Laguna Pueblo
Connie StevensErnie Stevens, Jr., Wisconsin Oneida
Anthony L. Strong, Tlingit-Klukwan
Maria Tallchief, Osage
Andrew Teller, Isleta Pueblo
Verna Teller, Isleta Pueblo
Studs TerkelTenaya Torres, Chiricahua Apache
Richard Trudell, Santee Sioux
Rebecca Tsosie, Pascua Yaqui
Thomas TureenTzo-Nah, Shoshone Bannock
Aine UngarRt. Rev. William C. Wantland, Seminole
Dennis WeaverW.  Richard West Jr., Southern Cheyenne
Mary Wynne, Rosebud SiouxNATIONAL SUPPORT COMMITTEE
~NARF works to construct the foundations that
are necessary to empower tribes so that they cancontinue to live according to their Native traditions,to enforce their treaty rights, to insure their independence on reservations and to protecttheir sovereignty. Specifically, NARF’s legal repre-sentation centers on sovereignty and jurisdictionissues, federal recognition and restoration oftribal status, and economic development. Thus,the focus of NARF’s work involves issues relatingto the preservation and enforcement of the status of tribes as sovereign governments. Tribalgovernments possess the power to regulate theinternal affairs of their members as well as otheractivities within their reservations. Jurisdictionalconflicts often arise with states, the federal government, and others over tribal sovereignty.
Tribal Sovereignty
The U.S. Constitution recognizes that Indian
tribes are independent governmental entities withinherent authority over their members and terri-tory.  In treaties with the United States, Indian
tribes ceded millions of acres of land in
exchange for the guarantee that the federal government would protect the tribes’ right toself-government. From the early 1800s on, theSupreme Court has repeatedly affirmed the fun-
damental principle that tribes retain inherent sovereignty over their internal affairs. Beginningwith the Supreme Court’s 1978 decision inOliphant v. Suquamish Indian Tribe and with
increasing frequency over the past decade, how-ever, the Supreme Court has begun to chip awayat this fundamental principle – not only by limitingtribal jurisdiction, but by extending state jurisdiction into Indian country.
The Tribal Supreme Court Project is part of the
Tribal Sovereignty Protection Initiative and waslaunched in conjunction with the NationalCongress of American Indians (NCAI) in 2001.The Project was created in response to a series ofUnited States Supreme Court cases that negativelyaffected tribal sovereignty. The purpose of theProject is to promote greater coordination and toimprove strategy on litigation that may affect therights of all Indian tribes, and to thereby reverse– or at least reduce – the erosion of tribal jurisdiction by the Court.
The Tribal Supreme Court Project is housed at
NARF’s office in Washington, D.C. and is staffedby one NARF attorney and support staff. In aneffort to foster greater coordination in advocacy,an Advisory Board of tribal leaders, comprised of10     annual report
The preservation of tribal existence
NCAI Executive Committee members and other
tribal leaders willing to volunteer their time, alsoassists the Project. The Board’s role is to providenecessary political and tribal perspective to thelegal and academic expertise. The Project hasalso established a Working Group – a group ofmore than 200 noted attorneys and academicsfrom around the nation who participate in theProject as their interest, time and resources allow.
To achieve the goals of the Tribal Supreme
Court Project, NARF monitors cases which appearto be headed for the Supreme Court, and organizes,coordinates and contributes to a nation-wideIndian amicus brief writing network. Also knownas “friend of the court” briefs, amicus briefsallow those not directly involved in litigation, butpotentially impacted by the outcome, to provideinformation and arguments directly to the Court.By bringing together experienced Indian lawpractitioners and scholars to discuss and agreeupon a coordinated amicus brief writing strategyin each case, NARF ensures that the most effectiveand focused arguments are made before theCourt on behalf of Indian Country. The TribalSupreme Court Project has already achievedmeasurable success.
While only in existence for a few years, the
success of the Tribal Supreme Court Project hasbeen appreciable. Out of five cases decided bythe Court since the Project began in 2001, tribeshave lost only one. A dramatic success in theProject was the April 2004 victory in U.S. v. Lara ,
a case involving a tribe’s exercise of jurisdictionover a non-member Indian. The authority oftribes to exercise such jurisdiction was expresslyrecognized and reaffirmed by Congress inresponse to an earlier Supreme Court decision,Duro v. Reina , in which the Supreme Court held
that tribes do not have criminal jurisdiction overnon-member Indians who commit misdemeanorcrimes on the reservation.  Before the Supreme
Court in Lara was the question of whether
Congress may reaffirm an inherent authority oftribes when that tribal power has been found tobe non-existent by a previous U.S. Supreme Court
decision. A majority of the Supreme Court held in
Lara that notwithstanding its decision in Duro ,
Congress can indeed recognize the sovereignty ofa tribe over misdemeanor crimes committed bynon-member Indians within its jurisdiction.
In another impressive example of
the Tribal Supreme Court Projectin action, the U.S. SupremeCourt, in October 2004,denied a petition for certio-rari filed by the State ofSouth Dakota in the case ofSouth Dakota v. Cummings .
As a result, a very gooddecision in which the SouthDakota Supreme Court heldthat Nevada v. Hicks does not
extend state criminal jurisdictiononto the reservations has been preserved. Byquickly mobilizing resources and coordinatingefforts in opposition to the State’s petition, the
annual report  11Native American Rights Fund
Project effectively persuaded the Supreme Court
not to review the Cummings case, thereby 
preventing the further extension of state jurisdictionwithin reservation boundaries. In short, theProject has demonstrated that by uniting andcoordinating, tribes can strengthen Indian advocacy before the Supreme Court and helpshape the future direction of Indian law.
In the 1950s Congress experimented with 
terminating the federally recognized status of NativeAmerican tribes and forcing their assimilationunder state law. This termination policy proved tobe a disaster, compelling Congress decades laterto restore federal recognition to these tribes. Inturning the page back to the 1950s, the AlaskaLegislature has for several years engaged in litiga-tion against the Department of the Interior andAlaska tribes to terminate the federally recognizedtribal status of Alaska Tribes. The AlaskaLegislature’s efforts have been actively supportedby Alaska Senator Ted Stevens, who has directlyurged Interior Secretary Gale Norton to reversethe Department’s recognition of Alaska Tribes.Pending the outcome of this litigation, SenatorStevens commenced a new campaign to under-mine tribal sovereignty. This campaign has been undertaken under the
guise of “regionalization” of tribal fundingsources and is being systematically carried outthrough riders to appropriations bills. In 2003,legislative riders to a consolidated spending billeliminated funds to tribal courts and tribal lawenforcement programs in Alaska Native Villages,and authorized the establishment of a jointFederal-State Commission to develop recommen-dations for bringing Alaska’s 231 tribes under aunified system of government. And again in 2004,the Senate Appropriations Committee (which waschaired by Senator Stevens) has attached to anIndian Health Service spending bill a rider whichmakes permanent a previously temporary mora-torium against Alaska tribes operating localhealth care services under the Indian SelfDetermination Act.
The effect of these and similar measures, if
enacted, would be to cut off the ability of Alaska 12     annual report
Native Tribes to function by denying them the
ability to provide for the health, safety and welfare of their communities. In remarks to the press in 2003, Senator Stevens made clearthat his regionalization campaign is not aboutimproving service delivery to Alaska Natives, butabout terminating the sovereignty of Alaskatribes.  Stevens is pushing regionalizationbecause he believes that tribal sovereignty posesa threat to statehood. If Senator Stevens’ proposalsbecome policy, such action would undermine the sovereign rights of all tribes, would denigratethe fundamental importance of federal recogni-tion, and set a dangerous precedent that wouldreflect a new Congressional policy of acquiescingto the whims of congressional members whofavor the termination of federal recognition of tribes.
NARF is leading efforts to give voice to tribal
governments by organizing a national campaignto alert tribal leaders of the pending threat of termination. To educate tribes and develop astrategy against the increasing use of legislativeriders to undermine tribal sovereignty, NARFworked with tribes to organize and facilitate aTribal Forum on Regionalization. The Forum,which was convened in Anchorage, Alaska inAugust 2004, was attended by over 400 partici-pants from 136 Alaska Tribes. At the end of thethree day forum tribal delegates adopted a TribalPosition Statement in Opposition to Regionalizationand an action plan to fight against regionalization/termination. NARF will continue to assist Alaskatribes in this effort by 1) bringing the issue tonational attention both before the NationalCongress of American Indians and tribes in theLower ‘48; 2) educate members of Congress onhow legislative riders are being used by theAlaska delegation to shift federal policy and terminate the rights of Alaska’s federally recog-nized tribes; and 3) build a coalition of tribal andother interest groups to fight against regionalization/
termination.  
Federal Recognition of Tribal Status
Achieving legal status as an Indian tribe is very
important to preserving tribal existence and self-
government. Some tribal groups do not have 
this status because they have never been formallyrecognized as tribes by the federal government.NARF provides representation to those tribalgroups who have a right to become federally recognized tribes.
NARF currently represents five
Indian communities who havesurvived intact as identifiableIndian tribes but who are notfederally recognized. TheseIndian tribes, for differingreasons, do not have a government-to-governmentrelationship between them-selves and the federal govern-ment. Traditionally, federalrecognition was accorded to atribe through treaty, land set aside fora tribe, or by legislative means. The majority ofthese NARF clients are seeking an administrativedetermination by the Bureau of Indian Affairs
annual report  13Native American Rights Fund
(BIA) that they, in fact, have continued to exist 
as Indian tribes from the time of significant whitecontact to the present day and have continued togovern themselves and their members. NARF,therefore, prepares the necessary historical,legal, and anthropological documentation to support a petition for acknowledgment. For morethan 100 years, these Indian communities havebeen denied the benefits of a formal relationshipwith the federal government. Through the processof administrative acknowledgment, NARF is now
trying to bridge that gap.
Federal recognition is an arduous process that
takes many years to complete. Petitioning tribesmust prove that they have been identified by reliable external sources on a substantially continuous basis as an Indian entity; they mustprove that they have maintained a continuouscommunity from historical times to the presentday; they must show that they have maintainedpolitical authority or influence on a substantiallycontinuous basis from historical times until thepresent day; they must prove that current tribalmembers, as a whole, descend from a historictribe or tribes which amalgamated; they mustprove that their members are not mostly membersof an already recognized tribe; and, their memberscannot be from groups which were terminated bylegislation. This process requires the testimony ofmany experts and thorough documentation ofeach requirement.
In 1997, the BIA Branch of Acknowledgment
and Research (BAR) placed the Little Shell Tribe14     annual report
of Chippewa Indians of Montana’s federal recog-
nition petition on active review status. In 2000,after many delays, the Assistant Secretary publisheda preliminary finding in favor of recognition. Workwill continue to be done to finalize the Tribe’sresponse to the proposed findings in 2005.  
With NARF’s assistance, the Shinnecock Indian
Nation located on Long Island, New York, filed apetition for Federal recognition in 1998. Thepetition was recently placed on the BIA’s ready-for-active-consideration list, the last proceduralstep before actual review and a milestone for theNation after years of hard work to fully documentthe petition.
Petitions were also filed by NARF on behalf of
the United Houma Nation of Louisiana and theMashpee Wampanoag Tribe of Massachusetts.The Mashpee petition is currently under activeconsideration, and the Houma petition awaits afinal determination. Responsibility for these twopetitions has shifted to other attorneys andresearchers. NARF’s work on a petition for thePamunkey Tribe in Virginia continues.
Environmental Law and Policy Initiative
NARF has played a key role in the implementa-
tion of federal environmental law and policy thatrecognizes tribal governments as the primary regulators and enforcers of the federal environ-mental laws on Indian lands. NARF continues to work with tribes, the National TribalEnvironmental Council and other Indian organi-zations to maintain the progress that has beenmade with the Environmental Protection Agency(EPA) and other federal agencies. With a repre-sentative on the Green Group, a coalition ofnational environmental leaders, NARF continuesto coordinate with and educate the environmentalcommunity on the role of tribal governments inenvironmental law and policy.NARF is working with the Oglala Sioux Tribe’s
Department of Water Maintenance andConservation and Environmental Health TechnicalTeam (EHTT) on a revision of the Tribe’sOrdinance for the Protection of the Oglala Sioux
Rural Water Supply System and Other Public
Water Systems Within the Pine Ridge IndianReservation. This Ordinance will provide for theprotection of the integrity of the pipeline, whichdelivers drinking water to the public water systems on the reservation. NARF has also assisted the Tribe in developing a Solid WasteManagement Code, which will provideenforceable standards and a feestructure for solid waste collec-tion and disposal of solid andhazardous waste. The SolidWaste Code is currentlyundergoing final revisionand will be presented tothe Tribal Council aftercommunity review andcomment.
annual report  15Native American Rights Fund
Throughout the process of European conquest
and colonization of North America, Indian tribesexperienced a steady diminishment of their landbase to a mere 2.3 percent of its original size.Currently, there are approximately 55 millionacres of Indian-controlled land in the continentalUnited States and about 44 million acres ofNative-owned land in Alaska. An adequate landbase and control over natural resources are centralcomponents of economic self-sufficiency andself-determination, and as such, are vital to thevery existence of tribes. Thus, much of NARF’swork involves the protection of tribal naturalresources.  
Protection of Indian Lands
Without a sufficient land base, tribal existence
is difficult to maintain.  NARF helps tribes establish
ownership and control over lands which are
rightfully theirs.
Since 1981, NARF has represented the
Alabama-Coushatta Tribe of Texas in their questto secure compensation for the loss of use of millions of acres of fertile forest land they onceoccupied in southeast Texas. In 2002, the UnitedStates Court of Federal Claims ruled in favor ofthe Alabama-Coushatta Tribe of Eastern Texas intheir breach-of-trust claim against the United
States, holding the Government liable for theTribe’s loss of use of over 2.85 million acres ofland between 1845 and 1954. The Court alsoruled that 5.5 million acres of aboriginal title hasnever been extinguished. Negotiators for theUnited States and Tribe reached an agreement onthe amount of damages for the loss of the land –$270 million – and the Court recommended theagreement to Congress in 2002.  NARF, privatecounsel, and the Tribe are now working to garnerCongressional approval for the payment of thisamount under the Congressional reference procedure.
NARF represents the Pottawatomi Nation of
Canada, a band of descendants from the HistoricPottawatomi Nation, which from 1795 to 1833signed a series of treaties with the United States.These treaties provided for the payment of certainannuities, among other things. The ancestors ofthe present-day Canadian Pottawatomi fled toCanada following the signing of the final treatyand were never paid their annuities as promised.While the American Pottawatomi bands recoveredthe payment of annuities in the Indian ClaimsCommission (ICC), the Canadian Pottawatomimembers could not bring a claim in the ICC.  
In 1993, NARF brought suit on behalf of the
Canadian Pottawatomi in the Court of FederalClaims, by way of Congressional reference, toseek redress.  After years of fact-finding, discoveryand briefing in the case, the parties reached anagreement in principle which was approved bythe Court in 2000 and recommended to Congressin 2001. In 2002, Senator Inouye introduced abill “For the Relief of the Pottawatomi Nation inCanada for Settlement of Certain Claims Againstthe United States.”  The bill was passed by unani-mous consent in the Senate in 2002, but did notpass the House prior to the end of the session.16     annual report
THE PROTECTION OF TRIBAL NATURAL RESOURCES
The bill was reintroduced by Senator Inouye in
2003, was referred to the Senate JudiciaryCommittee, but did not pass in 2004. NARF continues to work with the Senate Committee onIndian Affairs, the Senate Judiciary Committeeand the House Resources Committee to see thismatter through to final resolution.
NARF is working with the Lower Brule Sioux
Tribe against the State of South Dakota’s challengeto the United States’ decision to place approxi-mately 91 acres of land into trust for the LowerBrule Sioux Tribe under Section 465 of theIndian Reorganization Act. In South Dakota v.
United States , the State is alleging, among other
things, that the Secretary lacks authority to placeland into trust because Section 465 is an uncon-stitutional delegation of legislative authority. In anearlier proceeding regarding this same 91 acresof land, the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals didhold that Section 465 was unconstitutional, butthe U.S. Supreme Court vacated that opinion andremanded to the Secretary for further reconsider-ation. The State is now challenging the Secretary’sreconsidered, and again favorable, decision toplace the land in trust. In April 2004, the FederalDistrict Court upheld the Secretary's decision andthe State appealed. Now the Lower Brule SiouxTribe, acting as Amicus Curiae, and the UnitedStates are again before the Eighth Circuit Court ofAppeals to defend the Secretary’s decision andthe constitutionality of Section 465.
NARF represents the Native Village of Tuluksak
in Alaska in their quest to have the land ownedby the Village corporation transferred in fee simpleto the Village tribal council. The Department ofInterior would then be petitioned to place theland into trust on behalf of the Village. TheDepartment of the Interior is in the process ofrevising regulations governing the process of takingland into federal trust for Native Americans. NARFworked with the NCAI Tribal Leaders’ Task Force
on Land Recovery, on behalf of Tuluksak, todevelop comments to the proposed regulationsand has been waiting for the Secretary of theInterior to issue final regulations. The Department
of the Interior has decided to further postpone
consideration of a new regulation, after anassessment of ongoing policy work, available personnel and resources. The Native Village ofTuluksak has decided to pursue litigation toestablish the right of Alaska Tribes to petition theSecretary to place lands in trust. Pleadings are inthe process of being drafted.
NARF has worked with several
tribes to protect importantlands from commercialexploitation. In Alaska,NARF assists the Gwich’inSteering Committee in theirefforts to protect the ArcticNational Wildlife Refuge(ANWR) from oil develop-ment.  The Gwich’in, whichmeans ‘People of the Caribou’,are the northernmost Indian nationliving across northeast Alaska and northwestCanada.  There are about 7,000 Gwich’in peoplewho live on or near the migratory route of the
annual report  17Native American Rights Fund
Porcupine Caribou Herd. For thousands of years,
the Gwich’in have relied on the caribou for food,clothing, tools, and a source of respect and spiritual guidance. The calving grounds of thePorcupine River caribou herd inside ANWR isconsidered sacred. The Gwich’in call it “Vadzaihgoogii vi dehk’it gwanlii” (The Sacred PlaceWhere Life Begins). The Gwich’in will not journeyinto these sacred grounds for hunting, even intimes of great need or food shortage. Oil devel-opment in ANWR would not only harm the caribou and threaten the future of the Gwich’inpeople, but would also threaten more than 180
species of birds, and numerous mammals includingpolar bears, musk ox, wolves, wolverine, moose,Arctic and red foxes, black bears, brown bears,and the white Dall sheep. NARF successfullyworked with a coalition of environmental groupsand organizations to stop the U.S. Senate fromapproving oil drilling in ANWR in 2001 and2002.  Language was again introduced in the2003 Congress to allow for oil drilling in ANWRand was once again defeated in 2004. As theAdministration has vowed to continue to press forthe passage of this bill, NARF will continue toassist the Gwich’in Steering Committee in theirefforts to stop the approval of oil development in ANWR. 
Water Rights
Establishing tribal rights to the use of water 
in the arid west continues to be a major NARFpriority. The goal of NARF’s Indian water rightswork is to secure allocations of water for presentand future needs for three Indian tribes representedby NARF and other western tribes generally.18     annual report
Under the precedent established by the United
States Supreme Court in 1908 in Winters v.
United States and confirmed in 1963 in Arizona
v. California , Indian tribes are entitled under
federal law to sufficient water for present andfuture needs, with a priority date at least as earlyas the establishment of their reservations. Thesetribal reserved water rights are superior to allstate-recognized water rights created after thetribal priority date. Such a date will in most casesgive tribes valuable senior water rights in thewater-short west.  Unfortunately, many tribes havenot utilized their reserved water rights and theserights are unadjudicated or unquantified. Themajor need in each case is to define or quantifythe amount of water to which each tribe is entitledthrough litigation or settlement negotiations.Tribes are generally able to claim water for presentand future use of their practicably irrigable acreage,maintenance of treaty hunting and fishing rights,and municipal and industrial needs.
NARF represents the Nez Perce Tribe of Idaho
in its water rights claim in the Snake River BasinAdjudication (SRBA). The Nez Perce Tribe islocated in northern Idaho near the confluence ofthe Snake and Clearwater Rivers. The currentreservation boundaries contain approximately700,000 acres, or about one-tenth of the originalseven million acre reservation reserved in theTreaty of 1855 with the United States. That treatyalso reserved to the Tribe off-reservation fishingrights at all “usual and accustomed” sites on andoff the reservation. Subsequent treaties andagreements reduced the size of the reservation,but expressly left intact the Tribe’s on and off-Reservation treaty fishing rights. These rights areexercised by the Tribe’s members at ceremonial,subsistence and commercial fisheries. 
The Nez Perce Tribe’s claims to water rights
for instream flows in the Snake River and its primary tributaries, the Salmon and Clearwater
Rivers, to springs on lands ceded by the Tribe in1863, and to on-reservation consumptive uses ofwater, were filed in the SRBA in 1993. The NezPerce claims dispute has been the biggest out-
standing dispute in the SRBA, which includes 
a legal inventory of about 180,000 water rightsclaims in 38 of Idaho’s 44 counties. The Tribe’smain claim is for sufficient in-stream flows tomaintain its treaty rights to fish for salmon andsteelhead that migrate down the Snake River tothe Columbia River and out to the ocean beforereturning to spawn. 
Since 1998, the Nez Perce
Tribe, the United States, theState of Idaho, and localcommunities and waterusers in Idaho have engagedin court-ordered mediationto resolve the claims of theNez Perce Tribe. In 2003,all parties to the negotiationssigned on to a comprehensiveterm sheet agreement, which alsocalls for the suspension of all litiga-tion regarding Nez Perce claims in the SRBA.The Idaho Supreme Court and the SRBA Courtboth agreed to suspend all litigation to permit
annual report  19Native American Rights Fund
settlement negotiations to proceed. A landmark
settlement agreement was reached in this case inApril 2004. A bill directing the Secretary ofInterior and the heads of other federal agenciesto carry out the agreement was introduced bySenators Craig and Crapo of Idaho in June 2004.
The Snake River Water Rights Act of 2004 was
approved by the Congress prior to adjournmenton November 20, 2004. This Act is one piece ofthe complex settlement of claims by the NezPerce Tribe in the SRBA. Remaining pieces of thesettlement include approval processes by theIdaho Legislature and the Nez Perce Tribe.
The federal legislation: 1) recognizes the
Tribe’s right to 50,000 acre-feet of water for consumptive uses on reservation lands; 2) recognizes Nez Perce access and use rights to
water springs on federal public lands within the
Tribe’s original 1855 reservation boundaries; 3)transfers $7 million worth of Bureau of LandManagement lands from within its current reser-vation boundaries to the Tribe; 4) establishesthree trust funds for the Tribe – $60.1 millionwater and fisheries development fund, $23 millionwater and sewer improvement fund, and a $38million habitat trust fund, one-third of which willbe controlled by the Tribe; 5) directs that the
United States Fish and Wildlife Service and theTribe will enter into agreements providing forNez Perce management of the Kooskia NationalFish Hatchery and co-management of theDworshak National Fish Hatchery; and 6) directsthat the Tribe and the United States, with State ofIdaho input, will enter into an agreement for theuse of 200,000 acre-feet of water from theDworshak Project on the North Fork ClearwaterRiver as part of an improved flow augmentationplan for salmon.
NARF represents the Tule River Indian Tribe 
of California in its efforts to settle its claims to reserved water rights on its Reservation. TheTule River Reservation is located in a rocky,mountainous region and is crossed by the SouthFork of the Tule River. Flow from the river, likethe flows of many mountain streams, are abundantin the early spring but drop off precipitously asthe summer months wear on. Water from theSouth Fork of the Tule River is fully appropriated.Competing users include a downstream DitchCompany, downstream riparians, and four irrigation companies organized as the Tule RiverAssociation (TRA) which contracts with theUnited States for irrigation water from the LakeSuccess Reservoir supplied in part by the SouthTule River.
With the assistance of NARF and technical 
consultants, the Tule River Tribe analyzed itswater rights claims under both federal and statelaw. In light of this information the Tribe decidedto pursue establishment of its water rightsthrough a negotiated settlement. The Departmentof the Interior appointed a Federal NegotiationTeam to assist in settling water rights issues for the Tribe. The Tribe’s goal is to negotiate asettlement that will provide the Tribe with sufficient water to create a permanent sustainable20     annual report
homeland for its people with little or no adverse
impact on other water users.
As confirmed by the federal courts nearly
twenty years ago, the Klamath Tribes holdreserved water rights in the Klamath River Basinto support their treaty hunting, fishing and gath-ering rights, as well as to satisfy the agriculturalpurposes of the Klamath Reservation. Thesereserved rights are currently being quantified inthe context of a state-wide water adjudication inOregon. NARF represents the Klamath Tribes inthe adjudication and is currently litigating scoresof tribal contests against unsubstantiated non-Indian water right claims in the basin. Briefingon the Tribes’ claims commences in 2005. 
NARF has also worked to address a major
problem in water rights negotiations – the lack offederal funding for settlements. To this end, NARFcontinues to facilitate Indian water rights settle-ment policy in the Congress by working with ourstate and private partners in the Ad Hoc Groupon Indian Reserved Water Rights – the WesternGovernors’ Association, the Western States WaterCouncil and the Western Business Roundtable.NARF participates in the Joint Federal-TribalWater Funding Task Force in order to encouragethe Administration to support funding for Indianwater rights settlements. NARF also continues tobe involved with the Western Water Alliance(WWA) along with the General ServiceFoundation and others. WWA brings togetherorganizations and funders involved in westernwater issues to advance sustainable and equitablewater policy in the west.
Protection of Hunting and Fishing Rights 
in Alaska
The subsistence way of life is essential for the
physical and cultural survival of Alaska Natives.Most of the two hundred small Native villages inAlaska are located on or near the shores of a
river or a lake, or located on the coast of theNorth Pacific or Arctic Ocean. The proximity towater is no accident and reflects the dependenceof Natives on the harvest of fish stocks for 
sustenance and the basis of their traditional way
of life. In many Native villages fresh meat, fishand produce are unavailable except through thesubsistence harvest. Annually, subsistence harvestamounts to less than 10% of the total take of fishand game.
As important as Native hunting and fishing
rights are to Alaska Natives’ physical,economic, traditional, and culturalexistence, the State of Alaskahas been and continues to be reluctant to recognize the importance of the subsistence way of life. The State views subsistenceas nothing more than a takingof a natural resource, and assomething that all citizens ofthe state should be entitled toengage in on an equal opportunitybasis with little distinction between commercial, sport and trophy hunting, and 
subsistence needs. 
annual report  21Native American Rights Fund
22     annual reportmajor activities - 2004 - case map
1516
17
18192223 21
25
24
20
3433 3214
36
2
411
37
8
195 6
1013
12Alaska
Hawaiiannual report  23Native American Rights Fund
3528
3126
2730291 Kenaitze Indian Tribe - 
Subsistence (Alaska)
2 Gwich’in Steering Committee -
Environmental/Subsistence (Alaska)
3 Alaska Inter-Tribal 
Council/Native Village of Akiak - Equal Protection (Alaska)
4 Native Village of Alakayak - 
Language Initiative (Alaska)
5 NARF ANCHORAGE OFFICE6 Native Village of Tuluksak - 
Trust Lands (Alaska)
7 Native Village of Kiana - 
Education (Alaska)
8 Native Village of Nulato -
Education (Alaska)
9 Native Village of Eyak, Tatitlek,
Chenega, Nanwalek, and PortGraham -  Subsistence &Aboriginal Title (Alaska)
10 Ninilchick Tribe - 
Subsistence (Alaska)
11 Native Village of Venetie -
Subsistence (Alaska)
12 Pele Defense Fund - 
Aboriginal Rights (Hawaii)
13 Rice v. Cayetano - 
Voting Rights (Hawaii)
14 Nez Perce Tribe - 
Water Rights (Idaho)
15 Klamath Tribes - 
Water Rights (Oregon)
16 Bonnichsen v. United States
(“Kennewick Man case”) -Repatriation (Oregon)
17 Tule River Tribe - Water 
(California)
18 Jicarilla Apache Tribe - 
Education (New Mexico)
19 NARF HEADQUARTERS
BOULDER, COLORADO20 Medicine Wheel National Historic
Landmark - Sacred Site (Wyoming)
21 Fort Peck Tribes - 
Education (Montana)
22 Chippewa-Cree Tribe - 
Water & Trust Claim (Montana)
23 Little Shell Tribe - 
Recognition & Trust Claim (Montana)
24 Fort Berthold Reservation - 
Education (North Dakota)
25 Turtle Mountain Reservation - 
Trust Claim (North Dakota)
26 NARF WASHINGTON, D.C. 
OFFICE
27 IIM Case & Tribal Supreme Court
Project (Washington, D.C.)
28 Northern Lakes Pottawatomi 
Nation - Land Claim (Canada)
29 Mashpee Wampanoag Tribe - 
Recognition (Massachusetts)
30 Shinnecock Tribe - 
Recognition (New York)
31 Pamunkey Tribe - 
Recognition (Virginia)
32 Lower Brule Sioux Tribe - 
Trust Land (South Dakota)
33 Rosebud Sioux Tribe - 
Education & Cultural Property Rights (South Dakota)
34 Oglala Sioux Tribe - 
Environmental (South Dakota)
35 United Houma Nation - 
Recognition (Louisiana)
36 Alabama-Coushatta Tribe -  
Land Claim (Texas)United States of americaNARF represents the Alaska Native Villages of
Eyak, Tatitlek, Chenega, Nanwalek, and PortGraham seeking to establish nonexclusive aboriginal hunting and fishing rights to their 
traditional-use areas on the Outer ContinentalShelf (OCS) in the Gulf of Alaska. The issue presented is whether the Tribes may possess non-exclusive aboriginal hunting and fishing rights towaters on the OCS. The lawsuit challenges theDepartment of Commerce’s Individual FishingQuota (IFQ) regulations for halibut and sable fishon the ground that they prohibit tribal membersfrom fishing within their traditional fishinggrounds without IFQ’s. In 1998, the Ninth CircuitCourt of Appeals ruled that claims for aboriginaltitle, including exclusive hunting and fishingrights, on the Outer Continental Shelf werebarred by the federal paramountcy doctrine.NARF argued that the paramountcy doctrine didnot extinguish aboriginal title to the seabed andwaters off Alaska because aboriginal title doesnot interfere with the federal government’s abilityto protect the nation or to regulate internationaltrade.  The Court, however, expressly reservedthe question whether Native tribes might holdnon-exclusive hunting and fishing rights.  The question of whether the Villages have
nonexclusive aboriginal fishing rights wasremanded for determination by the District Court,which ruled against the Villages in 2002. Anappeal was filed by NARF to the Ninth CircuitCourt of Appeals and oral argument was held in2003. In January 2004, the Ninth Circuit orderedbriefing on whether the case should be heard initially en banc, and in April 2004, the courtissued an order for a hearing en banc to takeplace in San Francisco in June 2004. In July2004, the Ninth Circuit vacated the decision ofthe District Court and remanded for determinationof whether the tribes can establish aboriginalrights in the traditional-use areas. In August2004, the District Court ordered the parties tosubmit their views “as to how the court shouldproceed.” NARF submitted a report on behalf ofthe Villages requesting additional briefing onaboriginal use, to which the District Court agreed 24     annual report
in September 2004. Motions for summary 
judgment were submitted in the case inNovember 2004.
NARF is representing the Native Village of
Venetie Tribal Government, the Ninilchik TribalGovernment, and individuals as proposed interveners in a case that was initially brought by the Safari Club, a sporting club, to challengeregulations promulgated by the Secretaries ofInterior and Agriculture implementing the subsis-tence preference established by the 1980 AlaskaNational Interest Lands Conservation Act (ANILCA).ANILCA establishes a preference for customaryand traditional uses of fish and wildlife byaccording a priority for the taking of fish andwildlife on federal public lands in Alaska for non-wasteful subsistence uses by rural Alaskaresidents. The Federal Subsistence Board (FSB)has made over 180 determinations as to whichareas or communities of Alaska are rural andwhich are not, based on the recommendations of ten Regional Advisory Councils (RACs). Thecustomary and traditional use determinations arecritically important because eligibility to take aparticular resource may then be limited to thoseresidents of rural areas or communities so designated, and all other individuals may be prohibited, in some manner, from taking thatresource based on the limitations. The SafariClub challenged the validity of all 180 customaryand traditional use determinations under ANILCA,and challenged the composition of RACs as notadequately representing sport, recreational andcommercial interests.
NARF sought to intervene in the case on behalf
of its clients in order to defend the FSB’s subsis-tence use-determinations for their respectivecommunities and to protect their entitlement totake fish and wildlife on federal public lands inAlaska. NARF also challenged a recent decisionby the FSB to expand RAC membership to include
seats for sport, recreational and commercialinterests.  The court granted the Tribe’s motion tointervene in 2003, and in January 2004, issuedan order upholding the FSB’s customary and 
traditional use determinations and enjoining the 
FSB from implementing its new policy withrespect to expanded RAC membership until aproper rule-making procedure is undertaken.The case is currently stayed pending completionof the rule-making process, in which NARFintends to submit comments opposing expansion of RAC membership to accommodate the interests of sportand commercial users.
annual report  25Native American Rights Fund
Although basic human rights are considered a
universal and inalienable entitlement, NativeAmericans face an ongoing threat of having theirrights undermined by the United States govern-ment, states, and others who seek to limit theserights. NARF strives to enforce and strengthenlaws which are designed to protect the rights ofNative Americans to practice their traditional religion, to use their own language, and to enjoytheir culture. NARF also works with Tribes toimprove education for and ensure the welfare oftheir children. In the international arena, NARF isactive in efforts to negotiate declarations on therights of indigenous peoples.
Religious Freedom
Because religion is the foundation that holds
Native communities and cultures together, 
religious freedom is a NARF priority issue. As a
result, NARF has utilized its resources to protectFirst Amendment rights of Native American reli-gious leaders, prisoners, and members of theNative American Church, and to assert tribalrights to repatriate burial remains. Since NativeAmerican religious freedom affects basic culturalsurvival of Indian tribes, NARF believes that
American law and social policy must provideadequate legal protection.
NARF was a leading proponent of the Native
American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act(NAGPRA) which was signed into law in 1990.The Act requires federal agencies and privatemuseums that receive federal funding to inventorytheir collections of Native American humanremains and funerary objects, notify the tribe oforigin, and return the ancestral remains andfunerary objects upon request to the tribe. Itmakes clear that Indian tribes have ownership ofhuman remains and cultural items which areexcavated or discovered on federal or tribal landand that they alone have the right to determinedisposition of Indian human remains and culturalremains discovered in these areas. The Act pro-hibits the trafficking of Native American humanremains and cultural items where the items areobtained in violation of the Act and requires federal agencies and private museums thatreceive federal funds to create a summary ofsacred objects in their possession. If a tribe canprove a right of possession to these objects thenthey must be returned upon request of the tribe.NARF continues to provide guidance to tribes thatare asserting NAGPRA claims.
The Native American Rights Fund represented
the National Congress of American Indians(NCAI) as an amicus in the case of Bonnichsen
v. United States , sometimes referred to as the
“Kennewick Man case.”  The case arose from thediscovery of 9000 year old human remains alongthe Columbia River. Several northwest tribes collectively filed a claim for possession of theremains with the Department of Interior (DOI)under NAGPRA. The Tribes sought to repatriatethe remains in accordance with tribal religioustraditions.26     annual report
THE PROMOTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS
Several scientists ( i.e., anthropologists, arche-
ologists, and museumologists) petitioned DOI forpermission to conduct extensive studies of theremains before reburial by the Tribes. DOIdenied the scientists’ petition, but in 2002, theU.S. District Court for the District of Oregonissued a ruling requiring the DOI to transfer theremains to the scientists for study. The Tribesappealed, asserting that this far-reaching decisionremoved any barriers that would prevent scientistsfrom demanding access to all Native Americanhuman remains for their research and study,regardless of whether the remains were 20 or20,000 years old. The Ninth Circuit Court ofAppeals issued an order staying the DistrictCourt’s ruling pending resolution of the appeal.NARF filed an amicus brief on behalf of theAssociation on American Indian Affairs and theMorning Star Institute in 2003, but the NinthCircuit unfortunately affirmed the District Courtruling in February 2004. Supreme Court reviewwas not sought in the case, effectively ending the dispute over the Kennewick Man remains.NARF has now turned its attention to securing a legislative remedy.
In July 2004, NARF offered testimony before
the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs at anoversight hearing on this matter. NARF advisedthe Committee of the need for certain amend-ments to NAGPRA made necessary by the NinthCircuit’s decision in Bonnichsen . NARF also
reminded the Committee of the longstandingneed to enact enforceable legislation to protectsacred sites and offered recommendations. A follow-up meeting on these recommendationswith Committee staff was held in September 2004.
In addition to NAGPRA, NARF also played a key
role in the 1994 enactment of Public Law 103-344,which exempts the religious use of peyote byIndians in bona fide traditional ceremonies from
controlled substance laws of the federal and stategovernments. It also prohibits discriminationagainst Indians for such religious use of peyote,including the denial of otherwise applicable 
benefits under public assistance programs. The
bill closed the door to governmental prohibitionof sacramental use of peyote by Indians andeffectively reversed a 1990 United States SupremeCourt decision in Smith v. Oregon that denied
First Amendment protection to the NativeAmerican Church.
NARF is representing the Native
American Church of NorthAmerica in the case O Centro
EsprÌrita BeneficienteUniao Do Vegetal (UDV-USA) v. Ashcroft .  The UDV
is a Christian religiousorganization duly formedunder the laws of Brazil,with its headquarters inBrasilia, Brazil. The UDV-USAis the United States branch of theUDV whose principal offices are inNew Mexico. The UDV claims that the federal government is violating its constitutional right ofequal protection by permitting Native American
annual report  27Native American Rights Fund
Church members to possess and use peyote 
for religious purposes while denying them thereligious possession and use of ayahuasca byUDV members. 
NARF and the Church assisted the United States
Department of Justice in defending current federallaw which protects the religious use of peyote byIndian Church members. In 2002, the FederalDistrict Court in New Mexico rejected the UDV’sequal protection argument, but accepted its argu-ment that it was protected under the ReligiousFreedom and Restoration Act (RFRA). The NACtook no position on the UDV’s RFRA claimsagainst the United States. The governmentappealed to the Tenth Circuit Court of Appealsand the Tenth Circuit affirmed in 2003 in favor ofUDV’s RFRA claim, but also rejected the UDV’sequal protection claims that threatened the NAC’sspecial status under federal law.  The governmentfiled a petition for reconsideration and onNovember 12, 2004, the Tenth Circuit Court ofAppeals en banc ruled in favor of the UDV. Thegovernment has now requested review by theUnited States Supreme Court.
In Wyoming Sawmills v. United States and
Medicine Wheel Coalition , a private timber company in Wyoming challenged the legality of
the United States Forest Service’s HistoricPreservation Plan (HPP) for managing theMedicine Wheel National Historic Landmark onconstitutional (establishment of religion) andother grounds. The Medicine Wheel was desig-nated a National Historic Landmark in 1969, andis considered sacred to Native American tribesindigenous to the area. The Forest Service HPPrecognizes explicitly that the cultural and historicimportance of the Medicine Wheel is an elementfor many Native Americans’ religious traditions:“The purpose of this HPP is to ensure that theMedicine Wheel and Medicine Mountain aremanaged in a manner that protects the integrityof the site as a sacred site and a nationallyimportant traditional cultural property.”
NARF filed an amicus curiae brief on behalf of
the National Congress of American Indians urgingthe United States District Court for the District ofWyoming to uphold the Plan on statutory andconstitutional grounds, which it did in a decisionin 2002. The District Court did not address theconstitutionality of the HPP because it found thatWyoming Sawmills lacked standing to raise anEstablishment Clause claim. Wyoming Sawmills28     annual report
appealed this decision to the federal appeals
court. In September 2004, the United StatesCourt of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit affirmedthe District Court ruling.
Cultural Rights
While cultural rights are fundamental for every
human being, they particularly important forNative Americans. In the midst of the economic,political, social and other challenges they continueto face, traditional culture is a source of prideand strength for Native Americans.
In 1998, an “English Only” initiative was
passed in the State of Alaska.  The initiative waswritten in very broad terms and will have a majorimpact upon Alaska Natives. Unlike other officialEnglish measures that are primarily symbolic,this measure prohibits the use of any languageexcept English in all governmental functions andactions. In response to the initiative, NARF filedsuit on behalf of twenty-seven Native individualsand organizations, challenging the constitutionalityof the English Only law. In 1999, the AlaskaSuperior Court granted a preliminary injunctionthat enjoined the State of Alaska from the operationand enforcement of Alaska’s Official EnglishInitiative. Alaskans for a Common Languagesought and were allowed to intervene in 2000. In2002 the Alaska Superior Court struck down theEnglish-only law as a violation of the free speechclause of the Alaska Constitution. The State ofAlaska chose not to appeal, but Alaskans for aCommon language filed an appeal to the AlaskaSupreme Court. Oral argument was heard in2003 and NARF is now awaiting a decision.
NARF recently filed an amicus brief in the case
of Harjo et al v.Washington Redskin Football on
behalf of the National Congress of AmericanIndians, National Indian Educational Association,National Indian Youth Council, and the TulsaIndian Coalition Against Racism in Sports. The
brief argues that the federal trademark for thefootball team should be cancelled because the“Redskin” mark is racially disparaging in violationof federal trademark law. Oral argument was held
before the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia in November 2004.
NARF recently conducted an extensive analysis
of intellectual property laws and policies andtheir current impact on Native American intellec-tual property and cultural property issues. Theanalysis will form the basis of an action plan thatwill be presented to the NationalCongress of American Indians.This review constitutes phase Iof a proposed two phaseproject to initiate concreteefforts to improve the legalprotection of indigenousintellectual and culturalproperty rights.
NARF also assisted the
Rosebud Sioux Tribe of SouthDakota in developing a CulturalResources Management Code by whichthe Tribe can regulate its cultural and intellectualproperty on its reservation. 
annual report  29Native American Rights Fund
In 1978, the United States Congress enacted
the Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA). The Actstates as its purpose: “The Congress herebydeclares that it is the policy of this Nation to protect the best interest of Indian children and topromote the stability and security of Indian tribesand families by the establishment of minimumfederal standards for the removal of Indian children from their families and the placement ofsuch children in foster or adoptive homes which
will reflect the unique values of Indian culture,
and by providing for assistance to Indian tribes inthe operation of child and family programs.”The Act established substantive, procedural andjurisdictional protections for tribes and Indianfamilies in cases of adoption, pre-adoptive place-ment, foster care placement, and termination ofparental rights proceedings involving Indian children. Because these protections are chal-lenged or may conflict with state law, policy orpractice, there have been several hundred state
and federal court decisions interpreting the Act.Congress has also attempted to amend the Act to resolve concerns related to the enforcement of the Act.
Tribal courts, already understaffed, under-
funded, and lacking legal resources, are fightingan uphill battle to fully implement the ICWA. Athreshold obstacle to the success and implemen-tation of the ICWA is the fact that many tribes lackknowledge of their rights under the ICWA. Tribesthemselves have acknowledged that there is animmediate need for resources to enhance tribalcourt operations in order to empower them toutilize ICWA. Indian tribes, through their tribalcourts, attorneys, and social workers, oftenrespond to the receipt of statutory notice underthe ICWA by intervening in state court proceedingsto protect the interest of their children of thetribe. Tribes have identified that tribal courts and tribal officials need resources and assistancein intervening in such state court proceedingsand exercising their federal rights under theICWA, such as moving the state court to transferjurisdiction of the state court proceeding to tribalcourt. In addition, tribal court personnel andsocial workers currently lack the necessaryknowledge and materials to fully exercise theirrights under the ICWA.
To assist with this critical issue, the
Administration for Native Americans (HHS-ACF)has provided funding to NARF to assist tribes inresolving these issues through the development ofan ICWA Resource Guide that will address theseissues and benefit tribal courts and tribal socialservices programs.
Education
In 2002, NARF received a generous three-year
grant of $1.6 million from the Kellogg Foundation.30     annual report
The purpose of the grant is to help tribes in
improving the learning outcomes for NativeAmerican children in schools by utilizing a collaborative approach in which tribes workclosely with school officials to identify obstaclesto improvement in education, to identify andimplement potential solutions, and to establishand implement a tribal system of gathering andupdating basic data measuring achievement oftribal students.
NARF is currently working closely with six
tribes under the Kellogg grant – the Assiniboineand Sioux Tribe of the Fort Peck Reservation inMontana, the Three Affiliated Tribes of the FortBerthold Reservation in North Dakota, theJicarilla Apache Nation in New Mexico, the NativeVillages of Kiana and Nulato in Alaska, and theRosebud Sioux Tribe in South Dakota. NARF isproviding legal and technical assistance to helpthese tribes establish or reorganize tribal depart-ments of education. An important part of thiseffort involves the development and implementa-tion of legal instruments such as tribal educationcodes and intergovernmental agreements thatformalize collaborative activities which increasethe role of tribal governments in the schools thateducate Indian children. Another important partof the project is to assist tribes in developing systems and processes by which basic data concerning the educational status of tribal chil-dren will be collected, tracked on a regularbasis, and used to measure the progress of thecollaborative activities. In addition, NARF isassisting tribes in acting as catalysts to bringtogether tribal, state, and federal agencies andresources to work in concert to improve thelearning experience of Indian students. 
In October 2004, following the second full
year of the three-year project, NARF educationattorneys worked with an evaluation consultant toprepare the second annual evaluation of the
Project’s progress. The Project evaluation con-cluded that all six tribes had accomplished themajority of the objectives for the second year and
put them in a position of moving forward with the
project more expeditiously in the third year.
In addition to the Kellogg grant, U.S.
Department of Education Office of IndianEducation funding has enabled NARF to establisha new national organization for tribal educationdepartments and to develop the new organiza-tion’s web site. With the help of EducationDirectors of the Suquamish Tribe, theCheyenne-Arapaho Tribes, and theConfederated Salish andKootenai Tribes, the TribalEducation DepartmentsNational Assembly (TEDNA)was formed and incorpo-rated in 2003. The purposeof the TEDNA is to bringtogether tribal educationdirectors, staff and policy makers so that they can share
information, strategize and problemsolve on common issues of education gover-nance, policy and advocacy at the tribal, regionaland national levels.
annual report  31Native American Rights Fund
Through the efforts of NARF, TEDNA and other
Native organizations, President George W. Bushsigned an Executive Order on American Indianand Alaska Native Education on April 30, 2004.The new Executive Order clarifies that the man-dates of the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001shall be implemented in a manner consistentwith tribal traditions, cultures, and languages.NARF helped the National Congress of AmericanIndians (NCAI) host a tribal consultation onimplementing the Executive Order at NCAI’sAnnual Session in October 2004. NARF is alsohelping NCAI plan for the National IndianEducation Conference called for by the ExecutiveOrder and tentatively scheduled for March 2005.
International Recognition of Indigenous
Rights
At the direction of the NARF Board of Directors,
NARF recently entered into the internationalarena to protect indigenous rights. The impetusfor this decision was the lack of success in recentyears in domestic fora, especially the U.S.Supreme Court. Because NARF is a client-basedinstitution, we entered into an attorney-client
relationship with NCAI for the purpose of
participating in the development of
internationally-recognized base-
line standards on indigenous
peoples rights. To date, this
work has focused on two
Draft Declarations and the
World Conference Against
Racism. One Draft
Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples is being
considered by the Organization
of American States (OAS). This
document will be invaluable in estab-
lishing baseline rights for indigenous peoples in
the Western Hemisphere. The other DraftDeclaration is being considered by the United
Nations (UN), and will be world-wide in scope.NARF has obtained consultative status at the UNand is also accredited at the OAS. NARF was alsoaccredited for and participated in the 2001World Conference Against Racism. Over the pastseveral years, NARF has participated on behalf ofNCAI in numerous drafting sessions of the OASand UN Working Group on the Draft Declaration.
While the Draft Declarations cover a broad
range of rights, of central importance will besolidification of the status of indigenous peoplesas “Peoples” possessing group rights, including
the right to self-determination under international
law. Through a relentless campaign by a coalitionof tribes and Indian rights organizations includingNCAI, NARF and the Indian Law Resource Center,the United States announced in 2001 that it wasadopting a more forward-looking policy on rightsfor “Indigenous Peoples.” The announcementoccurred at the World Conference AgainstRacism, and resulted in the issuance of a policystatement by the National Security Council asPresident Clinton left office.
The new policy does three things which indicate
movement by the United States: (1) it acknowl-edges a right to “self-determination” (albeit onlyan ‘internal’ right), (2) it accepts that certainrights of “indigenous peoples” are “group rights”,and (3) it accepts the use of the term “Peoples”(albeit in the limited context of internal self-determination). While far from perfect, this policyshift is a step in the right direction and will setthe necessary foundation to begin a more constructive dialogue with the United States andother states during negotiations surrounding theUN and OAS Declarations on the Rights ofIndigenous Peoples.
32     annual report
Contained within the unique trust relationship
between the United States and Indian nations isthe inherent duty for all levels of government torecognize and responsibly enforce the many lawsand regulations applicable to Indian peoples.Because such laws impact virtually every aspectof tribal life, NARF maintains its involvement inthe legal matters pertaining to governmentaccountability to Native Americans. 
In 1996, NARF and other attorneys filed a class
action lawsuit, Cobell v. Babbitt (now Cobell v.
Norton ), against the federal government on
behalf of 500,000 Individual Indian Money (IIM)account holders seeking redress for governmentmismanagement of trust accounts through whichbillions of dollars of Indian money has flowedover the years. The suit charges the federal government with illegal conduct in what is viewedas the largest and most shameful financial scandalever involving the United States government.Commonly referred to as the “Cobell case,” thislitigation is intended to force the United States astrustee to:  (1) perform a complete, accurate andreliable accounting of all trust assets held to thebenefit of individual Indian trust beneficiaries;(2) properly restate the trust fund accounts inconformity with that accounting; and (3) createan accounting and trust management system thatis reliable and will safely and soundly manage thetrust funds of individual Indians in the future.
In 2001, the Court of Appeals for the District
of Columbia upheld a landmark 1999 FederalDistrict Court decision holding the United Statesin breach of trust and requiring the governmentto provide an accounting to the IIM beneficiaries.These decisions constitute two of the most impor-tant opinions ever issued on the trust responsibilitiesof the government to Native Americans.
Later in 2001, the District Court’s special master
finalized a report on the Interior Department’sinformation technology (IT) systems and con-
cluded that Interior’s computer systems werewholly lacking in security and did not effectivelyprevent intrusion by computer hackers. As aresult of these findings and Interior’s recognition
of significant deficiencies in security, the District
Court ordered that such IT systems giving accessto individual Indian trust data be disconnectedfrom the Internet. Nevertheless, in 2003 theDistrict Court entered another injunction orderingdisconnection because Interior had still failed toproperly address the deficiencies. In response,Interior asserted that they had fixed thesecurity problems, but refused tocertify and verify such ameliora-tion of the deficiencies. Basedon recent reports on thecontinuing problems withthese systems – including agovernment report thatgave Interior an “F” for ITsecurity – the District Courtentered another injunction inMarch 2004 requiring immediatedisconnection of the IT systems.The government appealed.
On the central issues in the case – the
accounting and trust management reform – 
annual report  33Native American Rights Fund
THE ACCOUNTABILITY OF GOVERNMENTSthe District Court held a two month trial in 2003
and issued a structural injunction establishing the specific affirmative steps and appropriatetimetable for Interior to meet in performing thehistorical accounting and trust reform. The gov-ernment also appealed the structural injunction.
In December 2004, the Court of Appeals for
the District of Columbia decided both the ITsecurity appeal and the structural injunctionappeal. The Court of Appeals vacated the ITinjunction on narrow procedural grounds, holdingthat the District Court should have had yet anotherevidentiary hearing prior to issuance of theinjunction. Importantly, the Court of Appealswholly repudiated the government’s argumentsthat the District Court did not have jurisdictionover IT security matters and that the DistrictCourt could not take the necessary steps toensure that individual Indian trust assets andinformation were not corrupted.
Similarly, the Court of Appeals vacated the
structural injunction, in part, but the Court onceagain reaffirmed the broad jurisdiction andauthority of the District Court to remedy the century old trust mismanagement. Further, thedecision did not reach the merits of the historicalaccounting part of the structural injunctionbecause Congress had temporarily delayed itseffect in a legislative act. The Court of Appealsheld that the Congressional action was constitu-tional only because of its temporary nature. In anunexpected but welcome holding, the Court ofAppeals also made clear that interest would beavailable to the individual Indian account holdersfor monies held in trust.  The government hasalways argued that they would not have to payinterest on whatever corrections are made in the accounts.
Taken together, the decisions set a proper
foundation for continued enforcement of therights of the individual Indian trust beneficiaries
and circumscribe the limits of Congressionalinterference in this case. At the same time, theCourt of Appeals determined that interest wouldbe due to the Indian beneficiaries for any correction of accounts.
While NARF is strongly committed to seeing
this important litigation through, the parties areexploring avenues to mediate the Cobell case at
the invitation and urging of the Chairmen andRanking members of both the House ResourcesCommittee and the Senate Committee on IndianAffairs. In late March 2004, the parties agreed tomediators – specifically, the Honorable CharlesB. Renfrew and John Bickerman, Esq. WhileNARF will participate in the mediation process inthe hope that it will lead to a fair resolution, litigation will continue.
In a Court of Federal Claims related action,
NARF represents the Turtle Mountain Band ofChippewa in North Dakota, the Chippewa-Cree ofthe Rocky Boys Reservation in Montana and theLittle Shell Tribe of Chippewa in Montana againstthe Bureau of Indian Affairs for mismanagementof the Pembina Judgment Fund.  The tribes allegemisaccounting, misinvestment, and mismanage-ment by the federal government of their $50 million tribal trust fund since the inception of thefund in 1964. The parties in this case continue to explore a negotiated settlement of the Tribes’claims. After several years of negotiations, theparties recently reached agreement on 99% of$67 million worth of non-investment transactionsin the fund from 1964 through 1992. The partiesare proceeding to review the Tribes’ investmentclaims for that same time period. At the sametime, the parties have asked the court to clarifythe threshold issue of who are the proper plain-tiffs in this action involving a trust fund with multiple beneficiaries. In 2003, the White Earth34     annual report
Band of Minnesota Chippewa moved to be named
a party plaintiff in this action.  If that motion isgranted, NARF will represent White Earth alongwith the other three Pembina Chippewa Tribes. In July 2004, individuals from the tribal memberand non-member groups of beneficiaries of thefund also sought the court’s approval to benamed class representatives and be representedby NARF. The government will have an opportunityto respond before the court rules on thesemotions.
In another related matter, NARF filed suit in
the Court of Federal Claims against the govern-ment seeking damages for breach of trust onbehalf of the Chippewa Cree Tribe of the RockyBoys Reservation in Montana. The Tribe allegesmisaccounting and misinvestment of the Tribe’strust funds based on oil and gas, timber, andgrazing resources. NARF is seeking an accountingof certain Tribal accounts and has asked theCourt to assign the case to the judge in the IIMcase. At this time, the litigation is on hold to allowthe parties to explore a negotiated settlement ofthe Tribe’s claims.
On behalf of the Alaska Inter-Tribal Council,
ten Native villages and seven Native individuals,NARF filed a civil lawsuit in 1999 in the SuperiorCourt for the State of Alaska seeking declaratoryand injunctive relief against the State of Alaskafor failure to provide minimally adequate policeprotection to off-road Native villages and for dis-criminating against them in the provision of Statelaw enforcement services. In Alaska Inter-Tribal
Council v. Alaska , NARF alleged that the actions
of the State in unlawfully prohibiting Native vil-lages from keeping the peace in their traditionalways, while failing to provide them even minimally-adequate police protection under the State lawenforcement system, violated the Villages’ rightsto Due Process of law and basic law enforcementprotection guaranteed by the Fourteenth
Amendment to the United States Constitution andArticle I of the Alaska Constitution. NARF alsoalleged that the State’s discriminatory treatmentof Native villages in the provision of police protection is based on race and therefore violatesthe Villages’ rights to Equal Protection of the lawunder the Fourteenth Amendment to the UnitedStates Constitution and Article I of the AlaskaConstitution. An adverse decision was renderedby the Superior Court in 2002 in favor of theState of Alaska. NARF appealed this decision tothe Alaska Supreme Court and argument washeard in 2003. A decision is expected shortly.
In 1993, the United States Congress enacted
the Hawaiian Apology Joint Resolution, PublicLaw 103-150, admitting that the role of theUnited States military in removing the Hawaiianmonarch, Queen Lili’u’okalani, from power andinstalling the provisional government was illegalunder American and international law. Prior tothe overthrow, Hawaii was regarded internation-ally as one of the family of nations which hadconcluded numerous treaties of trade, commerceand friendship with several countries includingthe United States. The Apology was awatershed event in American history,seen by many Hawaiian peopleas the first step in makingreparations for the illegaloverthrow. The overthrowhas been viewed by NativeHawaiians as the ultimateatrocity committed againsttheir sovereign nation, theculmination of the enormouspolitical, social, cultural, eco-nomic and spiritual changes wroughton the Hawaiian people since the 1778arrival of Captain Cook.
annual report  35Native American Rights Fund
The Apology has fueled the passions of the
Hawaiian people involved in the sovereigntymovement. The United States’ admission that theoverthrow was illegal, immoral, and unjust isseen as but a first step in the long process ofestablishing “ho’opono’pono” – the Hawaiian traditional system for “making things right.”    
Rice v. Cayetano involved a challenge by a 
non-Native to the voting restriction in the stateconstitution allowing only Native Hawaiians tovote for trustees of the Office of Hawaiian Affairs(OHA). The OHA administers income receivedfrom certain trust lands for the benefit of NativeHawaiians. Rice argued that the restriction violates the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendmentsto the U.S. Constitution. The Ninth Circuit Courtof Appeals upheld the voting restriction, but the United States Supreme Court reviewed thatdecision. One of Rice’s arguments is that sincethere are no tribes in Hawaii, the voting restrictionis purely race-based and subject to strict scrutiny.The Supreme Court case of Morton v. Mancari
held that legislation as to Indian tribes is basedon the political relationship between tribes andthe United States and need only be rationally
related to Congress’ unique obligation
toward Indian tribes. The question
was whether the same standard
applies to legislation passed
for the benefit of Native
Hawaiians. NARF filed an
amicus curiae brief in 
support of Native
Hawaiians on behalf of the
National Congress of
American Indians in the
Supreme Court. However, in
2000, the Supreme Court ruled
against the Native Hawaiians declaring that
the state restriction on voting for OHA trustees toHawaiians was based on race and, therefore, violated the Fifteenth Amendment which prohibits
denying anyone the right to vote based on race.
The aftermath of the Rice decision, while not
technically deciding the equal protection issue,sent signals to opponents of state Hawaiian programs that it was open season on what somesee as “race-based special benefits.” Over thepast four years a flurry of litigation has ensued.NARF continues to monitor numerous challengesby non-Native Hawaiians to programs and legislation that have been enacted to benefit to Native Hawaiians.
For many years, the Native American Rights
Fund has co-counseled with the Native HawaiianLegal Corporation (“NHLC”) and private counselin representing the Pele Defense Fund in effortsto prevent large-scale geothermal development inthe Wao Kele‘O Puna rainforest on the Big Island,and to regain Native Hawaiian access rights to
Wao Kele lands. These efforts culminated with theentry in August 2002 of a stipulated judgmentand order by the state court in Hilo, Hawaii recognizing the rights of Native Hawaiians tohunt, gather, and worship on the Wao Kele lands– as part of the bundle of “traditional and customary rights” protected, preserved andenforced under Article XII, Section 7 of theHawaii Constitution. Efforts are now underway for the acquisition of the Wao Kele‘O Puna rainforest lands. Discussions continue regardingthe sale of over 25,000 acres of rainforest to anon-profit land trust, thereby assuring perpetualaccess rights for Native Hawaiians. With NARF’sassistance, the Trust for Public Lands (HawaiiOffice) recently secured an appraisal of the property and efforts are now underway to purchase the land.
36     annual report
The systematic development of Indian law is
essential for the continued protection of Indianrights. This process involves distributing Indianlaw materials to, and communicating with, thosegroups and individuals working on behalf ofIndian people. NARF has two ongoing projectswhich are aimed at achieving this goal, theNational Indian Law Library and the Indian LawSupport Center.
The National Indian Law Library
The National Indian Law Library (NILL) is a
national public law library devoted to AmericanIndian law which serves both the Native AmericanRights Fund (NARF) and the public. The missionof NILL is to develop and make accessible aunique and valuable collection of Indian lawresources and to assist people with their researchneeds. Special emphasis is placed on helpingindividuals and organizations working on behalfof Native Americans who have the greatest potentialto positively influence their lives. As the only lawlibrary in the United States devoted solely toIndian law, NILL fills the needs of the often-for-gotten areas of the nation known as Indian country. NILL handles close to 1,800 researchand information requests per year and serves awide variety of public patrons including attorneys,tribal governments, tribal organizations,researchers, students, prisoners, the media, and the general public.
Since 1972, NILL has been collecting a wealth
of materials relating to federal Indian law andtribal law that include such tribal self-governancematerials as constitutions, codes and ordinances,legal pleadings from major Native American lawcases, law review articles, handbooks, conferencematerials, and other information. Now the generalpublic can access bibliographic descriptions ofthese materials from the electronic library catalog on the NILL website. (See: http://nillcat.narf.org/
) This searchable 
catalog provides free access to current descrip-tions of more than 10,000 holdings in the librarycollection. Once relevant documents are located,patrons can review materials at the Boulder,
Colorado library, request copies at a nominal fee,
or borrow materials through interlibrary loan. In addition, the library web pages provideresearch links, full-text copies of tribal codes and constitutions, and the Indian Law Bulletincurrent awareness service.
A longstanding goal has been to make NILL’s
unique collection more accessible tothe public. In January 2005, thelibrary will make a major steptowards achieving this goal byjoining a world-wide biblio-graphic utility which provides access to libraryholdings for thousands oflibraries. The library willalso continue to work towardproviding access to tribal lawthrough its leadership role in theTribal Law Collaborative CollectionDevelopment Project of the AmericanAssociation of Law Libraries Native Peoples Law Caucus. 
annual report  37Native American Rights Fund
THE DEVELOPMENT OF INDIAN LAWIndian Law Support Center
Since 1972, NARF’s Indian Law Support Center
(ILSC) has served as a national support center onIndian law and policy for the national Indianlegal services community and the 32 basic fieldprograms serving Native American clients. In itsfirst two decades of operation, the ILSC answeredhundreds of requests for assistance in all areas ofIndian law annually. Because of the unique andcomplex nature of Indian law and the geographicremoteness of Indian legal services programs,complicated by the difficulty of attracting andmaintaining experienced staff, ILSC has per-formed a vital and cost-effective support functionto Indian programs and other legal servicesproviders across the country for many years.
Due to the loss of Legal Services Corporation
funding in 1995, ILSC has been unable to carryon at traditional levels its program of workingwith Indian legal services lawyers nationwidethrough advice, research, recent Indian legalinformation, litigation and training. However,ILSC has been able to continue some assistanceto Indian legal services programs throughout the
year. ILSC continues to send out regular
mail-outs to Indian legal services
programs, handles requests for
assistance, sponsors an annual
training conference on tribal
courts, and works with the
National Association of
Indian Legal Services
(NAILS) to secure a more
stable funding base from the
Congress. ILSC was involved
in the passage of the Indian
Tribal Justice and Legal Assistance
Act of 2000 which President Clinton
signed into law. The Act authorizes theDepartment of Justice to provide supplementalfunding to Indian legal services programs for
their representation of Indian people and tribeswhich fall below federal poverty guidelines. In2003, ILSC worked with NAILS to secure the firstappropriation for the Act, $2 million.
In June 2004, the Department of Justice
awarded a grant of $1,987,000 to NARF to fundIndian legal services programs throughout Indiancountry. The grant will be utilized to support thirtyIndian legal services programs for civil and crim-inal representation in tribal courts and to developtribal court projects on a host of areas in justiceadministration. Funding will also be provided fortraining and technical assistance to train legalservices personnel and the tribal court personnelwith whom they will be working with. A kick-offmeeting for the grant was held in July 2004.
Other Activities
In addition to its major projects, NARF 
continued its participation in numerous confer-ences and meetings of Indian and non-Indianorganizations in order to share its knowledge and expertise in Indian law. During the past fiscalyear, NARF attorneys and staff served in formal orinformal speaking and leadership capacities atnumerous Indian and Indian-related conferencesand meetings such as the National Congress ofAmerican Indians Executive Council, Midyear andAnnual Conventions and the Federal BarAssociation’s Indian Law Conference. NARFremains firmly committed to continuing its effortto share the legal expertise which it possesseswith these groups and individuals working in support of Indian rights and to foster therecognition of Indian rights in mainstream society.
38     annual report
Contributions
Federal Awards
Foundation Grants
 Legal Fees
Other
TOTALS$ 2,622,033
 1,657,712 1,557,570
 785,570
 26,582
 802,272
     $ 7,451,73935.2%
 22.2% 20.9% 10.5%
0.4%
  10.8%
 100%$ 3,780,856
 1,147,310 1,342,339
  752,989
 15,293
 857,027
 $ 7,895,81447.9%
 14.5% 17.0%
 9.5%
0.2%
 10.9%
 100%dollars percents
2004SUPPORT AND REVENUE COMPARISON
dollars percents2003
Return on Investments
dollars percents2004EXPENSE COMPARISON
dollars percents2003
Litigation and Client Services
National Indian Law Library     Total Program Services
Management and GeneralFund Raising     Total Support Services
                         TOTALS$ 5,208,975
 340,277
 5,549,252
 902,913
 1,369,965
 2,272,878
     $ 7,822,130 66.6%
 4.4%
 71.0%
 11.5%
 17.5%
  29.0%
 100%  59.6%
 6.0%
 65.6%
 12.5%
 21.9%
 34.4%
 100%$ 4,734,537
  477,087
 5,211,624
 993,953
 1,736,627
 2,730,580
 $ 7,942,204Based on our audited financial statements for
the fiscal year ending September 30, 2004, theNative American Rights Fund reports total unre-stricted revenues of $7,451,739 against totalexpenditures of $7,822,130. Total net assets atthe end of the year came to $6,078,643. Due topresentation requirements of the audited financialstatements in terms of recognizing the timing of
certain revenues, they do not reflect the fact that,based on NARF’s internal reporting, operatingexpenses and other cash outlays actually exceededrevenue by $182,385, causing a decrease toNARF’s reserve fund. NARF received the finalinstallment of a major bequest in fiscal year 2003,
which accounts for the main differencebetween fiscal years 2004 and2003. NARF received additionalfunding of federal awards andfoundation grants in fiscalyear 2004.
Revenue and Expense
comparisons between fiscalyear 2004 and fiscal year2003 are shown below.
annual report  39Native American Rights Fund
2004 FINANCIAL REPORT
Note: This summary of financial information has been extracted from NARF’s audited financial statements on which
the accounting firm of JDS Professional Group expressed an unqualified opinion. Complete audited financials areavailable, upon request, through our Boulder office or at www.narf.org.Living Waters Endowment
Helen and Sidney Ungar 
Memorial Endowment Fund
Edward & Verna Gerbic 
Family Foundation
Susan K. Griffiths Memorial FundMary Lou Mosca-Ragona Memorial FundMarvin W. Pourier, Sr./Donna M. Deans
Memorial Fund
Kathleen and Ruth Dooley Family FundFrank J. McCormick Family FundJerome Davis Living Waters 
Endowment Fund
Elwood H. Brotzman Memorial Fund
Foundations, Corporations and
Organizations
The Ford FoundationGeneral Service FoundationW.K. Kellogg FoundationJohn D. and Catherine T. MacArthur
Foundation
Rockefeller FoundationEverett Public Service Internship ProgramCharles W. Hewlett FoundationAcres Of Diamonds Food Co-OpAlaska Conservation FoundationPaula and William Bernstein FoundationBiedenharn FoundationBonderenko Direct, Inc.The Boston FoundationBoulder County Bar Foundation 
(Law Clerk Program)
Charles P . and Mary E. Belgarde
Foundation
Christopher LundingCleary, Gottlieb, Steen & Hamilton 
(Law Clerk Program)
Community Foundation for Southeastern
Michigan (Intern Program)
Community Foundation of Northern
Illinois
Earth-Heart Institute of Vision & HealingEugene and Emily Grant 
Family Foundation
Focus Foundation Inc.Rita S. Gold Foundation 
Gorlitz Foundation, Ltd.Johnson Family FoundationKey FoundationLP Brown FoundationLutheran Community FoundationNative American Land Group, LLCNorth Star FoundationOpen Society InstitutePhogg Phoundation For The Pursuit 
Of Happiness
Quadriga Art, Inc.R.M.F. FoundationSanta Fe Natural Tobacco CompanyKathryn &  W. Harry Schwarzschild FundSeidman Family FoundationSidney Stern Memorial TrustStanley Family FundStettenheim FoundationThe Aspegren Charitable Foundation Thomas FoundationWhizin FoundationWinky Foundation
Corporate Matching Gifts
Altria Employee Involvement Programs
Aon Foundation
Aspect Matching Gift ProgramB.D. Matching Gift ProgramBank of America Foundation, Inc.Charitable Gift FundCommunicator Inc.Computer AssociatesDavid & Lucille Packard FoundationEdison InternationalFannie Mae Foundation 
Matching Gifts Center
Four Wind’s Trading CompanyGlaxo Wellcome, Inc.Gordon and Betty Moore FoundationHarris & Eliza Kempner FundIllinois Tool Works FoundationJ.P . Morgan Charitable TrustMicrosoft Matching Gifts ProgramNational Grange Mutual 
Insurance Company
Pepsico FoundationSidney Stern Memorial TrustSun Microsystems FoundationThe Eastern Bank Charitable FoundationThe Ford FoundationThe Freddie Mac FoundationThe Washington PostVerizon FoundationVivendi Universal US Holding Co.World Reach, Inc.Xcel Energy Foundation
Tribes and Native Organizations
Agua Caliente Band Of Cahuilla IndiansAkiak Native Community IRA Alaska Rural Partners, Inc.Aleut Community of St. Paul IslandChickaloon Village Traditional CouncilColusa Indian Casino & BingoConfederated Tribes of the Chehalis
Reservation
Confederated Tribes of the Colville
Reservation
Cow Creek Band Of Umpqua TribeDrumbeat Indian Arts, Inc.Forest County Potawatomi Community 
of Wisconsin
Grand Traverse Band of Ottawa and
Chippewa Indians
Kiowa Tribe of OklahomaKodiak Area Native AssociationLittle Traverse Bay Bands of Odawa
Indians
Louden Tribal CouncilMashantucket Pequot TribeMille Lacs Band Of Ojibwe IndiansMorongo Band Of Mission IndiansNative American Church of 
Navajoland Inc.
Native Village of EyakNative Village Of Port LionsOrutsararmuit Native CouncilSan Manuel Band Of Mission Indians
40     annual report
NARF Acknowledgment of Contributions:
We thank each and every one of our supporters for their commitment to the goals of NARF. NARF’s 
success could not have been achieved without the generosity of our many donors throughout the nation.
We gratefully acknowledge these gifts received for fiscal year 2004 (October 1, 2003 through September 30, 2004).Shoonaq’ Tribe of Kodiak
Southern Ute TribeSt. Croix Chippewa Indians of
Wisconsin
Tanana Chiefs Conference, Inc.The Kittamaqundi Community Tlingit and Haida Indian Tribes 
of Alaska
Viejas Band of Kumeyaay Indians
Bequests and Trusts
Mary AaltoBlythe BaeblerOlive BerryEdith DavisonRobert DeBoltAnnie Dix MeiersRuth DooleyCarolyn FerridayDorothy GleiserEmma HoffmanMarion HolmesFrances HorvathAnna JensenPauline KehlenbachElizabeth RoederC. Schornstheimer
Benefactors
Diane M. AndreeGeorge BaetjerFredericka A. BickelLinda Brockbank, PhDRev. & Mrs. C. Fredrick BuechnerThomas CampbellRichard DysartNancy FalkJane S. FondaPeter GerbicChris GoodwinSherrill HogenAlfred HooseKristin HumphreysWalter JacobsRichard K. KnutsonPatrice KuneshSusan KyleMary LiebmanPamela J. McMichaelBarbara MeislinHope S. Miller
Cassandra S. NaylorTina C. PetersonBarb PonterOla Mildred RexroatMichael J. ReynoldsWalter S. Rosenberry IIIMarc & Pam RudickErnest SchuskyMatthew Slater & Faith RoesselWilliam E. TuceiAmelia VernonCharles WilkinsonMr. & Mrs. Randall L. Willis
Peta Uha - Platinum Feather
John S. BevanRobert HartMarion McCollom HamptonMartha M. Phillippi
Peta Uha - Gold Feather
James & Louise ArnoldTheresa D. BellRobert & Patricia BerryDavid C. BlackWilliam & Elsa BoycePeter BronerMary Anibal BrookCatherine BrotzmanJack CampisiRaymond & Constance CarrollPolly R. ChernerJohn DercksenPaul Anthony D’ErricoLyle A. DethlefsenSubhuti DharmanandaDavid & Helen DornbuschLucille A. EchohawkRobert Rolland FoxRobert FriedeRico F. GenhartMary C. GriffinFrances HagemannMichael Patrick HanniganJohn & Emilie HellerKarin HolserM. HowesBob & Barbara HumesRobert Hutchinson
Richard Jongmok KimAlbert & Skaye KirkCharles KoobScott & Ricki KresanPaulette Lewis Joanne LymanDoris Renee MarxHelena MeltesenFriedrike MerckJeanne D. Morrel-FranklinFrannie OatesKady Lynn Offen-RovtarJoan R. OsborneGeorge C. ParentHoward ParkerClaude & Noelle PonceletHelene PresskreischerEsther Hayward RivinusCarol A. RobertsAlfred H. SchwendtnerMaurie & Marilyn SemelMary G. SpragueWayne & Nancy Starling RossLeRoy StippichWalter A. StockBridget StroudGlibert TauckBessie ThomasonElaine UmholtzMargaret VerbleCatherine S. Williams David WinstonHilda Woodford
Peta Uha - Silver
Feather
Elizabeth BenedictMarjorie I. BlachlyThelma G. CharenIlze Anna ChoiPatricia De KovenAnne De MuthHarvey A. DennenbergThomas & Jane DunphyDaren & Amy EilertKathryn L. ElstonAnne H. EvansJohn & Barbara EverettMary Fabri
Judy H. Fair-SpauldingRichard S. FergusonLyman M. FlinnPamela FordAndrew & Audrey FranklinRuby V. GarrettEric & Jeff GinsburgMr. & Mrs. G. Robert GreenbergDuncan HaasSteve HagermanCarole J. HallRobert HallameckThomas W. HancockCollier HandsLou HensleeSara S. HinckleyMark HodgeJudith S. HortonW. HowellsDavid KastCollier C. KimballPaul & Eileen Le FortRichard LightmanMr. & Mrs. William LymanPeter K. ManningHarry McAndrewRalph & Lorraine Memmer
Native American Rights Fund
Fiscal Year 2004
annual report  41continued on following pageSue Murphy Mote
Barbara J. MusicusSandra NowickiLewis PerkissRobert D. PhillipsMary PodmostkoEdith QuevedoEstelle StammMr. & Mrs. Gordon M. TorgersenMargaret Q. Travis Janice WarnerLois Whitman
Circle of Life
Catches Bear & Judy AdamsRichard & Gloria AdkinsonNina BarghoornMaxwell BarnardBarbara BeasleyJoyce BeaulieuDiane Ben AriRoy BensonSandra BergerBetty BlumenkampDale BrandWilliam BrownGloria BurgessPatricia BurnetThomas CampbellArthur CarterRobert CarterMary CasmusEd ChasteenPaul CliftonCharles ColeJanet CongeroJudith DayHarvey DennenbergGary DickerhoofStarr DormannPatricia DuvalNoelle EdwardsJudy Fair-SpauldingJames FeeDebra FrazierJan FreemanLyle FunderburkSuzanne GartzLawrence GellerDeborah Ghoreyeb
Estela GoldsmithLouise Gomer BangelArline GoodrichBernard GordonGene GrabauJean GundlachMerrill HakimMichael HallMargaret HartnettTheodora HaughtonPatricia HeidelbergerAlfred HooseJudith HortonElizabeth JohnsonVusama KaribaRose KeeneyEmily KirkBetty KleczyMargo KochrutheEllyne Krakower - RiceEdward KriegeJames LangharstIngrid LeblancJames LehnererFrank LovelandRichard LuersRima LurieSuzanne MacDonaldPatricia Marks-GreenfieldMarion McCollom HamptonKatrina McCormick BarnesJoseph McNamaraStanley MetzgerPeter & Betty MeyerLeila MooreJeanne MoskalShirley NortonSara OsborneMoses PeterRandall PetersenDenise PfalzerRose PilcarskyThelma Populus GordonB. J. PowellHorace RainesMr. & Mrs. Robert ResnikMaureen RipleyBarbara RobertsAndrea Robinsong
June RosenthalKeith RossWilliam RozierMary SacherB. SampsonPeter SchmidtLa Roy SeaverMichael SeeleyCharlotte SelverKatey SimetraMr. & Mrs. Charles SmithSandra SpeidenKirk SperryCarolyn StabyHerbert StewartJames & Patricia StrausRennard StricklandMichael & Carol SullivanLouis TaboisValeria TenyakCharlotte ThompsonM. TurekJohn TylerRene' VivoWilliam WadeTed WeitzRobert & Mary WellmanRoger WelschGary WhiteKaren Williams-Fast HorseMarcel WingateDavid YeomanWayne ZengelAbraham Zuckerman
NARF Endowment
Beverly BrownRose CunyJohn EchohawkGayla Fills PipeKim GottschalkHeather Kendall MillerYvonne KnightMereille MartinezMelody McCoySalvatore MendozaSteven MooreChristine Pereira
42     annual report
NARF Acknowledgment of Contributions:Donald Ragona
Ray RamirezClela RorexDavid SeldenJoanne SoklinDebbie ThomasMark TildenDon Wharton
Tsanahwit Circle Members
Cheyanne AlbertiKen & Carol AmpelDennis M. AndersonJacqui AndersonSusan AndersonMr. & Mrs. Richard AniballiPatricia ApplebeePaul & Janice ArcidiaconoDale ArmitageJurgen ArnoldHolly ArrowKathryn AskinsBarbara A. BabcockJohn BachPatricia BachleitnerKathy BagwellD. Michael BaileyMoira BailisColleen BakerJerry BakerJohn BallardKatalin BaltimoreMildred BarkovichCecil BarleyNancy BarnettRuth BarrConstance BaughJoanne BeckettRichard BedardLeona BegayBryan BelknapDiane BellGordon Danny BellJoyce BenedictPamela BennettJudy BertiJoan BeuttlerJefferson BishopElsie BleimillerNanette BohrenFern BoothJerry BowersRichard BoylanAnn BradenBeverly BranamanJoseph BraunMargaret BrennerHerbert BrentlingerElaine BrewingtonJohn BrighamMary BrooksBernice BrustMaureen BurkePerri BurrittJay ByerleyHelen CallbeckWilliam CalleyCarol CampauThomas CampbellEthelyne CarneyDoris ChapotJohn & Shirley ChaseNason & Lisa ChehrehJaney Callahan ChinJane ChristianAllyn CollinsMae CollinsPatricia CollinsThomas ColonHelen CooperG. CopelandDavid CopperPatty CrewsCharles CrittendenMichael CummingsRuth CuprakElizabeth CuprakLinda CwiakJerry DaleMarie DallozGwen DaumLois DauntNorman DaviesPam DavisonBarbara DeJaynesV. DeMarsKenneth DePaulPatricia DiLeoG. William DilleyRobert DillonPaul & Elizabeth DombroskyIan DouglasPhillip DouvilleJerome DravesDavid DresserSioux DuBoisDan DuransoMarilyn EberlyCheri EdwardsDaren & Amy EilertCathy EllisJ. Bruce EmburyJennifer ErdmannJudy Fair-Spaulding Judith FazioJames FeichtlJeannie FineMarleneFischerSharon FlahertyWinn FlanneryKim FlemingHolly FlutotMartha FordRichard FordFrances FreedMarianne FreidbergDavid FryeShirley FultzAnn GaborSuzanne GartzLawrence GellerMary GermaineTracy GibsonCarole GilesJames GilkesonClara GillisFreda GlennJudy GoebelGeorgene GoodwinJames GooteeJean GoreLarry & Melissa GraykinBarry GreenbergPaul GreenhallWeda GregorieffJeri Groves HodgkinsonMartha GrudzienSamuel GussThomas HallidayMarcia HalliganBarbara HannSusan HannaMark HannemannRichard HansenBarbara HargroveRonald HartlingMargaret HartnettBartlett HarveyCarol HatfieldRichard HathawayRuth HauserWayne HawkinsPatricia HaydenLeonard Heinz Sr. Ralph HenryAurdrey Herron
George Hetrick
D.R. HeynekerElna HicksonColonel Arthur HillTaps HinesMichael HinesJohn Hodgson
Native American Rights Fund
Fiscal Year 2004
annual report  43continued on following page´
Judith Hodson
Rex HohnsbehnCharles HoltzerNancy HomyakShirley HookerAlfred HooseJoyce HooverMr. & Mrs. Nicholas HorvathHelga HosmerCarol HoughtonLindsey HouselEthel HuebnerClayton HugoGary HultsTheresa HumphreyCharley IceJohn IvieGladys JacksonRochelle JacobsMaria JanuzysCollin JessopMarie JochumFrances JohnsonLouise JohnsonMaryellen JohnsonEarl JohnsonJeff JonesLeslie JonesBrenda JonesIsabelle KabrielianJudith KarpilowMarian KasabachStephen KelloggDana & Deborah KellyJeralyn KeltonicSherri KendrickGrace KeplerSusan KeplerPeggy KiracofeGerald KirnerHilde KlimekLarry KlingensmithKate KnappWilliam KoenigLaura KoesterPhyllis KominekFrances KranzVaunceil KruseAnnette KuhlmannJack Lamb
Rollins LambertRaymond LaPortDavid LarsenB. LavelleKurt LehmannLyon LeiferCat LeonardEugene LeTourneau Stanley LewandowskiJohn LewisJames LichtensteinJohn LipnerLeo LiretteHal LitoffValerie LloydDorothy LockmanMr. & Mrs. John LopezElisabeth LucreeRima LurieMary LyonGail MackenrothKimberly MacloudWayne MaggsRichard MagyarRon MahoneyBrigitta MannVerdena MardisMiroslav MarekFrancisco MarquezMarcelle MartinGreg MathiasJacqueline MatteMurray MatznerKathleen MavourninChristopher Mc AuliffeDonald Mc CaffreyMary Mc GuiganBoni McCabeLinda McgrewLeRoy McLaughlinPhyllis McNeillRita McQuownDorothy MeiskyMichael MelendezEva MendelsonWilliam MilliganShirley MiollaJanette MitchellRoss & Carolyn Mitchell
Patricia MixterSadie MonroeLora MoreauJeff MoreheadCynthia Morrison Rosa Lee MosherJean MoyerJosie MoyerGeraldine MuehlhausenKayla MullinsKathleen MunsellWendy NashMiriam NathensonRisa Lange NavarroJames NirensteinJeanne NobleDonna NormandRob NorrisPatricia OpaskarJames & Rachel OsborneBruce PageKathryn PalmerWanda PaolilloCatherine PapellJoyce PappasReverend David ParachiniOranoca ParijoDorothy PatrickToddy PerrymanBarbara PetersonAnna PfeiferMargaret Phillips David Curtis PiersonAlbert PilcherJacqueline PineJacquelyn PlattGerald & Antoinette PollackDeborah PomplunMichael PorlidesTrevor & Laura PowdrellMichael PriceLinda ProctorThomas QuealyTimothy RaabEmily RaderMarcus RamsEvelyn ReeceJohn Reed
44     annual report
NARF Acknowledgment of Contributions:Robert Renner
Mr. & Mrs. Robert ResnikThursa RevenaughPriscilla RichGail RichardsonRonald RicherPatrice RileyMartha RizzutoMaryana RobertsonDorothy RobinsonLinda RobinsonSusan RobinsonGerald RogersYdameh RoigJan RoomeChristine RosenRalph RossilliJay RubensteinRonald RubleRuth RubyMaura RussellDave & Adrienne RuudTheodore SahlNancy SanCarlosMr. & Mrs. Seaward SandRonald SavageEdmond & Brietta SavoieDarrell SchrammGregory SchuhGerald & Karen SchulerMr. & Mrs. David SchwienBrenda ScottShirley SeagrenJoanne SeymourSusan ShererPaul ShickleMyra Lynn ShinkleLaura SiegartelWilliam SiemersFreda SilverMarie SimirenkoLaura SironiHerman & Lois SiskJoan SlebosMichael SmithWalter SmithWiley SmithBetty SmithShirley SneedMarilyn Snider
Debbie SouceyJerry & Rita SpaldingEsther SpanLois SparksWilann SpicciaPaul SpicerJune St. James PfoutsShirley StabileMary Anne StaffordGretchen SteerenbergCraig StephensMichael StephensonWalter StevensJoanne StickelKatherine StoneStephen StromElizabeth SzawlowskiLaura TeaguePaul TheodoreClaudine ThomasDouglas ThompsonEdward ThompsonCharlotte ThompsonEthel TobachMr. & Mrs. Donald ToblerJanice ToniettoRosalie Trevino HydeKaren TrowbridgeJoyce TuckerThomas TurleyRichard Vanden HeuvelAnn VetranoKristy VisserR. WallRon WarrenBruce WeillJerry WeissJoel & Patricia WeissMartha WellerCathy WestlundPhilip WhalenGeri WhiteKatie WhiteDeborah WilkerCatherine WilliamsHolly WilliamsArnold WilsonMargaret WilsonJerry Wilson
Elizabeth WilsonRoger WiseWm C. WissmuellerGeoffrey & Mary WoldLisabeth Leigh WolfAndrew Kerry WolfeBasil WoodJean WoodmanDiane Carmody WynneShelley YeagerJim Yellow HorsePamela ZawilaMelissa Zook
Special Events
Oscar AlexiusAmerican Indian Chamber of
Commerce of New Mexico
Jack AndersonMary Anibal BrookAngela BabbyRuth BarrPhyllis BigpondElsie BleimillerGlen BonderenkoJim BoswellMystie BrackettThomas CampbellR.F. ChadwickMauraide C. CowanTom & Jeanne CrumKay CulbertsonJeanne CzajkaThomas & Jane
Dunphy
Eagle Plume’s
Gallery
John EchohawkLucille A.
Echohawk
Carole HallBunky Echo-Hawk Jr.Anne H. EvansJane FondaHarriet GarthRico GenhartJames GilleyEric GinsburgJohn GonzalesBernie Granados, Jr.
Rodney GrantElizabeth GrayEddie Griffith GalleryNathan HartSheldon HarveyJohn & Emilie HellerSara HinckleyIndian Voices NewsletterAnn JonesRebecca JonesLa Fonda HotelEva Mae LeeJohn C. LewisPaulette LewisAudrey Light TempleLeon Joseph LittlebirdCarol LujanBrett MabryKari MeskinShirley MiollaEugene S. MitchellSteve MooreTimoteo “Ikoshy” MontoyaLinda MorganJeanne Morrel-FranklinDel MulderStan Natchez
Native American Rights Fund
Fiscal Year 2004
annual report  45continued on following pageNative Voice Newspaper
PahponeeMichelle PaisanoPak Mail off the Plaza - Santa FeAmado Pena, Jr.NaNa PingChristina RiehmAndrew RodriguezRumsey Community FundCatherine ScottSusan SignorellaCatt SpencerWayne & Nancy Starling RossNico Strange OwlRabbett StricklandRandy TakemotoDebbie ThomasDerek ThompsonDouglas R. ThompsonInga ThompsonJill E. TompkinsDennis E. TorresJeannette TrineDora Tse PeFrances A. VelayMontoya A. WhitemanPatricia Wincklerwww
.chacodog.com
www.indianz.com
www.thenativepress.com
Melanie Yazzie
NARF gratefully honors our many 
friends and partners who sponsoredand supported some of our specialevents in 2004. Thanks a million forgoing to all the trouble and deeply caring about Indian rights advocacy.
In-Kind Contributions
Phil BangertPatton, Boggs LLPDaniel CordalisNakota Designs Inc.Lucille EchohawkAnne EstinGilmer, Sadler, Ingram, Sutherland &
Hutton, L.L.P
Eddie Griffith Fine Arts, 
Santa Fe, New Mexico
Jaime JacobyJohn Moore Aaron PrattTim ReeseHelen RountreeManuel SantosSundance Photography
David TatuniWes TaukchirayAlexa TetzlaffNative Voice NewspaperLaNada Warjack 
Boulder-Denver Advisory Committee
Lucille EchohawkThomas W. FredericksDavid GetchesAva HamiltonJeanne WhiteingCharles Wilkinson
Federated Workplace Campaigns
Thank you to the thousands of federal,
state, municipal and private sectoremployees throughout the country whothrough their payroll deduction planscontributed $144,956 in fiscal year 2004.
Federal Programs
Administration for Native AmericansBureau of Indian AffairsDepartment of Justice
46     annual report
NARF Acknowledgment of Contributions:
~
`Native American Rights Fund
Show Your Support in NARF’s Programs
annual report  47NARF receives contributions from foundations, corporations,
religious organizations, tribes and Native organizations,bequests and trusts, benefactors, private donations, and in-kind contributions. Below are descriptions of NARF’sdonor programs and additional ways you can get involved.
Peta Uha Membership
Peta Uha in the Lakota (Sioux) language means firekeeper.One that honors tribal members who made a solemn commitment to ensure that the sacred flame, source oflight, heat and energy for his people, always be kept burning.Like the firekeepers of old, members of the Peta UhaCouncil can demonstrate constancy and vigilance by helpingto ensure that the critical work of the Native AmericanRights Fund continues to move ever forward. For benefitsassociated with each level of Peta Uha membership, pleasecontact Donald Ragona, 303.447.8760 or e-mail him atpetauha@narf.org.
Tsanahwit Circle
Tsanahwit is a Nez Perce word meaning equal justice.
Tsanahwit Circle members provide a regular source ofincome to NARF by pledging and making monthly contributions at any level of your choice. You may sign upto receive monthly pledge reminders in the mail or yourcredit card may be billed automatically.
Otu’han Gift Membership
Otu’han is the Lakota Sioux word translated as giveaway.Otu’han is a memorial and honoring gift program modeledafter the tradition of the Indian giveaway in which items ofvalue are gathered over a long period of time to be givenaway in honor of birthdays, marriages, anniversaries, andin memory of a departed loved one.
Circle of Life
NARF’s Circle of Life are donors who provide a lasting legacyto the Native American Rights Fund by including NARF inestate planning or deferred gifts. The circle is an importantsymbol to Native Americans representing unity, strength andthe eternal continuity of life. These lasting gifts help ensurethe future of NARF and our Indian clients nationwide.
Endowments
NARF has two established endowments, the 21st CenturyEndowment and the Living Waters Endowment. The 21stCentury Endowment is a permanent fund in which the principal is invested and interest income is used for NARF’sprograms. This endowment is designed to provide a per-
manent, steady income that can support the ever-increasingcosts of providing legal representation to our tribal clients.
The Living Waters Endowment directly funds the 21st
Century Endowment. It allows donors to honor friends andloved ones by making an endowment gift of $10,000 ormore. By designating a gift to either endowment, you canbe sure that your contribution will continue to generateannual funds in perpetuity. Endowment supporters are recognized on a special wall plaque displayed at NARF.Supporters will also receive a memorial piece for theirhome and be acknowledged in NARF’s annual report.
Workplace Campaigns
NARF is a member of America’s Charities, a national work-place giving federation. Giving through your workplace isas easy as checking off box #0450 in the Combined FederalCampaign (CFC) pledge form authorizing automatic payrolldeduction. NARF is also a member of Community Shares ofColorado (CSC), member #5037.
Matching Gifts
Currently, more than 30 foundations and corporationsnationwide make matching gifts to NARF on a regular basis.Employers match their employees’ contributions sometimesdoubling or even tripling their donation. Please check withyour human resources office and request a matching gift form.
E-Action
Sign up for our e-action network by providing NARF with your email address. This is a great way to getperiodic case updates, calls-to-action, special events information,invitations and other activities.Your e-mail address is confidentialand we will not share it with anyoutside sources. For furtherinformation about any of the programs or services, please contact NARF’s DevelopmentDepartment at 303-447-8760. Thank you.
´
´
´Native American Rights Fund
CORPORATE OFFICERS
John E. Echohawk (Pawnee)
Executive Director/Attorney
Lorna Babby (Oglala Sioux)
Litigation Management CommitteeMember/Attorney
K. Jerome Gottschalk
Litigation Management CommitteeMember/Attorney
Yvonne T. Knight (Ponca-Creek)
Litigation Management CommitteeMember/Attorney
Mary Lu Rousseaux (Cheyenne River
Sioux) Director of Development
Ray Ramirez
Secretary/Editor/Grant Writer
Clela Rorex
Chief Financial Officer/Law OfficeAdministrator
BOULDER MAIN OFFICE STAFF
Walter R. Echo-Hawk (Pawnee)
Attorney
Melody McCoy (Cherokee) Attorney
Steven C. Moore Attorney
Mark Tilden (Navajo) Attorney
Donald R. Wharton AttorneyEric Anderson Legal Assistant
Jeremy Charley (Navajo)
Office Services Clerk
Rose Cuny (Oglala Lakota) 
Office Manager
Karen DeHerrera (Oglala Lakota)
Legal Assistant
Gayla Fills Pipe (Oglala Lakota)
Receptionist
Stephanie Hutton
Development Staff Assistant
Michael Kennedy
Assistant Controller
Mireille Martinez
Development Projects Coordinator
Christine Pereira
Micro Computer Specialist
Donald M. Ragona
(Mattinecock/Oglala Lakota) Director of PlannedGiving/Development House Counsel
Joanne Soklin Legal Assistant
Debbie Raymond-Thomas (Navajo)
Assistant Controller
Johanna Zeh AccountantNATIONAL INDIAN LAW LIBRARY
David Selden LibrarianMonica Martens Assistant Law Librarian
ANCHORAGE OFFICE STAFF
Heather Kendall-Miller (Athabascan)
Attorney
Natalie Landreth (Chickasaw) Attorney
Vince Pangan Legal Assistant
WASHINGTON, D.C. OFFICE STAFF
Keith Harper (Cherokee) Attorney
Richard Guest Attorney
Ruth Hargrow 
Legal Administrative Assistant
Angela Paige Legal Assistant
NARF staff
48     annual reportNative American Rights Fund
1506 broadway, boulder, colorado 80302