NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
2003 - ANNUAL REPORTMain Office
Native American Rights Fund1506 BroadwayBoulder, CO 80302303-447-8760http://www.narf.orgAlaska Office
Native American Rights Fund420 L Street, Suite 505Anchorage, Alaska 99501907-276-0680Washington, D.C. Office
Native American Rights Fund1712 N Street, NWWashington, D.C. 20036202-785-4166
1 native american rights fund - annual reportNARF - Annual Report 2003
Introduction ............................................................................................................................... ............................. 2
Chairman’s Message ............................................................................................................................... ...............4
Executive Director’s Report ............................................................................................................................... .6
The Board of Directors ............................................................................................................................... .........7
The Preservation of T ribal Existence .................................................................................................................... 8
The Protection of T ribal Natural Resources ...................................................................................................... 12
The Promotion of Human Rights ................................................................................................................ 18
Major Activities ............................................................................................................................... .................20
The Accountability of Governments ............................................................................................................ 26
The Development of Indian Law .................................................................................................................. 32
T reasurer’s Report ............................................................................................................................... .............35
Contributors ............................................................................................................................... ....................... 36
NARF Staff ............................................................................................................................... ......................... 40
Cover art: 
“Prosecution Rests”
About the artist: “I believe art should
reflect our society and the time in which it exists. I also believe that a society’s lawsystem should have the same function.What was art 79 years ago, and what waslaw 79 years ago, do not reflect our societytoday. In the same way that the attorneysof NARF and NARF affiliates work tochange the representation of N ative
Americans within the legal system, I amworking to change the representation ofNative Americans in the art world. A contemporary People deserve no less thancontemporary representation.” ~ Bunky Echo-HawkBunky Echo-Hawk is an enrolled member
of the Yakama Nation of WashingtonState and a member of the PawneeNation of Oklahoma. He is a graduateof the Institute of American Indian Artin Santa Fe, New Mexico. He currentlylives and paints in Longmont, Colorado.Bunky is the son of NARF attorneyWalter “Bunky” Echo-Hawk.
Contact the artist: 
Bunky Echo-Hawk, 1212 S. Emery St. #BLongmont, CO 80501 home: 303.772.8601 cell: 303.886.3859 http://www.bunkyechohawk.com
Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund
(NARF) is a nonprofit, charitable organizationincorporated in 1971 under the laws of the Districtof Columbia.  NARF is exempt from federal incometax under the provisions of Section 501(c)(3) of theInternal Revenue code.  Contributions to NARF aretax deductible.  The Internal Revenue Service hasruled that NARF is not a “private foundation” asdefined in Section 509(a) of the Internal RevenueCode.  NARF was founded in 1970 and incorporatedin 1971 in Washington, D.C.As the Native American
Rights Fund (NARF) begins itsthirty-fourth year of legal advocacy,it is fueled by the strength of itsvaried legal accomplishments aswell as the active memory of reasons why it was founded in thefirst place.  In 1970, a small butdetermined group of attorneysand tribal leaders created theNative American Rights Fund toaddress the need for legal repre-sentation in many major issuesfacing Indian people who couldperhaps not afford it otherwise.One of the first institutions of its kind, NARF has been an
unyielding advocate of Native
peoples’ needs resulting fromtheir unique government-to-government relationship with thefederal government and the rightsthat this sovereign status shouldconfer.  NARF’s diligence andvision have resulted in a multitudeof Native American legal victoriesin areas ranging from tribal sovereignty to natural resourceownership to human rights.Despite these crucial gains, how-ever, NARF must contend withsome of the same challenges thatoriginally propelled its formation.The historic injustices perpetratedagainst Native peoples continueto this day and provide a constant,
unending need for NARF to continue its fight.  To guide it 
on this purpose, NARF’s firstBoard of Directors created fivefundamental priorities:
• Preservation of tribal existence
• Protection of tribal natural
resources
• Promotion of Native American
human rights
• Accountability of governments
to Native Americans
• Development of Indian law and
educating the public aboutIndian rights, laws, and issues
As this battle continues,
NARF strives to protect the legaland sovereign rights of tribes andNative people within theAmerican legal system.  Thiseffort certainly could not existwithout the contribution of thethousands of individuals whohave offered their knowledge,courage, and vision to help guideNARF on its quest.  Of equalimportance, NARF’s financialcontributors have graciously pro-vided the resources to make theseefforts possible.  Contributorssuch as the Ford Foundation have been with NARF since itsinception.  The RockefellerFoundation, the General Service
Foundation, the John D. &Catherine T. MacArthurFoundation, the CarnegieCorporation of New York, the W. K. Kellogg Foundation andthe Skadden Foundation have alsomade consistent contributionsover the years.  Federal fundingfrom the Administration forNative Americans enables NARFto carry on its governance, eco-nomic, and social development
efforts in Indian country.  Finally,the effects of NARF’s work arereflective in the financial contri-butions by a growing number of
tribal governments. United, these
financial, moral, and intellectualgifts provide the framework forNARF to fulfill its mission: thesecuring of sovereignty and rightto self-determination to which all Native American peoples are entitled. 
3 native american rights fund - annual reportIntroduction
“ Tribal Law” investment and self-sustaining
strategies. With your kokua andkako’o, your help and continuingsupport, we will have the financialstrength to continue to focus onissues of concern to the peoples of “Indian Country,” and resolveinjustices that support the legalrights of Native nations, peoplesand communities.  We encouragethose Nations that are doing welleconomically to show their supportfor NARF with financial contri-butions to help it to continue itsimportant and necessary work tobring justice and peace to Nativecommunities.
Our communities‚ health 
and well-being are of utmostimportance to preserve our traditional values because it givesus the necessary strength for ournations’ survival and growth inthis rapidly changing world. Wemust be extra vigilant not tounconsciously participate in ourown exploitation by turning awayfrom the voice of our ancestors inorder to pander to mainstreamsociety. In working to achieveeconomic independence andsocial justice, we exercise ourindependence of mind and spiritto defend our lands and rights.We must continue to take our
rightful place in the world andnot depend upon others to securethe revitalization of our cultures.Our ancestor, Kapihe, shared thispromising prophecy with us:
E iho ana o luna ; 
That which is above shall bebrought down;E pi’i ana o lalo ;
That which is below shall be lifted;E hui ana na moku ;
The islands shall be united;E ku ana ka paia .;
The walls shall stand upright.
I would like to share these
revealing words from QueenLili’uokalani of the Nation ofHawai’i: “Oh, honest Americans, 
as Christians hear me for my down-trodden people! Their form of government is as dear to them asyours is precious to you. Quite aswarmly as you love your country, sothey love theirs. …to hear what isnot said, to see what cannot be seen,and to know the unknowable, thatis Aloha.”
And finally, in the words of
our most respected 19th CenturyFreedom advocate, JosephNawahi: “The cause of Hawaii andindependence is larger and dearer
than the life of any man connectedwith it. Love of country is deep-seated in the breast of everyHawaiian, whatever his station.”
We are at a turning point,
Huliau, a moment of truth. Letus holomua kakou (move forwardtogether) in 2004 with the greatspirits of T urtle Island, the alohaspirit of Hawai’i, and with themana of natives throughout theworld. May all people on thisearth enjoy peace, justice andaloha. 
Ku’e! Ku’e! Ku’e!
(Resist! Resist! Resist!)  Holomua! (Move Forward!)  
Ea!(Life!) 
E. A. Ho`oipo Kalaena’auao Pa,
Chairwoman
5 native american rights fund - annual reportAloha, Aloha ke Akua, na
‘aumakua a me na Kupuna:Huliau! (Time of Change!)
The Native American Rights
Fund (NARF) continues to be amajor influence for change. In myfour years on the NARF Board ofDirectors, I have enjoyed a muchcherished opportunity to learn fromand work with ‘ohana (family)from T urtle Island and now, as its Chairwoman, will do mybest to embrace the privilege,
challenges and responsibilities
that come with this position.With your confidence and trust, I look forward to sharing myknowledge and experience as anadvocate for justice from ka pae‘aina o Hawai’i, the land and oceanthat feed us in the archipelago ofHawai’i.  Mahalo a nui loa forthis opportunity to extend ourinfluence and commitment toaddress Native issues.As Lili’uokalani, the last ruling
monarch and queen of the Nationof Hawai’i, expressed (until illegallydethroned by “evil” descendants ofmissionaries with the backing of theUnited States military in 1893):
“I could not turn back 
time for the political change,but there is still time to saveour heritage. You must remembernever to cease to act becauseyou fear you may fail. The wayto lose any earthly kingdom isto be inflexible, intolerant, andprejudicial. Another way is tobe too flexible, tolerant of toomany wrongs and without judg-ment at all. It is a razor’s edge.It is the width of a blade of pili grass.”
NARF has diligently worked
at carrying out its mission to sup-port the integrity and strength ofits peoples and cultures, providinghelp to rebuild nations and tribes,through difficult and often seem-ingly insurmountable challenges.As an organization, NARF willcontinue to develop and imple-ment innovative strategies thatwill effectively deal with harminflicted on native peoples. In itsthirty-four years of service, NARFhas provided invaluable legal andmoral support to “Indian Country”as its peoples struggle againstoppressive laws, practices andgovernmental systems and hasremained responsive and account-able to its constituents. NARFmust continue to take bold stepswhen necessary to ensure that it remains a strong and viableresource for the continuing benefitof those who draw upon itsexpertise, compassion, andstrength as an organization com-
mitted to advocating for peaceand justice.
NARF’s cases accentuate the
burden of “Indian Country” andreveal the amazing spirit andresilience of its peoples to endureand survive severe acts of physical,economic and cultural genocide. I have experienced this sameamazing spirit at NARF and havewitnessed John Echohawkdynamically lead a brilliant anddedicated team of advocates forgeahead to defend, protect andwork to make whole NativeAmerica.
Nana I Ke Kumu!
[Look to the Source!] 
A renewed respect for our 
traditional values helps us toresolve the political, economic,and social problems that impactour community. It is now morethan ever crucially important thatwe rediscover the power of tradi-tional teachings and apply themto contemporary problems. Byreinvigorating the principlesembedded in our ancient teachings,we honor the memory and wisdomof our ancestors. With the mana(spiritual energy and life force) of our ancestors and our own wisdom, vitality and courage, we
will prevail and maintain thisinterdependency and enforce theintegrity of our cultures.
A primary challenge this New
Year, Makahiki 2004, will be tostrengthen NARF’s financialresources. Our Board is streamliningexisting financial commitmentsand implementing more efficient
4annual report - native american rights fundChairwoman’s Message
¯
¯¯
¯¯¯¯¯
¯
¯¯
¯ ¯ ¯
7 native american rights fund - annual reportThe Board of Director’s
The Native American Rights
Fund’s program of providing legaladvice and assistance to NativeAmericans across the country onlegal issues of national significancecontinued into its 33rd year infiscal year 2003.  Substantialdevelopments and important victories were achieved in severalcases and activities during theyear that I want to highlight.
In U
nited S tates v . White
Mountain A pache Tribe, the
United States Supreme Courtheld that the United States’breach of fiduciary duty to 
maintain and preserve Indian
trust property gave rise a claim formoney damages under federal law.Through the T ribal SupremeCourt Project operated by NARFand the National Congress ofAmerican Indians, amicus briefswere coordinated and filed in support of the White MountainApache T ribe in this importantfederal trust responsibility case.
Once again, NARF assisted
the Gwich’in Steering Committeein their efforts to protect theArctic National Wildlife Refuge(ANWR) in Alaska from oildevelopment and successfullyworked with a coalition of environmental groups to stop 
the U.S. Senate in 2003 fromapproving oil drilling in ANWR.7,000 Gwich’in people live on ornear the migratory route of thePorcupine caribou herd and relyon the caribou for food, clothing,tools and a source of respect andspiritual guidance.  The calvinggrounds of the caribou lie insideANWR and will be disturbed byany oil drilling.
Representing several Alaska
tribes and tribal members, NARF successfully intervened ina case brought by a sporting clubchallenging federal regulationsimplementing the preference contained in federal law for customary and traditional uses offish and wildlife by rural Alaskansover sports and commercial useson federal public lands in Alaska.NARF will help defend over 180customary and traditional usedeterminations made by the federal government which protectthe entitlement of rural areas orcommunities to take fish andwildlife and limit or prohibit others from taking the resource.
With the support and encour-
agement of the U.S. Departmentof Education, NARF helped toestablish the T ribal EducationDepartments National Assembly(TEDNA), a new national organization for tribal educationdepartments.  The purpose of theTEDNA is to bring together tribal
education directors, staff and policymakers so that they can shareinformation, strategize and problem solve on common issuesof education governance, policyand advocacy at the tribal, regional and national levels.   
In a widely publicized case,
NARF and private co-counselwon another important decisionin Cobell v
. Norton, the class
action on behalf of 300,000 indi-vidual Indian trust account holderswhich was filed in 1996.  FederalDistrict Court Judge RoyceLamberth issued a structuralinjunction requiring theDepartment of the Interior toconduct a historical accounting ofthe trust accounts going back totheir origin in 1887.  In addition,the Cobell
plaintiffs also agreed to
seek a mediated solution to thecase as proposed by Congress.
NARF also assisted in obtaining
a $2 million appropriation toimplement the Indian T ribalJustice and Legal Assistance Act,which we helped to pass inCongress in 2000.  The Actauthorizes the Justice Departmentto provide supplemental fundingto Indian legal services programsfor their representation of Indianpeople and tribes which fall belowthe federal poverty guidelines.  
The Native American Rights
Fund thanks all of our contributorsand supporters who have helpedto make these victories and devel-opments for Native Americanspossible.  As we face projectedfunding deficits in the future,your continuing support is moreimportant now than ever before if we are going to maintain ourefforts to seek justice for NativeAmericans through the legal system.
John E. Echohawk,
Executive Director
6annual report - native american rights fundExecutive Director’s Report
NARF’s Board of Directors:
(Pictured from left clockwise) Vernita Herdman (Inupiaq - Alaska); Nora McDowell
(Fort Mojave - California); John Gonzales (San Ildefonso Pueblo - New Mexico); 
Paul Ninham (Oneida Nation of Wisconsin);  Jaime Barrientoz , Vice-Chairman
(Grande Traverse Band of Ottawa & Chippewa Indians - Michigan); James Roan Gray
(Osage Nation - Oklahoma); E. Ho’oipo Pa , Chairwoman (Native Hawaiian - Hawaii).
(Not Pictured) Mark Brown (The Mohegan Tribe - Connecticut); Elbridge Coochise
(Hopi - Arizona); Billy Frank (Nisqually Tribe - Washington); Karlene Hunter (Oglala
Lakota - South Dakota); Anthony Pico (Viejas Band of Kumeyaay Indians - California);
Woody Widmark (Sitka Tribe - Alaska).The Native American Rights
Fund has a governing board com-posed of Native American leadersfrom across the country – wiseand distinguished people who arerespected by Native Americansnationwide.  Individual Boardmembers are chosen based ontheir involvement and knowledgeof Indian issues and affairs, as wellas their tribal affiliation, to ensurea comprehensive geographicalrepresentation.  The NARF Boardof Directors, whose membersserve a maximum of six years,provide NARF with leadershipand credibility, and the vision ofits members is essential to NARF’seffectiveness in representing itsNative American clients.
Owanah Anderson, Choctaw
Edward AsnerKatrina McCormick BarnesDavid BrubeckU.S. Senator Ben Nighthorse Campbell,Northern CheyenneWallace Coffey, Comanche
Ada Deer, Menominee
Harvey A. DennenbergMichael J. DriverRichard DysartLucille A. Echohawk, Pawnee
Louise Erdrich, Turtle Mountain Chippewa
James GarnerSy GombergCarol Hayward, Fond Du Lac Chippewa
Richard Hayward, Mashantucket Pequot
John HellerEmilie Heller-RhysAlvin M. Josephy, Jr.Charles R. KlewinNancy A. KlewinWilma Mankiller, Cherokee Nation of
OklahomaChris E. McNeil Jr., Tlingit-Nisga’a
Billy Mills, Oglala SiouxN. Scott Momaday, Kiowa
Clinton Pattea, Ft. McDowell Yavapai
Amado Peña Jr., Yaqui/Chicano
David Risling Jr., Hoopa
Pernell RobertsWalter S. Rosenberry, IIIMarc & Pam RudickLeslie Marmon Silko, Laguna Pueblo
Connie StevensErnie Stevens, Jr., Wisconsin Oneida
Anthony L. Strong, Tlingit-Klukwan
Maria Tallchief, Osage
Andrew Teller, Isleta Pueblo
Verna Teller, Isleta Pueblo
Studs TerkelTenaya Torres, Chiricahua Apache
Richard T rudell, Santee Sioux
Rebecca Tsosie, Pascua Yaqui
Thomas T ureenAine UngarRt. Rev. William C. Wantland, Seminole
Dennis WeaverW.  Richard West Jr., Southern Cheyenne
Mary Wynne, Rosebud SiouxThe National Support Committee
(NSC) assists NARF with itsfund raising and public relationsefforts nationwide.  Some of theindividuals on the Committee areprominent in the field of business,entertainment and the arts. Othersare known advocates for the rightsof the underserved.  All of the 48volunteers on the Committee arecommitted to upholding therights of Native Americans. NARF works to construct the
foundations that are necessary toempower tribes so that they cancontinue to live according to their Native traditions, to enforcetheir treaty rights, to insure their independence on reservations and to protect their sovereignty.Specifically, NARF’s legal repre-sentation centers on sovereigntyand jurisdiction issues, federalrecognition and restoration oftribal status, and economic devel-opment.  Thus, the focus ofNARF’s work involves issuesrelating to the preservation andenforcement of the status of tribesas sovereign governments.  T ribalgovernments possess the power toregulate the internal affairs oftheir members as well as otheractivities within their reservations.
Jurisdictional conflicts often arise
with states, the federal government,and others over tribal sovereignty.
TRIBAL SOVEREIGNTY
Securing and developing tribal
governmental authority derivedfrom tribal sovereign status is apriority issue for NARF becauseof its importance in maintainingtribal existence and self-government.As part of this commitment totribal sovereignty, NARF hasjoined forces with the National
Congress of American Indians(NCAI) to create the T ribalSupreme Court Project.
The T ribal Supreme Court
Project is a project to coordinateand strengthen the advocacy oftribal sovereignty and otherIndian issues before the SupremeCourt, and ultimately to improvethe deplorable win-loss recordtribes have suffered before thattribunal.  In fact, over the pasttwenty years, Indian people havelost approximately 80% of theircases before the Supreme Court.As one Indian law scholar hasnoted, no other group of litigantshas done worse.  The opinions aredeparting from longstanding,established principles of Indianlaw and are constituting a whole-
sale re-writing of the very concep-
tions of tribal sovereignty andjurisdiction by the Court.  Thesecases have diminished the rightsof every Indian tribe in the country.The Supreme Court Project is away for tribes to take action toprevent further erosion.
In recognition of the fact that
the tribes generally rise and falltogether in front of the Court,NARF coordinates, and substan-tively contributes to, the Project’snation-wide Indian amicus brief
writing network.  An amicusbrief, also known as a ‘friend ofthe Court’ brief, allows those notdirectly involved in litigation, butpotentially impacted by the out-come, to raise points before theCourt.  Through amicus briefwriting and coordination, NARFassists Indian country as a wholein most effectively supporting thetribes going before the Court.The Project submits to the Courtthe fewest number and highestquality briefs in support of theIndian argument.  This coordinatedapproach ensures that the briefsand the Indian voice get theCourt’s maximum attention.The Project submitted amicusbriefs in the three cases decided in2003, United States v. White
Mountain Apache Tribe, United
States v. Navajo Nation, and  Inyo
County v. Paiute-Shoshone Indiansof the Bishop Community , cases
raising fundamental issues of tribalsovereignty.  Perhaps because ofthe Project’s involvement, onlyone of these cases was lost.  Victorywas achieved in one case and theother was remanded to the lowercourt for further proceedings.
In United States v. White
Mountain Apache Tribe , the Court
9 native american rights fund - annual reportThe Preservation of Tribal Existence
“Alpha Scout” tribes, for differing reasons, do
not have a government-to-govern-ment relationship between them-selves and the federal government.T raditionally, federal recognitionwas accorded to a tribe throughtreaty, land set aside for a tribe, orby legislative means.  The majorityof these NARF clients are seekingan administrative determinationby the Bureau of Indian Affairs(BIA) that they, in fact, have continued to exist as Indian tribesfrom the time of significant whitecontact to the present day andhave continued to govern them-selves and their members.  NARF ,therefore, prepares the necessaryhistorical, legal, and anthropo-logical documentation to support
a petition for acknowledgment.For more than 100 years, theseIndian communities have beendenied the benefits of a formalrelationship with the federal government.  Through the processof administrative acknowledgment,NARF is now trying to bridgethat gap.
Federal recognition is an
arduous process that takes manyyears to complete.  Petitioningtribes must prove that they havebeen identified by reliable externalsources on a substantially contin-uous basis as an Indian entity;they must prove that they havemaintained a continuous commu-nity from historical times to thepresent day; they must show thatthey have maintained politicalauthority or influence on a sub-stantially continuous basis fromhistorical times until the presentday; they must prove that currenttribal members, as a whole,descend from a historic tribe or
tribes which amalgamated; theymust prove that their membersare not mostly members of analready recognized tribe; and,their members cannot be fromgroups which were terminated bylegislation.  This process requiresthe testimony of many expertsand thorough documentation ofeach requirement.
In 1997, the Branch of
Acknowledgment and Research(BAR) placed the Little ShellT ribe of Chippewa Indians ofMontana’s federal recognitionpetition on active review status.In 2000, after many delays, theAssistant Secretary published apreliminary finding in favor ofrecognition.  Work continues tobe done to strengthen the T ribe’spetition and the period for supplementing the record hasbeen extended to January 2004,because of a large amount of newdata being collected and analyzed.NARF and the T ribe are nowexploring legislative options theT ribe may have for recognition. 
With NARF’s assistance, the
Shinnecock Indian Nation locatedon Long Island, New York, filed apetition for Federal recognition in1998.  In response, the Bureau ofIndian Affairs (BIA) sent a letterof technical assistance to theNation that pointed out allegedomissions or deficiencies in thepetition.  Pursuant to the Federalacknowledgment regulations, theNation filed a response to the letterin March 2003. The petition willnow be placed on the BIA’s ready-for-active-consideration list whichis a first-come, first-served list.The list is a procedural step 
prior to being placed on ActiveConsideration when at such timethe petition will be activelyreviewed by the BIA research staffthat conducts such reviews.
On behalf of the United
Houma Nation of Louisiana,NARF responded to proposedfindings against federal acknowl-edgment issued by the BIA undertheir acknowledgment regulations.The T ribe has their petition for federal recognition pendingbefore the BIA’s Branch of
Acknowledgment and Research
and is now waiting for a finaldecision on its petition.  NARFhas also filed a petition for federalrecognition for the MashpeeWampanoag T ribe of Massachusettsthat is now under active consider-ation by the BIA.  Work on apetition for the Pamunkey T ribein Virginia continues.
11 native american rights fund - annual reportruled in favor of the T ribe holding
that the United States’ breach offiduciary duty to maintain andpreserve Indian trust propertygave rise to a claim for moneydamages under federal law. InUnited States v. Navajo Nation ,
the Court ruled against the T ribeholding that the T ribe’s claim forcompensation did not derive fromany liability-imposing provisionof Indian Mineral Leasing Act orits implementing regulations. InInyo County v. Paiute-ShoshoneIndians of the Bishop Community ,
the Court vacated the UnitedStates Court of Appeals for theNinth Circuit favorable opinionon tribal immunity from suit andremanded the case back to theNinth Circuit on jurisdictionalgrounds.
In the 1950s, Congressional
experiments with terminating thefederally recognized status ofNative American tribes and forcingtheir assimilation under state lawproved to be a disaster, compellingCongress decades later to restorethe tribal status of terminatedtribes.  In turning the page backto the 1950s, the AlaskaLegislature has for several yearsengaged in litigation against theDepartment of the Interior andAlaska T ribes to terminate thefederally recognized tribal statusof Alaska T ribes.  The AlaskaLegislature’s efforts have beenactively supported by AlaskaSenator Ted Stevens, who hasdirectly urged Interior SecretaryGale Norton to reverse theDepartment’s recognition ofAlaska T ribes.  Pending the out-come of this litigation, SenatorStevens has commenced a new
campaign to defund Alaska NativeT ribes in various spending bills. 
The effect of these and similar
measures, if enacted, would be toslowly cut off the ability of AlaskaNative T ribes to function bydenying them the ability to providefor the health, safety and welfareof their communities.  SenatorStevens, in remarks to the pressmade in October 2003, madeclear that his opposition to Alaskantribes is not about funding multi-ple tribal governments, but aboutterminating altogether the sover-eignty of Alaska tribes.  If SenatorStevens’ proposals become policy,such action would deteriorate thesovereign rights of all tribes, woulddenigrate the fundamental impor-tance of federal recognition, andset a dangerous precedent thatwould reflect a new Congressionalpolicy of acquiescing to the whimsof congressional members whofavor the termination of federallyrecognized tribes.
NARF is leading efforts to
give voice to tribal governmentsin Alaska by organizing a  nationalcampaign to alert tribal leaders ofthe pending threat.  Efforts areunder way to conduct hearingsthroughout rural Alaska to receivetestimony from tribal governmentson issues of self-governance andthe delivery of government servicesto tribal members.  The testimonyand data from these hearing willbe compiled into a report thatcan be delivered to Congress andused as a basis for rebuttingSenator Stevens’ rhetoric thatgovernment and services are bestadministered by state entities.In the case of Runyon v.
AVCP , NARF prepared an amicus
brief on behalf of the AlaskaInter-T ribal Council (AI-TC) thatwas filed with the Alaska SupremeCourt in April 2003 in a case thatraises the question of whether the Alaska Village Council ofPresidents (AVCP), a tribal con-sortium organized as a non-profitunder the laws of Alaska, can raisederivative sovereign immunity asa defense to suit. AI-TC’s amicibrief does not take a position withregard to whether AVCP possessesderivative sovereign immunity;rather, it rebuts the argumentsraised by amici for the plaintiffs,the Alaska Legislative Council,who urged the Court to reconsiderits historic holding in John v.
Baker in 1999 that tribes in
Alaska have been federally recog-nized. Oral argument was heardin September 2003 and a decisionis pending.
FEDERAL RECOGNITION
OF TRIBAL STATUS
Achieving legal status as an
Indian tribe is very important topreserving tribal existence andself-government.  Some tribalgroups do not have this statusbecause they have never been formally recognized as tribes bythe federal government.  NARFprovides representation to thosetribal groups who have a right to become federally recognizedtribes.
NARF currently represents
five Indian communities whohave survived intact as identifiableIndian tribes but who are not federally recognized.  These Indian
10 annual report - native american rights fundunconstitutional but the Supreme
Court vacated that opinion andremanded to the Secretary for further reconsideration. The Stateis now challenging the Secretary’sreconsidered, and again favorable,decision to place the land in trust.The T ribe filed a motion to inter-vene in this case, but the federaldistrict court denied the T ribe’smotion.  The T ribe appealed tothe Eighth Circuit on the issue of the T ribe’s intervention. TheEighth Circuit upheld the districtcourt’s denial of the T ribe’smotion for intervention in March2003.  The T ribe will not be
allowed to participate in the litigation as a party, but will haveits interests represented by theUnited States.
In 2002, the Secretary of the
Interior invited the Klamath T ribesto meet with the Presidentiallyappointed Klamath River BasinFederal Working Group (WorkingGroup) chaired by SecretaryNorton, and including theSecretaries of Agriculture andCommerce, and the Chairman ofthe Council on EnvironmentalQuality.  These appointmentsoffer an unprecedented opportunity
to restore the land, water, hunting,fishing and gathering resources ofthe Klamath T ribes.  Discussionsare now taking place betweentribal representatives, assisted byNARF , and the Secretary’s desig-nated team to seek long termsolutions to an entire range ofwater, land, and wildlife issuesfacing the people of the KlamathBasin in Oregon and California.This historic and broad invitationexpressly included the possiblereturn of lands taken from theT ribes in the 1960s under the
13 native american rights fund - annual report 12 annual report - native american rights fundThrough the process of
European conquest and coloniza-tion, Indian tribes experienced asteady diminishment of their landbase to a mere 2.3 percent of itsoriginal size.  Currently, there areapproximately 55 million acres ofIndian-controlled land in the continental United States andabout 44 million acres in Alaskawhich are owned by Natives afterthe 1971 Alaska Native ClaimsSettlement Act.  Central to main-taining economic self-sufficiencyas well as genuine self-determina-tion, the possession of an adequateland base and resources are vitalto the existence of tribes.  Withoutsuch fundamental necessities,tribal life is virtually impossible to maintain.  NARF’s work toensure tribal control over theirland, water, and subsistence rightsholds importance beyond materialwealth; indeed, it safeguards thevery core of tribal existence.
The federal government has
in many instances failed to fulfillits trust duty to protect Indiantribes and their property rights.The Native American RightsFund concentrates much of itslegal representation on cases thatwill ensure a sufficient naturalresource base for tribes.
PROTECTION OF INDIAN
LANDS
The Alabama-Coushatta T ribe
of Texas seeks compensation forthe loss of use of millions of acresof fertile forest that they onceoccupied in southeast Texas.  TheT ribe has been represented byNARF since 1981 in their questto prove that their ancestral landwas illegally taken from them by
settlers.  In 1996, the UnitedStates Court of Federal Claimsruled in Alabama-Coushatta Tribe
of T exas v. United States that the
United States should compensatethe Alabama-Coushatta T ribe forthe loss of use of ancestral landillegally taken without federalapproval between 1845 and 1954.In 2000, the United States Courtof Federal Claims ruled onceagain in favor of the Alabama-Coushatta T ribe of Eastern Texasin their breach-of-trust claimagainst the United States, holdingthe Government liable for theT ribe’s loss of use of over 2.85million acres of land between1845 and 1954.  The court alsoruled that 5.5 million acres ofaboriginal title has never beenextinguished, so the T ribe also has a possessory land claimagainst the current occupants of5.5 million acres.  Negotiators forthe U.S. and T ribe reached anagreement on the amount ofdamages, $270 million, and theCourt submitted a favorable recommendation to Congress in2002 on the T ribe’s breach oftrust claim against the UnitedStates.  NARF and the T ribe are now working to garnerCongressional approval for thepayment of this amount underthe Congressional reference procedure.
NARF represents the
Keewattinosagaing or NorthernLakes Potawatomi Nation ofCanada, a band of Pottawatomiesdescended from the historicPotawatomi Nation, which from1795 to 1833 signed a series oftreaties with the United States.
These treaties provided, amongother things, the payment of certain annuities.  The ancestorsof the present-day CanadianPotawatomi fled to Canada following the signing of the finaltreaty, the T reaty of Chicago in1833, because they did not wantto be moved west of theMississippi.  They were neverpaid their annuities.  In 1993,NARF brought suit on behalf ofthe T ribe in the Court of FederalClaims, by way of Congressionalreference, to seek redress of thesefailed payments.  After years offact-finding, discovery and briefingof this case, the T ribe and theUnited States agreed in principleto the settlement of this case.Settlement terms were approvedby the Court in 2000 and settle-ment legislation was presented toCongress in 2001, 2002, and2003 for compensation of $1.83million.  Congress has yet toapprove the settlement legislation.
NARF is working with the
Lower Brule Sioux T ribe againstthe State of South Dakota’s challenge to the United States’decision to place approximately91 acres of land into trust for theLower Brule Sioux T ribe underSection 465 of the IndianReorganization Act. The State isalleging, among other things, thatthe Secretary lacks authority toplace land into trust becauseSection 465 is an unconstitutionaldelegation of legislative authority.In an earlier proceeding regardingthis same 91 acres of land, theEighth Circuit Court of Appealsdid hold that Section 465 was
The Protection of Tribal Natural Resources
“De Soto’s Legacy” collection and disposal of solid
and hazardous waste. 
WATER RIGHTS
Establishing tribal rights to
the use of water in the arid westcontinues to be a major NARFinvolvement.  The goals ofNARF’s Indian water rights workare to secure allocations of westernwater for present and future needsfor three Indian tribes representedby NARF and other western tribesgenerally.  Under the precedentestablished by the United StatesSupreme Court in 1908 in thecase of Winters v. United States
and confirmed in 1963 in Arizona
v. California, Indian tribes are
entitled under federal law to suffi-cient water for present and futureneeds with a priority date at leastas early as the establishment oftheir reservations.  These tribalreserved water rights are superiorto all state-recognized water rightscreated after the tribal priority
date, which in most cases willgive tribes valuable senior waterrights in the water-short west.Unfortunately, many tribes havenot utilized their reserved waterrights and most of these rights areunadjudicated or unquantified.The major need, of course, ineach case is to define or quantifythe exact amount of water thateach tribe is entitled to throughlitigation or out-of-court settle-ment negotiations.  T ribes aregenerally able to claim water forpresent and future use of theirpracticably irrigable acreage,maintenance of treaty huntingand fishing rights, and municipaland industrial needs.NARF continues its extensive
involvement in the water rightslitigation and settlement negotia-tions on behalf of the KlamathT ribes to adjudicate the T ribes’reserved water rights to supportits 1864 treaty hunting and fishingrights. As confirmed by the federalcourts nearly twenty years ago,the Klamath T ribes of Oregonhold reserved water rights in theKlamath River Basin to supporttheir treaty hunting, fishing andgathering rights, as well as to satisfy the agricultural purposes of the Klamath Reservation.These reserved rights are currentlybeing quantified in the context ofa state-wide water adjudication inOregon. NARF is assisting theKlamath T ribes in asserting anddefending their treaty-based waterrights in the adjudication, and iscurrently engaged on a number offronts. First, in order to ensurethat the State of Oregon appliesthe correct federal standards inquantifying T ribal water rights,the T ribes asked the U.S. DistrictCourt for the District of Oregonto clarify the nature and scope ofthe Klamath T ribes’ reservedwater rights. In 2002, the Courtissued an opinion and order reaf-firming the T ribes’ water rightsand deciding all disputed issues infavor of the T ribes.  This importantdecision was appealed to theNinth Circuit Court of Appealsby private water users and theState of Oregon. In July 2003,the Court of Appeals vacated the2002 decision.  NARF has filed apetition for a rehearing en bancfrom the Ninth Circuit Court ofAppeals.  Meanwhile, the statewater rights adjudication is moving
forward. The T ribes contestednumerous unsubstantiated claimsin the basin, scores of which areunderway and tribal claims arebeing scheduled for hearing. Atthe same time, the T ribes continueto explore water settlementefforts.
NARF continues its represen-
tation of the Nez Perce T ribe ofIdaho in its water rights claim in the Snake River BasinAdjudication (SRBA).  The T ribe’smajor claim is for sufficient in-stream flows to maintain its treatyrights to fish for salmon and steel-head that migrate down the SnakeRiver to the Columbia River andout to the ocean before returningto spawn.  After issuance of a1999 decision, the T ribe learnedthat the judge and his brotherand sister have claims to both surface irrigation and groundwaterirrigation flows in the SRBA,which present direct and actualconflicts of interest with theT ribe’s claims. The T ribe filedmotions, in 2000, to disqualifythe judge and to set aside alljudgments, orders and decisionsinvolving the T ribe’s claims. TheT ribe and the United Statesappealed the decision to theIdaho Supreme Court.  In 2002,the Idaho Supreme Court dismissed the appeal as moot.The T ribe’s petition for rehearingwas denied by the Idaho SupremeCourt.  In October 2003, all parties to the negotiations signedon to a comprehensive term sheetagreement, which also calls forthe suspension of all litigationregarding Nez Perce claims in the
15 native american rights fund - annual reportnow repudiated “Termination”
policy.  Discussions also includethe restoration of degraded fishand wildlife habitat that currentlyprevent tribal resources from providing subsistence for tribalmembers.
NARF represents the Native
Village of T uluksak in Alaska intheir quest to have the landowned by the Village corporationtransferred over in fee simple tothe Village tribal council.  TheDepartment of Interior wouldthen be petitioned to place theland into trust on behalf of theVillage.  The Department of theInterior is in the process of revisingregulations governing the processof taking land into federal trustfor Native Americans.  NARFworked with the NCAI T ribalLeaders’ Task Force on LandRecovery, on behalf of T uluksak,to develop comments to the pro-posed regulations and has beenwaiting for the Secretary of theInterior to issue final regulations.The Department of the Interiorhas decided to further postponeconsideration of a new regulation,after an assessment of ongoingpolicy work, available personneland resources.  The Native Villageof T uluksak is weighing whetherto move forward with litigation atthe current time.
NARF has played a key role
in the implementation of federalenvironmental law and policy that recognizes tribal governmentsas the primary regulators andenforcers of the federal environ-mental laws on Indian lands.NARF continued to work withtribes, the National T ribalEnvironmental Council and other
Indian organizations to maintainthe progress that has been madewith the EnvironmentalProtection Agency (EPA) andother federal agencies.  With arepresentative on the GreenGroup, a coalition of nationalenvironmental leaders, NARFcontinues to coordinate with and educate the environmentalcommunity on the role of tribalgovernments in environmentallaw and policy.
NARF assists the Gwich’in
Steering Committee in theirefforts to protect the ArcticNational Wildlife Refuge(ANWR) from oil development.The Gwich’in, which means‘People of the Caribou’, are thenorthernmost Indian nation livingacross northeast Alaska andnorthwest Canada.  There areabout 7,000 Gwich’in people wholive on or near the migratoryroute of the Porcupine CaribouHerd.  For thousands of years, the Gwich’in have relied on the caribou for food, clothing, tools,
and a source of respect and spiritual guidance.  The calvinggrounds of the Porcupine Rivercaribou herd inside ANWR isconsidered sacred.  The Gwich’incall it “Vadzaih googii vi dehk’itgwanlii” (The Sacred Place WhereLife Begins).  The Gwich’in willnot journey into these sacredgrounds for hunting, even intimes of great need or food short-age.  Oil development in ANWRwould not only harm the caribou
and threaten the future of the
Gwich’in people, but would alsothreaten more than 180 species ofbirds, and numerous mammals
including polar bears, musk ox,wolves, wolverine, moose, Arcticand red foxes, black bears, brownbears, and the white Dall sheep.NARF successfully worked with a
coalition of environmental groups
and organizations to stop the U.S.Senate from approving oil drillingin ANWR in 2001 and 2002.Language was again introduced in the 2003 Congress to allow foroil drilling in ANWR and wasonce again defeated.  As theAdministration has vowed to continue to press for the passageof this bill, NARF will continueto assist the Gwich’in SteeringCommittee in their efforts to stopthe approval of oil developmentin ANWR. 
NARF is working with 
the Oglala Sioux T ribe’sEnvironmental Health TechnicalTeam (EHTT) in developingwater-related environmentalcodes.  NARF is working with theT ribe’s Department of WaterMaintenance and Conservationand the EHTT on the revision ofthe T ribe’s Ordinance for theProtection of the Oglala SiouxRural Water Supply System andOther Public Water SystemsWithin the Pine Ridge IndianReservation [“Tap-in” Ordinance],as well as a Solid WasteManagement Code.  The “Tap-in”ordinance will provide for theprotection of the integrity of thepipeline which delivers drinkingwater to the public water systemson the reservation. The SolidWaste Management Code willprovide enforceable standards anda fee structure for solid waste 
14 annual report - native american rights fundand fishing rights, on the Outer
Continental Shelf were barred bythe federal paramountcy doctrine.NARF argued that the para-mountcy doctrine did not extin-guish aboriginal title to theseabed and waters off Alaskabecause aboriginal title does notinterfere with the federal govern-ment’s ability to protect thenation or to regulate internationaltrade.  The Court, however,expressly reserved the questionwhether Native tribes might holdnon-exclusive hunting and fishingrights.  The question whether theVillages have nonexclusive aborig-inal fishing rights was sent backbefore the federal district.  Thefederal district court ruled againstthe Villages in 2002.  An appealwas filed by NARF to the NinthCircuit Court of Appeals and oralargument was held in August2003.  A decision is now pending.
The Kenaitze Indian T ribe of
Alaska is a federally recognizedtribal government whose membersare direct descendants of Tanaina(Dena'ina) Athabaskan Indians.The T ribe has occupied the KenaiPeninsula region for centuries andsubsisted by harvesting and gath-ering the resources offered by theland and the sea with salmon asthe primary subsistence resource.Under the Alaska NationalInterest Lands Conservation Act(ANILCA), residents of rural areasare given a subsistence priorityover sport and commercialhunters and fishermen.  In 1991,the Federal Subsistence Boarddeclared large portions of theKenai Peninsula to be non-rural,including the entire Kenai area,which comprises the primary
hunting and fishing grounds formembers of the Kenaitze IndianT ribe.  The Kenaitze T ribe, withNARF’s assistance, drafted andsubmitted a proposal to theRegional Advisory Council andthe Federal Subsistence Boardseeking to have the Board reverseits 1991 “non-rural” determina-tion. In 2000, the FederalSubsistence Board reversed itself,holding that the Kenai Peninsulawas indeed rural. However, theState and others requested theBoard to reconsider this determi-nation and in 2001, the Boardreversed itself again, holding that virtually all of the KenaiPeninsula was non-rural.  TheT ribe decided to challenge thisdecision in court and NARF fileda complaint in federal court onbehalf of the Kenaitze T ribe.
NARF is representing the
Native Village of Venetie T ribalGovernment, the Ninilchik T ribalGovernment, and individuals asproposed interveners in a casethat was initially brought by theSafari Club, a sporting club, tochallenge regulations promulgatedby the Secretaries of Interior andAgriculture implementing thesubsistence preference establishedby ANILCA.  ANILCA establishesa preference for customary andtraditional uses of fish andwildlife by according a priorityfor the taking of fish and wildlifeon federal public lands in Alaskafor non-wasteful subsistence usesby rural Alaska residents.  TheFederal Subsistence Board hasmade determinations as to whichareas or communities of Alaskaare rural and which are not, and
further made over 180 customaryand traditional use determinations.The customary and traditionaldeterminations are criticallyimportant because eligibility totake a particular resource maythen be limited to those residentsof rural areas or communities sodesignated, and all other individualsmay be prohibited, in some manner,from taking that resource basedon the limitations.  The SafariClub challenged the validity of all180 customary and traditionaldeterminations under ANILCA.NARF’s clients seek to interveneas co-defendants to defend thesubsistence use-determinations fortheir respective communities andto protect their entitlement totake fish and wildlife on federalpublic lands in Alaska for subsis-tence uses in Alaska.  The courtgranted the T ribe’s motion tointervene in January 2003, andentered an order establishing anew briefing schedule.  NARFsubmitted its brief in April 2003.
17 native american rights fund - annual reportSRBA.  The Idaho Supreme
Court and the SRBA Court bothagreed to suspend all litigation topermit settlement negotiations toproceed. 
NARF continues to assist the
T ule River T ribe of California insecuring its water rights.  NARF’smain focus has been on drafting asettlement agreement to presentto both the United States anddownstream users along the SouthFork of the T ule River.  TheT ribe’s goal is to prepare a proposalthat will provide the T ribe withsufficient water to create a perma-nent homeland for its people withminimal impact on the otherusers. Initially, the T ribe presentedthe downstream users with abroad conceptual plan for settle-ment, which included a proposedshort-term and long-term waterstorage facility, and proposedreservoir operation rules whichwould honor the terms of animportant 1922 agreement.  Aditch company and certain riparianusers tentatively approved theconceptual plan so long as it doesnot adversely impact their currentwater uses under the 1922 agree-ment.  However, some downstreamusers who rely on storage water ina large downstream federal reservoirare wary of the potential impactof new T ribal storage rights on water supply in the federalreservoir.  After refining the con-ceptual settlement plan in light ofupdated technical, legislative, andlegal information, the T ribe, inconsultation with the FederalNegotiation Team, presented therefined plan to the downstreamusers.  Negotiations are scheduledto continue based on the T ribe’s
revised settlement plan.
NARF also concentrated on
addressing a major problem inwater rights settlements - the lackof federal funding for settlements.NARF has continued to facilitateIndian water rights settlementpolicy in the Congress by workingwith our state and private partnersin the Ad Hoc Group on IndianReserved Water Rights, theWestern Governors’ Associationand the Western BusinessRoundtable.  NARF has also continued to participate in theJoint Federal-T ribal WaterFunding Task Force in order toencourage the Administration tosupport funding for Indian waterrights settlements.  NARF hasalso been involved in the creationof the Western Water Alliance,which hopes to bring togetherorganizations and fundersinvolved in western water issuesto advance sustainable and equi-table water policy in the west.
HUNTING AND FISHING
The subsistence way of life 
is essential for the physical and cultural survival of AlaskaNatives.  Most of the two hundred small Native villages inAlaska are located on or near theshores of a river or a lake, orlocated on the coast of the NorthPacific or Arctic Ocean.  Theproximity to water is no accidentand reflects the dependence ofNatives on the harvest of fishstocks for sustenance and thebasis of their traditional way oflife.  In many Native villages freshmeat, fish and produce areunavailable except through the
subsistence harvest.  Annually,subsistence harvest amounts toless than 10% of the total take offish and game.
As important as Native hunting
and fishing rights are to AlaskaNatives’ physical, economic, traditional, and cultural existence,the State of Alaska has been andcontinues to be reluctant to rec-ognize the importance of the subsistence way of life.  The Stateviews subsistence as nothing morethan a taking of a naturalresource, and as something thatall citizens of the state should beentitled to engage in on an equalopportunity basis with little distinction between commercial,sport and trophy hunting, andsubsistence needs. 
NARF represents the Alaska
Native Villages of Eyak, Tatitlek,Chenega, Nanwalek, and PortGraham seeking to establishnonexclusive aboriginal huntingand fishing rights to their tradi-tional-use areas on the OuterContinental Shelf (OCS) in theGulf of Alaska.  The issue pre-sented is whether the T ribes maypossess non-exclusive aboriginalhunting and fishing rights towaters on the OCS.  The lawsuitchallenges the Department ofCommerce’s Individual FishingQuota (IFQ) regulations for halibut and sable fish on theground that they prohibit tribalmembers from fishing withintheir traditional fishing groundswithout IFQ’s.  In 1998, theNinth Circuit Court of Appealsruled that claims for aboriginaltitle, including exclusive hunting
16 annual report - native american rights fundreview and reversal of DOI’s 
decision in the federal districtcourt of Oregon.  The court heardarguments and issued an opinionrequiring DOI to reconsider itsdecision in light of analysis of anumber of questions posed in theCourt’s opinion.  DOI reconsid-ered and adhered to its originaldecision.  The scientists again filedsuit in Oregon court seekingreview and reversal of DOI’s decision.
In 2002, the U.S. District
Court for the District of Oregonissued a ruling that requires theDOI to transfer the remains tothe plaintiffs (scientists) to studythe remains of “Kennewick Man.”
The tribes charge that this farreaching decision removes anybarriers that would prevent scien-tists from demanding access to allNative American human remainsfor their research and study,regardless of whether the remainswere 20 or 20,000 years old.  TheDistrict Court granted a requestby four Pacific Northwest tribes tointervene in the law suit.
The Ninth Circuit Court of
Appeals issued an order stayingthe District Court’s order allowingnon-Indian scientists access to theremains for study pending the resolution of the appeal.  NARFand the Association on American
Indian Affairs filed an amicus brief
on behalf of the Association onAmerican Indian Affairs and theMorning Star Institute in March2003.  The brief supports the tribal position that the DistrictCourt’s interpretation of NAG-PRA is legally erroneous.  Oralargument was held in September2003 and a decision is now pending in the Nin th Circuit.
In late 1994, Public Law 103-
344, which exempts the religioususe of peyote by Indians in bonafide traditional ceremonies fromcontrolled substance laws of the
19 native american rights fund - annual reportAlthough basic human rights
are considered a universal entitle-ment, Native Americans muststruggle against the constantthreat of having their rightsundermined by the United Statesgovernment and others who seekto limit these rights.  Althoughthe First Amendment of theUnited States Constitutionpledges to uphold guarantees ofreligious freedom, Native peopleshave to continue their fight toensure that their right to religiousexpression remains intact. NARF’s specialized knowledgeworks to uphold this essentialhuman right, along other keyissues such as education, prisonreform, and the welfare of Indianchildren.  NARF , on behalf of itsclients, seeks to enforce andstrengthen laws which aredesigned to protect the humanrights of Native Americans inthese areas.
RELIGIOUS FREEDOM
Because religion is the foun-
dation that holds Native commu-nities and cultures together, 
religious freedom is a NARF priority issue.  As a result, NARFhas utilized its resources to protectFirst Amendment rights ofNative Am erican religious leaders,
prisoners, and members of the
Native American Church, and toassert tribal rights to repatriateburial remains.  Since NativeAmerican religious freedomaffects basic cultural survival ofIndian tribes, NARF believesthat American law and socialpolicy must provide adequatelegal protection.NARF was a leading proponent
of the Native American GravesProtection and Repatriation Act(NAGPRA) which was signed intolaw in 1990.  The Act requiresfederal agencies and private museums that receive federalfunding to inventory their collec-tions of Native American humanremains and funerary objects,notify the tribe of origin, andreturn the ancestral remains andfunerary objects upon request tothe tribe.  It makes clear thatIndian tribes have ownership ofhuman remains and cultural itemswhich are excavated or discoveredon federal or tribal land and thatthey alone have the right to deter-mine disposition of Indian humanremains and cultural remains discovered in these areas.  The Actprohibits the trafficking of NativeAmerican human remains andcultural items where the items areobtained in violation of the Actand requires federal agencies andprivate museums that receive federal funds to create a summaryof sacred objects in their possession.If  a tribe can prove a right of pos-session to these objects then theymust be returned upon request ofthe tribe.  NARF continues toprovide guidance to tribes that areasserting NAGPRA claims.
The Native American Rights
Fund represented the NationalCongress of American Indians(NCAI) as an amicus in the caseof Bonnichsen v. United States ,
sometimes referred to as the“Kennewick Man case.”  The casearose from the discovery of 9000year old human remains along theColumbia River.  Several north-west tribes collectively filed a
claim for possession of theremains with the Department ofInterior (DOI) under the NativeAmerican Graves Protection andRepatriation Act.  The T ribes wish to repatriate the remains inaccordance with tribal religioustraditions.
Several scientists, i.e.,anthro-
pologists, archeologists, and muse-umologists petitioned DOI forpermission to conduct extensivestudies of the remains beforereburial by the tribes.  DOIdenied the scientists’ petition andgranted the tribes’ petition.  Atthat point, the scientists sought
18 annual report - native american rights fundThe Promotion of Human Rights
continued on page 22“State of the Union” 21 native american rights fund - annual report 20 annual report - native american rights fundNARF Major Activities 2003 - Case Map 
1516
17
1819202223 21
25
24
3433 3214
35362
411
37
8
195 6
1028
3126
273029
13
12United States
of America
HawaiiAlaska1 Kenaitze Indian Tribe - 
Subsistence (Alaska)
2 Gwich’in Steering Committee -
Environmental/Subsistence (Alaska)
3 Alaska Inter-Tribal 
Council/Native Village of Akiak - Equal Protection (Alaska)
4 Native Village of Alakayak - 
Language Initiative (Alaska)
5 NARF ANCHORAGE OFFICE6 Native Village of Tuluksak - 
Trust Lands (Alaska)
7 Native Village of Kiana - 
Education (Alaska)
8 Native Village of Nulato -
Education (Alaska)
9 Native Village of Eyak, Tatitlek,
Chenega, Nanwalek, and PortGraham -  Subsistence &Aboriginal Title (Alaska)
10 Ninilchick Tribe - 
Subsistence (Alaska)
11 Native Village of Venetie -
Subsistence (Alaska)
12 Pele Defense Fund - 
Aboriginal Rights (Hawaii)
13 Rice v. Cayetano - 
Voting Rights (Hawaii)
14 Nez Perce Tribe - 
Water Rights (Idaho)
15 Klamath Tribes - 
Water Rights & Self-Sufficiency (Oregon)
16 Bonnichsen v. United States
(“Kennewick Man case”) -Repatriation (Oregon)
17 Tule River Tribe - Water 
(California)
17 San Juan Southern 
Paiute Tribe - Land Claim (Arizona)
18 Jicarilla Apache Tribe - 
Education (New Mexico)19 NARF HEADQUARTERS
BOULDER, COLORADO
20 Medicine Wheel National Historic
Landmark - Sacred Site (Wyoming)
21 Fort Peck Tribes - 
Education (Montana)
22 Chippewa-Cree Tribe - 
Water & Trust Claim (Montana)
23 Little Shell Tribe - 
Recognition & Trust Claim (Montana)
24 Fort Berthold Reservation - 
Education (North Dakota)
25 Turtle Mountain Reservation - 
Trust Claim (North Dakota)
26 NARF WASHINGTON, D.C. 
OFFICE
27 IIM Case & Tribal Supreme Court
Project (Washington, D.C.)
28 Northern Lakes Pottawatomi 
Nation - Land Claim (Canada)
29 Mashpee Wampanoag Tribe - 
Recognition (Massachusetts)
30 Shinnecock Tribe - 
Recognition (New York)
31 Pamunkey Tribe - 
Recognition (Virginia)
32 Lower Brule Sioux Tribe - 
Trust Land (South Dakota)
33 Rosebud Sioux Tribe - 
Education & Cultural Property Rights (South Dakota)
34 Oglala Sioux Tribe - 
Environmental (South Dakota)
35 United Houma Nation - 
Recognition (Louisiana)
36 Alabama-Coushatta Tribe -  
Land Claim (Texas)“Getting’ Out of Bed” ment officers and employees.”  In
response to the initiative, NARFfiled suit on behalf of twenty-seven Native individuals andorganizations that have askedNARF to represent them.  In1999, the Alaska Superior Courtgranted a preliminary injunctionthat enjoined the State of Alaskafrom the operation and enforce-ment of Alaska’s Official EnglishInitiative.  Alaskans for aCommon Language moved tointervene and were granted inter-vention in 2000.  In 2002 theAlaska Superior Court struckdown the English-only law as aviolation of the free speech clauseof the Alaska Constitution.  The S tate of Alaska chose not 
to appeal, but Alaskans for a
Common language has appealed.Oral argument was heard in June2003.  NARF is now waiting for
a decision.
NARF conducted an extensive
analysis of federal and internationalintellectual property laws andpolicies and their current impacton Native American intellectualproperty and cultural propertyissues.  The analysis will form thebasis of an action plan that will bepresented to the NationalCongress of American Indians.This review constitutes phase I ofa proposed two phase project toinitiate concrete efforts to improvethe legal protection of indigenousintellectual and cultural propertyrights.
NARF is also helping the
Rosebud Sioux T ribe of SouthDakota develop a CulturalResources Management Code bywhich the T ribe can regulate itscultural and intellectual property
on its reservation.  The T ribe isparticularly interested in regulatingthe harvest and use of sage, itsSun Dances, and various arts and crafts.
In 1978, the United States
Congress enacted the IndianChild Welfare Act (ICWA).  TheAct states as its purpose: “TheCongress hereby declares that it isthe policy of this Nation to protectthe best interest of Indian childrenand to promote the stability andsecurity of Indian tribes and familiesby the establishment of minimumfederal standards for the removalof Indian children from their families and the placement of suchchildren in foster or adoptivehomes which will reflect theunique values of Indian culture,and by providing for assistance toIndian tribes in the operation ofchild and family programs.”  The Act established substantive,procedural and jurisdictional protections for tribes and Indianfamilies in cases of adoption, pre-adoptive placement, fostercare placement, and terminationof parental rights proceedingsinvolving Indian children.Because these protections are chal-lenged or may conflict with statelaw, policy or practice, there havebeen several hundred state andfederal court decisions interpretingthe Act.  Congress has alsoattempted to amend the Act toresolve concerns related to theenforcement of the Act.  NARFcontinued to monitorCongressional legislation and con-tinued its participation in nationalconferences and meetings relatedto Indian child welfare to address
tribal concerns.
EDUCATION
In 2002, NARF received a
generous grant of $1.6 millionfrom the Kellogg Foundation. Thegrant became effective September2002 and extends over a three-year period. The ultimate goal ofthe grant is for NARF to helptribes in improving the learningoutcomes for Native Americanchildren in schools by utilizing acollaborative approach in whichtribes work closely with schoolofficials to identify obstacles toimprovement in education, toidentify and implement potentialsolutions, and to establish andimplement a tribal system of gathering and updating basic datameasuring achievement of tribalstudents.
Under the Kellogg grant,
NARF is currently working closelywith six tribes - the Assiniboineand Sioux T ribe of the Fort PeckReservation in Montana, theJicarilla Apache Nation in NewMexico, the Native Villages ofKiana and Nulato in Alaska, theRosebud Sioux T ribe in SouthDakota, and the Three AffiliatedT ribes of the Fort BertholdReservation in North Dakota.NARF is providing legal and technical assistance to help thesetribes establish or reorganize tribaldepartments of education.  Theseefforts to improve tribal involve-ment in the education of theirchildren would enable the tribesto collaborate with the schoolsproviding education programs totribal children.  An important part
23 native american rights fund - annual reportfederal and state governments, was
passed.  NARF represented theNative American Church ofNorth America (NACNA) andplayed a key role in the passage ofthe legislation.  It also prohibitsdiscrimination against Indians forsuch religious use of peyote,including the denial of otherwiseapplicable benefits under publicassistance programs.  The billclosed the door to governmentalprohibition of  sacramental use ofpeyote by Indians and effectivelyreversed a 1990 United StatesSupreme Court decision in Smith
v. Oregon that denied First
Amendment protection to theNative American Church.
NARF is representing the
Native American Church in thecase O Centro Esprírita Beneficiente
União Do Vegetal (UDV-USA) v.Ashcroft. The UDV is a Christian
religious organization duly formedunder the laws of Brazil, with itsheadquarters in Brasilia, Brazil.The UDV-USA is the UnitedStates branch of the UDV whoseprincipal offices are in NewMexico.  The UDV claims thatthe federal government is violatingits constitutional right of equalprotection by permitting NativeAmerican Church members topossess and use peyote for religiouspurposes while denying them thereligious possession and use ofayahuasca by UDV members.Ayahuasca is a hallucinogenic teadecoction made from the stems orbark of the vine banisteriopsis(also known as “mariri”) togetherwith the leaves of psychotriaviridis (also known as “chacruna”).
Ayahuasca has been used for centuries in healing rituals inColumbia, Ecuador, Brazil, and Peru.
The government bases its 
protection of the religious use ofpeyote on the trust relationshipbetween the United States andIndians and the political relation-ship between the United Statesand tribes.  Numerous courts overthe past 20 years have recognizedand upheld this special relation-ship as a basis for the uniquetreatment of the Native AmericanChurch.  NARF and the Churchassisted the United StatesDepartment of Justice in defendingcurrent federal law which protectsthe religious use of peyote byIndian Church members.  In2002, the Federal District Courtin New Mexico rejected theUDV’s equal protection argument,but accepted its argument that itwas protected under the ReligiousFreedom and Restoration Act(RFRA).  The NAC took no posi-tion on the UDV’s RFRA claimsagainst the United States.  Thegovernment appealed to the TenthCircuit Court of Appeals and theTenth Circuit affirmed in 2003 infavor of UDV’s RFRA claim, butalso rejected the UDV’s equal pro-tection claims that threatened theNAC’s special status under federallaw.  The government has nowfiled a petition for reconsideration.
In Wyoming Sawmills v. United
States and Medicine WheelCoalition, a private timber company
in Wyoming has challenged thelegality of the United States ForestService’s Historic PreservationPlan (HPP) for managing the
Sacred Medicine Wheel on consti-tutional (establishment of religion)and other grounds.  NARF filedan amicus curiae brief on behalf of the National Congress ofAmerican Indians urging theUnited States District Court forthe District of Wyoming touphold the Plan on statutory andconstitutional grounds, which itdid in a decision in 2002.  TheDistrict Court did not address theconstitutionality of the HPPbecause it found that WyomingSawmills lacked standing to raisean Establishment Clause claim.Wyoming Sawmills has appealedthis decision to the federal appealscourt.  Oral argument was held inthe spring of 2003, and a decisionis forthcoming.
CULTURAL RIGHTS
In 1998, an “English Only”
initiative was passed in the State ofAlaska.  The initiative was writtenin very broad terms and will havea major impact upon AlaskaNatives.  Unlike other officialEnglish measures that are primarilysymbolic, this measure prohibitsthe use of any language exceptEnglish in all governmental func-tions and actions.  The measureapplies to “the legislative and exec-utive branches of the State ofAlaska and all political subdivi-sions, including all departments,agencies, divisions and instrumen-talities of the State, the Universityof Alaska, all public authorities andcorporations, all local governmentsand departments, agencies, divi-sions, and instr umentalities of
local governments, and all govern-
22 annual report - native american rights fundcontinued on from 19any right of self-determination for
tribes or other indigenous peopleswithin the international arena.For decades, tribes have urged theUnited States to abandon itsanachronistic and discreditedinternational policy against self-determination.
The new policy, while far
from perfect, is a step in the rightdirection and will set the necessaryfoundation to begin a more con-structive dialogue with the UnitedStates and other states on theRights of I ndigenous Peoples 
during negotiations surroundingthe Declarations on the Rights ofIndigenous Peoples in the U.N.and the OAS.  The new policydoes three things that indicatesconsiderable movement by theUnited States: (1) it acknowledgesa right to “self-determination”(albeit only an ‘internal’ right), (2) it accepts that certain rights of“indigenous peoples” are “grouprights”, and (3) it accepts the useof the term “Peoples.”  The use ofthe term Peoples has importantlegal significance, since two widelyaccepted international covenantsboth expressly provide that “AllPeoples have the right to self-determination...” as opposed to“people” which does not conveythe same legal rights.
The new policy also impacts
the United States’ official positionon the collective nature of therights of indigenous peoples.Prior to this change in policy, oneof the major stumbling blocks inthe discussions at both the U.N.and the OAS regarding therespective D eclarations has been
that the United States had takenthe position that it would only
recognize rights belonging to indi-viduals.  But, of course, Indiantribes by definition have alwayshad rights that are exercised by thegroup.  The new United Statespolicy acknowledges this reality.
NARF continued its partici-
pation on drafting sessions with
the U.N. Working Group OnIndigenous Populations and at theOAS on behalf of our client,NCAI.  NARF has been grantedspecial consultative status in theU.N. and can now appear on its own credentials at all U.N.activities dealing with Indigenouspeoples.  A U.N. drafting sessionwas held in September 2003 andthe OAS held drafting sessions inFebruary and November of 2003,
and has scheduled additional sessions for January and Februaryof 2004.  The drafting sessionsaddressed core paragraphs of the Draft dealing with self-determination, treaty rights and land rights.
25 native american rights fund - annual reportof this effort involves the develop-ment and implementation of legaldevices such as tribal educationcodes and intergovernmentalagreements that will operate toformalize tribal/school collaborativeactivities that increase the role oftribal governments in the schoolsthat serve their people. Anotherimportant part of the project is toassist tribes in developing a systemand process by which basic dataconcerning the education status oftribal children will be collected,tracked on a regular basis, and
used to measure the progress of
the tribe/schools’ collaborativeactivities. In addition, under theproject, NARF will assist tribes inacting as catalysts to bring togethertribal, state, and federal agenciesand resources to work in concertto improve the learning experienceof Indian students. 
In September 2003, following
the first full year of the three-yearproject, NARF education attor-neys worked with an evaluationconsultant to prepare the firstannual evaluation of the Project’sprogress.  The Project evaluationconcluded that all six tribes had made progress over the firstyear sufficient to put them in aposition of moving forward withthe project more expeditiously in
the second year.
The U.S. Department of
Education Office of IndianEducation awarded a one-timegrant of $20,000 to NARF for the purpose of establishing a newnational organization for T ribalEducation Departments and todevelop the new organization’sweb site.  With the help ofEducation Directors of theSuquamish T ribe, the Cheyenne-Arapaho T ribes, and theConfederated Salish and Kootenai
T ribes, the T ribal Education
Departments National Assembly(TEDNA) was formed and incor-porated in 2003.  The purpose ofthe TEDNA is to bring togethertribal education directors, staffand policy makers so that they canshare information, strategize andproblem solve on common issuesof education governance, policyand advocacy at the tribal, regionaland national levels.
INTERNATIONAL LAW
NARF and the National
Congress of American Indians(NCAI) entered into a attorney-client relationship for the purposeof working in the internationalarena to protect indigenous rights.To date, this work has focused on
the Draft Declaration on theRights of Indigenous Peoplesbeing considered by theOrganization of American States(OAS).  This document will beinvaluable in establishing baselinerights for indigenous peoples inthe Western Hemisphere.  Inaddition, a strong document inthis hemisphere will bolster theprocess in the United Nations(U.N.) where a Draft Declarationon the Rights of IndigenousPeoples is also being considered.
Conversely, if the OAS document
is adopted in weakened form, itmay be used to dilute the UnitedNations draft declaration, whichhas widespread indigenousapproval. 
Through a relentless campaign
by a coalition of tribes and Indianrights organizations includingNCAI, NARF and the Indian LawResource Center, the UnitedStates announced that it wasadopting a more forward-lookingpolicy on rights for “IndigenousPeoples” in 2001.  While theUnited States has promoted ameasure of self-determination forIndian tribes domestically sincethe 1970s, the government hadsteadfastly refused to recognize
24 annual report - native american rights fund
“We’re Sorry To Report” Contained within the unique
trust relationship between theUnited States and Indian nationsis the inherent duty for all levels ofgovernment to recognize andresponsibly enforce the many lawsand regulations applicable toIndian peoples.  Because such lawsimpact virtually every aspect oftribal life, NARF maintains itsinvolvement in the legal matterspertaining to government account-ability to Native Americans.  In atime when federal governmentaccountability is increasingly dubious, it is crucial that NARFcontinues its fight to assure that
Native Americans do not succumb
to government negligence. 
NARF , along with other attor-
neys, filed a class action lawsuit in1996 against the federal govern-ment.  The lawsuit was filed onbehalf of 300,000 IndividualIndian Money (IIM) accountholders to seek redress for govern-ment mismanagement of trustaccounts through which billions of dollars of Indian money hasflowed over the years.  The suitcharges the federal governmentwith illegal conduct in what isviewed as the largest and mostshameful financial scandal everinvolving the United States gov-
ernment.  NARF represents allpresent and past individual Indiantrust beneficiaries.  Commonlyreferred to as the “IIM Case,” thislitigation is intended to force theUnited States as trustee to:  (1)perform a complete, accurate andreliable accounting of all trustassets held to the benefit of indi-vidual Indian trust beneficiaries;(2) properly restate the trust fundaccounts in conformity with thataccounting; and (3) create anaccounting and trust managementsystem that is reliable and will safelyand soundly manage the trust
funds of individual Indians in 
the future.
In 2001, the Court of Appeals
for the District of Columbiaupheld the 1999 Federal DistrictCourt decision holding the UnitedStates in breach of trust andrequiring the government to provide an accounting to the IIMbeneficiaries.  These two decisionsconstitute two of the most impor-tant opinions ever issued on thetrust responsibilities of the govern-ment to Native Americans.
Following the Court of
Appeals decision, District CourtJudge Royce C. Lamberthappointed a court monitor, Joseph
S. Kieffer III, to independentlyassess the United States’ failingeffort to reform the Indian trustmanagement system.  His firstReport found that despite JudgeLamberth's 1999 order to account,the federal government failed toperform a full and fair accountingof trust funds.  He also found thatthe Interior Secretary and herpredecessor were orchestrating anelaborate charade to trick theCourt into believing that theywere taking action, when theywere not.  Mr. Kieffer’s second andthird Reports found that the gov-
ernment lied at trial regarding the
progress of trust reform and thelikelihood that their trust reformplan would result in success. Inaddition, the Reports demonstratedthat although federal officials wereunder an obligation to reporttruthfully on trust reform after the1999 decision in QuarterlyReports to the Court, they failedto do so.  Instead, time and timeagain they falsely told the Courtthat the reform effort was generallygoing as planned.  They neverrevealed that both the Bureau ofIndian Affairs (BIA) T rust Assetand Accounting Management
27 native american rights fund - annual reportThe Accountability of Governments
“Witness” Department of the Interior filed
three motions for summary judg-ment. After both parties briefedthe issues in April 2003, the Courtdenied all three motions in toto .
One of the motions is particularlynoteworthy since defendantssought to limit the accounting to1984 forward by application of thestatute of limitations. The Courtheld, consistent with NARF’s position, that no limitations areapplicable because defendants have
not “repudiated” the trust anduntil repudiation, limitations cannot begin to run.
In April 2003, Senate Indian
Affairs Committee Chairman BenNighthorse Campbell and ViceChairman Daniel Inouye wroteletters to the parties urging amediated settlement of the case.On behalf of the plaintiffs, NARFresponded favorably to the suggestion in a letter in May 2003
calling on Senator Campbell,
Senator Inouye and other keyCongressional leaders to becomedirectly involved in settlement discussions themselves.  NARFrepeated its support for a mediatedsettlement process at a SenateIndian Affairs Committee hearingin July 2003. 
In July 2003, a decision was
rendered on the government’sappeal of Judge Lamberth’s 2002ruling on contempt.  A three-judge panel of the U.S. Court ofAppeals for the District ofColumbia ruled that the DistrictCourt ruling holding theSecretary’s in civil contempt had tobe reversed because the sanctionwas a criminal proceeding, not acivil sanction, and the burden ofproof was not met.  In September2003, NARF attorneys asked thenine active judges who sit on theU.S. Court of Appeals for theDistrict of Columbia to reinstatethe civil contempt citations arguingthat the three-judge panel miscon-strued the true nature and purposeof the civil contempt proceedingin declaring it to be something itwas not – a criminal contemptproceeding.  NARF’s petition forrehearing was denied in October2003.
In May 2003, as scheduled,
T rial 1.5 on the accounting andtrust reform plans commenced.The trial lasted 44-trial-days withclosing arguments in July 2003.In September 2003, in ruling onT rial 1.5, the Court issued a two-part opinion and an order imposinga structural injunction whichrequires the Interior defendants to
29 native american rights fund - annual reportSystem (TAAMS) data cleanupeffort and the installation of theTAAMS system, the purportedcenterpiece of trust reform, wasrunning into serious problems.Finally, Mr. Kieffer issued a fourthreport, this one finding essentiallythat the Secretary had knowinglyverified an “inaccurate and incom-plete” Quarterly Report to theCourt.
Beginning late in 2001, 
contempt proceedings against theSecretary of the Interior and theAssistant Secretary for IndianAffairs were held.  In 2002, JudgeLamberth held the Secretary ofInterior and the Assistant Secretaryfor Indian Affairs in contempt ofCourt on the following fourcounts: 1) committing fraud onthe court by concealing the trueactions of the department regardingthe historical accounting;  2) com-mitting a fraud on the Court formisrepresentations regarding ITsecurity failures at the Departmentof Interior;  3) committing fraudon the Court for failing to disclosethe true status of the TAAMSproject and;  4) committing fraudon the Court by filing false andmisleading status reports regardingBIA Data Clean-up.  In addition,defendants were held to haveengaged in litigation misconductfor failing to comply with theCourt’s 1999 Order to initiate aHistorical Accounting Project.The government appealed JudgeLamberth’s decision.
The Court ordered that
Interior must, and plaintiffs may,each submit two separate plans byJanuary 2003 that would set fortha means to conduct the accountingrequired by law and set forth a
means to bring Interior into com-pliance with its trust duties (i.e. atrust reform plan).  In conformitywith the Order, NARF filed anaccounting plan which demon-strated that more than $13 billionin proceeds from individual landhas been produced by Indian allotted land (not counting interestaccrued).  NARF argued in theirplan that, pursuant to trust lawwhere all presumptions are against
the trustee, this amount is owed.If Defendants show with compe-tentevidence that they made 
disbursements to the correct beneficiary, the $13 billion will bereduced accordingly.  To the extentdefendants cannot make such ashowing, then the trust accountbalances must be corrected (plusinterest accrued since production).
In January 2003, the
28 annual report - native american rights fund
“Downwind From Hanford” concluded numerous treaties of
trade, commerce and friendshipwith several countries includingthe United States.  The Apologywas a watershed event inAmerican history, seen by manyHawaiian people as the first stepin making reparations for the illegal overthrow.  The overthrowhas, for over a century, beenviewed by Hawaiians as the ulti-mate atrocity committed againsttheir sovereign nation, the culmi-nation of the enormous political,social, cultural, economic andspiritual changes wrought on theHawaiian people since the 1778arrival of Captain Cook.
The Apology has fueled the
passions of the Hawaiian peopleinvolved in the sovereignty move-ment.  The United States’ admis-sion that the overthrow was illegal,immoral, and unjust is seen asbut a first step in the long processof establishing “ho’opono’pono” –the Hawaiian traditional systemfor “making things right.”    
For many years, the Native
American Rights Fund has beeninvolved in the Hawaiian rightsmovement, commencing with ourassistance in the founding of theNative Hawaiian Legal Corporation(“NHLC”) nearly 30 years ago.Also, since the mid-1980s, NARFhas co-counseled with NHLC andprivate counsel in representingthe Pele Defense Fund (“PDF”)in efforts to prevent large-scale geothermal development in theWao Kele‘O Puna rainforest onthe Big Island, 27,000 acres ofwhich are owned by the CampbellEstate, one of the largest land-holding estates in Hawaii.  PDFand others we re ultimately 
successful in turning away large-scale geothermal development onthe Big Island, in part becausesuch a venture has never madeany sense environmentally or economically, not to mention culturally and spiritually.  TheWao Kele rainforest is irreplace-able to those Hawaiians who worship the Goddess Pele, andwho hunt and gather there. Theefforts of PDF culminated in the 2002 entry of a stipulatedjudgment and order by the statecourt in Hilo, Hawaii recognizingthe PDF members’ rights to access,hunting, gathering, and worship
on the Wao Kele lands - part ofthe bundle of “traditional andcustomary rights” protected, pre-served and enforced under ArticleXII,  § 7 of the Hawaii Constitution.Efforts are now underway for theacquisition of the Wao KeleOfuna rainforest lands.
Rice v. Cayetano involved a
challenge by a non-Native to the voting restriction in the stateconstitution allowing only NativeHawaiians to vote for trustees ofthe Office of Hawaiian Affairs(OHA).  The OHA administersincome received from certain trustlands for the benefit of NativeHawaiians. Rice argued that therestriction violates the Fourteenthand Fifteenth Amendments to theU.S. Constitution.  The NinthCircuit Court of Appeals upheldthe voting restriction, but theUnited States Supreme Courtreviewed that decision.  One ofRice’s arguments is that sincethere are no tribes in Hawaii,  thevoting restriction is purely race-based and subject to strict scrutiny.
The Supreme Court case ofMorton v. Mancari held that legis-
lation as to Indian tribes is basedon the political relationshipbetween tribes and the UnitedStates and need only be rationallyrelated to Congress’ unique obli-gation toward I ndian tribes.  The
question was whether the same
standard applies to legislationpassed for the benefit of NativeHawaiians.  NARF filed an amicus
curiae brief in support of Native
Hawaiians on behalf of theNational Congress of AmericanIndians in the Supreme Court.However, in 2000, the SupremeCourt ruled against the NativeHawaiians declaring that the staterestriction on voting for OHAtrustees to Hawaiians was basedon race and, therefore, violatedthe Fifteenth Amendment whichprohibits denying anyone theright to vote based on race.
The aftermath of the Rice
decision, while not technicallydeciding the equal protectionissue, sent signals to opponents of state Hawaiian programs that it was open season on what somesee as “race-based special benefits.”Over the past three years a flurryof litigation has ensued.  NARFcontinues to monitor numerouschallenges by non-NativeHawaiians to programs and legislation that have been enactedto benefit to Native Hawaiians.
31 native american rights fund - annual reportconduct a historical accounting of
the IIM T rust and to provideplaintiffs with an accurateaccounting.  Judge Lamberth’sopinion consists of two-parts:Historical Accounting and Fixingthe System.  In HistoricalAccounting, the government mustaccount for all funds since thepassage of the General AllotmentAct of 1887 by 2007.  In Fixingthe System, the Court held that“Congress intended to imposeupon Interior the traditional fiduciary duties of a trustee, andthat the scope and nature of thoseduties are coextensive with theduties imposed upon trustees atcommon law.”  An appeal by thegovernment is expected.
In a Court of Federal Claims
related action, NARF representsthe T urtle Mountain Band ofChippewa in North Dakota, theChippewa-Cree of the RockyBoys Reservation in Montana andthe Little Shell T ribe of Chippewain Montana against the Bureau ofIndian Affairs for mismanagementof the Pembina Judgment Fund.The tribes allege misaccounting,misinvestment, and mismanage-ment by the federal governmentof their $50 million tribal trustfund since the inception of thefund in 1964.  The parties in thiscase continue to explore a negoti-ated settlement of the T ribes’claims.  At the same time, theparties have asked the court toclarify the threshold issue of whoare the proper plaintiffs in thisaction involving a trust fund withmultiple beneficiaries.  In July2003, the White Earth Band ofMinnesota Chippewa moved tobe named a party plaintiff in this
action.  If that motion is granted,NARF will represent White Earthalong with the other three PembinaChippewa T ribes.
In another related matter,
NARF filed suit in the Court of Federal Claims against the government seeking damages forbreach of trust on behalf of theChippewa Cree T ribe of the RockyBoy’s Reservation in Montana.The T ribe alleges misaccountingand misinvestment of the T ribe’strust funds based on oil and gas,timber, and grazing resources.NARF is seeking an accounting ofcertain T ribal accounts and has askedthe Court to assign the case to thejudge in the IIM case.  At this time,the litigation is on hold to allow the parties to explore a negotiatedsettlement of the T ribe’s claims.
The Native American Rights
Fund, on behalf of the AlaskaInter-T ribal Council, ten Nativevillages and seven Native individ-uals, filed a civil lawsuit in 1999in the Superior Court for theState of Alaska seeking declaratoryand injunctive relief against theState of Alaska for failure to provideminimally adequate police protec-tion to off-road Native villagesand for discriminating againstthem in the provision of State lawenforcement services.  In Alaska
Inter-Tribal Council v. Alaska,the complaint alleges that theactions of the State in unlawfullyprohibiting Native villages fromkeeping the peace in their tradi-tional ways, which rendered themdefenseless to lawbreakers, whilefailing to provide them even min-imally-adequate police protectionunder the State law enforcement
system, violated the Villages’rights to Due Process of law andbasic law enforcement protectionguaranteed by the FourteenthAmendment to the United StatesConstitution and Article I of theAlaska Constitution.
The complaint also alleges
that the State’s discriminatorytreatment of Native villages in the provision of police protectionis based on race and therefore violates the Villages’ rights toEqual Protection of the law underthe Fourteenth Amendment tothe United States Constitutionand Ar ticle I of the Alaska
Constitution. The complaint sets
forth in sad detail the history ofdiscrimination against Native
Villages in the provision of lawenforcement by both theTerritorial and State governments.A decision was rendered by theSuperior Court in 2002 in favor of the State of Alaska.NARF appealed this decision tothe Alaska Supreme Court andargument was heard in September2003.  NARF is now waiting fora decision.
In 1993, the United States
Congress enacted the HawaiianApology Joint Resolution, PublicLaw 103-150, 107 Stat. 1510(1993), admitting that the role of the United States military inremoving the Hawaiian monarch,Queen Lili’u’okalani, from powerand installing the provisional government was illegal underAmerican and international law.Prior to the overthrow, Hawaii wasregarded internationally as one ofthe family of nations, which had
30 annual report - native american rights fundThe systematic development
of Indian law is essential for thecontinued protection of Indianrights.  This process involves distributing Indian law materialsto, and communicating with,those groups and individualsworking on behalf of Indian people.  NARF has two ongoingprojects which are aimed atachieving this goal.
THE NATIONAL INDIAN
LAW LIBRARY
The National Indian Law
Library (NILL) is a national publiclaw library devoted to AmericanIndian law which serves both theNative American Rights Fund(NARF) and the public. The mission of NILL is to developand make accessible a unique andvaluable collection of Indian lawresources and to assist people withtheir research needs. Specialemphasis is placed on helpingindividuals and organizationsworking on behalf of NativeAmericans who have the greatestpotential to positively influencetheir lives. NILL fills the needs ofthe often-forgotten areas of thenation known as Indian country.NILL handles close to 1,800information requests per year andserves a wide variety of public
patrons including attorneys, tribalgovernments, tribal organizations,researchers, students, prisoners,the media, and the general public.
For the past thirty years,
NILL has been collecting a wealthof materials relating to federalIndian law and tribal law thatinclude such tribal self-governancematerials as constitutions, codes
and ordinances, legal pleadings
from major Native American law cases, law review articles,handbooks, conference materials,and other information. Now thegeneral public can access biblio-graphic descriptions of thesematerials from the electroniclibrary catalog on the NILL website.(See: http://nillcat.nar
f.org/ )
This searchable catalog providesfree access to current descriptionsof more than 10,000 holdings in the library collection. Oncerelevant documents are located,patrons can review materials atthe Boulder, Colorado library,request copies to be mailed(faxed or E-mailed for a nominalfee), or borrow materialsthrough interlibrary loan. Inaddition, the library web pagesprovide research links, full-textcopies of tribal codes and consti-
tutions, and the Indian LawBulletin current awareness service. Access these resources by directing your Internetbrowser to the Native AmericanRights Fund (NARF) website at www
.narf.organd click on 
the National Indian Law Library link. 
INDIAN LAW SUPPORT
CENTER
Since 1972, the Indian Law
Support Center (ILSC) of theNative American Rights Fundhad received funding from theLegal Services Corporation toserve as a national support centeron Indian law and policy for thenational Indian legal servicescommunity and the 32 basic fieldprograms serving Native Americanclients.  Literally hundreds ofrequests for assistance in all areasof Indian law were answeredannually.  Because of the uniqueand complex nature of Indian lawand the geographic remoteness ofIndian legal services programs,complicated by the difficulty ofattracting and maintaining experi-enced staff, ILSC performed avital and cost-effective support
33 native american rights fund - annual reportThe Development of Indian Law
“A Mother’s Love” Based on our audited financial
statements for the fiscal year endingSeptember 30, 2003, the NativeAmerican Rights Fund reportstotal unrestricted revenues of$7,895,814 against total expendi-tures of $7,942,204.  Net assets atthe end of the year came to$7,522,282. Due to presentationrequirements of the audited
financial statements in terms ofrecognizing the timing of certain
revenues, they do not reflect thefact that, based on NARF’s internalreporting, revenue actuallyexceeded operating expenses andother cash outlays by $163,239,allowing for an increase toNARF’s reserve fund.  This
increase is largely attributed tosettlements in attorney fees andgains on investments.
Revenue and Expense 
comparisons between fiscal year2003 and fiscal year 2002 areshown below.
35 native american rights fund - annual reportfunction to Indian programs andother legal services providersacross the country.
Due to the loss of Legal
Services Corporation funding in1995, ILSC has been unable tocarry on at traditional levels itsprogram of working with Indianlegal services lawyers nationwidethrough advice, research, recentIndian legal information, litiga-tion and training.  However,ILSC has been able to continuesome assistance to Indian legalservices programs throughout theyear.  ILSC continued to send outregular mail-outs to Indian legalservices programs, handlingrequests for assistance, and workingwith the National Association ofIndian Legal Services (NAILS) tosecure a more stable funding basefrom the Congress.  ILSC wasinvolved in the passage of theIndian T ribal Justice and LegalAssistance Act of 2000 whichPresident Clinton signed into law.The Act authorizes theDepartment of Justice to providesupplemental funding to Indianlegal services programs for theirrepresentation of Indian peopleand tribes which fall below federalpoverty guidelines.  In 2003,ILSC worked with NAILS tosecure the first appropriation forthe Act, $2 million, and contin-ues to sponsor an annual trainingconference on tribal courts.
OTHER ACTIVITIES
In addition to its major 
projects, NARF continued its participation in numerous confer-ences and meetings of Indian andnon-Indian organizations in orderto share its knowledge and expertise
in Indian law.  During the pastfiscal year, NARF attorneys andstaff served in formal or informalspeaking and leadership capacitiesat numerous Indian and Indian-related conferences and meetingssuch as the National Congress ofAmerican Indians ExecutiveCouncil, Midyear and AnnualConventions and the Federal BarAssociation’s Indian LawConference.  NARF remains
firmly committed to continuingits effort to share the legal expertisewhich it possesses with thesegroups and individuals working insupport of Indian rights and tofoster the recognition of Indianrights in mainstream society.
34 annual report - native american rights fundTreasurer’s Report
Contributions
Federal Grants
Foundation Grants
 Legal Fees
Other
TOTALS$ 3,780,856 
 1,147,310  1,342,339 
 752,989 
 15,293 
 857,027
     $ 7,895,814 47.9%  
 14.5%   17.0%  
 9.5%   0.2%  
   10.9%  
 100%$ 4,350,174   
 1,478,699   
 759,118   
  64,031   
 27,136   
 <742,026> 
 $ 5,937,132  73.3%   
 24.9%    12.7%   
 1.1%   0.5%  
 <12.5%>
 100%dollars percents
2003SUPPORT AND REVENUE COMPARISON
dollars percents2002
Return on Investments
Note: This summary of financial information has been extracted from NARF’s audited financial statements on
which the accounting firm of JDS Professional Group expressed an unqualified opinion. Complete audited financials are available, upon request, through our Boulder office or at www.narf.org.dollars percents2003EXPENSE COMPARISON
dollars percents2002
Litigation and Client Services
National Indian Law Library     Total Program ServicesManagement and GeneralFund Raising     Total Support Services TOTALS$ 4,734,537 
 477,087 
 5,211,624 
 993,953 
 1,736,627  2,730,580 
     $ 7,942,204 59.6%  
 6.0%  
 65.6%   12.5%   21.9%  
  34.4%  
 100% 63.4%   
 5.0%   
 68.4%   
 13.8%   17.8%   31.6%  
 100% $ 4,537,074   
  356,223   
 4,893,297   
 989,625   
 1,275,653    2,265,278   
 $  7,158,575  
“We Got The Vibe” “We Got The Vibe” Benefactors
John AugsburyGeorge BaetjerAlex BercierBenjamin BinderWilliam & Elsa BoyceRev. & Mrs. C. Frederick BuechnerC. ChangeKate ChristySusan ClementsPeter GerbicMrs. Akabe GulbankianGeorge HarringtonElisabethe Khult-Van-DenbergRichard KnutsonPatrice KuneshAnn LarimoreMary LiebmanJames MarienthalBarbara MeislinCassandra S. NaylorOla M. RexroatJohn M. ShermanMargaret SinclaireMatthew D. Slater & Faith RoesselJennifer TiptonAmelia VernonRobert WagnerW. Richard & Mary Beth West
Peta Uha - Platinum Feather ($5,000 +)
Elizabeth BenedictJohn S. BevanRobert HartMartha PhillippiFrances A. Velay (Panaphil Foundation)
Peta Uha - Gold Feather ($1000+)
James & Louise ArnoldRobert & Patricia BerryLawrence D. Bragg, IIIPeter BronerMary Anibal BrookCatherine Brotzman, Four Winds Trading Co.Jack CampisiRaymond & Constance CarrollThelma G. CharenKate ChristyTedd CockerHarvey Dennenberg
John DercksenPaul Anthony D' ErricoRobert DanielsSubhuti DharmanandaDavid M. Dornbusch, Dornbusch AssociatesLucille EchohawkAlan EvansRichard FergusonLemuel A. FraserRobert FriedeRico F. GenhartFrances HagemannCollier HandsJohn Heller & Emilie Heller-RhysBob & Barbara HumesRobert HutchinsonRichard Jongmok KimAlbert & Skaye KirkRobert E. Kleiger, M.D.Charles KoobScott & Ricki KresanPaul & Eileen Le FortStella LulhamJoanne LymanWarren MarrDoris Renee MarxMarion McCollom HamptonHelena MeltesenJeanne D. Morrel-FranklinFrannie OatesKady Offen-RovtarMr. & Mrs. Claude G. PonceletEsther Hayward RivinusCarol A. RobertsJay ScheideAlfred H. SchwendtnerMargaret SinclaireEdith J. SmithNancy & Wayne Starling RossWalter A. StockBridget StroudGilbert TauckBessie ThomasonElaine UmholtzMargaret VerbleStephen & Ann Marie WheelockCatherine WilliamsDavid WinstonPeta Uha - Silver Feather ($500-$999)
John S. ArnoldJane BairdMary E. BaneElizabeth BenedictNorval K. BhendraMarjorie I. BlachlyTom BlankElizabeth L. CelioPolly R. ChernerIlze Anna ChoiKen Bear Hawk CohenBarbara Conlon MuthMichael ConnollyRobert DanielsAnne De Muth & Mark HodgeThomas V. Di SilvioThomas & Jane DunphySusan & Henry EichhornDaren & Amy EilertKathryn ElstonAnne EvansJohn & Barbara EverettJudy Fair-SpauldingLyman FlinnPamela FordRobert Roland FoxAndrew & Audrey FranklinAdam P . GeballeJames E. GilleyEric O. GinsburgSusan & G. Robert GreenbergGloria GreenhillMary C. GriffinDuncan HaasSteve HagermanRobert HallameckLou HensleeSara HinckleyJudith S. HortonW. HowellsElaine HuttonMrs. Raymond W. IckesDavid KastDr. Mereld D. KeysMrs. Collier KimballGeorge KoehlerMr. & Mrs. William LymanBetty M. Martin
37 native american rights fund - annual reportWe thank each and every one of our supporters for their commitment to thegoals of NARF.  NARF’s success could nothave been achieved without the generosityof our many donors throughout thenation.  We gratefully acknowledge thesegifts received for fiscal year 2003.
Living Waters Endowment
Helen and Sidney Ungar Memorial 
Endowment Fund
Edward & Verna Gerbic Family FoundationSusan K. Griffiths Memorial FundMary Lou Mosca-Ragona Memorial FundMarvin W. Pourier, Sr./Donna M. Deans 
Memorial Fund
Kathleen and Ruth Dooley Family FundFrank J. McCormick Family FundJerome Davis Living Waters Endowment FundElwood H. Brotzman Memorial Fund
Foundations, Corporations and
OrganizationsThe Ford FoundationW. K. Kellogg FoundationRockefeller FoundationJohn D. and Catherine T. MacArthur 
Foundation
Carnegie Corporation of New YorkGeneral Service FoundationEverett Public Service Internship ProgramCharles W. Hewlett FoundationCommunity Foundation of Northern IllinoisDrumbeat Indian ArtsFalcon Charitable FoundationFocus Foundation Inc.Gay & Lesbian Fund for ColoradoGorlitz Foundation, Ltd.Gravestar FoundationHarrison FoundationHui Malama I Na Kupuna O Hawai’i NeiJohnson Family FoundationJoy Family FoundationKey FoundationBoulder County Bar Foundation 
(Law Clerk Program)
LW Robbins AssociatesLasser Family TrustLP Brown FoundationLutheran Community Foundation
North Star FoundationOnaway TrustPanaphil FoundationPaula & William Bernstein FoundationPhiladelphia Yearly Meeting of the Religious 
Society of Friends
Phogg Phoundation For the Pursuit 
of Happiness
R.M.F. FoundationRita S. Gold FoundationRuth M. Knight FoundationSeidman Family FoundationStanley Family FundStettenheim FoundationThomas FoundationTides FoundationUngar FoundationWhizin FoundationWinky FoundationWoodward Family FundWorking Assets
Corporate Matching Gifts
Amgen, Inc.Aon FoundationBank Of America Foundation, Inc.B.D. Indispensable to Human HealthB.D. Matching Gift ProgramBoston Foundation/Polaroid FundBP Amoco Foundation, Inc.Charitable Gift FundC.S.G. systems, Inc.The Eastern Bank Charitable FoundationFannie Mae FoundationThe Ford FoundationIllinois Tool Works FoundationJ.P . Morgan Charitable TrustMicrosoft Matching Gifts ProgramPepsico FoundationPfizer IncSt. Paul Companies, Inc.Strong Financial CorporationSun Microsystems FoundationSynopsys Foundation Matching Gifts ProgramUnilever United States Foundation, Inc.Verizon FoundationWorld Reach, Inc.Tribes and Native Organizations
Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla IndiansColusa Indian Community CouncilConfederated Tribes of the Umatilla 
Indian Reservation
Cow Creek Band of Umpqua IndiansElk Valley RancheriaFort MojaveGila River Indian CommunityHo-Chunk NationJamestown S’Klallam Tribal CouncilLac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior 
Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin
Little Traverse Band of Odawa IndiansMashantucket Pequot TribeMille Lacs Band of Ojibwe IndiansNative Village of Fort Yukon (I.R.A.)Native Village of KipnukNative Village of KwinhagakNez Perce TribeOneida Tribe of WisconsinOrutsaramuit Native CouncilPort Graham Village CouncilPueblo of San IldefonsoQuapaw TribeRedding RancheriaSan Manuel Band of Mission IndiansSeven Cedars CasinoShakopee Mdewakanton SiouxUgashik Traditional VillageWinnebago Tribe of NebraskaYavapai Prescott TribeWinnebago Tribe of Nebraska
Bequests and Trusts
F. Blythe BaeblerOlive F. BerryHelen Bircher TrustRuth G. BoyntonKathleen Dooley TrustThe Ferriday TrustRoseanne HoefelAnna H. JensenPauline KehlenbachRuth M. TearneyRuth ThompsonRuth M. Whitman
36 annual report - native american rights fundAcknowledgment of Contributions: Fiscal Year 2003Karen Williams-Fast Horse
Marcel WingateDavid YeomanWayne W. ZengelAbraham Zuckerman
NARF Endowment
Beverly BrownRose CunyJohn E. EchohawkWalter & Pauline EchohawkGayla Fills PipeK. Gerome GottschalkStephanie HuttonSandra JanisHeather Kendall-MillerMichael KennedyYvonne KnightMireille MartinezMelody McCoySalvatore MendozaSteven MooreChristine PereiraMary Lu RousseauxDonald M. RagonaRay RamirezClela RorexDavid SeldenJoanne SoklinDebbie ThomasMark TildenDon WhartonMontoya WhitemanMary WynneJohanna Zeh
Special Events
Cache Creek Indian Bingo & CasinoChickasaw NationChitimacha Indian TribeColusa Community Development ProgramCoeur d’Alene TribeJicarilla Apache NationThe Klamath TribesLac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior
Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin
Mazatzal CasinoMiccosukee Tribe of IndiansMille Lacs Band of Ojibwe Indians and Grand 
Casino Mille Lacs
The Mohegan TribeOneida Tribe of Indians of WisconsinPaiute Palace Casino The Pueblo of LagunaRobinson Rancheria Bingo & CasinoRumsey Band of Wintun IndiansRumsey Community FundSt. Regis Mohawk TribeTanana Chiefs Conference, Inc.Angela BabbyBonderenko Direct, Inc.Mystie BrackettMary Annibal BrookJackson BrowneDakota EmporiumDawn Dark MountainThe Denver SingersEagle Plume’s Gallery, Allenspark, COSteve Earle and the DukesBunky Echo-HawkGlendine FieldsJeanne Morrel FranklinGreene, Meyer & McElroy P .C.Four Winds Trading CompanyEric GinsburgJohn GonzalesBernie Granados, Jr.The Guacamole FundSara HinckleySandra IngermanKeb’Mo’Kogovsek & Associates Inc.Bob McIntoshBetty Mary MartinShirley MiollaThomas and Esther MooreDel Mulder, Pak Mail off the Plaza, NMNative America OnlineThe Native VoicePahponeeMichelle PaisanoAmado Peña, Jr.Ramona PetersPink Flamingo CateringSequoia and Sh’Tarra Queen-AnacondaDawn RivendellMateo RomeroAndrew Rodriguez
Rabbett StricklandTchinFrances VelayWhole Foods Market, Boulder, COMelanie Yazzie
(NARF gratefully honors our many friends
and partners who sponsored and supportedsome of our special events in 2003. Thanksa million for going to all the trouble anddeeply caring about Indian rights advocacy.) 
In-Kind Contributions
Miriam PaisnerMargery GoldmanAnne EstinEddie Griffith Fine Arts, Santa Fe, New MexicoIDEAS International Inc.Phillip EcklundFaegre & Benson, LLPBeth PattersonAmelia AbromaitisLynlee ThorneElizabeth MauldinAllison EberhardJaime JacobyHeather Holbrooks-KuratekBill Hendrix, BMJ EnterprisesBoulder Phone InstallersStuart T. LangleyBoulder-Denver Advisory CommitteeLucille EchohawkThomas W. FredericksDavid GetchesAva HamiltonJeanne WhiteingCharles Wilkinson
Federated Workplace Campaigns
Thank you to the thousands of federal, state,municipal and private sector employeesthroughout the country who through theirpayroll deduction plans contributed $132,628 in fiscal year 2003.
Federal Programs
Administration for Native AmericansBureau of Indian Affairs
39 native american rights fund - annual reportPeta Uha - Silver Feather ($500-$999)
(continued)
Harry McAndrewRalph & Lorraine MemmerShirley MiollaBryan MorganSue Murphy MoteSandra NowickiMrs. Howard ParkerLewis PerkissAntoinette PeskoffRobert D. PhillipsMary PodmostkoEdith QuevedoChristina RiehmDawn RivendellF. David & Helene RobertsMaurie & Marilyn SemelMr. & Mrs. Peter SheldonD.L. ShurtleffMarcia SiglerSusan SlaughterSybille SmithMary W. SmithEstelle Stamm & Alling Woodruff, Jr.LeRoy StippichHope P . StokesDorothy Harrison ThermanMr. & Mrs. Gordon M. TorgersenMargaret Q. TravisJanice WarnerMargaret WeitzmannRosella WelmaLois Whitman
Circle of Life
Charles Adams & Judith A. RobertsonNina BarghoornMaxwell K. BarnardBarbara BeasleyJoyce P . BeaulieuDiane Ben AriRoy BensonSandra C. BergerMary Helen BickleyBetty E. BlumenkampCharles BowersDale E. BrandWilliam BrownGloria Burgess
Patricia BurnetThomas CampbellArthur CarterRobert CarterMary CasmusEd ChasteenPaul D. CliftonCharles ColeJanet M. CongeroJudith A. DayHarvey A. DennenbergLaurie DesjardinsGary DickerhoofStarr DormannPatricia R. DuvalNoelle Edwards & David LawsonJudy Fair-SpauldingJames K. FeeDebra FrazierJan FreemanSusanne GartzLawrence H. GellerDeborah GhoreyebEstela GoldsmithLouise Gomer BangelArline M. GoodrichBernard GordonGene GrabauJean GundlachMerrill HakimMichael S. HallMargaret HartnettMrs. Theodora C. HaughtonPatricia HeidelbergerAlfred HooseJudith S. HortonVusama KaribaRose Ann KeeneyEmily S. KirkBetty KleczyMargo KochRutheEllyne Krackower-RiceEdward KriegeJames LangharstIngrid LeblancJames LehnererFrank LovelandRichard B. LuersRima Lurie
Suzanne MacDonaldPatricia Marks-GreenfieldMarion McCollom HamptonKatrina McCormick BarnesJoseph McNamaraStanley D. MetzgerJeanne MoskalShirley NortonSara OsborneMoses PeterRandall PetersenDenise PfalzerRose PilcarskyThelma Populus GordonB.J. PowellHorace RainesMr. & Mrs. Robert ResnikMaureen RipleyBarbara RobertsAndrea RobinsongJune B. RosenthalKeith RossWilliam RozierMary SacherB.W. SampsonB. Frederique SamuelPeter E. SchmidtLa Roy SeaverMichael & Gillian SeeleyCharlotte SelverKatey Lynn SimetraCharles & Neta SmithSandra SpeidenCarolyn StabyHerbert StewartJames & Patricia StrausRennard StricklandMichael & Carol SullivanLouis TaboisValeria TenyakCharlotte ThompsonM.D. TurekJohn H. TylerRene’ VivoWilliam Joseph WadeTed WeitzRoger WelschGary White
38 annual report - native american rights fundAcknowledgment of Contributions: Fiscal Year 2003CORPORATE OFFICERS
John E. Echohawk (Pawnee)
Executive Director/Attorney
Lorna Babby (Oglala Sioux)
Litigation Management CommitteeMember/Attorney
K. Jerome Gottschalk
Litigation Management CommitteeMember/Attorney
Yvonne T. Knight (Ponca-Creek)
Litigation Management CommitteeMember/Attorney
Mary Lu Prosser (Cheyenne River Sioux)
Director of Development
Ray Ramirez
Secretary/Editor/Grant Writer
Clela Rorex
Treasurer/Law Office AdministratorBOULDER MAIN OFFICE STAFF
Walter R. Echo-Hawk (Pawnee)
Attorney
Melody McCoy (Cherokee), AttorneySteven C. Moore, AttorneyMark Tilden (Navajo), AttorneyDonald R. Wharton, AttorneyEric Anderson, Legal AssistantBeverly Brown, Legal AssistantJeremy Charley (Navajo)
Office Services Clerk
Rose Cuny (Oglala Lakota)
Office Manager
Gayla Fills Pipe (Oglala Lakota)
Receptionist
Stephanie Hutton
Development Staff Assistant
Michael Kennedy
Assistant Controller
Mereille Martinez
Development Projects CoordinatorChristine Pereira
Micro Computer Specialist
Donald M. Ragona 
(Mattinecock/Oglala Lakota)Director of Planned Giving/DevelopmentHouse Counsel
Joanne Soklin, Legal AssistantDebbie Raymond-Thomas (Navajo)
Assistant Controller
Montoya Whiteman (Cheyenne-Arapaho)
Development/Public Relations Administrator
Lisa Yellow Eagle (Navajo/Lakota)
Legal Assistant
Johanna Zeh, Accountant
NATIONAL INDIAN LAW LIBRARY
David Selden, LibrarianMonica Martens, Assistant Law LibrarianTorry Mendoza, Library Assistant
ANCHORAGE OFFICE STAFF
Heather Kendall-Miller (Athabascan)
Attorney
Natalie Landreth (Chickasaw)
Attorney
Vince Pangan, Legal Assistant
WASHINGTON, D.C. OFFICE STAFF
Keith Harper (Cherokee) 
Attorney
Tracy Labin (Mohawk/Seneca)
Attorney
Richard Guest
Attorney
Ruth Hargrow
Legal Administrative Assistant
Angela Paige
Legal Assistant
40 annual report - native american rights fundNative American Rights Fund - Staff
“Peaceful Negotiations” “Peaceful Negotiations” NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
1506 Broadway, Boulder, Colorado 80302