Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is a nonprofit, 
charitable organization incorporated in 1971 under the laws of the Districtof Columbia. NARF is exempt from federal income tax under the provi-sions of Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue code. Contributions toNARF are tax deductible. The Internal Revenue Service has ruled thatNARF is not a "private foundation" as defined in Section 509(a) of theInternal Revenue Code. NARF was founded in 1970 and incorporated in1971 in Washington, DC.The Native American Rights Fund Statement 
on Environmental Sustainability
“It is clear that our natural world is undergoing severe, unsustainable and
catastrophic climate change that adversely impacts the lives of people andecosystems worldwide. Native Americans are especially vulnerable andare experiencing disproportionate negative impacts on their cultures,health and food systems. In response, the Native American Rights Fund(NARF) is committed to environmental sustainability through its mission,work and organizational values. Native Americans and other indigenouspeoples have a long tradition of living sustainably with the natural worldby understanding the importance of preserving natural resources andrespecting the interdependence of all living things. NARF embraces thistradition through its work and by instituting sustainable office practicesthat reduce our negative impact on our climate and environment. NARF isengaged in environmental work and has established a Green OfficeCommittee whose responsibility is to lead and coordinate staff participationin establishing and implementing policies and procedures to minimizewaste, reduce energy consumption and pollution and create a healthfulwork environment.” 
Table of Contents
executive Director’s Report..................................................................................................... ............................................... 2
Board Chair’s Message .......................................................................................................... .................................................. 4
Board of Directors and National Support Committee.............................................................................. .......................... 5
Introduction ................................................................................................................... ........................................................... 6
preserve Tribal existence ....................................................................................................................... ................................. 6
protect Tribal Natural Resources ............................................................................................... ........................................... 9
promote Native American Human Rights ............................................................................................ ............................ 17
Hold Governments Accountable .................................................................................................. ...................................... 25
Develop Indian law ............................................................................................................................. ................................. 26
Financial Report............................................................................................................... ....................................................... 27
Contributors ................................................................................................................... ......................................................... 28
NARF Staff ..................................................................................................................... ......................................................... 33
Boulder Office (main)
1506 BroadwayBoulder, CO 80302-6296303-447-8760www.narf.orgAnchorage Office
745 West 4th Avenue, Suite 502Anchorage, Alaska 99501-1736907-276-0680Washington D.C. Office
1514 p Street, NW 
(Rear) Suite D Washington, DC 20005-1910202-785-4166Cover and Art: Cara Romero (b. 1977, Inglewood, CA) is a contemporary
fine art photographer. An enrolled citizen of the Chemehuevi IndianTribe, Romero was raised between contrasting settings: the ruralChemehuevi reservation in Mojave Desert, CA and the urban sprawlof Houston, TX. Romero’s identity informs her photography, a blendof fine art and editorial photography, shaped by years of study and avisceral approach to representing Indigenous and non-Indigenous cultural memory, collective history, and lived experiences from aNative American female perspective.
As an undergraduate at the university of Houston, Romero pursued a
degree in cultural anthropology. Disillusioned, however, by academicand media portrayals of Native Americans as bygone, Romero realizedthat making photographs could do more than anthropology did inwords, a realization that led to a shift in medium. Since 1998, Romero’s expansive oeuvre has been informed by formal training infilm, digital, fine art and commercial photography. By staging theatricalcompositions infused with dramatic color, Romero takes on the role ofstoryteller, using contemporary photography techniques to depict themodernity of Native peoples, illuminating Indigenous worldviewsand aspects supernaturalism in everyday life. 
Maintaining a studio in Santa Fe, NM, Romero regularly participates in Native American art fairs and panel discussions,
and was featured in pBS’ Craft in America (2019). Her award-winning work is included in many public and private
collections internationally. Married with three children, she travels between Santa Fe and the Chemehuevi ValleyIndian Reservation, where she maintains close ties to her tribal community and ancestral homelands. 
ANN uAl RepORT 2020In 2020, the Native American Rights Fund commemorated 50
years of providing legal advice and representation to Indiantribes, organizations and individuals on the most importantfederal Indian law issues across the country.  We have wonmany significant legal victories for Native Americans since1970 through our non-profit legal advocacy and we continuedto win more important cases for Native Americans in 2020.
The United States Supreme Court in McGirt v. Oklahoma decided
that the Muscogee (Creek) Nation’s original boundaries hadnever been disestablished by Congress, so tribal jurisdictioncontinued to exist within those original reservation boundaries.We filed an amicus curiae brief in the case with co-counsel onbehalf of the National Congress of American Indians.
The proposed Keystone X l oil pipeline to run from Canada to
the Gulf Coast would cross or come very close to the boundariesof many Indian reservation lands and tribal land holdings.  Weare representing the Rosebud Sioux Tribe of South Dakota andthe Fort Belknap Indian Community of Montana in litigation tostop the pipeline based on Indian treaty, constitutional, trespassand tribal jurisdiction claims.  In January 2021, the incomingBiden Administration revoked the prior pipeline permit issuedillegally by president Trump for the Keystone X l pipeline.
We have been representing the Kickapoo Tribe of Kansas for
many years in its water rights claims in the Delaware River tosecure enough water on the reservation to provide basicmunicipal services to the community.  Finally, late in 2020, theKickapoo tribe water project study to build a reservoir projectto improve the water supply was approved by Congress.
In Alaska Department of Fish and Game v. Federal Subsistence
Board, we intervened representing the Organized Village of
Kake in a case where the State of Alaska seeks to stop Kakefrom exercising its subsistence hunting rights under federallaw as authorized by the Federal Subsistence Board.  TheAlaska federal district court upheld the Board’s authorizationof Kake’s emergency hunt. 
We have been assisting the Bering Sea elders Group, 
an alliance of 39 Yup’ik and Inupiaq Alaska Native Villages,seeking to protect the sensitive ecosystem of the Bering Seathat they depend on for their subsistence hunting and fishinglifestyle.  In years past, president Obama by executive Order
created the Northern Bering Sea Resilience Area to protect thearea but president Trump revoked it. In January 2021,
president Biden reinstated the executive Order restoring the
Northern Bering Sea Resilience Area.
We have been representing the united Tribes of Bristol Bay, a
consortium of Alaska Tribes in the Bristol Bay region formedto address the proposed
pebble Mine which threatens
salmon-rearing streams thatthe Tribes depend on for sub-sistence fishing.  litigation
has been underway involv-ing the Clean Water Act per-mit necessary for the pebble
Mine to move forward.Finally, in 2020, the ArmyCorps of engineers denied
the permit and the Tribescontinue to work to securepermanent protection for theBristol Bay watershed.  
InSolonex, v. Jewell, we represented the Blackfeet Nation of
Montana as amicus curiae where an energy company chal-lenged the authority of the united States to cancel its oil and
gas lease in areas that would threaten the Tribe’s sacred sites.The Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia CircuitCourt upheld the authority of the united States to cancel the
lease and the way it exercised that authority.
In Standing Rock Sioux Tribe v. Army Corps of Engineers, the Federal
District Court for the District of Columbia ruled that the Corpsmust prepare a new environmental Impact Statement to deter-
mine whether they can grant an easement to allow the DakotaAccess pipeline to cross under lake Oahe near the Tribe’s reser-
vation.  We filed an amicus curiae brief in the case on behalf of 14tribes and eight tribal organizations supporting the Tribe.
Representing the Native Village of Tyonek, the Blue lake
Rancheria and the National Association of Tribal Historicpreservation Officers, we have been opposing new regula-
tions proposed by the National park Service implementing
the National Register of Historic places that would prevent
traditional cultural properties, cultural landscapes and placesof traditional religious and cultural significance to tribes andNative Hawaiian organizations from being listed.  The newBiden Administration has stopped the National park Service
from moving forward with those new regulations.
Brakebill v. Jaeger and Spirit Lake Tribe v. Jaeger are two compan-
ion cases where we represented individual Indians and tribeschallenging North Dakota voter ID laws as unconstitutionaland in violation of the Voting Rights Act.  We were able to settleboth case favorably and saw a large turnout of Native votersin the 2020 elections.
Along with co-counsel we represented several Native
American organizations and tribes in Western Native Voice v.Executive Director’s Report
NATIV e AM eRICAN RIGHTS F uND
John E. Echohawk
executive DirectorANN uAl RepORT 2020Stapleton , a case challenging a Montana state law that prevents
ballot collection, which is when someone mails another per-son’s ballot for them.  This law was meant to stop nonprofitorganizations who collected ballots thereby increasing voterturnout.  A Montana state court ruled the law was unconstitu-tional in September 2020 and ballot collection is now allowedin Montana. 
Arctic Village v. Meyer was a case we filed to enjoin an Alaska
law requiring a witness signature on each ballot.  25% ofAlaska’s residents including many elders in Native villageslive alone and did not want to risk their health and lives just tosecure a witness signature on their absentee ballot.  The AlaskaSupreme Court enjoined the witness signature requirement.We created the Native American Voting Rights Coalition 
several years ago to organize everyone working on voting inIndian country.  One of our major projects was to hold a seriesof nine field hearings across Indian country on voting rightsissues.  In 2020, we published a report on the hearing entitled“Obstacles at every Turn.”
Thank you to all of our funders for your support.  All of these
important accomplishments in 2020 would not have been possible without your support.  In 2021 we hope that yourfinancial support will continue so that we can secure evenmore Native American legal victories.   
John e. echohawk
executive Director               
NATIV e AM eRICAN RIGHTS F uNDBoard Chair’s Message
Osiyo,
last May, I began my tenure as Chair of the Native American
Rights Fund’s Board of Directors. The transition happened during what was proving to be a remarkable time at NARF. Forone thing, it was NARF’s fifty-year anniversary. There had beenbig plans to celebrate NARF’s history of wins on behalf ofIndian Country. The fifty-year anniversary was going to be anopportunity to gather and celebrate the decades of work andcommitment that powered those wins. Then, COVID-19 struck.
Far beyond cancelling a much-anticipated celebration, the
pandemic changed everything. NARF staff scrambled tomove all of their efforts and advocacy online. Courtroomssuddenly became virtual. Remote rural Native communitiessuddenly became even further distanced and isolated. And, asis often the case when disaster strikes, existing inequalitieswere exposed and amplified. Those most in-need before thepandemic, found themselves in dire circumstances duringquarantine. Indian Country found itself facing challengesacross the board including devastating and disparate lossesspecific to Native communities that were losing first-languagespeakers, culture keepers, mothers, fathers, and grandparents. 
But, as we so often have done in the past, Indian Country and
NARF rose to the challenges. In communities across thenation, Native peoples stood together and stood strongagainst the pandemic. Tribal governments fought to protectand provide for their citizens. like we have been for the last
fifty years, NARF was there to support and serve IndianCountry every step of the way. 
As I write this, vaccinations are ramping up across the country,
and the rate of COVID infections are dropping every day. As anation, we look forward to this long winter being over. even as
circumstances change, NARF staff continue without rest; everyday they use their legal expert-
ise to fight for Native peoples.
Because even as NARF cele-
brates its past and all thosewho came before, the staffand board are committed tothe future. We are committedto protecting Native Americanrights, resources, and life-ways. Right now, the staffand board are actively work-ing to create and implementstrategic plans that willensure NARF will be here forIndian Country for another50 years.
We could not do what we do without your support.
Throughout this last year, NARF supporters have been stead-fast and enduring. Incredibly, many of you have even steppedup your support during this time of adversity. even as each of
us has dealt with the personal challenges, losses, and hard-ships inflicted by COVID-19, we have stood together andproven our resilience. We thank you for that, and we look forward to working together in the upcoming years to holdgovernments accountable. Our nation will be better for it.
And, finally, I am happy to tell you that there are new plans to
celebrate the first fifty years of NARF. Mark your calendarsfor April 2022, and I hope to see you there!
Wado,lacey A. Horn
Chair, NARF Board of Directors
Lacey A. Horn 
Chair, NARF Board of
Directors
Board of Directors
National Support Committee
The National Support Committee assists NARF with fundraising and public relations efforts. Some members are prominent in
the fields of business, entertainment, and the arts. Others are known advocates for the rights of the underserved. All are com-mitted to upholding the rights of Native Americans.The Native American Rights Fund has a
governing board composed of NativeAmerican leaders from across the coun-try. Board members are chosen based ontheir involvement and knowledge ofIndian issues and affairs, as well as trib-al affiliation, to ensure comprehensivegeographical representation. The visionof the Board members is essential toNARF's effectiveness in representing itsNative American clients.
NARF's Board of Directors:
Lacey Horn , Chair (Cherokee Nation);
Kenneth Kahn , Vice-Chair (Santa Ynez
Band of Chumash Indians); Derek Valdo ,
Treasurer ( pueblo of Acoma); Anita
Mitchell (Muckleshoot Indian Tribe);
Rhonda Pitka (Athabascan/Inupiaq);
Robert Miguel (Ak-Chin Indian
Community); Rebecca Miles (Nez perce
Tribe); Gayla Hoseth (Curyung Tribal
Council); Stephanie Bryan (poarch
Band of Creek Indians); Rebecca Crooks-
Stratton (Sisseton-Wahpeton Sioux)
Not pictured: Michael Colbert Smith
(Chickasaw Nation); Camille Kalama
(Native Hawai`ian); Jamie Azure
(Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa)
ANN uAl RepORT 2020Randy Bardwell, pechanga Band of
luiseño Mission Indians 
Deborah BardwellJaime Barrientoz, Grande Traverse Bandof Ottawa and Chippewa Indians John Bevan Wallace Coffey, Comanche Ada Deer, Menominee Harvey A. Dennenberg lucille A. echohawk, pawnee 
Jane Fonda eric Ginsburg Jeff Ginsburg 
Rodney Grant, Omaha Dr. Marion McCollom Hampton Chris e. McNeil, Jr., Tlingit-Nisga’a
Billy Mills, Oglala lakota 
Amado peña, Jr., Yaqui/Chicano 
Wayne Ross Nancy Starling-Ross Mark Rudick pam Rudick 
Michael G. Sawaya ernie Stevens, Jr., Wisconsin Oneida Andrew Teller, Isleta pueblo 
Verna Teller, Isleta pueblo 
Richard Trudell, Santee Sioux Rebecca Tsosie, pascua Yaqui 
Tzo-Nah, Shoshone BannockAine ungar 
Rt. Rev. William C. Wantland, SeminoleW. Richard West, Southern Cheyenne Randy Willis, Oglala lakota 
Teresa Willis, umatilla 
Mary Wynne, Rosebud Sioux
The uS Constitution recognizes Indian tribes as independent
governmental entities. Tribal governments possess the powerto regulate the internal affairs of their members and activitieswithin their reservations. In treaties, Indian tribes ceded mil-lions of acres of land in exchange for the guarantee that thefederal government would protect the tribes' right to self-gov-ernment. under the priority to preserve tribal existence, NARF
supports tribes’ rights to live according to traditions, enforcetreaty rights, ensure independence on reservations, and pro-tect their right to self-govern (sovereignty). 
TRiBAL S oVERE iGNTy AND J uRiSDiCTioN
Tribal Sovereignty Protection Initiative
NARF partners with the National Congress of AmericanIndians (NCAI) on the Tribal Sovereignty protection Initiative
to monitor legislation, judicial appointments, and cases relatedto tribal interests. 
~ Tribal Supreme Court Project (https://sct.narf.org/)
A major component of the Initiative, through the TribalSupreme Court project NARF and NCAI staff monitor cases at
or headed to the uS Supreme Court. The project is based on
the idea that a strong and coordinated approach can reduce,and even reverse, the erosion of tribal sovereignty by Justiceswho appear to lack an understanding of federal Indian lawand are unfamiliar with the practical challenges facing tribalgovernments. 
In a great win for tribes, on July 9, 2020, the Court issued its
opinion in McGirt v. Oklahoma (18-9526) and ruled in favor of
Jimmy McGirt, a citizen of the Seminole Nation. NARF andco-counsel filed an amicus curiae brief in this case on behalf ofthe National Congress of American Indians. The issue in this
case was whether Muscogee (Creek) Nation’s reservation wasdisestablished, and the Court held that it was not. You canlearn more about the case in our Summer 2020 legal Review,
available at https://www.narf.org/news/legal-review/. 
On October 5, the Supreme Court began its October Term
2020. The Court has decided one Indian law case in this term,Wilson v. Oklahoma (19-8126). The petitioner is an Indian, con-
victed in Oklahoma state court, who asserted that the crimeoccurred in “Indian Country,” and therefore the state courtwas without authority to convict him of the offense. TheSupreme Court summarily granted the petition, vacated thelower court’s decision, and remanded for further considera-tion in light of McGirt v. Oklahoma.
The Court granted review in United States v. Cooley (19-1414)
in which the lower court held that seizure and search of a non-Indian and his vehicle by a tribal police officer violated theIndian Civil Rights Act and that evidence obtained was subject to the exclusionary rule. 
At this writing, Alaska Native Vill. Corp. Assoc. v. Confederated
Tribes of the Chehalis Reservation (20-544) and Mnuchin v.
Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis Reservation (20-543) also were
granted review. Both of these cases concern the definition of“Indian tribe” for purposes of the CAR eS Act and have been
consolidated for oral argument.
~ Judicial Selection Project
Another important component of the Tribal Sovereigntyprotection Initiative is the Judicial Selection project. The
project’s focus is research and education: to educate the federal
NATIV e AM eRICAN RIGHTS F uNDPreserve Tribal ExistenceThe Native American Rights Fund holds governments accountable. We fight to protect Native
American rights, resources, and lifeways through litigation, legal advocacy, and expertise.
NARF’s first Board of Directors developed five priorities that still lead us today. In this
annual report, you will find NARF’s recent work within each of these priority areas.
• Preserve tribal existence
• Protect tribal natural resources• Promote Native American human rights• Hold governments accountable to Native Americans• Develop Indian law and educate the public about Indian rights, laws, and issuesIntroduction
ANN uAl RepORT 2020judiciary about tribal issues, to educate tribal leaders about
the federal judiciary, and to reach out to elected officials andthe public at large about the need for federal judges whounderstand the unique legal status of Indian tribes. 
By late 2020, the Senate had confirmed 200 Article III judges
nominated by president Trump. The rate of judicial confirma-
tions in this administration is outpacing the previous threepresidents. As it does in all administrations, the JudicialSelection project has monitored these nominations and produced
research memoranda on all three of president Trump’s uS
Supreme Court nominees and, as warranted, on lower courtju-dicial nominees.
Big Horn Electric Cooperative v. Alden Big Man, et al.
In 2012, Alden Big Man, an elderly member of the Apsaalooke(Crow) Tribe sued the Big Horn electric Cooperative in the
Crow Civil Court pursuant to an Apsaalooke tribal statutelimiting heat and electricity service disconnections duringwinter months for homes where elderly and disabled individ-uals reside. In 2013, the tribal court dismissed the case, holdingthat it lacked jurisdiction over the case against a non-memberutility company. Mr. Big Man appealed the ruling to theApsaalooke Appeals Court. In April 2017, the ApsaalookeAppeals Court held that the trial court did have jurisdictionand remanded the case to the Crow Civil Court. Big Hornelectric then filed a complaint in federal district court, asking
the court to find that tribal court remedies had been exhaustedand that the tribal court lacked jurisdiction over the suit.NARF, representing the Apsaalooke Appeals Court judgesand Crow Tribal HealthBoard members, filedmotions to dismiss. Thosemotions were denied, and thecourt found that exhaustionhad occurred. Motions forsummary judgment on theissue of tribal jurisdictionwere filed in November 2019.In June, the Magistrate heardoral argument. In July, theMagistrate concluded thatthe Crow Tribe has legislativejurisdiction over Big Horn onthe tribal trust land whereBig Man resides and theCrow Tribal Court has juris-diction to hear Big Man’sclaims. We now wait for thecourt to determine whetherto accept the Magistrate’s rec-ommendations.Oneida v. Village of Hobart - Amicus Support
The 7th Circuit Court of Appeals case, Oneida v. Village of
Hobart arises from the Village of Hobart, Wisconsin, imposing
fines on tribal officials for failure to obtain Village permits fora festival that took place on tribal property. The Tribe sued theVillage in federal district court, seeking injunction and a decla-ration that the Village could not enforce its regulations againstthe tribe within its reservation. In response, the Village allegedthat allotment disestablished or diminished the reservation.The federal district court held that the Oneida Reservation wasdiminished either by the vesting of fee title of allotments toIndians, or the subsequent conveyance of those allotments tonon-Indians. This is a drastic departure from established law,which has held that ownership status of land parcels has nobearing on reservation boundaries. Moreover, the district courtrelied on a broad (and incorrect) understanding that Congressintended that General Allotment Act would diminish reserva-tions—a conclusion at odds with a long line of uS Supreme
Court cases. NARF submitted an amicus brief on behalf of theNational Congress of American Indians and the Indian land
Tenure Foundation. Oral argument was held April 2020. InJuly, the court ruled in favor of the Oneida Nation.
FEDERAL REC oGNiTioN oF TRiBAL STAT uS
NARF represents Indian communities who have survived intact
as identifiable Indian tribes but are not federally recognized.Tribal existence does not depend on federal recognition, butrecognition is necessary for a government-to-government relationship.
ANN uAl RepORT 2020During colonization, tribes’ lands diminished to a mere 2.3
percent of their original size. An adequate land base and control over natural resources are necessary for economic self-sufficiency and self-determination. They are vital to tribalexistence. Thus, much of NARF’s work is to protect tribal natural
resources. 
iNDiAN LANDS
Keystone XL Pipeline
The TransCanada (TC energy) Keystone X l pipeline is a mas-
sive oil pipeline intended to link the oil producers in Canadawith the refiners and export terminals on the Gulf Coast. Itwould cross, or comes very close to, the boundaries of manyreservations and tribal land holdings, including the OcetiSacowin (Great Sioux Nation) lands from before the Fortlaramie Treaty of 1868. Moreover, the proposed route crosses
sacred Sioux land, cultural sites, and burials. However, noconsultation occurred between the federal government andthe tribes affected. For these and other reasons, president
Obama rejected the permit required for the Canada- uS
boundary crossing in 2015.
In March 2018, the Trump administration reversed course and
granted a presidential permit. In response, NARF filed a com-
plaint on behalf of the Rosebud Sioux Tribe and the FortBelknap Indian Community in August 2018. The president
issued a second permit to circumvent injunctions preventingconstruction. As a result, the Tribes amended their complaintto reflect new claims.
The government and TC energy filed motions to dismiss and
a hearing was held in September 2019. In December 2019, thecourt denied the government’s and TC energy’s motions to
dismiss. All of the Tribes’ claims relating to the new permitwere allowed to proceed, including the treaty claims, constitu-tional claims, trespass claims against TC energy, and claims
that TC energy and the Keystone X l pipeline are subject to
tribal regulatory jurisdiction. The order allowing the case tocontinue was a major victory.
In January 2020, TC energy filed a notice with the court that it
would begin “pre-construction” activities in February. Givenconstruction and the rise of the pandemic, the Tribes wereforced to move for a preliminary injunction and temporaryrestraining order. The court did not rule on those motionsbefore an April hearing; however, the court did issue aninjunction in another case that prevented TC energy from
crossing any rivers. In October, the judge ruled against theTribes on many claims finding that the permit only applied tothe border crossing, but he requested supplemental briefingand noted that the tribes could file a new suit against theBureau of land Management. On November 17, the Tribes,
represented by NARF, filed a federal lawsuit against theunited States Department of Interior and the Bureau of land
Management over their issuing of the KX l permit across 
federal lands. The lawsuit was filed because the united States
failed to honor the treaties and take a hard look at the impactthe pipeline will have on tribal communities. In January 2021,the incoming administration revoked the illegally issued presidential permit for the KX l pipeline.
Shoalwater Bay Indian Tribe
NARF is assisting the Shoalwater Bay Indian Tribe with a liti-gation request to the united States. The Tribe occupies a small,
coastal reservation southwest of Seattle, WA. A state highwaycrosses through the reservation, and its surface waterdrainage inundates a portion of the reservation. On behalf ofthe Tribe, NARF submitted a litigation request requesting thatthe united States, as the Tribe’s trustee, sue the Washington
Department of Transportation. 
Hualapai Tribe Fee to Trust Applications
NARF represents the Hualapai Indian Tribe of Arizona inpreparing and submitting applications for the transfer intotrust status of eight parcels of land owned in fee by the Tribe.Three of the parcels have been accepted into trust. Decisionson the other five parcels have been significantly delayed. InApril 2017, the Acting Assistant Secretary of Indian Affairswithdrew authority from BIA Regional Directors to approveoff-reservation, fee-to-trust applications and placed thatauthority with the Assistant Secretary of Indian Affairs. Theremaining applications continue and are in varying stages ofcompletion. progress has been slowed by the COVID-19 
pandemic.
Akiachak Native Community, et al. v. Department of Interior,
et al.In 2006, the Akiachak Native Community, the Chilkoot IndianAssociation, the Chalkyitsik Village Council, and theTuluksak Native Community IRA, represented by NARF,sought judicial review of 25 CFR part 151. This federal regula-
tion governs the procedures used by Indian tribes and indi-viduals requesting the Secretary of the Interior to acquire titleto land in trust on their behalf. At the time, the regulationbarred putting Alaskan land in trust other than for theMetlakatla Indian Community.
In March 2013, the court granted plaintiffs complete relief on
all of their claims—a major victory for Alaska tribes. InDecember 2014, DOI published its final rule rescinding the“Alaska exception.” Protect Tribal Natural ResourcesNATIV e AM eRICAN RIGHTS F uNDDOI completed one Alaskan trust land acquisition in 2017.
However, in 2018, the Trump Administration officially with-drew the Solicitor’s opinion supporting land-into-trust forAlaska tribes and announced the Department would reviewwhether to reinstate the “Alaska exception.” NARF represent-
ed clients at tribal consultations, making clear Alaska tribeswill tolerate nothing more than full reinstatement of theAlaskan trust lands program. On January 19, 2021, theDepartment decided that lands cannot be taken in trust forAlaska tribes.
WATER R iGHTS
under federal law, Indian tribes are entitled to sufficient water
for present and future needs. These water rights are superiorto all water rights created after the tribes’ priority dates, atleast as early as the establishment of their reservations. Inmost cases, this gives tribes senior water rights in the water-short West. unfortunately, many tribes have not used their
reserved water rights and the rights are unquantified. Theneed is to define and quantify the amount of water to whicheach tribe is entitled. 
Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians
NARF, with co-counsel, represents the Agua Caliente Band ofCahuilla Indians in a lawsuit filed in 2013 in the uS District
Court for the Central District of California. The Agua Calienteasked the court to declare their water rights senior in theCoachella Valley, quantify those rights, and prevent CoachellaValley Water District and Desert Water Agency from furtherimpairing the quantity and quality of aquifer water. In March2015, the court ruled largely in the Tribe’s favor, holding thatthe Tribe has a reserved right to water and that groundwateris a water source available to fulfill that right. upon appeal,
the decision was upheld. 
With “phase one” done, the parties addressed “phase two”
legal issues. phase two dealt with the method for quantifying
the Tribe’s water share, the right to water of a certain quality,and whether the Tribe owns the groundwater storage spaceunder its reservation. In April 2019, the court dismissed theclaims holding that, since the Tribe could not show that itpresently had a shortage of water, it was not sufficientlyinjured to prove standing. This decision was made despiteunrefuted evidence that the aquifer depth underlying thereservation had lowered substantially and the water had beendegraded by the water districts’ activities.
In July 2020, the Tribe filed an amended complaint, adding
allegations relating to the Tribe’s injuries and the Tribe’spumping of groundwater, and to more accurately frame theissue of the ownership of the pore space under the reserva-tion. In the meantime, the parties entered into mediation and
the case has been stayed until April 2021.
Palouse River Basin Adjudication 
– Nez Perce Tribe Water RightsNARF represents the Nez perce Tribe in its water rights claims
in the palouse River Basin Adjudication. In October 2016, the
Idaho Water Court issued a commencement order, and an ini-tial hearing was held in January 2017. The Tribe is workingwith the united States to examine the nature and scope of the
Tribe’s water rights claims. In late 2019, the uS and the Tribe
filed claims for instream flows in 24 reaches of the palouse
River and its tributaries, for nearly 200 springs claims on private and federal lands, and for water for consumptive useson two allotments in the palouse watershed. The next step will
be for the Idaho Department of Water Resources to prepare aDirector’s Report on all water claims filed in the palouse Basin. 
Klamath Basin Water Rights
Represented by NARF, the Klamath Tribes’ water rights wererecognized in 1983 in United States v. Adair , but the courts left
quantification of the water rights to Oregon’s Klamath BasinAdjudication (KBA). After finishing the KBA’s 38-year admin-istrative phase, the Tribes were able to enforce their waterrights for the first time in 2013. The Klamath County CircuitCourt is now reviewing the Oregon Water ResourcesDepartment’s (OWRD’s) Findings of Fact and Order ofDetermination (FFOD) issued in the KBA. 
In 2017 and 2018, the Klamath County Circuit Court resolved
jurisdictional and other legal issues as well as general proce-dural issues. Importantly, the court issued rulings limitingdiscovery and the introduction of new evidence, preventing acomplete do-over of the administrative proceedings.However, the court ruled that a de novo standard of review
would apply, in which the court will “look anew” at the deter-minations of OWRD in the FFOD and may give deference toOWRD’s determinations. 
Now the KBA is in phase 3, which addresses the substantive
exceptions filed to the individual water right claim determina-tions in the FFOD. part 1 of phase 3 addresses crosscutting
legal issues applicable to multiple claims. Two of three claimgroups were resolved in 2019. Opening motions for the thirdclaim group (tribal claims) were filed in December 2019.Briefing and oral arguments occurred throughout 2020 andwe await the judge’s ruling.
KBA phase 3 part 2 began in December 2020. The Court will
schedule motions to introduce non-record evidence in theTribal Group C claims once it has issued its phase 3 part 1 
rulings related to these claims.PROTECT TRIBAL NATURAL RESOURCESANN uAl RepORT 2020Tule River Tribe
After almost 30 years of advocacy, the Tule River Indian Tribe,represented by NARF, successfully settled its water rights inNovember 2007. The settlement agreement secured a domestic,municipal, industrial, and commercial water supply for theTribe. The Tribe now seeks federal legislation to ratify theagreement and authorize appropriations to develop the waterrights through the creation of water infrastructure and reser-voirs on the Tule River Reservation. 
The Tribe’s team assisted the federal team in developing an
appraisal of several alternatives. The federal team promised to bedone with the study by November 2015 so that the Tribe couldproceed to negotiate an appropriate settlement to present toCongress. In December 2016 the federal team delivered its reportto the Tribe. The Tribe and its team performed a detailed analysisand critique of the report and met with Interior Department offi-cials in March 2018 to brief them and bring them up to speed onnegotiation developments. In spring of 2019, the InteriorDepartment committed to some funding, but not enough toconstruct a meaningfully sized water storage project on thereservation. legislative efforts continued throughout 2020. 
Kickapoo Tribe in Kansas
At times in recent decades, the water supply for the KickapooReservation has violated the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974.Consequently, the Kickapoo people fear they are unable tosafely drink, bathe, or cook with tap water. There also is notenough water on the reservation to provide basic municipalservices to the community—the Tribe is not able to providelocal schools with reliable, safe running water, and the firedepartment cannot provide adequate protection. In June 2006,the Kickapoo Tribe in Kansas, represented by NARF, filed afederal court lawsuit to enforce express promises made to theTribe to build a reservoir project, the most cost-effective wayto improve the water supply. Despite promises made to the
Tribe, Nemaha Brown Watershed Joint Board #7, the NaturalResources Conservation Service of the uS Department of
Agriculture, and the State of Kansas continued to develop theregion’s water resources. The result was the near depletion ofthe Tribe's senior federal water rights. The federal govern-ment, the state, and the local watershed district all concedethe existence of the Tribe's senior Indian reserved water rights;the real issue is the amount of water needed to satisfy theTribe's rights and the source of that water. 
In September 2016, the Tribe and the state executed a settle-
ment agreement that includes a negotiated water right for theTribe, as well as all of the details for the administration of theTribe’s right in the Delaware River watershed. The Tribe devel-oped legislation in consultation with the Kansas congressionaldelegation to approve the negotiated water right. Over theyears, several bills were introduced, but not enacted into law.Finally, late in 2020, the Kickapoo Tribe water project studywas passed as part of the final omnibus appropriations act. Thelegislation kicks off a new study and re-evaluation of the plum
Creek project that the Tribe has been pursuing for years.
Pauma Band of Luiseno Indians
The pauma Band of luiseno Indians is one of the five tribes
party to the San luis Rey Water Rights Settlement. The San luis
Rey tribes’ water rights were initially addressed by aCongressionally-approved settlement act in 1988. However, fora wide variety of reasons, the settlement was unenforceable anddid not address the needs of the tribes. In 2016, a bill amendingthe original settlement act was passed by Congress, and the Sanluis Rey Water Rights Settlement is now in its implementation
stage. NARF represents the pauma Band in the implementa-
tion, which includes allocating water and funding as well asexamining groundwater management strategies. 
NATIV e AM eRICAN RIGHTS F uNDHuNTiNG AND F iSHiNG R iGHTS 
Tribal rights to hunt and fish are grounded in tribal sovereignty
and affirmed in many treaties and agreements. NARF hasdefended tribal hunting, fishing, and subsistence rights in avariety of cases, most recently focused in Alaska. There oftenare no roads or stores in rural Alaska, and so no other groupof people in the united States continues to be as intimately
connected to the land and water and as dependent upon itsvast natural resources as Alaska’s indigenous peoples.
Alaska Department of Fish and Game v. Federal Subsistence
BoardIn August, the State of Alaska filed a complaint in the Alaskafederal district court challenging three decisions made by theFederal Subsistence Board (FSB) related to subsistence hunt-ing in the state. (The FSB is the body responsible for setting allrules and regulations related to the taking of wild fish andgame by qualified subsistence users within Alaska’s federallands.) Alaska alleged that the FSB acted outside of theauthority granted to it by the Alaska National Interest lands
Conservation Act of 1980. 
NARF filed a motion to intervene on behalf of the Organized
Village of Kake to defend the FSB’s authority to authorizeemergency hunts. In September, the court
heard oral argument. In November, the Courtissued its final order denying the State’smotion to enjoin the Kake hunt. Specifically,the Court ruled that the FSB acted within itsauthority in accepting Kake’s request for ahunt and setting the standards by which thehunt was carried out. The case will now go tothe summary judgment phase, and the partiesare set to confer on a briefing schedule in lateJanuary.
Bering Sea Elders Group
The Bering Sea elders Group (BS eG) is an
alliance of thirty-nine Yup’ik and Inupiaq vil-lages that seeks to protect the sensitiveecosystem of the Bering Sea, as well as thesubsistence lifestyle and the communities thatdepend on it. NARF has represented BS eD
since 2010 and has designed a comprehensiveplan to help their efforts to protect the areaand become more engaged in its manage-ment. 
In December 2016, NARF’s work with BS eG
resulted in president Barack Obama signing
an historic executive Order creating the
Northern Bering Sea Climate Resilience Area. This was anincredible victory for our clients and the first of its kind fortribes anywhere in the united States. However, in April 2017,
president Trump signed an executive order called
“Implementing an America-First Offshore energy Strategy.”
While the order was aimed at re-opening Arctic and Atlanticareas for offshore drilling, it also entirely revoked executive
Order 13754. BS eG responded immediately, determined to
restore the important conservation, economic, and cultural provisions. BS eG elders passed a resolution calling for the rein-
statement of the executive Order and its protections. We are
proud to say that on his first day in office, president Biden
signed an executive Order that reinstated executive Order 13754
and the Northern Bering Sea Climate Resilience Area. BS eG will
now work on the implementation of the reinstated order.
Pebble Mine
Alaska’s Bristol Bay region is home to the largest wild salmonruns in the world. It is also home to the Yup’ik, Dena’ina, andAlutiiq peoples who depend on sustainable salmon runs fortheir subsistence. In 2013, NARF helped create the united
Tribes of Bristol Bay ( uTBB), a consortium of tribes in the
region formed to address mining proposals threateningsalmon-rearing streams. PROTECT TRIBAL NATURAL RESOURCES
ANN uAl RepORT 2020The proposed pebble Mine would sit on the headwaters of the
largest salmon-producing river in Bristol Bay. In February2014, epA gave notice that it would initiate a Clean Water Act
404(c) process for the proposed mine. Section 404(c) authorizesepA to prohibit or restrict the discharge of material in waters
when such disposal would have an adverse impact onresources, including fisheries, wildlife, municipal water sup-plies, or recreational areas. 
In September 2014, plp filed a complaint against epA. The
court granted plp’s request for a preliminary injunction to
halt the 404(c) process. As the case continued, the judge issueda broad order quashing plp’s subpoenas, finding that they
pushed the limits of federal rules. plp withdrew its remaining
subpoenas, but began serving narrower subpoenas, whichalso were quashed. In the last days of 2016, the partiesrequested a stay in order to negotiate settlement. 
In May 2017, the parties reached a settlement of the litigation.
Settlement terms included: (1) dismissing all pebble lawsuits
against the epA; (2) epA withdrawing the proposed Section
404(c) determination; (3) epA agreeing to not finalize any
Section 404(c) action for four years or until the uS Army
Corps of engineers issued its final environmental impact
statement. plp filed its federal permit application in
December 2017, beginning the N epA review. uTBB continued
to work to protect Bristol Bay throughout the federal and statepermitting process surrounding the pebble Mine.
In June 2019, Gov. Dunleavy briefly met with president Trump
on Air Force One; subsequently, he told reporters that he wasconvinced that the president was “doing everything he can towork with us on our mining concerns.” One day after themeeting, according to CNN, the epA held an internal meeting
and informed staff that they were reversing course and removingprotections for the Bristol Bay. In July 2019, the TrumpAdministration announced it would formally withdraw theproposed 404(c) determination from the Bristol Bay watershed. 
The action was undertaken with no public input, no tribal
consultation, and no prior notice to Bristol Bay’s tribes. Inresponse to this illegal act, local interests formed the BristolBay Defense Alliance, consisting of uTBB, Bristol Bay Native
Association, Bristol Bay Regional Seafood DevelopmentAssociation, Bristol Bay Reserve Association and Bristol Bayeconomic Development Corporation. Throughout 2020, the
Alliance took legal action on behalf of the local people whorely on the Bristol Bay fishery and all it sustains. 
In August 2020, the Army Corps took the unprecedented step
of publishing a letter requiring the plp to further develop its
compensatory mitigation plan. Many of the defects identifiedin pebble’s proposed plan were those identified in comments
submitted by NARF and the Tribes. The Army Corps ulti-mately denied pebble’s permit application for its deficient
compensatory mitigation plan ―marking the first permit
denial for an Alaska hard rock mine in modern memory.Moving forward, the Tribes will work to secure permanentprotections for the Bristol Bay watershed.
Ch’u’itnu Traditional Cultural Landscape 
NARF represented the Native Village of Tyonek (NVT) inresponse to a permit proposal by pacRim to mine coal from
the Beluga coal fields in the Cook Inlet. NVT focused on theNational Historic protection Act (NH pA) to identify historic
properties eligible for listing and protections. In March 2017,pacRim Coal announced its decision to suspend pursuit of
permitting efforts on the Chuitna Coal project. Regardless of
the closed permitting process, NVT nominated the entireCh’u’itnu watershed for inclusion on the National Register ofHistoric places as a Traditional Cultural landscape (TC
l). The
designation would recognize the profound importance theCh’u’itnu watershed has played in shaping and sustainingNVT’s peoples’ culture, traditions, identity, and subsistence.
In April 2018, the Alaska Historical Commission voted 6-2
that the Ch’u’itnu Historic District, Traditional Culturalproperty was eligible for listing on the National Register. The
State Historic preservation Officer rejected the recommenda-
tion, but sent the nomination to the Keeper of the NationalRegister for final determination. In June 2018, the Keeperrequested additional documentation. A revised nominationwas returned to the Keeper in June 2019. In August 2019, theKeeper requested more documentation. NARF will continueto represent NVT through the nomination process and defendthe Ch’u’itnu when it is listed.
Arctic National Wildlife Refuge
The Arctic National Wildlife Refuge’s Coastal plain is home to
the calving grounds of the porcupine Caribou Herd—one of the
largest wild herds in the world—and of great cultural impor-tance to the Gwich’in Tribes of Alaska, who refer to the area asIizhik Gwats’an Gwandaii Goodlit (the sacred place where lifebegins). Since 1980, when the Coastal plain was first considered
for development, the Gwich’in Tribes have worked tirelessly toprotect the Refuge and the caribou. NARF represents theNative Village of Venetie Tribal Government, Venetie VillageCouncil, and Artic Village Council, three federally recognizedGwich’in tribes, and advises them on their rights and strategicoptions surrounding proposed development of the Coastal plain.
In 2017, Congress enacted tax reform legislation that con-
tained a provision opening the Arctic National WildlifeRefuge’s Coastal plain to oil and gas development. TheNATIV e AM eRICAN RIGHTS F uNDBureau of land Management (B lM) began the environmental
review process to open the Coastal plain to oil and gas leasing. 
In December 2018, the B lM published its draft environmental
impact statement ( eIS). Despite months of government-to-
government meetings, the draft eIS was based on pre-existing
data and research from other regions in Alaska that brushedaside the effects on subsistence and cultural resources. Thefinal eIS, released in September 2019, identified the most
development-intensive alternative as the preferred option.
The B lM’s published the record of decision in August 2020.
The decision authorized oil development in the entirety of theCoastal plain, with few restrictions. On September 9, 2020,
NARF filed a lawsuit in federal court challenging the final eIS
as well as the record of decision. unfortunately, the Trump
Administration moved forward to authorize leases and explo-ration activities in the Arctic Refuge prior to the January 20transition to a Biden Administration.
Bering Sea-Interior Tribal Commission
The Bering Sea-Interior Tribal Commission (TribalCommission) is a tribal consortium of twenty-seven Tribesworking in unity to protect traditional ways of life by advocat-ing for land use planning processes and sustainable naturalresource management decisions that meaningfully reflectmember Tribes’ values. Currently, the Tribal Commission isparticipating in the resource management planning processesfor the Bering Sea-Western Interior and Central Yukon plan-ning areas. These vast areas of land encompass TribalCommission member-tribes’ traditional lands and containvital resources, which sustain member Tribes’ traditional subsistence-based ways of life. As B lM’s land use planning
processes move forward, NARF is providing legal and techni-cal support to the Tribal Commission and member Tribes. 
In December 2020, the B lM released the Bering Sea-Western
Interior proposed Resource Management plan and Final
environmental Impact Statement. The Tribal Commission
submitted a protest letter, raising the B lM’s exclusion of tribes
from the planning process and failure to adopt adequate pro-tections for cultural and subsistence resources. The B lM’s
proposed plan emphasized extractive resource developmentat the expense of resources and uses important to area Tribes.We await B lM’s response.
Bay Mills Indian Community Challenge to Enbridge’s Line 5
Pipeline Tunneling ProjectNARF and earthjustice have teamed up with the Bay Mills
Indian Community to fight a proposed oil pipeline tunnel thatthreatens the Community’s treaty rights, tribal fisheries, andthe environment. In August 2020, a judge granted Bay Mills Indian Community
the right to intervene in an ongoing process pending beforethe Michigan public Service Commission (M pSC). The deci-
sion allows Bay Mills to be a party to the enbridge’s permit
application to build a tunnel beneath the Straits of Mackinac,and relocate a new segment of its line 5 pipeline. The contest-
ed case process was extended in December and is now antici-pated to continue into the fall of 2021.
Wyoming v. Herrera
Clayvin Herrera, a member of the Crow Tribe of Indians, ischarged with taking elk out of season, and the state courts inWyoming to date have barred him from asserting his treatyrights in defense. In 2019, the uS Supreme Court affirmed the
continued existence of the Crow Tribe’s right to hunt on unoc-cupied lands of the united States and remanded the case to
the Wyoming courts; NARF represented the Crow Tribe asamicus curiae in that case. Now, Wyoming argues that Mr.Herrera is precluded from asserting his treaty rights becausethe uS Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit, in Crow Tribe of
Indians v. Repsis , made alternative holdings that (1)
Wyoming’s prosecution of Crow Tribe treaty hunters is war-ranted by conservation necessity, and (2) the Bighorn NationalForest, where Mr. Herrera took the elk at issue, is no longer“unoccupied” land. The trial court sided with Wyoming, andthe case is now on appeal. NARF again represents the CrowTribe as amicus curiae, this time working with the TribalJustice Clinic at the university of Arizona James e. Rogers
College of law and local counsel Kelly Rudd of Baldwin,
Crocker & Rudd, p.C. in l
ander, Wyo.
Crow Tribe of Indians v. Repsis
This matter is related to Herrera , above, in which the State of
Wyoming argues that the 1990s judgment in Crow Tribe of Indiansv. Repsis , precludes the Tribe or its members from making cer-
tain arguments today. As a result of the uS Supreme Court’s
2019 decision in Herrera v. Wyoming , the Tribe seeks relief from
the Repsis judgment pursuant to Rule 60(b) of the Federal
Rules of Civil procedure. If the court grants relief, then the
Repsis judgment would have no further force or effect, and the
State could no longer argue preclusion in the remandedHerrera case.
ENViRoNMENTAL PR oTECT ioN 
NCAI Climate Change Matters
The effects of climate change on indigenous peoples through-out the world are acute and will only get worse. NARF repre-sents the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI) atthe international level through the united Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change ( uNFCCC). 
The goal is ensuring indigenous rights are protected in anyPROTECT TRIBAL NATURAL RESOURCESANN uAl RepORT 2020international agreement governing greenhouse gas emissions
reductions.
In December 2015, the paris Agreement was adopted under
the uNFCCC. The International Indigenous peoples Forum
on Climate Change (indigenous caucus), in which NARF participates, did not achieve all that it sought, but it achievedsignificant references that can be built on going forward. TheAgreement states that, when taking climate change action,indigenous peoples’ rights must be acknowledged. Also, traditional, indigenous knowledge shall help guide the climate change science. It also recognizes the need to strengthenthat knowledge and establishes a platform for sharing infor-mation and best practices. 
Since the paris Agreement, the indigenous caucus has made
efforts to make the traditional knowledge platform a reality. InDecember 2018, a Facilitative Working Group (FWG) for theplatform was established. The working group met in June2019 with seven country representatives and seven indige-
nous representatives. For the first time, indigenous represen-tatives (chosen by indigenous peoples) are participating on anequal basis with states within a united Nations body. At the
June meeting, the working group prepared a two-year workplan that was approved at Conference of the parties 25 (CO p
25) in December 2019.
Because of the COVID-19 pandemic, CO p 26 was moved to
November 2021. Meetings of the FWG occurred virtually inOctober and December 2020. updates were given on imple-
mentation of the work plan. An educational webinar on tradi-tional knowledge was held on October 2020.
ANN uAl RepORT 2020To promote Native American human rights , NARF focuses on
equal protection and freedom from discrimination in areassuch as voting, education, incarceration, and religion. NARFalso helps develop laws that provide unique protections forNative collective rights, traditions, culture, and property suchas sacred places, peyote, eagle feathers, burial remains, andfunerary objects.
RELiGiou S FREED oM AND SACRED PLACES
Bears Ears
For years, the Bears ears Inter Tribal Coalition, a consortium
of five sovereign Indian nations (Hopi Tribe, Navajo Nation,ute Indian Tribe, ute Mountain ute Tribe, and pueblo of Zuni)
worked to protect the Bears ears region, America’s most sig-
nificant unprotected cultural landscape. located in utah, the
Bears ears region contains at least 100,000 archaeological sites,
some dated back to 12,000 BC e, and remains critical to many
tribes today for spiritual as well as hunting and gathering pur-poses. In response to tribal efforts, in December 2016,president Obama designated the Bears ears National
Monument and established the Bears ears Commission “to
provide guidance and recommendations on the developmentand implementation of management plans and on manage-ment of the monument.” The Commission included one electedofficer each from the Hopi Nation, Navajo Nation, ute
Mountain ute Tribe, ute Indian Tribe, and pueblo of Zuni. 
In April 2017, president Trump directed the Department of the
Interior to review the Bears ears National Monument to deter-
mine if it was created without “public outreach and propercoordination.” The suggestion that the monument’s designa-tion lacked outreach and coordination is disingenuous. TheBears ears National Monument was created after years of
advocacy and many public meetings in the Bears ears region
and in Washington, DC. The effort to protect Bears ears was
very long, very public, and very robust.
Despite an outpouring of public support for Bears ears, in
December 2017, president Trump issued an executive Order
revoking and replacing the national monument. Representingthe Hopi, Zuni, and ute Mountain ute Tribes, NARF sued the
Administration for violations of the Antiquities Act, theSeparation of powers, the property Clause and the
Administrative procedures Act. In October 2019, the court
denied the government’s motion to dismiss, but instructed theplaintiffs to file amended complaints. The court will allow the gov-ernment to file new motions to dismiss after that. The Tribes filedtheir First Amended Complaint on November 7, 2019 followed bya Motion for Summary Judgment in January 2020. Briefing wascompleted in 2020; however, the incoming Biden administrationrequested a stay pending a 60-day monuments review.Solonex v. Jewell
NARF represented the Blackfeet Tribe as amicus curiae in thefederal district court case, Solonex v. Jewell . Solonex llC chal-
lenged the authority of the united States to cancel its oil and
gas lease in areas that would threaten the Tribe’s sacred sites.
In September 2018, the judge entered summary judgement infavor of Solenex, concluding that the lease cancelation was“arbitrary and capricious” because more than 30 years ofindecision by the agency constituted an unreasonable delay.The judge also concluded that Department of the Interior didnot give Solenex appropriate notice that it was canceling thelease, which violated a duty to act in good faith. The plaintiffsappealed the decision and NARF filed an amicus brief onbehalf of the Tribe. In 2020, the DC Circuit rejected the lowercourt’s conclusions and found that the time to cancel the leasewas reasonable and Solonex did not build up any relianceinterests during that time.
Standing Rock Sioux Tribe v. Army Corp of Engineers -
Amicus Brief StrategyNARF and the National Congress of American Indians(NCAI) are assisting the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe and theirattorneys to develop and coordinate an effective amicus briefstrategy in their lawsuit against the uS Army Corps of
engineers in relation to the Dakota Access pipeline (DA pl). In
December 2016, the Army Corps of engineers issued a state-
ment that it would not grant an easement to allow the DakotaAccess pipeline to cross under lake Oahe. The Corps deter-
mined that further environmental review was warranted. 
However, in January 2017, president Trump directed the
Corps to take “any and all actions appropriate” to review andapprove the easement, rescind or modify the Decembermemo, and consider any prior determinations in the matter. InFebruary, the Corps provided notice of its intention to grantan easement to Dakota Access, llC, to construct a pipeline
under lake Oahe. Both Standing Rock Sioux Tribe and
Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe filed amended complaints andmotions for summary judgment. NARF, in conjunction withNCAI, coordinated an amicus brief strategy to support the
Tribes. 
In June 2017, the court issued a favorable ruling for the Tribes,
finding that the Corps “did not adequately consider theimpacts of an oil spill on fishing rights, hunting rights, orenvironmental justice, or the degree to which the pipeline’seffects are likely to be highly controversial.” In April 2018,Dakota Access filed its oil spill response plan. Then, in August2018, the Corps affirmed its decision to issue a permit forDApl. The Corps concluded that the “. . . review on remand
did not reveal ‘significant new circumstance[s] or informationrelevant to environmental concerns.’”Promote Human RightsNATIV e AM eRICAN RIGHTS F uNDThe Tribes filed motions for summary judgment in August
2019. NARF filed an amicus brief supporting the Tribes’motions for summary judgment on behalf of 14 tribes andeight tribal organizations. In March 2020, the court grantedsummary judgment in favor of the Tribes and remanded thematter to the Corps for preparation of an environmental
Impact Statement ( eIS). Much as it had done when remanded
to the Corps in June 2017, the Court ordered an additionalbriefing on whether the it should vacate the easement pend-ing completion of the eIS. NARF filed an amicus brief sup-
porting vacatur. In July 2020, the judge ordered that thepipeline be emptied of oil by August 5. Dakota Access filed anotice of appeal and the DC Circuit Court of Appeals issuedan administrative stay of the shut-down until further notice.NARF submitted an amicus brief on the emergency motion tostay on behalf of NCAI, the Great plains Tribal Chairmen’s
Association, and several other tribal organizations and tribes.NARF and NCAI continue to work with the Tribes’ attorneysand coordinate amicus strategy as requested.
National Register of Historic Places Rulemaking
In early 2019, the National park Service (N pS) announced pro-
posed rulemaking that would change the regulations thatimplement the National Register of Historic places (NRH p).
Among some minor housekeeping and administrativechanges, the N pS proposed substantive changes that are tar-
geted specifically at tribes and Native Hawaiian organiza-tions. The changes are intended to prevent traditional culturalproperties, cultural landscapes, and places of traditional reli-gious and cultural significance from being listed on the NRH p
and considered in the Section 106 review process. The pro-posed changes discredit the value of protecting these types ofcultural resources and sideline tribes and Native Hawaiianorganizations.
Initially, the N pS refused to consult with tribes (and Native
Hawaiian organizations), but relented under significant pres-sure. The N pS held a single “consultation” meeting in Nevada
in June 2019, and a single teleconference in July 2019. Alongwith over seventy tribes and Native organizations, NARFsubmitted extensive comments on the proposed rulemakingon behalf of the Native Village of Tyonek and attended the“consultations.” Of the more than 3,000 comments the N pS
received, only five were in support of the rulemaking. 
In October 2020, the N pS submitted its final rule for review.
NARF represents the Native Village of Tyonek, the Blue lake
Rancheria, and the National Association of Tribal Historicpreservation Officers (NATH pO) in the final rulemaking
process. Meetings were scheduled for November andDecember 2020 and January 2021. Because the final rule wasnot published before inauguration, the Biden Administrationstopped the N pS from moving forward with the rulemaking,
effectively killing the effort. 
Native American Church of North America
NARF has represented the Native American Church of NorthAmerica (NACNA) and its member chapters for four decades.Most recently, NARF has worked to support access to and theuse of peyote for NACNA. Importing from Mexico, wheremost naturally occurring peyote grows, is presently not legal.Artificial cultivation is difficult and extraordinarily expensive.The only domestic supply of peyote (in Texas) is becomingless sustainable due to growing Indian demand; exploitationand commercialization by non-Indian people; damage fromland use practices including cattle ranching; and damage fromincorrect harvesting practices and over-harvesting. 
Therefore, the peyote Research project has focused on raising
awareness in Texas of the need to protect the sacrament. NARFand NACNA representatives have held many meetings withlandowners, peyoteros, and botanists to develop relationships.In 2017, NARF closed on the purchase of 605 acres of Texasland, made possible by a grant from the RiverStyx Foundationof California. A nonprofit organization was created to hold titleto the land and put a peyote conservation project in place.Meetings on the land took place throughout 2018-2019 andmost recently February 2020. Work coordinating with the localranching community continues, and an adobe duplex and twobathhouses have been built on the land. Due to the pandemic,it is not possible to hold business or ceremonial activities on-site at this time. Work on the project continues remotely.
Graduation Eagle Feather and Regalia Project
every spring, NARF is contacted by Native American students
from across the country who are being prohibited from wearingeagle feathers at graduation ceremonies. By and large, onceschools come to understand the religious and cultural signifi-cance of eagle feathers, they make accommodations andexceptions for Native American students. unfortunately, there
are a handful of school districts that persist in restrictingNative American religious liberty and speech. This insistenceon uniformity puts Native American students in the positionof having to choose between celebrating with their classmatesor following their Native religious and cultural traditions.When appropriate and as resources permit, NARF may senda letter to the school explaining the religious significance ofeagle feathers, and how both federal and state law protectstheir use. Additionally, we are exploring the viability of targetedlegislative campaigns that could lead to a “fix” on a state-by-state basis.
On occasion, NARF pursues litigation on behalf of affected 
students. NARF is co-counseling with Rothstein Donatelli llp
PROMOTE HUMAN RIGHTSANN uAl RepORT 2020to bring suit against an Arizona school district for violating a
Native student’s religious freedom rights to wear an eaglefeather at graduation in 2019. The case is Waln v. Dysart School
District , et al. and pending in Arizona federal district court. 
iNDiAN ED uCATioN
Tribal Education Departments National Assembly
NARF founded the Tribal education Departments National
Assembly (T eDNA) more than fifteen years ago with funding
from the uS Department of education to start a national mem-
bership organization for Tribal education Departments (or
Agencies). With NARF’s assistance, T eDNA has become a
leading Indian education organization that focuses on tribalgovernance over K-12 education provided by state, federal,and tribal schools. NARF continues to represent T eDNA on
national legislative and administrative matters. Recently,NARF has reviewed tribal education codes to identify areasfor increased tribal governance. NARF also provides trainingfor TeDNA and its partners on various national, state, and
tribal education legislation and other legal matters. 
In October 2019, T eDNA was awarded a State-Tribal
education partnership grant to assist five tribes in Virginiaestablish education departments, develop education codes,
and work with the state to improve education for tribal students. NARF will assist with this work.
In October 2020, T eDNA was awarded a grant from the uS
Department of education to work with five tribes and two
schools in Oklahoma and research the effectiveness ofexpanding choices of education services to support over 1,000tribal secondary school students. T eDNA will subcontract
with NARF for training and technical assistance on this project.
Rosebud Sioux Tribal Education Code Revision Project
In 1987 NARF accepted the request of the Rosebud Sioux Tribeto develop a precedent-setting tribal education code to regu-late all K-12 schools on it reservation. The Rosebud SiouxTribe adopted its education Code in 1991. In 2015, the
Rosebud Sioux Tribe received a grant from the Department ofthe Interior to revise its 25-year-old education Code. In
October 2020, the Tribal education Committee approved a
final draft of the proposed revised Code. The formal approvaland enactment of the proposed revised Code continues underthe Tribe’s process.
NATIV e AM eRICAN RIGHTS F uNDLeech Lake Band of Ojibwe Education Code
NARF represents the leech lake Band of Ojibwe in drafting a
comprehensive education code. Development continues withcommunity meetings upcoming.
iNDiAN CH iLD WELFARE ACT DEFENSE 
The Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) was passed by the uS
Congress in 1978 in response to the disproportionate numbersof American Indian and Alaska Native children beingremoved from their families by state agencies and state courtsand placed in non-Native foster or adoptive homes or residen-tial institutions. Congress found that many of these removalsand placements were due to state officials’ inability or unwill-ingness to understand tribal cultures and societies. Theremovals were extremely detrimental to the children, theirfamilies, and tribes. 
In 2016, the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) issued regulations
and guidelines for the implementation of ICWA. The past sev-eral years have seen a dramatic increase in the number of legalchallenges brought by opponents of ICWA, all with the goal ofundermining ICWA and tribal sovereignty. The ICWADefense project is a partnership formed to protect the rights of
children, families, and tribes in ICWA proceedings nation-wide. The most prominent case right now is Brackeen v.
Bernardt (formerly Brackeen v. Zinke ).
In October 2018, Judge Reed O’Connor of the uS District
Court for the Northern District of Texas ruled that both ICWAand the 2016 ICWA regulations are unconstitutional. Thearguments Judge O’Connor relied on to hold ICWA and theregulations unconstitutional are contrary to the Constitution,congressional intent, and decades of well-established federalIndian law. Tribe defendants asked the united States Court of
Appeals for the Fifth Circuit to stay the decision, which it did,and initiated the appeal. NARF worked closely with partnersto coordinate amicus briefs, including a tribal brief, which wassigned by 325 tribes and 57 Native organizations. The FifthCircuit held oral argument in March 2019.We are delighted toreport that in August 2019, the Fifth Circuit overturned thedistrict court’s opinion and affirmed the constitutionality ofICWA. On October 1, the Individual plaintiffs and the State
plaintiffs petitioned the Fifth Circuit to rehear the case en banc
and, unfortunately, rehearing was granted. NARF coordinat-ed the amicus briefing strategy for the rehearing. We had 486tribes and 59 tribal organizations sign on to the amicus brief.The Fifth Circuit heard oral argument in January 2020. We areawaiting a decision though we are unsure how COVID-19issues may delay the court’s internal processes.Finally, NARF has been heavily involved in recent efforts in
Alaska to transfer more control over the state’s child welfaresystem to tribes through a compacting process. The AlaskaTribal Child Welfare Compact was signed in October 2017. Itallows tribes to enter into an agreement with the state to pro-vide services and functions that currently are provided by theAlaska Office of Children’s Services. For fiscal year 2021, thereare five scopes of work available to tribal co-signers. 
VoTiNG AND C iViL RiGHTS
Native American Voting Rights Project
(https://vote.narf.org/)The Voting Rights project refers to all the voting rights work
that NARF does. We used to have just one or two cases at atime and one project, but this work has expanded dramaticallyin the past few years. The goals and objectives of this work fallunder this priority because we view voting and representa-tion as a human right in any democracy.
The goal of the Voting Rights project is Indian political power.
When Indian people have enough power to determine theirelected officials, or better yet to elect people from their owncommunities, their representatives will be truly answerable totheir needs. When a congressional representative knows thetribe in her district is not big enough to un-elect her, she isunlikely to be responsive to their requests for legislation orappropriations. This is the lack of political power, and it is thePROMOTE HUMAN RIGHTS
ANN uAl RepORT 2020situation of the vast majority of tribes. political power means
the ability to effect positive change for the benefit of yourmembers. political power can be gained through media, rela-
tionships and—above all—voting. To reach its ultimate goal,this project focuses on removing barriers to voting from the
large to the small.
Our voting rights work consists of four general types,
although they can overlap: litigation, the coalition, projects,and census. 
~Litigation
In 2020, there were five active voting cases:
1. Toyukak v. Treadwell - This is an older case we won regarding
the translation of ballots and voting materials into AlaskaNative languages. It is still under court supervision and wewill be seeking to have that order extended this fall becausethe State of Alaska never fully complied with the order. 
2. Brakebill and Spirit Lake v. Jaeger - These are two companion
cases challenging the North Dakota voter ID law. They weresettled to the Tribes’ benefit in 2020.
3. Rosebud Sioux Tribe v. Barnett - This case challenges South
Dakota’s failure to implement the National VoterRegistration Act (the “motor-voter bill”) and offer registra-tion to those who use state services. 
4. Western Native Voice v. Stapleton - This is a case challenging
a state law that prevents ballot collection, which is whensomeone mails another person’s ballot for them. This lawwas meant to stop nonprofits who collected ballots inMontana and increased voter turnout. We won this case inSeptember 2020, and ballot collection is now allowed inMontana. 
5. Arctic Village v. Meyer - This case was filed to enjoin Alaska’s
requirement for a witness signature on a ballot. Alaska isone of only eleven states to have this antiquated require-ment but 25% of Alaska’s residents, including many eldersin Native villages, live alone and did not want to risk theirhealth and lives just to secure a witness signature on theirabsentee ballot. We won this case at the Alaska SupremeCourt and the witness signature requirement is nowenjoined.
The biggest issue during the 2020 election was that a number of
states and jurisdictions considered imposing mandatory mail-invoting. This will drive down voter turnout in Indian communi-ties for the reasons described at www.narf.org/vote-by-mail/.
~Coalition
In 2015, NARF created the Native American Voting RightsCoalition to organize everyone working on voting in IndianCountry so we could share information, resources and strate-gize on a nationwide basis. Members of the Coalition, led by
NARF, have completed two major, original reports. The first isthe largest voter survey ever conducted in Indian Country(almost 5,000 voters in five states) to help ascertain barriers topolitical participation. That report was published in 2018. Wehave also completed a series of nine field hearings acrossIndian Country; a report on the hearings was published in2020 and is available at https://vote.narf.org. 
~Projects
In 2020, NARF engaged in three voting-related projects: (1) securing polling places for the 2020 election; (2) addressreform for Native voters so that they can register and receiveballots in the mail; and (3) a first of its kind, redistricting proj-ect to undo damage to Native American representation acrossthe country.
~Cenus
NARF also has organized a distinct coalition that is specific tocensus issues. The people that work on these issues tend to bespecialized and more locally focused then the nationwide vot-ing coalition. The goal of this component is to educate Nativecommunities about the importance of participating in the cen-sus so that their voices can be heard in future elections andballot issues.
Smith v. State
For decades, the Alaska Court System has excluded the resi-dents of over 150 rural villages from being called for jury serv-ice. The courts claim that it’s too expensive to include ruralresidents; however, the exclusion of rural residents disenfran-chises communities with lower incomes and that are predom-inately Alaska Native. Not including those communities inthe jury pool results in thirty percent of Alaska Natives beingexcluded from participating in the justice system. It affectsperceptions of the justice system—when excluded from juryservice, then one only encounters the courts as a victim, wit-ness, or defendant. And, it results in unrepresentative juriesand likely disproportionate sentences.
In February 2017, NARF filed an amicus brief before the
Alaska Court of Appeals in support of Appellant Smith’sarguments that costs savings alone are not a sufficient govern-ment interest, under an equal protection and due processanalysis, to exclude thirty percent of the Alaska Native com-munity from serving on juries. In March 2019, the court heldthat it was an error to refuse Smith an evidentiary hearing onthe issue of whether the transportation and housing ofprospective jurors from two Native villages would pose anunreasonable expense. The case was sent back to the SuperiorCourt for specific findings and is now back before the Courtof Appeals.NATIV e AM eRICAN RIGHTS F uNDiNTERNAT ioNAL REC oGNiTioN oF iNDiGENouS
PEoPLES
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
PeoplesSince 1999, NARF has represented the National Congress ofAmerican Indians (NCAI) in the international arena to protectindigenous rights. In September 2007, the united Nations
General Assembly overwhelmingly adopted the Declarationon the Rights of Indigenous peoples (Declaration). The
Declaration recognizes that indigenous peoples have impor-tant collective human rights in a multitude of areas, includingself-determination, spirituality, cultural and linguistic heritage,and lands, territories, and natural resources. It sets minimumstandards for the treatment of indigenous peoples and canserve as the basis for the development of customary interna-tional law. 
NARF’s most recent actions on behalf of the NCAI have
focused on the participation of indigenous institutions at theunited Nations ( uN). until now, indigenous peoples have
had to appear in most uN bodies as non-governmental organ-
izations, which is precisely what they are not. Indigenous peoples’ representatives from around the world, including
one from NCAI, met in November 2016 to discuss areas ofconsensus. Informal consultations with member states beganin December 2016 and continued through July 2017. Thisseries of consultations concluded without any real movementon the issue, but the uN General Assembly committed, in
September 2017, to continue to consider the issue for the nextfive sessions.
In 2018, the Human Rights Council began to establish an
appropriate status for indigenous peoples representatives andinstitutions to participate. Discussions continued through2019 and was taken up at a meeting held in ecuador in
January 2020. It was intended to have meetings on this issuein April 2020, but that meeting was canceled in light of theglobal pandemic.
UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples in
Domestic Law Project (https://un-declaration.narf.org/) NARF and the university of Colorado law School (C u law)
are engaged in a project to guide the implementation of theunited Nations Declaration on the Rights of IndigenousPROMOTE HUMAN RIGHTS
ANN uAl RepORT 2020peoples (Declaration) in the united States. Guided by tradi-
tional values, contemporary challenges in Indian Country,and the needs of future generations, the goal of the project isto realize the promises of the Declaration in the uS.
The project held a conference in March 2019 to share experi-
ences implementing the provisions of the Declaration. Theevent generated substantial input and valuable discussion. A project website was launched in May 2020. In mid-2020,
working with uClA’s Native Nations law and policy
Center’s Tribal legal Development Clinic, we also began
developing a uN Declaration Implementation Toolkit. We are
planning to finalize the toolkit and launch a series of relatedwebinars in early 2021.
Organization of American States Draft Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous PeoplesThe Organization of American States (OAS) has been workingon an American Declaration on the Rights of Indigenouspeoples for over twenty-five years. NARF has been representing
NCAI on this matter. The General Assembly of the OASapproved the American Declaration on the Rights ofIndigenous peoples in June 2016. The American Declaration
goes beyond the united Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous peoples in several respects including addressing
treaties, the rights of children, and the rights of peoples in vol-untary isolation. The united States commented it had been a
persistent objector to the text and could not be bound by it. In2019, NARF joined a coalition of indigenous representativescalling for the OAS to fully carry out its plan to implement the American Declaration. After in-person meetings were cancelled, a virtual dialogue was held in October 2020.
World Intellectual Property Organization
NARF represents NCAI in the ongoing negotiations for aninternational instrument to protect intellectual property,including Traditional Knowledge, Genetic Resources andAssociated Traditional Knowledge (GRAATK), andTraditional Cultural expressions (TC e). The united States has
been participating in these negotiations at the WorldIntellectual property Organization (WI pO) since 2000. Since
2009, the negotiations have centered on the draft text of thethree potential instruments concerning TK, GRAATK, andTCe. 
In May 2017, NARF and the university of Colorado law
School (C u law) hosted a drafting session on the TC e instru-
ment. Some of that text was introduced into the WI pO draft.
In October 2017, the new WI pO Intergovernmental
Committee on Intellectual property and Genetic Resources,
Traditional Knowledge and Folklore (IGC) mandate and workplan were approved by the WI pO General Assembly. Building on that experience, NARF and C u law hosted
another drafting session in May 2018 focusing on theGRAATK instrument. In June 2018, NARF spoke on the IGCIndigenous panel on “ practical Measures Relating to
Intellectual property and Genetic Resources: Databases and
Contracts – Indigenous peoples’ and local Communities’
perspectives.” A NARF article summarizing the 2018 WI pO
IGC negotiations was published in The Indigenous World2019 (https://www.iwgia.org/images/documents/indige-nous-world/IndigenousWorld2019_ uK.pdf).
IGC 40 took place in June 2019. The text focus was the TK and
TCe texts, and the session included negotiations on the work
program for the 2020/2021 biennium. The Indigenous Caucusobtained recommendations from the Committee to the WI pO
General Assembly to update a 2016 technical review and con-vene an Indigenous expert workshop. progress also was made
funding indigenous participation. The WI pO General
Assembly approved the proposed 2020-2021 mandate andwork program during its annual meeting in fall 2019. NARFpublished an article about the 2019 WI pO negotiations in The
Indigenous World 2020 (http://iwgia.org/images/year-book/2020/IWGIA_The_Indigenous_World_2020.pdf).
In February 2020, at the NCAI Winter Session, federal 
agencies participating in the WI pO negotiations, attended a
listening session that NARF organized. Also in 2020, virtualmeetings of past participants in the Indigenous Caucus wereheld throughout 2020, to discuss interim activities that couldbe pursued while waiting for negotiation sessions to resume.The group is preparing Genetic Resources text to submit to theIGC Chair. More recently, the WI pO Secretariat invited NARF
to speak at a virtual seminar in January 2021.
The WI pO Traditional Knowledge Division and the uS patent
and Trademark Office agreed to work with NARF and C u
law School on developing two short webinars for uS tribes
on intellectual property issues uS. The webinars occurred
September 2020 and are available on the NARF website. ANN uAl RepORT 2020Within the unique trust relationship between the united
States and Native nations is the inherent duty for all levels ofgovernment to recognize and enforce the laws and regulationsapplicable to Native peoples. NARF is committed to hold gov-
ernments accountable to Native Americans. 
TRuST FuND MATTERS
Pembina Chippewa v. United States
NARF represents the Turtle Mountain Chippewa, ChippewaCree, White earth Band of Minnesota Chippewa, and little
Shell Chippewa Tribes in this case against the federal govern-ment for misaccounting and mismanagement of their tribaltrust fund, the pembina Judgment Fund. Starting in August
2007, the parties engaged in alternative dispute resolutionproceedings in the Court of Federal Claims. In July 2015, theparties reached agreement on a monetary amount for a poten-tial settlement of the plaintiffs' claims in this case. In March
2018, the parties reached agreement on the non-monetarycomponents of a potential settlement. In December 2020, theparties began the process of seeking court approval of the set-tlement.
Intertribal Council of Arizona v. United States 
In April 2015, NARF filed on behalf of the Intertribal Councilof Arizona (ITCA) a breach of trust case against the united
States seeking damages for mismanagement of the ArizonaIntertribal Trust Fund (AITF). The AITF was established byCongress in 1988 to compensate Arizona tribes for the closureof the phoenix Indian School. The school’s closure allowed the
Department of the Interior to exchange the school’s land forprivately owned lands of the Barron Collier Company inFlorida. The phoenix lands were more valuable than the
Florida lands, and Congress approved the land exchange onlyif the difference in value of the properties went to the AITFand a trust fund for the Navajo Nation. Collier partially paid
the property value, but then gave notice that they would nolonger make payments. The lawsuit seeks to hold the united
States liable for the remaining payments into the AITF. Afterfailed negotiations, ITCA filed an amended complaint in April2018, which the united States moved to dismiss. The court
granted virtually the entire motion, dismissing all but a por-tion of one of ITCA’s claims. In early-2019, ITCA appealed tothe uS Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit. In February
2020, the Court of Appeals heard oral argument. In April 2020,they issued a decision. It stated that two ITCA claims wereproperly dismissed, but a third claim, that the united States
failed to hold sufficient security for the trust fund payments,should not have been dismissed and should go forward. 
Repeal of the Klamath Tribe Distribution of 
Judgment ActThe Klamath Tribe retained NARF to seek repeal of theDistribution of Judgment Fund Act, which was adopted as part of the legislation that terminated the Tribes’ government-to-government relationship in 1954. The relation-ship was restored in 1986, but the remnant legislation was notrepealed. Senators Merkley and Wyden introduced S.46 torepeal the act. S.46 was adopted by the Senate and forwardedto the House. The House Subcommittee on Indigenouspeoples of the united States held a hearing; NARF provided
testimony in support of adoption and responded to follow-up
questions. S.46 now goes to the full Interior Committee formark-up; then to the full House for consideration. Hold Governments Accountable
NARF is firmly committed to sharing its legal expertise in
support of Indian rights. NARF maintains several projects todevelop Indian law and educate the public about Indian rights, laws,and issues . NARF staff also participates in numerous confer-
ences and events to share their knowledge and expertise inIndian law. 
indigenous Peacemaking initiative 
(https://peacemaking.narf.org/)
Indigenous peacemaking is a community-directed conflict
resolution process that addresses the concerns of all interestedparties. The peacemaking process uses traditional rituals suchas the group circle and Clan structures to involve the partiesto a conflict, their supporters, elders and interested communitymembers. Within the circle, people can speak from the heart ina shared search for understanding of the conflict, and togetheridentify the steps necessary to assist in healing all affectedparties and to prevent future occurrences and conflicts. Themission of NARF’s Indigenous peacemaking Initiative (I pI) is
to promote and support Native peoples in restoring sustain-able traditional dispute resolution practices. Our priorities,based on surveys of tribal justice system professionals, are: (1)collecting and making available online materials from tribalpeacemaking efforts and peacemaking in general; (2) provid-ing technical assistance to tribes that request it; (3) providingtrainings in tribal peacemaking; and (4) providing advocacysupporting tribal peacemaking. The project is guided by anadvisory committee of traditional peacemaking experts andpractitioners.
The IpI team continues to be very busy. In February, the team
provided training to university of Denver Sturm College of
law staff and students. Trainings and technical assistance for
tribes are a primary focal point for the project, but several in-person trainings and meetings were cancelled due to thepandemic. However, our efforts continued online. In March,IpI participated in a virtual gathering advancing restorative
justice in communities of color. In April, we co-sponsored the10th annual Global Cyberconference on Dispute Resolution.In July, I pI presented at “Building Better Child Welfare CourtsTogether” for state and tribal court staff and child welfare
workers from New Mexico. In August, we partnered withpeacemakers around the country on “ peacemaking
Colloquium: Shift Out of the Box and into the Circle.” InSeptember, I pI conducted an introduction to peacemaking for
the Oglala lakota Children’s Justice Center.In October-
November, we provided technical assistance to three tribalpeacemaking programs as they sought to expand their work.And in December, I pI staff conducted a training for newly-
elected tribal officials at the pueblo of Isleta
Native American Journalists Association Media GuidesThe Native American Journalists Association (NAJA) pro-
duces media guides—typically, a one-page informationsheet—with the goal of improving the quality of news cover-age of complex Native American issues. Beginning in 2020,NAJA and NARF formed a partnership for media guidesaddressing legal issues. NAJA identifies the subject for eachguide and produces an initial draft; NARF provides legalreview, to ensure any legal claims or representations are accu-rate. The first NAJA-NARF guide was completed in July 2020,after the uS Supreme decided McGirt v. Oklahoma . The guide
was cited by several news outlets in their coverage of the case.
The National indian Law Library 
(https://narf.org/nill/)
The National Indian law library (NI ll) is the only publicly
available law library in the united States devoted to Indian
law. In addition to the service that it provides to NARF’s attor-neys, the library is an invaluable resource supporting Indianlaw and educating the public on Indian law issues. The
library’s website recorded 268,000 users and 347,000 sessionsin 2020. The website averaged approximately 22,000 users permonth, with a high of 28,000 in July 2020. Additionally, eachweek, NI ll provides free updates through the Indian law
Bulletins. More than 9,000 subscribers receive the email bulletins. Throughout 2020, NI ll has worked with the
university of Wisconsin, the Open law library, the
Stockbridge Munsee Community, and the pueblo of San
Ildefonso to develop a new platform for publishing tribal laws. Develop Indian Law
NATIV e AM eRICAN RIGHTS F uND
Based on our audited financial statements for the fiscal year
ending September 30, 2020, NARF reports total revenue andnet assets of $16,071,348 and $49,250,906, respectively. Due topresentation requirements of the audited financial statementsin terms of recognizing the timing of certain revenues andexpenses, they do not reflect the fact that, based on NARF’sinternal reporting, revenue exceeded expenses and other cashoutlays resulting in an increase of $1,917,584 to NARF’sreserve fund.
When compared to fiscal year 2019: The decrease in public
contributions is mostly due to receiving almost $1.2 millionmore in bequests in fiscal year 2019 (this area can vary widelyfrom one year to the next). The decrease in tribal contributions
is mostly due to a $1 million donation from a tribe in fiscalyear 2019 (although this contribution covers a two-year period,the total amount was required to be recognized in that year).The $10,000 for federal awards relates to the SBA’s economic
Injury Disaster payment but prior to fiscal year 2020 it hasbeen the Bureau of Justice Assistance contracts that ended infiscal year 2019. We have been very fortunate to obtain newfoundation funding, mostly restricted to our important projects and cases. FY 2020 Financial Report
EXPENSE COMPARISON
Note: This summary of financial information has been extracted from NARF’s audited financial statements which received an unmodi fied
opinion by the accounting firm of BKD, llp. Complete audited financials are available, upon request, through our Boulder office, or at
www.narf.org.SUPPORT AND REVENUE COMPARISON
ANN uAl RepORT 2020NARF’s success relies on the gene rosity of our donors  
throughout the nation. We invite you to learn more about the 
benefits associated with each program listed below, please 
contact our Development Department at 303-447-8760.
We gratefully acknowledge these donors for fiscal year 2020 
(october 1, 2019 through September 30, 2020).
Tribes and Native organizations
AmerindRisk, Affiliated Tribes of Northwest Indians, Agua 
Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians, Ak-Chin Indian 
Community, Bristol Bay Native Corporation, Chickasaw 
Nation, Confederated Tribes of Siletz Indians, Cow Creek 
Band of umpqua Tribe of Indians, Mooretown 
Rancheria, Muckleshoot Indian Tribe, Nome eski mo 
Commun ity IR A, poarch Band of Cree k Indians, 
Redding Rancheri a, Rosebud Sioux Tribe, San Manuel 
Band of Mission India ns, Sealaska Corpora tion,  
Seminole Tribe of Florida, Tanana Chiefs Conference, Inc., 
Tilden Toelupe, l. l.C., united Tribes of Bristol Bay , 
Yocha Dehe Wintun Nation
Foundations, Corporations, and Law Firms
444S Foundation, Agua Fund Inc., Alaska Venture Fund, Aria 
Foundation, Amalgamated Foundation, Arkay Foundation, 
Bia-echo Foun dation, Morton K. & Jane Blaustein  
Foundation, Dr. Bronner's All-One, Casey Family programs, 
Chorus Foundation, Colorado Health Foundation, Comcast  
NBCuniversal Foundation, Common Counsel Foundation,  
Consolidated Investment Group, llC, Darby Foundation, 
Defense Against Thought Control Foundation, Democracy 
Fund, Roy & patricia Disney Family Foundation, edgerton 
Foundation, edward & Verna Gerbic Family Foundation, Ford 
Foundation, Foundation to promote Open Society, Goldman 
Sachs Gives, Grove Foundation, Hewlett Fou ndation,  
ladybug Foundation, life Comes From It, McNeill Charitable 
Foundation, Mericos Foundation, Mexican American legal 
Defense Fund, Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, NeO 
philanthropy, Nint Foundation, NoVo Foundation, Oak  
Foundation, park Foundation, patagonia, Carol & Milton 
petrie Foundation, pollan-Belzer Charitable Fund, RiverStyx 
Foundation, SAD Foundation, Solidarity Giving, The Bay and 
paul Foundations, The pew Charitable Trusts, The Reis  
Foundation, The ungar Foun dation, The Whitehead  
Foundation, Tides Foundati on, True Nor th Foundation,  
Turnbull Family Foundation Inc., Tzo-Nah Fund, Wallace 
Coulter Foundation, Steiner Family Foundation, William & 
Flora Hewlett Foundation, W.K. Kellogg FoundationLiving Waters Endowment– The Living Waters Endowment
allows donors to honor friends and loved ones by making an endow-
ment gift of $10,000 or more, where the principal is invested andinterest income is used for NARF’s programs. By designating a giftto endowment, contributions generate annual funds and providelegal representation to our tribal clients in perpetuity. elwood H. Brotzman Memorial Fund, Jerome Davis living
Waters endowment Fund, Kathleen & Ruth Dooley Family
Fund, John echohawk, Kim Gottschalk, Susan K. GriffithsMemorial Fund, The Robert & Joy Hanson leland
endowment, Frank J. McCormick Family Fund, Melody
McCoy, Marvin W. pourier Jr. & Donna M. Deans Memorial
Fund, Mary l ou Mosca-Ragona Memorial Fund, ernest l.
Schusky endowment, The Snoqualmie Indian Tribe, Helen &
Sidney ungar Memorial e ndowment Fund, Dan & Beth
Whittemore, Joel Williams
Bequests and Trusts
Nelvada Dean, Diane Delp, Ferriday Fund, Wanda KremerGregory, Janet Griffiths, William Guimond, Barbara low,
Ouida parham, Dean p eerman, Mary J. Resnik, Gene
Rothman-Choy, Maria Hannelore Schultz, Joan M. Seiger, Ann C. Stehle, J. Surasky, John Tyler, John Vaupel
Peta uha–Peta Uha in the Lakota (Sioux) language means firekeeper,
an individual who makes a solemn commitment to ensure that the
sacred flame—source of light, heat, and energy for the people—willbe kept burning. Peta Uha is a membership program for donors makingsubstantial annual commitments to NARF. Like the firekeepers ofold, members of the Peta Uha Council demonstrate constancy andvigilance to ensure the protection of justice for Native Americans.
Peta uha Pipestone 
lucile Hamlin, Alaska Venture Fund, Colorado Health
Foundation, Defense Against Thought Control Fnd, Dr.
Bronner's All-One, Goldman Sachs Gives, Head Family, InaKorek - Silver lining, Jessica Case, lucile Hamlin, Mary
Cowen Beitner Giving Fund, Mr. & Mrs. Arthur & MariaRichmond, Mr. Gloria Foster, park Foundation, Roy & patricia
Disney Family Foundation, Steiner Family Foundation, SusanFriedenberg, Susan Templeton, The Weaver Family, TheWhitehead Foundation, The Woodtiger Fund
Peta uha T urquoise
Amalgamated Fund, Arkay Foundation, Ann-Clarke Bailey,
Barnabas Foundation, Beane Family Foundation, Mrs. JudithBuechner, Mr. Scott Canute, Ron & leslie Dorosin, estridge
Family Foundation of Hamilton Carmel, Thomas Green,Charal Hatfield, lloyd Miller & Heather Kendall Miller, Mr.Trey Jones, Katherine Kovner, Ms. Virginia lincoln, patricia
N. Matkowski, eric p. & evelyn e. Newman Foundation,NARF Anowledgment of Contributions: 
Fiscal Year 2020
NATIVe  AMe RICAN RIGHTS Fu NDMichael G. Sawaya, Mark Schissel, Srinivasan Seshadri,
Brennan Sherry, Ms. elizabeth Steele, Julia S. Vlock, Mr. &
Mrs. Dan S. & Beth Whittemore, Ms. Naomi Wolf
Peta uha Granite
Kent Bach, elise Bornstein, Mr. Gary l. Brune, eric Dahlstrom,
Mr. Christian Finch, Robert Gips, Carey Gordon & lois
Bradshaw, eleanor Hellman, Honor the earth, Kauffman
Foundation Matching Gifts, Carolyn Kipper, Bill & IldikoKnott, Mr. & Mrs. paul leFort, Melody MacKenzie, Susan e.
Manuel, Mr. Samuel Marquis, Jr., Mrs. Josephine Merck, Mr.Thomas V . Muller, Network for Good, pollan-Belzer
Charitable Fund, Helene presskreischer, Danielle Redmond, R
eric Reuss, Barbara Rogoff, Mr. Merrill Schneider, livia Stone,
Jeanette Styres, Thanh Tran, ungar Foundation, Wendy van-
den Heuvel, Benjamin Webster, Akexander Weiss & SusanRowley, edward M. Young, Ms. Mary lee Zerby
Peta uha Flint
John Chance Allen, Joy Alwan, Sal Amendola, The ArchesFoundation, Cynthia Argani, Jane Avni, Darren Baker, BassettFoundation, Kenneth Baughman, The Bender Family, KarenBenjamin, William Bixby, elinor Blake, Diane Boehm, Mr. &
Mrs. David & Barbara Boerner, Mitchel Bollag, laura Borst,
Mrs. lorraine M. Bosche, Alex Bowie and Kyle Judge, Jennifer
Bright, Mrs. Alice l. Broner, M.S.W., Ms. Jane A. Brown, Sean
Buffington, Kathryn Campbell-Kibler, Jake Cannon, Ms.Cheryl Capps, G. Chafin-Garrett, Warren Chang, Mr. & Mrs.
Stuart Chapin, Ms. Barbara S. Chapman, Michael & BethChardack Charitable Fund, Mr. Richard W. Cobb, CharlesCole, James Cole, Alexander Colhoun & Selina Rossiter,Serena Connelly, patrick Conner, Nicholas & Carmen
Connors, Daniel Cooley, Mr. David Crand & Mrs. elizabeth
Dang, Ms. Karen J. Crook, Mr. James p. Cuny, Vanessa
Davenport, Dino and elizabeth M DeConcini, Juliane
Diamond, Karen Downing, lori Dudar, Daren & Amy eilert,
Mr. peter eliot, Mr. & Mrs. Jason & eliza Factor, Mb Fafunwa,
Fino Family Fund, Audrey Fisher, Simone Freeman, Mr. &Mrs. Andrew & Audrey Franklin, Daniel French & RosannTung, Mrs. Ann Getches, Joyce & Irving Goldman FamilyFoundation, Samuel & Grace Gorlitz Foundation, phillip
Gratwick, laura Grossman, leslie D. Hall, Terence Hancock,
Mr. Collier Hands, eileen Heaser, David Heinsler, e
milie
Heller-Rhys, Alison G. Herschede, Brian Highland,Hitchcock/Hoagland Foundation, Mr. Raymond C.Honeywell, Jr., Sari Ruth Hornstein, Dr. Joan l. Howison,
Mrs. Anne Humes, Wayne Hyatt, Raymond James, CarolJarecki, Ms. Carla H. Kaatz, Kenneth Kahn, Julie Karbo, Mr.philip M. Kenney, Ms. Sally Ketcham, Jim and D'Arcy
Kirkland, James & linda Kitchens, Mr. Frederick K. Kleene,
Mr. Richard K. Knutson, Mr. Ron Kreher, Ricki and ScottKresan, Ms. Gloria Kress, Tyler Kyle, Mrs. T. G. labrecque, Jai
lakshman, Ms. Judith lamb, Iona laVeine, eva lee, pamela
leech, lester poretsky Family Foundation, Mr. emmanuel
ANN uAl RepORT 2020levy, Benjamin litoff, Tyler lobdell, Alexandrine lyons-
Boyle, luisa M. Magarian, Ms. Florence Maher, Nancy Main,
Dr. & Mrs. Alex Malaspina, Heather Malcolm, Mr. OtwinMarenin, Ms. patricia e. Mautner, Ms. priscilla McDougal, Mr.
John R. Mc leod, Robert & Margaret McNamara Foundation,
Ms. Barbara J. Meislin, Isabella Michel, Gerrish & GailMilliken, Mary Anne Mills, Mr. & Mrs. Jane and ClarkMoeller, John Montgomery, Moore Family, Susan Morris,Michael Mountford, Barbara Musicus, Manan Nayak, Ms.Cassandra S. Naylor, Robert Nevil, New Visions Foundation,Ms. Marianne e. Nick, Ms. Frannie Oates, Mr. Stephen e.
palmer, Beth peisner, Taylor petrehn, Mrs. Noelle poncelet,
Amelie Ratliff, Siva Raven, Mr. John R. Reed, Mr. ComptonRees, Jr., Mrs. Faith Roessel & Mr. Matthew Slater, philip D.
Ross, emily Rudder, Andrew Sacamano, Ms. Margaret Sass,
erin Schifeling, Sylvia Selverston, Rupa Shankar, Hyunhee
Shin, Ms. Susan Slaughter, Izetta Smith, Brian B & KathleenKelly Spear, Mr. Richard Spitz, Mary Gabrielle Sprague, Mrs.Jennifer Stanley, Stanley Shalom Zielony Foundation, RussStarke, Wayne Ross and Nancy Starling Ross, lyle D.
Steinfeldt, Ms. Sherna Stewart, Mr. Roger A. Stoll, Daniel J.Taaffe, Steve Tait, Sonia Tamez & Kenneth Whistler, BarkTechnologies Inc., The ethel Kennedy Foundation, The Kay
Fund, The San Francisco Foundation, linda Thornton, Ms.
Jennifer Tipton, Tom Tremaine, Brandin Tumeinski, Ms. AliceD. Turak, Derek Valdo, Margaret S. Verble, Mr. StephenWaldman, Christine Walter, Chris Ware, linda and Chris
Warren, Mr. leonard M. Wasserman, Ms. Carol l. Weale,
Aaron Wernham, Moira Wilkinson, Rick & Sally Williams,Gayle Wilson, Kathleen Winder, emma Wohlgemuth,
Workers' Defense Fund, Julian and Stacy Yochum, DavidYoung IV , Ms. Jeanne ZasadilPeta uha obsidian
Maureen l Abel, Amanda Alves, American lutheran Church,
Mr. Robert Anderson & Ms. Marilyn Heiman, Mr. JohnAndrews, Mary Armstrong, Danelle Aurilil, Dianna p.
Babcock, Diana Bainbridge, Mr. Bill Bajari, Neil Baldwin,Dolores Barcroft, laura Barrett, Craig Barretto, Armilda
Beard, Heidi Behforouz, Hannah Belveal, laurie Bennett,
Robert & ellie Bernstein, elizabeth Bettenhauasen, esther
Billings, lorraine Boissoneault, linda B. Bolton, Nancy
Bonvillain, Cathryn Booth- laForce, B. Jay Bortz, Mr. Richard
l. Bosshardt, Kristen Boyles, Gladys Bratcher, Jerry l. and
Betty A. Berkhus, Herbert Brentlinger, Katherine K. Brobeck,
Brooklyn Community Foundation, Samantha Brown,Stephanie Brown, Mary Bucholtz, Mr. Dwight Call, JanetCampbell, James Campbell, Ms. elizabeth Caplan, Mr. paul
Caplan, Mrs. Ruth O. Carroll, Robert Cathcart, Candelario &elizabeth Celio, Nason & lisa Chehreh, Mr. Samuel M Chen,
James Clark, Katharine Clark, Henry Clayton, Mr. & Mrs.George & Rachel l. Cloward, Bruce Cobern, Mary Collier, The
Community Foundation, Carol Cone, Shiloh Congleton, Mr.Samuel T. Cook, Mr. lammot D. Copeland, Jr., Daniel Cordell,
Roger Coupal, Mr. Keith Cowan, Ms. Ruth B. Cowan, Mr. &Mrs. phillip & Julie Croll, Martha C. Crothers, phD, eric
Dahlhoff, Mrs. Jo Anna Dale, larry Davis, Charles Davis,
Olugbenga Dawodu, Anne DeMuth, Cathy DeNu, Mr. GeorgeDesmond, Denise Dreier, Mr. Craig J. Du prey, logan Dwyer,
lucille echohawk, John einhaus, Barry & Cecilia eldred, peter
ember, Mr. Robert endres, Serena epstein, Kristin erickson,
Joan eshler, ellen ettlinger Furnari, Cherrie lynn evans, John
& Barbara everett, Mary R. Fabri, James Faris, Ms. lenore
Feigenbaum, Mr. & Mrs. Benedict & Mary Feinberg, ezra
Firestone, p Douglas Folk, Ann M. Francis, Naomi C. Franklin,NARF ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS: FISCAL YEAR 2020
NATIV e AM eRICAN RIGHTS F uND
Kai Fujita, Nat Furman, lawrence Furnstahl, Tygerlily
Gagnon, eva Gantz, edna Garcia & Su ellen Shepard, Corrine
Garza, Damien Germano, Dina Ghen, Wayfair Gift, SamuelGluskin, Allison Goforth, Jayashree Gokhale, pamela Gordon,
David Gordon, Mr. larry Gray and Family, Sadja A.
Greenwood, pamela Greeson, Mr. Martin Griffith, linda J.
Grlser, Michelle Groleau, Ms. Heide Gulgowski, RobertGuthrie, Mr. Herbert Haderthauer, Moses Haia, Mr. William Y.Harley, Willodean Harness, Mr. Sprague Harrison & Ms. lord
Harrison, Mr. eric Heath, Heimbinder Family Foundation, Dr.
Robert Henry, Kevin Hermida, Joe Hessling, Mr. George C.Hetrick, Kirsten Holliday, Mr. Ken D. Holm, Alison Holman,Ruth Holmes, lacey Horn, Ivan & Carol Hoyt, Ms. eileen l.
Hufana, elizabeth Hunt, Mark Interrante and Mary Walker,
Roberta Johnson, Mr. Olivier Jolliet, Heidi l. Joos, MD,
Natalie Juliana, Mary Kancewick, David Kaneshiro, Brianewert and Kathleen Rulka, Ms. lois Katnick, Robert Kavner,
Ms. Karen Kehoe, William Kell Charitable Fund, AndrewKing, Mr. Adam Klepper, leo Korein, Shelley Krause & Terri
Riendeau, Andrew Krauss, Nickola Kuhn, Susan Kyle, Karilee, James and Cynthia leonard, Daniel leone, Monica Jakuc
leverett, Mr. & Mrs. Joshua & Rebecca levinson, David
lewis, Roberta lewis, Mr. & Mrs. Stephen & Margaret libera,
Marissa loNigro, Jennifer lucero, Ms. Carol J. ludwig, Mr.
Thomas e. luebben, James MacArthur, Mr. Stewart Macaulay,
Carolyn Swan Mack, patricia Macomber, Margarita Maestas,
Nancy Malone, Sheila Ann Maloney, Mr. & Mrs. John &Susanne Manley, Aaron Dorfman & Geneen Massey, IchiroMatsumura, peyton Mays, Milla McClellan, elizabeth McGee,
Timothy McGinnis, Mr. Colin McGurk & Ms. Orli Nativ, VickyMclane, Fara McMullen, Sally O. McVeigh, Richard
Merbaum, Margaret Meyerhofer, Amanda Michaels, Mr. &Mrs. Stephen T. Millham, Jon Milnes, Gwen Moffat, Ms. SaraJane Moss, Roberta Mundie, Scott & Jean Nelson, Ms. JudithR. Nelson, Mr. Grant Nelson, Kris Newgren, Stephanie Noack,The McKee Foundation, Mr. Vincent Noto, Setta Odoroff,Trinidad Ortega, Raymond Ovalle, David Owens, Mr. Calvinpagel, Joaquim panozzo, Dorothy parris, Mr. Roger B.
parsons, Kathleen paul, Mr. paul J. & Mrs. Diane elaine p
erry,
Mr. & Mrs. Jeffrey & Joan petertil, Zelie pforzheimer, Fred and
linda S. phaby, Irwin pless, Mr. Nick poeppelman, Ms. Anne
powell, T. Rowe price, Dee price, Sharon priven, lawrence
procell, Ms. Carol puri, Jacqueline Quinn, Betty Rains, G.
Craig Ramsay, Nancy C. Ramsey, Mary l. Rapczynski, Wayne
Rapkin, Catherine Ravinski, Roy Regozin, Mark Richardson,Riot Games, Inc, Mr. Martin C. Ritter, Tony Roberts and KarenFilipovich, Jean Roberts, Karen Robertson, Ron Rohde, Mr.David e. Rohrlich, Ian A Root, Mr. Robert C. Rothhouse,
Daniel Rothschild, Andrew Rowen, SAD Foundation, emily
Saltz and Ira Fader, Margaret Sanborn, elizabeth F. Sayman,
Georgina Schiavelli, Mr. James Schlessinger, Mrs. F. KarlSchoenborn, Gerald & Karen Schuler, Karl Schults, Doug Seay,Dr. & Mrs. Jonathan A. Shapiro, Mrs. elvera Shappirio, James
D Sharp, Ms. Noel Sheer, Mr. peter l. Sheldon, Ms. Gina
Shepard, Tara Sherman, Mr. William T. Sherman, Mr. SamuelSimpson & Ms. Susan Neff, Rachel Slaybaugh, Steven Slomka,Kaighn Smith, Jr. and Audrey Maynard, Mr. Michael ColbertSmith, Kirk & Sarah & Casey Smothers, Beth Snorf, Society ofthe Transfiguration, Susan Speth, John Squires, Tom andDiane St John, Kelley Stanley, Maria Steinrueck, patrick
Stollenwerk, Ms. Mary e. Stravens, Vivian Strosberg, Mr. Wes
Studi, Michael Stutz, Savithri Subramanyam, Dr. JonathanSunshine, Mr. lee Buck Susag, Anna Sutterisch, Demian
Trask, Jennifer Tyler, David Vandre, Mr. Charles Vetzner,Anthony Vidovich, Ann Viitala, W.K. Kellogg Foundation,Katherine Walker, Nancy liela Wallace Nelson, Ms. linda
Walsh, Gerald and Veronika S. Walton, Rev. WilliamWantland, Jacqueline and Charl Warren, Dann Webster,Wynne Weddell, Margaret N. Weitzmann, Caroline Wellbery,Arlene Wenthe, Cynthia Gail Werner, Harvey White, WideWaters Fund, Ms. paul Wilhite, Charles Wilkinson, Ms.
Katharine Wilson, Mr. David Winston, Jeanette Wolfley, Mr.eric Wong, lydia Wood, Gary Wright, Mr. & Mrs. philip &
Carolyn Wyatt, Georgine Yorgey, peg Yorkin, louise Young,
edward Zukoski
Circle of Life – The circle is an important symbol throughout
Native American cultures, representing unity, strength, and theeternal continuity of life. NARF’s Circle of Life donors provide alasting legacy to the Native American Rights Fund by includingNARF in estate planning or deferred gifts.
Mr. & Mrs. Catches Bear & Judy Adams, Mr. Rodney J.
Addison, Mr. Maxwell K. Barnard, Mrs. Barbara Beasley,Diane Ben Ari, Mrs. Nanette M. Bohren, Mr. Dale e. Brand,
Ms. Nina R. Brilli, Samuel B. Broaddus & Sandra Jensen, Ms.Gloria Burgess, Mr. Arthur Carter, Mr. ed Chasteen, Katherine
Curtis, Ms. Judith A. Day, Harvey Dennenberg, Mr. GaryDickerhoof, Ms. patricia R. Duval, Mrs. Susan e. eichhorn,
Ms. Allison B. emerson, Mr. James K. Fee, Mr. p
ete Floros,
ph.D., paul Finley & lisa Foxwell, Ms. Jan Freeman, Mr. lyle
Funderburk, Suzanne Gartz, The lawrence H. Geller Family,
Ms. Deborah Ghoreyeb, louise Gomer Bangel, Ms. Jean
Gundlach, Merrill Hakim, Mr. Michael S. Hall, Ms. MargaretHartnett, Mrs. Theodora C. Haughton, Ms. Karin Holser, Ms. Barbara A. Humes, Mr. Vusama Kariba, Ms. Betty Kleczy,Ms. ellyne Krakower - Rice, Mr. edward Kriege, Ms. Sharon
laughlin, Ingrid leBlanc, Mr. James lehnerer, Ms. Jane G.
libby, Ms. Rima lurie, Dr. patricia Marks-Greenfield, Mireille
Martinez, Ms. Helen G. McCahill, Ms. Marion McCollomHampton, Dr. Joseph McNamara, Mr. William G. Milligan,Mr. Gary Montgomery, Ms. leila V . Moore, Jeanne Moskal,
Nancy O'Neal, Mr. Anthony pampena, Mr. Marc pearce, 
Mr. Moses peter, Mr. Randall petersen, Ms. Denise pfalzer, 
ANN uAl RepORT 2020Ms. Thelma populus Gordon, Casey portnoy, Ms. Maureen
Ripley, Miss Barbara H. Roberts, Mrs. Andrea Robinsong, Mr.Ramon A. Rodgers, June Rosenthal, Mr. William Rozier, Mrs.B. W. Sampson, Mr. & Mrs. laRoy & Mary Seaver, Mr. Michael
Seeley, Ms. Charlotte Selver, Ms. Katey lynn Simetra, Mr. Kirk
Sperry, Mr. & Mrs. James & patricia Straus, Mr. & Mrs.
Michael & Carol Sullivan, louis Tabois, Valeria Tenyak, Ms.
Charlotte Thompson, Mr. Rene Vivo, Mr. William JosephWade, Mr. Ted Weitz, Dr. & Dr. Robert & Mary Wellman, Mr.Roger l. Welsch, Timothy Wernette, Mr. & Mrs. Dan S. & Beth
Whittemore, Mrs. Karen Williams-Fast Horse
Corporate Matching Gifts –Many companies support causes
that are important to their employees by matching their charitablecontributions—sometimes doubling or even tripling their donation. See if your employer participates at https://double thedonation.com /narf.
Abbvie, Bank of America, Battelle, Beacon Capital partners,
BD, Belle Day Jewelry, BO eING, Best Buy employee Giving
program, Business Wire, CAF America, The Campbell
Foundation, Colorado Health Foundation, ConsolidatedInvestment Group, llC, Dell, Federated Rural electric
Insurance exchange, Freeport McMoran, GA p Inc., G. e.
Foundation, Henry luce Foundation, Hi-Rez Studios,
Johnson & Johnson, J p Morgan Chase, Kaiser Foundation,
Kauffman Foundation Matching Gifts, llNl, MasterCard,
Medtronic Foundation Volunteer Grand program, The Merck
Foundation, Morgan Stanley, Nationwide Foundation,Nordstrom, North Forty Group llC, pepsico Foundation,
peW Charitable, pacific Gas & electric Company,
pricewaterhouseCoopers llp, Riot Games, Inc., Silicon Valley
Community Foundation, Starbucks Coffee Company, Target,Texas Instruments, Tokyo electronics, Vanguard, Verisk
Analytics, Wells Fargo Foundation, W.K. Kellogg Foundation,Xcel energy
NARF Employee Giving – NARF employees commit thousands
of hours to protecting the rights of tribes. They also commit theirown funds to help NARF. We appreciate their steadfast dedication.
in-Kind Donations
Dr. Nora Antoine, Jamie Azure, Steven Benally, Kurt BlueDog,James Botsford, Hon. Kevin Briscoe, Sven Collins & StacyKrumin of Squire patton Boggs, Tom Brock (Boulder
Magazine), Hon. Cheryl Demmert Fairbanks, Natasha Gourd,lacey Horn, Hon. Mike A Jackson, Camille Kalama, Kenneth
Kahn, Arlen lightfoot, Robert McGhee, Robert Miguel, Hon.
Michael petoskey, Rhonda 
pitka, Hon. Dave Raasch, Sandor
Iron Rope, Amanda Rios-Santiago, Carson Smith, Hon.Michael petoskey, Martin Terry, Andrew Tso, Hon. laura
Vilas, Miriam Volat, Hon. Robert YazzieBoulder-Denver Advisory Committee
lucille A. echohawk, Thomas W. Fredericks, Ava Hamilton,
Jeanne Whiteing, Charles Wilkinson
oTHER WA yS To SHoW you R SuPPoRT FoR THE
RiGHTS oF NAT iVE PE oPLES
Tsanáhwit Circle –Tsanáhwit is a Nez perce word meaning
equal justice. Tsanáhwit Circle members recognize the con-stant need to stand firm for justice by making monthly contri-butions. With cases that can span years, monthly ongoing con-tributions make a real difference for protecting the rights ofthe tribes we serve. Visit our online donation page atwww.narf.org to pledge your monthly support.
otu’han –Otu’ha n is the lakota (Sioux) word translated as
giveaway. Otu’han gifts are memorial and honoring giftsmodeled after the tradition of the Indian giveaway in whichitems of value are gathered over a long period of time to begiven away in honor of birthdays, marriages, anniversariesand in memory of a departed loved one. Visit our online dona-tion page at www.narf.org to make a tribute gift.
Follow us –Sign up at www.narf.org for our e-news or like and
follow us on social media. These are both great way to get caseupdates, calls-to-action, special events information, and invi-tations. Your e-mail address is confidential and we will notshare it with any outside sources.NARF ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS: FISCAL YEAR 2020
NATIV e AM eRICAN RIGHTS F uND
CORPORATE OFFICERS
John e. echohawk ( pawnee)
executive Director/Attorney
Matthew Campbell 
(Native Village of Gambell)litigation Management Committee
Member/Attorney
David Gover ( pawnee/Choctaw)
litigation Management Committee
Member/Attorney
erin Dougherty lynch
litigation Management Committee
Member/Attorney
Michael Kennedy
Chief Financial Officer
Donald M. Ragona (Matinecock)
Director of Development/HouseCounsel
Ronald p. Mack (Cheyenne
River/ lakota Sioux)
Corporate Secretary
BouLDER MA iN oFFiCE STAFF
John e. echohawk ( pawnee)
-executive Director/Attorney
Matthew Campbell (Native Village of
Gambell) - Attorney
Jacqueline D. De león (Isleta pueblo)
- Attorney 
K. Jerome Gottschalk - AttorneyDavid Gover ( pawnee/Choctaw)
- Attorney
Melody McCoy (Cherokee) - AttorneySteven C. Moore - AttorneySue Noe - AttorneyBrett lee Shelton (Oglala lakota)
- Attorney
Joe M. Tenorio (Santo Domingo pueblo)
- Attorney
Nate Ahrens - Systems AdministratorKevin Cheng - paralegal
Cita Gover (Diné) - Development Donor
Accounting AnalystNicole Keller - paralegal
Michael Kennedy - Chief Financial
Officer
patrice Kunesh (Standing Rock lakota
descent) - Major Gift Officer
Ronald p. Mack (Cheyenne River/
lakota Sioux) - Office/HR
Administrator
Mireille Martinez - Annual Giving Director
Dallin Maybee (Northern Arapaho/
Seneca) - Assistant Director Development
Mauda Moran - Director of
Communications
Donald M. Ragona (Matinecock) 
- Director of Development/HouseCounsel
Jennifer Redbone (Apache/Comanche/
Kiowa) - Donor Information/Giftprocessing Manager
Jeff Schmidt - paralegal
Debbie Raymond-Thomas (Navajo)
- Controller
Jennie Tsikewa (Zuni) - Accountant
NATioNAL iNDiAN LAW L iBRAR y
Anne lucke - Director, National Indian
law library
Nora Hickens - library AssistantANCH oRAGE oFFiCE STAFF
Heather Kendall-Miller (Athabascan)
- Attorney
Natalie landreth (Chickasaw)
- Attorney
Megan Condon - Attorney erin C. Dougherty lynch - Attorney
Wesley J. Furlong - Attorney Matthew Newman - AttorneyChloe Cotton - Berkley law Foundation
Fellow
Gaylen edmo (Shoshone Bannock/
potawatomi and Ottawa) - Alaska
Fellow
Maggie Massey - Alaska FellowJill Rush - Office Manager/ legal
Assistant
WASHINGTON DC OFFICE STAFF
Joel Williams (Cherokee) - AttorneySamantha Kelty - AttorneyDan lewerenz (Iowa Tribe of Kansas
and Nebraska) - Attorney
S. Denver Jacket ( ute Mountain
ute/Navajo) - Office Manager/
paralegal
NARF Staff
ANN uAl RepORT 2020NARF staff photo from prior year1506 Broadway, Boulder, CO 80302
303-447-8760
www.narf.org 