On August 19, 2015, a federal 
district court in North Carolina 
heard arguments on whether 
ex-Salvadoran Colonel Inocente 
Montano should be extradited 
to Spain to stand trial for his 
role in the murder of six Jesuit 
priests, their housekeeper, and 
her daughter in CJA ’s Jesuits 
Massacre Case .
Almost 26 years ago, on November 16, 1989, an elite battalion of the 
Salvadoran Army entered the grounds of the UCA, San Salvador’s 
renowned Jesuit University of Central America, and killed eight 
civilians.
CJA Senior Legal Advisor Patty Blum, who attended the hearing, 
said: “In the courtroom you could sense that, after all this time, 
accountability for the massacre was drawing near.  All eyes are now 
on the United States to grant extradition and Spain to hear this 
important case. ” (continued on page 5)                 Extradition Hearing Held for Jesuits 
Massacre Perpetrator
CJA Presents Oral Argument in Case 
Against Somali War Criminal
On September 16, 2015, CJA and pro bono co-counsel DLA Piper 
presented oral argument in an appeal before the Fourth Circuit 
Court of Appeals in Warfaa v. Ali , a case brought by a Somali 
torture survivor against the responsible war criminal currently 
living in Virginia. 
The defendant, former Somali commander Colonel Yusuf Abdi Ali 
(aka Colonel Tukeh), seeks to reverse more than three decades of 
legal precedent that has allowed victims of human rights abuses to 
bring lawsuits under the Alien Tort Statute in U.S. courts against 
their tormentors – when they are found in this country – for 
mass atrocities such as war crimes and crimes against humanity 
committed abroad. 
CJA client Farhan Warfaa has accused Colonel Tukeh 
of torturing him and attempting to kill him by firing 
his pistol at Warfaa five times at point blank range.  
Further, Warfaa alleges that Tukeh committed war crimes and 
crimes against humanity.
This case will determine whether the United States will legally 
provide safe harbor for Colonel Tukeh and other perpetrators 
of mass atrocity crimes.  The court will make a decision in the  
coming months. 
CJA Celebrates 17 Years of Bringing 
Human Rights Abusers to Justice
CJA ’s client in Warfaa v. Ali,  Farhan Warfaa, is 
profiled on page 4. The father of eight explains 
why he brought his case and his desire for justice.Former U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay, recipient 
of CJA ’s Champion of Justice Award 
Joan Jara, CJA client in Jara v. Barrientos
(More photos on page 3)Tara Lee (far left) and Lindsay Barnes (far right) from DLA Piper, and (L-R) 
CJA ’s Kathy Roberts, Dixon Osburn, and Nushin Sarkarati Colonel Inocente Montano
In This Issue:
2 Message from CJA ’s Executive Director
3 CJA ’s Annual Dinner4 CJA Client Profile: Farhan Warfaa
5 CJA Receives Letelier-Moffitt Award6 Supporter Profile: Sister Patricia Bruno
7 New CJA Staff         THE CENTER FOR JUSTICE & ACCOUNTABILITY
Fall 2015 NewsletterBringing Human Rights Abusers to Justice.     
2Dear Friends of CJA,
Our clients, who you will read about in these pages, are a testament to the power of one person 
making a difference.
To be sure, the challenge is daunting.  Over 75,000 Salvadorans died in the civil war in the 1980s.  
Tens of thousands of Somalis were subjected to summary killings, arbitrary arrest, torture, and rape 
during the 21-year regime of Siad Barre. At least 1.7 million Cambodians died under the Khmer 
Rouge regime led by Pol Pot in the late 1970s.
I firmly believe that we can reduce these crimes against humanity by holding perpetrators 
accountable under the law and by expanding the net of accountability around the globe so that 
human rights abusers cannot find safe harbor anywhere.
This year, we mark the 100th anniversary of the Armenian genocide, where 1.5 million people were 
killed.  We mark the 70th anniversary of the liberation of the Nazi concentration camps.  We mark the 40th anniversary of the Khmer 
Rouge invasion of Phnom Penh.
How do you process numbers like 1.5 million?  You do it by reducing it to one – one story, one life, and one case.  This focus on the 
individual has the ability to transform, shed light, expose the truth, and heal. 
Pope Francis said recently of the Armenian genocide, “Concealing or denying evil is like allowing a wound to keep bleeding without 
bandaging it. ” Archbishop Oscar Romero said that “some things can only be told by eyes that have cried. ”  
We must tell the stories of those who cannot.  We must breathe life into the memories of those who are not with us.  Through the 
strength of our convictions, we can make justice and accountability real.  I am so deeply grateful for your partnership.   
C. Dixon Osburn
Executive Director
C. Dixon Osburn, Executive Director
CJA in the News
“
There will be no movement in 
El Salvador for the vast majority 
of the defendants unless there is 
an erosion of the amnesty law. ” 
– CJA ’s Patty Blum, The Boston 
Globe , August 19, 2015,  on 
why the extradition of Colonel 
Montano from the United States 
to face a criminal trial is critical 
for accountability in the Jesuits 
Massacre.Archbishop Romero once said, ‘¡No 
se mata la justicia!’ — ‘Justice cannot 
be killed!’ In honor of Romero’s 
beatification, El Salvador should 
commit to this commandment. ” 
– CJA ’s Dixon Osburn, in an op-ed in 
The Miami Herald , May 21, 2015, on 
Salvadoran officers who have evaded 
justice because of El Salvador’s broad 
amnesty law.
This is the first time an appellate court will apply the Supreme Court decision to a case involving an 
individual perpetrator seeking refuge in the United States, and thus the first to decide whether  the 
US will legally provide such safe harbour for those who commit mass atrocity crimes. ” –  CJA ’s Kathy 
Roberts, The Guardian , September 15, 2015, on CJA ’s case against a Somali war criminal.“
“
Our client was a very 
young man at the 
time when all the men 
and boys in his village 
were gathered by Colonel 
Ali’s men, taken to 
headquarters, 
tortured and questioned 
and treated very 
brutally. ”– CJA ’s Kathy 
Roberts, National Law 
Journal , September 15, 
2015, on our case against 
Colonel Ali.“A Message from CJA’s Executive Director  3CJA’s 17th Anniversary Dinner: Celebrating Global Justice 2015  in San Francisco  
Toby Cadman presents Navi Pillay with CJA ’s Champion 
of Justice AwardOver 300 CJA supporters joined us at the Julia Morgan Ballroom in San Francisco on May 7, 2015 to celebrate our victories in the movement 
for global justice. Thank you to all of our generous supporters who helped us raise over $270,000, our most successful event to date.  
Lorraine Honig and Lisa HonigRachel Williams and Beth Van Schaack
 Lokelani Devone, Almudena Bernabeu, and Toby Cadman
George Sarlo presents a video greeting from 
Nuremberg prosecutor Benjamin Ferencz
CJA Board Chair Wilma Wallace
Ed Low, Ivor Samson, and Alexis Gevanter of 
Dentons US LLP
Paul Sack and Jonathan Sack
CJA client Joan Jara4
What CJA Does
The Center for Justice and Accountability (CJA) is an international human rights organization dedicated to 
deterring torture, war crimes, crimes against humanity and other severe human rights abuses around the world 
through litigation, policy advocacy, and outreach in pursuit of truth, justice, and redress for victims and survivors.
CJA was founded in 1998 with support from Amnesty International and the UN Voluntary Fund for Victims 
of Torture to represent torture survivors in their pursuit of justice. CJA recognizes that the need for justice 
is an integral component of a torture victim’s recovery process and that healing cannot take place when the 
perpetrator continues to live without consequence. Client Profile  
Farhan Warfaa with CJA Legal Director Kathy Roberts
Why is this case important to you? What do you hope your kids 
will learn from you bringing this case?
This is not just a case to me; it’s a part of my life I will never forget, 
and I want to see those responsible realize what they have done. 
They may have forgotten, but I and others like me will never  
be able to. 
I want my kids to learn that nobody is above the law, and every 
action has a consequence whether in this life or the afterlife.
What has it been like to be involved in this case so far? What are 
you hoping will happen?
It has taken some time; however, I am confident and grateful to 
those that are involved and fighting for justice on our behalf. I am 
hoping that justice will be served.
How has this case impacted you?
This case has given me hope and the opportunity to tell my side of 
the story and what happened to me.
What do you hope for future cases against human rights abusers 
like Tukeh?
I am hoping that this case 
will be a deterrent to other 
human rights abusers and 
to also give courage to those 
who are like me.
Is there anything else you would like to add or say?
There is a Somali proverb which says hold three things in your 
heart:
1. Hold in your heart your people 
2. Hold in your heart your family 
3. Hold in your heart the law (law of the land and of Allah (God)) 
I live my life by that proverb and deeply believe those who break 
Allah’s (God’s) laws and laws of the land should and will face justice.
I would also like to extend my gratitude to all the lawyers involved 
in this case, and God-willing we will succeed in our goal. In 2004, CJA filed a case against former Somali Colonel Yusuf Abdi 
Ali for war crimes. CJA represents Farhan Warfaa, whom Colonel Ali 
(aka Tukeh) and his troops tortured and whom Tukeh shot five times 
at point blank range, leaving him for dead. Warfaa miraculously 
survived and is now seeking justice.
Can you describe to me your role 
as the chief of the Y onis Hared 
clan? 
My role as a chief of the clan 
involves resolving all kinds of 
clan conflicts and representing 
my clan in major issues involving other clans, whether it’s paying 
or receiving compensation or taking part in meetings with other 
chiefs.
Can you tell me a little bit about your family?
I have one wife and eight children—the oldest is 18 and the 
youngest is just under a year old. 
Why did you want to bring this case against Tukeh?
I wanted everyone to know about the events that took place in 
Somaliland in the 1980s. I also want see justice served whether it’s 
on Somaliland soil or not—human rights abusers should face the 
consequences of their actions.Farhan Warfaa: ‘I want to see those responsible realize what they have done.’
I am hoping that this case will be a deterrent to other 
human rights abusers and to also give courage to 
those who are like me.5Court to Rule on Extradition of Colonel (cont. from p. 1)  International Attorney Almudena Bernabeu and CJA received the 
prestigious Letelier-Moffitt Human Rights Award from the Institute 
for Policy Studies, which recognizes individuals and groups in the 
United States and elsewhere in the Americas most dedicated to the 
struggle for human rights. Representative Jim McGovern (D-MA) 
presented Bernabeu with the award at a ceremony in Washington, 
D.C. on October 6. Almudena Bernabeu and CJA Receive 
Letelier-Moffitt Award  
(L-R) Rep. Jim McGovern (D-MA), Anita Earls and Daryl Atkinson of the 
Southern Coalition for Social Justice, CJA ’s Almudena Bernabeu and Dixon 
Osburn, MSNBC’s Dorian Warren, and IPS Director John Cavanagh
CJA Files Brief in Human 
Trafficking Case
Originally filed by Cohen Milstein in 2008, 
Adhikari v. Daoud & Partners  (KBR) is a 
case against a U.S. corporation responsible 
for human trafficking from Nepal to Jordan 
and then Iraq, as part of a scheme to employ 
forced labor in Iraq. 
On October 1, 2015, CJA and pro bono 
co-counsel Sanford Heisler Kimbel filed 
an amicus brief before the Fifth Circuit, 
arguing that the plaintiffs’ claims under the 
Alien Tort Statute - a law used for decades 
to prosecute human rights abusers - should 
be preserved in this case in which 13 Nepali 
men were recruited to work in Jordan only 
to face kidnapping and execution in Iraq. 
The plaintiffs argued that Daoud, KBR and 
their co-conspirators were responsible for 
the trafficking scheme.
The plaintiffs’ Alien Tort Statute claims 
are under threat because of the Supreme 
Court’s recent ruling in Kiobel v. Royal 
Dutch Petroleum  that these claims must 
“touch and concern” the territory of the 
United States.  
CJA hopes to influence the court not to bar 
all Alien Tort Statute claims for atrocities 
committed abroad, as the lower court did.  “ All eyes are now on the United 
States to grant extradition and 
Spain to hear this important case. ”
-CJA ’s Carolyn Patty Blum
A banner of one of the Jesuits Massacre victims commemorating the 25th anniversary in El Salvador
CJA is hoping for a decision from the 
North Carolina court regarding Montano’s 
extradition in fall 2015.  After more than 
25 years without accountability, this 
decision will pave the way for a criminal 
trial in CJA ’s Jesuits 
Massacre Case before 
the Spanish National 
Court. 
The Jesuits Massacre 
was a turning point, 
precipitating the end of the brutal 12-year 
civil war that claimed the lives of more 
than 75,000 Salvadorans.  
CJA and the Spanish Association for 
Human Rights filed the Jesuits Massacre 
Case  in Madrid in 2008 against the former high military officials who ordered the 
murders.  
Although the Spanish National Court 
indicted 20 military officials in relation to 
this prosecution 
and requested their 
extradition from El 
Salvador, a blanket 
amnesty law in 
place thwarted 
the request and 
protected those responsible. 
Montano is the only perpetrator within 
reach of the Spanish National Court. 
He would be the first member of El 
Salvador’s high command to face criminal 
accountability for this crime.  CJA International Attorney Almudena Bernabeu with a portrait of 
Orlando Letelier in Washington, D.C.CJA’s Young Professionals’ Committee 
Explores Immigrant Rights and Threats 
to Journalists 
(L-R) Leah Chen Price from CJA ’s Young Professionals’ Committee; San 
Francisco Supervisor David Campos; Maria Echaveste from UC Berkeley; 
and Grisel Ruiz from the Immigrant Legal Resource Center discuss 
immigrant rights at Runway Incubator in San Francisco
(L-R) CJA Board Chair Wilma Wallace, CJA attorney Nushin Sarkarati, 
CJA Board Member Farah Brelvi, and Jacob Foster from CJA ’s Young 
Professionals’ Committee at CJA ’s Drink + Think on October 1 at RunwaySister Patricia Bruno is a member 
of the Dominican Sisters of 
San Rafael. In early 2015, the 
Dominican Sisters of San Rafael 
awarded CJA a generous two-year, 
$200,000 grant. Sister Patricia 
has been a long-time supporter 
and advocate of CJA ’s work.  
How did you learn about CJA?
I met CJA in 2006.   I was invited to 
a house meeting to meet Irma and 
Francisco Calderon, Salvadoran 
refugees who were CJA ’s clients 
in its case against an ex-colonel who oversaw torture and other 
human rights abuses during El Salvador’s civil war.  I was eager to 
meet the Calderons, especially because it was another way for our 
sisters to actively support efforts for sanctuary for Salvadoran and 
Guatemalan refugees. 
Why do you think that CJA ’s work is important?
The way they DO justice. Justice and compassion are built into the 
very heart of CJA.  While seeking justice in the courts, they also 
seek to heal those who have suffered egregious crimes. CJA involves 
their clients in the trial process. Their clients are able to tell their 
story of violence and torture in a public arena. This is the beginning 
of the restorative process. It liberates the victims and allows them 
to regain a sense of self-worth and human dignity. CJA is a unique 
public voice for justice and compassion here in the Bay Area.  
Why did the Dominican Sisters decide to support this particular 
organization? 
CJA helps us fulfill our mission “to transform attitudes and systems 
that deprive any person of dignity. ”   CJA offers the bread of hope to 
the crucified people here and abroad and a measure of justice against 
those who have committed violent crimes against humanity. CJA 
stands with refugees, as they strive to change unjust laws, so that those 
who have been offended will be liberated from the fear of death—
death of their dignity, death of their humanity, death of their spirits.   
What do you think that others should know about CJA and its 
work?
I gain hope knowing that in a world of power and wealth, CJA has 
proven its capability to hold powerful people accountable for their 
atrocious crimes of injustice. I gain hope knowing that over the last 
18 years, CJA has won every case that they have brought to trial.
The Dominican Sisters boldly committed themselves to a Public 
Stance for Sanctuary for El Salvador and Guatemala; now, CJA has 
the capacity to bring a broader, deeper justice to those countries 
and also to others. So, in a way, we’ve already partnered with them. 
Resurrection is not just power over lies, deceit and death, but also 
divine love overcoming injustice, healing wounds and raising 
hopeless and desperate people to new life. Justice and mercy will 
have the last word. Supporter Profile  
Sister Patricia Bruno
Dominican Sisters of San Rafael
6
(L-R) CJA ’s Young Professionals’ Committee members Vicky Hartanto, 
Leah Chen Price, Kara Slack, and Amy Belsher at Kabam(L-R) Geoffrey King from the Committee to Protect Journalists, CJA ’s 
Dixon Osburn, and Eva Galperin from the Electronic Frontier Foundation 
at CJA ’s Drink + Think on July 1 at Kabam in San Francisco7Former U.S. Ambassador-at-Large for 
War Crimes Issues Stephen Rapp Visits 
CJA in San Francisco
Almudena Bernabeu ,
   International Attorney/
   Transitional Justice Program     
   Director
Carolyn Patty Blum , Senior
   Legal Advisor
Scott Gilmore , Staff Attorney
Rachel Hill ,  
   Development Director
Elizabeth Jiménez , Berkeley Law    
   Public Interest Fellow
Daniel McLaughlin , Senior Staff
   Attorney
Marjon Momand ,
   Development &    
   Communications Associate
Felipe Navarro Lux , International 
   Fellow
C. Dixon Osburn , Executive   
   Director
Kathy Roberts , Legal Director
Nushin Sarkarati , Staff 
   Attorney
Joninna Simpson , Finance &  
   Operations Director 
Susana Solis , Office Manager
See more photos from CJA on our Facebook pageCJA INTERNS
Paul Bennetch (Summer 2015)
Anna Manuel (Fall 2015)
Leslie Morales (Fall 2015)
Austin Shangraw (Summer 2015)Elizabeth Jiménez  joined CJA in 
the fall of 2015 as a Berkeley Law 
Public Interest Fellow. Jiménez 
graduated from Berkeley Law 
last year. During law school, 
Jiménez was involved with the 
Students for Economic and 
Environmental Justice student-  
run clinic (SEEJ), drafting 
sections of a complaint against the 
European Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development for violating the 
bank’s own human rights standards and policies.  Jiménez spent her 
summers at law school interning for the Human Rights and Business 
Department of the Danish Institute for Human Rights her first year, 
and the European Center for Constitutional and Human Rights her 
second year.  She received her B.A. from the University of Michigan 
with High Honors in 2005. Jiménez speaks fluent English, Spanish,  
and Danish.CJA Welcomes New Senior Staff Attorney, Fellows from UC Berkeley and Tufts
Felipe Navarro Lux joined 
CJA in the fall of 2015 as an 
International Fellow.  He rejoins 
the human rights community 
after four years in private practice 
at Caracol Television, a television 
network in his native Colombia, 
where he worked on issues 
such as freedom of speech and 
privacy. Prior to CJA, he attended 
graduate school at The Fletcher 
School of Law and Diplomacy, 
where he focused his studies on International Human Rights 
and Transitional Justice. Navarro Lux interned at the Center 
for Gender and Refugee Studies in 2014. He received an LL.B. 
and a graduate degree in journalism from University of the 
Andes (Universidad de los Andes) as well as an M.A. in Law and 
Diplomacy from The Fletcher School. He is licensed to practice 
in Colombia and is a native Spanish speaker. Daniel McLaughlin , Senior 
Staff Attorney, joined CJA in the 
fall of 2015. He founded Dejure 
Design , which provides visual 
design services to human rights 
organizations seeking to make 
their work more accessible and 
engaging. He previously served 
as a UN Legal Officer before 
the Extraordinary Chambers 
in the Courts of Cambodia 
and as an International Bar 
Association Fellow in the Trial and Appeals Chambers of the 
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in The 
Hague. McLaughlin taught human rights law at Fordham Law 
School, where he was a Crowley Fellow in International Human 
Rights and Adjunct Professor. Prior to working with the UN,  
McLaughlin served a judicial clerkship in the Southern District 
of New Y ork with the Hon. Robert L. Carter and was a litigation 
associate with Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton LLP in New Y ork 
specializing in sovereign nation litigation.  McLaughlin holds 
a dual degree (J.D. and Maîtrise en Droit) from Columbia Law 
School / Paris I Sorbonne-Panthéon and a B.A. from Y ale. 
(L-R) Amy Belsher, Dixon Osburn, Ambassador Stephen Rapp, Kathy 
Roberts, and Nushin Sarkarati at CJA ’s office on May 15, 2015William Aceves, Vice Chair
Farah Brelvi,  Secretary
Lokelani Devone , Treasurer
Tyler Giannini
Mina Titi Liu
James Mintz
Joey Neugart
C. Dixon Osburn , President
Jane Rocamora
Wilma Wallace, Chair
Chester Atkins
Carlos Castresana Fernandez
Russell Cohen
Sandra Coliver
Benjamín Cuéllar
James Eisenbrandt
Gerald Gray
Jennifer Green
Genevieve Jenkins
Paul Hoffman
Naomi Roht-Arriaza
Steven Schneebaum
Amitai Schwartz
Michael S. Sorgen
Ralph G. Steinhardt
Michael Traynor
Hon. Rebecca Westerfield (ret.) JAMSBOARD OF DIRECTORS
ADVISORY COUNCILCJA STAFFOn July 2, 2015, CJA ’s Almudena Bernabeu met with Father General Adolfo Nicolás Pachón at the Vatican to discuss 
C J A’s  Jesuits Massacre Case  and our efforts to pursue truth, justice, and redress for victims of human rights abuses.One Hallidie Plaza, Suite 406
San Francisco, CA 94102PRESORTED
STANDARD MAIL
US POSTAGE
PAID
OAKLAND, CA
PERMIT NO. 1097
www. cja.org