Aiding TorTure:
Health Professionals’ 
ethics and Human rights Violations
revealed in the May 2004  
CiA inspector general’s report
A Report by
Physicians for Human Rights
August 2009AIdI ng Tor TurePh y s i c i a n s  f o r hu m a n  
ri g h t s
PHR was founded in 1986 on the idea that health profes -
sionals, with their specialized skills, ethical commitments, 
and credible voices, are uniquely positioned to investigate the 
health consequences of human rights violations and work to 
stop them. 
Since 2005, PHR has documented the systematic use of  
psychological and physical torture by US personnel against  
detainees held at Guantánamo Bay, Abu Ghraib, Bagram air -
base, and elsewhere in its groundbreaking reports Break Them 
Down, Leave No Marks,  and Broken Laws, Broken Lives .
PHR is a non-profit, non-sectarian organization fund -
ed through private foundations and by individual donors. 
Membership is open to all, not only health professionals. PHR 
shared the 1997 Nobel Peace Prize.
2 Arrow Street, Suite 301
Cambridge, MA  02138 USA
Tel:   +1.617.301.4200
Fax:  +1.617.301.4250
http://physiciansforhumanrights.or g
Washington DC Office:
1156 15th St. NW, Suite 1001
Washington, DC  20005 USA
Tel:   +1.202.728.5335
Fax:  +1.202.728.3053  
© 2009, Physicians for Human Rightsau t h o r s
Scott Allen, Md
Associate Professor of Medicine,  
 Alpert School of Medicine  
Co-Director, Center for Prisoner Health and Human Rights,  
 Brown University  
Medical Advisor, Physicians for Human Rights
Allen Keller, Md
Associate Professor of Medicine, NYU School of Medicine
Director, Bellevue/NYU Program for Survivors of Torture
Advisory Board Member, Physicians for Human Rights
Steven reisner, Phd
Adjunct Professor of Counseling and Clinical Psychology,  
 Teachers College, Columbia University
Clinical Assistant Professor, NYU School of Medicine
Advisor on Psychological Ethics,  
 Physicians for Human Rights
Vincent Iacopino, Md, Phd
Senior Medical Advisor, Physicians for Human Rights
Adjunct Professor of Medicine,  
 University of Minnesota Medical School
Senior Research Fellow, Human Rights Center,  
 University of California, BerkeleyHeALTH P roFeSSIon ALS’ eTHI cS And Hu MAn rI gHTS V IoLATIon S re VeALed I n TH e M Ay 2004 c IA In SPecTor g ener AL’S r ePorT         1Introduction
The version of the 2004 CIA Inspector General’s report  
released on August 24, 2009 provides greater detail on the 
central role that health professionals played in the CIA’s torture 
program and reveals a level of ethical misconduct that had not 
previously come to light. 
The report confirms that the CIA inflicted torture on 
detainees interrogated while in US custody as part of the 
agency’s counterterrorism activities and exposes additional 
interrogation techniques that had not yet been reported. It also 
demonstrates that health professionals were involved at every 
stage in the development, implementation and legitimization of 
this torture program. 
The doctors and psychologists who laid the foundation upon 
which attorneys rationalized an illegal program of torture also 
actively participated in abusive and illegal interrogations, thus 
betraying the ethical standards of their professions by contrib -
uting to physical and mental suffering and anguish. The very 
premise of health professional involvement in abusive interro -
gations — that they have a role in safeguarding detainees — is 
an unconscionable affront to the profession of medicine. 
The Inspector General’s report also reveals that medical 
professionals were directed to meticulously monitor the water -
boarding of detainees to try to improve the technique’s effec -
tiveness, essentially using the detainees as human subjects, a 
practice that approaches unlawful experimentation.  
Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) has prepared the 
following analysis of the Inspector General’s report, building on  
the 2007 report by PHR and Human Rights First (HRF), Leave 
No Marks ,  which assessed interrogation techniques reported up 
to that time, which have now been confirmed by the Inspector 
General’s report. This paper provides an introductory summary 
of techniques newly described in the Inspector General’s report 
and then offers a more detailed medical analysis of those 
techniques. The paper then reviews the various ways health 
professionals were complicit in enabling the torture regime.
Summary of Newly Detailed Techniques
The Inspector General’s report describes several forms of 
abuse not previously reported that CIA interrogators and con -
tractors implemented, and that from a medical and legal per -
spective constitute torture. These include:
Mock executions and threatening detainees by brandish - • 
ing handguns and power drills;
Threatening the detainee with harm to his family mem - • 
bers including sexual assault of female family members, 
and murder of detainee’s children; and
Physical abuse including the application of pressure to • 
the arteries on the sides of a detainee’s neck resulting in 
near loss of consciousness, and tackling or hard take -
downs.These methods have significant harmful physical and mental 
health consequences. 
The report provides new details about previously reported 
forms of abuse referred to as “enhanced interrogation tech -
niques”. The harmful health consequences of these forms of 
torture and abuse have previously been described by PHR, in -
cluding in the reports Break Them Down, Leave No Marks  and 
Broken Laws, Broken Lives. ” 1 
The Inspector General’s report clearly questions the efficacy, 
ethics and legality of these as well as the previously mentioned 
“enhanced interrogation techniques”. The report also confirms 
the theory of a “slippery slope” in interrogation settings, name -
ly that torture by its very nature escalates in the severity and 
frequency of its use beyond the approved techniques.
Medical Analysis of the Interrogation 
Techniques Described in the Inspector General’s 
Report
The adverse physical and mental health effects of stripping 
(forced nudity), isolation, white noise or loud music, continu -
ous light or darkness (sensory deprivation), temperature ma -
nipulation, stress positions, sleep deprivation, attention slap, 
abdominal slap, stress positions and waterboarding have been 
previously described in the Physicians for Human Rights and 
Human Rights First report Leave No Marks.  The following 
medical analysis focuses on techniques not previously re -
viewed by PHR.
As with the techniques previously analyzed, it is important 
to understand two key points. First, while the techniques are 
evaluated individually, these techniques were designed to be 
used in combination in a way that enhanced pain and stress. 
Second, to comprehend the severity of the effects of these 
techniques, it is essential to consider the context of their use. In 
terms of both long and short term psychological effect, there is 
no meaningful equivalence between waterboarding when used 
as part of survival training of service men who have volun -
teered and consented to the procedure and who know that they 
are in an environment where they trust the mock interrogator to 
protect their safety and may stop the procedure at any time, and 
waterboarding of a high value detainee in a black site where the 
detainee is in actual fear for his life and safety. As the Inspector 
General’s report indicates:
“One of the psychologist/interrogators acknowledged 
that the Agency’ s use of the [waterboarding] technique 
differed from that used in SERE training and explained 
1 Broken Laws, Broken Lives: Medical Evidence of Torture by US Personnel 
and Its Impact.  2008. Available at: http://brokenlives.info/?page_id=6 9 ; 
Break Them Down: Systematic Use of Psychological Torture by US Forces.  
2005. Available at: http://physiciansforhumanrights.org/library/report-2005-
may.htm l ; Leave No Marks: Enhanced Interrogation Techniques and the Risk 
of Criminality 2007. Available at:  http://physiciansforhumanrights.org/library/
report-2007-08-02.html .2  AIdIng T orTurethat the Agency’ s technique is different because it is ‘for 
real’ and is more poignant and convincing.” 2
Analysis of New Approved Techniques Revealed 
in Inspector General’s Report
The additional approved techniques listed in the Inspector 
General’s report and not previously analyzed by PHR include 
shaving, hooding, restricted diet, prolonged diapering, “wall -
ing” and confinement boxes.
As with the previously reviewed techniques, while these 
techniques can have harmful physical as well as mental health 
effects, their chief objective is to produce psychological im -
pact, and their chief risk is prolonged mental pain and suffer -
ing.
1. Forced shaving
Forced shaving of the head and beard was alleged by two 
of the fourteen detainees interviewed by the ICRC for its 2007 
report. 
Mr. Ramzi Bin-al-Shib alleged that, in his eighth place of 
detention, first his head was shaved and then some days 
later his beard was also shaved off. He was particularly 
distressed by the fact that the people who shaved him al -
legedly deliberately left some spots and spaces in order 
to make him look and feel particularly undignified and 
abused.3
In 2007, PHR physicians examined a former US detainee, 
who reported:
“When they finished hitting me… they shaved my hair. 
The only hair I had was in the middle. This was only to 
humiliate me.” 4
Medical Analysis:  Forced shaving obviously carries little 
risk of physical harm, and is chiefly designed to inflict psy -
chological harm by means of humiliation, both personal and 
religious. Forced shaving was part of a campaign to sever the 
sense of self derived from religious belief, and was often ac -
companied by forced removal of religious articles. 
In addition to the violation of cultural and religious taboos, 
forced shaving constitutes an intrusion into the personal space 
and bodily integrity of the person, infringing on autonomy and 
self-control. The combined effects of this type of treatment in 
combination with other techniques have been associated with 
long-lasting psychological injury such as posttraumatic stress 
disorder, anxiety and depression.
2 Inspector General’s report p. 37.
3 ICRC Report on the Treatment of Fourteen “High Value Detainees” in CIA 
Custody. International Committee of the Red Cross. February 2007. Available 
at http://www.nybooks.com/icrc-report.pd f.
4 Broken Laws, Broken Lives: Medical Evidence of Torture by US Personnel 
and Its Impact.  2008. Available at: http://brokenlives.info/?page_id=6 9. The 
former detainee’s history was deemed credible by examining physicians. He 
suffers from symptoms consistent with posttraumatic stress disorder. 2. Hooding 
Detainees were blindfolded or hooded to instill in them a 
sense of fear, disorientation and dependency on their captors. 
According to the February 2004 report of the International 
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) on treatment of detainees 
in Iraq:
Hooding [was] used to prevent people from seeing and to 
disorient them, and also to prevent them from breathing 
freely. One, or sometimes two bags, sometimes with an 
elastic blindfold over the eyes which, when slipped down, 
further impeded proper breathing. Hooding was some -
times used in conjunction with beatings thus increasing 
anxiety as to when blows would came. The practice of 
hooding also allowed the interrogators to remain anony -
mous and thus to act with impunity. Hooding could last 
for periods from a few hours to up to 2 to 4 consecutive 
days, during which hoods were lifted only for drinking, 
eating or going to the toilets.5
PHR reported in  Broken Laws, Broken Lives  that according 
to former detainees medically evaluated by PHR, hooding was 
used both during transportation and during interrogation.
Medical Analysis: When not used in transport, hooding is 
a form of sensory deprivation aimed at causing dislocation and 
confusion. Research shows that prolonged sensory depriva -
tion can result in depression, depersonalization and psychosis. 
According to the ICRC report, hooding, and other observed 
sensory deprivation techniques resulted in 
“signs of concentration difficulties, memory problems, 
verbal expression difficulties, incoherent speech, acute 
anxiety reactions, abnormal behavior and suicidal 
tendencies.”6
3. dietary Manipulation 
Detainees were deprived of solid food for periods ranging 
from days to months. Mr. Abu Zubaydah alleged that for a pe -
riod of two to three weeks during his initial period of interroga -
tion, he was kept sitting on a chair constantly and only provid -
ed with liquid Ensure (a nutrient formula) and water. Mr. Bin-
al-Shib reported that he went three to four weeks without solid 
food, and was only provided with Ensure and water. In addi -
tion, six other high-value detainees reported being deprived of 
solid food for periods ranging from days to weeks.7
Medical Analysis:  While physical risks of a liquid diet are 
minimal as long as appropriate calories and nutrients are pro -
vided, the intent of dietary manipulation is to inflict psycholog -
ical distress by infringing on the detainee’s sense of autonomy 
and self control and increasing discomfort and a sense of help -
lessness and dependency. While the risk of death or debilitation 
may be minimal, the effects on concentration and mood may be 
substantial.
5 ICRC Report.
6 ICRC Report.
7 ICRC Report.HeALTH P roFeSSIon ALS’ eTHI cS And Hu MAn rI gHTS V IoLATIon S re VeALed I n TH e M Ay 2004 c IA In SPecTor g ener AL’S r ePorT         34. Prolonged diapering 
Detainees were placed in diapers and denied access to a toilet 
for prolonged periods of time. According to the ICRC Report, 
high value detainees in CIA custody were placed in diapers for 
prolonged periods for transport. 
The detainee would be made to wear a diaper and dressed 
in a tracksuit… The journey times obviously varied con -
siderably and ranged from one hour to over twenty-four 
to thirty hours. The detainee was not allowed to go to the 
toilet and if necessary was obliged to urinate or defecate 
in the diaper.
The ICRC report states that one of the detainees, Mr. Bin 
Attash, was compelled to wear a diaper for a prolonged period:
[H]e commented that on several occasions the diaper 
was not replaced so he had to urinate and defecate on 
himself while shackled in the prolonged stress stand -
ing position. Indeed, in addition to Mr. Bin Attash, three 
other detainees specified that they had to defecate and 
urinate on themselves and remain standing in their own 
body fluids.8
Medical Analysis:  Prolonged diapering especially when 
combined with leaving the subject in a diaper soiled with urine 
and feces can result in both physical and psychological harm. 
Prolonged exposure of the skin can result in skin infection, 
skin breakdown and ulceration and urinary tract infections. In 
addition, the placement of a normally continent adult in a dia -
per will likely lead to efforts by the adult to resist urination or 
defecation, which in turn will likely result in bowel cramping 
and bladder spasm. 
Access to toilet is a universally recognized minimum stan -
dard for prisoners and detainees. In spite of the physical risks, 
the chief aim of this technique is to cause psychological stress 
through humiliation, induced dependency, loss of autonomy, 
and regression to an infantile state.9 Like all such techniques, 
especially when combined with others of the ‘DDD’ type 
(debility-dependency-dread), these are cumulative and lead to 
short and long-term debilitation. At Guantánamo, the standard 
operating procedures included requiring the detainee to ask 
the interrogator for toilet paper, food, and religious articles. 
Here, the torturers go even further, returning the detainee to 
pre-toilet-training levels. When combined with a liquid diet, 
the experiences of regression, humiliation, and dependency are 
magnified. 
5. Walling
Six of the fourteen high-value detainees interviewed by the 
ICRC reported being placed in a neck collar or roll and then 
slammed against a wall. According to the CIA guidelines, 
8 ICRC Report.
9 “The purpose of all coercive techniques is to induce psychological 
regression in the subject by bringing a superior outside force to bear on his 
will to resist. Regression is basically a loss of autonomy, a reversion to an 
earlier behavioral level. As the subject regresses, his learned personality traits 
fall away in reverse chronological order…” Human Resource Exploitation 
Manual, CIA, 1983slamming against a wall could be used twenty or thirty times 
consecutively. 
During the walling technique, the detainee is pulled forward 
and then quickly and firmly pushed into a flexible false wall so 
that his shoulder blades hit the wall. His head and neck are sup -
ported with a rolled towel to prevent whiplash. 10
Although the guidelines require that the wall be a specially 
constructed flexible one, some detainees alleged that they were 
also slammed against concrete wall using the collar during 
transport.11
Mr. Bin Attash alleged that during interrogation in 
Afghanistan: 
“on a daily basis during the first two weeks a collar was 
looped around my neck and then used to slam me against 
the walls of the interrogation room.”
Medical Analysis:  Walling results in blunt trauma and ac -
celeration/deceleration type injuries. Blunt trauma can result 
in bruises and bleeding from ruptured blood vessels. Studies 
have observed persistence of musculoskeletal pain cause by 
blunt trauma even a decade after the trauma has occurred. In 
rare cases, repeated beating can cause damage to muscle tissue 
and muscle breakdown resulting in release of muscle enzymes 
resulting in a life-threatening condition called rhabdomyolisis . 
In addition, walling can expose the subject to risk of whiplash 
type injury to the neck and spine. 12 
Psychological stress, which is the primary aim of the pro -
cedure, is achieved by use of surprise, generating a startle re -
sponse, an experience of shock, loss of control and helpless -
ness. Also, rage is engendered which turns to further humilia -
tion, insofar as the detainee cannot fight back.
6. Confinement in a Box 
Confinement in a box is a rather extreme version of a stress 
position with the added potential for claustrophobia. 
According to the ICRC report, Abu Zubaydah alleged that 
in Afghanistan in 2002 he was held in boxes designed to con -
strain his movement. Mr. Zubaydah stated:
“As it was not high enough even to sit upright, I had to 
crouch down. It was very difficult because of my wounds. 
The stress on my legs held in this position meant that my 
wounds both in the leg and the stomach became very 
painful.” 
He went on to say that a cover was placed over the boxes 
while he was inside making it hot and difficult to breathe. 
Medical Analysis:  Confinement in a box is an extreme ex -
ample of stress positions, with the added effect of decreased 
access to fresh air, temperature changes, light deprivation and 
isolation. Stress positions have been associated with permanent 
10 CIA guidelines as reproduced in Inspector General’s report, p. 15.
11 ICRC Report.
12 Leave No Marks.4  AIdIng T orTurejoint and ligamentous injury, and both acute and prolonged 
musculoskeletal pain. In addition, use of stress positions fol -
lowing blunt trauma carries the risk of deep vein thrombosis 
(clotting) and associated and potentially fatal pulmonary em -
boli. This is not a theoretical risk, as at least two detainees in 
US Custody in Afghanistan died of pulmonary emboli due to 
use of stress positions in interrogation settings.13
Confinement in a box was devised as a direct appropriation 
of Martin Seligman’s research on “learned helplessness.” In 
fact, on at least two occasions, Seligman presented his learned 
helplessness research to CIA contract interrogators referred to 
in the Inspector General’s report. In Seligman’s experiment, 
dogs were confined to boxes in which they discovered that fa -
miliar mechanisms of control would no longer have an effect in 
avoiding pain. 
Like their canine counterparts, humans subjected to similar 
confinement develop psychomotor and cognitive responses 
that would be clinically diagnosed as depression and, in cer -
tain cases, PTSD. Such symptoms include apathy, helpless -
ness, hopelessness, foreshortened sense of future, and a (in this 
case justified) lack of belief in their ability to affect their future 
prospects. In Seligman’s experiments, these symptoms were 
severe and lasting, in that a change to an environment where 
the dogs could have an effect did not change the symptoms of 
learned helplessness.
Unapproved and Improvised Techniques
The Inspector General’s Report contains numerous accounts 
of interrogation techniques that were not approved for use, in -
cluding threats with a gun and power drill, threats of harm to 
loved ones, and choking and carotid artery pressure. 
Threats of harm to the detainee or loved ones are reviewed 
in Leave No Marks . The risks of choking and carotid artery 
pressure should be self-evident. They include risk of choking 
death and stroke, as well as high risk of psychological trau -
ma from a near-death experience. Near-death experiences are 
highly correlated with the risk of developing post traumatic 
stress disorder.
Role of Health Professionals in Torture
Health professionals played central roles in developing, im -
plementing and providing justification for torture.
Health professionals in the Office of Medical Services and 
psychologist contractors14 engaged in designing and monitoring 
13 Allen S. Rich J. Bux R. Farbenblum B. Berns M. Rubenstein L. Deaths of 
Detainees in the Custody of US Forces in Iraq and Afghanistan from 2002 to 
2005. Medscape General Medicine: 2006;8(4):46.
14  From the DoD’s Joint Personnel Recovery Agency (JPRA) and SERE 
(Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape) Programs.harmful interrogation techniques.15 Such medical participation 
in torture is a clear violation of medical ethics. Furthermore, 
health professionals were complicit in selecting and then ra -
tionalizing these abusive methods whose safety and efficacy 
in eliciting accurate information have no valid basis in sci -
ence. The severe physical and psychological pain and endur -
ing harms associated with these techniques make it evident that 
they constitute torture and ill treatment. Monitoring of interro -
gation techniques by medical professionals to determine their 
effectiveness uses detainees as human subjects without their 
consent, and thus also approaches unlawful experimentation.16 
According to CIA guidelines, health professionals including 
a psychologist and doctor were required to be present during 
the use of enhanced interrogation techniques.17 The required 
presence of health professionals did not make these methods 
safer, and in fact only served to sanitize their use and enable 
the abuse to escalate, thereby placing health professionals in 
the untenable position of calibrating harm rather than serving 
as protectors and healers as required by their ethical oath.  
The report also documents the role of health professionals in 
participating in initial psychological and physical assessments 
of detainees in an intake process closely linked to the process 
of interrogation. By requirement, all interrogations were moni -
tored in real-time by health professionals. Previous reports, 
including the ICRC report, document allegations that a medi -
cal device called a pulse oximeter (a device to measure oxygen 
saturation in a subject’s blood) was placed on the finger of a 
15 “Several months earlier, in late 2001, CIA had tasked an independent 
contractor psychologist, who had [redacted] experience in the US Air 
Forces’ Survival, Evasion, resistance, and Escape (SERE) training program, 
to research and write a paper on Al-Qa’ida’s resistance to interrogation 
techniques. This psychologist collaborated with a Department of Defense 
(DoD) psychologist who had [redacted] SERE experience in the US 
Air Force and DoD to produce the paper “Recognizing and Developing 
Countermeasures to Al-Qa’ida’s Resistance to Interrogation Techniques: 
A Resistance Training Perspective.” Subsequently, the two psychologists 
developed a list of new and more aggressive EIT’s [enhanced interrogation 
techniques] that they recommended for use in interrogations.” Inspector 
General’s Report p. 13. “CIA’s OTS obtained data on the use of the proposed 
EIT’s and their potential long-term psychological effects on detainees. 
OTS input was based in part on information solicited from a number of 
psychologist and knowledgeable academics in the area of psychopathology” 
and “OTS also solicited input from DoD/Joint Personnel Recovery Agency 
(JPRA) regarding techniques used in SERE training and any subsequent 
psychological effects on students.” Inspector General’s Report p. 14.
16 The Office of Medical Services guidelines for waterboarding state “A  
rigid guide to the medically approved use of the waterboard is not possible, as 
safety will depend on how the water is applied and the specific response each 
time it is used. The following general guidelines are based on very limited 
knowledge, drawn from very few subjects whose experience and response 
was quite varied.” They add “NOTE: In order to best inform future medical 
judgments and recommendations, it is important that every application of the 
waterboard be thoroughly documented: how long each application (and the 
entire procedure) lasted, how much water was applied, if a seal was achieved, 
if the naso- or oropharynx was filled, what sort of volume was expelled, how 
long was the break between applications, and how the subject looked between 
each treatment.”
17 “In 2004, when Daniel B. Levin, then the acting assistant attorney general 
in the counsel’s office, sent a letter to the CIA reauthorizing waterboarding, 
he dictated the terms: “no more than two sessions of two hours each, per day, 
with both a doctor and a psychologist in attendance.” Report Shows Tight 
CIA Control on Interrogations. Mark Mazzetti and Scott Shane. New York 
Times, August 26, 2009. Available at: http://www.nytimes.com/2009/08/26/
us/26prison.html?_r=1&hp wHeALTH P roFeSSIon ALS’ eTHI cS And Hu MAn rI gHTS V IoLATIon S re VeALed I n TH e M Ay 2004 c IA In SPecTor g ener AL’S r ePorT         5detainee to monitor the effectiveness of his respiration during 
waterboarding.18 In this way, medical professionals were used 
to calibrate physical and mental pain and suffering.
Not only were health professionals involved in designing 
and monitoring the CIA interrogation program, they also played 
an indirect but essential role in the legal justifications for the 
program prepared by the Office of Legal Counsel (OLC).  The 
OLC was asked by the CIA whether certain techniques consti -
tuted torture under 18 USC §2340 by causing “severe physi -
cal or mental pain or suffering.” Since the OLC lawyers had 
no direct experience of the techniques, they necessarily relied 
instead on the judgment of health professionals. Yet, in a strik -
ing example of bootstrapping, they turned for advice about the 
pain caused by the techniques to the very health professionals 
who were implementing them.19  
In essence, the lawyers were asked if the techniques consti -
tuted torture and they replied to the CIA that they only did so if 
the CIA Office of Medical Services (OMS) informed them that 
the techniques reached the defined standard of pain. The OMS 
health professionals obligingly passed on through CIA chan -
nels their opinion that the pain was not in fact severe
In an egregious example of this circular process, one OLC 
memo concludes that waterboarding is not torture because 
“however frightening the experience may be, OMS personnel 
have informed us that the waterboard technique is not physi -
cally painful.” Scores of similar references to OMS medical 
judgments about pain and the safeguarding effects of medical 
monitoring appear throughout the memos. Although OMS did 
express some concern about some techniques, those objections 
were limited. Without the cooperation of health professionals 
in making these assessments, the OLC memos could not have 
reached the conclusions they did and could not have so easily 
justified torture.  
The intent of the CIA interrogation program was to cause 
severe psychological distress.20 Despite citation of unnamed 
18 ICRC report. Note that the use of a pulse oximeter, and the requirement 
that an emergency tracheostomy kit be kept ready is even more evidence that 
the procedure is intentionally harmful, risky and potentially lethal.
19 In certain cases the very same JPRA psychologists who designed the 
torture and implemented the techniques, and, who, as private contractors, 
profited from the operation, also provided the research that justified the 
techniques: “You have informed us that your on-site psychologists, who have 
extensive experience with the use of the waterboard in Navy training, have 
not encountered any significant long-term mental health consequences from 
its use. Your on-site psychologists have also indicated that JPRA has likewise 
not reported any significant mental health consequences from the use of the 
waterboard.”
20 CIA Inspector General’s Report. Appendix F. “Captured terrorists turned 
over to the CIA for interrogation may be subjected to a wide range of legally 
sanctioned techniques, all of which are also used on US military personnel in 
SERE training programs. These are designed to psychologically ‘dislocate’ 
the detainee, maximize his feelings of vulnerability and helplessness, and 
reduce or eliminate his will to resist our efforts to obtain critical intelligence.” 
In addition, the sanction techniques include so-called “Standard measures” 
or those deemed to be without physical or substantial psychological pressure 
and so-called “Enhanced measures,” or those deemed to cause physical or 
psychological pressure beyond “Standard measures.” (p. 1). “In all instances, 
the goal of these techniques is psychological impact…” and are “designed to 
induce shock, surprise and/or humiliation.” (p. 2).experts who reportedly concluded that these techniques were 
unlikely to cause significant harm, the notion that these abusive 
techniques can be used safely has no basis in medical science 
and is not supported by an extensive peer-reviewed literature.21 
From a medical, scientific and common sense perspective the 
idea that such abusive and inhumane techniques can be safe -
ly deployed is unsupportable. The techniques authorized and 
deployed have long been documented to cause significant and 
long lasting psychological pain and suffering including post -
traumatic stress disorder, anxiety and major depression.22  In 
fact, a recent study demonstrates that abusive techniques em -
ployed during captivity which emphasized psychological tor -
ture over physical injury, such as psychological manipulation, 
forms of deprivation, humiliation and stress positions, cause as 
much mental pain and traumatic stress as does torture designed 
to inflict physical injury. 23
The use of these abusive methods violates international hu -
man rights standards. The likely illegality of the program was 
known to the agency and debated within the agency. Those ad -
vocating for the use of abusive techniques such as waterboard -
ing should have known that the US had prosecuted these same 
techniques as torture. Health professionals who were involved 
in its justification, design and implementation should have 
known that professional ethics prohibit health professionals 
from complicity in such harmful acts against prisoners or de -
tainees. It is precisely to avoid such complicity that health pro -
fessionals have recourse to professional codes of ethics, as well 
as international standards of medical conduct. Familiarity with 
these codes – not to mention basic human decency – should 
preclude such conduct, making clear to health professionals 
and government institutions both its essentially unethical na -
ture and illegal status under international law.
Not only should interrogators be subject to an investiga -
tion of alleged criminal conduct. Health professionals who 
were involved in this program should be the subject to inde -
pendent investigation for both criminal and unprofessional 
conduct. Professionals who have violated professional ethics 
or the law must be held accountable through criminal pros -
ecution, loss of license and professional society membership, 
where appropriate.
21 See Leave No Marks  and Broken Laws, Broken Lives.  Although these 
reports were published in 2007 and 2008 respectively, they summarized 
scientific literature that was well established in 2001. In a bizarre justification 
for the safety of the techniques, the OLC report states, “You have also 
reviewed the relevant literature and found no empirical data on the effect of 
these techniques with the exception of sleep-deprivation.” OLC August 1, 
2002, p. 6. Yet, there is a large body of research on the effects of these and 
similar techniques, much of it supported by the CIA. See for example The 
Search for the Manchurian Candidate (c) 1979 by John Marks. Published by 
Times Books.
22 PHR and HRF previously reported on the harmful effects of many of these 
techniques in their report Leave No Marks: Enhanced Interrogation and the 
Risk of Criminality.
23 Basoglu M. et al. Torture vs. Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment: 
Is the Distinction Real or Apparent? Archives Gen. Psychiatry 277 (2007).6  AIdIng T orTureConclusion
The newly released version of the May 2004 CIA 
Inspector General’s report on Counterterrorism Detention 
and Interrogation Activities reveals the use of a number of 
previously undescribed techniques including: 
Forced Shaving• 
Hooding• 
Dietary Manipulation• 
Prolonged Diapering• 
Walling • 
Confinement in a box• 
These techniques used alone or in combination may meet the 
definition of torture under US and international law. Legality 
aside, they are associated with high risk of physical and psy -
chological harm, including harm that is enduring, in those sub -
jected to these techniques. They also represent clear violations 
of well-established medical ethics governing the behavior of 
health professionals.
The report also confirms use of previously reported tech -
niques, covered in the PHR and Human Rights First report 
Leave No Marks , such as isolation, forced nudity, stress po -
sitions, temperature manipulation, waterboarding, and other 
techniques which were used in ways that violated the torture 
statute and international law.The Inspector General’s report confirms much of what had 
been reported about the essential role played by health profes -
sionals in designing, deploying, monitoring and legitimizing 
the program of torture, but also raises disturbing new questions 
which require further investigation. The possibility that health 
professionals monitored techniques to assess and improve their 
effectiveness, constituting possible unethical human experi -
mentation, urgently needs to be thoroughly investigated.  
PHR has long called for full investigation and remedies in -
cluding accountability for war crimes, and reparation such as 
compensation, medical care and psycho-social services. PHR 
also calls for health professionals who have violated ethical 
standards or the law to be held accountable through criminal 
prosecution, loss of license and loss of professional society 
membership where appropriate.