 
 2 Nuremberg Betrayed Physicians for Human Rights phr.org  
 Contents 
3  Executive Summary 
6  Methodology  
7  Introduction   
22  CIA Torture 
Experiments   
30  Research on the Health 
Effects of Torture  
44  Applications of CIA 
Research on Detainees 
51  Conclusion   
55 Recommendations 
56  Appendix A: Legal and 
Ethical Standards for 
Human Subjects 
Protection  
60  Appendix B: Select New 
Evidence since PHR’s 
2010 Analysis 
61  Appendix C: Select 
Timeline of Relevant 
Events 
65 Endnotes  
 
 
 
  Cover: A detainee at Guantánamo Bay detention center. Some detainees tortured at secret CIA “black sites” around the world were later transferred to Guantánamo. Photo: John Moore/Getty 
Acknowledgments 
This report was written by Sarah Dougherty, JD, MPH, 
senior anti-torture fellow at Physicians for Human Rights 
(PHR) and Scott Allen, MD, FACP, medical advisor at PHR. 
 
The report benefitted from review by PHR staff, including 
Carolyn Greco, JD, senior U.S. policy associate; Vincent 
Iacopino, MD, PhD, senior medical advisor; Donna 
McKay, executive director; Marianne Møllmann, LLM, 
MSc, director of research and investigations; Susannah 
Sirkin, director of international policy and partnerships; 
and Homer Venters, MD, director of programs. PHR 
advisors and former employees contributed invaluable 
expertise and guidance on this report, including Widney 
Brown, JD; Nathaniel Raymond; and Stephen Soldz, PhD. 
PHR intern Robert Erikson provided research assistance.  
 
The report also benefitted from external review by 
Deborah D. Ascheim, MD, member of PHR’s board of 
directors.  
 
The report was reviewed, edited, and prepared for 
publication by Claudia Rader, MS, content and marketing 
manager.  
 
Support for this report was provided by the Open Society 
Foundations. 
 
 
  
 3 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org Executive Summary 
 
After the 9/11 terror attacks, as part of  its counterterrorism efforts, the Bush 
administration authorized the systematic tort ure and ill-treatment of detainees in U.S. 
custody. In order to do so, it created a legal and policy framework to permit abusive 
interrogation and detention practices and undid long-standing, internationally-agreed 
protections for prisoners of war. The goal  of the Central Inte lligence Agen cy (CIA) 
“enhanced interrogation” program was to br eak detainees psychologically, using harsh 
techniques designed to inflict severe pain  and suffering. The program rested on the 
flawed claim that torture could be useful  in overcoming a person’s resistance to 
interrogation and in facilitating the collec tion of intelligence. Physicians for Human 
Rights (PHR) has previously documented that, as  part of the CIA torture program, U.S. 
health professionals systematically collect ed data involving torture and conducted 
analysis to make this inform ation generalizable to other aspects of the program. These 
activities amounted to human subjects res earch, a term used interchangeably with 
human experimentation. Analysis of new in formation indicates that the CIA torture 
program was itself a regime of applied research on detainees and implicitly 
conceptualized as such by the CIA. This co nstitutes one of the gravest breaches of 
medical ethics by U.S. health  professionals since the Nure mberg Code was developed to 
protect individuals from nonconsensual human experimentation following Nazi 
medical atrocities during World War II. 
 
At the heart of the CIA’s research was an unproven theory that exposing detainees to 
uncontrollable stress and trauma would disrupt  normal mechanisms of resistance and 
create “learned helplessness” and dependence.1 That, in turn, would induce total 
compliance in detainees, enablin g interrogators to secure their cooperation and elicit 
accurate intelligence from them . The techniques proposed for this process were derived 
from the U.S. military’s Survival, Evasio n, Resistance, and Es cape (SERE) training 
program to teach service personnel how to re sist abusive treatment if captured. These 
tactics were themselves a distillation of co ercion methods used by Cold War communist 
regimes to produce false confessions. While the underlying phenomenon of 
helplessness and dependency had been studied by U.S. researchers trying to understand 
the apparent “brainwashing” effect of such techniques, the new theory that torture 
would produce learned helplessness – an d that this would ultimately produce 
intelligence – had never been researched or de monstrated to be “effective.” At the time 
the CIA program began, the existing evidence suggested that coercive approaches to  
 
Analysis of new information indicates that the CIA 
torture program was itself a regime of applied research on detainees. 
 
  
 4 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org interrogation did not work and were counterproductive.2 Nevertheless, psychologists 
contracted by the CIA promoted this theo ry, improvised and applied various torture 
techniques, and reported outcomes in line wi th their contention th at these techniques 
facilitated detainee compliance and cooperation with interrogation.  
 This research was driven by implicit hypoth eses of “efficacy” and “safety.” The CIA 
sought to demonstrate that the tactics “wor ked” for interrogation and would not injure 
the subjects beyond a certain threshold of harm , as delineated in secret “torture memos” 
issued by the Department of Justice Office of  Legal Counsel (OLC). The August 2002 OLC 
memos authorized the use of “enhanced interro gation” techniques, to be applied in an 
isolated and sequential manner, and redefined  “pain and suffering” such that the effects 
had to be much more severe and/or lasting than previously permitted in order for the 
techniques to be regarded as torture. This creat ed a permissive, rather than prohibitive, 
approach to torture. Relatedly, the memos also directed medical personnel to conduct 
systematic monitoring of interrogations in order to calibrate pain and mitigate harm. 
This role posed a conflict from the outset . Medical ethics absolutely prohibit the 
involvement of health professionals in to rture and ill-treatment, including even being 
present when abuse is used or threatened. In  addition, it is a vi olation of ethics to 
mitigate harm in the context of facilitating the intentional inflic tion of physical or 
mental pain and suffering. Torture cannot be made “safe,” nor was the Bush 
administration interested in making it “safe. ” Instead, it was interest ed in not exceeding 
certain limits of injury. 
 Health professionals in the CIA Office of Medi cal Services (OMS) were ordered to ensure 
interrogators did not exceed these limits – thus  ostensibly maintaining the “safety” of 
the subjects – with little idea in actual practi ce of how to do so. The extant literature was 
restricted to SERE studies, which involved lim ited application of milder forms of the 
methods for the purposes of increasing, ra ther than destroying , resilience. The SERE 
subjects were volunteers from the U.S. militar y who were able to stop the infliction of 
the torture techniques at any time. In addi tion, precautions were taken to prevent the 
risk of harm, which was well-docum ented in the SERE literature.  
 
By contrast, the people subjected to th e CIA’s “enhanced interrogation” were 
indefinitely detained, did not provide consent,  and were unable to stop the infliction of 
physical or mental pain. In light of the vast gap between the SERE and CIA models and 
populations, medical officers worked to moni tor, collect, analyze, and disseminate data 
on the effects of the torture  tactics in real world applications to detainees. These 
observations were used to formulate clinical  protocols to modify the techniques and 
guide medical monitors in future interrogations  – conducting, in effect, a “safety trial.” 
This research was part of an effort to cont end that the torture tactics did not exceed the 
elevated physical and mental pain thresholds  established by OLC lawyers. At the same 
time, the CIA’s research was driven by a need  to create a legal defense for U.S. personnel 
involved in the “enhanced interrogation” pr ogram, in the event of future torture 
charges. OLC lawyers claimed that revi ewing evidence gained in the course of  
 5 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org interrogations could establish that interroga tors lacked the intent  to inflict lasting 
harm, and thus commit torture.  The resulting findings were used to justify commission 
of the crime and to protect perpetrators from legal liability.  
 
The CIA’s “enhanced interrogation” program was based on a tenuous theory proffered 
by contract psychologists with a financial vested interest. The subsequent deployment 
of this crude program required constant in vention, assessment, an d modification in the 
field – based on actual applications of torture techniques on non-consenting 
interrogation subjects – to refine the appr oach and demonstrate the promised “safety” 
and “efficacy.” In any other co ntext, such an approach wo uld be considered merely 
improvisational. However, when the indivi duals improvising are scientists and the 
subjects are humans, such improvisation is something more. When human subjects 
undergo an intervention or interventions (par ticularly harmful interventions) and their 
response is methodically measured and anal yzed, and the results of the analysis are 
disseminated – even internally  within a program – the activity meets the U.S. 
government’s definition of human subjects research.  
 
The definition of research does not require that the methodology used be sound or that 
investigators intend or are even aware that  their investigation constitutes research. 
Indeed, it appears the CIA’s research to esta blish learned helplessness as a theoretical 
construct, and parallel efforts to try to pr ove that torture did not have lasting health 
effects, all lacked a legitimate research purpose, design, and methodology. The premise 
of “efficacy” conflicted with the extant lit erature on effective interrogation, which 
showed that coercive measures were co unterproductive and undermined intelligence 
collection. Similarly, the premise of “safet y” conflicted with the U.S. government’s own 
SERE research, which showed  a significant risk of harm  even in the controlled 
environment of training. Here, the CIA’s activit ies not only met the essential criteria for 
human subjects research, they were explicitly  conceptualized as such: a systematic 
investigation – including data collectio n and analysis – to create generalizable 
information in support of “enhanced interrogation” and detention.  
 
The CIA’s research evolved to fit the legal need s of the Bush administ ration in response 
to internal and external pressures on the torture program. In particular, interrogators 
were using multiple torture techniques in combination, with a far greater severity, 
duration, and repetition than initially describ ed to OLC lawyers. This was inflicting far 
greater physical and mental injury to detain ees, contradicting representations that the 
techniques were safe. Health professionals fa ced increasing pressure to generate data to 
justify and indemnify torture pr actices that were already in  use, but that exceeded the 
scope of authorization or were not yet appr oved. Accordingly, OMS medical guidelines 
were created to reflect and incorporate the latest findings of CIA medical officers. In 
response to requests by Bush administration  officials to provide scientific and clinical 
assurances of “safety” and legality, these fin dings were reinforced with additional data 
to develop new legal memos.  
  
 6 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org Over time, the severe physical and psychological  harm of the torture techniques, as well 
as an absence of proof of their effectiven ess for interrogation purposes, undermined the 
flawed theories of “safety” and “efficacy.” The  torture program was eventually reined in 
and ultimately ended – but not before great damage had been done to the human beings 
at its center.  
The available evidence documents, at a mi nimum, deployment by the CIA of coercive 
techniques for interrogation that were unproven  both in terms of “efficacy” and “safety.” 
There was, at the very least, an ad hoc effo rt to assess these newly deployed techniques 
on detainees in the field – at  secret “black site” prisons.  The documents newly in the 
public domain, which form the basis of this re port, detail activities by the CIA that meet 
the definition of human subjects research . Without a more comp lete record, it is 
difficult to say how formal or extensive this res earch was. What is clear is that this type 
of research on prisoners or detainees is the very reason the Nuremberg Code protocols 
were developed.  In the cou rse of facilitating the crime of torture, U.S. health 
professionals committed a second and rela ted crime: human subjects research and 
experimentation on detainees being tortured, in violation of medi cal ethics and U.S. 
and international law.   
There must be accountability for both the crime of torture and the second and related 
crime of human experimentation. There is  also a pressing need for additional 
information to come to light , with transparency as a cr itical first step toward 
accountability for and prevention of grave hum an rights violatio ns. Drawing on the 
lessons of Nuremberg, we must never again pe rmit the exigencies of national security – 
or any other reason – to be used as justific ation for unlawful and unethical research on 
human beings. In this uncertain political climate, it is even more crucial to shine a light 
on this disturbing chapter and act now to  prevent such crimes from being repeated. 
 
Methodology  
 
This Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) report  is based on analysis of public source 
materials documenting the Central Intelligence  Agency (CIA) renditio n, detention, and 
interrogation program. This includes review of  thousands of pages of declassified U.S. 
government records, reports, and other materi als from the CIA, Department of Defense, 
Department of Justice, and other U.S. agenci es. Many of these materials were publicly 
released, or released in substantially less re dacted form, following the 2014 publication 
of the summary of the U.S. Senate Sel ect Committee on Intelligence report on CIA 
torture, as well as in response to Freedom of Information Act requests by human rights, 
civil liberties, and media organizations. In addi tion, this report draws on more than 15 
years of PHR’s research, investigation, and repor ting in connection with the U.S. torture 
program and the role of U.S. health profe ssionals in detainee mistreatment and harm. 
  
 7 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org PHR analyzed the factual record , reviewed the state of know ledge about the physical and 
psychological effects of so-called “enhanced interrogation” techniques at the time the 
CIA program began, and conducted research on  the ethical and legal protections for the 
human subjects of research, including esp ecially vulnerable populations such as 
prisoners. In addition, this analysis referenc es evidence cited in PHR’s 2010 publication, 
“Experiments in Torture,”3 the first report to show human subjects research and 
experimentation in the CIA program, as well as  additional data that has come to light. 
 This report is limited to publicly available sources. Given the scope, complexity, and 
secrecy of the CIA program, this analysis does not claim to provide a complete picture of 
the public record, nor a definitive analysis of  the CIA’s illegal and unethical research on 
prisoners. To date, no evidence has been made public of a formalized research protocol, 
plan, or ethics review. In addi tion, actual data from psyc hological evaluations, medical 
monitoring, and other observations is not pu blicly available. Nevertheless, a research 
regime can be inferred from CIA contracts discussing “applied research,” CIA medical 
guidelines reflecting generalizable knowled ge drawn from prior interrogation of 
detainees, references to data  collection, analysis, and dissemination in government 
records, and documented activities of CIA personnel corresponding with human 
subjects research and experimentation.  
 
The analysis is made more difficult by the continued classification of the CIA program, 
including the concealment of the names and ti tles of the health professionals who were 
involved. Many relevant documents remain cl assified, and most of the declassified 
documents that are available are heavily redacted,
4 including nearly all information 
regarding Office of Medical Services pers onnel. In addition, the U.S. government 
continues to make incomplete, conflicting , and inaccurate representations regarding 
the program.5 
 
I.  Introduction  
 
After the 9/11 terror attacks, the Bush admini stration authorized the torture and ill-
treatment of detainees in U.S. custody as part  of its counterterrorism efforts. In order to 
do so, it created a legal and policy framew ork to permit abusive interrogation and 
detention practices and undid long-standin g, internationally-agreed protections for 
prisoners of war (POWs). The goal of this  so-called “enhanced interrogation” program 
was to exploit detainees for intelligence collection purposes.  The Bush administration 
authorized the capture, re ndition, and indefinite secret  detention of individuals 
considered to have links with terrorist organ izations. It additionally  authorized a range 
of interrogation tactics long recognized by  the United States as illegal, such as 
waterboarding, isolation, sleep  deprivation, sensory depri vation, forced nudity, extreme 
temperature manipulation, and stress position s. Over time, these practices, as well as 
their legal and operational justifications, sp read from the Centra l Intelligence Agency  
 8 Nuremberg Betrayed Physicians for Human Rights phr.org (CIA) “black sites” – secret overseas pris ons – to military detention and interrogation 
facilities. 
 
In the wake of the 9/11 attacks, the CIA fa ced pressure to obtain better intelligence from 
human sources derived from more aggressive interrogation strategies.6 Psychological 
expertise in human manipulation and exploita tion was seen as especially critical to 
these efforts.7 The Bush administration sought  to “take the gloves off,”8 yet experienced 
professionals within the intelligence communi ty did not support the use of coercion or 
torture.9 The CIA turned to psychologists James Mitchell and Bruce Jessen to design and 
develop its interrogation operations.10 In December 2001, the CI A contracted with them 
to review the Manchester Manual – a traini ng manual of the terrorist organization al-
Qaeda discovered in Manchester, England – wh ich ostensibly contained strategies for 
resisting interrogation by countries comp liant with the Geneva Conventions’ 
protections for POWs.11 Mitchell and Jessen drafted a white paper assessing that al-
Qaeda operatives were highly traine d to resist hostile questioning.12 They proposed 
providing a range of psychological consultation  services, reflected in dozens of contracts 
for “applied research,” development, and operational support. Individually, they each 
received in excess of $1 million, in additi on to $81 million paid to their consulting 
company, Mitchell Jessen and Asso ciates, between 2005 and 2009.13  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
In addition to Mitchell and Je ssen, who ultimately design ed, implemented, and oversaw 
a vast regime of psychological torture an d ill-treatment, a wide range of health 
professionals were complicit in the progra m. Psychologists, physicians, physician 
assistants, nurses, and medics participated in torture, monitored and collected data 
ostensibly to manage harm, maintained ab usive detention conditions and treatment, 
and provided basic care to an institutionalized population.
14 They were involved in the 
following activities: withholdin g food, medical care, and pe rsonal hygiene; medically 
clearing detainees for torture; medically treating detainees to  return to abusive 
treatment; sharing medical information with interrogators; advising on the application 
CIA contract psychologist 
James Mitchell speaks at the 
American Enterprise Institute 
on December 6, 2016 while 
promoting his new book on 
the CIA torture program.  
 9 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org of techniques; directly committing acts of  torture and ill-treatment; studying and 
experimenting with the effects of tortur e; failing to stop and report abuse; and 
concealing evidence of mistreatment.  
 
Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) has pr eviously documented evidence that the CIA 
engaged in activities constituting nonc onsensual human subjects research and 
experimentation on detainees being tortured.15 New evidence indicates that the CIA 
“enhanced interrogation” program itself was a regime of human subjects research and 
that the agency conceptualized it as such. Thi s creates the most complete picture of this 
illegal and unethical enterprise to date. In  2016, Mitchell co-published a book describing 
his participation in waterboarding and other forms of torture and told interviewers he 
had no regrets.16 Yet due to continued secrecy su rrounding the program, the identities 
of many other individuals involved, includ ing health professionals, remain unknown. 
 
Definition of Research and Experimentation  
 
The system of protections for human subjects of research is enshrined in U.S. federal 
policy in the form of the Common Rule and Code  of Federal Regulations Title 45 part 46. 
The latter contains a detailed definition of what constitutes human subjects research: 
 
“Research means a systematic investigation , including research 
development, testing, an d evaluation, designed to develop or contribute to 
generalizable knowledge . Activities that meet th is definition constitute 
research for purposes of this policy, whether or not they are conducted or 
supported under a program that is considered research  for other 
purposes. For example, some demonstrat ion and service programs may include 
research activities. […] 
 
Human subject means a living individual  about whom an investigator 
(whether professional or st udent) conducting research obtains  
 1 Data through intervention or interaction  with the individual, or 
2 Identifiable private information. 
 
Intervention includes both physical procedures  by which data are gathered 
(for example, venipuncture) and manipulations of the subject or the 
subject's environment  that are performed for research purposes. Interaction 
includes communication or interpersonal contact between investigator 
and subject .”
17 [emphasis added] 
 
To be considered a “systematic investigation, ” the concept of a research project must 
meet the following criteria: it attempts  to answer research questions; it is 
methodologically driven (that is, collects da ta or information in an organized and  
 10 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org consistent way; the data or information (wheth er quantitative or qua litative) is analyzed 
in some way; and conclusions are drawn from the results.  
 
“Generalizable knowledge” must  include one or more of the following concepts: the 
knowledge contributes to a theoretical framew ork of an established body of knowledge; 
the primary beneficiaries of the research  are other researchers, scholars, and 
practitioners in the field of study; publicatio n, presentation, or othe r distribution of the 
results is intended to inform the field of study; the results are expected to be generalized 
to a larger population beyond the site of data  collection; and the re sults are intended to 
be replicated in other settings.18 
 
Accordingly, the key elements of  human subjects research are: 
1 Systematic investigation (data collection) a bout an interaction or intervention with a 
living individual, 
2 Designed to develop or contribut e to generalizable knowledge. 
 
Legitimate human subjects research can includ e studying the effectiveness of specific 
medical treatments or procedures on patient s, collecting data to better understand a 
sociological problem, or assessing the suscep tibility of certain demographic groups to 
disease, among other applications. The term  “human experimentation” is often used 
interchangeably with “human subjects research ,” as in this analysis, and involves the 
systematic variation and study of a new or unproven practice. Research can be 
considered experimental when it is based  on untested ideas or involves methods or 
devices that lack an established or accepted  scientific basis, proc edure, or clinical 
standards. As a result, it entails inhere nt uncertainty about benefits, risks, and 
effectiveness of the intervention.19 Note, however, that thes e definitions do not require 
that an activity was contemplated or conc eived of as research by the investigators in 
order to constitute research, nor do they requ ire a particular study design, the testing of 
hypotheses, the use of control groups, or  even a legitimate scientific purpose.  
 
In addition, the evaluation of “service” programs  – that is, formal or ad hoc efforts to 
promptly improve a process rather than co ntribute to generaliz able knowledge – can 
constitute research if it meets the criteria de tailed above. However, guidance exists to 
help differentiate quality improvement proce sses that would not be subject to rigorous 
human subject protections from research subj ect to ethics review by an Institutional 
Review Board (IRB). While both processes in volve the systematic collection of data, 
several features preclude designation as qua lity improvement, including activities that 
pose risk to human subjects or activities th at are in fact design ed to determine the 
“safety” and “efficacy” of an interventi on. The quality improvement designation 
generally applies only when mo nitoring the application of low-risk interventions that 
have already been well-establi shed in the field as a solid, evidence-based practice – 
which does not apply in the context of torture. 
  
 11 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org  
 
Research Hypothesis for CIA Torture 
 
CIA contract psychologists Mitchell and Je ssen proposed using coercive techniques and 
abusive conditions of confinement to break detainees down psychologically.20 They 
claimed that torture could be  useful in overcoming an individual’s resistance to 
interrogation and in creating conditions that  were conducive to intelligence collection. 
The psychologists hypothesized that expos ing detainees to uncontrollable stress and 
trauma would disrupt normal mechanisms of resistance and create the condition of 
“learned helplessness.”21 That, in turn, would induce to tal compliance and cooperation 
with interrogation, causing detainees to vol untarily provide accurate intelligence. The 
interrogator’s goal was to “est ablish absolute control,” “induce dependence to meet 
needs,” “elicit compliance,” and “shap[e] cooperation.”22  
 Mitchell and Jessen formulated their research hypothesis in part from the U.S. military’s 
Survival, Evasion, Resistance, and Escape (S ERE) counter-resistance training program, 
which taught select U.S. service personnel stra tegies to resist exploitation if captured by 
countries that did not adhere to the Geneva Conventions.
23 The purpose of the training 
was to build resistance to the extreme stresses of capture , interrogation, and detention 
by exposing students to simulated scenario s in a controlled and constructive manner. 
The physical and mental pressures used in th e SERE curriculum carried a serious risk of 
psychological and physical harm.24 In particular, SERE manuals in 2002 warned that 
instructors needed to take steps to prevent learned helplessness from the tactics, 
particularly waterboarding:  
“Maximum effort will be made to ensure  that students do not develop a sense of 
'learned helplessness’ during the pre-acad emic laboratory…. The goal is not to 
push the student beyond his means to resist or to learn (to prevent ‘Learned 
Helplessness’).”
25 
 
Mitchell and Jessen proposed doing the reverse – using torture to produce “fear and 
panic”26 and, ultimately, learned helplessness27 – and adapting this process for use on 
detainees. Consistent with this implicit hypot hesis, their research centered on whether 
the psychological and physical pressures empl oyed in SERE training could be used to 
disrupt detainees’ resistance and produce compliance,28 and when the threshold of 
learned helplessness had been reached.29  
 On December 15-16, 2001, Mitchell, already under contract with the CIA, met with a 
select group of intelligence personnel and academics in the home of Martin Seligman, 
the psychologist who first identified th e learned helplessness phenomenon based on 
electroshock experiments on dogs. The pur pose of this meeting was to discuss 
counterterrorism strategies based on the “p sychology of capitulation” as applied to  
 12 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org “jihad Islamic” terrorist organizations.30 By March 2002, Jessen was conducting 
briefings for the military on counter-resista nce techniques for interrogation, including 
on how to “apply psychological torture.”31 
 
By April 1, 2002, Mitchell was urging the CIA to focus on developing learned 
helplessness in detainees.32 Mitchell met with Seligman two days later to discuss 
learned helplessness, along with Jessen and psychologist Ki rk Hubbard, their 
operational supervisor at the CIA.33 Hours later, Mitchell flew to Thailand to advise on 
the interrogation of Abu Zubaydah, a Saudi ci tizen whom the CIA claimed was a high-
ranking leader of al-Qaeda.34  
 
In Thailand, Mitchell continued to recommend learned helplessness as an aid to gaining 
compliance and cooperation. For example, an April 12, 2002 interrogation plan 
proposed for use on Abu Zubaydah stat ed: “The development of psychological 
dependence, learned helplessness and short te rm thinking are key factors in reducing 
[redacted] sense of hope that his well-hon ed counter-measure interrogation skills will 
help him from disclosing important intelligence.”35 The CIA relayed to the White House 
that inducing learned helplessness was e ssential to preparing the detainee for 
interrogation: 
 
“At the meeting, the CIA attorneys explained that the plan developed by CIA 
psychologists relied on the theory of ‘learned helplessness, ’ a passive and 
depressed condition that leads a subjec t to believe that his resistance to 
disclosing information is futile. The condition reportedly creates a 
psychological dependence and instills a se nse that, because resistance is futile, 
cooperation is inevitable…. The CIA attend ees reportedly outlined the effects of 
learned helplessness, citing the psycho logist who had developed the theory for 
them, [redacted]. They told [former Justice Department lawyer John] Yoo that 
[redacted] had concluded that learne d helplessness does not result in a 
permanent change in a subject’s person ality, and that full recovery can be 
expected once the conditions inducing  learned helplessness are removed.”36 
[emphasis added] 
 U.S. personnel present at Abu Zubaydah’s initial interrogations described Mitchell’s 
approach to interrogation, as  conveyed to investigative jour nalist Jane Mayer: “Mitchell 
announced that the suspect had to be treat ed ‘like a dog in a cage,’ informed sources 
said. ‘He said it was like an experiment, wh en you apply electric shocks to a caged dog, 
after a while, he’s so dimi nished, he can’t resist.’”
37 
 
Mitchell and Jessen’s advocacy of this protocol  resulted in its adoption by the CIA. 
Throughout the torture program, learned helplessness continued to be a central 
objective of the prototypical “enhanced” interr ogation, as noted in a 2005 Department of 
Justice (DOJ) Office  of Legal Counsel (OLC) memo providing renewed policy 
authorization for torture:  
 13 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org  
“Although the combination of interroga tion techniques will wear a detainee 
down physically, we understand that the principal effect, as well as the primary 
goal, of interrogation using these techniques is psychological – ‘to create a 
state of learned helplessness and dependence  conducive to the collection 
of intelligence in a predictable, relia ble, and sustainable manner’ … and 
numerous precautions are designed to avoid inflicting ‘severe physical or 
mental pain or suffering.’”38 [emphasis added] 
 
From its inception, the research hypothesis advanced by Mitchell and Jessen was not 
only unethical but conceptually  flawed. First, it conflated ideas of coercion, compliance, 
cooperation, and truth-telling, based on inaccu rate and disconnected interpretations of 
the underlying theoretical constructs. The “enhanced interrogation” techniques were 
derived from the U.S. military’s SERE training  school. The SERE tactics, in turn, were a 
distillation of coercive methods used by  communist regimes to produce “debility, 
dependence, and dread” in U.S. prisoners of war (POWs).39 These methods were 
designed to make POWs compliant through coercion in order to generate propaganda 
statements and false confessions.40 This coercion was aimed at destroying the 
individual’s sense of self. 
 
“Debility, dependence, and dread ,” the theoretical basis of the SERE program, had never 
been used for interrogation by U.S. forces , although the phenomenon had been studied 
and had influenced the CIA’s historical counterintelligence methods.41 The 
phenomenon of learned helplessness, effectivel y a continuation of that theory, had also 
been studied. However, it had never been  used for intelligence collection purposes, 
demonstrated to be effective in producing cooperation – let alone truth-telling – nor 
researched in this context. Moreover, us ing torture to voluntarily “encourage” a 
detainee to talk necessarily co nflicts with the underlying th eory of learned helplessness: 
that of an individual who is psychologically incapable of taking action to improve their 
situation. By definition, an individual with learned helple ssness would be incapable of 
cooperating with interrogators in the manner described by the CIA.  
 
Second, the contention that mental and physi cal pressures could be used in this manner 
to produce intelligence results was entirely th eoretical, as SERE ta ctics had only been 
used defensively on volunteers, n ever offensively, or on prisoners.42 Historically, torture 
has been used as a tool to force compliance  with captors. There is no experimental 
evidence from studies of victims measuring th e degree of compliance or indicating that 
these techniques “work” to elicit accurate  information. As interrogation experts have 
affirmed, any truthful information produ ced would be an incidental as well as 
unreliable byproduct; for this reason, U.S.  military and intelligence doctrine has long 
rejected abusive treatment as counterproduc tive. Prior to 9/11, the CIA had concluded 
that “inhumane physical or psychological te chniques are counterproductive because 
they do not produce intelligence and w ill probably result in false answers.”43 
  
 14 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org Third, the SERE program fundamentally diffe red in purpose, scope, and application 
from what Mitchell and Jessen proposed. The 2008 Senate Armed Services report 
describes a number of differences, including: 
 
“… (1) the extensive physical and ps ychological pre-screening processes for 
SERE school students that are not feas ible for detainees, (2) the variance in 
injuries between a SERE school student  who enters training and a detainee who 
arrives at an interrogation facility after capture, (3) the limited risk of SERE 
instructors mistreating their own personne l, especially with extensive oversight 
mechanisms in place, compared to th e risk of interrogators mistreating non-
country personnel, (4) the voluntary natu re of SERE training, which can be 
terminated by a student at any time, co mpared to the involuntary nature of 
being a detainee, (6) the lim ited duration of SERE training, which has a known 
starting and ending point, compared to the often lengthy, and unknown, period 
of detention for a detainee, and (7) the underlying goals of the SERE school (to 
help students learn from and benefit fr om their training) and the mechanisms 
in place to ensure that students reach those goals compared to the goal of 
interrogation (to e licit information).”44 
 
Omitted from this list was the brutality of  the tactics used in each context and the 
purpose it was intended to serve. The SERE  program was designed to develop resistance 
by exposing students to extreme stress in a controlled environment. The goal was to 
increase their ability to withstand harsh  treatment. By contrast, “enhanced 
interrogation” was designed to overcom e resistance by exposing detainees to 
uncontrollable stress. The goal was to de crease their ability to withstand harsh 
treatment. Intensifying the application of the techniques – to go past the point of mental 
and physical endurance – would be expected to be harmful, particularly without the 
controls, safety measures, and over sight mechanisms employed in SERE.45 These 
differences would render any SERE data on  “safety” irrelevant for the purposes of 
understanding the effects of CIA methods on detainees.  
 
In addition, the existing SERE research  documented extreme physiologic stress 
reactions to limited application of these techniques in a mock training exercise.46 These 
studies’ purpose was to identify the ri sks of the techniques and measure their 
immediate and short-term effects in order to protect volunteers from harm. They did 
not look at long-term physical or psychologi cal harm, such as post-traumatic stress 
disorder, nor did they investigate “safety” pa rameters to prevent such risks. There was 
no literature on minimizing th e harms of torture in order to  continue it, in large part 
because such research woul d be highly unethical.  
 
The CIA acknowledged the difference between  the SERE training program and real 
world application of the techniques in seek ing initial legal authorization for “enhanced 
interrogation” from the DOJ.47 It also acknowledged the health  risks of such differences: 
  
 15 Nuremberg Betrayed Physicians for Human Rights phr.org “…[W]hile the interrogation techniques  mentioned above (attention grasp, 
walling, facial hold, faci al slap (insult slap), cramped confinement, wall 
standing, stress positions, sleep deprivat ion, waterboard, and mock burial) are 
administered to student volunteers in the U.S. in a harm less way, with no 
measurable impact on the psyche of the volunteer , we do not believe we can 
assure the same here for a man forced through these processes and who 
will be made to believe this is the fu ture course of the remainder of his 
life.  While CIA will make every effort possibl e to ensure that the subject is not 
permanently physically or mentally harmed some level of risk still exists . 
The intent of the process is to make the subject very disturbed, but with the 
presumption that he will recover.”48 
 
It further stated that detainees  subjected to such treatment could “suffer a heart attack, 
stroke, or other adverse event.”49 The departure of “enhanced interrogation” techniques 
from SERE techniques highlights the experime ntal nature of the torture program. The 
CIA’s calculated representations – that there was a sufficient empirical basis to proceed, 
yet “real world” application was sufficiently distinct to introduce a risk of death – 
suggest an awareness of th at experimental nature. 
 
Mitchell and Jessen proposed developing and sca ling this model. Over the course of the 
program, they oversaw the intentional inflic tion of severe pain and suffering on 
detainees, with the stated aim of overcoming  resistance, inducing learned helplessness, 
creating compliance, and shaping cooperat ion. Despite the CIA’s stated goal of 
obtaining actionable intelligence, Mitchell a nd Jessen measured success (i.e., “efficacy”) 
in a more restricted way –through inform ation indicating the degree of detainees’ 
willingness to “participate” wi th interrogation. As SERE trainers, Mitchell and Jessen 
would have been aware of false confessions asso ciated with the physically and mentally 
coercive interrogation practices. That did no t stop them from promising what they 
could not provide – an effective mean s of obtaining actionable intelligence.50 In 2015, 
Mitchell stated that he and Jessen intended to “find and pay an in dependent researcher” 
to study the effectiveness of the techniques, but that this never took place because their 
contract was terminated.51 Ultimately, the CIA paid Mitchell, Jessen, and their 
consulting company more than $81 million to  diminish the resistance of detainees on 
the apparent presumption that it would produce actionable intelligence.52 
Psychologists James Mitchell, Bruce Jessen, and their consulting company were paid more than $81 
million to design, implement, and oversee the CIA torture program, as noted in this excerpt from the 
summary of the 2014 Senate Select Committee on Intelligence’s torture report.  
 16 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org  
Experimentation to Develop “Enhanced Interrogation” Model 
 
Mitchell and Jessen conducted a behavioral experiment to induce learned helplessness 
in detainees. They conducted their research in  the context of the threat and experience 
of extrajudicial and indefinite detention, prolonged isolation, additional forms of 
torture and ill-treatment, and abusive condi tions of confinement. The goal was to 
achieve psychological disintegration by exer cising total control over the detainee, 
beginning with dislocation from all lega l and social connections. This included 
extrajudicial detention – namely, the tacti cal elimination of Geneva protections. 
Mitchell and Jessen identified this as a cr itical factor in undermining detainee 
resistance: 
 
“It is apparent from reading the [red acted] manual that the thrust of the 
resistance training provided to operatives  in special terrorist cells focuses on 
preparation for capture in countries [redacted] …. The text in these 
documents converge to instruct captives  to stick to a preplanned cover story 
during interrogation, request legal coun sel, complain about treatment and 
conditions, ask for medical attention,  and then report that they have been 
tortured and mistreated regardless of actual events.”53 [emphasis added] 
 
Social isolation was viewed as “a main bu ilding block of the exploitation process” 
because it “allow[ed] the capto r total control over person al inputs to the captive.”54 This 
was designed to achieve phased, tactical dest ruction of the personality and basic senses 
of the detainee. Mitchell and Jessen develope d and proposed a list of several “enhanced 
interrogation” techniques, which included waterboarding, sensory manipulation, 
beatings, prolonged isolation, and other methods of inflicting severe physical and 
mental harm.55 These tactics were instrumental no t simply because they caused pain 
and discomfort but because they infringed on the most intimate aspects of life 
associated with autonomy and the sense of self. They were de signed to be used together 
to achieve a synergistic effect of degradation and loss of control, as the CIA described in 
a 2004 memo to the OLC: 
 
“Effective interrogation is based on th e concept of using both physical and 
psychological pressures in a compre hensive, systematic, and cumulative 
manner to influence HVD [high value detainee] behavior. The goal of 
interrogation is to create a state of learned helplessness and dependence 
conducive to the collection of intelligen ce in a predictable, reliable, and 
sustainable manner. […] The use of th ese conditioning techniques do not 
generally bring immediate results; rather, it is the cumulative effect of these 
techniques, used over time and in co mbination with other interrogation 
techniques and intelligence exploitatio n methods, which achieve interrogation 
objectives.56  
 17 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org  
Mitchell and Jessen proposed an exploitation  process that would proceed in several 
stages:  
• During capture and rendition, initial conditions, and setting the stage, including 
exploiting “capture shock,” hooding, sh ackling, and sensory deprivation;  
• Upon reception at the black site, admini strative procedures, and medical assessment 
in order to create apprehension, uncerta inty, and dread, including shaving, nude 
photographs, medical evaluati on to identify contraindi cations for torture, and 
psychological evaluation to id entify the detainee’s psycho logical vulnerabilities; and 
• Transition to interrogation, consisting of an initial interview to assess the detainee’s 
“resistance posture” and willingness to  cooperate with interrogators.57 
 
By December 2004, the CIA’s “prototypical  interrogation” process for “high value” 
detainees consisted of four parts: 
• Detention conditions – to disorient and dest abilize, such as loud noise, constant light, 
and other environmental manipulations; 
• Conditioning techniques – to reduce the deta inee to a “baseline, dependent state” “to 
demonstrate to the [detainee] that he has no control over basic human needs” and to 
create a “mindset in which he learns to perceive his personal welfare, comfort, and 
immediate needs more than the information he is protecting,” such as nudity, sleep 
deprivation, and di etary manipulation; 
• Corrective techniques – to confuse or star tle, such as the so -called insult slap, 
abdominal slap, facial hold, and attention grasp;  
• Coercive techniques – to place the detain ee in high physical and psychological stress 
and considered “more effective” tools in pe rsuading detainees to cooperate, such as 
so-called walling, water dousing, stress positions, wall standing, and cramped 
confinement.58  
 The objective was to “shape compliance of high value captives” and transition them to a 
point where they were “participating in a predictable, reliable, and sustainable 
manner,”
59 at which point they would be interviewed and debriefed by substantive 
intelligence experts.60 Eventually, select detainees woul d be transitioned to “long-term” 
detention, for continuing exploitation61 or to ensure that they would “remain in 
isolation and incommunicado” for the remainder of their lives.62 
 
Earlier iterations of the “enhanced inte rrogation” model were ad hoc and involved 
“rapid escalation and indiscriminate repetitions” of the techniques.63 Even as the 
program evolved, the CIA maintained  that “there is no template  or script that states with 
certainty when and how these techniques  will be used in combination during 
interrogation,” indicating an ongoing level of  improvisation despit e the development of 
a prototypical process.64 As discussed below, this caused problems for the program, 
forcing CIA interrogators in collaboration w ith medical professionals to modify the 
techniques in response to ch anging internal and external pressures. Over time, the CIA 
presented this more nuanced model, which purported to “gradually [rely] less on  
 18 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org coercion” as its “understanding of the effectiveness of the techniques grew.”65 In 
medicine and clinical research, this process is often referred to as “learning by doing.” 
 
Mitchell and Jessen proposed transforming S ERE into a larger program significantly 
expanded in terms of duration of exposure, severity of the application, and combination 
of techniques. They claimed, without supporti ng evidence, that this would eliminate 
detainees’ resistance to disclosing informat ion and facilitate the intelligence collection 
process. Neither the “safety” nor “efficacy” of this theoretical approach had ever been 
established. As they developed this methodol ogy, they consulted with a number of CIA, 
military, and FBI operational psychologist s, academics, and various American 
Psychological Association members.66 Ultimately, the CIA and White House supported 
the experimentation of Mitchell and Jessen and approved their research.  
 Implementation of this plan would occur o ver six years and in multiple countries, and 
would meet standard definiti ons of human subjects research, including systematic 
collection of information involving human  subjects for the purpose of testing a 
hypothesis or creating generalizable informat ion. This truth woul d be acknowledged by 
internal CIA reporting as well as its own in spector general, who requested further data 
on “efficacy” but denied a need for “addition al, guinea pig research on human beings” 
when objections over possible human  experimentation were raised.
67 As the CIA 
worked to create legal protection for the “enhanced interrogation” program, it also 
began to monitor, collect, and analyze data on the health impacts of the tactics on 
detainees. Over time, these ef forts resulted in an expand ed regime of human subjects 
research to support torture. 
 
Legal and Policy Changes Conducive to Human Subjects Research 
 
The Bush administration created a legal an d policy framework to enable the torture and 
ill-treatment of detainees while attempting to  avoid criminal liability. In doing so, it 
dismantled longstanding barri ers to the exploitation and mistreatment of prisoners of 
war, which also reduced protections against th eir use as human subjects of research. In 
addition, a number of these legal and policy changes created a practical need to conduct 
research to justify and indemnify the use of to rture, creating a vicious cycle of escalating 
abuse.  
 
Liability for Human Experimentation under Customary International Law Shortly after 9/11, the CIA began review ing legal standards for detention and 
interrogation operations and exploring potential legal defenses to torture.
68 In 
particular, the agency argued th at it should be exempted from the Geneva Conventions, 
because the legal protections contained in these documents would “significantly 
hamper the ability of the CIA to obtain crit ical threat information necessary to save 
American lives.”69 On January 22, 2002, the OLC issued a memo concluding that neither 
customary international law nor U.S. treaty  obligations, as a matter of federal law,  
 19 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org applied to “war on terror” detainees.70 This closed off the humane treatment protections 
that are common to all four Geneva Conventi ons (known as “Common Article 3”), as 
well as specific Geneva protections against “torture or inhuman treatment, including 
biological experiments.” It additionally re moved liability for these acts under the War 
Crimes Act.71 
 
On February 7, 2002, President Bush signed an order stating that al-Qaeda and Taliban 
detainees were not entitled to prisoner of war status under Geneva and that Common 
Article 3 did not apply to them.72 The order stated that, as a matter of policy, the U.S. 
military would “continue to treat detainees  humanely and, to the extent appropriate 
and consistent with military necessity, in a manner consiste nt with the principles of 
Geneva.”73 However, the CIA was deliberately exempted from this requirement – 
reflecting ongoing discussions of the legalit y of “enhanced interrogation” techniques 
within the administration. In February 2 003, then-CIA General Counsel Scott Muller 
affirmed the Bush administration’s position th at customary international law did not 
protect detainees beyond the Co nvention Against Torture, to which the United States is 
a party.74  Notably, the Convention does not explicitly ban human experimentation,75 as 
the Geneva Conventions76 and the International Covenan t on Civil and Political Rights77 
do.  
 
These developments produced weaker domest ic legal protections for human research 
subjects, regardless of whether such an effect was intended.78 After the Supreme Court’s 
2006 ruling in Ha mda n v. Rumsfeld , which held that Common Article 3 afforded “some 
minimal protection” to enemy combatants, th e War Crimes Act was amended to specify 
which acts were punishable as “grave breaches.” The amended language maintained the 
ban on biological experiments. However, it weakened the exceptions under which such 
research could take place, no longer requir ing it to be “carried  out in the detainee’s 
interest” and justified by his medical treatment . Instead, it merely prohibited research 
lacking “a legitimate medical or dental purpo se” that also endangered the subject’s body 
or health.79 This weakened language currently remain s in effect, but, even in its more 
narrow form, would never have made the CIA human subjects experiments allowable.  
 
Medical Monitoring Creates a Practical Need for Research  Over the course of the program, the OLC i ssued numerous legal opinions analyzing the 
statutory prohibition on torture and ill-t reatment, most of which have since been 
withdrawn.
80 An August 1, 2002 memo written by  Assistant Attorney General Jay Bybee 
(“Bybee I Memo”) elevated the threshold of pain  or suffering that an  act would need to 
cause in order to constitute torture:  
 
“Physical pain amounting to torture must be equivalent in inte nsity to the pain 
accompanying serious physic al injury, such as organ failure, impairment of 
bodily function, or even death. For purely mental pain or suffering to amount to 
torture under Section 2340, it must result  in significant psychological harm of 
significant duration, e.g., last ing for months or even years.”81  
 20 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org  
By contrast, the Convention Against Torture defines torture as th e deliberate infliction 
of severe mental or physical pain or sufferi ng, by or with the consent or acquiescence of 
state authorities, for a specific purpose, such  as extracting information or a confession, 
punishment, or intimidation.82 Cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment is the 
infliction of severe pain or  suffering, by or with the consent or acquiescence of state 
authorities.83 
 Thus, the Bybee definition improperly substitute d the effects of torture – i.e., its harms – 
for the act itself, while inventing new severity  and duration requirements that had not 
previously existed.
84 A companion memo (“Bybee II Memo”) directed health 
professionals to monitor the application of “enhanced” techniques and intervene if the 
detainee experienced severe pain or suffering, as defined by the OLC.85 This would 
ensure the techniques were applied in a “s afe” and therefore legal manner, according to 
Bush administration lawyers. Medical an d psychological personnel thus became 
responsible for identifying wh en interrogators had crossed the threshold of “severe pain 
or suffering” and calibrating the levels to keep them within au thorized limits.  
Medical and psychological personnel thus became 
responsible for identifying when interrogators had crossed the threshold of “severe pain or suffering” and calibrating the levels to keep them within authorized limits. 
 
The earliest iteration of formal CIA Office of Medical Services (OMS) medical guidelines 
were developed in March 2003.86 They appear to have been informed by the CIA’s 
experience from past interrogations of de tainees, including the catastrophic August 
2002 waterboarding of Abu Zubaydah.87 The guidelines set medical limits on the 
physical pressures used in in terrogation. To date, there are just three sets of publicly 
available guidelines, including a “draft” dated September 2003, a formal version dated 
May 2004, and a revision dated December 2004.88 
 
However, in the early stages of the CIA program, health professionals tasked with 
medical supervision lacked guidance on how to do so, ultimately leading to the 
development of the OMS guidelines. The thresh old itself was undefined, as the OLC’s 
definition was pieced together from unrelated health benefits statutes89 and had no 
basis in the existing scientific literature or clinical practice. Nor were there clinically 
accepted standards for monitori ng pain to keep torture “saf e.” In the clinical context, 
measures of pain are created to assess th e ability to make pain go away, not to 
determine the tolerance for sust ained, inflicted pain. In addition, measures of effect – 
i.e., of harm or disability – do not necessa rily correlate with severity of pain and 
suffering. Lastly, the extant SE RE literature did not address how to keep the techniques 
“safe.” Instead, it documented high risks of  harm, even with limit ed application in a 
controlled setting.  
  
 21 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org Therefore, in order to establish the practical guidelines, health prof essionals needed to 
collect data to define a process for this mo re expansive and aggressive application of the 
SERE techniques against detainees held in  the context of armed conflict. The OLC 
memos thus effectively created a research ma ndate. To perform the monitoring role as 
directed, health professionals needed to  develop a basic understanding of the harm 
caused by the expanded use of the techniques in  actual theater of war settings, define its 
clinical parameters and indicators, and develo p a standard of “safety.” Collecting data 
was a practical necessity, given the untested na ture of the techniques and the lack of 
literature on using torture for compliance rela ted to intelligence colle ction in the field. 
 
“Good Faith Belief” Defense Makes Research a Form of Legal Due Diligence 
The OLC created a heightened standard for th e “specific intent” element of the crime of 
torture, further eroding the sc ope of protection against abuse.90 Accordingly, even if 
officers knew their actions would cause deta inees severe physical pain or severe and 
prolonged mental harm, the OLC argued that  producing this resu lt had to be their 
“precise objective” in order for the act to be illegal. The “specific  intent” requirement 
dovetailed with a parallel heat shield that OLC lawyers were constructing in concert 
with the CIA. The legal defense of “good fa ith belief” was designed to account for harm 
nonetheless caused. Officers could negate the “specific inten t” requirement if they 
demonstrated a good faith belief that their actions would not cause severe or prolonged 
harm. In July 2002, OLC lawyer John Yoo advi sed the CIA how to do so: “Due diligence to 
meet this standard might in clude such actions as surveyi ng professional literature, 
consulting with experts, or evid ence gained from past experience.”91  
 
By then, the OLC was already incorporating da ta from interrogations to generate legal 
cover for the “enhanced interrogation” program. The CIA provided the DOJ and White 
House with information about the psychol ogical effects of the techniques on Abu 
Zubaydah92 as well as on his “resilience to date.”93 It further claimed that the use of the 
techniques would not cause prolonged mental  harm. These representations were folded 
into the August 1, 2002 OLC memos. Before the OLC even declared the use of “enhanced 
interrogation” techniques legal, it was alr eady advising the CIA th at evidence, and the 
act of evidence-generation, could be used to avoid criminal prosecution. At the same 
time, the CIA was already collecting, analyz ing, and providing preliminary evidence.  
 
Over the course of the program, the OLC and CIA continued to contend that drawing on 
a “relevant body of knowledge” regarding the effects of interrogation could help negate 
a charge of torture, including research cond ucted on detainees. This was made explicit 
in a joint CIA-OLC memo, dated June 2003:  
 
“The absence of specific intent (i.e., good faith) can be established through, 
among other things, evidence of effort s to review relevant professional 
literature, consulting with experts, reviewing evidence gained from past 
experience where available (including experience gained in the course 
of U.S. interrogations of detainees) , providing medical and psychological  
 22 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org assessments of a detainee (including the ability of the detainee to withstand 
interrogation without experiencing severe physical or mental pain or suffering), 
providing medical and psychological personnel on site during the conduct of 
interrogations…”94 [emphasis added] 
 Thus, research data and the research process it self – i.e., consulting experts and learning 
from their experience through a process of evaluation, analysis, and refinement – were 
cited as a way to demonstrate due diligence in avoiding harm. 
 
II.  CIA Torture Experiments 
 Mitchell and Jessen were contracted by th e Central Intelligence Ag ency (CIA) to develop 
the “enhanced interrogation” program. They clai med that resistance training scenarios 
from the U.S. military’s Survival, Evasion, Resistance, and Escape (SERE) program could 
be developed into offensive techniques to induce learned helplessness and produce 
compliance. They further claimed that learned helplessness would cause detainees to 
become cooperative, enabling interrogators to  extract useful information from them. 
This ignores well-established in formation that torture is fa lsely premised, ineffective, 
and counterproductive,
95 as well as illegal and unethic al. While the full scope of the 
research conducted by Mitchell and Jessen is not known, from 2002 to 2004, at least a 
dozen contracts explicitly re ferred to “applied research.”96 The domestic portion of this 
work consisted of developing research meth odologies and advising the CIA on their 
application.97 The overseas portion involved “con ducting specified, time-limited 
research projects” – that is, site-based in vestigation. The contracts do not specify what 
the research entailed. However, the available evidence suggests it involved scaling SERE 
methods for exploitation purposes and studyi ng the effects, consistent with Mitchell 
and Jessen’s white paper hypothesis.98 At a minimum, it appears that Mitchell and 
Jessen conducted an uncontrolled observationa l study. The contracts correspond with 
their documented activities at  various CIA black site secret  prisons and were executed at 
critical moments of the CIA program.  
 
Conducting Initial Experiments  
 Gathering Baseline Data 
Two unidentified CIA office rs – but likely Mitchell and Jessen, given the dates – 
proposed an interrogation plan in March 2002,
99 two weeks before Abu Zubaydah’s 
capture and rendition to a black site in  Thailand. Mitchell’s contract for “applied 
research” was modified and increased on Ap ril 4 ($101,600), immediately before he 
deployed to Thailand to consult on the psychological aspects of Abu Zubaydah’s 
interrogation.100 Throughout the spring and summer of 2002, the CIA tortured Abu 
Zubaydah and shared the resu lts with the White House and Department of Justice (DOJ) 
as part of an ongoing discussion about the legality of the techniques. Specifically,  
 23 Nuremberg Betrayed Physicians for Human Rights phr.org Mitchell “wrote cables every night to get the ne xt day’s abuse approved by [White House 
Counsel] Alberto Gonzales.”101 These cables likely detailed th e effects of the techniques 
on Abu Zubaydah in order to secure appr oval. As the CIA began using techniques 
described by an FBI agent on-site as “bor derline torture,” Abu Zubaydah reportedly 
became uncooperative with the interrogation process.102  
 
Not obtaining the results it sought, the CIA became progressively convinced it needed to 
use harsher tactics.103 Mitchell and Jessen were “tasked with devising a more aggressive 
approach to interrogation.”104 This resulted in accelerated development of “a formal set 
of enhanced interrogation techniques” th e psychologists were in the process of 
developing.105 By mid-April, Mitchell had taken over the interrogation.106 As he 
proposed the use of increasingly harsh measures,107 his “applied research” contract was 
again increased ($162,600).108 The CIA began pushing for written authorization to use 
waterboarding and other “enhanced techniqu es” on Abu Zubaydah, and placed him in a 
six-week period of extreme isolation in J une. This enabled Mitche ll to return to the 
United States and attend meetings with CIA,  DOJ, and White House officials to discuss 
legal authorization to proceed.109  
 
These discussions increasingly tu rned on the question of whether or not the abusive 
practices deployed in these experiments would cause lasting damage to detainees. 
Mitchell and Jessen set about obtaining observat ional data on the historical use of the 
SERE techniques on volunteers, conducting desk research (a literature review), and 
“soliciting information on effectiveness and harmful after effects from various 
psychologists, psychiatrist s, academics, and the Join t Personnel Recovery Agency 
(JPRA), which oversaw military SERE programs.”110 By early July, a plan was worked out 
for a 20-day “aggressive phase,” to be hand led exclusively by the two psychologists.111 
However, the White House and DOJ remain ed fixated on potential exposure of 
interrogators and U.S. officials to criminal liability for inflicting or ordering prolonged 
mental harm.  
 
A Department of Defense 
memo recommending the continued detention of Abu 
Zubaydah at Guantánamo Bay 
detention center, where he was transferred after being tortured at secret CIA “black 
sites.”  
 24 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org False Claims of “Safety” and “Efficacy” in Exchange for Legal Cover 
The CIA stated that medical personnel would be present during the “enhanced 
interrogations” to keep inte rrogators from crossing the th reshold of inflicting severe 
pain or suffering that would constitute torture. At the sa me time, the CIA represented 
that there were medical risks of heart attack , stroke, and death. It requested assurances 
that Abu Zubaydah would remain in isolat ion and incommunicado for the rest of his 
life, indicating the severit y of techniques to come.112  
 The CIA and DOJ discussed legal defenses in the event that the predicate, or underlying, 
act of torture did occur in spite of medica l monitoring. This centered on undertaking 
acts of due diligence to show “good faith,” as a defense to the criminal element of 
specific intent. After CIA Senior Deputy Ge neral Counsel John Rizzo asked the OLC for 
written advice on elements of the federal an ti-torture statute, the OLC’s John Yoo noted 
that due diligence could be shown, among other things, by evidence gained from past 
experience. As the Senate to rture report summary notes: 
 
“Finally, the Agency presented OLC w ith a psychological profile of Abu 
Zubaydah and with the conc lusions of officials and psychologists associated 
with the SERE program that the use of EITs [enhanced interrogation techniques] 
would cause no long term mental harm. OLC relied on these representations to 
support its conclusion that no physical harm or prol onged mental harm would 
result from the use on him of th e EITs, including the waterboard.”
113  
 The purpose of psychological profiling was to identify vulnerabilitie s for interrogators to 
exploit. It should be noted th at this activity, done in support of the intentional infliction 
of pain and suffering, could not be cons trued as a legal defense against torture. 
Nevertheless, the CIA asserted this and made additional representations about the 
manner in which the techniques would be appl ied, including limits in time, on an as-
needed basis, in an es calating fashion, and according to precise procedure.
114 Mitchell 
and Jessen reasserted that “the safety of any technique lies primarily in how it is applied 
and monitored.”115 Such representations, however, failed to acknowledge the range of 
ways in which scaling SERE would be funda mentally different: detention basis/legal 
status (prisoner of war), conditions of co nfinement, basic treatment, and the frequency 
and severity of mistreatment. As the CIA so ught legal authorization to proceed, based 
on the SERE medical findings and data collect ed from Abu Zubaydah, Mitchell’s pay was 
substantially increased ($257,600) and Je ssen was given his own “applied research” 
contract ($135,000). 
 
The DOJ approved the “enhanced” techniques on August 1, 2002 in a pair of legal 
memos. These incorporated the findings to date and institutiona lized the need for 
research as part of a carefully construc ted legal defense. By requiring medical 
monitoring of a new harm standard, the memo s gave rise to a practical need to conduct 
research – not just to perform a “safety” mo nitor role, but to gene rate data to define a  
 25 Nuremberg Betrayed Physicians for Human Rights phr.org harm standard. Shortly after, Mitchell and Jessen began the “aggressive phase” of Abu 
Zubaydah’s interrogation. Mi tchell and Jessen began waterboarding Abu Zubaydah on 
August 4.116 A period of escalating mistreatment followed, so extreme that personnel 
were warned to “prepare for something not seen previously” and some were affected to 
the point of tears. The Senate torture repor t summary notes reactions and comments by 
CIA personnel: 
 
• August 5, 2002: “…want to caution [medical officer] that this is almost certainly not a 
place he's ever been before in his medical career.... It is visually and psychologically 
very uncomfortable.” 
• August 8, 2002: “Today's first session ... had a profound effect on all staff members 
present.... It seems the collective opinion that we should not go much further.... 
Everyone seems strong for now but if the group has to continue ... we cannot 
guarantee how much longer.” 
• August 8, 2002: “Several on the team profo undly affected … some to the point of tears 
and choking up.”117  
 
When the “aggressive phase” came to an end, Mitchell and Jessen proposed it be used as a template for future inte rrogations, with psychologist s shaping compliance first. 
118 
Mitchell and Jessen began waterboarding Abu Zubaydah 
on August 4. A period of escalating mistreatment followed, so extreme that personnel were warned to “prepare for something not seen previously” and some were affected to the point of tears. 
 
Refining the Variables 
The CIA extended Mitchell’s psychological a ssessment contract on August 21, 2002.119 
He and Jessen had been evaluating CIA captive s and promoting this as critical to the 
“enhanced interrogation” process. This in cluded initial assessmen ts to analyze the 
Starting in 2001, psychologist 
James Mitchell was contracted 
by the CIA to conduct applied research on the effects of 
torture on U.S. detainees.  
 26 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org detainee’s personality, identify vulner abilities, and determine whether to use 
“enhanced” techniques;120 subsequent evaluations of the impact of the techniques on 
the detainee;121 and mental examinations before waterboarding and other measures 
requiring pre-approval.122 Mitchell was specifically tasked  with analyzing psychological 
variables relevant to detainee manipulation and exploitation as well as behavioral 
science theories and methods for moti vating and influencing human behavior.123 The 
assessments themselves constituted a form of internal data collection and were 
disseminated outside the agency.124 
 
Scaling Up the Torture Research 
 
Translating Initial Experiments into Methodology  
The CIA, in collaboration with Mitchell and Jessen, built a repertoire of “enhanced 
interrogation” tactics and a pattern of deployment of those tactics that they 
subsequently used on others. It evaluated the effects of torture on detainees as well as 
the methodology itself. Over time, the CI A undertook efforts to develop written 
protocols and procedures for the interrogat ions, incorporating data collected by 
interrogators, medical staff, and other pe rsonnel. The systematic monitoring and 
analysis of “enhanced interrogation” methods  to induce compliance, and the widening 
efforts to study the physical limits of ho w methods were combined (and sequenced) all 
constituted human subjects research. 
 
Throughout the program, Mitchell’s and Je ssen’s contracts for “applied research” 
increased in value. Because th e contracted rate remained the same, this suggests that 
the number of work days increased. These increases coincided with the capture or 
rendition of new detainees, in addition to  the ongoing “exploit ation” of detainees 
already in custody. For example, the CIA increased Mitchell’s and Jessen’s pay on 
September 5, 2002, days after the “Salt Pit” prison opened in Afghanistan and Ridha al-
Najjar’s abusive treatment began.125 It increased Mitchell’s pay on September 12, the day 
after Ramzi bin al Shibh was captured.126 It increased Jessen’s pay on October 24, after 
Abd al Rahim al Nashiri’s capture an d just before Gul Rahman’s capture.127  
 
The CIA program was operationalized hast ily, without established guidelines or 
procedures. Interrogations were described  as involving “rapid escalation and 
indiscriminate repetitions.”128 Gul Rahman’s death while in U.S. custody in Afghanistan 
in November 2002 and the use of “unaut horized” techniques on other detainees 
exposed the ad hoc nature of the program.129 In January 2003, the CIA instituted its first 
written guidelines, which required advan ce headquarters approval for “enhanced 
interrogation” techniques, on-site physical and psychological examinations by health 
personnel, and medical monitoring during application.130 Over time, the program was 
subjected to greater internal scrutiny. The CIA Office of Inspector General conducted an 
internal review in 2003 an d early 2004, at which time a number of CIA personnel  
 27 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org expressed concerns over the “efficacy” of the techniques.131 
 
Refining the Research Experiment: “Less Invasive Techniques” 
In May 2003, Mitchell and Jessen developed a proposal “to study how CTC [CIA 
Counterterrorism Center] can develop and appl y even less-intrusive techniques without 
any loss in the interrogation’ s psychological impact” – which the CIA would “field 
test.”132 Starting in April 2003, they began transi tioning from a direct interrogation role 
to strategic consulting, research and program development, and other undisclosed 
projects.133 Mitchell was contracted to develop a model for conducting assessments and 
applied research – to include refining var iables to apply the model to specific 
individuals and developing ways to evaluate the variables.134 Jessen’s contemporaneous 
contracts involved developing a model for providing psychologica l consultation and 
assessments to the intelligence  community – including modify ing the process to inform 
strategies for applying research methodology.135  
 
This transition appears to have signaled a sh ift from operationalizing research findings 
– that is, applying generalized knowledge from  discrete interventions to the exploitation 
and interrogation process – to engaging in br oader research involved in the expansion 
and scale up of the program’s tactics, techniques, and procedures.136 The CIA has 
explained this as intentiona l: “… as interrogators becam e more knowledgeable, as it 
became easier to use information from one de tainee to get more from another, and as 
our understanding of the effectiveness of var ious techniques grew, CIA's interrogations 
gradually relied less on coercion.”137 
 
However, the record suggests that factors be yond a desire to use less coercion were at 
work. At the time, the CIA was in fact pus hing the DOJ for written authorization to 
continue using harsh methods.138 In addition, there was disse nt within the agency over 
Mitchell and Jessen’s role. The CIA’s Office of  Medical Services (OMS), in particular, 
supported a revised role for the psychologists,  focusing on “external data collection” 
regarding the program’s “efficacy” and leaving  detainee assessments to medical officers. 
The OMS also discussed the need for greater  evidence of “safety” and “efficacy” as a 
matter of programmatic “due diligence.”139 Significantly, OMS complaints about 
Mitchell and Jessen acknowledged that the “enhanced interrogation” process involved collecting data from detainees. The DOJ provi ded written approval in June 2003 in a 
still-classified memo.
140  
 Refining the Research Experiment: Combined Use of Techniques 
The CIA began restricting the use of “enhan ced interrogation” techniques and fully 
suspended them in May 2004, following the Abu Ghraib torture scandal and the release 
of the CIA’s internal report.
141 In June, the Bybee memos we re withdrawn, and the OLC 
began to distance itself from the jointly d eveloped “Bullet Points,” which contained the 
most concrete expression that evidence from  abused detainees could form part of a 
good faith legal defense.142 Throughout the next several months, into 2005, the CIA 
requested a new opinion on the legality of “enhanced interrogation” methods from the  
 28 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org DOJ, which in turn requested additional in formation on specific techniques and their 
combined application.143  
 
As of 2005, the research questions were still evo lving, in response to internal pressure to 
demonstrate the “efficacy” and “safety” of the “enhanced interrogation” techniques.144 
Mitchell and Jessen defended their methodology , stating that the individual physical 
techniques could not be studied or evaluated, and that one must look at the total effect 
of sequencing multiple techniques. An  undated OMS memo quotes a 2005 paper 
written by the psychologists: 
 
“… the choice of which physical techniqu es, if any, to use is driven by an 
individually tailored interrogation plan  and by a real-time assessment of the 
detainee’s strengths and weaknesses and r eactions to what is happening. In this 
process, a single physical interrogation technique is almost never employed in 
isolation from other techniques and influence strategies, many of which are not 
coercive. Rather, multiple techniques  are deliberately orchestrated and 
sequenced as a means for inducing an  unwilling detainee to actively seek a 
solution to his current predicament, an d thus work with the interrogator who 
has been responding in a firm, but fair and predictable way.”145 
 
This hypothesis, as well as evidence generat ed by the OMS to support these findings, 
was reflected in the 2005 Bradbury memos – a series of OLC opinions written by 
Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney Genera l Steven Bradbury, au thorizing additional 
“enhanced interrogation” techniques to be applied individually or in combination. 
However, the DOJ Office of Professional Re sponsibility’s (OPR) 2009 report into OLC 
memos issued in connection with the tortur e program notes that the Bradbury memos 
were erroneous and failed to recognize sign ificant differences between the CIA program 
and the SERE antecedent. As summarized in the OPR Report:    
“The 2005 Bradbury Memo acknowledged that most SERE trainees experienced 
the technique only once, or twice at most, whereas the CIA program involved 
multiple applications, and that ‘SERE trainees know it is part of a training 
program,’ that it will last ‘only a short time,’ and that ‘they will not be significantly harmed by the training.’”
146 […] 
 
“The Classified Bybee Memo also summari zed some of the information provided 
to OLC by the CIA concerning the medi cal supervision and monitoring of 
interrogation, the views of experts about the effects of EITs, the experience of 
SERE training, and the CIA’s review of relevant professional literature.”147 
 
Dissemination of Research Findings  
  
 29 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org Throughout the “enhanced interrogation” program, the CIA produced generalizable 
knowledge derived from its research on detainees. These observations and findings 
were shared in the form of reports, presenta tions, briefings, trai ning materials, and 
consultations with individuals inside and outside the agency. In particular, Mitchell and 
Jessen developed a model to train CIA and military personnel in using “enhanced interrogation” and organized specialized trai ning courses in which they presented what 
they had learned to date, based on their res earch. At least some of the courses were 
attended or otherwise observed by OMS pers onnel, indicating an overlap between the 
“safety” and “efficacy” inquiries.
148 The CIA also contracted with the company Mitchell 
and Jessen formed in 2005 to staff the program with operational psychologists and 
provide consultation and training. This incl uded analyzing past and current practices 
and providing recommendations for th e program’s operation and development.149  
 The dissemination process took place through organized as well as ad hoc channels, and 
involved applying the generalizable knowledg e to a broader population of practitioners. 
Some of these discussions included the utility of research related to detainee 
interrogations. For example, in late 2002, ps ychologist Melvin Gravitz, a member of the 
CIA’s Professional Standards Advisory Committee and a form er American Psychological 
Association (APA) official, was consulted on whether Mitchell’s participation in 
detainee interrogations was ethical. This was in response to an OMS complaint that 
Mitchell was conducting interrogations and evaluating the effects of his own efforts. 
Gravitz concluded that the participation was ethical. In a February 2003 email to 
Mitchell, he noted:   
“Psychologists base their work on es tablished scientific and professional 
knowledge. It follows that, when there is a minimal kn owledge base existing in 
science or practice, such services may be informed by the psychologist’s prior 
and ongoing experience.”
150   
 
As the 2015 report on the APA’s independent review into APA ethics, national security, 
and torture (Hoffman Report) notes, “this appears to be a reference to the relative 
paucity of research on the effectiveness of  the ‘enhanced’ interrogation techniques, and 
a suggestion that Mitchell’s experience with SERE training or other detainee 
interrogations could be relied upon.”151 Gravitz’ opinion thus appeared to suggest that 
research could supplement a lack of knowled ge, making an otherwise untested activity 
ethical.   
In July 2003, the APA and RAND Corporatio n co-sponsored an invitation-only workshop 
on the “Science of Deception: Integration of  Theory and Practice,” with CIA funding, 
which was attended by Mitchell, Jessen, and other personnel connected with U.S. 
interrogation operations.
152 Mitchell was particularly focuse d on conducting research in 
the counterterrorism context, as one particip ant’s follow up email to a CIA psychologist 
indicates: “Kirk, I appreciated how Jim Mitche ll kept saying (especially on the second 
day), ‘this is an empirical question; we  need to collect data and do studies.’”153  
 30 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org  
III.  Research on the Health Effects  
of Torture 
 
Creating Illusions of Legitimacy and “Safety” 
 
The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) work ed to give the “enhanced interrogation” 
program an appearance of legal legitimacy and safety. As Mitchell and Jessen conducted 
their initial experiments and scaled up data collection on multiple  detainees across the 
CIA program, they engaged in regular comm unications about the documented health 
consequences of their research with CIA pe rsonnel and officials in the Department of 
Justice (DOJ), Department of Defense, and the White House.154 The CIA sought legal 
guidance as well as preemptive immunity fr om prosecution for activities it recognized 
would violate the ban on torture.155 In turn, DOJ lawyers soug ht assurances that the 
techniques would not cause severe pain or su ffering or prolonged harm to detainees in 
order to protect its client, the Bush administration.156  
 
Health professionals in the CIA Office of  Medical Services (OMS) were accordingly 
tasked with conducting medical monitoring of  the techniques. This presented an ethical 
as well as a practical dilemma: how to define “safety” while intentio nally inflicting pain 
and how to keep the techniques from inflic ting harm beyond what was authorized by 
the Office of Legal Counsel (OLC) memos.  The extant literature derived from the 
military’s Survival, Evasion, Resistance , and Escape (SERE) training fell short of 
providing the clinical guid ance that was needed. The SERE program had involved 
limited exposure to minimal applications of select techniques to young, healthy 
volunteers in mock prisoner-of-war settings. E ven in those lower risk  applications, SERE 
investigators recorded serious risk of harm , including dramatic stress hormone spikes 
and psychological stress measures.157  
 
Medical officers thus worked to develop clini cal standards in order to fulfill the role of 
“safety officer.” They collected and aggregat ed data on detainee health, generally and 
specific to the medical effects of torture an d abusive conditions of confinement. They 
analyzed the data, producing findings that  were incorporated  into interrogation 
protocols and clinical guidance for use across the detainee population.  
As the program continued, a greater variety and combination of tactics were employed, 
exceeding the scope of initial au thorization. The severity of  the harms also increased 
and the OMS encountered increasingl y complex clinical presentations.158 Yet the CIA 
repeatedly misrepresented the health effect s of the techniques, as the Senate torture 
report summary notes: 
  
 31 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org “From 2002 to 2007, the Office of Legal Counsel (OLC) within the Department of 
Justice relied on CIA representation s regarding: (1) the conditions of 
confinement for detainees, (2) the a pplication of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, (3) the physical effects of the techniques on detainees, 
and (4) the effectiveness of the tec hniques. Those representations were 
inaccurate in material respects.”159  
 
These variations forced the OMS to continue expanding its knowledge base. OMS research became increasingly tailored to th e effects of the techniques as they were 
actually used, in order to document their “s afety” – despite the various conflicts of 
interest inherent in mitigating as well as measuring harm. These observations were 
documented and analyzed. They informed th e development of individual procedures, 
which in turn informed standard operatin g procedures across the detainee population. 
Those protocols informed the developme nt of subsequent legal standards. 
 
Developing Clinical Parameters for Torture 
 
New documents confirm that the OMS was coll ecting data and generating findings – to 
define and standardize acceptable levels of harm – to a degree that reaches clinical 
research. The OMS guidelines, which represen ted “best practice” based on accumulated 
experiences in the CIA program, outlined the responsibilities of medical officers: 
 
“OMS is responsible for assessing and monitoring the health of all Agency 
detainees subject to ‘enhanced’ interro gation techniques, and for determining 
that the authorized administration of  these techniques would not be expected 
to cause serious or permanent harm.… As a practical matter, the detainee’s 
physical condition must be such that these interventions will not have lasting 
effect, and his psychological  state strong enough that no severe psychological 
harm will result.”160  
New documents confirm that the OMS was collecting data 
and generating findings – to define and standardize acceptable levels of harm – to a degree that reaches clinical research. 
 
The only way to determine this would be through long-term studies, which did not 
appear to exist. Therefore, they were aske d to provide judgment in the absence of any 
knowledge or evidence. Accord ingly, the OMS guidelines e xplicitly instructed health 
professionals to document their clinical obser vations for use by future on-site medical 
personnel.161 This record-keeping differed in sign ificant respects from the routine 
management of medical files that occurs in  other institutional an d correctional settings. 
OMS staff were not just keeping records on  the use of accepted medical or security 
practices on individual detainees. They were collecting data on the medical effects of  
 32 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org the techniques, with the aim of standardizin g the application of those techniques. The 
purpose of the data collection was to develop clinical standards th at would enable the 
OMS to identify and manage harm across the de tainee population, not just at the level of 
individual detainees.  
 The monitoring requirement created a need  for research to address the lack of 
theoretical or practical knowledge of how to  deploy the methods. Unlike the controlled 
environment of SERE training, those monitori ng the interrogations were compelled to 
explore a different question: how to keep th e techniques from causing severe or lasting 
harm, despite extreme applications over indefinite periods of time on a hostile, 
involuntary, and cross-cultur al population. This knowledg e gap was reflected in the 
OMS’ own records, including the medical gu idelines and cables from the black sites.
162  
 Medical monitoring thus gave rise to a res earch endeavor to define torture practices as 
“safe” and “effective.” From 2002 on, the OMS worked to address this knowledge gap 
and undertook activities to identify the heal th effects of the techniques, develop 
scientific procedures for their use, and de fine both limitations to their use and the 
medical rationale. The OMS monitored and doc umented harm, i.e. discernible effects, 
and collected data to inform future medical judgments. It a ppears that medical data was 
being collected consistent with guidelines an d shared systematically inside and outside 
the CIA.
163 
 
Even the physical abuse was aimed at psyc hological manipulation – namely, inducing 
learned helplessness and dependency. Notably,  the documentation had a bias for short-
term physical effects, as there is no evidenc e of guidelines for monitoring psychological 
harm, despite it being the precise objective of  the program. In fact, the techniques that 
formed the basis of “enhanced  interrogation” were alread y known to cause severe and 
lasting physical and psychological harm. As no ted in PHR’s 2010 report, which analyzed 
publicly available SERE literature at  the time the CIA program began: 
 
“Among other findings, the SERE studie s indicated that the exposure of the 
soldier-subjects to the ‘uncontrollable stre ss’ of the survival training exercise 
produced ‘rapid and profound changes in  cortisol’ and other stress hormones. 
The cortisol levels measured were found to be high enough to produce immune 
suppression and adversely affect memo ry and were comparable to levels 
measured in subjects undergoing ma jor surgery. Norepinephrine and 
epinephrine (noradrenaline and adrenali ne) levels were comparable to levels 
measured in novice parachutists and du ring tracheal suctio ning in intubated 
patients. The protective neuropeptide, NP Y, was found to be rapidly depleted 
during the short exercise, and testostero ne levels were reduced by over 50% (all 
participants studied were men).”164 
 
A July 2002 memo from SERE’s chief of psychology services, which informed the 
decision of the OLC to authorize “enhanced interrogation,” concluded that there were  
 33 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org minimal long-term psychological effects from SERE training, based on efforts 
undertaken to mitigate temporary risks and to ensure that training did not become 
“traumatic” for students. The officer later sa id the analysis was pr oduced with students 
in mind and would not be applicable to real -world detainees, noting  that “while long-
term psychological harm can occur from re latively brief distressing experiences, the 
likelihood of psychological harm is genera lly increased by more lengthy and uncertain 
detentions.”165  
 There were no credible OMS guidelines to conduct psychological assessments in 
accordance with inte rnational, UN standards. Nonethel ess, the OMS worked to develop 
medical limits and medical justifications fo r the techniques, which included identifying 
unique sequelae and physical forensic patterns specific to torture; comparing the effects 
with reported research and previous observat ions; identifying cont raindications, risk 
factors, warning signs, and clinical correlations; allevi ating interrogation-limiting 
conditions to allow abuse to proceed; and establishing procedures to monitor and 
modify effects for the purpose of enhancin g operational impact or mitigating clinical 
risks. 
 The following examples illustrate how the OMS conducted research on “safety,” and in 
particular struggled with a lack of past res earch to perform this role. In each case, the 
development of the torture procedures met the criteria that define research, including: 
 
• Implicit Research Question : The activities attempted to answer research 
questions driven by a lack of clinical sta ndards, in response to a lack of knowledge 
about the “safety” of a technique or, altern atively, an awareness of the potential risks 
of a technique. 
• M ethodology : The activities were methodologica lly driven, involving systematic 
data collection. 
• Data Collection and Analysis : Data was collected from observations of and 
interactions with detainees and subseque ntly analyzed. Conclusions were drawn 
from the results. 
• Generalizable Knowledge : This work was designed to contribute to generalizable 
knowledge, as evidenced by the applica tion and dissemination of the findings. They 
were directly incorporated into interrogation protocols, clinical standards, legal 
authorizations, and operational training s for application across the detainee 
population. In some instance s, the interrogation or clinical procedures were 
modified based on these findings.  
 34 Nuremberg Betrayed Physicians for Human Rights phr.org Water Dousing 
The CIA began using water dousing as an interrogation technique at COBALT, a CIA 
black site in Afghanistan, as early as February 2003.166 This torture method was also 
described as “bathing.” A variant that did not involve full immersion – cold showers – 
was in use as a “deprivation technique” as early as November 2002.167 Water dousing 
involved pouring water over detainees while they  were lying on a tarp or in a tub or 
hosing them down while they were shackled in a standing sleep deprivation position.168 
In some instances, detainees were strapped to a wooden board and had water poured over their faces in an appr oximation of waterboarding.
169 Throughout the process, they 
were kept naked or in wet clothing. Afterwar ds, they were placed in  cold rooms, still wet 
and shackled.170  
 
Water dousing was not approved for use by CIA headquarters until June 2003, when it 
was classified as a “standard technique.”171 In the preceding months, the OMS was 
involved in developing the method at COBALT.172 This involvement included research 
focused on identifying and miti gating the health risks and ha rms. Specifically, detainees 
subjected to cold water immersion, some times combined with exposure to cold 
temperatures, were at risk of developing hy pothermia. In addition, detainees who had 
water poured over their faces were at risk of inhaling or ingesting fluid.173 These risks 
were articulated in medical OMS guidelines, as well as in  later representations that 
medical personnel would monito r and mitigate such risks. 
 
Medical and psychological guidelines issued by the CIA’s Office of Medical Services in December 2004 
detailing medical limits for various torture practices, including water dousing. 
  
 35 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org It is unclear how much formal guidance exis ted on the use of water dousing, including 
medical monitoring and support, before th e September 2003 “draft” OMS guidelines, 
which is the earliest publicly available version.174 From these guidelines, it is apparent 
that little was known about water dousing at th e time. Although it was purportedly used 
in SERE training, the clinical reference poin ts cited consisted of guidelines for exposure 
to water, derived from U.S. naval su bmersion studies dating to the 1940s.175 In addition, 
the section on water dousing was contained within a larger section on “uncomfortably 
cool environments,” suggesting the practice may have emerged as a variation of cold 
exposure. The available evidence suggests that  this input, and the development of the 
water dousing procedure itself, formed part  of an iterative process that meets the 
elements of research.  
 
There was an implicit research question , namely how to monitor and maintain 
“safety” during applications of water dousing. 
 
There was systematic data collection . OMS personnel were directed to observe the 
effects of water dousing and document what they saw. Particular attention was to be 
paid to environmental and core body temper atures, as well as factors affecting heat 
retention: contact with the floor, immobilizat ion by restraints, low muscle mass, a state 
of fatigue, being older than 45.176 In addition, the OMS was inst ructed to note wet skin or 
clothing from “partial or comp lete soaking.” The Senate tort ure report contains multiple 
examples of notes kept by the OMS, which were shared in an organized manner with 
several parties. For example, the CIA inves tigator general investigated a report of 
unauthorized water dousing or waterboarding from March through May 2003 of 
Mustafa al-Hawsawi, a Saudi national who rema ins in U.S. custody at Guantánamo Bay, 
and made specific reference to notes kept by the OMS, Counterterrorism Center (CTC) 
Legal, and CTC/Renditions and Detainees Group.177 
 The data collected was analyzed and conc lusions were drawn from the results, 
resulting in changes to the administration of the method . This observational data 
was documented with the aim of applying th e findings to inform future practice. This 
included advising on interrogations and mod ifying the use of water dousing on specific 
detainees. CIA and other records provide the following examples of the OMS experimenting with the procedure at th e Salt Pit prison in Afghanistan:  
 
• March 2003: “OMS advised that placing KSM [Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, a Pakistani 
national held at a black site in Poland] on bare cement could cause his body heat to 
leach much faster than if he is placed on  a towel or sheet. Also, the air temp must be 
above 65 degrees if KSM would not be dried immediately.”
178  
 
• May 2003: OMS advised that the water dousing procedure could be modified for two 
detainees with broken feet, Abu Hazim and Mohammed Shoroeiya (a.k.a. Abd al-
Karim), by wrapping their legs in plastic.179 
  
 36 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org • Date unknown: In an in terview with Human Rights Watch, former CIA detainee 
Khalid al-Sharif indicated a male doctor t ook part in his water dousing, telling others 
in the room to either continue with the tactic  or stop: “Sharif also said that the cast he 
had on his leg due to his broken foot became soft as a result of this water treatment, 
so the doctor put another type of cast on him that had three sides that could be 
removed. They would take off his leg cast be fore the sessions with water and then put 
it back on afterwards, binding it with mesh.”180  
 The activities were designed to contribute to generalizable knowledge . These 
observations were aggregated across the de tainee population to inform interrogation 
protocols and to standardiz e clinical guidelines.  
 
The May 2004 OMS guidelines, however, a ddressed water dousing in a standalone 
section incorporating the previously reporte d research and anecdotal observations. It 
also contained specific recommendations, in cluding to advise on  acceptable lower 
temperatures “in certain operational settings;”  modify or limit the practice if detainees 
showed signs of mild hypothermia; and pr ovide aggressive medical intervention if 
detainees showed moderate hypothermia.
181 These were, in turn, incorporated into the 
December 2004 guidelines, with  more detail about specific risk factors (e.g., wet skin, 
wet clothing, low ambient temperatures) and risks (hypothermia), mitigation and 
intervention strategies, and reference to CTC guidelines:182 
 
• “In our opinion, a partial dousing, with co ncomitant less total exposure and potential 
heat loss, would therefore be safe to  undertake within these parameters.” 
• “The total dousing time represents a ma ximum for safety reasons; evidence of 
developing hypothermia should pr ompt immediate rewarming and 
recommendation to terminate water expos ure for the session, regardless of the 
amount of time elapsed.”183 
 
In this manner, the clinical  guidelines underwent modification and development, based 
on the aggregate observation of detainees. These  findings were also used for additional 
legal authorization of water dousing, part icularly its prior yet unauthorized use in 
connection with sleep deprivation. Accord ing to the Senate torture report summary: 
 
• At an August 2004 meeting with the OL C, “[w]ith regard to water dousing, CIA 
officers represented that ‘water is at norm al temperature; CIA makes no effort to 
“cool” the water before applying it.’”184 
 
• In a May 2005 response to questions from th e OLC, “[w]ith regard to the effect of sleep 
deprivation on the experience of water dousin g, the CIA response stated that ‘at the 
temperatures of water we have recommended for the program the likelihood of induction of pain by water dousing is ve ry low under any circumstances, and not a 
phenomenon we have seen in detain ees subject to this technique.’”
185  
  
 37 Nuremberg Betrayed Physicians for Human Rights phr.org In January 2004, water dousing was recategorized by the CIA as an “enhanced” 
interrogation technique.” This classification affected how authorization proceeded for 
use of techniques at other sites.186 
 
By March 2004, the CIA was urging the OLC to  approve water dousing’s use, describing a 
well-developed protocol: 
 
“Water dousing is ‘intended to weaken the detainee’s overall resistance posture 
and persuade him to cooperate with interrogators by removing his sense of 
predictability and control. The detainee, dr essed or undressed, is restrained by 
shackles and/or interrogators in a standi ng, sitting or supine position on the 
floor, bench or similar level surface.’ Pot able water is poured on the detainee 
from a container or garden hose connected to a water source. Water is applied so as to not enter the nose or mouth. A session can last from 10 minutes (a 
single application) to an hour (multipl e applications). The detainee’s resilience, 
level of cooperation, amount and temp erature of water, temperature of the 
ambient air, and physical and mental st ate are all factors regulating the length 
of the water dousing session.”
187  
 
Waterboarding 
Human research and medical experimentation were employed to measure the effects of 
waterboarding and adapt the procedure to avoid injury and fatalities. The evidence 
consists of OMS guidelines for the systemat ic collection and documentation of medical 
data and subsequent refinement of waterboa rding practices, which made use of data 
from the medical monitori ng and documentation.  
 
There was an implicit research  question , namely how to monitor and maintain 
“safety” during applicatio ns of waterboarding.  
 
There was systematic data collection . Medical personnel were required to monitor 
all waterboarding practices and collect detail ed medical information that was used to 
Medical and psychological guidelines issued by the CIA’s Office of Medical Services in December 2004 
directing health professionals to systematically document each waterboarding session, “to best inform 
future medical judgments and recommendations.”  
 38 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org design, develop, and deploy subsequent wate rboarding procedures. The OMS guidelines 
state: 
 
“In order to best inform future medica l judgments and recommendations, it is 
important that every application of the waterboard be thoroughly documented: 
how long each application (and the enti re procedure) lasted, how much water 
was applied (realizing that much spla shes off), how exactly the water was 
applied, if a seal was achieved, if the naso - or oropharynx was filled, what sort of 
volume was expelled, how long was th e break between applications, and how 
the subject looked between each treatment.”188 
 
Prior to the experimental use of large-vo lume waterboarding on detainees in U.S. 
custody, little scientific information was apparently available to the OMS to develop 
parameters for the application of this technique. The OMS guidelines state: 
 
“A rigid guide to the medically approved  use of the waterboard in essentially 
healthy individuals is not possible, as safety will depend on how the water is 
applied and the specific response each time it is used. The following general 
guidelines are based on very limited knowledge, drawn from very few subjects 
whose experience and response was quite varied.”189 
 
In particular, OMS guidelines noted the ex tent to which CIA waterboarding differed 
from the procedure used in the SERE training  model, particularly when applied to an 
individual less fit than a SERE trainee: 
 
“Our very limited experience with the wa terboard is different [from the SERE 
model]…. D/CTC policy set an occlusion li mit of 40 seconds,  though this was 
very rarely reached. Additionally, the procedure was repeated sequentially 
several times, for several sessions a day,  and this process extended with varying 
degrees of frequency/inten sity for over a week.”190 
 
The guidelines also recognized the height ened medical risks of waterboarding, as a 
result of this deviation:  
“In our limited experience, extensive sustained use of the waterboard can 
introduce new risks. Most seriously,  for reasons of physical fatigue or 
psychological resignation, the subject may simply give up, allowing excessive 
filling of the airways an d loss of consciousness.”
191 
 
The data collected was analyzed and conclusions were drawn from the results, 
resulting in changes to the administration of the method . These risks began 
manifesting from the earliest use of wate rboarding, and medical personnel began 
manipulating its application to mitigate such effects. For exam ple, to reduce the risk of 
aspiration of vomit, Abu Zubaydah was placed on a liquid diet, as reflected in an email  
 39 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org from a medical officer to OMS leadership: “He did vomit a couple of times during 
waterboarding with some beans and rice. It’s been 10 hours since he ate so this is 
surprising and disturbing. We plan to only feed Ensure.”192 The serious respiratory risks 
similarly became clear during an August 2002 incident in which he lost consciousness: 
“Abu Zubaydah remained unresponsive unt il his interrogators gave him a ‘xyphoid 
thrust,’ at which point he regained consci ousness and expelled ‘copious amounts of 
liquid.’”  
 As a result of OMS observations and inter ventions, a number of modifications to the 
waterboarding procedure became part of the standard operating procedure. This 
included initial medical screening and assessment of detainees for specific 
contraindications to provide “reasonable a ssurance that the subject does not have 
serious heart or lung disease, particularly any obstructive airway disease or respiratory 
compromise from morbid obesity” and to ensure the detainee has “stable anterior 
dentition, no recent facial or ja w injuries, and an intact gag reflex.”
193 
 
This also included mandatory presence of medical personnel “to respond immediately” 
in the case of a crisis caused by respirator y arrest associated with laryngospasm, 
including a physician present in the treatme nt room. In addition, the OMS supervised 
the introduction of other medical equipme nt and procedures for waterboarding, 
including a “specially designed ” gurney to move the detainee upright quickly in case of 
choking, the use of a blood oximeter to meas ure detainee vital signs, placing detainees 
on a liquid diet so their emesis would be  soft and less likely to cause choking or 
aspiration pneumonia if the detainee were to vo mit, the delivery of a sub-xyphoid thrust 
to expel water if the detainee lost consciou sness, and possession of a tracheotomy kit 
“not visible to the detainee” in case a deta inee’s airway had to be surgically opened in 
order to prevent drowning. The May 10, 2005  Bradbury “Individual Techniques” Memo 
stated:   
“During the use of the waterboard, a phys ician and a psychologist are present at 
all times. The detainee is monitored to ensure that he does not develop 
respiratory distress. If the detainee is not breathing freely after the cloth is 
removed from his face, he is immediately moved to a vertical position in order to clear the water from his mouth, nose, and nasopharynx. The gurney used 
for administering this techni que is specially designed so this can be 
accomplished very quickly if necessary. Your medical personnel have explained 
that the use of the waterboard does pose  a small risk of certain potentially 
significant medical problems and that certa in measures are taken to avoid or 
address such problems. First a detain ee might vomit and then aspirate the 
emesis. To reduce this risk, any detainee on  whom this technique will be used is 
first placed on a liquid diet . Second, the detainee might aspirate some of the 
water, and the resulting water in th e lungs might lead to pneumonia. To 
mitigate this risk, a potable saline solution is used in the procedure . Third, 
it is conceivable (though, we understa nd from OMS, highly unlikely) that a  
 40 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org detainee could suffer spasms of the larynx that would prevent him from 
breathing even when the application of water is stopped and the detainee is 
returned to an upright position.  In the event of such spasms, a qualified 
physician would perform a tracheotomy . Although the risk  of such spasms 
is considered remote (it has appare ntly never occurred in thousands of 
instances of SERE training),  we are informed that the necessary emergency 
medical equipment is always present – although not visible to the 
detainee  – during any application of the waterboard.”194 [emphasis added] 
The OMS [The Office of Medical Services] supervised the 
introduction of other medical equipment and procedures for waterboarding, including a “specially designed” gurney to move the detainee upright quickly in case of choking … placing detainees on a liquid diet so their emesis would be soft and less likely to cause choking or aspiration pneumonia if the detainee were to vomit, the delivery of a sub-xyphoid thrust to expel water if the detainee lost consciousness, and possession of a tracheotomy kit “not visible to the detainee” in case a detainee’s airway had to be surgically opened in order to prevent drowning. 
 
OMS data collection and analysis acti vities regarding waterboarding were 
designed to contribute to generalizable knowledge . This included the 
development of standardized medical guidelin es themselves. The OMS guidelines state: 
 
“Several such sessions per 24 hours h ave been employed without apparent 
medical complication. The exact numbe r of sessions cannot be medically 
prescribed and will depend on the re sponse to each; however, all medical 
officers must be aware of the Agency po licy on waterboard exposure.… By days 
3-5 of an aggressive program, cumulati ve effects become a potential concern. 
Without any hard data to quantify either this risk or the advantages of this 
technique, we believe that beyond this  point continued intense waterboard 
applications may not be medically appropriate. Continued aggressive use of the 
waterboard beyond this point should be reviewed by the HVT [high-value 
target] team in consultation with Head quarters prior to any further aggressive 
use. (Absent medical contraindications , sporadic use probably carries little 
risk.) Beyond the increased medical concern (for both acute and long term 
effects, including PTSD), there possi bly would be desensitization to the 
technique.”195 
 CIA medical personnel also helped modify the SERE version of the technique for the 
purposes of studying “efficacy:”  
 41 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org  
“While SERE trainers believe trainees are unable to maintain psychological 
resistance to waterboarding, our exper ience was otherwise. Some subjects 
unquestionably can withstand a large number of applications, with no 
immediately discernable cumulative impact  beyond their strong aversion to the 
experience. Whether the waterboard offers  a more effective alternative to sleep 
deprivation and/or stress positions, or is an effective supplement to these 
techniques is not yet known.”196 
 
Over time, OMS research was incorporated in to development of legal authorization, as 
reflected in 2005 OLC memos: 
 
• “Safety” of the technique: “We underst and that these limitations have been 
established with extensive input from OMS,  based on experience to date with this 
technique and the OMS’ professional judgm ent that use of the waterboard on a 
healthy individual subject to these limitat ions would be ‘medically acceptable’.… 
There is no evidence for such prolonged me ntal harm in the CIA’s experience with 
the technique.”197  
• “Safety” of repeated use: “… the CIA has previously used the waterboard repeatedly on 
two detainees, and as far as  can be determined, these detainees did not experience 
physical pain or, in the professional judgme nt of doctors, is there any medical reason 
to believe they would have done so.”198 
 
Indemnifying Harms of Repeated and Combined Use 
 OMS health professionals continued to r ecord clinical observations, experimental 
modifications, clinical indica tors, forensic patterns, and warning signs. This program 
came under increasing scrutiny starting in 2003 as a result of the legal, policy, and 
operational factors described above. The CI A faced increasing pressure to demonstrate 
the “safety” and “efficacy” of the “enhanced interrogation” program. At the same time, 
OMS medical officers faced increasing pressure to manage not just the severity of pain 
as described by the August 2002 OLC memos,  but also the long-term harmful effects of 
the practices across the detainee populatio n. They struggled to address the unique 
sequelae and clinical presentations, which lay outside their clinical expertise and 
experience.  
 Mitchell and Jessen had claimed the SERE tec hniques would scale smoothly in the CIA 
program. However, “enhanced interrogation”  differed from SERE in fundamental 
respects. The CIA’s captives were not “jihadis t” analogues to ultraf it U.S. soldiers, but 
rather arbitrarily detained individuals with  varying health issues. They were subjected 
to severe and repeated torture and mistr eatment, over months and years, with no 
control over their future. By contrast, SERE students could stop the techniques at any 
time and the training itself was time-limited , meaning they could predict a future after  
 42 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org the training. The fact of indefinite, extra judicial detention, potentially the most 
detrimental aspect of the CIA program, mean t there was no end in sight to the abusive 
treatment in the mind of detainees.199   
 
The SERE and CIA programs were thus fundamentally different psychological 
experiences. These differences were intentional, and the CIA exploited them as part of 
the experimental effort. Everything in th e “enhanced interrogation” program was a 
variation of indefiniteness and uncontro llability, to foster helplessness and 
dependency. It is not surprising that thes e differences produced uncontrolled and tragic 
effects. Detainees were suffering extreme harm from the abuse, including death, 
maiming, brain damage, and signs of profound psychological disturbance.200 For 
example, Gul Rahman died of hypothermia as  the result of short shackling, isolation, 
water dousing, and rough takedowns, which were not officially authorized and, in some cases, went unreported in CIA cables.
201 The use of the techniques exceeded existing 
authorization with respect to the severity , repetition, combined use, and cumulative 
effect over time.  
 
Past authorization covered single techniques  used in a limited fashion in sequential 
order. The CIA had claimed that the mere pr esence of health professionals could keep 
torture “safe.” Not only was this untrue, bu t the manner in which the techniques were 
applied bore no resemblance to these representations.202 By May 2004, the CIA had 
suspended the use of the techniques and th e August 2002 memos were withdrawn two 
months later.203 With authorization increasingly lim ited to a per detainee basis, the CIA 
increasingly relied on the OMS to provide da ta to justify past, current, and future 
practices.204  
 
This data was desperately needed because th e CIA was running into complications from 
using techniques not yet authorized, notably the combined use of tactics.205 The 
research process itself was thus part of the Bush administration’s position that if 
detainees died, it was not through intent or n egligence relating to authorized practices, 
but rather because of technicalities or failu re to follow the articulated standards. OMS 
staff investigated the degree to which severe pa in that may meet the legal definition of 
torture arose from the applications of spec ific techniques or from combinations of 
individual techniques. Harm thus became a rationale for the CIA’s expanding human 
subjects research program, even as this da ta was needed for authorization of the 
techniques after they had been suspended.206 
 
Sleep Deprivation 
Health professionals documented sleep depr ivation on more than a dozen detainees 
that lasted between 48 and 180 hours. Th e Bradbury “Individual Techniques” Memo 
states:  
“To assist in monitoring experience w ith the detainees, we understand that 
there is regular reporting on medical a nd psychological experience with the use  
 43 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org of these techniques on detainees and th at there are special instructions on 
documenting experience with sleep deprivation and the waterboard.”207 
 
In addition, the OMS drew conclusions based on its observations. For example, a May 4, 
2005 fax from the CIA to the OLC contained the following findings:  
“OMS believes the studies on sleep de privation and pain threshold remain 
inconsistent in their findings in health y subjects, even in the papers cited. 
Where differences in pain threshol d may have been demonstrated (i.e. 
increased sensitivity to heat, nonsig nificant or no diffe rences in cold, 
nonsignificant changes in pe rception to pressure), th ey are not germane to the 
techniques used in the interrogation program. None of CIA’s methods are 
designed to induce pain, under any circum stances; to the exte nt that they might 
(i.e. facial slap, abdominal slap), they do not involve application of heat, cold, 
pressure, any sharp objects (or indeed an y objects at all)….  We believe that 
because of fatigue (not increased sensit ivity to pain), sleep deprivation would 
reduce the ability to maintain a stress pos ition compared to normal subjects, 
leading to sooner release from the posi tion, not greater pain. In other words, 
when the individual reaches his limit, th e technique ends, and we would expect 
him to reach that limit sooner under co nditions of sleep deprivation. We have 
no reason to believe slaps are more painfu l, and no reason to believe, based on 
CIA or SERE experience, that they wo uld induce severe permanent injury.”
208 
 The OLC later used that observational data and related conclusions to set limits and 
procedures for the use of sleep deprivation based on the research allegedly performed 
by health professionals. The Bradbury  “Individual Techniques” Memo states: 
 
“We understand from OMS, and from ou r review of the literature on the 
physiology of sleep, that even very exte nded sleep deprivation does not cause 
physical pain, let alone severe physic al pain…. We noted that there are 
important differences between sleep depr ivation as an interrogation technique 
used by the CIA and the controlled exper iments documented in the literature…. 
OMS staff have also informed us, based on their experience with detainees who 
have undergone extended sleep deprivatio n and their review of the relevant 
medical literature, that extended sleep deprivation does not cause physical 
pain. Although edema, or swelling, of the lower legs may sometimes develop as 
a result of the long periods of standing  associated with sl eep deprivation, we 
understand from OMS that su ch edema is not painful and will quickly dissipate 
once the subject is removed from the stan ding position…. For these reasons, we 
conclude that the authorized use of extended sleep deprivation by adequately 
trained interrogators would not be expected to cause and could not reasonably be considered specifically intended  to cause severe physical pain.”
209 
  
 44 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org Combined Use of Tactics 
Health professionals apparently collected data  that was used to dr aw conclusions about 
whether the application of a combinatio n of several “enhanced interrogation” 
techniques at once, versus individually applie d tactics, increased the susceptibility of 25 
detainees to severe pain. The Bradbury “Combined Use” Memo stated:   
“But as we understand the experience involving the combination of various 
techniques, the OMS medical and psych ological personnel have not observed 
any such increase in susce ptibility. Other than the waterboard, the specific 
techniques under consideration in this memorandum – including sleep 
deprivation – have been applied to mo re than 25 detainees. No apparent 
increase in susceptibility to severe pain has been observed either when 
techniques are used sequentially or when they are used simultaneously – for 
example, when an insult sl ap is simultaneously combin ed with water dousing or 
a kneeling stress position, or when wall standing is simultaneously combined 
with an abdominal slap and water dousin g. Nor does experience show that, even 
apart from changes in susce ptibility to pain, combinations of these techniques 
cause the techniques to operate differe ntly so as to cause severe pain. OMS 
doctors and psychologists, moreover , confirm that they expect that the 
techniques, when combined as described in the Background Paper and in the 
April 22 [redacted] Fax, would not operate  in a different manner from the way 
they do individually, so as to cause severe pain.”
210 
 
IV.  Applications of CIA Research  
on Detainees  
 
The evidence reviewed by Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) indicates that the Central 
Intelligence Agency (CIA ) engaged in human subjects res earch. One aspect of this 
research involved engaging the services of  psychologists Mitchell and Jessen to induce 
learned helplessness in detainees through to rture, in an effort  to obtain compliance 
during interrogation. As that work was sca led up, detainees were subjected to an 
increasing variety and number of techniques. In response, risk managers inside the CIA 
sought more information on the physical limits and other generalizable data on the 
effects of torture, which evolved into a parallel area of research. CIA research on 
detainees appears to have been driven by the need to justif y and provide legal cover for 
the torture program, as well as practical questi ons from health professionals tasked with 
keeping the process “safe” and “effective.” H ealth professionals were central to the Bush 
administration’s strategy for legitimizing and sa nctioning the use of torture. Their role 
extended to providing legal co ver to U.S. officers and officials who committed, ordered, 
and authorized torture and ill-treatment at the very highest levels of  the administration 
and shielding them from poten tial prosecution. These activities took place in a legal and  
 45 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org policy framework devised by lawyers to w eaken existing protections regarding the 
treatment of detainees in order to protect th e White House from the legal risks of that 
experiment.  
Health professionals were central to the Bush 
administration’s strategy for legitimizing and sanctioning the use of torture. Their role extended to providing legal cover to U.S. officers and officials who committed, ordered, and authorized torture and ill-treatment at the very highest levels of the administration and shielding them from potential prosecution.   
 
Operational Support of the Torture Program 
 
The CIA’s torture activities were carried out as research and the program itself was set 
up as a research project with human subject s. Data collection and meticulous record-
keeping was undertaken for the purposes of “ongoing evaluation of the ‘efficacy’ of each 
technique and its potential for any uni ntended or inappropriate results.”211 The 
“enhanced interrogation” techniques progra m and the monitoring and collection of 
data regarding the physical and psychologica l responses of subjects clearly meets the 
following definitions  of research:  
 Data collection attempted to answ er implicit research questions . The CIA’s 
collection of data was an attempt to answer  research questions. Among them: 1) Could 
“enhanced interrogation” produce a state of learned helplessness?; 2) Would learned 
helplessness render a human subject compliant  with interrogators?; and 3) If so, would 
compliance lead to the production of reliabl e intelligence (the object of interrogation in 
national security settings)? While Mitche ll and Jessen have denied investigating the 
third question,
212 the CIA has claimed that the us e of coercive measures produced 
intelligence – a claim rejected by the Senate  Intelligence Committee’s investigation. The 
CIA itself has acknowledged it lacked a “sus tained, systematic, and independent means 
… to evaluate the effectiveness of th e approaches used with detainees.”213 
 
In addition, there were explicit ly stated questions about a fo urth area of investigation: 4) 
Could this process be done “safely,” and, if so , how? The “safety” of the techniques and 
potential limits and/or modifications to the application of techniques were based on 
knowledge derived from the data collection an d analysis of initial applications in the 
field. The implicit hypothesis of this inves tigation was that the techniques could 
establish a state of learned helplessness, and that the state of learned helplessness 
would yield compliance of the subject and resu lt in disclosure of actionable intelligence 
– and that this could all be done safely. 
  
 46 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org Data was systematically collected , as instructed by and re flected in the Office of 
Medical Services (OMS) guidelines, as well as  other CIA and Department of Justice (DOJ) 
communications.  
 
The data collected was analyzed and co nclusions were drawn from the results . 
The data derived from the application of thes e techniques was analyzed after the fact to 
assess the “safety” of the techniques. Such an alysis is referred to in the Office of Legal 
Counsel (OLC) memoranda authorizing con tinued use of the t echniques. Minimally, 
conclusions (albeit incorrect conclusions) we re derived from an analysis of the data. 
This is also documented in the OLC memos. 
 
The research was designed to co ntribute to generalizable knowledge . 
• Connection to a theoretical framework : The research was justified within the 
theoretical framework of an established body of knowledge, including theories of 
learned helplessness (psychologist Martin Seligman’s work) and the effects of the 
techniques (literature from the military’s Su rvival, Evasion, Resistance, and Escape 
(SERE) program), even though the investigati on made rather broad leaps from both 
theoretical frameworks. 
• The primary beneficiaries of the research were other practitioners : The 
primary beneficiaries of the acquired know ledge were other “pra ctitioners in the 
field,” i.e. other CIA interrogators and heal th professionals. Al though it could be 
argued that the “safety” of the subjects was one area of knowledge derived that could 
be of benefit to the subject , that interpretation ignore s that the context of the 
investigation was the application of tort ure. The main reasons for undertaking the 
investigation was to provide interrogators wi th effective tools and to provide legal 
cover for interrogators and health professionals. 
• Distribution of the results : While clearly constrained by national security 
concerns, the results of the research were distributed to other “practitioners” in the 
agency as well as legal counsel an d others in the administration. 
• Results generalized beyond the subject population : The results of the research 
were generalized for further application to  other individuals in U.S. custody who 
were not the subject of the in itial research investigation. 
• Replication of results : The results of the research were  intended to be replicated in 
other settings, and, in fact, were replicated. 
 
There were not established or accepted stan dards for the safe or efficacious deployment 
of the “enhanced interrogation” techniqu es. In multiple documents, government 
officials acknowledged as much. The literat ure on the SERE program, a much milder 
form of the techniques applied to military  volunteers, documented real and significant 
risk of harm to the subjects. “Enhanced in terrogation” had never been tested as an 
interrogation tool before these investi gations and its “efficacy” has never been 
established. 
  
 47 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org Legal Indemnification of the Torture Program 
 
The Bush administration en gaged in an overlapping strategy of using OMS and other 
CIA data, and the research process itself, to authorize and justify the program and 
mitigate it from legal risks. The unlawful na ture of the CIA “enhanced interrogation” 
program gave rise to the need for operational pr oof of “efficacy” as well as legal cover in 
the form of empirical data demonstrating “sa fety.” Research thus evolved to meet the 
legal needs of the program.  
 As an initial matter, health professionals conducted resear ch into the pain and harm 
inflicted by the “enhanced interrogation” tact ics. This was done to comply with the 
“safety” monitor requirement in the OLC me mos, as a means of preventing interrogators 
from violating the flawed legal definition of torture given by Bush administration 
lawyers. Due to the lack of scientific res earch into the techniques, conducting research 
was also a practical necessity. To prevent in terrogators from “crossing the line,” health 
professionals first had to define what the lin e was and what its clinical parameters were. 
Health professionals ostensibly worked to  increase the knowledge available about the 
effect of the tactics by gathering, systemat izing, and extracting conclusions from the 
data collected. Data collection and evaluati on were thus nece ssary to fulfil the 
monitoring role and became part of  the monitoring process itself.  
 
Health professionals also conducted research  on detainees as a means of providing 
interrogators and other U.S. officials with ev idence of “good faith” efforts to prevent a 
prohibited level of harm. Notably, the activiti es did not need to be in service of avoiding 
inflicting the harm. Instead, the mere fact of  undertaking such activities could be used 
to provide proof of “due diligence” and es tablish a lack of intent to cause harm. 
Throughout 2002 and 2003, the CIA, OLC, an d White House discussed the legal defense 
of drawing on past experience gained fr om the interrogation of U.S. detainees.
214 The 
OLC thus built research into the interrogation  process with a view to redefining certain 
procedures as “safe” and to develop guidelines  for engaging in such “safe” torture. These 
“good faith” efforts were likely employed so as  to support the assertion  that U.S. officers 
and officials did not specifica lly intend to cause pain th at would constitute torture. 
 
There is evidence that OMS officers at times expressed concern over the health effects of 
the techniques seen in detainees.215 The Senate torture report summary provides an 
overview of severe psychological problems br ought on by abusive treatment in many 
detainees, including hallucinations, parano ia, insomnia, attemp ts at self-harm, 
psychosis, and mental states on the “verge of a breakdown.”216 Notably, these objections 
did not appear to have stopped the continued mistreatment of detainees, including by 
health professionals. Given the U.S. gover nment’s continued efforts to conceal the 
mental and physical effects of CIA abuse,217 there is a pressing need for more relevant 
information to come to light.    
 48 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org As the program evolved and evidence of extreme physical and psychological harm 
mounted, including due to variations from SE RE parameters, the research function of 
health professionals became increasingly e xplicit and formalized in policy. Bush 
administration lawyers increasingly demanded and the CIA provided empirical data in 
order to indemnify practices already in use and justify practices that lacked 
authorization. The collection of data on the health “limits” of torture was critical to 
assessments and approvals for continued mi streatment, as seen in the CIA’s 2013 
response regarding waterboarding:  
“Technique was used with a frequency th at exceeded CIA’s representations to 
the Department of Justice’s Office of Le gal Counsel (OLC), and this intensity 
raised serious concerns on the part of the Agency’s own medical staff about the 
lack of available data upon which to dr aw conclusions about its safety…. The 
Attorney General later reaffirmed the le gality of the technique despite the 
intensity of use, but the medical con cerns, combined with CIA’s increasing 
knowledge base, its improving skill us ing less coercive techniques, and the 
move of al-Qaida’s senior leaders beyo nd its reach, ended the use of this 
technique.”
218  
 
There is evidence that OMS officers objected to their increasing legal indemnification 
role in the program. For example, on March 13, 2003, a medical officer raised concerns 
that waterboarding Khalid Sheikh Mohammed a third time that day would exceed draft 
OMS guidelines and sought written authori zation from CIA headquarters. This failed to 
materialize, yet waterboarding continued. As the Senate torture report summary notes: 
 
“At the end of the day, the medical officer  wrote [redacted] OMS that “things are 
slowly evolving from [sic] OMS being view ed as the institutional conscience and 
the limiting factor to the ones who are de dicated to maximizing the benefit in a 
safe manner and keeping everyone’s butt out of trouble.”219 
 
However, research data – and the research process itself – continued to be used as 
evidence of “safety” and thereby of the legality  of torture. This process is most apparent 
in the development of the 2005 Bradbury “Combined Use” memo. The OLC specifically 
demanded empirical data from past practice with CIA detainees. This data was used to 
justify the legal implications of abusi ve practices whose severity, duration, and 
combined use were not accounted for in the August 2002 memos. The purpose of this 
data was to show that any de tainees harmed would be the result of technicalities or 
improper adherence, rather than the author ization of fundamentally harmful practices 
or a lack of understanding wi th respect to that harm.  
 
In April 2005, the OMS reviewed the draft Bradbury memo and expressed concern that 
its medical assessments were being used to determine the legality of techniques: 
  
 49 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org “…[s]imply put, OMS is not in the busi ness of saying what is acceptable in 
causing discomfort to other human beings , and will not take on that burden…. 
OMS did not review or vet these techni ques prior to their introduction, but 
rather came into this pr ogram with the understanding of your office and DOJ 
that they were already determined as legal, permitted and safe. We see the 
current iteration [of the OLC memorandum] as a reversal of that sequence, and a 
relocation of those decisions to OMS. If this is the case, that OMS has now the 
responsibility for determining a procedur e’s legality through its determination 
of safety, then we will need to review all procedures in  that light given this new 
responsibility.”220  
 
Despite objections by some personnel, th e OMS summarized its findings to date and 
affirmed the “safety” of the experimental techniques.221 The research findings were 
incorporated into operational and legal guidance for torture. 
 
Knowledge of Illegal Human Experimentation 
 
OMS ad hoc research activities regarding “s afety” and harm were part of a larger 
research enterprise examining the operati onal effects of abusive treatment for 
intelligence collection purposes. The CIA’s ongoi ng efforts to secure legal cover for the 
torture program indicate an awareness th at the techniques were likely illegal and 
exposed officers to potential cr iminal liability. At various times, CIA and other officers 
expressed concern over “enhanced interrogatio n,” both as torture and ill-treatment and 
as potential human experimentation. Some of  these concerns related to Mitchell and 
Jessen’s brutal approach, including its esca lation and lack of scientific credibility, 
described above.222 Complaints by the OMS in pa rticular reflected internal 
acknowledgment of data collec tion and analysis on detainees. 
 In 2007, the Senate Armed Services Committ ee interviewed Jessen, among others in the 
course of its investigation into detainee abuses in co nnection with the military’s 
interrogation program. Its report noted:  
“Dr. Jessen acknowledged that empirically, it is not possible to know the effect of 
a technique used on a detainee in the lo ng-term, unless you study the effects in 
the long-term. However, he said that hi s conclusion about the long-term effects 
of physically coercive techniques was ba sed on forty years of their use at SERE 
school.” 
 
The CIA’s ongoing efforts to secure legal cover for the 
torture program indicate an awareness that the techniques were likely illegal and exposed officers to potential criminal liability.  
  
 50 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org Yet in 2015, as noted above, Mitchell stated that he and Jessen had intended to 
commission a study of the effectiveness of the techniques.223 And during the course of 
the CIA inspector general’s (IG) review, co ncerns were raised over potential human 
experimentation. The May 2004 IG report included a recommendation that the CIA’s 
operational division conduct a study of the “efficacy” of each “enhanced interrogation” 
technique and environment deprivation to de termine if any should be “added, modified, 
or discontinued.”224  The two senior officers who un dertook an informal assessment 
declined to assess the questi on of “efficacy.” As the Senate torture report summary 
notes:  
 
“…[they] determined it would not be possi ble to assess the effectiveness of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques without violating ‘Federal Policy 
for Protection of Human Subjects’  regarding human experimentation.”225 
[emphasis added] 
 
In effect, the IG pu shed for the creation of a model to study the program’s “efficacy.” 
Such a course would simply reproduce a process that those within the program, 
including Mitchell and Jessen, had already b een engaged in. However , when an outside 
unit was asked to create such a model, they refused on the grounds that doing so would 
violate the Common Rule of the U.S. Code of Federal Regula tions within the existing 
human subjects protection framework. In 2013 , under pressure to justify its program, 
the CIA again echoed these concerns. It stated that if it were to conduct a “systematic 
study over time of the effectiveness of the techniques,” even for monitoring and 
evaluation purposes, it would have “been en cumbered by a number of factors,” 
including “federal policy on the protecti on of human subjects and the 
impracticality of establishing an effective control group.”226 [emphasis added]  
 
The IG’s recommendation triggered an a dditional objection. Sometime between May 
2004 and January 2005, CIA medical officer s raised additional concerns that the 
assessment of “efficacy” could present liabil ity for human experimentation. On January 
28, 2005, the IG attempted to put these concerns to rest: 
 
“I fear there was a misunderstanding. OIG [Office of Inspector General] did 
not have in mind doing additional, guinea pig research on human 
beings . What we are recommending is that  the Agency undertake a careful 
review of its experience to date in using the various techniques and that it draw 
conclusions about their safety, effectivene ss, etc., that can guide CIA officers as 
we move ahead. We make this recommendation because we have found that the 
Agency over the decades has continued to get itself in messes related to 
interrogation programs for one overriding reason: we do not document and 
learn from our experience – each generation of officers is left to improvise anew, 
with problematic results for our officers as individuals and for our Agency. We 
are not unaware that there are subtleties to  this matter, as the effectiveness of 
techniques varies among individuals , over time, as administered, in  
 51 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org combination with one another, and so on. All the more reason to document 
these important findings .”227 [emphasis added] 
 
The reference to “ additional , guinea pig research on human beings” implies that 
previous  research had taken place, and was not limited to data colle cted for clinical 
purposes but rather primary data collection. Th is implication is strengthened by the fact 
that the concern was first raised by the OMS.  The IG’s statement, combined with his 
efforts to distance his request from past research, indicate an awareness that the 
program potentially constituted human expe rimentation. The communication to the 
OMS indicates this awareness was shared across different parts of the CIA. In addition, it 
is noteworthy that after denying an interest in “guinea pig research,” the IG nevertheless 
requested a review of the experience of th e “enhanced interrogatio n” interventions on 
actual subjects, in order to develop genera lizable knowledge from the experience. In 
other words, he proceeded to request human  subjects research without using the word. 
 
VI.  Conclusion  
 In the course of facilitating the crime of to rture, U.S. health professionals committed a 
second and related crime: human subjects research and experimentation on detainees 
being tortured, in violation of medical ethi cs and U.S. and international law. Human 
subjects research entails the systematic co llection and analysis of data from living 
individuals for the purpose of developing  generalizable knowledge. The Central 
Intelligence Agency’s ( CIA) “enhanced in terrogation” program was a research 
experiment on detainees. The deployment of this new program required applied 
research to develop and refine the torture me thodology in order to generate proof of its 
“safety” and “efficacy.” CIA heal th professionals not only monitored interrogation and 
detention practices that employed the use of torture, but also colle cted and analyzed the 
results, sought to derive generalizable knowledge to be applied to subsequent 
interrogations of and clinical interactions with detainees, and disseminated the results. 
The CIA referred to interrogation activiti es as “applied research” and they were 
conducted on living individuals. 
In the course of facilitating the crime of torture, U.S. health 
professionals committed a second and related crime: human subjects research and experimentation on detainees being tortured, in violation of medical ethics and U.S. and international law. 
 
The flawed hypothesis, the lack  of rigorous scientific procedures, and the lack of an 
effective control group and other methodol ogical deficits does not mean the CIA was 
not conducting research. The application and study of experimental practices on 
detainees brought psychologists James Mitchell and Bruce Jessen and the CIA squarely  
 52 Nuremberg Betrayed Physicians for Human Rights phr.org into the realm of conducting human subjects research. This research would not pass 
institutional review board revi ew owing to lack of informed  consent of the subjects, the 
infliction of intentional harm on subjects,  and fundamental research design flaws, 
including a poorly supported hypot hesis, among other reasons.  
 Furthermore, in order to meet legal and ethi cal standards, research must at a minimum 
be conducted with the informed  consent of the participants, an absence of coercion, and 
efforts to minimize harm. Here, the res earch and the experim ental interventions 
informed by the research were performed on prisoners without their consent and for the 
purposes of inflicting torture. They were  conducted for nonclinical purposes and 
without evidence of benefit or avoidance of ha rm. They were not serving the interests of 
the subject in any arguable way; maki ng a torture technique “safer” cannot be 
considered an act done in th e service of the torture victim. These activities were not 
medically ethical nor done in  service of the detainee.
228 Instead, they served operational 
and legal aims. 
 
The CIA’s torture research was never safe, l egal, or “effective.” It was research based on 
bad science, focused on how to make torture  “work” to extract information and deflect 
legal responsibility.229 Moreover, the research itself yiel ded no evidence that torture was 
“safe,” nor could it. The architects of the research disregarded the known harms in the 
torture and military literature and the actu al harms manifesting from real time 
application. They disregarded the inability an d inappropriateness of medical personnel 
to measure pain or keep torture “safe” and disregarded accepted standards to assess the physical and psychological effects of torture. They formed part of a systematic effort to 
brutalize and degrade human beings in captivity  in violation of a health professional’s 
core ethical duty to do no harm and the absolute prohibition against torture and ill-
treatment in domestic and international law.  
Seventy years ago, the Doctors Trial at Nuremb erg created an ethical bright line: health 
professionals are ethically prohibited from experimenting on prisoners. Instead, their 
obligation to people in custody is to treat  them humanely and provide care. The CIA’s 
experimental research on detainees violat es the expansive regime of human subjects 
Karl Brandt, Adolf Hitler’s personal 
physician, hears his sentence at the 
post-WWII Doctors Trials at 
Nuremberg. In the wake of Nazi medical atrocities, the Nuremberg Code was developed to protect individuals from nonconsensual 
human experimentation.  
 53 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org protections developed and strengthened si nce World War II. The regulations and 
practices regarding ethical research were es pecially designed for vulnerable populations 
such as prisoners, based on the inherent risk of their dehumanization and inability to 
freely provide informed consent. The CIA’s research on detainees constitutes a stark 
violation of the lessons of Nuremberg. 
The CIA’s experimental research on detainees violates the 
expansive regime of human subjects protections developed and strengthened since World War II … [and] constitutes a stark violation of the lessons of Nuremberg. 
 
Evidence of illegal human subjects research  by the CIA torture program under the Bush 
administration is highly relevan t for current practices. Firs t and foremost, the full scope 
of research on detainees by the CIA and othe r agencies must be known, which requires 
an end to the continued secrecy in connec tion with the U.S. torture program. In 
addition, several critical lessons from Physicia ns for Human Rights’ analysis can be used 
to monitor and promote ethical actions by the U.S. government: 
 1 The U.S. government must prohibit all human  experimentation that does not comply 
with the Code of Federal Regu lations (CFR), regardless of the purpose or focus of the 
activities.  
 
2 The CIA and other U.S. security services must not engage in, promote, or profit from 
unethical and illegal human subjects research  in furtherance of torture or in any 
manner that skirts U.S. and international law. 
a Human subjects research involving any pr actices that meet legal definitions of 
torture or cruel, inhuman, or degradin g treatment is always prohibited.  
b Even when interrogation methods do not m eet criteria for torture or ill-treatment, 
the systematic collection of data to test  a hypothesis or otherwise contribute to 
generalizable information constitutes human subjects research and is unethical in 
the absence of voluntary, informed consen t and other internationally recognized 
human subjects protections. 
c When questions are raised about the ethical or legal und erpinning of U.S. 
interrogation practices by interrogation progr am staff, their lead ership, or outside 
parties such as the inspec tor general, such practices should cease immediately 
until review by qualified experts in human  subjects research and other relevant 
legal disciplines is conducted. 
 3 Oversight of U.S. interrogation practices should include a requir ement to show that 
any collection of data involv ing human subjects has been reviewed by an ethics or 
institutional review board comprised of a ma jority of non-security board members, in 
accordance with 45 CFR 46. 
  
 54 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org 4 Professional societies in medicine, ps ychology, and psychiatry should prohibit 
involvement in illegal human su bjects research, including; 
a Updating professional guidance on co nducting research to include avoiding 
participation in nonconsensual and ot her illegal human subjects research. 
b Developing continuing medi cal education modules that present realistic scenarios 
that clinicians may encounter  in working with armed forc es and security services. 
5 Both the U.S. government and professional  societies for health professionals must 
ensure that health profe ssionals do not become partic ipants in the torture of 
detainees. 
 
Finally, the U.S. government has continuous ly obstructed the public’s access to full 
information about the CIA torture program. This report presents clear evidence of 
illegal and unethical conduct, sanctioned  at the highest levels of the Bush 
administration, including nonconsensual research conducted on prisoners in the 
context of torture.  
 
There is a pressing need for additional information to come  to light, with transparency 
as a critical first step toward accountabil ity for and prevention of grave human rights 
violations. Drawing on the lessons of Nu remberg, we must never again permit the 
exigencies of national security – or any othe r reason – to be used as justification for 
unlawful and unethical research on human beings . In this uncertain po litical climate, it 
is even more crucial to shin e a light on this disturbing chapter and act now to prevent 
such crimes from being repeated. 
   
 55 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org Recommendations 
 
To the President of the United States: 
• Order the attorney general to undertake an immediate criminal investigation of 
alleged illegal human experimentation and research on detainees conducted by the 
CIA and other government agencies following  the attacks on September 11, 2001. 
• Issue an executive order immediately su spending any federally funded human 
subjects research involving detainees  currently occurring in secret. 
• Declassify and release the full Senate Select Committee on Intelligence’s report, 
Panetta Review, and other records relevan t to the CIA renditio n, detention, and 
interrogation program, redacting only what is  strictly necessary to protect national 
security. 
 
To the Central Intelligence Agency: • Declassify and release any applied research  proposals or protocols of James Mitchell, 
Bruce Jessen, or CIA Office of Medical Services personnel, and any clinical 
observations, redacting only what is strict ly necessary to protect national security. 
 
To the Department of Health and Human Services: • Instruct the Office for Human Research Pr otections to begin an investigation of any 
violations of the federal protections fo r human subjects contained in the Common 
Rule by the CIA and other government agencies as part of the “enhanced” 
interrogation program. 
• Refer personnel found to have violated th e law to the Department of Justice for 
prosecution. 
 
To Congress 
• Amend the War Crimes Act to eliminate changes made to the Act in 2006 which 
weaken the prohibition on bi ological experimentation on detainees, and ensure that 
the War Crimes Act definition of the gr ave breach of biological experimentation is 
consistent with the definition of that  crime under the Geneva Conventions. 
• Convene a joint select committee compri sing members of the House and Senate 
committees responsible for oversight on inte lligence, military, judiciary, and health 
and human services matters to conduc t a full investigation of alleged human 
research and experimentation activiti es on detainees in U.S. custody. 
 
To Health Professional Associations • Convene a commission to conduct a full in vestigation of alleged human research and 
experimentation activities on detainees in U.S.  custody to establish the public record 
of what is known, including the parti cipation of health professionals. 
• Refer health professionals found to have vi olated their ethical obligations to state 
licensing and disciplinary bodies for appropriate sanctions. 
  
 56 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org Appendix A: Legal and Ethical 
Standards for Human Subjects Protection 
 
U.S. and international law have establishe d clear standards for all ethical research 
involving human subjects, which form the ba sis of an extensive regime of legal and 
ethical protections. The main tenets of thes e standards are: 1) the requirement that a 
person give meaningful voluntary informed co nsent to any research or experimentation 
carried out on them; and 2) th e need for special protections  for populations considered 
particularly vulnerable to abuse, such as, for exampl e, prisoners and detainees.230 
 Human subjects research is regulated to protect  the interests of research and to prevent 
abuse. The basis for these protections is resp ect for persons: research subjects must be 
treated with the dignity befitting human beings, not as experimental guinea pigs. 
Health professionals must treat individuals  with their best interests in mind and 
minimize avoidable harms and unjustified risk s in the service of a research goal. In 
addition, health professionals are required to use treatments that are expected to be 
effective and not engage in speculative medi cine at the expense of a human subject.
231  
 
The prohibition against nonconsensual re search and experimen tation on human 
subjects is the cornerstone of modern me dical ethics. First articulated at the 
international level in the Nuremberg Co de, this prohibition emerged from the 
prosecution of physicians who committed me dical atrocities in Nazi Germany during 
World War II, including painful and often d eadly medical experiments on concentration 
camp prisoners without their consent 
 
“The voluntary consent of the human subj ect is absolutely e ssential. This means 
that the person involved should have legal capacity to give consent; should be so 
situated as to be able to exercise free power of choice, with out the intervention 
of any element of force, fraud, deceit, duress, over-reaching, or other ulterior 
form of constraint or coercion; an d should have sufficient knowledge and 
comprehension of the elements of the s ubject matter involved, as to enable him 
to make an understanding and enlightened decision.”232 
 
The history of experimentation in prisons and on other vulnerable populations reveals 
the extreme risks of using these subjects in state-sanctioned or private medical 
experiments. Reflecting this history, th e prohibition against nonconsensual human 
experimentation is particularly concerne d with the treatment of people who are 
detained or otherwise in state custody , especially in the context of war. 
 
  
 57 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org International Laws and Standards 
 
Unlawful human experimentation is a vi olation of customary international law.233 It is a 
war crime in the context of armed conflict and rises to the level of jus cogens .234 In 
addition, it is a jus cogens  crime in time of peace when it is part of crimes against 
humanity, genocide, or torture.235 Unlawful human experimentation is a separate crime 
from torture. However, it falls within the meaning of torture236 and is outlawed by some 
of the same instruments. For example, the Geneva Conventions define “torture or 
inhuman treatment, includi ng biological experiments” as “grave breaches.” 237 The 
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) notes: 
 
“‘Biological experiments’  are prohibited by the First and Second Geneva 
Conventions, while the Third and Fourth  Geneva Conventions prohibit ‘medical 
or scientific experiments’ not justified by  the medical treatment of the person 
concerned…. Additional Protocol I prohibits ‘medical or scientific 
experiments’…. Additional Protocol I also prohibits ‘any medical procedure 
which is not indicated by the state of h ealth of the person concerned and which 
is not consistent with generally accepted medical standards’ and makes it a 
grave breach of the Protocol if the medical procedure undertaken seriously endangers the physical or mental health or integrity of the person concerned. 
Additional Protocol II contains the same  prohibition with respect to persons 
deprived of their liberty for reas ons related to the armed conflict.”
238 
 
Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions outlaws “violence to life and person, in 
particular murder of all kinds, mutilation, cruel treatment and torture” – prohibitions 
that often accompany the ban on illegal human experimentation.239 It also outlaws 
“outrages upon personal dignity, in parti cular humiliating and degrading treatment.” 
Thus, adherence to Common Article 3 would preclude illegal human experimentation, 
even though it is not e xplicitly prohibited.  
 
The right to be free from nonconsensual human experimentation has also been 
incorporated into in ternational human rights treaties and instruments, including the 
International Covenant on Civi l and Political Rights. Article 7 prohibits “medical or 
scientific experimentation” along with torture and ill-treatment.240 The ICRC notes: 
 
“The U.N. Human Rights Committee, in  its General Comment on Article 7, 
specifies that special protection against such experiments is necessary in the 
case of persons not capable of giving valid consent, in particular those under 
any form of detention or imprisonment.”241 
 
This right is additionally contained within th e right to the highest attainable standard of 
health. The U.N. Committee on Economic, Soc ial and Cultural Rights notes that the 
right to health contains the freedom “to co ntrol one’s health and body, including … the  
 58 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org right to be free from torture, no n-consensual medical treatment and 
experimentation.”242  
 
Additional guidance offered to member states includes: th e UNESCO Universal 
Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights ; and the Body of Principles for the 
Protection of All Persons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment243 and the 
Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.244 Both were adopted by 
consensus by the UN General Assembly, and both affirm the autonomy of prisoners and prohibit acts that may constitute torture or ill-treatment, including medical or scientific 
experimentation that may be detrimental to  health, even with th e detainee’s consent. 
 
The World Medical Association’s Declaration of Helsinki notes that human subjects 
research includes research on  identifiable human materi al and data, and sets out 
comprehensive ethical standards for such research, including the requirement of 
voluntary informed consent, the need to prioritize, at all ti mes, the interests and rights 
of the individual research subjects, an d the obligation to implement specifically 
considered protections for groups and indivi duals who have an increased likelihood of 
being wronged or of incurring additional harm.
245  
 
International and U.S. standards set out specific protections for populations whose 
ability to make an informed  and voluntary decision to participate in research, and 
consent to the risks involved, is compromised as a result of their greater vulnerability or 
conditions giving rise to the possibility of coercion.246 This category includes children, 
pregnant women, mentally disabled persons, prisoners, and economically or 
educationally disadvantaged persons.247 With respect to prison ers, there are only very 
limited circumstances in which they may pa rticipate in medical research. Any such 
research must be expected to benefit the pris oner as part of their hospital treatment and 
the prisoner must freely and fully consent to participate in the res earch. In addition, the 
norm against nonconsensual human experiment ation is written into the domestic laws 
of more than 80 nations. 
 
U.S. Laws and Regulations 
 In the United States, protections of indivi dual research and experimentation subjects 
are codified in federal regulations, as we ll as in codes of professional conduct.
248 The 
U.S. system of protection for human re search subjects is heavily influenced by 
the Belmont Report of 1979, which improved the process of obtaining informed consent 
and demanded equitable selection of partic ipants to avoid populations that may be 
unfairly coerced into participating.249 Based on the Belmont Report, the Department of 
Health and Human Services (DHHS) began a pro cess that led to the adoption of revised 
regulations for the protection of human subj ects by 15 U.S. federal departments and 
agencies. Subpart A of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Titl e 45 Part 46, often 
referred to as the “Common Rule” or “Protect ion of Human Subjects Regulations,” serves  
 59 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org as the baseline standard of ethics to whic h government-funded research in the United 
States is held.250 
 
The systematic collection of data from any human subject for purposes other than their 
direct benefit requires human subjects pr otections and prospect ive review of and 
approval by an institutional review board (IRB). These protections must at a minimum 
guarantee that: 
 • Risks of harm to the subject are minimized; 
• Risks of harm to the subject are reasonable in relation to antici pated benefits to the 
subject and the importance of the knowledge that is  expected to result;  
• Selection of research subjects is equitable,  with an assessment of  research setting and 
special problems of research in volving vulnerable groups; and 
• Informed consent is sought from each  prospective subject and appropriately 
documented.
251 
 
The Common Rule, and 45 CFR 46 more broadly, requires rigorous procedures to ensure 
compliance with these protections and provide for the establishment and empowerment of IRBs, which review and de termine whether or not a proposed activity 
is in fact human subjects research, and then  determine whether it is ethical and is 
permissible. Subpart C of 45 CFR 46 affords extr a protections to prisoners in light of their 
greater vulnerability and compromised abilit y to give truly non-coerced informed 
consent.
252  
 
Although the CIA has not codified the Commo n Rule in its regulations, by executive 
order any human subjects research sponsore d, contracted, or conducted by the CIA 
must comply with DHHS-issu ed guidelines, and thus all subparts of 45 CFR 46.253 As 
such, the CIA is one of three federal agencies  to be bound by the more rigid regulations 
for protection of prisoners in medical studie s. When research is conducted outside the 
United States, international laws and regula tions may apply, but, in any event, the 
restrictions must meet or exc eed the Common Rule standards.  
 
   
 60 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org Appendix B: Select New Evidence 
Since PHR’s 2010 Analysis  
 
• Declassified CIA contracts of James Mitc hell and Bruce Jessen for “applied research” 
dating from 2002 to 2005, corresponding  with known events in the public record 
regarding torture at CIA blac k sites (released in 2016)254 
• Declassified documents on the evolution  of Mitchell and Jessen’s experimental 
proposal,255 including 2002 presentation materials,256 CIA contracts for Mitchell, 
Jessen and Associates dating from 2005 to 2009, and CIA records and memoranda257 
(released in 2016) 
• Declassified or newly unredacted documents  on the activities of the CIA Office of 
Medical Services,258 including medical guidelines issued in 2003 and 2004259 
• Declassified or newly unredacted reports of  the CIA Office of Inspector General into 
the mistreatment and/or deaths of detainees (released in 2016) 
• Newly unredacted portions of the 2004 CIA Inspector General’s special review of the 
CIA’s detention and interrogation activities fr om 2001 to 2003 (released in 2016)  
• Newly unredacted portions of the 2009 U.S. Department of  Justice Office of 
Professional Responsibility’s report on the Office of Legal Counsel’s memoranda, 
including discussion of “learned helplessn ess” and the evolution of legal defenses 
(released in 2016) 
• Declassified information on  the collection, analysis, an d dissemination of medical 
and interrogation data among and within the CIA, Department of Justice, and White 
House officials (released in 2016)260 
• Report of the American Psychological Asso ciation’s independent review relating to 
APA Ethics Guidelines, National Security Interrogations, and Torture (released in 
2015)261 
• Declassified summary of the U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence’s report on 
the CIA’s detention and interrogation prac tices, including concerns expressed over 
potential violation of federa l human subjects protection  rules (released in 2014)262 
 
   
 61 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org Appendix C: Select Timeline  
of Relevant Events 
 
2001 
• August 8, 2001: James Mitchell is gr anted a Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) 
contract for $90,000 to develop methods for conducting “cross-cultural” 
psychological assessments overseas. 
• September 11, 2001: Terrorist attacks occur. 
• December 2001: “Learned helplessness” theo rist Martin Seligman hosts meeting with 
Mitchell and others. CIA asks Mitchell and Bruce Jessen to review the Manchester Manual. They draft a white paper hypothesizing  that coercion can be used to reduce 
detainee resistance to hostile questioning. 
• December 21, 2001: Mitchell is granted a CIA contract for $10,000 to consult on CIA 
Office of Technical Services “applied res earch efforts” overseas and to conduct 
“specific, time-limited research projects.”  
 
2002  
• March 16, 2002: Two CIA officers devel op a draft proposal to use “enhanced 
interrogation” techniques. 
• March 28, 2002: Abu Zubaydah is capture d in Pakistan and flown to Thailand on 
March 31. 
• April 3, 2002: Seligman meets with Mitchell about learned helplessness.  
• April 4, 2002: Mitchell’s “applied research ” contract is modified and increased to 
$101,600. Shortly after, he deploys to Thailand to consult on detainee Abu 
Zubaydah’s interrogation. 
• April 16, 2002: First record of the Office of Legal Counsel (OLC) advising CIA on the 
legal meaning of “specific intent” to torture.  
• April to June 2002: CIA uses increasingl y abusive techniques on Abu Zubaydah in 
Thailand. 
• May 14, 2002: Mitchell’s “applied research ” contract is increased to $162,600. 
• June-July 2002: To secure approval for more “aggressive” techniques, Mitchell and 
Jessen consult experts and literature regardi ng “long-term psychological effects” of 
Survival, Evasion, Resistance,  and Escape (SERE) methods. 
• July 2002: COBALT, a CIA black site, ope ns in Afghanistan and operates without 
written interrogation or medical guidance. 
• July 1-2, 2002: Mitchell’s “applied res earch” contract is increased to $257,600. 
• July 22, 2002: Jessen is granted his first CIA contract for $135,000 to conduct “applied 
research.” 
• July 12, 2002: OLC advises CIA that “evide nce gained from past experience” can form 
part of a “good faith” defense of tortur e. CIA discusses medical risks of SERE 
techniques in real world applications.  
 62 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org • July 12-24, 2002: White House, Department  of Justice (DOJ), FBI, and CIA personnel 
discuss legal authorization for “enhanced  interrogation,” including the aim of 
producing learned helplessness. 
• August 1, 2002: OLC legal memos require health professionals to monitor harm and 
discuss “evidence gained from past experienc e” as part of “good faith” defense. 
• August 4-23, 2002: CIA subjects Abu Zubaydah to waterboarding and other 
“enhanced” methods. 
• August 21, 2002: Mitchell is granted a co ntract to identify relevant psychological 
variables and develop a model for psychological assessment. 
• September 5, 2002: Jessen’s “applied resear ch” contract is increased to $187,500. 
Mitchell’s “applied research” contract is increas ed to $310,100. Several days later, it is 
increased to $410,100.  
• November 12-18, 2002: CIA runs a pilot tr aining program on interrogation of “high 
value” detainees. 
• November 20, 2002: Detainee Gul Rahman freezes to death in his cell at COBALT 
prison. 
• October 24, 2002: Jessen’s “applied resear ch” contract is increased to $267,500. 
• December 2002: The Office of Medica l Service (OMS) takes over psychological 
coverage at COBALT. The Thailand black site  is closed and BLUE in Poland opens. 
 
2003 
• Early 2003: Mitchell claims that the “w heels had come off” the CIA’s “enhanced 
interrogation” program. 
• January 1, 2003: Mitchell’s “applied research” contract is increased to $348,000. 
Jessen’s is increased to $348,000. Jessen rece ives an additional contract to develop a 
consultation and training model. 
• January 28, 2003: CIA issues written interrogation and detention guidelines. CIA 
Office of Inspector General (OIG) initiates an internal review of the CIA program. 
• February 2003: The American Psychological  Association’s Mel Gravitz affirms that 
Mitchell’s involvement is ethical, statin g “prior and ongoing experience” can 
supplement a lack of knowledge basis in a pplying psychological skills in this area.  
• March 2003: OMS completes a draft version of medical guidelines. A medical officer 
describes a shift in the OMS’s role from limiting to “maximizing” the impact of interrogations and indemnifying interrogators.  
• April 2003: OLC and CIA begin jointly d eveloping “Bullet Point s” discussing legal 
defenses to torture. 
• May 2003: Mitchell and Jessen shift from interrogator to program developer role and 
develop a proposal to apply “even less intr usive techniques,” which CIA will then 
“field test.”  
• June 2003: OLC issues a still-classified le gal memo providing written authorization of 
waterboarding and other techniques. 
• June 13, 2003: Mitchell’s and Jessen’s “app lied research” contracts are both increased 
to $598,000. Jessen receives an additional  contract to develop a consultation and  
 63 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org training model. Mitchell is given a cont ract to adapt and modify additional 
psychological theories for us e in “operational settings.” 
• June 16, 2003: OLC/CIA Bullet Points includ e data gained from interrogations as part 
of a “good faith” defense. OMS objects to Mitchell’s and Jessen’s dual role and calls 
any data collected by them “suspect.” 
• June 20, 2003: The DOJ distances itself  from joint Bullet Points. OMS reviews 
Mitchell’s and Jessen’s contracts. 
• July 17-18, 2003: Mitchell and Jessen di scuss data collection and studies at the 
APA/CIA/RAND Science of Deception conference. 
• September 2003: OMS issues “draft” medical guidelines. The black site BLUE closes in 
Poland and BLACK in Romania is opened. 
 
2004 • January 1, 2004 : Mitchell and Jessen are granted contracts to consult on debriefing 
efforts at black sites and to conduct training. 
• January 13, 2004: OMS raises concerns about Mitchell’s and Jessen’s conflicts of 
interest, as part of the OI G Special Review process.  
• March 2, 2004: CIA requests that OLC reaffirm the Bullet Points and other legal 
interpretations.  
• April 2004: COBALT prison is closed. 
• April 28, 2004: Photos of dead or tortu red detainees at Abu Ghraib are publicly 
released.  
• May 3, 2004: CIA Inspector General (IG) recommends a study of the “efficacy” of the 
techniques. A rapid review is undertaken by two senior CIA officers, but they decline 
to review “efficacy,” citing concern over fe deral human subjects protection rules.  
• May 17, 2004: OMS issues official medical guidelines. 
• May 24, 2004: CIA General Counsel Scott Mu ller states that “enhanced interrogation” 
techniques were suspended on this date. 
• June 2004: CIA and OLC continue to discu ss the status of the Bullet Points. Mitchell 
and Jessen write a paper defendin g their interrogation methods.  
• June 15-18, 2004: Assistant Attorney Ge neral Jack Goldsmith withdraws Assistant 
Attorney General Jay Bybee’s legal guidance.  
• June 23, 2004: IG Helgerson transmits Special Review to the House and Senate 
Intelligence Committees.  
• July 2004: CIA seeks a formal written opi nion regarding the legality of “enhanced” 
techniques. 
• August 2004: Close Counterterrorism Ce nter/OLC communication re authorization 
of specific techniques, including re presentations from OMS doctors.  
• November/December 2004: CIA reiterates that it is not possible to conduct a study of 
“efficacy.” 
• December 2004: OMS issues revised medical guidelines. • December 30, 2004: CIA sends OLC a 20-page “background paper” on the combined 
use of techniques. 
  
 64 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org 2005 
• January 1, 2005: Mitchell’s and Jessen’s co ntracts for debriefing and training support 
are increased to $235,000 each. The black site VIOLET opens in Lithuania.  
• January 8-15, 2005: OLC begins drafting  a “combined techniques” memo and CIA 
sends updated OMS guidelines. 
• January 28, 2005: IG reassures OMS that  a study of “efficacy” did not involve 
“additional guinea pig research,” indicatin g OMS had expressed concerns, likely 
between May 2004 and January 2005. 
• February 2005: Mitchell and Jessen issue pape r explaining that in dividual physical 
techniques can’t be studied but must be a ssessed in light of the total effect of 
sequencing multiple techniques. 
• March 2005: OLC and CIA communicate regularly about effects of “enhanced” 
techniques. Mitchell, Jessen and Associates ar e granted a consulting contract for $1.1 
million to develop the CIA’s interrogation capabilities, which includes training 
operational psychologists and other CIA personnel. 
• April 11, 2005: OMS expresses concerns about an apparent sh ift in its role to 
determining the legality of techniques.  
• May 4, 2005: Mitchell’s and Jessen’s debrie fing and training contracts are increased to 
$378,700 each. 
• May 4-5, 2005: Bradbury faxes CIA questions  regarding the medical effects of various 
techniques. CIA responds, based on OMS desc ription of its findings to date with CIA 
detainees.  
• May 10-30, 2005: OMS research findings ar e incorporated into new Bradbury legal 
memos. 
   
 65 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org Endnotes 
 
1 U.S. Senate, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Committee Study of the Central Intelligence Agency’s Detention and Inte rrogation 
Program, December 9, 2014, 10, 32, https://fas.org/irp/congress/2014_rpt/ssci-rdi.pdf [“SSCI Summary”].  
2 SSCI Summary, 17-18; U.S. Senate Armed Services Committee, Report of its Inquiry into the Treatment of Detainees in U.S. Cust ody, 
November 20, 2008, xii, 69, 100, 102, https://www.armed-services.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Detainee-Report-Final_April-22-2009.p df 
[“SASC Report”]. 
3 Physicians for Human Rights [PHR], “Experiments in Torture: Evidence of Human Subject Research and Experimentation in the ‘En hanced’ 
Interrogation Program,” June 2010, https://s3.amazonaws.com/PHR_Reports/Experiments_in_Torture.pdf.  
4 For more on the U.S. government’s wrongful classification of information regarding the CIA torture program, see Open the Gove rnment’s 
September 15, 2015 complaint to the U.S. National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), 
http://www.openthegovernment.org/sites/default/files/ISOO_Complaint_CIA_torture.pdf. 
5 See, e.g., U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Professional Responsibility, Investigation into the Office of Legal Counsel’ s Memoranda 
Concerning Issues Relating to the Central Intelligence Agency’s Use of “Enhanced Interrogation Techniques” on Suspected Terrori sts, July 29, 
2009, 242-243, https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/33.pdf [“OPR Report”]. See also U.S. Senator Dianne Feinst ein’s 
statements regarding the CIA’s inaccurate representations: https://www.feinstein.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/senate-intelligenc e-
committee-study-on-cia-detention-and-interrogation-program.  
6 National Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the United States, The 9/11 Commission report: final report of the National Com mission on 
Terrorist Attacks upon the United States, 2004, https://9-11commission.gov/report. 
7 Jean Maria Arrigo, Roy J. Eidelson, and Ray Bennett, “Psychology under fire: Adversarial operational psychology and psycholog ical ethics,” 
Peace and Conflict 18, no. 4 (2012): 384-400, http://psycnet.apa.org/journals/pac/18/4/384. 
8 Cofer Black, former CIA Counterterrorism Center Director, quoted in Jane Mayer, “Outsourcing Torture,” New Yorker, February 1 4, 2005, 
http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2005/02/14/outsourcing-torture. 9 SSCI Summary, 18. See also Ali Soufan, The Black Banner: The Inside Story of 9/11 and the War Against al-Qaeda (New York: W.W . Norton & 
Co., 2011). 
10 U.S. Senate, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Committee Study of the Central Intelligence Agency’s Detention and Int errogation 
Program, Findings and Conclusions, December 9, 2014, 11 [“SSCI Summary, Findings and Conclusions”]. 
11 Jane Mayer, “The Experiment,” New Yorker, July 11, 2005, http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2005/07/11/the-experiment-3. 12 CIA Cable, “Eyes Only – Countermeasures to Al-Qa’ida Resistance to Interrogation Techniques,” April 1, 2002, 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/96o.pdf [“Countermeasures Cable”]. This document appears to draw on the s till-
classified white paper developed by Mitchell and Jessen in December 2001, “Recognizing and Developing Countermeasures to Al Qae da 
Resistance to Interrogation Techniques: A Resistance Training Perspective.” See SSCI Summary, 21. 
13 SSCI Summary, Findings and Conclusions, 11; SSCI Summary, 168-169. 
14 SSCI Summary, Findings and Conclusions, 11-12; PHR, “Doing Harm: Health Professionals’ Central Role in the CIA Torture Progr am,” 
December 2014, http://s3.amazonaws.com/PHR_Reports/doing-harm-health-professionals-central-role-in-the-cia-torture-program.pdf.  
15 PHR, “Experiments in Torture.” 16 James E. Mitchell and Bill Harlow, Enhanced Interrogation: Inside the Minds and Motives of the Islamic Terrorists Trying to Destroy 
America (New York: Crown Publishing, 2016); Alexandra King, “CIA contractor: Enhanced interrogation techniques ‘saved lives’,” CNN, 
December 17, 2016, http://www.cnn.com/2016/12/17/politics/james-mitchell-advanced-interrogation-cnntv. 
17 45 C.F.R. § 46 (2016). A revision the Common Rule, set to take effect January 19, 2018, includes the following exemptions: “ For purposes of 
this part, the following activities are deemed not to be research: ‘Authorized operational activities (as determined by each ag ency) in support of                                                               
 66 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org                                                                                                                                                                       
intelligence, homeland security, defense, or other national security missions.” “§__.102: Definitions for purposes of this poli cy,” Federal 
Register 82 (12), January 19, 2017, 7261, https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2017-01-19/pdf/2017-01058.pdf. 18 See, e.g., California State University San Marcos, “Definition: Guidelines for Defining Systematic Investigation and General izable 
Knowledge,” Graduate Studies and Research, https://www.csusm.edu/gsr/irb/documents/policy_guidelines/definition.html. 
19 Richard Cash, Daniel Wikler, Abha Saxena, and Alexander Capron (eds.), Casebook On Ethical Issues in International Health Re search 
(Geneva: World Health Organization, 2009), http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/44118/4/9789241547727_eng.pdf; Jay Katz, “H uman 
Experimentation and Human Rights,” Saint Louis University Law Journal 38, no. 7 (1993), http://digitalcommons.law.yale.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=3917&context=fss_papers; Elliott J. Schuchardt, “Walking a Thin Line: 
Distinguishing Between Research and Medical Practice during Operation Desert Storm,” Columbia Journal of Law and Social Problem s 26, no. 
77 (1992). 
20 See, e.g., Countermeasures Cable; Bruce Jessen, Joint Personnel Recovery Agency, “Al Qaida Resistance: Training Based on Rec ently 
Obtained Al Qaida Documents,” DOD Briefing Slides, March 1, 2002, https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/al-qaida_resistance_slides_part1.pdf, https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/al-qaida_resistance_slides_part2.pdf ( “Resistance 
Slides”); Bruce Jessen, Joint Personnel Recovery Agency, “Exploitation,” DOD Briefing Slides, undated, 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/exploitation_slides_part1.pdf,  
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/exploitation_slides_part2.pdf (“Exploitation Slides”); SASC Report, 7-9. 
21 SSCI Summary, 10, 32. For an analysis of “learned helplessness” theory as applied in the CIA torture program, see Metin Baso glu, “Definition 
of torture in United States law: Does it provide legal cover for “enhanced interrogation techniques”?,” February 7, 2015, 
https://metinbasoglu.wordpress.com/2015/02/07/definition-of-torture-enhanced-interrogation. 
22 Exploitation Presentation. See also CIA, Background Paper on CIA’s Combined Use of Interrogation Techniques, December 2004, 1-9, 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/pdfs/DOJOLC001126.pdf [“Background Paper”]. 
23 OPR Report, 34; SASC Report, 4. 24 See, e.g., PHR, “Experiments in Torture,” 19-24; SASC Report, 31. 
25 OPR Report, 34. 
26 Jason Leopold, “Psychologist James Mitchell Admits He Waterboarded al Qaeda Suspects,” VICE News, December 15, 2014, 
https://news.vice.com/article/psychologist-james-mitchell-admits-he-waterboarded-al-qaeda-suspects. 
27 SSCI Summary, 21, 26, 464; CIA Cable, “Eyes Only – Interrogation Plan [redacted],” April 12, 2002, 2, https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/50_0.pdf. 
28 Exploitation Slides, Part 1, 15. 
29 See SSCI Summary, 21, 26, 32, 464; OPR Report, 40-42; SASC Report, 17, citing Jane Mayer, “The Black Sites,” The New Yorker,  August 13, 
2007, http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2007/08/13/the-black-sites. 
30 David H. Hoffman et al., Sidley Austin LLP, Report to the Special Committee of the Board of Directors of the American Psycho logical 
Association: Independent Review Relating to APA Ethics Guidelines, National Security Interrogations, and Torture, July 2, 2016,  48,  
http://www.apa.org/independent-review/revised-report.pdf [“Hoffman Report”]; Hoffman Report, Binder 5, “How to Win the Peace,” 830, 
http://www.apa.org/independent-review/binder-5.pdf. 31 Resistance Slides, Part 1, 12. See also SASC Report, 8-9. 
32 SSCI Summary, 463-464. 
33 Hoffman Report, 127. 
34 Seligman denies discussing interrogation with Mitchell or other CIA personnel, despite contemporaneous media accounts that 
psychologists were involved in inflicting “non-violent forms of coercion” in the interrogation of Abu Zubaydah. See “‘Learned H elplessness’ & 
Torture: An Exchange,” Martin Seligman, Reply by Tamsin Shaw, The New Yorker, April 21, 2016, 
http://www.nybooks.com/articles/2016/04/21/learned-helplessness-torture-an-exchange. 
35 CIA Cable, “Eyes Only – Interrogation Plan (Redacted),” April 12, 2002. 
36 OPR Report, 40-42.  
 67 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org                                                                                                                                                                       
37 Jane Mayer, The Dark Side: The Inside Story of How The War on Terror Turned into a War on American Ideals (New York: Anchor Books, 
2009): 156. 38 Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, U.S. Department of Justice, “Memor andum for 
John A. Rizzo [Senior Deputy General Counsel, CIA]; Re: Application of 18 U.S.C. §§ 2340-2340A to 
Certain Techniques that May Be Used in the Interrogation of a High Value al Qaeda Detainee,” May 10, 2005, 59, 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/20.pdf [“Bradbury Individual Techniques Memo” (May 2005)], citing Backgro und 
Paper. 39 SASC Report, 103. 
40 OPR Report, 34, 226-227. See also Senator Carl Levin in 2008: “These techniques were designed to give our students a taste o f what they 
might be subjected to if captured by a ruthless, lawless enemy so that they would be better prepared to resist. The techniques were never 
intended to be used against detainees in U.S. custody. As one [Joint Personnel Recovery Agency (JPRA)] instructor explained, SE RE training is 
based on illegal exploitation (under the rules listed in the 1949 Geneva Convention Relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of W ar) of prisoners 
over the last 50 years.” SSCI Summary, 32. 
41 KUBARK Counterintelligence Interrogation, July 1963, https://nsarchive.gwu.edu/NSAEBB/NSAEBB122/CIA%20Kubark%201-60.pdf. See  
also SSCI Summary, 18. 
42 SASC Report, xxvii, 5, 6, 30, 172, 231. 
43 SSCI Summary, 18. 44 SASC Report, 31. 
45 See SASC Report, 4-5, 29-31, 36. 
46 See PHR, “Experiments in Torture,” 19-24. 
47 OPR Report, 55. 
48 Ibid.; CIA Cable, “Eyes Only – Comments on Proposed Enhanced Interrogation Process,” July 23, 2002, 1-2, https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/31_0.pdf. 
49 OPR Report, 65. 
50 Mitchell and Jessen’s company agreed to train CIA officers in order to provide “the capability of employing ‘state of the ar t’ scientifically 
based exploitation and interrogation tactics, techniques and procedures designed to gain actionable intelligence from willing a nd unwilling 
human sources under time urgent conditions.” Mitchell, Jessen & Associates, “Statement of Work: DCI’s Counterterrorist Center ( CTC): 
Elicitation and Training for CTC, ‘ETC’ Project,” June 15, 2005, 5, https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/cia_4 3.pdf [“MJA 
Contract, June 15, 2005”]. 
51 Hoffman Report, 128. 52 SSCI Summary, Findings and Conclusions, 11; SSCI Summary, 168-169. 
53 Countermeasures Cable, 6. The document further states, “Skillfully crafted countermeasures can be developed in such a way th at they do 
not violate the Geneva Conventions.” However, Jessen told the Senate Armed Services Committee in 2007 that there was no basis t o make such 
a claim. SASC Report, 10-11. 
54 SASC Report, 9. 55 SSCI Summary, Findings and Conclusions, 11. 
56 Background Paper, 1. 
57 Ibid., 1-9. 
58 Ibid. 
59 Ibid. 60 SSCI Summary, 46. 
61 MJA Statement of Work, June 15, 2005, 3-5 
62 SSCI Summary, 35.  
 68 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org                                                                                                                                                                       
63 CIA OMS, “Summary and Reflections of Chief of Medical Services on OMS Participation in the RDI Program,” undated, 46, 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/cia_24.pdf [“OMS Summary and Reflections”]. 64 Background Paper, 1-9. 
65 CIA, “CIA Comments on the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Report on the Rendition, Detention, and Interrogation Prog ram,” June 
27, 2003, 7, https://fas.org/irp/congress/2014_rpt/cia-ssci.pdf [“CIA Comments”]. 
66 See, e.g., Hoffman Report, 48 (discussing a December 2001 meeting between Seligman, Mitchell, Jessen, and Kirk Hubbard); 165  (discussing 
a January 2002 meeting of the CIA’s Professional Standards Advisory Committee (PSAC), in which Mitchell presented “research fin dings in 
cross-cultural assessment of personality”); 48 (discussing a February 2002 meeting with American Psychological Association acad emics and 
researchers and various law enforcement and intelligence personnel, including Hubbard and Mitchell); 127, 164 (discussing an Ap ril 2002 
meeting between Seligman, Mitchell, Jessen, and Hubbard); 51 (discussing PSAC member Mel Gravitz’s email communication with Mit chell); 
and 53 (discussing a joint APA, CIA and RAND conference on “The Science of Deception,” attended by Mitchell, Jessen). See also SASC Report, 
11, 14-16 (discussing Jessen’s 2002 contacts with JPRA regarding interrogation training and prisoner handling recommendations);  CIA OIG 
Report, 14 (discussing OTS consultations with JPRA experts an d academics on the SERE techniques); and Stephen Soldz, Nathaniel Raymond, 
Steven Reisner et al., All the President’s Psychologists: The American Psychological Association’s Secret Complicity with the W hite House and 
U.S. Intelligence Community in Support of the CIA’s “Enhanced” Interrogation Program, April 2015, 
https://s3.amazonaws.com/s3.documentcloud.org/documents/2069718/report.pdf. 
67 SSCI Summary, 126. 68 CIA, Inspector General, Special Review: Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities, May 7, 2004, 11, 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/cia_26.pdf [“CIA OIG Report”]; SSCI Summary, 12, 18-20. 
69 SSCI Summary, 20. 
70 Ibid. 
71 For a discussion of Geneva prohibitions against human experimentation, see M. Cherif Bassiouni, Crimes Against Humanity in International Criminal Law, 2d rev. ed. (Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1999). See also Hoffman Repor t, 144-149. 
72 SASC Report, 2; SSCI Summary, 20. In Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 126 S. Ct. 2749 (2006), the Supreme Court rejected the Bush Adminis tration’s 
interpretation of Common Article 3 set forth by the President in 2002.  The Supreme Court found that Common Article 3 applied t o all 
individuals in the conflict, required fair trials for all detainees, and prohibited torture and indefinite detention.  In respo nse, Congress enacted 
the Military Commissions Act (MCA) of 2006, 28 U.S.C. § 2241, which barred victims of Common Article 3 violations from invoking  the Geneva 
Conventions in habeas corpus proceedings or civil actions, effectively rendering Common Article 3 unenforceable except for cond uct that 
[could be prosecuted under the War Crimes Act if it] fell within the MCA’s narrow definition of “grave breaches.”  The MCA furt her delegated 
authority to define Common Article 3 violations other than grave breaches to the President. Subsequently, in 2007, President Bu sh issued 
Executive Order 13440 which provided an interpretation of Common Article 3’s application the CIA’s detention and interrogation program; 
this order was rescinded in 2009 by President Obama in Executive Order 13493. 
73 “Memorandum from President George W. Bush to the Vice President, Secretary of State, Secretary of Defense, Attorney 
General, Chief of Staff to the President, CIA Director, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs and Chairman o f 
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, regarding “Humane Treatment of al Qaeda and Taliban Detainees,” February 7, 2002, https://lawfare.s3 -us-west-
2.amazonaws.com/staging/s3fs-public/uploads/2013/05/Memorandum-from-President-to-Vice-President-et-al.-Humane-Treatment-of-al-
Qaeda-and-Taliban-Detainees-Feb-7-2002.pdf 
74 See Human Rights Watch (HRW), No More Excuses: A Roadmap to Justice for CIA Torture, December 2014, 
53-55, https://www.hrw.org/report/2015/12/01/no-more-excuses/roadmap-justice-cia-torture. See also SSCI 
Summary, 115-116, citing CIA General Counsel Scott W. Muller, “Memorandum for the Record: ‘Humane’ 
Treatment of CIA detainees,” February 12, 2003, 
https://ciasavedlives.com/bdr/humane-treatment-of-cia-
detainees.pdf .  
 69 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org                                                                                                                                                                       
75 Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, adopted December 10, 1984, G.A. Re s. 
39/46, annex, 39 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 51) at 197, U.N. Doc. A/39/51 (1984), entered into force June 26, 1987, http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CAT.aspx [Convention against Torture]. The United States ratified the Conven tion in 
October 1994. 
76 Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field, adopted August  12, 1949, 
75 UNTS 31, entered into force October 21, 1950, art. 50, https://ihl-
databases.icrc.org/applic/ihl/ihl.nsf/Article.xsp?action=openDocument&documentId=8DE472A17F7E30AFC12563CD0051A2D6 [Geneva Convention I]; Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, adopted August 12, 1949, 75 UNT S 287, entered 
into force October 21, 1950, art. 147, https://ihl-
databases.icrc.org/applic/ihl/ihl.nsf/9861b8c2f0e83ed3c1256403003fb8c5/f8d322bf3c0216b2c12563cd0051c654 [Geneva Convention II];  
Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War, adopted August 12, 1949, 75 UNTS 135, entered into force Octob er 21, 1950, 
art. 130, https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/ihl/WebART/375-590156?OpenDocument [Geneva Convention III]; and Geneva Convention rela tive to 
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, adopted August 12, 1949, 75 UNTS 287, entered into force October 21, 1950, a rt. 147, 
https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/applic/ihl/ihl.nsf/Article.xsp?action=openDocument&documentId=F8D322BF3C0216B2C12563CD0051C654 
[Geneva Convention IV].  
77 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), Art. 7, G.A. Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 UN GAOR Supp. (No. 16), UN D oc. A/6316 
(1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, http://www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/pages/ccpr.aspx; see also ICRC, “Rule 92.” 78 Throughout this period, human subjects protections were also weakened in connection with military research. In December 2001 , Congress 
amended the U.S. criminal code to allow the Secretary of Defense to waive informed consent for experimental research projects t o “advance 
the development of a medical product necessary to the armed forces,” if it might “directly benefit the subject.” 
https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/BILLS-107hr2586rh/pdf/BILLS-107hr2586rh.pdf In March 2002, the Department of Defense (DOD) withdr ew 
a 1983 directive on the protection of human subjects in DOD-supported research. The new version replaced requirements of Nuremb erg 
compliance with weaker language requiring Nuremberg familiarity. See DOD Instruction, “Protection of Human Subjects and Adheren ce to 
Ethical Standards in DoD-Supported Research,” DODD 3216.02, March 25, 2002, 
http://www.med.navy.mil/sites/nmrc/documents/hspp_dod3216_2.pdf. In addition, as a practical consequence, because the Common Ru le 
no longer applied to detainees, neither did the Code of Federal Regulations. These changes potentially impacted the CIA program , given the 
comingling of DOD and CIA activities, personnel, and detention facilities. See, e.g., SSCI Summary, 140; Memo from Scott W. Mul ler to James 
L. Pavitt, “CIA Detainees at GITMO,” February (redacted) 2004, 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/pdfs/cia_production_c06552087_cia_detainees_at_gitmo.pdf; and Memorandum of 
Agreement between the Department of Defense (DOD) and Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Concerning the Detention by DOD of CIA 
Terrorists at a Facility at Guantanamo Bay Naval Station, September 1, 2006, https://www.cia.gov/library/readingroom/docs/00065 41712.pdf. 
For a lengthier discussion, see Hoffman Report, 144-149. 
79 War Crimes Act, 18 U.S.C. § 2441(d)(1)(C) (2006). 
80 See, e.g., Memorandum from David J. Barron, Acting Assistant Attorney General, OLC, for the Attorney General, Re: Withdrawal  of Office of 
Legal Counsel Opinions (April 15, 2009), https://fas.org/irp/agency/doj/olc/withdraw-0409.pdf and Memorandum from David J. Barr on, 
Acting Assistant Attorney General, OLC, for the Attorney General,  Re: Withdrawal of Office of Legal Counsel Opinion (June 11, 2 009), 
https://fas.org/irp/agency/doj/olc/withdraw-0609.pdf. 
81 Memorandum from Jay S. Bybee, assistant attorney general, to Alberto R. Gonzales, counsel to the president, regarding 
“Standards for Conduct of Interrogation under 18 U.S.C. Sections 2340-2340A,” August 1, 2002, 1, 
https://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/olc/legacy/2010/08/05/memo-gonzales-aug2002.pdf [“Bybee I Memo”]. 82 Convention against Torture, art. 1. 
83 See Special Rapporteur on Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, Report on Torture and Other  Cruel, 
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, Human Rights Council, 30, U.N. Doc. A/HRC/13/39/Add.5 (Feb. 5, 2010),  
 70 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org                                                                                                                                                                       
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrcouncil/docs/13session/A.HRC.13.39.Add.5_en.pdf;  
http://digitalcommons.law.yale.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=5735&context=fss_papers.  84 See David J. Luban and Henry Shue, “Mental Torture: A Critique of Erasures in U.S. Law,” Georgetown Law Journal 100, no. 3, 
http://scholarship.law.georgetown.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1619&context=facpub (describing the “substitution trick,” a f allacy by 
“which mental pain and suffering get defined through their causes and aftermath and not the experience itself”). 
85 Memorandum from Jay S. Bybee, assistant attorney general, to John Rizzo, acting general counsel of the CIA, regarding ‘Inter rogation of al 
Qaeda Operative,’” August 1, 2001, http://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/olc/legacy/2010/08/05/memo-bybee2002.pdf  [“Bybee  II 
Memo”]. 
86 SSSI Summary, 84. 
87 One episode of waterboarding, in which Abu Zubaydah lost consciousn ess, was cited in multiple OMS emails from March 6, 2003 through at 
least October 26, 2004. SSSI Summary, 44. 
88 CIA Office of Medical Services, “Draft OMS Guidelines on Medical and Psychological Support to Detainee Interrogations,” Sept ember 4, 2003 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/document/cia-oig-special-review [“OMS Guidelines (September 2003)”]; “OMS Guidelines on Medi cal 
and Psychological Support to Detainee Rendition, Interrogation and Detention,” May 17, 2004, 
https://www.aclu.org/sites/default/files/torturefoia/released/103009/cia-olc/2.pdf [“OMS Guidelines (May 2004)”]; “OMS Guidelin es on 
Medical and Psychological Support to Detainee Rendition, Interrogation and Detention,” December 2004, 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/pdfs/cia_production_c06541536_oms_guidelines_on_medical_and_psychological _su
pport_to_detainee_rendition_interrogation_and_detention.pdf [“OMS Guidelines (December 2004)”]. 
89 Bybee I Memo, 5-6. 
90 Ibid., 8-9. 
91 OPR Report, 48, 66. 
92 Ibid., 52. 93 Ibid., 56, 66. 
94 Letter from Scott Muller, CIA, to Jack Goldsmith, OLC, re: legal principles applicable to the CIA interrogation program, Mar ch 2, 2004, 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/55.pdf [“Bullet Points”]. For a lengthier discussion, see OPR Report, 100 -103 and HRW, 
No More Excuses, 67. 
95 See, e.g., SSCI Summary, 18; SASC Report, xii; Shane O’Mara, Why Torture Doesn’t Work: The Neuroscience of Interrogation (Ca mbridge: 
Harvard University Press, 2015); Steven M. Kleinman, “The Promise of Interrogation v. the Problem of Torture,” Valparaiso Unive rsity Law 
Review 43, no. 4 (2009): 1577-1590, http://scholar.valpo.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1128&context=vulr; John W. Schiemann, Does 
Torture Work? (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016); Allison D. Redlich, Christopher E. Kelly, and Jeanee C. Miller, “The Who , What, and 
Why of Human Intelligence Gathering: Self-Reported Measures of Interrogation Methods,” Applied Cognitive Psychology 28, no. 6 ( 2014): 817–
828, http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/acp.3040/abstract; High-Value Detainee Interrogation Group Report, Interrogatio n: A 
Review of the Science, September 2016, https://www.fbi.gov/file-repository/hig-report-interrogation-a-review-of-the-science-sep tember-
2016.pdf/view; and Mark Costanzo, Ellen Gerrity, and M. Brinton Lykes, “Psychologists and the Use of Torture in Interrogations, ” Analyses 
Social Issues and Public Policy 7, no. 1 (2007): 7-20,  https://www.spssi.org/index.cfm?fuseaction=page.viewpage&pageid=1251; L etter to 
Presidential Candidates signed by 26 interrogation and intelligence professionals. September 17 2015, 
http://www.humanrightsfirst.org/sites/default/files/interrogator-letter-candidates.pdf.   
96 See Mitchell’s CIA contracts for “applied research,” dated December 21, 2001; April 4, 2002; May 14, 2002; July 1, 2002; Sep tember 5, 2002; 
September 12, 2002; January 1, 2003; April 8, 2003; June 16, 2003; June 16, 2003; and January 1, 2004, 
https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/2992829/Read-the-contracts-for-James-Mitchell.pdf [“Mitchell Research Contracts”]; J essen’s 
CIA contracts for “applied research,” dated July 22, 2002; September 5, 2002; October 24, 2002; January 1, 2003; April 8, 2003;  and June 16, 
2003, https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/2992828/Read-the-contract-for-John-B-Jessen.pdf [“Jessen Research Contracts”].  Some 
of the contracts have missing, undated, or ambiguous Statements of Work.  
 71 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org                                                                                                                                                                       
97 The contracts classify work as CONUS (contiguous United States, i.e., domestic) and OCONUS (outside contiguous United States , i.e., 
abroad). 98 See Countermeasures Cable. 
99 This plan is cited in a Vaughn Index describing documents from the files of the CIA Office of Inspector General, in response  to 2003 and 
2004 FOIA requests by the American Civil Liberties Union. See ACLU OIG Remand, “Other-81,” 71, 
https://www.aclu.org/sites/default/files/field_document/oig_vaughnindex.pdf [“OIG Vaugn Index”]. 
100 Mitchell Research Contract, April 4, 2003; SSCI Summary, 26; and Mitchell, Enhanced Interrogation, 16-17. 101 Marcy Wheeler, “Did Abu Zubaydah’s Torture Begin After May 28, 2002?,” Emptywheel, May 22, 2009, 
https://www.emptywheel.net/2009/05/22/did-abu-zubaydahs-torture-begin-after-may-28-2002, citing Ari Shapiro, “Did White House O K 
Earliest Detainee Abuse?,” NPR, May 20, 2009, http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=104350361 and ACLU’s “Tortur e FOIA 
List” in ACLU v. Department of Defense, 04-CV-4151, May 18, 2009, 
https://www.aclu.org/sites/default/files/torturefoia/legaldocuments/torturefoia_list_20090518.pdf. See also Sheri Fink, “Do CIA  cables show 
doctors monitoring torture?,” Salon, May 28, 2009, http://www.salon.com/2009/05/28/torture_27. 
102 OPR Report, 33. 
103 Ibid., 34. See also, e.g., CIA Cable, “IMMEDIATE Turning Up the Heat in the AZ Interrogations,” April 30, 2002, 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/99o.pdf. 
104 OMS Summary and Reflections, 13. 105 OPR Report, 33-34. 
106 SSCI Summary, 27-30. See also CIA Email, “Hold Eyes Only – Request IC Psychologist Remain at (redacted),” mid-April 2002, 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/19_0.pdf. 
107 SSCI Report, 30. See also Soufan, The Black Banner, 399; CIA Email, “IMMEDIATE: Turning up the Heat in the AZ Interrogation s,” April 30, 
2002, https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/99o.pdf; and CIA Cable, “Eyes Only – Plans to Increase Pressure on Abu 
Zubaydah,” May (redacted), 2002, https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/97o.pdf. 
108 Mitchell Research Contract, May 17, 2002. 
109 SSCI Summary, 30-31; OMS Summary and Reflections, 13-14. 
110 OMS Summary and Reflections, 15. See also OIG Report, 13-14. 
111 OMS Summ ary and Reflections, 13-14. 
112 SSCI Summary, 34. 
113 CIA OIG Report, 21. 
114 Ibid. 115 SSCI Summary, 36. 
116 Ibid., 40-42. 
117 Ibid., 44-45. 
118 Ibid., 36, 42. 
119 Mitchell Contracts, August 8, 2001; August 21, 2002; April 8, 2003; June 16, 2003. 120 See, e.g., CIA Memo, Draft “Psychological Assessment of Zain al-“Abedin al-Abideen Mohammad Hassan, a.k.a., Abu Zubaydah,” undated, 
https://www.aclu.org/sites/default/files/torturefoia/released/082409/olcremand/2004olc4.pdf and CIA Email, “Setting up for 
Interrogations,” September 22, 2002, https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/36_0.pdf. 
121 SSCI Summary, 65-66, 71-72. See also CIA Email, “Mental Status Examination and Recommended Interrogation Plan for Gul Rahma n,” 
November 2002, https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/63.pdf and CIA Cable, “Eyes Only - Interrogation/Psycholog ical 
Assessment of Abu Zubaydah,” July 2003, https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/80.pdf. 
122 CIA Director of Central Intelligence, “Guidelines on Interrogations Conducted Pursuant to the Presidential Memorandum of No tification of 
17 September 2001,” January 28, 2003, 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/pdfs/cia_production_c06541522_guidelines_on_interrogations_conducted_purs uant 
 72 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org                                                                                                                                                                       
_to_the_presidential_memorandum_of_notification_of_17_september_2001.pdf [“DCI Interrogation Guidelines”]. See CIA Email, “Sett ing up 
for Interrogations,” September 22, 2002, www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/36_0.pdf. 123 Mitchell Contracts, April 8, 2003 and June 16, 2003. 
124 See, e.g., OPR Report, 56, 125 and SSCI Summary, 114, 416. 
125 Mitchell Research Contract, September 5, 2002; SSCI Summary, 49-50, 53. 
126 Mitchell Research Contract, September 12, 2002; SSCI Summary, 75. 
127 Jessen Research Contract, October 24, 2002; SSCI Summary, 66; CIA OIG, Report of Investigation, Death of a Detainee in [red acted], April 27, 
2005, 2, 35-36, https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/cia_25_29.x.pdf [“OIG Rahman Report”]. 
128 OMS Summary and Reflections, 45. 
129 Ibid., 33; Memorandum for Deputy Director for Operations (CIA), “Death Investigation – Gul Rahman,” January 28, 2003, 8-9, 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/cia_17_29.m_0.pdf [“Rahman Investigation”]. Following Rahman’s death, Jes sen 
stated that the use of “hard takedowns” and other techniques “need to be written down and codified with a stamp of approval or you’re going to 
be liable.” CTC Memo, Rahman Death Investigation – Interview of John B. Jessen,” undated, 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/cia_1_0.pdf. 
130 SSCI Summary, 63, 102. 
131 Ibid., 124. See also OMS Summary and Reflections, 41. 
132 CIA Email, “Availability of (redacted) Psychologist Jim Mitchell / Role of Mitchell and Jesson (sic),” May 28, 2003,  https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/4_0.pdf. See also CIA Email, “(Redacted) RDG Tasking for IC Psychologists  Jessen and 
Mitchell,” June 16, 2003, https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/cia_16_29.t.pdf. 
133 “From now on they will be doing mostly strategic consulting, research and program development projects, and the [redacted] psychology 
role. They are willing to interrogate, mentor, given presentations, or whatever as needed, but they now believe we have enough interrogators 
to go forward and need them much less in the interrogation role, if at all.” CIA Email, “Availability of (redacted) Psychologis t Jim Mitchell / 
Role of Mitchell and Jesson (sic),” May 28, 2003. 
134 Mitchell Research Contracts, April 8, 2003, possibly June 16, 2003. 
135 Jessen Research Contracts, April 8, 2003, June 16, 2003. 
136 CIA Email, “(Redacted) RDG Tasking for IC Psychologists Jessen and Mitchell,” June16, 2003. 
137 CIA Comments, 7. 138 OPR Report, 106, 116, 124-125. 
139 CIA Email, “RDG Tasking for IC Psychologists Jessen and Mitchell,” June 16, 2003. 
140 Joby Warrick, “CIA Tactics Endorsed in Secret Memos,” Washington Post, October 15, 2008, http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/10/14/AR2008101403331.html. 
141 SSCI Summary, 135, 413. 
142 OPR Report, 106, 116, 124-125, 132-133. See also Bradbury Fax, May 4, 2005. 
143 SSCI Summary, 
144 Ibid., 124, 126-127. 145 OMS Summary and Reflections, 45. 
146 OPR Report, 134-137, quoting “Memorandum for John A. Rizzo (Senior Deputy General Counsel, CIA), Re: Application of 18 U.S. C. §§ 2340-
2340A to Certain Techniques that May Be Used in the Interrogation of a High Value al Qaeda Detainee,” May 10, 2005, 6, 8, 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/pdfs/olc_6_compressed.pdf. 
147 OPR Report, 164. 148 OMS Summary and Reflections, 29; CIA Email, “Study by VIP Med,” undated, 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/109.pdf; CIA Email, “interro course critiques,” July 28, 2004, 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/113o.pdf.  
 73 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org                                                                                                                                                                       
149 Mitchell, Jessen and Associates, “Letter Contract for Project, March 2005, 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/cia_42.pdf. 150 Email from Melvin Gravitz to Jim Mitchell, “FYI,” February 13, 2003. Hoffman Report, Binder 4, 164, http://www.apa.org/inde pendent-
review/binder-4.pdf. 
151 Hoffman Report, 50-51. 
152 Ibid., 53. See also Soldz et al., All the President’s Psychologists. 
153 Email from Brandon to Gerwehr et al., “rude shock,” July 21, 2003, in Hoffman Report, Binder 3, 31. 154 See, e.g., OMS Guidelines (September 2003); (May 2004); (December 2004); Background Memo; SSCI Report, 84-87, 415, 495; OPR  Report, 
40-42, 127, 131-133; and CIA Fax, from: (redacted) Legal Group, DCI Counterterrorist Center; to: Steve Bradbury, OLC, DOJ, May 4, 2005, 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/pdfs/c06541714_fax_to_steve_bradbury.pdf [“Bradbury Fax, May 4, 2005”]. 
155 OPR Report, 37. 
156 See note 154, supra. 157 See PHR, “Experiments in Torture,” 19-24. 
158 See, e.g., SSCI Summary, 111-113. 
159 SSCI Summary, Findings and Conclusions, 4-5. 
160 OMS Guidelines (December 2004), 9. 
161 “Documented subsequent medical rechecks during the interrogation period should be performed on a regular basis… The recheck  can be 
more focused on relevant factors. The content of the documentation should be similar to what would ordinarily be recorded in a medical chart. 
Although brief, the data should reflect what was checked and include negative findings….This file must be available to successi ve medical 
practitioners at site.” OMS Guidelines (December 2004), 6. 
162 With respect to waterboarding, see references to “limited experience,” a lack of “hard data to quantify either the risk or advantages of this 
technique,” and the directive to document “every application” “to best inform future medical judgments and recommendations,” in  OMS 
Guidelines (December 2004), 17-20. See also Bradbury Individual Techniques Memo, 14: “We understand that these limitations have  been 
established with extensive input from OMS, based on experience to date with this technique….” With respect to shackles and stan ding sleep 
deprivation, see references to “our experience with a number of detainees,” in OMS Guidelines (December 2004), 14. With respect  to sleep 
deprivation, see “[t]here is little if any research evidence to support a fixed period of time” for sleep to allow sleep depriv ation to continue and 
circumstances facing medical officers differing from “ones that have been subject to reported research,” in OMS Guidelines (Dec ember 2004), 
16. 
163 See note 154, supra. 
164 PHR, “Experiments in Torture,” 20. 165 SASC Report, 30-31. 
166 Spencer Ackerman, “Torture by another name: CIA used ‘water dousing’ on at least 12 detainees,” The Guardian, October 16, 2 015, 
https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/oct/16/cia-torture-water-dousing-waterboard-like-technique. See also SSCI Summary, 105. 
167 SSCI Summary, 89, 99, 103. See OIG Rahman Report, 2, 35-36. 
168 SSCI Summary, 453. 169 See ibid., 96, 106-107, 419. HRW describes the following, based on an interview with former CIA detainee Khalid al-Sharif: “While this was 
going on he would be made to wear a black hood made out of thick cloth over his head and they would also pour jugs of freezing cold water 
directly over his nose and mouth.” HRW, Delivered Into Enemy Hands: US-Led Abuse and Rendition of Opponents to Guaddafi’s Libya , 
September 5, 2012, https://www.hrw.org/report/2012/09/05/delivered-enemy-hands/us-led-abuse-and-rendition-opponents-gaddafis-li bya. 
170 SSCI Summary, 105-107. 171 Water dousing was classified as a “standard” interrogation technique in June 2003. This designation required off-site medic al and 
psychological personnel to be available for possible consultation. Water dousing was recategorized as an “enhanced” technique i n January 
2004, which required OMS personnel to be physically present on-site during its use. SSCI Summary, 63, 99, 102-103, 412; OMS Sum mary and 
Reflections, 32-33.  
 74 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org                                                                                                                                                                       
172 SSCI Summary, 107 
173 OMS Guidelines (December 2004), 12. 174 Interrogation activities were communicated and approved via cables between COBALT and CIA’s Headquarters. SSCI Summary, 99.  
175 OMS Guidelines (December 2004), 13, 34. 
176 Ibid., 11. 
177 CIA, Disposition Memorandum: Alleged Use of Unauthorized Interrogation, December 6, 2006, 2, 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/pdfs/cia_production_c06541723_alleged_use_of_unauthorized_interrogation_t echni
ques.pdf [“CIA Hawsawi Memo”]. 
178 CIA, Disposition Memorandum: Alleged Use of Unauthorized Interrogation, December 6, 2006, 6, 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/pdfs/cia_production_c05959918_disposition_memorandum.pdf [“CIA Al-Libi 
Memo”]. 
179 SSCI Summary, 112, 492. 180 HRW, Delivered Into Enemy Hands. 
181 OMS Guidelines (May 2004), 10, 23. 
182 OMS Guidelines (December 2004), 12-13. 
183 Ibid., 13. 
184 SSCI Summary, 415. 185 Ibid., 419. 
186 See, e.g., ibid., 103. 
187 Bullet Points. 
188 OMS Guidelines (December 2004), 17. 
189 Ibid., 18. 190 Ibid., 17. 
191 Ibid., 18. 
192 SSCI Summary, 41-42. 
193 OMS Guidelines (December 2004), 18. 
194 Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, OLC, DOJ, “Memorandum for John A. Rizzo (Senior Deputy Gen eral 
Counsel, CIA): Re: Application of 18 U.S.C. §§ 2340-2340A to the Combined Use of Certain Techniques in the Interrogation of Hig h Value al 
Qaeda Detainees,” May 10, 2005, 59, 68, https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/20.pdf [“Bradbury Combined Use Me mo”]. 
195 OMS Guidelines (December 2004), 19. 196 Ibid., 17. 
197 Bradbury Combined Use Memo, 18. 
198 Bradbury Individual Techniques Memo, 44. 
199 See SASC Report, 31. 
200 See, e.g., SSCI Summary, 111-115. In addition, PHR clinicians evaluated a contemporaneous cohort of military detainees subj ected to 
“enhanced interrogation”-style techniques, which reveal long-term physical and mental health problems resulting from torture. P HR, “Broken 
Laws, Broken Lives: Medical Evidence of Torture by US Personnel and Its Impact,” June 2008, http://phr.org/library/reports/brok en-laws-
torturereport-2008.html. 
201 SSCI Summary, 56, 63. 
202 SSCI Summary, 99-105. See also OPR Report, 247, discussing waterboarding: “most if not all of the CIA’s past experience wit h that 
technique appear to have exceeded the limitations, conditions, and understandings recited in the Classified Bybee Memo and the Bradbury 
Memo.” 
203 Ibid., 135, 413. 
204 See, e.g., SSCI Summary, 87, 419-421; OPR Report, 135-140; Bradbury Fax, May 4, 2005.  
 75 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org                                                                                                                                                                       
205 The CIA has been implicated in a number of detainee deaths, including Gul Rahman and Manadel al-Jamadi. See Hina Shamsi, 
“Command’s Responsibility: Detainee Deaths in U.S. Custody in Iraq and Afghanistan,” February 2006, https://www.humanrightsfirs t.org/wp-
content/uploads/pdf/06221-etn-hrf-dic-rep-web.pdf. For more detail on psychological problems exhibited by detainees, see SSCI S ummary, 
113-115. While details on physical sequelae of torture remain difficult to come by, they may be gleaned from detainees’ Combata nt Status 
Review transcripts, https://www.aclu.org/csrt-foia. See also PHR, “Broken Laws, Broken Lives.” 
206 SSCI Summary, 135, 413. 
207 Bradbury Individual Techniques Memo, 30. 208 Bradbury Fax, May 4, 2005, 1-2. 
209 Bradbury Individual Techniques Memo, 38-39. 
210 Bradbury Combined Use Memo, 61. 
211 Soldz et al., All The Presidents’ Psychologists, 24, citing “Memorandum for John A. Rizzo (Senior Deputy General Counsel, C IA]; Re: 
Application of United States Obligations Under Article 16 of [Convention against Torture] to certain Techniques that May Be Use d in the 
Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees,” May 30, 2005, 8,  http://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/olc/legacy/2013/1 0/21/memo-
bradbury2005.pdf [“Bradbury CIDT Memo”]. 
212 See Hoffman Report, 128. 
213 CIA Comments, 24. 
214 OPR Report, 48, 53, 59, 66, 103, 108, 161-162. 165. 215 SSCI Summary, 472. 
216 Ibid., 114. 
217 See Open the Government’s NARA complaint, supra note 4. 
218 CIA Comments, 6. 
219 SSCI Summary, 87. 220 SSCI Summary, 420. 
221 See, e.g., Bradbury Fax, May 4, 2005. See also SSCI Summary, 419-421; OPR Report, 135-140. 
222 See, e.g., Soufan, The Black Banners, 399; SSCI Summary, 71; CIA Email, “RDG Tasking for IC Psychologists Jessen and Mitchell,”  June 16, 
2003; June 20, 2003, 2:19:53 PM, https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/cia_prod_c06552086_-_ocr.pdf ; June 20, 2003, 
5:23:29 PM, https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/7_0.pdf . 
223 Hoffman Report, 128. 
224 SSCI Summary, 124. 
225 SSCI Summary, Findings and Conclusions, 13, 19. 226 CIA Comments, 24. 
227 SSCI Summary, 126. 
228 An example includes medical officers minimizing wound care for Abu Zubaydah to enable interrogation to take precedence. SSC I Report, 
412. Another example: “These medical interventions, however, should not undermine the anxiety and dislocation that the various 
interrogation techniques are designed to foster.” OMS Guidelines (December 2004), 10. See also PHR, “Doing Harm,” and Katherine  Hawkins, 
“Medical Complicity in CIA Torture, Then and Now,” Just Security, July 1, 2016, https://www.justsecurity.org/31762/medical-comp licity-cia-
torture. 
229 Vince Iacopino, Scott Allen and Allen Keller, “Bad Science Used to Justify and Support Torture and Human Experimentation,” Science 331, 
no. 6013 (2011): 34-35, http://science.sciencemag.org/content/331/6013/34?ijkey=yeImJBWU9oKlY&keytype=ref&siteid=sci. 
230 The Nuremberg Code, “Trials of War Criminals before the Nuremberg Military Tribunals under Control Council Law No. 10,” Vol . 2 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1949): 181-182, https://history.nih.gov/research/downloads/nuremberg.pdf. 
231 Ibid.   
232 Ibid. 
233 M. Cherif Bassiouni (ed.), International Criminal Law: Sources, Subjects, and Contents (Leiden: Martinus Nijoff, 2008), 138 .  
 76 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org                                                                                                                                                                       
234 Customary international law is the custom of states that has been accepted as law, and that doesn’t require a convention or  treaty to be 
seen as a legal obligation. The respect for sovereignty, for example, or the proportionality of punishment to crime. By observi ng what states do 
and say, scholars identify customary international legal norms that have weight (status) even without conventions behind them. Ius cogens 
(Latin for “compelling law” or rather “the law that is brought together”) is a part of customary international legal norms. The y are the specific 
part of customary law that states are not allowed to derogate from under any circumstances (because they are so compelling). Wh ile 
international law allows for (even demands) the derogation from the principle of national sovereignty in some circumstances (to  protect 
against a genocide, for example) the prohibition of torture is absolute and is both customary law and part of jus cogens. 235 Bassiouni, International Criminal Law, 148-149. 
236 Ibid., 161-162. 
237 Geneva Convention I, art. 50; Geneva Convention II, art. 147; Geneva Convention III, art. 130; and Geneva Convention IV, ar t. 147.  
238 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), “Rule 92. Mutilation and Medical, Scientific or Biological Experiments,” h ttps://ihl-
databases.icrc.org/customary-ihl/eng/docs/v1_cha_chapter32_rule92. 239 Bassiouni, International Criminal Law, 148-149. 
240 ICCPR, Art. 7 ; see also ICRC, “Rule 92.” 
241 ICRC, “Rule 92.” 
242 U.N. Committee on Economic Social and Cultural Rights, “General Comment No. 14: The Right to the Highest Attainable Standar d of 
Health (Art.12),” August 11, 2000, U.N. Doc. E/C.12/2000/4, para. 8., http://www.refworld.org/pdfid/4538838d0.pdf. 243 ICRC, “Rule 92.” 
244 UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC), Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (Nelson Mandela Rules), May 13, 
1977, https://www.unodc.org/documents/justice-and-prison-reform/GA-RESOLUTION/E_ebook.pdf. 
245 World Medical Association, “Declaration of Helsinki, Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects,” as amended by 
the 64th WMA General Assembly, Fortaleza, Brazil, October 2013, paras. 8, 19, 25, https://www.wma.net/policies-post/wma-declara tion-of-
helsinki-ethical-principles-for-medical-research-involving-human-subjects. 
246 45 C.F.R. §46, subpart C and requirements for informed consent: http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-policy/regulations/ common-
rule/index.html; http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-policy/regulations/45-cfr-46/index.html 
247 45 C.F.R. §46. 
248 Ibid. 249 U.S. Department of Health & Human Services (DHHS), The Belmont Report: Ethical Principles and Guidelines for the Protection  of Human 
Subjects of Research (Bethesda, MD: The Commission, 1979), https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-policy/belmont-report. 
250 Each federal agency and department to have codified the Common Rule includes in its chapter of the Code of Federal Regulati ons section 
numbers and language identical to that of the Department of Health and Human Services’ (HHS) codification at 45 C.F.R. §46, sub part A. For all 
participating departments and agencies, the Common Rule outlines the basic provisions for institutional review boards, informed  consent, 
and assurances of compliance. The regulations were amended in 2005 and remained unchanged until the issuance of a final rule pu blished in 
the Federal Register on January 19, 2017, https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2017-01-19/pdf/2017-01058.pdf. 
251 45 C.F.R. §46. 252 Only four narrow categories of biomedical or behavioral research conducted or supported by DHHS may include prisoner subjec ts: (1) 
research about the effects of incarceration; (2) research about prisons as institutions; (3) research about conditions particul arly affecting 
prisoners; and (4) research about practices expected to improve the health of individual subjects. See 45 C.F.R. §46.306(a)(2)( i)-(iv), 
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-policy/regulations/common-rule/index.html; http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-
policy/regulations/45-cfr-46/index.html 253 Executive Order 12333, paragraph 2.10 (1981) (“Human Experimentation. No agency within the Intelligence Community shall spo nsor, 
contract for or conduct research on human subjects except in accordance with guidelines issued by HHS. The subject’s informed c onsent shall 
be documented as required by those guidelines.”), https://www.cia.gov/about-cia/eo12333.html.  
 77 Nuremberg Betrayed 
 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org                                                                                                                                                                       
254 Mitchell Research Contracts, December 21, 2001; April 4, 2002; May 14, 2002; July 1, 2002; September 5, 2002; September 12,  2002; January 
1, 2003; April 8, 2003; June 16, 2003; June 16, 2003; and January 1, 2004; and Jessen Research Contracts, July 22, 2002; Septem ber 5, 2002; 
October 24, 2002; January 1, 2003; April 8, 2003; and June 16, 2003. 
255 See, e.g., Countermeasures Cable; Background Paper; and OMS Summary and Reflections. 
256 Exploitation Slides and Resistance Slides. 
257 See ACLU’s Torture Database, https://www.thetorturedatabase.org. 
258 See, e.g., DCI Interrogation Guidelines; OIG Rahman Report. 259 OMS Guidelines (September 2003)
, OMS Guidelines (May 2004), and OMS Guidelines (December 2004). 
260 See, e.g., SSCI Summary, 87, 472; CIA Email, “RDG Tasking for IC Psychologists Jessen and Mitchell,” June 16, 2003; June 20 , 2003, 2:19:53 
PM; June 20, 2003, 5:23:29 PM; CIA Email, “8 April Draft Opinion from DoJ – OMS Concerns,” April 11, 2005, 10:12 AM, 
https://www.thetorturedatabase.org/files/foia_subsite/pdfs/cia_production_c06552088_8_april_draft_opinion_from_doj-
_oms_concerns.pdf; and Bradbury Fax, May 4, 2005. 261 Hoffman Report. 
262 SSCI Summary, Findings and Conclusions, 13; SSCI Summary, 126; CIA Comments.
 2J[UKEKCPUHQT
*WOCP4KIJVU 
