Native American Rights Fund
Page 1CONTENTS
Introduction .................................................................................................................. ................................ page 3
Executive Director’s Report .................................................................................................... ...................... page 5
Chairman’s Message ............................................................................................................. ......................... page 7
The Board of Directors ........................................................................................................ ........................ page 8
The National Support Committee ................................................................................................ ................ page 9
The Preservation of Tribal Existence .......................................................................................... .............. page 11
The Protection of Tribal Natural Resources .................................................................................... .......... page 17
MAJOR ACTIVITIES 2005 - NARF CASE MAP ......................................................................................... . page 22
The Promotion of Human Rights ................................................................................................. ............. page 27
The Accountability of Governments ............................................................................................. ............. page 33
The Development of Indian Law ................................................................................................. ............. page 35
Treasurer’s Report ............................................................................................................ .......................... page 36
Contributors .................................................................................................................. .............................. page 37
NARF Staff ..................................................................................................................... ............................... page 44
Main Office
Native American Rights Fund1506 BroadwayBoulder, CO 80302303-447-8760http://www.narf.org
Alaska Office
Native American Rights Fund420 L Street, Suite 505Anchorage, Alaska 99501907-276-0680
Washington, D.C. Office
Native American Rights Fund1712 N Street, NWWashington, D.C. 20036202-785-4166On the cover of the NARF 2006 Annual Report, and throughout, we
capture the “grandness” of our Indigenous “way of life” outlooks...through the skies and Indigenous star knowledge and symbolisms inthe form of the morning star, where each day begins... our firstprayer, to the feminine energies asking for balance in our lives, to thetrue warriors of the people... the women, our mothers... protected bythe messengers, the eagle, the hawk, all the winged ones... lookingtowards a better future for all nations, all my relations, walking inbeauty... together, down to the simplest of life forms. 
This is the grand idea that NARF represents... through preservation,
protection, accountability, promotion, and through development,NARF fights for justice for all of our Indigenous “way of life” outlooks... honoring our mothers, while working to create a betterfuture for our children... and we thank you, for all you do in supporting this venture.
Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is a nonprofit, charitable
organization incorporated in 1971 under the laws of the District of Columbia.  NARFis exempt from federal income tax under the provisions of Section 501(c)(3) of theInternal Revenue code. Contributions to NARF are tax deductible. The InternalRevenue Service has ruled that NARF is not a “private foundation” as defined in Section 509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code. NARF was founded in 1970 andincorporated in 1971 in Washington, D.C.The Native American Rights Fund
(NARF) is the oldest and largest nonprofit national Indian rights organ-ization in the country devoting all itsefforts to defending and promoting thelegal rights of Indian people on issuesessential to their tribal sovereignty,their natural resources and their humanrights. NARF believes in empoweringindividuals and communities whoserights, economic self-sufficiency, andpolitical participation have been 
systematically or systemically eroded 
or undermined. 
Native Americans have been subju-
gated and dominated. Having beenstripped of their land, resources anddignity, tribes today are controlled bya myriad of federal treaties, statutes,and case law. Yet it is within theselaws that Native Americans place theirhope and faith for justice and the protection of their way of life. WithNARF’s help, Native people can go onto provide leadership in their commu-nities and serve as catalysts for justpolicies and practices towards Nativepeoples nationwide. From a historicalstandpoint Native Americans have, fornumerous reasons, been targets ofdiscriminatory practices.
For the past 36 years, NARF has
represented over 200 Tribes in 31states in such areas as tribal jurisdictionand recognition, land claims,  huntingand fishing rights, the protection ofIndian religious freedom, and manyothers. In addition to the great stridesNARF has made in achieving justice onbehalf of Native American people, perhaps NARF’s greatest distinguishing
attribute has been its ability to bringexcellent, highly ethical legal repre-sentation to dispossessed tribes. NARFhas been successful in representingIndian tribes and individuals in casesthat have encompassed every area andissue in the field of Indian law. Theaccomplishments and growth of NARFover the years confirmed the greatneed for Indian legal representationon a national basis. This legal advocacyon behalf of Native Americans continuesto play a vital role in the survival oftribes and their way of life. NARFstrives to protect the most importantrights of Indian people within the limitof available resources. 
NARF’s efforts could not exist with-
out the contribution of the thousandsof individuals who have offered theirknowledge, courage, and vision tohelp guide NARF on its quest. Of equalimportance, NARF’s financial contribu-
tors have graciously provided theresources to make these efforts possible.  Contributors such as theFord Foundation have been with NARFsince its inception.  The RockefellerFoundation and the John D. &Catherine T. MacArthur Foundationhave also made consistent contributionsover the years.  Federal funding fromthe Administration for NativeAmericans enables NARF to carry onits social development efforts in Indiancountry.  Finally, the positive effects of NARF’s work are reflected in thefinancial contributions by a growingnumber of tribal governments.United, these financial, moral, andintellectual gifts provide the frame-work for NARF to fulfill its goal ofsecuring the right to self-determinationto which all Native American peoplesare entitled. 
Native American Rights Fund
Page 3INTRODUCTION
NARF’s Priorities
One of the initial responsibilities of
NARF’s first Board of Directors was todevelop priorities that would guide theNative American Rights Fund in itsmission to preserve and enforce thelegal rights of Native Americans.  TheCommittee developed five prioritiesthat continue to lead NARF today:
✜Preservation of tribal existence
✜Protection of tribal naturalresources
✜Promotion of Native Americanhuman rights
✜Accountability of governments toNative Americans
✜Development of Indian law andeducating the public about Indianrights, laws, and issues
Under the priority of the preserva-
tion of tribal existence , NARF works
to construct the foundations that are necessary to empower tribes so thatthey can continue to live according totheir Native traditions, to enforce theirtreaty rights, to insure their independ-ence on reservations and to protecttheir sovereignty. 
Throughout the process of
European conquest and colonizationof North America, Indian tribes expe-rienced a steady diminishment of theirland base to a mere 2.3 percent of itsoriginal size.  Currently, there areapproximately 55 million acres ofIndian-controlled land in the conti-nental United States and about 44 million acres of Native-owned land inAlaska.  An adequate land base and
control over natural resources arecentral components of economic self-sufficiency and self-determination, andas such, are vital to the very existenceof tribes.  Thus, much of NARF’s workinvolves the protection of tribal 
natural resources .  
Although basic human rights are
considered a universal and inalienableentitlement, Native Americans face anongoing threat of having their rightsundermined by the United States gov-ernment, states, and others who seekto limit these rights. Under the priorityof the promotion of human rights ,
NARF strives to enforce and strengthenlaws which are designed to protect therights of Native Americans to practicetheir traditional religion, to use theirown language, and to enjoy their culture.
Contained within the unique trust
relationship between the United Statesand Indian nations is the inherent dutyfor all levels of government to recognizeand responsibly enforce the many lawsand regulations applicable to Indianpeoples.  Because such laws impactvirtually every aspect of tribal life, NARF
maintains its involvement in the legalmatters pertaining to accountability
of governments to Native Americans.
The coordinated development of
Indian law and educating the publicabout Indian rights, laws, and issuesis essential for the continued protectionof Indian rights.  This primarilyinvolves establishing favorable courtprecedents, distributing informationand law materials, encouraging andfostering Indian legal education, andforming alliances with Indian lawpractitioners and other Indian organizations. Annual Report 2006
Page 4Out of the Indian approach to life there came
a great freedom, an intense and absorbing
respect for life, enriching faith in a Supreme
Power, and principles of truth, honesty, 
generosity, equity, and brotherhood as 
a guide to mundane relations.
Native American Rights Fund
Page 52006 marked the 36th year that the
Native American Rights Fund has pro-vided legal advocacy on major issueson behalf of Native Americans acrossthe country.  Once again, a number ofsignificant victories and achievementsfor Native Americans were made possible through the hard work of theBoard and staff of the Native AmericanRights Fund.
In an unprecedented effort, we
joined in with other Native organiza-tions and tribes to help block theSenate confirmation of William G.Myers to the Ninth Circuit Court ofAppeals.  Acting on behalf of ourclients in the Cobell v. Kempthorne
Indian trust funds class action lawsuit,we opposed the nomination of Mr.Myers by President Bush because ofMr. Myers adverse record in theCobell case when he served as
Solicitor of the Department of theInterior.  His anti-Native record in thatcase and other Native American casesdemonstrated a bias against the interests of Native peoples.
Once again in 2006, on behalf of
the Gwich’in People of Alaska, weworked with a coalition of environ-mental organizations and others tostop the Congress from approving oildevelopment in the Arctic NationalWildlife Refuge (ANWR).  There areabout 7,000 Gwich’in people who livenear the migratory route of thePorcupine caribou herd.  For thousandsof years, the Gwich’in have relied onthe caribou for food, clothing, toolsand a source of respect and spiritualguidance.  Oil development in ANWR
would harm the caribou and threatenthe future of the Gwich’in people.
On behalf of the Lower Brule Sioux
Tribe, we successfully helped theUnited States resist the efforts of theState of South Dakota to establish thatthe Secretary of the Interior lacksauthority under the IndianReorganization Act of 1934 (IRA) toplace Indian land into federal truststatus.  South Dakota argued that theland-into-trust provision of the IRAwas an unconstitutional delegation oflegislative authority by the Congress tothe Secretary.  The Eighth Circuit Courtof Appeals had upheld the constitu-tionality of the IRA provision in 2005and the United States Supreme Courtdeclined to review the case in October,2006.  We represented the Tribe asamicus curiae in the proceedings to
help protect federal trust statusapproval for 91 acres of Lower BruleSioux lands and protect the rights ofall tribes to have land taken into trustfor them by the federal government.
In conjunction with the National
Congress of American Indians (NCAI),we worked with the LeadershipCouncil on Civil Rights to secureCongressional reauthorization in 2006of certain remedial provisions in theVoting Rights Act which were sched-uled to expire in 2007.  The criticalprovisions that were reauthorizeddealt with language assistance andrequire certain states and local juris-dictions to provide voting materials in languages other than English,including American Indian and Alaska
Native languages.  In the process, weprepared the first report ever writtenon the impact of the Voting Rights Acton Alaska Natives and, in conjunctionwith NCAI, provided testimony to theNational Commission on the VotingRights Act on behalf of Indian country. 
We won important arguments in the
United States Court of Federal Claimson behalf of the Turtle MountainChippewa, Chippewa Cree of theRocky Boy’s Reservation, White EarthBand of Minnesota Chippewa and theLittle Shell Chippewa Tribe in theirmonetary damages case against thefederal government for mismanage-ment of their tribal trust fund, the $53million Pembina Judgement Fund,awarded to them by the Indian ClaimsCommission in 1964 and 1980.  TheCourt of Federal Claims rejected fourmajor arguments by the United Statesto have the case dismissed or substan-tially limited and ruled that the case
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR ’SREPORT
continued on the following pageJohn E. Echohawkcan go forward to determine whether
the United States breached its trustresponsibilities to the PembinaChippewa Tribes with respect to thePembina Judgement Fund.
Our National Indian Law Library
(NILL) received a national award from the American Association of LawLibrarians for “Public Access toGovernment Information.” Our NILLproject is a national public law librarydevoted to American Indian law whichserves both the Native American RightsFund and the public.  Since 1972 NILLhas collected nearly 9,000 resourcematerials that relate to federal Indianand tribal law.  NILL’s holdings include
the largest collection of tribal constitu-tions, codes and ordinances in theUnited States.
These accomplishments on behalf
of Native American people would nothave been possible without the gener-ous financial support that we receiveas a non-profit organization from indi-
vidual contributors, foundations,tribes and federal agencies.  We thankyou for your support and hope thatyour assistance to Native Americansnationwide through the NativeAmerican Rights Fund will continue.
John E. Echohawk Executive Director
Annual Report 2006
Page 6
We ask for nothing more, and will accept
nothing less than the U.S. Government keeping
the promises it has made to Native Americans.Native American Rights Fund
Page 7I once again bring greetings from
San Ildefonso Pueblo, New Mexico –Pueblo Country.  As my second year asChairman of the Board of Directorshas begun, I would like to share withyou some thoughts about the NativeAmerican Rights Fund. 
NARF’s new public service
announcement campaign “The IndianWars Never Ended – They OnlyChanged Venue” calls out to Americathat after 515 years, tribes continuetheir fight to maintain their cultureand their sovereignty.  For the past 36 years, NARF has been leading thischarge.  NARF’s Board and staff,Indian and non-Indian alike, havededicated their lives to bring excellentand highly ethical legal representationto tribes and achieving justice onbehalf of America’s indigenous peoples.Many of the gains in Indian countryduring this time can be attributed to NARF.
When I think of all the battles that
the Native American Rights Fund hasbeen involved in, I think of a 1953quote by Felix S. Cohen, the “father”of Federal Indian law, when he stated,“[l]ike the miner’s canary, the Indianmarks the shifts from fresh air to poisongas in our political atmosphere; andour treatment of Indians, even morethan our treatment of other minorities,reflects the rise and fall in our demo-cratic faith...”  From these words weunderstand that unless our country’ssocial policy and government institutions can protect America’ssmallest, poorest and weakest minority
group from discrimination and injustice, they may also lack thestrength and will to accord equal protection for the rest of society. 
How far have we come in the 54
years since this statement was made?After each solid step taken by thetribes and NARF, the courts and/orfederal and state governments haveconsistently found ways to bring usback two steps.  Tribes are still strug-gling to protect their sacred sites andtheir religions are constantly underassault.  Sports teams and fans continueto racially disparage Indigenous peoples – something that would neverbe tolerated for any other minoritygroup.  Desecration of Indian andNative Hawaiian burial remains andfunerary objects continues.  VotingRights Act violations on reservationsand Alaska Native villages continue.Basic needs on reservations, such ashealth care, education, transportation,and law enforcement continue to beunderfunded.  Settlement of the trustfund issue continues to be torpedoed bythe federal government.  Unfortunately,these and other issues continue to find life and NARF readies the warriorsfor battle.
Throughout all of these battles
NARF continues to find ways to win,continues to reload and fight again.Why has NARF been so resilient afterall of these years?  As NARF seniorattorney Yvonne Knight so aptly statedsome years back “Indian attorneyshave an advantage.  They are fighting
courtroom battles, not for abstractreasons, but for family... and thismakes Indian attorneys more formidable in court.”
If NARF is to continue to be a 
formidable force – we need your help.We challenge tribes, foundations andthe thousands of individual supportersto be part of the solution. Help us toresolve these problems and issuesonce and for all.  Together, we canthen guide our energy and efforts intohelping secure a future of our MotherEarth and in turn, secure a future forour children and grandchildren.  
John Gonzales , Chairman
CHAIRMAN ’SMESSAGE
John Gonzales
Together... we can.Annual Report 2006
Page 8The Native American Rights Fund
has a governing board composed ofNative American leaders from acrossthe country -- wise and distinguishedpeople who are respected by NativeAmericans nationwide.  IndividualBoard members are chosen based ontheir involvement and knowledge ofIndian issues and affairs, as well astheir tribal affiliation, to ensure acomprehensive geographicalrepresentation.  The NARF Board ofDirectors, whose members serve amaximum of six years, provide NARFwith leadership and credibility, andthe vision of its members is essentialto NARF’s effectiveness in representingits Native American clients.
NARF’s Board of Directors : (First row left to right) –  John Gonzales ,
Chairman (San Ildefonso Pueblo - New Mexico); Andrew Bowers (Seminole
Tribe of Florida); Lydia Olympic (Yupik/Aleut - Alaska);  Karlene Hunter
(Oglala Lakota - South Dakota);  Delia Carlyle (Ak Chin Indian Community -
Arizona). (Second row left to right) – Kunani Nihipali (Native Hawaiian -
Hawaii); (Jaime Barrientoz’ son) ; Jaime Barrientoz , Vice-Chairman (Grande
Traverse Band of Ottawa & Chippewa Indians - Michigan); Billy Frank (Nisqually
Tribe - Washington). (Not Pictured) –  Elbridge Coochise (Hopi - Arizona)
Jim Gray (Osage Nation - Oklahoma); Anthony Pico (Viejas Band of Kumeyaay
Indians - California); Paul Ninham (Oneida Nation of Wisconsin); Woody
Widmark (Sitka Tribe - Alaska). BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Even the seasons form a great circle in
their changing, and always come back
again to where they were.Native American Rights Fund
Page 9The National Support Committee
(NSC) assists NARF with its fund raisingand public relations efforts nationwide.Some of the individuals on theCommittee are prominent in the field
of business, entertainment and thearts.  Others are known advocates forthe rights of the underserved.  All ofthe 51 volunteers on the Committee
are committed to upholding the rightsof Native Americans.NATIONAL SUPPORT COMMITTEE
Owanah Anderson, Choctaw
Edward Asner Katrina McCormick Barnes John Bevan David BrubeckBen Nighthorse Campbell, Northern Cheyenne
Wallace Coffey, Comanche
Ada Deer, Menominee
Harvey A. DennenbergMichael J. Driver Richard DysartLucille A. Echohawk, Pawnee
Louise Erdrich, Turtle Mountain Chippewa
Jane FondaJames GarnerSy GombergCarol Hayward, Fond du Lac
Richard A. Hayward, Mashantucket Pequot
John Heller Emilie Heller-Rhys Charles R. KlewinNancy  Klewin  Wilma Mankiller, Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma
Chris E. McNeil, Jr., Tlingit-Nisga’a
Billy Mills, Oglala Lakota
N. Scott Momaday, KiowaClinton Pattea, Ft. McDowell Yavapai
Amado Pena, Jr., Yaqui/Chicano
Pernell RobertsMarc RudickPam RudickWayne Ross/Nancy Starling-RossLeslie Marmon Silko, Laguna Pueblo
Connie Stevens Ernie Stevens, Jr., Wisconsin Onieida
Anthony L. Strong, Tlingit-Klukwan
Maria Tallchief, Osage
Andrew Teller, Isleta Pueblo
Verna Teller, Isleta Pueblo
Studs TerkelTenaya Torres, Chiricahua Apache
Richard Trudell, Santee Sioux
Rebecca Tsosie, Pasqua Yaqui
Thomas TureenTzo-Nah, Shoshone Bannock
Aine UngarRt. Rev. William C. Wantland, Seminole
W. Richard West, Southern Cheyenne
Randell Willis, Oglala Lakota
Teresa Willis, Umatilla
Mary Wynne, Rosebud Sioux
Everything on the
earth has a purpose,and every person has a mission toaccomplish...~Native American Rights Fund
Page 11NARF works to construct the foun-
dations that are necessary to empowertribes so that they can continue to liveaccording to their Native traditions, toenforce their treaty rights, to insuretheir independence on reservationsand to protect their sovereignty.Specifically, NARF’s legal represen-tation centers on sovereignty and
jurisdiction issues, federal recognitionand restoration of tribal status, andeconomic development.  Thus, thefocus of NARF’s work involves issuesrelating to the preservation andenforcement of the status of tribes assovereign governments.  Tribal govern-ments possess the power to regulatethe internal affairs of their membersas well as other activities within theirreservations.  Jurisdictional conflictsoften arise with states, the federal government, and others over tribalsovereignty.
Tribal Sovereignty
The focus of NARF’s work under
this priority is the protection of thestatus of tribes as sovereign, self-governing entities.  The United StatesConstitution recognizes that Indiantribes are independent governmentalentities with inherent authority overtheir territory.  In treaties with theUnited States, Indian tribes ceded millions of acres of land in exchangefor the guarantee that the federal government would protect the tribes’right to self-government.  From theearly 1800s on, the Supreme Courthas repeatedly affirmed the fundamentalprinciple that tribes retain inherentsovereignty over their territory.
However, in the past two decades, theSupreme Court has steadily chippedaway at this fundamental principle,both by restricting tribal jurisdictionand by extending state jurisdiction.
These decisions by the Supreme
Court have made this priority morerelevant than ever, and have led to aTribal Sovereignty Protection Initiativein partnership with the NationalCongress of American Indians (NCAI)and tribes nationwide to restore thetraditional principles of inherent tribalsovereignty where those have beenundermined and to safeguard the coreof sovereignty that remains.
This initiative consists of three 
components.  The first component isthe Tribal Supreme Court Project, thefocus of which is to monitor casespotentially headed to the United StatesSupreme Court and those which actually are accepted for review.  Aneffort is made to promote the caseswith the most likely success before the
Court.  When cases are accepted, theProject helps ensure that the attorneysrepresenting the Indian interests haveall the support they need, and to coor-dinate the filing of a limited number of strategic amicus briefs.  A secondcomponent of the initiative is to par-ticipate in the judicial nominationsand confirmations at the lower courtand the Supreme Court levels.  Finally,there is a Congressional initiative tofight legislative measures that areagainst tribal interests and to affirma-tively push legislation to correct anti-tribal Supreme Court precedent.
NARF launched the Tribal Supreme
Court Project in conjunction with NCAIin 2001.  Since 2001, the Project hasbeen involved with nine cases – fourwins, four losses, and one draw.  Thisis an impressive track record, giventhat before the inception of the Projecttribes lost 80% or more of these
THEPRESERVATION OF TRIBAL EXISTENCE
continued on the following page
cases.  In addition, the Project worked
to ensure that tribal victories in Courtsof Appeals were denied review by theU.S. Supreme Court.The TribalSupreme Court Project is housed atNARF’s office in Washington, D.C., andis staffed by one NARF attorney and bysupport staff.  In an effort to fostergreater coordination in advocacybefore the Supreme Court, an AdvisoryBoard of tribal leaders, comprised ofNCAI Executive Committee membersand other tribal leaders willing to volunteer their time, also assists theProject.  The Board’s role is to providenecessary political and tribal perspec-tive to the legal and academic expertise.The Project has also established aWorking Group – a group of morethan 200 noted attorneys and academics from around the nationwho participate in the Project as theirinterest, time and resources allow.
To achieve the goals of the Project,
NARF monitors cases which appear tobe headed for the Supreme Court, andorganizes, coordinates and contributesto a nation-wide Indian amicus brief
writing network.  Amicus briefs allowthose not directly involved in litigation,but potentially impacted by the out-come, to provide information andarguments directly to the Court.  Bybringing together experienced Indianlaw practitioners and scholars to discuss and agree upon a coordinatedamicus brief writing strategy in eachcase, and by assisting the parties,NARF ensures that the most effectiveand focused arguments are madebefore the Court on behalf of Indian Country.On the positive side, NARF, through
the Supreme Court Project, participatedin a case upholding the Secretary ofthe Interior’s authority to take landinto trust on behalf of Indian tribes inCarcieri v. Norton .  The Tribal
Supreme Court Project coordinatedthe writing of amicus briefs in the casewith the attorneys for the NarragansettIndian Tribe and the United Statesthroughout the appeals process.  TheProject also filed an amicus brief insupport of the petition for rehearingen banc in Smith v. Salish Kootenai
College , a favorable decision upholding
tribal court civil jurisdiction over atort action that arose as a result of atraffic accident on a public highwaywithin the Reservation and involving anon-member Indian who was a studentat the tribal college and who was drivingthe vehicle as part of a vocational program at the college.  Finally, theProject filed an amicus brief resultingin an en banc decision in Morris v.
Tanner , upholding tribal criminal 
misdemeanor jurisdiction over a nonmember Indian.  The Project has alsofiled a brief in opposition to certiorari
in Morris v. Tanner . 
Unfortunately, there were three 
significant setbacks for the SupremeCourt Project.  In City of Sherrill v.
Oneida Indian Nation , the Supreme
Court for the first time applied thedoctrine of laches to bar a jurisdic-tional claim brought by an Indiantribe.  The doctrine of laches preventsconsideration of claims based on thepassage of time. Next, the U.S. Court ofAppeals for the Second Circuit in theCayuga case relied on Sherrill to bar
an Indian land claim, the precise typeof action that the Supreme Court hadpreviously allowed in 1985 in County
of Oneida v. Oneida Indian Nation ,
a decision that the Court took pains topreserve in Sherrill .  Despite the
Project's best efforts, the SupremeCourt denied certiorari in Cayuga ,
thus leaving intact a decision thatadversely affects many eastern Indianland claims.  The Project has nowmobilized its resources nationwide toprovide assistance to attorneys infighting the laches defense.
Annual Report 2006
Page 12
Another setback for the Project was
the loss in Wagnon v. Kansas Prairie
Band Potawatomi Nation .  The
Supreme Court ruled that the statecould impose a tax on motor fuel soldto a reservation gas station by non-Indian wholesalers.  The Tribe imposeson gasoline purchases a tax equal tothat of the state to build and maintainroads on the reservation.  The Courtfocused on the incidence of the taxbeing on the non-Indian wholesalersand did not apply the balancing testthat considers the impact of the tax onthe Tribe.  This is a dangerous prece-dent and could negatively impact manyother tribes.  The Project had devotedconsiderable effort to coordinatingamicus briefs and persuading the U.S.
Solicitor General’s Office to supportthe Tribe.
Several nominations to federal
judgeships, including to the SupremeCourt, have been considered by theSenate.  NARF has researched thebackground of these nominees onIndian issues and made this informationavailable to tribal leaders to considerin deciding whether to support oroppose a nominee. For example, wehelped gather information on thenomination of Chief Justice JohnRoberts and Associate Justice SamuelAlito to the Supreme Court.
On behalf of our clients in the
Cobell v. Kempthorne case, NARF
opposed the nomination of William G. Myers to the Ninth Circuit Court ofAppeals because of his adverse recordas Interior Department Solicitor inthat case. His nomination was notconfirmed by the Senate in 2006.When Mr. Myers was first nominated
by President Bush in 2003, the NativeAmerican Rights Fund, along with theNational Congress of American Indians
and numerous Indian tribes and inter-tribal organizations, took theunprecedented step in formally opposinga judicial nominee to a lifetimeappointment on the federal bench.
In the private sector, Mr. Myers has
largely represented the mining andcattle industries as their lawyer andlobbyist. During his tenure as Solicitor– as the top lawyer at the Departmentof the Interior from 2001 to 2003 –Mr. Myers displayed a complete lackof understanding of the government-to-government trust relationshipbetween the Federal government and
Indian tribes, while demonstrating a
calculated bias in favor of mining,grazing and other special interests. 
Mr. Myer’s record regarding issues
impacting Indian country was unmis-takably clear: He is hostile to the ruleof law whenever the law does not servethe special interests he represents inthe private sector. His record demon-strated a bias – a wholesale biasagainst the fundamental and soundinterests of Native peoples. Indiancountry had grave concerns with Mr. Myers ability to apply the law fairlyand impartially as a federal judge onthe Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals
which contains over 400 Indian tribesand millions of acres of Indian lands.
Federal Recognition 
of Tribal Status
Achieving legal status as an Indian
tribe is very important to preservingtribal existence and self-government.Some tribal groups do not have thisstatus because they have never beenformally recognized as tribes by thefederal government.  NARF providesrepresentation to those tribal groupswho have a right to become federallyrecognized tribes.
NARF currently represents Indian
communities who have survived intact
as identifiable Indian tribes but who
are not federally recognized.  TheseIndian tribes, for differing reasons, donot have a government-to-governmentrelationship between themselves andthe federal government.  Traditionally,federal recognition was accorded to atribe through treaty, land set asideadministratively for a tribe, or by legislative means.  The majority ofthese NARF clients are seeking anadministrative determination by theBureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) thatthey, in fact, have continued to exist asNative American Rights Fund
Page 13continued on the following pageThe life of a human being is a circle from
childhood to childhood, and so it is in 
everything where power moves.Indian tribes from the time of signifi-
cant white contact to the present dayand have continued to govern them-selves and their members.  NARF,therefore, prepares the necessary historical, legal, and anthropologicaldocumentation to support a petitionfor acknowledgment.  For more than100 years, these Indian communitieshave been denied the benefits of a formal relationship with the federalgovernment.  Through the process ofadministrative acknowledgment, NARFis now trying to bridge that gap.
Federal recognition is an arduous
process that takes many years to com-plete.  Petitioning tribes must prove thatthey have been identified by reliableexternal sources on a substantiallycontinuous basis as an Indian entity;they must prove that they have main-tained a continuous community fromhistorical times to the present day;they must show that they have main-tained political authority or influenceon a substantially continuous basisfrom historical times until the presentday; they must prove that current tribalmembers, as a whole, descend from ahistoric tribe or tribes which amalga-mated; they must prove that theirmembers are not mostly members ofan already recognized tribe; and, theirmembers cannot be from groupswhich were terminated by legislation.This process requires the testimony ofmany experts and thorough documen-tation of each requirement.
Tribal existence does not depend
on federal recognition, but recogni-tion is necessary for a government-to-government relationship and thereceipt of many federal services.  In
1998, NARF filed a petition for federalrecognition on behalf of theShinnecock Indian Nation inSouthampton, New York.  The Bureauof Indian Affairs  (BIA) has nowplaced Shinnecock on the “Ready,
Waiting for Active Consideration” list.
This is a milestone for the Nation aftermany years of waiting.  Shinnecockappears to be well on its way toachieving federal recognition.  NARFhas also assisted the Little Shell Tribeof Chippewa Indians of Montana.  In2000, the Assistant Secretary publisheda preliminary finding in favor ofrecognition.  Final submissions in sup-port of Little Shell’s petition have beensubmitted and we are awaiting decision.Finally, NARF is helping the PamunkeyTribe in Virginia finalize its petition forfederal acknowledgment to the BIA’sOffice of Federal Acknowledgment forfederal recognition.
At the U.S. Congressional level, 
on behalf of it is federal recognitionclients, NARF monitors and respondswhen appropriate to federal legislationaffecting the federal acknowledgmentregulatory process.
Environmental Law 
and Policy Initiative
NARF has played a key role in the
implementation of federal environ-mental law and policy that recognizestribal governments as the primary regulators and enforcers of the federalenvironmental laws on Indian lands.NARF continued to work with tribes,the National Tribal EnvironmentalCouncil and other Indian organizationsto maintain the progress that has been
made with the EnvironmentalProtection Agency (EPA) and otherfederal agencies. With a representativeon the Green Group, a coalition ofnational environmental leaders, NARFcontinues to coordinate with and educate the environmental communityon the role of tribal governments inenvironmental law and policy.
In Alaska, NARF assists the Gwich’in
Steering Committee in their efforts toprotect the Arctic National WildlifeRefuge (ANWR) from oil development.There are about 7,000 Gwich’in peoplewho live on or near the migratoryroute of the Porcupine caribou herd.For thousands of years, the Gwich’inhave relied on the caribou for food,clothing, tools and a source of respectand spiritual guidance.  Oil develop-ment in ANWR would not only harmthe caribou and threaten the future ofthe Gwich’in people, but would alsothreaten more than 180 species ofbirds, and numerous mammalsincluding polar bears, musk ox,wolves, wolverine, moose, Arctic andred foxes, black bears, brown bears,and the white Dall sheep. NARF hassuccessfully worked with a coalition ofenvironmental groups and organiza-tions for several years to stop theCongress from approving oil drillingin ANWR.  Drilling for oil in ANWRwas once again hotly debated in thelast Congress as the Senate budgetreconciliation bill language allowedfor drilling in ANWR and the Houseversion did not, but it was defeated.This was a close call, but ended upbeing a great success.  NARF will Annual Report 2006
Page 14continue to assist the Gwich’in
Steering Committee in their efforts tostop the approval of oil developmentin ANWR. 
Global warming is wreaking havoc
in Alaska. In recent years scientistshave documented melting ocean ice,rising oceans, rising river temperatures,thawing permafrost, increased insectinfestations, animals at risk and dyingforests. Alaska Natives are the peopleswho rely most on Alaska’s ice, seas,marine mammals, fish and game fornutrition and customary and traditionalsubsistence uses; they are thus experi-encing the adverse impacts of globalwarming most acutely. 
In February 2006, during the Alaska
Forum on the Environment, AlaskaNative participants describedincreased forest fires, more dangeroushunting, fishing and traveling condi-tions, visible changes in animals andplants, infrastructure damage frommelting permafrost and coastal erosion, fiercer winter storms, andpervasive unpredictability. Virtuallyevery aspect of traditional AlaskaNative life is impacted. As noted in therecently released Arctic ClimateImpact Assessment 2004, indigenouspeoples are reporting that sea ice isdeclining, and its quality and timingare changing, with important negativerepercussions for marine hunters.Others are reporting that salmon arediseased and cannot be dried for winterfood. There is widespread concernabout caribou habitat diminishing aslarger vegetation moves northward.Because of these and other dramaticchanges, traditional knowledge isjeopardized, as are cultural structures
and the nutritional needs of Alaska’sindigenous peoples.
The Alaska legislature created the
Alaska Climate Impact AssessmentCommission, which is charged withassessing the effects and costs of globalwarming on Alaskans, the state’s naturalresources, and its economy. The Com-mission will hold eight field hearingsthroughout Alaska to receive testimonyfrom individuals and tribal representa-tives, who will be assisted by NARF. 
NARF, working with the Tribe’s
Environmental Health Technical Team(EHTT), has assisted the Oglala SiouxTribe (OST) in developing water-relatedenvironmental codes. NARF is workingwith the OST Department of WaterMaintenance and Conservation and theEHTT on the revision of the Tribe’sOrdinance for the Protection of theOglala Sioux Rural Water SupplySystem and Other Public WaterSystems Within the Pine Ridge IndianReservation [“Tap-in” ordinance], aswell as a Solid Waste ManagementCode, and development of a tribal SafeDrinking Water Act . The “Tap-in”ordinance, which was adopted by theTribal Council, will provide for theprotection of the integrity of thepipeline which delivers drinking waterto the public water systems on thereservation. The Code was adopted bythe Tribal Council in January 2006.NARF is presently assisting the Tribe toformulate and adopt regulations forimplementation of the Code, and hasdeveloped draft forms for applicationand permit for connections “in-lieu”of the usual process, and for delegationof authority to provide connections to
the pipeline. NARF will conduct training for the staff of the WaterMaintenance and ConservationDepartment concerning the imple-mentation of these important codes.
The Three Affiliated Tribes of the
Fort Berthold Indian Reservation inNorth Dakota have had an applicationpending before USEPA Region 8 inDenver, CO since 1997 for delegationto set water quality standards for thesurface water of the Reservation.USEPA recently responded to Tribalrequests to act on that application.The Tribes’ Manager of EnvironmentalPrograms retained NARF to assist theTribe in assuring that the applicationis current, complete, and adequate toobtain delegation. NARF is workingwith the Tribes’ EnvironmentalProgram, Tribal Reservation Attorneys,and the Tribal Council to complete arevised application.
Native American Rights Fund
Page 15
Native American Rights Fund
Page 17Over time, Indian tribes have expe-
rienced a steady diminishment of theirland base to a mere two percent of itsoriginal size.  An adequate land baseand control over natural resources arecentral components of economic self-sufficiency and self-determination, andas such, are vital to the very existenceof tribes.  Therefore, protection oftribal natural resources is a high priority at NARF.
Protection of Indian Lands
Without a sufficient land base, tribal
existence is difficult to maintain.  ThusNARF helps tribes establish ownershipand control over lands which arerightfully theirs.
NARF has worked with the Lower
Brule Sioux Tribe against the State ofSouth Dakota’s challenge to the UnitedStates’ decision to place approximately91 acres of land into trust for theLower Brule Sioux Tribe under Section465 of the Indian Reorganization Act.The State is alleging, among otherthings, that the Secretary lacks authorityto place land into trust becauseSection 465 is an unconstitutional delegation of legislative authority.  The U.S. Court of Appeals for the EighthCircuit issued a favorable decision in2005 upholding the constitutionality ofSection 465.  The Attorney Generalmoved for rehearing and the Tribefiled an amicus brief opposing rehearing.After the rehearing was denied, theState filed a petition for review in theSupreme Court but that was denied inOctober 2006.NARF has been retained by the
Eastern Shoshone Tribe of the WindRiver Indian Reservation to prepare alegal memorandum on the boundariesof their reservation. Congress adopteda Surplus Land Act for the reservationin 1905. The question is whether theresult of that Act was to diminish theboundaries of the reservation, or tosimply open the reservation for settle-ment by non-Indians while retainingthe existing boundaries. Since the passage of the 1905 Act, Congress hasadopted a number of other laws thataffect the area in question, includingan Act in 1939 that returned to tribalownership all of the lands in the“ceded” area that had not been settledby non-Indians or set aside as a reclamation project. The memorandum
has been completed and was presentedto the Tribal Business Council.
At the Tribal Business Council and
General Council meetings additionalassignments were made to look at andreport on other Eastern Shoshoneinterests at Bull Lake, Wind RiverCanyon and the City of Riverton,Wyoming. A report to the Tribe'sGeneral Council was made in February2006, and an additional assignmentwas given to NARF to look into theTribe’s application for lands to betaken into trust that the Tribe hadacquired within the reservationboundaries. In the meantime the Tribe
THEPROTECTION OF TRIBAL NATURAL RESOURCES
continued on the following page– along with the Northern Arapaho
Tribe – has been invited by the Mayorof the City of Riverton to sit down anddiscuss the important issues related tojurisdiction and boundaries to see ifan agreement can be reached. It islikely that the Tribes will accept theMayor’s invitation.
NARF continues to assist the
Hualapai Indian Tribe of Arizona witheconomic development. The Tribe islocated on the south rim of the GrandCanyon in Arizona, and claims aboundary that runs to the center of theColorado River. The Tribe asked thatNARF provide an interpretation of key provisions of their Constitutionconcerning the management anddevelopment of the Tribe’s naturalresources. In addition, the Tribe ownsthe Cholla Canyon Ranch near Wikiup,Arizona. The Ranch was gifted to theTribe by its owners and is presentlybeing operated as a palm tree planta-tion. NARF reviewed the proposedagricultural lease on the Ranch landsand may assist in further negotiationson this matter. Finally, NARF hasreviewed and provided legal analysisof other issues related to agreementswith Coconino County, mineral devel-opment of tribal land acquired fromfee owners, and whether the tribalconstitution requires voter approval ofa project involving tribal housing.
NARF represents the Pottawatomi
Nation of Canada, a band of descen-dants from the Historic PottawatomiNation, which from 1795 to 1833signed a series of treaties with theUnited States.  While the AmericanPottawatomi bands recovered the payment of annuities in the Indian
Claims Commission (ICC), theCanadian Pottawatomi members couldnot bring a claim in the ICC.  In 1993,NARF brought suit on behalf of theCanadian Pottawatomi in the Court ofFederal Claims, and the partiesreached a $1.8 million agreementwhich was approved by the Court in2000 and recommended to Congressin 2001.  NARF continues to work withthe Senate Committee on Indian Affairs,the Senate Judiciary Committee andthe House Resources Committee to seethis matter through to final resolution.
Since 1981, NARF has represented
the Alabama-Coushatta Tribe of Texasin their quest to secure compensationfor the loss of use of millions of acresof fertile forest land they once occupiedin southeast Texas.  In 2002, theUnited States Court of Federal Claimsruled in favor of the Alabama-Coushatta Tribe of Eastern Texas intheir breach-of-trust claim against theUnited States, holding the Governmentliable for the Tribe’s loss of use ofover 2.85 million acres of landbetween 1845 and 1954.  The Courtalso ruled that 5.5 million acres ofaboriginal title has never been extin-
guished.  Negotiators for the U.S. andTribe reached an agreement on theamount of damages for the loss ofland - $270 million- and the Courtrecommended the agreement toCongress in 2002.  NARF, privatecounsel, and the Tribe are now workingto garner Congressional approval forthe payment of this amount under theCongressional reference procedure.
NARF represents the Native Village
of Tuluksak in Alaska in their quest tohave the land owned by the Villagecorporation transferred in fee simpleto the Village tribal council.  TheDepartment of the Interior would thenbe petitioned to place the land intotrust on behalf of the Village.Currently tribes in Alaska are not permitted to place lands into trust asdo tribes in the “Lower 48.”  TheNative Village of Tuluksak has decidedto pursue litigation to establish theright of Alaska Tribes to petition theSecretary to place lands in trust.  Thelitigation was filed in 2006 in the fed-eral court in the District of Columbia.
For many years, NARF has co-coun-
seled with the Native Hawaiian Legal
Annual Report 2006
Page 18Treat the earth well, 
it was not given to you by
your parents, it was loaned 
to you by your children.Corporation (“NHLC”) and private
counsel in representing the PeleDefense Fund in efforts to preventlarge-scale geothermal development inthe Wao Kele'O Puna rainforest on theBig Island, and to regain NativeHawaiian access rights to Wao Kelelands.  These efforts culminated withthe entry in 2002 of a stipulated judg-ment and order by the state court inHilo, Hawaii recognizing the rights ofNative Hawaiians to hunt, gather, andworship on the Wao Kele lands – aspart of the bundle of “traditional andcustomary rights” protected, preservedand enforced under Article XII,Section 7 of the Hawaii Constitution.Efforts are now underway for theacquisition of the Wao Kele O Punarainforest lands.  Discussions continueregarding the sale of over 25,000acres of rainforest to a non-profit landtrust, thereby assuring perpetualaccess rights for Native Hawaiians.With NARF’s assistance, the Trust forPublic Lands (Hawaii Office) securedan appraisal of the property.  NARFworked with the Trust for PublicLands in applying for purchase fundsfrom the U.S. Department ofAgriculture’s (Forest Service) ForestLegacy Program.  TPL was successfulin securing Forest Legacy Fundingand, in 2006, the State of Hawaii'sOffice of Hawaiian Affairs agreed toput up funding to cover the balanceand make the transfer of the Wao KeleO Puna lands a reality.
Water Rights
Establishing tribal rights to the use
of water in the arid west continues tobe a major NARF priority.  The goal ofNARF’s Indian water rights work is to
secure allocations of water for presentand future needs for four Indian tribesrepresented by NARF and other west-ern tribes generally.  Under the prece-dent established by the United StatesSupreme Court in 1908 in Winters v.
United States and confirmed in 1963
in Arizona v. California , Indian tribes
are entitled under federal law to suffi-cient water for present and futureneeds, with a priority date at least asearly as the establishment of theirreservations.  These tribal reservedwater rights are superior to all state-recognized water rights created afterthe tribal priority date.  Such a datewill in most cases give tribes valuablesenior water rights in the water-shortwest.  Unfortunately, many tribes havenot utilized their reserved water rights
and most of these rights are unadjudi-cated or unquantified.  The majorneed in each case is to define orquantify the amount of water to whicheach tribe is entitled through litigationor out-of-court settlement negotiations.Tribes are generally able to claimwater for any purpose which enablesthe tribes’ reservations to serve as apermanent homeland.
NARF represents the Nez Perce
Tribe of Idaho in its water rights claimin the Snake River Basin Adjudication(SRBA). The Nez Perce Tribe is locatedin northern Idaho near the confluenceof the Snake and Clearwater Rivers.The Nez Perce claims have been theNative American Rights Fund
Page 19
continued on the following pagebiggest outstanding dispute in the
SRBA, which includes a legal inventoryof about 180,000 water rights claimsin 38 of Idaho’s 44 counties.  In 2005,the Nez Perce Tribal ExecutiveCommittee (NPTEC) accepted the finalterms of the water rights claims in theState of Idaho’s SRBA. The Nez PerceTribe has agreed to: 50,000 acre feetof water decreed to the Tribe for on-reservation uses; instream flowsdecreed on almost 200 Tribal prioritystreams to be held by the State ofIdaho; 600 springs claims decreed onabout 6 million acres of Federal landin the Tribe’s 1863 ceded area; over11,000 acres of on-reservation Bureauof Land Management land transferredto the Tribe in trust; and, $96 million inthree separate funds, for Tribal drinkingwater and sewer projects, water devel-opment projects, in addition to variousTribal projects including culturalpreservation and fishery habitatimprovements.  NARF has representedthe Nez Perce Tribe in Idaho in theSRBA – both litigation and settlementphases – since 1987. Congress enactedthe Snake River Settlement Act of 2004and President Bush signed it into lawthe same year. The Governor signedthe approval legislation in 2005. The approval by NPTEC representedthe final sign-off by the three sover-eigns.  This is a major accomplish-ment for the Nez Perce Tribe and itsmembers. NARF continues to workwith the Tribe to secure final approvalof the settlement by the SRBA watercourt, and on the federal appropria-tions process. The Idaho Congressionaldelegation has informed the Tribe that the Tribe’s FY 2007 settlementappropriations are secure.
NARF represents the Klamath Tribes
of Oregon who hold reserved waterrights in the Klamath River Basin tosupport their treaty hunting, fishingand gathering rights, as well as to satisfy the agricultural purposes of theKlamath Reservation.  NARF filedabout 150 contests on behalf of theTribes against unsubstantiated privatewater right claims and actively prose-
cuted them for the past four years.During 2004 and 2005, in one of thelargest contests, a four-week trial washeld concerning water rights for theBureau of Reclamation’s KlamathProject.  In Case 003 (one of thelargest contests where NARF is stillparticipating following a four weektrial) a ruling on the merits upheldNARF’s position that the United States,
Annual Report 2006
Page 20May we be strong in spirit and equal to
our Fathers of another day in reading the
signs of nature accurately and interpreting
them wisely... through the good earth, 
the blue sky, the flying birds and the
changing winds.
not private water users or irrigation
districts, owns the water rights for theenormous Klamath Irrigation Project.Accordingly, the claims of the waterusers and the districts were denied,and the holding ensures that theKlamath Project will continue to beoperated pursuant to the United States’Endangered Species Act and tribaltrust obligations.  Proceedings to finalize the Order in Case 003 arecontinuing.
Adjudication of the Tribes’ water
rights claims became active and theparties briefed legal issues on themerits on those cases in the summaryjudgment stage. In November 2006,the Administrative Law Judge (AJL)entered Orders in all eight cases thatupheld the Tribes’ legal position in asweeping set of victories. The ALJ heldthat the Tribes are entitled to a suffi-cient amount of water for a healthyhabitat and productive fishery. Theparties recently agreed to a vigorousdiscovery and trial schedule to adjudicate remaining issues regardingthe Tribes’ water right claims in theeight tribal cases which will extendwell into 2008. 
NARF represents the Tule River
Indian Tribe of California in on-goingnegotiations to settle the Tribe’s claimsto reserved water rights on itsReservation.  After legal and technicalanalyses of its water rights claims, theTribe decided to pursue a negotiatedsettlement of its water rights claimsbefore engaging in litigation. TheDepartment of the Interior appointeda Federal Negotiation Team to assistthe Tribe in settling its water rightsclaims. The Tribe’s goal is to negotiate
a settlement that will provide the Tribewith sufficient water to create a permanent sustainable homeland forits people with no or minimal adverseimpact on other water users. SettlingParties have made great progresstoward reaching a water rights settle-ment agreement and continue to negotiate remaining issues. 
In June 2006, the Kickapoo Tribe in
Kansas filed a federal lawsuit in U.S.District Court in an effort to enforceexpress promises made to the Tribe tobuild the Plum Creek ReservoirProject in the Upper Delaware andtributaries watershed. The Nemaha-Brown Watershed Joint Board # 7, the Natural Resources ConservationService of the United StatesDepartment of Agriculture, and theState of Kansas made these promises
to the Tribe over a decade ago. In theintervening years these parties havebeen actively developing the waterresources of the watershed, resultingin the near depletion of the Tribe’ssenior federal water rights in the drainage. 
The water quality on the reservation
is so poor it is harmful to humanhealth and unsuitable for human consumption according to the EPA.The water supply is in violation of theSafe Drinking Water Act of 1974. As aresult the Kickapoo people are unableto safely drink, bathe or cook with tapwater. The Plum Creek ReservoirProject is the most cost-effective andreliable means by which the Tribe canfree its members from the dire living
Native American Rights Fund
Page 21
continued on page 24Major Activities 2006
NARF Case Studies
Page 22Page 23NEW MEXICO
• Jicarilla Apache Tribe - Education 
• Mescalero Apache Tribe – Tribal Trust Fund
NEW YORK
• Shinnecock Indian Nation - Recognition 
NORTH DAKOT A
• Fort Berthold Reservation - Education & Water• Turtle Mountain Reservation - Tribal Trust Fund
OKLAHOMA
• Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes – Tribal Trust Fund• Pawnee Nation – Education, NAGPRA & Tribal
Trust Fund
• Sac & Fox Nations – Tribal Trust Fund
OREGON
• Klamath Tribes - Water Rights & Tribal Trust Fund• Bonnichsen v. United States
(“Kennewick Man case”) - Repatriation 
SOUTH DAKOT A
• Lower Brule Sioux Tribe - Trust Lands
• Rosebud Sioux Tribe - Education & Tribal
Administration
• Oglala Sioux Tribe - Environmental 
TEXAS
• Alabama-Coushatta Tribe -  Land Claim 
VIRGINIA
Pamunkey Tribe – Recognition
WASHINGTON
• Yakama Nation – Tribal Trust Funds
WASHINGTON, D.C.
NARF WASHINGTON, D.C. OFFICE• Cobell v. Norton & Tribal Supreme Court Project
• Harjo et al v. Washington Redskin Football
- Cultural Rights 
WYOMING
• Eastern Shoshone Tribe - Land Issue 
CANADA
• Northern Lakes Pottawatomi Nation - Land Claim 
INTERNA TIONAL
• Draft Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples – United Nations & Organization ofAmerican StatesALASKA
NARF ANCHORAGE OFFICE
• Chistochina Tribe – Subsistence• Curing v. Alaska - ICWA
• Kaltag Tribe – ICWA• Katie John v. Norton - Subsistence
• English Only Initiative• Global Warming Project• Native Villages of Eyak, Tatitlek, Chenega,
Nanwalek, and Port Graham - Subsistence
& Aboriginal Title
• Gwich’in Steering Committee -
Environmental/Subsistence
• Native Village of Kiana - Education• Native Village of Nulato - Education and
ICWA
• Ninilchick Tribe - Subsistence• Native Village of Tuluksak 
- Trust Lands
• Native Village of Venetie - Subsistence• Voting Rights Act
ARIZONA
• Hualapai Tribe – Boundary Issue
CALIFORNIA
• Tule River Tribe – Water • Yurok Tribe – Tribal Trust Funds
COLORADO
NARF HEADQUARTERS
BOULDER, COLORADO
• ICWA Site• TEDNA Headquarters• Valmont Butte – Sacred Site Issue
HAWAII
• Pele Defense Fund - Aboriginal Rights
IDAHO
• Nez Perce Tribe - Water Rights 
KANSAS
• Kickapoo Tribe – Water Rights
MINNESOT A
• White Earth Band of Chippewa Indians -
Tribal Trust Fund 
MONT ANA
• Chippewa-Cree Tribe of the Rocky Boys
Reservation - Tribal Trust Fund
• Little Shell Tribe - Recognition & Tribal
Trust Fund
NEBRASKA
• Santee Sioux Tribe – Tribal Trust FundNative American Rights Fundconditions forced upon them by 
their unreliable and dangerous water supply.
A thirty-year era of unreliable water
supplies on the Kickapoo Reservationlocated in Brown County, Kansas hasdisabled the Kickapoo Tribe from providing basic municipal servicesnecessary to protect its residents fromillness, fire, and unsanitary living conditions. There is not enough wateron the reservation to provide basicmunicipal services to the community,the Tribe is unable to provide localschools with a reliable, safe runningwater, and the fire department cannotprovide adequate fire protection dueto the water shortage.
Protection of Hunting and
Fishing Rights in Alaska
The subsistence way of life is essen-
tial for the physical and cultural survivalof Alaska Natives.  As important asNative hunting and fishing rights are toAlaska Natives' physical, economic,traditional, and cultural existence, 
the State of Alaska has been and continues to be reluctant to recognize
the importance of the subsistence wayof life. 
In 2004, the U.S. Court of Appeals
for the Ninth Circuit en banc remandedfor a determination of whether thetribes can establish aboriginal rightsin their traditional-use areas.  TheDistrict Court ordered the parties (theplaintiff Chugach Tribes are representedby NARF) to refile Motions forSummary Judgment.  The Chugachchose not to file a motion for summaryjudgment given the remaining fact disputes, but the government did submit one. Summary judgement wasdenied in December 2006 and aschedule for trial will now be set.
NARF is representing the Native
Village of Venetie Tribal Government,the Ninilchik Tribal Government, andindividuals as proposed interveners ina case that was initially brought by theSafari Club, a sporting club, to challenge regulations promulgated by
the Secretaries of the Interior andAgriculture implementing the subsis-tence preference established by the1980 Alaska National Interest LandsConservation Act (ANILCA).  ANILCAestablishes a preference for customaryand traditional uses of fish andwildlife by according a priority for thetaking of fish and wildlife on federalpublic lands in Alaska for non-wastefulsubsistence uses by rural Alaska residents, most of whom are AlaskaNatives. The Safari Club challenged the validity of all 180 customary andtraditional use determinations underANILCA, and challenged the composi-tion of Regional Area Council (RAC)as not adequately representing sport,recreational and commercial interests.NARF intervened in the case on behalfof its clients in order to defend theFederal Subsistence Board’s (FSB)subsistence use-determinations fortheir respective Alaska Native commu-nities and to protect their entitlementto take fish and wildlife on federalpublic lands in Alaska. The courtissued a decision in July 2006, holdingthat the FSB had not followed theAdministrative Procedures Act inpromulgating the regulation allowing30% of the RAC seats to be held bynon-subsistence users.  Thus the FSBnow has to re-do its regulations aboutwho can hold seats on it, and it isexpected to reissue the regulations forpublic comment in early 2007.  
In 2005, the State of Alaska filed a
lawsuit in the District of Columbiachallenging the final rule implementingthe mandate in the prior subsistence
Annual Report 2006
Page 24
case, John v. United States . This prior
NARF case established that the UnitedStates must protect subsistence uses offisheries in navigable waters where theUnited States possesses a reservedwater right. The State challenges theSecretaries’ implementation of themandate by arguing that the reservedwaters doctrine requires a quantifica-tion of waters necessary to fulfill specific purposes. Alaska Native sub-sistence user Katie John filed a motionfor limited intervention for purposesof filing a motion to dismiss for failureto join an indispensable party. TheUnited States filed a motion to transfervenue to Alaska. The court entered anOrder transferring the case to the
District of Alaska.
Katie John had filed John v. Norton
in the District of Alaska challengingthe Secretaries’ final rule implementingthe prior Katie John mandate as beingtoo restrictive in its scope. Katie John’scomplaint alleges that the Secretariesshould have included Alaska Nativeallotments as public lands and furtherthat the federal government’s interestin water extends upstream and down-stream from the Conservation Unitsestablished under ANILCA.  The twocases have now been consolidated and briefing is underway.In June 2006 the State of Alaska
brought suit challenging the FederalSubsistence Board’s customary andtraditional use finding for subsistenceuses of moose by members of theChistochina Tribe. A positive customaryand traditional use finding entitles residents for a specific community tothe subsistence priority under TitleVIII of the Alaska National InterestLands Conservation (“ANILCA”).Represented by NARF, Chistochina wasgranted intervention in this action toprotect its customary and traditionaluse status for moose.
Native American Rights Fund
Page 25
Native American Rights Fund
Page 27Although basic human rights are
considered a universal and inalienableentitlement, Native Americans face anongoing threat of having their rightsundermined by the United States gov-ernment, states, and others who seekto limit these rights.  NARF strives toenforce and strengthen laws which aredesigned to protect the rights of NativeAmericans to practice their traditionalreligion, to use their own language,and to enjoy their culture.  NARF alsoworks with Tribes to improve educationfor and ensure the welfare of theirchildren.  In the international arena,NARF is active in efforts to negotiatedeclarations on the rights of indige-nous peoples.
Religious Freedom
Because religion is the foundation
that holds Native communities andcultures together, religious freedom isa NARF priority issue. Legal work continues on the implementation ofthe Native American Graves Protectionand Repatriation Act (NAGPRA) whichNARF helped secure in 1990. NARFoffered testimony in 2004 and 2005before the Senate Committee onIndian Affairs at oversight hearingsregarding NAGPRA issues. NARF sup-ports legislation to amend NAGPRA tocorrect problems created by the NinthCircuit decision in the Bonnichsen
case which effectively reversed thepresumption that all ancient remainsare Native. In addition, NARF providedcomments on various proposed regulations and policies implementingNAGPRA.NARF represents the Pawnee Nation
in the reburial of about 800 humanremains in the State of Nebraska. Thisreburial entails facilitation of a transferof private land located within the heartof the aboriginal Pawnee homeland tothe Nation for use as a reburial andcultural site. Meetings were held during2006 concerning these matters. The Nebraska Attorney General issuedan opinion in 2006 clarifying thatreburials may be done on private land in Nebraska.
In January 2006, NARF as part of a
legal team, filed an amici curiae brief
in the Spirit Cave repatriation litigationcaptioned Fallon Paiute-Shoshone
Tribe v. United States Bureau ofLand Management in the United
States District Court of Nevada. NARFis representing the National Congress of American Indians, Morning StarInstitute, Association of AmericanIndian Affairs and the Medicine WheelCoalition of Sacred Sites in NorthAmerica in this important NAGPRArepatriation litigation. The brief supports the Fallon Paiute-ShoshoneTribe’s efforts to repatriate theremains of their ancestor from theUnited States Bureau of LandManagement (BLM). 
In September 2006, the Court
granted the Tribe’s Motion forSummary Judgment and remanded thematter to the BLM for reconsideration.The Court determined that the BLMfailed to fully and fairly review theTribe’s scientific evidence or addressthe NAGPRA Review Committee’s findings that opposed the BLM’s initial
determination. This failure by the BLMviolates the NAGPRA and theAdministrative Procedures Act and,therefore, necessitated a finding thatthe BLM acted arbitrary and capricious.The order, however, does not requirethe BLM to reverse its determinationof non-affiliation. Instead, the Courtordered the BLM to compare its initial
determination with the Tribe’s evidenceand the Review Committee’s findings,and to 
“explain why its determination
is, or is not, still the most correct finding available.”
In November 2006, the United
States appealed the Judge’s decision to the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals.The Tribe, in turn, filed a cross-appealin December 2006. As a result, NARFis again, considering filing an amici
brief in support of the Tribe.THEPROMOTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS
continued on the following pageIn addition to NAGPRA, NARF also
played a key role in the 1994 enact-ment of Public Law 103-344, whichexempts the religious use of peyote by Indians in bona fide traditional ceremonies from controlled substancelaws of the federal and state govern-ments.  This law also prohibits discrimination against Indians forsuch religious use of peyote.
NARF is representing the Native
American Church of North America(NAC) in the case O Centro Esprírita
Beneficiente Uniao Do Vegetal (UDV-USA) v. Ashcroft .  NARF and the NAC
assisted the United States Departmentof Justice in defending current federallaw which protects the religious use ofpeyote by NAC members.  In 2002, theFederal District Court in New Mexicorejected the UDV’s equal protectionargument that it was entitled to thesame protection as the NAC’s use ofpeyote. The U.S. Court of Appeals forthe Tenth Circuit also rejected theUDV’s equal protection claims thatthreatened the NAC’s Indian churchesspecial status under federal law. TheUnited States Supreme Court issued adecision in February 2006, holdingthat the government has a burden todemonstrate a specific, compellinginterest in regulating the use of a hallucinogenic tea under the ReligiousFreedom Restoration Act, but that ithad failed to do so.  The SupremeCourt did not rule on the equal protection claim.
NARF and the Colorado Commission
of Indian Affairs (“CCIA”) were firstasked in 2003 to become involved inthe City of Boulder’s process to decidewhether to site two facilities – 
a biosolids composting facility and afire training center – at Valmont Butte,located just east of the City.  In themidst of these legal processes, curiousphenomena began to unfold. Given avoice and means of expression by NARFand CCIA’s involvement, the NativeAmerican community came forwardwith powerful evidence that (1) theButte is a place of significant prehis-toric connections to Native peopleswho inhabited Boulder Valley longbefore Euro American settlers cameinto the area in the 19th Century; and(2) the Butte is a place of contempo-rary religious importance to manyIndian people in the metropolitanDenver area, as well as to Indian people of Ute, Arapaho and Cheyennedescent who reside on reservations inOklahoma, Wyoming and SouthwestColorado. Important spirit voices arebelieved to reside in and around theButte itself, and it is the locus of anactive sweat lodge being utilized byseveral Indian religious leaders.  
In 2005, the City Council heard andrespected the wishes of the IndianCommunity, and rejected the planningstaff recommendations to locate thecomposting and fire training facilitieson the Butte property. NARF is workingwith the CCIA, the local Indian com-munity in the Denver metropolitanarea, the interested tribes, and theresidents of the Valmont Butte area, to identify a means of acquiring theproperty from the City.
Cultural Rights
NARF, in conjunction with NCAI,
worked with a coalition of civil rightsorganizations under the direction ofthe Leadership Conference on CivilRights (LCCR) to ensure that Congressreauthorized certain remedial provi-sions within the Voting Rights Act(VRA) which were scheduled to expire in 2007.  The critical remedialprovisions are found in the languageassistance provision, §203 of the VRA,Annual Report 2006
Page 28
~which requires certain states and local
jurisdictions to provide voting materialsin languages other than English,including American Indian and AlaskaNative languages.  
In March 2006, NARF prepared the
first ever report on the impact of theVRA in Alaska.  This report was sub-mitted to Congress and included in theCongressional record. NARF was thenrequested to provide written and oraltestimony in support of this report tothe Senate Judiciary Committee in May2006.  In addition, NARF, in conjunctionwith NCAI, provided written and oraltestimony at a hearing before theNational Commission on the VotingRights Act – Examining the Degree of
Racial Discrimination in Voting andthe Impact of the Voting Rights ActSince 1982: A Perspective FromIndian Country – held in September
2005, in Rapid City, South Dakota.NARF is extremely pleased to say thatthe VRA was re-authorized byCongress with all of its critical provi-sions intact in the summer of 2006.This ensures that Native voters areprotected for the next 25 years. 
Also in the area of cultural rights,
NARF filed an amicus brief in the case
of Harjo et al v. Washington Redskin
Football in the U.S. Court of Appeals
for the District of Columbia on behalfof the National Congress of AmericanIndians, National Indian EducationalAssociation, National Indian YouthCouncil, and the Tulsa Indian CoalitionAgainst Racism in Sports in support ofthe Indian appellants. The briefargued that the federal trademark forthe football team should be cancelledbecause the use of the “Redskin” mark
is racially disparaging in violation offederal trademark law. A decision wasrendered in 2005 holding that thecase may have been prematurely dismissed as to the youngest Indianpetitioner. The case was remanded tothe district court to consider whetherthe youngest Indian plaintiff, who wasa year old when the Redskins trade-marks were first registered, should bebarred from bringing his claimbecause of delay in bringing the claim.NARF will continue to monitor thisimportant case on remand.
NARF is also helping tribes and
Indian families to enforce their federalrights under the Indian Child WelfareAct (ICWA).  Tribal courts, alreadyunderstaffed, underfunded, and lackinglegal resources, are fighting an uphillbattle to fully implement the ICWA.  To assist with this critical issue, theU.S. Department of Health and HumanServices’ Administration for NativeAmericans (HHS-ACF) has providedfunding to NARF to assist tribes inresolving these issues through thedevelopment of a Practical Guide tothe ICWA that will address these issues
and benefit tribal courts and tribalsocial services programs, as well astheir non-Indian counterparts.  ThisGuide, once completed in 2007, willbe the largest and most comprehen-sive of its kind, containing resourcesfor all 50 states, and organized as afully searchable online database.  Thiswill enable any ICWA worker, includingat the tribe level, involved in a stateIndian child custody proceeding tohave full access to all the necessarylaws and rules governing ICWA.  
In January 2005 the Villages of
Tanana, Nulato, Akiak, Kalskag, LowerKalskag and Kenaitze along with thenamed parents filed a complaintagainst the State of Alaska, AttorneyGeneral, and various state agencieschallenging the policy adopted by theAttorney General of Alaska that statecourts have exclusive jurisdiction overchild custody proceedings involvingAlaska Native children and that tribesin Alaska do not have concurrentjurisdiction to hear children’s casesunless (1) the child’s tribe has 
Native American Rights Fund
Page 29We must protect the forests for our 
children, grandchildren and children
yet to be born. We must protect the
forests for those who cannot speak 
for themselves such as the birds, 
animals, fish and trees.
continued on the following pagesuccessfully petitioned the Department
of Interior to reassume exclusive orconcurrent jurisdiction under theIndian Child Welfare Act (ICWA), or(2) a state superior court has trans-ferred jurisdiction of the child’s caseto a tribal court in accordance with 26 U.S.C. §§1911(b). Oral argumenttook place in October 2006.  A decisionis now pending from the SuperiorCourt.
In another ICWA matter, the Kaltag
Tribe and the parents had completedan adoption and applied for a newbirth certificate listing the new parentsbut the State refused to issue one onthe grounds that the Tribe had notpetitioned for reassumption of juris-diction under ICWA. The Tribe and theparents (two individual Kaltag tribalmembers) brought suit against theState of Alaska Department of Healthand Social Services and the AlaskaBureau of Vital Statistics for denyingfull faith and credit to a tribal adoption decree in violation of section1911(d) of the Indian Child WelfareAct. The parents also have raised acivil rights claim.
Education
From the founding of this country,
federal policy effectively strippedIndian tribes of control over the education of their children.  The disempowerment of tribes over education has been devastating. Inmost tribal communities, formalschooling is resented and rejected. Inresponse, NARF has worked closelywith six tribal communities – theAssiniboine and Sioux Tribe of theFort Peck Reservation in Montana, the
Three Affiliated Tribes of the FortBerthold Reservation in North Dakota,the Jicarilla Apache Nation in NewMexico, the Native Villages of Kianaand Nulato in Alaska, and the RosebudSioux Tribe in South Dakota – to createa foundation for working collabora-tively with public school districts,states, and other parties. Partnershipswere established; basic aggregate student data was gathered and ana-lyzed; initial collaborative strategieswere determined; tribal curriculumwas developed; and tribal educationcodes and policy were developed andadopted. NARF’s client tribes are nowon firm ground for equal partnershipswith school districts and states inimproving the education of tribalstudents. This remarkable progresssolidifies our belief that partnershipsand collaboration among tribes andother key stakeholders in Indian education are critical to effectuatingneeded change and to achieving the ultimate goal of improving theeducation of tribal students.
NARF also helped establish theTribal Education Departments National
Assembly (TEDNA) under contractsfrom the U.S. Department ofEducation's Office of Indian Education.Thirty-five federally-recognized tribaleducation departments now havejoined TEDNA. TEDNA carries on avariety of advocacy activities. Mostrecently, on behalf of TEDNA and withfunding from the Administration forNative Americans, NARF partneredwith the Council of Chief State SchoolOfficers (CCSSO) in a recent initiative,Strengthening Partnerships for NativeAmerican Students in Education. NARFdrafted and then finalized a Manual
for Chief State School Officers andState Education Agencies onAmerican Indian and Alaska NativeTribal Sovereignty, Federal EducationPrograms for Tribal Students, andTribal Education Departments . While
the Manual is not specific to any onestate, it is intended to help any stategenerally and provide useful modelsand examples from various states inan effort to guide all states.  The information in the Manual is current,accurate, and pertinent and has beenwidely distributed. 
Annual Report 2006
Page 30We put our minds together to give thanks to
our oldest Grandmother, the Moon, who
lights the night-time sky. She is the leader of
women all over the world, and she governs
the movement of the ocean tides... it is she
who watches over the arrival of our children.Finally, NARF is helping the Pawnee
Nation College get off the ground.During its first year of operation,twenty-one courses were offered to 99students.  The college is now focusingon completing work necessary toobtain accreditation.
International Recognition
of Indigenous Rights
The development of international
laws and standards to protect therights of indigenous peoples can bebeneficial to Native American peopleas well as other indigenous peoplesaround the world. Native Americantribes therefore need to be involved inthese efforts and enlist the support ofthe United States since it is so influen-tial in international circles.
NARF and the National Congress of
American Indians entered into anattorney-client relationship severalyears ago for the purpose of workingin the international arena to protectindigenous rights. There have beenrecent, significant developments inboth the United Nations andOrganization of American States.  InJune 2006, in an historic vote, the newUnited Nations’ Human Rights Counciloverwhelmingly approved the UnitedNations' Draft Declaration on theRights of Indigenous Peoples.  Thevote was thirty in favor, two opposed,and twelve abstaining.  The only twocountries voting against theDeclaration were Russia and Canada.The Declaration approved was a com-bination of provisions agreed upon byindigenous peoples worldwide andstates, and a compromise text of thoseprovisions upon which consensus had
not been reached.  This compromisetext was developed by the Chair of the Working Group on the DraftDeclaration.  Thus, while theDeclaration as approved was not totallya consensus document, it wasendorsed by most indigenous peoplesworldwide as a major step forward ina process that has been going on sincethe 1970s.  The Declaration recog-nizes that indigenous peoples haveimportant collective rights in a multitude of areas, including self-determination, spirituality, lands, territories and natural resources. 
The positive vote by the Human
Rights Council resulted in theDeclaration being forwarded to theGeneral Assembly of the UnitedNations for a hoped for approval in2006.  Unfortunately, the Declarationwas referred to the Third Committeeof the General Assembly rather thangoing directly to the General Assembly.In the Third Committee, certainAfrican Nations led a successful effortto defer consideration to allow moretime for consultation.  This was a significant setback and is cause forconcern because no one knows what iscontemplated by the term “consultation.”The consultation and action on theDeclaration are supposedly to be completed by September of 2007, but a timetable and framework for“consultation” have not been estab-lished as yet.
In the Organization of American
States, the most recent drafting sessionon the Declaration on the Rights ofIndigenous Peoples, the eighth, tookplace in December 2006 in
Washington, D.C.  Section One,Indigenous Peoples, Scope ofApplication and Section Two,Collective Rights were discussed, butlittle progress was made.  The ninthsession will be held in Washington,D.C. and Section Three on CulturalIdentity and Section Four onOrganizational and Political Rights will be covered. The net result of thesenegotiation sessions to date is that afew provisions have been tentativelyagreed upon and the areas of differencein the remainder of the documenthave been significantly narrowed. Thistime through the document was tohave resulted in substantial adoptionof provisions, but if the discussionconcerning Sections One and Two isany indication, agreement on aDeclaration is still a ways off.
Native American Rights Fund
Page 31
Native American Rights Fund
Page 33Contained within the unique trust
relationship between the United Statesand Indian nations is the inherent dutyfor all levels of government to recognizeand responsibly enforce the many lawsand regulations applicable to Indianpeoples and the trust duties to whichthose give rise.  Because such lawsimpact virtually every aspect of triballife, NARF maintains its involvement in the legal matters pertaining to government accountability to NativeAmericans. 
The Cobell v. Kempthorne case was
filed in 1996. It is brought on behalfof approximately 500,000 past andpresent individual Indian trust benefi-ciaries.  The individual Indian moneyaccount holders (plaintiffs) seek a fullaccounting of their trust assets for theentire period that such assets havebeen held in trust – since 1887.Trustees, without exception, have aduty to provide accurate and completestatement of accounts to each benefi-ciary at regular intervals and a completeand accurate accounting upondemand. Yet, the United States hasnever provided an accounting to indi-vidual Indian trust beneficiaries. It hasnever provided beneficiaries accurateand complete statement of accounts.In addition, plaintiffs ask that theaccount balances be restated in accor-dance with the accounting. Finally,plaintiffs seek reform of the trust management and accounting system.
NARF continues in its new role as
Of Counsel in this case working primarily on settlement issues with theprivate attorneys involved in this case.
Settlement was the major focus in theCobell case during the last Congress.
Settlement bills including an $8 billionsettlement figure were not passed byCongress due to opposition from theAdministration.  The Administrationwanted to include provisions limitingthe ownership of Indian allotments toten Indians, creating a beneficiary-managed trust for individual and tribally owned  land, eliminating anyfurther liability for the federal govern-ment as trustee, and requiring theinclusion of all tribal trust fund mismanagement claims in the settle-ment as well.  Tribal leaders rejectedthe Administration’s position, so theCobell settlement legislation died.
Prospects for Cobell settlement 
legislation in the new Congress areuncertain.  Trust reform has become a priority in the Senate Indian AffairsCommittee. NARF continues to urgeCongress to hold oversight hearings ontrust reform and to develop Cobell settlement legislation based on thosehearings. 
In the litigation, two petitions were
filed in the U.S. Supreme Court inDecember 2006, seeking review oftwo D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals deci-sions last year removing Judge RoyceLamberth from the case and reversingJudge Lamberth’s order to disconnectmany of the Interior Department com-puters from the internet and internalcomputer networks to protect theintegrity of individual Indian trust dataon Interior’s computers.  The SupremeCourt should decide whether it will
hear either case by early spring. 
In the meantime, Judge James
Robertson, the new U.S. District Courtjudge assigned to the Cobell case,
held a status conference in December2006, to hear from the parties on thenext steps in the case.  NARF urgedJudge Robertson to hold a trial on theaccounting which would show that thegovernment is unable to do anaccounting and which would requirethe Judge to order alternative relief forthe Cobell plaintiffs.  The government
opposed a trial and asked for anunlimited amount of time to work onan accounting as it sees fit.  We awaita decision from Judge Robertson onwhich direction he will go with the case.
NARF represents the Turtle Mountain
Chippewa, Chippewa Cree of theRocky Boy’s Reservation, White EarthBand of Minnesota Chippewa, andLittle Shell Chippewa Tribe in this caseagainst the Federal government formonetary damages for mismanagementof their tribal trust fund, the $53 millionPembina Judgment Fund, awarded tothem by the Indian Claims Commissionin 1964 and 1980 decisions. In January2006, the U.S. Court of Federal Claimsrejected four major arguments by theUnited States to get the case dismissedor substantially limited and ruled thatthe case can go forward to determinewhether the United States breached itstrust responsibilities to the PembinaChippewa Tribes with respect to theirJudgment Fund.
THEACCOUNTABILITY OF GOVERNMENTS
continued on the following pageThe Court ruled that statutes of lim-
itations do not bar the case becausethe United States has never provided afull accounting of the PembinaJudgment Fund to its beneficiaries.The Court ruled that the United Statesheld the Pembina Judgment in trustfrom the time that Congress appropri-ated the monies for the Fund, and thatthe United States had a judiciallyenforceable statutory duty to make theFund productive while it held the Fundin trust. The Court also ruled that thecase can go forward as a “groupclaim” by the Pembina Judgment Fundbeneficiaries without the proceduraldifficulties of joining all of the benefi-ciaries individually, or certifying thebeneficiaries as a class.  On this lastissue - the posture of the case as agroup claim - The United States movedfor reconsideration in April 2006. TheTribes opposed reconsideration and in
September 2006, the Court denied theUnited States’ reconsideration motion.In December 2006 the Court orderedthe case to be at least partially settledor brought to trial in calendar year2007.  The parties have resumednegotiated settlement discussions.
NARF represents eleven named
plaintiffs – the Nez Perce Tribe, theMescalero Apache Tribe, the TuleRiver Indian Tribe, the Hualapai Tribe,the Yakama Nation, the KlamathTribes, the Yurok Tribe, the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribe, the Pawnee Nation ofOklahoma, the Sac and Fox Nation,and the Santee Sioux Tribe – in a newaction filed in December 2006 in thefederal district court for the District ofColumbia.  The action seeks full andcomplete accountings of tribal trustfunds, which never have been provided
by the federal government which is thetrustee for the funds.  The action alsoseeks a court order declaring that theArthur Andersen reconciliation reportsprepared under contract and providedto tribes in the 1990’s are not full andcomplete trust fund accountings.  Theaction was filed as a class action toprotect the rights of all tribes that donot file their own such actions andthat want to choose to remain in theclass.  It is estimated that about 70 to80 tribes filed their own actions, butas many as 240 may be in the class ifcertification is granted.  The actionhad to  be filed by December 31, 2006under an act of Congress that gavetribes that date as a deadline by which to challenge the adequacy ofthe Arthur Andersen reconciliationreports.
Annual Report 2006
Page 34
Native American Rights Fund
Page 35The systematic development of
Indian law is essential for the contin-ued protection of Indian rights.  Thisprocess involves distributing Indianlaw materials to, and communicatingwith, those groups and individualsworking on behalf of Indian people.NARF has two ongoing projects whichare aimed at achieving this goal, theNational Indian Law Library and theIndian Law Support Center.
The National Indian 
Law Library
The National Indian Law Library
(NILL) is a national public law librarydevoted to American Indian law whichserves both the Native American RightsFund and the public. Since 1972 NILLhas collected nearly 9,000 resourcematerials that relate to federal Indianand tribal law. The Library’s holdingsinclude the largest collection of tribalcodes, ordinances and constitutions inthe United States; legal pleadings frommajor American Indian cases; and lawreview articles on Indian law topics.In addition to making its catalog andextensive collection available to thepublic, the National Indian LawLibrary provides reference andresearch assistance relating to Indianlaw and tribal law.
In an effort to provide Colorado
lawyers and the general legal commu-nity with a useful guide to Indian lawresearch, NILL published two shortarticles on Indian law research in theColorado Lawyer . “Basic Indian Law
Research Tips - Federal Indian Law”was published in the May, 2005 issue
and “Basic Indian Law Research Tips -Tribal Law” was published in theAugust issue.  As part of NILL’s long-standing goal to make the unique NILLcollection more accessible to the public, the Library has joined theworld-wide bibliographic utility calledWorldcat, which allows librarians andlibrary users to find out what is in thecollections of libraries nationwide. 
For its outstanding work in providing
information to the public, NILLreceived a national award from theAmerican Association of LawLibrarians for 
“Public Access to
Government Information.”  Also, oneof NILL’s librarians published“Creating a Supplemental Thesaurus tothe LCSH for a specialized collection:The Experience of the National IndianLaw Library.”  Law Library Journal volume 98 n2 (Spring 2006). 
Indian Law Support Center
Since 1972, NARF’s Indian Law
Support Center (ILSC) has served as anational support center on Indian lawand policy for the national Indianlegal services community and the 32basic field programs serving NativeAmerican clients. ILSC continues tosend out regular correspondence toIndian legal services programs, handling requests for assistance, andworking with Indian legal servicesprograms to secure a more stablefunding base from the Congress.  TheDepartment of Justice awarded a grantof $1,987,000 to NARF in 2004. Mostof the grant funds have been 
contracted out to the Indian legal services programs with a small portionused to cover NARF administrativecosts. NARF continues to be activelyinvolved with local Indian legal servicesprograms in the administration of thegrant and in developing training eventsto meet local program needs. NARFreceived an award of additional funding in the amount of $1,726,626for calendar year 2006 for the project.
Other Activities
In addition to its major projects,
NARF continued its participation innumerous conferences and meetingsof Indian and non-Indian organizationsin order to share its knowledge andexpertise in Indian law.  During thepast fiscal year, NARF attorneys andstaff served in formal or informalspeaking and leadership capacities atnumerous Indian and Indian-relatedconferences and meetings such as theNational Congress of American IndiansExecutive Council, Midyear and AnnualConventions and the Federal BarAssociation’s Indian Law Conference.NARF remains firmly committed tocontinuing its effort to share the legalexpertise which it possesses with thesegroups and individuals working insupport of Indian rights and to fosterthe recognition of Indian rights inmainstream society.THEDEVELOPMENT OF INDIAN LAW
Honoring the EarthAnnual Report 2006
Page 36Public Contributions
Tribal Contributions
Federal Awards 
Foundation Grants
Return on Investments
Other
TOTALS$ 1,795,069
           796,167
2,001,980
736,900
2,811,484
556,866
68,005
$ 8,766,471 20.5%
       9.1%
22.8%
8.4%
 32.1%
6.3%0.8%
100%  $ 2,263,209
        336,460     1,490,509
   1,370,529
 957,609 709,026
17,351
 $ 7,144,69331.7%
        4.7%
20.9%19.1%13.4%
9.9%0.3%
100%dollars percents
2006
dollars percents2005
Legal Fees
dollars percents2006
dollars percents2005
Litigation and Client Services
National Indian Law Library     Total Program ServicesManagement and GeneralFund Raising     Total Support Services                         TOTALS$ 4,935,436
313,365
 5,248,801
935,263
1,640,024
2,575,287
$ 7,824,08863.1%
  4.0%
67.1%
11.9%21.0%
32.9%
100%66.6%
3.6%
 70.2%
12.7%17.1%
 29.8%
100%$ 4,850,670
262,086
5,112,756
925,508
1,243,550
2,169,058
    $ 7,281,814
Note: This summary of financial information has been extracted from NARF’s audited financial statements which received an unqualified  opinion by the accounting
firm of JDS Professional Group. Complete audited financials are available, upon request, through our Boulder office or at www.n arf.org.UNRESTRICTED SUPPORT AND REVENUE COMPARISON
EXPENSE COMPARISONBased on our audited financial
statements for the fiscal year endingSeptember 30, 2006, the NativeAmerican Rights Fund reports totalunrestricted revenues of $8,766,471against total expenditures of$7,824,088.  Total net assets at theend of the year came to $6,871,196.Due to presentation requirements ofthe audited financial statements interms of recognizing the timing of
certain revenues, they do not reflectthe fact that, based on NARF’s internalreporting, revenue exceeded operatingexpenses and other cash outlays by$980,416, resulting in an increase toNARF’s reserve fund. In fiscal year2006, there was increased activityrelated to federal awards and legal feecases. Also, we received a substantialcourt award for attorney’s fees for the
Cobell case. The decrease in founda-
tion grants was attributed to the factthat one of our major grants was notrenewed in fiscal year 2006.
Revenue and Expense comparisons
between fiscal year 2006 and fiscalyear 2005 are shown below.
2006 F INANCIAL REPORTNative American Rights Fund
Page 37NARF A CKNOWLEDGMENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS : 
Living Waters Endowment
Elwood H. Brotzman Memorial FundJerome Davis Living Waters Endowment FundKathleen and Ruth Dooley Family FundEdward & Verna Gerbic Family FoundationSusan K. Griffiths Memorial FundThe Robert and Joy Hanson Leland EndowmentFrank J. McCormick Family FundMarvin W. Pourier, Sr./Donna M. Deans Memorial
Fund
Mary Lou Mosca-Ragona Memorial FundErnest L. Schusky EndowmentHelen and Sidney Ungar Memorial Endowment
Fund
Foundations, Corporations and Organizations
Adirondack Community Trust - Evergreen FundAgape FoundationAlan B. Cutting FoundationAnalysis & Information Services, Inc.The Arches FoundationAria FoundationBassett FoundationThe Bay and Paul FoundationsThe Boston FoundationCohen Family FundCombined Jewish PhilanthropiesCommunity Foundation For Southwest WashingtonDellEdward & Verna Gerbic Family FoundationEverett Public Service Internship ProgramFalcon Charitable FoundationFocus Foundation Inc.Ford FoundationThe Fox FundThe Glad Earth Foundation Inc.Gorlitz Foundation, Ltd.Harrison FoundationJohnson Family FoundationLasser Family Trust
Mr. & Mrs. Paul LeFortLP Brown FoundationLutheran Community FoundationMacArthur FoundationNAFA Capital MarketsNative American Rainbow NetworkNew Mexico Community FoundationNorth Star FoundationOpen Society InstitutePanaphil FoundationPaula and William Bernstein FoundationPhogg Phoundation For The Pursuit Of HappinessRita S. Gold FoundationRockefeller FoundationRuth M. Knight FoundationRMF FoundationStanley Family FundStettenheim FoundationSt. Paul FoundationThomas Fund at PACFUngar FoundationWells Fargo FoundationWinky Foundation
Corporate Matching Gifts
AIG Matching Grants ProgramAlliant Energy FoundationAmerican Express Matching Gift ProgramAmeriprise Financial Employee Gift Matching
Program
Aon FoundationBank of America Foundation, Inc.BFG Marine, Inc.David & Lucille Packard FoundationDell Direct Giving CampaignEdison InternationalExxonMobil FoundationG.E. FoundationHome Depot
HP Employee Charitable Giving ProgramJ.P . Morgan Chase FoundationJohn Hancock Matching Gifts ProgramMicrosoft Matching Gifts ProgramMorgan StanleyNGM Charitable FoundationNokia Inc.Pfizer FoundationThe May Department Stores Company FoundationVerizon FoundationVivendi Universal US Holding Co.Wachovia FoundationXcel Energy FoundationZiff Brothers Investments, L.L.C.
Tribes and Native Organizations
Agua Caliente Band of CahuillaBarona Band of Mission IndiansCoquille TribeCow Creek Band Of Umpqua Tribe Of IndiansGrand Traverse Band of Ottawa and Chippewa
Indians
Grand Traverse Casinos & ResortsHopi TribeKeweenaw Bay Indian CommunityLittle Traverse Bay Band of Odawa IndiansMashantucket Pequot TribeMohegan Sun CasinoMorongo Band of Mission IndiansNative Village of Nunapitchuk (IRA)Oneida Tribe of Indians of WisconsinSaginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe of MichiganSan Manuel Band Of Mission IndiansSeminole Tribe of FloridaShakopee Mdewakanton Sioux CommunityTwenty Nine Palms Band Of Mission IndiansViejas Band of Kumeyaay IndiansWhite Mountain Apache Tribe
We thank each and every one of our supporters for their commitment to the goals of NARF.  NARF’s success could not have
been achieved without the generosity of our many donors throughout the nation.  We gratefully acknowledge these giftsreceived for fiscal year 2006 (October 1, 2005 through September 30, 2006).
continued on following pageAnnual Report 2006
Page 38FISCAL YEAR2006
Bequests and Trusts
Philip  AndereggMichael  BerkeyMary Helen BickleyCarolyn W. FerridayWilliam R. GibsonJohn S. HubnerPauline  KehlenbachMary J. KohrElizabeth B. LoseyChristine  MullikinSusan  NivenRosalie  PaliusMarjorie A ParkerMargaret  RandolJeanne W. ReederJosef  Van der KarJustin M. WoolErnest  Ziegfeld
Peta Uha Pipestone
John S. BevanMartha M. PhillippiFrances A. Velay
Peta Uha Turquoise
Robert Friede Mr. & Mrs. Robert Hart Karin  Holser Paulette  Lewis 
Peta Uha Granite
John Dercksen Collier Hands Marion  McCollom Hampton Friedrike  Merck Carol A. Roberts Jay Scheide Jill Vogt 
Peta Uha Flint
Jerald H. Anderson James & Louise Arnold Theresa D. Bell 
Robert & Patricia Berry William & Elsa Boyce Lawrence D. Bragg IIIPeter Broner Lawrence B. Carroll Raymond & Constance Carroll Polly R. Cherner Paul Anthony D'Errico Sarah C. Doering Lucille A. Echohawk Daren & Amy Eilert Rico F. Genhart Gloria  Greenhill Mary C. Griffin Duncan A. Haas Alfred  Hoose Bob & Barbara Humes Robert  Hutchinson Albert & Skaye Kirk Robert E. Kleiger Charles  Koob Scott & Ricki Kresan Paul & Eileen LeFort Joan A. Lester Joanne  Lyman Mr. & Mrs. William Lyman James Marienthal Doris Renee Marx Helena  Meltesen Arthur & Hope  Miller Thomas H. Moore Jeanne D. Morrel-Franklin Frannie  Oates George C. Parent Mrs. Howard Parker Lewis  Perkiss Tina C. Peterson Claude & Noelle Poncelet Helene Presskreischer Edith S. Quevedo Esther H. Rivinus Ruth E. Schuster Alfred H. Schwendtner 
Peter L. Sheldon Edith J. Smith Mary G. Sprague Wayne & Nancy  Starling Ross LeRoy A. Stippich Walter A. Stock Bridget  Stroud Gilbert  Tauck Elaine  Umholtz Elisa J. Wilkinson David  Winston 
Peta Uha Obsidian
James  Arnaldo Mary E. Bane Janice A. Bate Norval K. Bhendra Marjorie I. Blachly David C. Black Jeffrey T. Bosch Mary Anibal Brook Catherine A. Brotzman – Four Winds
Trading Company
Jane A. Brown Jack  Campisi Elizabeth L. Celio Barbara  Conlon MuthJean  Craney Patricia  deKoven Anne E. DeMuth Subhuti  Dharmananda Thomas & Jane  Dunphy Kathryn L. Elston Anne H. Evans Mary  Fabri Judy H. Fair-Spaulding Richard S. Ferguson Lyman M. Flinn Herbert & Clare Floyd Pamela  Ford Andrew & Audrey  Franklin Ruby V. Garrett Eric & Jeff  Ginsburg 
James M. Grace Susan  Gray Mr. & Mrs. G. Robert Greenberg Stephen A. Hagerman Carole J. Hall Michael Patrick Hannigan Virgina H. Hays Lou  Henslee George C. Hetrick Sara S. Hinckley Mark Hodge Raymond C. Honeywell Judith S. Horton Janice  Johnson Adaline  Jyurovat Gregory & Jennifer Kaufmann Richard Jongmok Kim George  Koehler Hal  Litoff Peter K. Manning Janet U. McAlpin Harry  McAndrew William & Eileen B. McCarron Ralph E. & Lorraine Memmer Shirley  Miolla Trica  Murphy Barbara J. Musicus Robert D. Phillips Mary  Podmostko Michael J. Reynolds Jonathon M. Richman Martin  Ritter George & Jo Rainie Rodgers Sybille  SmithDavid  Stewart-Smith Gordon & Margaret Torgersen Margaret Q. Travis Margaret S. Verble Janice  Warner Stephen  Wasby Margaret N. Weitzmann Lisa M. Wersal Native American Rights Fund
Page 39Lois  Whitman 
Mary Lee Zerby 
Circle of Life
Catches Bear & Judy AdamsRodney AddisonRichard & Gloria AdkinsonNina BarghoornMaxwell BarnardBarbara BeasleyJoyce BeaulieuDiane Ben AriRoy BensonSandra BergerBobby BitnerBetty BlumenkampDr. & Mrs. Charles BowersDale BrandWilliam BrownGloria BurgessPatricia BurnetThomas CampbellLawrence CandelArthur CarterRobert CarterMary CasmusEd ChasteenPaul CliftonCharles ColeJanet CongeroJudith DayHarvey DennenbergGary DickerhoofStarr DormannPatricia DuvalNoelle EdwardsAllison EmersonJudy Fair-SpauldingJames FeeDebra FrazierJan FreemanLyle FunderburkSuzanne GartzLawrence Geller
Deborah GhoreyebEstela GoldsmithLouise Gomer BangelArline GoodrichBernard GordonGene GrabauJean GundlachMerrill HakimMichael HallMargaret HartnettTheodora HaughtonPatricia HeidelbergerAlfred HooseJudith HortonVeronica IfillElizabeth JohnsonVusama KaribaRose KeeneyEmily KirkBetty KleczyMargo KochrutheEllyne Krakower - RiceEdward KriegeJames LangharstIngrid LeblancJames LehnererFrank LovelandRichard LuersRima LurieSuzanne MacDonaldPatricia Marks-GreenfieldMarion McCollom HamptonJoseph McNamaraStanley MetzgerPeter & Betty MeyerLeila MooreJeanne Morrel-FranklinJeanne MoskalShirley NortonSara OsborneMarc PearceMoses PeterRandall Petersen
Denise PfalzerRose PilcarskyThelma Populus GordonB. PowellHorace RainesRobert & Mary ResnikMaureen RipleyBarbara RobertsAndrea RobinsongJune RosenthalKeith RossWilliam RozierMary SacherB. SampsonPeter SchmidtLaRoy SeaverMichael SeeleyCharlotte SelverKatey SimetraMr. & Mrs. Charles SmithKirk SperryCarolyn StabyHerbert StewartJames & Patricia StrausRennard StricklandMichael & Carol SullivanLouis TaboisValeria TenyakCharlotte ThompsonM. TurekJohn TylerRene' Vivo'William WadeTed WeitzRobert & Mary WellmanRoger WelschGary WhiteKaren Williams-Fast HorseMarcel WingateDavid YeomanWayne Zengel
FISCAL YEAR2006
continued on following pageAnnual Report 2006
Page 40FISCAL YEAR2006
NARF Employee Endowment
Giving
Rose CunyJohn EchohawkGayla Fills PipeKim GottschalkHeather Kendall MillerYvonne KnightMelody McCoySteven MooreChristine PereiraDonald RagonaRay RamirezDavid SeldenMark TildenDon Wharton
Tsanáhwit Circle Members
Jay AdlerCheyanne AlbertiKen & Carol AmpelDennis AndersonSusan AndersonMaryLou AniballiDale ArmitageJurgen ArnoldHolly ArrowJohn BachCarla BagleyKathy BagwellD. BaileyMoira BailisColleen BakerJerry BakerN. BalfourJohn BallardJesus BarbarinMildred BarkovichCecil BarleyRuth BarrC. BarronInez BaskinSusan BattleJoanne Beckett
Richard BedardLeona BegayBryan BelknapDiane BellGordon BellJohn BellefountaineLoretta BemesderferJoyce BenedictPamela BennettJames BergstromJudy BertiJoan BeuttlerJefferson BishopJanine BlackburnSteven BlockNanette BohrenRobbin BondFern BoothRichard BoylanBeverly BranamanJoseph BraunMargaret BrennerHerbert BrentlingerElaine BrewingtonJohn BrighamNina BrilliMary BrookMary BrooksMichael & Geri BrownShelley Buck-YeagerMaureen BurkeChris BurrPerri BurrittJay ByerleySarah Callahan - ChinCarol CampauThomas CampbellCarolyn CarterJohn & Shirley ChaseNason & Lisa ChehrehJane ChristianSamuel ClopperGeorge Colias
Allyn CollinsMae CollinsHelen CooperG. CopelandCharles CrittendenW. CroftMichael CummingsRuth CuprakElizabeth CuprakLinda CwiakGwen DaumLois DauntNorman DaviesPam DavisonBarbara DeJaynesPatricia deKovenCathy DeNuPatricia DiLeoPaul & Elizabeth DombroskyIan DouglasPhillip DouvilleDavid DresserSioux DuBoisWilliam DyerCheri EdwardsAlfred EgendorfDaren & Amy EilertCathy EllisJ. EmburyRebecca EnglebyJennifer ErdmannJudy Fair-SpauldingDorothy FardanPatricia FaulknerJudith FazioJames FeichtlMichael & Ellen FinazziMarlene FischerSharon FlahertyWinn FlanneryHolly FlutotMartha FordMarianne Freidberg
Russell FreshourDavid FryeShirley FultzAnn GaborJames GalleJames GambinoDiann GambleSuzanne GartzLawrence GellerTracy GibsonCarole GilesJames GilkesonClara GillisJudy GoebelJames GooteeJean GoreLarry & Melissa GraykinBarry GreenbergPaul GreenhallWeda GregorieffJeri Groves HodgkinsonMartha GrudzienBernie HaaseThomas HallidayMarcia HalliganBarbara HannSusan HannaRichard HansenBarbara HargroveRonald HartlingMargaret HartnettBartlett HarveyCarol HatfieldWayne HawkinsPatricia HaydenLeonard HeinzDawson Her Many HorsesEgbert & Ghislaine HeslingaGeorge HetrickDiana HeynekerElna HicksonTaps HinesNative American Rights Fund
Page 41FISCAL YEAR2006
Michael Hines
John HodgsonJudith HodsonCharles HoltzerNancy HomyakShirley HookerJoyce HooverJudith HortonNicholas HorvathCarol HoughtonEthel HuebnerClayton HugoGary HultsCharley IceJohn IvieRochelle JacobsMaria JanuzysLouise JohnsonJanice JohnsonEarl JohnsonBrenda JonesKelly JonesJudith KarpilowMarian KasabachGeorge KeeferBarbara KeithStephen KelloggJeralyn KeltonicSherri KendrickGrace KeplerSusan KeplerLatifah KhidhrHilde KlimekLarry KlingensmithKate KnappWilliam KoenigLaura KoesterNiilo KoponenFred KraeuterFrances KranzVaunceil KruseRollins LambertRisa Lange-NavarroNona LaRue
Yuk LauDorothy LearKurt LehmannLyon LeiferCatherine LeonardNina LermanEugene LeTourneauStanley LewandowskiJohn LewisJames LichtensteinJohn LipnerDebra LippittLeo LiretteHal LitoffValerie LloydDorothy LockmanElisabeth LucreeRima LurieMary-Lee LutzLydia LymanMary LyonKimberly MacLoudJil MacMenaminWayne MaggsRichard MagyarRon MahoneyFrank MakaiBrigitta MannVerdena MardisMiroslav & Anna MarekMarcelle MartinJames MartinGreg MathiasJacqueline MatteMurray MatznerChristopher McAuliffeBoni McCabeDonald McCaffreyAnn McCarthyDebbi McCoyJames McDanielLinda McGrewMary McGuigan
LeRoy McLaughlinPhyllis McNeillDorothy MeiskyMichael MelendezEva MendelsonWilliam Milligan Doris MitchellJean MooreLora MoreauJeff MoreheadImogene MorganClaire MorissetJanis MorrisonJean MoyerJosie MoyerKayla MullinsKathleen MunsellRick MyersLouise Myers IspayWendy NashMiriam NathensonSabina NelsonJames NirensteinDonna NormandRob NorrisJoan OlguinPatricia OpaskarJames & Rachel OsborneDoris PalmerJoyce PappasDavid ParachiniDorothy PatrickToddy PerrymanAnna PfeiferMargaret PhillipsDavid PiersonAlbert PilcherJacqueline PineJacquelyn PlattGerald & Antoinette PollackDeborah PomplunMichael PorlidesTrevor & Laura Powdrell
Larry PowellMichael PriceLinda ProctorTimothy RaabEmily RaderLouis RagnoJohn ReedRobert RennerRobert & Mary ResnikThursa RevenaughPriscilla RichGail RichardsonPatrice RileyGeorge RineMaryana RobertsonLinda RobinsonSusan RobinsonElizabeth RockmoreGerald RogersYdameh RoigSonia RomanoJan RoomeChristine RosenStephanie RossiRalph RossilliMarlene RounsavilleJay RubensteinRonald RubleRuth RubyMaura RussellDavid & Adrienne RuudTheodore SahlMarge SaloHoward SargentRonald SavageEdmond & Brietta SavoieMary SchappellWilliam SchatzGerald & Karen SchulerDavid SchwienBrenda ScottShirley Seagren
continued on following pageAnnual Report 2006
Page 42FISCAL YEAR2006
Susan Sherer
Paul ShickleMyra ShinkleFreda SilverMarie SimirenkoPat SimonsLaura SironiHerman & Lois SiskJoan SlebosMichael SmithWalter SmithBetty SmithShirley SneedMarilyn SniderJerry & Rita SpaldingEsther SpanWilann SpicciaPaul SpicerMary StaffordGretchen SteerenbergCraig StephensStephen & Karen StromElizabeth SzawlowskiPatricia TaylorLaura TeaguePaul TheodoreClaudine ThomasDouglas ThompsonEdward ThompsonCharlotte ThompsonDonald ToblerJanice ToniettoRebecca TownsendKaren TrowbridgeJoyce TuckerRichard Vanden HeuvelMontez VaughtKristy VisserR. WallCarolyn WarnerRon WarrenLynn WaughCecelia WelenowskiMartha Weller
Cathy WestlundGeri WhiteLisbeth WhitledgeDeborah WilkerCatherine WilliamsHolly WilliamsArnold WilsonMargaret WilsonJerry WilsonRoger WiseWm. WissmuellerGeoffrey & Mary WoldLisabeth WolfAndrew WolfeRonald & Frances WoodallJean WoodmanJim Yellow HorsePamela ZawilaSpecial Events
NARF gratefully honors our many
friends and partners who sponsoredand supported our special eventsin 2006.  Thank you for your support and for caring so deeplyabout Indian rights, laws and issues.
In-Kind Contributions
Amy HayesAnne EstinBernies Route 66 MotorcyclesCrossroads CyclesDonovan (Tex) & Lisa BrownDrew AllenJackie FinchPaul Gibb Santa Fe Harley DavidsonStuart T. LangleySundance PhotographyTed BarudinTim ReeseTribal MotorworksBoulder-Denver Advisory
Committee
Lucille A. EchohawkThomas W. FredericksDavid GetchesAva HamiltonJeanne WhiteingCharles Wilkinson
Federated Workplace Campaigns
Thank you to the thousands of federal,
state, municipal and private sectoremployees throughout the countrywho through their payroll deductionplans contributed $65,180 in fiscalyear 2006.
Federal Programs
Administration for Native AmericansDepartment of EducationDepartment of Justice
Native American Rights Fund
Page 43NARF receives contributions from foundations, corpora-
tions, religious organizations, tribes and Native organiza-
tions, bequests and trusts, benefactors, private donations,and in-kind contributions. Below are descriptions ofNARF’s donor programs and additional ways you can getinvolved.
Peta Uha Membership – Peta Uha in the Lakota (Sioux)
language means firekeeper. One that honors tribal members who made a solemn commitment to ensure thatthe sacred flame, source of light, heat and energy for hispeople, always be kept burning. Like the firekeepers of old,members of the Peta Uha Council can demonstrate constancy and vigilance by helping to ensure that the critical work of the Native American Rights Fund continuesto move ever forward.  For benefits associated with eachlevel of Peta Uha membership, please contact DonaldRagona, 303.447.8760 or e-mail him at petauha@narf.org.
Tsanáhwit Circle – Tsanáhwit is a Nez Perce word 
meaning equal justice.  Tsanáhwit Circle members providea regular source of income to NARF by pledging and making monthly contributions at any level of your choice.You may sign up to receive monthly pledge reminders inthe mail or your credit card may be billed automatically.
Otu’han Gift Membership – Otu’han is the Lakota Sioux
word translated as giveaway.  Otu’han is a memorial andhonoring gift program modeled after the tradition of theIndian giveaway in which items of value are gathered overa long period of time to be given away in honor of birth-days, marriages, anniversaries, and in memory of a departedloved one.
Circle of Life – NARF’s Circle of Life are donors who 
provide a lasting legacy to the Native American Rights Fundby including NARF in estate planning or deferred gifts. The circle is an important symbol to Native Americans rep-resenting unity, strength and the eternal continuity of life.These lasting gifts help ensure the future of NARF and ourIndian clients nationwide.
Endowments – NARF has two established endowments,
the 21st Century Endowment and the Living WatersEndowment. The 21st Century Endowment is a permanentfund in which the principal is invested and interest incomeis used for NARF’s programs. This endowment is designed
to provide a permanent, steady income that can supportthe ever-increasing costs of providing legal representationto our tribal clients.
The Living Waters Endowment directly funds the 21st
Century Endowment. It allows donors to honor friends andloved ones by making an endowment gift of $10,000 ormore.  By designating a gift to either endowment, you canbe sure that your contribution will continue to generateannual funds in perpetuity. Endowment supporters are recognized on a special wall plaque displayed at NARF.Supporters will also receive a memorial piece for theirhome and be acknowledged in NARF’s annual report.
Workplace Campaigns – NARF is a member of America’s
Charities, a national workplace giving federation. Givingthrough your workplace is as easy as checking off NARF’sbox on the Combined Federal Campaign (CFC) pledge formauthorizing automatic payroll deduction. NARF is also a member of Community Shares of Colorado (CSC), member #5037.
Matching Gifts – Currently, more than 25 foundations
and corporations nationwide make matching gifts to NARF on a regular basis.  Employers match their employees’ contributions sometimes doubling or even tripling theirdonation. Please check with your human resources officeand request a matching gift form.
E-Action – Sign up for our e-action network by providing
NARF with your email address . This is a great way to getperiodic case updates, calls-to-action, special events information, invitations and other activities. Your e-mailaddress is confidential and we will not share it with any outside sources.  For further information about any of theprograms or services, please contact NARF’s DevelopmentDepartment at 303-447-8760.  Thank you.
SHOW YOURSUPPORT IN NARF’ S PROGRAMS
“Ho’opono’pono”
making things right.Annual Report 2006
Page 44CORPORATE OFFICERS
John E. Echohawk (Pawnee)
Executive Director/Attorney
K. Jerome Gottschalk
Litigation Management CommitteeMember/Attorney
Yvonne T. Knight (Ponca-Creek)
Litigation Management CommitteeMember/Attorney
Natalie Landreth (Chickasaw)
Litigation ManagementCommittee/Attorney
Donald M. Ragona
(Mattinecock/Oglala Lakota)Director of Development
Ray Ramirez
Secretary/Editor/Technical Writer
Clela Rorex
Chief Financial Officer/Law OfficeAdministrator
BOULDER MAIN OFFICE STAFF
John E. Echohawk (Pawnee)
Executive Director/Attorney
Walter R. Echo-Hawk (Pawnee)
Attorney
K. Jerome Gottschalk - AttorneyDavid Gover (Pawnee/Choctaw)
Attorney
Yvonne T. Knight (Ponca-Creek)
Attorne
Melody McCoy (Cherokee) - Attorney
Steven C. Moore - AttorneyMark Tilden (Navajo) - Attorney
Donald R. Wharton - AttorneyEric Anderson - Legal AssistantRose Cuny (Oglala Lakota)
Office Manager
Crystal Echo Hawk (Pawnee)
Assistant Development Director
Gayla Fills Pipe (Oglala Lakota)
Receptionist
Michael Kennedy - Assistant ControllerMireille Martinez
Development Projects Coordinator
Christine Pereira
Micro Computer Specialist
Donald M. Ragona
(Mattinecock/Oglala Lakota)Director of Development
Ray Ramirez
Editor/Technical Writer/PublicRelations
Jennifer Redbone 
(Apache/Comanche, Kiowa)Development Staff Assistant
Clela Rorex
Law Office Administrator
Susan Irwin-Savage (Dineh)
Office Services ClerkJoanne Soklin - Legal Assistant
Debbie Raymond-Thomas (Navajo)
Assistant Controller
Jennie Tsikewa (Zuni) - Accountant
NATIONAL INDIAN LAW LIBRARY
David Selden - LibrarianMonica Martens
Assistant Law Librarian
ANCHORAGE OFFICE STAFF
Heather Kendall-Miller (Athabascan)
Attorney
Natalie Landreth (Chickasaw)
Attorney
Anne Thomas - Legal Assistant
WASHINGTON, D.C. OFFICE STAFF
Richard Guest - AttorneyDawn Baum (Mole Lake
Chippewa/Menominee) - Attorney
Darian Balcom - Legal AssistantNARF S TAFF
1506 Broadway, Boulder, CO 80302
303-447-8760 • http://www.narf.org