Native American Rights Fund     |   01Table of Contents
Introduction ........................................................ 02
Executive Director’s Report ........................................04Chairman’s Message ..................................................05The Board of Directors ..............................................06The National Support Committee ................................07The Preservation of Tribal Existence ............................09The Protection of Tribal Natural Resources ....................15The Promotion of Human Rights ..................................25NARF Case Map ....................................................26-27The Accountability of Governments ..............................39The Development of Indian Law ..................................43Financial Report ......................................................46Contributors ..........................................................47NARF Staff ............................................................52
Main Office
Native American Rights Fund1506 BroadwayBoulder, CO 80302303-447-8760http://www.narf.org
Alaska Office
Native American Rights Fund745 West 4th Avenue, Suite 502Anchorage, Alaska 99501-1736907-276-0680
Washington D.C., Office
Native American Rights Fund1514 P Street, NW, Suite D (Rear)Washington, D.C. 20005202-785-4166Tax Status:
The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is anonprofit, charitable organization incorporated in1971 under the laws of the District of Columbia.NARF is exempt from federal income tax underthe provisions of Section 501(c)(3) of the InternalRevenue code.  Contributions to NARF are taxdeductible.  The Internal Revenue Service hasruled that NARF is not a “private foundation” as defined in Section 509(a) of the InternalRevenue Code.  NARF was founded in 1970 andincorporated in 1971 in Washington, D.C.
Cover:
NARF’s feather logo – The tradition of clients as friends was firmly established in 1971 whenJohn Echohawk spent two weeks on the HopiReservation in Arizona.  The traditional Hopileaders wanted to be sure he understood whatthey felt about the white man’s legal systembecause of what their prophecies said.  Whenthe work was finished there was feasting andsharing.  The Hopis made a gift of two specialprayer eagle feathers to John.  They were thefirst token of appreciation NARF ever receivedfrom a client.  It was those Hopi feathers whichwere the inspiration for NARF’s feather logo.02   |     Native American Rights FundINTRODUCTION
When the Native American Rights Fund was
started forty-six years ago, our objective was tobring competent and ethical legal representationto Native Americans who were unable to affordsuch representation.  We believed that Indians – ifgiven this opportunity – could receive justice fromthe American legal system.
Our mission had always been to secure for
Indians the sovereignty, natural resources andhuman dignity that the laws of the majority socie-ty promised.  At the heart of these laws lies thegoal of all Native people – to maintain their statusand traditional ways of life.
Treaties forged between the United States and
Indian leaders during the last two centuries createthe foundation of Indian law.  These treaties,which Congress made the law of the land, areunprecedented in the American experience.  Theyrecognize the existence of sovereign governmentswithin the boundaries of the United States.
The treaties were promises made to the Indian
people – ensuring their special rights of sovereigntyand self-determination.  As part of these agree-ments, the United States entered into a uniquetrust relationship with Indian tribes.  The UnitedStates government agreed to protect the safetyand well-being of Native Americans.In case after case, the modern courts insisted
that the federal government honor its historiccommitments to Native Americans.  Until recently,the promises have survived the passage of time.
Over the years, NARF has achieved hundreds of
victories in courtrooms across the country.  Wehave been involved in most of the major litigationbrought on behalf of Native Americans during themore than four decades that have passed.  Wehave experienced many successes.  Some of thosevictories have been major – others less sweeping.In some instances – despite a valiant fight – wehave fallen short.  These defeats, however, havenot deterred us.  We are committed to seeking justice for Native Americans.  We will continue thefight and we expect to prevail.
From the vantage point of these 46 years, we
can see how the dynamic of NARFs work hasplayed out.  It can be truly said that starting in1970 and today, NARF’s role has been a significantcontributor to the modern tribal movement.Through NARF’s priorities, established by its firstSteering Committee and still in force today –Preservation of tribal existence; Protection of tribalnatural resources; Promotion of Native Americanhuman rights; Accountability of governments toNative Americans; and, the Development of Indianlaw and educating the public about Indian rights,Promises.... spelled out in treaties agreed to by the United States and Indian leaders during 
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
Promises.… through treaties which guaranteed that Indian tribes would maintain their 
sovereignty within their reservation homelands.
Promises…. by the United States government which agreed to maintain a unique trust relation-
ship with Indians protecting land, rights and resources.
The Ultimate Promise.… that Indians could create homelands where their people and their
cultures would prosper.
The Native American Rights Fund has spent the last forty-six years ensuring that the
promises are kept.Native American Rights Fund     |   03laws, and issues – NARF’s victories and work have
made a major difference in Indian country.
NARF’s Funding
NARF’s existence would not be possible without
the efforts of the thousands of individuals whohave offered their knowledge, courage and visionto help guide NARF on its quest.  Of equal impor-tance, NARF’s financial contributors have graciouslyprovided the resources to give our efforts life.Contributors such as the Ford Foundation havebeen with NARF since its inception.  The OpenSociety Institute and the Bay and Paul Foundationshave made long term funding commitments ashas the Chorus Foundation.  Also, the positiveeffects of NARF’s work are reflected in the financialcontributions by a growing number of tribal governments like the Yocha Dehe Wintun Nation,the Seminole Tribe of Florida, the Shakopee
Mdewakanton Sioux Community, the San ManuelBand of Mission Indians, the Muckleshoot Tribe,the Confederated Tribes of Siletz Indians, theTulalip Tribes, the Chickasaw Nation, and thePoarch Band of Creek Indians.  United, these finan-cial, moral, and intellectual gifts provide theframework for NARF to fulfill its goal of securingthe right to self-determination to which all NativeAmerican peoples are entitled.  Finally, NARF’slegal work was greatly enhanced by the on-goinggenerous pro bono contributions by the manyattorneys who have devoted their time andexpertise to our causes and to the Tribal SupremeCourt Project.  Their many hours of work made itpossible for NARF to present the best positionspossible and to move forward in insuring NARF’sand Indian country’s success.
04   |     Native American Rights FundEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR’S REPORT
2016 marked the 46th year that the Native
American Rights Fund has been serving as thenational Indian legal defense fund providing legaladvice and assistance to tribes, Native organiza-tions and individual Indians in cases of major sig-nificance across the country.  Once again duringthe year, we were able to help our NativeAmerican clients achieve several important legalvictories and accomplishments.
In Alaska, after many years of litigation in federal
courts in Washington, D.C., we were finally able tosecure the right of Alaska Native tribes to havelands taken into trust for them by the Secretary ofthe Interior like tribes in the lower 48 states.  TheAgua Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians ofCalifornia received a favorable ruling from a feder-al district court that equitable defenses like thepassage of time could not be asserted against theAgua Caliente Band’s Indian reserved water rightsclaim by the defendant water agencies.
After several years of litigation and negotiations,
the Kickapoo Tribe of Kansas executed an agree-ment with the State of Kansas recognizing theTribe’s senior Indian reserved water right in the
Delaware River watershed.  Federal legislation isnow being developed for Congress to considerwhich would approve the water right negotiatedby the Tribe with the State.
President Barack Obama signed an historic
Executive Order before he left office creating theNorthern Bering Sea Climate Resilience Areaestablishing an important set of policies aimed atpromoting resilient tribal communities and pro-tecting the Alaska Native subsistence way of life inthe face of increasing effects of climate change.The Bering Sea Elders Group, an alliance of thirty-nine Yup’ik and Inupiaq villages, advocated for theExecutive Order to protect the sensitive ecosystemof the Bering Sea that they depend on for theirsustainability.
Assistance was provided to the Standing Rock
Sioux Tribe and the Tribe’s attorneys to developand coordinate an amicus brief strategy in supportof the Tribe in their lawsuit against the U.S. ArmyCorps of Engineers in relation to the Dakota AccessPipeline.  At issue is whether an easement shouldbe granted for a major crude oil pipeline to passunder the Missouri River at Lake Oahe just half amile upstream of the Tribe’s reservation boundary,where a spill would be culturally and economicallycatastrophic.  The easement was first denied pendingfurther environmental review, but it has now beengranted without a full environmental review.   Thatdecision is now being challenged by the Tribe.
Seven Native Americans from North Dakota
were successful in asserting that North Dakota’srecently enacted voter ID law violated the VotingRights Act and the U.S. and North DakotaConstitutions because it disproportionately bur-dened Native Americans and denied qualified voters the right to vote.  The North Dakota federalcourt formally required the State to provide anaffidavit fail-safe mechanism to ensure that allqualified voters would be permitted to vote in the2016 general election.
Establishing a body at the United Nations to
monitor implementation of the Declaration on theRights of Indigenous Peoples within the UN and
Native American Rights Fund     |   05by Nation States has been a goal for indigenous
peoples.  After a series of meetings, the UNHuman Rights Council passed a resolutionexpanding and improving the mandate of theExpert Mechanism on the Rights of IndigenousPeoples which will enable it to review compliancewith the Declaration.  The Organization ofAmerican States, after twenty-five years negotia-tions, finally approved an American Declaration onthe Rights of Indigenous Peoples, a major victoryfor indigenous peoples.
Settlements were negotiated and finalized for
eleven tribes resolving their litigation against thefederal government seeking full and accurateaccountings of their tribal trust funds.  Such
accountings have never been provided by the fed-eral government which is the trustee for the funds. 
All of these successful efforts on behalf of Native
Americans would not have been possible withoutthe support of all of the funders of our non-profitorganization.  We thank you for your grants andcontributions and hope that your support will con-tinue into 2017 and beyond to enable us to makemore progress for Native people.
John E. Echohawk
Executive Director 
Aloha mai kAkou
As the end of my final term as a board member
nears, I am left with the undeniable realization thatmy experiences as a board member have blessedme with so much more than I deserve.  All I did wasshow up and I received the loyal and loving friend-ship and hospitality of my fellow board members,each member of the staff and their families, and themembers of each of our tribal hosts.  Mahalo nui loa(thank you very much) for welcoming me into theNARF ‘ohana (family).  I am deeply grateful for sucha rewarding experience and please know that I willremain committed to doing whatever I can toensure the health and wellbeing of this organizationand the people and cultures it serves.
As warriors of NARF, each and every one of us
have a critical part to play in ensuring justice isserved!  And, without all of us working together wefail to be everything we can be.  And so, on behalfof the staff and board of NARF, mahalo nui loa(thank you very much) for your continuing sup-port!  NARF’s ability and capacity to continue andbuild on its valuable work depends on each of us. A hui hou (until we meet again).Mahalo,
Moses K. N. Haia IIIChairman, Board of Directors 
CHAIRMAN'S MESSAGE
06   |     Native American Rights FundBOARD OF DIRECTORS
The Native American Rights Fund has a governing
board composed of Native American leaders fromacross the country – wise and distinguished peoplewho are respected by Native Americans nation-wide. Individual Board members are chosen basedon their involvement and knowledge of Indianissues and affairs, as well as their tribal affiliation,to ensure a comprehensive geographical represen-tation. The NARF Board of Directors, whose members serve a maximum of six years, provideNARF with leadership and credibility, and thevision of its members is essential to NARF's effec-tiveness in representing its Native Americanclients.NARF’s Board of Directors: 
First row (left to right): Anita Mitchell ,
(Muckleshoot Indian Tribe), Julie Roberts-
Hyslop (Native Village of Tanana), Larry Olinger
(Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians), Robert
McGhee , Vice-Chairman (Poarch Band of Creek
Indians), Gary Hayes (Ute Mountain Ute Tribe).  
Second Row (left to right): Richard Peterson
(Central Council of the Tlingit and Haida IndianTribes), Kurt BlueDog (Sisseton-Wahpeton
Sioux), Michael Smith (Chickasaw Nation), and,
Tex Hall , Board Treasurer (Three Affiliated Tribes).
(Not Pictured): Moses Haia , Chairman, (Native
Hawaiian), Stephen Lewis , (Gila River Indian
Community), Jefferson Keel (Chickasaw
Nation), and, Peter Pino , (Zia Pueblo).   
Native American Rights Fund     |   07NATIONAL SUPPORT COMMITTEE
The National Support Committee assists NARF with its fund raising and public relations efforts nation-
wide.  Some of the individuals on the Committee are prominent in the field of business, entertainmentand the arts.  Others are known advocates for the rights of the underserved.  All of the 29 volunteerson the Committee are committed to upholding the rights of Native Americans.
Randy Bardwell 
(Pechanga Band of LuisenoMission Indians)
Jaime Barrientoz 
(Grand Traverse Band of Ottawa& Chippewa Indians)
John BevanWallace Coffey 
(Comanche Nation)
Ada Deer 
(Menominee)
Harvey A. DennenbergLucille A. Echohawk
(Pawnee)
Jane FondaEric GinsburgJeff GinsburgRodney Grant 
(Omaha)
Chris E. McNeil, Jr. 
(Tlingit-Nisga’a)
Billy Mills 
(Oglala Lakota)
Amado Pena Jr.
(Yaqui/Chicano)
Wayne RossNancy Starling-RossMarc RudickPam RudickErnie Stevens, Jr. 
(Wisconsin Oneida)
Andrew Teller 
Isleta Pueblo)Verna Teller 
(Isleta Pueblo)
Rebecca Tsosie 
(Pascua Yaqui)
Tzo-Nah 
(Shoshone-Bannock)
Aíne UngarRt. Rev. William C.
Wantland (Seminole)
W. Richard West, Jr. 
(Southern Cheyenne)
Randy Willis 
(Oglala Lakota)
Teresa Willis 
(Umatilla)
Mary T. Wynne
(Rosebud Sioux)
mni wiconi
water is life - LakotaNative American Rights Fund     |   09THE PRESERVATION OF TRIBAL EXISTENCE
Under the priority of the preservation of tribal
existence , NARF works to construct the founda-
tions that are necessary to empower tribes so thatthey can continue to live according to their Nativetraditions, to enforce their treaty rights, to insuretheir independence on reservations and to protecttheir sovereignty. 
Specifically, NARF’s legal representation centers
on sovereignty and jurisdiction issues and also onfederal recognition and restoration of tribal status.Thus, the focus of NARF's work involves issuesrelating to the preservation and enforcement ofthe status of tribes as sovereign governments.Tribal governments possess the power to regulatethe internal affairs of their members as well asother activities within their reservations.Jurisdictional conflicts often arise with states, thefederal government and others over tribal sover-eignty.
Tribal Sovereignty
The focus of NARF’s work under this priority is
the protection of the status of tribes as sovereign,self-governing entities.  The United StatesConstitution recognizes that Indian tribes are inde-pendent governmental entities with inherentauthority over their members and territory.  Intreaties with the United States, Indian tribes cededmillions of acres of land in exchange for the guar-antee that the federal government would protectthe tribes' right to self-government.  From theearly 1800s on, the Supreme Court has repeated-ly affirmed the fundamental principle that tribesretain inherent sovereignty over their membersand their territory. 
Beginning with the decision in Oliphant v.
Suquamish Indian Tribe in 1978 and with increasing
frequency in recent years, the Supreme Court hassteadily chipped away at this fundamental principle,both by restricting tribal jurisdiction and byextending state jurisdiction.  These decisions bythe Supreme Court have made this priority morerelevant than ever and have led to a TribalSovereignty Protection Initiative in partnershipwith the National Congress of American Indians(NCAI) and tribes nationwide to restore the tradi-tional principles of inherent tribal sovereignty
where those have been undermined and to safe-guard the core of sovereignty that remains.
This Initiative consists of three components.  The
first component is the Tribal Supreme CourtProject, the focus of which is to monitor casespotentially headed to the Supreme Court andthose which actually are accepted for review.When cases are accepted, the Tribal SupremeCourt Project helps to ensure that the attorneysrepresenting the Indian interests have all the supportthey need and to coordinate the filing of a limitednumber of strategic amicus briefs.  A second com-ponent of the Initiative is to weigh in on judicialnominations at the lower court and the SupremeCourt levels.  Finally, there is a legislative compo-nent to fight bills that are against tribal interestsand to affirmatively push legislation to overturnadverse Supreme Court decisions.
The Tribal Supreme Court Project is a joint project
staffed by the Native American Rights Fund andthe National Congress of American Indians. TheTribal Supreme Court Project is based on the prin-ciple that a coordinated and structured approachto Supreme Court advocacy is necessary to protecttribal sovereignty — the ability of Indian tribes to
“It was foretold that each generation
would be challenged in their time withthreats to the gifts of the Creator and ourright to exist. How well we respond wouldbe the ultimate measure and expressionof our love and commitment to a way oflife as prescribed by the Creator.  What weare doing today is no different from whatour forefathers did to respond to the chal-lenges in their time.”  Pueblo Prophecy10   |     Native American Rights FundTHE PRESERVATION OF TRIBAL EXISTENCE
function as sovereign governments — to make
their own laws and be ruled by them.  Early on,the Tribal Supreme Court Project recognized theU.S. Supreme Court as a highly specialized institu-tion, with a unique set of procedures that includecomplete discretion on whether it will hear a caseor not, with a much keener focus on policy consid-erations than other federal courts.  The TribalSupreme Court Project established a large networkof attorneys who specialize in practice before theSupreme Court along with attorneys and law pro-fessors who specialize in federal Indian law.  TheTribal Supreme Court Project operates under thetheory that if Indian tribes take a strong, consis-tent, coordinated approach before the SupremeCourt, they will be able to reverse, or at leastreduce, the on-going erosion of tribal sovereigntyby Justices who appear to lack an understandingof the foundational principles underlying federalIndian law and who are unfamiliar with the practi-cal challenges facing tribal governments.
In September 2016, the U.S. Supreme Court
granted review in 
Lewis v. Clarke , a petition seeking
review of a decision of the Connecticut SupremeCourt which held that doctrine of tribal sovereign
immunity extends to an employee of the tribewho is acting within the scope of his employment.The petitioners—the Lewises—are a non-Indiancouple who were rear-ended by a limousineowned by the Mohegan Tribal Gaming Authorityon I-95.  The petitioners – the Lewises – sued theTribal Gaming Authority and Mr. Clarke (the driverand an employee of the Tribal Gaming Authority)in state court for negligence caused by a car acci-dent outside the Tribe’s reservation. However,prior to the filing of the motion to dismiss basedon tribal sovereign immunity, the petitionersdropped their suit against the Tribal GamingAuthority, and proceeded against Mr. Clarke in hisindividual capacity. The trial court, relying on
Maxwell v. San Diego (9th Cir. 2013), held that the
doctrine of tribal immunity does not apply whenthe Tribe is neither a party, nor the real party ininterest because the remedy, and the damagessought will be paid by the defendant himself, andnot the Tribe.  The Connecticut Supreme Courtdistinguished 
Maxwell (a case involving claims of
gross negligence), reversed the trial court, andheld that the doctrine of tribal sovereign immunityextends to the driver as an employee of a Tribewho was acting within the scope of his employ-ment when the accident occurred. 
The question presented in the cert petition is:
“Whether the sovereign immunity of an Indiantribe bars individual-capacity damages actionsagainst tribal employees for torts committed withinthe scope of their employment.”  Although sover-eign immunity does not bar personal-capacitysuits against employees of a sovereign, employeeswho are sued in their personal capacities may raisethe related but distinct defense of official immunity.
In December 2016, the Tribe filed its response
brief and argued that tribal sovereign immunitybars this suit based on the fact that the Tribe is thereal party in interest.  The petitioners have sued atribal employee for negligent conduct that wasperformed within the scope of his official duties.In addition, the Tribe’s obligation to pay comesfrom a legally binding indemnity law enacted bythe Tribe.  In the alternative, the common-lawdoctrine of official immunity bars this suit.  The
Native American Rights Fund     |   11THE PRESERVATION OF TRIBAL EXISTENCE
Project worked directly with the attorneys repre-
senting Mr. Clarke and the interests of theMohegan Tribe to develop an effective amicusbrief strategy.  A total of four amicus briefs werefiled in support:  (1) Brief amici curiae of theNational Congress of American Indians, theNavajo Nation, et al. (joined by the States ofTexas, New Mexico, Colorado, Arizona andOregon); (2) Brief amici curiae of Ninth and TenthCircuit Tribes (a total of 21 Tribes); (3) Brief amicicuriae of Seminole Tribe of Florida, et al.; and (4)Brief amici curiae of The Otoe-Missouria Tribe ofIndians, et al.  
In November 2016, an amicus brief on behalf of
Native American Organizations (NCAI, MorningStar Institute, Cherokee Nation, Navajo Nation,and Yocha Dehe Wintun Nation) was filed in 
Lee v.
Tam, a case in which the Court will review an en
banc decision of the U.S. Court of Appeals for theFederal Circuit which held that the disparagementclause in § 2(a) of the Lanham Act is facially invalidunder the free speech clause of the FirstAmendment.  This case is directly related to theProject’s participation in 
Pro-Football v. Blackhorse
which is currently pending before the U.S. Court ofAppeals for the Fourth Circuit on appeal from thedecision of the District Court to affirm theTrademark Trial and Appeal Board’s 2014 cancella-tion of the mark for the Washington Football team.
The Judicial Selection Project is about research
and education: to educate the federal judiciaryabout tribal issues; to educate tribal leaders aboutthe federal judiciary and the judicial nominationprocess; and to reach out to elected officials andthe public at large about the need for judges inthe federal courts who understand the uniquelegal status of Indian tribes.  The research objectiveof the Project evaluates the records of judicialnominees on their knowledge of Indian issues.The analysis and conclusions are shared with trib-al leaders and federal decision-makers in relationto their decision whether to support or oppose aparticular nomination.  The Project works with theU.S. Senate Judiciary Committee to ensure that allnominees are asked about their experience withIndian tribes and their understanding of federalIndian law during confirmation proceedings.  President Trump announced his nomination of
Judge Neil Gorsuch to fill the vacancy on theSupreme Court of the United States created by thedeath of Justice Antonin Scalia.  Judge Gorsuch hasserved on the United States Court of Appeals forthe Tenth Circuit since 2006, nominated byPresident George W. Bush and confirmed by theU.S. Senate by unanimous consent (voice vote).The U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee announcedthat Committee will begin confirmation hearingson March 20, 2017 to consider Judge Gorsuch asthe next Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.In preparation for these hearings, the TribalSupreme Court Project, through the NationalCongress of American Indians and the NativeAmerican Rights Fund, will closely review JudgeGorsuch’s background and record as it relates tofederal Indian law and the sovereign interests ofIndian tribes.  NARF will provide a full report totribal leaders and advocates prior to the confirma-tion hearings.
Judge Gorsuch hails from the West, with the
Tenth Circuit encompassing six states: Colorado,Kansas, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Utah andWyoming; and the territory of 76 federally recog-nized Indian tribes.  NCAI, NARF and other advo-cates throughout Indian country have long soughtthe nomination of Justices with knowledge of fed-eral Indian law, and more generally with experi-ence on western issues directly impacting Indiantribes such as water law and public lands.  Westernexperience is lacking in the current makeup of theCourt, and is a vitally important perspective.  As anexample, Justice Sandra Day O’Connor came tothe Court in 1981 as a former attorney, legislatorand judge for the State of Arizona, and participat-ed in the 2001 historic visit to Indian reservationsto learn more about tribal judicial systems and fed-eral Indian law.  Judge Gorsuch appears to share asimilar interest, joining a group of Tenth CircuitJudges in 2007 to attend the NCAI Annual meet-ing in Denver and to participate in a dialogue withthe Litigation and Governance Committee,chaired by John Echohawk.  Judge Gorsuchappears to have significantly more experiencewith Indian law cases than other recent SupremeCourt nominees.  His opinions have commonlyrecognized Tribes as sovereign governments,12   |     Native American Rights FundTHE PRESERVATION OF TRIBAL EXISTENCE
although these cases only addressed a relatively
narrow set of issues.
In addition to the one Supreme Court vacancy,
there are a total of 113 vacancies on the federalbench:  17 on the U.S. Courts of Appeal; 88 on the U.S. District Courts; 2 on the Court ofInternational Trade; and 6 on the U.S. Court ofFederal Claims.  NARF is working directly with theNational Congress of American Indians, theNational Native American Bar Association andothers to ident ify qualified Native American attor-
neys, tribal court judges and state court judgeswho may be interested in being considered forvacancies on the federal bench.  We are expandingour search to include qualified non-Native attor-neys with substantial experience in the field of fed-eral Indian law.  Of particular interest are the currentvacancies on the U.S. Court of Appeals for theNinth Circuit (4 vacancies), the U.S. District Courtsfor the Western District of Oklahoma (3 vacancies),the Western District of Washington (3 vacancies),and the District of Arizona (2 vacancies).
The education objective of the Project seeks to
replicate the success of the historic visit by U.S.Supreme Court Justices O’Connor and Breyer toreservation communities during the summer of2001.  Since then, judges from the U.S. Courts ofAppeals for the Ninth Circuit, Tenth Circuit andEighth Circuit have attended the NCAIConferences held in Sacramento, Denver andRapid City respectively.  In August 2011 during theEighth Circuit Judicial Conference, Chief JudgeRiley was joined by Supreme Court Justice Alito ona tour of the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation in avisit coordinated by NCAI and the South DakotaTribes.  In September 2011, Supreme Court JusticeSotomayor visited the Jemez Pueblo, the SantaDomingo Pueblo, the Leadership Institute at theSanta Fe Indian School and the University of NewMexico.  At the 2014 Tenth Circuit JudicialConference held in Colorado Springs, NARFExecutive Director John Echohawk was able tomeet and talk with Justice Sotomayor regarding apossible visit to Indian country.  In September2014, on her own initiative, Justice Sotomayorvisited with tribal leaders during her visit to the
University of Tulsa College of Law, the OklahomaCity University and the University of Oklahoma
College of Law. In her public remarks during hervisit, she is reported as saying “Indian law was ‘anarea of law I virtually know nothing about’ beforejoining the high court in 2009 … ‘I needed to bea good student [so I did] a lot of reading,’ goingback to early court decisions about tribal sovereign-ty.”  At the 2016 Tenth Circuit Judicial Conferenceheld in Colorado Springs, Colorado, JusticeSotomayor talked about the importance of tribalcourts as part of her presentation.  Justice Kaganalso spoke at the Conference and John Echohawkinvited her to tour tribal courts.
Federal Recognition of Tribal Status
The second category of NARF’s work under this
priority is federal recognition of tribal status.  NARFcurrently represents Indian communities who havesurvived intact as identifiable Indian tribes but whoare not federally recognized.  Tribal existence doesnot depend on federal recognition, but recognitionis necessary for a government-to-government rela-tionship and the receipt of many federal services.
In 1997, the Branch of Acknowledgment and
Research (BAR) placed the Little Shell Tribe ofChippewa Indians of Montana federal recognitionpetition on active review status.  In July 2000 theAssistant Secretary for Indian Affairs (AS-IA) pub-lished a Preliminary Determination in favor ofrecognition.  In October 2009, the Acting AS-IAissued a Final Determination against recognition ofthe Tribe, overruling the decision in thePreliminary Determination notwithstanding thefact that no substantial negative comments werereceived.  The stated rationale for the FinalDetermination was the unwillingness to go alongwith the "departures from precedent" which theprevious AS-IA found to be justified by historicalcircumstances.  In February 2010, the Tribe filed aRequest for Reconsideration with the InteriorBoard of Indian Appeals (IBIA).  The IBIA allowedinterested parties, if any, to file opposition briefs.No one filed an opposition brief.  
In June 2013, the IBIA affirmed the negative Final
Determination.  However, it referred five legalquestions to the Secretary of the Interior (SOI).Native American Rights Fund     |   13THE PRESERVATION OF TRIBAL EXISTENCE
In an important development after the IBIA deci-
sion, but also in June 2013, the AS-IA made anannouncement of “Consideration of Revision toAcknowledgment Regulations” along with prelim-inary discussion draft regulations which proposedmajor changes in the regulations.  In light of thisannouncement, NARF urged the SOI to requestthe AS-IA to suspend consideration of the FinalDetermination pending completion of the revisionprocess. The Tribe submitted extensive commentson the draft regulations in September 2013.
Also in September 2013, the SOI referred all five
questions to the AS-IA, stating, “The allegations inthese grounds suggest that further review by youroffice would ensure that the Department’s finaldecision in this matter benefits from a full analysisand comports with notions of a full and fair evalu-ation of the Little Shell petition.”  The SOI requestedthe AS-IA to consider the request for suspension aswell.  In January 2014, the AS-IA granted theTribe’s request to place its petition on suspensionpending completion of the process to amend theacknowledgment regulations.  
In May 2014, the AS-IA issued proposed regula-
tions for comment and the final rule was pub-lished on July 1, 2015.  All of the comments theTribe had raised were addressed to some extent.The Tribe is now proceeding under the new, substantially changed rules.
In an historic day for the Pamunkey Indian Tribe,
in July 2015, after decades of research and partic-ipation in the federal acknowledgment regulatoryprocess, the Assistant Secretary – Indian Affairs,U.S. Department of the Interior published a FinalDetermination acknowledging that the Tribe existsas an Indian tribe within the meaning of Federallaw.  A request for reconsideration, however, wasfiled in October 2015, with the Indian Board ofIndian Appeals (IBIA), an independent appellatereview body within the Department’s Office ofHearings and Appeals.  In January 2016, thePamunkey Indian Tribe’s Final Determinationbecame effective as a result of the IBIA’s final dis-missal of the request for reconsideration.  The IBIAruled that Stand Up for California, an organizationthat focuses on gambling issues affectingCalifornia, failed to show that it is an “interested
party” to the Final Determination within themeaning of the Federal acknowledgment regula-tions, and was therefore not entitled to seekreconsideration of the Final Determination.  
The Pamunkey Indian Tribe is the only tribe
located in Virginia to have filed a fully document-ed recognition petition.  Established no later than1646, the Tribe's Reservation is located next to thePamunkey River, and adjacent to King WilliamCounty.  The Reservation comprises approximately1,200 acres and is the oldest inhabited Indianreservation in America.  NARF has represented theTribe in this effort since 1988.
'pippooÿtooÿtsp'o"kii
Through creation we were given water.
- Blackfeet'pippooÿtooÿtsp'o"kii
Through creation we were given water.- BlackfeetNative American Rights Fund     |   15THE PROTECTION OF TRIBAL NATURAL RESOURCES 
Throughout the process of European conquest
and colonization of North America, Indian tribesexperienced a steady diminishment of their landbase to a mere 2.3 percent of its original size.Currently, there are approximately 55 million acresof Indian-controlled land in the continental UnitedStates and about 44 million acres of Native-ownedland in Alaska.  An adequate land base and controlover natural resources are central components ofeconomic self-sufficiency and self-determination,and as such, are vital to the very existence oftribes.  Thus, much of NARF’s work involves the
protection of tribal natural resources. 
Protection of Indian Lands
Without a sufficient land base, tribal existence is
difficult to maintain. Thus NARF helps tribes estab-lish ownership and control over lands which arerightfully theirs. 
NARF has been retained by the Eastern
Shoshone Tribe (EST) of the Wind River IndianReservation to analyze the Surplus Land Act ofMarch 3, 1905 (1905 Act), and other legislationand cases, to determine their implications for theboundaries of the Reservation.  The EST and theNorthern Arapahoe Tribe (NAT), which also islocated on the Reservation, filed a joint applicationto the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (US-EPA) for delegation of certain Clean Air Act (CAA)programs.  US-EPA approved the delegation inDecember 2013 including the conclusion that theboundaries of the Reservation were not altered bythe 1905 Act.  While this case is pending, the ESTfiled an amicus brief in the U.S. Supreme Court inthe case of 
Nebraska, et al. v. Parker. Like the Wind
River case, the Parker case involved the questionwhether the boundary of the Omaha IndianReservation had been diminished by a statute thatopened the Tribe’s Reservation to non-Indian set-tlement. In March 2016, the U.S. Supreme Courtissued a unanimous opinion that, pursuant to wellsettled principles of diminishment analysis, theboundaries of the Omaha Reservation had notbeen diminished. The EST sent a letter to theTenth Circuit Court of Appeals notifying the Courtof this decision, and urging application of thesame principles to reach a similar result in EST’s
Wind River case.
In 2006, the Akiachak Native Community, the
Chilkoot Indian Association, the Chalkyitsik VillageCouncil, and the Tuluksak Native Community IRA,represented by NARF, brought suit in federal dis-trict court for the District of Columbia seekingjudicial review of 25 C.F.R. Part 151 as it pertainsto federally-recognized tribes in 
Alaska – Akiachak
Native Community, et al. v. Department of Interior, et
al. This federal regulation governs the procedures
used by Indian tribes and individuals requestingthe Secretary of the Interior to acquire title to landin trust on their behalf. At the time, the regulationbarred the acquisition of land in trust in Alaskaother than for the Metlakatla Indian Communityor its members.  “Our land and its resources are at the
center of our culture. We closely follow theseasons and cycles of the year and honorevery living thing. Our lands andresources exist only because of the bal-ance of the universe and the balancebetween Mother Earth and Father Sky. Ineverything that we do, we seek to main-tain this balance. By respecting the earth’scycles and preserving this sacred balance,we are able to cultivate and gather theearth’s resources. These resources providethe necessities for daily living and prayer,which are both essential for our survival.”Pueblo16   |     Native American Rights FundTHE PROTECTION OF TRIBAL NATURAL RESOURCES 
In March 2013, the court granted Plaintiffs’
complete relief on all of their claims – a major victory for Alaska tribes.  In December 2014, theInterior Department published its final rulerescinding the “Alaska Exception”, which becameeffective in January 2015.  The State of Alaska thenmoved to suspend briefing in this appeal, to“explore a range of policy options on this issueand related tribal issues in Alaska, including poten-tial alternatives to continuing this litigation.”  TheCourt granted the stay.   In August 2015, the Statefiled its Appellate brief.  The Federal agencies fileda motion to dismiss their appeal in October 2015,on the ground that the Secretary’s rescission of the“Alaska Exception” moots the case.  In December2015 NARF and the Interior Department filed theirresponse briefs and Alaska filed its reply brief. A three judge panel of the Court of Appeals heardoral argument in March 2016.  In July 2016, theCourt published its decision in favor of the TribalAppellees.  In August 2016, Alaska’s AttorneyGeneral announced she would not seek furtherappeals in the case.  Instead, she announced theAdministration’s intent to work closely with tribalinterests and the Interior Department in handling
future trust land applications in Alaska.
NARF represents the Hualapai Indian Tribe of
Arizona in preparing and submitting applicationsfor the transfer into trust status of 8 parcels of landowned in fee by the Tribe.  The Tribe is located onthe south rim of the Grand Canyon in Arizona, andclaims a boundary that runs to the center of theColorado River. The applications have been sub-mitted to the BIA which is preparing draftApproval Decisions for the properties.
Water Rights
The culture and way of life of many indigenous
peoples are inextricably tied to their aboriginalhabitat. For those tribes that still maintain tradi-tional ties to the natural world, suitable habitat isrequired in order to exercise their treaty-protect-ed hunting, fishing, gathering and trapping rightsand to sustain their relationships with the animals,plants and fish that comprise their aboriginalhabitats.
Establishing tribal rights to the use of water in
the arid western United States continues to be amajor NARF priority.  The goal of NARF's Indianwater rights work is to secure allocations of waterfor present and future needs for specific Indiantribes represented by NARF and other westerntribes generally.  Under the precedent establishedby the Supreme Court in 1908 in 
Winters v. United
States and confirmed in 1963 in Arizona v.
California, Indian tribes are entitled under federal
law to sufficient water for present and futureneeds, with a priority date at least as early as theestablishment of their reservations.  These tribalreserved water rights are superior to all state-rec-ognized water rights created after the tribal prior-ity date.  Such a date will in most cases give tribesvaluable senior water rights in the water-shortwest.  Unfortunately, many tribes have not utilizedtheir reserved water rights and most of theserights are unadjudicated or unquantified.  Themajor need in each case is to define or quantifythe amount of water to which each tribe is entitledthrough litigation or out-of-court settlementnegotiations.  Tribes are generally able to claim
Native American Rights Fund     |   17THE PROTECTION OF TRIBAL NATURAL RESOURCES 
water for any purpose which enables the Tribe's
reservation to serve as a permanent homeland.
NARF, together with co-counsel, represents the
Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians in a lawsuitfiled in May  2013 in the U.S. District Court for theCentral District of California, asking the court todeclare the existence of the Tribe's water rights asthe senior rights in the Coachella Valley under fed-eral law, to quantify these rights, and to preventCoachella Valley Water District and Desert WaterAgency from further injuring the Tribe, its mem-bers and residents in surrounding communitiesthroughout the Valley by impairing the quantityand quality of water in the aquifer.
The water districts import and then fail to ade-
quately treat substantially lower quality waterfrom the Colorado River before injecting thatwater into the aquifer. The recharge water, whichcontains higher total dissolved solids, nitrates, pes-ticides, and other contaminants, is reinjected intothe Coachella Valley aquifer at a facility close tothe Tribe's lands. Thus, the groundwater in theWestern Coachella Valley, including the waterbelow the Agua Caliente Reservation, whichincludes the cities of Palm Springs, Cathedral City,Rancho Mirage, and Thousand Palms, is being pol-luted at a faster rate than the aquifer down-valley.
The court issued its ruling in March 2015.  The
court ruled largely in the Tribe’s favor, holding thatthe Tribe has a reserved right to water, and thatgroundwater is a water source available to fulfillthat right.  The water agencies moved to stay pro-ceedings before the district court while the NinthCircuit reviews the court’s decision on the Tribe’sreserved right to groundwater and the districtcourt granted their motion in part in September2015.  However, Phase 2 proceeded on a limitedbasis, with the court agreeing to hear argumentson the issue of whether the equitable defensesraised by the water agencies apply to tribal waterrights claims.   Briefing on that issue was complet-ed in November 2015 and oral argument washeard in December 2015.  In February 2016, thecourt granted the Tribe’s and United States’motions for partial summary judgment, ruling thatthe defenses asserted by the water agencies couldnot, as a matter of law, be asserted against an
Indian water rights claim.  The remainder of thePhase 2 issues was stayed by the court pendingthe Ninth Circuit’s resolution of the water agen-cies’ appeal.  The court also denied the Tribe’smotion for summary judgment on its claim foraboriginal title to groundwater.  The water districtsfiled a petition with the U.S. Court of Appeals forthe Ninth Circuit for interlocutory review of theportion of the Court’s order addressing the Tribe’sreserved right to groundwater.  The Tribe opposedinterlocutory review but in June 2015, the NinthCircuit granted the water districts’ petition forinterlocutory review.  Briefing to the Ninth Circuitwas completed, and oral argument on the inter-locutory review of the district court’s Phase 1 rul-ing on the Tribe’s reserved right to groundwaterwas heard by a three judge panel of the NinthCircuit in October 2016 and we now await a deci-sion from that court.  
NARF represented the Nez Perce Tribe in Idaho
in its water rights claims in the Snake River BasinAdjudication (SRBA), both litigation and settle-ment phases, for over 16 years. In 2004 Congressenacted and the President signed the Snake RiverSettlement Act.  NARF’s work with the Tribe hasnow turned to development of water rights claimsin the Palouse River Basin Adjudication (PRBA).The State of Idaho recently petitioned the IdahoWater Court to commence the PRBA, and inOctober 2016, the Court issued the commence-ment order.  Under the Order, there will be an ini-tial hearing on the PRBA in January 2017, inMoscow, Idaho. NARF and the Tribe are workingwith the United States to examine the nature andscope of the Tribe’s water rights claims in thePalouse Watershed.
The Klamath Tribes’ water rights were recog-
nized in the federal courts in the 
United States v.
Adair litigation in 1983, but the federal courts left
quantification of the Tribal water rights to theState of Oregon’s general stream adjudication –the Klamath Basin Adjudication (KBA).  Followingconclusion of the 38-year-long administrativephase of the KBA, the Tribes were able to enforcetheir water rights during the 2013 irrigation sea-son for the first time ever.  The Oregon Water18   |     Native American Rights FundTHE PROTECTION OF TRIBAL NATURAL RESOURCES 
Resources Department’s (OWRD’s) Findings of Fact
and Order of Determination (FFOD) issued in theKBA are now subject to judicial review in theKlamath County Circuit Court in Klamath Falls,Oregon.  The Klamath Court has adopted a phasedapproach for the judicial review of the FFOD.
The Klamath County Circuit Court has contin-
ued to deal with matters related to the first twosub-phases of the KBA proceedings, concerningthe resolution of jurisdictional and other thresholdlegal issues (Phase 1A) and general proceduralissues (Phase 1B).  Judge Wogan denied threePhase 1A motions in December 2016, which theTribes had opposed; there are three other motionsstill pending and the Court has indicated rulingson those will be issued by January 2017.  Partiesfiled motions on Phase 1B procedural issues inDecember 2016.  Ten motions were filed by sevenKBA parties or groups of parties (including theKlamath Tribes).  It is anticipated that briefing andoral argument on the Phase 1B motions will becompleted sometime in May 2017.
After almost 30 years of advocacy, the Tule River
Indian Tribe, represented by NARF, successfullysettled its water rights in November 2007 by sign-ing a Settlement Agreement with water users onthe South Fork Tule River of California. TheSettlement Agreement secures a domestic, munic-ipal, industrial, and commercial water supply forthe Tribe. The Tribe now seeks federal legislationto ratify the Settlement Agreement and authorizeappropriations to develop the water rightsthrough the creation of water infrastructure andreservoirs on the Tule River Reservation.  
New Federal Negotiation Team members were
appointed by the Secretary’s Indian Water RightsOffice in 2014.  The Tribal Water Team assisted theFederal Negotiation Team in developing anappraisal level study of several alternatives thatwere identified in a February 2015 meeting.  TheFederal Team promised to be done with the studyby November 2015 so that the Tribe and FederalNegotiation Team could proceed to negotiate anappropriate settlement to present to Congress forintroduction and possible enactment in 2016.Only in December of 2016 did the Federal Teamdeliver its report to the Tribe, approximately 14
months late.  The Tribe is dissatisfied with theresults and analysis of the report, and has set ameeting with the Federal representatives forJanuary 2017, to discuss ways to attempt to findcommon ground on an affordable water storageand delivery system.
According to the Environmental Protection
Agency, the water supply for the KickapooReservation is in violation of the Safe DrinkingWater Act of 1974. The Kickapoo people areunable to safely drink, bathe or cook with tapwater.  There is not enough water on the reserva-tion to provide basic municipal services to the
community and the Tribe is not even able to pro-vide local schools with reliable, safe running water.The fire department cannot provide adequate fireprotection due to the water shortage.  The pro-posed Reservoir Project is the most cost effectiveand reliable means by which the Tribe canimprove the water supply.  In June 2006, theKickapoo Tribe in Kansas, represented by NARF,filed a federal court lawsuit in an effort to enforceexpress promises made to the Tribe to build aReservoir Project.  The Nemaha Brown WatershedJoint Board #7, the Natural ResourcesConservation Service of the U.S. Department ofAgriculture, and the State of Kansas made thesepromises to the Tribe over two decades ago.  Inthe intervening years these parties have beenactively developing the water resources of thewatershed, resulting in the near depletion of theTribe's senior federal water rights in the drainage.The U.S., the State and the local watershed districtall concede the existence of the Tribe's seniorIndian reserved water rights; the real issue is theamount of water needed to satisfy the Tribe'srights, and the source or sources of that water. TheTribe and the US have also discussed funding toquantify the Tribe's water rights. 
In September 2016, the Tribe and the State exe-
cuted the “Global Settlement Agreement” whichincludes a negotiated water right for the Tribe,including sufficient water for losses from storagedue to seepage and evaporation, and all of thedetails for the State’s administration of the Tribe’swater right as the senior water right in theNative American Rights Fund     |   19THE PROTECTION OF TRIBAL NATURAL RESOURCES 
Delaware River watershed. The Tribe and NARF are
now developing federal legislation in consultationwith the Kansas congressional delegation toapprove the water right negotiated with the State.This draft legislation will also be vetted with thefederal Departments of Interior, Agriculture andJustice.
Protection of Hunting 
and Fishing Rights
The subsistence way of life is essential for the
physical and cultural survival of Alaska Natives.  Asimportant as Native hunting and fishing rights areto Alaska Natives' physical, economic, traditionaland cultural existence, the State of Alaska has beenand continues to be reluctant to recognize theimportance of the subsistence way of life. 
The Bering Sea Elders Group (BSEG) is an
alliance of thirty-nine Yup’ik and Inupiaq villagesthat seeks to protect the sensitive ecosystem of theBering Sea, the subsistence lifestyle, and the sus-tainable communities that depend on it.  NARFhas designed a comprehensive plan to help thisgroup of Alaska Native villages in their efforts toprotect the area and become more engaged in itsmanagement.  Subsistence is the inherently sus-tainable Native philosophy of taking only whatyou need.  There are often no roads and no storesin rural Alaska, and so no other group of people inthe United States continues to be as intimatelyconnected to the land and water and as depend-ent upon its vast natural resources as Alaska’sindigenous peoples.  
NARF worked with BSEG on their efforts to pro-
tect the northern Bering Sea.  In December 2016,this work resulted in President Barack Obama sign-ing a historic Executive Order creating theNorthern Bering Sea Climate Resilience Area.  Thiswas an incredible victory for NARF’s clients.  Yup’ikand Inupiaq tribal communities in the region havea deeply personal and cultural connection to theNorthern Bering Sea and its rich marine resources.Their lives have been linked with the NorthernBering Sea for thousands of years.  It is their high-way, their grocery store, their way of life, and theirchildren’s inheritance.  The Executive Order established an important
set of policies aimed at promoting resilient tribalcommunities and protecting the Alaska Nativesubsistence way of life in the face of increasingeffects of climate change.  It also, for the first time,creates a formal role for the region’s tribes in fed-eral decision-making, so as to ensure that Nativevoices continue to be heard as they deal with theincreasing pressure on their resources. TheExecutive Order elevates the voice of Alaska Nativetribes and the role of indigenous knowledge indecision-making within the region by establishinga Federal Task Force on the Northern Bering SeaClimate Resilience Area (Bering Task Force) andmandating that the Task Force establish andengage in regular consultation with a BeringIntergovernmental Tribal Advisory Council, whichwill consist primarily of tribal government repre-sentatives with participation from Federal, state,and local officials for coordination purposes.  
The Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation
Act (ANILCA) provides a subsistence harvest prior-ity to Alaska’s “rural” residents.  ANILCA itself,however, does not define which individuals or
20   |     Native American Rights FundTHE PROTECTION OF TRIBAL NATURAL RESOURCES 
communities qualify as “rural.” Saxman Village is a
coastal community of 411 residents.  The popula-tion is overwhelmingly Alaska Native.  Saxman hasits own federally recognized tribal government, itsown state recognized municipality, and its ownAlaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA) vil-lage corporation.  Saxman is connected to the cityof Ketchikan by a two-mile long road. In 2007, theFederal Subsistence Board (FSB) promulgated afinal rule revoking Saxman’s rural community sta-tus.  The FSB reasoned that Saxman’s close prox-imity to Ketchikan justified aggregating the twocommunities as one non-rural community.  TheTribe pursued its administrative remedies in orderto reinstate its rural status.  Implementation of the2007 Final Rule was delayed by the Secretary ofthe Interior as the FSB engaged in an overhaul ofthe rural determination criteria used to designatecommunities “rural or non-rural” under ANILCA.
In June 2014, NARF filed a complaint for
declaratory and injunctive relief in Alaska’s federaldistrict court challenging the merits of the FSB’s2007 decision to classify Saxman as non-rural.Soon after the Complaint was filled, the DeputySecretary of the Interior announced the initiation
of administrative rule-making aimed at requiring“the Federal Subsistence Board to use more flexi-ble criteria to designate rural communities” duringthe rural/nonrurual determination process.Subsequently, NARF and the U.S. Department ofJustice jointly moved to stay the litigation duringthe pendency of the administrative rule-making.The court granted the stay in December 2014.  InJanuary 2015, a proposed rule for the rural deter-mination process was published in the FederalRegister.  NARF assisted the Tribe in drafting writ-ten comments on the proposed rule and appearedwith tribal officials at public hearings.  In May2015, Senator Murkowski and CongressmanYoung introduced bills which would legislativelyreinstate Saxman as a rural community. One weekafter the hearing, the FSB voted unanimously toadopt the proposed administrative rule favoringSaxman’s rural status.  The proposed rule andupdated community list were published in theFederal Register in November 2015.  With the rulein effect, NARF moved to voluntarily dismiss thefederal lawsuit.  NARF continues to work with theTribe on issues surrounding the FSB and federalsubsistence management program – includingfuture policy issues surrounding rural communitystatus.
In 
John Sturgeon v. Sue Masica et al., the federal
courts upheld the right of the National Park Serviceto prohibit the use of a hovercraft on a river insidea National Park or Preserve.  The hovercraft wasbeing used on the Nation River, which is a naviga-ble river inside the Yukon-Charley Rivers NationalPreserve.  The lower federal courts ruled in favor ofthe federal government on the basis that nation-wide Park and Preserve rules generally apply to alllands and waters that are inside a Park or Preserve.Yet, a key provision of the 1980 Alaska NationalInterest Lands Conservation Act (ANILCA) wasintended to exempt those kinds of lands from pre-cisely these kinds of federal Park rules.
Because the Ninth Circuit’s ruling resulted in
ANCSA lands being subject to Park regulations,ANCSA corporations joined Mr. Sturgeon and thestate of Alaska in petitioning for review of the caseby the U.S. Supreme Court.  The Court granted
Native American Rights Fund     |   21THE PROTECTION OF TRIBAL NATURAL RESOURCES 
review in October 2015.  NARF elected to file an
amicus brief on behalf of subsistence users in sup-port of the federal government in the SupremeCourt because of concern that the case may inad-vertently implicate subsistence fishing rightsestablished by the 
Katie John litigation.
In Katie John, the federal courts ruled that the
government owns a federal interest in navigablerivers running inside Parks and Preserves under thereserved water rights doctrine.  On that basis thecourts upheld the right of the federal governmentto protect subsistence fishing in those rivers.  Thesame, one would think, would be the case here—since the government owns an interest in naviga-ble waters inside a Preserve, the government canregulate other uses of those waters.  But Mr.Sturgeon and the state of Alaska argued inSturgeon that the State owned the submergedlands and navigable waters that run through Parksand thus the federal government has no interest innavigable waters inside Parks and Preserves.  If theSupreme Court had agreed, the basis for federalregulation of subsistence fishing could be severelyundermined.  
Oral argument in 
Sturgeon was held in January
2016 and the Court issued an opinion reversingand remanding to the lower court in March 2016.The Supreme Court agreed with the State and theANCSA corporations that their lands get specialtreatment under ANILCA, and are not to be treat-ed as if they were federal “public” lands.  But theCourt went no further than that.
The Supreme Court said it is for the lower courts
to decide if the Nation River is “public land” forpurposes of ANILCA (which is how the 
Katie John
court viewed the issue).  The Supreme Court alsosaid it is for the lower courts to decide whether thePark Service has the power to regulate activities inthe River even if the River does not qualify as fed-eral “public land.”  The Ninth Circuit heard oralargument in October 2016.  NARF filed an amicusbrief earlier in October 2016 supporting the feder-al government’s position and the subsistence fish-ing rights established by the Katie John line ofcases. A decision in the case is pending.Alaska’s Bristol Bay region is home to the largest
wild salmon runs in the world.  It is also home tothe Yup’ik, Dena’ina, and Alutiiq peoples whodepend on the sustainable salmon runs for theirsubsistence.  In April 2013, NARF assisted in thecreation of the United Tribes of Bristol Bay (UTBB).UTBB is a consortium of federally- recognizedtribes in the region.  It was formed in order fortribes to directly address regional large-scale min-ing proposals threatening salmon rearingstreams—such as the proposed Pebble Mine,which would sit on the headwaters of the largestsalmon-producing river in Bristol Bay.  Exercisingits delegated governmental authority, with NARFas legal counsel, UTBB has actively engaged thefederal government in direct government-to-gov-ernment consultation on large scale mining inBristol Bay.  
In February 2014, EPA gave notice that it would
initiate a Clean Water Act 404(c) process for thePebble Mine.  The State of Alaska immediatelyfiled a statement requesting a stay to allow thedeveloper to submit a permit under the NEPAprocess.  EPA granted the State and the Corp. ofEngineers an extension until April 28, 2014, torespond to the notification of 404(c) process.Public hearings were held over the 2014 summerseason.  In May 2014, Pebble Limited Partnership(PLP) filed suit in federal district court in Alaskaagainst EPA and the Region 10 Administrator chal-lenging EPA’s Section 404(c) review process asexceeding its statutory authority under the CleanWater Act.  The State of Alaska filed a motion tointervene as a plaintiff which was granted in June2014.  Both parties moved for a preliminaryinjunction.  UTBB, represented by NARF, filed amotion to intervene as Intervenor-Defendantswhich was granted in July 2014.  In September2014 Judge Holland heard oral argument, andthen ruled from the bench dismissing PLP and theState of Alaska’s Motion for a PreliminaryInjunction on the ground that the agency actionwas not final.  PLP appealed to the U.S. Court ofAppeals for the Ninth Circuit where oral argumentwas held in May 2015.  Two weeks later, the NinthCircuit issued a per curiam opinion affirming JudgeHolland in all respects – effectively ending the casein favor of our clients.22   |     Native American Rights FundTHE PROTECTION OF TRIBAL NATURAL RESOURCES 
However, in September 2014, PLP had filed a
separate complaint in federal district court inAlaska against EPA for declaratory and injunctiverelief under the Federal Advisory Committee Act(FACA).  In November 2014, Judge Holland heldoral argument on PLP’s motion for preliminaryinjunction and again issued a ruling from thebench granting the preliminary injunction, there-by halting EPA’s work on the 404(c) process inBristol Bay.    PLP then filed an amended com-plaint, and EPA filed an updated motion to dismisson the grounds that PLP had not properly stated aclaim for relief and that FACA did not apply toEPA’s 404(c) action. In October 2015, JudgeHolland issued a broad order quashing PLP’s sub-poenas, specifically finding that PLP’s effortspushed the federal discovery rules to their verylimits.  After Judge Holland issued his order, PLPwithdrew its remaining subpoenas, but less thanfour months later PLP began serving narrowersubpoenas on third parties, which Judge Hollandagain quashed. In the last days of 2016, the par-ties requested a stay of the proceedings in order tonegotiate a possible mediated settlement of thecase.  Judge Holland granted the stay until March
2017.  In the interim, Judge Holland’s preliminaryinjunction remains in effect.
NARF represents the Native Village of Tyonek
(NVT) as a co-operating agency in the develop-ment of a Supplemental Environmental ImpactStatement (SEIS) in response to a permit proposalby PacRim to mine coal from the Beluga coal fieldsin the Cook Inlet.  NARF continues to be activelyengaged in a multifaceted approach to assist NVTin its opposition to the proposed Chuitna CoalProject.  
NARF continues to retain experts to analyze SEIS
component parts.  Experts have been retained torespond to each draft chapter of the draft SEIS, allappendices and related studies within the SEIS.NARF submitted its comprehensive comments tothe Corps in January 2016.  These comments andthe Corp’s response will form the basis of theadministrative record supporting or rejecting theChuitna coal development.
Native American Rights Fund     |   23THE PROTECTION OF TRIBAL NATURAL RESOURCES 
Climate Change Project
Climate change is wreaking havoc in Alaska. In
recent years scientists have documented meltingocean ice, rising oceans, rising river temperatures,thawing permafrost, increased insect infestations,animals at risk and dying forests. Alaska Nativesare the peoples who rely most on Alaska's ice, seas,marine mammals, fish and game for nutrition andcustomary and traditional subsistence uses; theyare thus experiencing the adverse impacts of cli-mate change most acutely. In 2006, during theAlaska Forum on the Environment, Alaska Nativeparticipants described increased forest fires, moredangerous hunting, fishing and traveling condi-tions, visible changes in animals and plants, infra-structure damage from melting permafrost andcoastal erosion, fiercer winter storms, and perva-sive unpredictability. Virtually every aspect of tradi-tional Alaska Native life is impacted. As noted inthe Arctic Climate Impact Assessment of 2004,indigenous peoples are reporting that sea ice isdeclining, and its quality and timing are changing,with important negative repercussions for marinehunters. Others are reporting that salmon are dis-eased and cannot be dried for winter food. Thereis widespread concern about caribou habitatdiminishing as larger vegetation moves north-ward. Because of these and other dramaticchanges, traditional knowledge is jeopardized, asare cultural structures and the nutritional needs ofAlaska's Indigenous peoples. Efforts are continuingto convene Congressional hearings on climatechange impacts on indigenous peoples.
NARF is now representing NCAI on international
climate change matters.  Climate change is one ofthe most challenging issues facing the worldtoday. Its effects on indigenous peoples through-out the world are acute and will only get worse.The effects are especially pronounced in Alaskawhere as many as 184 Alaska Native villages arethreatened with removal.  
On the international stage, the first meetings on
the specifics of the new “protocol to be adoptedby December 2015, were held in Bonn, Germanyin April/May and June, 2013.  At the March 2014meeting of the United Nations FrameworkConvention on Climate Change in Bonn, an open-
ended consultation occurred where countriesexchanged views on the elements of the 2015agreement. No text was produced and developingcountries expressed their view that more formalnegotiations that allowed for the tabling of textwere due.  In the June 2014 session, it was antici-pated that draft text would be tabled but this didnot happen, as more discussion occurred on theelements of a draft text.  An additional session washeld in Bonn in October 2014. In anticipation ofthe COP 20, a meeting was held in Lima, Peru inlate November 2014.
In December 2015, the Paris Agreement, the
first ever universally binding accord on climatechange, was adopted under the United NationsFramework Convention on Climate Change(UNFCCC) and achieves the universality whichwas missing from the last attempt at such anagreement – the Kyoto Protocol. The InternationalIndigenous Peoples Forum on Climate Change(IIPFCC or indigenous caucus), which NARF hasparticipated in, has been involved in the UNFCCCprocess for years.  It is clear that without the pres-ence of Indigenous Peoples’ representatives, theAgreement and Decision would have had no refer-ence to them.  While the indigenous caucus didnot achieve all that it sought, it did achieve somevery significant references which can be built ongoing forward.  The language in the Agreementstates that when taking action on climate changethe rights of indigenous peoples must be acknowl-edged and that traditional knowledge, knowledgeof indigenous peoples and local knowledge sys-tems shall help guide the science used to addressclimate change.  This language recognizes theneed to strengthen knowledge, technologies,practices and efforts of local communities andindigenous peoples, related to addressing andresponding to climate change, and establishes aplatform for the exchange of experiences andsharing of best practices on mitigation and adap-tation in a holistic and integrated manner.Gándl uu xíinaang íijang
water is life - HaidaNative American Rights Fund     |   25THE PROMOTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS 
Although basic human rights are considered a
universal and inalienable entitlement, NativeAmericans face an ongoing threat of having theirrights undermined by the United States govern-ment, states and others who seek to limit theserights. Under the priority of the promotion ofhuman rights, NARF strives to enforce andstrengthen laws which are designed to protectthe rights of Native Americans to practice theirtraditional religion, to use their own languageand to enjoy their culture. NARF also works withTribes to ensure the welfare of their children.  Inthe international arena, NARF is active in efforts tonegotiate declarations on the rights of indigenouspeoples.
Religious Freedom
Because religion is the foundation that holds
Native communities and cultures together, reli-gious freedom is a NARF priority issue. 
In NARF’s Sacred Places Project, NARF has part-
nered with the National Congress of AmericanIndians and the Morningstar Institute to helpensure that various federal agencies with jurisdic-tion over federal lands are held accountable totheir obligation to protect sacred places and pro-vide meaningful access to tribal people wishing touse those places for traditional purposes. Theseefforts will include providing best practices analy-sis, as well as raising awareness of issues and differ-ent approaches that can be used to protect sacredplaces held by the federal government.  To theextent possible, analysis and practices learnedfrom federal lands will also be compared for useon private and state-held lands.
NARF has a long history in the protection of
Native religion and cultural property, includingsacred sites.  NARF’s Sacred Places Project focuseson monitoring legal issues impacting sacred placesfor Native peoples, collaborating with variousgroups that are already working to protect sacredplaces, monitoring and participating in litigationto protect sacred places, and advocating forgreater protection and access for sacred places atthe congressional and administrative levels. Awebsite will be developed to act as a clearing-house of information regarding sacred places
protection laws and cases.
During the Obama administration, NARF pro-
vided input to the federal Departments of theInterior, Agriculture, Defense, and Energy, whichsigned a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)Regarding Interagency Coordination andCollaboration for the Protection of Indian SacredSites to improve the protection of, and tribalaccess to, Indian sacred sites through enhancedand improved interdepartmental coordinationand collaboration. The MOU was followed with an“Action Plan” calling for establishment of working“We are all the People of this land. We were
created out of the forces of earth and sky,the stars and water. We must make surethat the balance of the earth be kept. Thereis no other way. We must struggle for ourlives. We must take great care for eachother. We must share our concern witheach other. Nothing is separate from us. Weare all one body of People. We must strug-gle to share our human lives with eachother. We must fight against those forceswhich will take our humanity from us. We must ensure that life continues. Wemust be responsible to that life. With thathumanity and the strength which comesfrom our shared responsibility for this life,the People shall continue.”  Simon J. Ortiz26   |     Native American Rights FundMAJOR ACTIVITIES 2016
NARF CASE MAPNative American Rights Fund     |   27FLORIDA
Seminole Tribe of Florida
– Tribal Trust Funds
IDAHONez Perce Tribe - Water
Rights 
KANSASKickapoo Tribe – Water
Rights 
MAINEPenobscot Indian Nation –
Tribal Trust Funds
MICHIGANGrand Traverse Band of
Ottawa and ChippewaIndians – Tribal TrustFunds
MINNESOTAMenominee Indian Tribe –
Equitable Tolling
White Earth Band of
Chippewa Indians - TribalTrust Funds 
MISSISSIPPIMississippi Band of
Choctaw Indians – TribalCivil Jurisdiction
MONTANABlackfeet Tribe – Sacred
Sites
Chippewa-Cree Tribe of
the Rocky BoysReservation - Tribal TrustFunds
Little Shell Tribe of
Chippewa Indians -Recognition & Tribal TrustFunds
NEW MEXICOPueblo of Acoma – Tribal
Trust Funds
Jemez Pueblo – Sacred
Site Protection/AboriginalTitle
NORTH DAKOTATurtle Mountain Chippewa
Tribe - Tribal Trust Funds
North Dakota Voting
Rights Law
OKLAHOMAComanche Nation – Tribal
Trust Funds
Kickapoo Tribe – Tribal
Trust Funds
Muscogee Creek Nation –
Tribal Trust Funds
OREGONKlamath Tribes - Water
Rights & Tribal TrustFundsALASKA
NARF ANCHORAGE OFFICE
Akiachak Native
Community – Land intoTrust
Aleut Community of St.
Paul Island – Tribal TrustFunds
Bering Sea Elders Group –
Subsistence
Bristol Bay – Subsistence Chilkoot Indian
Association – Land intoTrust
Chalkyitsik – Land into
Trust
Organized Village of
Saxman – Subsistence
Stickwan – Subsistence Native Village of Toyukuk
–Voting Rights Act 
Native Village of Tyonek –
Subsistence & CulturalPreservation
United Tribes of Bristol
Bay –Environmental/Subsistence
ARIZONAArizona Inter Tribal
Council – Education TrustFunds
Hualapai Tribe –
Boundary Issue 
San Juan Southern Paiute
– Northern ArizonaWithdrawl
CALIFORNIAAgua Caliente Band of
Cahuilla Indians – TribalWater Rights
Tule River Tribe – Tribal
Water Rights 
Santa Ynez Band of
Chumash Indians – TribalConsultation
COLORADONARF HEADQUARTERS
BOULDER, COLORADO
Indian Boarding School
Healing Project
Indigenous Peacemaking
Initiative
National Indian Law
Library
Native American Church of
North America
Sacred Places ProjectSouthern Ute Tribe –
Tribal Trust Funds/SacredSitesConfederated Tribes of the
Umatilla Reservation –Tribal Trust Funds
SOUTH DAKOTASisseton Wahpeton Oyate
– Tribal Trust Funds
TEXASNative American Church of
North America – ReligiousFreedom
UTAHNorthwestern Band of
Shoshone Nation – SacredSites
Paiute Indian Tribe –
Sacred Sites
Indian Peaks Band of
Paiute Indians – SacredSites
VIRGINIAPamunkey Tribe – Tribal
Recognition
WASHINGTONQuinault Indian Nation –
Tribal Trust Funds
Skokomish Tribe – Tribal
Trust Funds
WASHINGTON, D.C.
NARF WASHINGTON, D.C.
OFFICE
National Congress of
American Indians –InternationalRepresentation
Tribal Supreme Court
Project
Morningstar Institute –
Arizona Withdrawl
WISCONSINBad River Band of Lake
Superior ChippewaIndians – Tribal WaterRights 
WYOMINGEastern Shoshone Tribe -
Land Issue 
INTERNATIONALDeclaration on the Rights
of IndigenousPeoples/Climate ChangeIssues – Organization ofAmerican States andUnited Nations28   |     Native American Rights FundTHE PROMOTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS 
groups to perform various listed activities to facili-
tate better coordination and access. It was hopedthat the working group would have a series ofconsultations on some proposals they havereceived for better protecting and providingaccess to sacred sites, but that has not occurred inany meaningful way. NARF and partner, theMorningstar Institute, did participate in develop-ment of preliminary training materials to beshared across the agencies, spearheaded by theDepartment of Defense.    During and after thetransition in Presidential administrations, NARF willmonitor the intent of the Trump administration forintent to continue to advance the principles of theMOU. Once we identify opportunities to continueto constructively press for better access and pro-tection, we will act accordingly. 
NARF, representing the Indian Peaks Band of
Paiute Indians, the San Juan Southern Paiute Tribe,and the Morningstar Institute, filed an amicus briefin 
Yount v. Jewell, a case in the federal district court
of Arizona about the Northern ArizonaWithdrawal.  In 2012, then-Interior SecretarySalazar announced that he was withdrawing overa million acres of Bureau of Land Managementand Forest Service land around the Grand Canyonfrom future uranium mining claims.  The NorthernArizona Withdrawal would prohibit future miningclaims from being perfected as of January 2012,but would permit claims that were valid as of thatdate to go forward.  Several mining companiesand individuals challenged the Withdrawal onmany grounds, including that the Withdrawal violated the Establishment Clause of the U.S.
Constitution because it relied on American Indianspiritual beliefs and therefore constituted animpermissible establishment of religion.  NARF’samicus brief addressed the Establishment Clauseargument as well as the other American Indiancultural arguments that the mining companiesraised. The amicus brief was in support of theUnited States, the Havasupai Tribe, and other envi-ronmental groups that intervened in the matter.Oral argument was held in September 2014. Thecourt upheld the Northern Arizona Withdrawal,preventing new future mining claims.  The Courtgave little attention to the Plaintiff’s EstablishmentClause and American Indian cultural argumentsindicating they were without merit.  The miningcompanies appealed this decision to the U.S.Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.  NARF, rep-resenting the Paiute Indian Tribe of Utah, San JuanSouthern Paiute Tribe, Kaibab Band of PaiuteIndians, Hualapai Tribe of the HualapaiReservation, Northwestern Band of the ShoshoneNation, the Morning Star Institute, and theNational Congress of American Indians filed anamicus brief in the Ninth Circuit.  The brief asksthe Court of Appeals to uphold the withdrawaland counters arguments made against tribal inter-ests by the mining companies and other amicusparties. The Ninth Circuit held oral argument inthis case in December 2016.
In May 2015, environmentalists and historic
preservation advocates secured a victory in
Southwest Utah Wilderness Alliance, et  al. v.
Schneider when a Utah federal district court
ordered the Bureau of Land Management (BLM)to conduct on-the-ground surveys to identify cul-tural artifacts in need of protection on more than4,000 miles of dirt roads and trails where BLM per-mits off-road vehicles to be driven. BLM appealedthat decision in the U.S Court of Appeals for theTenth Circuit. NARF, representing the PaiuteIndian Tribe of Utah, Indian Peaks Band of Paiutes,the Southern Ute Indian Tribe, and the MorningStar Institute, filed an amicus brief in the TenthCircuit in support of the environmentalists andrequested that the surveys be conducted. InDecember 2015, The Tenth Circuit confirmed thatBLM must comply.  BLM is now required to survey
Native American Rights Fund     |   29THE PROMOTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS 
the routes designated for off-highway vehicle use
within three years.  Further issues, however,remain to be litigated in this case.
In September 2014, NARF filed an amicus brief
on behalf of the Blackfeet Tribe in the federal district court case of 
Solonex v. Jewell. The energy
company is challenging the United States govern-ment’s process and decision to limit oil and gasdevelopment in areas that would threaten theTribe’s sacred sites.  When the court ordered thefederal government to decide whether it wouldseek to cancel or to lift a suspension on Solonex’sgas permit on lands sacred to the Tribe, the UnitedStates decided to cancel the oil and gas lease.Solonex since has amended its complaint challeng-ing the authority of the United States to cancel thelease.  In October 2016, NARF filed an amicus briefon behalf of the Tribe on certain legal issues raisedby the amended complaint.  The parties recentlycompleted briefing on motions for summary judg-ment, so the matter is before the court.  
The Standing Rock Sioux Tribe requested NARF’s
assistance, in conjunction with the NationalCongress of American Indians (NCAI), to workalongside the Tribe’s attorneys, Earthjustice, todevelop and coordinate an effective amicus briefstrategy in support of the Tribe in their lawsuitagainst the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers in relationto the Dakota Access Pipeline (DAPL).  The litiga-tion involves two broad issues surrounding theproposed construction of a major crude-oilpipeline that passes through the Tribe’s ancestrallands.  First, the pipeline would pass under theMissouri River (at Lake Oahe) just a half a mileupstream of the tribe’s reservation boundary,where a spill would be culturally and economicallycatastrophic.  Second, the pipeline would passthrough areas of great cultural significance, suchas sacred sites and burial grounds that theNational Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) wasenacted to protect.  
Based on their years of experience with the work
of the Tribal Supreme Court Project, NCAI andNARF agreed to provide direct assistance in chan-neling the overwhelming support received by theTribe from across Indian country in order to pro-vide a strong, unified voice in the federal courts.
In September 2016, Judge Boasberg, U.S. DistrictCourt for the District of Colombia, issued a 58-page opinion and order denying the Tribe’smotion for a preliminary injunction to stop con-struction of the DAPL, finding that “the Corps haslikely complied with the NHPA and that the Tribehas not shown it will suffer injury that would beprevented by any injunction the Court couldissue.”  Immediately following the issuance of thecourt’s opinion, the Department of Justice, theDepartment of the Army and the Department ofthe Interior issued a joint statement: The Army willnot authorize constructing the Dakota Accesspipeline on Corps land bordering or under LakeOahe until it can determine whether it will need toreconsider any of its previous decisions regardingthe Lake Oahe site under the NationalEnvironmental Policy Act (NEPA) or other federallaws.  Therefore, construction of the pipeline onArmy Corps land bordering or under Lake Oahewill not go forward at this time.  The Army willmove expeditiously to make this determination, aseveryone involved — including the pipeline com-pany and its workers — deserves a clear and time-ly resolution.  In the interim, we request that the pipeline company voluntarily pause all construction activity within 20 miles east or westof Lake Oahe.
The Tribe filed its notice of appeal and an emer-
gency motion for a stay pending appeal. In October 2016, the D.C. Circuit issued an orderdenying the Tribes’ emergency motion for a stay,but recognized: Although the Tribe has not metthe narrow and stringent standard governing thisextraordinary form of relief, we recognize Section106 of the National Historic Preservation Act wasintended to mediate precisely the disparate per-spectives involved in a case such as this one. Itsconsultative process—designed to be inclusiveand facilitate consensus—ensures competinginterests are appropriately considered and ade-quately addressed. But ours is not the final word.A necessary easement still awaits governmentapproval—a decision Corps’ counsel predicts islikely weeks away; meanwhile, Intervenor DAPLhas rights of access to the limited portion ofpipeline corridor not yet cleared—where the Tribe30   |     Native American Rights FundTHE PROMOTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS 
alleges additional historic sites are at risk. We can
only hope the spirit of Section 106 may yet prevail.
In December 2016, the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers issued a statement that it would notgrant an easement to allow the Dakota AccessPipeline to cross under Lake Oahe.  The Corps hasdetermined that further environmental review iswarranted and, if necessary, will prepare anEnvironmental Impact Statement to evaluate alter-native routes.   In response, DAPL filed a motionfor summary judgment in the district court seek-ing a declaration that the Army Corps had issueda legal right-of-way for the pipeline under LakeOahe as set forth in the July 2016 MitigatedFindings of No Significant Impact, and that DAPLis entitled to a judgment as a matter of law that nofurther permission (
e.g.,easement) is required.
Judge Boasberg held a status conference in rela-
tion to the issuance of the statement by the ArmyCorps that it would not grant an easement at thistime and set the deadlines for the Tribes and theArmy Corps to respond to the DAPL’s motion forsummary judgment.   Judge Boasberg indicatedthat a motions hearing could take place as early asmid-February, but he briefly acknowledged thepossibility that the incoming TrumpAdministration could moot this case. Followingthe status conference, NARF met briefly with theattorneys for the Tribes to discuss how the mem-bers of this Workgroup could best provide supportmoving forward.  Based on narrowness of theissue raised in the motion for summary judgment,the consensus was that amicus briefs are not war-ranted at this stage of the litigation.  However,there are other possible avenues where supportcould be provided by members of this Workgroup,including:  (1) Securing Support for Tribes inCongress (Tribes are concerned that legislationmay be introduced early next year to moot theirlitigation);  (2) Providing Support During EISProcess (Tribes would ask that other tribes andtribal organizations weigh-in during the ArmyCorps upcoming “robust consideration of reason-able alternatives”); and (3) Supporting Tribes inInternational Human Rights Forums (UnitedNations and Organization of American States).In January 2017, the Army Corps, the Standing
Rock Sioux Tribe and the Cheyenne River SiouxTribe each filed a response in opposition to DAPL’smotion for summary judgment and a motion todismiss DAPL’s cross-claim.  In addition, bothTribes filed cross-motions for summary judgment.At this time, NARF is moving forward withEarthjustice on the strategies discussed followingthe December status hearing.  NARF, along withNCAI, is also active in monitoring the progress ofthe consultation sessions hosted by theDepartment of the Interior, Department of Justice,Department of the Army, and other Federal agen-cies on “how the Federal Government can betteraccount for, and integrate tribal views, on futureinfrastructure decisions throughout the country.”
NARF has represented the Native American
Church of North America (NACNA) and its mem-ber chapters for four decades in the litigation andlegislative arenas.  NARF represented NACNA andits several dozen local membership chaptersthroughout the United States to successfully enactfederal legislation in 1994 that finally creatednational protection for the traditional, indigenoususe of Peyote by Native peoples.  For the past twoyears, NARF has been working with the NACNAon a project to research the impact of peyotedecline on Native American Church members andto develop and support access to and the use ofpeyote for NACNA.  Because importation fromMexico, where most of the naturally occurringpeyote grows, is presently not legal, and becauseartificial cultivation is difficult and extraordinarilyexpensive, North American peyotists currentlydepend on the only region where Peyote abun-dance occurs in the United States, the Rio GrandeRiver Valley in south Texas.  In recent years it hasbecome increasingly apparent that the domesticsupply of peyote is under threat of unsustainabilitydue to a myriad of factors.  The decline in theavailability of peyote is attributed to four majorfactors: growing Indian demand; exploitation andcommercialization by non-Indian people; damagefrom private landowner land use practices includ-ing cattle ranching; and damage from incorrectharvesting practices and over-harvesting of thepeyote cactus. Native American Rights Fund     |   31THE PROMOTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS 
There is a limited amount of available, published
scholastic research that supports this hypothesis.NARF’s Peyote Research Project team met twice in2015 and developed a specific plan to guide itswork through 2016.  Near term action focused onTexas and developing a relationship with privatelandowners to heighten the awareness of the needto protect the sacrament.   NARF and NACNA rep-resentatives met three times in 2016 withlandowners, peyoteros, and botanists to developessential relationships in Texas.  Additional meet-ings in Texas are scheduled for February, Marchand April, 2017.
Indian Education
During the 19th and into the 20th century, pur-
suant to federal policy, Native American childrenwere forcibly abducted from their homes to attendChristian and government-run boarding schools.The purpose was to "civilize" the Indian and tostamp out Native culture. It was a deliberate poli-cy of ethnocide and cultural genocide.  Cut offfrom their families and culture, the children werepunished for speaking their native language,banned from conducting traditional or culturalpractices, shorn of traditional clothing and identityof their native culture, taught that their cultureand traditions were evil and sinful, and that theyshould be ashamed of being Native American.Placed often far from home, they were frequentlyneglected or abused physically, sexually and psy-chologically. Generations of these childrenbecame the legacy of the federal Boarding SchoolPolicy.  They were returned to their communities,not as the Christianized farmers that the BoardingSchool Policy envisioned, but as deeply scarredhuman beings with none of the acculturated skills– community, parenting, extended family, lan-guage, cultural practices – gained by those whoare raised in their cultural context. 
There has been scant recognition by the U.S.
federal government that initiated and carried outthis policy, and no acceptance of responsibility forthe indisputable fact that its purpose was culturalgenocide.  There are no apparent realistic legalavenues to seek redress or healing from the deepand enduring wounds inflicted both on the indi-viduals and communities of tribal nations.
Lawsuits by individuals have been turned aside,and unlike other countries that implemented similar policies – e.g. Canada, Australia – there has been no official U.S. proposal for healing orreconciliation.  
NARF represents the Native American Boarding
School Healing Coalition (NABS or the “Coalition”)in seeking appropriate acknowledgment by theUnited States and major Christian denominationsof their roles in establishing and implementing theBoarding School Policy of cultural genocide aimedat Native American children. The Coalition contin-ues education and outreach in four general areas:(1) Indian Country, (2) Churches and the non-Indian public, (3) Congress, and (4) Internationalpressure on the United States to disclose andaddress the fate of Boarding School students.Recent activities include seeking acknowledgmentby the United States of its responsibilities, boththrough requests for information to theDepartment of the Interior and by international filings, to establish data on the population of num-bers and fates of children affected by the BoardingSchool Policy.  
NARF also continues to provide additional 
assistance in various, case-by-case situations con-cerning work towards boarding or industrialschool healing. NARF has also worked with threetribes and Tribal Tech, a contractor with theSubstance Abuse and Mental Health Services
32   |     Native American Rights FundTHE PROMOTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS 
Administration (SAMHSA), to support those tribes
in conducting healing programs.  Two tribes haveheld successful gatherings and a third is in theworks. NARF and the Intertribal Council of Arizonaorganized a tribal leaders’ roundtable and expertsforum on historical trauma (held in conjunctionwith NCAI’s 2016 Annual Conference), and inNovember 2016, NARF Executive Director JohnEchohawk delivered the keynote address at theinternational conference, Quakers, First Nations,and Native Americans. The Quakers are beginningto document and analyze their roles and responsi-bilities in the historic Boarding School Policy.  
After over 20 years of work, NARF and the Tribal
Educations Departments National Assembly(TEDNA) secured the first source of direct federalfunding – $2 million – for tribal education depart-ments ("TEDs") in the Labor, Health, and HumanServices FYs 2012 and 2015 Appropriations Bills.These funds were distributed by the U.S.Department of Education via a competitive grantprocess under a new State Tribal EducationPartnerships ("STEP") Program. The STEP programauthorizes eligible TEDs to participate in a pilotproject that allows TEDs to operate federal educa-tion programs in schools located on Indian reser-vations. The first STEP grants were awarded to theNez Perce Tribe, the Confederated Tribes of theUmatilla Reservation, the Navajo Nation, and theChickasaw Nation. All of these tribes have beenlong time members of TEDNA. The second roundof grant awardees included the ConfederatedSalish and Kootenai Tribes, the Muscogee (Creek)Nation, the Nez Perce Tribe, the Coeur d'AleneTribe, and the Chickasaw Nation and Cheyenneand Arapaho Consortium. TEDNA has sinceworked to ensure continued funding for the STEPprogram by helping to make it a permanent pro-gram as part of the 2015 long-awaited reautho-rization by Congress of the Elementary andSecondary Education Act, the Every StudentSucceeds Act (ESSA).  
In FY 2015, the U.S. Department of the-
Interior's Bureau of Indian Education (BIE)announced its new direct funding for TEDs, theSovereignty in Education (SIE) Program. Six tribeswere awarded grants under this pilot program. For FY 2016, Congress appropriated an additional
$2 million for TEDs to be distributed by BIE via acompetitive grant under its 1988 statutory author-ization which has never before been funded. Thefollowing TEDs were provided BIE TED funds:Cohort 1: Hopi Tribe, Navajo Nation, Oglala SiouxTribe, Pueblo of Acoma, Rosebud Sioux Tribe,Santa Clara Indian Pueblo, and Standing RockSioux Tribe; and Cohort 2: Sault Ste. Marie Tribe ofChippewa Indians, Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe,Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, and theMuscogee (Creek) Nation.  
NARF and TEDNA worked closely with NCAI and
the National Indian Education Association (NIEA)on the ESSA which was signed by PresidentObama in December 2015. The ESSA generallyrejects the overuse of standardized tests and one-size-fits-all mandates on public schools, promisesthat our education systems will prepare every childto graduate from high school ready for collegeand careers, and provides more children access tohigh-quality state preschool programs.  Withregard to Indian Education Act programs, theESSA moved Title VII to Title VI. Within Title VI, theESSA incorporates several suggestions fromTEDNA and its education partners on the formulagrant funds that typically go to Local EducationAgencies (LEAs). The ESSA provides that, shouldan LEA or Indian Tribe not apply for an IndianEducation Formula grant, an Indian Organizationor Indian Community Based Organizations cannow apply for and receive a grant so long as cer-tain conditions are met. The broad definition of"organization" will permit additional grants to beawarded to ensure that the maximum number ofIndian students is receiving the supplemental edu-cation programs and services provided for by theIndian Education Act.  
The ESSA requires State Education Agencies to
engage in timely and meaningful consultationwith tribes in the development of State plans forTitle I grants. Additionally certain LEAs with a highpercentage of Indian students must engage intimely and meaningful consultation with tribes oncertain education grant programs prior to the sub-mission of those grant plans or applications. Theseremarkable new requirements are reflective ofNative American Rights Fund     |   33THE PROMOTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS 
TEDNA's, NCAI's and NIEA's efforts to move more
K-12 public school education under co-gover-nance by states and tribes.
Civil and Cultural Rights
From the embryonic days of our Nation, Indian
tribes have long struggled against the assimilationistpolicies instituted by the United States whichsought to destroy tribal cultures by removingNative American children from their tribes andfamilies.  As an example, the federal governmentfailed to protect Indian children from misguidedand insensitive child welfare practices by statehuman service agencies, which resulted in theunwarranted removal of Indian children from theirfamilies and tribes and placement of those children in non-Indian homes. Statistical and anec-dotal information show that Indian children whogrow up in non-Indian settings become spiritualand cultural orphans. They do not entirely fit intothe culture in which they are raised and yearnthroughout their life for the family and tribal culture denied them as children. Many Native children raised in non-Native homes experienceidentity problems, drug addiction, alcoholism,incarceration and, most disturbing, suicide.
In order to address these problems facing tribes
as a result of the loss of their children, the IndianChild Welfare Act (ICWA) was enacted byCongress in 1978. It established minimum federaljurisdictional, procedural and substantive stan-dards aimed to achieve the dual purposes of pro-tecting the right of an Indian child to live with anIndian family and to stabilize and foster continuedtribal existence.  Since that time, there have beenmisinterpretations and, in some cases, outrightrefusal to follow the intent of the law by stateagencies and courts. 
State services frequently do not reach village
Alaska. Tribal courts must therefore handle mostcases involving the welfare of village children.State recognition of those tribal court proceedingsis therefore critical to assure that proceedingswhich occur in tribal court are then respected byother state agencies.  Otherwise, adoptive parentsmay not be able to participate in state-fundedassistance programs, to secure substitute birth 
certificates necessary to travel out of state, toenroll children in school, or to secure medical care.  
In January 2015, the BIA published its new revi-
sions to the Guidelin es for State Courts and
Agencies in Indian Child Custody Proceedings.The new Guidelines represent major progress inaddressing many of the problematic areas whichhave arisen since ICWA was enacted in 1978 –such as the Existing Indian Family exception,which the Guidelines expressly repudiate. In February 2015, the BIA announced it intendedto take its reforms even further by proposing, forthe first time ever, to promulgate binding federalregulations governing the implementation ofICWA.  These reforms, however, have drawn theire of ICWA opponents nationwide.  
The first response from ICWA opponents came
in May 2015, when the National Council forAdoption (NCA) filed a suit against the BIA in fed-eral district court for the Eastern District ofVirginia.  The case, 
National Council for Adoption v.
Jewell, claims that the BIA exceeded its authority in
publishing the updated 2015 Guidelines; that theGuidelines themselves violate the Constitutionalrights of Indian children and parents; and, thatprovisions of ICWA itself are unconstitutional underthe Tenth Amendment.  Days after the case wasfiled, NARF began working with other attorneysfrom the National Indian Child Welfare Association(NICWA), the National Congress of AmericanIndians (NCAI), and the Association of AmericanIndian Affairs (AAIA) to develop a response.Together, this informal working group has workedto develop a litigation defense strategy. The BIAfiled a motion to transfer venue in July 2015,which the court denied.  Plaintiffs then filed forsummary judgment, which the BIA opposed, andfiled a motion to dismiss for lack of subject-matterjurisdiction and for judgment on the pleadings.NARF representing NICWA, NCAI, and AAIA, filedan amicus brief in support of the BIA in September2015.  In September 2015, the court deniedPlaintiff’s motion for summary judgment on thegrounds that (1) Plaintiffs lacked standing to chal-lenge the Guidelines, (2) the Guidelines are not a“final agency action” within the meaning of the34   |     Native American Rights FundTHE PROMOTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS 
APA because they do not create legal rights 
and obligations, and (3) the Guidelines are non-binding interpretive rules not subject to theAdministrative Procedures Act’s notice-and-com-ment procedures.  The court later issued a fullorder dismissing the case in its entirety.  In addi-tion to the points raised in its order denyingPlaintiff’s motion for summary judgment, theCourt held:  (1) that ICWA is a law rationally relat-ed to American Indians as a political class andtherefore did not offend due process, and (2) thatthe Plaintiff foster parents did not have a cogniz-able constitutionally-protected right to raise theNative foster children in their care.  With theCourt’s order on dismissal, the case is formallyclosed at the district court level.  An appeal of thedecision is unlikely.     
In Minnesota, leading members of the Academy
of Adoption Attorneys filed a constitutional chal-lenge in state court to the Minnesota IndianFamily Preservation Act.  The case, 
Doe v. Jesson,
makes many of the same constitutional challengesto the MIFPA as the plaintiffs make in 
National
Council for Adoption v. Jewell; specifically, that the
MIFPA violates the rights of Indian children andparents by requiring them to notify the tribe of theadoptive proceeding and by allowing a tribe tointervene in the case.  Plaintiffs filed for a prelimi-nary injunction and requested expedited consider-ation of the case.  NARF immediately reached outto the attorneys for the Tribe involved, the MilleLacs Band of Ojibwe, and provided research andtechnical assistance in forming a response.  TheTribe was ultimately successful in defeating thepreliminary injunction, with the court finding theplaintiffs would suffer no irreparable harm by hav-ing to notify the Tribe on the adoptive proceedingin state court.  The Tribe and the State have sincefiled separate motions to dismiss the case.Because many states have enacted similar state-ICWAs like Minnesota’s MIFPA, NARF is working inconjunction with the attorneys from theMinnesota based firm BlueDog, Paulson & Small,P.L.L.P. in developing an amicus strategy on behalfof Minnesota’s other tribal governments.  Thecourt heard oral arguments on the motions to dis-miss in early August 2015.  NARF is awaiting adecision from the bench.Finally, in July 2015, the Goldwater Institute—a
conservative think tank located in Phoenix,Arizona—filed a lawsuit challenging the constitu-tionality of ICWA and the revised Guidelines.  Thesuit, filed in Arizona federal district court as 
A.D. v.
Washburn, seeks declaratory and injunctive relief
and specifically targets the transfer, active efforts,burdens of proof for removal and termination ofparental rights, and placement preferences provi-sions of the ICWA, as well as corresponding sec-tions in the Guidelines.  The complaint requeststhat the court declare these provisions of ICWA,and the corresponding Guidelines, unconstitution-al as beyond the authority of Congress and theDepartment of the Interior. It further requests thatthe court enjoin the defendants from ensuringenforcement of the provisions.  NARF, togetherwith NICWA, NCAI, and others immediatelybegan formulating a media and legal response tothe suit.  NARF has been coordinating with thetwo tribes with member children in the case—theNavajo Nation and the Gila River IndianCommunity.  NARF also continues to coordinatewith NICWA, NCAI, and AAIA and filed an amicusbrief in the case on behalf of the organizations. Inaddition to the federal cases listed above, NARF’sICWA Defense team is monitoring important casesin Michigan and Oklahoma.
Voting Rights
In January 2016 in Brakebill, et al. v. Jaeger, seven
Native Americans from North Dakota filed a casein federal district court in North Dakota under theVoting Rights Act and the U.S. and North DakotaConstitutions challenging North Dakota's recentlyenacted voter ID law on the grounds that it dispro-portionately burdens Native Americans and deniesqualified voters the right to vote.
The case challenges the North Dakota laws
requiring North Dakota voters to present one ofonly four qualifying IDs with a current residentialaddress printed on it in order to vote. Before enact-ment of these laws, North Dakota required a pollclerk to request an ID, but a voter without onecould still vote if the clerk vouched for their qualifi-cations or the voter signed an affidavit of identity.While other states also have voter ID requirements,Native American Rights Fund     |   35THE PROMOTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS 
North Dakota is the only state without a fail-safe
provision, such as provisional balloting that allowsa voter to produce their ID within a few days of theelection or an affidavit of identity. Additionally,North Dakota's list of acceptable IDs is much morelimited than other states, which, for example, allowU.S. passports and military IDs to be used.
Many Native Americans living on Indian reserva-
tions in North Dakota do not have IDs needed toqualify under the new state laws, such as driver'slicenses or state ID cards containing a residentialaddress. Thus, in both the primary and generalelections in 2014, many qualified North DakotaNative American voters were disenfranchisedbecause their IDs did not qualify.
The lawsuit alleges that North Dakota's new
voter ID requirements arbitrarily and unnecessarilylimit the right to vote and disproportionately bur-den Native American voters in North Dakota. Theburdens are particularly substantial for a numberof Native Americans who cannot afford to drive tothe nearest driver's license site ("DMV"). There areno DMV locations on any of the four Indian reser-vations in North Dakota, and for many NativeAmericans. Many Native Americans live below thepoverty line, and do not have dependable accessto transportation or cannot afford travel to a dis-tant DMV location.
The State moved to dismiss the case for failure
to state a claim, but the Court denied the motionin April 2016. In June 2016, the Plaintiffs movedthe Court to enjoin North Dakota's voter ID lawand to reinstate the voter identification proce-dures that were in place before the new laws.Following briefing on the motion, in August 2016,the Court granted a preliminary injunction. InSeptember 2016, the Court formally required thestate to provide an affidavit fail-safe mechanism toensure that all qualified voters will be permitted tovote in the 2016 general election. The plaintiffs arerepresented by NARF, Richard de Bodo of Morgan,Lewis & Bockius LLP, and Tom Dickson of theDickson Law Office.  
In January 2015, NARF proposed an ambitious
new project: gathering voting rights advocates,lawyers, experts, and tribal advocates into one
room to discuss current problems with voting inIndian Country and begin to develop solutions tothese problems.  The meeting was held in May2015 in Washington, DC.  This meeting was con-ceived and planned specifically to address theshifting and increasingly complex issues sur-rounding American Indian/Alaska Native (AIAN)voting. The specific goals of the meeting were:(1) Bring together in one room lawyers, advo-cates, and grassroots organizers involved in liti-gating voting rights cases in Indian Country andothers who have information to share about cur-rent problems in Indian Country; (2) Conduct aseries of work sessions in which the participantsdiscuss common issues, brainstorm approaches tothese challenges, and generate a strategy and litigation plan to address the highest priority votingrights issues in Indian Country; (3) Allocate orassign issues to specific people or organizationsand form collaborative partnerships to executeour strategy and litigation plan; and (4) Have anorganized and prepared litigation strategy for the2016 election cycle.  
In addition, in the wake of the U.S. Supreme
Court’s decision in 
Shelby County, numerous state
legislatures have passed new election laws thatimpose significant barriers to AIAN voters.Previously, individuals and organizations workingon AIAN voting rights issues did so independent ofone another, with no coordinated strategy in placeto address voting rights issues in Indian Country.
36   |     Native American Rights FundTHE PROMOTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS 
This work was generally (but not exclusively) reac-
tive – in response to an immediate threat – ratherthan proactive or planned in advance of a specificelection. That is what this project was meant tochange.   
With the completion of this initial meeting, the
participants developed an ongoing project calledthe Native American Voting Rights Coalition(NAVRC).  It has met on a monthly basis for thelast 18 months and developed a strategic plan thatset out short and long term goals and priorities forthe 2016 election, as well as the 2018 and 2020election cycles. It met in-person at NCAI in June2016 and again in July 2016 in Washington, D.C.to plan how it will address the many electionproblems throughout by Indian Country.  
With the results of the 2016 election, and
mounting evidence of voter suppression and violations of voting rights laws, NARF has pivotedand accelerated the work of the NAVRC.  Thisincludes: (1) adding new partners to the Coalition;(2) seeking out a permanent home for theCoalition in a large civil rights organization, toincrease efficiencies and maximize ability to raisefunds; (3) setting out a plan for redistricting workrelated to the 2020 census; (4) placing one of ourmembers on the National Advisory Committee forthe Census to ensure AIAN communities arecounted properly; (5) amending our strategic planto account for violations observed in the 2016elections; and (6) overseeing the largest survey ofAIAN voters ever conducted to discover the extentof voting problems in Indian Country.
International Recognition of
Indigenous Peoples
The development of international laws and stan-
dards to protect the rights of indigenous peoplesgreatly benefits Native American peoples.  NARFand the National Congress of American Indians(NCAI) entered into an attorney-client relationshipover a decade ago for the purpose of working in theinternational arena to protect indigenous rights. 
In September 2007, the United Nations General
Assembly overwhelmingly adopted the Declarationon the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (Declaration).
The vote was 143 in favor, 4 opposed, and 11abstaining. The votes in opposition were Canada,Australia, New Zealand, and the United States.NARF has represented the National Congress ofAmerican Indians (NCAI) in this matter since 1999.The Declaration recognizes that IndigenousPeoples have important collective human rights ina multitude of areas, including self-determination,spirituality, cultural and linguistic heritage, lands,territories and natural resources. It sets minimumstandards for the treatment of Indigenous Peoplesand can serve as the basis for the development ofcustomary international law.  
In 2009 Australia and New Zealand reversed
their positions and now support the Declaration.Canada endorsed the Declaration in November2010 and in December 2010, President Obamamade the historic announcement that the U.S.was reversing its negative vote and now endorsesthe Declaration.  
Subsequently, NARF and NCAI coordinated with
Tribes and other indigenous organizations in iden-tifying key themes to be addressed by the UN atthe High Level Plenary Meeting of the GeneralAssembly, to be known as the World Conferenceon Indigenous People (WCIP).  NARF and NCAIparticipated in Indigenous preparatory meetingswhich produced an outcome document used byIndigenous Peoples to lobby states in advance ofthe WCIP.  The outcome document as adopted bythe General Assembly addresses all of the elementsproposed by NARF, NCAI, and the other indige-nous organizations and tribal governments:Establishment of a body at the UN to monitorimplementation of The Declaration within the UNand by States; Creation of a permanent, dignifiedand appropriate status for Indigenous Peoples atthe UN; Violence against indigenous women; and,Sacred Sites.  
NARF attended an Expert Workshop in Geneva
in April 2016 on the review of the mandate of theExpert Mechanism on the Rights of IndigenousPeoples (EMRIP), as well as other indigenousmechanisms, with the goal of strengthening themandate to enable it to review states’ complianceNative American Rights Fund     |   37THE PROMOTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS 
with the Declaration.  NARF attended the Ninth
Session of EMRIP in Geneva in July 2016, and gavestatements on indigenous participation in the UNsystem and on the improvement of the EMRIPmandate.  NARF attended the 33rd Session of theHuman Rights Council in September 2016, duringwhich a series of informal consultations on theEMRIP mandate took place, as well as meetingswith various state delegations. Ultimately, theCouncil passed by consensus a resolution expand-ing and improving the mandate of the EMRIP byadding members, additional meeting days, andproviding for more autonomy and responsivenessfor the mechanism.  
A series of consultations on the issue of
enhanced participation of indigenous institutionsat the UN is ongoing.  Until now, indigenous peo-ples have had to appear in most UN bodies asnon-governmental organizations (NGOs), which isprecisely what they are not. A meeting ofIndigenous Peoples’ representatives from aroundthe world, including one from NCAI, met inNovember 2016 among themselves and then withindigenous advisers appointed by the President ofthe General Council to discuss areas of consensus.Informal consultations with member states beganin December 2016 and will continue into May2017 at the Permanent Forum.  
The Organization of American States (OAS) has
been working on an American Declaration on theRights of Indigenous Peoples for over twenty-fiveyears.  NARF also has been representing NCAI onthis matter.  Nineteen rounds of negotiations wereheld between member states and IndigenousPeoples, and in a final session of negotiations thatwas held in May 2016, in Washington, D.C., anagreement on a Declaration was reached.  TheGeneral Assembly of the OAS, by consensus,approved the American Declaration on the Rightsof Indigenous Peoples in June 2016, in theDominican Republic.  This Declaration marks amajor victory for indigenous peoples. TheAmerican Declaration goes beyond the UNDRIP inseveral respects including, among others, treaties,the rights of children, and the rights of peoples involuntary isolation.  The American Declaration isimportant because of these and other provisions inparticular and in general because it will be used by
the Inter-American Court on Human Rights andthe Inter-American Commission on Human Rightsto build on an existing body of decisions support-ing indigenous rights.  Three states, the UnitedStates, Canada, and Colombia made statements inregard to the Declaration and requested theirinclusion as footnotes to the Declaration. TheUnited States commented it had been a persistentobjector to the text and could not be bound by it,despite the fact many of the provisions are identi-cal, or nearly so, to the UN Declaration.  Canadastated it had not participated in recent years andwas therefore not able to take a position at thistime. Colombia stated that it was breaking con-sensus as to several provisions of the text, includ-ing some it approved in the UN Declaration andissued various interpretational notes as to otherprovisions.  
NARF recently has agreed to represent NCAI in
the ongoing negotiations for an InternationalTreaty to protect various intellectual property,including Traditional Knowledge, GeneticResources and Traditional Cultural Expressions.The United States has been participating in theseTreaty negotiations at the World IntellectualProperty Organization (WIPO) since 2000, andsince 2016 there has been draft text of the poten-tial treaties. The United States Department ofState has delegated authority to the U.S. Patentand Trademark Office (PTO) for these negotia-tions, but neither the PTO, the State Department,nor any federal agency has ever consulted withAmerican Indian and Alaska Native Tribes regardingthe negotiations. At its 2016 Annual Convention,NCAI passed a resolution calling for such consul-tation. It is expected that the PTO will conduct lis-tening sessions with Tribes on this matter in 2017.Haa daséiguxh sitee héen
water is life - TlingitNative American Rights Fund     |   39THE ACCOUNTABILITY OF GOVERNMENTS 
Contained within the unique trust relationship
between the United States and Indian nations isthe inherent duty for all levels of government torecognize and responsibly enforce the many lawsand regulations applicable to Indian peoples andthe trust duties to which those give rise.  Becausesuch laws impact virtually every aspect of triballife, NARF maintains its involvement in the legalmatters pertaining to 
accountability of governments
to Native Americans.  
In Pembina Chippewa v. United States, NARF rep-
resents the Turtle Mountain  Chippewa, ChippewaCree, White Earth  Band of Minnesota Chippewa,and  Little  Shell  Chippewa  Tribes  in  this  caseagainst  the  federal  government  for misaccountingand mismanagement of their tribal trust fund, thePembina Judgment Fund (PJF), since the inceptionof the fund in 1964. In 2006 the Tribes defeatedthe United States' motion to have the case dis-missed. Since August 2007, the parties have beentrying to resolve the Tribes' claims primarilythrough alternative dispute resolution proceed-ings before a Settlement Judge of the Court ofFederal Claims. In August 2009, the partiesreached agreement at least for settlement negoti-ations purposes on the population of "baseline"(non-investment) transactions in the PJF. In July2015 the parties reached agreement on a mone-tary amount for a potential settlement of thePlaintiffs' claims in this case. Since that time theparties have been discussing numerous non -mon-etary components of a potential settlement, andpreparing various documents.  
In 
Nez Perce Tribe, et al. v. Jewell, NARF represent-
ed forty plaintiffs:  the Nez Perce Tribe; theMescalero Apache Tribe; the Tule River IndianTribe; the Hualapai Tribe; the Klamath Tribes; theYurok Tribe; the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma; theSac and Fox Nation; the Santee Sioux Tribe ofNebraska; the Tlingit and Haida Indian Tribes ofAlaska; Aleut Community of St. Paul Island; BadRiver Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians;Bois Forte Band of Chippewa; Cachil Dehe Band ofWintun Indians of Colusa Rancheria; ConfederatedSalish & Kootenai Tribes; Confederated Tribes ofSiletz Indians; Grand Traverse Band of Ottawa andChippewa Indians; Kaibab Paiute Tribe; KenaitzeIndian Tribe; Kickapoo Tribe in Kansas; Lac Courte
Oreilles Band of Ojibwe; Lac Du Flambeau Band ofLake Superior Chippewa; Leech Lake Band ofOjibwe; Minnesota Chippewa Tribe; Native Villageof Atka; Nooksack Indian Tribe; Prairie IslandIndian Community; Pueblo of Zia; QawalanginTribe; Rincon Luiseno Band of Indians; SamishIndian Nation; San Luis Rey Indian WaterAuthority; Sault Ste. Marie Tribe of Chippewa;Shoalwater Bay Tribe; Skokomish Tribe; Spirit LakeDakotah Nation; Spokane Tribe; Summit LakePaiute Tribe; Tulalip Tribes; and, Ute Mountain UteTribe, in this action filed in the federal district courtfor the District of Columbia in December 2006seeking full and accurate accountings of their trustfunds. Such accountings never have been provid-ed by the federal government which is the trusteefor the funds.  
Pending before the Court is the government's
motion to dismiss the action for lack of jurisdic-tion, which the Tribes have opposed. In 2009 theTribes represented by NARF in this case wereamong the over 90 Tribes who wrote PresidentObama regarding his campaign promise toresolve equitably all Indian trust fund mismanage-ment litigation against the federal government, bybeginning settlement negotiations in this case andother tribal trust cases.  In 2010 and 2011, NARF“We, our people, have been here before,
and as before we will stand for what isright and good. They will come for us andothers and we will not turn our backs onthose who need our protection. We willnever forget our sacred responsibility toall as we have been taught by our Creatorand as we have promised our ancestors.”Abby Abinanti, Yurok Tribe40   |     Native American Rights FundTHE ACCOUNTABILITY OF GOVERNMENTS 
attorneys along with the attorneys for dozens of
other Tribes litigating trust accounting and mis-management claims coordinated and attendedmany meetings hosted by the President'sappointees in Washington, D.C. in preparation forsettlement negotiations.  In December 2011,active claims settlement negotiations on a tribe-by-tribe basis began for many Tribes. To date, allof NARF’s client Tribes in this case have reachedsettlement agreements or other resolution of theirclaims with the United States.  The settlementagreements have been filed in, and approved by,the Court.  Per the settlement agreements, oncethe Tribes have received their settlement pay-ments their claims are dismissed with prejudice.  
In 
Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate, et al. v. Jewell, NARF
represents 10 tribes – Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate;Quinault Indian Nation; White Earth ChippewaNation; Oklahoma Kickapoo Tribe; ComancheNation; Penobscot Indian Nation; Pueblo ofAcoma; Seminole Tribe of Florida; Southern UteIndian Tribe; and Confederated Tribes of theUmatilla Indian Reservation – in this case filed inApril 2013 in the federal district court for theDistrict of Columbia seeking historical accountingsof the Tribes' trust accounts, funds, and resources.In November 2013 the government filed a Motionto Dismiss the case for lack of jurisdiction, but inSeptember 2015, the Court denied the Motion. In
October 2015, the parties' joint request that theCourt stay further active litigation in this casewhile the parties engage in settlement negotia-tions of the Tribes' trust accounting and trust fundand asset mismanagement claims was approved.The parties then proceeded with their settlementnegotiations pursuant to court-approved jointstipulations of confidentiality. By September 2016all 10 plaintiff Tribes had reached settlementagreements in principle with the United Statesregarding their claims. By October 2016 all of thesettlement agreements had been filed with andapproved by the Court. By December 2016, all ofthe Tribes had received their settlement payments,and their claims had been dismissed with preju-dice. This case has now concluded.  
In January 2014, the Muscogee Creek Nation
retained NARF to represent it in its pending actionin the federal district court for the District ofColumbia for an historical accounting of its trustfunds and assets.  NARF and experts retained byNARF reviewed the Nation’s trust account dataprovided by the government and assisted theNation in its settlement negotiations with the gov-ernment.  In September 2015 the parties reachedagreement on a settlement in principle of theTribe’s claims in this case.  In August 2016, thefinal settlement agreement was filed with andapproved by the Court.  The Joint Stipulation ofDismissal was filed in September 2016 and isawaiting approval by the Court.  
In April 2015 in 
Intertribal Council of Arizona v.
United States, NARF filed on ITCA’s behalf a breach
of trust case against the United States in the U.S.Court of Federal Claims (CFC) seeking damagesfor mismanagement of the Arizona Intertribal TrustFund (AITF).  The AITF was established byCongress in 1988 to compensate Arizona tribes forthe closure of the Phoenix Indian School whichwas an off-reservation boarding school operatedby the Bureau of Indian Affairs since 1891.  Theschool’s closure allowed the Department of theInterior to exchange the land on which the schoolhad been located for privately owned lands of theBarron Collier Company in Florida that wouldbecome part of a national wildlife refuge. The
Native American Rights Fund     |   41THE ACCOUNTABILITY OF GOVERNMENTS 
Phoenix lands were more valuable than the Florida
lands and Congress approved the land exchangeonly if the difference in value of the propertieswent to the AITF and a trust fund for the NavajoNation.  Collier has paid some, but not all, of theproperty value differential and has given theUnited States notice that he will no longer makethe AITF or Navajo Nation trust fund payments.The lawsuit seeks to hold the United States liablefor the remaining payments into the AITF.  In July2015 the United States filed a Motion to Dismissthis case, which ITCA opposed.  Following briefingand an oral argument on the Motion to Dismiss, inFebruary 2016 the court granted in part anddenied in part the motion.  In May 2016 the par-ties to this case – ITCA and the United States –attempted a voluntary global mediation effort oftheir claims along with claims between the UnitedStates and Collier, but the mediation was not suc-cessful, and the case was returned to active litiga-tion.  However, in October 2016 the United Statesand Collier announced that they had reached asettlement in principle of their claims against eachother.  It is possible this could lead to a successfulnegotiated settlement of ITCA’s claims against theUnited States.  Nevertheless, in the event that theclaims must be litigated, ITCA filed a First AmendedComplaint in December 2016. The United Stateshas 60 days to respond to the AmendedComplaint.  
The Klamath Tribe has retained NARF to seek
repeal of the Distribution of Judgment Fund Act(25 U.S.C. Sec 565). Section 565 was adopted aspart of the legislation that terminated the Tribes'government-to-government relationship in 1954.That relationship was restored in 1986, but theremnant legislation contained in section 565 wasnot repealed. The Distribution Act requires distri-bution of judgments from the United StatesTreasury to descendants of those who appear onthe final roll compiled pursuant to the TerminationAct. That would include distribution of tribal fundsto a significant number of non-Indians and indi-viduals who are not enrolled members of theTribes. Repeal would result in funds deposited inthe Treasury from judgments against the UnitedStates being distributed pursuant the Distributionof Judgment Funds Act for all Tribes. Discussions
with congressional staff on this matter are ongoing.  
In 
Center for Biological Diversity, et al. v. U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, et al., NARF represents the
Santa Ynez Band of Chumash Indians in a casechallenging the issuance of a Clean Water ActSection 404 permit.  The proposed Newhall RanchProject area encompasses 12,000 acres along 5.5linear miles of the Santa Clara River and calls forthe construction of nearly 21,000 homes onapproximately 2,550 acres. The Project Area is alsothe ancestral homeland of Chumash and includesat least two significant archaeological sites as wellas a number of ancient burials. The Corps issued afinal Clean Water Act Section 404 permit toNewhall in October 2012.  The underlying suit followed.  The Tribe joined this case in the SecondAmended Complaint specifically to protect theirright to government-to-government consultationunder the Administrative Procedure Act and theNational Historic Preservation Act. The Tribe’sclaim is simple: the Corps never even contacted,much less formally consulted, the Tribe about theNewhall Project.  Accordingly, the Corps deniedthe Tribe the opportunity to participate in theidentification of any historic properties, determineany adverse effects, or help resolve or mitigatethose adverse effects even though the Project is intheir traditional ancestral territory.  
The NHPA and its detailed implementing regula-
tions—as well as the Corps’ own policies andinstructions—required the Corps to consult earlyin the process and directly with the Tribe’s leader-ship.  The Corps failed to follow the statutory andregulatory mandates with respect to the Tribe.Thus the Section 404 permit the Corp’s granted toNewhall is in violation of the NHPA and APA. TheTribe is requesting revocation of the permit unlessand until the Corps complies with the NHPA.Briefing has been completed at the Ninth CircuitCourt of Appeals and oral argument is scheduledin Pasadena, California in February 2017.   tó éí ííná áté
water is life - DinéNative American Rights Fund     |   43THE DEVELOPMENT OF INDIAN LAW 
The coordinated development of Indian law and
educating the public about Indian rights, laws andissues is essential for the continued protection ofIndian rights.  This primarily involves establishingfavorable court precedents, distributing informa-tion and law materials, encouraging and fosteringIndian legal education, and forming alliances withIndian law practitioners and other Indian organiza-tions. NARF has three ongoing projects which areaimed at achieving this goal: the IndigenousPeacemaking Initiative; the National Indian LawLibrary; and the Indian Law Support Center.
Indigenous Peacemaking
Initiative 
The mission of the Indigenous Peacemaking
Initiative (IPI) is to promote and support Nativepeoples in restoring sustainable peacemakingpractices.  This project provides NARF with anopportunity to support traditional peacemakingand community building practices as an extensionof Indian law and sovereign rights.  The project isguided by an Advisory Committee consisting oftraditional peacemaking experts and practitioners.Peacemaking is a community-directed process todevelop consensus on a conflict resolution planthat addresses the concerns of all interested parties. The peacemaking process uses traditionalrituals such as the group circle, and Clan structures,to involve the parties to a conflict, their supporters,elders and interested community members.Within the circle, people can speak from the heartin a shared search for understanding of the con-flict, and together identify the steps necessary toassist in healing all affected parties and to preventfuture occurrences and conflicts.
The IPI program helped facilitate the planning of
a two-site introductory peacemaking training forOglala Sioux Tribe community members, attendeda meeting and provided an expert plenary speakerat a University of Washington program that trainsjudges from state and tribal courts.  IPI also contin-ued discussions with a judge from a state court inSouthern California who is interested in imple-menting peacemaking to help with a dependencyand delinquency docket that includes a high num-ber of Native children.The collaborative efforts with the National
American Indian Court Judges Association and theColumbia and New Mexico Schools of Law continue. The collaborators recently provided a
training workshop in St. Paul, Minnesota, in con-junction with Tekamuk Inc.  (the training businesswholly owned and operated by the Mesa GrandeBand of Mission Indians). The St. Paul training wasattended primarily by members of the variousMinnesota Chippewa Tribes working in the TwinCities or at their home reservations, as well as participants from tribes in Arizona, Idaho, SouthDakota, and Michigan.  
The collaborative group added the Chief Justice
from the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians anda Michigan State Court judge to the faculty, andprovided an innovative three-day training inpeacemaking and integrating culture, sponsoredby the Pokagon Band of Pottawatomi Tribal Courtin Dowagiac, Michigan, as requested by thatTribe’s Court.  IPI has also been asked to providepeacemaking training travel to the AmericanIndian and Alaska Native program as well as otherdepartments.  The dates have been set for twodays of trainings in this effort, with travel and feespaid.  An existing relationship with StanfordUniversity is already serving as a base for develop-ment of other potentially impactful relationships.For example, the Design School and GraduateSchool of Business are eagerly awaiting meetingswith the IPI to discuss collaboration and applica-tion of their best practices technology to curricu-lum development and delivery in peacemaking.  
“Like the miner’s canary, the Indian
marks the shift from fresh air to poisongas in our political atmosphere, and ourtreatment of the Indian…marks the riseand fall in our democratic faith.”Felix Cohen (1953)44   |     Native American Rights FundTHE DEVELOPMENT OF INDIAN LAW 
NARF’s National Indian Law Library staff have
developed a web page and continue integratingthat page with the electronic versions of resourceson Peacemaking in the NILL catalog.  The web-page will serve as a basis for outreach and provideeasy access to resources gathered for the project.The project also continues to grow and strength-en its networks, as part of raising awareness andalso recruiting additional expert resources. Theproject has also been working closely withColumbia Law School to complement each other’swork, and the Colorado University Indian LawClinic has placed an intern to help in developmentand analysis of the catalog of resources for theproject.  
The National Indian Law Library 
The National Indian Law Library (NILL) is the
only law library in the United States devoted toIndian law. The library serves both NARF andmembers of the public. Since it was started as aNARF project in 1972, NILL has collected nearly9,000 resource materials that relate to federalIndian and tribal law. The Library’s holdingsinclude the largest collection of tribal codes, ordi-
nances and constitutions; legal pleadings frommajor Indian cases; and often hard to find reportsand historical legal information. In addition tomaking its catalog and extensive collection avail-able to the public, NILL provides reference andresearch assistance relating to Indian law and triballaw and its professional staff answers over 2,000questions each year. In addition, the Library hascreated and maintains a huge web site that pro-vides access to thousands of full-text sources tohelp the researcher.  NARF’s website has recordedover 336,000 visits each year. See www.narf/org/nill/index.htm. 
The Access to Tribal Law Project continues to be
an invaluable resource for researchers and practi-tioners in tribal law.  In the last fiscal year, wereceived updates to 92 Constitutions or Codesfrom 43 tribes.  NILL has developed good relation-ships with a number of tribes who regularly sendupdates to their laws as changes are made and weare working to develop relationships with otherswho have expressed interest.  NILL is also workingto move tribal law pages from our old tribal lawindex to our new Tribal Law Gateway.  NILL hasreceived several enthusiastic compliments on thenew platform, with researchers saying it is helpfuland easy to navigate.  
The website for the Indigenous Peacemaking
Initiative has been launched as NILL worked close-ly with IPI attorneys, the IPI Advisory Committeeand other NARF staff members to create the newIPI website, which is available at http://narf.org/peacemaking. The website providesresources to help visitors learn about peacemakingas well as tools to help practitioners implementpeacemaking in their community.  Many of theresources highlighted are available online andNILL has obtained permission to post someresources that were not already available online.
NILL has partnered with the University of
Colorado Indian Law Clinic on a project to add aTribal Court Opinion Bulletin to the eight Indianlaw bulletins updated weekly by the library.  IndianLaw Clinic students are working with NILL toestablish selection criteria and methods of 
Native American Rights Fund     |   45THE DEVELOPMENT OF INDIAN LAW 
obtaining copies of appropriate opinions to be
published on the NILL bulletin website.  This part-nership is expected to continue for many years.
In providing access to law review articles on
Indian law, each week when the Indian LawBulletin is published, NILL indexes the law reviewarticles from the bulletin and puts them in ouronline catalog. By including a table of contentsand subject headings for each article, we have created a searchable database of articles on Indianlaw for our patrons.  Whenever an article is avail-able for free online, we add a link, making it easyfor researchers to access the article quickly.  In theevent an article is not available online, patrons cancontact the library to request a copy of the article.Because NILL has been indexing articles for over10 years, our online catalog is a useful place tostart research on Indian law for attorneys and academics alike.
In providing for a Tribal Nation Pronunciation
Guide, NILL is actively seeking funds as well as volunteers and/or interns to help develop andpublish an audio index of tribal nations.  Webelieve this unique guide will be a valuableresource for those who need to communicate withtribes. The guide will allow people to address atribe in a respectful manner.  This project wouldinvolve developing and implementing a plan to:1) find authoritative pronunciations for eachIndian nation’s name; 2) lease/purchase properrecording equipment/technology to capture thecorrect pronunciation of each Indian nation’sname for publication on the Internet; and 3) capture and publish the recorded names on theNational Indian Law Library website.  
Indian Law Support Center
NARF continues to perform Indian Law Support
Center duties by sending regular electronic mailouts nationwide to the 24 Indian Legal Services(ILS) programs, hosting a national listserv, han-dling requests for assistance, and working with ILSprograms to secure a more stable funding basefrom Congress.  The Indian Tribal Justice and LegalAssistance Act of 2000 authorizes the U.S.Department of Justice to provide supplementalfunding to Indian legal services programs for their
representation of Indian people and Tribes whichfall below federal poverty guidelines.  After fund-ing in 2003, 2004, and 2005, funding in 2006 -2009 was unsuccessful.  However, funding wasreceived in FYs 2010-2015 and made available toNARF for the ILS programs through the Bureau ofJustice Assistance (BJA) in the Department ofJustice. BJA will award $1.2 million in 2016 supple-mental funding for ILS, and NARF is in the midst ofpreparing all of the grant documents for the ILSprograms.
Other Activities
In addition to its major projects, NARF contin-
ued its participation in numerous conferences andmeetings of Indian and non-Indian organizationsin order to share its knowledge and expertise inIndian law.  During the past fiscal year, NARF attor-neys and staff served in formal or informal speak-ing and leadership capacities at numerous Indianand Indian-related conferences and meetings suchas the National Congress of American IndiansExecutive Council, Midyear and AnnualConventions and the Federal Bar Association’sIndian Law Conference.  NARF remains firmlycommitted to continuing its effort to share thelegal expertise which it possesses with thesegroups and individuals working in support ofIndian rights and to foster the recognition ofIndian rights in mainstream society.46   |     Native American Rights FundFY 2016 FINANCIAL REPORT
Based on our audited financial statements for the fiscal year
ending September 30, 2016, the Native American Rights Fundreports unrestricted revenues of $11,331,017 against total
expenditures of $10,770,637.  Total revenue and net assets at
the end of the year came to $13,343,983 and $21,213,252,respectively.  Due to presentation requirements of the auditedfinancial statements in terms of recognizing the timing of cer-tain revenues and expenses, they do not reflect the fact thatbased on NARF’s internal reporting, revenue exceeded expens-es and other cash outlays resulting in an increase of $447,469to NARF’s reserve fund.  When compared to fiscal year 2015:The increase in Public Contributions is due to receiving approx-imately $210,000 more in bequests (this area can vary widelyfrom one year to the next) and taking on more ambitious directmail campaigns.  Also, included are additional contributions for our 45th anniversary events. The increase in Tribal
Contributions is mostly due to receiving sizable, one-time, con-tributions from two of our tribal trust funds clients. FederalAwards relate to our Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA) contracts(the majority of which is also included in expenses since it ispaid-out to sub-recipients) and, although we continue to beawarded new contracts, the amounts vary from year to year.We continue to receive new Foundation Grants that are restricted to our work in Alaska.  The decrease in Legal Fees ismostly due to a large settlement received in fiscal year 2015.Along with the overall investment markets, NARF’s investmentsperformed well in fiscal year 2016.
Unrestricted Revenue and Expense comparisons between 
fiscal year 2016 and fiscal year 2015 are shown below.
Public Contributions
Tribal Contributions
Federal Awards 
Foundation Grants
Return on Investments
Other
TOTALS         $  2,064,991
       2,496,058       1,011,476       2,067,375
   2,028,322
       1,604,562
            58,233
  $ 11,331,017            18.2%
    22.0%      8.9%
 18.3% 17.9% 14.2%
 0.5%
    100%         $  1,701,434
       1,004,250       1,330,607
      1,707,184      7,065,520
       (443,858)
            16,222
   $12,381,359             13.7%
     8.1%   10.8%   13.8%   57.1%
    -3.6%
     0.1%
    100%dollars percents
2016
dollars percents2015
Legal Fees
dollars percents2016
dollars percents2015
Litigation and Client Services
National Indian Law Library     Total Program Services
Management and GeneralFund Raising     Total Support Services
                         TOTALS                      $ 7,749,780
           362,854
        8,112,634
           861,057
        1,796,946
        2,658,003
   $ 10,770,637    71.9%
   3.4%
 75.3%
 8.0%
 16.7%
  24.7%
 100%            71.5%
     3.6%
   75.1%
     7.9%
 17.0%
 24.9%
 100%                 $ 7,160,564
          358,675
       7,519,239
          789,122
       1,704,661
       2,493,783
  $ 10,013,022UNRESTRICTED SUPPORT AND REVENUE COMPARISON
EXPENSE COMPARISON
Note: This summary of financial information has been extracted from NARF’s audited financial statements which received an unmod-
ified opinion by the accounting firm of BKD, LLP.  Complete audited financials are available, upon request, through our Boulder  office
or at www.narf.org.Native American Rights Fund     |   47NARF Acknowledgment of Contributions: Fiscal Year 2016
We thank each and every one of our supporters
for their commitment to the goals of NARF.  NARF’ssuccess could not have been achieved without thegenerosity of our many donors throughout thenation. NARF receives contributions from foundations,corporations, tribes and Native organizations,
bequests and trusts, benefactors, private donations,and in-kind contributions.  We gratefully acknowl-edge these gifts received for fiscal year 2016(October 1, 2015 through September 30, 2016).
Tribes and Native
Organizations
Agua Caliente Band
of Cahuilla Indians
Ak-Chin Indian
Community
Asa‘carsarmiut Tribal
Council
Chickasaw NationConfederated Tribes
of Siletz Indians 
Cow Creek Band of
Umpqua Indians
Klamath TribeMiccosukee Tribe of
Indians
Mohegan Indian
Tribe of Connecticut
Muckleshoot Indian
Tribe
Muscogee Creek
Nation 
National Indian
Gaming Association
Nome Eskimo
Community
Nottawaseppi Huron
Band of thePotawatomi
Omaha Tribe of
Nebraska
Organized Village of
Saxman IRAPechanga Band of
Luiseno Indians
Poarch Band of
Creek Indians
Pueblo of IsletaRosebud Sioux Tribe Sac and Fox Nation
of Oklahoma
San Manuel Band of
Mission Indians
San Pasqual Band of
Mission Indians
Seminole Tribe of
Florida
Seven Cedars
Casino/JamestownS'Klallam
Shakopee
Mdewakanton SiouxCommunity
Stebbins Native
Corporation
Suquamish Indian
Tribe of PortMadison
Tanana Chiefs
Conference Inc.
Tulalip TribesWyandotte Nation Yavapai-Prescott
Indian Tribe
Yocha Dehe Wintun
Nation Foundations,
Corporations andLaw Firms
AEG Live, LLCAgua Fund Inc.Alaska Conservation
Foundation
AmeripriseGiving Back GroupBelgarde EnterprisesBarbara McDowell &
Gerald HartmanFoundation
Casey Family
Programs
Chorus FoundationComcast
Corporation
Comcast FoundationCrossconcepts
Construction LLC
Ford FoundationEdward & Verna
Gerbic FamilyFoundation
Hanuman
Foundation
Lannan FoundationMALDEFGordon and Betty
Moore Foundation
Native American
BankNBCUniversal
NEO PhilanthropyOak FoundationOceans 5RiverStyx FoundationSawaya Law FirmThe Arches
Foundation
The Bay and Paul
Foundations
The Pew Charitable
Trust
Tiffany and Co.
Foundation
True North
Companies
True North
Foundation
Tzo’-Nah FundW.K. Kellogg
Foundation
Corporate
Matching Gifts –
Corporations nation-wide make matchinggifts to NARF onbehalf of theiremployees.  Pleasecheck with yourhuman resourcesdepartment to partic-ipate in this program.
Adobe Matching GiftAmerican Express
Matching GiftProgram
Bank of American
Foundation
GE Foundation
Morgan StanleyPfizer FoundationP.S.E.G. FoundationS & P GlobalVerizon FoundationWells Fargo
Community
Xcel EnergyLiving Waters
Endowment
Elwood H. Brotzman
Memorial Fund
Jerome Davis Living
Waters EndowmentFund
Kathleen & Ruth
Dooley Family Fund
Susan K. Griffiths
Memorial Fund
The Robert & Joy
Hanson LelandEndowment
Frank J. McCormick
Family Fund
Marvin W. Pourier, Jr.
& Donna M. DeansMemorial Fund48   |     Native American Rights FundNARF Acknowledgment of Contributions: Fiscal Year 2016
Mary Lou Mosca-
Ragona MemorialFund
Ernest L. Schusky
Endowment
The Snoqualmie
Indian Tribe
Helen & Sidney
Ungar MemorialEndowment Fund
Dan & Beth
Whittemore
Bequests and
Trusts
Lynne AltwergerRa Aman EstateSandra Carroll BergerRobert Borsch TrustCarter CastleJane Church TrustDiane DelpDaniel EthCarolyn Ferriday
Fund
William Guimond
Trust
Ethel HuebnerDorothy Huelsman
Trust
Ruth Emily LeimanDonald McKinleyMary MeyerJanet R. MooneMildred RiedellRonnie Lee RyanDoris StillJohn VaupelRichard WhitePeta Uha – Peta
Uha is an exclusivemembership pro-gram for donorsmaking substantialannual commitmentsto NARF.
Peta Uha
Pipestone
Barbara McDowellLucille EchohawkPeter GerbicPaul & Eileen LeFortDon LichtyMr. & Mrs. Dan
Whittemore
Peta Uha
Turquoise
Kent BachAnna BradberryFrederick & Judith
Buechner
Lyle A. DethlefsenShannon FinleyAnn E. LarimoreJohn J. SparacioJohn & Carson Taylor
Peta Uha Granite
Rich Bienstock &
Carla Fredericks
Jane A. BrownKathryn GreisCollier HandsMarion McCollom
Hampton
Helene
PresskreischerBrenda Tomaras
Mary Lee Zerby
Peta Uha Flint
Kamal AhmedJerald H. AndersonRick AveryValerie M. BarthBarbara J. BastleDr. & Dr. David BoydAlice L. BronerMr. & Mrs. Michael
Caputo
Ruth O. CarrollElizabeth L. CelioMaxene ChoiRichard W. CobbBruce CobernKeith CowanKaren J. CrookEric DahlstromChristina DavidsonJ. Barry DentonJoyce E. DobbertCrystal EchohawkDaren & Amy EilertAnita FinedayHerbert D. FloydAndrew & Audrey
Franklin
Daniel FrenchPamela GordonMarlene GrzywinskiAmy HallGarnet W. HammondLois KatnickRichard K. KnutsonRicki and Scott
Kresan
Judith KyshMerry LanceYvonne T. LeMelleNeeta LindMelody MacKenzieDr. & Mrs. Alex
Malaspina
John & Susanne
Manley
Otwin MareninNancy McInnesBarbara J. MeislinGerrish MillikenCraig MinowaCassandra S. NaylorClaude & Noelle
Poncelet
Edith S. QuevedoArthur & Maria
Richmond
Faith RoesselMitch RogersRobert RyanErnest & Mary Sue
Schusky
Peter L. SheldonLynda SimmonsMary Gabrielle
Sprague
Kelley StanleyElizabeth SteeleRick TallmanTom TremaineMargaret S. VerbleWilliam & Janet
WantlandPeta Uha Obsidian
Leo AcostaDabney AltafferGrace B. AndersonCarol AstDean Scott AttawayYalcin AyasliWard J. BaumanByron T. BeasleyDavid and Barbara
Boerner
Nanette M. BohrenMitchel BollagNancy BonvillainSarane BoocockCathryn Booth-
LaForce
William and Elsa
Boyce
Kristin BriggsSusan Okie BushLili ByersDuncan CampbellCheryl CappsCharles W. CarllsonRon CarterCasey CarterJoseph R. CazaresJon M. ChaseMrs. George
Cloward
Carol CobbSamuel T. CookCharles CornwellAnne DeMuthJon DorschnerSusan E. EichhornNative American Rights Fund     |   49NARF Acknowledgment of Contributions: Fiscal Year 2016
Marcella M. Elkins
Peter EmberRobert EndresMary-Anne EnochAlan EssnerCarol EsterkinJohn and Barbara
Everett
Cody FairbanksFalcon Tracing Co.Lenore FeigenbaumLeonora FlorendoSheila FortuneSimone FreemanL. J. FurnstahlJosephine GardinerEric and Jeff
Ginsburg
Chris GoodwinJan GriesingerMartin GriffithHeide GulgowskiFrances HagemannHagop J. HaladjianTerence HancockMark HandschyTerrie HarrisDavid HartsoughRobert HenryRobert HenryRaymond C.
Honeywell
Eric HymanMark A. KadzielskiCarolyn KipperHarvey KirkValerie KnettleIngrid LeBlanc
Eva LeeJames and Cynthia
Leonard
Lester Poretsky
Family
Sheila LoftusRobert LovemanStewart MacaulayPatricia E. MautnerRobert McCoyScott and Sally
McElroy
John McKeeMichael MobleyJeanne Morrel-
Franklin
Lou Jean MoyerThomas V. MullerBoulder History
Museum
Barbara J. MusicusJean MusteNobuyuki NakajimaScott NelsonGrant NelsonSara D. NerkenMartha NewellBeate NolanKady Offen-RovtarJames OlanderDavid OliensisDorothy T. ParrisWilliam and Coleen
Pass
Steven PordesPatricia PrestonRobert and Mary
Resnik
Catherine A.
Ridgway
Donald RileyLorna Rose-HahnRobert RothhouseGordon RothrockBuffy Sainte-MarieSaurin Sunny ShinePat SimonsKaighn SmithMichael Colbert
Smith
John SquiresJennifer StanleyWayne and Nancy
Starling Ross
Marion StevensWes StudiBeverly TerryWilliam and Elizabeth
Thomas
Louise ThomsMargaret Q. TravisPaul TroweCathern TuftsDaniel and Dianne
Vapnek
Rebecca WaltonJanice WarnerCharles WarrenStephen L. WasbyDaniel J. WellehanKaren WelmasKatharine WilsonRobert and Jody
WilsonDavid Winston
Roger WiseHenry and Jennifer
Wishcamper
Mary YoungJeanne ZasadilSteven Zuckerman
Circle of Life –
Circle of Life mem-bers have made alasting commitmentby including NARF intheir wills.
Catches Bear and
Judy Adams
Rodney J. AddisonGloria AdkinsonDale M. ArmitageMaxwell K. BarnardBarbara BeasleyDiane Ben AriMr. Roy BensonBobby BitnerBetty E. BlumenkampDale E. BrandWilliam BrownGloria BurgessPatricia BurnetArthur CarterRobert CarterMary CasmusEd ChasteenJudith A. DayHarvey DennenbergGary DickerhoofStarr DormannPatricia R. DuvalNoelle Edwards
Susan E. EichhornAllison B. EmersonJames K. FeeDebra K. FrazierJan FreemanLyle FunderburkThe Lawrence H.
Geller Family
Deborah GhoreyebEstela GoldsmithLouise Gomer BangelDr. Gene GrabauAnna GulickJean GundlachMerrill HakimMichael S. HallMargaret HartnettTheodora C.
Haughton
Patricia HeidelbergerKarin HolserBarbara HumesVeronica IfillElizabeth A. JohnsonVusama KaribaBetty KleczyEllyne Krakower -
Rice
Edward KriegeSharon LaughlinIngrid LeBlancJames LehnererRima LurieSuzanne MacDonaldDr. Patricia Marks-
Greenfield50   |     Native American Rights FundNARF Acknowledgment of Contributions: Fiscal Year 2016
Helen McCahill
Marion McCollom
Hampton
Dr. Joseph McNamaraWilliam G. MilliganGary MontgomeryLeila V. MooreJeanne MoskalAnthony PampenaMarc PearceMoses PeterRandall PetersenDenise PfalzerThelma Populus
Gordon
Robert & Mary ResnikMaureen RipleyBarbara H. RobertsAndrea RobinsongRay RodgersJune RosenthalKeith I. RossWilliam RozierMrs. B. W. SampsonLaRoy SeaverMichael SeeleyCharlotte SelverKatey Lynn SimetraKirk SperryHerbert StewartJames and Patricia
Straus
Michael and Carol
Sullivan
Louis TaboisValeria TenyakCharlotte Thompson
M. D. TurekRene VivoWilliam Joseph WadeTed WeitzDr. Robert and Dr.
Mary Wellman
Roger L. WelschMr. and Mrs. Dan
Whittemore
Karen Williams-Fast
Horse
Marcel E. WingateDavid YeomanWayne W. Zengel
NARF Employee
Giving – NARF
employees committhousands of hoursto protecting therights of tribes.  Theyalso commit theirown funds to helpNARF.
John EchohawkKim GottschalkDavid GoverRichard GuestLora Johnson DieckHeather Kendall
Miller
Melody McCoySteven MooreMorgan O’BrienRay RamirezJoel WilliamsSpecial Events 
American Indian
Youth RunningStrong, Inc.
AmeripriseBKDCasey Family
Programs
Duncan CampbellRichard B. CollinsComcast
Corporation
Lucille EchohawkFirst Nations
DevelopmentInstitute
Fredericks, Peebles &
Morgan
Fond du Lac Band of
Lake SuperiorChippewa 
Ann GetchesJudith GouldBruce GreeneHanuman FoundationPaul & Eileen LeFortYvonne Lemelle
Don & Pamely LichtyPatricia Nelson
Limerick
Robert LovemanNBCUniversalBill RobinsonSawaya Law FirmTrue North
Foundation
In-Kind Donations
There are many ways
to support theNative AmericanRights Fund, in addi-tion to cash gifts.People who volun-teer their time andtalents, or donatevaluable goods andservices, provide cru-cial support for theNARF mission.  Wewould like toexpressly thank thefollowing individualsand organizations fortheir generosity:Amanda Bauer
Kurt V. BlueDogNathan BrienRich DeBodo,
Morgan Lewis
Tom Dickson Law
Office
Ann EstinBernie GranadosJefferson KeelStephen LewisRosemary LoehrRobert McGheeAnita MitchellLarry N. OlingerRichard J. PetersonTim ReeseJulie Roberts-HyslopNancy A. StrelauUniversity of
Colorado Indian LawClinic
Lucy WalkerNative American Rights Fund     |   51Boulder-Denver Advisory Committee: Lucille
A. Echohawk, Thomas W. Fredericks, AvaHamilton, Jeanne Whiteing, Charles Wilkinson.
Show Your Support in NARF’s programs – NARF
receives contributions from many sources and formany purposes.  Below are descriptions of NARF’sdonor programs and additional ways you can getinvolved.
Peta Uha Membership – Peta Uha in the Lakota
(Sioux) language means firekeeper – an individualwho made a solemn commitment to ensure thatthe sacred flame, source of light, heat and energyfor his people, would always be kept burning.  Likethe firekeepers of old, members of the Peta UhaCouncil can demonstrate constancy and vigilanceby helping to ensure that the critical work of theNative American Rights Fund continues to moveever forward.  For benefits associated with eachlevel of Peta Uha membership, please contact ourDevelopment Department, 303.447.8760. 
Tsanáhwit Circle – Tsanáhwit is a Nez Perce
word meaning equal justice.  Tsanáhwit Circlemembers recognize the constant need to standfirm for justice by pledging and making monthlycontributions.  Monthly contributions add up overthe years to make a real difference for the tribeswe serve.
Otu’han Gift Membership – Otu’han is the
Lakota Sioux word translated as giveaway.Otu’han is a memorial and honoring gift programmodeled after the tradition of the Indian giveawayin which items of value are gathered over a longperiod of time to be given away in honor of birth-days, marriages, anniversaries, and in memory of adeparted loved one.
Circle of Life – NARF’s Circle of Life donors pro-
vide a lasting legacy to the Native American RightsFund by including NARF in estate planning ordeferred gifts.  The circle is an important symbolto Native Americans, representing unity, strengthand the eternal continuity of life.  These lastinggifts help ensure the future of NARF and ourIndian clients nationwide.Endowments – NARF has two established
endowments.  The 21st Century Endowment is apermanent fund in which the principal is investedand interest income is used for NARF’s programs.This endowment is designed to provide a perma-nent, steady income that can support the ever-increasing costs of providing legal representationto our tribal clients. The Living Waters Endowmentdirectly funds the 21st Century Endowment. Itallows donors to honor friends and loved ones bymaking an endowment gift of $10,000 or more.By designating a gift to either endowment, youcan be sure that your contribution will continue togenerate annual funds in perpetuity.  
Workplace Campaigns – NARF is a member of
America’s Charities, a national workplace givingfederation.  Giving through your workplace is aseasy as checking off NARF’s box, #10350 on theCombined Federal Campaign (CFC) pledge formauthorizing automatic payroll deduction.  
Matching Gifts – Currently, 11 foundations and
corporations nationwide make matching gifts toNARF on a regular basis.  Employers match theiremployees’ contributions sometimes doubling oreven tripling their donation. Please check withyour human resources office and request a match-ing gift form.
E-News – Sign up at www.narf.org  for our e-news
network by providing NARF with your emailaddress.  This is a great way to get periodic caseupdates, calls-to-action, special events information,invitations and other activities.  Your e-mail addressis confidential and we will not share it with any out-side sources. For further information about any ofthe programs or services, please contact NARF’sDevelopment Department at 303-447-8760.Thank you.52   |     Native American Rights FundNARF STAFF
CORPORATE OFFICERS
John E. Echohawk (Pawnee)
Executive Director/Attorney
K. Jerome Gottschalk
Litigation ManagementCommittee Member/Attorney
Natalie Landreth (Chickasaw)
Litigation ManagementCommittee/Attorney
Melody McCoy (Cherokee)
Litigation ManagementCommittee Member/Attorney
Michael Kennedy
Chief Financial Officer
Ray Ramirez
Corporate Secretary
BOULDER MAIN OFFICE
STAFF
John E. Echohawk (Pawnee)
Executive Director/Attorney
Matt Campbell (Native
Village of Gambell)AttorneyK. Jerome Gottschalk
Attorney
David Gover (Pawnee/Choctaw)
Attorney
Melody McCoy (Cherokee)
Attorney
Steven C. Moore
Attorney
Sue Noe
Attorney
Brett Shelton (Oglala Lakota)
Attorney
Donald R. Wharton
Attorney
Heather Whiteman Runs Him
(Crow) Attorney
Nate Ahrens
Systems Administrator
Karla Bowman
(Stockbridge-Munsee)Office/Human ResourcesAdministratorScott Denver Jacket (Ute
Mountain Ute/Navajo)Legal Assistant
Nicole Keller
Paralegal
Michael Kennedy
Chief Financial Officer
Mireille Martinez
Annual Giving Director
Katrina Mora (Oglala Lakota)
Administrative Assistant
Don Ragona (Mattinecock)
Development Director
Ray Ramirez
Editor/Grant Writer
Jennifer Redbone
(Apache/Comanche/ Kiowa)Development SupportSpecialist
Cibonet Salazar
(Taos Pueblo/Santa Ana Pueblo)Receptionist/Office ServicesAssistantKalee Salazar (Taos
Pueblo/Santa Ana Pueblo)Accounting Clerk
Jeff Schmidt
Paralegal
Debbie Raymond-Thomas
(Navajo) Controller
Jennie Tsikewa (Zuni)
Accountant
NATIONAL INDIAN LAW
LIBRARY
David Selden Director,
National Indian Law Library
Anne Lucke
Assistant Law Librarian
Mauda Moran
Web Services Coordinator
ANCHORAGE OFFICE STAFF
Heather Kendall-Miller
(Athabascan) Attorney
Erin Dougherty Lynch
Attorney
Natalie Landreth (Chickasaw)
Attorney
Matt Newman
Attorney
Wesley Furlong
Attorney (Fellow)
Jill Rush
Legal Assistant/Office
Manager
WASHINGTON, D.C. OFFICE
STAFF
Richard Guest
Attorney
Joel Williams (Cherokee)
Attorney
Eric Anderson
Legal Assistant
The Native American Rights Fund Statement on
Environmental Sustainability
“It is clear that our natural world is undergoing severe, unsus-
tainable and catastrophic climate change that adversely impactsthe lives of people and ecosystems worldwide. Native Americansare especially vulnerable and are experiencing disproportionatenegative impacts on their cultures, health and food systems. In response, the Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is committedto environmental sustainability through its mission, work andorganizational values. Native Americans and other indigenouspeoples have a long tradition of living sustainably with the naturalworld by understanding the importance of preserving naturalresources and respecting the interdependence of all living things.NARF embraces this tradition through its work and by institutingsustainable office practices that reduce our negative impact onour climate and environment. NARF is engaged in environmentalwork and has established a Green Office Committee whoseresponsibility is to lead and coordinate staff participation inestablishing and implementing policies and procedures to minimize waste, reduce energy consumption and pollution andcreate a healthful work environment.” 