Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is a nonprofit, charitable organization incorporated in 1971 under the
laws of the District of Columbia. NARF is exempt from federal income tax under the provisions of Section 501(c)(3) of theInternal Revenue code. Contributions to NARF are tax deductible. The Internal Revenue Service has ruled that NARF is nota “private foundation” as defined in Section 509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code. NARF was founded in 1970 and incorpo-
rated in 1971 in Washington, D.C.The Native American Rights Fund Statement on Environmental Sustainability
It is clear that our natural world is undergoing severe, unsustainable, and catastrophic climate change that adversely impacts
the lives of people and ecosystems worldwide. Native Americans are especially vulnerable and are experiencing dispropor-tionate negative impacts on their cultures, health and food systems. In response, the Native American Rights Fund (NARF)is committed to environmental sustainability through its mission, work, and organizational values. Native Americans andother indigenous peoples have a long tradition of living sustainably with the natural world by understanding the importanceof preserving natural resources and respecting the interdependence of all living things. NARF embraces this tradition throughits work and by instituting sustainable office practices that reduce our negative impact on our climate and environment.NARF is engaged in environmental work and has established a Green Office Committee whose responsibility it is to lead andcoordinate staff participation in establishing and implementing policies and procedures to minimize waste, reduce energyconsumption and pollution, and create a healthful work environment.NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND - 2017 ANNUAL REPORT 1Executive Director’s Report .................................................................................................... ........................ 2
Chairman’s Message............................................................................................................. ............................. 4
Board of Directors and National Support Committee .............................................................................. .. 5
Introduction ................................................................................................................... ..................................... 6
Preserving Tribal Existence ................................................................................................... ......................... 7
Protecting Tribal Natural Resources ........................................................................................... ................. 11
Promoting Human Rights ........................................................................................................ .................... 17
Holding Governments Accountable ................................................................................................ ............ 24
Developing Indian Law .......................................................................................................... ........................ 26
Financial Report .............................................................................................................. ................................ 28
Contributors .................................................................................................................. .................................. 29
NARF Staff .................................................................................................................... .................................. 33
Boulder Office (main)
1506 BroadwayBoulder, CO 80302-6296303-447-8760www.narf.orgAnchorage Office
745 West 4th Avenue, Suite 502Anchorage, Alaska 99501-1736907-276-0680Washington D.C. Office
1514 P Street, NW (Rear) Suite D Washington, D.C. 20005-1910202-785-4166Table of Contents
Cover and Art: Pahponee (Kickapoo and Potawaomi) has been
working with clay since the early 1980s. She is a self-taught clayartist who has re-learned the traditional pottery methods of herwoodland culture as well as learning contemporary pottery makingtechniques. After speaking with her tribal elders, Pahponee spentyears experimenting with hand-dug clay and commercial clay aswell as primitive outdoor dung firing and contemporary kiln firing.Mastering several pottery techniques has provided the platform forPahponee to create distinctive pottery that expresses her own per-sonal style and innovative spirit. Working with clay is a sacredactivity for her. It involves personal interaction between clay, her-self, and as Native people say, “All My Relations.” View more ofPahponee’s work at www.pahponee.com.All My Relations
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDFor 47 years, the Native
American Rights Fund hasbeen providing legal adviceand representation to Indiantribes, organizations, and indi-viduals on the most importantfederal Indian law issues facingthem. Since 1970, we haveachieved many important legalvictories for Native Americanpeople through our non-profitlegal advocacy and that recordof significant legal accomplish-ments continued in 2017.
In a major Indian water rights
case, the United StatesSupreme Court denied reviewof a federal court of appealsdecision holding that tribal
reserved water rights include rights to groundwater inaddition to surface water. We are pleased to be servingas co-counsel for the Agua Caliente Band of CahuillaIndians who brought the case to prevent the impair-ment of the quantity and quality of groundwater in theCoachella Valley in California where they are located.In another tribal water rights case on behalf of theKickapoo Tribe of Kansas, we were able to negotiateand have introduced in Congress the Kickapoo Tribe inKansas Water Rights Settlement Act after many yearsof litigation and negotiations.
Many Alaska Natives depend upon federally-
protected hunting and fishing rights for their subsis-tence and we have been involved in litigation for manyyears protecting those subsistence rights. A recent fed-eral appeals court decision upheld federal regulatoryauthority over hovercraft on a river on federal land,thus also continuing federal protection of Native sub-sistence rights in these places. We filed an amicus briefin the case on behalf of Native subsistence users. On behalf of the Native Village of Tyonek in Alaska, wewere able to stop a proposed coal mine after severalyears of advocacy that would have threatened the traditional subsistence lifestyle of the Village.
When President Trump issued an Executive Order
revoking and replacing the Bears Ears NationalMonument in southeastern Utah, we filed suit on
behalf of the Hopi, Zuni and Ute Mountain Ute Tribesasserting that President Trump does not have authorityto take that action and only Congress has the power toextinguish national monuments once they are estab-lished. These three tribes are part of the Bears EarsInter-Tribal Coalition that convinced President Obamato proclaim the Monument to protect this significantunprotected cultural landscape still critical to the tribesfor spiritual, hunting, and gathering purposes.
Federal lands around Grand Canyon also have cultural
and spiritual significance to several tribes in that areaand they support the federal action in 2012 known asthe Northern Arizona Withdrawal which prevents anynew uranium mining claims. The Withdrawal was chal-lenged in court by several mining companies and indi-viduals, but a federal appeals court recently upheld theWithdrawal. We filed an amicus brief in the case onbehalf of five tribes and two Native organizations.
The Standing Rock Sioux Tribe is in litigation against
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers over the proposedconstruction of the Dakota Access Pipeline in NorthDakota that passes through the Tribe’s ancestral landscontaining sacred places and burial grounds andthreatens the Tribe’s water supply since it would passunder the Missouri River at Lake Oahe just a half amile upstream of the Tribe’s reservation boundary. Afederal district court issued a favorable ruling for theTribe, finding that the Army Corps of Engineers failedto adequately consider the impacts of a potential oilspill on fishing and hunting rights or environmentaljustice concerns, and ordered further environmentalanalysis. We filed an amicus brief in the case in supportof the Tribe on behalf of twenty Native organizationsand tribes.  
The 1978 Indian Child Welfare Act was passed to stop
the disproportional removal of Indian children fromtheir families by state agencies and state courts andtheir placement in non-Indian foster or adoptivehomes or residential institutions. When a conservativethink tank filed a lawsuit challenging the constitution-ality of the Indian Child Welfare Act, we filed an amicus brief in the case on behalf of three nationalNative organizations supporting a motion to dismissand the case was successfully dismissed. 
2Executive Director’s Report2017 ANNUAL REPORTThe ancestral homelands of the Santa Ynez Band of
Chumash Indians in California containing significantarchaeological sites and a number of ancient burialsalong the Santa Clara River were threatened by a largedevelopment project that was challenged in court. We represented the Santa Ynez Band and asserted thatthey were never consulted by the Army Corps ofEngineers about the project as required by law. The litigation was successfully settled and the Santa YnezBand received cultural resource protections and support for their cultural center. In closing, I want to thank all of our funders for their
support. Without your support, these significant legalaccomplishments in 2017 would not have been possible.We can only hope that your support will continue in2018 so that we can achieve even more legal victoriesfor Native Americans.
John E. Echohawk
Executive Director           
3NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 4Aloha mai kakou
This is my sixth and final year serving as a NARF board member, and I am ever 
thankful for the opportunity and experiences that I have had being a part of the NARFfamily. To be a warrior for justice is a struggle, but an honor because we are part ofsomething so much bigger than ourselves. In looking back over NARF’s 47 years, we seethat the work that we do today is firmly rooted in the efforts of those who have comebefore us. We must remain steadfast and continue to build on those efforts to create justice for our Native peoples. Even though my time on the board is ending, I willalways be an advocate for NARF.
To make the necessary and significant impact that we seek—sustaining justice, 
protecting Native rights, preserving tribal sovereignty—we must all remain tirelessadvocates. It is through your support, based upon your continuing belief in the impor-tance of NARF’s work, that true justice is made possible. As the work that we are doingtoday to improve and protect the rights of our people is built upon the legacy of thosewho came before us, we are sowing the seeds for tomorrow. And so, on behalf of thestaff and board of NARF, mahalo nui loa (thank you very much) for your continuing 
support.
A hui hou (until we meet again).
Mahalo,Moses K. N. Haia III
Outgoing Chairman, Board of Directors Chairman’s Message
2017 ANNUAL REPORT 5The Native American Rights Fund has a governing
board composed of Native American leaders fromacross the country—wise and distinguished peoplewho are respected by Native Americans nationwide.Individual Board members are chosen based on theirinvolvement and knowledge of Indian issues andaffairs, as well as their tribal affiliation, to ensure acomprehensive geographical representation. TheNARF Board of Directors, whose members serve amaximum of six years, provide NARF with leadershipand credibility, and the vision of its members is essen-tial to NARF's effectiveness in representing its NativeAmerican clients.
NARF’s Board of Directors: Front row (left to right):
Julie Roberts-Hyslop (Native Village of Tanana); 
Peter Pino (Zia Pueblo); Moses Haia , Chairman
(Native Hawaiian), Robert McGhee , Vice-Chairman
(Poarch Band of Creek Indians); Anita Mitchell ,
(Muckleshoot Indian Tribe). Back row (left to right): 
Gary Hayes (Ute Mountain Ute Tribe); Michael Smith
(Chickasaw Nation); Tex Hall , Board Treasurer (Three
Affiliated Tribes); and Kurt BlueDog (Sisseton-
Wahpeton Sioux). Not pictured: Richard Peterson
(Central Council of the Tlingit and Haida IndianTribes); Larry Olinger (Agua Caliente Band of 
Cahuilla Indians); Stephen Lewis (Gila River Indian
Community); and Jefferson Keel (Chickasaw Nation). Board of Directors
National Support Committee
The National Support Committee assists
NARF with fundraising and public rela-tions efforts. Some members are prominentin the fields of business, entertainment, andthe arts. Others are known advocates forthe rights of the underserved. All are com-mitted to upholding the rights of NativeAmericans.
Randy Bardwell, Pechanga Band of
Luiseño Mission Indians 
Jaime Barrientoz, Grande Traverse Band of
Ottawa and Chippewa Indians 
John Bevan Wallace Coffey, Comanche Ada Deer, Menominee Harvey A. Dennenberg 
Lucille A. Echohawk, Pawnee Jane Fonda Eric Ginsburg Jeff Ginsburg Rodney Grant, Omaha Dr. Marion McCollom HamptonChris E. McNeil, Jr., Tlingit-Nisga’a Billy Mills, Oglala Lakota Amado Peña, Jr., Yaqui/Chicano Wayne Ross Nancy Starling-Ross Mark Rudick Pam Rudick Michael G. Sawaya
Ernie Stevens, Jr., Wisconsin Oneida Andrew Teller, Isleta Pueblo Verna Teller, Isleta Pueblo Richard Trudell, Santee Sioux Rebecca Tsosie, Pasqua Yaqui Tzo-Nah, Shoshone Bannock Aine Ungar Rt. Rev. William C. Wantland, Seminole W. Richard West, Southern CheyenneRandy Willis, Oglala Lakota Teresa Willis, Umatilla Mary Wynne, Rosebud Sioux
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 6
One of the initial responsibilities of NARF’s first Board of Directors was to develop priorities that would guide the Native
American Rights Fund in its mission to preserve and enforce the legal rights of Native Americans. That Board developed fivepriorities that continue to lead NARF today:
1. Preserving tribal existence
2. Protecting tribal natural resources3. Promoting Native American human rights4. Holding governments accountable to Native Americans5. Developing Indian law and educating the public about Indian rights, laws, and issues
This report includes NARF’s recent work within each priority.Introduction2017 ANNUAL REPORTUnder the priority of preserving tribal existence, NARF
constructs the foundations necessary to empowertribes to live according to Native traditions, to enforcetheir treaty rights, to insure their independence onreservations, and to protect their sovereignty (right toself-govern). Tribal governments possess the power toregulate the internal affairs of their members as well asother activities within their reservations and NARFfights to protect that right. 
Tribal Sovereignty and JurisdictionThe U.S. Constitution recognizes that Indian tribes are
independent governmental entities with inherentauthority over their members and territory. In treatieswith the United States, Indian tribes ceded millions ofacres of land in exchange for the guarantee that thefederal government would protect the tribes' right toself-government. 
Tribal Sovereignty Protection Initiative
From the 19th to mid-20th centuries, the SupremeCourt repeatedly affirmed the fundamental principlethat tribes retain inherent sovereignty over their mem-bers and their territory. Then, with the 1978 decision inOliphant v. Suquamish Indian Tribe , the Supreme Court
began chipping away at tribal sovereignty by restrictingtribal jurisdiction and extending state jurisdiction. Inresponse, NARF partnered with the National Congressof American Indians (NCAI) in 2001 to develop theTribal Sovereignty Protection Initiative to restore theprinciple of inherent tribal sovereignty and safeguardthe core of sovereignty that remains. The Initiativemonitors legislation, judiciary, and cases related totribal interests. 
~ Tribal Supreme Court Project
A major component of the Initiative is the TribalSupreme Court Project, which monitors cases potentiallyheaded to the Supreme Court as well as those actuallyaccepted for review. The Project also ensures that attor-neys representing Indian interests before the SupremeCourt have the support they need, including coordinat-ing the filing of a limited number of strategic amicusbriefs. Staffed jointly by NARF and NCAI, the TribalSupreme Court Project is based on the principle that astrong, consistent, coordinated approach will be able toreverse, or at least reduce, the on-going erosion of tribalsovereignty by Supreme Court Justices who appear tolack an understanding of the foundational principlesunderlying federal Indian law and who are unfamiliarwith the practical challenges facing tribal governments.October Term 2016 was an eventful year. In April 2017,
the Court issued its opinion in Lewis v. Clarke , reversing
the Connecticut Supreme Court and holding that, “in asuit brought against a tribal employee in his individualcapacity, the employee, not the tribe, is the real party ininterest and the tribe’s sovereign immunity is notimplicated.” After a stunning victory in Michigan v. Bay
Mills Indian Community in June 2014, which affirmed
the doctrine of tribal sovereign immunity, the Courtcreated a bright line rule that tribal sovereign immunitydoes not extend to suits brought against tribal employeesor officials in their individual capacity unless there is a determination that the Tribe is the “real party ininterest.” However, the Court left open the question ofwhether tribal employees and officials would be enti-tled to “official immunity” (i.e., immunity for actionstaken within the scope of their employment) on a similar basis as state and federal employees. The impli-cations of this decision are unclear at this point, butshould begin to be clarified through pending andfuture litigation.
In June 2017, the Court issued its opinion in Matel v.
Tam, affirming the U.S. Court of Appeals for the
Federal Circuit and holding that the disparagementclause of federal trademark law violates the FirstAmendment’s Free Speech Clause and is unconstitu-tional. Although Tam is not an Indian law case, itsimpact was immediate in relation to the Blackhorse liti-
gation pending before the U.S. Court Appeals for theFourth Circuit which challenged the trademark regis-tration of the Washington NFL football team. NARFexpressed its disappointment with the Court’s decisionwhich clears “the legal pathway for the Washingtonprofessional football team to continue to use a racialslur for Native Americans as its mascot.” And while theCourt explicitly acknowledged that this type of demean-ing speech is “hateful,” it found that “the proudest boastof our free speech jurisprudence is that we protect thefreedom to express ‘the thought that we hate.’”
The October Term 2017 is shaping up to be a potentially
significant one for Indian law. In addition to being thefirst full term of Associate Justice Neil Gorsuch, a num-ber of pending petitions involve important Indian lawissues, as well as subjects the Court has not addressedin a long time.
• On November 7, 2017, the Court heard argument in
Patchak v. Zinke . While this case involves legislation
reaffirming the Secretary of Interior’s taking of landinto trust for the Gun Lake Tribe, the petition was
7Preserving Tribal ExistenceNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDgranted for the Court to consider a separation of
powers question, not an Indian law question:whether Congress may direct a federal court topromptly dismiss a pending lawsuit as Congress didwith its Gun Lake Act, which directed the dismissalof any legal cases relating to the property in question.• On November 27, 2017, the Court denied review in a
significant Indian water rights case that was the sub-ject of two petitions, Coachella Valley Water District v.
Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians and Desert
Water Agency v. Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians .
The petitions sought review of a Ninth Circuit Courtof Appeals decision, which held that when theUnited States established the Agua Caliente Band ofCahuilla Indians’ reservation as a homeland, the fed-eral government reserved appurtenant watersources—including groundwater—for use by theTribe. Thus, the Court’s denial of these petitions pre-serves an important Indian water rights victory inthe lower courts. 
• On the same day, the Court denied review in another
case that also was the subject of two petitions, Upstate
Citizens for Equality v. U.S. and Town of Vernon v. U.S. .
Both petitions challenged the Secretary of theInterior’s authority to take 13,000 acres of land intotrust for the benefit of the Oneida Nation of New York.
~ Judicial Selection Project
In addition to the Tribal Supreme Court Project, anotherimportant component of the Tribal SovereigntyProtection Initiative is the Judicial Selection Project.The Project’s focus is research and education: to edu-cate the federal judiciary about tribal issues, to educatetribal leaders about the federal judiciary, and to reachout to elected officials and the public at large about theneed for federal judges who understand the uniquelegal status of Indian tribes. 
On April 10, 2017, Neil M. Gorsuch took his seat as an
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the UnitedStates, filling the year-long vacancy following the deathof Justice Antonin Scalia. NARF prepared a reportreviewing his background, analyzing his judicial phi-losophy, and examining his experience with Indian lawcases. Justice Gorsuch has significantly more experi-ence with Indian law cases than any other recentSupreme Court nominee. His opinions generally recog-nize tribes as sovereign governments. However, thetwenty-eight Indian law cases on which he participatedprior to sitting the U.S. Supreme Court addressed onlya subset of issues important to Indian tribes.
In April 2017, NARF presented at the National Native
American Bar Association (NNABA) annual meeting.The Judicial Selection Project has coordinated itsefforts with NNABA, which has a standing committeeon judicial selection. The presentation focused on 
8
2017 ANNUAL REPORTcurrent federal judicial vacancies and was followed by
a discussion forum on judicial vacancies and how tosupport Native candidates interested in pursuing acareer in the judiciary.
In September, NARF presented at the Native American
Judicial Bootcamp at the Shakopee MdewakantonSioux Community and was co-sponsored by theMinnesota American Indian Bar Association and theInfinity Project. The purpose of the full-day training
was to prepare Native American attorneys for applyingto the federal and state judiciary.
Big Horn Electric Cooperative v. Alden Big Man, et al.
In 2012, Alden Big Man, an elderly member of theApsaalooke (Crow) Tribe sued the Big Horn ElectricCooperative in the Crow Civil Court pursuant to anApsaalooke tribal statute limiting heat and electricityservice disconnections during winter months forhomes where elderly and disabled individuals reside.In 2013, the tribal court issued its ruling and dismissedthe case, holding that it lacked jurisdiction over thecase, brought against a non-member utility company.Mr. Big Man appealed the ruling to the ApsaalookeAppeals Court. In April 2017, the Apsaalooke AppealsCourt issued a decision holding that the trial court didhave jurisdiction over Big Horn Electric and remandedthe case to the Crow Civil Court for further proceed-ings. Big Horn Electric then filed a complaint in feder-al district court in May 2017, asking the court to findthat tribal court remedies have been exhausted andthat the tribal court and judges lack jurisdiction overthe suit, to enjoin the Apsaalooke Appeals Courtjudges from continuing with the case, and to enjoin Mr.Big Man from further prosecuting the case in the courtsof the Apsaalooke Nation. NARF, representing theApsaalooke Appeals Court Judges and Crow TribalHealth Board Members, filed a Motion to Dismiss forfailure to exhaust tribal court remedies and lack ofjurisdiction in September 2017. 
Federal Recognition of Tribal StatusNARF represents Indian communities who have sur-
vived intact as identifiable Indian tribes but are notfederally recognized. Tribal existence does not dependon federal recognition, but recognition is necessary fora government-to-government relationship and thereceipt of many federal services.Little Shell Tribe of Chippewa Indians of Montana
NARF continues to represent the Little Shell Tribe ofChippewa Indians of Montana in its pursuit of federalrecognition. More than 20 years ago, in 1997, the gov-ernment placed the Little Shell Tribe’s federal recogni-tion petition on active review status. Since that time,the Tribe has endured through several about-face deci-sions by various Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairswho found first in favor and then against recognitionof the Tribe. In 2013, NARF urged the Secretary of theInterior to suspend consideration of the FinalDetermination pending revisions to the federalacknowledgement regulations. The Tribe submittedextensive comments on the draft regulations. Newrules for the federal acknowledgement process werepublished in July 2015. All of the comments the Tribehad raised were addressed to some extent. The Tribe isnow proceeding under the new, substantially changedrules and continues to pursue legislative recognition.
9
Preserving Tribal Existence
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 10
2017 ANNUAL REPORT 11Throughout the process of European conquest and colo-
nization of North America, Indian tribes experienced asteady diminishment of their land base to a mere 2.3 percent of its original size. Currently, there are approxi-mately 55 million acres of Indian-controlled land in thecontinental United States and about 44 million acres ofNative-owned land in Alaska. An adequate land baseand control over natural resources are central compo-nents of economic self-sufficiency and self-determina-tion and are vital to the existence of tribes. Thus, much ofNARF’s work involves protecting tribal natural resources. 
Indian LandsEastern Shoshone Tribe, Wind River Indian Reservation
BoundariesNARF has been retained by the Eastern Shoshone Tribe(EST) of the Wind River Indian Reservation to analyzethe Surplus Land Act of March 3, 1905 (1905 Act), andother legislation and cases, to determine their implica-tions for the boundaries of the Reservation. InDecember 2013, the U.S. Environmental ProtectionAgency approved the delegation of certain Clean AirAct programs to the EST and the Northern ArapahoeTribe (NAT), which is also located on the same reserva-tion. The delegation included the conclusion that theboundaries of the reservation were not altered by the1905 Act. The State of Wyoming filed and was grantedin part a Petition for Reconsideration and Stay withEPA. The state filed a petition for review by the U.S.Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit. In February2017, the Court issued a 2-1 decision holding that theintent of Congress in the 1905 Act was to diminish theboundaries of the Wind River Reservation. In July, theEST and NAT filed petitions for rehearing en bancbefore the entire panel of judges in the 10th Circuit. 
Hualapai Tribe Fee to Trust Applications
NARF represents the Hualapai Indian Tribe of Arizonain preparing and submitting applications for the trans-fer into trust status of eight parcels of land owned infee by the Tribe. Three of the parcels have been acceptedinto trust. Decisions on the other five parcels will besignificantly delayed. By Memorandum of April 6,2017, the Acting Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairswithdrew authority from BIA Regional Directors toapprove off-reservation fee-to-trust applications andplaced that authority with the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs. The BIA issued proposed changes to theexisting regulations in October 2017 and held tribalconsultation meetings in November.Water Rights
Establishing tribal water rights, especially in arid west-
ern states, continues to be a major NARF priority. Thegoal of NARF's Indian water rights work is to secureallocations of water for present and future needs forspecific Indian tribes represented by NARF and otherwestern tribes generally. Under the precedent estab-lished by the Supreme Court in 1908 in Winters v.
United States and confirmed in 1963 in Arizona v.
California , Indian tribes are entitled under federal law
to sufficient water for present and future needs, with apriority date at least as early as the establishment oftheir reservations. These reserved water rights aresuperior to all water rights created after the tribal priority date. Such a date will in most cases give tribesvaluable senior water rights in the water-short west.Unfortunately, many tribes have not used theirreserved water rights and most of these rights areunadjudicated or unquantified. The major need is todefine or quantify the amount of water to which eachtribe is entitled. 
Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians
NARF, together with co-counsel, represents the AguaCaliente Band of Cahuilla Indians in a lawsuit filed inMay 2013 in the U.S. District Court for the CentralDistrict of California, asking the court (a) to declare theTribe's water rights as the senior rights in the CoachellaValley, (b) to quantify these rights, and (c) to preventCoachella Valley Water District and Desert WaterAgency from further injuring residents throughout theValley by impairing the quantity and quality of waterin the aquifer through the import of lesser qualitywater.
The court issued its ruling in March 2015. The court
ruled largely in the Tribe’s favor, holding that the Tribehas a reserved right to water, and that groundwater isa water source available to fulfill that right. The wateragencies appealed that decision and, in March 2017, athree judge panel of the Ninth Circuit unanimouslyaffirmed the lower court’s ruling, holding that theWinters’ doctrine applies to water sources appurtenant
to the Agua Caliente Reservation, including ground-water. The court also broadly construed the originalpurposes for the creation of the reservation. The waterdistricts petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court for a writof certiorari. On November 27, that petition wasdenied and the lower court’s decision held. 
Protecting Tribal Natural ResourcesNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDWith this “phase one” part of the trial put to rest, the
parties are addressing what are called the “phase two”legal issues. Phase two will deal with the correctmethod for quantifying the Tribe’s share, whetherthere is a right to water of a certain quality, andwhether the Tribe owns the groundwater storage spaceunder its reservation. A decision on these three legalissues will be issued by the court in the first quarter of2018, and that decision will guide the “phase three”legal issues of the case which include quantification.
Palouse River Basin Adjudication – 
Nez Perce Tribe Water RightsNARF represented the Nez Perce Tribe in Idaho in its water rights claims in the Snake River BasinAdjudication for over 16 years. NARF’s work with theTribe has now turned to development of water rightsclaims in the Palouse River Basin Adjudication(PRBA). In October 2016, the Idaho Water Court issueda commencement order for the PRBA. An initial hearingwas held on the PRBA in January 2017. NARF and theTribe are working with the United States to examinethe nature and scope of the Tribe’s water rights claimsin the Palouse Watershed. 
Klamath Basin Water Rights
The Klamath Tribes’ water rights were recognized inthe federal courts in the United States v. Adair litiga-tion in 1983, but the federal courts left quantification ofthe Tribal water rights to the State of Oregon’s generalstream adjudication, the Klamath Basin Adjudication(KBA). Following conclusion of the 38-year-long
administrative phase of the KBA, the Tribes were ableto enforce their water rights for the first time duringthe 2013 irrigation season. The Oregon WaterResources Department’s (OWRD’s) Findings of Factand Order of Determination (FFOD) issued in the KBAare now subject to judicial review in the KlamathCounty Circuit Court. The Klamath Court has adopteda phased approach for the judicial review of the FFOD.
In 2017, the Klamath County Circuit Court resolved
jurisdictional and other threshold legal issues (Phase1A) as well as general procedural issues (Phase 1B). Italso began working on the final sub-phase (Phase 1C)dealing with threshold or cross-cutting issues notaddressed in earlier sub-phases. Importantly, the courtissued rulings limiting discovery and the introductionof new evidence, thus preventing a complete do-overof the administrative proceedings. However, the courtruled that a de novo standard of review will apply, inwhich the court will “look anew” at the determinationsof OWRD in the FFOD and may give deference toOWRD’s determinations. The court also determinedthe list of issues for resolution in Phase 1C and opening briefs addressing those issues were filed inOctober 2017.
Related case Baley v. U.S.: After sixteen years of litiga-
tion, the Court of Federal Claims resoundingly re-affirmed the superiority of the senior water rights ofthe Klamath Tribes and downriver Klamath Basintribes over other water interests in the Klamath Basin.Though the tribes were not parties to the case, NARFfiled several briefs as amicus curiae (“friends of thecourt”) on behalf of the Tribes.
Tule River Tribe
After almost 30 years of advocacy, the Tule RiverIndian Tribe, represented by NARF, successfully settled its water rights in November 2007 by signing asettlement agreement. The settlement agreementsecured a domestic, municipal, industrial, and com-mercial water supply for the Tribe. The Tribe nowseeks federal legislation to ratify the agreement andauthorize appropriations to develop the water rightsthrough the creation of water infrastructure and reser-voirs on the Tule River Reservation. 
The Tribe’s team assisted the federal team in develop-
ing an appraisal of several alternatives. The federalteam promised to be done with the study byNovember 2015 so that the Tribe could proceed to
12
2017 ANNUAL REPORTnegotiate an appropriate settlement to present to
Congress. Only in December of 2016 did the federalteam deliver its report to the Tribe. The Tribe and itsteam performed a detailed analysis and critique of thereport and is evaluating political options for movingforward.
Kickapoo Tribe in Kansas
According to the Environmental Protection Agency,the water supply for the Kickapoo Reservation is inviolation of the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974. TheKickapoo people are unable to safely drink, bathe, orcook with tap water. There is not enough water on thereservation to provide basic municipal services to thecommunity—the Tribe is not able to provide localschools with reliable, safe running water and the firedepartment cannot provide adequate fire protectiondue to the water shortage. In June 2006, the KickapooTribe in Kansas, represented by NARF, filed a federalcourt lawsuit in an effort to enforce express promisesmade to the Tribe to build a Reservoir Project, the mostcost effective and reliable means by which the Tribecan improve the water supply. The Nemaha BrownWatershed Joint Board #7, the Natural ResourcesConservation Service of the U.S. Department ofAgriculture, and the State of Kansas made these prom-ises to the Tribe over two decades ago. Since that time,these parties have been actively developing the waterresources, resulting in the near depletion of the Tribe'ssenior federal water rights. The federal government,the state, and the local watershed district all concedethe existence of the Tribe's senior Indian reservedwater rights; the real issue is the amount of waterneeded to satisfy the Tribe's rights, and the source orsources of that water. 
In September 2016, the Tribe and the state executed the
“Global Settlement Agreement” which includes anegotiated water right for the Tribe and all of thedetails for the administration of the Tribe’s seniorwater right in the Delaware River watershed. The Tribeand NARF developed legislation in consultation withthe Kansas congressional delegation to approve thewater right negotiated with the state. In November2017, Kansas Senator Moran introduced S.2154Kickapoo Tribe in Kansas Water Rights SettlementAgreement Act, which was referred to the SenateIndian Affairs Committee. 
Pauma Band of Luiseno Indians
The Pauma Band of Luiseno Indians is one of the fivetribes party to the San Luis Rey Water RightsSettlement. The San Luis Rey Tribes’ water rights were
initially addressed by a Congressionally-approvedSettlement Act in 1988. However, for a wide variety ofreasons, the settlement was unenforceable and did notaddress the needs of the tribes. In 2016, a bill amendingthe original settlement act was passed by Congress,and the San Luis Rey Water Rights Settlement is now inits implementation stage. NARF represents the PaumaBand in this implementation phase, which will includeallocation of water and funding and groundwatermanagement strategies. 
Hunting and Fishing Rights 
Subsistence is the inherently sustainable Native philos-
ophy of taking only what you need. There are often noroads and no stores in rural Alaska, and so no othergroup of people in the United States continues to be asintimately connected to the land and water and asdependent upon its vast natural resources as Alaska’sindigenous peoples. 
Bering Sea Elders Group
The Bering Sea Elders Group (BSEG) is an alliance ofthirty-nine Yup’ik and Inupiaq villages that seeks toprotect the sensitive ecosystem of the Bering Sea, thesubsistence lifestyle, and the sustainable communitiesthat depend on it. NARF has designed a comprehen-sive plan to help this group of Alaska Native villages intheir efforts to protect the area and become moreengaged in its management. 
NARF worked with BSEG on their efforts to protect the
northern Bering Sea. In December 2016, this workresulted in President Barack Obama signing an historicexecutive order creating the Northern Bering SeaClimate Resilience Area. This was an incredible victoryfor NARF’s clients. However, in April 2017, PresidentTrump signed an executive order called“Implementing an America-First Offshore EnergyStrategy.” While the order was aimed at re-openingArctic and Atlantic areas for offshore drilling, it alsoentirely revoked Executive Order 13754. This reversaloccurred without notice and despite all indicationsthat the suite of northern Bering Sea protections—including the focus on the role of Tribes in future deci-sions—were not in danger. BSEG responded immedi-ately in the media, determined to restore the importantconservation, economic, and cultural provisions. BSEGheld an Executive Committee meeting in August and afull Summit in September, where the Elders passed 
13Protecting Tribal Natural ResourcesNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDa resolution calling for the reinstatement of the
Executive Order and its protections. BSEG and allies areworking with federal representatives to restore the pro-visions.
Pebble Mine
Alaska’s Bristol Bay region is home to the largest wildsalmon runs in the world. It is also home to the Yup’ik,Dena’ina, and Alutiiq peoples who depend on sustain-able salmon runs for their subsistence. In 2013, NARFhelped create the United Tribes of Bristol Bay (UTBB),a consortium of tribes in the region. UTBB was formedfor tribes to directly address regional large-scale min-ing proposals threatening salmon-rearing streams.Exercising its delegated governmental authority, withNARF as counsel, UTBB has engaged the federal gov-ernment in direct government-to-government consul-tation on large scale mining in Bristol Bay like the pro-posed Pebble Mine. 
The proposed Pebble Mine would sit on the headwa-
ters of the largest salmon-producing river in BristolBay. In February 2014, EPA gave notice that it wouldinitiate a Clean Water Act 404(c) process for the pro-posed mine. Section 404(c) authorizes EPA to prohibitor restrict the discharge of material in waters when itdetermines that such disposal would have an unac-ceptable adverse impact on various resources, includingfisheries, wildlife, municipal water supplies, or recre-ational areas. As soon as the EPA announced that itwould study the Pebble Mine, the State of Alaskarequested a stay to allow the developer to submit apermit under the NEPA process. EPA granted the Stateand the Corp. of Engineers an extension to respond tothe notification of 404(c) process. That stay ended inApril 2013; in May, Pebble Limited Partnership (PLP)filed suit challenging EPA’s Section 404(c) reviewprocess as exceeding its statutory authority under the Clean Water Act. After months of litigation, the district court and the U.S. Court of Appeals both dismissed the case.
In September 2014, PLP filed another complaint
against EPA for relief under the Federal AdvisoryCommittee Act (FACA). In November 2014, the courtgranted the preliminary injunction, thereby haltingEPA’s work on the 404(c) process in Bristol Bay. As thecase continued, the judge issued a broad order quash-ing PLP’s subpoenas, finding that they pushed federaldiscovery rules to their very limits. After the order, PLPwithdrew its remaining subpoenas, but less than fourmonths later PLP began serving narrower subpoenas,which Judge Holland again quashed. In the last days of
2016, the parties requested a stay of the proceedings inorder to negotiate a settlement of the case. 
In May 2017, the parties reached a total settlement of
the litigation. Key terms of the settlement include: (1)dismissing all Pebble’s pending lawsuits against theEPA; (2) EPA’s agreeing to propose to withdraw theproposed Section 404(c) determination; (3) EPA’sagreeing it will not move to finalize any Section 404(c)action until 48 months from the date of the settlementor until the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers issues itsfinal environmental impact statement, whichevercomes first. In light of this reversal in course by theEPA, NARF and UTBB will continue to work to protectBristol Bay throughout the forthcoming federal andstate permitting process surrounding the Pebble Mine.
John Sturgeon v. Sue Masica et al.
In John Sturgeon v. Sue Masica et al ., the federal courts
upheld the right of the National Park Service to prohib-it the use of a hovercraft on a river inside a NationalPark or Preserve. The lower federal courts ruled infavor of the federal government on the basis thatnationwide Park and Preserve rules generally apply toall lands and waters that are inside a Park or Preserve.Yet, a key provision of the 1980 Alaska NationalInterest Lands Conservation Act (ANILCA) wasintended to exempt those kinds of lands from precise-ly these kinds of federal park rules. 
Because the Ninth Circuit’s ruling resulted in Alaska
Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA) lands beingsubject to Park regulations, ANCSA corporationsjoined in petitioning for review of the case by the U.S.Supreme Court. The Court granted review, and NARFfiled an amicus brief on behalf of subsistence users insupport of the federal government because of concernthat the case may inadvertently implicate subsistencefishing rights established by the Katie John litigation.
In March 2016, the Supreme Court agreed that the
lands get special treatment under ANILCA and are notto be treated as if they were federal “public” lands. Butthe Court went no further than that. The SupremeCourt said it was for the lower courts to decide if theNation River is “public land” for purposes of ANILCA(which is how the Katie John court viewed the issue)
and whether the Park Service has the power to regulateactivities in the River even if the River does not qualifyas federal “public land.” NARF filed an amicus briefsupporting the federal government’s position and the
142017 ANNUAL REPORTsubsistence fishing rights established by the Katie John
line of cases. In October 2017, the Ninth Circuit Courtof Appeals upheld for the second time the right of thePark Service to prohibit the use of a hovercraft on theNation River. In reaching its ruling, the Court reliedupon and reaffirmed all three of the Court of Appeals’prior “Katie John” decisions.
Chuitna Mine
NARF represented the Native Village of Tyonek (NVT)in response to a permit proposal by PacRim to minecoal from the Beluga coal fields in the Cook Inlet. Asproposed, Chuitna would have been the largest stripmine in Alaska. NVT focused on the National HistoricProtection Act (NHPA) to identify historic propertieseligible for listing. In March 2017, PacRim Coalannounced its decision to suspend pursuit of permit-ting efforts on the Chuitna Coal Project. In June 2017,the Army Corps published in the Federal Register thatit was terminating the EIS process.
As part of the NHPA process, NARF helped NVT nom-
inate the entire Ch’u’itnu watershed for inclusion onthe National Register of Historic Places as a TraditionalCultural Landscape. The designation would recognizethe profound importance the Ch’u’itnu watershed hasplayed in shaping and sustaining NVT’s peoples’ cul-ture, traditions, identity, and subsistence lifestyle. Thegoal is also to ensure that impacts to Tubughna cultur-al, traditional, and subsistence practices are taken intoconsideration during future consultation processes forprojects within the Ch’u’itnu.
The nomination was submitted to the Alaska Office of
History and Archeology in February, 2017. The AlaskaHistorical Commission was to take up the Ch’u’itnunomination at a meeting, in December 2017. NARF willcontinue to work with NVT to petition the Secretary totake tribally owned lands into trust.
Environmental Protection
Much of NARF’s current environmental protectionwork is related to climate change. The effects of climatechange on indigenous peoples throughout the worldare acute and will only get worse. NARF represents theNational Congress of American Indians (NCAI) on climate change matters at the international levelthrough the United Nations Framework Conventionon Climate Change (UNFCCC). NARF and NCAI areensuring that indigenous rights are protected in anyinternational treaty or agreement governing green-house gas emissions reductions.In December 2015, the Paris Agreement, the first ever
universally binding accord on climate change, wasadopted under the UNFCCC. The InternationalIndigenous Peoples Forum on Climate Change(indigenous caucus), which NARF participates in, hasbeen involved in the UNFCCC process for years. Whilethe indigenous caucus did not achieve all that itsought, it did achieve some very significant referencesthat can be built on going forward. The language in theAgreement states, when taking action on climatechange, that the rights of indigenous peoples must beacknowledged and that traditional, indigenous knowl-edge shall help guide the science used to address climate change. It also recognizes the need to strengthenthat knowledge and establishes a platform for the sharing of information and best practices.
Since the Paris Agreement, the indigenous caucus has
begun efforts to make the traditional knowledge plat-form a reality. Several meetings were held throughout2017, and NCAI and NARF signed onto a statementsubmitted by tribes and organizations from the UnitedStates. The discussion process culminated in the prepa-ration of a position paper for discussion and recom-mendation on the platform that was made at COP 23 inBonn in November 2017. 
15Protecting Tribal Natural Resources
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 16
2017 ANNUAL REPORT 17Although basic human rights are considered a univer-
sal and inalienable entitlement, Native Americans facean ongoing threat of having their rights underminedby the United States government, states, and otherswho seek to limit these rights. Under the priority of thepromoting human rights , NARF concentrates on enforcing
laws regarding equal protection and freedom from discrimination in voting, education, incarceration, andreligion. NARF also helps develop laws that provideunique protections for Native collective rights, tradi-tions, culture, and property such as sacred places, peyote, eagle feathers, burial remains, and funeraryobjects.
Religious Freedom and Sacred PlacesSacred Places Project
NARF has a long history in the protection of Nativereligion and cultural property, including sacred places.NARF’s Sacred Places Project focuses on monitoringlegal issues impacting sacred places for Native peo-ples, collaborating with various groups that arealready working to protect sacred places, monitoringand participating in litigation to protect sacred places,and advocating for greater protection and access forsacred places at the congressional and administrativelevels. 
Bears Ears
For several years, the Bears Ears Inter Tribal Coalition,a consortium of five sovereign Indian nations (HopiTribe, Navajo Nation, Ute Indian Tribe, Ute MountainUte Tribe, and Pueblo of Zuni) has worked to protectBears Ears region in Utah, America’s most significantunprotected cultural landscape. The Bears Ears regioncontains at least 100,000 archaeological sites, somedated back to 12,000 BCE, and is still critical to manytribes today for spiritual and hunting and gatheringpurposes. On December 28, 2016, President Obamaissued a Proclamation designating the Bears EarsNational Monument. The Proclamation also estab-lished the Bears Ears Commission “to provide guid-ance and recommendations on the development andimplementation of management plans and on manage-ment of the monument.” The Commission has nowbeen fully constituted and consists of one elected officer each from the Hopi Nation, Navajo Nation, Ute Mountain Ute Tribe, Ute Indian Tribe, and Puebloof Zuni. 
In April 2017, President Trump attacked this important
designation. Trump signed an executive order directing Department of Interior Secretary Ryan Zinketo conduct a review of the Bears Ears NationalMonument to determine if it was created without
“public outreach and proper coordination.” However,the suggestion that the monument’s designationlacked outreach and coordination is disingenuous. TheBears Ears National Monument was created after yearsof advocacy and many public meetings in the BearsEars region and in Washington, DC. The effort to protect Bears Ears was very long, very public, and veryrobust.
In August 2017, Zinke submitted recommendations to
shrink several monuments, including Bears Ears.Despite Zinke’s claim to be giving the people theirvoice back, his recommendation ignored an outpour-ing of public support for Bears Ears and other monu-ments. More than 95% of comments received by theDepartment of the Interior supported keeping thenational monuments, including 65% of comments fromUtah residents. NARF, on behalf of its three tribalclients (the Hopi Tribe, Pueblo of Zuni, and UteMountain Ute Tribe) filed comments in opposition tothe plan to remove Bears Ears from public lands protection on May 26 and again on July 10, 2017. 
On December 4, President Trump issued an Executive
Order revoking and replacing the Bears Ears NationalMonument. However, President Trump does not havethe authority to take that action. Only Congress has thepower to extinguish monuments once established.NARF represents the Hopi, Zuni, and Ute MountainUte Tribes and sued the Administration the day theaction was taken for violation of the Separation ofPowers enshrined in the Constitution and for violationof the Antiquities Act itself. 
At the same time, Representative Rob Bishop (R-UT)
has introduced House Bill 3990 that would provide thePresident the authority to revoke and diminish nation-al monuments designated under the Antiquities Act.HB 3990 has passed out of the Natural ResourcesCommittee and is awaiting a vote for the full House.We will be fighting this bill on behalf of our tribalclients.
Keystone Pipeline
The TransCanada Keystone Pipeline is a massive oilpipeline intended to link the oil producers in Canadawith the refiners and export terminals on the GulfCoast. It stretches 1,179 miles and crosses or comesvery close to the boundaries of many reservations andtribal land holdings, including the Oceti Sacowin orGreat Sioux Nation lands from before the Fort LaramieTreaty of 1868. It also crosses many rivers and theOgallala Aquifer, which provides water to South
Promoting Human RightsNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDDakota, Nebraska, and others. Moreover, the proposed
pipeline route crosses over sacred Sioux land and anundetermined number of cultural sites and burials.Despite these realities, no consultation has occurredbetween the federal government and the tribes affect-ed. For these and other reasons, President Obamarejected the permit required for the Canada-US bound-ary crossing in 2015. In March 2017, the TrumpAdministration reversed course and granted the neces-sary permit. NARF represents the Rosebud Sioux Tribein determining what course of action to take to bestprotect the Tribe’s citizens, natural resources, andsacred places.
Northern Arizona Withdrawal
In 2012, then-Interior Secretary Salazar announced thathe was withdrawing over a million acres of Bureau ofLand Management and Forest Service land around theGrand Canyon from any new uranium mining claims,an action known as the Northern Arizona Withdrawal.Several mining companies and individuals challengedthe Withdrawal on many grounds, including that theWithdrawal violated the Establishment Clause of theU.S. Constitution because it relied on American Indianspiritual beliefs and therefore constituted an impermis-sible establishment of religion. NARF, representing theIndian Peaks Band of Paiute Indians, the San JuanSouthern Paiute Tribe, and the Morningstar Institute,filed an amicus brief in one of those cases, Yount v.
Jewell. NARF’s amicus brief addressed the
Establishment Clause argument as well as the otherAmerican Indian cultural arguments that the miningcompanies raised. The court upheld the NorthernArizona Withdrawal. 
The mining companies appealed this decision to the
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. NARF, rep-resenting the Paiute Indian Tribe of Utah, San JuanSouthern Paiute Tribe, Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians,Hualapai Tribe of the Hualapai Reservation,Northwestern Band of the Shoshone Nation, theMorning Star Institute, and the National Congress ofAmerican Indians, again filed an amicus brief. The
Ninth Circuit held oral argument in this case inDecember 2016. In December 2017, the Ninth Circuitaffirmed the district court’s opinion upholding theNorthern Arizona Withdrawal. 
Southern Utah Wilderness Alliance, et al. v. Schneider
In May 2015, environmentalists and historic preserva-tion advocates secured a victory in Southwest Utah
Wilderness Alliance, et al. v. Schneider when a Utah fed-
eral district court ordered the Bureau of LandManagement (BLM) to conduct on-the-ground surveysto identify cultural artifacts in need of protection onmore than 4,000 miles of dirt roads and trails whereBLM permits off-road vehicles to be driven. BLMappealed that decision in the U.S Court of Appeals forthe Tenth Circuit. NARF, representing the PaiuteIndian Tribe of Utah, Indian Peaks Band of Paiutes, theSouthern Ute Indian Tribe, and the Morning StarInstitute, filed an amicus brief in the Tenth Circuit insupport of the environmentalists and requested thatthe surveys be conducted. A settlement agreement wasexecuted in January 2017. The settlement terms includerequirements for new travel planning on thirteen different areas under federal management, includingadditional and more intensive cultural resource surveys and inventories, as well as other provisionsrelated to wilderness areas, updated oil and gas guid-ance and modeling efforts, and vacating the districtcourt opinion. NARF continues to monitor theprogress of the case and the viability of the settlement.
Solonex v. Jewell
In September 2014, NARF filed an amicus brief onbehalf of the Blackfeet Tribe in the federal district courtcase, Solonex v. Jewell. The energy company is challeng-
ing the United States government’s process and deci-sion to limit oil and gas development in areas thatwould threaten the Tribe’s sacred sites. When the courtordered the federal government to decide whether it
18
2017 ANNUAL REPORTwould seek to cancel or to lift a suspension on
Solonex’s gas permit on lands sacred to the Tribe, theUnited States decided to cancel the oil and gas lease.Solonex since has amended its complaint challengingthe authority of the United States to cancel the lease. InOctober 2016, NARF filed an amicus brief on behalf of
the Tribe. In early 2017, the parties completed briefingon motions for summary judgment, so the matter isbefore the court. 
Standing Rock Sioux Tribe v. Army Corp of Engineers -
Amicus Brief StrategyNARF and the National Congress of American Indians(NCAI) are assisting the Standing Rock Sioux Tribeand their attorneys to develop and coordinate an effec-tive amicus brief strategy in their lawsuit in federal
court in Washington, DC, against the U.S. Army Corpsof Engineers in relation to the Dakota Access Pipeline(DAPL). The litigation involves two broad issues surrounding the proposed construction of a majorcrude-oil pipeline that passes through the Tribe’sancestral lands. First, the pipeline passes under theMissouri River at Lake Oahe, just a half a mileupstream of the tribe’s reservation boundary, where aspill would be culturally and economically catastrophic.Second, the pipeline passes through areas of great cultural significance, such as sacred sites and burialgrounds that the National Historic Preservation Act(NHPA) was enacted to protect. 
In December 2016, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
issued a statement that it would not grant an easementto allow the Dakota Access Pipeline to cross underLake Oahe. The Corps determined that further envi-ronmental review was warranted. However, onJanuary 24, 2017, President Trump issued a“Memorandum for the Secretary of the Army [re]:Construction of the Dakota Access Pipeline” directingthe Army to take “any and all actions appropriate” toreview and approve the easement, rescind or modifythe December memo, and consider any prior determi-nations in the matter. 
On February 8, 2017, the U.S. Department of Justice
informed the court that the Army Corps had providednotice of its intention to grant an easement to DakotaAccess, LLC to construct a pipeline under Corps-man-aged federal land at Lake Oahe. On February 9, 2017,the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe filed an emergencymotion for a Temporary Restraining Order (TRO); onFebruary 10, NARF filed an amicus brief on behalf ofthe Great Plains Tribal Chairman’s Association in sup-port of the TRO, focusing on the irreparable harmprong of the TRO in relation to historical trauma andpsychological harm. The court denied the TRO and the
preliminary injunction.
In February 2017, both Standing Rock Sioux Tribe and
Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe filed amended complaintsand motions for summary judgment challenging theissuance of the easement. NARF, in conjunction withNCAI, coordinated an amicus brief strategy in supportof the Tribes’ motions for summary judgment. 
In June 2017, the court issued a favorable ruling for the
Tribes, finding that the Army Corps of Engineers “didnot adequately consider the impacts of an oil spill onfishing rights, hunting rights, or environmental justice,or the degree to which the pipeline’s effects are likelyto be highly controversial.” However, the courtordered supplemental briefing on the question ofwhether remand (to the Corps) with or without stop-ping the flow of oil in the pipeline is appropriate. Inthis remedy phase of the proceeding, NARF filed anamicus brief on behalf of the Great Plains TribalChairman’s Association, NCAI, and eighteen Tribesand Tribal organizations. The brief argued two primarypoints: (1) failing to vacate the Corps permits and ease-ment would destroy the federal government’s obliga-tion to protect the Tribes’ resources and reduce Tribaltreaty rights to mere paper promises, and (2) failing to vacate would be an affront to environmental justiceby continuing the historic shifting of burdens to Indian Tribes.
In October 2017, the court decided to allow oil to 
continue flowing in the pipeline while the Corpsaddresses the errors in its environmental analysis iden-tified by the court in its opinion. However, he did notrule on the Tribes’ request that the court impose aseries of conditions on the continued operation ofDAPL under Lake Oahe. He will allow the partiesadditional briefing on that issue. NARF and NCAI con-tinue to work to coordinate an amicus strategy goingforward in this phase of the litigation
Native American Church of North America
NARF has represented the Native American Church ofNorth America (NACNA) and its member chapters forfour decades in the litigation and legislative arenas.Most recently, NARF has worked on a project toresearch the impact of peyote decline on NACNAmembers and to develop and support access to and theuse of peyote for NACNA. Importing from Mexico,where most naturally occurring peyote grows, ispresently not legal, and artificial cultivation is difficultand extraordinarily expensive, so North Americanpeyotists depend on the only region where peyote
19Promoting Human RightsNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDabundance occurs in the United States, the Rio Grande
River Valley in south Texas. In recent years that supplyof peyote is becoming less sustainable due to a myriadof factors: growing Indian demand; exploitation andcommercialization by non-Indian people; damagefrom land use practices including cattle ranching; anddamage from incorrect harvesting practices and over-harvesting of the peyote cactus. 
For the last few years, the Peyote Research Group has
focused on raising awareness in Texas of the need toprotect the sacrament. NARF and NACNA representa-tives have held many meetings with landowners, pey-oteros, and botanists to develop relationships. Mostrecently, NARF has closed on the purchase of 605 acresof south Texas land, made possible by a grant from theRiverStyx Foundation of California. 
Indian EducationBoarding School Healing Project
During the 19th and into the 20th century, pursuant tofederal policy, Native American children were forciblyabducted from their homes to attend Christian andgovernment-run boarding schools. The purpose was to"civilize" the Indian and to stamp out Native culture.Cut off from their families and culture, the childrenwere punished for speaking their native language,banned from conducting traditional or cultural prac-
tices, shorn of traditional clothing, and taught thattheir culture and traditions were sinful. Often placedfar from home, they were frequently neglected orabused physically, sexually, and psychologically. Theywere returned to their communities, not as theChristianized farmers that the policy envisioned, butas deeply scarred human beings with none of theacculturated skills (e.g., parenting, extended family,language, cultural practices) gained by those who areraised in a cohesive community. 
There has been scant recognition and no acceptance of
responsibility by the U.S. federal government that initi-ated and carried out this policy of cultural genocide.There are no realistic legal avenues to seek redress orhealing from the enduring wounds inflicted on the indi-viduals and communities of tribal nations. Unlike inother countries (e.g. Canada, Australia), there has beenno official U.S. proposal for healing or reconciliation. 
NARF represents the Native American Boarding
School Healing Coalition in seeking appropriateacknowledgment by the United States and majorChristian denominations of their roles in establishingand implementing the boarding school policy of cul-tural genocide. The Coalition provides education andoutreach in Indian Country, churches and the non-Indian public, Congress, and international venues. 
Tribal Education Departments National Assembly
NARF founded the Tribal Education DepartmentsNational Assembly (TEDNA) more than ten years agowith funding from the U.S. Department of Educationto start a new, first-of-its-kind national membershiporganization for Tribal Education Departments (orAgencies). With NARF’s assistance, TEDNA hasbecome a leading Indian education organization thatfocuses on tribal governance over K-12 education provided by state, federal, and tribal schools. NARFcontinues to represent TEDNA on national legislativeand administrative matters, including direct federalappropriations for TEDs, substantive provisions in leg-islation and regulations, and negotiations in otherinstruments and documents. For example, in May2017, NARF assisted TEDNA with its testimony to theU.S. House of Representatives subcommittee onInterior Department appropriations. In July 2017,NARF drafted a letter of support for S. 943, a bill thatwould require the Interior Department to update thestudent count used for program funding. In October2017, NARF drafted a letter of support on H.R. 1528,the Native American Indian Education Act, whichwould provide for federal funding for out-of-state
20
2017 ANNUAL REPORTNative American students at state universities that
offer tuition waivers to in-state Native American stu-dents. NARF also provides training for TEDNA and itspartners on various national, state, and tribal educa-tion legislation and other legal matters. 
In 2015, TEDNA was awarded one of the U.S.
Department of Education’s Indian Education Act dis-cretionary grants, a Native Youth Community Project(NYCP) Grant. Under this four-year grant, TEDNA ispartnering with four tribes and several educationalentities in a project that focuses on improving collegeand career readiness for tribal students. NARF isreviewing and analyzing tribal education codes toidentify areas for increased or improved tribal gover-nance to enhance in college and career readiness.NARF provided trainings on this point at TEDNANYCP meetings in 2017.
Since January 2017, NARF has been helping TEDNA
draft a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)between TEDNA and the Bureau of Indian Education(BIE) that provides for TEDNA to offer technical assis-tance to TEDs that receive direct federal fundingthrough the Interior Department. Finally, NARF hasconducted research for TEDNA on best practices fortribal consultation on education matters. NARF pre-sented the results of this research during the OklahomaSovereignty Symposium in June 2017, a data qualityseminar in July 2017, TEDNA’s annual meeting inOctober 2017, and at a TEDNA forum, in conjunctionwith the National Congress of American Indian’sannual convention in October 2017.
Indian Child Welfare Act Defense ProjectThe Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) was passed by
the U.S. Congress in 1978. A congressional investiga-tion showed that American Indian and Alaska Nativechildren were being removed disproportionately fromtheir families by state agencies and state courts andplaced in non-Native foster or adoptive homes or resi-dential institutions. Congress found that many of theseremovals and placements were due to state officials’inability or unwillingness to understand tribal culturesand societies. The impact of the removals and place-ments was extremely detrimental to the children, theirfamilies, and tribes. The ICWA Defense Project is apartnership between the Native American RightsFund, the National Indian Child Welfare Association,the National Congress of American Indians, and theICWA Appellate Clinic at Michigan State UniversitySchool of Law, formed to protect the rights of children,families, and tribes in ICWA proceedings nationwide.In June 2016, the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) issued
Regulations for Indian Child Welfare Act Proceedings,capping off more than a year of BIA ICWA reforms thatrepresented major progress in addressing many of theproblematic areas that have arisen since ICWA wasenacted in 1978. The new regulations went into effectin December 2016 and the BIA released updated ICWAGuidelines. Subsequently, a network of ICWA oppo-nents filed multiple lawsuits challenging the Guidelines
and ICWA’s constitutionality. 
In Minnesota, members of the Academy of Adoption
Attorneys filed a constitutional challenge to theMinnesota Indian Family Preservation Act (MIFPA).The case, Doe v. Jesson, claimed that the MIFPA violatedthe rights of Indian children and parents by requiringthem to notify the tribe of the adoptive proceeding andby allowing a tribe to intervene in the case. NARFassisted the attorneys for the tribe involved, the MilleLacs Band of Ojibwe, and provided research and tech-nical assistance in forming a response. In August 2017,the court declared the proceedings moot.
In July 2015, the Goldwater Institute—a conservative
think tank located in Phoenix, Arizona—filed A.D. v.
Washburn challenging the constitutionality of ICWA
and the revised Guidelines. NARF, on behalf of theNational Indian Child Welfare Association, NationalCongress of American Indians, and Association onAmerican Indian Affairs, filed an amicus brief in the
case supporting the motion to dismiss. In March 2017,the federal district court dismissed Goldwater’s casefor lack of standing. Goldwater has appealed to theNinth Circuit.
In addition to this litigation work, NARF has conducted
trainings and provided technical support on the newICWA regulations. In the last year and a half, NARFstaff conducted over twenty trainings reaching over1,150 state legislators, state judges, state attorneys, triballeaders, tribal ICWA workers, tribal attorneys, childwelfare attorneys and practitioners, volunteers whoserve as Court Appointed Special Advocates, statesocial workers, and guardians ad litem . NARF also
answered more than forty technical assistance requestsfrom tribal attorneys, parents’ attorneys, private practi-tioners, and nonprofit legal service providers. 
NARF also has been working to build the ICWA
Defense Project coalition with a series of meetingssponsored by NARF’s Kellogg Foundation grant. 
Finally, NARF has been heavily involved in recent
efforts in Alaska to transfer more control over the
21Promoting Human RightsNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDstate’s child welfare system to tribes through a com-
pacting process, similar to what has been used in theIndian Health Service context. This effort will allowtribes to enter into an agreement with the state to pro-vide services and/or perform functions that are current-ly provided by the Alaska Office of Children’s Services. 
Voting and Civil RightsBrakebill, et al. v. Jaeger
On December 13, 2017, NARF again brought actionagainst the state of North Dakota seeking to overturnNorth Dakota’s newest discriminatory voter ID law.NARF filed an amended complaint on behalf of NativeAmerican plaintiffs impacted by the discriminatorylaw. Last year, NARF fought to enjoin enforcement ofNorth Dakota’s voter ID law, which disproportionate-ly prevented Native Americans from exercising theirright to vote. In that action, Judge Daniel L. Hovland ofthe U.S. District Court for the District of North Dakotafound “[i]t is undisputed that the more severe condi-tions in which Native Americans live translates to dis-proportionate burdens when it comes to complyingwith the new voter ID laws.” Judge Hovland, there-fore, held the law likely violated the U.S. Constitutionbecause it disproportionately kept Native Americansfrom voting and required the state to provide a fail-safemechanism for those without IDs in the 2016 generalelection. Judge Hovland wrote, “… it is clear that a safe-ty net is needed for those voters who simply cannotobtain a qualifying voter ID with reasonable effort.”
In light of this defeat, the legislature amended their
law earlier this year, but the new law failed to includemeaningful protections for voters’ rights. PlaintiffsRichard Brakebill, Dorothy Herman, Della Merrick,Elvis Norquay, Ray Norquay, and Lucille Vivieramended their suit, which now challenges this recentlyenacted voter ID law, HB 1369. HB 1369 ignores theproblems Judge Hovland identified in his previousopinion and perpetuates voter suppression tactics byrequiring every voter to possess a narrowly prescribedform of ID. It also lacks the necessary fail-safe provi-sions that would ensure that qualified voters are notdenied their right to vote. The Legislature passed theseprovisions despite knowing they would suppress theNative American vote. This law was implemented inorder to deny qualified Native American voters accessto the ballot box.
Native American Voting Rights Coalition
In 2015, NARF founded the Native American VotingRights Coalition (NAVRC), a non-partisan alliance ofnational and grassroots organizations, scholars, andactivists advocating for equal access for Native
Americans to the political process. NARF developedthe project to coordinate efforts at overcoming the bar-riers Native Americans face in registering to vote, cast-ing their ballot, and having an equal voice in elections.NAVRC employs three primary methods to achieve itsgoal. It educates the public about the unique chal-lenges Native voters face. It works with policy makersand election officials to address those challenges. And,when necessary, NAVRC members may pursue otherlegal avenues, including litigation, to stop practices thathave a discriminatory purpose or effect on Native voters.
In September 2017, NAVRC began holding field hear-
ings across the country. The hearings will constitute thelargest survey of Native voters every conducted andcreate a documentary record of the circumstances sur-rounding voting in Indian Country, identifying theunique needs and challenges faced by Native voters.
Smith v. State
For decades, the Alaska Court System has excluded theresidents of over 150 rural villages from being calledfor jury service. The courts claim that it’s too expensiveto include rural residents; however, the exclusion ofrural residents ends up disenfranchising communitieswith lower incomes and that are predominately AlaskaNative. Not including those communities in the jurypool results in thirty percent of Alaska Natives beingexcluded from participating in the justice system. Itaffects perceptions of the justice system—if you’reexcluded from jury service then you only encounterthe courts if you’re a victim, witness, or defendant.And, it results in unrepresentative juries and likely dis-proportionate sentences.
In February 2017, NARF filed an amicus brief before the
Alaska Court of Appeals in support of AppellantSmith’s arguments that costs savings alone are not asufficient government interest, under an equal protec-tion and due process analysis, to exclude thirty percentof the Alaska Native community from serving on juries. 
International Recognition of Indigenous PeoplesUnited Nations Declaration on the Rights of 
Indigenous PeoplesNARF and the National Congress of American Indians(NCAI) entered into an attorney-client relationshipover a decade ago for the purpose of working in theinternational arena to protect indigenous rights.September 2017 was the tenth anniversary of theUnited Nation’s adoption of the Declaration on theRights of Indigenous Peoples. The Declaration recog-
222017 ANNUAL REPORTnizes that indigenous peoples have important collec-
tive human rights in a multitude of areas, includingself-determination, spirituality, cultural and linguisticheritage, and lands, territories and natural resources. Itsets minimum standards for the treatment of indige-nous peoples and can serve as the basis for the devel-opment of customary international law. NARF’s mostrecent actions on behalf of the NCAI have focused onthe enhanced participation of indigenous institutionsat the United Nations (UN).
Until now, indigenous peoples have had to appear in
most UN bodies as non-governmental organizations,which is precisely what they are not. A meeting ofIndigenous Peoples’ representatives from around theworld, including one from NCAI, met in November2016 to discuss areas of consensus. Informal consulta-tions with member states began in December 2016 andcontinued through July 2017. This series of consulta-tions concluded without any real movement on theissue, but the UN General Assembly committed inSeptember 2017 to continue to consider the issue forthe next five sessions, and directed that additionalregional consultations take place and that a report becompiled.
Organization of American States Declaration on the Rights
of Indigenous PeoplesThe Organization of American States (OAS) has beenworking on an American Declaration on the Rights ofIndigenous Peoples for over twenty-five years. NARFhas been representing NCAI on this matter. TheGeneral Assembly of the OAS approved the AmericanDeclaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples inJune 2016. This Declaration marks a major victory forindigenous peoples. The American Declaration goesbeyond the United Nations Declaration on the Rightsof Indigenous Peoples in several respects including,among others, treaties, the rights of children, and therights of peoples in voluntary isolation. The UnitedStates commented it had been a persistent objector tothe text and could not be bound by it. 
NARF, on behalf of NCAI, attended a meeting of the
OAS General Assembly in June 2017. The GeneralAssembly adopted a resolution approving a plan toimplement the Declaration. 
World Intellectual Property Organization
Recently, NARF has represented NCAI in the ongoingnegotiations for an international treaty to protect various intellectual property, including TraditionalKnowledge, Genetic Resources and TraditionalCultural Expressions (TCE). The United States hasbeen participating in these treaty negotiations at the
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) since2000, and since 2016 there has been draft text of thepotential treaties. The United States Department ofState has delegated authority to the U.S. Patent andTrademark Office (PTO) for these negotiations, but nei-ther the PTO, the State Department, nor any federalagency has ever consulted with American Indian andAlaska Native tribes regarding the negotiations. At its2016 Annual Convention, NCAI passed a resolutioncalling for such consultation. In June 2017, the PTO andother federal agencies conducted the first listening ses-sion with tribes on this matter. 
In May 2017, NARF and the University of Colorado
Law School hosted a major drafting session on theWIPO TCE instrument. NARF took a proposed draft ofnew TCE provisions to the 34th WIPO session in June2017. The WIPO Indigenous Caucus approved the draftand some of the text from it was introduced into theWIPO draft TCE instrument. In October 2017, the newWIPO Intergovernmental Committee on IntellectualProperty and Genetic Resources, TraditionalKnowledge and Folklore mandate and work plan wereapproved by the WIPO General Assembly. 
23Promoting Human Rights
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 24Contained within the unique trust relationship
between the United States and Native nations is theinherent duty for all levels of government to recognizeand responsibly enforce the many laws and regula-tions applicable to Native peoples. Because such lawsimpact virtually every aspect of tribal life, NARF main-tains its involvement in the legal matters pertaining toholding governments accountable to Native Americans. 
Trust Fund MattersPembina Chippewa v. United States
In Pembina Chippewa v. United States , NARF represents
the Turtle Mountain Chippewa, Chippewa Cree, WhiteEarth Band of Minnesota Chippewa, and Little ShellChippewa Tribes in this case against the federal gov-ernment for misaccounting and mismanagement oftheir tribal trust fund, the Pembina Judgment Fund(PJF). Since August 2007, the parties have beenengaged in alternative dispute resolution proceedingsbefore a Settlement Judge of the Court of FederalClaims. In July 2015, the parties reached agreement ona monetary amount for a potential settlement of thePlaintiffs' claims in this case. Since that time the partieshave been discussing numerous non -monetary components of a potential settlement, and preparingvarious documents. 
Muscogee (Creek) Nation v. Zinke 
In January 2014, the Muscogee Creek Nation retainedNARF to represent it in its pending action in federaldistrict court for an historical accounting of its trustfunds and assets. NARF reviewed the Nation’s trustaccount data provided by the government and assistedthe Nation in its settlement negotiations with the gov-ernment. In August 2016, the final settlement agree-ment was filed with and approved by the Court. TheJoint Stipulation of Dismissal was filed in September2016 and is awaiting approval by the Court. 
Intertribal Council of Arizona v. United States 
In April 2015, NARF filed on behalf of the IntertribalCouncil of Arizona (ITCA) a breach of trust caseagainst the United States seeking damages for mis-management of the Arizona Intertribal Trust Fund(AITF). The AITF was established by Congress in 1988to compensate Arizona tribes for the closure of thePhoenix Indian School, an off-reservation boardingschool operated by the Bureau of Indian Affairs since1891. The school’s closure allowed the Department ofthe Interior to exchange the land on which the schoolhad been located for privately owned lands of theBarron Collier Company in Florida that would become
part of a national wildlife refuge. The Phoenix landswere more valuable than the Florida lands, andCongress approved the land exchange only if the dif-ference in value of the properties went to the AITF anda trust fund for the Navajo Nation. Collier paid some,but not all, of the property value and gave the UnitedStates notice that they would no longer make pay-ments. The lawsuit seeks to hold the United Statesliable for the remaining payments into the AITF. InMay 2016, the parties to this case (i.e., ITCA and theUnited States) attempted a voluntary mediation effort,but the mediation was not successful, and the case wasreturned to active litigation. However, in October 2016,the United States and Collier announced that they hadreached a settlement in principle of their claims againsteach other. It is possible this could lead to a successfulnegotiated settlement of ITCA’s claims against theUnited States. In the event that the claims must be litigated, ITCA filed a First Amended Complaint inDecember 2016, which the United States moved to dismiss in February 2017. However, in August 2017 thecourt terminated the dismissal motion and orderedITCA to file a second amended complaint. 
Repeal of the Klamath Tribe Distribution of Judgment Act
The Klamath Tribe retained NARF to seek repeal of theDistribution of Judgment Fund Act, which was adoptedas part of the legislation that terminated the Tribes'government-to-government relationship in 1954. Thatrelationship was restored in 1986, but the remnant leg-islation was not repealed. The Distribution Actrequires distribution of judgments from the UnitedStates Treasury to descendants of those who appear onthe final roll compiled pursuant to the TerminationAct. That would include distribution of tribal funds toa significant number of non-Indians and individualswho are not enrolled members of the Tribes. Repealwould result in funds deposited in the Treasury fromjudgments against the United States being distributedpursuant the Distribution of Judgment Funds Act forall Tribes. Senators Merkley and Wyden introduced S. 1223 on May 24, 2017 to repeal the Klamath TribeJudgment Fund Act. A hearing on the Bill was held in July 2017, and NARF provided testimony insupport of its adoption. In December, the SenateCommittee on Indian Affairs recommended the bill, asamended, pass.
Holding Governments Accountable2017 ANNUAL REPORTCenter for Biological Diversity, et al. v. U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, et al.
NARF represented the Santa Ynez Band of Chumash
Indians in a case challenging the issuance of a CleanWater Act Section 404 permit. The proposed NewhallRanch Project area encompasses 12,000 acres along 5.5linear miles of the Santa Clara River and calls for theconstruction of nearly 21,000 homes on approximately2,550 acres. The project area is also the ancestral home-land of Chumash and includes at least two significantarchaeological sites as well as a number of ancientburials. The Corps issued a Clean Water Act Section404 permit to Newhall in October 2012, and the suitsoon followed. The Tribe joined this case to protecttheir right to government-to-government consultationunder the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) and the
National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA). TheTribe’s claim is simple: the Corps never contacted,much less formally consulted, the Tribe about the proj-ect. The Corps failed to follow the statutory and regu-latory mandates with respect to the Tribe. Thus theSection 404 permit the Corp’s granted to Newhall is inviolation of the NHPA and APA. Oral argument washeld in February 2017. Subsequently, Newhall begansettlement discussions in earnest and the case was settled in September 2017. The Tribe negotiated for cultural resource protections that exceed what isrequired by California and federal law, support fortheir cultural center, and amending of the flawedagreement that previously applied to the project. 
25
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 26NARF has three ongoing projects aimed at developing
Indian law and educating the public about Indian rights,laws, and issues: the Indigenous Peacemaking Initiative,
the National Indian Law Library, and the Indian LawSupport Center. NARF also participates in numerousconferences and meetings to share its knowledge andexpertise in Indian law. During 2017, NARF attorneysand staff served in speaking and leadership capacitiesat numerous conferences and meetings such as theNational Congress of American Indians ExecutiveCouncil, Midyear and Annual Conventions and theFederal Bar Association’s Indian Law Conference.NARF remains firmly committed to continuing its effortto share its legal expertise in support of Indian rights.
Indigenous Peacemaking Initiative Indigenous peacemaking is a community-directed 
conflict resolution process that addresses the concernsof all interested parties. The peacemaking process usestraditional rituals such as the group circle and Clanstructures to involve the parties to a conflict, their supporters, elders and interested community mem-bers. Within the circle, people can speak from the heartin a shared search for understanding of the conflict,and together identify the steps necessary to assist inhealing all affected parties and to prevent future occur-rences and conflicts. Learn more from the IPI video athttp:/ / bit.ly /IPI-video. 
The mission of the Indigenous Peacemaking Initiative
(IPI) is to promote and support Native peoples inrestoring and revitalizing sustainable peacemakingpractices. The project is guided by an AdvisoryCommittee consisting of traditional peacemakingexperts and practitioners. 
Trainings and technical assistance for tribes are an IPI
focus. In August 2017, the IPI worked with the EasternBand of Cherokee Indians to assist in a CommunityDispute Resolution program under the Tribal Courtincluding on-site trainings for peacemaking facilita-tors. August brought the annual Pokagon Band ofPotawatomi Tribal Court-sponsored training in PeaceCircles. IPI also began community peacemaking dis-cussions at the Ho-Chunk Nation in September, andpresented a peacemaker training for the ChoctawNation Judicial Branch. With Advisory Committeesupport, IPI has been working on planning and funding recruitment for peace circles development andimplementation in southeast Alaska as well. IPI also provided several presentations and panels this
year. IPI and its Advisory recently presented at theAnnual National American Indian Court JudgesAssociation meeting in October and the AmericanIndian Justice Conference in December.
The National Indian Law Library The National Indian Law Library (NILL) is the only
law library in the United States devoted to Indian law.The library serves NARF and members of the public.Since it started as a NARF project in 1972, NILL hascollected nearly 9,000 resource materials that relate tofederal Indian and tribal law. The collection includestribal laws and constitutions, pleadings from majorIndian cases, and hard-to-find reports and historicallegal information. The library maintains an immensewebsite (www.narf.org/nill/), which receives 25,000visits each month. In addition to making its extensivecollection available to the public, NILL providesresearch assistance related to Indian law and tribal law,and its staff answers over 2,000 questions each year.
The library’s holdings include the largest collection of
tribal codes, ordinances and constitutions, and the TribalLaw Gateway (www.narf.org/nill/triballaw/) contin-ues to be an invaluable resource for researchers andpractitioners in tribal law. In the last year, NILL receivedupdates to seventy-eight constitutions/codes fromforty-two tribes and completed the migration from itsold tribal law index to the new Tribal Law Gateway.
Each week, NILL provides free updates on Indian law
through the Indian Law Bulletins (www.narf.org/nill/bulletins/), which are available by email or on thewebsite. More than 5,000 subscribers currently receivethe bulletin updates. For more than a decade, thelibrary has offered access to federal and state courtcases, legal news and scholarship, federal legislation,and regulatory action from agencies and departmentslike the Environmental Protection Agency and theBureau of Indian Affairs. In 2017, the library added abulletin covering tribal court opinions. In addition tothe weekly distribution, the Indian Law Bulletins arearchived on the NILL website, where they can be usedas a searchable database of Native American law andlegal news. 
Developing Indian Law2017 ANNUAL REPORT 27Indian Law Support Center
NARF continues to perform Indian Law Support
Center duties by sending regular electronic communi-cations to the twenty-four Indian Legal Services (ILS)programs, hosting a national listserv, handlingrequests for assistance, and working with ILS pro-grams to secure a more stable funding base. The IndianTribal Justice and Legal Assistance Act of 2000 author-
izes the U.S. Department of Justice to provide supple-mental funding to Indian legal services programs fortheir representation of Indian people and tribes thatfall below federal poverty guidelines. The NationalAssociation of Indian Legal Services and NARF havebeen awarded a civil-program-only grant of $600,000in FY 2017 funds that NARF will administer.
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 28Based on our audited financial statements for the fiscal year
ending September 30, 2017, NARF reports total revenue andnet assets of $32,097,408 and $42,245,235, respectively. Due topresentation requirements of the audited financial state-ments in terms of recognizing the timing of certain revenuesand expenses, they do not reflect the fact that based onNARF’s internal reporting, revenue exceeded expenses andother cash outlays resulting in an increase of $22,347,195 toNARF’s reserve fund. After the creation of a $25 millionFuture Legal Advocacy Fund, a Board-designated endow-ment, our reserve fund stands at $13.5 million.
When compared to fiscal year 2016: There was a slight
increase in public contributions. Although we have escalatedour direct mail campaigns (donations increased over 60% inthat area), bequests had decreased significantly (this area canvary widely from one year to the next). The significant
increase in tribal contributions is due to receiving generousdonations from our tribal trust fund clients. Federal awardsrelate to our Bureau of Justice Assistance contracts, themajority of which is also included in expenses since it ispaid-out to sub-recipients, and, although we continue to beawarded new contracts, the amounts vary from year to year.The decrease in foundation grants is due to receiving manynew and large foundation grants last year that actually ben-efit future years. Our relationships with those foundationsare strong and renewed funding after the current agreementsend is possible. The slight increase in legal fees is mostly dueto the actual fees related to our tribal trust fund work. Alongwith the overall markets, NARF’s investments continue toperform well. Also, we added more funds to our investmentsover the year.
FY 2017 Financial Report
Public Contributions
Tribal Contributions
Federal Awards 
Foundation Grants
Return on Investments
Other
TOTALS          2,121,784
23,771,360
1,001,888
907,065
2,123,889
2,115,776
55,646
$32,097,4086.6%
74.1%
3.1%2.8%6.6%6.6%0.2%
100.0%2,074,593
3,457,9651,011,4763,108,8322,028,3221,604,562
58,233
$13,343,98315.6%
25.9%
7.6%
23.3%15.2%12.0%
0.4%
100.0%dollars percents
2017
dollars percents2016
Legal Fees
dollars percents2017
dollars percents2016
Litigation and Client Services
National Indian Law Library     Total Program Services
Management and GeneralFund Raising     Total Support Services
                         TOTALS                        7,738,649 
     356,178 
   8,094,827  
     902,350 
   2,068,248    2,970,598 
 $11,065,425     69.9%
3.2%
73.1%
8.2%
18.7%26.9%
100.0%            71.9%
3.4%
75.3%
8.0%
16.7%24.7%
100.0%                    7,749,780 
     362,854 
    8,112,634  
     861,057 
    1,796,946     2,658,003 
$10,770,637  EXPENSE COMPARISON
Note: This summary of financial information has been extracted from NARF’s audited financial statements which received an unmod ified
opinion by the accounting firm of BKD, LLP . Complete audited financials are available, upon request, through our Boulder office , or at
www.narf.org.SUPPORT AND REVENUE COMPARISON2017 ANNUAL REPORT 29NARF’s success relies on the generosity of our donors
throughout the nation. We invite you to learn moreabout the benefits associated with each program list-ed below, please contact our DevelopmentDepartment, 303-447-8760.
We gratefully acknowledge these donors for fiscal year
2017 (October 1, 2016 through September 30, 2017).
Tribes and Native Organizations
Aleut Community of St. Paul Island, AMERIND Risk,Chickasaw Nation, Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma,Comanche Nation, Confederated Tribes of SiletzIndians, Confederation Tribes of the Umatilla IndianReservation, Cow Creek Band of Umpqua Tribe ofIndians, Gila River Indian Community, KenaitzeIndian Tribe, Keweenaw Bay Indian Community, LittleTraverse Bay Bands of Odawa Indians, MuckleshootTribe, National Indian Gaming Association,Nottawaseppi Huron Band of the Potawatomi Indians,Pauma Band of Mission Indians, Pechanga Band ofLuiseño Indians, Penobscot Indian Nation, PoarchBand of Creek Indians, Ponca Tribe of Nebraska,Pueblo of Acoma, Quinault Indian Nation, Sac and FoxNation, San Manuel Band of Mission Indians, SeminoleTribe of Florida, Seven Cedars Casino/JamestownS'Klallam, Shakopee Mdewakanton Sioux Community,Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate of Lake TraverseReservation, Soboba Band of Luiseño Indians,Southern Ute Indian Tribe, Tulalip Tribes, White EarthNation, Yocha Dehe Wintun Nation
Foundations, Corporations and Law Firms
Adirondack Foundation; Agua Fund; AlaskaConservation Foundation; AOH Foundation; ArchesFoundation; Aria Foundation; Ark and the DoveFoundation; Bay and Paul Foundations; Casey FamilyPrograms; Charles P . & Mary E. Belgarde Foundation;Chorus Foundation; Comcast Foundation; CookInletkeeper; Dave and Sheila Gold Foundation;Defense Against Thought Control Foundation;Edgerton Foundation; Mary Engelbreit Retail, Inc;Edward & Verna Gerbic Family Foundation; FordFoundation; Gordon & Betty Moore Foundation;Gorlitz Foundation; Hewlett Foundation; JewishFederation of Greater Pittsburgh Area; Keluche-FullerFoundation, Inc; Lannan Foundation; MALDEF;Natural Resources Consulting Engineers; NEOPhilanthropy; Oak Foundation; Oceans 5; PewCharitable Trust; RiverStyx Foundation; Rocky HillAdvisors; Sawaya Law Firm; Stetson Engineers; ThreeSisters Foundation; Tiffany & Co Foundation; True
North Foundation; Tzó-Nah Fund; W.K. KelloggFoundation
Living Waters Endowment
The Living Waters Endowment allows donors to honorfriends and loved ones by making an endowment gift of$10,000 or more, where the principal is invested and inter-est income is used for NARF’s programs. By designating agift to endowment, your contribution will generate annualfunds and provide legal representation to our tribal clients inperpetuity. 
Elwood H. Brotzman Memorial Fund, Jerome Davis
Living Waters Endowment Fund, Kathleen & RuthDooley Family Fund, Susan K. Griffiths Memorial Fund,The Robert & Joy Hanson Leland Endowment, Frank J.McCormick Family Fund, Marvin W. Pourier Jr. &Donna M. Deans Memorial Fund, Mary Lou Mosca-Ragona Memorial Fund, Ernest L. Schusky Endowment,The Snoqualmie Indian Tribe, Helen & Sidney UngarMemorial Endowment Fund, Dan & Beth WhittemoreNARF Acknowledgment of Contributions:
Fiscal Year 2017
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDBequests and Trusts
Jeannette Anderson, Dale Armitage, Edith Borden,Diane Delp, Carolyn Ferriday/Ferriday Fund, WilliamGuimond, Elizabeth Ross Johnson, Patricia Kutzner,Donald McKinley, Mary L. Meyer, Joseph Padula, JackRobbins, Kathleen Newton Shafer, John Vaupel
Peta Uha
Peta Uha in the Lakota (Sioux) language means firekeeper,
an individual who makes a solemn commitment to ensurethat the sacred flame—source of light, heat, and energy forthe people—will be kept burning. Peta Uha is a membershipprogram for donors making substantial annual commit-ments to NARF. Like the firekeepers of old, members of thePeta Uha Council demonstrate constancy and vigilance toensure the protection of justice for Native Americans.
Peta Uha Pipestone 
Adam Albright, Charles Belgarde, Susan Dunlap,Lucille Echohawk, Kathryn Greis, William & ElizabethJones
Peta Uha T urquoise
Beane Family Foundation, Anna Bradberry, Frederick& Judith Buechner, John Gaguine, Henry Schimberg,Ann Larimore, Maryann Macias, Paul & Julie Murphy-
Ribes, Thanh Tran, Suzanne Whiting, Ziering FamilyFoundation
Peta Uha Granite
Karen Benjamin, Dave & Sheila Gold, Ezra Firestone,Amy Hall, Collier Hands, Willodean Harness, AdamKlepper, Richard Knutson, Paul & Eileen LeFort,Megan McQueen, Beverly Terry, Marty Vaughan, MaryZerby
Peta Uha Flint
Kamal Ahmed, Rachel & Hannah Allen, Joy Alwan,Grace Anderson, Robert Anderson & Marilyn Heiman,AOH Foundation, Phyllis Bardo, Carlin Barton, AmyBlackwell, David & Barbara Boerner, NancyBonvillain, David Boyd & Misae Nishikura, Brian Britt,Alice Broner, Jane Brown, Janet Campbell, MichaelCaputo, Candelario & Elizabeth Celio, John Clement,Richard Cobb, Keith Cowan, David Crane & ElizabethDang, Karen Crook, Austin Dahl & Pamela Kraus, EricDahlstrom, Gart Davis, Patrick Dyer, Bert & Jo AnnEder, Daren & Amy Eilert, Peter Ember, Anita Fineday,Louise Fishman, Winston Fitzhugh, Herbert Floyd,Jonathan Fraade, Andrew & Audrey Franklin, DanielFrench & Rosann Tung, Rosemary Gabriel, Samuel &Grace Gorlitz, Frank Grant, James Grasher, ElizabethGrinnell, Michelle Groleau, David Harwood, EileenHeaser, Emilie Heller-Rhys, Brian Highland, GlennHilliard, John Hirschi, Raymond Honeywell, MyriamHouser, Louise & Herb Hovitz, Joan Howison, AnneHumes, Dylan Johnson, Bernadine Jones, Mona Karim,Lois Katnick, Rebecca Kay, Ricki & Scott Kresan, T.Labrecque, Supawan Lamsam, Eva Lee, David Lemal,Yvonne LeMelle, Adam Lisagor, Henry LuceFoundation, Terry Luke, Stewart Macaulay, MelodyMacKenzie, John Magnusson, Alex Malaspina, LynnMarran, Peyton Mays, Priscilla McDougal, BarbaraMeislin, Dale & Carol Miller, Gerrish & Gail Milliken,Lisa Moersdorf, RN, Jeanne Morrel-Franklin,Cassandra Naylor, Robbie Nevil, Frannie Oates, John& Elizabeth O'Brien, Helen Ostruske & David Ringo,Jeannette Peterson, Claude & Noelle Poncelet, EdithQuevedo, Sara Ransford, Derek Richardson, Arthur &Maria Richmond, Faith Roessel, Barbara Rogoff, Marc& Pam Rudick, Robert Ryan, Gabriela Santiago-Romero, Kobi Sarker, Michael Sawaya, Sara Schepp,Ernest & Mary Sue Schusky, Peter Sheldon, PeterSimonson, Susan Slaughter, Mary Gabrielle Sprague,Sprocket Foundation, Jennifer Stanley, Elizabeth Steele,Wes Studi, Jonathan Sunshine, John Swaner, CharlesSwezey, Tom Tremaine, Mary Trujillo, Rebecca Tsosie,Julia Tullis, Unitarian Universalist Church of Urbana-Champaign, Margaret Verble, Nicholas Vrooman,
30
2017 ANNUAL REPORTNancy Walder, Stephen Waldman, Suzanne Way, Lara
Weatherly, Alexander Weiss, Peter Wiley, Julian &Stacy Yochum, Frank R. & Faye M. Zimmerman FamilyFund
Peta Uha Obsidian
Maureen L. Abel, Eugenie Allen, Grace Anderson,Thomas Andreas, Dana Andrewson, Dean Attaway,Sarah Bell, Kendall Bills, Raoul & Celesta Birnbaum,Mitchel Bollag, Cathryn Booth-LaForce, William & ElsaBoyce, Kristen Boyles, Kristin Briggs, Robert Busey,Susan Bush, Cheryl Capps, Ruth Carroll, Casey Carter,Christian Cashman, Ann Catts, Joseph Cazares,Abraham Chavez, George Cloward, Bruce Cobern,Serena Connelly, Cheryl A. Conner, Samuel Cook, RuthCowan, Christina Craigo, Alfred Croce, BernadetteCronin, Barbara Davis, Rebecca Deans, Anne DeMuth,John Dercksen, Jacqueline Dinker, Steve Dixon, JonDorschner, Lori Dudar, Rosemary Duesterhaus, SusanEichhorn, Helen Elahi, Ann Ellis, Robert Endres, CassEpstein, Joan Eshler, John & Barbara Everett, LenoreFeigenbaum, Barbara Forster, Kristina Frank, JohnFueller, L. J. Furnstahl, Domino Gehred-O'Connell,Lawrence Geller, Ann Getches, Eric & Jeff Ginsburg,Jean Giron, Duncan Gold, Chris Goodwin, ChuckGoossen, Pamela Gordon, Martin Griffith, MichaelGross, Juliana Guenther, Guilford Publications Inc,Heide Gulgowski, Edward Haddock Jr., FrancisHagan, Lucile Hamlin, Wayne Hardwick, JamesHealey, Ralph Helms, William Hintzman, Janie Hipp,Hollie Hirat, Larry Hoellwarth, Sandra Hollander,Karin Holser, Robert Honsinger, Stephanie Housley,Ivan & Carol Hoyt, Adrian Hutchinson, Wayne Hyatt,Liz Marr John Price, Rodolfo Juarez, Peter Kaczmarek,Mark Kadzielski, Julie Karbo, Scott & Michelle Kegler,Karen Kehoe, John Kelly, Lewis Kirk, Valerie Knettle,Herr George Kochjar, Mark Kollasch, Lavanya Kraus,Jeremiah Kreisberg, Susan Kyle, Bennye Laffere,Wayne Lawson, Renee LeBeau, Ingrid LeBlanc,Sheralyn Listgarten, Stu Livingston, Nicole Loffler,Sheila Loftus, Ken Lundstrom, Alexandrine Lyons-Boyle, Patricia Macomber, Margarita Maestas, DanielMagraw, Florence Maher, Marana Webber TostCharitable Fund, Philip Mark, Courtney Marshall,Carolyn Mason, Barry Matt, Patricia Mautner, DavidMavricos, Susan McClary, Scott & Sally McElroy, JeanMcNamara, James Merkey, Raymond Meyer, CharlesMiller, Bernice Moffett, Richard Monkman, JamesMortenson, Lou Moyer, Barbara Musicus, NobuyukiNakajima, Natural Resources Consult Engineers Inc,Carol Navsky, Grant Nelson, Sara Nerken, MarthaNewell, Nomadics Tipi Makers, Richard Parker, GaryParlet, Dorothy Parris, William & Coleen Pass, LorenPattschull, Wendy Pei, Goldman Philanthropy, Nick Poeppelman, Steven Pordes, Lester Poretsky
Family, Gail Povey, Lawrence Procell, Darius Puff,Jacqueline Quinn, Luellen Ramey, Amelie Ratliff,Helen Redbird-Smith, John Reed, James Reichwein,Caryl Rine, Jimmy Roberts-Miller, Georgia Rogers,Mary Rose, Wayne Ross & Nancy Starling Ross, RobertRothhouse, Gordon Rothrock, SAD Foundation, JulieSaracino, Martha Saxton, Robert Scarborough, JoyceSchnobrich, James D Sharp, Noel Sheer, StevenSlomka, Kaighn Smith, Abby Smith, Peter Sorensen,Alexandra Spellm an, Donna Spillane, John Squires,
Kelley Stanley, Lyle Steinfeldt, Mark Stephany, ShernaStewart, Bridget Talone, William & Elizabeth Thomas,Louise Thoms, Stephen Todd, Alice Turak, UnitarianUniversalist Church, Daniel & Dianne Vapnek, HowardWack, Linda Walsh, Reino Wantin, Maxine Ware, JaniceWarner, Stephen Wasby, Debbi & Joe Welch, DanielWellehan, Karen Welmas, Paul Wilhite, William PennFoundation, Nancy Williiams, Katharine Wilson, DavidWinston, Roger Wise, Elisabeth Wood, Mark Stephany& BhaVana Averring, Judy Worth, Yoga HarmonyNashville Friends, Glen Yoshioka, Mary Young
Circle of Life
NARF’s Circle of Life donors provide a lasting legacy to theNative American Rights Fund by including NARF in estateplanning or deferred gifts. The circle is an important symbolthroughout Native American cultures, representing unity,strength, and the eternal continuity of life. These lasting gifts helpensure the future of NARF and our Indian clients nationwide.
Catches Bear & Judy Adams, Rodney J. Addison,
Gloria Adkinson, Maxwell K. Barnard, BarbaraBeasley, Diane Ben Ari, Roy Benson, Bobby Bitner,Betty E. Blumenkamp, Nanette M. Bohren, Dale E.Brand, Nina R. Brilli, Samuel Broaddus & SandraJensen, William Brown, Gloria Burgess, PatriciaBurnet, Arthur Carter, Robert Carter, Mary Casmus, EdChasteen, Judith A. Day, Harvey Dennenberg, Lyle A.Dethlefsen, Gary Dickerhoof, Starr Dormann, PatriciaR. Duval, Noelle Edwards, Susan E. Eichhorn, AllisonB. Emerson, James K. Fee, Debra K. Frazier, JanFreeman, Lyle Funderburk, Suzanne Gartz, TheLawrence H. Geller Family, Deborah Ghoreyeb, EstelaGoldsmith, Louise Gomer Bangel, Dr. Gene Grabau,Anna Gulick, Jean Gundlach, Merrill Hakim, MichaelS. Hall, Margaret Hartnett, Theodora C. Haughton,Patricia Heidelberger, Karin Holser, Barbara A.Humes, Elizabeth A. Johnson, Vusama Kariba, BettyKleczy, Ellyne Krakower - Rice, Edward Kriege, SharonLaughlin, Ingrid LeBlanc, James Lehnerer, Rima Lurie,Suzanne MacDonald, Dr. Patricia Marks-Greenfield,Helen McCahill, Marion McCollom Hampton, Dr. Joseph McNamara, Peter & Betty Meyer, 
31ContributionsNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDWilliam G. M illigan, Gary Montgomery, Leila V . Moore,
Jeanne Moskal, Anthony Pampena, Marc Pearce,Moses Peter, Randall Petersen, Denise Pfalzer, ThelmaPopulus Gordon, Robert & Mary Resnik, MaureenRipley, Barbara H. Roberts, Andrea Robinsong, RamonA. Rodgers, June Rosenthal, Keith I. Ross, WilliamRozier, Mrs. B.W. Sampson, LaRoy Seaver, MichaelSeeley, Charlotte Selver, Katey Lynn Simetra, KirkSperry, Herbert Stewart, James & Patricia Straus,Michael & Carol Sullivan, Louis Tabois, ValeriaTenyak, Charlotte Thompson, M.D. Turek, Rene Vivo,William Joseph Wade, Ted Weitz, Dr. Robert & Dr.Mary Wellman, Roger L. Welsch, Timothy Wernette,Dan & Beth Whittemore, Karen Williams-Fast Horse,Marcel E. Wingate, David Yeoman, Wayne W. Zengel
Corporate Matching Gifts
Many companies support causes that are important to theiremployees by matching their charitable contributions—some-times doubling or even tripling their donation. See if youremployer participates at https://doublethedonation.com/narf.
AT&T Employee Giving; Adobe Systems Inc; Bank of
America Foundation, Inc; Equifax; Frontstream; GEFoundation; Henry Luce Foundation; JP Morgan Chase& Co; Lawrence Companies; Pfizer Foundation; TheRosewood Foundation; S&P Global CorporateResponsibility; SNF USA, Inc; The Merck Foundation;Verizon Foundation; Visa Giving Station; Wells FargoFoundationNARF Employee Giving
NARF employees commit thousands of hours to protectingthe rights of tribes. They also commit their own funds to helpNARF.
John Echohawk, Kim Gottschalk, Richard Guest,
Heather Kendall-Miller, Anne Lucke, Melody McCoy,Steven Moore, Ray Ramirez, Joel Williams
In-Kind Donations
Kurt V . BlueDog; James Botsford, Esq.; Nora CampbellHickins; Liliana Rae Elliott; Ann Estin; Julie Roberts-Hyslop; Jefferson Keel; Stephen R. Lewis; Lisa Link;David Martin, Esq., Porter Hedges LLP; Bob Maynard,Colorado Plateau Photo Tours; Robert McGhee; AnitaMitchell; Larry Olinger; Richard J. Peterson; Dorsey &Whitney, LLP; Michael K. Pignato; J. Scott Sypolt, Partner,Akerman LLP; Anisah Spahn; Nadyah Spahn; RachelSteinberg; Lucy Sternback; Tim Reese Photography;Natasha Rigg Photography; Ray Torgerson, Esq., PorterHedges LLP; Lucy Kennedy Walker
Boulder-Denver Advisory Committee
Lucille A. Echohawk, Thomas W. Fredericks, AvaHamilton, Jeanne Whiteing, Charles Wilkinson
Other Ways to Show Your SupportTsanáhwit Circle
Tsanáhwit is a Nez Perce word meaning equal justice.
Tsanáhwit Circle members recognize the constant needto stand firm for justice by making monthly contribu-tions. With cases that can span years, monthly and ongo-ing contributions make a real difference for protectingthe rights of the tribes we serve. Visit our online donationpage at https:/ / www.narf.org to join the Circle.
Otu’han
Otu’han is the Lakota (Sioux) word translated as give-
away. Otu’han gifts are memorial and honoring giftsmodeled after the tradition of the Indian giveaway inwhich items of value are gathered over a long period oftime to be given away in honor of birthdays, mar-riages, anniversaries, and in memory of a departedloved one. Visit our online donation page atwww.narf.org to make a tribute gift.
Follow Us
Sign up at www.narf.org for our e-news or like and fol-low us on Facebook. These are both great way to getperiodic case updates, calls-to-action, special eventsinformation, and invitations. Your e-mail address isconfidential and we will not share it with any outsidesources.
32
2017 ANNUAL REPORT 33CORPORATE OFFICERS
John E. Echohawk (Pawnee)
Executive Director/Attorney
K. Jerome Gottschalk
Litigation Management CommitteeMember/Attorney
Natalie Landreth (Chickasaw)
Litigation ManagementCommittee/Attorney
Melody McCoy (Cherokee)
Litigation Management CommitteeMember/Attorney
Michael Kennedy
Chief Financial Officer
Gary Hayes (Ute Mountain Ute)
Corporate Secretary
BOULDER MAIN OFFICE STAFF
John E. Echohawk (Pawnee),
Executive Director/Attorney
Matt Campbell (Native Village of Gambell),
Attorney
Jacqueline D. De León (Isleta Pueblo),
Attorney (Voting Rights Fellow)
K. Jerome Gottschalk, AttorneyDavid Gover (Pawnee/Choctaw),
Attorney
Melody McCoy (Cherokee), AttorneySteven C. Moore, AttorneySue Noe, AttorneyBrett Shelton (Oglala Lakota), AttorneyJoe M. Tenorio (Santo Domingo Pueblo),
Attorney
Donald R. Wharton, AttorneyHeather Whiteman Runs Him (Crow),
Attorney
Nate Ahrens, Systems AdministratorCandace Bonham (Cochiti Pueblo),
Accountant
Brooklyvon Descheny (Navajo),
Office Services Assistant/ReceptionistCita Gover (Diné), Development Donor
Accounting Analyst 
Gary Hayes (Ute Mountain Ute)
Office/Human Resources Administrator
Scott Denver Jacket (Ute Mountain
Ute/Navajo), Paralegal
Nicole Keller, ParalegalMichael Kennedy, Chief Financial OfficerMireille Martinez, Annual Giving DirectorKatrina Mora (Oglala Lakota),
Administrative Assistant
Mauda Moran, Communications ManagerDon Ragona (Matinecock),
Director of Development/ House Counsel
Jennifer Redbone (Apache/Comanche/
Kiowa), Donor Information/Gift
Processing Manager
Kalee Salazar (Taos Pueblo/Santa Ana
Pueblo), Legal Assistant
Jeff Schmidt, ParalegalDebbie Raymond-Thomas (Navajo),
Controller
Jennie Tsikewa (Zuni) AccountantNATIONAL INDIAN LAW LIBRARY
David Selden, Library Director, Anne Lucke, Law LibrarianANCHORAGE OFFICE STAFFHeather Kendall-Miller (Athabascan),
Attorney
Natalie Landreth (Chickasaw) AttorneyErin Dougherty Lynch, AttorneyMatt Newman, AttorneyWesley Furlong, Attorney Jill Rush, Legal Administrative
Assistant/Office Manager
WASHINGTON D.C. OFFICE STAFF
Richard Guest, AttorneyDan Lewerenz (Iowa Tribe of Kansas and
Nebraska), Attorney
Joel Williams (Cherokee), AttorneyEric Anderson, Legal Administrative
Assistant
NARF Staff1506 Broadway
Boulder, CO 80302
303-447-8760
www.narf.org 