NARFMain Office
Native American Rights Fund1506 BroadwayBoulder, CO 80302303-447-8760http://www.narf.org
Alaska Office
Native American Rights Fund801 B Street, Suite 401Anchorage, Alaska 99501907-276-0680
Washington, D.C. Office
Native American Rights Fund1514 P Street, NW, Suite D (Rear)Washington, D.C. 20005202-785-4166NARF - Annual Report 2009
Introduction ............................................................................................................................... ............................... 3
Executive Director’s Report ............................................................................................................................... ...4
Chairman’s Message ............................................................................................................................... ................. 6
The Board of Directors ............................................................................................................................... ............. 7
The Preservation of T ribal Existence ........................................................................................................................ 9
The Protection of T ribal Natural Resources ............................................................................................................ 15
Major Activities ............................................................................................................................... ..................... 20
The Promotion of Human Rights .................................................................................................................... 22
The Accountability of Governments .................................................................................................................. 29
The Development of Indian Law ...................................................................................................................... 33
T reasurer’s Report ............................................................................................................................... ................. 35
Contributors ............................................................................................................................... ........................... 36
NARF Staff ............................................................................................................................... ............................. 39
COVER ART... and artwork
throughout this Annual Report is by painter/sculptor, Eddie RunningWolf who has been a full supporterof NARF’s mission for many years.The creative focus is on the history,leadership and spirituality of the“way of life” of our ancestors’ past. 
1 native american rights fund - annual reportTax Status: The Native American Rights Fund
(NARF) is a nonprofit, charitable organizationincorporated in 1971 under the laws of theDistrict of Columbia.  NARF is exempt from federal income tax under the provisions of Section501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue code.Contributions to NARF are tax deductible.  TheInternal Revenue Service has ruled that NARF isnot a “private foundation” as defined in Section509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.  NARF wasfounded in 1970 and incorporated in 1971 inWashington, D.C. 
The Native American Rights
Fund (NARF) is the oldest andlargest nonprofit national Indianrights organization in the countrydevoting all its efforts to defendingand promoting the legal rights ofIndian people on issues essentialto their tribal sovereignty, theirnatural resources and their humanrights. NARF believes in empow-ering individuals and communities
whose rights, economic self-suffi-ciency and political partici pation
have been systematically er oded
and undermined. 
At its inception in 1970, NARF
believed that the best hope forIndian survival and developmentrests with the maintenance of thetribe as an institution.  The inher-ent sovereign powers of a tribe tohold land, to govern tribal mem-bers and to command the respectof other units of government areessential to an Indian nation concept.  Throughout the past 39 years, NARF has held fast tothis hope and through its workhas insured that this concept hasbecome a reality.  
Every year NARF receives far
more requests for assistance thanit can afford to take on.  Ourability to take on most of ourcases continues to be dependenton the generous support of the
thousands of individuals whocontribute to us, but unfortunatelythese contributions fall short ofthe legal support needs in Indiancountry.  NARF takes on cases onbehalf of tribes and Native organ-izations and individuals that mayhave a potential precedent-settingimpact on all Indigenous peoples.Our battles continue to be againstthe federal government, state gov-ernments, local governments, andcorporations who are impedingon tribal sovereignty and culture.Our resources are limited and wemust choose those battles carefully.Our energy and resources areaimed at those who refuse toaccept that the United StatesConstitution recognizes thatIndian tribes are independentgovernmental entities with inher-ent authority over their membersand territory.  In treaties with theUnited States, Indian tribes cededmillions of acres of land in exchangefor the guarantee that the federalgovernment would protect thetribes' right to self-government. 
NARF’s existence would not be
possible without those contribu-tions of the thousands of individ-uals who have offered theirknowledge, courage, and vision to help guide NARF on its quest.
Of equal importance, NARF’sfinancial contributors have gra-ciously provided the resources togive our efforts life.  Contributorssuch as the Ford Foundation havebeen with NARF since its incep-tion. The Open Society Institute,the Bay and Paul Foundationsand the Unger Foundation havealso made long term fundingcommitments.  Finally, the positiveeffects of NARF’s work arereflected in the financial contri-butions by a gr owing number of
tribal governments.  United, thesefinancial, moral, and intellectualgifts provide the framework forNARF to fulfill its goal of securingthe right to self-determination towhich all Native American peoplesare entitled. 
3 native american rights fund - annual reportIntroduction
“What we are told as children is that people when they walk on the
land leave their breath wherever they go. So whenever we walk,that particular spot on the earth never forgets us, and when we goback to these places, we know that the people who have lived thereare in some way still there, and we can actually partake of theirbreath and their spirit.” — Rina Swentzell, Santa Clara Pueblo
NARF’s Priorities
One of the initial responsibilities of NARF’s first Board of Directorswas to develop priorities that wouldguide the Native American RightsFund in its mission to preserve andenforce the legal rights of NativeAmericans.  The Committee developed five priorities that continue to lead NARF today: 
• Preservation of tribal existence
• Protection of tribal natural
resources
• Promotion of Native American
human rights
• Accountability of governments to
Native Americans
• Development of Indian law and
educating the public about Indianrights, laws, and issues2009 marked the 39th year that
the Native American Rights Fundhas been providing legal adviceand assistance to Native Americansacross the country on the mostimportant legal issues confrontingthem.  Once again, our legal workresulted in several significant victories and accomplishments of benefit to Native Americanpeople nationally.
After thirty-one years of assis-
tance from the Native AmericanRights Fund, the ShinnecockIndian Nation of New Yorkreceived a proposed finding infavor of federal acknowledgmentas an Indian tribe from theUnited States Department of the Interior.  As a result of thisfinding, federal recognition of theShinnecock Indian Nation as atribe is scheduled to be formallyand finally acknowledged by mid-summer 2010.
An Alaska Native student was
allowed to wear her eagle feathersat her school’s graduation ceremonyto honor her spiritual beliefs asthe result of a successful negotia-tion last June by the NativeAmerican Rights Fund in collabo-ration with the California IndianLegal Services and the AmericanCivil Liberties Union of NorthernCalifornia with the SacramentoCity Unified School District.The school had previously deniedher request to wear her eaglefeathers by citing their mandatorygraduation dress code policywhich was intended to preventthe display of gang symbols anddisruptions to the ceremony.Additional language assistance
for Yup’ik speakers at municipalelections in Bethel, Alaska asrequired by the federal VotingRights Act will be provided as aresult of a settlement in Nick, et
al. v. Bethel, et al. , a lawsuit
brought by the Native AmericanRights Fund and the AmericanCivil Liberties Union on behalf oftwo local Alaska Natives againstthe city of Bethel in 2007.  Yup’ikis the primary language of amajority of citizens in the Bethelregion.  Under the settlementagreement, the city of Bethel willprovide trained poll workers whoare bilingual in English andYup’ik, sample ballots in writtenYup’ik, a written Yup’ik glossaryof election terms, advance noticeof translator services, and electionannouncements on the radio.Since the State of Alaska refusedto settle, NARF and the ACLUcontinue to litigate against theState so that all Yup’ik speakingvoters in the state can be fullyincluded in the political process.
The U.S. Court of Appeals for
the Ninth Circuit held in State of
Alaska v. Kaltag that the State of
Alaska must recognize and givefull faith and credit to a Kaltagtribal court’s adoption judgmentunder the federal Indian ChildWelfare Act.  The NativeAmerican Rights Fund had filedthis case in 2006 on the behalf ofthe Kaltag T ribe and two Kaltagtribal members involved in theadoption because the State ofAlaska had asserted that theKaltag T ribe lacked jurisdictionover children’s proceedings.  The
Court of Appeals held that theT ribe has inherent jurisdiction toadjudicate adoptions of its owntribal members.
In another Indian Child
Welfare Act case, In re E.L. , the
Nebraska Supreme Courtaffirmed the absolute and uncon-ditional right of a representativeof an Indian tribe to intervene in achild custody proceeding involvingchildren who are members of thattribe.  The decision reversed aNebraska county court order thathad not allowed the Ponca T ribeof Nebraska’s designated represen-tative to intervene in the casebecause that representative wasnot a licensed Nebraska attorney.The Native American RightsFund filed an amicus curiae briefin the case on behalf of six tribesand two Native organizations.
The Native American Rights
Fund, representing the NationalIndian Child Welfare Association,provided testimony for theWisconsin Legislature whichpassed a bill enacting a stateIndian Child Welfare Act intolaw.  The new law articulates acooperative and collaborativeapproach between the sovereignIndian nations located inWisconsin and the State ofWisconsin and demonstrates theState’s intent to clearly recognizeand reinforce tribal sovereignty asan essential means of achievingthe objective of the Indian ChildWelfare Act to keep Indian chil-dren with Indian families.
4 annual report - native american rights fundExecutive Director’s Report
¯Although it is no longer
involved in historic Cobell v.
Salazar individual Indian trust
funds mismanagement caseagainst the federal governmentbecause of its recent representa-tion of 42 tribes with tribal trustmismanagement claims, theNative American Rights Fund isvery pleased that a settlementagreement has been reachedbetween the Cobell plaintiffs and
the Obama administration.Under the terms of the settlementagreement, the federal govern-ment will create a $1.4 billionAccounting/T rust Fund and a $2billion T rust Land ConsolidationFund.  The settlement agreementmust be approved by Congressand by the federal district court.NARF was co-counsel in the casewhen it was filed in 1996 and willbe eligible for any attorneys feesawarded by the federal districtcourt.  
The Native American Rights
Fund is in the start-up phase of anew project called the “ManyPaths to Peace Project.”  Madepossible by a long-term anony-mous grant, the mission of theProject is to promote and supportNative people in restoring sus-tainable peacemaking practices.This project provides NARF with an opportunity to supporttraditional peacemaking and community-building practices as an extension of Indian law and
sovereign rights.  Peacemaking isa community-directed process todevelop consensus on a conflictresolution plan that addresses theconcerns of all interested parties.
The National Indian Law
Library, a project of the NativeAmerican Rights Fund, partneredwith Thomson/West on analliance to increase access to triballaw – specifically tribal codes, con-stitutions and intergovernmentalagreements.  This alliance includesworking to make annotated tribalcodes and constitutions availablethrough the Westlaw fee-baseddatabases as well as available forfree through the National IndianLaw Library website.  This signifi-cant development in making tribal law accessible will help to
enhance knowledge of tribes assovereign nations and distinctpolitical entities.  
In closing, I want to thank all
of our contributors and supporterswho have made all of this wonder-ful legal work on behalf of NativeAmericans possible.  As we prepareto celebrate our 40th anniversaryin 2010, I urge all of you to sustain and increase your contri-butions and support if possible sothat the Native American RightsFund can continue to provideaccess to justice for NativeAmericans across the country.John E. Echohawk
Executive Director
5 native american rights fund - annual report
I bring you greetings from the
Ak Chin Indian Community.
The year 2009 has brought
hope to Indian country thatmajor issues that our communitiesface day-in and day-out will finallybe addressed.  President Obamaand Interior Secretary Salazarhave made important strides inaddressing these critical issues.  As part of the T ribal NationsConference held in November,President Obama signed a memo-randum on tribal consultationdirecting all federal agencies to
submit a detailed tribal consulta-
tion plan in 90 days with aprogress report due in 270 days.It is imperative that our tribalnations' free, prior and informedconsent is respected and that ourpeople’s participation in decision-making processes that affect ourwell-being is guaranteed.
In December 2009, after over 
a decade in the courts, InteriorSecretary Salazar and the ObamaAdministration announced a set-tlement agreement in the Cobell 
v. Salazar class action lawsuit over
federal mismanagement of indi-vidual Indian trust fund accounts.It’s now up to Congress and thefederal district court to act on thesettlement.  NARF first filed thiscase in 1996, but is no longerinvolved because our resourceswere needed on the tribal trustfunds case.  Once the settlementis finalized, the Board has highhopes that the tribal trust fundscase, which NARF filed in 2006on behalf of forty-two tribes, willalso soon be settled.
Particularly bothersome for
tribes has been the five Justicemajority of the U.S. SupremeCourt.  It has become apparentthat these Justices lack an under-standing of the fundamental principles underlying federalIndian law and are unfamiliarwith the practical challenges facingtribal governments.  By way of itsseemingly anti-tribal sovereigntydecisions, the Supreme Court hasrepeatedly taken favorable decisionsby the lower courts and reversedthem making bad situations worsefor Indian country.  As these battleswage on, the importance ofNARF’s involvement in the T ribalSupreme Court Project continuesto demand constant vigilance andcoordination of the collectiveresources of Indian tribes, legalscholars and tribal attorneys.
Much of NARF’s efforts goes
into protecting the subsistenceway of life that is essential for thephysical and cultural survival ofAlaska Natives.  As the State ofAlaska continues to be reluctantto recognize the importance ofthe subsistence way of life, weurge the Obama Administrationto do what is necessary to insurethe protection of subsistencehunting and fishing for AlaskaNatives.  We also urge theAdministration and Congress tosupport funding for tribal waterrights settlements for tribes in thelower 48. 
Climate change issues are chal-
lenging our very way of life.  Ouroral tradi-
tions havetaught us tobe observers,recorders oftime.  Wehave a historyof adapta-tion to our environment and tothe challenges posed by outsideforces. Our way of knowing, ashas been taught to us by our elders,tells us that everything possesseslife and that is why we treat thisEarth as our living Mother.  Wehave thousands of years of knowl-edge to share with the scientificcommunity and with the world.Indigenous medicine people havethe spiritual technology to savethe earth.  NARF is working toinsure that we have a seat at thetable to secure a future for ourgrandchildren.  We call uponCongress to pass climate changelegislation that includes tribes and indigenous peoples as fullpartners.
Finally, we call upon President
Obama to reverse the UnitedStates’ position and support theUnited Nations Declaration onthe Rights of Indigenous Peoples.The United States is only one ofthree countries in the world whodo not support this Declaration.NARF has worked on this issuesince 1999 and will continue towork to get our country to recog-nize and support these rights.
With Sincere Thanks,
Delia Carlyle , Board Chairman
6 annual report - native american rights fundChairman’s Message
The Board of Director’s
NARF’s Board of Directors:
(Seated - left to right) Ron His Horse Is Thunder (Standing Rock Sioux T ribe);
Lydia Olympic (Yupik/Aleut - Alaska); Miko Beasley Denson (Mississippi Band 
of Choctaw Indians); Delia Carlyle , Board Chairman (Ak Chin Indian
Community - Arizona).  (Standing - left to right) Gerald Danforth (Oneida -
Wisconsin); Kunani Nihipali , Board Vice-Chairman (Native Hawaiian - Hawaii); 
Richard Luarkie (Pueblo of Laguna); Barbara Smith (Chickasaw Nation -
Oklahoma);  Anthony Pico (Viejas Band of Kumeyaay Indians - California).
(Not Pictured) Fred Cantu, Jr. (Saginaw Chippewa); Woody Widmark , Board
T reasurer (Sitka T ribe - Alaska); Billy Frank (Nisqually T ribe - Washington); 
Alfred Berryhill (Muscogee (Creek) Nation - Oklahoma).The Native American Rights
Fund has a governing board com-posed of Native American leadersfrom across the country – wiseand distinguished people who arerespected by Native Americansnationwide.  Individual Boardmembers are chosen based ontheir involvement and knowledgeof Indian issues and affairs, aswell as their tribal affiliation, toensure a comprehensive geo-graphical representation.  TheNARF Board of Directors, whosemembers serve a maximum of sixyears, provide NARF with leader-ship and credibility, and thevision of its members is essentialto NARF’s effectiveness in representing its Native Americanclients.
Randy Bardwell, Pechanga Band of
Luiseno Indians Katrina McCormick Barnes Jaime Barrientoz, Grand Traverse Band
of Ottawa and Chippewa IndiansJohn Bevan Wallace Coffey, Comanche
Ada Deer, Menominee 
Harvey A. DennenbergLucille A. Echohawk, Pawnee
Jane FondaJames GarnerEric GinsburgJeff GinsburgRodney Grant, Omaha
Chris E. McNeil, Jr., Tlingit-Nisga’a
Billy Mills, Oglala Lakota
Amado Peña, Jr., Yaqui/Chicano Nancy Starling Ross
Wayne RossMarc RudickPam RudickErnie Stevens, Jr., Wisconsin Onieida
Andrew Teller, Isleta Pueblo
Verna Teller, Isleta Pueblo
Richard T rudell, Santee Sioux
Rebecca Tsosie, Pasqua Yaqui 
Tzo-Nah, Shoshone Bannock
Aine UngarRt. Rev. William C. Wantland,Seminole W. Richard West, Southern Cheyenne
Randy Willis, Oglala Lakota
Teresa Willis, Umatilla
Mary Wynne, Rosebud SiouxThe National Support
Committee assists NARF with itsfund raising and public relationsefforts nationwide.  Some of theindividuals on the Committee areprominent in the field of business,entertainment and the arts.Others are known advocates forthe rights of the underserved.  All of the 32 volunteers on theCommittee are committed toupholding the rights of NativeAmericans.
7 native american rights fund - annual reportUnder the priority of the preser-
vation of tribal existence , NARF
works to construct the foundationsthat are necessary to empowertribes so that they can continue to live according to their Nativetraditions, to enforce their treatyrights, to insure their independ-ence on reservations and to protect their sovereignty. 
Specifically, NARF’s legal repre-
sentation centers on sovereigntyand jurisdiction issues, federalrecognition and restoration oftribal status, and economic devel-opment.  Thus, the focus ofNARF’s work involves issuesrelating to the preservation andenforcement of the status of tribesas sovereign governments.  T ribalgovernments possess the power toregulate the internal affairs oftheir members as well as otheractivities within their reservations.Jurisdictional conflicts often arisewith states, the federal government,and others over tribal sovereignty.
TRIBAL SOVEREIGNTY
The focus of NARF’s work
under this priority is the protec-tion of the status of tribes as sovereign, self-governing entities.
The United States Constitutionrecognizes that Indian tribes areindependent governmental entitieswith inherent authority over theirmembers and territory.  In treatieswith the United States, Indiantribes ceded millions of acres ofland in exchange for the guaranteethat the federal governmentwould protect the tribes’ right toself-government.  From the early1800s on, the Supreme Court hasrepeatedly affirmed the funda-mental principle that tribes retaininherent sovereignty over theirmembers and their territory.However, beginning with thedecision in Oliphant v. Suquamish
Indian Tribe , 435 U.S. 191
(1978) and with increasing frequency in recent years, theSupreme Court has steadilychipped away at this fundamentalprinciple, both by restricting tribaljurisdiction and by extendingstate jurisdiction.  These decisionsby the Supreme Court have madethis priority more relevant thanever, and have led to a T ribalSovereignty Pr otection Initiative
in partnership with the NationalCongress of American Indians
(NCAI) and T ribes nationwide torestore the traditional principlesof inherent tribal sovereignty
where those have been under-mined and to safeguard the core 
of sovereignty that remains.
This initiative consists of three
components.  The first compo-nent is the T ribal Supreme CourtProject, the focus of which is tomonitor cases potentially headedto the Supreme Court and thosewhich actually are accepted forreview.  When cases are accepted,the Project helps ensure that theattorneys representing the Indianinterests have all the support theyneed, and to coordinate the filingof a limited number of strategicamicus briefs.  A second compo-nent of the Initiative is to weighin on judicial nominations at thelower court and the SupremeCourt levels.  Finally, there is alegislative component to fightbills that are against tribal interestsand to affirmatively push legisla-tion to overturn adverse SupremeCourt decisions.
NARF launched the T ribal
Supreme Court Project in con-junction with NCAI in 2001.The T ribal Supreme Court Projectis housed at NARF’s office inWashington, D.C. and is staffedby one NARF attorney and bysupport staff.  In an effort to fostergreater coordination in advocacybefore the Supreme Court, anAdvisory Board of tribal leaders,comprised of NCAI ExecutiveCommittee members and other
9 native american rights fund - annual reportThe Preservation of Tribal Existence
“With the dawn we face sunrise. We face it with all our humility.
We are mere beings. All we can do is extend our hands toward thefirst light. In our hands we capture the first light. We take it andcleanse ourselves. We touch our eyes with it. We touch our faceswith it. We touch our hair with it. We touch our limbs. We rubour hands together, we want to keep this light with us. We are complete with this light. This is the way we begin and end things.” — Ofelia Zepeda, Tohono O`odham.tribal leaders willing to volunteer
their time, also assists the Project.The Board's role is to providenecessary political and tribal per-spective to the legal and academicexpertise.  The Project has alsoestablished a Working Group – agroup of more than 200 notedattorneys and academics fromaround the nation who participatein the Project as their interest,time and resources allow.
To achieve the goals of the
Project, NARF monitors
cases which appear to be
headed for the Supreme
Court, and organizes,
coordinates and con-
tributes to a nation-wide
Indian amicus brief writing
network.  Amicus briefs allow
those not directly involved in liti-gation, but potentially impactedby the outcome, to provide infor-mation and arguments directly tothe Court.  By bringing togetherexperienced Indian law practi-tioners and scholars to discuss
and agree upon a coordinatedamicus brief writing strategy ineach case, and by assisting theparties, NARF ensures that themost effective and focused argu-ments are made before the Courton behalf of Indian Country.
The U.S. Supreme Court’s 2009
summer recess provided NARF anopportunity to review the work ofthe T ribal Supreme Court Projectduring this past term and sincethe beginning of the RobertsCourt era in 2005. During theOctober 2008 Term, the Courtissued three Indian
law decisions – ruling againstNative interests inall three cases. TheT ribal SupremeCourt Project coor-dinated resourcesand developedstrategy in eachcase at the meritsstage, with theNCAI appearing asan amicus party inall three cases andNARF preparing amicus briefs intwo of the three cases. It is signifi-cant that in all three cases –United States v. Navajo Nation,State of Hawaii v. Office ofHawaiian Affairs and Carcieri v.
Salazar – the Native interests had
been upheld by the lower courtsof appeal with no conflictbetween the lower courts on thelegal issues presented in each case.This development is a continua-tion of a disturbing trend inIndian law cases granted reviewsince Chief Justice Roberts joinedthe Court (tribal interests havelost in two other cases – Plains
Commerce Bank v. Long FamilyLand & Cattle Co. and Wagnon v.
Prairie Band Potawatomi Nation –
under similar circumstances).
The U.S. Supreme Court began
the October 2009 Term with itsnewest Associate Justice, JusticeSonia Sotomayor, now sitting onthe Court, and speculation thatJustice Stevens may retire at theend of the term. The implicationsfor Indian country as a result of
these changes are still unfolding,but at present, Indian country is0 for 5 before the Roberts’ Court. 
The T ribal Supreme Court
Project dedicated substantialresources in the wake of theCourt’s disastrous decision inCarcieri v. Salazar .  In Carcieri ,
the Court held that the authorityof the Secretary of the Interior totake land in trust for Indian tribesunder the provisions of the IndianReorganization Act (“IRA”) islimited to tribes that were “underFederal jurisdiction” in June 1934,the date the IRA was enacted.NARF and NCAI coordinatedtribal efforts to pursue a legislative“fix” to rev erse the Cour t’s damage
to Congress’ overall policy ofIndian self-determination andeconomic self-sufficiency.
In December 2009, the Senate
Indian Affairs Committee unani-mously reported the “Carcieri fix”legislation, S. 1703, to amend theIndian Reorganization Act of June18, 1934, to reaffirm the authority
10 annual report - native american rights fund
NARF Board members Beasley Denson and Gerald DanforthThe Preservation of Tribal Existence
of the Secretary of the Interior to
take land into trust for Indiantribes.  The bill ratifies the priortrust acquisitions of the Secretary,who for the past 75 years hasexercised his authority to placelands into trust, as intended bythe Indian Reorganization Act. It also reaffirms the Secretary ofInterior's continuing authority toaccept lands into trust for Indiantribes, regardless of when the tribewas federally recognized.  Anamendment was accepted thatrequires Interior to come up witha list of federally recognized tribescovered by the new legislation aswell as an inventory of land takeninto trust since 1934 affected bythe legislation.  Another amend-ment was accepted to clarify thatDepartment of the Interior regu-lations are not affected by the legislation.  The effective date ofthe legislation would be the datethat it is signed into law by thePresident, with no delay to waitfor an inventory as originally proposed.
The Judicial Selection Project is
about research and education: toeducate the federal judiciaryabout tribal issues; to educatetribal leaders about the federaljudiciary and the judicial nomina-tions process; and to reach out toelected officials and the public atlarge about the need for judges inthe federal courts who understandthe unique legal status of Indiantribes.  The research objective ofthe Project evaluates the recordsof judicial nominees on theirknowledge of Indian issues.  The
analysis and conclusions are sharedwith tribal leaders and federaldecision-makers in relation totheir decision whether to supportor oppose a particular nomina-tion.  The Project works with theU.S. Senate Judiciary Committeeto ensure that all nominees areasked about their experience withIndian tribes and their under-standing of federal Indian lawduring confirmation proceedings.  
The Project has now prioritized
the development of a process toidentify, evaluate and promotequalified Native attorneys, tribaljudges and state court judges fornomination to the federal bench.Currently, there are no activejudges on the federal bench whoare Native American.  There are866 federal judgeships – nine onthe Supreme Court, 179 on theCourts of Appeals and 678 forthe district courts.  And there arezero American Indian, AlaskaNative and Native Hawaiian fed-eral judges.  A primary objectiveof the Project will be to ensurethat qualified Native candidatesare considered and nominated to fill current vacancies on the federal bench.  
In addition to the T ribal
Sovereignty Protection Initiative,other work within this overall priority is related to the federalrecognition of tribal status and theconcomitant establishment of agovernment-to-government rela-tionship with tribes, and the envi-ronmental law and policy initiative.FEDERAL RECOGNITION
OF TRIBAL STATUS
The second category of NARF’s
work under this priority is federalrecognition of tribal status.NARF currently represents Indiancommunities who have survivedintact as identifiable Indian tribesbut who are not federally recog-nized.  T ribal existence does notdepend on federal recognition,but recognition is necessary for agovernment-to-government rela-tionship and the receipt of manyfederal services.
In December 2009, the
Department of the Interiorannounced a proposed finding infavor of federal acknowledgmentof the Shinnecock Indian Nationof New York.  As a result of thisfinding, federal recognition of theNation is on course to be formallyand finally acknowledged by mid-summer 2010.  The Nationand NARF first started theiracknowledgment efforts thirty-one years ago. 
The Office of Federal
Acknowledgment [OFA] releasedits final determination decliningto acknowledge the Little ShellT ribe of Chippewa Indians ofMontana in November 2009.OFA found that 89% of the tribalmembers descend from the histor-ical Pembina Band of ChippewaIndians, but they determined thatthere was insufficient evidence of identification by outsiders,community, and political authority.This determination comes after athirty-one year administrative
11 native american rights fund - annual reportprocess that cost millions of 
dollars and enormous effort onthe part of Little Shell members.The final determination reversedOFA’s own previous proposedfinding in favor of recognition,despite the fact that there were nosignificant negative commentsreceived during the commentperiod.  The T ribe will now lookto Congress for recognition andwill also consider an appeal to theInterior Board of Indian Appeals.
NARF has been working with
the Pamunkey T ribe in Virginia toprepare the necessary historical,legal and anthropological docu-mentation to support a petitionfor federal acknowledgment. Thepetition is nearing completionand is expected to be filed in early2010 with OFA.  NARF has alsocontinued representation of theMashpee Wampanoag T ribe whoreceived federal recognition in2007.  Since that time, NARF hasdevoted its time to matters relatedto tribal governance and interna-tional repatriation. 
ENVIRONMENTAL LAW
AND POLICY INITIATIVE
The third category of NARF’s
work under this priority is theenvironmental law and policy initiative.  NARF has played a keyrole in the implementation of fed-eral environmental law and policythat recognizes tribal governmentsas the primary regulators andenforcers of the federal environ-mental laws on Indian lands. 
A scientific consensus hasemerged in recent decades that
human activities are causing sig-nificant changes to our climateand environment.  Among thedocumented changes are highertemperatures, rising sea levels,warming oceans and meltingpolar ice sheets.  Climate changeis a global phenomenon and will affect everyone under eventhe most conservative scientific projections.
However, climate change will
not affect everyone equally.Native peoples find themselvesalready at ground zero in a fightthat will ultimately determine thesurvival of their tribal nations.Native communities are excep-tionally vulnerable to the effectsof climate change and the devas-tating results have already begunto fall disproportionately ontribes.  Despite the fact thatNative peoples have historicallyleft a negligible carbon footprint,they are suffering and will sufferdisproportionately from theeffects of climate change. Nativepeoples are often the first to see,and the first to feel changes in thenatural environment.  T raditionaltribal practices and relationshipswith the natural world form thespiritual, cultural and economicfoundation for many NativeAmerican nations that will beand, in some cases already are,threatened by climate change.Mother Earth is definitely in crisis, and Native peoples’ knowl-edge and their intimate and directrelationships with our ecosystemspoint the way toward an urgent
need for a paradigm shift andchange in lifestyle for all humanity.
In October 2009, the United
States District Court for theNorthern District of Californiadismissed a lawsuit by the NativeVillage of Kivalina in Alaska(Native Village of Kivalina v.
Exxon Mobil, et al ) against twenty-
four oil, energy and utility companies.  The Village soughtdamages under a federal commonlaw claim of nuisance, based onthe companies contribution to theexcessive emission of carbon diox-ide and other greenhouse gaseswhich the Village claims is causingglobal warming.  The DistrictCourt concluded that the Village’sfederal claim for nuisance isbarred by the political questiondoctrine and for lack of standingunder Article III of the UnitedStates Constitution.  This casewill now be appealed to theNinth Circuit Court of Appeals.The Fifth Circuit and the SecondCircuit (a total of six judges) havedecisions on the same issueswhich disagree with the DistrictCourt ruling.
NARF and The Center on
Race, Poverty & the Environment– plus six law firms – had filedthe lawsuit on behalf of the tinyand impoverished Alaskan villageof Inupiat Eskimos located in theArctic Circle against industrialcorporations that emit large quan-tities of greenhouse gases.  TheNative Village of Kivalina facesimminent destruction from global
12 annual report - native american rights fundwarming due to the melting of
sea ice that formerly protected the
Village from coastal storms
during the fall and winter.
The diminished sea ice,
due to global warming,
has caused a massive 
erosion problem that
threatens the Village’s
existence and urgently
requires the Village be relocated.
It has been estimated that the costto move the Village could rangeup to $400 million.
Climate change is one of the
most challenging issues facing theworld today.  Its effects onIndigenous peoples throughoutthe world are acute and will onlyget worse.  The effects are espe-cially pronounced in Alaska where184 villages are threatened withremoval.  NARF , in addition toworking with Alaska Native villages on this issue, is workingwith the National T ribalEnvironmental Council (NTEC)on climate change issues and in particular on ensuring that climate change legislation andaction at the international level,incorporate Indigenous Peoples assovereign partners in addressingthis issue and provides them theneeded resources for adaptationand mitigation.  NTEC, NARF ,NCAI and the National WildlifeFederation worked together andcreated a set of tribal principleswhich should govern treatment oftribes in any legislation or treaty. 
In June 2009, H.R. 2454, the
American Clean Energy andSecurity Act, was passed.  The bill
is the first climate bill passed byeither the full House or Senate.The House bill provides forreduced greenhouse gas emissions,renewable energy standards, energyefficiency standards, investmentin carbon capture and sequestra-tion, clean vehicles, clean energy,resources for states and tribes toengage in adaptation and help forlow income consumers.
There are a good number of
tribal provisions in the bill whichtreat them as sovereign partners inthe effort to address this crucialissue.  However, tribes are left outof some key provisions and fundingof set-asides for tribes is inade-quate.  Congressional focus nowshifts to the Senate which cameout with a draft bill in September2009.  NARF has been workingwith T ribes and tribal organiza-tions to strengthen the bill in the Senate.
NTEC and NARF attended a
global summit on climate changein Alaska in April 2009 whichresulted in the AnchorageDeclaration of August 24, 2009,which was taken to the UnitedNations Climate ChangeConference in Copenhagen inDecember of 2009.  The purposeof that meeting was to worktoward a post Kyoto agreement.The Kyoto Agreement expires in 2012. 
NARF and the Oglala Sioux
T ribe (OST) have been workingon the delivery of a safe, reliableand adequate source of munici-
pal, industrial and rural watersupply through the federallyauthorized and funded MniWiconi Project. A critical elementof the delivery of a safe source ofdrinking water to the OST is toensure the security of the pipelinethat distributes the water to theusers. NARF has assisted theOST Department of WaterMaintenance and Conservation in fulfilling its responsibility tosecure the pipeline through thedevelopment and adoption of the OST Pipeline SecurityOrdinance. The Department of Water Maintenance andConservation is now faced withenforcement of the Ordinanceagainst individuals who do notaccept that they cannot waste thewater provided through the MniWiconi Distribution System onthe OST’s Reservation.  NARF isassisting the Department with thedevelopment of the necessaryforms and protocols to accom-plish enforcement of this criticallyimportant law of the T ribe andwith the training of Departmentpersonnel on enforcement of theOrdinance. NARF conducted a training for Department personnel on the enforcement of the Pipeline SecurityOrdinance in June 2009 and provided revised and updatedforms and standards for adminis-tration of the Ordinance. 
13 native american rights fund - annual reportThe Preservation of Tribal ExistenceThroughout the process of
European conquest and coloniza-tion of North America, Indiantribes experienced a steady diminishment of their land baseto a mere 2.3 percent of its origi-nal size.  Currently, there areapproximately 55 million acres ofIndian-controlled land in the con-tinental U nited States and about
44 million acres of N ative-owned
land in Alaska.  An adequate landbase and control over naturalresources are central components of
economic self-sufficiency and self-
determination, and as such, arevital to the very existence oftribes.  Thus, much of NARF’swork involves the protection of
tribal natural resources.
PROTECTION OF 
INDIAN LANDS
Without a sufficient land base,
tribal existence is difficult tomaintain.  Thus NARF helpstribes establish ownership andcontrol over lands which arerightfully theirs.  
Since 1981, NARF has repre-
sented the Alabama-CoushattaT ribe of Texas in their quest tosecure compensation for the lossof use of millions of acres of fertileforest land they once occupied insoutheast Texas.  In 2002, theU.S. Court of Federal Claimsruled in favor of the T ribe in theirbreach-of-trust claim against the
United States, holding the gov-ernment liable for the T ribe’s lossof use of over 2.85 million acresof land between 1845 and 1954.The Court also ruled that 5.5million acres of aboriginal titlehas never been extinguished.Negotiators for the U.S. andT ribe reached an agreement onthe amount of damages for theloss of land – $270.6 million –and the Court recommended the agreement to Congress in2002.  NARF is working with the T ribe to have a bill intro-duced in Congress to settle theT ribe’s claims. 
NARF has been retained by the
Eastern Shoshone T ribe of theWind River Indian Reservation toanalyze the legal implications ofthe Surplus Land Act of March 3,1905 as it may have affected theboundaries of that Reservation.NARF is working with the T ribe’s Attorney General and the Shoshone Business Councilon a variety of fronts to secure thevindication of the boundary. 
NARF continues to do legal
work for the Hualapai IndianT ribe of Arizona. The T ribe islocated on the south rim of theGrand Canyon in Arizona andclaims a boundary that runs tothe center of the Colorado River.The T ribe asked that NARF provide an interpretation of key
provisions of their Constitutionconcerning the management anddevelopment of the T ribe’s naturalresources. In addition, the T ribeowns the Cholla Canyon Ranchnear Wikiup, Arizona. The Ranchwas gifted to the T ribe by its ownersand is presently being operated asa palm tree plantation. NARF isassisting the T ribe in the transferof the Cholla Canyon Ranchlands from fee status to be held intrust by the United States for thebenefit of the T ribe.  The applica-tion for the transfer of these landshas been completed and is readyto file.
In Chalkitsik, et al v. United
States , the T ribe brought suit 
seeking judicial review of 25 C.F .R.Part 151 as it pertains to federallyrecognized tribes in Alaska. Thisregulation governs the proceduresused by Indian tribes and indi-viduals when requesting theSecretary of the Interior toacquire title to land in trust ontheir behalf. The regulation barsthe acquisition of land in trust in Alaska other than for theMetlakatla Indian Community orits members. The case has beenfully briefed and is waiting for decision.
WATER RIGHTS
The culture and way of life of
many indigenous peoples areinextricably tied to their aborigi-nal habitat. For those tribes thatstill maintain traditional ties tothe natural world, suitable habitat
15 native american rights fund - annual reportThe Protection of Tribal Natural Resources
“What you call natural resources, we call our relatives.”  
- Oren Lyons, Seneca Nationis required in order to exercise
their treaty-protected hunting,fishing, gathering, and trappingrights and to sustain their rela-tionships with the animals, plants,and fish that comprise their aboriginal habitats. 
Establishing tribal rights to the
use of water in the arid west con-tinues to be a major NARF priority.The goal of NARF’s Indian waterrights work is to secure allocationsof water for present and futureneeds for Indian tribes representedby NARF and other westerntribes generally.  Under the prece-dent established by the SupremeCourt in 1908 in Winters v.
United States and confirmed in
1963 in Arizona v. California ,
Indian tribes are entitled underfederal law to sufficient water forpresent and future needs, with apriority date at least as early as theestablishment of their reservations.These tribal reserved water rightsare superior to all state-recognizedwater rights created after the tribalpriority date.  Such a date will inmost cases give tribes valuablesenior water rights in the water-short west.  Unfortunately, manytribes have not utilized theirreserved water rights and most ofthese rights are unadjudicated orunquantified.  The major need ineach case is to define or quantifythe amount of water to whicheach tribe is entitled through liti-gation or out-of-court negotiatedsettlements. T ribes are generallyable to claim water for any pur-pose which enables the T ribe'sreservation to serve
as a permanenthomeland.
NARF represents
the Nez PerceT ribe of Idaho inits water rightsclaim in the SnakeRiver BasinAdjudication(SRBA). The NezPerce T ribe islocated in northernIdaho near the confluence of theSnake and Clearwater Rivers.The Nez Perce claims dispute hasbeen the biggest outstanding dispute in the SRBA, whichincludes a legal inventory ofabout 180,000 water rights claimsin 38 of Idaho’s 44 counties.  Inearly 2005, the Nez Perce T ribalExecutive Committee (NPTEC)accepted the final terms of thewater rights claims settlement in the State of Idaho’s SRBA.Congress enacted the Snake RiverSettlement Act of 2004 andPresident Bush signed it into lawthe same year. The Governorsigned the approval legislation in2005. The approval by NPTECrepresented the final sign-off bythe three sovereigns.  This is amajor accomplishment for theNez Perce T ribe and its members.This settlement represents themerging of traditional Indianwater rights settlement elementswith other major environmentalissues confronting all of the peopleof Idaho.  NARF continued towork with the T ribe to secure
final approval of the settlement by the SRBA water court and onthe federal appropriations process.NARF and the T ribe were successful in securing FY 2009appropriations for the T ribe andare working now on the 2010appropriations.
The Klamath T ribes of Oregon
hold reserved Indian water rightsin the Klamath River Basin tosupport their treaty hunting, fishingand gathering rights with a timeimmemorial priority date, as wellas water rights needed to satisfythe agricultural purposes of theKlamath Reservation.  Theirreserved water rights for thesepurposes are currently beingquantified in a state-wide wateradjudication in Oregon. NARFrepresents the Klamath T ribes inasserting and defending theirtreaty-based water rights in theadjudication, and in prosecutingcontests against many juniorwater rights claims filed by non-Indian water users. NARF’s work
16 annual report - native american rights fund
NARF Development Director Carly Harein the contests against junior
water rights was concluded andNARF withdrew from most ofthose proceedings.
In 2006, the Administrative
Law Judge (ALJ) entered a rulingon the merits upholding theT ribes’ position that the UnitedStates, not private water users orirrigation districts, owns the waterrights for the enormous KlamathIrrigation Project. Accordingly,the ALJ denied the claims of the water users and irrigation districts. The holding ensures thatthe Klamath Project will continueto be operated pursuant to theUnited States’ Endangered SpeciesAct and tribal trust obligations.
Exceptions to this order were
briefed in the summer
2007, with NARF filing
three briefs and related
papers on behalf of the
T ribes. Later that year,
NARF filed an amicus
curiae brief in Klamath
Irrigation District, et al. v.
United States , which raises the
same issues, in order to protectthe favorable judgment. Onappeal, the U.S. Court of Appealsfor the Federal Circuit deter-mined that because the merits ofthe issues are based on Oregonproperty law and there is no con-trolling precedent for this matter,the Oregon Supreme Court wasbetter suited to hear the case.Accordingly, the Court of Appealscertified three questions for theOregon Supreme Court’s consid-eration, which the Court grantedin January 2009. Following brief-
ing the Oregon Supreme Courtheld oral argument in May 2009with the T ribes’ participating asamicus curiae . A decision is pending
for Klamath Irrigation District, et
al. v. United States .
In eight other separate cases in
the state adjudication, in 2005and 2006, the parties filed sixty-four briefs on various  legal issuesdefining the nature of the tribalwater right claims and variousdefenses against those waterrights. The ALJ entered Orders inall eight cases in 2006 that upheldthe T ribes' legal position in asweeping set of victories. The ALJheld that the T ribes are entitled toa sufficient amount of water for ahealthy habitat and productivefishery. The eight cases were inthe final discovery stages in 2008,when parties received severalextensions to pursue settlementnegotiations. These negotiationsare ongoing at this time, however,the parties completed discoveryand will file written direct testi-mony. Cross-examination hearingsare scheduled for May 2010.
After almost 30 years of advocacy
work, the T ule River Indian T ribehas successfully settled its waterrights claims. In 2007 the T ribesigned a settlement agreementwith water users on the SouthFork T ule River of California. Thesettlement agreement secures adomestic, municipal, industrial,and commercial water supply forthe T ribe. The T ribe is engaged inpreparing federal legislation thatwill ratify the settlement agree-
ment and authorize appropriationsto develop the water rightsthrough the creation of waterinfrastructure and reservoirs onthe T ule Reservation. In 2007, abill was introduced on behalf ofthe T ribe to authorize a feasibilitystudy to evaluate the appropriatelocation of a reservoir on theirreservation to store the T ribe’swater.  The bill was passed by thefull House of Representatives latein the 2008 session, but was notpassed by the Senate.  A new billwas then introduced in the Houseand in the Senate in 2009.  InJuly 2009, HR 1945 was passedby the House.  A very successfulhearing was held before a Senatecommittee in July and the T ribe isnow awaiting the bill’s passage bythe full Senate.  Once the bill issigned, NARF will begin work onCongressional appropriations tofund the feasibility study. 
In 2006, the Kickapoo T ribe in
Kansas filed a federal lawsuit inU.S. District Court in an effort toenforce express promises made tothe T ribe to build the Plum CreekReservoir Project in the UpperDelaware and tributaries water-shed. The Nemaha-BrownWatershed Joint Board # 7, theNatural Resources ConservationService of the U.S. Departmentof Agriculture, and the State ofKansas made these promises tothe T ribe over a decade ago. Inthe intervening years these sameparties have been actively devel-oping the water resources of the
17 native american rights fund - annual reportThe Protection of Tribal Natural Resourceswatershed, resulting in the near
depletion of the T ribe’s senior federal water rights in thedrainage. 
The water quality on the reser-
vation is so poor it is harmful tohuman health and unsuitable forhuman consumption according tothe EPA. The water supply is inviolation of the Safe DrinkingWater Act of 1974. As a result theKickapoo people are unable tosafely drink, bathe or cook withtap water. The Plum CreekReservoir Project is the most cost-effective and reliable meansby which the T ribe can free itsmembers from the dire livingconditions forced upon them bytheir unreliable and dangerouswater supply.  A thirty-year era of unreliable water supplies on theKickapoo Reservation located in Brown County, Kansas has disabled the Kickapoo T ribe fromproviding basic municipal servicesnecessary to protect its residentsfrom illness, fire, and unsanitaryliving conditions. There is notenough water on the reservationto provide basic municipal servicesto the community. The T ribe isunable to provide local schoolswith a reliable, safe running waterand the Fire Department cannotprovide adequate fire protectiondue to the water shortage.
The United States, the State
and the local watershed districthave all conceded the existence ofthe T ribe’s senior Winters water
rights. The real issue ultimatelywill be the amount of water tosatisfy the T ribe’s needs and the
source or sources of those rights.Settlement negotiations extendedthroughout 2009. The T ribe and the U.S. are also discussing
funding to quantify the T ribe’s
water rights.  
PROTECTION OF HUNTING
AND FISHING RIGHTS INALASKA
The subsistence way of life is
essential for the physical and cultural survival of AlaskaNatives.  As important as Nativehunting and fishing rights are toAlaska Natives' physical, economic,traditional, and cultural existence,the State of Alaska has been andcontinues to be reluctant to recognize the importance of thesubsistence way of life. 
InNative Villages of Eyak,
T atitlek, Chenega, Nanwalek, andPort Graham v. Evans , five Chugach
villages sued the Secretary ofCommerce to establish aboriginal
rights to their traditional-use areason the Outer Continental Shelf ofAlaska, in Cook Inlet and theGulf of Alaska. A decision wasrendered by the federal districtcourt in 2002, against theChugach. NARF brought anappeal to the Ninth Circuit andin 2004, the Ninth Circuit issuedan order for a hearing en banc to
take place. The Ninth Circuit enbanc panel vacated the decision ofthe district court and remandedfor determination of whether thetribes can establish aboriginalrights to the areas. T rial onwhether these T ribes hold aborigi-nal rights to hunt and fish in federal waters was held in 2008.In August 2009, the federal courtheld that although the fiveChugach tribes had establishedthat they had a “territory” andhad proven they had used thewaters in question, the T ribes
18 annual report - native american rights fund
NARF staff Debbie Thomas, Carly Hare, Rose Cuny and John Echohawkcould not hold aboriginal rights
as a matter of law . The Chugach
have appealed to the NinthCircuit en banc panel which has
retained jurisdiction over this caseand briefing on the appeal is setto begin in 2010. 
In State of Alaska v. Norton , the
State of Alaska filed a lawsuit inthe District of Columbia chal-lenging the U.S. Department ofthe Interior’s final rule imple-menting the mandate in the priorsubsistence case, John v. United
States . That prior NARF case
established that the United Statesmust protect subsistence uses offisheries in navigable waters wherethe United States possesses areserved water right. The Statechallenges the Department’simplementation of the mandateby arguing that the reservedwaters doctrine requires a quan-tification of waters necessary to
fulfill specific purposes. Katie
John, the plaintiff in John v.
United States , filed a motion for
limited intervention for purposesof filing a motion to dismiss forfailure to join an indispensableparty. The United States filed amotion to transfer venue toAlaska.  The judge entered anOrder in 2005 transferring thecase to the District of Alaska. Thecase was then consolidated withJohn v. Norton , the case discussed
below.  The issues in the twocases were bifurcated for briefingwith the State’s claims addressedfirst. In 2007, the district courtentered an Order upholding theagency’s rule-making process
identifying navigable waters inAlaska that fall within federaljurisdiction for purposes of Title VIII’s subsistence priority.
In 2005, NARF filed a law suit
on behalf of Katie John (Katie
John v. Norton) in the District of
Alaska challenging the U.S.Department of the Interior’s finalrule implementing the prior KatieJohn mandate as being toorestrictive in its scope. KatieJohn’s complaint alleges that theDepartment should have includedAlaska Native allotments as publiclands and further that the federalgovernment’s interest in waterextends upstream and down-stream from the ConservationUnits established under federallaw.  The State of Alaska intervened and challenged theregulations as illegally extending
federal jurisdiction to state waters.In September 2009 the DistrictCourt entered an order upholdingthe agency’s final rule as reason-able.  While rejecting Katie John’sclaim that the agency had a dutyto identify all of its federallyreserved water rights in upstreamand downstream waters, theCourt stated that the agencycould do so at some futuretime if necessary to fulfillthe purposes of thereserve.  The case will beappealed to the NinthCircuit Court of Appeals.
19 native american rights fund - annual report
John Echohawk bids farewell to NARF attorney Mark Tilden The Protection of Tribal Natural Resources20 annual report - native american rights fundNARF Major Activities 2009 - Case Map 
NEBRASKA
• Santee Sioux Tribe – Tribal Trust FundNEW MEXICO• Mescalero Apache Tribe – Tribal Trust Fund
NEW YORK
• Shinnecock Indian Nation – Recognition NORTH DAKOTA• Fort Berthold Reservation – Water Rights• Turtle Mountain Reservation 
– Tribal Trust Fund
OKLAHOMA• Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes – Tribal Trust Fund• Pawnee Nation – Education, 
NAGPRA & Tribal Trust Fund
• Sac & Fox Nations – Tribal Trust FundOREGON• Klamath Tribes 
– Water Rights & Tribal Trust Fund
SOUTH DAKOTA• Lower Brule Sioux Tribe – Trust Lands• Oglala Sioux Tribe – Environmental TEXAS• Alabama-Coushatta Tribe – Land Claim VIRGINIA• Pamunkey Tribe – RecognitionWASHINGTON• Yakama Nation – Tribal Trust FundsWASHINGTON, D.C.NARF WASHINGTON, D.C. OFFICE• Cobell v. Norton & Tribal Supreme 
Court Project
• Harjo et al v. Washington Redskin Football –
Cultural Rights 
WYOMING• Eastern Shoshone Tribe – Land Issue CANADA• Northern Lakes Pottawatomi Nation 
– Land Claim 
INTERNATIONAL• Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples/Climate Change Issues – UnitedNations & Organization of American StatesALASKA
NARF ANCHORAGE OFFICE• Chistochina Tribe – Subsistence• Curing v. Alaska - ICWA
• Kaltag Tribe – ICWA• Katie John v. Norton – Subsistence
• Global Warming Project• Native Villages of Eyak, Tatitlek,
Chenega, Nanwalek, and Port Graham–  Subsistence & Aboriginal Title
• Gwich’in Steering Committee –
Environmental/Subsistence
• Native Village of Nulato - ICWA• Ninilchick Tribe – Subsistence• Native Village of Tuluksak – Trust
Lands
• Native Village of Venetie – Subsistence• Tlingit and Haida Indian Tribes – Tribal
Trust Funds
• Voting Rights Act SuitARIZONA• Hualapai Tribe – Boundary IssueCALIFORNIA• Tule River Tribe – Water, Tribal Trust
Funds 
• Yurok Tribe – Tribal Trust FundsCOLORADONARF HEADQUARTERS
BOULDER, COLORADO
• ICWA Site• TEDNA Headquarters• Valmont Butte – Sacred Site IssueIDAHO• Nez Perce Tribe – Water Rights, Tribal
Trust Funds 
KANSAS• Kickapoo Tribe – Water RightsMINNESOTA• White Earth Band of Chippewa Indians
- Tribal Trust Fund 
MONTANA• Chippewa-Cree Tribe of the Rocky Boys
Reservation – Tribal Trust Fund
• Little Shell Tribe - Recognition &
Tribal Trust Fund
21 native american rights fund - annual reportAlthough basic human rights
are considered a universal andinalienable entitlement, NativeAmericans face an ongoing threatof having their rights underminedby the United States government,states, and others who seek tolimit these rights. Under the pri-ority of the promotion of human
rights , NARF strives to enforce
and strengthen laws which aredesigned to protect the rights ofNative Americans to practice theirtraditional religion, to use theirown language, and to enjoy theirculture. NARF also works withT ribes to ensure the welfare oftheir children.  In the internationalarena, NARF is active in efforts tonegotiate declarations on therights of indigenous peoples.
RELIGIOUS FREEDOM
Because religion is the founda-
tion that holds Native communitiesand cultures together, religiousfreedom is a NARF priority issue. 
The Native American Rights
Fund established a working groupof Indian organizations and triballeaders to address governmentintervention in the lives of Native
people who work with or useeagle feathers in traditional ways.Since time-immemorial, the eagleand other raptor birds have beenan integral part and intrinsic tothe traditions, culture and religionof many tribes, pre-dating U.S.colonization.  The U.S. Fish andWildlife (FWS) and other federallaw enforcement agencies havebeen conducting raids, confisca-
tions and interrogations on manyIndian reservations and Pow-wowevents, in at least 14 states of thewestern United States under whatpurportedly is referred to as an“Eagle Feather Sting Operation.”
The immediate purpose of these
investigations by the FWS was toaddress the illicit sale of eaglesand eagle parts and the poaching
22 annual report - native american rights fundThe Promotion of Human Rights
“Once social change begins, it
cannot be reversed. You cannotun-educate the person who haslearned how to read. You cannothumiliate the person who haspride. And you cannot oppressthe people who are not afraidanymore.” — Cesar Chavezof eagles.  However, the impact of
these investigations has awakenedfear that the U.S. government isonce again encroaching upontribal culture and religious prac-
tices, to the point where the
tribal culture and religion
may be forced under-
ground once again. 
In June 2009 the
working group met
with the FWS and the
Department of Justice
(DOJ) to express tribal 
concerns about raids that were conducted by the FWS, FBI andother law enforcement officialswho seized feathers and demandeddocumentation.  Under federal law,only Native people can possesseagle feathers through gifts orinheritance, or from a govern-ment-run repository near Denverwhich issues permits specificallyfor individual birds or parts, generally after lengthy waits.
As a result of this meeting,
FWS and DOJ pledged to takeaction regarding their lack ofeffective outreach and educationto tribes on policies regarding thepossession, use, gifting, and crafting of eagle feathers andother endangered birds.  FWSproposed the development of aT ribal Advisory Group to workout long term solutions to theissues that tribes raised. 
At its 2009 Mid-Year Session in
June 2009, the National Congressof American Indians (NCAI)adopted a resolution supportingthe establishment of T ribal
Advisory Group to the U.S. Fishand Wildlife Service in order toprovide consultation on the poli-cies, regulations, and proceduresfor the acquisition, possession,gifting, crafting, and use of eaglesand other migratory birds by tribalmembers.  It was also resolvedthat NARF shall serve as a centralclearinghouse for the cases apper-taining to the “Eagle FeatherSting Operation” being conductedby the U.S. Fish & Wildlife andother federal law enforcementagencies. 
NARF and NCAI will continue
meetings with U.S. Fish andWildlife and other federal lawenforcement agencies to discussand seek solutions as to the effectsand impacts of eagle feather con-fiscations and to discuss the draftingof an all inclusive bill to “fix” thegap between current law andadministrative policies, regula-tions, and procedures.
In June 2009, NARF collabo-
rated with the California IndianLegal Services and the AmericanCivil Liberties Union of NorthernCalifornia in a successful negotia-tion with the Sacramento CityUnified School District to allowan Alaska Native student to wearher eagle feathers at the school’sgraduation ceremony to honorher spiritual beliefs.  The schoolhad previously denied her requestto wear her eagle feathers by citingtheir mandatory graduation dresscode policy which was intendedto prevent the display of gang
symbols and disruptions to theceremony.
Legal work continues on a
number of Native AmericanGraves Protection andRepatriation (NAGPRA) imple-mentation issues.  In 2009,NARF continued a decade longeffort as a member of theColorado Commission of IndianAffairs to work out agreementsand protocols with the ColoradoState Historical Society for therepatriation and reburial of hun-dreds of Native American humanremains, both culturally affiliatedand unaffiliated. Part of the workalso involved the development ofa protocol for the future identifi-cation and disposition of NativeAmerican remains disturbed onstate or private lands, which spec-ifies a process for consultationwith interested tribes and for thereburial on site of those remainswhenever possible. 
CIVIL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Measures providing additional
language assistance for Yup'ikspeakers at municipal elections inBethel, Alaska were agreed uponas part of a settlement among thecity of Bethel, NARF , theAmerican Civil Liberties Union(ACLU) and two local AlaskaNatives. Yup'ik is the primarylanguage of a majority of citizensin the Bethel region. The settle-ment agreement follows a lawsuit
23 native american rights fund - annual reportfiled against the city by NARF
and the ACLU on behalf of thetwo local Alaska Natives.  Thelawsuit Nick, et al. v. Bethel , et al.,
remains pending in the federaldistrict court for the District of Alaska against the State ofAlaska. The lawsuit was broughton behalf of the same AlaskaNatives who agreed to the currentsettlement as well as two otherAlaska Natives and four tribalgovernments. 
Under the settlement agree-
ment, the city of Bethel will pro-vide enhanced language assistanceto Yup'ik voters, including trainedpoll workers who are bilingual inEnglish and Yup'ik; sample ballotsfor election measures in writtenYup'ik; a written Yup'ik glossaryof election terms; advance noticeof translator services; electionannouncements on the radio; andpre- and post-election reports tothe Federal District Court forAlaska tracking the city’s efforts.
However, since the State of
Alaska refuses to reach an amica-ble solution, the ACLU andNARF continue to litigate againstthe State of Alaska so that allYup'ik speaking voters in the statecan be fully included in the politi-cal process.  Alaska is one of justfive states covered in its entiretyby the language assistance provi-sions of the Voting Rights Act.Those provisions, sections 4(f)(4)and 203, apply to areas that meetcertain threshold requirements fornumbers of citizens with limitedEnglish proficiency. Section 208
has nationwide applicability andgives “any voter who requiresassistance to vote by reason ofblindness, disability, or inabilityto read or write” a right to receive“assistance by a person of thevoter’s choice.” The temporaryprovisions of the Voting RightsAct, including sections 4(f)(4)and 203, were reauthorized byCongress in 2006 for an additional25 years.
From the embryonic days of
our Nation, Indian tribes havelong struggled against the assimi-lationist policies instituted by theUnited States which sought todestroy tribal cultures by removingNative American children fromtheir tribes and families.  As anexample, the federal governmentfailed to protect Indian childrenfrom misguided and insensitivechild welfare practices by statehuman service agencies, whichresulted in the unwarrantedremoval of Indian children fromtheir families and tribes andplacement of those children innon-Indian homes. Statistical andanecdotal information show thatIndian children who grow up innon-Indian settings become spiri-tual and cultural orphans. Theydo not entirely fit into the culturein which they are raised and yearnthroughout their life for the familyand tribal culture denied them aschildren. Many Native childrenraised in non-Native homes experience identity problems,drug addiction, alcoholism, 
incarceration and, most dis-turbing, suicide.
In order to address these prob-
lems facing tribes as a result of theloss of their children, the IndianChild Welfare Act (ICWA) wasenacted by Congress in 1978. Itestablished minimum federaljurisdictional, procedural andsubstantive standards aimed toachieve the dual purposes of protecting the right of an Indianchild to live with an Indian familyand to stabilize and foster contin-ued tribal existence.  Since thattime, there has been misinterpre-tations and, in some cases, outright refusal to follow theintent of the law by state agenciesand courts. 
NARF filed and won a federal
lawsuit affirming the IndianChild Welfare Act’s full faith andcredit clause to tribal adoptions.In Kaltag v. State of Alaska , the
Kaltag T ribe entered an Order ofadoption in tribal court andrequested that a new birth certifi-cate be issued from the AlaskaBureau of Vital Statistics. TheState refused to issue a new birthcertificate on the alleged basis thatthe T ribe lacked jurisdiction overchildren’s proceedings unless ithad first petitioned for reassump-tion of jurisdiction under ICWA.This argument assumes that aT ribe does not have inherentjurisdiction to adjudicate adop-tions of its own tribal members.The T ribe and the parents (two
24 annual report - native american rights fundindividual Kaltag tribal members)
brought suit in the United StatesDistrict Court for the District ofAlaska against the State of AlaskaDepartment of Health and SocialServices and the Alaska Bureau of Vital Statistics for denying full faith and credit to a tribal adoption decree in violation ofthe ICWA. Cross motions for summary judgment were filed in2007 and the court ruled in favorof the T ribe on all claims, holdingthat the tribal court decision wasentitled to full faith and creditunder the ICWA. The Statemoved to stay the judgment butlost that motion as well, forcingthe State to immediately issue abirth certificate to the child.
The State appealed to the U.S.
Court of Appeals for the NinthCircuit. In August 2009, a threejudge panel of the Ninth Circuitaffirmed the District Court’s decision that full faith and creditbe given to the Kaltag tribalcourt’s adoption judgment. Thepanel ruled that the DistrictCourt correctly found that neither the ICWA nor Public Law280 prevented the Kaltag tribalcourt from exercising jurisdictionand that reservation status is not arequirement of jurisdictionbecause “[a] T ribe’s authority overits reservation or Indian countryis incidental to its authority overits members.”
In September 2009, the State of
Alaska filed a petition for panelrehearing and, in the alternative,for rehearing en banc. In October
2009, the panel unanimouslyvoted to deny the State’s petitionfor rehearing. The full court ofthe Ninth Circuit was advised ofthe petition for court rehearing en
banc, but no judge of the court
requested an en banc rehearing. 
In another Alaska ICWA case,
the Villages of Tanana, Nulato,Akiak, Kalskag, Lower Kalskagand Kenaitze along with two indi-viduals filed a complaint againstthe State of Alaska, AttorneyGeneral and various state agencieschallenging the policy adopted bythe Attorney General of Alaskathat state courts have exclusivejurisdiction over child custodyproceedings involving AlaskaNative children and that tribes inAlaska do not have concurrentjurisdiction to hear children’scases unless (1) the child’s tribehas successfully petitioned theDepartment of Interior to reas-sume exclusive or concurrentjurisdiction under the ICWA, or(2) a state superior court hastransferred jurisdiction of thechild’s case to a tribal court inaccordance with law.  ThePlaintiffs’ seek a declaration thatT ribes have inherent jurisdictionto initiate children’s proceedingswithout first filing a petition toreassume jurisdiction underICWA.  In 2007 Alaska state district court issued an opinion inthe T ribes’ favor rejecting all ofthe State’s arguments. After exten-sive briefing on the form of relief,judgment was entered. The case is
now on appeal before the AlaskaSupreme Court. Oral argumentwas held in December 2009. 
In a unanimous decision in the
case of In re E.L. , the Nebraska
Supreme Court reversed andremanded a decision by aNebraska county court which hadrefused to allow the Ponca T ribeof Nebraska to intervene in achild custody case involving twochildren that are members of theT ribe.  The Nebraska SupremeCourt affirmed the absolute andunconditional right of an Indiantribe to intervene in a child custody proceeding under theICWA.  The Ponca T ribe’s ICWASpecialist had filed a Motion to
Intervene pursuant to the ICWA.
The Nebraska county courtentered an order denying the filing of the T ribe’s motion tointervene on the grounds that itsICWA Specialist, the T ribe’s designated representative, was notan attorney admitted to practicelaw pursuant to Nebraska RevisedStatutes.  As a result, the PoncaT ribe was required to hire anattorney licensed to practice lawin the courts of the State ofNebraska.  The Ponca T ribe hadthen filed an appeal of this deci-sion with the Supreme Court ofNebraska.
NARF had been retained as
legal counsel to represent amici
curiae in the filing of a joint amicus
brief in the Supreme Court ofNebraska.  NARF represented the
25 native american rights fund - annual reportThe Promotion of Human Rightsfollowing organizations and
tribes: the National Indian ChildWelfare Association in Portland,Oregon; the Indian Center, Inc.in Lincoln, Nebraska; the SanteeSioux T ribe of Nebraska; theOglala Sioux T ribe of SouthDakota; the Osage Nation ofOklahoma; the Sac and Fox T ribeof the Mississippi in Iowa; theSpirit Lake T ribe of NorthDakota; and the Rosebud SiouxT ribe of South Dakota. In March2009, the amicus brief was filedwith the Supreme Court ofNebraska   The amicus briefmaintained that the Ponca T ribehas an absolute and unconditionalfederal right to intervene in theproceeding according the clearlanguage of the ICWA and thatthe requirement that the T ribe berepresented by a licensed attorneyis preempted by the ICWA.Additionally, requiring a tribe tobe represented by an attorney tointervene and participate in astate ICWA case would have asignificant, detrimental effect onall tribes, including the infringe-
ment on tribal sovereignty.
The amicus brief respectfully
requested that the Court
reverse the county court’s
decision and order the
county court to grant the
T ribe’s Motion to Intervene
and allow the T ribe’s ICWA
Specialist to fully participate as
the designated representative ofthe Ponca T ribe of Nebraska. TheNebraska Supreme Court agreedwith the Ponca T ribe and allowed
the T ribe the right to intervenethrough its ICWA specialist, theT ribe’s designated representative.
In September 2009, NARF 
represented the National IndianChild Welfare Association(NICWA) and provided testimonyfor the Wisconsin Legislature on a bill which would enact a stateIndian Child Welfare Act intolaw.  The bill articulates a cooper-ative and collaborative approachbetween the sovereign Indiannations located in Wisconsin andthe State, demonstrating the Stateof Wisconsin’s intent to clearlyrecognize and reinforce tribal sovereignty as an essential meansof achieving ICWA’s objectives,which are echoed in the bill, andalso to provide an even greaterpossibility for improving servicesand outcomes for Indian childrenin the State.  In October 2009,both the Senate and Assembly ofthe State of Wisconsin Legislatureapproved and passed the bills.The legislation will help makecertain that the State complieswith the requirements of theICWA.
Also in the area of cultural
rights, NARF had filed an amicus
brief in the case of Harjo et al v.
Washington Redskin Football in the
U.S. Court of Appeals for theDistrict of Columbia on behalf ofthe National Congress ofAmerican Indians, NationalIndian Educational Association,National Indian Youth Council,and the T ulsa Indian Coalition
Against Racism in Sports in support of the Indian appellants.The brief argued that the federaltrademark for the football teamshould be cancelled because theuse of the “Redskin” mark isracially disparaging in violation offederal trademark law.
In a disappointing outcome, in
November 2009, the U.S.Supreme Court denied review inHarjo v. Pro-Football, Inc. The D.C.
Circuit’s May 2009 decision inthat case held that the doctrine oflaches ( i.e.long delay in bringing
lawsuit) precluded considerationof a petition seeking cancellationof the “Redskins” trademarksowned by Pro-Football, eventhough the T rademark T rial andAppeals Board’s found that thetrademarks disparaged NativeAmericans. The T ribal SupremeCourt Project coordinated fouramicus briefs in support ofreview: (1) the NCAI-T ribalAmicus Brief which summarizesthe efforts of the Native Americancommunity over the past fortyyears to retire all Indian namesand mascots; (2) the SocialJustice/Religious OrganizationsAmicus Brief which focuses onthe social justice and public inter-ests present in the case; (3) theT rademark Law Professors’ Briefwhich supports and enhances thetrademark law arguments put forward by petitioners; and (4)the Psychologists’ Amicus Briefwhich provides an overview of the
26 annual report - native american rights fundempirical research of the harm
caused by racial stereotyping.Attention will now focus on theBlackhorse v. Pro-Football, Inc.litigation which was brought in2006 by young Native Americansin an effort to avoid the lachesdefense, and then stayed pendingthe outcome in the Harjo case. 
INTERNATIONAL
RECOGNITION OFINDIGENOUS RIGHTS
The development of interna-
tional laws and standards to protect the rights of indigenouspeoples greatly benefits NativeAmerican peoples.  NARF andthe National Congress ofAmerican Indians entered into anattorney-client relationship severalyears ago for the purpose of working in the international arenato protect indigenous rights. 
In 2007, the United Nations
General Assembly overwhelminglyadopted the Declaration on theRights of Indigenous Peoples. Thevote was 143 in favor, 4 opposed,and 11 abstaining. The only votesin opposition were Canada,Australia, New Zealand, and theUnited States. Australia has nowreversed its position and supportsthe Declaration. This historic votecomes after 30 years of worldwideindigenous efforts.  NARF hasrepresented the NationalCongress of American Indians(NCAI) in this matter since 1999.
The Declaration recognizes that
Indigenous peoples have impor-tant collective human rights in a
multitude of areas, including self-determination, spirituality, andlands, territories and naturalresources. The Declaration setsout minimum standards for thetreatment of Indigenous peoplesand can serve as the basis for thedevelopment of customary inter-national law. The special theme ofthe Permanent Forum onIndigenous Issues sessions hasbeen climate change, a crucialissue for Indigenous peoplesworldwide.  Climate change continued to occupy a prominentplace on the agenda of the U.N.with special emphasis on REDD -Reduction of Emissions Due toDeforestation.  Much of the landon which these forests exist isIndigenous land.
The adoption of the U.N.
Declaration on the Rights ofIndigenous Peoples will have animpact on the Organization ofAmerican States (OAS) process.NARF also represents NCAI inthis process.  In recognition ofthis, the OAS held a “reflection”session in Washington, D.C. in2007 to discuss that import. It was agreed that the UnitedNations’ Declaration would beused as the foundation for theOAS document, in that all theterms of the OAS documentwould be consistent with, ormore favorable to, Indigenousrights than the United Nationsdocument. The group furtheragreed that all the terms would be
met through a consensus baseddecision making process whichincludes the Indigenous represen-tatives. The United States andCanada expressed their oppositionto a document that would beconsistent with the UnitedNations Declaration, againstwhich they had voted, but agreedthey would not oppose theprocess moving forward. 
NARF represents the
Pottawatomi Nation of Canada, a band of descendants from theHistoric Pottawatomi Nation,which from 1795 to 1833 signeda series of treaties with the UnitedStates.  While the AmericanPottawatomi bands recovered thepayment of annuities in theIndian Claims Commission(ICC), the Canadian Pottawatomimembers could not bring a claimin the ICC.  In 1993, NARFbrought suit on behalf of theCanadian Pottawatomi in theCourt of Federal Claims, and theparties reached an agreement inprinciple which was approved bythe Court in 2000 and recom-mended to Congress in 2001.Attempts to pass Congressionallegislation approving the settle-ment agreement has stalled since2002.  In January 2009, SenatorDaniel Inouye once again re-introduced a settlement bill,which has been referred to theSenate Judiciary Committee.
27 native american rights fund - annual reportThe Promotion of Human Rightsillustration by Walt PourierContained within the unique
trust relationship between theUnited States and Indian nationsis the inherent duty for all levels ofgovernment to recognize andresponsibly enforce the many lawsand regulations applicable toIndian peoples and the trust dutiesto which those give rise.  Becausesuch laws impact virtually everyaspect of tribal life, NARF main-tains its involvement in the legalmatters pertaining to accounta-
bility of governments to Native
Americans. 
The Cobell v. Salazar case was
filed in 1996 in the U.S. DistrictCourt for the District of Columbiaby NARF and private co-counsel,on behalf of approximately500,000 past and present individ-ual Indian trust beneficiaries. Theindividual Indian money accountholders (plaintiffs) seek a fullaccounting of their trust assets forthe entire period that such assetshave been held in trust – since1887. T rustees, without exception,have a duty to provide accurateand complete statement ofaccounts to each
beneficiary at regu-lar intervals and acomplete and accu-rate accountingupon demand. Yet,the United Statesgovernment astrustee has neverprovided anaccounting to indi-vidual Indian trustbeneficiaries. It hasnever providedbeneficiaries accu-rate and complete statement ofaccounts. In addition, the Cobell
plaintiffs seek that their accountbalances be corrected, restated and,where appropriate, distributed tothe correct beneficiary in the cor-rect amount. Finally, the Cobell
plaintiffs seek reform of the trustmanagement and accounting system.
A settlement agreement was
announced in December 2009between Elouise Cobell, leadplaintiff in the Cobell v. Salazar
class action lawsuit over federalmismanagement of individualIndian trust fund accounts, andthe Obama Administration. Underthe terms of the settlement, thefederal government will create a$1.4 billion Accounting/T rustFund and a $2 billion T rust LandConsolidation Fund. The settle-ment also creates an IndianEducation Scholarship fund of upto $60 million to improve accessto higher education for Indians.The settlement agreement must be
approved by Congress and a federaldistrict court. NARF is no longerinvolved in the Cobell case because
of its involvement in the tribaltrust fund mismanagement casesdiscussed below.
NARF represents forty-two
plaintiffs – the Nez Perce T ribe;the Mescalero Apache T ribe; theT ule River Indian T ribe; theHualapai T ribe; the YakamaNation; the Klamath T ribes; theYurok T ribe; the Cheyenne-Arapaho T ribe; the Pawnee Nationof Oklahoma; the Sac and FoxNation; the Santee Sioux T ribe ofNebraska; the Tlingit and HaidaIndian T ribes of Alaska; AleutCommunity of St. Paul island;Bad River Band of Lake SuperiorChippewa Indians; Bois ForteBand of Chippewa; Cachil DeheBand of Wintun Indians of ColusaRancheria; Confederated Salish &Kootenai T ribes; ConfederatedT ribes of Siletz Indians; GrandT raverse Band of Ottawa and
29 native american rights fund - annual reportThe Accountability of Governments
NARF attorney Amy Bowers“Like the miner’s canary, the
Indian marks the shift fromfresh air to poison gas in ourpolitical atmosphere; and ourtreatment of Indians, even morethan our treatment of otherminorities, reflects the rise andfall in our democratic faith...
”
— Felix CohenChippewa Indians; Kaibab Paiute
T ribe; Kenaitze Indian T ribe;Kickapoo T ribe in Kansas; LacCourte Oreilles Band of Ojibwe;Lac Du Flambeau Band of LakeSuperior Chippewa; Leech LakeBand of Ojibwe; MinnesotaChippewa T ribe; Native Village ofAtka; Noocksack Indian T ribe;Prairie Island Indian Community;Pueblo of Zia; Qawalangin T ribe;Rincon Luiseno Band of Indians;Samish Indian Nation; San LuisRey Indian Water Authority; SaultSte. Marie T ribe of Chippewa;Shoalwater Bay T ribe; SkokomishT ribe; Spirit Lake DakotahNation; Spokane T ribe; SummitLake Paiute T ribe; T ulalip T ribes;and, Ute Mountain Ute T ribe, inan action in the federal districtcourt for the District of Columbia
seeking full and completeaccountings of their trust funds.
Such accountings never have beenprovided by the federal govern-ment which is the trustee for thefunds.
Pending before the Court is the
government’s motion to dismissthe action for lack of jurisdiction,which the T ribes have opposed.During the Presidential campaign,candidate Barack Obama “com-mitted to resolving equitably” allIndian trust fund mismanagementlitigation against the federal government if he was electedPresident.  NARF is now hopefulthat the Obama Administrationcan soon focus its efforts on settle-ments for the tribal claims oncethe Cobell settlement is finalized.
There are also about 100 othertribal cases asserting claims stem-ming from federal mismanagementof tribal trust fund accounts. Bythe government’s own figures, tribaltrust accounts hold five times asmuch money as the individualIndian trust accounts involved inthe Cobell case.
In a separate U.S. Court of
Federal Claims action, NARF represents the T urtle MountainChippewa, Chippewa Cree, WhiteEarth Band of MinnesotaChippewa, and Little ShellChippewa T ribes in this caseagainst the federal government formisaccounting and mismanage-ment of their tribal trust fund, thePembina Judgment Fund (PJF),since the inception of the fund in1964. In 2006 the T ribes defeatedthe United States’ motion to havethe case dismissed.
Since 2007 the parties have been
trying to resolve the T ribes’ claimsprimarily through alternative dis-pute resolution proceedings beforea Settlement Judge of the Court.In August 2009 the parties reachedagreement at least for settlementnegotiations on the population of“baseline” (non-investment) trans-actions in the PJF .  They are nowproceeding to analyze the govern-ment’s investment management ofthe PJF .  
30 annual report - native american rights fund
Alaska voting rights case clients: back row: Joe Alexie (Tuluksak Tribal Council), Jason
Brandeis (Alaska ACLU), Peter Andrew (Tuluksak Tribal Council), Michael Martin(Kasigluk Traditional Council), Jim Tucker (attorney), Nick David (TuntutuliakTribal Council) front row: Jim Davis (attorney), Leo Beaver (Kasigluk TraditionalCouncil), Robert Enoch (Tuntutuliak Tribal Council), Natalie Landreth (NARFAttorney) and Elsie Nichols (Kasigluk Traditional Council)31 native american rights fund - annual report
(top left to right) NARF attorney Heather Kendall-Miller; NARF history presentation to Boulder community; NARF attorneys Amy Bo wers
and Dawn Baum; NARF consultant Stephanie Wilcox, Kellie Jewett, NARF staff Mireille Martinez; NARF Board members KunaniNihipali, Ron His Horse Is Thunder and NARF staff Mireille Martinez:  Former NARF attorney Roy Haber and John EchohawkThe Accountability of GovernmentsThe coordinated development of
Indian law and educating the public about Indian rights , laws
and issues is essential for the continued protection of Indianrights.  This primarily involvesestablishing favorable court prece-dents, distributing informationand law materials, encouragingand fostering Indian legal educa-tion, and forming alliances withIndian law practitioners and otherIndian organizations. NARF hasthree ongoing projects which areaimed at achieving this goal: theMany Paths to Peace Project; theNational Indian Law Library; andthe Indian Law Support Center.
MANY PATHS TO PEACE
PROJECT
NARF is in the start up phase
of a new project, tentatively calledthe “Many Paths to PeaceProject.”  Made possible by along-term anonymous grant, themission of the “Many Paths toPeace Project” is to promote andsupport Native people in restoringsustainable peacemaking practices.This project provides NARF withan opportunity to support 
traditional peacemaking and community-building practices asan extension of Indian law and sovereign rights. 
Peacemaking is a community-
directed process to develop con-sensus on a conflict resolutionplan that addressesthe concerns of allinterested parties.The peacemakingprocess uses tradi-tional rituals suchas the group circle,and traditionalpeacemaker suchas from a tradi-tional Clan, toinvolve the partiesto a conflict, theirsupporters, andother elders andinterested community members.Within the circle, people canspeak from the heart in a sharedsearch for understanding of theconflict, and together identify thesteps necessary to assist in healingall affected parties and preventfuture occurrences and conflicts.NARF will begin program rollout in calendar year 2010 withsupport of the Many Paths toPeace Advisory Committee, consisting of peacemaking expertsand practitioners.  NARF willfocus its initial efforts on the creation of a clearinghouse, conducting needs assessment ofpeacemaker resources, and devel-oping a sustainable businessmodel for the program.THE NATIONAL INDIAN
LAW LIBRARY 
The National Indian Law
Library (NILL) is the only lawlibrary in the United States devotedto Indian law. The library servesboth NARF and members of thepublic. Since it was started as a
NARF project in 1972, NILL has
collected nearly 9,000 resourcematerials that relate to federalIndian and tribal law. TheLibrary’s holdings include thelargest collection of tribal codes,ordinances, and constitutions;legal pleadings from major Indiancases; and often hard to findreports and historical legal infor-mation. In addition to making itscatalog and extensive collectionavailable to the public, NILL provides reference and researchassistance relating to Indian lawand tribal law, and its professionalstaff answers close to 2,000 ques-tions each year. In addition, theLibrary has created and maintainsa huge web site that provides
The Development of Indian Law
33 native american rights fund - annual report
NARF Board member Ron His Horse Is Thunder“Our stories were the libraries
of our people.  In each story,there was recorded some eventof interest or importance.People enrich their minds whokeep their history on the leavesof memory.”— Luther Standing Bear, Lakotaaccess to thousands of full-text
sources to help the researcher.
In 2009, NARF/NILL part-
nered with Thomson/West
on an alliance to increase
access to tribal law –
specifically tribal codes,
constitutions and intergov-
ernmental agreements. This
alliance includes working to
make annotated tribal codes andconstitutions available throughthe Westlaw fee-based databasesas well as available for freethrough the NILL web site. Thissignificant development in makingtribal law accessible will help toenhance knowledge of tribes assovereign nations and distinctpolitical entities.
NILL also launched a new U.S.
Legislation Bulletin which tracksand provides current informationon legislation being consideredand enacted by 111th U.S.Congress impacting NativeAmericans. The bulletin includes:1) topical listings of bills for thecongressional term; 2) current billstatus, summary and sponsors; 3)links to full-text copies of billsand enacted laws; 4) links to relevant news stories; 5) links toadditional information about thelegislation; and 6) links toCongressional reports and hearinginformation (both print and videowhen available). 
INDIAN LAW SUPPORT
CENTER
Since 1972, NARF’s Indian
Law Support Center (ILSC) hasserved as a national support center
on Indian law and policy for thenational Indian legal servicescommunity and the 32 basic fieldprograms serving Native Americanclients.  NARF continues to per-form Indian Law Support Centerduties by sending out regularmailouts to Indian Legal Servicesprograms, handling requests forassistance, and working withIndian legal services programs tosecure a more stable funding basefrom Congress. 
In 2000 Congress enacted the
Indian T ribal Justice and LegalAssistance Act which PresidentClinton signed into law. The Actauthorizes the Department ofJustice to provide supplementalfunding to Indian legal servicesprograms for their representationof Indian people and tribes whichfall below federal poverty guide-lines. Congress appropriatedfunding in 2003 and 2004 underthe Act and NARF and Indianlegal services (ILS) programsworked with the Department ofJustice to devise an allocationmethodology. Most of the grantfunds were contracted out to theIndian legal services programswith a small portion used to coverNARF administrative costs.NARF continued to be activelyinvolved with local ILS programsin the administration of the grantand in developing training eventsto meet local program needs.Funding for calendar year 2006was appropriated by Congress forthe project. Funding via 2007,2008 and 2009 Congressional
appropriations was unsuccessful.NARF is now working withIndian Legal Services on a strategyfor FY 2010 funding.
OTHER ACTIVITIES
In addition to its major projects,
NARF continued its participationin numerous conferences andmeetings of Indian and non-Indian organizations in order toshare its knowledge and expertisein Indian law.  During the pastfiscal year, NARF attorneys andstaff served in formal or informalspeaking and leadership capacitiesat numerous Indian and Indian-related conferences and meetingssuch as the National Congress ofAmerican Indians ExecutiveCouncil, Midyear and AnnualConventions and the Federal BarAssociation’s Indian LawConference.  NARF remainsfirmly committed to continuingits effort to share the legal expertisewhich it possesses with thesegroups and individuals working insupport of Indian rights and tofoster the recognition of Indianrights in mainstream society.
34 annual report - native american rights fundThe Development of Indian LawBased on our audited financial
statements for the fiscal year endingSeptember 30, 2009, the NativeAmerican Rights Fund reports totalunrestricted revenues of $7,458,048against total expenditures of$7,166,227.  Total net assets at theend of the year came to $4,976,789.Due to presentation requirements ofthe audited financial statements interms of recognizing the timing ofcertain revenues, they do not reflectthe fact that, based on NARF’s 
internal reporting, revenue exceededlosses and other cash outlays resultingin an increase of $172,481 toNARF’s reserve fund.  When com-pared to fiscal year 2008, we haveexperienced decreases in public andtribal contributions primarily due toeconomic conditions.  One of ourfederal awards was not renewedgoing into fiscal year 2009.  Theincrease in foundation grants is dueto $1.3 million released from 
endowment restrictions by the FordFoundation.  Legal fees revenue hasincreased due to escalated activity inour major cases.  Investments haveimproved in fiscal year 2009, but westill incurred a slight loss.
Unrestricted Revenue and 
Expense comparisons between fiscalyear 2009 and fiscal year 2008 areshown below.
35 native american rights fund - annual reportNARF - Treasurer’s Report
Note: This summary of financial information has been extracted from NARF’s audited financial statements which received an unqua lified opinion
by the accounting firm of BKD, LLP.  Complete audited financials are available, upon request, through our Boulder office or at www.narf.org.Public Contributions
Tribal Contributions
Federal Awards 
Foundation Grants
Return on Investments
Other
TOTALS$ 1,812,793
           1,198,941
10,000 
1,972,1722,488,811
(50,952)
26,283
$ 7,458,048 24.3%
       16.1%
0.1%
26.4%
 33.4%
(0.7)%
0.4%
100%  $ 2,288,390
        1,398,950
     158,447
   643,982
 2,059,580
 (790,470)
51,051
 $ 5,809,93039.4%
        24.1%
2.7%
11.1%35.4%
(13.6)%
0.9%
100%dollars percents
2009UNRESTRICTED SUPPORT AND REVENUE COMPARISON
EXPENSE COMPARISONdollars percents2008
Legal Fees
dollars percents2009
dollars percents2008
Litigation and Client Services
National Indian Law Library     Total Program ServicesManagement and GeneralFund Raising     Total Support Services                         TOTALS$ 4,770,000
246,948
 5,016,948
779,843
1,369,436
2,149,279
$ 7,166,22766.6%
  3.4%
70.0%
10.9%19.1%
30.0%
100%65.0%
4.2%
 69.2%
10.9%19.9%
 30.8%
100%$ 4,656,499
297,599
4,954,098
781,522
1,423,930
2,205,452
    $ 7,159,55036 annual report - native american rights fundNARF - Acknowledgment of Contributions: Fiscal Year 2009
Tribes and Native Organizations
Chickasaw NationChoctaw Nation of Oklahoma Chugachmiut, Inc.Cow Creek Band of Umpqua T ribe of
Indians
Drumbeats Indian ArtsElk Valley RancheriaEyak Native VillageKaibab Band of  Paiute T ribe Kenaitze Indian T ribeMashantucket Pequot T ribal NationMississippi Band of Choctaw IndiansMohegan Indian T ribeMuckleshoot Indian T ribeOsage Nation Pawnee Nation of OklahomaNative Village of Port LionsSac and Fox NationSaginaw Chippewa Indian T ribe of MichiganSan Manuel Band of Mission IndiansSeminole T ribe of FloridaSeven Cedars CasinoConfederated T ribes of Siletz Indians of
Oregon
St. Regis Band of Mohawk T ribeSun'aq T ribe of KodiakSycuan Band of Kumeyaay IndiansT ulalip T ribesViejas Band of Kumeyaay Indians 
Foundations, Corporations and
Organizations
Ford FoundationOpen Society InstituteTzo'Nah FundArches Foundation
Aria FoundationBay & Paul FoundationBassett FoundationBiedenharn FoundationChicago Community T rustCommunity Foundation Boulder CountyEdward & Verna Gerbic Family FoundationEverett Philanthropic FundEvergreen FundFredericks, Peebles & Morgan LLPGorlitz Foundation, Ltd.Hamill Revocable T rustHickrill FoundationIndian Land Tenure FoundationInge FoundationKirkland & Ellis FoundationKogovsek & AssociatesLeFort – Martin FundLutheran Community FoundationPanaphil FoundationRMF FoundationStanley Family FundStettenheim FoundationThe Boston FoundationThe Susan and Ford Schumann FoundationUngar FoundationVivendi Universal US Holding Co.Walton Avenue FoundationWhizin FoundationWinky Foundation
Endowments – NARF has two established
endowments, the 21st Century Endowmentand the Living Waters Endowment. The 21stCentury Endowment is a permanent fund inwhich the principal is invested and interestincome is used for NARF’s programs. This
endowment is designed to provide a perma-nent, steady income that can support theever-increasing costs of providing legal repre-sentation to our tribal clients.  The LivingWaters Endowment directly funds the 21stCentury Endowment. It allows donors tohonor friends and loved ones by making anendowment gift of $10,000 or more.  Bydesignating a gift to either endowment, youcan be sure that your contribution will con-tinue to generate annual funds in perpetuity.Endowment supporters are recognized on aspecial wall plaque displayed at NARF .Supporters will also receive a memorial piecefor their home and be acknowledged inNARF’s annual report.
Living Waters Endowment
Elwood H. Brotzman Memorial FundJerome Davis Living Waters 
Endowment Fund
Kathleen and Ruth Dooley Family FundEdward & Verna Gerbic Family FoundationSusan K. Griffiths Memorial FundThe Robert and Joy Hanson Leland
Endowment
Frank J. McCormick Family FundMarvin W. Pourier, Sr. & Donna M. Deans
Memorial Fund
Mary Lou Mosca-Ragona Memorial FundErnest L. Schusky EndowmentHelen & Sidney Ungar Memorial
Endowment Fund
NARF Employee Endowment Giving -
Jonathan Briggs, Rose Cuny, JohnEchohawk, Kim Gottschalk, David Gover,Richard Guest, Carly Hare, Heather Kendall-Miller, Melody McCoy, Steve Moore,Christine Pereira, Donald Ragona, RayRamirez, Don Wharton.
We thank each and every one of our supporters for their commitment to the goals of NARF .  NARF’s success could not 
have been achieved without the generosity of our many donors throughout the nation. NARF receives contributions fromfoundations, corporations, religious organizations, tribes and Native organizations, bequests and trusts, benefactors, privatedonations, and in-kind contributions.  We gratefully acknowledge these gifts received for fiscal year 2009 (October 1, 2008 through September 30, 2009).37 native american rights fund - annual reportPeta Uha Membership – Peta Uha in the
Lakota (Sioux) language means firekeeper.One that honors tribal members who made asolemn commitment to ensure that thesacred flame, source of light, heat and energyfor his people, always be kept burning. Likethe firekeepers of old, members of the PetaUha Council can demonstrate constancy and vigilance by helping to ensure that thecritical work of the Native American RightsFund continues to move ever forward.  Forbenefits associated with each level of PetaUha membership, please contact theDevelopment Department, 303.447.8760. 
Peta Uha Pipestone
John BevanRobert Friede
Peta Uha Turquoise
Tina Peterson
Peta Uha Granite
Barbara BastleLyle & Vera DethlefsenMarion McCollom HamptonBridget M.K. Stroud
Peta Uha Flint
Robert & Patricia BerryPeter BronerMary Anibal BrookElizabeth CelioMark CookeLaura DennisonThomas & Jane DunphyLucille EchohawkBert & JoAnn EderDaren & Amy EilertAnne EvansJudy Fair-SpauldingLyman FlinnHerbert FloydRico GenhartDuncan HaasCollier Hands
Esther Hayward RivinusKarin HolserScott & Ricki KresanYvonne LeMelleHal LitoffMr. & Mrs. William LymanJames MarienthalD. Michael McBrideGene MillerBrent & Marilyn MinneyEdith QuevedoFaith RoesselPeter SheldonMathew SlaterMary SpragueEdmund & Jennifer StanleyWalter StockGilbert TauckMargaret VerbleJanice WarnerMargaret WeitzmannElisa WilkinsonMary Lee Zerby
Peta Uha Obsidian
James & Louise ArnoldNorval Bhendra & John FletcherMarjorie BlachlyDavid & Barbara BoernerWilliam & Elsa BoyceAnne DeMuthAnn  EllisElvin FowlerMark HodgeRaymond HoneywellBrenda JonesGerri KayGeorge & Carolyn KoehlerJoan LesterHarry McAndrewDonald McKinleyMichael Meredith
Shirley MiollaJeanne Morrel-FranklinBarbara MusicusFrannie OatesAllan OlsonClaude & Noelle PonceletMichael ReynoldsAlfred SchwendtnerMargaret T ravisJennifer VanicaDavid Winston
Circle of Life – NARF’s Circle of Life are
donors who provide a lasting legacy to theNative American Rights Fund by includingNARF in estate planning or deferred gifts.The circle is an important symbol to NativeAmericans representing unity, strength andthe eternal continuity of life. These lastinggifts help ensure the future of NARF and ourIndian clients nationwide. For more informa-tion please contact the DevelopmentDepartment, 303.447.8760 or e-mail us atcircle@narf.org.
Bequests and Trusts
John ArnoldJoyce BeaulieuMary Helen BickleyJoan Saugrain BredendieckAinslie Alice Bricker ClarkLois DauntCarolyn FerridayRico GenhartVirginia HazzardBarbara LeightonBarton MossJoel SchenkmanAnn SchwartzJohn VaupelViolet YoungDorean Wert38 annual report - native american rights fundNARF - Acknowledgment of Contributions: Fiscal Year 2009
Circle of Life – Catches Bear & Judy
Adams, Rodney Addison, Gloria Adkinson,Maxwell Barnard, Barbara Beasley, DianeBen Ari, Roy Benson, Sandra Berger, BobbyBitner, Betty Blumenkamp, Charles Bowers,Dale Brand, William Brown, Gloria Burgess,Patricia Burnet, Thomas Campbell, LawrenceCandel, Arthur Carter, Robert Carter, MaryCasmus, Ed Chasteen, Paul Clifton, CharlesCole, Janet Congero, Judith Day, HarveyDennenberg, Lyle Dethlefsen, GaryDickerhoof, Starr Dormann, Patricia Duval,Noelle Edwards, Allison Emerson, Judy Fair-Spaulding, James Fee, Debra Frazier, JanFreeman, Lyle Funderburk, Suzanne Gartz,Lawrence Geller, Deborah Ghoreyeb, EstelaGoldsmith, Louise Gomer Bangel, ArlineGoodrich, Bernard Gordon, Gene Grabau,Jean Gundlach, Merrill Hakim, MichaelHall, Margaret Hartnett, TheodoraHaughton, Patricia Heidelberger, KarinHolser, Charles Holtzer, Alfred Hoose, JudithHorton, Veronica Ifill, Elizabeth Johnson,Vusama Kariba, Emily Kirk, Betty Kleczy,Margo Kochruthe, Ellyne Krakower - Rice,Edward Kriege, James Langharst, SharonLaughlin, Ingrid Leblanc, James Lehnerer,Frank Loveland, Richard Luers, Rima Lurie,Suzanne MacDonald, Patricia Marks-Greenfield, Marion McCollom Hampton,Joseph McNamara, Stanley Metzger, Peter &Betty Meyer, Gary Montgomery, LeilaMoore, Jeanne Morrel-Franklin, JeanneMoskal, Shirley Norton, Marc Pearce, MosesPeter, Randall Petersen, Denise Pfalzer, RosePilcarsky, Thelma Populus Gordon, B.Powell, Horace Raines, Robert & MaryResnik, Maureen Ripley, Barbara Roberts,Andrea Robinsong, June Rosenthal, KeithRoss, William Rozier, Mary Sacher, B.Sampson, Peter Schmidt, LaRoy Seaver,Michael Seeley, Charlotte Selver, KateySimetra, Charles Smith, Kirk Sperry, CarolynStaby, Herbert Stewart, James & PatriciaStraus, Rennard Strickland, Michael & CarolSullivan, Louis Tabois, Valeria Tenyak,Charlotte Thompson, M. T urek, John Tyler,Rene' Vivo', William Wade, Ted Weitz,Robert & Mary Wellman, Roger Welsch,Gary White, Karen Williams-Fast Horse,Marcel Wingate, David Yeoman, WayneZengelCorporate Matching Gifts – Currently,
more than 25 foundations and corporationsnationwide make matching gifts to NARF ona regular basis.  Employers match theiremployees’ contributions sometimes dou-bling or even tripling their donation. Pleasecheck with your human resources office andrequest a matching gift form.
Adobe Systems Inc.
AIG Matching Grants ProgramBank of America Foundation, Inc.DellGE FoundationGiving Express Program from 
American Express
Hanson Bridgett LLPIllinois Tool Works FoundationJustGive.orgMicrosoft CorporationPrudentialThe David & Lucile Packard FoundationWachovia FoundationWellPoint Foundation, Associate 
Giving Campaign
Boulder-Denver Advisory Committee –
Lucille A. Echohawk, Thomas W. Fredericks,David Getches, Ava Hamilton, JeanneWhiteing, Charles Wilkinson.
Tsanáhwit Circle – Tsanáhwit is a Nez Perce
word meaning equal justice.  Tsanáhwit Circlemembers provide a regular source of incometo NARF by pledging and making monthlycontributions at any level of your choice.We currently have over 300 Tsanáhwit Circlemembers. You may sign up to receive monthlypledge reminders in the mail or your creditcard may be billed automatically.
Native Ways Federation – The Native Ways
Federation (Native Ways) is unique in that itis the only workplace giving program in theUnited States to directly serve Native non-profits that assist Native peoples and com-munities in Indian Country. Native Ways iscomprised of seven national Native nonprofitorganizations that serve Indian Country: theAmerican Indian College Fund, theAmerican Indian Science and EngineeringSociety, American Indian Youth RunningStrong, the Association on American IndianAffairs, First Nations Development Institute,
the National Indian Child WelfareAssociation, and the Native American RightsFund. NARF’s share of those campaign contributions in FY09 is $932.  Native Waysexists to build a brighter future for NativePeople by strengthening the circle of givingin Indian Country. 
Federated Workplace Campaigns – NARF
is a member of America’s Charities, a nationalworkplace giving federation. Giving throughyour workplace is as easy as checking offNARF’s box on the Combined FederalCampaign (CFC) pledge form authorizingautomatic payroll deduction.  NARF is also amember of Community Shares of Colorado(CSC), member #5037.
Thank you to the thousands of federal, state,
municipal and private sector employeesthroughout the country who through theirpayroll deduction plans contributed $96,511in fiscal year 2009.
Special Events – In May 2009, two of our
National Support Committee members,Nancy Starling Ross and her husband WayneRoss, held their bi-annual wine tasting eventand silent auction for NARF’s benefit inDenver, Colorado. This event raised in$4,720 for NARF . 
In-Kind Donations – The Native American
Rights Fund would like to thank all the indi-viduals who have contributed in-kind gifts in2009. Without your time and talents, NARFwould not be able to accomplish the workwe do. Thank you for these gifts. 
E-Action – Sign up for our e-action network
by providing NARF with your email addressat www.NARF .org. This is a great way to getperiodic case updates, calls-to-action, specialevents information, invitations and otheractivities. Your e-mail address is confidentialand we will not share it with any outsidesources.  
For further information about any of the
programs or services, please contact NARF’sDevelopment Department at 303-447-8760.Thank you.39 native american rights fund - annual reportCORPORATE OFFICERS
John E. Echohawk (Pawnee)
Executive Director/Attorney
K. Jerome Gottschalk
Litigation Management CommitteeMember/Attorney
Natalie Landreth (Chickasaw)
Litigation Management Committee/Attorney
Melody McCoy (Cherokee)
Litigation Management CommitteeMember/Attorney
Carly Hare (Pawnee/Yankton Sioux)
Director of Development
Ray Ramirez
Corporate Secretary
Michael Kennedy
Chief Financial Officer
BOULDER MAIN OFFICE STAFFJohn E. Echohawk (Pawnee)
Executive Director/Attorney
Amy Bowers (Yurok)
Attorney
Walter R. Echo-Hawk - Ret. (Pawnee)
Attorney
K. Jerome Gottschalk
Attorney
David Gover (Pawnee/Choctaw)
Attorney
Melody McCoy (Cherokee)
Attorney
Steven C. Moore
Attorney
Mark Tilden (Navajo)
Attorney
Donald R. Wharton
Attorney
Eric Anderson
Legal Assistant
Rose Cuny (Oglala Lakota)
Office Manager
Carly Hare (Pawnee/Yankton Sioux)
Development DirectorChrissy Johnson
Legal Assistant
Michael Kennedy
Chief Financial Officer
Mireille Martinez
Development Projects Coordinator
Katrina Mora (Oglala Lakota)
Office Services Assistant
Christine Pereira
Systems Administrator/Webmaster
Donald M. Ragona 
(Mattinecock/Oglala Lakota)Director of Planned Giving
Ray Ramirez
Editor/Technical Writer/Public Relations
Jennifer Redbone (Apache/Comanche/ Kiowa)
Development Staff Assistant
Clela Rorex
Law Office Administrator
Joanne Soklin
Legal Assistant
Debbie Raymond-Thomas (Navajo)
Controller
Jennie Tsikewa (Zuni)
AccountantNATIONAL INDIAN LAW LIBRARY
David Selden
Librarian
ANCHORAGE OFFICE STAFF
Heather Kendall-Miller (Athabascan)
Attorney
Natalie Landreth (Chickasaw)
Attorney
Erin Dougherty
Skadden Fellow Attorney
Jonathan Briggs
Legal Administrative Assistant
WASHINGTON, D.C. OFFICE STAFF
Richard Guest
Attorney
Dawn Baum 
(Mole Lake Chippewa/Menominee)Attorney
Angela Gonzalez
Legal AssistantNative American Rights Fund - Staff
40 annual report - native american rights fundStatement on Environmental Sustainability.
“It is clear that our natural world is undergoing
severe, unsustainable and catastrophic climatechange that adversely impacts the lives of peopleand ecosystems worldwide. Native Americans areespecially vulnerable and are experiencing dispro-portionate negative impacts on their cultures, healthand food systems. In response, the Native AmericanRights Fund (NARF) is committed to environmen-tal sustainability through its mission, work andorganizational values. Native Americans and otherindigenous peoples have a long tradition of livingsustainably with the natural world by understandingthe importance of preserving natural resources and
respecting the interdependence of all living things.NARF embraces this tradition through its work andby instituting sustainable office practices that reduceour negative impact on our climate and environ-ment. NARF is engaged in environmental work andhas established a Green Office Committee whoseresponsibility is to lead and coordinate staff partici-pation in establishing and implementing policiesand procedures to minimize waste, reduce energyconsumption and pollution and create a healthfulwork environment.”
Native American Rights FundNARFPRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPERNative American Rights Fund
1506 Broadway, Boulder, Colorado 80302
303-447-8760 • www.narf.org