 
STATEMENT TO HEARING  
OF SENATE COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY  
ON S.B. 0584  
 
Chair McCaffrey, Honorable Senators, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 
Good evening. We deeply regret  that the demands of working with our 
clients made us unable to join you on such short not ice for today’s 
hearing on S.B. 0584 .  We very much appreciate the opportunity share 
our experience and expertise with you by way of this statement.  
 
 Over the past seven years, the Sex Workers Project at the Urban Justice 
Center has provided critical lega l and social services to hundreds of 
victims of trafficking into prostitution in New York City. We have also 
participated, as part of a broad coalition of feminists, social service 
providers, and anti -trafficking experts in the reauthorization of the 
feder al anti -trafficking law and in advocating for the passage of the New 
York State anti -trafficking legislation.  
 
We are speaking out today against S.B. 0584 and H.B. 5044 -A based on 
our own extensive experience working with survivors of human 
trafficking, as  well as that of service providers and anti -trafficking 
advocates across the country. Collectively, members of the national 
Freedom Network, of which we are a member, have served almost 2000 
trafficking victims in the U.S. since 2001, and have assisted cli ents in 
approximately half of the cases where the federal government certified 
that individuals were victims of human trafficking.  
 
Based on this extensive experience, we urge Rhode Island to go 
forward, not backward, in the fight against human traffickin g, by passing 
strengthened state anti -trafficking legislation rather than rushing to 
enact legislation that will ultimately have the effect of punish ing victims 
of trafficking into prostitution and push ing them further from help.  We 
implore Rhode Island t o continue to pursue the sound public policy it 
has adopted – whether intentionally or inadvertently – and avoid the 
mistakes of other states which have failed to eradicate prostitution 
while causing severe harm to the very people they claim to be helping.   
 
 Contrary to the assertions of the bill’s proponents, prostitution a rrests help no one . 
Furthermore, there is no guarantee of immunity for victims of trafficking, even under the 
narrow affirmative defense offered by H -5044A . Moreover, assumptions that p olice will exercise 
their discretion in a manner that will avoid arrests of trafficking victims assume that they will be 
able to identify them at first sight. The experience of advocates in other states, as well as the 
results of a recent Northeastern Univ ersity study commissioned by the National Institutes of 
Justice, strongly indicate that this is not always possible or likely. S tatements suggesting that no 
victims of trafficking have been prosecuted under prostitution laws in other states are, quite 
simp ly, unfounded. Our agency has worked directly with many victims of human trafficking who 
were arrested, prosecuted, and convicted of prostitution -related offenses under New York 
State’s laws, which are almost identical to the legislation under consideratio n today , without 
ever being identified as trafficked . So there can be no question that the bill has the potential to 
inflict greater harm to victims of human trafficking than the status quo.  
 
There is also no question that law enforcement already  has a pan oply  of tools at its disposal to 
investigate, pursue, and prosecute traffickers and others who harm those engaged in 
prostitution. There is absolutely no need to criminalize prostitution in order to put a stop to 
human trafficking. Indeed, current federal anti-trafficking legislation imposes stiff criminal 
penalties on  anyone  who uses force, fraud, or coercion to induce any person in to any 
commercialized activity. Cases of labor trafficking can be and are prosecuted without 
criminalizing picking tomatoes, domestic work, or waiting tables in a restaurant. The state of 
Rhode Island’s law on prostitution is in no way  an obstacle to law enforcement ’s pursuit of 
traffickers under state or federal anti -trafficking laws.  To suggest otherwise is  to shirk law 
enforcemen t agencies ’ responsibilities under existing state and federal law . 
 
Nor would the proposed legislation encourage or in any w ay make it easier for trafficking victims 
to come forward. As world renown anti -trafficking expert Professor Ann Jordan of American 
University’s Center on Human Trafficking points out, blanket arrests of people engaged in 
prostitution in the hopes of encou raging trafficking victims to come forward and testify against 
their traffickers has the effect of using a blunt instrument where careful, well -informed surgical 
strikes are needed. It is a weapon we wouldn’t dream of using against any other victim of 
violence. We would never argue that we need legislation that allows us to arrest victims in order 
to stop domestic violence.  As Professor Jordan points out, the purpose of the criminal law is to 
prosecute criminals, not to twist victims’ arms into recognizing  their victimization. We would 
never try to force a domestic violence victim to cooperate in the prosecution of her abuser, we 
would offer supportive services, increase public awareness of the problem, and support her in 
achieving safety in the best way for her and her children.  
 
As Robert Moosy, an experienced prosecutor in the U.S. Department of Justice’s anti -trafficking 
unit points out, what is needed in the fight against human trafficking are in -depth investigations 
based on the voluntary cooperation  of victims, obtained by building trust over the long term and offering much needed support to overcome fear of retaliation by traffickers and to address the 
circumstances that render victims vulnerable to coercion by traffickers.  
 
The findings of SWP’s mo st recent research report, Kicking Down the Door: The Use of Raids to 
Fight Trafficking in Persons, are consistent with these trafficking experts’ experiences. One of 
the primary findings of our report was that a focus on enforcement of prostitution statut es to 
address human trafficking has led to the identification of very few victims of trafficking into 
prostitution. It has, however, caused severe  harm by subjecting those trafficked into sex work to 
repeated arrests, incarceration, prosecution and retraum atization without increasing the 
likelihood of locating, identifying, or assisting victims.  
 
The report was based on interviews with 46 people with experience of law enforcement actions 
against indoor sex venues, including service providers who have worked with hundreds of 
trafficking victims, law enforcement personnel, and 15 immigrant women who have been 
trafficked. Trafficked women reported that they were repeatedly arrested, in some cases up to 
ten times, in police raids on brothels and other sex work venues, convicted of prostitution, and 
even sentenced to jail without ever being identified as trafficked. Their experiences were 
corroborated by interviews with service providers who had worked with hundreds of trafficking 
victims over the years.  
 
Law enforcement personnel also described difficulties gaining the trust of people arrested as 
part of anti -prostitution efforts, and noted that they were often not good witnesses in the 
prosecution of their traffickers. This is certainly consistent with the experience of the 
Provincetown Mayor’s outreach team, which has not successfully identified or assisted a single 
trafficking victim as part of raids on spas and brothels. One law enforcement agent told us:  “The 
nature of the crime and the nature of the vi ctims make raids not effective. What level of 
evidence do you need? You need a victim to be willing to open up and tell you.” As a service 
provider put it more bluntly, “it’s incongruous to think that you would open up after being 
handcuffed.”  
 
By continuing with  its enlightened  approach, Rhode Island would by no means stand  alone. New 
Zealand decriminalized prostitution in 2003 , and Sweden has removed criminal penalties against 
people  engaged in prostitution .  Nor would maintaining the status quo  turn Rhode Island into a 
haven for sex trafficking. A government com mission in New Zealand found no link between the 
decriminalization of the sex industry and human trafficking.  In fact, t he United Nations Human 
Rights Commission Trafficking in Persons report for 2008 notes that the incidence of 
international trafficking in New Zealand is “modest. ”  
 
We therefore urge Rhode Island legislators to avoid a rush to judgment, and instead respectfully 
suggest that they carefully consider whether the proposed legislation will result in greater harm to victims of trafficki ng into sex work, and direct their  energies to passing and enforcing 
strengthened anti -trafficking legislation pending in the House and Sen ate. 
 
Thank you  for your consideration and attention. I am available at your convenience to discuss 
this legislation  and our research and experience further.  
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
Andrea Ritchie  
Director, Sex Workers Project at the Urban  Justice Center  
646.602.5690  
aritchie@urbanjustice.org  
 