DISCLAIMER :  This fact sheet was researched and written in March , 200 6. The law may have changed. These materials are provided 
solely for informational purposes and are not legal advice. Transmission of these materials is not intended to create, and receipt does 
not constitute, an attorney client relationship. This matter should not b e pursued further without contacting an attorney or legal 
representative.      Urban Justice Center  
                                666 Broadway, 10th floor, New York, NY 10012  
                                Tel:  (646) 602 -5600 • Fax:  (212) 533 -4598  
  
SEX WORKERS PROJECT FACT SHEET: SEX WORKERS AND TAXES  
 
Many sex workers, es pecially those who engage in unlawful activity, wonder whether they should, or are allowed to, 
pay taxes , or if they will be penalized for failing to do so. The Sex Workers Project (“SWP”) at the Urban Justice 
Center created this fact sheet as an informati onal tool on  general  tax issues for sex workers . This is not a 
comprehensive guide, and sex workers should consult a tax preparer or attorney for specific guidance.  You may also 
contact the SWP at 646/602.5617 with general questions about this issue.  
 
Acco unting for Unlawfully Earned Income  
 
• The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) imposes a tax on all income  for taxpayers who earn more than a certain 
amount  a year , regardless of the source.  The amount varies based on a number of factors.  In any case, you 
will wa nt to file a return if taxes were withheld from your paychecks and you are entitled to a refund or if 
you may be eligible for the Earned Income Tax Credit.  Some sex workers may consider themselves “sole 
proprietors,” who report profits and losses from busi ness. They will need to “[d]escribe the business or 
professional activity that provided [her/his] principal source of income . . .”  
 
• This means that under the law, even illegal income is subject to the federal income  tax and must be 
accurately reported to the IRS. However, this also means that those  who report income from illegal activities 
may also be concerned about protecting themselves from criminal liability.   
 
• People who do not report income should also be concerned about civil and criminal liability . The IRS has 
pursued women it believes derived income from  sexual activities for failure to file a return or tax evasion. It 
is not clear how a taxpayer comes to the attention of the IRS, but it is possible that a tax return, or a failure 
to file a return , has somehow triggered an audit or has flagged this taxpayer as unusual in some way.  
 
In some cases, taxpayers have defended their failure to file a return or to pay taxes by arguing that the 
money received was a gift rather than taxable income. While inc ome is taxable, gifts are not taxable to the 
recipient. Whether a payment is a gift depends  on the donor’s intent in making the payment. A payment is 
considered a gift where it is motivated by feelings of “detached and disinterested generosity . . . out of  
affection, respect, admiration, charity or like impulses.”  This test has been applied in the context of 
payments made by men to women with whom they had sexual relationships on a number of instances. In 
one case from 1955, the U.S. Tax Court decided that  the taxpayer “used her home to operate a house of 
prostitution” and that she “staged immoral shows for a fee and personally acted as a prostitute.” Another 
court has decided that “a person is entitled to treat cash and property received from a lover as gi fts, as long 
as the relationship consists of something more than specific payments for specific sessions of sex.”  
  
Confidentiality of  Communications Between  Accountant/Tax  Preparer and Client  
 
• This is a very grey area, and the law around the issue of confidentiality of communications between an 
accountant or tax preparer and his or her client is very muddled —however, it is clear that there is only a 
very limited privilege that exists only in specific circumstances. For most questions that sex workers have  
about how to file their taxes, no such privilege seems to exist , and your tax preparer could be forced  to 
disclose information that you have shared with him or her . 
 
DISCLAIMER :  This fact sheet was researched and written in March , 200 6. The law may have changed. These materials are provided 
solely for informational purposes and are not legal advice. Transmission of these materials is not intended to create, and receipt does 
not constitute, an attorney client relationship. This matter should not b e pursued further without contacting an attorney or legal 
representative.  • New York State does not have  a specific  accountant -client conf identiality protection by l aw. F ederal law has 
provided a n extremely  limited confidentiality protection  with respect to tax advice , but it is not very useful 
for sex workers —it offers the same confidentiality protections which apply to a communication between a 
taxpayer and an attor ney to a communication between a taxpayer and any federally authorized tax  
practitioner to the extent it  would be considered a privileged communication if it were between a taxpayer 
and an attorney.   
 
The p rivilege only applies to conversations that would have been considered privileged had they taken place 
between a taxpayer and an attorney , where a client asks for legal advice . More importantly, this p rivilege 
only applies in any non-criminal tax matter  before the IRS and any non-criminal  tax proceedings  in 
Federal court brought by or against the United States. This p rivilege does NOT  extend to criminal 
proceedings. If a tax preparer is  subpoenaed  to appear as a witness in a criminal proceeding, his  or her 
communications with the taxpayer would not be cove red by the privilege .   
   
• Information shared for the sole purpose of preparing a  tax return, which is intended for viewing by the 
government, is not privileged . However, a person believing that he or she may have committed a crime may 
seek the advice of a ny attorney as to how and what to prepare regarding such criminal activities for income 
tax purposes .  
 
• A sex worker can seek the advice of a lawyer on how to prepare their taxes and that will be privileged since 
it is seeking the professional legal advice  of an attor ney. But if the attorney merely files forms, then there is 
no privilege.  A sex worker may be able to discuss illegal activity and ask for advice from an attorney who is 
also a tax preparer, but discuss ing the same information  with a tax prepare r who is not an attorney is  not 
privileged.  A sex worker’s best chance for confidentiality is to ask questions about illegal activity of a lawyer 
who performs other legal work for you and  is also your tax preparer , but even this is not a guaranteed 
protect ion in all cases . Finally, it is unlikely that an accountant who works for an attorney enjoys a privileged 
relationship with clients.  
 
Employee v. Independent Contractor Status  
 
• Whether a worker is characterized as an employee or independent contractor has  major  tax implications for 
both the worker and the employer . For example, when an employer mischaracterizes an employee as an 
independent contractor, the employee will  pay taxes that are the responsibility of the employer.  There may 
be times when a sex wo rker believes  that he or she has been wrongly identified by an employer as an 
independent contractor instead of as an employee. Whether a particular worker is considered an employee is 
a fact -intensive inquiry , and for tax purposes, there is a twenty -facto r test that addresses the issue of control. 
The greater the degree of control exerted over a worker, the more likely it is that the worker is properly 
considered an employee.   
 
• If a taxpayer feels that he or she  is wrongly classified as an inde pendent con tractor, it is in his or her best 
interest to pay the taxes up front and file grievances with the IRS directly to obtain any refund that is due.  
While a worker  suffers an economic harm —already having paid higher  taxes b ecause  of the  independent 
contractor  classification — the employee has no right to sue  the employer. Instead, the worker must make a 
claim for a refund for overpayment of taxes with the IR S.   
 
This fact sheet is based on a legal memo written for the SWP by Anika  Singh of the Community 
Develop ment Project at the Urban Justice Center. We greatly appreciate her assistance with this project.  
© Sex Workers Project at the Urban Justice Center 2006  