Twenty Years of Bringing 
Human Rights Abusers To Justice2/T_he Cent er
f
or Just ice &
A
ccountability
TWENTY YEAR IMPACT REPORTDear Friends: 
Twenty years ago, the Center for Justice and Accountability 
launched with a bold idea -- could we hold those responsible for torture, war crimes, and genocide accountable in a court of law? 
In our first case in 1998, CJA represented four Bosnian 
refugees to the United States against the man who had tortured them and was now living in Atlanta, Georgia. The men had faced sheer terror at the hands of Nicola Vukovic, a Bosnian Serb soldier in charge of a detention center during the Bosnian War. Vuckovic beat our clients with bare fists and metal pipes, and used a knife to carve symbols into one man’s forehead.  CJA won that case, and it became part of a cascade of victories against perpetra-tors of atrocities from Cambodia, Chile, El Salvador, Haiti, Somalia, and beyond. CJA has never lost a case that has gone to trial. 
CJA’s vision is a world in which justice thrives -- where 
those who have suffered unimaginable horror and pain chart the course for truth and justice; where courts hold  accountable those who commit atrocities; where there is no safe haven anywhere around the globe for perpetrators to escape justice; and where survivors gain confidence in the democratic institutions necessary for Never Again to mean Never Again.
CJA’s success is a remarkable two-decade testament to the 
unyielding strength of our clients, our fearless community of human rights defenders and in-country partners, our savvy and determined staff, board and volunteers, and to your constant support. 
We invite you to review our Twenty Year Impact Report. 
Take a moment to reflect on what we have accomplished together, and what we can achieve over the next twenty years.  The soul-wrenching tragedies in Syria and elsewhere provide a sobering reminder that justice is an unfinished business. Together, though, we will chart a bold path forward for the next twenty years to seek justice and redress for our clients against all barriers.
With the deepest gratitude,
C. Dixon Osburn
Farah Brelvi
Ex
ecutive Director Chair
, Board of Directors
Twenty Years of Bringing 
Human Rights Abusers To Justice2/T_he Cent er
f
or Just ice &
A
ccountability
Mission.
CJA’s mission is to deter torture, war crimes, crimes against humanity, and other severe  
human rights abuses around the world through innovative litigation, policy, and transitional 
justice strategies.
Vision.
CJA’s vision is a world in which justice thrives – where every nation has the capacity and  
willingness to prosecute human rights criminals and achieve justice for those most marginalized in 
society.  We believe too that the world’s worst human rights criminals should be brought to justice 
wherever they are found, as we help build the rule of law in the nations where the original crimes 
occurred. 
Theory of Change.
Empowerment
Survivors inform, 
guide and lead  
initiatives confronting 
mass atrocities
Rule of Law
Legal framework 
strengthened and 
key precedents 
establishedTruth &  
Accountability
Abusers held  
accountable  
before court of lawSustainability
Legal institutions 
are functional, 
accountable and 
transparentCJA By The Numbers.
265
clients represented by CJA 
$29 million
in donated pro bono  
legal support (2007-2017)
We make law.
CJA has developed key legal doctrine that sets standards for international 
human rights prosecutions.
We uphold truth & dignity.
“When I testified, a strength came over me. I felt like I was in the prow of a boat  and there were many, many people rowing behind me - that they were moving me into the moment…. Being involved in the case, confronting the Generals with these terrible facts – that’s the best possible therapy a torture survivor can have.” –Dr. Juan Romagoza Arce, CJA client.
We win cases.
CJA has won favorable verdicts in every case that has gone to trial.
“CJA’s overall goals are some of the finest examples of effective work for justice 
and human rights we have today.”  –Fr. Stephen Privett, SJ, President Emeritus, University of San Francisco.IMPACT“[My mother’s] stories about 
the Nuremberg trials had a big impact on me as I was 
growing up.  Those stories 
nurtured a sense of outrage at injustice and the convic-
tion that the law could pro-
vide a measure of relief. ”
– Former CJA Executive Director Sandy 
Coliver, The Recorder, August 19, 2002
“Great work!”
– Stat
ement by Dalai Lama to Jerry Gray 
as he was recognized as one of fifty 
“unsung heroes of compassion .” San 
Francisco Chronicle, February 26, 2006 
CJA plays “key role in  
bringing war criminals 
to justice. ”
– San Francisco Chronicle, February 16, 
2016 
“A small San Francisco-
based nonprofit org aniza-
tion called the Cen ter for 
Justice and Accounta bility 
(CJA) works to find a  
measure of justic e – and, 
just as importantly , truth – 
for such victims. ”
– Josh Alle n, “Seeking Justice fo r Vic-
tims Across Borders ,” Christian Scienc e 
Monitor, December 27, 20110 cases
lost at trial
192 partner
NGOs around the globe1998
Origins. CJA is launched.
Jerry Gray, Paul Hoffman, Bill Schulz, and Ralph Steinhardt all played critical roles in the founding of 
the Center for Justice and Accountability. Jerry had founded one of the first torture treatment centers in Northern California. Paul Hoffman was and is one of the leading Alien Tort Statute litigators, former Legal Director of the ACLU of Southern California, and served on the board of Amnesty International where Bill Schulz was Executive Director. Ralph Steinhardt is a law professor at George Washington University specializing in international law and human rights, and served as CJA’s first Board Chair. 
Jerry recalls the moment he thought something had to  be done: “I received a call from San Francisco General  Hospital regarding a Bosnian refugee who wanted to see a psychiatrist. The man learned that the guy who had tortured him had moved to the Bay Area. He was pretty agitated. I thought he might kill the guy.” Jerry had heard Paul Hoffman speak about a lawsuit where Paul successfully represented three women from Ethiopia against their torturer. He approached Paul to see whether something more could be done. Paul Hoffman recalls, “No other group was suing individual perpetrators, and there was no money in it for private litigators, but it was critically important work to do.”
CJA Founder, Jerry Gray Bill Schulz Ralph Steinhardt Paul Hoffman“When I think of those early, some-what tenuous, but exciting days, it all feels borderline miraculous. ” 
 
– Ralph Steinhardt
“Before CJA existed, there was no organization dedicated to persistently bringing litigation against alleged perpetrators of 
human rights crimes.  That was a gaping hole in the human rights arsenal. ”  – Bill SchulzCJA represented four Bosnian men --- Kemal Mehinovic, 
Muhamed Bicic, Safet Hadzialijagic, and Hasan Subasic. They were beaten and tortured by Serb prison guard Nikola Vuckovic during the Bosnian War who was found living in Atlanta. Vuckovic knew our clients from before the war because they were neighbors in Bosanski Samac. Several of his victims were friends and even relatives of his wife and sister. Mehinovic, was a Bosnian Muslim baker at the time he was abducted from his family. He was taking a mid-day nap at home when Serb police and soldiers knocked on his door. They beat him in front of his family, arrested him without a warrant, and then drove him to a police station for interroga-tion. For the next six months, he was tortured by Vuckovic. 
He beat our clients with bare fists and metal pipes, some-
times hanging them from ropes and beating their genitals. With a knife, he carved a symbol into one plaintiff’s face and plunged his head into a latrine. Witnesses testified that Vuckovic often drank with other Serb soldiers and invited them to “help themselves” to the detainees.
In 2002, a district court found Vuckovic liable for torture, 
war crimes and other abuses and ordered him to pay our clients $140 million in compensatory damages. Former CJA Legal Director, Shawn Roberts, told 20/20, “People who commit these acts will be caught. No matter where it is that they go, they are going to be tracked down….”1998
The Bosnian War.
CJA’s first case addressed atrocities from the Bosnian War. The war had killed 350,000 people.   In 1993, the international community had established an international tribunal to address the  
egregious crimes, including genocide, torture, and other crimes against humanity.  Yet, there were perpetrators who had escaped the reach of the tribunal, including those who sought safe haven in the United States.  
“The memories are still with me.  They come back as nightmares.  When you hear the sound of a chain moving, you get the 
chills because you know they’re coming to beat you. The sound of that chain I can still hear at night. ”  - CJA client Kemal
Mehinovic, 20/20 ABC News, January 29, 19991999
Pinochet’s Caravan of Death.
Winston Cabello was regional planning direc-
tor for Atacama-Coquimbo, which is a north-ern region in Chile, in President Allende’s ad-ministration. When General Pinochet staged a coup in 1973 and seized control, Winston was one of the many civilians that were tortured and murdered by a military death squad, known as the Caravan of Death.
The Caravan of Death traveled between 
cities in search of political opponents to the new military regime. They brutally tortured and executed at least 75 Chileans and bur-ied them in unmarked graves in a timespan of several weeks.While under arrest, Winston was falsely told that his file had been reviewed and that he would be released soon. Instead, he was taken to a secluded area with twelve other prisoners and executed by Caravan member Larios, among other members.
It wasn’t until 1990 that families were told 
where to find the bodies of their loved ones. By that time, Larios was living in the United States. The civil lawsuit against Larios was the only means for the Cabellos to achieve accountability.In 1999, CJA filed a civil suit against Armando Fernández Larios for the murder of Winston Cabello immediately following the Pinochet coup in 1973.  In 2003, a Miami jury found him liable for tor -
ture, crimes against humanity, and extrajudicial killing and awarded $4 million in damages to the Cabello family. As The Miami Herald reported on November 30, 2003, “The U.S. government did not bring the…case. The case was courageously initiated and developed by the Center for Justice and Accountability….”
“This lawsuit cannot reduce the pain I feel over the death of my brother, Winston. Nothing will ever diminish that pain. 
But, working with CJA has given meaning to my pain. That is a tremendous gift. ”  – Zita CabelloZita Cabello, CJA Client 2002
Salvadoran Civil War: 75,000 Dead.
As former defense ministers of El Salvador, Generals José 
Guillermo García and Carlos Eugenio Vides Casanova pre-sided over the disappearance, killing, and torture of more than 75,000 civilians during the Salvadoran Civil War. 
In December 1979, the Salvadoran National Guard detained 
Neris González—then an 8-month pregnant health care and agrarian reform activist. The guardsmen tortured her continuously for two weeks. While González eventually gave birth, her son died shortly after due to the severity of the injuries she sustained in utero.
A year later, in December 
1980, Dr. Juan Romagoza was providing medical care in a rural church clinic when two vehicles arrived carrying Salvador-an National Guardsmen and paramilitary soldiers. The soldiers and guards-men opened fire on the clinic. The soldiers later arrested Romagoza and detained him at National Guard headquar-ters for 22 days. He was repeatedly tortured, interrogated, and purposely shot in the left hand, which permanently affected his ability to perform surgery.
CJA successfully represented González, Romagoza and 
Carlos Mauricio, and the court found Vides Casanova and 
Garcia liable, ordering them to pay $54.6 million in damages.
After the trial, CJA partic-
ipated in a congressional hearing and promoted the removal proceedings of the generals from the country. Vides Casanova and García were deport-ed back to El Salvador after immigration judges found them responsible for human rights crimes, including the torture of CJA’s clients.
CJA filed its third case in 1999 against two notorious generals and former Ministers of Defense responsible for some of the worst atrocities during El Salvador’s civil war that claimed the lives of 75,000 Salvadorans. In 2002, CJA won civil judgments against both generals.  
Carlos Mauricio, CJA client on courthouse steps demanding justice for El Salvador.2004
Assassination of Archbishop Óscar Romero.
On March 23, 1980, Archbishop Óscar Romero, a leading figure in the struggle for human rights 
in El Salvador, delivered a sermon over national radio. The next day, while giving mass, the  Archbishop was assassinated by ring-wing extremists. 
It was one of the most heinous and shocking political murders of the late 20th century. 
Officers of the Salvadoran military and leaders of right- 
wing paramilitaries conceived of and coordinated Arch- bishop Romero’s assassination. Protected by a broad  amnesty law, they evaded justice for over two decades.On behalf of a relative of the Archbishop, CJA brought a civil suit against one of the architects of the assassination, Captain Alvaro Saravia. In 2004, a U.S. federal court found Saravia liable for extrajudicial killing and crimes against humanity and ordered Saravia to pay $10 million in damages.
“Romero’s murder remains a dangerous topic. ” 
– Matt Eisenbrandt, former CJA Legal Director, The Guardian, J
anuary 19, 2017
“For almost 25 years, I have carried a bag of heavy rocks with me everywhere I go. Today, I have left this bag of rocks with 
the U.S. system of justice. ” - Dr. Francisco Acosta, whose brother’s life was saved by Archbishop Romero2006
Guatemala Genocide.
More than 200,000 Guatemalans were killed or forcibly disappeared in a civil war that raged from  
1960-1996. Of those victims identified by the U.N. sponsored Historical Clarification Commission, 
83% were indigenous Mayans. 93% of these human rights violations were carried out by government forces.
CJA joined the Guatemala Genocide case as lead counsel before the Spanish National Court in 2006. Nobel Prize winner Rigoberta Menchú and her eponymous foundation had filed a criminal complaint against President General Ríos Montt and other senior officials for the genocide of the indigenous Mayan Ixil community. CJA brought more than 40 indigenous Guatemalans to Madrid to testify about the 
atrocities they had faced, marking the first time a national 
court had heard evidence from Mayan survivors of Guate-
mala’s “silent holocaust .”
When Attorney General Claudia Paz y Paz brought a domestic 
case ag ainst General Montt for the genocide, the Spanish 
National Court stayed its proceedings, and CJA ensured 
transfer of witnesses, evidence, and several experts to the 
domestic prosecution.  In 2012, a Guatemalan court, with 
CJA acting as a key advisor, indicted Ríos Montt for torture, 
genocide, forced disappearances, state terrorism, and 
crimes against humanity. 
The trial resulted in Ríos Montt’s conviction and he was 
sentenced to 80 years in prison. This was the first time 
that a former head of state had been convicted of 
genocide by a national court. The ruling was also the 
state’s first official acknowledgment that the genocide had 
occurred. 
Rigoberta Menchú Tum.“Survivors of torture around the world will not be silenced. With the help of CJA we are rising up to hold our abusers  
accountable under the law. CJA ’s victories are bringing us closer to a world in which state sponsored torture is unacceptable. ”
- Nobel Peace Prize Laureate, Rigoberta Menchú Tum2007/8
Making New Laws  
to Address Atrocities.
“Our promise to hold accountable those who 
commit the most unspeakable crimes will ring hollow unless we lead the world in punishing those responsible for the gravest human rights violations. ”
 – Dick Durbin, 2009On December 21, 2007, President George W. Bush signed into law the Genocide Accountability Act that empowers the U.S. Department of Justice to prosecute perpetrators of genocide found in the United States for genocide perpe-trated outside the U.S.
On October 3, 2008, President Bush signed into law the 
Child Soldiers Accountability Act that empowers the U.S. Department of Justice to prosecute military and paramilitary leaders that have recruited and used child soldiers.CJA’s former Executive Director Pamela Merchant testified before the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Human Rights and the Law, chaired by Senator Dick Durbin (D-IL), to urge passage of laws that would close gaps in U.S. civil and criminal law that let the worst international human rights criminals  
slip through the cracks. Senator Durbin’s leadership led to the passage of two bills:
Photo: Roel Coutinho
“To prosecute a perpetrator without addressing his or her role in the overall pattern of abuses and repression sends a 
message of indifference.  It also sends a mixed message about our overall commitment to human rights, the sanctity of 
life, and each individual’s right to freedom from state-sponsored abuses. ”   
- Former CJA Executive Director Pamela Merchant testifying before the Senate Judiciary Committee’s Human Rights and the Law Subcommittee2005-2009
Achievements.
2005  CJA wins a case against
Memphis resident, Colonel Nicolas Carranza, the former Vice Minister of Defense of El Salvador who oversaw the murder of 10,000 to 12,
000 un-
armed civilians in 1980. CJA’s case marks the first time that a U.S. jury found Command Re-sponsibility for crimes against humanity.
2006   A district court finds formerchief of military intelligence, Juan López Grijalba, liable for torture
, extrajudicial killings 
and disappearances while overseeing a notorious Hon-duran death squad and orders him to pay $47 million in dam-ages to CJA’s six clients.
2006  A district court found New York resident Emmanuel
“Toto” Constant, the former leader of a Haitian 
paramilitary death squad, liable for crimes against 
humanity and torture, including rape and the 
systematic use of violence by the 1991-1994 
military junta.2007  Jury finds Carl Dorelien, a former member of the
Haitian military’s high command, liable for torture, 
extrajudicial killing, arbitrary detention and crimes 
against humanity including for the Rabateaux 
Massacre.  Dorelian was discovered living in 
Miami after he won the Florida state lottery. 
2008    A U.S. court convicts Chuckie Taylor of torture
for his role in the torture and murder of civilians during his father’s reign in Liberia, the first and only time the U
.S. has prosecuted someone under 
the Torture Act. He was sentenced to 97 years in prison. CJA deferred filing a civil case against Chuckie Taylor once the government brought criminal charges.  
2009  Former Peruvian PresidentAlberto Fujimori is convicted of human rights violations and sentenced to 25 years in prison. More than 70,000 P
e-
ruvians died in its twenty-year conflict.  The verdict marked the first time that an elected head of state had been extradited to his home country (from Chile), tried, and convicted of human rights violations. CJA had acted as an international legal advisor to the Fujimori prosecution team since 2007.
Irma Calderon, CJA 
client in Chavez V . Carranza 
Zenaida Velásquez, CJA 
client in Reyes v. Lopez Grijalba 2010
Somalia: Siad Barre regime.
A successful businessman living in Hargeisa, Somalia, Bashe Abdi Y ousuf was committed to im-
proving his community. However, in 1981, Yousuf was arrested by Somali National Security Service
(NSS) agents and taken to a government build-ing. Yousuf did not know why he had been 
arrested and detained.
On the third night of his detention, government soldiers 
took him out of his cell and interrogated him about his 
friends who also worked to support local health care and 
education. The next time Yousuf was taken out of his cell, 
he was blindfolded, and driven out of the city through a 
military checkpoint where he was subjected to torture, 
including simulated drowning and electrocution. They 
threatened to kill Yousuf if he did not confess to crimes he 
had not committed and he feared for his life. 
After months of horrific abuse, 
Yousuf was convicted in a sham trial of belonging to an anti-govern-ment organization. He was trans-ferred to a top-security prison and confined to a tiny cell for seven years of solitary confinement. Yousuf was eventually released from prison in 1989 and fled Soma-lia. He arrived in the United States 
in 1991.General Mohammed Ali Samantar, Somalia’s former prime minister and minister of defense, presided over the killings and torture of countless civilians in the 1980s. In 2004, CJA filed a civil suit against Samantar on behalf of Somali survi-vors, including Yousuf. 
Samantar was found liable for human rights atrocities and 
ordered to pay $21 million in damages to our clients. This historic case established the important precedent that simply having held a government office does not shield perpetrators of human rights crimes from prosecution. 
Although he raised no factual challenge to CJA’s case,  
Samantar petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court claiming  
immunity for acts he said were taken in his official capacity, 
and therefore shielded by the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act. But in 2010, the Supreme Court ruled that the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act does not shield the conduct of individual officials.
CJA Client  Bashe Yousuf in 
Y ousuf v. Samantar“Justice is everything. Where ever there is no justice, there is no life. Justice is the thing that puts all people together, that 
makes you friends of your enemy, without taking a gun, without killing anybody, just fighting for your rights in a court. ”
- 
Bashe Y ousuf2014
The Khmer Rouge.
Before 1975, Sophany Bay lived a simple life. She grew up lived a simple life. She was a young 
mother and a school teacher.
Sophany was born in a small 
Cambodian village. After graduating from college, she worked as a school teacher in Phnom Penh. Bay married her husband, who served in the National Military, and they had three kids.
On April 17, 1975, Sophany 
and her family were forced to leave their homes and belongings behind. She left the city by foot with her three young children and saw corpses scattered along the road out of Phnom Penh. Sophany was then arrested by the Khmer Rouge and put into a labor camp, where she was forced to dig and plow paddy fields and build dams under inhumane conditions. She witnessed the torture and abuse of many civilians. She was later sent to a “reeducation” camp.
Sophany lost about 100 relatives during the Cambodian 
genocide, including her three young children. Her daughter fell ill and died shortly after a Khmer Rouge soldier injected an unknown substance into her head. Her other two children died from serious illnesses and lack of medical care. Nearly 2 million civilians died during the Khmer Rouge regime, and as many as 800,000 of these deaths were violent. The crimes left the country and its survivors destabilized, trauma-tized, and in need of justice. 
Sophany is one of 45 Civil Parties represented by CJA in 
Case No. 002 against the two living senior leaders of the Khmer Rouge: “Brother Number Two” under Pol Pot, Nuon Chea, and former Head of State Khieu Samphan. CJA’s  
clients are all members of the Cambodian diaspora living in the United States, and are all direct victims of the Khmer Rouge regime.  During the close of the first trial against the two senior leaders, CJA client and civil party Sophany Bay testified to the harms inflicted upon her and her fam-ily during the forced evacuation of Phnom Penh, and the continued impact of these harms on her and her community in the United States diaspora. The court sentenced the senior leaders to life imprisonment and awarded reparations to the 3,867 victims participating in the trial.  The court cited Sophany and several other CJA clients in the final judgment against the senior leaders. 
Today, CJA is preparing to represent up to 105 Cambodi-
an-American survivors of the Khmer Rouge in Cases 003 and 004, likely the final cases for Khmer Rouge atrocities and perhaps the most consequential as they involve defendants still tied to the current government. 
Sophany Bay in court.U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum
U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum
“Before I die, I want justice. ” – Sophany Bay, San Jose Mercury News, November 20, 20112016
Jesuits Massacre.
In 2016, a North Carolina magistrate judge ruled that Colonel Inocente Montano, the former vice 
minister of public safety, could be extradited to Spain to face criminal trial for the murder of six Jesuit priests, a housekeeper and her daughter in 1989. The decision was the culmination of a transnational litigation strategy seeking accountability for one of the most emblematic crimes  
during the Salvadoran civil war. As former CJA Senior Legal Advisor Patty Blum told The New York Times in 2016, “Every rock that was in the path is being thrown to one side.”  
On the morning of November 16, 1989, an elite battalion of the Salvadoran Army entered the grounds of the Jesuit University of Central America, with orders to kill Father Ignacio Ellacuría,  an outspoken champion of peace on behalf of the poor, and ensure that there were no witnesses. The murders shocked the world’s conscience.
On November 13, 2008, CJA and the 
Spanish Association for Human Rights filed criminal charges in Spain against the for-mer President of El Salvador and 19 former members of the military for the massacre. 
All but one of the defendants lived in 
El Salvador and were protected by an amnesty law shielding them from respon-sibility for the Jesuits massacre and other heinous crimes.  Colonel Montano, however, was living out-side of Boston, working as a candy-maker.  As a result of the indictment in Spain and CJA’s advocacy, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security filed immigration fraud charges against Montano and he was sen-tenced to 21 months in prison. 
As Montano’s sentence drew to an end, the 
Spanish National Court renewed its extradi-tion request, which the U.S. government supported. At the end of November 2017, Montano was extradited to Spain where he will be the first to face a criminal trial for the Jesuits Massacre. The litigation is being led by former CJA International Attorney Almudena Bernabeu and Guernica 37. As she told America Magazine: “the stars are 
getting aligned to improve justice in El Salvador.” 
  “My hope is that these men will be judged.  Not out of vengeance, but because it’s important for the Salvadoran people and 
for the rest of us. Our humanity depends on justice. ”   - Carlos Martin Baró, brother of slain priest2016
Victor Jara.
In 2016, an Orlando jury held former Lieutenant P edro Barrientos Núñez responsible for the 
murder of Victor Jara, a musician 
Rolling Stone Magazine calls one of the most important protest 
artists of all time. The verdict was the culmination of a four-decade quest by Victor’s widow, 
Joan, and their children to seek truth, justice and redress for Victor. CJA had filed the case in 
2013.
In 1973, Víctor Jara was one of Chile’s biggest music stars, 
famous for his outspoken messages of social equality and the plight of the working class. When the right-wing Pinochet regime seized power in a coup, Jara was one of the first to be singled out.
Just one day after the coup, mili-
tary troops took control of the university where Jara taught.
Jara, along with hundreds of 
other students, professors, and 
staff members, was taken to 
Chile Stadium, the notori-
ous mass detention center run 
by the new dictatorship. Jara 
was interrogated and tortured 
before being shot 44 times: a 
warning to those who challenged Pinochet’s authority.CJA spoke with former military conscripts who 
confirmed Bar-rientos’ authority. One testified at trial that 
Barrientos had repeatedly bragged at the officers club 
about killing Jara, brandishing the pistol he said he used 
to murder him.
A Chilean court had indicted
Barrientos and other officersalleged to have participated in thekilling of Jara. While the other former military officials remained in Chile, Bar-rientos had moved to Florida, beyond the reach of Chilean courts. But not beyond the reach of the U.S. courts.
The jury declared Barrientos liable 
for his involvement in Jara’s torture and murder. Barrientos was ordered to pay Jara’s estate and family $28 
million in compensatory and punitive damages. 
“…one of the…most significant legal human rights victories”  -The Guardian, 2016 on CJA ’s victory in Jara v. Barrientos2013 - 2017
Achievements.
2013  CJA successfully holds the former investigations
chief of the Somali National Security Service (NSS), 
Colonel Abdi Aden Magan, liable for the torture and 
arbitrary detention of our client, Professor Abukar 
Ahmed, a renowned human rights activist and law 
professor in Somalia. CJ A’s case i s the first time a 
court of law has held a member of the NSS  
accountable for torture, arbitrary detention, and 
attempted extra-judicial killing under t he notorious 
Siad Barre regime, whose brutal rule k illed tens of  
thousands of Somalis.
“J ustice is universal,”  Professor Ahmed said after 
the hearing. “Those who  try to torture a human 
being will be brought to justice any-w here he is. That 
is my message.” - Professor Ahmed
2014  Baby Doc Duvalier dies as criminal prosecution is
underway in Haiti. CJA had filed an amicus brief
 
with the appeals court to reinstate charges against Duvalier for crimes against humanity.
2015  The American Psychological Association (APA)bans psychologists from national security inter-rogations based on findings that practitioners participated in torture at Guantánamo and other sites.  The AP
A changes its policy in response to 
the Hoffman Report which cites CJA’s case against Dr. John Leso.
2016    A Peruvian court convicts two soldiers responsiblefor the Accomarca Massacre, one of the most notorious human rights violations committed by the P
eruvian state during the country’s internal 
conflict.  CJA represented two survivors in a suit against soldiers who had participated in the  Massacre and fled to the United States to seek safe haven. They were sentenced to 24 and 23 years in jail, respectively. 
2017  On March 23, 2017, CJ A filed a civil suit on behalf of
three Haitian citizens who were violently perse-cuted for challenging corruption and brutality in their local government. Between 2007 and 2009, Jean Morose Viliena—the mayor of Les Irois, a town 
in south-western Haiti—led an armed group of support-ers in a campaign of 
terror against 
media activists and human rights defenders. Viliena lives outside of Boston, and was driving a school bus and for Uber until our lawsuit.
CJA former international attorney Almudena Bernabeu in Peru.
CJA attorney Scott Gilmore with Haitian clients
2016
Syrian War Crimes.
Marie was killed covering the Siege of Homs 
in 2011, the first widespread and systematic attacks by the Assad regime against the Syrian civilian population.  Reporting from an improvised media office in Homs, Syria, Marie Colvin told CNN’s Anderson Cooper that it was “a complete and utter lie that they’re only going after terrorists. The Syrian army is sim-ply shelling a city of cold, starving civilians.” Hours later, the Syrian army fired a barrage of artillery at Marie’s position, killing her along with the French photographer Rémi Ochlik, and injuring others.
Around the world, Syrians honored Marie for 
her sacrifice. But for years, Marie’s family and her Syrian supporters grappled with an un-solved mystery: Who killed Marie Colvin, and why?
After a three-year investigation, CJA unearthed evidence 
that Marie was deliberately assassinated by Syrian military and intelligence forces. Her murder was part of a broader conspiracy to neutralize Syrian and foreign media through violence. CJA Attorney Scott Gilmore said, “The [Assad re-
gime] wanted to wage a war without witness….  To do that 
they needed to neutralize the media.” 
On July 9, 2016, CJA  brought suit against the government of 
Syria for the murder of Marie Colvin. The case is ongoing.Continuing CJA’s legacy to tackle the most difficult and noxious international crimes, CJA filed the 
first war crimes lawsuit against the Syrian regime in 2016 on behalf of the family of Marie Colvin, one of the most decorated and intrepid war correspondents of her generation. 
Marie Colvin reporting in the field. “One fights wanton illegality with the law, not lawlessness. ”  – C. Dixon Osburn, San Jose Mercury News, February 1, 2017The Next Twenty Y ears.
One might look at the past seven decades with despair. 
More than 1.7 million people died under the Khmer Rouge regime in Cambodia. The Rwanda genocide killed 800,000 Tutsis in 100 days. In Syria, 470,000 have been killed, and who knows when the bloodshed will end.  Srebrenica, Darfur, and so many other places tell the story of humanity’s failure to prevent harrowing crimes.
At the same time, from World War II to present, we have wit-
nessed a blossoming of human rights.  After the Holocaust, leaders established the United Nations, the Universal Decla-ration of Human Rights and human rights treaties to prevent, mitigate and redress future crimes against humanity.  In the wake of the genocides in Rwanda and Bosnia, the interna-tional community established international tribunals to hold accountable those who committed unspeakable atrocities. Not every step has been a resounding success, but each has been a step forward.For our next twenty years, CJA is committed to ensuring that No Safe Haven rings true globally. We believe that every nation should have the capacity, capability and will to pros-ecute international crimes that occur within their borders. 
CJA will enlist partners to map the existing transnational 
and domestic frameworks for accountability for interna-tional crimes and their implementation against international standards. With a global leadership council and partner organizations, we will identify strategies and opportunities for building, expanding, enhancing, and mending the global net of accountability for mass atrocities that incorporates survivor perspectives. 
With the partnership of our fearless community of survivors, 
human rights defenders, policymakers, lawyers, and sup-porters like you, we will look back twenty years from now, and note once again that there is more justice, not less. It has been more than seventy years since the Holocaust. Yet despite the world’s cry of “never again,” war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity continue. But justice cannot be denied. The Center for Justice and Accountability proudly carries the torch of the Nuremberg Principles.  
We believe that some crimes are so egregious that the perpetrators of those crimes should be held accountable wherever they are found.By C. D ixon osBurn, ExECutivE  DirECtor1998 - 2017
CJA Supporters. Thank you!
$1 million+
Anonymous (2)
Oak Philanthropy (UK) LimitedOpen Society FoundationsSigrid Rausing Trust
$250,000-$1 million
Firedoll FoundationFord FoundationJEHT FoundationLouis Blum Feinblatt
Paul Sack
The Judith Stronach Fund for 
Nonviolent Social Change
United Nations Voluntary 
Fund for Victims of Torture
$100,000-$249,999
Dominican Sisters of San 
Rafael
George SarloMaja Kristin
Pro Victimis
The Unemployed  
Philosophers Guild
Thomas McKennaJames Mintz and Deborah A. 
Stewart
Tides Foundation
Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & 
Rosati
$50,000-$99,999
A.M. Fund
Beth van Schaack and Brent 
Lang
Gerald B. Rosenstein
Kathleen Blamey and Jack 
Londen
Mary Patricia Davis and  
Wesley Callender
Norton Rose Fulbright
Philippe and Kate VillersPlanethood Foundation
Raymond Lifchez
Squire Patton Boggs, LLPThe Conanima Foundation
$25,000-$49,999
Akin Gump Strauss Hauer  
& Feld, LLPAnonymous (1)AT&T CaliforniaCenter for Victims of TortureClara BasileCotchett, Pitre & McCarthyDentons
DLA Piper
Farah Brelvi and David BallGap FoundationJacob Blaustein Institute for 
the Advancement of  Human Rights 
Joan Haratani
Joey and Lucy Neugart
Joseph and Annelise BrandKabam, Inc.Keker, Van Nest & Peters LLPLatham & Watkins LLPLeo Nevas Family Foundation Lokelani Devone and  
Annette Brands
Medea BenjaminMina Titi Liu and  
Eric Rosenblum
Morgan, Lewis & BockiusRobert KerriganSandra Coliver
The Mintz Group, Inc.
University of Connecticut 
Foundation, Inc.
William Neukom and Sally 
Neukom
Wilma Wallace and Richard 
Meyers
Working Assets/CREDOYahoo! Employee Foundation
$10,000-$24,999
Ann MerrillAnonymous (2)Betty and Jack SchaferBeveridge & Diamond PC
Chester Atkins and Jessica 
Stern
Covington & Burling LLP
Drs. Irene and Michael KarlEric RobertsFalconwood Foundation, Inc.Funding Exchange
Gerald Gray and Coleen Higa
Hafner VineyardsHelen BingHolland & Knight LLPHon. Rebecca Westerfield 
and Ivy Fine
International Bar Association 
Foundation, Inc.
Irene Karl Scott and Lisa Keogh
James Nepple
Jane and William MerchantJane RocamoraJay McNally and Jennifer 
Nancy McNally
Jerrold Mark DionKarunyan and Inpamani 
Arulanantham
Kelly Ann Brown FoundationLisa HonigLouis Vasquez and Alison 
Thoreau
Louise and Jim EisenbrandtMark Tauber and Julie Roley
Martin Tannenbaum and Alex 
Ingersoll
Melody and Colin Anderson
Molly and Scott ForstallMorrison & FoersterPamela Merchant and Kirby 
Sack
Partners for a Better WorldPatricia GoudvisPhyllis CookRamey Wine CellarsSamuel Rubin FoundationSanta Clara UniversityScott and Lisa Keogh 
Sisters of Charity of Leaven-
worth Social Justice Network
Steve Silberstein
Steven and Karen SchneebaumStewart and Janet PaperinStewart R. Mott FoundationSusan and Gary Halling
Morton K. and Jane Blaustein 
Foundation
Union Bank
William and Seema Aceves
$5,000-$9,999
Alvin H. Baum, Jr.Amanda Levinson and Adam 
Rosenblatt
Amitai SchwartzAndrea Evans and Chris 
Lehane
Angelica and Rodrigo Leigh
Beth Stephens and Elly Bulkin
Bonnie LauBurke, Williams & Sorensen, 
LLP
California Labor FederationCarol Dreselly and Stephen 
Thomas
Cathleen ColvinChinami Saida Stern and 
Peter Stern
Clinton and Janet Reilly 
Holdings
David EsquivelDavid Krimm and Peter 
Bradley
Dennis Gilbert and Stephan 
Oullette
Dipti Ghosh and Margaret 
Gotuaco
Donahue FitzgeraldDonald P. Sullivan and  
R. Steven Taylor
Dr. Syed Waseem Brelvi and 
Mrs. Shehnaz Brelvi
Dr. William Schulz and Rev. 
Beth Graham
Eileen O’Connor and John 
Bilotta
Elizabeth FarnsworthEllen UllmanFaleh and Alya HusseiniHenry J. Kaiser Family  
Foundation
Irene TannenbaumJanet and Richard Grossman
Jeffrey Bleich
Jeron and Marjorie DonaldsJoan Patrice McSherryJoseph Garrett and  
John Lomibao
Karen Knudson and  
Terri Tachovsky
Kathy Roberts and  
Aaron Loeb
Khaled AlkikKilpatrick Townsend  
& Stockton LLP
Maria and Larry RobertsMaria Rivera and James GarrettMark Kleiman and Stefanie 
Fletcher
Mazen Najjar and Hana Sankari
Meyers, Nave, Riback, Silver 
& Wilson
Michael Sorgen
Michael TraynorMichelle and Brett GallowayMohamad Alhakim and Rola 
Khayata
Munger, Tolles & Olson LLPNicholas van AelstynOrrick, Herrington &  
Sutcliffe LLP
Paul AlbertPaulette Meyer and David 
Friedman
Phyllis HatfieldRenne Sloan Holtzman  
Sakai LLP
Richard Hill and Susan LevineRochelle and Warren KingRoseben FundRoselyne Swig
Rosen Bien Galvan  
& Grunfeld LLP
Ruth Ford and Richard 
Owens
Safwan Kassas and Nancy 
Abdulghani
Sandler FoundationSanta Clara University  
School of Law
Shearman & Sterling, LLP
Shefa FundSimon and Sylvia GuendelmanSpotifyStephan Shaw and Sunita 
Viswanath
The Dana-Z FoundationThe King Family Charitable 
Fund
The Mata FoundationThe Rt. Rev. Marc Handley 
Andrus and Dr. Sheila 
Andrus
Thomas Lehrer
Topel Estate WineryTreazure R. JohnsonVan Der Hout, Brigagliano  
& Nightingale, LLP
Wolfgang Homburger/T_he Center fo r
J
ustice & Accountability
Bringing Human Rights Abusers to Justice 
One Hallidie Plaza, Suite 406 | San Francisco, CA 94102
(415) 544-0444 | www.cja.orgStaff
C. Dixon Osburn, Executive Director
Megdi Abebe, Development and Social Media CoordinatorAndrea Cayley, Senior Legal FellowCarmen Cheung, Legal DirectorCristian González Cabrera, Legal FellowScott Gilmore, Staff AttorneyLisa Hammond, Finance & Operations DirectorSarah Hwang, Senior Legal FellowAlexandra Insinga, Legal FellowBlake Johnson, Major Gifts OfficerDietlind Lerner, Director of Communications and OutreachDaniel McLaughlin, Senior Staff AttorneyJennifer Rasmussen, Director of Strategic PartnershipsKathy Roberts, Director of Transitional InitiativesNushin Sarkarati, Senior Staff AttorneySusana Solis, Office ManagerStaff, Board & Council.
Board of Directors 
Farah Brelvi, ChairWilliam Aceves, Vice ChairRobert FlynnTyler GianniniJoan M. HarataniRochelle KingAjay KrishnanMina Titi LiuJames Mintz, TreasurerJoey Neugart, SecretaryC. Dixon Osburn, President Jane RocamoraDr. William F. SchulzCaroline L. ScullinGlobal Advisory Council
Chester AtkinsCarlos Castresana FernandezSandra ColiverBenjamin CuellarGerald GrayJennifer M.  GreenPaul HoffmanNaomi Roht-ArriazaSteven M.  SchneebaumRalph G. SteinhardtBeth Van Schaack