ANNUAL REPORT  
July 1, 2010 - June 30, 2011
1
OUR MISSION
The Center for Justice and Accountability  
is an international human rights  organization dedicated to deterring  torture and other severe human rights abuses around the world and advancing the rights of survivors to seek truth,  justice, and redress.
CJA uses litigation to hold perpetrators 
individually accountable for human  rights abuses, develop human rights law, and advance the rule of law in countries transitioning from periods of abuse.
2
LETTER FROM THE BOARD AND CHAIR
It is with great pleasure that we present you with this report of our  
July 1, 2010 through June 30, 2011 activities.
CJA’s mission to end impunity has taken root in the United States and spread its wings 
around the world. This year, we served 194 clients, including 176 torture survivors and  relatives of people who were tortured or disappeared. Our clients come from a total  of 21 countries. We increased our docket of high profile human rights cases and  investigations, while expanding our transitional justice efforts in Argentina, Cambodia, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Peru, and Somaliland.
From Central America, to the Horn of Africa and Cambodia, our accountability work has taken wing internationally. This year, CJA assumed a leadership role in representing 
survivors as civil parties in the Khmer Rouge trials before the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC). After successfully appealing a ruling that denied civil party  status to eleven of our clients, we now represent 45 survivors from the Cambodian diaspora community in the United States. CJA is taking the lead among the civil party lawyers on command responsibility, the military and administrative command structure of the Khmer rouge, the forced evacuation of Phnom Penh in April 1975, and reparations.
This year, our mission for accountability took deeper root in the United States.  
Our licensing complaint against Guantanamo Bay psychologist John Leso marks the first effort to hold a health care professional accountable for participating in the abusive 
interrogation program at Guantánamo. This year also saw the State Department deny immunity to General Mohamed Ali Samantar, defendant in our case Yousuf v. Samantar. The case set a powerful precedent for denying immunity to former officials who abuse human rights and then seek safe haven overseas. At the same time, we ramped up our work with law enforcement and State Department officials on extraditions, removals, and human rights prosecutions. In April 2011, after years of pressure from CJA, the U.S. government initiated removal proceedings against former Salvadoran Generals Vides Casanova and Garcia, defendants in CJA’s case, Romagoza Arce v. Garcia.
We significantly expanded the prosecutions in our two Spanish cases. The Guatemala Genocide Case 
now includes the Dos Erres Massacre and a new defendant: Jorge Vinicio Sosa Orantes, an elite military unit leader who is a duel U.S./Canadian citizen. This summer the judge granted our request to add claims  of gender-based violence to the charges. Meanwhile, in the Jesuits Massacre Case, we added six new defendants and—in a historical development—the Spanish judge issued 20 indictments and arrest warrants.  By handing down these indictments, the Court has forever changed the accountability discussion in El Salvador.
We made strong headway in our transitional justice program. Two defendants in our cases, Peruvian 
military officers Hurtado and Rivera Rondón, are now standing trial in Peru for their role in the Accomarca Massacre. And we are now active in eight countries on transitional justice efforts and have started working 
directly with the Somaliland Minister of Justice to support their transitional justice efforts.
On the outreach and education front, we launched a series of outreach forums with the Cambodian 
community in the United States, in partnership with the Applied Social Research Institute of Cambodia. 
Pamela Merchant
Executive Director
Wilma Wallace
Board Chair3
Designed to inform the community about the Khmer Rouge Tribunal, the forums present survivors with an  
opportunity for dialogue among themselves and with attorneys working before the Tribunal.
This was the fifth year of our annual dinner, which featured an inspiring keynote by Ambassador 
Eileen Chamberlain Donahoe, the first U.S. representative to the U.N. Human Rights Council. We honored Kamala D. Harris, California Attorney General, for her leadership on behalf of victims of human trafficking, and William H. Neukom, San Francisco Giants CEO and founder of the World Justice Project. Jose Pablo Baraybar received the 2011 Judith Lee Stronach Award on behalf of the Peruvian Forensic Anthropology Team and the law firm Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP received the Partner in Justice Award.
This year, our accountability work took root at home and spread its wings abroad thanks to our strong  
community of supporters like you, who are dedicated to supporting global justice and human rights.
With your continued support, we look forward to serving new communities around the world that have  
been denied access to justice. We are so proud of CJA’s committed staff, their work, and the unwavering  support from the board of directors and our allies.     
Sincerely,
Pamela Merchant
   W
ilma Wallace
Executive Director
   B
oard Chair
   
4
BACKGROUND ON CJA
OUR FOUNDING
In 1998, psychologist and CJA founder Gerald Gray 
was faced with a dilemma.  One of his clients—a refugee from the Bosnian conflict who had survived brutal torture—was shocked to learn that his former torturer was living in comfort in the United States.  Gray feared that a direct confrontation would be re-traumatizing, yet he knew that his client could not heal without getting justice.  So he sought legal advice on how the law might offer some measure  of redress.  
Four visionaries—Gerald Gray, Paul Hoffman,  
Bill Schulz, and Ralph Steinhardt—took up that  core challenge and launched a new organization  to empower survivors to hold their abusers to  account. With support from Amnesty International, the UN Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture,  and committed human rights defenders like  Judith Lee Stronach, CJA was born.                
OUR WORK
CJA is part of the movement for global justice for those who have been tortured or subjected to other severe human rights abuses.  We were founded on the principle, first used during the Nuremberg trials after World War II, that certain crimes are so egregious that they represent offenses against all humankind.   These crimes include  genocide, crimes against  humanity, extrajudicial  killing, and torture.  Such crimes are subject to universal jurisdiction under internation-al law.  Centuries ago, under this principle, pirates could be brought to justice in whatever port they were found.  Like  the pirates of old, today’s torturers and war criminals should be held criminally or civilly liable wherever they are found, no matter where the crime occurred, and regardless of the victim’s or the perpetrator’s nationality.
CJA is making this promise of global justice a reality, 
by pursuing human rights litigation across borders. In the United States, we use two civil laws to hold perpetrators of human rights abuses accountable:  the Alien Tort Statute and the Torture Victim  Protection Act.  We also engage in human rights litigation in foreign jurisdictions, such as Spain  and Cambodia, and work on transitional justice initiatives around the world.  
CJA has pioneered a survivor-centered approach to 
the quest for justice.  Working with partner orga-nizations, we combine legal representation with medical and psycho-social services to both empow-er and heal torture survivors and their communities. 
In addition to our staff of attorneys, CJA leverages 
resources by partnering with pro bono law firms,  investigators, and expert witnesses to help litigate  our cases.  We have built a unique network of partners which includes medical professionals, therapists, military and forensic experts, refugee groups, law school clinics, and other human rights non-governmental organizations.
5
OUR PROGRAMS 
HUMAN  RIGHTS  LITIGATION : 
ending impunit
y and seeking redress  
for survivors in courts around the world. 
T
RANSITIONAL
 J
USTICE
:  
supporting institutional capacity  
to prosecute human rights crimes  and repair post-conflict societies.
Ex
TR
ADITION
, R
EMOVAL
, 
AND
  
U.S. H
UMAN
 R
IGHTS
 P
OLIC
y:  
building the political will and  
legal framework for human rights  enforcement in the United States.
O
UTREACH
 
AND
 E
DUCATION
: 
supporting survivor communities  
and training the next generation of  human rights attorneys and advocates.OUR GOALS
Deterring Human Rights Abusers
Real deterrence can only be achieved through  
accountability.   By exposing human rights abusers and hauling them into court, CJA’s cases provide a critical deterrent. A generation ago, perpetrators often traveled with impunity and moved assets freely.  Many were sheltered by amnesty laws in their home countries.  Today, we work to ensure that the prospect of travel carries the risk of arrest and prosecution in universal jurisdiction proceedings or ruinous civil liability.  Through our legal trainings and capacity-building sessions in Latin America  and the Caribbean, the Horn of Africa, and South East Asia, we are encouraging governments in  transitioning countries to open their courts to  survivors and prosecute perpetrators.
Healing Survivors
A key part of CJA’s mission is to heal and empower survivors and the families of those who were killed.  Each survivor’s experience is unique.  But for many of our clients, confronting their abusers and  exposing the truth is an essential part of the  healing process.  Participating in accountability  can overcome a sense of powerlessness.  CJA’s  cases help survivors experience a sense of  justice, a sense of meaning in their survival, and  a tremendous satisfaction in knowing that they have brought dignity to themselves and the  memories of those who were killed or tortured.  
Seeking Truth
Revealing the truth about periods of human rights abuse is also an important aspect of our mission.  Our investigations uncover facts and witnesses that are critical for building legal accountability and  producing a historical record.  For example, CJA’s $37 million judgment against former Peruvian  military officer Telmo Hurtado represented the first time that anyone had been held to account for atrocities against civilian men, women, and children in the Accomarca Massacre.  The record produced in the civil trial has in turn catalyzed U.S. and Peruvian  authorities to take immigration and criminal enforcement actions against Hurtado and other perpetrators of the massacre.
Catalyzing Transitional Justice
CJA’s cases are a catalyst for transitional justice because they create a vehicle for a broad range of organizations and activists to work together for accountability and civil society renewal.  We work closely with in-country partners, country experts, survivor coalitions, accountability organizations, and local community groups when we build our cases.  We also engage with torture survivor and refugee communities to ensure that the survivor’s voice is a core component of the litigation.  By gen-erating legal and media attention, our cases serve as platforms for public dialogue.  This dialogue is needed to repair the social fabric of communities riven by conflict or abusive governments.  
6
HUMAN RIGHTS LITIGATION
Seeking justice in the courts is at  
the core of our mission.
CJA pursues civil and criminal cases in the U.S.,  
foreign national courts, regional human rights  bodies, and hybrid national/international tribunals.
In the United States, we bring civil cases against  
foreign human rights abusers found on U.S. soil under the Alien Tort Statute and Torture Victim  Protection Act, which allow survivors to seek  reparations for torture, extrajudicial killing, and other violations of international law.  While civil damages cannot undo the harm of torture, these cases offer a measure of justice, impose severe  financial costs on defendants, and offer survivors the satisfaction of seeing their abusers condemned in a court of law.  CJA also brings disciplinary  proceedings to hold health-care professionals responsible for breaching professional ethics by participating in torture and other abuses.  In  addition, we file legal briefs as third party “amicus curiae” in cases involving torture, arbitrary detention, and other human rights abuses.   To maximize the deterrent effect of our litigation, we focus on the civilian and military leaders who bear ultimate responsibility for systematic human rights violations.  CJA has pioneered the use of the command responsibility doctrine, which holds lead-ers in a chain of command accountable when they fail to prevent or punish their subordinates’ abuses.
CJA’s capacity to act globally is expanding.  In  
Spain, we serve as popular prosecutors in criminal prosecutions of Guatemalan officials responsible for the Mayan genocide and of Salvadoran leaders responsible for the infamous 1989 Jesuits Massacre.  In Latin America and the Caribbean, we provide expert legal advice to prosecutors in human rights cases, including the 2009 trial of Peruvian former President Alberto Fujimori for his role in death squad massacres.  In Cambodia, we represent civil parties in the Second Khmer Rouge trial.  Further, our global reach is evident in our appearance  before international and regional tribunals and  our membership in the International Federation  for Human Rights (FIDH) as one of only two U.S. member organizations.
7
CJA’s current litigation docket includes 12 civil and criminal cases against  
49 human rights abusers from eight countries:  Cambodia, Colombia, Guatemala, Haiti, El Salvador, Peru, Somalia, and the United States.  We represent a total of 194 clients, including 176 torture survivors and 18 relatives of people who  were tortured or disappeared. 
Our clients come from a total of 21 countries.  In addition, we pursue a number of confidential investigations of suspected  
human rights abusers, leading to litigation or referral to government prosecutors. 
8
HIGHLIGHTS FROM OUR CASES
CAMBODIA
Second Khmer Rouge Trial
Reparations for Survivors in the  
Cambodian Diaspora
From 1975 to 1979, the leadership of the Khmer 
Rouge, the Communist Party of Kampuchea,  subjected the people of Cambodia to devastating mass atrocities that claimed an estimated 1.5 to 2.2 million people out of a total population of 7 million. 
In June 2010, CJA began to represent 45 survivors 
from the U.S. Cambodian diaspora community in the second case before the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC) against four  surviving senior leaders of the Khmer Rouge on charges of genocide, crimes against humanity,  and war crimes.  The ECCC is a hybrid tribunal  established by the U.N. and the Cambodian  government to prosecute those most responsible for Khmer Rouge era atrocities.  In an effort to  promote survivor participation before the court,  the ECCC has established a novel process that  allows survivors to participate directly in court  proceedings as civil parties.  
However, on September 7, 2010, the ECCC declared 
that 11 civil party applicants were inadmissible,  for lack of a sufficient factual basis.  CJA appealed the decision, and on June 24, 2011, the Pre-Trial  Chamber of the ECCC reversed the order rejecting the civil party applications and announced that over 1,700 rejected applicants would be accepted, bringing the total number of civil parties to 3,850.
Being able to participate as civil parties is crucially 
important to many survivors.  Civil parties have  the right to non-monetary, “moral and collective”  reparations if the defendants are found guilty.  Moral reparations are of symbolic value, whereas collective reparations are reparations that benefit groups of civil parties or victims, or that benefit Cambodian society as a whole.
CJA attorneys present arguments on behalf of  
these civil parties in what many consider to be  the most complex human rights trial since the Nuremberg Tribunals.
The judges of the  
Extraordinary Chambers
in the Courts of Cambodia, viewed 
from the public gallery.“They don’t just have  
evidence from a newspaper  
or a book, they have victims.   
I am a real victim.  I can  
be a witness.” 
                    –     CJA clien t Sophany Bay, after hearing  
defendant Khieu Samphan claim that  
the only evidence against him are  fabricated news articles.
9
EL SALVADOR
Jesuits Massacre Case
Spanish Judge  
Issues Indictments  of Senior Salvadoran  Former Officers
On May 30, 2011, a Spanish  
judge issued a 77-page  indictment and arrest warrants  for 20 Salvadoran ex-officers  who were charged with crimes against humanity and state  terrorism for their role in the  murders of six Jesuit priests who were outspoken critics of the  military dictatorship, along with their housekeeper, and her  16-year-old daughter in 1989.
The defendants were all members of the Salvadoran 
military, including several who were in the High Command.  The highest ranking defendant, Rafael Humberto Larios, was the Minister of Defense at the time of the massacre.  Also indicted are General  Rafael Bustillo, Colonel Orlando Zepeda who was Vice  Minister of Defense, and Colonel Inocente Orlando Montano who was Vice Minister of Public Safety.
In the lengthy charging document, Judge Eloy 
Velasco describes the far-reaching conspiracy to kill the Jesuit priests, explaining how it was conceived as a military operation at the highest levels of the Salvadoran Army and Military Intelligence.  
This indictment came almost three years after  
CJA and the Spanish Human Rights Association (APDHE) initiated a case before the Spanish  National Court for the murders against members  of the Salvadoran military.  CJA worked closely  with Spanish and US authorities to ensure the  arrest of the defendants and to expand the case to include six more defendants who were responsible for the massacre. We have presented extensive testimony to the court over the past few years including expert testimony from Stanford Professor Terry Karl, military expert Colonel García, and Salvadoran Judge Sydney Blanco, among others.  
In explaining the basis for the issuance of the  
indictment and the arrest warrants, the judge  indicated that any claim of double jeopardy should fail because the 1990 trial held in El Salvador was a  “sham trial.”  
CJA and APDHE originally filed the criminal case 
before the Spanish National Court on November  13, 2008. The complaint was originally filed against former members of the Salvadoran High Command and the Atlacatl battalion for their role in the Jesuits Massacre. Among the victims: Fathers Ignacio  Ellacuría, Ignacio Martín-Baró, Segundo Montes, Amando López, and Juan Ramon Moreno, who were born and ordained in Spain; and Father Joaquin López y López, Elba Ramos, and her 15-year-old daughter Celina Meredith, who were Salvadoran.  CJA would like to thank the firm of Mintz Levin Cohn Glovsky & Popeo, PC for their pro bono support and CJA Senior Legal Advisor Carolyn Patty Blum.
Placards commemorate the victims of the Jesuits Massacre and Archbishop  
Oscar Romero, assassinated by government forces in 1980.10
HIGHLIGHTS FROM OUR CASES
S
OMALIA
Yousuf v. Samantar
U.S. Federal Judge and State  
Department Deny Common Law  Foreign Official Immunity to Former  Somali Minister of Defense Accused  of Human Rights Abuses
This year brought progress in our courageous  
Somali clients’ suit against General Mohamed Ali  Samantar, the former Defense Minister of Somalia who oversaw a campaign of widespread human rights violations in Somalia during the 1980s.   
In 2004, CJA brought suit on behalf of five survivors 
and their families who were tortured while Samantar served under the Siad Barre regime: Bashe Yousuf, a young business man tortured and kept in solitary confinement for over six years; Aziz Deria, whose father and brother were abducted by officials and never seen again; John Doe I, whose two brothers were summarily executed by soldiers; Jane Doe, a university student detained by officials, raped 15 times, and held in solitary confinement for over three years; and John Doe II, who was imprisoned for his clan affiliation and was shot by a firing squad, but survived by hiding under a pile of dead bodies.  
Over the next six years, the case worked its way 
up to the U.S. Supreme Court on the question of foreign sovereign immunity.  Samantar—who has been a U.S. resident for 15 years—contended  that he was immune from the jurisdiction of U.S. courts because he held office in Somalia at the  time the alleged acts occurred.  On June 1, 2010, the Supreme Court rejected his argument that the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act shielded former foreign officials from such lawsuits.  And on remand before Judge Leonie Brinkema of the U.S District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia, Samantar’s argument that he was immune under an obscure common law doctrine of  “official acts” immunity  fared no better.
In a rare move, on February 14, 2011, the U.S. State 
Department filed a statement of interest in the case denying immunity to Samantar on two grounds.  First, Somalia lacked a recognized government to assert immunity.  Second, as a permanent resident of the United States, Samantar was subject to our laws and jurisdiction, and hence was not entitled  
to immunity from a suit alleging com-mand responsibility for torture, war crimes, and crimes against humanity.  On February 15, 2011, Judge Brinkema agreed with CJA and the State Depart-ment and issued an order denying common law foreign official immunity.
Although Samantar filed an interlocu-
tory appeal to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, Judge Brinkema denied his motion to stay proceedings pending the appeal, certifying that Samantar’s argument on immunity  was frivolous.  With that, after many  years, the case will finally proceed to discovery and trial.  CJA would like to thank our pro bono co-counsel at Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld, LLP .
11
UNITED  STATES
Reisner v. Leso
Revoking the License of a  
Guantánamo Bay Psychologist 
On July 7, 2010, CJA and the New York Civil  
Liberties Union filed a complaint with the  New York Office of Professional Discipline (OPD) against Dr. John Leso for his role in designing,  implementing, and participating in a system of  abusive interrogations at Guantánamo Bay that later spread to Afghanistan and Iraq.  
Dr. Leso led the first Behavioral Science Consultation 
Team  at the United States Naval Station at  Guantánamo Bay, Cuba (Guantánamo or GTMO) from June 2002 to January 2003.  There, Dr. Leso  co-authored an interrogation policy memorandum that incorporated unlawful torture techniques adapted from methods used by the Chinese and North Korean governments against U.S. prisoners  of war.  He recommended the application of a series of increasingly psychologically and physically abusive interrogation techniques against detainees in U.S. custody.
Neither Dr. Leso nor any other U.S. official involved 
in these interrogation activities has ever been held accountable for the cruel treatment of detainees at 
Guantánamo.  Our case marked a crucial step  forward in the push to hold U.S. officials account-able for violations of U.S. and international human rights law.  CJA has also worked with an informal  coalition of psychologists and human rights attor-neys to build a coordinated strategy to hold those health care professionals who participate in human rights abuses accountable.
In July 2010, however, the OPD announced  
that it would not investigate the complaint, on  the theory that Dr. Leso’s use of psychological  techniques to “break” the personalities of  detainees did not constitute the practice of  psychology under New York law, and hence was  beyond the OPD’s jurisdiction.  So in November 2010, CJA petitioned a New York state court to  order the OPD to initiate a misconduct investiga-tion, as mandated by state law.  The court heard  oral arguments in April 2011.  We will continue to press for an investigation.“Those of us who are  
psychotherapists to torture  
survivors know something the  
general public does not: that other 
psychologists have been involved  
in carrying out and designing  
cruel and abusive interrogation  
techniques that at times  
amounted to torture.”  
                    – CJA founder Gerald Gray, LCSW, MPHVideo frames from an interrogation of then-sixteen year 
old Guantánamo detainee, Canadian citizen, and alleged child soldier Omar Khadr.12
AMICUS BRIEFS
CJA authors or signs onto “friend of the 
court” briefs in cases before U.S. courts and tribunals around the world with  jurisdiction over human rights abuses.  
EUROPEAN  COUR T  OF   
H
UMAN
 R
IGHTS
Zontul v. Greece
Supporting Claims of Torture Against 
LGBT Refugees and Developing Human Rights Jurisprudence on Sexual  Orientation Discrimination
In June 2001, the Greek Coast Guard intercepted a 
boat in the Mediterranean carrying migrants and transferred the passengers to a detention facility in Crete.  One of them was Necati Zontul, a gay Turkish national seeking asylum from persecution.  While in custody, Zontul’s guards specifically targeted him for abuse because of his homosexuality.  One Coast Guard agent cornered Necati in a bathroom and violently raped him with a baton, while another agent stood watch.  When Zontul filed complaints about his abuse, Greek authorities denied him a medical examina-tion and failed to conduct a proper investigation.  Although his assailant was eventually prosecuted, the Greek court refused to recognize the rape as torture.  Moreover, the court denied Zontul an opportunity to participate in the trial or appeal, as guaranteed by the European Convention on Human Rights.  Ultimately, Zontul’s abuser was sentenced to a shockingly lenient six-month suspended sentence and was allowed to keep his position in the Coast Guard.  On appeal, the Greek martial court held that rape by a government official did not constitute torture.  In response to this miscarriage of justice, Mr. Zontul, with the help of the U.K.-based human rights organization REDRESS, filed a complaint in April 2008 before the European Court of Human Rights against the government of Greece.In June 2010, the President of the Court granted CJA the rare opportunity to intervene as a third party to provide expertise on several pressing legal issues: first, the recognition of custodial rape as torture under international law; and second, the protec-tion of sexual minorities from discrimination or abuse under human rights law.  In our brief to the Court, we argued that the European Convention on Human Rights provides specific protection to sexual minorities and supports extending the Court’s racial discrimination jurisdiction to encompass discrimination based on sexual orienta-tion.  Our brief also provided a comparative analysis of international and national trends in criminal sentenc-ing.  It concluded that under widespread State practice, a crime motivated by sexual orientation bias—like other “hate  crimes”—is an aggravating  factor triggering higher penalties.
Ultimately, the Court ruled in favor of Zontul and 
held, for the first time in its history, that rape of a detainee by state agents constitutes torture.
U.S. S UPREME  COURT
Ashcroft v. Al-Kidd
Exposing the U.S. Government’s  
Detention of Criminal Suspects  as “Witnesses” 
On January 28, 2011, CJA filed an amicus brief 
before the U.S. Supreme Court in Ashcroft v. Al Kidd, arguing that in March 2003, Attorney General John Ashcroft, serving under President George W. Bush, unconstitutionally detained a U.S. citizen without 
Necati Zontul, 
plaintiff in  Zontul v. Greece13
probable cause by holding him as a witness to a 
crime while in fact investigating him as a suspect.  Abdullah al-Kidd is a U.S. citizen and former star football player for the University of Idaho.  In March 2003, he was arrested without probable cause, and held under a statute that permits the federal government to detain a witness to a crime, under exceptional circumstances, in order to compel  testimony.  Al-Kidd alleges that former Attorney General Ashcroft instituted an unconstitutional policy of detaining individuals as potential witness-es under this law, as an alternative to arrest, in order to circumvent the constitutional requirements of probable cause.
Our brief argues that the U.S. Justice Department 
exceeded its authority by trying to circumvent the Fourth Amendment requirement of probable  cause.  Unfortunately, on June 1, 2011, the Supreme Court held that Ashcroft had immunity because  the law governing the material witness statute  was too unsettled for Ashcroft’s policy to constitute a  “clear constitutional violation,” the threshold for overcoming immunity.  Like so many other victims of Bush-era  detention policies, Al-Kidd will not  get his day in court.  His case, however, has at least helped to expose unlawful detention practices.
Ali v. Rumsfeld
The Right to Redress  
for Torture at Overseas  U.S. Military Facilities
On September 20, 2010, CJA  
co-authored an amicus brief filed  with the D.C. Circuit in the case of several plaintiffs who were allegedly tortured and abused while detained  in U.S. military facilities in Iraq and  Afghanistan.  A federal district court had dismissed their suit, precluding  them from seeking redress.
In our brief, authored by CJA Board member  William Aceves and UVA law professor Deena  Hurwitz, we argued that (1) victims of torture have  a right to seek redress for their injuries under  international law, and (2) U.S. law should be  interpreted consistently with international  law whenever possible. 
On June 21, 2011, the Eleventh Circuit Court of  
Appeals affirmed the district court’s decision to dismiss the claims.  The court found that it was an unsettled question whether non-resident aliens detained abroad have Fifth and Eighth Amend-ment rights.  Therefore, the government actors had qualified immunity against the constitutional claims.  Turning to the ATS claim, the court relied on precedent to find that the officials’ actions were  “incidental” to their employment.  As such, the Westfall Act required that the U.S. substitute in as defendant, and the Federal Tort Claims Act (FTCA) provided the governing standard.  Because plaintiffs had not exhausted their remedies under the FTCA, the court affirmed dismissal of the statutory claim.
Necati Zontul, 
plaintiff in  Zontul v. Greece14
TRANSITIONAL JUSTICE
CJA works with NGOs and governments 
around the world on a range of  transitional justice initiatives.  
“Transitional Justice” refers to a range of strategies 
that permit a country to recover from a legacy of human rights abuses and armed conflict.  These strategies share several goals: to hold those who had “command responsibility” for systematic abuses legally accountable; to repair social divisions caused by conflict; to provide survivors with a full account-ing and acknowledgement of the abuses that occurred; to offer material and moral reparations to survivors; and to reform key state institutions, including the military, police, and judiciary, to  ensure that the pattern of human rights violations is not repeated.
As part of CJA’s comprehensive strategy to end im-
punity, we work alongside in-country prosecutors to hold human rights abusers criminally accountable in national courts—especially where defendants that we expose in U.S. cases have been deported or extradited to stand trial in the home country.  CJA attorneys offer expert advice in witness prepara-tion, presentation of evidence, and charging human rights crimes.
•
  In 
Somaliland, CJA is working with the Minister 
of Justice to support local transitional justice 
efforts, including exhumation of mass graves and forensic investigation of Siad Barre-era war crimes.  In 2011, CJA staff, representatives from the Peruvian Forensic Anthropology Team,  and pro bono counsel from Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP met with the Somaliland War Crimes Commission. 
•
  In 
Guatemala, CJA is working closely with the 
Guatemalan NGO CALDH and local authorities  in connection with the arrest of Elena Fuentes and the prosecution of five men responsible for the Plan de Sánchez massacre.  The prosecution  in Guatemala relies on expert reports that  CJA prepared in our case in Spain, and we are working on witness preparation.
•
  In 
Peru, CJA is assisting the criminal case against 
Juan Rivera Rondón and Telmo Hurtado for their role in the August 1985 Accomarca Massacre.   CJA has played an integral role in the develop-ment of the criminal case and in the overall  litigation strategy.  In 2007, CJA and Peruvian  NGO APRODEH joined together to pursue  a combined litigation strategy involving  ATS/TVPA litigation in the U.S. and a criminal  prosecution in Peru.  By filing these suits in  the U.S., CJA helped to keep the accountability  efforts of the survivors alive and to support  their transitional justice efforts in Peru.  The  suits also became the basis for extradition  proceedings in the U.S. government. 
Meeting with the Somaliland Minister of  
Justice and Chair of the Somaliland War  Crimes Commission at the Somaliland  Justice Ministry in Hargeisa, Somaliland. L-R: Jose Pablo Baraybar (Director of the Peruvian Forensic Anthropology Team), Kathy Roberts (CJA Staff Attorney), Minister of Justice Hussein Aideed,  Joe Decker and Jon Robell (pro bono co-counsel, Akin Gump Strauss Hauer &  Feld LLP), Natasha Fain (CJA Staff Attorney), 
Aziz Deria (CJA Client), and Khadar Ahmed 
(Chair of the War Crimes Commission).
15
ExTR ADITIONS, REMOVALS, AND U.S. HUMAN RIGHTS POLIC y
CJA works on a variety of human rights 
legislative and policy initiatives in the United States.
In our policy efforts, we aim to increase U.S.  
enforcement of human rights law, to incorporate human rights norms of command responsibility  into U.S. law and practice, and to oppose immunity for torture and other abuses. We focus particular attention on supporting policy initiatives that advance the U.S. government’s  commitment to criminally prosecute human  rights abusers.   
We have worked closely with the U.S. government on immigration removal and criminal extradition cases against human rights abusers from Colombia, El Salvador, Peru, and Somalia.  In recognition of our unique expertise in human rights enforcement, we have been invited to submit multiple rounds of testimony to Congress on strengthening the U.S. statutory framework for human rights crimes and adapting U.S. law enforcement to the global effort to deter mass atrocities through individual account-ability for perpetrators. 16
OUTREACH, EDUCATION, AND PROFESSIONAL TRAINING
CJA’s outreach and education program 
mobilizes torture survivors to speak publicly to personalize how international  human rights are explained to the  general public.
Through our outreach program, we seek to impact 
the international debate on the use of torture and empower other survivors to seek justice. 
This year brought a great expansion in CJA’s  
media presence. CJA’s Guatemala Genocide Case, CJA International Attorney Almudena Bernabeu, and CJA Advisory Council Member Naomi Roht- Arriaza were featured in Pamela Yates’ powerful  documentary Granito, which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in January 2011.  Granito 
documents how footage taken by Yates during  her 1982 film on the Guatemalan genocide,  When the Mountains Tremble, became evidence in CJA’s case before the Spanish National Court.
In addition, CJA staff participated in over 40 
outreach events in the U.S., Argentina, Cambodia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Spain.  The audiences included refugee groups, religious organizations, psychologists and medical professionals who  work with torture survivors, law, college and high school students, government officials, and the  general public.
In October 2010, CJA organized two trainings  
for Ecuadoran Supreme Court justices and  human rights prosecutors in Quito and Guayaquil.  The sessions focused on developing human rights  cases, gathering evidence, and special litigation  issues that arise in this context.  In November  2010, CJA participated in a day-long training  at the U.S. Department of Homeland Security  for asylum officers.  And in March 2011, CJA  co-sponsored a Continuing Legal Education  training on “Enforcing International Human Rights in U.S. Courts,” in connection with the Amnesty International Annual General Meeting.
L-R: Granito producer Pamela Yates, CJA International 
Attorney Almudena Bernabeu, Robert Redford, and Celia Tejada at the Sundance premier.17
In 2011, CJA and our partner organization, the  
Applied Social Research Institute of Cambodia  (ASRIC), began a series of forums in locations throughout the United States.  The purpose of  these forums was to provide legal outreach and information about the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC), also known as  the Khmer Rouge Tribunal, and the trial against  four former senior officials of the Khmer Rouge.  The forums were open to CJA clients as well as  individuals from the Cambodian diaspora.  CJA  represents the Cambodian survivors living in  the United States participating in the Khmer  Rouge Trial.
CJA and ASRIC with Cambodian survivors after the forum in Long Beach, CA.   
L-R: Prumsodun Ok (ASRIC Artist-in-Residence), Eric Romero (ASRIC Student Volunteer), Cathy Schlund-Vials 
(ASRIC Program Curator), Michele Cadigan (ASRIC Student Volunteer), Maria DeGaetano (CJA Development & Outreach 
Associate), Luis Rodriquez (ASRIC Student Volunteer), Nushin Sarkarati (CJA Staff Attorney), Andrea Evans (CJA Legal Director), Mrs.  Roth Prum (Survivor), Leakhena Nou (ASRIC Executive Director), Mrs. Chanthan Pich (Survivor), Mrs. Cragn Vishsnah (Survivor), Kosal Path (ASRIC Senior Researcher), Theodora Yoshikami (ASRIC Director of 
Administration & Development), Trent Walker (ASRIC Volunteer & Smot Performer), Sopheada Phy (ASRIC Intern).
Approximately 50 to 80 survivors and Cambodian 
community members attended each of the forums.  CJA provided information on the law and structure of the Khmer Rouge Tribunal, the defendants in the upcoming trial, and the role of survivor participation and reparations.  Several survivors also came for-ward and shared stories and photographs of loved ones who died during the Khmer Rouge regime. 
CJA and ASRIC will continue to hold events open  
to the Cambodian community.  It is an opportunity for survivors to share their stories of survival with each other and voice any questions or concerns about the trial with CJA attorneys working before the Tribunal.18
AWARDS AND  CELEBRATIONS
THE JUDITH  LEE STRONACH  HUMAN  RIGHTS  AW ARD   
AND
 CJA’
S
 A
NNUAL
 D
INNER
, M
AY
 25, 2011
Each year since 2007, CJA has honored an individual or organization  
for their outstanding contribution to the movement for global justice  with the Judith Lee Stronach Human Rights Award.  Presented at CJA’s  Annual Dinner in San Francisco, the award is inspired by Judith Lee  Stronach (1943-2002), a committed human rights activist who was  instrumental in the founding of CJA through a generous gift from the Judith Stronach Fund for Non-Violent Social Change.  CJA’s work continues to benefit from her vision and spirit, as well as the ongoing support and friendship of her husband, Raymond Lifchez.
On May 25, 2011, over 320 CJA supporters, clients, community leaders, and pro bono attorneys joined us  
to celebrate our victories in the movement for global justice.  We presented the 2011 Stronach Award to Jose Pablo Baraybar, who accepted on behalf of the Peruvian Forensic Anthropology Team.   Mr. Baraybar’s extraordinary commitment to human rights and his groundbreaking work in forensic  anthropology have been instrumental in the prosecutions of human rights abusers from Peru to the  Philippines, and from Haiti to Ethiopia.
Highlights from the event included:
•   A mbassador Eileen Chamberlain Donahoe, the first U.S. Representative to the  
UN Human Rights Council, spoke eloquently on human rights as the cornerstone  
of U.S. foreign policy, and specifically about U.S. engagement with the Human  Rights Council.
•  
 K
amala D. Harris, California Attorney General, was honored for her leadership  
on behalf of victims of human trafficking.
•   W
illiam H. Neukom, San Francisco Giants CEO, was honored for his extraordinary  
commitment to international justice as founder of the World Justice Project.
•  
 A
ziz Mohamed Deria, CJA client in Yousuf v. Samantar, spoke about his experience 
holding former Somali Defense Minister Mohamed Samantar accountable in a  U.S. court for human rights abuses.
•  
 S
teven Shulman, partner at Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP , accepted  
the Partner in Justice award on behalf of our pro bono partner Akin Gump and  spoke about the significance of the Supreme Court victory in the Samantar case.
•  
 H
on. Willie L. Brown, Jr., former mayor of San Francisco, served as Master  
of Ceremonies.19
photos clockwise from top left:
Jose Pablo Baraybar, Raymond Lifchez 
Art Pulaski, Attorney General Kamala Harris,  
Andrea Evans (CJA Legal Director) 
Nushin Sarkarati (CJA Staff Attorney), Beth Stephens 
(CJA Board), Steven Schulman, Aziz Deria (CJA Client)
John Russo (CJA Board), Willie L. Brown, Jr.
Mariano-Florentino Cuellár, Ambassador Eileen  
Chamberlain Donahoe, Sally Neukom, William  
Neukom, Eileen ChamberlainCJA’S 2011 A NNUAL  DINNER20
ORGANIZATIONAL SUPPORT
PRO BONO  LA W  F IRMS  AND  AT TORNEYS
Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP
Amir Hatem Ali
Brian Anthony BurnorIain D. BurnsTroy D. CahilElizabeth Jane Conte Colleen M. CoyleDanielle Christine CrockettJoseph L. DeckerNatalya Daria DobrowolskyMarwan ElrakabawyJoseph FicocelloTheresa Wang GhaliRuth Wangari GithumbiJonathan Graham GoodrichElise Ann HabermanAdria M. HicksRebekah Marie JonesAshley J. KeapprothMelanie Lynn LangfordDavid C. LawrenceHarry Lee LaxtonSean C. LayAnne Jahee LeeDomingo Manuel LlagosteraMark J. MacDougallJonah Eric McCarthyThomas P . McLishPatricia Ann MilletMichael R. MorseDavid R. NelsonBilly James NolanAllissa Aileen Rose PollardHolli V. Pryor-BazeJonathan P . RobellReed L. RussellSteven H. SchulmanKristine L. Sendek-SmithStephen W. SimpsonTiffany T. SmithJane M. StackChad Allen StegemanGregory StrongNada Ismail TahaW. Randolph TeslikJames O. Thompson Elizabeth TobioJoshua B. WaxmanJoseph W. WhiteheadJennifer L. Woodson
Dechert LLP
John C. Lutrario
H. Joseph EscherAmy E. Thayer
Hogan Lovells US LLP
Donna Fagerstrom
Latham & Watkin
Matthew J. Baier
Lucas J. BastinJessica N. BoludaRichard P . BressEmily CridlandKatya S. GeorgievaJeremiah D. GibsonWilliam K. HackettChristina G. HioureasHussein Haeri MazanderaniGraham J. Samuel-GibbonRachel W. ThornSimon H. Yeung
James Mintz Group
Staci Dresher
Hannah MintzMelanie Azoubel-MitchellNina LoscialoAndrew Melnick
Mintz, Levin, Cohn, Glovsky and Popeo, P.C. 
Michael Gardener
Helen GuytonS. FernandoisS. RaffertyH. Phillips
Morgan, Lewis & Brockius LLP
Lincoln O. Bisbee
Linda EatonKelli E. HallHeather V. HayEric MeckleyHoward M. RadzelyTracy L. SteeleRonald J. Tenpas
Ollé & Sesé LLP
Luis Acebal
Nuria GarciaEva GimbernatManuel OlléMaite Parejo
Steptoe & Johnson LLP
Korey Barry
Noelle ChungKaren CottrellJonathan C. DrimmerKatheryn J. GaineyKevin HaggertySarah Rose LamoreeJohn P . NolanNoah J. PhillipsAnthony Rapa
21
Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati, PC
J. Cassel
Leo CunninghamE. CarnicaA. JorgensenS. LoveLee Anne MulhollandM. RuedaP . SandilloYasmine TarhouniRobert Terenzi Jr.B. Winfield
VOL UNTEER  AT TORNEYS
Francesca BordinCarolyn Patty BlumRebecca MintyAusra PadskocimaiteBeth StephensJulia Watson
LA W  S CHOOL  PAR TNERS
International Law Students Association,  University of San Francisco School of Law
Jamal Cool
Cara Defilippis Lindsay FreemanMichael MullanJessica PlattMatt Palmer Megan Sallomi
LEGAL  INTERNS
Bradford Adams
Harvard University School of Law
Sarah Ross Benjamin
Emory University School of Law
Michael Caesar
Stanford University School of Law
Lauren DeMartini 
New York University School of Law
Jennifer Gibson
Stanford University School of Law
Amaha Khassa
UC Berkeley School of Law
Zara Lockshin 
Harvard University School of Law
Clara Long
Harvard University School of Law
Kelly Madigan 
Emory University School of Law
Rebecca Minty
UC Berkeley School of Law
Katrina Natale
UC Berkeley School of Law
Matthew Palmer
University of San Francisco School of Law
Kristin Rau
University of Minnesota School of Law
Emily Rosendahl 
UC Hastings College of the LawWaiez Syed
University of Minnesota Law School
Andy Shen 
Santa Clara University School of Law
Julia Watson
UC Berkeley School of Law
Sara Zampierin
Harvard Law School
VOLUNTEERS
Tiffany ClarkeCaitie De AlmeidaJulissa GomezMonique GonzalezShawnim KashaniMarion KriegerCecilia Naomi LippNatalia PerozzoLeah PriceMinoo SarkaratiBen SerlethEmily SerlethRebecca SiegelSahar SultanKelli Youngson
PRO BONO  SUPPORT
djovidaJane DruryPamela Jue Elizabeth Low
ORGANIZATIONAL  SUPPORT
Erin CallahanLisa CohenEric Fountain, Kathryn Kennedy WineryLuis Gonzales of Luis Gonzales & AssociatesStacy HawverJuice Design, Brett CritchlowSuse NakataRyan SharonMartin TannenbaumRadical Designs, Ted Young
22
PARTNERS AND SUPPORTERS
Académie de droit International Humanitaire  
et de Droits Humains à Genève
adh-geneve.ch
Advocates for Human Rights
theadvocatesforhumanrights.org
Amnesty International USA
amnestyusa.org
Amnesty International UK
amnesty.org.uk
Applied Social Research Institute of Cambodia
asricjustice.org
Asociación Bufete Jurídico Popular
mujerachi.interconnection.org/bufete.htm
Asociación ProBúsqueda de Niñas y Niños Desaparecidos
probusqueda.org.sv
Asociación Pro Derechos Humanos
aprodeh.org.pe
Asociación Pro Derechos Humanos de España
apdhe.org
Association for Justice and Reconciliation
Boston Center for Refugee Health and Human Rights
bcrhhr.org
Bureau des Avocats Internationaux
ijdh.org
California Consortium of Torture Treatment Centers
notorture.org/ccttc
Center for Constitutional Rights
ccrjustice.org
Centro para Acción Legal en Derechos Humanos
caldh.org
Centro International de Toledo para la Paz 
toledopax.org
Centro Romero
centroromero.org
Comisión Colombiana de Juristas 
coljuristas.org
Comisión de la Verdad de Ecuador
coverdad.org.ec
Comisión de Verdad de Honduras
comisiondeverdadhonduras.org
Comité de Apoyo al Tíbet 
Comité de Familiares de Detenidos Desaparecidos 
en Honduras
cofadeh.org
Corporación de Promoción y Defensa  de los Derechos 
codepu.cl
Colectivo de Abogados José Alvear Restrepo 
colectivodeabogados.org
Colegio de Abogados de Madrid
icam.es
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
ucm.es
Dejusticia 
dejusticia.org
Dolly FilártigaEarthRights International
earthrights.org
East Bay Sanctuary Covenant
eastbaysanctuary.org
East Timor Action Network 
etan.org
El Rescate
elrescate.org
Equipo de Estudios Comunitarios y Acción Psicosocial
ecapguatemala.org
Equipo Peruano de Antropología Forense
epafperu.org
Escola de Cultura de Pau 
escolapau.uab.cat
Fédération Internationale des Ligues des Droits de l’Homme 
fidh.org
Florida Center for Survivors of Torture
gulfcoastjewishfamilyandcommunityservices.org
FondasyonKoleZepol
fonkoze.org
Fundación para el Debido Proceso Legal
dplf.org
FreedomHouse
freedomhouse.org
Fundación de Antropología Forense de Guatemala
fafg.org
 
F
undación Democracia sin Fronteras
fdsf.hn
Fundación Nueva Esperanza
fne.cosmosmaya.info
Fundación para el Debido Proceso Legal
dplf.org
Fundación Rigoberta Menchú Tum
frmt.org
George Madison University/Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú
pucp.edu.pe
Global Lawyers and Physicians
globallawyersandphysicians.org
23
Haiti Action Committee 
haitiaction.net
Horn of Africa Human Rights Watch Committee
hornwatch4rights.blogspot.com
Human Rights First
humanrightsfirst.org
Human Rights Watch
hrw.org
HUMANAS 
humanas.org.co
Impunity Watch
impunitywatch.net
Institute for Redress and Recovery
law.scu.edu/redress
Institute for Justice and Democracy in Haiti
ijdh.org
Instituto de Defensa Legal 
idl.org.pe
Instituto de Derechos Humanos de la  
Universidad Centroamericana   
uca.edu.sv/publica/idhuca
Interights 
interights.org
International Center for Transitional Justice
ictj.org
International Forum for Truth and Justice in Africa of the Great Lakes Region
veritasrwandaforum.org
International Rights Advocates
iradvocates.org
Fundación Myrna Mack
myrnamack.org.gt
Jueces para la Democracia, Spain
juecesdemocracia.es
La Peña Cultural Center 
lapena.org
LASA, Latin American Studies Association
lasa.international.pitt.edu/
Legal Aid Cambodia
lac.org.kh
Leo Valladares, Former Honduran National Commissioner for Human Rights
Maryknoll Office for Global Concerns
maryknollogc.org
Memoria y Justicia 
memoriayjusticia.cl
Moakley Foundation
moakleyfoundation.com
Movimiento Nacional de Víctimas de Crímenes de Estado 
movimientodevictimas.org
Muslim Public Affairs Council
mpac.org
National Consortium of Torture Treatment Providers
ncttp.org
National Security Archive
gwu.edu/~nsarchivNew York Civil Liberties Union
nyclu.org
Partners in Health 
pih.org
Physicians for Human Rights
physiciansforhumanrights.org
Pinochet Watch: Institute for Policy Studies 
tni.org//archives/pin-watch_watch
Plataforma de Derechos Humanos 
pidhdd.org
Program for Survivors of Torture and Trauma: 
Northern Virginia Family Service
nvfs.org
Program for Torture Victims
ptvla.org
REDRESS 
redress.org
Rotary Center for International Studies in Peace  and Conflict Resolution, U.C. Berkeley
iastp.berkeley.edu/node/137
SafetyNet Project for Trafficked and Enslaved Persons,Cambridge Health Alliance
Sister Dianna OrtizSkylight Pictures
skylightpictures.com/
Spanish Embassy, El SalvadorSurvivors International
survivorsintl.org
Survivors of Torture, International
notorture.org
The Central American Resource Center 
carecen-la.org
The Marjorie Kovler Center for the Treatment  
of Survivors of Torture
heartlandalliance.org/kovler
The Shalom Center
theshalomcenter.org
Torture Abolition and Survivors Support  Coalition International
tassc.org
Tutela Legal del Arzobispado de San Salvador
tutelalegal.org
Universidad Autonoma de El País Vasco, Deusto
Unión de Fiscales Progresistas de Cataluña Universidad Autonoma de Madrid
uam.es
Universidad Carlos III, Madrid-Spain
c3m.es
Universidad Centroamericana, “Jose Simeón Cañas” (UCA)
uca.edu.sv
Universidade de Salamanca
usal.es
Washington Office on Latin America 
wola.org
Women’s Link Worldwide
womenslinkworldwide.org27
FINAN CIALS
OPER
ATING REVENUE AND EXPENSES*
JULy  1, 2010 – JUNE 30, 2011
OPERATING REVENUES:
 F oundation Grants  $  586,500
 UN 
Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture
 52,000
 Individual and C
orporate Contributions
 383,780
 In-K
ind Contributions**
 2,241,794
 In
vestment Income
              8,685
 T
OTAL OPERATING REVENUES:  $  3,272,759
OPERATING E xPENSES: 
 P rogram  $  3,091,487
 A
dministration
 158,847
 
 F
undraising
 205,075
 T
OTAL OPERATING EXPENSES
 $  3,455,409
PROGRAM E xPENSES:
Program   89%
A
dministration
  5%
F
undraising
   6%FundraisingAdministration
Program
              *Audited figures for July 1, 2010 - June 30, 2011.  An audited financial statement is available upon request.
            **
 CJA par
tners with outside law firms and investigation firms to investigate and litigate cases on behalf  
of its clients. Sixteen firms and individual attorneys provided over 5,706 hours of pro bono services valued  
at $2,153,429.  In addition, eleven firms made contributions of $73,659 to cover out of pocket expenses.  The total donated pro bono legal services was $2,227,088. 28
STAFF AND BOARD
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
William Aceves, Vice Chair
California Western School of Law
William Belding, Treasurer
American University
Farah Brelvi, Secretary
Attorney
Lokelani Devone
Promontory Financial Group
Richard Leigh
Retired Credit Union CEO
Pamela Merchant
President
Jane Rocamora
Harvard Immigration & Refugee Clinic at GBLS
John Russo
City of Alameda Manager
Beth Stephens
Rutgers School of Law – Camden
Wilma Wallace, Chair
Gap, Inc.
ADVISORY COUNCIL 
Chester Atkins
ADS Ventures, Inc.,  
former Member of Congress
Carolyn Patty Blum
CJA Senior Legal Advisor,  UC Berkeley School of Law
Carlos Castresana Fernandez
Spanish Supreme Court Prosecutor
Sandra Coliver
Open Society Justice Initiative
Benjamin Cuellar
University of Central America,  El Salvador
James Eisenbrandt
Berkowitz Oliver Williams Shaw  & Eisenbrandt LLP
Gerald Gray
CJA Founder,  Institute for Redress & Recovery
Jennifer Green
University of Minnesota Law School
Paul Hoffman
Schonbrun DeSimone Seplow  Harris & Hoffman LLP
Naomi Roht-Arriaza
U.C. Hastings College of the Law
Beth Van Schaack
Santa Clara University School of Law
Steven Schneebaum
Greenberg Traurig LLP
Ralph G. Steinhardt
CJA Founding Board Member,  George Washington UniversityBAY AREA LEADERSHIP COUNCIL 
Russell Cohen
Orrick, Herrington, Sutcliffe LLP
David Lowe
Rudy, Exelrod & Zieff LLP
Paul Renne
Cooley Godward Kronish LLP
Frank Russo
California Progress Report
Amitai Schwartz
Law Offices of Amitai Schwartz
Michael S. Sorgen
Law Offices of Michael S. Sorgen 
Michael Traynor
The American Law Institute
Hon. Rebecca Westerfield (Ret.)
JAMS
CJA STAFF
Almudena Bernabeu
International Attorney/Transitional Justice Program Director
Maria DeGaetano
Development & Outreach Associate
Andrea Evans
Legal Director
Natasha Fain
Staff Attorney
Scott Gilmore
Writer/Researcher
Jeff Leininger
Development & Outreach Director 
Pamela Merchant
Executive Director
Kathy Roberts
Staff Attorney
Nushin Sarkarati
Staff Attorney
Dana Serleth
Operations & Finance Director 
PHOTO CREDITS
cover L-R:  UN P hoto/AID Purcell (CC)
 
 UN P
hoto/Eskinder Debebe (CC)
 
 UN P
hoto/John Isaac (CC)
 
 F
alsalama (CC)
page 1  
 UN P
hoto/Kibae Park (CC)
page 2  
 UN P
hoto/Martine Perret (CC)
page 3  
 CJA
page 4  
 UN P
hoto / Martine Perret (CC)
page 6 
 UN P
hoto/Albert Gonzalez Farran (CC)
page 8 
 T
he Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia
page 9
 © A
aron Ganz
page 10 
 UN P
hoto/ Stuart Price (CC)
page 11 
 P
ublic Domain (U.S. Government)
page 12  
 R
edress Trust
page 13  
 UN P
hoto/Bikem Ekberzade (CC)
page 14  
 CJA
page 15  
 UN P
hoto/Stuart Price (CC) 
page 16  
 CJA
page 17  
 E
ugene Morita (ASRIC)
page 19  
 CJA
page 20 
 F
alsalama (CC)
page 21 
 UN P
hoto/Albert Gonzalez Farran (CC)
page 22 
 UN P
hoto/Marie Frechon (CC)
page 28 
 CJA
inner back
 CJA
* 
 A
ll photos marked (CC) are licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Non-Commercial- 
No Derivatives 2.0 Generic License (CC BY-NC-ND 2.0).
Back row, L-R: Emily Rosendahl (CJA Legal Intern), Julia Watson (CJA Volunteer Attorney), 
Natasha Fain (CJA Staff Attorney), Judge Baltasar Garzón, Ausra Padskocimaite 
(CJA Volunteer Attorney), Dana Serleth  (CJA Operations & Finance Director). 
Front row, L-R: Kathy Roberts  (CJA Staff Attorney),  Almudena Bernabeu (CJA International 
Attorney),  Andrea Evans  (CJA Legal Director),  Pamela Merchant  (CJA Executive Director). 
Not pictured: Maria DeGaetano (CJA Development & Outreach Associate), Scott Gilmore 
(Writer/Researcher), Nushin Sarkarati (Staff Attorney).
The Center for Justice and Accountability
870 Market Street,  Suite 680San Francisco, CA 94102(415) 544-0444www.cja.org
Graphic design by JPD Communications, LLC