ANNUAL REPORT
January 1, 2007 - June 30, 20081The Center for Justice and Accountability is an 
international human rights organization dedicated to deterring torture and other severe human rights abuses around the world and advancing the rights of survivors to seek truth, justice and redress.
CJA uses litigation to hold perpetrators individually accountable for human rights abuses, develop human rights law and advancethe rule of law in countries transitioning from periods of abuse.OUR MISSION
2It is with great pleasure that we present you with this report of our January 2007 - June 2008 activities.
Looking back on our founding nine years ago, it is clear that 2007-2008 was a major tipping point
for this organization in which the incremental hard work of our attorneys and pro bono network, andthe continued willingness of our clients to publicly speak the truth against human rights abuses combined to produce extraordinary results. 
There are a number of separate developments that have helped launch CJA into the next phase 
of our development.
In October 2007, CJA received the Thomas J. Dodd Prize in International Justice & Human Rights 
from the University of Connecticut and Senator Christopher Dodd. As a Dodd Prize recipient, CJA joinsthe ranks of South African Justice and anti-apartheid activist Richard Goldstone and former U.N. HighCommissioner for Human Rights Louis Arbour. The receipt of this prestigious award clearly representsa coming of age for CJA.
In a CJA first, in November 2007, CJA client Juan Romagoza Arce and Executive Director 
Pamela Merchant testified before the U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee's Subcommittee on 
Human Rights and the Law. The hearing, "No Safe Haven: Accountability for Human Rights Violatorsin the U.S.,” sought to examine government efforts to hold human rights abusers who have settled in the U.S. accountable for their actions. Following on this, in June 2008, CJA submitted testimony that explored gaps in the current criminal human rights regulatory framework for the hearing, "From Nuremberg to Darfur: Accountability for Crimes Against Humanity."
MESSAGE FROM THE CHAIR AND EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR3In December 2007, CJA conducted its first human rights training program in Honduras , bringing
together 80 Honduran prosecutors with a faculty of legal practitioners from throughout the Americas,
Spain and the U.S. to cover the practical “how to” specifics of using national courts to try humanrights crimes. 
In May 2008, with the distribution of $580,000 to Haitian torture and massacre survivors, 
CJA crossed the one million dollar mark in assets recovered from human rights abusers. Perhaps
even more extraordinary is the fact that all seven of the survivors who successfully collected damagesin our cases chose not to keep their award for their own personal use, but instead shared it with their communities and other victims of human rights abuses. 
CJA’s participation in the Fujimori prosecution in 2008 was the result of relationships we built in 
connection with the 2007 filing of the first human rights cases in the U.S. for atrocities committed
against the Peruvian civilian population during the 1980-2000 internal conflict. The cases, against two commanders responsible for a major massacre, represent a new chapter in CJA’s work in theAmericas and our first effort to aid the struggle against impunity in Peru.
In the midst of this programmatic expansion, CJA launched the Judith Lee Stronach Human 
Rights Award which is to be given annually to an individual or organization who has made an 
outstanding contribution to the movement for global justice. The award was presented to CJA 
founding board member Paul Hoffman and Yale Law School Dean Harold Hongju Koh in 2007 and
2008 respectively at our annual dinners. We were also honored with the presence of two of our most important in-country partners at the dinners: Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Rigoberta Menchú Tum
and Francisco Soberón Garrido, founder of the Association for Human Rights in Peru.
Finally, we welcomed four new dedicated human rights defenders to our board: William Belding,
Maryam Elahi, Eileen O'Connor and Denise Vanison.
CJA’s 2007-2008 victories belong to the entire CJA community – to our clients, pro bono law firm partners, expert witnesses, community and in-country groups, donors and supporters, and to all ofyou who share a commitment to ending torture, genocide and other atrocities. We thank you for yourcontinued support and for all you do to help make the world a more just place.
Sincerely,
Joseph Brand Chet Atkins Pamela Merchant
2007 Chair 2008 Chair Executive Director
Board of Directors Board of Directors
We issue this eighteen month report because CJA changed our fiscal year in 2007 from a calendar 
year to one beginning July 1 and ending June 30. This report, therefore, presents our audited financial statements and program activities for the eighteen month period from January 1, 2007through June 30, 2008. Future CJA annual reports will return to a twelve month cycle.
4“Universal Jurisdiction” is the doctrine of international law that holds that certain crimes are 
so egregious that the perpetrators may be held accountable wherever they are found. These crimes
include genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes, and torture. The doctrine provided the legalfoundation for the Nuremberg trials against Nazi war criminals. More recent events – including thearrest of Chilean General Augusto Pinochet in London, the establishment of the International CriminalTribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, the prosecution of Liberian dictator Charles Taylor in Sierra Leone and the establishment of the International Criminal Court – all reflect the growing determination of the international community to carry forward the Nuremberg legacy of bringing individuals to justice for violations of international law that “shock the conscience of humanity.” 
CJA is playing a leading role in this emerging era of international justice by pursuing universal jurisdiction cases in the U.S. and Spain. In the U.S., we use two civil laws to hold perpetrators of international human rights abuses accountable: the Alien Tort Statute and the Torture Victim ProtectionAct. We also pursue criminal human rights cases before the Spanish National Court, which has initiatedinvestigations into abuses around the world. CJA has pioneered a survivor-centered approach to thequest for justice that combines legal representation with medical and psycho-social services to bothempower and heal torture survivors and their communities. 
“Transitional Justice” refers to a range of judicial and non-judicial strategies that are used to deal
with a legacy of human rights abuses and armed conflict in a given country. These strategies have avariety of goals: to hold those who had “command responsibility” for systematic abuses legallyaccountable; to help repair social divisions caused by conflict; to provide survivors with a full accounting and acknowledgement of the abuses that occurred; to offer material and moral reparationsto survivors; and to reform key state institutions including the military, police and judiciary to ensurethat the pattern of human rights violations is not repeated.
From using a U.S. civil case to jump-start Honduran efforts toprosecute those responsible forforced disappearances in the 1980s, to managing the distribution of over $400,000 of U.S. court award damages to massacre survivors in one of Haiti’s poorest communities,CJA is advancing transitional justice goals in countries whereabuses have occurred. INTRODUCTION
51789 Congress enacts the Alien Tort Statute (ATS) to provide federal courts with 
jurisdiction over torts committed against aliens “in violation of the law of nations.”
1945 The United Nations (UN), the Nuremberg International Military Tribunal, and theTribunal for the Far East are established. Crimes against humanity are defined andmade subject to prosecution. The tribunals establish that rules of international lawapply to individuals as well as states.
1948 The UN General Assembly adopts the Genocide Convention, which provides that persons who commit genocide shall be punished, "whether they are constitutionally responsiblerulers, public officials or private individuals.” The General Assembly, without dissent, alsoadopts the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
1980 A U.S. appellate court issues the groundbreaking decision in Filártiga v. Peña-Irala, holding 
a Paraguayan police officer liable under the ATS for acts of summary execution and torturecommitted in Paraguay.
1992 President George H.W. Bush signs into law the Torture Victim Protection Act (TVPA), whichendorses the ATS and provides a cause of action for U.S. citizens, as well as aliens, to sue for torture and extrajudicial killing.
1993 The UN establishes the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.
1994 The UN establishes the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. The U.S. ratifies the UN Convention Against Torture and adopts a law making torture, wherever it is committed, 
a crime that can be criminally prosecuted in U.S. courts.
1998 CJA is incorporated. General Pinochet is arrested in London pursuant to a Spanish warrant for torture and related crimes committed in Chile. CJA files its first case in the U.S. againstBosnian war criminal Nikola Vuckovic.
2002 The International Criminal Court is established. CJA wins a landmark jury trial against two Salvadoran former Ministers of Defense, which confirms the doctrine of command responsibility in U.S. civil human rights cases.
2003 CJA wins the first jury verdict in U.S. history for crimes against humanity in a contested case brought against Chilean death squad operative Armando Fernández Larios. 
2004 The U.S. Supreme Court affirms in Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain that non-U.S. citizens may use 
the ATS to sue human rights violators for abuses committed overseas. CJA joins a criminalcomplaint filed by Nobel Laureate Rigoberta Menchú Tum and others in Spain against EfraínRíos Montt and other senior Guatemalan officials charging terrorism, genocide and torture.
2006 Nigeria surrenders former Liberian dictator Charles Taylor to the UN-backed Special Court forSierra Leone for trial. In the U.S., Taylor’s son, Chuckie Taylor, is indicted for torture, markingthe first time that the U.S. government has filed a criminal case under the 1994 torture law.
2007 An international arrest warrant is issued by Peru for former Peruvian President Alberto Fujimoriafter a unanimous decision by the Peruvian Congress to lift his immunity as former head ofstate. Fujimori is extradited to Peru from Chile to face corruption and human rights charges. 
2008 In one of the largest recoveries of court awarded damages in a U.S. human rights case, CJA clients recovered $580,000 from former Haitian Col. Carl Dorélien.TIMELINEBosnia and Herzegovina
War Crimes and Ethnic Cleansing 
(Mehinovic v. Vuckovic)In 2002, an Atlanta judge found Bosnian Serb war criminal Nikola Vuckovic liable for torture, war crimes and other abuses committed against Bosnian Muslims.
Chile
Pinochet’s “Caravan of Death”  (Cabello v. Fernandez Larios) In 2003, a Florida jury found Pinochet operative Armando Fernández Larios responsible for torture and murder. 
China
Torture and Religious Persecution (Doe v. Liu Qi)In 2004, a San Francisco judge issued a default judgment against Liu Qi, the Mayor of Beijing, for his role in the torture of Falun Gong practitioners. 
El Salvador
Command Responsibility for Atrocities (Romagoza Arce v. Garcia)In 2006, the 11th Circuit upheld CJA’s 2002 $54.6 million jury verdict against Generals García and Vides Casanova for the torture of three CJA clients. 
Assassination of Archbishop Romero 
(Doe v. Saravia)In 2004, CJA won a $10 million judgment against Alvaro Saravia, marking the first time anyone had been held responsible for the assassination of Archbishop Romero. 
The Civil War’s Most Notorious War Criminal 
(Chavez v. Carranza)In 2005, a Memphis jury found Colonel Nicolás Carranza liable for abuses suffered by our clients and ordered him to pay $6 million. 
Guatemala
Justice for the Mayan Genocide (The Guatemala Genocide Case)In 2006, CJA became lead counsel on the Guatemala Genocide Case filed by Nobel Laureate
Rigoberta Menchú Tum and others in Spain against seven senior Guatemalan military officials. 
6
CJA’S CASES AT A GLANCEHaiti
The High Command and the Raboteau Massacre
(Jean v. Dorelien)In 2007, a Miami federal jury found Colonel Carl Dorélien liable for abuses and ordered him to pay $4.3 million. In a separate state court action, a landmark $580,000 was recovered for Haitian massacre survivors.
Death Squads and Gender-Based Violence 
(Doe v. Constant)In 2006, a New York judge found death squad leader Emmanuel “Toto” Constant liable for abuses and ordered him to pay $19 million to three survivors of state-sponsored rape.
Honduras
Forced Disappearances (Reyes v. Lopez Grijalba)
In 2006, a Florida judge held Colonel Juan López Grijalba responsible for abuses and ordered him to pay $47 millionto six survivors and relatives of the disappeared.
Indonesia
Atrocities During the East Timor Independence Referendum 
(Doe v. Lumintang)
In 2001, a D.C. judge found General Johny Lumintang 
liable for abuses and ordered him to pay $66 million to 
six survivors. While the judgment was reversed on a 
technicality, Lumintang no longer travels to the U.S.
Peru
The Accomarca Massacre I 
(Ochoa Lizarbe v. Hurtado )
In 2007, CJA filed suit on behalf of two survivors 
against Major Telmo Hurtado Hurtado for abuses. 
In 2008, after a trial on damages, a Miami judge  
ordered Hurtado to pay $37 million.
The Accomarca Massacre II  (Ochoa Lizarbe v. Rivera Rondon)In 2007, CJA also filed suit against Captain Juan Rivera Rondón for torture and killings committed during the Accomarca Massacre.
Somalia
Civil War and Widespread Repression  (Yousuf v. Samantar)
In 2004, CJA filed suit on behalf of five Somali survivors against General Mohamed Ali Samantar for widespread abuses committed during the 1980s under his command.
Clan Violence and Torture  (Doe v. Ali) 
In 2004, CJA filed suit on behalf of two Somalis against Colonel Yusuf Abdi Ali for war crimes.
7
8CJA Defends Verdict on Appeal Against Former Salvadoran Vice-Minister of Defense: 
Chavez v. Carranza 
In June 2008, after many delays by the defendant, the briefing for the appeal in CJA’s case against 
former Salvadoran Vice-Minister of Defense Col. Nicolas Carranza was finally completed. In an extraordinary development, the Government of El Salvador filed an amicus brief with the Sixth CircuitCourt of Appeals in support of the defendant's argument that the 2005 judgment against him shouldbe voided because he is entitled to amnesty under El Salvador's 1993 Amnesty Law. 
This is the first time that a government has intervened at this level on behalf of a defendant in a 
CJA case. In response, a broad coalition of international law experts filed an amicus brief which arguesthat the Amnesty Law is illegal under both Salvadoran constitutional law and international law. Theamnesty law, which has been strongly criticized by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights,was passed five days after a U.N. sponsored Truth Commission found that the Salvadoran governmentwas responsible for most of the abuses committed during the 1980-1992 civil war. 
Background In November 2005, after a three week trial, a Memphis jury held Carranza liable for crimes against
humanity, torture and extrajudicial killing for his role overseeing abuses committed by the military. He was ordered to pay $6 million in damages. The verdict represents the first time that a U.S. jury in a contested case has found a commander liable for crimes against humanity. 
The case was brought on behalf of five courageous plaintiffs: Erlinda Franco, Ana Patricia Chávez,
Francisco Calderón, Cecilia Santos and Daniel Alvarado. The plaintiffs were torture survivors and familymembers of those disappeared or assassinated by forces under the command of Carranza. 
It is estimated that over 75,000 civilians were killed by government and paramilitary forces during the
Salvadoran civil war; thousands of others were tortured, raped and suffered other abuses. Carranzawas Vice-Minister of Defense of El Salvador from late 1979 to early 1981. In that position, he exercisedcommand over the three units of the Security Forces – the National Guard, National Police andTreasury Police – that were responsible for widespread attacks on civilians. 
Carranza came to the U.S. in 1985 and became a U.S. citizen in 1991. At trial, he testified that he 
had been a paid informant for the CIA. CJA is joined by Carolyn Patty Blum, Clinical Professor of Law,Emeritus, at U.C. Berkeley Boalt Hall School of Law and pro bono co-counsel Bass, Berry and Sims PLCon the case.El SalvadorSELECTED ACCOMPLISHMENTS 2007-2008It is estimated that over 75,000 civilians were killed by government 
and paramilitary forces during the Salvadoran civil war; thousands ofothers were tortured, raped and suffered other abuses.
910Historic Testimony of Survivors of the Mayan Genocide Before the 
Spanish National Court: The Guatemala Genocide Case
Many developments have occurred over the past eighteen months that have changed the face of the
litigation. In our last report, we explained that international arrest warrants and extradition requestshad been issued by Spanish Judge Pedraz for former President Efraín Ríos Montt and five other highranking military and police officials responsible for the genocide of indigenous communities inGuatemala. The arrest warrants had been accepted by the Guatemala Constitutional Court and extradition proceedings were initiated. 
Then, unexpectedly, in December 2007 the Guatemalan high court reversed itself and held that the
arrest warrants and extradition requests were invalid. As a result, Judge Pedraz issued an internationalcall to invite witnesses to travel to Madrid to present evidence on the genocide. CJA had previouslyreceived permission from the court to bring 40 individual witnesses to testify in Spain in three separate groups. After the judge's call, many more witnesses, including Rigoberta Menchú, traveled to Madrid to give evidence.
As lead counsel, CJA organized two delegations of witnesses. The first group testified in January 2008
and included fifteen survivors and three experts. The presentation of the testimony was an historicmoment for the Mayan survivors as it represented the first time a national court had allowed them topresent evidence of the campaign of torture, rape and killing perpetrated against their communities.Because of the refusal of Guatemalan courts to prosecute those responsible for the genocide, theGuatemalan Genocide Case has become a critical avenue of justice for these survivors.
While most of the witnesses’ identities were kept confidential due to security concerns, two CJA clients testified publicly: Jesus Tecú Osorio, survivor of the Rio Negro massacre and winner of theReebok Human Rights Award, and Juan Manuel Jeronimo, survivor of the Plan de Sanchez massacre.The second group testified in May 2008 and included five survivors and anthropologists Ricardo Falla Sanchez, Charles Hale and Beatriz Manz.
The historic testimony of the survivors was made possible through the unique, transnational 
collaboration among members of the CJA-led legal team. In addition to CJA, members of the international legal team include CJA pro bono co-counsel Ollé & Sesé, LLP , the Association for Human Rights in Spain and U.C. Hastings College of the Law, as well as the Harvard Human RightsProgram, the National Security Archive, Impunity Watch, the Rigoberta Menchú Tum Foundation and lawyers from the Center for Human Rights Legal Action, who helped prepare the testimony of the Mayan survivors and assisted with security and logistics.GuatemalaSELECTED ACCOMPLISHMENTS 2007-200811Proving That Atrocities Were 
Authorized at the Highest Levels: The Guatemala Evidence Project 
In May 2007, CJA and our partners at the
National Security Ar
chive and the Myrna
Mack Foundation received support from the Open Society Institute to fundtwo researchers to analyze military andpolice command structures in Guatemaladuring the Guatemalan civil war. In addition to the Guatemala GenocideCase in Spain, a number of other 
accountability efforts will benefit from the project. The final report, which wehope to release next year, will be availableto human rights attorneys working ongenocide cases pending in Guatemalan,Spanish and Belgian courts and in theInter-American Court on Human Rights.Naomi Roht-Arriaza, Professor of Law at University of California, HastingsCollege of the Law is leading this effort.Background
In 2004, CJA joined a criminal complaint filed in 
1999 by Nobel Laureate Rigoberta Menchú Tum andothers charging former President Efraín Ríos Monttand other senior Guatemalan officials with state terrorism, genocide and systematic torture. The case is modeled on the Pinochet case – also brought in Spain – in which courts recognized universal jurisdiction over certain human rights crimes. In2006, a new legal team led by CJA began workingwith attorneys from Guatemala, the Netherlands,Spain and the U.S. to develop evidence on theMayan genocide.
According to the UN-sponsored Commission on
Historical Clarification, over 200,000 people werekilled or disappeared between 1960 and 1996 inGuatemala. During the worst period of violence in1982 – 1983, the army and its counterinsurgencyforce began a systematic campaign of repressionagainst the Mayan indigenous community. The armyand its paramilitary teams attacked and destroyedan estimated 440 Mayan villages. This two year period became known as the “Silent Holocaust.”12CJA Victory Leads to Historic Recovery for Massacre Survivors in Haiti: 
Jean v. Dorelien
2007 saw victories in parallel cases in state and federal court against Colonel Carl Dorélien, a 
former member of the Haitian Military’s High Command who had command responsibility for humanrights violations committed against civilians during the 1991-1994 dictatorship in Haiti. Dorélien fled to the U.S. after the collapse of the dictatorship along with many other members of the Haitian military. His presence in the U.S. became widely known after he won $3.2 million in the 1997 Floridastate lottery.
The Federal Court CaseIn February 2007, a Miami jury found Dorélien liable for torture, extrajudicial killing, arbitrary 
detention and crimes against humanity suffered by plaintiffs Lexiuste Cajuste, Marie Jeanne Jean and her two young children. Dorélien was ordered to pay $4.3 million in damages. Testimony at trial included an eyewitness to the violent 1991 coup d’état who watched as soldiers indiscriminatelyshot into crowds of innocent people protesting in the streets. CJA client Lexiuste Cajuste took thestand and courageously detailed the viciousness of the torture he endured. Cajuste was targeted by Haitian military forces under Dorélien’s command because of his role as a union organizer and pro-democracy activist.
CJA client Marie Jeanne Jean also testified about how her husband, Michel Pierre, was forced to 
run into the sea to escape the soldiers’ guns. Three days later, she watched as a member of the paramilitary dragged Pierre’s body ashore by rope. Pierre was killed during a massacre by the Haitianmilitary against the citizens of the Raboteau neighborhood in the seaside city of Gonaives. The caserepresents the first time that a U.S. jury has held a former member of the Haitian military responsiblefor the widespread human rights abuses that were committed against the civilian population. 
The State Court CaseSimultaneous with the federal court case, CJA filed a state court case against Dorélien in 2003 in 
an effort to recover his remaining lottery winnings. We finally prevailed in late 2007. As a result, inJanuary and April 2008, $580,000 was distributed to our clients, Lexiuste Cajuste, Marie Jeanne Jeanand her children. Cajuste is using a portion of the recovery to help fund The Hope Center for HaitianRefugees, an organization he founded to provide social services to Haitian refugees. Jean divided her share among the other 90 survivors of the Raboteau massacre. In May 2008, over $400,000 wasdistributed to the Raboteau victims at a community meeting in Gonaives, Haiti. The timing of this distribution was particularly significant in the context of the 2008 Haitian food crisis.HaitiSELECTED ACCOMPLISHMENTS 2007-2008Background
The Raboteau Massacre was a joint military/paramilitary attack on a pro-democracy neighborhood 
carried out on April 22, 1994. The victims started fighting for justice the next day when they filed complaints in Haiti with a local judge. CJA partner, Bureau des Avocats Internationaux (BAI), later filedcomplaints against senior military and paramilitary leaders and brought the case to a successful 6-week trial in Haitian courts in 2000. The Haitian trial resulted in the conviction of Dorélien and 52 other soldiers and death squad members as well as a large damage award. The enforcement of thisjudgment in Florida state court eventually led to the recovery of Dorélien’s $580,000 in lottery assets.
Working closely with the BAI, CJA filed the U.S. state and federal cases against Dorélien in January
2003. Holland & Knight LLP were co-counsel on both cases and attorney John Thornton provided additional assistance with the state court action. In transferring the recovery to the Raboteau survivors, CJA worked closely with Mario Joseph of the BAI; Brian Concannon of the Institute for Justice and Democracy in Haiti; reparation experts; and Haiti’s largest community bank, Fonkoze. 
With the historic distribution of $580,000 
to Haitian torture and massacre survivors, CJA crossed the one million dollar mark in assets recovered for our clients.
13
14War Crimes and Crimes Against Humanity Suits Filed Against Peruvian Officers: 
Ochoa Lizarbe v. Hurtado and Ochoa Lizarbe v. Rivera Rondon
In July 2007, CJA and pro bono co-counsel Morgan Lewis & Bockius LLP filed two lawsuits on behalf 
of plaintiffs who survived the infamous Accomarca Massacre in Peru. The defendants, Telmo HurtadoHurtado and Juan Rivera Rondón, are former Peruvian military officers who resided in the U.S. During the 1985 massacre, Rivera Rondón’s troops blocked a nearby escape route while Hurtado andhis soldiers went house to house, forcibly removing villagers from their homes. The soldiers attackedand raped many of the women in the community. The troops forced scores of people, including severalpregnant women and elderly residents, into two buildings. Hurtado then ordered his troops to openfire on the buildings. At the end of the day, 69 civilians were killed by the military.
The cases were filed in Miami, Florida and Greenbelt, Maryland. These are the first human rights cases
to be filed in the U.S. for atrocities committed against the Peruvian civilian population during the 1980-2000 internal conflict. The defendants were charged with extrajudicial killing, torture,war crimes and crimes against humanity. The plaintiffs, Teófila Ochoa Lizarbe and Cirila PulidoBaldeón, were 12 years old at the time and survived by hiding from the soldiers. While she managed toescape, Ochoa Lizarbe’s mother, sister, and four brothers were killed. Pulido Baldeón’s mother andbrother were also murdered by the soldiers. 
Massacre Commander Ordered to Pay $37 Million to SurvivorsIn March 2008, after a default verdict, a federal district court judge ordered Hurtado to pay $37 million
in damages. This marks the first time that anyone has been held to account for atrocities committed inconnection with the Accomarca Massacre.
The award was based on evidence presented during a February 2008 trial on damages. Our clients
gave emotional and courageous testimony about how Hurtado and his men murdered their familiesand neighbors before their eyes. They also testified about their on-going struggle to heal after such adevastating loss. Two expert witnesses, Eduardo Gonzalez of the International Center for TransitionalJustice and one of the authors of the Peruvian Truth Commission Report, and former Peruvian SenatorJavier Diez Canseco, also testified. 
In its opinion, the district court stated, “Mr. Hurtado said he was following orders to capture and
destroy the enemy, and justified the killing of children and infants by explaining that the young would be indoctrinated by the […] Shining Path. Significantly, Mr. Hurtado expressed no remorse for his actions.”PERUSELECTED ACCOMPLISHMENTS 2007-2008Background
The Accomarca Massacre was committed on August 14, 1985, during the 1980-2000 internal conflict
between the government of Peru and insurgent groups, including Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path).
During the conflict, the Peruvian Army and other government forces were responsible for widespreadand systematic human rights abuses against the civilian population; over 26,259 civilians died or disappeared in the area surrounding Accomarca. 
15CJA secured a 
$37 million judgmentagainst Peruvian MajorTelmo Hurtado Hurtado on behalf of clients Cirila Pulido Baldeón and Teófila Ochoa Lizarbe (left), survivors of the 1985 AccomarcaMassacre. The judgmentmarked the first time that anyone had been held to account for the massacre.
16CJA Appeals District Court Ruling on Immunity for Ex-Officials:
Yousuf v. Samantar
CJA continues to litigate the first ever attempt at accountability for human rights abuses in Somalia.
Our case, Yousuf v. Samantar, arises from the brutal internal conflict that took place under the military
regime of General Siad Barré. In the 1980s, Barré’s army brought the full force of the state’s warmachine against the civilian population of Northern Somalia. The military subjected the region to awidespread campaign of killing, arbitrary detention, sexual violence and torture which culminated inthe 1988 aerial bombing of Hargeysa. An estimated 40,000 people were killed in the attack, while over400,000 Somali refugees fled to Ethiopia. 
In 2007-2008, CJA responded to a major challenge in our effort to secure redress for Somali survivors.
In April, a federal district court judge in Virginia dismissed our human rights case against GeneralMohamed Ali Samantar, Minister of Defense under General Barré, on Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act (FSIA) grounds. 
CJA and pro bono co-counsel Cooley Godward appealed the dismissal to the Fourth Circuit Court 
of Appeals. In our briefs we argued that Congress never intended to immunize former government officials who commit torture and extrajudicial killing. CJA also coordinated the filing of two amicusbriefs. One was prepared by the International Human Rights Clinic at Harvard Law School and submitted on behalf of a diverse group of organizations providing health and social services to torture survivors. A second brief, focusing on congressional intent, was prepared by the Human Rights Clinic at the University of Virginia School of Law and was signed by Congresswoman SheilaJackson Lee among others. Briefing was completed in July 2008. We are optimistic that we will prevail in the appeal and will have more to report on Yousuf in early 2009. 
Background
In 2004, CJA and pro bono counsel Cooley Godward Kronish LLP filed a lawsuit in federal court in
Virginia against Somali General Ali Samantar. As Somali Defense Minister from 1980 to 1986 and Prime Minister from 1987 to 1990, Samantar was responsible for widespread atrocities committed by forces under his command. Since 1997, he has lived with impunity at his home in Fairfax County,Virginia, just miles from nation’s capitol.
We represent five plaintiffs in the Yousuf case: Bashe Abdi Yousuf, a young business man detained,
tortured and kept in solitary confinement for over six years; Aziz Mohamed Deria, whose father 
and brother were abducted by officials and never seen again; John Doe I, whose two brothers weresummarily executed by soldiers; Jane Doe, a university student detained by officials, raped 15 times,and put in solitary confinement for over three years; and John Doe II, who was imprisoned for his clanaffiliation and shot by a firing squad, but miraculously survived by hiding under a pile of bodies. SOMALIASELECTED ACCOMPLISHMENTS 2007-2008CJA’s U.S.-based litigation against
Somali military commanders represents the first ever attempt at accountability for human rightsabuses committed in Somalia.
17
18CJA authors or signs onto “friend of the court” briefs in human rights cases
filed with appellate courts and the U.S. Supreme Court. Highlights from the January 2007 - June 2008 period include the following:
Guantánamo Bay
Rasul v. Rumsfeld. In January 2007, 
CJA Board member William Aceves authored an amicus brief signed by CJA and other human rights organizations and law professors and submitted to theD.C. Circuit Court of Appeals. The briefargued that torture is a violation of international law and cannot be consideredan “official” government action; therefore a torturer cannot claim sovereign immunity.Rasul v. Rumsfeld was filed by CJA partner,
the Center for Constitutional Rights, onbehalf of four British former Guantánamodetainees against former Secretary ofDefense Donald Rumsfeld and military leaders in the chain of command responsiblefor the plaintiffs’ arbitrary detention as wellas for the torture and physical, psychological and religious abuses perpetrated againstthem during their two years of detention without charge at Guantánamo.  
Immunity
Belhas v. Ya’alon. On August 31, 2007, CJA authored and submitted a brief to the D.C. Circuit Court 
of Appeals on behalf of the plaintiff appellants whose claims were dismissed on immunity grounds.The brief argued that the district court's application of the Foreign Sovereign Immunity Act (FSIA) contradicts congressional intent for the Torture Victim Protection Act (TVPA) to provide redress against former foreign government officials responsible for torture and extrajudicial killing who seeksafe haven in the U.S. The brief also argued that the district court's decision to dismiss the case onimmunity grounds unjustifiably narrows the application of the TVPA and would deny many survivors of torture and other severe human rights violations access to the courts.
Matar v. Dichter. On September 27, 2007, CJA authored and submitted a brief to the Second Circuit
Court of Appeals on behalf of CJA, Heartland Alliance for Human Needs and Human Rights, the
Institute for Redress and Recovery and Survivors International. The brief argues that the district courtin Matar erred when it also dismissed the TVPA claims based on the FSIA. As with the brief in Belhas,
CJA's brief argued that Congress clearly intended that the TVPA applies to former government officialsaccused of human rights violations such as torture or extrajudicial killing.AMICUS BRIEFS
CJA’s outreach and education program mobilizes torture survivors to speak publicly in order to 
personalize the international debate on torture and to empower other survivors to seek justice. Our attorneys, clients and expert partners conduct extensive public education on human rights issues in the U.S. and around the world.  
Our staff and clients participated in outreach events in the U.S., Guatemala, Honduras, the
Netherlands, Peru and Spain in 2007 and the first half of 2008. The audiences included governmentofficials, refugee groups, religious organizations, psychologists and medical professionals, as well aslaw, college and high school students and the general public.  OUTREACH AND EDUCATION
20CJA works on a variety of U.S. human rights legislative and policy efforts. We focus particular attention
on supporting policy initiatives that advance the U.S. government's commitment to criminally prosecute human rights abusers. Today, the vast majority of human rights enforcement efforts in the U.S. are removals and related prosecutions for lying on immigration applications. We strongly support efforts to reorient enforcement policy to make the criminal prosecution of human rightsabusers a priority. CJA also encourages a focus on prosecutions of high-level officials who wereresponsible for setting policy in their own country and have sought refuge in the U.S. In order toachieve real deterrence, military and government officials must perceive that they may be held individually accountable, not just for committing abuses, but for their failure to take reasonable action to stop others under their command from committing abuses.
On the legislative side, we support the expansion of the current human rights statutory framework 
to include abuses such as extrajudicial killing and crimes against humanity. We also strongly push for the inclusion of the "command responsibility" doctrine into all human rights laws. Commandresponsibility is a well-established theory of liability which covers military officers or civilian superiorswho knew or should have known about abuses taking place under their command and failed to takesteps to stop the abuses or punish the offenders.
Highlights of our legislative and policy work over the past 18 months include the following:"From Nuremberg to Darfur: Accountability for Crimes Against Humanity"
U.S. Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Human Rights & the Law, June 24, 2008CJA submitted testimony before this Senate Judiciary subcommittee hearing on crimes against humanity. We summarized the gaps in the current criminal human rights statutory framework and theimportance of enacting crimes against humanity legislation for survivor communities and for futureprosecution of perpetrators. The testimony also reviewed instances where crimes against humanitycharges have been used successfully in the U.S. civil context against human rights abusers from Chile, Haiti and Peru.
"No Safe Haven: Accountability for Human Rights Violators."
U.S. Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Human Rights & the Law, November 14, 2007CJA client Dr. Juan Romagoza Arce and Executive Director Pamela Merchant testified before this Senate
Judiciary Subcommittee hearing which examined what could be done on the level of 
policy, legislation and enforcement to hold human rights abusers who have settled in
the U.S. accountable. The testimony focused on the failure of the government to
deport those with command responsibility for abuses and highlighted the fact
that the generals responsible for Dr. Romagoza Arce’s torture remain in the U.S. The next week, Senators Richard Durbin (D-IL) and Tom Coburn (R-OK) sent a request to Attorney General Mukasey and Department of HomelandSecurity Secretary Michael Chertoff asking them to review the prosecution
and/or deportation of Generals Garcia and Vides Casanova. As a result of the
Senators’ letters, we have responded to numerous requests from the government
for evidence against the generals and are hopeful that action soon will be taken
against them. U.S. HUMAN RIGHTS POLICY AND LEGAL REFORM21Honduras
Human Rights Training for Prosecutors In December 2007, CJA completed its first human rights training program, Prosecuting Human Rights Crimes in National Courts, which was held in December 2007 in Tegucigalpa, Honduras. 
The training brought together 80 Honduran prosecutors with a faculty of 
legal practitioners from Latin America, Spain and the U.S. with experience andexpertise in the prosecution of human rights abusers. The faculty includedsuch luminaries as Eduardo Freiler, Judge of the Argentine Federal Court ofAppeals and one of the lead prosecutors of abuses committed during the"dirty war," and Sergio Muñoz, President of the Supreme Court of Chile and a lead prosecutor of Pinochet-era abuses. 
The goal of the three-day training was to advance the ability of Honduran
prosecutors to take legal action against those responsible for human rightsviolations, particularly the forced disappearances that occurred in the early1980s. To do this, the faculty provided the participants with specific legalstrategies used by prosecutors, judges and attorneys for non-governmentalagencies in the national courts of Argentina, Chile, Peru, Spain and the U.S. 
The program was historic on many levels and represented the first time that 
prosecutors in Honduras were trained in international law and human rights prosecutions. The training program was widely covered by the print and broadcast media in Honduras. 
Peru
Trial Support for the Prosecution of Former Peruvian President Alberto Fujimori The groundbreaking human rights trial against former Peruvian President Alberto Fujimori began inDecember 2007 in Lima. During Fujimori’s tenure (1992-2000), Peru suffered a dramatic increase inhuman rights violations. In developing our two Peru cases (see Selected Accomplishments, Page 14),CJA worked closely with a number of human rights groups in Peru including the Association for Human Rights in Peru, one of the driving forces behind the Fujimori prosecution. CJA has entered into a co-counsel agreement with the Peruvian prosecution team and has provided assistance in litigation strategy and witness preparation.
Assisting in the First Census of the Disappeared
CJA serves as a senior advisor to the Peruvian Institute of Forensic Anthropology (EPAF). EPAF conducts exhumations and investigations of massacres and forced disappearances as well as otherhuman rights abuses. EPAF’s findings have been crucial to the criminal investigations ongoing in Peru and the cases before the Inter-American Court for Human Rights. EPAF has provided importantevidence on the Accomarca massacre to CJA for our Peru litigation.“The Honduran
Government has 
not done enough to prosecute thoseresponsible for human rights abuses.This training by CJA is a first step tochange that fact.” 
– Honduran Attorney
General Leonidas RosaBautista speaking atCJA’s December 2007human rights training.HUMAN RIGHTS TRAININGS AND 
TRANSITIONAL JUSTICE SUPORTThe Judith Lee Stronach Human Rights Award and CJA’s Annual Dinner
The Judith Lee Stronach Human Rights Award was created in 2007 to be given annually to an 
individual or organization that has made an outstanding contribution to the movement for global justice. The award is presented at CJA’s Annual Dinner in San Francisco. 
The inspiration for this award is Judith Lee Stronach (1943-2002), a committed human rights activist
who was instrumental in the founding of CJA. CJA was originally conceived as a project of Amnesty
International USA. The transition to an independent organization was made possible through a generous gift from the Judith Stronach Fund for Non-Violent Social Change. Judith’s insights on the therapeutic effect of seeking redress on torture survivors helped shape CJA’s original mission.Judith believed deeply in the transcendent value of the humanity of all persons.
Judith supported a wide variety of human rights causes and wrote often of her opposition to torture
and other human rights abuses. She was also prescient in recognizing the role that the arrest ofGeneral Pinochet in London would have in challenging the culture of impunity in Chile and healing a society. CJA's work continues to benefit from her vision and spirit, as well as the ongoing supportand friendship of her husband, Raymond Lifchez.
2007 Stronach Awardee Paul Hoffman is a founding member of CJA's board and a long time
member of our Legal Advisory Council. He is one of this country’s leading human and civilrights attorneys and argued for the plaintiff in Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain, the U.S. Supreme
Court case which upheld the right of survivors to bring international human rights claims inU.S. courts. Paul is a partner with Schonbrun DeSimone Seplow Harris & Hoffman LLP .
2008 Stronach Awardee Harold Hongju Koh is Dean of the Yale Law School and former
Assistant Secretary of State for Democracy, Human Rights and Labor. Dean Koh is a leading
expert on international law and a prominent advocate of human and civil rights. He has been an outspoken critic of the Bush Administration's policies on the legality of torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment and the applicability of theGeneva Conventions to alleged combatants held in U.S. custody.
Honoring CJA’s In-Country Partners
The success of CJA’s cases is reliant on strong collaboration with in-countrypartners working on the frontlines to challenge, investigate and demandaccountability for human rights abuses. We hosted two very special partners at our 2007 and 2008 annual dinners. 
In 2007, Nobel Peace Prize Laureate and former Guatemala Presidential candidate Rigoberta Menchú Tum spoke passionately about her collaboration with CJA on the
landmark Guatemala Genocide Case before the Spanish National Court. 
In 2008, Francisco Soberón Garrido, founder of the Association for Human Rights 
in Peru, spoke about his partnership with CJA on cases against former Peruvian military officers in the U.S. and on the prosecution of former Peruvian presidentAlberto Fujimori for human rights abuses.
Paul Hoffman
Harold Hongju Koh
Francisco 
Soberón GarridoAWARDS
22Rigoberta 
Menchú Tum23CJA Receives The Third Annual Thomas J. Dodd Prize 
in International Justice and Human Rights
On October 1, 2007, CJA received the Third Thomas J. Dodd Prize in International Justice and Human
Rights. The Dodd Prize is awarded biennially by the Thomas J. Dodd Research Center at the Universityof Connecticut to an individual or group who has made a significant effort to advance the cause ofinternational justice and global human rights. The award was established in 2003 to commemorate the distinguished public service career of Thomas J. Dodd, who served as Executive Trial Counsel atthe Nuremberg Trials. 
The Dodd Prize has been given twice before in 2003 and 2005. The 2005 winners were Justice Louise
Arbour, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and Justice Richard J. Goldstone, retiredJustice of the Constitutional Court of South Africa. In 2003, the honorees were Taoiseach Bertie Ahern,Prime Minister of Ireland, and Tony Blair, former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. CJA was proudto share the award with Mental Disability Rights International. 
This award represents a coming of age for CJA. After a series of groundbreaking human rights legal 
victories, CJA's model of pursuing justice for survivors of international human rights abuses in U.S.and Spanish courts is gaining wider acknowledgement. CJA was nominated for the prize byAmbassador Robert E. White, our longtime friend and expert witness in our El Salvador cases.
Senator Christopher Dodd presents CJA Executive Director Pamela Merchant with 
the Thomas J. Dodd Prize in International Justice and Human Rights, October 2007.  24PARTNERS AND SUPPORTERS
Pro Bono Law Firms
Bass Berry & Sims PLC
Jennifer Eberle
David EsquivelSteve JasperMatt SinbackMeredith Thompson
Beveridge & Diamond PC
Nicholas van Aelstyn
Cooley Godward Kronish LLP
Maureen Alger
Zmarak KhanTara LeeLisa MacDonaldBonnie NelsonMichelle RasmussenRafael Sanchez Sherron ThomasMike TraynorRobert Vieth
Heller Ehrman LLP
Russell Cohen
Deborah Croyle
Hogan & Hartson LLP
Audrey Haroz Reed
Holland & Knight LLP
Dwayne Williams
Morgan Lewis & Bockius LLP
Timothy G. Ackermann
Jennifer S. AcunaJennifer A. BowenMark N. BravinRobert M. BrochinM. Michael ColeAndrea J. FitanidesMarisa FortunatiSonia R. GioseffiChristina K. HarperElham KayvaniAlexis Reisen MillerTuan N. NguyenThomas J. O’BrienMark A. SapirieAmanda D. SmithMark A. SrereDonald P . SullivanRobert B. WigginsWade W. Wilson
Ollé & Sese LLP
Eva Gimbernat
Manuel Ollé SeseOrrick Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP
Rene A. Kathawala
Eileen O’Connor
Patton Boggs LLP
Joseph Brand
Denise Vanison
Sonnenschein Nath & Rosenthal LLP
Ivor Samson
Jessica Woelfel
Private Investigators
The Mintz Group
Staci Dresher 
Lecia KaslofskyJames Mintz 
Trial Support & Presentation
The Focal Point LLC
Organizational Support
Brett Critchlow
Juice Designs
Peter Grace
Accountant
Gooby Herms
IT and design
Jennifer Kemp
The Kemp Group
Martin Tannenbaum
Tannenbaum Associates
25Law School Clinic Partners
International Human Rights Clinic, 
U.C. Berkeley Boalt Hall School of Law
Laurel Fletcher, Director
Roxanna Altholz, Associate Director
International Human Rights Clinic, 
Human Rights Program, Harvard Law School
James Cavallaro, Executive Director
Tyler Giannini, Clinical DirectorNate Ela, Clinical Litigation FellowThomas DaviesFernando DelgadoMatt PeraultDeborah Alejandra PopowskiSarah SorscherClaret VargasJoy Y. Wang
Refugee & Human Rights Clinic, 
U.C. Hastings College of the Law
Karen Musalo, Director
Naomi Roht-Arriaza, Faculty Advisor
Kim Thuy Seelinger, Clinical Teaching Fellow
Blaine M. BookeyMichael Ho
International Human Rights Law Clinic, 
University of Virginia School of Law
Deena Hurwitz, Director
Germaine S. Dunn
Kerry M. Shapleigh
Allard K. Lowenstein International 
Human Rights Law Clinic, Yale Law School
James Silk, Director
Jessica M. KarbowskiAshley Ridgway LynnBidish Sarma
Inter-American Center for Human Rights, 
Nova Southeastern University
James Wilets, Chair
Dominique MiniaciLegal Interns 
Kristen Berg
New York University School of Law
Josh Friedman
U.C. Hastings College of the Law
Vicky Hartanto
U.C. Berkeley Boalt Hall School of Law
Kyle Lakin
Stanford Law School
Lena Masri
Indiana University School of Law
Jaime Mira
University of San Francisco School of Law
Zoë Polk
U.C. Hastings College of the Law
Amy Schuller
Morgan Lewis & Bockius LLP
Jackie Shull-Gonzalez
Morgan Lewis & Bockius LLP
Jetaun Stephens
Santa Clara University School of Law
Client Support
Lucia Agudelo
Ana Deutsch
Program for Torture Victims 
Non-Legal Interns 
Elizabeth BlackwellMaria DeGaetanoMollie JaverbaumDrew StrausCarlos Vasquez
26PARTNERS AND SUPPORTERS
Partners
Académie de droit International Humanitaire et de 
Droits Humains à Genève (Switzerland)
www.adh-geneva.ch
American Friends Service Committee 
www.afsc.org
Amnesty International 
www.amnesty.org
Asociación Bufete Jurídico Popular (Guatemala)
Asociación Pro Derechos Humanos (Peru)
www.aprodeh.org.pe 
Asociación Pro Derechos Humanos de España (Spain)
www.apdhe.org
Boston Center for Refugee Health and Human Rights 
www.bcrhhr.org
Bureau Des Avocats Internationaux (Haiti) 
www.ijdh.org/bureau.htm
Center for Constitutional Rights 
www.ccr-ny.org
Centro para la Acción Legal en Derechos Humanos 
(Guatemala) 
www.caldh.org
Corporación Colectivo de Abogados (Colombia)
www.colectivodeabogados.org
Comisión Colombiana de Juristas (Colombia) 
www.coljuristas.org/inicio.htm
Comite de Apoyo al Tibet (Spain) 
www.tibetcat.com
Comité de Familiares de Detenidos 
Desaparecidos en Honduras (Honduras) www.cofadeh.org 
Corporación de Promoción y Defensa 
de los Derechos (Chile) www.codepu.cl
Dejusticia (Colombia) 
www.dejusticia.org 
Earthrights International 
www.earthrights.org
East Bay Sanctuary Covenant 
www.eastbaysanctuary.org
El Rescate 
www.elrescate.org
Equipo de Estudios Comunitarios y Acción 
Psicosocial (Guatemala) www.ecapguatemala.org
Escola de Cultura de Pau (Spain) 
www.escolapau.orgFédération Internationale des Ligues des Droits 
de I’Homme (France) www.fidh.org
Dolly Filártiga
Florida Center for Survivors of Torture 
www.gcjfs.org/fcst
Fondasyon Kole Zepol (Haiti) 
www.fonkoze.org
Fundación Democracia sin Fronteras (Honduras) 
www.fdsf.hn
Fundación Nueva Esperanza (Guatemala) 
www.fne.cosmosmaya.info
Fundación Rigoberta Menchú Tum (Guatemala)
www.frmt.org
Global Lawyers and Physicians 
www.glphr.org
Horn of Africa Human Rights Watch Committee 
(Somalia) 
Human Rights First 
www.humanrightsfirst.org
Human Rights Watch 
www.hrw.org
Instituto de Derechos Humanos de la 
Universidad CentroAmericana “Jose Simeón Cañas” 
(El Salvador) www.uca.edu.sv/publica/idhuca
Impunity Watch (The Netherlands) 
www.impunitywatch.net
International Center for Transitional Justice 
www.ictj.org
International Forum for Truth and Justice in Africa 
of the Great Lakes Region 
Institute for Justice and Democracy in Haiti
www.ijdh.org
Institute for Redress and Recovery, 
Santa Clara University School of Law www.scu.edu/law/redress
International Rights Advocates 
www.iradvocates.org
International Rivers Network 
www.irn.org
Interights (United Kingdom) 
www.interights.org
The Marjorie Kovler Center for the 
Treatment of Survivors of Torturewww.heartlandalliance.org/kovler27Maryknoll Office for Global Concerns 
www.maryknollogc.org
Minnesota Advocates for Human Rights 
www.mnadvocates.org
Movimiento Nacional de Víctimas de Crímenes 
de Estado (Colombia)
www.movimientodevictimas.org
Muslim Public Affairs Council 
www.mpac.org
Myrna Mack Foundation (Guatemala) 
www.myrnamack.org.gt
The National Security Archive 
www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv
Office of the Attorney General (Honduras) 
Sister Dianna OrtizProgram for Survivors of Torture and Severe Trauma, 
Northern Virginia Family Service 
www.nvfs.org
Program for Torture Victims 
www.ptvla.org
Redress (United Kingdom) 
www.redress.org
Rocky Mountain Survivors Center 
www.rmscdenver.org
SafetyNet Project for Trafficked and Enslaved Persons, 
Cambridge Health Alliance
The Shalom Center 
www.shalomctr.org
Spanish Embassy, Guatemala City (Guatemala)
Survivors International 
www.survivorsintl.org
Survivors of Torture, International 
www.notorture.org
Torture Abolition and Survivors Support 
Coalition International 
www.tassc.org
Tainos (Haiti) 
Leo Valladares, Former Honduran National 
Commissioner for Human Rights (Honduras)
Women’s Link Worldwide (Spain) 
www.womenslinkworldwide.org
31Operating Revenue and Expenses
January 1, 2007 – June 30, 2008
**CJA partners with outside attorneys, law firms and investigative support firms to litigate cases 
on behalf of its clients. The pro bono firms donate the time of their attorneys and staff in 
addition to paying out of pocket expenses associated with investigations and litigation. During the January 1, 2007 to June 30, 2008 period, seven firms made contributions of $134,528 to cover out of pocket expenses. In addition, sixteen firms provided over 7,021 hours of pro bono services valued at $3,051,526. CJA calculated the value of donated services using the hourly rates provided by the firms.  
The total donated pro bono services for the January 1, 2007 to June 30, 2008 period was $3,186,054.
All donated services are recognized as both revenue and expense and, therefore, do not affect theunrestricted net assets of CJA.Foundation Grants
UN Voluntary Fund for Victims of TortureGuatemala Evidence ProjectIndividual and Corporate ContributionsIn-Kind Contributions**Investment IncomeOther
TOTAL OPERATING REVENUES
*Audited figures for January 1, 2007 - June 30, 2008. 
An audited financial statement is available upon request.Operating Revenues
$762,149 
125,000
49,827 
314,577 
3,186,054
72,944
2,511
$4,513,062
Pro Bono Fees and Expenses**
ProgramGeneral and AdministrationFundraising
TOTAL OPERATING EXPENSESOperating Expenses
$3,186,054 
791,703
149,628 
194,539 
$4,321,924FINANCIALS32Board of Directors 
William Aceves, Secretary, 2007-08
California Western School of Law
Chester Atkins, Chair 2008
ADS Ventures, Inc., Former Member of U.S. Congress  
William Belding, Treasurer 2008
Association of Small Foundations
Joseph Brand, Chair 2007  
Patton Boggs LLP
Maryam Elahi
Open Society Institute
Gerald Gray, Founder
Institute for Redress & Recovery
Richard Leigh, Treasurer 2007
Retired Credit Union CEO
Eileen O’Connor
Orrick Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP
Jane Rocamora
Harvard Immigration & Refugee Clinic at GBLS
Ralph Steinhardt
George Washington University Law School
Beth Stephens
Rutgers School of Law - Camden 
Nico van Aelstyn
Beveridge & Diamond PC
Denise Vanison
Patton Boggs LLC
Legal Advisory Council
Carolyn Patty Blum, Senior Legal Advisor
UC Berkeley Boalt Hall School of Law
Carlos Castresana Fernández, 
International Commission 
Against Impunity in Guatemala
Sarah Cleveland 
Columbia Law School
Sandra Coliver 
Open Society Justice Initiative
Benjamin Cuellar
University of Central America, El Salvador
James Eisenbrandt
Berkowitz Oliver Williams Shaw & Eisenbrandt LLP
Jennifer Green
Center for Constitutional Rights
Paul Hoffman
Schonbrun DeSimone Seplow Harris & Hoffman LLP
Naomi Roht-Arriaza
UC Hastings College of the Law
Steven Schneebaum
Greenberg Traurig LLP
Amanda Smith
Morgan Lewis & Bockius LLP
Beth Van Schaack 
University of Santa Clara School of LawBay Area Leadership Council
Lena Ayoub-VanLeeuwen
Law Office of Lena Ayoub-VanLeeuwen
Jeffrey Bleich
Munger Tolles & Olson LLP
Russell Cohen
Orrick Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP
Chiméne Keitner
UC Hastings College of the Law
David Lowe
Rudy Exelrod & Zieff LLP
Paul Renne
Cooley Godward Kronish LLP
Frank Russo
California Progress Report
Amitai Schwartz
Law Offices of Amitai Schwartz
Michael Traynor
Cooley Godward Kronish LLP
Hon. Rebecca Westerfield (Ret.)
JAMS
Douglas Young
Farella Braun & Martel LLP
Staff
Neshemah Beanez-BlackwellOperations Coordinator
Almudena Bernabeu
International Attorney
Elizabeth Chertoff 
Development & Outreach Associate
Matt Eisenbrandt
Legal Director
Moira Feeney 
Staff Attorney 
Chris McKenna
Development & Outreach Director
Pamela Merchant
Executive Director
Special thanks to the following for their service
on the CJA Development Committee:
Lena Ayoub-VanLeeuwen
Mana Lewis Sean McCormickFrank Russo Martin TannenbaumBOARD,LEGAL ADVISORY COUNCILAND LEADERSHIP COUNCILPhoto Credits
cover: zoriah/zoriah.com
page 1: zoriah/zoriah.compage 2: Peter Bakkerpage 4: Rusty Stewartpage 9: zoriah/zoriah.compage 11: Rai Poquizpage 13: Dana Shepardpage 15: South Florida Sun-Sentinelpage 17: Joe McKaypage 18: Shane T. McCoy/ Department of Defensepage 19: zoriah/zoriah.compage 23: The Thomas J. Dodd Research Center, University of Connecticutpage 24: zoriah/zoriah.compage 25: Joe McKaypage 27 (top – bottom): Peter Bakker, Peter Bakker, Neil Liddle, Peter Bakker, Peter Bakker
CJA Board and Staff, 2008
Back row (left to right): Denise Vanison, Joseph Brand, Richard Leigh, Chester Atkins, Ralph Steinhardt, William Aceves
Middle row: Beth Stephens, Gerald Gray, Neshemah Beanez-Blackwell, Jane Rocamora, Almudena BernabeuFront row: Chris McKenna, Pamela Merchant, Elizabeth Chertoff, Moira FeeneyThe Center for Justice and Accountability
870 Market Street, Suite 688
San Francisco, CA 94102
(415) 544-0444
www.cja.org
graphic design by JPD Communications LLC