 
Equal Justice Initiative
EJI is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization.
122 Commerce Street
Montgomery, Alabama 36104
334-269-1803
www.eji.org
ALL CHILDREN ARE CHILDREN
Challenging Abusive Punishment of Juveniles
© 2017 by Equal Justice Initiative. All rights reserved. 
The Equal Justice Initiative (EJI) is a private, 
nonprofit human rights organization. EJI 
helps the poor, the incarcerated, the condemned, and children. Our work with children is focused on 
providing legal assistance to juveniles condemned to 
die in prison; challenging the placement of  youth in 
adult jails and prisons, where they face an elevated 
risk of  assault and sexual violence; and challenging the prosecution of  very young children as adults.
In the last several years, EJI has won several reforms that 
aid children caught in the American criminal justice 
system. As this report outlines, more work remains. 
EJI currently is seeking to end the adult prosecution of  
any child under age 14; to end the placement of any 
juvenile under age 18 in an adult jail or prison; and 
to abolish life imprisonment without parole and other excessive sentences imposed on children.
Please visit us at www.eji.org to learn more about 
how you can help end excessive punishment and eliminate cruel treatment of children in the adult criminal justice system.
Cover Photo by Richard Ross Photo by Steve Liss 1 2 
Children under the age of  14 are protected in virtually every area of
the law, except when it comes to the criminal justice system. Over
the last 25 years, very young children have been prosecuted as adults
in increasing numbers and subjected to very harsh adult sentences.
Prosecuting underage children as adults is not only incompatible with
the capabilities of  young children, but also traumatizing, abusive,
cruel, and unusual.
Young children are developmentally incapable of  exercising the 
judgment, maturity, and knowledge necessary to competently defend 
themselves against criminal prosecution in adult court. The U.S.  
Supreme Court has developed clear guidelines for insuring that adults  
are competent before they are subjected to criminal prosecution,  
but courts have not developed rules that address the unique character-istics of  children, leaving child defendants vulnerable and at great risk  
in adult court.
UNDERAGE PROSECUTION  
OF CHILDREN
Consistent with what adolescent development experts have  
taught us and with what teachers, parents, and child advocates 
appreciate, young children cannot be prosecuted fairly as adults. 
The practice of  prosecuting children under the age of  14 as  
adults should be eliminated.
Photo by Steve Liss 3 4Children as young as eight have been prosecuted as adults. Some 
states set the minimum age at 10, 12, or 13. EJI believes that the 
adult prosecution of  any child under age 14 for any crime should 
be banned.Thirteen states in the United States have no 
minimum age for trying children as adults.
Photo by Steve Liss Photo by Richard Ross 5 6STATES WITH NO MINIMUM  
AGE FOR ADULT PROSECUTIONAlaska  
Delaware 
FloridaHawaii IdahoMaine Maryland MichiganPennsylvania Rhode Island South CarolinaTennesseeWest Virgina
Photo by Richard Ross 8 7Some 95,000 children are housed in adult 
jails and prisons in America each year. 
Unquestionably, jailing children with adults 
needlessly puts young people at great risk. 
Children are five times more likely to be 
sexually assaulted in adult prisons than in 
juvenile facilities.
Children are much more likely to commit 
suicide after being housed in an adult 
jail or prison than incarcerated adults or 
children incarcerated in juvenile facilities. 
Youth in adult facilities get little to no access 
to age-appropriate services like school, 
mental health, and in-person family visits.
As thousands of  children have been 
transferred to adult courts for criminal 
IMPRISONING CHILDREN WITH ADULTS
At the age of 13, Joe 
Sullivan was arrested and 
prosecuted as an adult.  
He was convicted and initially sentenced to die  
in prison.After arriving at an adult prison in Florida,  
he was repeatedly subjected to sexual 
violence and assaults. By the age of  27, he 
began showing signs of  multiple sclerosis 
that experts believe was in part induced by 
trauma and abuse he suffered in prison.  
Now 37, he is confined to a wheelchair. EJI recently won a reduced sentence for Joe and  
is now providing him with support services.prosecution, growing numbers of them have been automatically placed 
in adult jails and prisons. Many states 
strictly prohibit placing children in adult 
jails or prisons. But a majority of  states 
still permit the practice and thousands of  
young people have been assaulted, raped, 
and traumatized as a result.
Every state in the country maintains 
juvenile facilities or could segregate 
juveniles from adults, but many refuse  
to do so. 
Prison confinement of  children with 
adults is indefensible, cruel, and unusual, and it should be banned.
Photo by Glenn PaulChildren are housed in adult  
jails and prisons each yearMore likely to be sexually  
assaulted in adult prisons95,000 5x
9 10Unlike adults with mental illness, children have very limited 
experience managing their disabilities, anxieties, fears, 
and trauma. They often act impulsively, recklessly, and 
irresponsibly. In an adult jail or prison, this behavior 
results in more aggressive punishment, which can worsen  
a child’s mental health problems.Many children prosecuted as adults 
suffer from untreated mental illness.
Photo by Steve Liss 11 12Shortly after her arrival at the adult 
women’s prison in Muncy, Pennsylvania, 
she was raped by a male guard and 
became pregnant. After she delivered 
the child, the baby was taken from her 
and she became increasingly mentally ill. The officer who raped her was never criminally prosecuted. At 50, Trina 
suffers from multiple sclerosis and uses a wheelchair. EJI is currently 
challenging Trina’s sentence.At the age of 14, Trina Garnett was arrested and 
prosecuted as an adult. She was convicted and 
sentenced to life imprisonment without parole.
After Ian turned himself  in, his attorney 
told him to plead guilty and he would 
be sentenced to 15 years. Ian accepted 
responsibility and pleaded guilty but was 
sentenced to life imprisonment without 
parole. His lawyer never appealed or 
withdrew the plea. When he arrived at 
prison processing in Central Florida, he 
was so small that no prison uniform fit him. Within months, Ian was sent to 
one of  the toughest adult prisons in the state, where because of  his size and age he 
was placed in solitary confinement. He remained there for 18 years. He has lived 
most of  his life in a closet-size concrete 
box, getting his food through a slot in the 
door, never seeing another inmate, with 
only limited reading materials. Isolation 
led him to repeatedly attempt suicide.  
EJI recently won Ian’s release from 
prison and he is now in our specialized 
re-entry program.Ian Manuel was 13 when older teens directed  
him to commit a robbery, during which a woman  
suffered a nonfatal gunshot wound.
Photo by Juan Castañeda / Human Pictures13 14For more than 20 years, EJI has challenged excessive 
punishments imposed on children, including the death penalty, life imprisonment without parole, and “virtual life” sentences that deny children any meaningful  
opportunity for release.
EXCESSIVE PUNISHMENT OF CHILDREN
Fourteen-year-old George Stinney was  
arrested in Clarendon County, South Carolina, 
on March 23, 1944. 
An all-white jury convicted him of 
murdering two white girls after a one-
day trial. Just 81 days later, the 5-foot-
1-inch, 95- pound boy was executed 
in the electric chair. The adult-sized face mask slipped off, revealing  
his wide-open, tearful eyes and saliva coming from his mouth. He 
was the youngest person executed  
in the U.S. in the 20th century. 
EJI has represented dozens of 
children facing execution in Alabama, which had the nation’s 
highest death-sentencing rate for 
juveniles. Children continued  
to be sentenced to death and executed in the United States until 
2005, when the Supreme Court 
finally banned the execution of  
juveniles in Roper v. Simmons.
15 16In 2005, the U.S. Supreme Court declared 
in Roper v. Simmons that death by exec-
ution is unconstitutional for juveniles. 
Before the ruling, 365 children had been 
legally executed in the United States, 
including 22 since 1985.
The Court’s ban on juvenile executions 
allowed EJI to focus on the plight of 
nearly 3000 children age 17 or younger 
who had been sentenced to imprisonment 
until death through life-without-parole 
sentences imposed with very little scrutiny 
or review. Children as young as 13 were 
among the thousands condemned to die  
in prison. 
Most of  the sentences imposed on these 
children were mandatory: the court could 
ROPER V. SIMMONS, 2005not give any consideration to the 
child’s age or life history. Some of  the 
children were charged with crimes 
that do not involve homicide or even 
injury; many were convicted for 
offenses where older teens or adults 
were primarily responsible for the 
crime; 70% of  condemned kids 14 or 
younger are children of  color. 
EJI believes that such a harsh 
sentence imposed on children is 
cruel and unusual in violation of  
the Eighth Amendment to the U.S. 
Constitution. In 2006, we launched a litigation campaign to challenge 
death-in-prison sentences imposed 
on children.
(Right)  In Florida, a 15-year-old boy is sentenced 
to life imprisonment without parole and runs to 
his mother in court. 
Photo by Bob Self/Florida Times-Union 17 18In November 2009, EJI attorneys went to the U.S. Supreme 
Court and argued for a constitutional ban on imposing death-
in-prison sentences on children.
On May 17, 2010, the Court issued a groundbreaking 
ruling in Graham v. Florida declaring that life-without-  
parole sentences could no longer be imposed on juveniles convicted of  non-homicide offenses.
GRAHAM v. FLORIDA, 2010
Joshua Carter spent 49 years in the Louisiana 
State Penitentiary, one of the nation’s most  
dangerous prisons, for a nonhomicide offense  
he allegedly committed as a teenager.  
EJI took his case after the Graham  decision, and in December 
2010, he became the first person released under Graham . Blind 
from untreated cataracts at age 66,  Mr. Carter walked out of  prison 
in time to spend Christmas with his seven brothers and sisters and 90-year-old mother.
EJI’s Bryan Stevenson argued Sullivan v. 
Florida , the companion case to Graham .
19 20The Court’s decision in  Graham  recognized that children are different 
from adults in several ways that directly impact the appropriate punish-
ment for juvenile offenses. The Court wrote:
International law prohibits sentencing children to death in prison. The
United States is the only country in the world that sentences juveniles
to life in prison without parole.
Since 2010, EJI has provided legal assistance to scores of  people 
who were condemned to die in prison and won the release of 
dozens who were sentenced to life imprisonment without parole when they were children.Juveniles are more capable of  change than adults, and their actions are less likely to be evidence 
of  ‘irretrievably depraved character’ than are the 
actions of  adults. It remains true that ‘[f]rom a moral standpoint it would be misguided to equate 
the failings of  a minor with those of  an adult, for 
a greater possibility exists that a minor’s character deficiencies will be reformed.“
”
Robert Caston was sentenced in die in prison for an 
assault when he was just 17 years old. He was sent 
to work in the fields of Louisiana’s infamous Angola 
prison plantation under brutal conditions.
He was extremely vulnerable in adult 
prison, constantly faced with threats 
of  rape, murder, and sexual slavery. 
In 1986, he lost four fingers on his 
right hand in a prison work accident 
but continued to learn carpentry, 
baking, and air conditioner repair. He 
maintained an impeccable conductrecord: he was a Class A Trusty for  
the last 25 years prior to his release; obtained his GED; and completed classes in anger management, HIV/AIDS 
education, refereeing and umpiring, and 
sports statistics. Even the prosecutors 
assigned to his case were impressed  
with his rehabilitation. After Graham , 
EJI filed a motion to challenge Mr. 
Caston’s sentence, and just three days before his 64th birthday, won  
his release.
21 22As part of  our ongoing litigation campaign 
to end life imprisonment without parole 
for children in all cases, EJI asked the 
U.S. Supreme Court to review two cases 
in which 14-year-old children had been 
sentenced to die in prison after being 
convicted of  homicide crimes.
In November 2011, the Supreme Court 
granted review in both cases, Miller v. 
Alabama  and Jackson v. Hobbs.
MILLER V. ALABAMA, 2012Evan Miller and Kuntrell Jackson were 
among hundreds of  children convicted 
of  tragic crimes and condemned to die 
in prison by judges who were required 
to impose life-imprisonment-without-
parole sentences without considering 
the child’s age or circumstances, even 
though most of  the kids facing these 
harsh sentences had suffered extreme abuse, neglect, and trauma.
(Right)  Two 14-year-old boys in Michigan are 
sentenced to life imprisonment without parole in 
2009. Seventy percent of children 14 or younger 
sentenced to life imprisonment without parole 
are children of color.
AP Photo 23 24Evan Miller  suffered physical and emotional 
abuse so severe that he tried to hang himself 
at age five. On the night of  the crime, a man 
gave 14-year-old Evan and an older boy drugs 
and alcohol. When the man grabbed Evan, 
the boys hit him with a bat and set a fire in the 
trailer. The man died of  smoke inhalation. Evan 
was sentenced to die in prison in Alabama 
without any consideration of  his age or the 
abuse he suffered throughout his short life.Kuntrell Jackson  was convicted of  murder after 
his older cousin and friend shot a video store 
clerk during a robbery attempt. He received 
a mandatory sentence to die in prison in 
Arkansas even though he never possessed 
the weapon, he was not the shooter, and 
his involvement in the robbery was limited.
In March 2012, EJI lawyers argued at the Supreme Court that 
sentencing kids to life in prison without parole is cruel and 
unusual punishment that violates the Eighth Amendment to the 
U.S. Constitution, relying on the Court's recognition in Roper v. 
Simmons and Graham v. Florida that children’s unique immaturity, impulsiveness, vulnerability, and capacity for redemption and 
rehabilitation are not crime-specific.
25 26On June 25, 2012, the Supreme Court 
issued an historic ruling in Miller v. 
Alabama  and Jackson v. Hobbs holding  
that mandatory life-without-parole sentences for all children 17 or younger convicted 
of  homicide are unconstitutional. Kuntrell 
Jackson and Evan Miller were granted  
new sentencing hearings. The ruling will 
affect hundreds of  individuals whose 
sentencers did not take their age or other 
mitigating factors into account, including 
13-year-old Joseph Jones in North Carolina 
(below) and 14-year-old Ashley Jones in 
Alabama (opposite). 
The Court did not ban all juvenile life-
without-parole sentences, but wrote that requiring sentencers to consider “children’s 
diminished culpability, and heightened 
capacity for change” should make such sentences “uncommon.”
On January 25, 2016, the United States 
Supreme Court decided in Montgomery v. 
Louisiana  that states must retroactively 
apply the ban on mandatory death-in-prison sentences for juveniles. The Court explained: 
“Before  Miller , every juvenile convicted of  
a homicide offense could be sentenced to life without parole. After Miller , it will be 
the rare juvenile offender who can receive that same sentence.”
Photo by Gigi Cohen 27 28 Photo by Birmingham NewsTHANK YOU.
Photo by Steve LissThere is still much work to be done to protect children in an era 
when extreme and excessive punishments have become a serious threat 
to basic human rights in the United States. EJI is committed to challenging 
abusive treatment of  children in the criminal justice system. 
For videos, reports, and additional information about our work  
on behalf  of  children, please visit our website at www.eji.org. EJI is a 
501(c)(3) organization that depends on individual donations. We  
are honored and energized when others stand with us, and we are  
grateful for your support.
(Clockwise from top left)  EJI attorneys Alicia D’Addario and John Dalton 
prepare for oral argument; law fellow Jennifer Williams with EJI client Willie 
Leason, who was released after more than 50 years in Louisiana’s notorious 
Angola prison for a nonhomicide offense as a teenager; and, EJI Director 
Bryan Stevenson with Kuntrell Jackson, who was released in 2017 after EJI 
successfully challenged his death-in-prison sentence at the Supreme Court.
30 29 
Equal Justice Initiative
EJI is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization.
122 Commerce Street
Montgomery, Alabama 36104
334-269-1803
www.eji.org
ALL CHILDREN ARE CHILDREN
Challenging Abusive Punishment of Juveniles
© 2017 by Equal Justice Initiative. All rights reserved.