Annual Report
Our Mission
The Center for Constitutional Rights is a 
non-profit legal and educational organization 
dedicated to advancing and protecting the rights 
guaranteed by the United States Constitution 
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 
Founded in 1966 by attorneys who represented 
civil rights movements in the South, 
CCR is committed to the creative use of law 
as a positive force for social change .Letter from the Executive Director  2
Letter from the President 4
International Human Rights 6
Military Contractors in Iraq 8
Guantánamo Global Justice Initiative 10
Racial, Gender and Economic Justice 12
Accountability for Torture 16
Rendition and Ghost Detentions 18
Government Abuse of Power 20
Attacks on Dissent 22
Letter from the Legal Director 24
CCR Case Index 25
The Case for Prosecutions  32
Internships and Fellowships 34
In the News 35
100 Days Campaign 36
Get Involved 37
2009 President’s Reception 38
Friends and Allies 39
CCR Donors 44
Board of Directors and Staff 60
Financial Report 62
In Memoriam 63CCR Annual Report 20092In November 2008, we witnessed an  
extraordinary and historic event in the election 
of Barack Hussein Obama. This year also saw 
Sonia Sotomayor join the Supreme Court, the 
first Latina and only the third woman to sit on  
that bench. These important milestones in the struggle for racial and gender equality are cause 
for celebration, reflection and remembrance of the 
many people who have fought alongside us – even 
in the darkest days – but were not with us to see these achievements. Now we must take time to 
assess the landscape before us. What do these 
momentous events portend for our work to  
create positive social change? More specifically,  
will current leadership aid our work in dismantling the national security state?
In thinking about these questions, we would do  
well to remember what Shirley Chisholm, the first 
Black woman to be elected to congress, taught us 
40 years ago, “[t]hat I am a national figure because  
I was the first person in 192 years to be at once a 
congressman [sic], black and a woman proves,  
I think, that our society is not yet either just or free.” 
Even as we celebrate the change in complexion  
of some of our government’s leaders, we must  
be prepared for the often vicious backlash from  
the right that is sure to follow. We must push  
aggressively and uncompromisingly beyond the 
status quo and toward the change we want to see  
in our society and the world.
As the new administration gets down to work, we see a pronounced chasm between the values 
Obama extolled on the campaign trail and the  
policies that he is putting into place as president. 
And CCR has called him out on it. We launched 
our 100 Days Campaign to help focus the national debate on issues including indefinite detention, 
torture, the repression of dissent, and illegal wire -
tapping. The campaign culminated in our report card on President Obama’s lackluster work in these 
areas. As a result, the nation now sees what we see:  that in more ways than not, Obama has adopted 
the Bush plan in virtually all of these areas. CCR has 
also led, and will continue to lead, the national fight for accountability for Bush-era war crimes, bringing 
home to the United States the push for a criminal 
investigation that we took to Europe through our universal jurisdiction litigation several years ago. 
Importantly, our work attracted the attention of the 
president himself. For the first time in our history, 
the Center was invited to the White House to meet 
with the President of the United States. I was very clear with him that he was on the wrong track and that, like it or not, history will assess the Obama  
administration, at least in part, on the extent to which it renounces the illegal Bush-era detention and civil liberties policies, brings the U.S. in line 
with international law, and holds those responsible 
for illegalities accountable through a meaningful criminal investigation. 
President Obama starts negotiating from the middle 
and has shown an instinct to move to the right at 
Letter from the Executive Director 
3the first sign of pressure. The right, for its part, is breathing 
new life into the pernicious tactics that were its stock in trade  
in the South during the 1960’s when CCR was founded.  
They have found footing by fomenting racism to effectively mobilize angry, hysterical opposition against even the most 
tepid administration policies. The Supreme Court under John 
Roberts has the singular mission of closing the courthouse doors to cases that advance and defend the rights of the  
people in this country. Last year, our allies lost all First Amendment cases, all environmental cases and 8 out of  
13 employment discrimination cases before that Court.  
Congress has yet to even dip its toe into the pool of leader -
ship on the issues that are so important to us, even while significantly undercutting President Obama on his pledge  
to close Guantánamo. Indeed, one MSNBC commentator noted that there are only 90 people in the entire United  
States that are afraid to house detainees in U.S. facilities 
when Guantánamo closes, and all of them are in the Senate. 
So, even if President Obama and Justice Sotomayor were 
bold social justice visionaries, they would, like us, be faced 
with overwhelming opposition from all branches of govern -
ment. But it is clear that they are not such visionaries and 
it remains to be seen whether they will live the values we 
ascribe to them through their offices. CCR must continue to push. This shouldn’t be surprising to anyone, but may be 
gravely disappointing to many. We must remember that the 
road to a just and free society is a long one and fraught with severe challenges. For every extraordinary victory that CCR achieves, there are a thousand losses. For every loss, there are ten thousand stories of injustice that have yet to be told. It 
is our role to keep pushing for justice no matter who is in the 
seat of power.
CCR’s mission, forged 43 years ago in the fires of the civil 
rights movement, is simply to fight – and fight hard – for justice, and to defend and expand the rights enshrined in the 
U.S. Constitution and the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights. When those rights are curtailed by government or corporations, we defend those rights. When the government 
or corporations violate those rights, we put the government 
and corporations on trial. 
For years we have fought the illegal expansion of executive 
power to detain and spy on people. As we move forward, we will focus our efforts on dismantling the national security 
state erected by George W. Bush and maintained by Barack 
Obama. Our strategies on Guantánamo and related issues will continue to shift as the policy debate does. We will also 
focus on the root causes of much of the injustice in our soci -
ety through a focus on the expansion of social and economic 
rights so people can live and thrive in decency. CCR will 
remain steadfast in our work to create meaningful change in 
policy and practice, justice for the victims, and accountability for those who are responsible. 
Vincent WarrenLetter from the Executive Director4The first few months of the Obama 
administration have proven how 
difficult it is to make change and 
restore the fundamental rights that 
were trampled on by the Bush administration. 
Our 100 Days Campaign called on Obama 
to restore key constitutional rights within the first 100 days of his administration. Our list 
of necessary changes included:  the closing 
of Guantánamo and ending of the preventive detention scheme it embodies; an end to mili -
tary commissions; ending the torture program and accountability for its architects; limitations on the assertions by the government of state 
secrets used as a weapon to dismiss lawsuits 
seeking accountability; a reigning in of domes -
tic warrantless wiretapping of U.S. citizens; the 
stopping of renditions; and an end to the use 
of signing statements.
While there has been progress in some areas, 
the majority of Bush policies on these issues have been adopted by the new administration. 
While we hope Guantánamo will be closed as 
a physical location, the preventive detention scheme underlying it will apparently become 
part of our legal landscape. Amazingly, military 
commissions to try alleged terrorists are back up and running under procedures that will make conviction easier than in regular courts. That is why such commissions are unaccept -
able; writing the rules subsequent to the crime is anathema to the rule of law. The torture program appears to be more or less at an end, 
but accountability for its architects has been 
taken off the table. Without such a reckoning there is no assurance that another president 
will not revive the program, but there is every 
assurance that other countries will feel free to follow our infamous example.
Despite promises to the contrary, invoking 
state secrets is still employed by the adminis -
tration to hide embarrassing or illegal conduct including the torture program, to subvert justice for the victims and to prevent account -
ability in lawsuits against government officials. Nor has there been any change in the war -
rantless wiretapping practices of the Bush 
administration. 
Obama is continuing the rendition program— 
simply repeating Bush administration assur -
ances that we would not render someone to a 
country that tortures. CCR believes that  
renditions should never be employed. The 
forcible abduction of a person always involves force and violence, as was recently illustrated 
Letter from the President 
5by the first post-Obama case to come to light.  
President Obama, to our surprise, has continued  
the practice of signing statements which are an 
unwarranted assertion of executive power over congressional authority.
This is not to say that we expected change to be 
easy. We understood the political limitations of a 
somewhat split electorate and the resistance that the 
right wing and institutions such as the CIA would have to any efforts to reform and hold accountable 
those responsible for the disastrous last eight years. 
Even the mildest of measures taken by the Obama administration are viciously attacked as if those  
efforts would inevitably open the country to terrorist 
violence. The recent backlash against the adminis -
tration for daring to open a limited criminal investiga -
tion of CIA agents provides a good example of the difficulty of what we have set out to accomplish.
Despite the antediluvian screaming by the  
right wing, CCR and many others believe it is absolutely necessary for those who formulated and implemented the torture program to be held accountable. We have made a major effort to do so 
and to push the administration into appointing a  
special prosecutor with a broad mandate to inves -
tigate the torture program all the way to the top. 
From the earliest days of the Bush administration, 
CCR has sought accountability, whether through our FOIA cases, our habeas corpus cases for the 
Guantánamo detainees, our civil cases on behalf of 
victims and survivors of torture, and our efforts in Europe at international prosecution of the torture 
conspirators. We have some faith that the courts, as 
they occasionally did during the Bush years, will turn back a very dark tide. With continued work and a 
lot more pressure, this administration can still do the 
right thing. So far the administration has fallen short.  
That means we must redouble our efforts.  
We are at an historic moment. The sinister policies 
and practices of the Bush administration must not 
become rooted in our society. We have only a brief 
opportunity to permanently undo the Bush legacy. That time is now. 
Michael Ratner6
Wiwa v. Shell
CCR celebrated a significant victory this year, 
obtaining a major settlement agreement in a  
series of cases on behalf of Nigerian environ -
mental activists suing Shell for human rights abuses in Nigeria. 
Royal Dutch Shell (Shell) has a long history of 
working closely with the Nigerian government 
to quell popular opposition to its presence in the 
Niger Delta region. At the request of Shell, and 
with Shell’s assistance and financing, Nigerian forces used deadly force and oppression  against the local Ogoni people to repress a growing movement against the oil company  
in the early 1990s.  In 1995, the “Ogoni 9”  
activists, including world-renowned writer Ken 
Saro-Wiwa, were given a sham trial and then 
hanged. CCR was determined to hold Shell  accountable for human rights violations against 
the Ogoni, and after 13 years of litigation, a trial 
date was set for 2009.
On the eve of trial, a public settlement was reached for $15.5 million. The settlement  
compensates the plaintiffs who were injured  
and whose family members were killed, and  
covers a portion of their legal fees and costs. It  
also establishes a $5 million trust to benefit the 
Ogoni people, including for education, health, 
community development, and women’s programs. 
Filed by CCR 13 years ago, and later joined by 
co-counsel and EarthRights International, these 
cases are among the first to charge a multina -
tional corporation with human rights violations. International Human RightsThis settlement demonstrates that multinational 
corporations can no longer act with the impunity 
they once enjoyed. 
The struggle for economic and environmental 
justice will need to continue, both in Nigeria and 
worldwide. This momentous victory helps to 
validate CCR’s long-held belief in fighting with 
creativity and persistence for our principles even 
when the odds may seem long and even when a successful conclusion may take decades to 
achieve.The Center for Constitutional Rights has always 
worked towards the strengthening of interna -
tional human rights and humanitarian law.  
Our work in this area has contributed to a  
dramatic reshaping of the role of international law in the United States and around the world. 
Wiwa  is just one of our many cases against former 
government officials and corporations that use in -
ternational legal principles in the struggle towards 
a more universal application of human rights and 
humanitarian standards around the world.
7Over 13 years after being  
indicted, Bosnian Serb leader  
Radovan Karadžic was arrested in July 2008 and is now in the custody of the 
International Criminal Tribunal for the 
former Yugoslavia. He is facing crimi -
nal prosecution for numerous crimes including genocide, war crimes, murder 
and inhumane treatment and torture, 
including physical and sexual violence 
committed against Bosnian Muslims, 
Bosnian Croats and other non-Serbs.
In 1993, CCR and co-counsel sued Karadžic for 
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity. 
Karadžic appeared in the case until defaulting in 
1997. In September 2000, a jury awarded a judg -
ment of $4.5 billion to victims and survivors of his 
brutal campaign of genocide and torture in Bosnia. 
Claims of sexual violence were central to the case, 
with the court citing rape as a form of genocide and 
torture. The judgment is still outstanding. CCR  
continues to pursue enforcement of the judgment.Doe v. Karadžic was the first time that  
a private person was held liable for  
violations of international law in  
U.S. courts under the Alien Tort  Statute (ATS), extending accountability 
for human rights violations to non-  
governmental entities, including  
corporations. The ATS, rediscovered  
by CCR in the landmark 1980 case,  
Filártiga v. Peña-Irala, allows foreigners to sue in U.S. courts for human rights 
violations committed anywhere in the world.  
The statute has become instrumental in holding 
foreign officials and corporations accountable to  
the public for human rights violations committed around the globe. 
This year, CCR litigated ATS cases against former 
government officials in Bolivia for attacks on civilian 
protesters and in Israel for a “targeted assassination” 
which killed 15 civilians, oil companies for human 
rights abuses in Africa, and military contractors for 
murder and torture in Iraq.  
Read more on CCR’s website at:   
www.CCRjustice.org/WiwaKaradžic Update
CCR and our allies launched an international campaign 
to highlight the issues in this case, including this cam -
paign website at: www.wiwavshell.org8
Cases Against Blackwater
Blackwater Worldwide is a U.S.-based private 
company that provides a range of services to U.S. 
agencies operating in Iraq and other locations – 
with over one billion dollars worth of government 
contracts ranging from providing security for U.S. 
officials, to aviation services, to, as reported in the NY Times , a covert CIA assassination program. 
CCR, working with lead co-counsel, has two 
cases against Blackwater (recently renamed Xe) 
and its founder Erik Prince for shooting Iraqi civilians in Al Watahba Square in Baghdad in September 2007 and, days later, killing 17 Iraqi civilians in Nisoor Square. Estate of Himoud Saed Abtan  
v. Prince, et al. and Estate of Ali Hussamaldeen  
Albazzaz v. Prince, et al. are on behalf of the  
families of those killed and injured in the attacks. The lawsuits allege Blackwater fostered a  
culture of lawlessness among its employees,  
encouraging them to act in the company’s  
financial interests at the expense of innocent human life; routinely deployed heavily armed shooters in urban streets knowing that some were abusing steroids or other judgment-altering drugs; and destroyed evidence of criminal acts.
The Obama administration has continued  
the use of private military contractors in Iraq,  
Afghanistan, and beyond. CCR’s challenges  
to the impunity of military contractors remain 
critical to acknowledging and redressing some  
of the serious harms done to Iraqis in the course of the U.S. occupation and moving U.S. policy 
back toward respecting the rule of law.Military Contractors in IraqIraqi and foreign mercenary members of a private  
security company stand on the rooftop of a house  
in Baghdad as a U.S. Blackhawk helicopter  
flies over.Torture in Prisons in Iraq
In 2004, the world’s attention turned to the 
torture and humiliation of Iraqi prisoners at Abu 
Ghraib prison in Iraq. The release of images 
documenting the horrific abuses led to the court-
martial of a few low-level U.S. soldiers. Relatively 
unexamined, however, is the role played by 
contractors from two U.S.-based corporations: 
L-3 Services (formerly Titan Corporation), and CACI International. Although Titan/L-3 and CACI 
employees were directly involved in the conspir -
acy to torture Iraqi detainees at Abu Ghraib, no employee of either company has been convicted of any offense. 
 
In 2004, the Center and co-counsel brought a 
lawsuit, Saleh v. Titan and CACI , on behalf of tor -
ture survivors from Abu Ghraib and their families, charging the companies with participating in a conspiracy that included rape and other acts of 
torture, and assault and killing of Iraqi detainees 
held at Abu Ghraib and other prisons in Iraq.  
This case is currently on appeal. 
In 2008, CCR and co-counsel filed five new cases 
against individual torturers and the two private contractors on behalf of new plaintiffs. These 
cases have been condensed into two lawsuits. 
Al-Shimari v. CACI International  is on behalf of four 
“hard site” victims of torture at Abu Ghraib prison. According to statements by co-conspirators, 
certain CACI employees directed some of the 
most egregious torture and abuse at Abu Ghraib.  Al-Quraishi v. Nakhla and L-3 Services, Inc. is on 
behalf of 72 Iraqi plaintiffs who were abused at 
more than 25 prisons in Iraq.  
 
L-3 and CACI claim immunity as government  
contractors and because these violations arise  
out of detentions in Iraq. CCR agues that torture  
is clearly against U.S. and international law and 
anyone who tortures, no matter who they are, 
must be held accountable. Survivors of torture at 
Abu Ghraib and other prisons in Iraq have waited 
long enough to have their day in court.
End Human Rights Abuse  
by Military Contractors
The U.S. government has increasingly been  
outsourcing functions previously carried out 
by government employees or members of the 
military to for-profit corporations. Today, there 
are more private military contractors than U.S. 
soldiers in both Iraq and Afghanistan.  
After the 2003 invasion of Iraq, dozens of  
private military companies were hired to  
support U.S. military and government  
operations there. These companies provide a 
vast array of services, ranging from personal 
security for Iraqi and American officials, to  
protecting oil facilities and providing armed 
escorts for “reconstruction” businesses. The 
contracts are worth billions of dollars. 
Titan/L-3 provided translation services for 
U.S. personnel at Iraqi prisons. CACI provided 
interrogation services, at one point supplying 
nearly half of the interrogators at Abu Ghraib. 
Employees from both corporations were part 
of the conspiracy to torture Iraqi detainees at 
Abu Ghraib and other prisons. Employees from 
another contractor, Blackwater Worldwide, 
opened fire on Iraqi civilians on at least two 
occasions, killing dozens of Iraqi civilians. CCR 
serves as co-counsel in lawsuits brought by 
Iraqis against all three of these companies.
The use of private contractors is growing  
dramatically, both domestically and abroad,  
in areas including: intelligence, homeland  
security, surveillance, policing and prisons.  
Hiring private contractors cannot be a route  
to impunity for illegal acts. Corporations and 
those who run them must be held accountable 
for human rights violations.CCR has factsheets with more  
information on these and other  
issues available at:  
www.CCRjustice.org/faqs
910
Since CCR brought the first lawsuit challenging the 
detentions at Guantánamo Bay over seven years 
ago, we have been responsible for organizing and 
coordinating more than 500 pro bono lawyers who represent the men still in detention, and have 
launched a major international effort to repatriate 
detainees needing asylum in safe third countries.
There are three categories of detainees at 
Guantánamo. The first and largest group is the people who should never have been picked up, 
and who could be sent home immediately. The second group are those who could be released, 
but who wait in limbo but because their home 
country routinely engages in torture or other 
abuses. The real work of closing Guantánamo will be the multilateral effort to find homes for 
these men: Guantánamo’s refugees. 
The third and smallest group – those with 
potential serious criminal charges – need to be 
charged in regular federal courts, which have proved able to efficiently and fairly try terrorism 
suspects over the last fifteen years. President Obama has failed to repudiate the 
irredeemably flawed military commissions  
system and spoke of a new preventive  
detention scheme that would only serve to move Guantánamo to a new location and give 
it a new name. Military commissions have one 
purpose: to allow evidence not admissible in real courts  – including hearsay, coerced  
statements and information resulting from torture – and must be abandoned completely. Preventive detention goes against every 
principle our nation was founded on. We have Guantánamo11courts and laws in place that cannot be simply 
disregarded when they are inconvenient. 
CCR continues to work on behalf of the men 
who have spent eight years in detention while 
our government wrestles to find the least  
embarrassing way to undo its mistakes.
In the wake of CCR’s and our allies’ Supreme 
Court victory last year in Boumediene , the mas -
sive effort of challenging detentions through 
the habeas  process continues in federal courtrooms. Included in this is the case of 13 
Uighurs, members of a Muslim ethnic group  
in China, who face certain persecution and tor -
ture if returned to China. After the government failed to defend the legality of their continued 
detention, a judge ordered them released into 
the U.S. last October. Yet, after a successful government appeal these men remain in deten -
tion and trial courts have interpreted the ruling to mean that even when these men win their habeas  cases, the court lacks the power to do 
anything more than order the government to make diplomatic efforts to release the men.
CCR plays a coordinating role in over 200 cases, 
as well as directly representing a number of  individuals on habeas  or civil lawsuits. (See our 
case index on page 25 for more details.) CCR  will continue to work on behalf of the detainees and to uphold constitutional principles until 
Guantánamo is closed and all of the men have 
been charged or safely released. It is time to bring an end to this sad episode in the history  
of human rights.
Uighur detainees show a protest sign to  
members of the media at Camp Iguana,  
Guantánamo.Within the walls of Guantánamo are approximately 
60 men who cannot return home for fear of torture or persecution or because they are stateless. The U.S. put these men in the double jeopardy of being forced to stay in the camp because there is no safe resettle -
ment option. Working with a coalition of habeas co-counsel and NGOs, the Center has instituted inter -
national advocacy efforts and is dedicated to ensuring that detainees are transferred out of Guantánamo 
safely and through a transparent process that must 
ensure that the men will not be sent into the hands of a torturous regime.
CCR retained a UK-based barrister to coordinate  
our European resettlement advocacy and has  
worked with United Nations Special Rapporteurs, 
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, the Council of Europe, the European Union, and European Parliamentarians to garner broader regional support for the resettlement of individuals.
While the U.S. created this human tragedy and legal 
travesty, it will take a global response to resolve it. Like many at Guantánamo, most of these abandoned detainees were wrongly detained in the first place, and present no threat to any country. The international community should join us in committing to finding safe havens. These men must not face the impossible choice of continued indefinite detention or forcible repatriation to torture or other abuses.Guantánamo’s Refugees
More information on Guantánamo’s 
refugees is available on our website at:
www.CCRjustice.org/refugees12
Policing and Prisons
Continuing CCR’s groundbreaking work on the 
Daniels  case which forced NYC to collect and turn 
over information on “stops,” CCR’s current police accountability work includes a class action lawsuit against the NYC Police Department (NYPD) for 
racial profiling and unconstitutional stop-and-
frisks.  Floyd v. City of New York represents 
hundreds of thousands of New Yorkers who have 
been stopped on the way to work, in front of their 
houses, or walking down the street without any cause, primarily because they were men of color. Floyd  attempts to fully enforce the consent 
decree issued in our landmark Daniels  case. CCR 
produced a report analyzing NYPD stop-and-frisk 
data obtained in the course of this litigation. The 
data revealed that police stops increased by more than 500% between 2002 and 2006, with Blacks 
and Latinos accounting for an overwhelming 
number of those stopped. The full report and the supporting data are available on our website.
In addition to the litigation, the Center has 
formed a Police Accountability and Transparency Project – working in partnership with commu -
nity-based groups in New York City to develop educational materials and accountability  
mechanisms to address all aspects of police  
misconduct, including training, supervision, oversight, and appropriate disciplinary  
measures. Improving policing in New York  
City can serve as a model for reforming police departments throughout the nation.
CCR remains active in the movement for police 
accountability, particularly as it relates to Racial, Gender and Economic Justiceimmigrants and young men of color. CCR sees  
a clear connection between our work to end  
the U.S. overseas torture program to the prob -
lem of domestic police abuse – including the  
use of private contractors, extended solitary 
confinement of prisoners, and other forms of 
torture and abuse – in communities and  
detention facilities within the United States. 
Targeting of Immigrants
In 2002, CCR filed Turkmen v. Ashcroft on behalf of non-citizen detainees who were rounded up and held for up to nine months on 
minor immigration violations in the post 9-11 
sweeps. While detained in New York and New Jersey, the men were subjected to restrictive 
confinement conditions with some suffering 
severe physical, verbal, or religious abuse. We are pursuing discovery as we await a decision on 
a cross-appeal.
In May, the Supreme Court issued a disap -
pointing decision in a similar case on behalf of 
former post-9/11 immigration detainees: Iqbal v. Ashcroft .  The decision severely limits plaintiffs’ 
abilities to sue high-level officials by requiring detailed factual allegations proving the official’s actions intended to discriminate against a group 
of people. This type of information about an 
official’s state of mind is difficult to prove and rarely available, even with full discovery. CCR 
had filed an amicus  brief in Iqbal on behalf or 
our clients in Turkmen.
Immigrant detention is the fastest growing  
form of detention in the United States. See  the case index beginning on page 25 of this 
report for information on CCR’s other cases 
defending non-citizens and challenging this disturbing trend.
Data released as part of CCR’s ongoing  
racial profiling case,  Floyd v. City of New  
York, shows that New York City Police  
Department’s stop-and-frisk practices are  
on the rise, with nearly 1,600,000 stops in  
the 3 1/2 years beginning in 2005. Over 80% 
of those stops targeted Blacks or Latinos  
while 11% were of Whites.  Racial Disparity in  
NYPD Stops-and-Frisks: 
CCR’s Preliminary Report,  
2005 through June 2008
3% Asian/Pacific Islander5% Other81% Black/Latino
11% White “We were deprived of our rights  
and abused simply because of our 
religion and the color of our skin.  
I am still waiting for justice more  
than six years later.” 
—Yasser Ebrahim, a client in Turkmen v. Ashcroft
13CCR’s full report and the  
supporting data is available at:
www.CCRjustice.org/stopandfrisk14
Employment Discrimination
The struggle for racial and gender equality  
must include achieving economic justice for 
women and racial minorities. CCR has a series 
of employment discrimination cases on behalf of women and minorities who are being unfairly 
excluded from, or marginalized in, the workplace. 
CCR has partnered with the Vulcan Society, the 
organization of Black firefighters in New York 
City, to take a stand against the discriminatory entrance exam used by the Fire Department of 
New York (FDNY). After our successful Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) 
filings, the U.S. Department of Justice decided to file a lawsuit against the city, charging that the 
test disproportionately disqualifies Black and 
Latino applicants in a way that does not relate to job skills. 
When the first EEOC charge was filed New York 
City’s fire department was 2.9 percent Black, in 
a city whose Black population is 27 percent. Five 
years later, those numbers had still not changed. The FDNY has by far the worst minority hiring  
record of any major city in America. CCR has joined the DOJ lawsuit, now called U.S.A.  
and Vulcan Society v. City of New York , and  
continues to work with the Vulcan Society  
towards increasing racial diversity in the FDNY.
Another challenge to discriminatory testing is 
CCR’s case on behalf of New York public school 
teachers of color. Gulino v. Board of Education represents teachers who were demoted for not 
passing a test – often losing licenses, seniority 
and having their salaries reduced drastically – yet still retained in the same teaching positions on a 
per diem basis. Racial, Gender and Economic Justice (continued)15
CCR is also defending the religious freedom  
and First Amendment rights of Sikh transit  
workers. Harrington v. MTA is on behalf of a  
subway motorman who was ordered by the  
Metropolitan Transit Authority of New York to 
either wear an MTA cap instead of his turban or 
choose a yard job out of sight of the public. 
Women’s Reproductive Rights
In March, CCR scored a major victory when a federal court ruled that the Food and Drug  
Administration (FDA) must reconsider its policies regarding the Morning-After Pill, often referred to by its brand name, Plan B . The agency must now 
make the Morning-After Pill available to women 
17 and older without a prescription and has to 
review the age and other restrictions currently placed on the drug through reconsideration of a 
“Citizen’s Petition” previously filed by numerous 
reproductive health organizations and advocates.
The case, Tummino v. Hamburg , charged that  
the FDA bowed to political pressure from the 
Bush administration when it imposed medically  
 unnecessary age restrictions on a drug that is  
safe and effective. The agency violated women’s constitutional rights to privacy and equal  
protection by unlawfully restricting access to 
contraception and discriminated against women, 
who are the exclusive users of Plan B.
CCR has been supporting the feminist movement 
and the struggle for women’s reproductive free -
dom since bringing the country’s first abortion 
rights cases in the 1960’s. Unrestricted access 
to the Morning-After Pill is an important step towards realizing women’s liberation through the 
ability to control the direction of their lives by 
choosing if, or when, to have children.Victory for Women’s  
Reproductive Freedom
CCR represents a group of feminist activists who 
challenged Food and Drug Administration (FDA) poli-cies regarding the Morning-After Pill (also known as “emergency contraception” or by the brand name Plan B). Decades of scientific research and testimony from women show that the Morning-After Pill is effective and safe as an over the counter self-medication. Restric-tions on access to the drug are motivated by anti-birth control politics and political pressure, not science.
Following legal and organizing pressure, the FDA had 
approved the switch of Plan B from prescription only to over-the-counter use in 2006, but only for women 18 and older. In practice, this meant that Plan B  could only be obtained from behind a pharmacy  
counter for women 18 and older, and only if they  show identification.
The lawsuit, Tummino v. Hamburg, asked the  
court to order the FDA to make Plan B available to women of all ages and without any behind-the-counter restrictions or identification requirements. In March, the court agreed that the FDA had put politics before women’s health when it limited access, ordering the agency to reconsider its decision and to extend over-the-counter access to 17-year-olds in the meantime. This is a major victory that expands reproductive rights and access to contraception for women all over the country.
CCR worked in support of the Center for Reproductive 
Rights on this case. The activist clients are  organizers with the Morning-After Pill Conspiracy.  For more information visit their website at  
www.nationalwomensliberation.org.
16
Since the first days of the public revelations 
regarding the Bush administration’s torture 
program, the Center for Constitutional Rights has 
made efforts to hold high level officials and their lawyers accountable for their crimes. 
European Cases:
When it became apparent that the Bush  
administration and Congress would not properly 
investigate and punish those responsible for  
serious violations of U.S. and international law, 
CCR and our co-counsel and allies in Europe launched criminal lawsuits in Europe under  
the principle of universal jurisdiction.  
CCR has now tried three times, twice in Germa -
ny and once in France, to bring criminal cases  
in Europe against former Defense Secretary 
Rumsfeld, former CIA director George Tenet, 
and former White House Counsel/former At -
torney General Alberto Gonzales as well as the 
other lawyers who were part of the conspiracy 
that authorized the torture program in Guantána -
mo, Iraq, secret CIA sites, and elsewhere. CCR also has torture cases pending in U.S. courts.
In one of the German cases, the prosecutor 
found that there was “no indication” that the 
U.S. would “refrain” from investigating these allegations, and dismissed the case. Our motion 
for reconsideration was denied.
Those who bear the greatest responsibility for 
the torture policy and practices employed by 
the United States must be held individually criminally responsible. (The center spread of Accountability for Torturethis report has more information on our work 
towards prosecutions in the U.S.) If the United 
States does not initiate a meaningful criminal  
investigation, then other venues must be  
pursued to ensure that justice is done.
When Healers Harm
This year, CCR expanded its accountability 
efforts to include government and contractor 
health professionals who have been involved  
in the torture program at both policy and  
operations levels. Despite the health professions’ universally 
recognized duty to do no harm, doctors and psychologists have played a key role in the U.S. 
government’s policy of torture in its  
overseas prisons. They crafted and justified 
torture tactics, inflicted pain, oversaw abuse 
and enabled, covered up and turned a blind eye 
to cruel treatment. CCR launched our “When Healers Harm” campaign as part of our efforts 
to hold accountable those most responsible for 
torture and abuse. 
Most torture regimes - even ones as old as the 
Holy Roman Empire and as notorious as the Nazi government during World War II - have 
relied on health professionals to facilitate tor -
ture. It is critical that we also explore the role of 
health professionals in our systems of injustice 
at home - since our mainland prisons are no 
strangers to abuse. Wherever torture and abuse occurs, it is time to hold accountable the healers 
who have harmed.
A Prosecution 
by Book
As part of our ongoing  
efforts to hold Bush  
administration officials criminally responsible for war crimes, CCR  released The Trial of  
Donald Rumsfeld: A  Prosecution by Book . 
Presented in the form of a 
court case brought by CCR, the book lays out the 
proof that high-level officials ordered, authorized, implemented, and permitted war crimes, in  
particular the crimes of torture and cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment in the name of fighting the “war on terror.”
The right of every human being to be free from  
torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment 
is universal and absolute. Under the laws of war, commission of such acts constitutes war crimes. War crimes and acts of torture are some of the most serious international crimes that exist. They are an attack on humanity as a whole, and it is in the interest of all that the authors of these crimes be prosecuted. For these reasons, international law provides that all states have an obligation to 
prosecute the alleged perpetrators of these crimes 
or turn them over to another state for prosecution.
This obligation applies regardless of the nationality 
of the perpetrator, the nationality of the victim, or  the place where the crime was committed, and  
applies regardless of the rank or political station of the perpetrator up to and including heads of state.This is the principle of universal jurisdiction.
- From The Trial of Donal Rumsfeld: A Prosecution by Book  
by Michael Ratner and the Center for Constitutional Rights
Read more on CCR’s website at:  
More information on CCR’s work to hold health professionals 
accountable for torture is available on the campaign website: www.whenhealersharm.org
17www.CCRjustice.org/trialofrumsfeld
18
Arar v. Ashcroft
In 2002, Maher Arar, a Syrian-born Canadian, 
was detained at JFK airport while changing 
planes on his way back to Canada. He was 
interrogated, detained for two weeks, denied his right to go to court, and sent to Syria where 
he was tortured and held in a grave-like cell for 
ten months. Mr. Arar was returned to Canada in 2003 and was eventually cleared of all allega -
tions by a Canadian government inquiry. He was never charged with any crime. Arar v. Ashcroft charges former Attorney General Ashcroft and other officials with violating Mr. Arar’s right to be free from torture and arbitrary detention as well as his right to have access to a court.  
 
The case was dismissed primarily on national  security grounds in 2006, and a majority of a 
three-judge Second Circuit Court of Appeals 
panel affirmed the dismissal on similar grounds. However, the full Second Circuit Court of Ap -
peals (twelve judges) reheard Mr. Arar’s appeal in December 2008. The argument was aired by C-SPAN and can be viewed on our website. Mr. Arar continues to speak out on behalf of human rights as he awaits the Court’s decision on whether this case can proceed. He remains on a “watch list” 
and is not allowed to enter the United States.
Ghost Detentions
CCR is participating in two Freedom of Informa -
tion Act (FOIA) lawsuits seeking records pertain -
ing to secret detentions, extraordinary rendition 
and torture. This information is critical to many of our civil cases and for exposing abuses committed 
under the guise of the so-called “war on terror.” Rendition and Ghost DetentionsGovernment-censored documents in the  
Arar Inquiry being released in Canada.19ACLU, CCR, et al. v. Department of Defense  
charges that government agencies illegally  
withheld records concerning the abuse of de -
tainees in American military custody. Amnesty 
International, CCR, et al. v. CIA, Department of 
Defense, et al. seeks information about “disap -
peared” detainees, including those at CIA ‘ghost’ 
sites, and has produced thousands of documents 
so far. These documents, even in their heavily 
redacted form, confirm the existence of secret prisons at Bagram (Afghanistan) and in Iraq; af -
firm the DOD’s cooperation with the CIA’s ghost detention program; and show the DOD delayed the release of cleared Guantánamo prisoners for 
a month and a half merely to avoid embarrassing 
press coverage.
It is clear this is only the tip of the iceberg and that 
most agencies have not complied with President Obama’s memo promising more transparency in 
government, including Freedom of Information 
Act (FOIA) requests. CCR will continue to work towards exposing these abuses and ending tor -
ture and illegal detentions wherever they occur.
Extraordinary Rendition
Extraordinary rendition is the forced transfer of a person 
from one country to another in order to hold that person with no legal oversight and to conduct interrogations 
under torture. Suspects are put on planes and secreted 
off to either a prison run by cooperative countries in the 
Middle East or Central Asia, or to one of the CIA’s own 
covert prisons, also called “black sites.” 
Since September 11, 2001, the Bush administration  
used extraordinary rendition to covertly transport an  
estimated 150 persons—and possibly more—for  
detention and interrogation as part of the so-called “war 
on terror.” Victims of extraordinary rendition are sent to 
countries where torture is routinely practiced on  
detainees. CCR represents rendition victims Maher  
Arar, who was sent to Syria where he was tortured and 
jailed for a year before being returned home to Canada, 
and Majid Khan, who was detained in secret for years 
before being transferred to Guantánamo Bay.
“This is who I am. I am a father and a  
husband. I am a telecommunications  
engineer and entrepreneur. I have  
never had trouble with the police, and  
have always been a good citizen. So I  
still cannot believe what has happened  
to me, and how my life and career have 
been destroyed.”  — Maher ArarFor more information on this case, including interviews with Maher Arar and video  
of the Court of Appeals argument, visit:  www.CCRjustice.org/ArarCCR and Witness Against Torture coordinated a rally and  
procession to the courthouse before the en banc Court of  
Appeals argument in Arar v. Ashcroft.20
Government Abuse of Power 
Illegal Surveillance
Since at least 2001, the U.S. Government has 
worked with major telecommunications compa -
nies in a massive program of illegal surveillance of individuals’ communications. The Center for Constitutional Rights is continuing our work to 
expose and challenge this program. 
Shortly after details of the program were 
released, CCR filed CCR v. Bush , charging that 
the program was illegal and seeking an injunc -
tion that would prohibit the government from conducting warrantless surveillance of com -
munications in the U.S. This case is still pending, 
although Congress has since passed legislation 
intended to legalize part of this program.
Wilner v. NSA is a Freedom of Information Act 
(FOIA) lawsuit demanding records of wiretapping 
of 16 attorneys who represent Guantánamo de -
tainees. The plaintiffs – who include CCR staff at -
torneys Gitanjali Gutierrez and Wells Dixon – may have been the subjects of the National Security Agency (NSA) warrantless wiretapping program.The agency is refusing to either confirm or deny the existence of any relevant materials, claiming that to do so “would reveal information about 
the NSA’s capabilities and activities.” It would 
be unconstitutional and illegal to eavesdrop  
on lawyers without a warrant, and FOIA  
exemptions cannot shield illegal conduct. The new administration has no legal basis for refusing to come clean about any violations of 
attorney-client privilege by the NSA.Challenging the “Material 
Support” Provisions 
The 1996 Anti-Terrorism and Effective Death 
Penalty Act made it a crime to provide “material 
support” to any organization designated by the 
U.S. State Department as a “Foreign Terrorist  Organization.” Expanded by the USA PATRIOT 
Act and an executive order by President Bush, 
these provisions violate the First Amendment and amount to guilt by association by criminal -
izing support that is intended to promote the lawful activities of a designated organization.Under these provisions it is a crime to provide 
support, including humanitarian aid, literature 
distribution and political advocacy, to any  
foreign entity that the government has  
designated as a “terrorist” group. CCR has been tackling these provisions in court for nearly ten years, with a series of cases on behalf of the 
Humanitarian Law Project, a Los Angeles-based 
non-profit that advocates for the peaceful reso -
lution of armed conflicts, and Tamil-American 
aid groups which sought to provide tsunami 
relief in areas of Sri Lanka that are controlled by a designated organization. The case is  
pending review at the Supreme Court under the consolidated case name: Holder v.  
Humanitarian Law Project . 
The Center for Constitutional Rights has always taken a stand when government oversteps its 
constitutionally defined boundaries and abuses 
its power. In an era that has been marked by a culture of secrecy paired with a dramatic 
increase in the reach of the executive branch, 
these challenges remain vitally important.
During its tenure, the Bush administration sought  
to centralize power in the executive in order to carry 
out its policies without oversight by any other branch of government. In the name of the “war on terror,”  the government spied on American citizens, tortured 
and abused detainees in Iraq, Afghanistan,  
Guantánamo and CIA “black sites” and carried out abuses of human rights around the globe in defiance of U.S. and international law. 
When these unconstitutional actions were  
challenged in court, the administration resorted  
more than any previous one to invoking the “state 
secrets privilege,” in attempts to prevent these  
challenges from ever being heard by a court of  
law.  This privilege allows the head of an executive 
department to refuse to produce evidence on the grounds it would harm national security or foreign relations interests if disclosed.
The Bush administration frequently invoked the  
privilege in order to dismiss cases altogether,  
attempting to use it to cover up government abuses 
and criminal activities and to block embarrassing disclosures. This abuse of the state secrets privilege undermines the very idea of an independent  
judiciary; contradicts the core idea of judicial review, in which independent judges make independent evaluations of all of the facts; and essentially allows the executive branch to dictate to the federal courts 
what cases they can and can’t hear. 
In addition to challenging NSA warrantless  
wiretapping, CCR v. Bush challenged the abuse  
of this doctrine by the Justice Department. In this case, which is fundamentally about Americans’  right to be free of unchecked government surveil -
lance, the government professed its own need for 
secrecy in order to block scrutiny of blatantly  
unlawful actions and asked the judge to dismiss  
the case without reviewing the evidence. CCR’s  
extraordinary rendition case, Arar v. Ashcroft, was  
also met with “state secrets” claims. (See p. 18 of this report for more on that case.)
The judicial system must serve as a check upon  
the power of the executive. Preventing judges from 
seeing the evidence in question is an end run  
around judicial review and an unacceptable shield  
for government lawbreaking.Abuse of the State Secrets Privilege 
21George W Bush extending the “Protect America Act” (PAA): 
an amendment to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) that removed the warrant requirement for government surveillance of some foreign intelligence targets. Later, the FISA Amendments Act of 2008 reauthorized many provisions of the PAA.22
The Center for Constitutional Rights, founded  
out of the Southern civil rights movement, has  
always represented demonstrators who have 
been wrongfully arrested and movements that have been infiltrated and spied on. The right to  
political dissent is a fundamental and necessary  
liberty in any democratic society. The Bush  
era saw a rise in the criminalization of dissent, 
from the surveillance of activists and the federal -
ization of local law enforcement, to the labeling of 
activists as “terrorists.” In 2003, for meetings of the Free Trade  
Agreement of the Americas (FTAA) in Miami,  
authorities adopted a repressive approach to policing protests that came to be known as the “Miami model”—the extreme use of surveillance, 
brutal force, and mass arrests, that effectively 
suspended the First and Fourth Amendments in the city. This year we reached a settlement 
agreement in a FTAA protest case, Bell v. Miami-
Dade County , on behalf of 29 activists, including 
a CCR staff attorney, who were arrested at a jail 
solidarity vigil for others arrested earlier.The Center celebrated another victory for the 
right to dissent with a major settlement for over 
70 protesters who were arrested outside the 
NYC offices of an affiliate of the Carlyle Group, a defense-related investment firm with financial 
ties to the Bush and bin Laden families. The 
protesters were illegally arrested, detained for excessive periods of time and denied access 
to their lawyers. CCR sued for violations of the 
First, Fourth, and Fourteenth Amendment. The lawsuit, Kunstler v. City of New York , settled for 
$2 million.Attacks on DissentIn 2006, the Animal Enterprise Terrorism  
Act (AETA) became law. Presented as a  
way to crack down on violent extremists, the  
bill in fact criminalizes legal, constitutionally  
protected activity in order to silence political 
dissent. 
The AETA primarily targets animal rights and 
environmental activists, but is written in language 
so broad that it can be read to cover many types 
of political activism. It uses a broad definition of 
“terrorism” that includes protest that causes a 
company, or “animal enterprise,” to lose profits. It even extends to attempting to interfere with an 
animal enterprise company, even if no economic  
damage actually occurs. Use of the internet  
in conjunction with these actions is sufficient to 
trigger prosecution under this federal criminal 
law. Put another way, if you and a friend go on 
the web to research a company whose practices 
you plan to protest, you may have just become 
a terrorist. CCR is currently defending four animal rights activists in the first prosecution under the AETA.  
Our clients in this case, USA v. Buddenberg, are accused of chanting, making leaflets and writing 
with chalk on the sidewalk in front of a senior  
bio-researcher’s house, as well as using the internet to research the company whose actions 
they planned to protest. They are charged with 
acts of animal enterprise terrorism.
The AETA is a serious threat to free speech.  
Part of a larger effort by corporate interests  
to use the terrorism label to constrain social 
activism, it is one of the most extreme pieces  
of legislation to come out of the last eight  
years. The Center for Constitutional  
Rights, in partnership with the Civil Liberties  
Defense Center and grassroots activists  
around the country, has launched the Coalition  
to Abolish the AETA to put an end to this  
repressive legislation and to protect your right  
to dissent. 
The “Green Scare”
The “Green Scare” refers to recent government 
targeting of environmental and animal rights  
activists under the guise of fighting terrorism. The federal government, at the behest of  
corporate industry groups, increased the  
surveillance and intimidation of activists in these movements, as well as the severity of criminal penalties, declaring the animal rights movement 
“the number one domestic terrorism threat.” 
CCR joined the defense team in United States  
v. Buddenberg , the first criminal prosecutions  under the Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act 
(AETA). CCR is mounting a direct challenge  
to the constitutionality of the act arguing  
the law violates the First Amendment and  
Due Process.
From our beginnings in the Southern civil  
rights movement, CCR has always worked  to defend activists and organize legal support  
for political movements. Our commitment  
to standing up to the silencing of dissent and  the targeting of political activists has never  
been more necessary.
23The Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act:  
The Most Dangerous Domestic Terror Law You’ve Never Heard Of
Learn more and join  
the campaign at:  
www.CCRjustice.org/anti-AETA
24I joined the Center for Constitutional Rights as 
Legal Director in May and it feels like I have been 
building towards this job for over 30 years. 
My ties to CCR go back 30 years, to my first job 
out of law school as the law clerk for legendary 
New Orleans civil rights lawyer and CCR founder Ben Smith. I went on to become a civil and hu-
man rights lawyer in New Orleans where I fought 
for voting rights, decent public housing, quality public education, ending homelessness, creating 
a living wage, justice after Katrina, and against 
police brutality and sanctions against Iraq, the death penalty, and the imprisonment of political 
prisoners in Haiti.
Along the way, groups of public housing grandmothers, Haitian  
revolutionaries, as well as peace and community activists took me in and 
trained me in social justice advocacy and solidarity. Together, we went to housing developments, classrooms, shelters, death row chambers, military  
installations, and the back streets of Baghdad and Port au Prince. We  
sued, marched, boycotted, demonstrated, petitioned, lobbied, sang, prayed, sat in, blockaded, did vigils, poured blood, witnessed deaths, got 
shot at and got arrested for standing up for human rights. For a stretch of 
over 15 years, I was privileged to teach and practice social justice lawyering at Loyola University’s Poverty Law Center and Social Justice Clinic. 
Joining CCR I have found a community of staff, directors, board members 
and allies working furiously to challenge the status quo in our courts, in  
the media, and in our communities, and to further social justice work and support movements for change. This annual report demonstrates both the challenges we are up against and the tremendous energy and 
passion that CCR staff and supporters bring to this 
work. The index of cases that follows represents a truly stunning breadth and depth of work and an  
audacity of spirit that is exhilarating and at times 
daunting. The good news is that CCR is up to the task.
Looking ahead, I see CCR continuing our efforts  
to prosecute President Bush and his torture team,  
to hold private military contractors accountable  
for the damage they caused, to challenge the  
racist prison system of this country, and to close  
Guantánamo once and for all. 
New CCR work on the horizon will expand our commitment to international 
human rights, particularly in the areas of economic and social rights. I also 
look forward to helping CCR get back to its roots in the South with new 
cases along the Gulf Coast. We will actively support Gulf Coast struggles for rebuilding, especially for low-income and marginalized groups. We will 
remain strongly supportive of the right to dissent by representing protesters, 
targeted press, and marginalized groups like animal rights activists.
On a personal level, it is clear to me that CCR is the place I belong at this 
important moment in history – the logical next step on my 30-year journey  
as a social justice lawyer. Thank you to all of you who have stood by CCR  
in these difficult years and who will be there with us in our work to restore our rights and move forward on opportunities in the future.
 Bill QuigleyLetter from the Legal Director
Why I Am at the Center for Constitutional Rights
25Guantánamo Habeas  Cases
Al-Qahtani v. Obama 
Habeas corpus petition for Mohammed  
al Qahtani, who suffered physical and  
psychological torture when he was subjected  
to the extraordinarily abusive “First Special  
Interrogation Plan,” a regime of “systematic  
enhanced interrogation techniques”  
authorized by Donald Rumsfeld.
Status:  pending in D.C. District Court
Ameziane v. Obama
Habeas corpus petition on behalf 
of Djamel Amez-iane, an Algerian 
man who requires 
urgent resettlement 
protection. Mr. Ameziane has never 
been charged with 
any crime and fears 
forced repatriation 
to Algeria.
Status:  pending in D.C. District Court
Ameziane v. United States
First ever Inter-American Commission on  
Human Rights (IACHR) petition and request  
for precautionary measures filed on behalf of  
a Guantánamo detainee Djamel Ameziane,  
an Algerian man who has been severely abused at Guantánamo Bay and is at risk of continued serious harm if forcibly transferred to Algeria. 
He is seeking third country resettlement.
Status:  urgent precautionary measures granted 
in August 2008; petition pending before the 
IACHR
Barre v. Obama
Habeas corpus petition filed on behalf of  
Mohammed Barre, a United Nations High  
Commissioner for Refugees mandate refugee 
from Somalia. Mr. Barre has never been charged 
with any crime and wishes to return to his family 
in Somaliland, an autonomous, stable region in 
northwestern Somalia.
Status:  pending in D.C. District Court
Khan v. Obama
Habeas corpus petition filed on behalf of Majid Khan, who was held and tortured in CIA secret 
detention for several years prior to his transfer 
to Guantánamo. Because the government has 
classified Khan’s experiences in CIA detention, 
access to our client is subject to extraordinary 
security and censorship procedures.
Status:  pending in D.C. District Court
Khan Tumani, et al., v. Obama
Habeas corpus petition filed on behalf of Syrian father and son, Abdul Nasser and Muhammed 
Khan Tumani, detained at Guantánamo Bay. 
Muhammed was still a juvenile when he was 
originally detained with his father. Despite being imprisoned at the same facility, Muhammed has been held in solitary confinement in Camp 6 and 
separated from his father for years.
Status:  pending in D.C. District Court
Kiyemba v. Obama
Consolidated habeas corpus petition for ethnic 
Uighurs captured by bounty hunters, sold to  
the U.S. military and detained at Guantánamo 
Bay. Despite being found not to be enemy  
combatants and ordered released by a U.S. 
federal judge, some of the Uighurs still remain 
in Guantánamo awaiting an offer of resettlement 
from a safe third country.
Status:  ordered released into U.S. in October 
2008; Court of Appeals reversed; petition for 
certiorari review in Supreme Court is pending
Taher v. Obama
Habeas corpus petition for Mohammed Taher, 
one of the remaining 95 Yemenis in Guan-
tánamo. Yemenis comprise over one-third of 
the remaining Guantánamo population due to 
breakdowns in negotiations between the U.S. 
and Yemen regarding their return.
Status:  pending in D.C. District Court
Zalita v. Obama
Habeas corpus petition involving the first legal 
challenge brought by a Guantánamo detainee to 
an intended transfer to his native country, Libya, 
where he would likely face torture or execution.
Status:  pending in D.C. District CourtGuantánamoCase Index
CCR Client Djamel Ameziane.Below is an index of cases and amicus briefs that CCR litigated or filed during this past year. In addition,  
we are continuously developing new cases and working closely with progressive attorneys and other  
organizations on a host of constitutional and human rights issues.International Law  
and Accountability
Human Rights Abuse by Military Contractors in Iraq
Al-Shimari v. CACI
Al-Quraishi v. Nakhla 
and L-3
Saleh v. Titan
Lawsuits on behalf of  
nearly 340 Iraqi civilian 
detainees alleging that  
individual military 
contractors and the 
corporations that hired 
them (CACI and L-3), 
participated in a torture 
conspiracy at Abu Ghraib 
and other detention  
facilities in Iraq.
Status:  Saleh appeal is 
pending following oral argument in February.  In 
Al Shimari, CACI’s motion to dismiss was denied; 
CACI’s petition for interlocutory appeal is pending.  
In Al-Quraishi, Defendants’ motions to dismiss were briefed and argued; a decision is pending
Estate of Himoud Saed Abtan v. Erik Prince
Suing the private military contractor, Blackwater, on behalf of Iraqi plaintiffs injured or killed when 
Blackwater shooters opened fire at Nisoor Square in Baghdad, September 2007.
Status:  voluntarily dismissed in the District  
of Columbia and re-filed in the Eastern District of  
Virginia, where preliminary motions are pendingGuantánamo Civil Cases
Al Laithi v. Rumsfeld
Civil suit for damages filed on behalf of an Egyptian doctor who is now confined to a 
wheelchair due to the torture and mistreat-
ment he experienced at Guantánamo Bay.
Status:  stayed pending outcome of appeals in 
Rasul v. Rumsfeld
Al-Zahrani v. Rumsfeld
Civil suit for damages on behalf of the families and estates of Yasser Al-Zahrani and Salah 
Ali Abdullah Al-Salami, two Yemeni men who 
died while in U.S. custody at Guantánamo 
Bay in 2006.
Status:  pending in D.C. District Court;  
government’s motion to dismiss will be 
briefed during fall of 2009
Boumediene et al. v. Bosnia and Herze-
govina (amicus)
The first case on behalf of Guantánamo detainees before an international tribunal, this 
case at the European Court of Human Rights 
addresses the responsibility of countries that 
assisted the U.S. in transferring men to  
Guantánamo for the violations that occur 
there.
Status:  the European Court of Human Rights 
ruled the application inadmissible Celikgogus v. Rumsfeld
Civil suit for damages against Donald Rums-
feld and others responsible for the detention, 
torture and mistreatment of five men illegally 
detained in Guantánamo for years, including 
two men detained for more than four years 
and released years after being classified as 
non-enemy combatants.
Status:  stayed pending outcome of appeals in 
Rasul v. Rumsfeld
Rasul v. Rumsfeld
Civil suit for damages against former Secre-
tary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld on behalf  
of four British former detainees seeking  
damages for their arbitrary detention and 
torture while detained at Guantánamo.
Status:  Court of Appeals dismissed all  
claims; Supreme Court reversed for reconsid-
eration in light of Boumediene; Court of  
Appeals again dismissed all claims on  
sovereign immunity and qualified immunity 
grounds; petition for certiorari review in  
Supreme Court is pendingGuantánamo
Mr. Al-Janabi, a plaintiff in  
Al-Quraishi v. Nakhla and L-3, was held and tortured at Abu Ghraib prison for nearly a year.
The “Tipton Three.” From left: Shafiq Rasul, Rhuhel 
Ahmed, and Asif Iqbal. 
26Estate of Ali Hussamaldeen  
Albazzaz v. Erik Prince
Suing the private military contractor, Blackwater, 
on behalf of two Iraqi civilians killed near Al Wa-
tahba Square in Baghdad in September 2007.
Status:  voluntarily dismissed in the District of 
Columbia and re-filed in the Eastern District of 
Virginia, where preliminary motions are pending
Corporate Human Rights Abuse
Bowoto v. Chevron
Part of a team suing Chevron for its involvement in a helicopter-borne attack killing unarmed envi-
ronmental protesters in Nigeria in 1998 and 1999.
Status:  lost at trial – appealing based on the 
district court’s trial errors
Corrie v. Caterpillar
Suing Caterpillar, Inc. for selling D9 bulldozers to 
the Israel Defense Forces knowing they would be 
used to unlawfully destroy homes and endanger 
civilians.
Status:  petition for rehearing was denied, ending 
the case on grounds that it would interfere with 
U.S. foreign policy 
Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum (amicus)
Arguing that the executions of the Ogoni 9 in 
Nigeria constitute extrajudicial executions under 
international law and are justiciable in U.S. Courts.
Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum (amicus)
A second amicus in this case regarding the legal 
definitions of crimes against humanity, arbitrary 
arrest and detention, and cruel, inhuman or  
degrading treatment or punishment.Wiwa v. Royal Dutch Shell
Wiwa v. Anderson
Wiwa v. Shell Petroleum  
Development Company
13-year-long battle on behalf of Ogoni human rights defenders and their relatives suing Shell 
for complicity in torture, arbitrary detention and 
extrajudicial killings in Nigeria.
Status:  settled on the eve of trial for $15.5  
million to compensate plaintiffs and to establish  
a trust fund to benefit the Ogoni people
Government Officials
Complaint to German Federal Prosecutor 
re: Individual Criminal Responsibility  
of U.S. Officials in Abu Ghraib and  
Guantánamo Torture
Petition submitted to the German Prosecutor  
requesting an investigation into the responsi-bility of civilian and military high-ranking U.S. officials for war crimes and torture under the 
principle of “universal jurisdiction.”
Status:  in 2007, CCR and our allies appealed the 
decision not to open an investigation – appeal 
was dismissed and a motion for reconsideration 
was filed and dismissed
Mamani v. Sanchez de Lozada 
Mamani v. Sanchez Berzain
Cases against former President and former Min-ister of Defense of Bolivia for attacks on villagers 
to suppress popular civilian protests in 2003.
Status:  plaintiffs were ordered to exhaust  
remedies in Bolivia for their Torture Victim  
Protection Act claims, and a decision on their 
other claims is pending
Matar v. Dichter
Suing Israeli official for a “targeted assassina-
tion” in Gaza that killed eight children and seven 
adults and injured more than 150 civilians.
Status:  Second Circuit affirmed the dismissal, 
deferring to the U.S. Executive’s position that 
Dichter had immunity, ending the case
27Case Index
CCR clients in Wiwa v. Shell, Karalolo Kogbara (left) and 
Friday Nuate (right) with CCR attorney Maria LaHood (center).
Photo: Qa’id Jacobs
Rally supporting CCR’s lawsuit Matar v. Dichter.Policing and Prisons
Bandele v. The City of New York
Representing members of the Malcolm X Grass-
roots Movement who were arrested while peace-
fully and lawfully videotaping NYPD officers.
Status: successful settlement
Floyd v. The City of New York
Class action lawsuit against the New York City Police Department challenging widespread racial 
profiling and unconstitutional “stop-and-frisk” 
practices.
Status: in discovery – CCR has received raw  
statistical data on the number of “stop-and-frisks” 
for 1998 through 2008
Graham v. Florida (amicus)
Sullivan v. Florida (amicus)
Argues that under international law, life in prison 
without parole is indecent and excessive punish-
ment for juveniles under 18. The United States 
is the only country in the world that imposes 
sentences of life without parole against juveniles.
Status: Supreme Court will hear the case in its 
fall 2009 term 
Walton v. New York State Department of 
Correctional Services (NYSDOCS)  
and MCI/Verizon
Challenging the NYSDOCS monopoly telephone 
contract with MCI/Verizon, which forced family 
members to pay exorbitant phone rates to speak 
with incarcerated family members.
Status: on appeal to Court of Appeals
 Wright v. Corrections Corporation of 
America (FCC Rule-making Petition)
Petitioning the FCC to regulate interstate prison 
telephone calls to ensure fair and reasonable 
rates for prisoners and their families.
Status: awaiting FCC action on Petition for  
Rule-making
Targeting of Immigrants
Ashcroft v. Iqbal (amicus) 
Supreme Court amicus in this post 9-11  
detention case regarding immunity for high  
level government officials. Companion case to  
Turkmen v. Ashcroft (see below).
Status: Supreme Court ruled that top govern-
ment officials were not liable for the actions of 
their subordinates absent evidence that they 
explicitly ordered the discriminatory activity
Anderson v. Holder, DHS v. Anderson
Habeas petition and immigration case defending a mentally disabled and mentally ill permanent 
resident facing deportation.
Status: successfully ended deportation  
proceedings – client was released  to his family 
after two years in detention Cardenas Abreu v. Holder 
Petition to review a Board of Immigration  Appeals precedent decision that orders a  
deportation based on a criminal conviction  
that is not yet final.
Status: petition for review pending
Turkmen v. Ashcroft
Class-action lawsuit seeking to hold former  
Attorney General John Ashcroft and other  
high-level officials accountable for unlawful 
racial profiling, mass detentions, and abusive 
treatment of South Asian, Arab, and Muslim 
non-citizens after 9/11.
Status: in discovery; awaiting decision on  
cross-appeal from Second CircuitRacial, Gender and Economic Justice
CCR attorneys Matthew Strugar (left) and Rachel Meeropol 
(right) with Turkmen v. Ashcroft clients Yasser Ebrahim and Hany Ibrahim (center) in Alexandria, Egypt.
Ivey Walton, plaintiff in Walton v. NYSDOCS .
28Employment Discrimination
Gulino v. The Board of Education of the  
City of New York and the New York State 
Education Department
Class action on behalf of public school teachers 
of color who are challenging the use of discrimi-
natory tests and licensing rules.
Status: Second Circuit Court of Appeals  
remanded to the District Court with instructions 
to reevaluate the challenged tests – awaiting 
further order from District Court
Harrington v. New York Metropolitan  
Transit Authority
Defending the First Amendment rights of  
Sikh transit workers to wear turbans at work as  
a religious observance.
Status: pending – awaiting decisions on  
summary judgmentUnited States of America and 
Vulcan Society v. City of New York
Challenging discriminatory hiring practices of  
the NYC Fire Department on behalf of an  
association of Black firefighters and individual 
class representatives. The NYC fire department  
is the least racially diverse of any major  
U.S. city – 2.9% Black, of a population that is  
27% Black.
Status: district court found that the entrance 
exams had a discriminatory impact on African-
American and Hispanic test-takers and is  
currently deciding on the appropriate remedy – 
Vulcan Society’s intentional discrimination claim 
is still pendingWomen’s Rights
Amador v. Superintendents of the  
Department of Correctional Services  
(amicus)
Supporting the Legal Aid Society of New York  
in challenging the systemic sexual abuse and  
harassment of women prisoners in New York 
State.
Tummino v. Hamburg
Feminist activists sued the FDA for relying on political bias instead of science in refusing to 
approve the Morning-After Pill as an over-the-
counter drug available to women of all ages.
Status:  won on cross motions for summary  
judgment. Agency ordered to make Plan B  
available to 17-year-olds and up without a 
prescription and reconsider all age and other 
restrictions
NYC firefighter members of the Vulcan Society and CCR 
clients in United States of America and Vulcan Society v. City 
of New York. From left: Duery Smith, Paul Washington and John Coombs.
Co-counsel Amardeep Singh of the Sikh Coalition (right)  
and Ravinder Singh Bhalla (left) with CCR Attorney  Shayana Kadidal at press conference showing photos of  
MTA employees wearing permitted non-religious headgear.Members of CCR client organization, Morning-After Pill  
Conspiracy, at a speak out and civil disobedience.
29Case Index30Government Abuse of Power 
Illegal Government Surveillance
CCR v. Bush
Challenging NSA warrantless domestic electronic 
surveillance, asserting that it violates FISA and 
the First and Fourth Amendments. Lawsuit is on 
behalf of CCR attorneys, seeking to protect our 
clients’ right to confidential attorney-client  
communications.
Status: Congress amended FISA statute in  
mid-2008; case remains pending in Northern 
District of California
Wilner v. NSA and DOJ
FOIA lawsuit to determine if the government has 
engaged in warrantless wiretapping of CCR  
attorneys and Guantánamo habeas counsel.
Status: appeal pending to Second Circuit on 
Glomar issues
Cuba
Ruben Campa v. U.S. (amicus)
Requesting the Supreme Court to review the 
Miami convictions of five Cuban government 
agents, the so-called “Cuban Five.” 
Status: Supreme Court refused to review the 
convictionsU.S. v. Sanders
Legal defense of people in penalty proceedings 
due to alleged violation of the Cuba travel  
embargo, and a constitutional challenge to the 
process by which the government investigates  
suspected violations.
Status: CCR’s appeal was denied and the fine 
increased – planning a broader challenge to the 
the entire investigative process in federal court
Vilaseca v. U.S. Department of Treasury 
(amicus)
Federal lawsuit in Vermont challenging severe restrictions imposed by the Bush administration 
on travel to visit close family members in Cuba.
Status: stipulation agreement voluntarily  
dismissing the case after the rollback of family 
travel restrictions to Cuba
Rendition and Ghost Detentions
ACLU, CCR, et al. v. Department  
of Defense
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) lawsuit charging that government agencies illegally  
withheld records sought concerning the abuse  
of detainees in American military custody.
Status: litigation pending in the Southern  
District of New York and the 2nd Circuit Court  
of AppealsAmnesty International, CCR, et al. v. CIA, 
Department of Defense, et al.
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) lawsuit  
seeking information about renditions and  
“disappeared” detainees, including those at CIA 
”ghost” sites and unregistered prisoners.
Status: over 6,000 pages of documents from the 
Department of Defense, Department of State 
and Central Intelligence Agency have been 
released – litigation is pending
Arar v. Ashcroft
Challenging the “extraordinary rendition” of  Maher Arar and seeking accountability from  
Ashcroft, Mueller and other U.S. officials for 
sending Canadian citizen Arar to Syria to be 
tortured.
Status: decision by the full Second Circuit is 
pending after it decided on its own to rehear  
the case
CCR board member David Cole arguing for Maher Arar at the 
Second Circuit Court of Appeals.Defending Dissent
The Right to Political Dissent
Bell v. Miami-Dade County
Challenging mass arrests and police misconduct 
during the 2003 Free Trade Area of the Americas 
meeting in Miami, FL.
Status:  successful settlement
Kunstler v. City of New York (“A7”)
Suing the NYPD on behalf of protesters who were illegally arrested during an anti-war rally 
in April, 2003 and detained for excessively long 
periods of time.
Status:  settled for $2 million
United States v. Buddenberg
Defending four animal rights activists who are 
being charged under the Animal Enterprise  
Terrorism Act (AETA) for First Amendment – 
protected political activity.
Status:  our motion to dismiss the indictment is 
pendingUnited States v. Stop Huntingdon Animal 
Cruelty (“SHAC7”) (amicus)
In support of animal rights activists convicted  of violating the Animal Enterprise Protection  
Act (AEPA) for website postings and organizing 
demonstrations.
Status:  filed an amicus brief 
CCR clients in USA v. Buddenberg. From left: Nathan Pope, 
Adriana Stumpo, Maryam Khajavi and Joseph Buddenberg  
(the AETA 4).Challenging the  “Material Support” Statutes
Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project
Series of cases challenging the material  
support statue that makes it a crime to provide 
support, including humanitarian aid, literature 
distribution and political advocacy, to any  
foreign entity that the government has  
designated as a “terrorist” group.
Status:  partial victory in the lower court,  
holding significant parts of the statute unconsti-
tutional on vagueness grounds; Supreme Court 
has accepted the case for review; argument will 
take place in February 2010
Humanitarian Law Project v. Department of 
the Treasury
Challenge to similar restrictions under the  
Global Terrorism Sanctions Regulations, the 
IEEPA statute, and post-9/11 Executive Order 
13,224.
Status:  further action stayed pending Supreme 
Court ruling in Holder v. HLP (see above)
From left: Andrew Stepanian, Lauren Gazzola, Kevin Kjonaas, 
Joshua Harper, Jacob Conroy, Darius Fullmer, members of the “SHAC7.”
31More information on all of CCR’s 
cases can be found on our website at: 
www.CCRjustice.org/our-casesCase Index32
The unlawful activities of the Bush administration 
are now well documented, in many cases as  
a direct result of CCR’s litigation and early  
detainee representation. The evidence is  
clear that officials at the highest level of government  
were involved in egregious and illegal actions, including the authorization of torture and other war crimes. The United States must immediately undertake thorough 
investigations and prosecute those government officials 
who designed, orchestrated, or implemented the U.S. torture program. 
Why prosecutions?
President Obama has indicated his reluctance to pursue prosecution for the crimes of the Bush administration, 
saying that he prefers to look forward rather than back -
ward.  CCR strongly disagrees. That egregious crimes 
were committed is undeniable. President Obama has  
reiterated the fundamental principle that no one is above the law.  Therefore, he must not step back from this principle by granting a pass to the perpetrators of those 
crimes for the sake of political expediency.  By definition, 
fully investigating those crimes requires looking back. Prosecuting the high-level former officials responsible for 
torture and other crimes can offer a measure of justice 
to the victims, re-establish higher standards for human rights protection, and provide the strongest deterrent 
against future administrations going down this dark  
path again. Prosecutions will also be a clear signal to 
countries around the world that the U.S. has drawn the 
line at torture. No commission, executive order, policy 
change or new legislation will have that same power.A criminal investigation and the prosecution of any of -
ficials responsible for egregious human rights violations are required under both domestic and international law, including Article 4 of the Convention Against Torture. 
As a treaty ratified by the U.S., the Convention is  
binding as “supreme law” under the U.S. Constitu -
tion. As the Supreme Court said last year in CCR and co-counsel’s Guantánamo case, Boumediene v. Bush , 
“The laws and Constitution are designed to survive, 
and remain in force, in extraordinary times. Liberty and 
security can be reconciled; and in our system they are 
reconciled within the framework of the law.”
What crimes were committed?
The Bush administration displayed shameless contempt for the rule of law and conducted their policies under an 
unprecedented veil of secrecy, consistently attempting 
to evade judicial, congressional, and public inquiry. In closed meetings, the so-called “Principals Committee”–
which included Vice President Cheney, Attorney General 
Ashcroft, Secretary of State Powell, CIA Director Tenet, and National Security Advisor Rice – authorized the use 
of “enhanced interrogation techniques” that included  
waterboarding and other interrogation methods that 
clearly amounted to torture. 
Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld authorized and 
implemented unlawful interrogation practices; in fact, 
a recently released Senate Armed Services Committee 
report held Rumsfeld largely responsible for the abuses committed against detainees at Guantánamo, Abu 
Ghraib and other prisons. Inexcusably, administration The Case for Prosecutions33
lawyers – including David Addington, John Yoo, Alberto 
Gonzales, Jay Bybee and others – constructed strained 
rationales to give the torture program legal cover.  
The prohibition against torture and cruel, inhuman and  
degrading treatment is reflected in several international 
treaties and domestic laws. These include the Convention 
Against Torture, the Geneva Conventions, the War Crimes 
Statute and the Anti-Torture Statute. Torture is prohibited under any circumstance and for any reason, and when it is 
committed during a war, is considered a war crime. When 
it comes to charges of torture, officials who hold high office are not entitled to immunity. As the U.N. High Commis -
sioner for Human Rights, Navanethem Pillay, has stated:  “People who order or inflict torture cannot be exonerated.”
What can be done? 
The Attorney General must appoint an independent prose -
cutor with a full mandate to investigate those responsible for 
torture and war crimes, especially the high-ranking officials 
who authorized and orchestrated the torture program. We call on the Obama administration not to tie the prosecutor’s hands but to let the investigation go as far up the chain of 
command as the facts lead. 
Responsibility for the torture program cannot be laid solely 
at the feet of a few low-level operatives. Some agents in the field may have gone further than the limits so ghoulishly laid 
out by the lawyers who twisted the law to create legal cover for the program, but the lawyers and officials who oversaw 
and approved the program must also be investigated and 
held accountable. 
It is essential that any inquiry or commission not be a  
substitute for criminal prosecutions. Furthermore, the  
possibility of prosecutions must not be undercut by  
commissions that offer amnesty or any other measure  
that would shield those responsible from being held  
accountable. Only prosecutions will send a clear message to 
the rest of the world, to future government officials, and to the victims of torture that these crimes are unacceptable and 
that the rule of law has been restored in the United States. 
Take action!
Join us in the call for meaningful investigations and  
prosecutions. This important moment in our nation’s history provides us with the opportunity to take some critical steps 
to protect and expand human rights and social justice. 
To get involved with CCR’s ongoing  
accountability work and other campaigns,  
sign up for our e-Action Alerts on our website:    
www.CCRjustice.org/get-involved ?34Internships and Fellowships
Terri Nilliasca  grew up in Virgin -
ia, the child of a Filipina immigrant 
mother and an Anglo-American  
father. Racism, displacement and 
loss of culture had a profound, 
radicalizing effect on her and she 
began organizing around issues  
of race and gender in college.  
After graduation, she organized welfare recipients, was an  
organizer at UNITE, organized  
low wage textile workers in the  
U.S. South and worked in the Phil -
ippines with a progressive labor federation. Inspired by the depth of 
the movement in the Philippines, Terri decided to go to law school in 
order to gain tools for the struggle for social justice and the liberation of all peoples. She is the proud and exhausted mother of four year-
old twins and a second year law student at CUNY School of Law.
“It has been an honor to work at the Center. CCR’s work is vitally 
important to our ability to resist forces that seek to crush the poor,  
incarcerate and torture people of color, and deny our rights as  
women, LGBTQ peoples or political activists. Interns made substan -
tive contributions to CCR’s work and the seminars and discussions 
added political depth to our journey towards becoming people’s lawyers in this struggle for a truly just world.”The Ella Baker Fellowship Program was named in honor of a great and often unheralded leader of the civil rights movement. The program strives to exem-plify Ella Baker’s firm commitment to mentoring and developing young leaders to carry the mantle of the struggle for social justice through the generations.
In addition, CCR hosts undergraduate students who work on cases and campaigns throughout the year. Our International Scholars program brings law 
students, legal scholars and lawyers from around the globe to work with CCR attorneys on constitutional, international and human rights litigation.
Hiba Hafiz  was born in Al-Khobar, 
Saudi Arabia, where her family 
still lives. After graduating from 
Wellesley College, she completed a 
Ph.D. in Comparative Literature at 
Yale University. She was involved in organizing with HERE and spent 
a summer interning in the Ramallah 
office of the Palestinian Academic Society for the Study of International 
Affairs where she researched the 
effects of Israel’s Wall on Palestinian religious rights. Now a student  
at Columbia Law School, she has worked on a variety of international human rights issues.
Hiba is incredibly grateful to have had the opportunity to intern at  
the Center for Constitutional Rights. She has long admired the work  
of CCR founders Arthur Kinoy and William Kunstler as people’s  
lawyers, as well as CCR’s pioneering work in Alien Tort Statute  
cases and in challenging U.S. illegal detention and torture policies  
in Guantánamo and elsewhere.
“I applied to CCR because I see it as the ideal model of social justice 
lawyering. My experience as an Ella Baker intern was transformative 
and deeply enriching. It allowed me to participate in the breadth of CCR’s public interest work and to meet a community of activists that 
will inspire me for the rest of my life!”
 
      More information on all of these programs is available on our website:  www.CCRjustice.org/ella-baker-fellowship35CCR is proud of our staff and board members who have received 
awards this year for their work with the Center. Below are a few  
of these honors:
• The same week the President Obama signed the executive order to close Guantánamo, CCR president, Michael Ratner, was awarded BuzzFlash’s Wings of Justice Award for his work fighting against illegal detentions “from the very beginning”
• The Houston Peace and Justice Center honored CCR 
at its annual awards dinner. 
CCR attorney Pardiss Kebriaei accepted the award on behalf of the Center. 
• CCR attorney Shayana Kadidal was honored for his 
work at CCR by the South 
Asian Bar Association with the Access to Justice Award. 
• The Williams J. Butler Human Rights Medal was awarded to Michael Ratner by the Urban Morgan Institute for Human Rights at the University of Cincinnati College of Law for his “leadership 
on behalf of the Center for Constitutional Rights for the defense of 
prisoners at Guantánamo.”
• Michelle DePass, former Kunstler Fellow and CCR board  
member, has been appointed Assistant Administrator for  
International Affairs at the Environmental Protection Agency  
Office of International Activities. CCR understands that the court of public opinion can be as important as 
any court of law for bringing about change. Getting the right messages out 
can affect outcomes both in and out of the courtroom. That’s why we work 
with bloggers, reporters, producers and editors to make our voice heard and bring our perspective to the widest possible audiences. 
Our staff members are interviewed for their insight and expertise in publi -
cations, and on radio and television around the world. Our communications 
department keeps the media up to date on our cases and campaigns and lays the groundwork for a more progressive point of view to deepen the 
way a story is covered.
CCR attorney Pardiss Kebriaei (left)  
accepts an award from the Houston 
Peace and Justice Center President, Debbie Antoon.Honors In the News
For more news and updates or to set up an interview, visit:
www.CCRjustice.org/newsroomClockwise from top left: CCR Executive Director Vince Warren on The Rachel Maddow Show  
discussing preventive detention after his meeting with President Obama. CCR President, Michael 
Ratner, speaks with Democracy Now! about pushing for prosecutions of former Bush administration officials. CCR attorney Darius Charney gives a television interview on the courthouse steps. CCR attorney Shayana Kadidal on World Focus, speaking about the decision to close Guantánamo.36CCR has always approached challenges 
from multiple angles: combining our 
litigation with public education and 
strategic organizing work. The Center 
organizes speaking engagements, summits,  community forums and legal education seminars. 
We also produce reports, provide expertise to 
policy makers and conduct grassroots campaigns.
The 100 Days project exemplified CCR’s  
approach to integrating non-litigation advocacy 
into our work. The project combined research, 
policy analysis, legislative advocacy, public educa -
tion and organizing work in a multi-faceted effort to inform and mobilize the public to insist the new administration take strong first steps to undo the 
harm from the past eight years.
While CCR never shies away from challenges in 
court, we know that real change comes from building 
a movement outside of the courtroom.  CCR will 
utilize every avenue available in pursuing our mission to use the law as a creative force for social change.
The 100 Days Campaign
To make the most of the opportunities presented by the presidential transition, CCR implemented 
an aggressive media, educational and web-based 
organizing campaign to keep our issues upfront  
in the political debate, provide alternatives to  
the tepid reform plans offered by many of the 
candidates, and engage our supporters in advo -
cacy efforts to demonstrate political support for 
meaningful reforms and real change.
A centerpiece of these efforts was our 100 Days 
project, calling on the new president to work with Congress to restore the Constitution and the 
traditional checks and balances of our democratic 
system. 
Based on our clients’ own stories, CCR’s analysis 
often puts a face  to the policy debates. We laid 
out the very human consequences of prolonged 
detention in places such as Guantánamo and the 
inherent likelihood of abuse in prisons like Abu 
Ghraib.
In January, CCR convened a summit of national  
human rights organizations in Washington, D.C.  
to set a human rights agenda for advocates and 
government – The First 100 Days: Bringing  
Human Rights Home . The groups joined in a call  
to rein in executive power, restore the rule of  law and ensure accountability. 
The final phase of the campaign included an 
assessment of the new administration’s first 100 
days. Sadly, little progress had been made in many 
important areas. CCR continues to push for a swift 
closure of Guantánamo; the safe resettlement 
or return of the detainees; the end of the use of 
extraordinary rendition; increased protections against domestic wiretaps; and for the complete 
repudiation of the Bush program of “enhanced 
interrogations.” CCR continues to fight for inde -
pendent and full investigations and prosecutions of officials who violated U.S. or international law.Our series of white 
papers outlining policy recommendations to restore the Constitution are available on  
our website: www.CCR  
justice.org/100days.
The Right to Dissent explores attacks  
on dissent, from surveillance of activists,  
to federalization of local law enforcement,  
to labeling activists as “terrorists.”
Ending Arbitrary Detention, Torture 
and Extraordinary Rendition provides 
an overview of these Bush administration 
policies and what must be done to reverse 
them.
Amend the War Powers Resolution 
outlines the executive abuse of war-making power, and calls for restoring checks and  
balances and increased congressional  
oversight.
Stop Warrantless Wiretapping  
exposes the last eight years of secret  
surveillance, including the expansion of  
warrantless wiretapping and the dangers inherent in the erosion of privacy rights.
100 Days Campaign
More information on our 100 
Days Campaign is available on  
our website at:  
www.CCRjustice.org/100daysto restore the constitution37
From left: CNN’s Rachel Maddow, General Ricardo 
Sanchez, CCR Executive Director Vince Warren and journalist Ron Suskind at Blueprint for Accountability , a 
panel arranged by the Culture Project.Get Involved
Get Involved
“Is there anything I can DO about this horrible situation?”  is a refrain often heard 
at CCR from people concerned about social justice work. We regularly generate email action 
alerts that include calls to take specific actions in critical situations, or to inform you of important 
developments in cases or issues. This year, action alert topics have ranged from calls to “pack the courtroom” for one of our cases, to sending letters to President-elect Obama calling on him to 
stand by his promise to close Guantánamo. 
Our emails are informative, motivating, and help to mobilize our many wonderful supporters on 
important issues. Our work in the courtroom will not always be enough to turn back the tide; we 
need you to keep the pressure on. 
To sign up for email updates, follow us on YouTube or become a fan of the Center on 
Facebook, visit our website at: http://CCRjustice.org/spread-wordCCR sponsors numerous events 
across the country each year.  
To find out about upcoming  
CCR events in your area, sign up for email alerts, or visit our calendar page at:  
www.CCRjustice.org/calendar
Want the torturers prosecuted? 
Tired of the “few bad apples” line? The Center for 
Constitutional Rights has partnered with CREDO  
Mobile to distribute Torture Team trading cards to spark the conversation about responsibility for torture at the highest levels. View them all or order your own 
set of cards for free at www.tortureteam.orgDownload Reports On-line  
CCR partnered with the University of California, 
Berkeley to study the impact of Guantánamo on the lives of former detainees. The report, Guantánamo and Its Aftermath: U.S. Detention and Interrogation Practices and Their Impact on Detainees , based 
on a two-year study, reveals in graphic detail the cumulative effect of Bush administration policies on 
the lives of 62 released detainees.• Watch one of CCR’s videos on YouTube. If you like a  
 video you can give it a good rating, pass it along   
 to friends or embed it on a webpage.
• Make CCR a friend online. If you belong to MySpace  
 or Facebook be sure to make CCR your friend.
382009 President’s Reception
The Center for Constitutional Rights held our annual President’s Reception in New York City in May.  
This event is an expression of gratitude and appreciation for our generous donors and supporters who are  
indispensable partners in advancing and protecting fundamental rights for everyone.
CCR major donors Laurie Arbeiter and Jennifer Hobbs were honored for being outstanding partners to CCR 
through their unstinting support, tireless activism for government accountability, and fearless and outspoken 
leadership for the right to dissent.
CCR presents a Pro Bono Service Award each year to lawyers and firms who, without compensation, have 
provided legal services for those with the fewest protections and least access to legal resources. This year the award went to the law firm of Bingham McCutchen, for their tenacious and impassioned representation 
of Uighur prisoners, past and present, at Guantánamo Bay.
The event welcomed CCR’s new Legal Director, Bill Quigley, who spoke about his connection to CCR and  
his vision for where the legal work is headed. Special Recognition was also given to the JEHT Foundation for 
its visionary support for social justice and human rights work. The JEHT Foundation and its staff exemplified CCR’s determination to find innovative and effective approaches to advance justice and defend human rights.
Left: Sabin Willett accepted the Pro Bono Service Award on behalf of the legal team at Bingham McCutchen who represented Uighur prisoners at Guantánamo Bay.  
Right: CCR donors Jennifer Hobbs and Laurie Arbeiter were honored for their tireless financial support and activism. Top: CCR welcomed Bill Quigley as Legal Director.Demissie Abebe
ACLU
ACLU of Florida
ACLU of Massachusetts
ACLU of Vermont
Action Réfugiés Montréal
Debo Adegbile
Suzanne Adely
Agit-Pop
Amna Akbar
Shereef Hadi Akeel
Akeel & Valentine P .C.
Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld 
Kali Akuno
Iyad Alami 
Ashlee Albies
Debbie Almontaser
Adrian Alvarez
Brigit G. Alvarez
American Univ. International   Human Rights Clinic
Amnesty InternationalAmnesty International USA
Chris Anders
Heather Andersen
Rumzi Araj
Nan Aron
Ahilan Arulanatham
Frank Askin
Barbara Aubrey
Audre Lorde Project
Tracy Austin
John Austria
Michael Avery
Mojgone Azemun
Baach Robinson & Lewis PLLC
Sandra Babcock
Baker & McKenzie LLP
David BaluarteChiann BaoOctavia Barber
Garvey Schubert Barer
Nigel Barrella
Chris Bartlett
Monika Batra
Jack Beck
Beldock, Levine & Hoffman LLP
Derrick Bell
Bellevue/NYU Program for  
 Survivors of Torture
Khadine BennettNajla Benson
Nancy Bernstein
Frida Berrigan
Ravinder S. Bhalla
Anurima Bhargava
Chandra Bhatnagar*
Andy Bichlbaum
John A. BickBingham McCutchen LLP
Bob Bloom
Douglas Bloom
Patty Blum
Martha Boden
Jocelyn Bogdan
Heidi Boghosian
Jeremy F . Bollinger 
Victoria Bolton
Mike Bonanno
Trudy Bond
Jenn Borchetta
Karen Borg
Andrew Boyd
Bob Boyle
Emma Bradford
Sharon Bradford Franklin
Matt Brinckerhoff
Yael BrombergAndrew BrouwerDavid Brown
Jessica Buchanan
Allan Buchman
Susan Burke
Burke O’Neil LLC
Paul Butler
Butler Rubin Saltarelli & Boyd LLP
Brian Byrd
Jean Callahan
Canadian Council for Refugees
Alan Cantos
Edmund Cardoni
Cheri Carr
Juan Cartagena
Kenavon T. Carter
James Cavallaro
Antonia Cedrone
Center for Human Rights  
 and Global Justice
Center for International Human Rights,  
 Northwestern Univ Sch of Law
Center for Justice and Accountability    (CJA)
Center for Justice and International Law  
 (CEJIL)
Center for Reproductive RightsDevon Chaffee
Nathaniel Charny
Marco Chelo
Erwin Chemerinsky 
Emily Chiang
Judith Brown Chomsky
Cindy Chupack
Civil Liberties Defense Center
Melanca D. Clark
George Clarke
Right Reverend Barry B. Clarke,  
 Anglican Bishop of MontrealCoalition for an Ethical PsychologyCoalition for Parole  
 Restoration (CPR)
Coalition for the Defense   of Human Rights
Coalition to Raise Minimum   Standards at NYC Jails
Stanford CohenCohen, Milstein, Sellers & Toll
Cindy Cohn
Marjorie Cohn
David Cole*
Sandy Coliver
Community Church of New York
Community Service Society
Jenny-Brooke Condon
Sophia Conroy
Rhonda Copelon*
Correctional Association  
 of New York
Clare Coss
Nicholas Coster
Brenda Coughlin
Andrea Cousins
Kurt Coutain
Covington & Burling LLP
CREDO/Working Assets
Catherine E. Creely
Critical Arts Ensemble Defense Fund   
 (CAE)
Culture ProjectD.C. Prisoners’ Project
Jamil Dakwar
Matthew Daloisio
George Daly
Ron Daniels
Jennifer Daskal
Thomas Davies
Jeff DavisOver the past year, the Center for Constitutional Rights has worked with hundreds of attorneys, legal organizations, private law firms, clients and activists 
on our cases, campaigns and fundraising efforts. CCR extends its deepest appreciation for all they have done as volunteer attorneys, cooperating attorneys, 
co-counsel and colleagues in the struggle for justice. ( * CCR board member/co-counsel)
39Friends and Allies40Martha Davis
Pat Davis
Shelbi Day
Maddy DeLone
Janet Dench
Jamie Denvir
Meera Deo
Detention Watch Network
Jeff Deutch
Anthony DiCaprio
Angelia Dickens
DLA Piper US LLP
George Dobbins
Domestic Workers United
Paul Donowitz
Terrence Dougherty
Drop the Rock
Drug Policy Alliance
Thomas Duane
Jon DubinMalika Dutt
EarthRights International (ERI)
Harrison Eiteljorg, II
Edward J. ElderElectronic Frontier Foundation
Laurie Elkin
Elkin, Steliger & Elkin Ltd.
Emery, Celli, Brinckerhoff & Abady LLP
Kathy Engel
Megan Erickson
Ethical Culture Society
European Center for Constitutional  
 and Human Rights (ECCHR)
Chinyere EzieFabulous Independent Educated   
 Radicals for Community  
 Empowerment (FIERCE!)
Natasha Fain 
Families for Freedom
Families Rally for Emancipation  
 and Empowerment (FREE)
Susan FarbsteinJamie Fellner
Arwa FidahuseinOmar Figueroa
Jonathan Fine
Davida Finger
Gregory H. Finger*Sharon Flaherty
Laura Flanders
Laurel Fletcher
Tina Foster
Rachel Fowler
Ben Fox
Caroline Fredrickson
Spencer Freedman
Daniel Friedman
Friends of the Earth
Agnieszka Fryszman
Jose Luis Fuentes
Kit Gage
Rosa Garcia
Janice Gehlmeyer
Mary Geissman
Georgetown Law – Institute for  
 Public Representation
Andrew GeraghtyCarsten GerickeFrances Geteles-Shapiro
Rana Ghaleb
Tyler Giannini
Gibbons P .C.Cathe Giffuni
John Gilmore
Beth Gilson
Leah Gitter
Sarah Goetz
Miriam Gohara
Deborah Golden
Eliza Golden
Brian Goldman
Carla Goldstein
Thomas C. Goldstein
Bill Goodman
Melissa Goodman
Debbie Gordon
Sabrina Gordon
Richard Gottfried
Amy Gottlieb
William Gould
Amanda Gourdine
Eldon GreenbergGreenpeace
Kate Greenwood
Colin Greer
Olivia GreerFriends and Allies (continued)
CCR SpotlightMerry Neisner  is a CCR volunteer who for several years has distributed our Jailhouse Lawyers  
Handbook (JLH), a free CCR/NLG publication that we send to prisoners throughout the country. Merry 
responds to hundreds of prisoners’ letters per month, sending out a package of print resources and often 
researching further referrals, resources or answers to legal questions. She has made a real and positive  
impact on the lives and conditions of prisoners as well as on the work of the Center.
“ I got the idea to volunteer at an event where CCR presented The Articles of  
Impeachment against our last president. Sending the JLH, the Constitution  
and the Human Rights Declaration to prisoners who write in is such a concrete 
and simple act. The fact that thousands of incarcerated people ask for legal  
information, and then receive it, is mind-boggling to me. For me, knowing  
CCR lawyers whose cause is the Constitution and who are in this struggle for the 
longhaul is a source of real inspiration.”Grinnell College
Bob Guild
Barbara E. Hadsell
Hadsell, Stormer, Keeny, Richardson  
 & Renick
Jonathan HafetzHiba Hafiz
Lisa Hajjar
Melissa Hale Woodman
Julie Hall
Kimberly Hamper
Harvard Human Rights Program
Harvard Law Student Advocates  
 for Human Rights
Dalia HashadKatherine Hawkins
Steve Hawkins
Mike Healey
Art Heitzer
Eric HellermanOwen Henkel
Caitlin K. Henry
Madeleine Hensler
Rick Herz
Damon Hewitt
Daniel Heyman
Carolyn Hicks
Ginny Hildebrand
Jaribu Hill
Morgan Hill
Rachel Hill
Claire Hobden
Paul L. Hoffman
Taylor Hoffman
Jean Hoffmann
Sarah Hogarth
Adrienne Holder
Toni Holness
Scott HortonSumi Hoshiko
Ina Howard-Parker
Carolyn Hsu
Margaret Huang
Shanti HubbardJayne HuckerbyHuman Rights First
Human Rights Watch
Marianne Humbersot
Chaumtoli Huq
Zaid Hydari 
Immigrant Justice Solidarity Project
Institute for Policy Studies
Institute for Redress and  
 Recovery at Santa Clara Univ
Interfaith Coalition of Advocates for    Reentry and Employment (ICARE)
International Center for Transitional    Justice (ICTJ)
International Federation for   Human Rights (FIDH)
International Human Rights   Clinic at Harvard Law Sch
International Human Rights Clinic   at Seattle Univ Sch of Law
International Network for Economic,   
 Social and Cultural Rights
Irving R. Kaufman Fellowship - HLS Bernard Koteen Office of Public  
 Interest Advising 
Philip IrwinRenee Isely
Jackman & Associates
Marianne Jackson
Ethan Jacobs
Omar Jadwat
Jameel Jaffer
Meetali Jain
Alan Jenkins
Bonnie Scott Jones
Keith Jordan
Jessica Juarez
Judson Memorial Church
Justice CommitteeJustice in Nigeria Now
Juvenile Justice Project  
 of Louisiana
Marie KahnDavid KairysKairys Rudovsky Messing &   Feinberg LLP 
Johanna KalbWolfgang Kaleck
Carolyn Kalos
Joy Kanwar
Craig Kaplan
Dana Kaplan
Woody Kaplan
Jonathan Kaufman
Paul Keegan
Allen Keller
Kate Kelly
Sarah Kermensky
Mahdis Keshavarz
Ateqah Khaki
Seher Khawaja
Doane Kiechel
Michael Kieschnick
Jane KimPeter Kinoy
Kim Paula Kirkley
Rachel Kleinman
Klimaski & Associates
Jennifer Kostyu
Makane Kouyate
Kramer Levin Naftalis & Frankel LLP
Susan Krehbiel
Ruth Kreinik
Michael Krinsky
Frank Krogh
Lisa Kung
Emily Kunstler
Margaret Ratner Kunstler
Sarah Kunstler
Steven Kurtz
Leonard Kurz
Ira Kurzban
Kurzban Kurzban Weinger & Tetzeli Neal Kwatra
Dror Ladin
Jim Lafferty
Lambda Legal Defense and  
 Education FundElena LandriscinaDarren LaVerne 
Law Office of Judith Brown Chomsky
Daniel Lee
Legal Aid Society of New York
David Lerner
Judy Lerner
Rachel Levine
Kirsten Levingston
Richard Levy
Levy Ratner, PC
Eric Lewis
Megan Lewis
Dahlia Lithwick
Paula & Barry Litt
Jules Lobel*
Terry Lodge
Carlos Lopez
Dana Lossia
Sonia LowNicholas Lusiani
Lutheran Immigration and  
 Refugee Services
Tarek MaassaraniLisa Magarrell
Make the Road, NY
Colette Makenian
Vladimir Makhlis
Carmelyn Malalis
Malcolm X Grassroots Movement 
(MXGM)
Anjana Malhotra
David Mandel- Anthony
Susan Baker Manning
Joe Margulies
Melissa Marks
Frank Marotta
Robin Martin
Rikki MartinezMolly McCowen
Alison McCrary
Neil McGaraghan
Brian McTigue
Garth Meintjes
4142Ari Melber
Pamela Merchant
Cassie Metcalf-Solvo
Matthew Meyer
Danny Meyers
Jill Meyers
Steven Miles
George Miller
Katherine Miller
Monica Miller
Sam Miller
Miller & Chevalier Chtd
Susan Misner
Neera Mohess
Jonathan Moore
Tamara Morgenthau
Morrison & Foerster LLP
Sahr MuhammedAlly
Jumana Musa
Rafael MutisMarie N’Diaye
Joanna Naples-Mitchell
National Association of Environmental  
 Law Students
National HIRE NetworkNational Lawyers Guild, National Office
National Lawyers Guild -  
 Bay Area Chapter
National Lawyers Guild - LA ChapterNational Lawyers Guild - NYC Chapter
National Organization for Defending   
 Rights and Freedoms (HOOD)
NC Stop Torture NowMerry Neisner
Victoria Nelson
Sarah Netburn
Netroots Nation
New York Coalition Against Torture
New York Lawyers for the   Public Interest
Natalie Ngoc TruongAndrew Nicolai
Terri Nilliasca
Nixon Peabody LLPTom NolanNorthwestern Univ Sch of Law’s Center  
 for International Human Rights
NYCLU
NYU Washington Square Legal  
 Services
October 22nd Coalition to Stop   Police Brutality
Ricky and Cheri O’DonoghueOffice of the Appellate Defender
Zara Ohiorhenuan 
Oil Change
Barbara Olshansky
Brad Olson
William T. O’Neil
Rachel Oppenheimer
Ramona Ortega
Palestinian Center for Human Rights
Daniel Pancotti 
Egizio PanettiCarly J. Pansulla
Brian Paragas
Vikram Parekh
Dennis Parker
Helene Parker
Tom Parker
Jill Pasquarella
Mona Patel 
Peoples’ Justice
People’s Law Office
C. William Phillips
Physicians for Human Rights
Jason S. Pinney
Police Transparency &  
 Accountability Project 
Ai Jen PooKatherine Porterfield
Emily Powers
Fred PrattFreya Putt
Rabinowitz, Boudin, Standard,  
 Krinsky & Lieberman, P .C.
Leila RachidiKaren RanucciMichael RapkinMichael Ratner*
Ratner, DiCaprio & Chomsky LLP
Nathaniel Raymond
Cynthia Reed
Lauren Regan
Katja Rehm
Paul Rehm
Norman Reimer
Steven Reisner
Remember Saro-Wiwa
Isha Renner-Wright
Reprieve
Republican Attorneys Association   
 (RAV – Germany)
David RhodesAnne Richardson
Rights for Imprisoned People with   
 Psychiatric Disabilities (RIPPD) 
Rights Working Group
Jenny Rivera
Riverside Church
Richard Roberts
Marion Rodriguez
Franklin Romeo
Mindy Roseman
Alex & Carole Rosenberg*
Ben Rosenfeld
Jordan Rubenstein
Len Rubenstein
James Rubin
Abby Rubinson
David Rudovsky
Visuvananathan Rudrakumaran
Rheba Rutkowski
Ellen Ryan
Miriam Saag-Maasz
Kathryn Sabbeth
Safe Streets/Strong CommunitiesNaomi Sager
Seema Saifee 
Radhika Sainath
Yanick Salazar
Ivor SamsonDouglas SapolaMeg Satterthwaite
Sally Saulvester
Pamela Sawnhey
Jeremy Scahill
Ann Marie Scalia
Schnader, Harrison, Segal & Lewis LLP
Rocky Schoen
Marty Schoenhals 
Schonbrun, DeSimone, Seplow,  
 Harris and Hoffman
Steven H. SchulmanMark A. Schwartz
Judy Scolnick
Scott & Scott
Randy Scott-McLaughlin
Seattle Univ Sch of Law
Liliana Segura
Stephen Seliger
Brad SeligmanJohn Sellers
Barbara Seniawski
Seton Hall University
Sex Workers’ Project - Urban  
 Justice Center
Meera ShahHan Shan
Steve Shapiro
Moh Sharma 
Ted Shaw
Stanley & Betty Sheinbaum
Shell Guilty
Julie Shelton
Peter Shepherd
Galen Sherwin
Henry Shi
Kareem Shora
Reggie Shuford
Siegel & YeeSierra Club
John Sifton
Sikh Coalition
Julie Simeone
Marco SimonsFriends and Allies (continued)Amardeep Singh
Amrit Singh
Gwynne L. Skinner  
Skirball Foundation
Claudia Slovinsky
Prof. Ronald C. Slye
Michael C. Small 
Alexandra Houston Smith
Carol A. Sobel
Joshua A. Sohn
Stephen Soldz
Lucia Sommer
Sonnenschein, Nath & Rosenthal
Michael S. Sorgen
Raji Sourani
Southern Legal Counsel
Elisabeth Springer
Jennifer Stark
Nancy Stearns
Arlene SteinbergIrene Steiner
Beth Stephens
Christina Stephenson 
Michael J. Sternhell 
Dan Stormer
Michele StormsEric Stover
Nan Strauss
Ted Strauss
Vivian Stromberg
Robert Stroup
Matthew Strugar
Sarah Sturges
Zeeshan Suhail
Liz Sullivan
Joanne Sum-Ping
Martha Swan
Leigh Sylvan
Sylvia Rivera Law Project 
Dwede Tarpeh
Charles Tate
Mateo Taussig
Lauren Teukolsky
Nikki Thanos
Gerald Thompson
James McNair ThompsonEric A. Tirschwell 
Katherine Toomey
Gabriel Torres Rivera
Torture Abolition and Survivors  
 Support Coalition (TASSC)
Theresa TraberTraber & VoorheesRobert Trujillo
UC Berkeley Human  
 Rights Center
Sue UdryUnited for Peace & Justice
Unrepresented Nations and  
 Peoples Organization
Urban Justice CenterUS Human Rights Network
Uyghur American Association
Meredith Vacek
John L. Van Sickle 
Eric Vang
Venceremos Brigade
Mara Verheyden Hilliard
Angela C. Vigil
David Vladeck
Bert Voorhees
Vulcan SocietyIan Wallach
Mariann Meier Wang
Peter & Cora Weiss*
Raymond Welch
Phil Wider
Richard R. WiebeBlanche Wiesen Cook  
Sabin Willett
Glynis Williams
Sarah S. Willie
Elizabeth Wilson
John Wilson
Michael Winger
Michael Withey
WITNESS
Witness Against Torture
Ben Wizner
Naomi Wolf
Chic Wolk
Women’s Rights Law Reporter,  
 Rutgers Univ Sch of Law
Gordon WoodwardLaura Flahive Wu
Mel Wulf
The Yes Men
Jacqui ZalcbergDorothy Zellner
Kimberly Zelnick
Weiqi Zhang
Tobias Eli  Zimmerman
Jason Zoladz 
43
CCR Spotlight Elizabeth Gilson  calls herself “profoundly marked” by the Sixties’ hope for a better America. That 
inspiration is evident in so much of her work, from teaching in a Lebanese village, to working for civil 
rights, to her law practice suing polluters and devising environmental solutions. Her zeal for speaking  
out against injustice motivated her to bring habeas corpus petitions on behalf of two Uighur men  
detained at Guantánamo since 2002. These cases are a significant undertaking, particularly for a solo practitioner, requiring regular travel to the prison; to D.C. courtrooms to fight obstructive government 
motions; translator costs; plus countless hours away from paying clients. Beth says she couldn’t do this work without the expertise and support from CCR’s staff, and the collegial network of habeas lawyers 
CCR has built. The Center for Constitutional Rights is grateful to Beth and the many other lawyers for 
their commitment and dedication to the rule of law.44Our planned giving program forms the bedrock of our efforts to build an endowment for CCR and to create an institutional legacy dedicated to upholding 
the hard-won victories of your lifetime and protecting them from future challenges and attack.  By becoming a member of the Thelma Newman Society, you 
will join others committed to ensuring that CCR will be there to fight into the next generation. Please contact us if you have any questions about making a 
bequest, endowment, gift annuity or other form of estate gift.
Ethel G. Ackley
Salah and  
Catherine Al-Askari
Vicki A. Alexander
Evelyn Alloy
Thomas E. and  
Donna Ambrogi
Ruth Andrews
Carol Ascher
Ruth Bardach
Philip Bereano
Gene C. Bernardi
Harvey Blend
David M. Block
Robert H. Bonthius
Frederick Briehl
Peter Broner
Mary L. Carr
Matthew Cooper
Shulamit Decktor
Margaret R. de Rivera
Theresa Del Pozzo
Marial Delo
Jeffrey M. Dickemann
George and  
Minna Doskow
Wendy Dwyer
Carl H. Feldman
George and Mary Ferger
Leona Feyer
Anne L. FilardoCurt J. Firestone
Solomon Fisher
Cecily Fox
Mary J. Geissman
Frances Goldin
Edward E. Goldman
Del Greenfield †
Ellen Harris
John Hayward
Martin and Mildred Hird
Timothy A. Holmes
Leo Hurvich †
Martin and  
Carolyn Karcher
Gordon D. Kent
Hilda Knobloch
Elizabeth S. Landis
Helen S. Lane
Joan Lewis
Evelyn C. Lundstrom
Hilda and  
Charles N. Mason, Jr.†
Normon Masonson
Alice G. McGrath
Priscilla J. McMillan
Barbara Michael
Joseph Morton
Eva S. Moseley
James Odling
Edward H. and  
Chorale† PageWilliam Parsons
Mahlon F . and  
Lovel P . Perkins
Rachel Porter
Jeanne Audrey Powers
Dolores M. Priem
David G. Rich
Jack L. Rihn
Marie H. Rothman
Michael A. Schlosser
Doris Shaffer †
Edwin Salpeter † and 
 Antonia L. Shouse
Robert M. Siegel
Rosalie K. Stahl
Margot Steigman
Joseph Stern
Barbara Stewart
Clio Tarazi
Ethel Tobach
Florence Wagner
Peter Weiss
Barbara West
Ginia D. Wexler
John H. Wilson
Howard D. Zucker
and the many members 
who have chosen to remain 
anonymousThelma Newman Planned Giving SocietyCCR Donors July 1 2008 - June 30 2009
Doris Shaffer
The Center for Constitutional 
Rights mourns the passing  
of our dear friend and long-time supporter, Doris Shaf-
fer (1929-2009).  A history 
professor at Nassau Commu-
nity College, Doris served as 
president of the faculty union for 14 years. One of her proudest accomplishments 
was winning the inclusion of sexual orientation in 
the union contract’s non-discrimination clause, mak-
ing NCC one of the first unions to do so. With her 
husband, Donald, she helped form the Great Neck 
Committee for Human Rights, and she served as a 
board member and chapter advocate of the New 
York Civil Liberties Union for more than 35 years. 
Doris devoted much of her life to working for  
social justice causes, and became a member of  
CCR’s Thelma Newman Planned Giving Society  
when she took out a Charitable Gift Annuity with us.  
After her retirement Doris could regularly be found 
volunteering in the CCR office. All of us at the  
Center will miss her good company and unfail-
ing support. We send our deepest condolences to  
Donald and their family.
deceased  †$100,000 And above
Anonymous
The Atlantic Philanthropies (USA), Inc.
Hilda and Charles N. Mason, Jr.†
The CS Fund/Warsh-Mott Legacy
Fidelity Charitable Gift Fund
The Ford Foundation
Lise Giraud †
Del S. Greenfield †
The HKH FoundationThe JEHT Foundation
The Oak Foundation
The Open Society InstituteThe Tides Foundation
The Vanguard Charitable Endowment Program
The Vital Projects Fund, Inc.The Wallace Global Fund
$50,000 - $99,999
AnonymousThe 1848 Foundation
The Angelina Fund
The Funding Exchange National Community FundsJohn Gilmore
Muriel Goldring 
†
The John Merck Fund
Madison Community Foundation
Richard B. and Marilyn L. Mazess
MoveOn.orgJames Robertson 
†
The San Francisco FoundationSamuel Wiener, Jr.
$25,000 - $49,999
AnonymousBardon-Cole Foundation
The Charles Evans Hughes Memorial FoundationThe Common Counsel Foundation
CREDO Mobile
Robert A. Friedman and Anita Davidson
Leo and Sherry Frumkin
John and Kathryn Greenberg
Victor and Lorraine Honig
The Jewish Communal FundThe Kaphan Foundation
Shel KaphanAlfred Knobler 
†
Joanna Knobler
Peter and Jane Knobler
Elizabeth S. LandisThe Libra Foundation
Zella LuriaKatherine and David Moore
Abigail Norman
The Normandie Foundation
Marie Henderson Rothman
Samuel Rubin Foundation
The Scherman Foundation, Inc.
Deborah H. Wald Peter and Cora Weiss
John H. Wilson
$10,000 - $24,999
Anonymous
The Alfred and Jane Ross Foundation
Thomas E. and Donna Ambrogi
Eric and Cindy Arbanovella
Laurie Arbeiter and Jennifer Hobbs
Frederick Benenson
The Blue Oak Foundation
The Bright Horizons Fund of the Tides Foundation
DLA Piper Foundation
The Epstein Teicher Philanthropies
Lois B. FeinblattThe Fiduciary Trust Company International
The Firedoll Foundation
The Frances and Benjamin Benenson FoundationThe Fritz and Yvonne Pappenheim Fund  
 of the Tides Foundation
Adelaide GomerThe Grodzins Fund
The Helena Rubinstein Foundation
John B. and Sarah L. HenryIara Lee and George Gund III Foundation
The Jeannette and H. Peter Kriendler  
 Charitable Trust
The JKW FoundationStephen and Marian J. Kent 
†
The Liberty Hill Foundation
Jules Lobel
The Lois and Irving Blum Foundation Inc.
Nancy Meyer and Marc Weiss
Eva S. Moseley
Holly Myers and Kirk Neely The New Prospect FoundationM. William Pomerance 
†
The Puffin FoundationSteve and Carolyn Purcell
The Ratner Family
Reed Smith The Richard A. Busemeyer Atheist Foundation
Perry and Gladys Rosenstein
Alfred and Jane RossRotonda Foundation
Silicon Valley Community Foundation
Louis SlesinAdam and Jane Stein
Jean Stein 
Florence WagnerWilliam B. Wiener, Jr.
The William B. Wiener, Jr. FoundationFounders Circle  gifts of $1,000 and above
45$5,000 - $9,999
Anonymous
Franz and Marcia AllinaJoan Antonucci 
†
The Aquidneck FoundationKay Berkson and Sidney HollanderDiane BoehmMartin D. BranningVirginia BrodyThe Bydale FoundationElizabeth A. Castelli L. Sandra ColiverDavid Kimmel FoundationThomas DurstNels Ekroth 
†
Marc FalkoffSolomon FisherJames B. and Louise FrankelDaniel Greenberg and Karen NelsonEvelyn HaasSusan J. Haas and Keith J. PattiJewish Community Federation  
 of Cleveland
The Key FoundationDavid Kimmel FoundationWilliam D. KirbyLinda Krupa 
†
Landau Family FoundationWilliam LankfordThomas A. LehrerJoan LewisBarry and Paula LittDaniel MargolisWilliam G. MascioliRob McConnell and Maria DeCastroVincent McGeeMildred Miller 
†Maryanne MottThe New York Community TrustRichard L. PearlstoneThe Posel FoundationAnne PoselMitzi C. RaasRalph E. Ogden Foundation, Inc.Ronald and Deborah B. RatnerAlex J. and Carole Rosenberg Beatrice SternThe Stewart R. Mott Charitable TrustSteven R. VanBeverWendy Vanden HeuvelNancy K. ViolaGeorge WallersteinWilliam Lehrer Charitable FundAnne C. WilsonChic WolkBarbara A. Zeluck
$2,500 - $4,999
AnonymousAlterman & Boop, LLPDaniel L. Alterman and Li Wah LaiNabil M. and Ann S. AmerRita L. and William J. BenderMaryalice Bigham-HughesBoston Trust and Investment  
 Management Company
John CarusoJohn A. Chandler and  
 Elizabeth V . Tanis
The Chicago Community FoundationPeter and Stella EllistonCorrina FalesEvan M. FalesDaniel and Anita FineGregory H. Finger and Joan HollisterLouis FisherThe Elizabeth M. Gitt Foundation Janice GoodmanPatricia B. GreenwaldLisa HonigThe John D. and Catherine T.  
 MacArthur Foundation
Eugenia KalnayJulie Kay and Tom FergusJeffrey M. KellerTimothy J. Lee and Eleanor McBrideMark Lopez and Leslie Spira LopezTom W. LyonsMahmoud and Laila MohamedRichard A. MoranNational Philanthropic TrustJill W. Nelson and Thomas R. BidellNetwork for GoodWendy R. Olesker and John CrowThe Overbrook FoundationMary R. and Benjamin I. PageThe Philanthropic CollaborativeWilliam L. and Sandra L. RosenfeldEric C. and Fiona RudinEdwin E. Salpeter 
† and Antonia   
 Lhamo Shouse
Alfred H. Schwendtner and  
 Carole Wagner
Seymour & Sylvia Rothchild Family    2004 Charitable Foundation
Donald and Doris
† Shaffer
Wallace M. ShawnMorton Sobell and  
 Nancy Gruber
Richard A. SobleLynn S. SternThe Susan Sarandon  
 Charitable Foundation
Katrina Vanden HeuvelWorkable Alternatives FoundationThe Wyss Family Foundation
$1,000 - $2,499
AnonymousLeslie Abbey and Steve DietzMichelle and Bernard AisenbergTheresa F . AltDonna Katzin and Alan AltschulerJ.W. AndersonRuth AndrewsHarry AnduzeBarbara M. ArmentoJanet S. Arnold and Michael H. RubinSally Arnold and Christine WeirThe Arthur & Henrietta  A. Sorin    Charitable Trust
Cindy Barber and Horace HortonJoseph BaribeauThe Beavertides FoundationMedea Benjamin and Kevin DanaherCharles L. and Leslie A. BergerMatthew A. Berlin and  
 Simone Liebman
Ara and Linda BernardiFrancella W. and Jose F . BetancourtAlexis and Michael BleichCharles R. and Linda BrainardJudith T. and Donald S. BroderPeter and Alice BronerEdward J. and Marion D. BronsonAllan and Muriel BrotskyJudith ButlerTara A. Caffrey and Jeffrey J. Vroom
46CCR Donors
deceased  †John Callas
Ann Cammett and Marcia GalloJames T. Campen and Phyllis EwenCapital Trust Company of DelawareTeresa M. CastelliLaura and Richard ChasinDavid D. Cole and  
 Cornelia T. L. Pillard
The Community Foundation  
 of Santa Cruz
Rhonda CopelonJanet Corpus and John HoffmeyerCharles M. Crane and Wendy BreuerGrace B. CreceliusDavis Wright Tremaine, LLPEmily Deferrari and Mel PackerMadeline H. deLone and  
 Robert L. Cohen
Democrats.com LLCMichelle J. DePassHerman A. Dobbs, Jr.James K. DonnellKevin DonovanDaniel L. and Lee M. DrakePaul and Susan I. DurrantM. Scott DuttonDiane Early and Daniel GigoneEddie EasterlingShiva EftekhariHarrison Eiteljorg, IITony EliasEsdaile, Barrett and EsdaileEdward A. Everts and  
 Deborah C. Davis
Robert M. FactorRobert Fertik and Antonia StolperRobert Fodor and Thurid H. ClarkMargaret A. GeddesLola and Isaiah GellmanJohn J. GibbonsSherna B. and Marvin GluckLeonard C. GoodmanWaleed K. and Hannah GosaynieFrank and Judith GreenbergLynn Greiner and  
 John B. Midgley
Byron A. HammerGina HarmanMarjorie HeinsThe Helen Keeler Burke Charitable    Foundation
Robert and Claire HeronSusan J. HesselRosemary HicksWinifred W. HirschMichael J. Hirschhorn and  
 Jimena P . Martinez
Zach Hochstadt and Sadie HoneyRandall D. Holmberg and Evelyn YeeTimothy A. HolmesRuth W. HubbardHunton & WilliamsSteven and Miriam HymanAbdeen M. Jabara and  
 Holly Maguigan
Chung-Ja and Cassim M. JadwatJewish Federation of Greater SeattleMaile N. JohnsonJoseph Rosen FoundationWilliam Josephson and Barbara HawsHenry S. Kahn and  
 Mary Gillmor-Kahn
Wendy Kaminer and Woody KaplanTerry L. KarlJoyce Kirschner and  
 Richard S. Aronson
Joanne Kliejunas and Irving LublinerMarily KnieriemenDavid KormanRochelle KormanJoyce and Max KozloffMerle and Phyllis KrauseDoug KreegerEdward M. Krishok and  Peggy K. Hong
CCR SpotlightThe JEHT Foundation  supported CCR on projects ranging from the New York  
Telephone Justice Campaign to Guantánamo, and to cases against Blackwater, the notorious 
military contractor. JEHT always went “out on a limb” funding work that many found too politi-
cally sensitive.  Sadly, the foundation closed its doors in 2009, their investments a casualty of  
Bernard Madoff’s fraud. CCR will miss the deep relationship we had with this staunch partner 
in the social justice struggle. JEHT helped CCR become the effective institution that it is today 
and their past support will continue to have an impact for years to come.
“ I am proud of JEHT’s support for CCR, which, as it so often does, 
jumped out first to challenge the U.S. government’s lawless detention 
of prisoners in Guantánamo and elsewhere.  CCR acts with the haste 
that those in peril demand from a human rights organization!”  
– Garth Meintjes, former JEHT Program OfficerRobert Crane, Foundation President, accepting an award 
on behalf of JEHT from CCR Executive Director, Vince Warren, at CCR’s President’s Reception in May 2009.
4748Joseph B. and Rachel Kruskal
Roger S. and Belle KuhnLuis and Lee LainerJohn W. and Claudia LampertiEileen and Paul F . Le FortPhyllis and John LehmanStephen O. LesserDaniel LevinWilliam L. LewisPhilip and Elsa R. LichtenbergLeslie LomasGail K. Lopez-HenriquezHubert and Rachelle MarshallWarren E. and Joyce W. MathewsAlice G. McGrathPriscilla J. McMillanC. Victor McTeer Robert H. and Ellen V . MeeropolJuliet A. MelamidDonald and Suzanne MillerRuthann B. and Warren H. MillerL. David MirkinDaphna H. MitchellRichard W. and Barbara F . MooreRichard H. MorsePatricia F . MullahyNancy J. Newman and  
  Mark Walstrom
Louie D. Nikolaidis and  
 Rachel Horowitz
Michael O. NimkoffHenry NorrThe O Live FundGregory O’KellyIsabelle C. OsborneWayne OuttenMahlon F . and Lovel P . PerkinsGloria C. Phares and Richard DannayHanna F . PitkinFrances R. PoselJames R. PotterWilliam P . and Debra Dupre Quigley Brian J. RatnerKenneth ReinerJennie Rhine and Tom MeyerDavid RhodesAdrienne RichLawrence and Janet A. RivkinRonald A. and Susan Hirtz RobboyJames Roberts and Patricia CalbersonWayne RobertsFredelle and John RobinsonJohn RogersAlbert RubenJoseph L. RubyThe Saint Paul FoundationEleanor C. Salkind 
†
Jack SawyerJames A. Schamus and  
 Nancy Kricorian
Julie SchecterAnne and Tom ScheuerRobert E. Schoen and  
 Nancy Bernstein
William J. and Katherine L. SchrenkEdwin M. Schur and  
 Joan Brodsky Schur
Schwab Charitable FundSteven SchwartzSusan ScottWilliam SeamanSteve SeltzerElizabeth and Stephen ShaferCareen B. ShannonStanley and Betty SheinbaumPeter and Elizabeth C. ShepherdAlbert D. Shuldiner and  
 Emily B. Myers
Sidney Stern Memorial TrustEmily M. SkolnickMichael Steven Smith and  
 Debby Smith
Michelle D. SmithCarolyn J. SorensenMichael S. SorgenDouglas K. SpauldingEmily A. Spieler and Gregory WagnerBarbara S. Starfield and  
 Neil A. Holtzman
Lewis M. and Kitty SteelRobert B. Stewart and  
 Susan Waterman
Elizabeth and Byron StookeyClayton A. StruveSusan D. SusmanAlan and Victoria SussmanJudith A. Szepesi and  
 Charles Merriam
John ThackrayBetsy Thomas and Adrian WennerThomas and Sue Pick Family FundBonnie E. Thomson and  
 Eugene Tillman
Merry TuckerEdward R. TufteHazel Tulecke and William B. HoustonBarbara C. and Franklin M. TurnerJames S. TyreNina UntermyerMarshall and Deborah WaisDaniel J. and Judith WalkowitzJulia A. and James E. WallaceVincent Warren and Ann Marie ScaliaPeter and Cora WeissLee Wallis WhitingSabin and Marta WillettLincoln and Wilma C. WolfensteinRichard K. WorthingtonEllen YaroshefskyAnn YasuharaNiki and Manoucher Yektai William D. Zabel and Deborah MillerMichael F . Zweig and  
 Kathy Chamberlain
Lisa B. Zycherman
$500 - $999
AnonymousPearla AbramisKaren AbravanelEthel G. AckleyCathy AlbisaNeil AltmanJudy A. Austermiller and  
 Warren R. Betty
Radhika Balakrishnan and  
 David W. Gillcrist
Margo BaldwinThe Baltimore Family FundBo BarkerRainer C. BaumRichard BealeMyron Beldock and Karen DippoldAlvin BennettJames M. Bergin and Ellen P . LukensAmanda Bergson-ShilcockJudy BierbaumHelen C. Black CCR Donors
deceased  †George and Eleanor Bollag
Beth Marie Bonora and Michael LaineEve BorensteinBelinda B. BreeseAngela BrooksJonathan BrownRichard J. BrownRobert E. L. and Sylvie Maria BrownCalvert Social Investment FoundationDeborah CampbellTim Caro and  
 Monique Borgerhoff Mulder
Ira CarpRachel K. CharnyDouglas and Ann L. ChristensenKay CloudHope CobbTimothy CoffeyJerry CohenColchamiro Family FoundationThe Columbus FoundationDavid B. Cone and Kellie StoddartMichael CooperMary Ellen Copeland and  
 Edward M. Anthes
Asho I. CraineRobert A. CunninghamE. Patrick Curry and  
 Susan B. Campbell
David CynamonMohammed and Marcia F . DaoudiDatacap, Inc.Kenneth DeedBindu DesaiRiva DewittAnnette W. DickersonRoger R. DittmannHildegard DorrerLewis and Edith S. DrabkinBarry N. and Ismartilah DrummondRobert DubrowMargaret L. EberbachAnne EhrlichSusan L. EinbinderThe Elias FoundationPeter ErlinderWallace B. and Heike EubanksDiane FarsettaLenore Feigenbaum and  
 Simon J. Klein
Ed and Ann FergusonJan L. and Cornelia FloraKathleen FonesAngela and Jeremy FosterMaria C. Freeman and  
 Donald K. Larkin 
William H. FrelickAmanda H. FrostGail FurmanKit Gage and Steven J. MetalitzRonald E. and Jacqueline GarrettMary GeddesSheila GeistGeneral Board of Global MinistriesDaniel GillmorMaxine S. GoadKurt and Sorel GottfriedJane S. Gould 
†
Allen and Nancy GreenleafJerry A. GreenwaldAriela GrossCollier M. HandsSara and Donna HaneyGuy M. HarrisRachel J. HarrisMary E. Harvey 
†
Paul Hathaway and Lynda DaileyJoseph Herron and Patricia BairdLouise S. HertzCatherine N. HolmesHoneybee FoundationAllen M. Howard and  
 Peggy Friedman
Richard R. and Elizabeth C. HoweEmbry M. HowellJ. William Ingeman Zeljko IvanekMargaret JahnJewish Community Endowment FundGail K. JohnsonMarc E. JohnsonTim C. JohnsonBrian P . JohnstonKenneth M. Jones and Carol Koury Herschel and Margrit KaminskyAmy KaplanMartin and Carolyn L. KarcherPatrice KaskaAntje KatcherMark KempsonJohn I. KennedyCharles L. and Anna KersteinJerry KickensonAshish KilamDonald D. and Margaret A. KioseffHeinz J. KlugHilda KnoblochKaren KrahulikPhilip KramerFayette F . KrauseJames KwakJeffrey LamkinJudy LernerDavid R. LewisBetsy Lieberman and  
 Richard Groomer
Ray LightstoneRichard and Rita G. LipsitzMiriam H. Lukens 
†
M. Brinton Lykes and  
 Catherine M. Mooney
Green Meadow Fund of the Maine  
 Community Foundation
Richard Makdisi and Lindsay WheelerElena S. ManitzasRichard W. Mark and  
 Maura L. Harway
John B. and Martha S. MarksPeter J. MayerHarold A. MayersonDavid McColginThe McGraw-Hill Companies  
 Employee Giving Campaign
Barbara J. MeislinBarbara MichelShelley and Joe MillerLynn and Arthur R. MinkHelen R. MooreJohn MuellerThomas B. and Johannah NewmanCaroline M. PaulDon PierceEllyn and James PolshekNancy R. PoselBennett M. Pudlin and  
 Margaret Ann Judd
Christopher H. and Cynthia F . PyleC. Raphael
49Tina L. Rasnow
Julie B. RauchMarcus Rediker and  
 Wendy Z. Goldman
Claire Reed and  
 Jonathan R. Scheinbart
Doris E. ReedAnn ReinhartGeorge RenningerJoyce L. RichardsonJill and Ronald RohdeBarbara and Oren RootThe Rose FoundationGeorge S. Rothbart and  
 Ingrid Scheib-Rothbart
Dean G. RubyVirginia C. RuschGladys B. RustayNaomi SagerSigrid SaloBrian SandlinRobert Schaibly and Steven SorlaEdward Schiff and Betsy PinoverDeborah Schifter and  
 Alan Schiffmann
Ruth K. SelbyEvan D. and Janet ShaadAnn and Ahmad ShiraziBenjamin R. ShreckDorothy Slater-BrownCherida C. SmithAnn W. SpeckmanJohn Spragens, Jr.Peter D. StanskyNorton and Irene StarrNancy StearnsAmanda StentRichard P . SutterThe T. Rowe Price Program  
Kelly F . TaylorRichard TeitelbaumMark TheuneWilliam ThomasJoseph and Cornelia C. TierneyMurray TobakElizabeth TuccilloMark TushnetUnited WayJoseph VitaleSteven Vogel and Jane HendersonGeraldine WallmanRichard F . WattMichael WaxAlan M. Weiner and Nancy MaizelsDaniel Weiss and Anne StewartAnne WidmarkSarah S. WillieJeffrey and Lucinda WilnerJo-anne WolfsonRobert R. and Blaikie F . WorthFrank O. WyseRobert J. and Karen R. Zelnick
$250 - $499
Anonymous
A Hundred MonkeysMilton AbelsonRobert and Miriam AbramovitzStephen R. and Virginia AbramsMerritt and Barbara AbrashWilliam H. AbrashkinEmory W. and Marilyn M. AckleyJudy AllenDaniel AltmanEthan D. and Sandra D. AlyeaAmerica’s CharitiesStuart H. AndersonAndrew M. Ansorge and  
 Laura S. Koopman
Barbra Apfelbaum and  
 Michael Reuveni
Carol H. ArberBella D. August and  
 Everett Belvin Williams
Jaime S. and Christine AustriaGeorge S. and Jill S. AvruninRebecca BakuninFrank C. and Blythe Baldwin Will BeattyBeate K. BeckerMichael BeerDenise BellDouglas J. Bender and  
 Emma B. Trejo
Ruth G. and Carl S. BensonAndrew J. Berlinger and  
 Nancy C. Scerbo Berlinger
Estelle A. and Howard A. BernWilliam I. BernellBethesda Friends Meeting:  
 Religious Society of Friends
Helga K. BilikPeggy BillingsStephanie G. and Jacob G. BirnbergStanley and Naomi BleifeldAnne BloomScott BohningBarton and Barbara BoyerLila BraineKevi P . BrannellyPaul BrewerLois V . BromsonBrad and Liana Brooks-RubinWes CallenderPhil M. CampbellWaifun Becky Chan and  
 Kurt Breuninger
Gordon A. ChapmanAva CheloffRenee D. Chotiner and  
 Stuart W. Gardner
A. Stephens and Helen ClayWallace B. ClelandMarilyn B. Clement 
†
Jane C. and John G. ComfortThe Community Church of New York   Unitarian Universalist
Janet M. ConnJim and Cecilia A. ConroyKaren Cooper and George GriffinClare M. CossSusan CrileBarbara Cuneo and Alan KesselhautPeter and Phyllis DaviesDayton Foundation DepositoryDavid P . Dean and  
 Catherine M. Bergmann
Richard A. DenisonStuart DesserRobert and Susan DeutschGerald DickinsonJoseph F . DohertyJeron E. and Marjorie DonaldsAlan and Susan S. DranitzkeBrendan DriscollBarbara L. DudleyCamille EhrenbergMichael EhrlichLaurel and Eugene EisnerAbdul El-TayefPamela D. EmersonBrad P . Engdahl and Patricia L. LaytonAnthony EwingTraci L. ExtMartin R. Feinman
50CCR Donors
deceased  †Ruth Finkelstein and Ruth Craig
Stuart M. FlashmanPaul D. Fogel and Ventura Y . ChalomMurray FoglerErica G. FoldyJohn M. and Nancy E. FosterKatrin E. and Steven B. FrankRobert A. and Evelyn D. FrankelElliot Fratkin and Martha A. NathanBernard Friedman and Lesley HyattRobert FuldWilliam R. GarnerEdward I. GeffnerMartin GellertPaula GellmanMargo R. George and  
 Catherine Karrass
Jamie W. GermanPatricia A. GermanEllen F . Gesmer and  Alan S. HydeJohn GibsonKaren GinsburgAmy GladsteinRichard A. and Carolyn GlicksteinHarriet S. Goldberg and  
Gregory C. JohnsonEdward E Goldman and Judith RivenEllen R. GoldmanRichard A. and Jill GollubKatherine GomezGeorge M. GoodburnClaire GottfriedHarold GreenblattMarcelle GreenfieldJeffrey GreyGeorge and Ingrid R. GuerciKaren W. GuzakHans C. and Linda HaackeAlice L. Hageman and  
 Aubrey N. Brown
Kathleen A. Hager and  
 Arthur A. Wasserman
Dwight HahnConstance HallH. K. Hall, Jr.David HarbaterLeora T. HarrisSule HarshJed HartmanThomas L. and Dorothy W. HaskellStephen A. HayesJenny HeinzHorace HeitmanRussell K. Henly and  
 Martha Lee Turner
Edward S. and Mary W. HermanBetty and Jackson HerringDavid G. HerrmannNoa HeymanHans HimeleinJean HoffmannSherrill HogenChristopher W. Hornig and  
 Nancy J. Garruba
Carole R. Horowitz and Richard L. LastStephen J. HrinyaLori D. HudsonKevin M. Hunt and Margaret DowningKristine A. HuskeyStella JacobsOmar C. JadwatRoberta JaffeJewish Foundation of GreensboroNorman I. JohnsonRalph A. and Bonnie C. JohnsonJeffrey A. JonesLee T. JosephJust GiveRobert KehrJudy K. KernPeg KeyesJoan D. and Arthur J. KidnayNobal E. and Martha E. KingPeter S. KlostermanTeresa M. KohlenbergBonnie Korman and Robert BishopJane and Ladis KristofEric Kruh
CCR SpotlightThe Critical Art Ensemble (CAE) Defense Fund  recently celebrated a victory for 
the First Amendment with the dismissal of criminal charges against artist and SUNY Professor, Steven 
Kurtz.  In 2004, Dr. Kurtz’s wife, Hope, died suddenly as the couple was putting together a show about 
genetically modified agriculture for the Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art. The police who responded after Hope’s death decided the couple’s art materials represented a bio-terrorist threat. Dr. 
Kurtz and his supporters spent the next four years fighting mail and wire fraud charges against him and 
a colleague. The team has graciously decided to donate the bulk of their remaining funds to CCR.
“ The CAE Defense Fund committee is extremely honored to be able to donate 
to the Center for Constitutional Rights. Throughout the rogue years of the 
Bush administration and to this day, CCR has stood on the just side of  
every legal dispute regarding rights on both national and international  
levels, no matter how unpopular or risky. “Steven Kurtz and participant in Critical Art  
Ensemble’s science-theater project GenTerra,  at the London Museum of Natural History, 2003. The project was among several seized in the FBI’s 2004 raid of Kurtz’s home.
51Karin Kunstler Goldman  
 and Neal Goldman
Lillian and Herbert Laskin
Ellie LauWilliam E. LeavittLisa LeffMartin and Gita LefsteinSue LeonardCathy J. LevineEve LevyRichard A. Levy and  
 Jane R. Hirschmann
Ida J. LewensteinDonald LipmansonGeorge F . Loewenstein and  
 Donna Harsch
Matthew LondonWilliam LorentzSivia W. LoriaCathy LuiLorraine LymanRamsay MacMullenNgaere Macray and David SeelerAnnie MakhijaniHarvey and Carole MallementGene Marchi and Travis SmithBonnie L. MaslinWilliam H. and Judith W. MatchettRobert J. and Maryann MaxwellRichard C. and  
 Francesca A. McCleary
Sarah McKeeMartin and Margaret MelkonianCarol J. and Donald MerrickBeth and David P . MeshkePaul MichabofskyJacqueline MillerMarvin and Marline MillerMae K. Millstone 
†
Charles MooreWhitney MoreScott MorganJ. Malcolm MorrisStephen MorrisPeter and Gail S. MottThomas V . MullerKathryn MulveyEdward S. MunyakLaura S. MurraSmita NayakJan Nefke and Ginny HildebrandMarilyn Neimark and Alisa SolomonRobert C. NewmanWilliam K. NisbetJulie NovkovCraig OettingerEdward H. PageCynthia L. Pansing and  
 Arlin S. Wasserman
Julie ParadisKristin ParkerBarbara ParsonsAlexandra E. PaulSteven PedersonRosselle PekelisRosalind PetcheskyDorothy Z. PetersCharlotte Phillips and Oliver FeinLynette B. PhillipsJohn W. Pilgrim and Petra E. JanopaulBarbara B. PolkJohn A. PollackBruce K. PollockFlorence B. PrescottKatharine M. Preston and  
 John Bingham
Kurt PrestonJim RadfordVicki Rajendra and  
 R. S. Krishnaswamy
Joanna M. Rankin and Mary FillmoreMartha RaynerKay G. ReevesDavid G. RichThe RMF FoundationRoberta RobanHerbert W. RobinsonSteven D. and Joyce RobinsonPaula RogovinBeth RosnerJanet R. RossMatthew RothschildEsther and Lewis RowlandMarcie A. Rubel and Mike RufoMark RuddPhillip M. RunkelJennifer RyanHoward D. SacksRegina Sandler-PhillipsMarc Sapir and Sheila ThorneGilbert and Alicia SaucedoPauline and Richard G. SaxonVivian SchatzGordon Schiff and Mardge CohenCamilla L. SchneiderSteven A. and Janet H. SchneiderMartin SchoenhalsEllen Schrecker and  
 Marvin Gettelman
Ruth and Charles B. SchultzMichael SchwalbeMeryl SchwartzJonathan SeidmanDeborah G. SenftRupa ShahAnthony ShihAmy ShipmanEugene and Marina ShpirtAlfred and Mary SianoFranklin SiegelRobert M. Siegel Susan A. SilversteinSusan Simone and David BellinChristopher SimpsonJaswinder Pal Singh and Silvia ErcolaniSkadden, Arps, Slate,  
 Meagher & Flom, LLP
David SkinnerCarl and Jane SmithCarol Smith and Joseph EspositoStephen S. SmithRebecca SolnitCarolyn SonfieldTimothy SozenSandra M. Squire FluckBen R. Stavis and Marjatta LyyraBurton SteckDavid J. Steichen, Jr.Jens StengerWayne StinsonIan E. StockdaleMildred B. StoutBert Stover and Teresa HolderNancy StrongAlice S. Sturm SutterDaniel B. SzyldMartin ThomsonJohn L. ThorstenbergJean TocheMichael Touger and Margaret LevittRobert TraverRandall H. Trigg and Caitlin StantonSue Lee K. TroutmanSelma and William TuckerCharles F . TurnerDavid B. TurnerRichard H. and Gail M. UllmanUnited Way California Capital RegionJill van BergMarc Van Der Hout and  
 Jodie Le Witter
John and Mira Van DorenDirk Van LoonChristine A. Vassallo
52
CCR Donors
deceased  †Deborah Ventura
Susan von ArxMary K. VossMark D. Wainger and  
 Rhoda Han Pu Woo
Doris B. WalkerDaniel F . WallowitzFrancis M. WaltersJennifer WarburgJoan M. WarburgChris WayJohn Weeks and Christine L. ChinniDavid R. and Joan WeimerThe Weithorn and  
 Ehrmann Families Foundation
Stanley S. and Muriel WeithornJames M. and Lori WellmanCarol Ann Wells and  
 Theodore T. Hajjar
Lawrence WeschlerJohn L. and Linda WetherbyDanny C. Wharton and  
 Marilyn C. Hoyt
Richard P . and Tobey M. WiebeJohn P . WilsonJeremy WoodburnAntonia WoodsJudith Yanowitz and  
 Harry S. Hochheiser
Wayne N. YoungJune ZacconeThomas ZaslavskyMitchell H. and Jane Zimmerman
$101 - $249
Anonymous
David J. AalderksEmily AchtenbergAndrew AckermanAlice K. AdamsMiriam S. and Stephen M. AdamsHarold AhrensRobert AisenbergLawrence AlbertsNorman AltstedterAmeriprise FinancialMark L. AmsterdamClifford E. AndersonStephen C. and Betty Ann AndersonRona Z. ArmillasM.L. ArmstrongKent AutreyIvan A. BackerKatherine Baker and Peter TitelmanPatrick and Cheri BakerLee BartellPauline M. Bassett and Alan KatzPaul W. Beach, Jr.Lenore BeakyMirriel Bedell and Judy D’AmoreEsther M. BeebeSara E. BeinertArthur and Anne BerndtJerry BernhardChandra Bhatnagar and Sunita PatelRussell BirchCameron BishopEvelyn BlackmanPatty BlumEllen Beth Bogolub and Neil FriedmanJeanne BornsteinEdna BosletJoan G. and Jack BotwinickGerard and Sabina D. BraunthalRobert S. Briggs and Virginia I. LohrGregory P . BrownFrancis BrueyJohn Brundage and Harriet ParsonsArthur W. and Alice R. BurksAntonio W. Burr and Diane di MauroJerrold S. and Barbara H. ButtreyRenee CafieroBlair and Josephine CampbellVicente L. Caride and Melissa MarksCheri Carr William J. CarryLynne and George CarvellJim CassidyDaniela CastaDarlene Ceremello and  
 Jessea Grennman
Carolyn ChambersMortimer H. Chambers, Jr.Stephen R. ChapmanJulian D. and Mildred ChazinChantal and Gregory L. CherlinSara P . and Ralph C. ChernoffJames R. and Roshan ChristensenAntonie K. ChurgDeborah CoatsworthRichard W. and Georgiena CobbBruce S. CohenJoseph D. and Cathy J. CohenVirginia and Douglas ColeJoanne M. CollierThe Community Foundation  
 of Western Mass.
Farok J. ContractorChristie CooperSandi E. Cooper and  
 John M. Cammett
Edward F . CorwinFred B. and Joyce CowanJennifer R. Cowan and Dan M. Jacob William CowlinThomas S. CraneDeborah CrawfordKen CrossmanGillian M. DaleMarion S. and Arthur D. DamickRon D. DanielsSidney and Selma DavisBarbara E. DawsonThomas E. DeCourseyBetty DevalcourtJoel DobrisGeorge and Minna DoskowRuth DrakeKeith DreierMichael DrohanEileen DrutzH. Stewart Dunn Jeanne M. DursiDavid J. EckGlenn EdwardsMelanie and Kenneth EhrlichColin EislerSusan ElanSteven and Deborah ElkintonT. David EpleyMatthew EvangelistaSaralee E. EvansLeonard and Helen EvelevHossam E. and S. H. FadelJeffrey A. Fagan and  
 Connie S. Fishman
Blythe Cutler and Jerry FairMark D. FalkoffFrances T. FarentholdMartha S. and Donald Farley Adriene FaulknerHarriet A. FeinbergJoan M. FerranteJudith A. FiestalDolly Filártiga and Diego CallesJoan FingerMay FisherPat L. FlierlAnne E. FlynnKenneth FogartyArnold and Renee FrankSteve FrankelJane M. and Howard Bruce FranklinFreedom Socialist PartyHarris FreemanHerbert FreemanNancy and Julian FriedenJoseph C. and Pearl G. GaleKatherine GallagherSheryl P . GardnerAllen GarrettWilliam H. GavelisMary J. Geissman
53David G. and Elisabeth Gelzer
Paul GeorgeFrances Geteles-ShapiroWilliam J. GilsonStephen GimberDavid C. GlickRobert M. GoldJean R. GoldmanElizabeth GolubritskyGoodrich Quality Theatres Inc.Bernard H. GordonDebbie GordonAmy GottliebPatricia M. Gracian and  
 Mikail K. SyeedCorwin Greenberg and  
 Parvati Maggie Grais
Stuart J. and Kathleen A. GreenbergBruce GriffithsJoan L. GriscomWilliam and Sharon GrossKathy Gruber and Fred LevyRuthe S. and Arnold GrubinScott GrusinMargaret and David GulletteAlbert L. and Virginia T. HalePeter HanauerLaura HanksHelen Hardacre and Linda J. SteinWilliam T. Hardison, Jr.Keith Hefner and Diana AutinPhyllis HeftVirginia HendryChristopher L. HenleyPeter HennerJohn and Rachel HeumanGregory HipwellAmy HochTamara HodgsonJohn D. and Lynne E. HoffmanJoan HoltRaymond A. HryckoElizabeth L. HubermanKabeer HussainStanley T. HutterJoan B. IndusiAnne Irving and Armin T. WrightPeter IsraelFrederick JacobsJudy and Henry JacobsMarc JahrWarren Jones and Marian GeeMarie I. Jordan and Joseph P . LyonsRussell F . and Mary L. JorgensenShayana KadidalAlfred E. and Mary S. KahnStephanie KaplanMargo Kasdan and Martin FiebertAnne KastorJoanna B. Katz
54CCR Donors
Jim Adams
Carolyn Aquino BergerMaher ArarLaurie Arbeiter and Jennifer HobbsRona Z. ArmillasLisa BarnettRita L. and William J. BenderChandra BhatnagarCarrie BlankfieldRobert BloomSascha BollagDanielle BrianGerard BuznickTom and Emma ByrneElizabeth A. CastelliRhonda CopelonJoe CourtneyCharles M. CraneJ. Wells DixonNorma and Tom DrysdaleDavid P . Elkinton and Janis HurstGregory H. FingerMark FlemingRoma FoldyBill GoodmanJames GormleyDan GottliebKaren GropperGitanjali GutierrezGerald HartingDaniel HatfieldEzra Molik Katz LoveNarasimhan LarkinJoe MaranzanoJoseph MarguliesPati and Bill MeadowsNathanael MillerJ. Griffin MorganDouglas MullkoffJen NesselHarold NortonFaith OlsonMarissa Patsey and Elizabeth StilesConnie PlattFrances R. PoselWilliam P . QuigleyMichael D. RatnerKevin RoeAlex J. RosenbergNicholas S. RyanLowell SachnoffJeffrey SchwartzJennifer Seltz and Niall O’MurchuMike Seltz and Gillie CampbellBrian SheppardSusan and Dan SimonsJane SloanBarbara E. SmithLeilani SquireLinda SteinEric Van BuskirkEric VangGeraldine WallmanVincent WarrenRichard W. WeiskopfPeter WeissMargee H. WolfChic Wolk
In honor of
Those listed below had donations made to CCR in their honor by thoughtful friends, family members or organizations that wanted to make a meaningful  
gift with lasting impact. Many of these donations were in lieu of birthday, wedding or holiday gifts, or in commemoration of a special occasion. We thank 
both the donor and the recipient for sharing their support and for introducing new people to CCR’s work.
deceased  †Caryn B. Kauffman
Arnold KawanoLynda KeatingSeymour KellermanMha Atma Singh KhalsaSara J. KleinDaniel L. KniesnerRivko KnoxLawrence Koplik and Sarah RobertsRichard Koretz and Judy E. BauerTammany M. Kramer and Shankar IyerFred P . and Beverly P . KrasnerSaul KripkeRobert E. and Francoise KulpRobert P . KunreutherCathryn H. Kurtagh 
†
Maria LaHoodLynne LaneDavid J. LansnerThomas R. LansnerJack L. LarsenLester J. Le VinessSusan L. LeeLeon LefsonDale and Gail LehmanWilliam J and Ellen S. LeiboldShari LeinwandEdward and Ann LeonardJerry D. LevineAlbert and Lulu Lee LevyJay LevyLisa LevyDaniel H. LichtenwaldJeffrey D. Lifson and Aloha E. Keylor Elisabeth LinderRobin LloydAnthony LoeppertRobert LoftfieldLeonard and Rosemarie LorensenMrs. Oscar C. Lundstrom Mary W. LuntRussell LyonsA. Kent and Kathleen MacDougallJohn J. and Janet A. MacdougallJeanette D. and Daniel J. MaceroPeter G. MacharrieArthur MaiselEmily M. MaloneyJerome H. ManheimPeter and Frances MarcuseLou MarjonStephen E. MarstonElaine K. MartinezElaine MatthewsMarian MatthewsAlan MaximukJames McCabeKevin McCafferyEileen M. McCarthyDelbert McCombsSteven McKinney and Jane ShoferNancy and William F . McLoughlinDonald M. and Sandra B. McPhersonCheren MeadeMarcos MeconiMedco Health SolutionsJennifer E. MeeropolSarah MehtaPamela M. Merchant and Kirby SackCarlin Meyer and Peter BienstockTerry MeyerBruce and Jane O. MillerElliot Mishler and Victoria SteinitzDavid B. MitchellThomas C. MitchellKaren MockPhilip C. MonradWard Morehouse and  
 Carolyn Toll Oppenheim
Jose L. MorinRobyn P . MorrisDenis D. Mosgofian and  
 Lori Liederman
John J. and Darlene MurninPeter F . NaccaratoShadi Nahvi and Mitra RastegarMariel Nanasi and Jeffrey H. HaasAndrea E. NashJason A. NeidlemanRonald NeschisGreta NewmanJohn S. NicholsRael NidessBarry J. and Ellen NigroshWilliam A. NorrisH. Toni NortonWilliam J. and Patricia C. NottinghamMarie Brutvan and Jay M. NovelloJames O’ConnellJane O’GradyMahmoud OhadiesfahaniLucienne O’KeefeMargaret OkuzumiPatricia OldhamOlaf S. and Sondra S. OlsenChristine OlsonNels OlsonSean O’MearaMartin OrnerHelen M. OrtmannNorman Oslik and Madeleine GoldeMichael T. OzogNancy M. PageDonald and Ellen ParkerSean L. PatrickTimothy PattersonLowell C. PaulAndrew PavelchekRobert and Ruth PeckEve PellDonald C. and Edith PelzSuzanne D. and Robert J. PetrucciPfizer Foundation Matching  
 Gifts Program
Anthony and Lizbeth H. Piel Erika PoethigAnne M. PoirierRachel PorterMary E. PrattHomer E. PriceBrian PridhamRobert J. Quartell and Florence D’EmiliaJohn QuimbyJoni Rabinowitz and John HaerElizabeth RadleySusan G. RadnerDeborah RandMargaret J. Randall and Barbara ByersAnn B. Reichsman and  
 Bruce A. Catalano
Robert A. and Mary J. ResnikWesley ReutimannNina ReznickTracy RiceDale RichardsonKathleen L. RichardsonSteven RiskinPeggie RoastCraig RoseJeffrey Rosenberg and Sally StanleyPaul C. RosenblattDennis A. Rosenblitt and  
 Arlene M. Pitman
Paul RosenblumHarriet Rosenfeld 
†
R. William Rosenfeld and  
 Suzanne M. Rubel
Anton B. RosenthalRobert Roth and Judith LernerJesse and Polly RothsteinErin RunionsGail RunkNerissa RussellR. A. RyanLaura and John SaadeLowell SachnoffMichael and Barbara SacksJohn J. SaemannDewitt SageNancy F . and Stefan SageArnold S. SaksLisa J. SamuelsonDonald E. SandersonDon Erik Sarason and  
 Mary H. Jennings
Juliet Sarkessian
5556Giuseppina Scalia
Martin M. Scher and Sylvia ChavkinDaniel H. and Paula SchillerSybil E. Schlesinger and  
 Steven Rosenberg
Ann M. SchneiderKeith SchwabRenata M. SchwebelRobert B. and Nancy ScottMarilyn SearcySybil ShainwaldCarol Ruth Sheinfeld and  
 Yoshifumi Tanaka
Scott ShershowSylvia ShihRuth E. ShinnMary and Henry N. ShoiketFrederick L. and Susan C. ShriverReggie ShufordAaron M. and Ruth ShureDaniel M. Siegel and Anne B. WeillsMatthew SirokaElmer D. and Patricia SitkinPeggy SkinnerVictor Skorapa, Jr.Barbara S. SmithDavid SmithMargaret M. SmithRosalind B. SmithJeannette SmythMarc A. SnyderSidney J. and Ethel B. SocolarStanley Sorscher and Judith M. ArmsJohn D. Spence and  
 W. Katherine Yih
Cary StegmanRobert A. and Elaine SteinJulie SteinbergerHenry J. and  
 Pamela Pomerance Steiner
Mark StephensEvelyn SternMichael J. SternhellMelvyn T. StevensBarbara StewartBertram and Lynne Y . StriebLucy A. SuchmanAlice C. and Arthur R. SwiftRonald J. TabakDolores S. TallerEvelyn P . TaylorFrances H. Taylor and Iris BiblowitzJonathan TeppermanJonathan C. and  
 Katsuyo H. Tetherly
Dianne V . ThielThomson Reuters Workplace  
 Giving Campaign
Jerome S. and Hazel TobisLee H. TockmanHoward and Nina TolleyBetsy Towle OrdlCorin TrachtmanMichael H. TraisonBernard TuchmanRobert TwomblyConnie W. TylerJames A. Van SwedenStephen F . Vause and Carlyn SyvanenJohn K. WadeColton P . WagnerGordon G. WaldronGail WalterLowell WaxmanAlexis B. WaysbergMarvin J. WeinbergerEdmund and Mary Brizius WeingartJeffrey WeinrichJoel Weisberg and Janet WatchmanMarilyn J. WeissmanDolores WeltyJohn WetherholdHilda M. WilcoxL. Bosworth WilliamsLawrence B. WilliamsCree M. WindusPatricia WinerEllen J. Winner and David A. LewisJanet A. WinstonLinda WintnerCharles S. WithuhnSteven J. WolfElizabeth A. WolfskillArnold C. Woodrich, Jr.Rachel WysokerKate YavendittiMona YounisLeonard and Ellen ZablowSandra A. Zagarell
George and Sondra ZeidensteinJeanette ZelhofH. Berrien ZettlerHoward D. Zucker  
Burton and Sally Zwiebach
CCR Donors
In memory of
Friends, family and loved ones made gifts to CCR in memory of the people listed below. By designating CCR for support (often instead of flowers), donors both 
promote their own social justice values and recognize that the individual being honored shared these values and would want the work to continue after them. 
Robert L. Black
Vivian Erdreich
Luis G. Espinola
Ruth FalesCarol Ferry
Anita Fried
Jack FriedmanLouise A. HalperLeo M. Hurvich
Dorothea Jameson Hurvich
William KunstlerJohn Leonard
Gladys Lyles
Iris MansourNorman Marcus
Rebecka Peters
Richard RoastBernard S. Robboy
Harriet Rosenfeld
Edith Rosenthal
Edwin E. SalpeterDoris Shaffer
Elton J. Warren
Richard A. WeinstockIrving M. Wolfe
deceased  †57$100
Anonymous F Aaron Abend F Rosalind and Robert Abernathy F Jane H. and Michael P . Adas F Susan S. Addiss F The Agape Foundation F Edwin Aiken 
F L D Albin F Charles K. Alexander II F Deborah Allen F Genevieve Allen F Nicholas Allen and Stacie Hammersberg F Alison B. Alpert F William C. 
Altham F James S. and Marilyn Bender Altschul F Rodolfo Alvarez F Daniella Ambrosino F Susan D. Amussen and David Underdown F Helene M. and James Anderson F Richard Angell F William and Kendall S. Anthony F Alan and Judith Appelbaum F Daniele Armaleo and Laurie Fox F Alice Aronow F Ken Ashe F Norman B. and Lenore E. Asher F Mike M. Asla F T. Whit and Jean L. Athey F Erik Azulay F Christian Balintec F Marion R. Banks F Dena 
Barbara F John Barker F Harvey Barlow F David Barnard F Alan W. and Ruth P . Barnett F Richard H. and Joanne L. Barsanti F Keith D. Barton F Martha Baskin F Robert Baskin F Patricia Bass F T. and E.C. Bastasch F Barbara S. and Philip L. Bayless F Mekayla Beaver F Irwin N. and Adeline Becker F Julie Beckman-Key F William P . Beckwith F Mario Beer F Mary and Robert Belenky F Edith and Alice Bell F Malcolm H. and Nancy Bell F Nick Bell F Karima Bennoune F Nathaniel and Mary M. Bercovitz F Beth Berkowitz F Berkshire Taconic F Daniel E. Berning F Alison Bernstein F Barry and Ocie Bernstein  
F Judith Bernstein F The Bernstein-Maslansky Fund of California F Ann E. and Warner B. Berthoff F Ricardo and Michelle Bertran F J. Beverley and G. Beverley F Jaime Biderman and Lauren Leroy F Robert M. Biesemeyer F Linda Billings F Harvey Blend F Linda and Mitchel S. Bollag F Max and Margot Bollock F Robert H. Bonthius and C. Frances Truitt F William M. and Ruth R. Boothby F Constance and David C. Borde F Stephen M. Born F Leslie Bornstein F William H. Bortree F Eric R. Boucher F Renee L. Bowser F James R. and Elizabeth W. Boylan F Jacqueline Boynton F Jeanne R. Boynton F Pamela Brennan F James Bridges F J. Patrick Briscoe F Chuck Broscious F Frieda S. Brown F E. Wayles Browne F Thomas W. Browne F Robert H. and Helene Browning F June L. Brumer F Donald Brusselars F Daniel J. Brustein F William Burke F Cathleen Burnett F Maxine Burress F John Burton F Helga Busemann F Barton Byg F David Byrne and Adelle Lutz F Harry A. Caddow, Jr. F Stephanie Campbell and Richard Gillock F The Carmel Hill Fund F Julia Carol F Eugenia T. Cayce F Florence Chan F Ernest Chanes F Roger Chapanis F Andrea Charles F Victor H. Chechanover F Michelle Chen F 
Wes Cherry F Steve A. and Laurel Chessin F Noam Chomsky F Robert J. and Bonnie J. Cindrich F Caleb Clausen F George S. Cleaver and Erin Y . Lee  F 
Steve Clemens F Robert F . Cohen and Kathleen Abate F Vicky E. Cohen F Jennifer G. Collins and Mark H. Ettinger F Eli Bernard and Helen Comay F David R. and Sally Y . Conrad F Hugh Cosman F Jason M. Cox F Gary L. Cozette and Joe Lada F James Crittendon F William and Mary H. Crotty F David Crowley F Lea Csala F Damian Cuffel F Barbara Curtis F Leif Danielson F Anya E. Darrow F Ernest Simon and Bianca Iano Davis F Hal Davis F Judith and Malcom Davis F Day is Done Foundations F Peter De Rege and Alison Hyslop F Dale Stull and Peter M. Demy F Frederick Dettmer F Masada Disenhouse F Richard Doberstein F Bill F . Dombrowski F Robert Donohue F Larry D. Doores and Janet R. Wolfe F Alvin and Rochelle Dorfman F Stephen N. and Phyllis B. Dorsi F Jim Douglas and Sasha Harmon F Lee Draper F Carol F . Drisko F Connie Drysdale F Walter Ducharme F Mark Dumont F David B. Dunning F Barbara H. Dupee F Lloyd Duren F Patricia Durham and Douglas L. Hammer F Thomas A. Durkin F Steven B. Dutky F Leslie Ebert F Joan E. Edelstein F Arthur Efron F Lance Egley F Michael C. and Tracy Bachrach Ehlers F Howard Ehrman F Nora Eisenberg and James Halper F Hester Eisenstein and Michael Tanzer F Calvin C and Eloise R. Eland F Jacqueline J. and Tareck Ralph Elass F Sheldon Elsen F Julie Elson F Mary Taggart Emeny and Hunter Ingalls F Ruth C. Emerson F Gilbert English F Steve and Amy Eppler-Epstein F Samuel I. Eskenazi F Gerald and Sandra Eskin F Essex County Faculty Association F Caroline L. Everts F Hillary Exter F Garold and Joyce Faber F Michael C. Fahey F Jeffrey S. Falk F Nancy Falk F Edna Farkas F Elizabeth Farnsworth F Joan L. Faust F Carolyn Federoff F Stephen Fein F 
Nina E. Felshin F Patricia Ferrari F A. Belden Fields and Jane Morhaz  
F Marie A. Finston F Roland and Gloria Finston F Richard and Miriam Flacks F Nancy Fleischer F Rachel Fletcher F Lionel L. Fogelman F Raquel For-sythe F Jane and Eugene Foster F Lorry S. Foster F Josh Fraidstern F Tovia G. and William Freedman F Timur Friedman F George Friemoth and Dale Sorensen F Michiko Fukuda F Dorah Funmilayo Rosen F Victoria J. Furio F Gregory T. and Gladys S. Furness F Elizabeth Gaines and John Mason F 
Stephen Gallant F The Gannett Foundation F Walter and Joan L. Geier F Gail Gelburd and Joel H. Meyers F Sherry Gendelman F Wendell A. George F Gale Gerogalas F John R. Gibson F James Gicking F Martha Gies F Leah Gitter F Bruce Gladstone F Nona Glazer F Herbert P . Gleason F Mary G. Gleysteen F Kayla E. Gluck F Amy M. Godine F Dan Goldberg and Melissa Jacobs F Donald Goldhamer and Nancy B. Mikelsons F Joan and Bert Golding 
F Jeremy P . Goldman F Susan D. Goldman F Margaret P . and William W. Goldsmith F Debora Goldstein F James E. Gonzales, II F Gordon Goodman F  Robin Goodman F Kathy Goos and Barry A. Werth F Robert Gould F Gene J. and Virginia Grabiner F Vera Grant F Spencer B. Graves and Betsy Wolf-
Graves F Alice Green and Charles Touhey F Graham Green F Philip I. and Gloria Greenblat  F Louise L. Gregg F Paul Grekin F Newton H. Gresser F 
John W. Grula and Joan Depew F Miguel Guerrero F Phyllis E. Guest F Lloyd H. and Virginia E. Guptill F Henrietta Gwaltney F Ruth A. Hafter F William 
F . Hagel and Martha Weisman F Elaine Hagopian F Christopher J. Halkides F John L. Hammond F Cynthia S. and Edwin Hamowy F Hedda Haning F 
James R. Hanson F Paul R. Hanson and Betsy A. Lambie F Faith Harasack F Robert B. and Kristi Hardin F James Hargrove F Robert W. Harmon F Sheldon M. and Margery Harnick F Harriet P . and Philip S. Harper F Robert J. Harris F Gerald Harting F Bartlett and Margaret Harvey F Judith Harway F Marguerite H. V . Hasbrouck F Mark A. and Jane D. Heald F Healey and Hornack P .C. F Dick S. and Loretta Heiser F Virginia P . Held F Peter N. Heller F 
Christopher Hess F Carolyn F . Hicks and Frank C. Marotta F Martin and Mildred Hird F Richard and Jean Hirschler F Charles J. Hitchcock and Deborah M. 
Snyder F Leo J. Hoar F David K. and Judith A. Hoffman F Paul L. Hoffman F Penny Holland F Samuel and Mary Holland F David P . and Jean H. Hoose F 
Sue Hoover F Zoia Horn and R. Dean Galloway F Philip Hornik F Richard A. Horvitz F C. Douglas Hostetter and Barbara E. Smolow F Donald G. Hudson  
F Derrick A. Humphries F Julie Y . Hungar F Ruth D. Hunter F David Igasaki F Elizabeth Imholz F Carl Imparato F Barbara and Allen Isaacman F Joel and 
Helen R. Isaacson F Jenifer F . and Peter Ives F Gloria Jacobs F David Jaffe and Amie B. Kennedy F Kevin and Adrienne James F Sitaram S. and Alice J. 
Jaswal F The Jewish Community Foundation F Corinne B. Johnson F Harmer and Judith Johnson F Ben and Kathleen Jone F Beatrice Jones F Lynn Jones 
F Kiara Jordan F David A. Judd F Kathleen Judge F Robert G. Kahl F David Kairys F Daniel Kaiser F Mordechai Kamel F Louis Kampf F Arnold and 
Carol Kanter F Jay M. Kappraff F Aslam Karachiwala F Rhoda H. Karpatkin F Frank and Dorothy Kehl F Florence M. Kelly F Gregory Kelly F Kevin B. 
Kelly F Jane Kelsberg F Elizabeth L. Kennedy and Barbara J. Prebis F James Kerwin and Gretchen Steadry F Billy Kessler F Kimberly A. Kessler F Edwin King F Robert King and Sharon Riddler F John P . Kirk F Stefi L. Kirschner and Gilbert Z. Schneider F Robert Z. Klein and Nancy K Vandewart F Jay C. 
Klemme and Anne S. Wilson F Eric Klinger F Sharon L. Knopp and Ingolf Vogeler F Philip O. Koch F James T. Kofron, Jr. F Ellen D. and Marshall M. Kolba 
F Maurice and Lorraine Kosstrin F Lawrence Krantz and Diane Pittman F Beatrice Kreloff F Dennis J. and Estelle I. Krumholz F Robert and Lorri Kurzfeld  
F Elizabeth Kushigian F Kendall Landis F Robert E. and Helen S. Lane F Eleanor Lange F Leslie Laurie F Robert J. Lavenberg F Elizabeth A. Leader F 
Deidre Leavell F Thomas M. Leimkuhler F Mary Lellouche F Art Leonard F Thomas Lesser F Judy Lessing F Charles Levenstein F Robert Levey F Claire and Lawrence Levine F Daniel J. Levy F Morton Philip and Ellen Strauss Levy F Edward R. Leydon F Charlotte and Martin Lichterman F Lori B. Liederman  
F Theodore M. Lieverman F Bruce and Louise Lincoln F Lucy R. Lippard F Eden R. Lipson F Ann and John Livengood F Annea Lockwood and Ruth Anderson F Lyn Lofland F John R. Long F Paul Loomis F Lois Lorentzen F Marsha L. Love and Maarten Bosland F Louise C. and Bernard Lown F Sylvia and Raymond Lubow F Ellen Luks F Maribeth S. Lynn F Sandra N. and David B. Lyons F Robert D. Mabbs F Joan and Wally MacDonald F Cord 
MacGuire F Miriam D. and Darryl Mack F Theodore G. Macklin F Barbara Macri-Ortiz F Lorne and Susan Magnone F June Makela F Louise R. and 
Michael P . Malakoff F Susan E. Manuel F Laura C. and Robert S. Marin F George F . and Rose A. Markham F Diane D. Marks F Eisha Mason F John Mason F Joshua Mayes F Mary G. McCall F Joan A. and Richard D. McCarthy F Leon R. and Judith McCulloh F D. D. McGill F Kelly Mcmahan F Bruce J. McWhirter F Lynn M. McWhood F Morton Mecklosky F Horace Medwed F Michael Meeropol F Isa-Kae Meksin F Michael and Heli Meltsner F Saul 
H. Mendlovitz F Kate Menendez F The Mennonite Foundation F Patricia Messick F Alvin and Edna Meyer F Joseph Miller F Vann Miller F Andrew C. and Helen S. Mills F John Mineka
 F Ralph E. Miner F Ruth R. Misheloff F Paul R. Monroe F Marilyn Montenegro F Madelyn F . Morales F Annselm 
Morpurgo F Alan B. and Anne S. Morrison F Lawrence B. and Claire K. Morse F J. Andrew Moss  F Stephen and Joan Mudrick F Norman Mullen F Valerie R. Mullen F John H. Muse F Dory S. Myers F Afsaneh Najmabadi F Judy and Roy Nakadegawa F Helen Nau F Donald M. Neill F Merry E. 
Neisner F Bruce D. Nestor and Susana De Leon F Ronald M. Neuman and Jane Zimmy F Ann Nevans F Carol G. Newman F John S. and Margaret Newton F Neil L. Nininger F Hans Noll F Regina Nugent F Rudi H. and Laureen K. Nussbaum F Samuel P . Oast, III F Anthony J. and Nancy Ody F Matthew and Barbara O’Hara F Richard M. Ohmann F John O’Hyun Kim and J. Neiderhauser F John R. and Mary R. Oleson F David Olivenbaum F Scott Oliver F Mary K. O’Melveny F David R. Oran and Silvia M. Arrom F Paul O’Rorke F  Jim Oswald F John M. and Suzanne Otter F Nieba Paige F Naomi 
Paley F Carrie S. Parks and Gary M. Akizuki F Stephen and Debbie Paschall F Patrick Patterson and Maria Wilkens F Jacob Patton F Frank Paysen F 
58CCR Donors
deceased  †59This list includes gifts of $100 and over made between July 1, 2008 and June 30, 2009. All gifts are greatly  appreciated and collectively allow CCR to  
continue its work; unfortunately, space limitations prohibit us from listing every gift. Most stock transfers come to us without attribution, untraceable to the 
donor, so if you made a gift of stock (or any kind of gift) which is not listed, please contact us so we may we may correct our files and acknowledge you in our next newsletter. Judith Pecho F Jane Peebles and Linda Flournoy F Paul Peloquin F David Perk F Kira Perov and Bill Viola F Beth Peterson F Edgar G. and Pauline Petry F 
Stephen Pew F Douglas W. Philips F Lemoine D. Pierce F Anne Pilsbury F Tom Pirko F Johanna M. and Thomas F . Plaut F Tim Plenk and Janet Axelrod F 
Hertha Poje-Ammoumi F John G. and Barbara Polk F Wendy Pollock F Stephen Pomerance F James G. Pope and Nancy S. Marks F Andre Popovici F 
Robert and Marcia Popper F Frances D. Potter F Joan C. and Charles W. Pratt F Dolores M. Priem F Edward A. Purcell, Jr . F Carolyn Quenon F Frances 
Leon Quintana and Joel K. Swadesh F Michael Rabb F Jean Rabovsky F Shankar Ramamoorthy F Ron Rattner F Helen Reed-Gray F Julie Reeve F 
Kenneth C. Regal and Judith A. Ruszkowski F William D. Reilly F Nancy Reimer F John M. Reinke F Victoria Reiss F Margaret A. and David Reuther F Judy R. and Jeffrey L. Reynolds F Paul D. Rheingold F Albert D. Rich F M. Hytham Rifai F Robert Rios F Candice Roberts F Justine Roberts F Susan Robinson F Evangeline H. Rocha F Maria C. Rodriguez F Fritz Rohrlich F George Roman F Theodore Romer F Sheila Ronsen F Daniel Rosenberg F Jean and John Rosenberg F Lawrence Rosenberg and Judith Somberg F Susan Rosenberg F Leslie A. Rosenfeld F Karen Rothman F Sara Rothstein F 
Lisa Rotterman F William J. Ruane, Jr. F John W. Rudolph and Sheryn R. Holinsworth F Jane P . Rundell F Rachel E. Sanborn F Miriam and David M. Sanders F Gail A. and M. H. Sangree F Matthew Schell F Lawrence J. Schiff F June and Gerald Schiller F Paul G. Schmidt F Richard Schoen F Penny Schoner F Manuel and Bonnie Schonhorn F Henry Schreiber F Daniel G. Schulof F Anne Schwartz F Barry L. Schwartz F Robert D. Schwartz F Steve L. Schwartz F Joan W. Scott F Gerda Seaman F Rebecca Seawright and Jay Hershenson F Joshua Seff F Arif Sehba F Sara J. and Henry M. Seiden  F 
Gabrielle Semel and Mark Levitan F Lew D. Serbin F Estelle and Ralph Shabetai F Al Shehadi F Allen W. and W. F . Shelton F Sloane Shelton F Alan Shieh F Joy Shigaki F Donald A. Shipley F Jack Shuck F Alix Kates Shulman and Scott York F Victor W. and Ruth Sidel F Selma R. Siege F Dorothy E. Siegel 
and Michael R. Abram F Norman Siegel F Lisa Siegman and John K. Young F M. Roy Silberstein and Brian E. Garrison F Michele Simon F Bonita M. and  
Jack Singal F Miriam Sirott F Sisters of Saint Dominic F Calvin L. Skaggs F Blanche J. and Eugene D Skurnick F William H. and Ursula Slavick F Hugh Smart F Brian Smith F Maureen Smith F Nancy C. Smith and David N. Rockwell F Ruth P . Smith F Ben and Betty-Jane Sobin F Denise Soffel F Leona and Sidney N. Solomon F Renee Solomon F Fred J. Solowey and Kathryn L. Ries  F Paul J. and Ann Sperry F Jerold M. and Judy Starr F Otto L. and Diana 
B. Stein F Michael Steiner F Nancy Steinson F Michael Stelmach F Mae Stephen F Helen Stephenson F Anne F . Sterling F Arthur Stern F Ellen 
Stevenson F Richard and Judith Stillinger F Ian A.F . Stokes and Nancy Zimny F Daniel J. and Ruth Stone F Christopher Strawn F Douglas and Margie Jean A. Sturm F Randall Styers F Charles J. Sugnet F Aaron Sussman F David Sutter F Anand Swaminathan F Jennifer Szalai F Jerilyn Tabor F Harold Taggart F Dee L. Taitt F Anne R. Teicher and Sy Rutkin F Michael C. Thielmann F Teresa Thompson F Alan C. Thomson F Harriet B. Todd F Cris Toffolo  
F Joseph and Minette Tolciss F Martha C. Tompkins F Lucile P . Townsend F George Trevor F Mark Underwood F Gregory P . and Sharon A. Urban F 
Katherine Vang F Radha Vatsal and Daniel Welt F Marko Velikonja F Joan Vermeulen F Mari Vlastos F Janet von Reyn F Joachim Vosgerau F Kevin and 
Teresa Vukson F Michael S. and Johanna H. Wald F Katherine Waldbauer and Ronald L. Henry F Mary Jane Wallace F James F . and Jacquelyn M. Walsh F Terry Walsh F Tim Walton F Judith P . Ward and Bernard D. Tuchman F Arthur O. Waskow and Phyllis O. Berman F Peggy D. Watson and Victor Teich F Jonas Waxman F J. Richard and Margaret Weaver F Elizabeth Weed F David A. Weiner and Sally Kux F Margot A. Welch F Raymond Welch F Carolyn M. Welshhans F Janet E. and James Wenninger F Hermine L. Weston F Verity A.J. Weston-Truby and T. James Truby F Lucille Whalen F David A. White F 
Nicholas White F Hope D. Williams F Jack and Mary Willis F Jane and Robert H. Willis F Camilo Wilson F Ellen S. Wilson and Fredric V . Price F 
Warren B. Wilson F Richard C. Winant F Barbara Winslow F David A. Wirth F Martin A. Wohl and Marisa G. Labozzetta F Richard M. Wolfe F A. 
Wolper F Margaret Wood F Jonathan A. Woodbridge F Charles B. Woodbury F Gregg Wright F Jerome Wujek F Sarah R. Wunsch F Laurence and Muriel Ann Wyatt F Peter Yarrow F Ronald H. and Lorraine S. Yuccas F Michael A. Zagone F Ron Zajac F Arlene S. Zaucha F Maurice and Marilyn Zeitlin60Catherine Albisa 
Harry Anduze
Radhika Balakrishnan  
(Treasurer - beginning January 2009)
Ajamu Baraka 
Karima Bennoune 
Chandra Bhatnagar
Ann Cammett 
Marilyn Clement †David Cole 
Rhonda Copelon 
Michelle DePass 
Gregory H. Finger, Secretary  
(Treasurer - through January 2009) 
Abdeen Jabara 
Wilhelm H. Joseph, Jr. 
Julie F . Kay 
Jules Lobel 
Vice-President Michael Ratner 
President 
Alex Rosenberg 
Vice-President 
Franklin Siegel 
Michael Smith 
Richard A. Soble 
Peter Weiss  
Vice-President 
Ellen YaroshefskyBoard of Directors and Staff
deceased  †Directors
Vincent Warren, Executive Director
Kevi Brannelly, Development Director
Carolyn Chambers, 
Associate Executive Director
Annette Warren Dickerson 
Director of Education & Outreach
Sam Miller 
Interim Legal Director   
William Quigley, Legal DirectorAdministrative Staff
Gregory Butterfield, Administrative Assistant
Orlando Gudino, Network Administrator
Lisa Levy, Executive Assistant
Dwede Tarpeh, Administrative Assistant  (temp)
Jeffrey Weinrich, Finance Manager
Alberto White, Office Manager
Communications Department
Qa’id Jacobs, Web Communications  
and Multimedia Manager
Lindsey Kaley, Communications Assistant (temp)
Jen Nessel, Communications Coordinator
Alison Roh Park, Communications AssociateDevelopment Department
Sara Beinert, Major Gifts Officer
Kevin Gay, Database Manager
Emily Harting, Foundations Relations Officer
Rachel Hill, Development Assistant (temp)
Eliot Katz, Grant Writer
Christine Kim, Development Associate
Jose Monzon, Development Assistant
Jeremy Rye, Major Gifts Officer
Education & Outreach  
Department
C. Lynne Kates, E&O Associate (through 5/09)
Lauren Melodia, E&O Associate
Deborah Popowski, Kaufman-Skirball Fellow
Laura Raymond, E&O Associate
An-Tuan Williams, E&O AssistantBoard of Directors 61CCR staff with colleagues from the U.S. Human Rights Network (Ajamu Baraka, Kali Akuno, and Rachel Fowler) and the National Economic and Social Rights Initiative 
(Cathy Albisa, Phil Wider, Liz Sullivan and Meredith Vacek). The three groups received a grant from the Omega Institute in New York for a strategic planning retreat to discuss opportunities for strengthening our social and economic justice work. Legal Department
Heather Andersen,  
Assistant to Legal Director (temp)
Jessica Baen, Legal Worker
Liz Bradley, Legal Worker
Darius Charney, Staff Attorney
Andrea Costello, Staff Attorney (through 8/08)
Chaneen Cummings, Legal Worker  
(through 5/09)
Claire Dailey, Legal Worker
J. Wells Dixon, Senior Staff Attorney
Karl Kamau Franklin, Racial Justice Fellow 
(through 9/08)
Katherine Gallagher, Staff Attorney
Jennifer Green, Senior Staff AttorneyGitanjali Gutierrez, Staff Attorney
Susan Hu, Legal Worker (through 7/08)
Shayana Kadidal, Senior Managing Attorney
Pardiss Kebriaei, Staff Attorney
Marc Krupanski, Legal Worker
Maria LaHood, Senior Staff Attorney
Emi MacLean, Staff Attorney (through 5/09)
Rachel Meeropol, Staff Attorney
Carolyn O’Neil, Assistant to Legal Director
Sunita Patel, Staff Attorney
Ibraham Qatabi, Legal Worker
Anjana Samant, Staff Attorney
Matthew Strugar, Staff Attorney  
(through 5/09)
Claire Tixeire, Legal Research Assistant Consultants
Sabrina Gordon, 100 Days Video Project
Glover Park Group,  
Communications and Media
Sarah Hogarth,  
Project Management/Writer/Editor
Riptide Communications,  
Communications and Media
Irena Sabic,  
Guantánamo Resettlement Liason
62Financial Report  July 1 2008 – June 30 2009*
Net Assets as of June 30, 2008      $4,472,207
Change in Net Assets      $2,048,493
Net Assets as of June 30, 2009      $6,520,700
Revenue, Gains and Other Support ExpensesNet Assets
For an independent evaluation of our financial health visit Charity Navigator 
at  www.charitynavigator.org, which gave us a perfect four star rating 
*audited figures pending board approval.
Program: Litigation, Education and Outreach $5,068,554
Development $845,519
Administration & General $610,890
Total Expenses $6,524,963Foundations (including Donor Advised Funds)  $6,159,223
Individuals (including Planned Gifts)  $2,468,382
Court Awards and Attorney Fees $368,381
Interest $94,039
Other $(44,362)
Total Revenue, Gains and Other Support $9,045,66363The following CCR supporters passed away this 
year and many thoughtfully honored CCR with a 
bequest. It is always sad to lose a member of our 
community, but their ideals will live on in the work they supported at CCR.Lise Giraud
This year the Center mourned the loss of our longtime donor, Lise Giraud. Born in Austria in 1924, Lise escaped with her parents after the Nazis had killed most of her 
family. She earned a library degree and worked as a librarian at Stanford University, 
where her husband Raymond was a professor of French literature. The Girauds worked tirelessly for human rights, including serving as election observers in  
Haiti and supporting student anti-war protests, and were passionate advocates for animal rights. Ray and Lise were members of our Thelma Newman Planned Giving Society, memorializing their commitment to human rights with a generous legacy 
gift to CCR.
Chorale Page
Chorale Page was a lover of life and justice until her passing in October 2008. 
Named after a musical composition by J.S. Bach, Chorale graduated from Wellesley 
College and received a Masters in Counseling from Montclair State College in New 
Jersey. She worked variously as a representative for Blue Cross of Chicago, a career counselor and hospital ombudsman until she and her husband Edward retired to 
Sarasota, Florida. Chorale and Ed were proud supporters of the Center for  
Constitutional Rights for more than 20 years, and generously named the Center as  
a beneficiary of their Charitable Remainder Trust. All of us at CCR are very grateful for their support and share in the loss of Chorale.
Edwin Salpeter
CCR supporter Edwin Salpeter, who passed away in November 2008 at age 83, was 
an eminent astrophysicist whose theories revolutionized the field. Salpeter fled his homeland of Austria as the Nazis rose to power and arrived at Cornell University, 
where he remained throughout his career. In his wide-ranging research, he gained 
notoriety for debunking Ronald Reagan’s proposal for a “Star Wars” missile defense system. Ed and his wife, Antonia Lhamo Shouse Salpeter, frequently visited New 
York City for CCR events and cultural outings, and were generous to CCR both 
financially—and in the occasional gift of opera tickets! He will be greatly missed.Jane Buffett
Scott Charles
 Neal Daniels
 Robert Dunne
 Nels Ekroth
 Vivian Erdreich
 Shirley Fingerhood
 C. M. Berndes Franck
 Leo M. Hurvich
 Cathryn H. Kurtagh
 Eva R. Lederman
 John Leonard
 Marianne L. Levey
 Mildred Miller Mae K. Millstone
 Arthur M. Moosen
 Herbert W. Neil
 Rebecka Peters
 Richard Roast
 Edith Rosenthal
 Edwin E. Salpeter
 Doris Shaffer
 Steve M. Slaby
 Lloyd P . Tyler
 Elton J. Warren
 Richard A. Weinstock
 Mortimer Weiss
 Irving M. WolfeIn memoriam64The Center for Constitutional Rights 
mourns the passing on August 3, 
2009, of a core member of the CCR 
family, Marilyn Clement. A lifelong social justice activist who worked with 
Martin Luther King, Jr. in Atlanta in 
the 1960s, Marilyn served as CCR’s Executive Director from 1976 to 1989, 
and continued working with the  
Center as an active member of our board of directors. 
Marilyn was fond of quoting civil rights activist Ella Baker, who 
famously said, “We who believe in 
freedom cannot rest.” In her own life, Marilyn worked tirelessly for a wide 
range of progressive causes. 
During her twelve years as Executive Director, Marilyn’s vision and  
leadership shaped CCR into a nationally renowned instrument for social 
justice without compromising the principles which motivate our work.  
Her initiative to open CCR South led to a docket of voting rights cases which had a profound impact on the American South. CCR’s Movement 
Support Network, which Marilyn championed, broadened our work to  
include community education and organizing. The Ella Baker Program, which brings progressive law students to the Center each summer, may 
be one of Marilyn’s most enduring contributions to CCR. The program has 
trained hundreds of law students to be effective social justice and legal advocates in the service of the people.
Marilyn was CCR’s Executive Director during the landmark Filártiga   
case, which pioneered the use of the Alien Tort Statute (ATS) to enable 
victims of human rights abuses from anywhere in the world to sue the perpetrators in U.S. courts. While at CCR, Marilyn also helped found the National Anti-Klan Network. As CCR President Michael Ratner notes: 
“Marilyn was incredibly courageous putting herself into people’s struggles, 
especially on issues of race.”
Marilyn later headed the U.S. office of the Women’s International  
League for Peace and Freedom and helped organize the WILPF Peace Train to the International Women’s Congress in Beijing in 1995. When Rep. 
John Conyers introduced legislation in 2003 for a national, single-payer 
health care system, Marilyn decided to devote her energies to building  a movement to support that important cause and she founded the  
organization, Healthcare-NOW! After being diagnosed with multiple 
myeloma in June 2008, Marilyn continued to serve as Healthcare-NOW’s National Coordinator and helped train a younger generation of leaders to 
keep the movement growing.
Marilyn Clement possessed a remarkable combination of passion,  
creativity, personal honesty, extraordinary organizing skills, and a great 
sense of humor and friendship that all of us here at CCR will deeply miss. In memoriam
Marilyn receiving an award from CCR at our 
2008 President’s Reception.
 with Victoria Gray Adams at a CCR event honoring Arthur Kinoy in 1999.Marilyn ClementEditor and Project Manager: Sarah Hogarth. Design: Nicholas Coster •nicholas@modino.com. Photo credits: p.6, Shell Worker, © Ed Kashi 
p.10, Guantánamo (both images), ©Getty Images, p.8, Military Contractors, AFP/Getty Images, p.12, Police Brutality, Thomas Hawk@Flickr, 
p.14, Nicholas Coster, p.16, Rumsfeld Books, Sarah Sturges for Yanick Salazar Photography, p.18, Rendition, © Jim Young/Reuters/Corbis, 
p.19, Arar protest, Rick Kopstein, p.20 Govt abuse main image, © Brooks Kraft/Corbis, p.22, Dissent image, djbones@flickr.com, p.27, Vul-
can Society, Qa’id Jacobs, p.29, IMAP photo, Jenny Brown, p.37, Culture Project, pjtstreet photography, p.38, (bottom left) Yanick Salazar, (right) Sarah Sturges for Yanick Salazar Photography, p.47, Sarah Sturges for Yanick Salazar Photography, p.61, Qa’id Jacobs, p. 64, (lower), Sid Trommer, back cover, Sarah Sturges for Yanick Salazar Photography.
The Center for Constitutional Rights is a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization. On request, a copy of CCR’s latest financial report may be obtained  
from us or from the Office of the Attorney General of the State of New York, Charities Bureau, 120 Broadway, New York, NY 10271.www.CCRjustice.org
666 broadway, 7 fl, new york, ny 10012
212-614-6489   email: info@CCRjustice.org CCR supporter David Hermann makes his politics known  
at CCR’s 2009 President’s Reception in New York.