Annual Report 2008The laws and Constitution are  
designed to survive, and remain  
in force, in extraordinary times.  
-Supreme Court, June 12, 2008, Boumediene v. BushOur Mission
The Center for Constitutional Rights is a 
non-profit legal and educational organization 
dedicated to advancing and protecting the rights 
guaranteed by the United States Constitution 
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 
Founded in 1966 by attorneys who represented 
civil rights movements in the South, 
CCR is committed to the creative use of law 
as a positive force for social change.
The cover quotation is from the U.S. Supreme Court decision in Boumediene v. Bush . See page 6 of this report for details of  
this historic victory for CCR, our clients at Guantánamo and for our system of checks and balances and the rule of law.Letter from the President  2
Letter from the Executive Director  4
Docket Areas
Guantánamo 6
Outsourcing Violence:  
Holding Corporations Accountable 10
Rendition and Ghost Detentions 12
Racial, Gender and Economic Justice 14
Criminal Justice and Mass Incarceration   16
International Law and Accountablity 18
Illegal Government Surveillance 20
Attacks on Dissent 22
International Advocacy and Travel 24
2008 President’s Reception 26
Internships and Fellowships 27
Awards, News and Events 28
Publications 30
100 Days to Restore the Constitution   32
Case Index 34 
Guantánamo Habeas Counsel 39
Friends and Allies 43
Our Donors 48
Financial Report  61
Board of Directors and Staff 62
In Memoriam 642Letter from the President
After seven long years of struggle, 
CCR finally achieved the Supreme 
Court victory that we sought when 
we filed the first case on behalf 
of Guantánamo detainees in early 2002. In a 
5-4 ruling in Boumediene v. Bush , the Court 
held that Guantánamo detainees have the 
constitutional right to go to a federal court 
and challenge their detentions. The efforts of 
the Bush administration to deny the prisoners their fundamental right of habeas corpus  had 
failed. 
When we filed the first Guantánamo cases,  
we were treated as legal and political pariahs.  
No other organization would join us and the  
hate mail piled up. We went forward in the  
belief that we had to do what was right, and  
what was right was to challenge the Bush  
administration’s denial of constitutional rights 
in every possible way. In the beginning we 
were few, CCR and three other attorneys;  
but today we are many. Not only are CCR 
lawyers constantly at Guantánamo meeting 
with clients, but CCR also coordinates the hundreds of other lawyers who courageously 
came forward as counsel on these cases. They 
are heroes in this continuing fight to restore the Constitution. They, and the many of you  who support this work, have our thanks and the thanks of all those who understand the 
necessity of the struggle we are engaged in  
to protect our liberty. 
Despite our victory, the struggle to close 
Guantánamo and end secret detention is  
not over. We are in the federal district court 
trying to have the hearings the Supreme Court 
required. If and when those hearings occur,  
I am sure that the Bush administration will  
not have sufficient evidence to detain most  
of the prisoners. CCR has already begun international advocacy on behalf of detainees 
likely to be released, working to ensure their 
resettlement to countries where they will not face persecution or torture.
We have also undertaken major initiatives  
to roll back the privatization of war and 
interrogation—interrogation that often leads 
to torture. Our cases against Blackwater for killings in Iraq and contract interrogators for 
torture in Iraq are testing not just the issue 
of accountability of private armies, but the deeper question of whether private armies 
have any place in a democracy. 
 
3A key issue going forward is whether high  
administration officials will be held responsible  
for the torture and rendition of hundreds, if not  
thousands, of human beings. Our efforts in U.S. 
courts have been met with bogus assertions of state 
secrecy and national security. So far, the courts have 
gone along with these executive claims, but we think that in at least some of these cases we will prevail –  
and we expect the next congress will take on this  
issue. Our efforts in Europe against Rumsfeld and others have not yet resulted in criminal charges,  
but they have put the investigation and prosecution  
of this administration on the agenda. Former  
administration officials visit Europe at their peril  
and going forward they will have much to fear.  
Even a presidential pardon cannot protect them if they leave our shores.
Although litigation is central to our work, CCR is 
more than a litigation organization. We understand 
that litigation is a tool for social change and to  
protect rights; and that activism, media, education 
and advocacy are necessary to win in the courts. 
The Center has strong dockets in many areas. We  
are committed to aggressively building up our  
existing racial and economic justice work, as well as 
continuing our leadership in enforcing international human rights law. Defending dissent in this country 
is more important than ever, as we have seen in the recent attacks on protestors at the RNC in St. Paul. 
CCR was born out of our defense of the Southern 
civil rights movement and we have not forgotten the 
importance of those struggles then and today.
Vincent Warren, our Executive Director, has been 
with us for just over two years. I can brag a lot about Vincent and the amazing job he has done. For now 
it is sufficient to say that CCR is in very good hands 
and that Vincent and the entire CCR staff represent a future for the Center that would make our found -
ers proud. And you , our supporters, make that future 
possible.
I think we will all breathe a sigh of relief when this 
administration is over. Our work, however, will continue. Our Constitution has been badly battered; 
restoring it is not a job for sunshine patriots. It will 
take the hard work of us all. We feel proud of what we have achieved in the last years, but understand 
that we are only at the beginning of regaining our 
lost freedoms and restoring respect for the rule of law. We appreciate your support along this difficult 
journey and are confident that the values for which 
we all stand will prevail. 
Michael Ratner4Letter from the Executive Director
This has been an extraordinary year for 
CCR. Once again, we have worked  
to make the impossible possible.  
We pushed back as hard as we could 
against gross government abuses and injustice 
and have knocked the Bush administration  
back on its heels. Our significant victory in the 
Supreme Court through the Boumediene  case 
was extraordinary for several reasons. We were successful in framing the issues broadly so that the Court addressed not only the legal plight of 
the men that remain in Guantánamo, but also 
drew a clear line that was a significant step in putting presidential powers back in the constitu -
tional box during a time of great national fear.  This case represents the fruit of six years of  
tireless work by CCR and our allies, but it is also the seed we have planted to lead the  
country beyond Guantánamo and toward a  
just vision – one anchored in the protections  
of the Constitution as well as the promise of  
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 
which will turn 60 this year.
The last seven years have seen systematic  
attacks on civil and other human rights. This 
year we will directly confront the legacy of  
illegality that will be inherited by a new  administration. No matter who is in office,  
you can count on us to continue to challenge 
the detention of individuals without charge  
in abusive and deplorable conditions at  
Guantánamo and elsewhere around the globe. We will work to ensure that those who are 
released are released to safety and not sent to more illegal detention, torture or abuse. We 
will oppose any effort by this administration 
or the next to torture or justify the rendition of people to countries that perpetrate torture. We 
will continue our fight against the complicity 
of corporations in the perpetration of human rights abuses. We will continue to challenge 
racial profiling and the unlawful stop, arrest or 
detention of individuals in any context. We  
will continue to be a leader in combating illegal 
government action through a secret program 
of warrantless domestic surveillance and the targeting, infiltration and monitoring of activist 
organizations. And we will increase our core 
work to combat racial and gender injustices that have only festered and grown in the  
post-9/11 period.
As CCR looks to the rest of 2008, the elections 
in November and a new presidential administra -
tion in early 2009, it has become increasingly 
clear that we have a unique role to play at this 
 
5critical moment in our country’s history – that  
we must continue our decades-old work of  
challenging government abuses, and our rich  
experience in protecting and promoting human 
rights, to take maximum advantage of the opportu -
nities presented by the change in administration and the effect it will have on Congress and the judiciary. 
As we move beyond Guantánamo, we will press 
the new administration to renounce the executive orders and policies that have formed the bases of 
this lawless era in our history. This is the moment 
to roll back repressive legislation, repudiate  
executive signing statements that allow a  
president to act with impunity and, importantly, this is the moment for the perpetrators to be held accountable. CCR has launched the First 100 
Days campaign which will provide a framework 
for us to pressure the next administration to make the work of restoring our rights a top priority. 
But make no mistake, this is not a plea for the 
restoration of our rights and accountability – this is a demand. A demand that will require all of 
our efforts to ensure that things are made right. A 
demand that will take vigilance and commitment. A demand that will, in essence, determine how far 
the next administration will go to repair the grave 
damage done to the rule of law. The First 100 Days campaign represents the next step of the journey that we started when we filed the first habeas corpus petition six years ago. We have focused on 
three branches of government to make things right. 
Now is the time to focus on the fourth branch: the people. With your support, we will continue 
to insist that the damage be repaired in a way that 
promotes a just domestic and global framework.
This is a moment of celebration, promise and  
renewed commitment. As we celebrate the incred -
ible achievements we have made, we now turn to 
the future which brings new opportunities to work 
for justice domestically and internationally. 
In looking though this report, you will see what 
your support and partnership has made possible.  
We thank you for standing with us this year and  
we rely on your continued partnership and vigilance to ensure that we remain effective on this crucial journey. CCR looks forward to your support as we 
fulfill our mission to advance the rights enshrined in 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 
Vincent Warren6
“The laws and Constitution are designed to survive, and remain in force, in  
extraordinary times. Liberty and security can be reconciled; and in our system 
they are reconciled within the framework of the law. The Framers decided  
that habeas corpus, a right of first importance, must be a part of that framework,  
a part of that law.” - Supreme Court, June 12, 2008 Boumediene v. BushSupreme Court Victory for  
Guantánamo DetaineesSince February 2002, when 
the Center for Constitutional 
Rights filed the first case chal-
lenging the illegal detentions 
in Guantánamo, we have been at the 
forefront of the struggle to seek justice 
on behalf of the Guantánamo detainees. 
On June 12, 2008, CCR won a second 
U.S. Supreme Court victory on behalf of the men held at Guantánamo Bay. In an 
historic decision that restores our system 
of checks and balances, the Court ruled in Boumediene v. Bush that detainees 
have a constitutional right to file habeas 
corpus petitions in federal court chal-lenging the lawfulness of their detention. 
In a resounding victory for the rule of 
law, the Court rejected the President  
and Congress’s attempts to declare  
that the Constitution did not apply at Guantánamo because it is located outside 
the sovereign territory of the United 
States. “Our basic charter cannot be  
contracted away like this. The  
Constitution grants Congress and the President the power to acquire, dispose of, and govern territory, not the power to 
decide when and where its terms apply.” 
The decision also held that the proce-dures created by the Detainee Treatment 
Act were not an adequate substitute for habeas hearings and emphasized that 
the lower courts must move their cases 
forward without delay. 
Requiring government to operate within 
the law and ensuring access to an inde-
pendent judiciary are part of the bedrock of a free society. This decision protects 
the individual rights and liberties of us all 
and impacts every area of CCR’s work.
January 11, 2008 marked the sixth  
anniversary of the interrogation and  
detention camp in Guantánamo. Since 
then, over 770 men have passed through 
its gates, some as young as ten or as old as eighty. Hundreds of men – some  
250-plus at last count – continue to be held, facing indefinite detention, torture, sham trials, and conditions that induce 
rapid psychological deterioration.
As we have from the very beginning 
of this struggle, CCR will continue our 
efforts to provide a measure of justice and hope for the men at Guantánamo. As 
we move forward, working with our co-
counsel on the pending habeas cases in federal court, we will also persist in our 
efforts to shine a light on related abuses 
including the use of torture, “extraordi-nary rendition” and secret U.S. deten-
tions at other facilities around the world. “Security subsists…in fidelity to freedom’s first principles, chief among them 
being freedom from arbitrary and unlawful restraint and the personal liberty 
that is secured by adherence to the separation of powers.”
January 2002 First prisoners are 
brought to Guantánamo Bay
February 2002 CCR files the first 
habeas corpus  challenges, including 
Rasul v. Bush
June 2004 Supreme Court upholds 
the detainees’ right to access to federal 
courts in Rasul v. Bush
December 2005 In response, Con -
gress passes the Detainee Treatment Act (DTA) purporting to strip federal 
courts of jurisdiction over prisoners in Guantánamo and creating a sham 
substitute for habeas
June 2006 Supreme Court affirms the 
detainees’ right to protection under the Geneva Conventions and rejects the 
existing military commissions frame -
work in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld decision
September 2006 In response, 
Congress enacts the Military Commis -
sions Act (MCA) creating a new military commission system and purporting to strip the habeas  jurisdiction articulated 
in Rasul v. Bush
June 2008 Supreme Court rules in 
Boumediene v. Bush that detainees 
have the right to challenge their deten -
tion in civilian courts, the MCA was 
an unconstitutional suspension of that 
right and habeas  hearings must move 
forward without delay
78Guantánamo’s Refugees  
After completing a survey in the 
summer of 2007 to determine which 
remaining Guantánamo detainees would 
be in danger if repatriated to their home countries, CCR has determined that 
approximately 50 “high-risk” detainees 
are in need of safe haven in third  
countries. These men – effectively  
refugees – cannot return because of  fear of torture or persecution.  
Through diplomatic and parliamentary contacts in the Middle East and Europe 
and international venues including the 
United Nations, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and  
the European Court of Human Rights, CCR is engaged in vigorous advocacy to transfer all of Guantánamo’s refugees 
to the U.S. or safe third countries. Torture
During the past six years, CCR  
has compiled evidence that many 
Guantánamo detainees have been  
tortured, abused and humiliated while in U.S. custody. In particular, CCR  
has been active in the individual  
representation of Majid Khan, a former “black site” detainee who was moved  
to Guantánamo in September 2006.  
Family members hold photos of Guantánamo detainees at the “Let Our People Go” International Action Conference in Yemen,  
January 2008. Habeas  counsel panelists at table: (left to right) Stephen Truitt, CCR attorney Emi MacLean, and Charles CarpenterThe government initially denied access 
to Khan, claiming CIA black site loca -
tions and their “enhanced interrogation techniques” are top secret, and has required his CCR attorneys to agree to a 
strict protective order that prevents them 
from disclosing details of his treatment. This past year, CCR filed two motions 
on behalf of Mr. Khan – one to have the 
techniques used against him declared to constitute torture and one for preserva -
tion of evidence. The latter successfully led the Court of Appeals to promptly issue an order requiring the government 
to preserve evidence of his torture by 
the CIA.
In March 2008, CCR attorney Gita 
Gutierrez provided a classified brief -
ing to the Senate Select Committee 
on Intelligence with details of Majid 
Khan’s torture. This was the first  time 
that Congress heard details of the CIA 
interrogation program from someone 
outside of the executive branch. 
A lawsuit on behalf of three former 
Guantánamo detainees charging U.S. officials with ordering torture and 
religious abuse, Rasul v. Rumsfeld , was 
dismissed in January 2008. A petition 
for certiorari before the U.S. Supreme 
Court is pending. 
As the habeas  cases move forward in 
federal courts since the Boumediene   decision, CCR will use the opportu -
nity to raise significant related issues 
including conditions of detention. For 
six years now, most of the detainees have been held in solitary confinement, 
including dozens who have been cleared 
for release. Many of them are losing their minds as a result. 
CCR’s ongoing work to ban and expose 
torture extends beyond Guantánamo to 
Bagram Airbase in Afghanistan, to Abu 
Ghraib and elsewhere in Iraq and to secret CIA prisons around the world.
Military Commissions 
Early in 2008, the administration  
announced death penalty charges 
against CCR client Mohammed al 
Qahtani, and then dropped them in May after a vigourous defense by CCR. The 
use of torture against Mr. Qahtani is 
well-documented. This case illustrates that military commissions are political 
show trials based on unreliable  
evidence obtained through torture and 
that nothing can bring legitimacy to 
such an inherently flawed system.
The military commission system is 
cloaked in secrecy, tainted by torture 
and stacked against the defendants. What is at stake is fundamentally  
similar to what CCR has defended from the beginning in the habeas  cases – the 
rule of law. This includes the right to be“Tell [my wife] to remarry. She should consider me dead.” 
– Chinese Uighur imprisoned at Guantánamo
Guantánamo prisoners 
have been:
• Held  in solitary confinement for   
 periods exceeding a year
• Deprived  of sleep for days and   
 weeks and, in at least one case,   
 months
• Exposed  to prolonged temperature  
 extremes
• Beaten
• Threatened  with transfer to a  
 foreign country for torture
• Tortured  in foreign countries or   
 at U.S. military bases abroad  
 before transfer to Guantánamo
• Sexually  abused  and humiliated  
 or threatened with rape
• Deprived  of medical treatment  
 for serious conditions, or allowed   
 treatment only on the condition that  
 they “cooperate” with interrogators
• Routinely “short-shackled”    
 (wrists and ankles bound together  
 and to the floor) for hours and even  
 days during interrogation.
• Subjected to brutal  
 force-feeding  when protesting   
 these conditions by refusing food
9free from torture and from the use of 
evidence obtained through torture and to 
be free from “disappearance” and secret 
detention. CCR is uniquely positioned to raise these issues and will continue to  
work relentlessly to challenge the military commissions system, end the use of torture and to hold the government accountable  
for its illegal actions.10
For decades, CCR has been 
breaking new ground on 
the road to accountability 
for human rights violations 
committed by corporations and private 
contractors. This area of our work has 
become even more critical in today’s world, where traditional governmental 
functions have been privatized and  
outsourced in an attempt to evade re -
sponsibility for criminal behavior  and which inevitably lead to human 
rights abuses by contractors. 
For over 25 years, CCR has used the 
Alien Tort Statute (ATS) to allow  
victims of human rights abuses to  
bring cases in U.S. courts regardless  
of where the events occurred. We  
have expanded this area of law to cover 
abuses committed by corporations, including private military contractors. This year, CCR and co-counsel filed two cases against the military contrac -
tor, Blackwater, for war crimes against civilians in Iraq. Abtan v. Blackwater 
seeks to hold the corporation account -
able to Iraqi survivors or the estates of some of those who were killed when Blackwater mercenaries opened fire at 
Nisoor Square in Baghdad in Septem -
ber 2007. Albazzaz v. Blackwater  is 
on behalf of the families of two Iraqi Outsourcing Violence: 
         Holding Corporations Accountable
Training at the Blackwater facilities in Moyock, North Carolinacivilians who were killed in a second 
Blackwater shooting two weeks later.
 
The Center’s lawsuit against Titan (now called L-3) and CACI corpora -
tions for conspiring with U.S. officials to torture and abuse detainees in several Iraqi detention centers, including Abu 
Ghraib, is moving forward with appeals 
on both sides. We anticipate significant rulings in this case on the issue of  
private contractor accountability.
This year, the legal team filed five  
additional cases against CACI and  
L-3 corporations, and a number of  
individual contractors, on behalf of 
Iraqi detainees who were tortured at 
various detention centers in Iraq,  
including Abu Ghraib.
Between 1996 and 2004, CCR filed 
three cases against the Royal Dutch 
Shell oil company, one of its corporate 
officers and its Nigerian subsidiary, for human rights abuses in the oil-rich 
Ogoni region of Nigeria, including the 
execution of Ken Saro-Wiwa and other Nigerian political leaders. In March 
2008, the District Judge dismissed 
the case against the subsidiary, Shell Petroleum Development Company, 
finding that it did not conduct sufficient business in the United States to be tried 
in a U.S. court. CCR filed an appeal 
of this erroneous ruling and argument 
is expected in December 2008. CCR also filed two amicus briefs this year in 
a related case, Kiobel v. Royal Dutch 
Petroleum, on issues concerning the 
Wiwa plaintiffs.
In another related case, CCR is  
working with a team of human rights 
organizations and public interest  
lawyers on Bowoto v. Chevron, an  
ATS case that charges Chevron with involvement in an attack on unarmed 
environmental protestors in Nigeria in 1998. The case is set for trial in October 2008.  A case brought under California 
state law is set for trial in 2009. 
 In September 2007, a federal appeals 
court affirmed the dismissal of CCR’s 
case against Caterpillar, Inc. for selling bulldozers to the Israel Defense Forces 
knowing they would be used to  
unlawfully destroy homes and endanger  
civilians. The Court found it did not have jurisdiction to decide the case, 
claiming that doing so would intrude upon U.S. foreign policy decisions be-
cause the U.S. pays for the bulldozers. 
CCR’s request for rehearing is pending. Outsourcing Violence: 
         Holding Corporations Accountable
11“On September 16 2007, I was driving to work from one courthouse 
in Baghdad to the ministry of Justice through Nisoor Square.  
I saw four armored four-wheel drives blocking the main road. 
These vehicles belonged to the security company ‘Blackwater.’  As is usual to the Iraqi people, we should stop until these vehicles  
pass by because we are scared we might get shot.
After waiting for 15 minutes, the vehicles started shooting at  
civilians’ cars that were parked there, including my car. This was a secure area near the Green Zone and no Iraqis shot at  
the security company.
At that time I saw some of the people fleeing their cars. They 
were afraid of being shot, and many of them did get shot. I also saw a white car on fire, and inside the car there were a young 
man and a woman burned.”
- CCR client Hassan Salman’s testimony at a UN Human Rights Council panel  “Ten years of misleading Americans about its record in Nigeria is too long. 
It’s time for Chevron to come clean with the public about its operations in 
Nigeria and to take responsibility for violence done in its name.” 
- CCR client Larry Bowoto12
Rendition and Ghost Detentions
“In sharing my experiences with you, I hope that the effects of torturing a human 
being will be better understood. I also hope to convey how fragile our human 
rights have become, and how easily they can be taken from us by the same  
governments that have sworn to protect them.”
- CCR client Maher Arar in video testimony at joint House Judiciary and Foreign Affairs Committees hearing, October 18, 2007CCR client Maher Arar and his wife Monia MazighExtraordinary rendition is the 
forced transfer of a person 
from one country to another in 
order to secretly do what the 
law forbids – torture the suspects and detain them without judicial oversight. 
Individuals are transferred into the cus-
tody of notorious human rights-abusing regimes for interrogation by officials  
of that country, or to secret overseas prisons, run by the U.S. Central  
Intelligence Agency. These individuals are victims of enforced disappearance  
as defined by international law. The  
CIA admits to using ‘enhanced  
interrogation techniques’ against ghost 
detainees. These techniques, such as 
waterboarding, are torture.
Rendition victim Maher Arar had a 
notable year in his quest for justice and 
accountability. In November 2007, CCR Board member David Cole argued our 
appeal of the dismissal in Arar v. Ash-
croft.  The three-member panel affirmed 
the dismissal, deciding that adjudicating Mr. Arar’s claims would interfere with 
national security and foreign policy.  
In an extremely rare and encouraging 
move in August, the court announced, 
even before CCR was able to file for a rehearing, that it would hear the case 
before the full panel of judges in  
December 2008. 
Members of Congress have also  
investigated Maher’s rendition to torture. 
In October 2007, Maher testified via  
video-link at a House joint hearing  
convened to examine his rendition to Syria. At the hearing, members of  
Congress apologized to Mr. Arar – the only apology he has received from mem-
bers of the U.S. government. In June, 
the Inspector General of the Department 
of Homeland Security testified that he could not rule out the possibility that 
Mr. Arar was sent to Syria in order to be 
interrogated under unlawful conditions. 
In Amnesty International, et al., v.  
CIA, et al., CCR and co-counsel are 
seeking the release of records from  
several government agencies about 
secret detentions and extraordinary 
rendition in the so-called “war on  
terror.” This year, the district court judge granted the government’s  
summary judgment with the Department 
of Homeland Security. We are currently briefing on a summary judgment motion 
with the Central Intelligence Agency and preparing for upcoming briefing 
with the Departments of Justice, State 
and Defense. 
Rendition and secret detentions are  
illegal under U.S. and international law. 
There is no way to know where all of 
these secret prisons are or how many people the U.S. is holding in proxy 
detention around the world. CCR is 
committed to shining a light on these 
clandestine abuses and working to end 
the practice, wherever it occurs.
“Canadian investigators 
made extensive efforts  
to find any information  
that could implicate Mr. Arar in terrorist activities.  They did so over a lengthy 
period of time, even after 
Mr. Arar’s case became a cause célèbre. The results speak for themselves: they 
found none.”
- Justice Dennis O’Connor for the 
Commission of Inquiry into the  
Actions of Canadian Officials in Relation to Maher Arar
13“Dressed head to toe in black, including masks, they blindfold and cut the 
clothes off their new captives, then administer an enema and sleeping drugs… 
Their destinations: either a detention facility operated by cooperative countries 
in the Middle East and Central Asia, including Afghanistan, or one of the CIA’s 
own covert prisons – referred to in classified documents as “black sites.””
- Description of CIA Counter Terrorist Center’s “Rendition Group” from the Washington Post14
For years CCR has partnered 
with the Vulcan Society, 
the organization of Black 
firefighters in New York City, 
to challenge racial discrimination in 
recruitment and the entrance exam that 
determines who will be hired. New York has a shameful record of only  
2.9 percent black firefighters in a city 
that is 27 percent Black; the worst  percentage of any major U.S. city. After CCR’s Equal Employment Oppor -
tunity Commission charges resulted in 
rulings that the test was discriminatory, 
U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) filed a lawsuit charging that the test has no 
relationship to job skills and results in 
far fewer Black and Latino hires. CCR has joined the DOJ suit. Now called 
United States of America and Vulcan 
Society v. City of New York , the case 
continues to be actively litigated and the Center is working with the Vulcan Society to increase racial diversity and 
opportunity within the FDNY.  
Another CCR challenge to discrimi -
natory testing is a long-running class 
action suit on behalf of public school teachers of color who have challenged 
the use of discriminatory tests that 
branded them as being unqualified,  
deprived them of equal salaries,  Racial, Gender and Economic Justice
Members of the Morning-After Pill Conspiracy at a 2004 March for W omen’s Lives in Washington, D.C. CCR represents members  
of the ‘MAP Conspiracy’ in our lawsuit against the FDA for refusing to approve the morning-after pill as an over-the-counter drug  
available to women of all agespensions, benefits and seniority, yet  
kept them in the classroom. In June 
2008 the U.S. Supreme Court denied  
defendant’s request for review of our win 
at the NY Court of Appeals and Gulino 
v. The Board of Education of the City of 
New York and the New York State Edu -
cation Department will move forward. 
CCR’s case defending the religious 
freedom and First Amendment rights of 
Sikh transit workers, Harrington v. New 
York Metropolitan Transit Authority , is 
a civil suit on behalf of a Sikh subway motorman against the New York Transit 
Authority,  which attempted to prevent him from wearing his turban while on 
the job. The MTA ’s motion for summary 
judgment is pending. 
Gender Justice
This year, CCR represented several  
feminist activists from the “Morning-
After Pill Conspiracy.” Tummino  v. 
Von Eschenbach challenges the Federal 
Drug Administration’s failure to approve 
the Morning-After Pill (emergency 
contraception) as an over-the-counter medication for women. This case is 
part of the MAP Conspiracy organiz -
ing campaign, exposing how the FDA ’s 
science-based decision-making process 
was prejudiced by anti-birth control 
sentiments within the government. 
In our amicus  work, CCR continues to 
support The Legal Aid Society of New 
York in its lawsuit Amador v. Superin -tendents of the Department of Correc -
tional Services , challenging the systemic 
sexual abuse and harassment of women prisoners in New York State prisons. 
We also filed amicus  briefs in Dukes  
v. Wal-Mart Stores , in support of a class 
action against Wal-Mart for discriminat -
ing against female employees, and in 
Witt v. Department of Defense , a  
challenge to “don’t ask, don’t tell” policy 
that discriminates against LGBT mem -
bers of the military and violates their 
right to privacy under international law.
Prison Telephone
Last year, our NY Campaign for  
Telephone Justice victory ended the 
kickback on collect calls from prisons. Our lawsuit, Byrd v. Goord , was  
dismissed in September 2007, since 
the organizing efforts of the campaign 
had resulted in policy changes and new 
legislation that address the issues raised in that case. Walton v. New York State 
Department of Correctional Services  
(NYSDOCS) and MCI/Verizon , is 
continuing to move forward, seeking compensation for friends and family of 
prisoners who were unfairly overcharged for years.  
Over 40 states have similar policies, 
exploiting prison families for profit  
and keeping families disconnected. We continue our work with grassroots groups and activists in other states to 
end the practice across the country.  
Profiting from Prisons
Single-carrier collect call systems are the norm for telephone service in prisons 
across the United States. People in prison can only call collect, and loved ones  
who accept the calls must accept the terms dictated by the phone company .  
Typically, states receive kickback commissions from the phone companies, creating 
a situation in which there is no incentive to seek competitive bids. Unsurprisingly , 
rates for such calls are well above market rates – 630% more than typical consumer rates for phone calls.
Telephone companies and state governments often make millions of dollars in  
profits from surcharges and inflated per-minute rates for prisoners. In New York 
State, 57.5% of the profits – over $200 million since 1996 – were kicked back to  
the State in the form of commissions.Responding to the demands of CCR’s campaign, New York State eliminated prison 
telephone kickbacks. In October 2007, NY prison telephone rates had been reduced 
by 57.5%. CCR’s case, Walton v. New York State Department of Correctional 
Services and MCI/Verizon  continues to seek compensation for this illegal form of 
taxation that targeted friends and family of prisoners. 
1516
Criminal Justice  
and Mass IncarcerationPolice Accountability
In January 2008 CCR filed a federal 
class action, Floyd v. City of New York , 
a companion lawsuit to our ground-
breaking racial profiling case, Daniels v. City of New York , which shut down 
the infamous Street Crimes Unit. Based on analysis of the data CCR received as part of the settlement agreement in 
Daniels , the new lawsuit challenges 
widespread racial profiling and  
suspicionless ‘stop-and-frisks’ of law 
abiding New York City residents in  
targeted communities. 
Another element of CCR’s work to end 
racial profiling is our ongoing recent case, Bandele v. City of New York , 
representing members of the Malcolm X Grassroots Movement who were arrested while filming New York City police  
officers as part of a CopWatch program.
CCR prepared a report on the issue  
of police brutality for the UN Special 
Rapporteur on Racism’s visit to New York City this year, and has been  
working towards strengthening the 
authority of New York City’s Civilian Complaint Review Board. We intend to 
remain active in the movement to elevate  
police abuse issues – as they relate to  
immigrants, the LGBT community, as 
well as to young men of color – to the 
level of human rights abuses.Immigrant Detention
In February 2008, CCR staff attorney Rachel Meeropol argued the appeal in 
the Center’s case, Turkmen v. Ashcroft,  
challenging the post-9/11 racial  profiling and detentions of Muslim,  
Arab and South Asian men, calling 
again for high-ranking officials to  be held accountable for the illegal  
round-ups and subsequent abuse that  
occurred in the detention facilities.
In Turkmen , CCR charges that the 
government used minor immigration 
violations as a pretext to unlawfully 
hold these men in detention while  
the FBI conducted a criminal investiga -
tion. Based entirely on racial, religious 
and ethnic profiling, these men were 
held; often for months – long after their immigration cases were completed –  
before being cleared by the FBI of any 
“terrorist” related activity.
In the oral argument, CCR defended 
our lower court victory that allowed the conditions of confinement and religious 
discrimination challenges to go forward 
and kept high-level officials in the case. At the same time, CCR is appealing 
the dismissal of the profiling and illegal 
detention claims, arguing that plaintiffs’ constitutional rights to due process and 
equal protection were violated.Racial Profiling by  
the New York City  
Police Department*
In 2006, the NYPD stopped,  
questioned and/or frisked over 506,491 people — an increase  
of over 500% from 2002
Nearly  90% of those stopped 
and frisked were Black or  
Latino, while these groups make  
up only 52% of the City’s populationOnly 10% of stops led to a  
summons or arrest, demonstrat-
ing that these stops lack the required reasonable suspicion 
46% of Blacks who were stopped 
were subjected to an intrusive frisk compared to 29% of Whites
*figures are for 2006 
17“Immigration law cannot be used as a short-cut around the Fourth Amendment”
- CCR staff attorney Rachel Meeropol’s oral argument in CCR’s post-9/11 immigration detentions case, Turkmen v. Ashcroft
In our amicus  work, CCR submitted two 
briefs in support of immigrants’ rights  
this year. Khouzam v. Chertoff supports  
a U.S. resident’s challenge to removal,  
arguing that diplomatic assurances  
from the Egyptian government do not  
provide a safeguard against torture if  
he is deported to Egypt. Our brief in  
Casas-Castrillon v. Lockyer , argues that 
prolonged immigration detention degrades 
constitutional due process protections by 
requiring people to surrender their rights  
in exchange for judicial review.18
International Law  
and Accountablity
Haitian paramilitary death squad leader Emmanuel “Toto” ConstantThe Center filed two cases in 
September 2007 against the 
former Bolivian President and 
Minister of Defense for their 
roles in the killing of civilians during popular protests against the Bolivian 
government in 2003. The lawsuits, 
Mamani v. Sanchez de Lozada and Mamani v. Sanchez Berzain , charge 
the former officials with extrajudicial killings and crimes against humanity 
for the massacre of unarmed civilians, 
including children. 
This year we also continue our ongoing 
efforts to hold former U.S. Secretary of 
Defense Donald Rumsfeld accountable 
for torture. CCR and our allies filed 
a complaint before the Paris District 
Prosecutor charging Rumsfeld with 
responsibility for personally crafting 
and ordering the use of “harsh”  interrogation techniques constituting 
torture. Supported by testimony from 
former U.S. Brigadier General Janis 
Karpinski, the complaint charges that 
such techniques were implemented 
under his supervision, notably at 
Guantánamo and Abu Ghraib, and that starting in 2002, Rumsfeld personally 
managed several torture sessions.
 
Unfortunately, the Paris Prosecutor 
dismissed the complaint, purportedly 
relying on the opinion of the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Two 
United Nations Special Rapporteurs 
have been apprised of this issue and are 
communicating with French authorities.
Matar v. Dichter is a federal class  
action lawsuit against Avi Dichter,  
former Director of Israel’s General  Security Service, for dropping a one-
ton bomb on a residential neighborhood 
in Gaza City at midnight, killing fifteen 
and injuring over 150 civilians. The  
attack has been condemned by the Bush 
administration and is the subject of a 
criminal investigation in Israel. In May 2007, the district court dismissed the 
case, finding that Dichter was immune 
under the Foreign Sovereign Immuni -
ties Act (FSIA) because, according to the Israeli government, he was acting in the course of his official duties. We appealed in June 2007, arguing that 
the FSIA does not immunize former 
officials, or acts outside of an official’s 
authority, such as war crimes. 
In December 2007, we had oral  
argument in the appeal in our class action suit Belhas v. Ya’alon , against a 
former Israeli official responsible for the 1996 shelling of a UN compound in 
Qana, Lebanon in 1996 that killed over 
100 civilians and injured even more. In 
February 2008, the judges affirmed the 
district court’s dismissal on immunity grounds, ending the case in the U.S.
CCR is dedicated to the struggle to 
hold government officials accountable 
for their crimes.“We cannot and should not sit idly by while high-level officials in the most 
powerful country in the world are allowed to torture with impunity…”
 –Excerpt from the opening statement in The Trial of Donald Rumsfeld , by Michael Ratner and the Center for Constitutional Rights
Emmanuel “Toto” Constant  led the Haitian paramilitary death squad 
known as FRAPH during Haiti’s 1991-1994 military rule. In 2004, CCR and the 
Center for Justice and Accountability filed Doe v. Constant on behalf of three 
women who survived FRAPH’s campaign of violence against women. Constant was found liable for torture, including rape, attempted extrajudicial killing and 
crimes against humanity and was ordered to pay $19 million in damages.
 After his arrest in New York in 2006 for mortgage fraud, CCR worked with Haitian 
community allies asking the court to consider his human rights record, resulting in 
the judge rejecting an initial plea bargain. Mr. Constant was convicted in July 2008 
and awaits sentencing.
CCR has worked for years to hold Constant accountable for his crimes, from filing 
lawsuits to leading protests and working with grassroots groups in New York and 
Haiti to have him brought to justice. 
1920
Illegal Government Surveillance
George W. Bush speaks about his authorization of domestic surveillance without 
warrants during a visit to the ultra-secret National Security Agency at Fort MeadeIn late 2005, it was revealed that the 
National Security Agency (NSA), 
with the approval of President 
Bush, had, since 9/11, engaged 
in a widespread program of warrant -
less electronic surveillance of domestic 
telephone calls and emails. In response, 
CCR filed CCR v. Bush asking the courts to order a halt to the NSA program. CCR 
v. Bush argues that the program violates 
wiretapping statutes created in the wake 
of the Watergate scandal. CCR filed the 
suit on behalf of itself and the individual 
CCR attorneys and staff who represent 
clients who fit the criteria described by the Attorney General for targeting under 
the program.
We moved for summary judgment 
based on public admissions made by 
administration officials that proved the 
program’s illegality, and await rulings on our motions. In the interim, Congress 
passed a pair of new laws designed to 
whitewash the program. The most recent, 
the FISA Amendments Act, moves  
constitutionally mandated judicial review 
of some aspects of these surveillance 
programs into the hands of the secret 
FISA court. CCR is currently consider -
ing next steps in light of the new Act.
Shortly after CCR v. Bush was filed, 
CCR also filed FOIA requests  
demanding that the government turn over records of the NSA’s warrantless 
wiretapping of a number of attorneys – 
including CCR staff attorneys  
Gitanjali Gutierrez and Wells Dixon – who represent detainees at Guantánamo 
and therefore have reason to believe 
they may have been targets of the NSA  
program. The NSA and the Department of Justice (DOJ) refused to turn over 
those records, and CCR filed a suit,  
Wilner v. NSA, to compel them to do so.
Both the DOJ and the NSA refuse to 
confirm or deny whether the lawyers  
in the case were being subjected to 
warrantless surveillance, or whether the 
government possesses records of such 
surveillance. In June 2008, the district 
court judge agreed that the NSA could 
not be forced to reveal information 
about its domestic spying program  
because “confirming or denying  
whether plaintiffs’ communication  
with their clients has been intercepted 
would reveal information about the 
NSA’s capabilities and activities.”  
CCR plans an appeal.
While the government may act to  
protect legitimate interests in preventing 
sensitive information from public disclo -
sure, it cannot be allowed to use secrecy to conceal illegal activity. Warrantless 
government surveillance of attorneys is 
particularly pernicious: in addition to violating the wiretapping laws, it  
also makes it harder for attorneys to  
effectively challenge other illegal  
behavior of this administration.
State Secrets Privilege
In addition to the NSA warrantless 
wiretapping program, CCR v. Bush 
challenges the use of the “State  
Secrets Privilege,” a doctrine the government invokes to block litiga -
tion, claiming that the case involves information that cannot be publicly disclosed. The Bush administration 
has asserted this privilege more 
often than any other administration, wielding it as a shield to avoid public 
scrutiny of its policies and to evade 
accountability. 
“When federal courts accept 
the executive branch’s state 
secrets claims as absolute, 
our system of checks and  balances breaks down. By  refusing to consider key piec-
es of evidence, or by dismiss-
ing lawsuits outright without considering any evidence at 
all, courts give the executive 
branch the ability to violate American laws and consti-tutional rights without any 
accountability or oversight, 
and innocent victims are left unable to obtain justice.”
- Senator Edward Kennedy
21“Arbitrary general searches and seizures are always... the path  
to the insertion of tyrannical control over the lives of people.” 
- CCR founder Author Kinoy’s historic Supreme Court agurment in U.S. v. U.S. District Court in 197222
Riot police fire rubber bullets at demonstrators after 
firing teargas during a protest against meetings of 
the Free Trade Area of the Americas, Miami 2003
Attacks on DissentCCR celebrated a huge  
victory in April 2008  
with an $895,500 settle -
ment for our clients in 
Killmon v. City of Miami , which  
challenged the government’s attack  
on the constitutional rights of protesters during the 2003 Free Trade Area of the 
Americas (FTAA) meeting in Miami. 
Over 40 local, state and federal law authorities coordinated an all-out assault 
on the First Amendment, engaging in 
widespread political profiling, sweeping the streets of anyone viewed as being  
an anti-FTAA activist and unlawfully 
arresting almost 300 hundred people. 
CCR has also worked to decriminalize 
dissent by launching a joint educational and legal effort against enforcement  
of the Animal Enterprise Terrorism  
Act (AETA), a bill that brands a huge range of legitimate protest activity  
as “terrorism” if carried out against  
a business that uses animals or is  
related to such a business. As part  
of this work, CCR and our partners 
organized the Coalition to Abolish the AETA  to educate the public about this 
repressive legislation and filed an  amicus  brief in support of the ‘SHAC 
7’– activists who were convicted of 
‘ Animal Enterprise Terror’ based on 
website postings and organizing  demonstrations. 
The Center is also continuing our  
educational and litigation efforts to  challenge material support provisions and related prohibitions created by  
President Bush’s executive order that 
make it illegal to provide support, including humanitarian aid, expert 
advice or political advocacy, to any 
foreign group that the government labels “terrorist.” CCR argues that these 
provisions violate the First Amendment 
and amount to guilt by association by criminalizing support solely intended  
to promote the lawful activities of a 
designated organization.
CCR has a series of cases on behalf of 
the human rights group Humanitarian Law Project, and Tamil-American aid 
groups which sought to provide tsunami 
relief in areas of Sri Lanka that are controlled by a designated organiza -
tion. The court has ruled multiple times that the material support provisions are unconstitutionally vague. Appeals from 
both sides are moving forward.CCR’s two decade struggle to win 
justice for two Palestinian immigrants 
finally came to an end in October 2007 
when the Bush administration agreed to dismiss all charges. The government had 
been seeking to deport Khader Hamide 
and Michel Shehadeh since 1987 based on their lawful First Amendment  
activities in support of Palestinians. 
Calling the government’s actions “an embarrassment to the rule of law,” the 
judge terminated deportation proceed -
ings last year citing the government’s 
refusal to disclose favorable evidence  
in compliance with his orders. 
Social justice movements depend on  
the ability to organize, demonstrate  
and provide mutual support. CCR  will continue to challenge legislation 
and government misconduct aimed  
at criminalizing these activities either by attempting to label activists as  
“dangerous” or by targeting protestors.
[These] convictions sent a chill through the activist community. 
Should this Court uphold these convictions, it would blur the line 
between protected advocacy and criminally sanctionable speech…
When First Amendment protections are blurred, previously resolute 
voices err on the side of caution out of fear of prosecution.
The focus of this case is words — primarily words posted to a 
website — used in the context of an emotionally charged political 
struggle. Appellants now sit in federal penitentiaries for using 
those words. If Appellants’ convictions stand, virtually all internet-
based social justice campaigns are at risk of prosecution. 
- from CCR’s amicus curiae  brief in support of the ‘SHAC7’: United States v. 
Stop Huntingdon Animal Cruelty, Inc.
2324International  Advocacy
United Nations Human Rights Council in Geneva
Hassan Salman, a victim of the Nisoor Square shooting in Baghdad and a plaintiff in  
CCR’s case Abtan v. Blackwater , testified at a Human Rights Council panel in Geneva.  
CCR attorney Katherine Gallagher accompanied him and advocated among delegates to ensure that the views and experiences of those directly affected by corporate abuses are 
incorporated into discussions seeking solutions.
European Court of Human Rights
In November, we submitted an amicus  brief to the European Court of Human Rights in  
Boumediene v. Bosnia and Herzegovina , the companion case to Boumediene v. Bush in  
the U.S. Supreme Court. The European case challenges the role of Bosnia in the illegal 
transfer of six Bosnian-Algerian petitioners to U.S. authorities, who then transferred them to 
Guantánamo, where they remain imprisoned. The case also argues that Bosnia breached its duty to protect the men’s human 
rights, including by failing to press more effectively for their return to Bosnia. 
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
In July, CCR attorney Emi MacLean participated in a hearing before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights on the U.S. government’s compliance with urgent measures of protection that the Commission issued for Guantánamo detainees. 
CCR, in collaboration with the Center for Justice and International Law and American University’s Washington College of 
Law, has filed annual requests for such measures since 2002, which the Commission granted and has renewed each year.
United Nations Headquarters in New York
CCR Executive Director Vincent Warren participated in a panel on human rights and the struggle against racism at UN headquarters in New York City. What Would Martin Say?  
Human Rights and the Struggle Against Racism Forty Years after the Death of Martin  
Luther King, Jr. was part of a series of discussions leading up to the celebration of the 60th 
Anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, on December 10 2008.
United Nations Special Rapporteurs
CCR worked with several UN Special Rapporteurs this year, including briefing the  
Special Rapporteur on Human Rights and Counter-Terrorism and the Special Rapporteur 
on Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary Executions, during their missions to the United States. We also worked with the  
Special Rapporteur on Torture in our efforts to find safe third countries for the resettlement of Guantánamo prisoners who 
face the risk of torture if returned to their home countries.
The Center’s impact extends beyond national borders to other national and regional governmental bodies, the United 
Nations and working alongside other NGOs in the international movement for social justice and accountability.  Below are some highlights from our international work this year.
CCR client and Blackwater shooting  victim Hassan Salman testifies at a  hearing in Geneva
CCR Executive Director Vincent Warren  speaking at UN headquarters in NY25International Travel
Afghanistan
CCR attorney Pardiss  
Kebriaei traveled to Kabul 
to follow the situation of Guantánamo prisoners being returned to Afghanistan. Since April 2007, all such prisoners have been sent to  
a U.S.-built detention facility within the Soviet era Pul-e-charkhi prison located outside Kabul. Some of these men have been held for over a year without charges or trials. CCR and its partner organization, FIDH, have lobbied the UN to pressure the U.S. and Afghan govern-ments to be more transparent about the detention facility, to promptly charge or release prisoners, and to ensure that any trials comport with fundamental due process requirements. 
Egypt
Staff Attorney Emi MacLean traveled to Egypt twice  
to meet with a released Guantánamo detainee who is forced to use a wheelchair as a result of his detention and abuse. She also participated in an annual meeting of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), of which CCR is a member.Europe
CCR staff attorney Emi  
MacLean traveled to  
Denmark, Germany,  Switzerland, Italy, France and Belgium in work related to repatriating Guantána -
mo’s refugees. These trips included meetings with government officials, par -
liamentarians, lawyers and activists. Ms. MacLean also testified on the issue before the European Parliament, which has demonstrated its strong support for European countries to offer humanitar -
ian protection to refugees.
CCR staff attorney Gitanjali 
Gutierrez attended the 21
st 
International School on  
Disarmament and Research on Conflicts meeting in Andalo, Italy where she presented a lecture entitled The Failure of the ‘War on Terror’ Model and Restoring Criminal Justice Safeguards.
Mexico
CCR legal worker Marc Krupanski attended an inter -
national seminar in Mexico on the human rights of mi -
grants, where he moderated a panel entitled  Deprivation 
of Liberty: Due Process and Deportation.Thailand
CCR attorney Jennie Green and cooperating attorney Judith Chomsky went to Thailand to follow-up on the settlement in our case, Doe v. 
Unocal. CCR sued the U.S. oil giant for complicity  
in forced labor, rape and murder committed in the mid-1990’s by soldiers  providing security for  
Unocal’s natural gas  pipeline in southern  
Burma. Settlement funds will compensate the villagers and enable the plaintiffs to develop programs to improve living conditions, health care and education and protect the rights of people from  
the pipeline region.Yemen
CCR attorneys, Emi  
MacLean and Pardiss  
Kebriaei, traveled to  
Yemen to support the  
repatriation of Yemenis  who remain in Guantánamo. Of approximately 270 detainees in Guantánamo in the summer of 2008, more than one-third were from Yemen. Both attorneys participated in a conference with government officials, family members, religious leaders, released detainees and the public. They also met separately with government officials, allies and family members of CCR clients. 
“Let Our People Go” International Action Conference on the Yemeni Prisoners in 
Guantánamo, January 2008, Yemen262008 President’s  Reception
CCR’s President’s Reception was held on May 1, in New York City. 
This year, we commemorated the 20th anniversary of the Ella 
Baker Fellowship Program and its graduates, who embody CCR’s 
goal to train the next generation of social justice lawyers. Special 
honor was given to Marilyn Clement, the program’s founder and Dorothy  Zellner, the program’s first director.
Other honorees included: Covington & Burling LLP for its pro bono support 
of CCR’s post-9/11 immigration sweep case, Turkmen v. Ashcroft; the Liberty 
Hill Foundation for supporting social change at the grassroots level and for  
financial support to CCR from its Donor Advised Funds; and Cassim and 
Chung Ja Jadwat and their son Omar for making the support of CCR a family 
affair. Jeremy Scahill, author of the acclaimed book Blackwater: The Rise and 
Fall of the World’ s Most Powerful Mercenary Army was the featured speaker.
The President’s Reception is CCR’s annual event that honors the generous 
benefactors who are the Center’s indispensable partners in advancing and  
protecting fundamental human rights for all.
Marilyn Clement  established the Ella Baker Fellowship Program in 1987, while she served 
as CCR’s Executive Director. After attending Ella Baker’s funeral in 1986, Marilyn was struck 
by how many diverse groups within the civil rights movement were represented there. Marilyn 
immediately decided to create the Fellowship Program to help students develop their political 
education and to cultivate the next generation of dedicated political lawyers and activists.
Since that time, the Ella Baker Program has trained hundreds of Fellows. The Center is grateful 
for Marilyn’s vision and leadership and proud of the legions of Fellows who have continued the 
tradition of political lawyering and advocacy.
“They all came together to honor Miss Baker and I saw the 
effect that one tiny powerful figure, a woman no less, could 
have in changing history.”
- Marilyn Clement, CCR board member and former Executive Director  
and founder of the Ella Baker Fellowship Program
Marilyn Clement at CCR’s 2008  
President’s ReceptionJeremy Scahill, author and longtime Democracy Now!  correspondent
Celebrating 20 Years of the Ella Baker Fellowship Program 
Internships and Fellowships
27Adrián Alvarez
Adrián Alvarez is a native 
of El Paso, Texas. As a 
Latin American Studies 
student hungry to learn 
about his cultural heritage, 
he discovered Rigoberta 
Menchu’s autobiography 
and books on liberation theology which inspired him 
to work against the systemic discrimination in the U.S. 
criminal justice and immigration systems. As an Ella 
Baker fellow, he supported the International Human 
Rights and Racial Justice/Government Misconduct 
dockets, helping to file an appellate brief and  
researching criminal justice issues in New Orleans. Adrian expects to graduate from American University’s 
Washington College of Law in 2010.
“My fellowship with CCR allowed me  
to support cutting-edge litigation, with  attorneys grounded in the community and  
an inspiring class of fellow interns. I go back  
to law school understanding the importance 
of crafting legal strategies driven by the  communities we represent.” Toni Holness
Toni Holness became an 
Ella Baker Fellow follow -
ing her first year at Temple University-Beasley School of Law. Born and raised in 
Jamaica, she witnessed  
the common injustices faced by Jamaicans and  
disenfranchised communities in the U.S. and has  
dedicated herself to working toward a system of  
global economic justice. During her time at CCR,  
she had the opportunity to work within the Corporate Accountability and Government Misconduct docket 
areas. Toni is currently pursuing a JD/MA-Economics at Temple and plans to graduate in 2011. 
“My time with CCR was unparalleled in so 
many ways. Most memorable is the activist spirit of the office, which kept me from ever losing sight of the social relevance of CCR’s work and also that of my own individual  projects. The attorneys and staff were a  constant source of mentorship.”
The Ella Baker Fellowship Program was named in 
honor of a great and often unheralded leader of  
the civil rights movement. The program strives  
to exemplify Ella Baker’s firm commitment to 
mentoring and developing young leaders to carry the mantle 
of the struggle for social justice through the generations.In addition, CCR hosts undergraduate students who work on 
cases and campaigns throughout the year. Our International 
Scholars program brings law students, legal scholars and 
lawyers from around the globe to work with CCR attorneys on constitutional, international and human rights litigation. 
More information on all of these programs is available on our 
website at www.CCRjustice.org.28CCR is proud of our staff and board members who have received 
awards this year for their work with the Center. The following are  
a few of these honors:
In recognition of her groundbreaking feminist legal work,  
board member Rhonda Copelon received two awards this year.  
The 2008 Rosie Jimenez Award from the Women’s Medical Fund 
recognized her work on Harris v. McRae as a CCR attorney during 
the 1970s, challenging Hyde Amendment restrictions on Medicaid  
funding for abortions. Rhonda and former CCR staff attorney  
Nancy Stearns were also among the women lawyers honored by Veteran Feminists of America for their contributions to challenging 
restrictive abortion laws.
CCR board president Michael Ratner was awarded the 2007 Puffin/Nation Prize for Creative Citizenship  for 
“repeatedly challenging the Bush administration on the constitutionality of indefinite detention and restrictions on domestic civil liberties.” 
CCR and the Guantánamo legal teams received the 2007 Frederick Douglass Human Rights Award from  
the Southern Center for Human Rights for courageously safeguarding the fundamental human rights of the  
men detained at Guantánamo Bay. 
CCR received the  War Resisters League 2007 Peace Award in honor of an organization “whose work  
represents the League’s radical nonviolent platform of action.”
CCR attorney Jennie Green was named a 2008 Wasserstein Public Interest Fellow  by Harvard Law School.  
The fellowship recognizes exemplary lawyers who have distinguished themselves in public interest work and  
who can assist students considering similar career paths.CCR was nominated by United Sikhs for the Punjabi Cultural and Literary Society award for “delivering  
justice through the judicial system.” Staff attorney Shane Kadidal accepted the award of behalf of the Center.The American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Association awarded CCR board member David Cole and cooperating 
attorneys Marc Van Der Hout and Michael Maggio (in memoriam) the Lifetime Commitment to Justice Award 
for their 21 years of work on the LA8 case.Awards
29News and Events
In January 2008, CCR client Maher 
Arar was profiled on CNN”s “Anderson Cooper 360.” The program probes into the United States’ direct role in Arar’ s rendition to torture in Syria.
CCR President Michael Ratner on 
MSNBC’ s “Countdown with Keith  
Olbermann” discussing CCR’ s case against private military contractor Blackwater.Below are a few of the hundreds of public appearances that CCR staf f and board members made last year – online  
and over the airwaves – to share our analysis, inform the public and mobilize support for our issues, clients and 
ideals.  From offering continuing legal education programs with a decidedly progressive slant, to public speaking 
engagements before faith communities and after school programs, CCR is out there “on the front lines” helping to 
shape public awareness and civic engagement.
In January 2008, CCR’ s Executive 
Director Vincent Warren appeared on CNN’ s “The Situation Room” to discuss the leaked military manual for guards at Guantánamo Bay.
37,000 people asked CCR to send a copy of the Constitution 
to George Bush in the hope that he might actually read it. 
Santa (bearing a strong resemblance to former CCR Legal 
Director, Bill Goodman) made the trip down in his sleigh to 
try to deliver the law.
CCR hosted an event entitled Beyond Guantánamo:  
The Supreme Court Has Spoken - What Next?  From left: 
CCR Executive Director Vincent Warren,  CCR Director  
of Education and Outreach Annette Dickerson, Stephen 
Abraham, Baher Azmy, CCR staff attorney Pardiss Kebriaei. 
Re p o Rt sPublications
The Trial of Donald Rumsfeld: A Prosecution 
by Book  by Michael 
Ratner and the Center 
for Constitutional Rights. 
Presented in the format of a court case and based 
on the complaints that 
CCR has brought against Rumsfeld and other high-
ranking U.S. officials in 
Germany and France, this book presents compelling 
evidence that the Bush 
administration is guilty  of war crimes. Using  
primary source documents, it lays out the proof that high-
level officials of the Bush administration ordered, authorized, implemented and permitted torture and cruel, inhuman and 
degrading treatment in violation of U.S. and international law.International Human Rights 
Litigation in U.S. Courts,  Second Edition
 by Beth Stephens, 
Judith Chomsky, Jennifer Green, Paul 
Hoffman and Michael Ratner. This 
treatise offers a comprehensive analysis of human rights litigation in U.S. courts 
under the Alien Tort Statute and related 
provisions, including jurisprudential complexities and litigation guidance. 
Violence and Gender in the Globalized World: 
The Intimate and the Extimate,
edited by Sanja Bahun-Radunovic and V . G. Julie Rajan.
CCR attorney Jennie Green authored a chapter in this  
anthology titled: Litigating International Human Rights 
Claims of Sexual Violence in the U.S. Courts: A Brief  Overview of Cases under the Alien Tort Statute and the  
Torture Victim Protection Act .
Look for details and ordering information at www.CCRjustice.org.Guantánamo’s Refugees: Trapped by Inaction
Profiles of Guantánamo RefugeesGuantánamo Global Justice Initiative  
News Briefing
Guantánamo: Six Years LaterHere Come the Thought Police: The Violent  
Radicalization and Homegrown Terrorism  Prevention Act of 2007
100 Days: Restore. Protect. Expand:  
The Right to Dissent
CCR’s reports are free and available to download at:  www.CCRjustice.org/reportsDe t a i n e e  st uDy
CCR partnered with the International Human Rights 
Law Clinic and the Human Rights Center at the 
University of California, Berkeley to conduct a  
two-year study of detainees released from U.S. custody at Guantánamo Bay. The study will: create a factual  
record of the long-term impact of U.S. detention 
practices on detainees during their confinement and after release; assess how the detentions have affected 
families and communities; and recommend appropriate 
legal mechanisms, detention practices, and polices to protect the human rights of detainees taken into U.S. 
custody. The study will be released by early 2009. 
3031www.CCRjustice.org
CCR client Ibrahim Turkmen discusses 
his experience as a post-9/11 immigration detainneeVanessa Redgrave reads a letter sent to her by former Guantánamo detainee  
Murat KurnazActor and activist Danny Glover narrates a 30-second CCR commercial that was banned by FOXCCR launched a new website
during the summer of 2007.
www.CCRjustice.org has 
new features including: 
breaking news, updates and analysis on our cases, information on campaigns, 
issues and ways to get involved.
This year we asked people to take  
their activism online by sending letters 
to representatives and government  
officials; spreading the word about  
rallies, protests or events; and by 
watching online videos or exploring 
our cases and issues. We conducted 
68 online campaigns, inspiring over 
70,000 people to take action online.
Visit our growing multimedia section
to view videos of clients, experts and
public figures discussing our work and
the issues we are involved in.32End Torture, Rendition and  
Illegal Detention
From Guantánamo to Abu Ghraib, from secret CIA “black sites” to proxy detention in other countries that engage in torture, the U.S. has created a system of illegal detentions and justified the use of torture.
•	Shut	down Guantánamo
•	Close	CIA	“black	sites”	and	all	other	secret	detention	sites	
•	End	torture	and	reject	all	legal	memos,	executive	orders	 
and signing statements that justify its use
•	End	the	use	of	extraordinary	rendition	•	End	the	use	of	evidence	obtained	through	torture
Limit State Secrets Privilege
Secrecy and evasion have been hallmarks of the Bush administra -
tion. They have classified more documents than any administration in 
history, restricted responses to Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests, and attempted to protect government officials and military contractors from being held liable for illegal actions like torture. They 
have repeatedly invoked the State Secrets Privilege to avoid court  
scrutiny and being held responsible for their actions.
•	Investigate and prosecute crimes carried out by both  
officials and private contractors
•	Reverse	the	expansion	of	the	State	Secrets	Privilege	and	 
over-classification of documents
•	End	the	use	of	the	State	Secrets	Privilege	to	allow	 
military contractors to evade accountability for abusesOver the last eight years, 
the Bush administration 
set out to dismantle  
our most important  
constitutional protections and showed deep disregard for interna-
tional and domestic law. CCR was 
there to stand in its way. In June  
2008, the U.S. Supreme Court issued  
a resounding affirmation of the  
Constitution in Boumediene v. Bush. 
Even as we prepare to move forward on this victory for our clients, we  
have launched a new media and  
educational campaign titled  
Beyond Guantánamo: Restore the 
Constitution.
This is a sustained effort to neutralize 
the Bush legacy and restore the  
Constitution. As part of the project, 
CCR created the First 100 Days  
campaign, outlining ways the new president can restore, protect and 
expand our fundamental rights in  
his first 100 days in office.Beyond Guantánamo:
Restore the Constitution
What do you want in the first 100  
days	of	the	next	administration?33Protect the Right to Dissent
Increasingly, political dissent is treated as terrorism. From  
surveillance of activists to federally coordinated attacks on  
political speech, the government has been targeting activists  
and attempting to stifle dissent. 
•	Repeal	the	Patriot	Act	and	other	repressive	 
legislation
•	Repeal	all	FBI	guidelines	that	allow	enhanced	 
surveillance of activists and investigate their abuse
Restore the War Powers Act
The Bush administration illegally invaded Iraq, occupies  
Afghanistan and has threatened Iran, Syria, and Venezuela.  
They have abused the Authorization to Use Military Force 
(AUMF) and ignored the constitutional requirement of  
Congress to declare war before attacking another nation.
•	End	the	occupation of Iraq and end abuse of the AUMF
•	Pledge	to	abide	by	the	War	Powers	Act
Roll	Back	Executive	Power
The last eight years have seen an unprecedented expansion  
of executive power. Presidential signing statements on legisla -
tion passed by Congress attempted to nullify the separation of 
powers. The so-called Unitary Executive theory, the “War on Terror” paradigm, impunity and lawlessness have destroyed the balance of power in a coordinated assault on the Constitution.
•	Repudiate the “unitary” or imperial presidency
•	Renounce	the	use	of	signing	statements	 
that attempt to alter legislation
•	Recognize and respect international law Stop Warrantless Wiretapping
In the past, the government was required to get a warrant if 
it wanted to spy on people in the U.S. In cases involving an international party, they used a special FISA court, which almost never refused a request and even granted requests retroactively. In 2002, President Bush issued a secret executive order illegally authorizing the NSA to wiretap Americans without a warrant. After the program was exposed, the administration secured  
immunity from Congress for the telecommunications companies that participated. 
•	Repeal	amendments to FISA and immunity for  
telecommunications corporations who broke the law
•	Repudiate	Bush	executive	orders	supporting	 
warrantless wiretapping 
•	Pledge	to	end	all	secret	surveillance	programs	 
not reviewed by either the courts or congressional  
committees
Abolish Preventive Detention
The government has been holding people indefinitely  
without charge, sometimes only for suspicion of potential  
future actions. It has used immigration detention to target 
groups based on racial or religious profiling, abused federal conspiracy charges and held activists on the vague charge of “material support.” 
	•	Appoint officials who will not abuse the material  
witness statute, immigration law, grand juries or  
conspiracy charges
•	Pledge	to	veto	any	legislation	creating	preventive	 
detention or national security courts
•	Repeal	the	Anti-Terrorism	and	Effective	 
Death Penalty Act Beyond Guantánamo:
The new president can repair the harm done to our Constitution. It is up  
to all of us to keep up the pressure and see that he does. 
To get involved, sign up for action alerts and check for information,  
updates and events at: www.CCRjustice.org/100days to restore the constitution34Corporate Human  
Rights Abuse
Al-Janabi v. Stefanowicz
Al-Shimari v. DuganAl-Ogaidi v. Johnson
Al-Taee v. L-3 Services
Al-Quraishi v. NakhlaLawsuits on behalf of Iraqi civilian  
detainees alleging that individual  
military contractors and the corpora -
tions that hired them (CACI and L-3), participated in a torture conspiracy  
at Abu Ghraib and other detention facilities in Iraq.
Bowoto v. Chevron
Suing Chevron for its involvement in three machine-gun attacks on unarmed environmental protestors in Nigeria in 1998 and 1999.
Corrie v. Caterpillar
Suing Caterpillar, Inc. for selling  
D9 bulldozers to the Israel Defense  
Forces, knowing they would be used  
to unlawfully destroy homes and  
endanger civilians.
Abtan v. Blackwater
Suing the private military contractor on behalf of Iraqi plaintiffs injured 
or killed when Blackwater shooters 
opened fire at Nisoor Square in  
Baghdad, September 2007.Albazzaz v. Blackwater
Suing the private military contractor 
on behalf of two Iraqi civilians killed near Al Watahba Square in Baghdad in September 2007.
Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum  
(amicus 1) Arguing that the executions of the Ogoni 9 in Nigeria constitute extrajudi -
cial executions under international law and are justiciable in U.S. courts.
Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum  
(amicus 2)A second amicus in this case regarding the legal definitions of crimes against 
humanity, arbitrary arrest and detention 
and cruel, inhuman or degrading treat -
ment or punishment.
Saleh v. CACI 
Appeals in case against Titan (now L-3) 
and CACI alleging that both contractors conspired with certain U.S. officials  
to humiliate, torture and abuse  
detainees in several Iraqi detention 
centers, including Abu Ghraib.
Wiwa v. Royal Dutch Petroleum
Wiwa v. AndersonWiwa v. Shell Petroleum  Development Company
Relatives of murdered leaders and 
activists in Nigeria suing for human rights abuses against the Ogoni people in Nigeria.Racial, Gender, and 
Economic Justice
Amador v. Superintendents of the  
Department of Correctional  
Services (amicus)
Supporting the Legal Aid Society  
of New York in challenging the  
systemic sexual abuse and harassment 
of women prisoners in New York State.
Byrd v. Goord 
Fighting against exploitative telephone rates and monopoly contracts that adversely affect the ability of prisoners’ 
families to remain in contact.
Dukes v. Wal-Mart Stores (amicus)
In support of a class action lawsuit charging Wal-Mart with discriminating against female employees.
 
Gulino v. The Board of Education of the City of New York and the New York State Education DepartmentClass action on behalf of public  
school teachers of color who are  
challenging the use of discriminatory tests and licensing rules.
Harrington v. New York Metropolitan  
Transit Authority
Defending the First Amendment rights 
of Sikh transit workers to wear turbans at work as a religious observance.The Center for Constitutional Rights has many ongoing cases before state, federal and international courts each year .  
Below is a list of cases and amicus briefs that we litigated or filed during the past year. In addition, we have been  
developing numerous new cases and working closely with progressive attorneys and other or ganizations on a host of 
constitutional and human rights issues. Case	Index35Tummino v. von Eschenbach
Feminist activists suing the FDA for  refusing to approve the morning-after 
pill as an over-the-counter drug  
available to women of all ages based  
on political bias instead of science.
United States of America and Vulcan 
Society v. City of New York
Challenging discriminatory hiring practices of the NYC Fire Department on behalf of an association of Black firefighters and individual class  
representatives.
Walton v. New York State Department of 
Correctional Services (NYSDOCS) and MCI/VerizonChallenging the NYSDOCS monopoly 
telephone contract with MCI/Verizon, 
which forced family members to pay exorbitant phone rates to speak with incarcerated family members.
Witt v. Department of Defense (amicus)
Supporting a challenge to the “don’t ask, don’t tell” policy that discriminates against LGBT members of the military and violates their right to privacy under 
international law.
Material Support
Humanitarian Law Project v. Mukasey 
(HLP-3)Humanitarian Law Project v.  
Department of the Treasury (HLP-4)
First and Fifth Amendment challenges to the “material support” statute and related schemes that punish association with foreign organizations placed on 
terrorism lists.Illegal Government  
Surveillance
CCR v. Bush
Challenging NSA warrantless domestic electronic surveillance, asserting that it 
violates FISA and the First and Fourth 
Amendments.
Wilner v. NSA and DOJ
FOIA lawsuit to determine if  
the government has engaged in warrant -
less wiretapping of CCR attorneys and Guantánamo habeas counsel.
Mass Incarceration and 
Criminal Justice
Bandele v. The City of New York
Representing members of the Malcolm X Grassroots Movement who were  
arrested while filming NYPD officers as 
part of a CopWatch program. 
Casas-Castrillon v. Lockyer (amicus)
Arguing that prolonged immigration 
detention degrades constitutional due 
process protections by requiring people to surrender their rights in exchange for judicial review.
Daniels v. The City of New York
Class action that challenged  
unlawful racial profiling through the 
‘stop-and-frisk’ practices of the New York City Police Department’s  notorious Street Crimes Unit.
Floyd v. The City of New York
Class action lawsuit against the New York City Police Department challeng -
ing widespread racial profiling and un -
constitutional ‘stop-and-frisk’ practices.Khouzam v. Chertoff (amicus)
In support of a U.S. resident’s  
challenge to removal, arguing that  
diplomatic assurances from the  
Egyptian government do not provide  
a safeguard against torture if returned  
to Egypt.
Turkmen v. Ashcroft
Fighting unlawful post-9/11 arrest, mass detention and abusive treatment  
of South Asian, Arab and Muslim  
non-citizens.
Wilkinson v. Austin
Working to enforce minimum due process requirements for prisoners held 
in extended solitary confinement at a 
maximum security prison in Ohio.
Wright v. Corrections Corporation of 
America (FCC Rule Making Petition)
Petitioning the FCC to regulate  
interstate prison telephone calls to 
ensure fair and reasonable rates for prisoners and their families.
Cuba Travel 
U.S. v. HarrellU.S. v. HeslopU.S. v. Kennelly
U.S. v. Rawson
U.S. v. SandersLegal defense of people in penalty  
proceedings due to alleged violation  
of the Cuba travel embargo.
Vilaseca v. U.S. Department  
of Treasury (amicus)Federal lawsuit in Vermont challenging severe restrictions imposed by the Bush administration on travel to visit close 
family members in Cuba.36International Law  
and Accountability
Belhas v. Ya’alon
Class action against former Israeli  
official responsible for the 1996  
shelling of a UN compound in  
Qana, Lebanon that killed over 100 civilians most of whom were women and children.
Boumediene and others v. Bosnia and 
Herzegovina (amicus)The first case on behalf of Guantánamo detainees before an international  
tribunal, this case at the European Court of Human Rights addresses the responsibility of countries that assisted the U.S. in transferring men to  
Guantánamo have for the violations 
that occur there.
Complaint to French Prosecutor re: 
Culpability of Former U.S. Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld for TortureRequesting an investigation into the 
criminal responsibility of Rumsfeld for 
having directly and personally crafted and ordered the use of interrogation techniques constituting torture.
Complaint to German Federal  
Prosecutor re: Culpability of U.S.  
Officials in Abu Ghraib & Guantánamo 
TorturePetition submitted to the German  
Prosecutor requesting an investigation 
into the responsibility of civilian and 
military U.S. officials for war crimes and torture under the principle of  
“universal jurisdiction.”Mamani v. Sanchez de LozadaMamani v. Sanchez BerzainCases against former President and  
former Minister of Defense of Bolivia 
for attacks on villagers to suppress 
popular civilian protests during 2003.
Matar v. Dichter
Suing Israeli official for a “targeted 
assassination” in Gaza that killed eight 
children and seven adults and injured more than 150 civilians.
Rendition and Ghost  
Detentions
ACLU, CCR, et al. v. Department  
of DefenseFreedom of Information Act (FOIA) 
lawsuit charging that government  
agencies illegally withheld records 
sought by CCR concerning the abuse of detainees in American military custody.
Amnesty International, CCR, et al. v. 
CIA, Department of Defense, et al.Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) lawsuit seeking information about  
“disappeared” detainees, including  
those at CIA ‘ghost’ sites and  
unregistered prisoners.
Arar v. Ashcroft
Challenging the “extraordinary  
rendition” of Maher Arar and  
seeking accountability from Ashcroft, 
Mueller and other U.S. officials for sending Canadian citizen Arar to Syria to be tortured.Defending the Right  
to Dissent
Killmon v. City of Miami
Fletcher v. City of MiamiBell v. Miami-Dade County
Swanson v. Broward Sheriff’ s Office
Challenging mass arrests and police misconduct during the 2003 Free Trade of the Americas meeting in Miami, FL.
In the Matters of Hamide and Shehadeh
Ended 20-year-long deportation  
proceedings against, members of  
the LA 8, political activists who were 
lawfully engaged in protected First 
Amendment advocacy on behalf of Palestinians.
Kunstler v. City of New York (“A7”)
Suing the NYPD on behalf of  
protestors who were illegally arrested during an anti-war rally on April 7, 2003 and detained for excessively long periods of time.
United States v. Stop Huntingdon  
Animal Cruelty (“SHAC7”) (amicus) In support of animal rights activists convicted of violating the Animal  
Enterprise Protection Act (AEPA)  for website postings and organizing 
demonstrations.Case	Index  (continued)Guantánamo	Case	Index
The Center for Constitutional Rights was the first human rights or ganization to fight for the rights of detainees at  
Guantánamo Bay Naval Station and remains deeply committed to ensuring that detainees are either char ged and given 
fair trials or released to safe countries where they will not face torture. 
   
This year, even as we celebrate a remarkable victory in Boumediene v. Bush/Al Odah v. United States , we are working to  
move these cases forward in the ongoing struggle to provide due process for the men held at Guantánamo and to hold the  
government accountable for torture and abuse of detainees. Below are the cases in which we have been most active.
Boumediene v. Bush /Al Odah v.  
United States
Group of consolidated habeas corpus 
petitions on behalf of Guantánamo  
detainees. On June 12, 2008,  
the Supreme Court released an  
historic decision, confirming that the  
detainees at Guantánamo Bay have a  
constitutional right to habeas corpus 
and to challenge their detention before  
a neutral judge in a real court.
Ameziane v. Bush / Ameziane  
v. United States
Habeas corpus petition and first ever Inter-American Commission on Human  
Rights (IACHR) petition filed on behalf of Guantánamo detainee, Djamel  
Ameziane, an Algerian who is one of Guantánamo’s refugees. He is seeking third country resettlement in Canada or any other country willing to offer him safe haven.
Ayoub Haji Mamet v.  
Bush and Razakah v. BushHabeas corpus petitions for five  
ethnic Uighurs captured by bounty hunters and sold to the U.S. military. 
Three have been released to a refugee  
center in Albania, while two remain in  
Guantánamo five years later, despite 
being told that their capture was a mistake. Barre v. Bush/ Barre v. GatesHabeas corpus and DTA petitions  
on behalf of Mohammed Barre, a  
UNHCR-certified refugee from  
Somalia.
Al-Qahtani v. Bush/ Al Qahtani v. Gates
Habeas corpus and DTA petitions for 
Mohammed Al Qahtani, who suffered 
physical and psychological torture when he was subjected to the  
extraordinarily abusive “First Special Interrogation Plan” authorized by  
Donald Rumsfeld.
Khan v. Bush/ Khan v. Gates
Habeas corpus and DTA petitions for Majid Khan, who was held in CIA 
secret detention for several years prior 
to his transfer to Guantánamo. Because the government has classified all of Khan’s experiences in CIA detention at the highest level possible–“top secret/
sensitive compartmented information”  
– access to our client is subject to  
extraordinary security and censorship 
procedures. Rasul v. Rumsfeld and  Celikgogus v. Rumsfeld
Civil suits for damages against Donald 
Rumsfeld and others responsible for  
the detention, torture and mistreatment of nine men illegally detained in  
Guantánamo for years, including two men detained for more than four years 
and released years after being classified 
as non-enemy combatants.
Taher v. Bush/ Taher v. Gates
Habeas corpus and DTA petitions  
for Mohammed Taher, one of the  remaining ninety-five Yemenis in  
Guantánamo. Yemenis comprise over one third of the remaining Guantánamo  
population due to breakdowns in  
negotiations between the U.S. and  
Yemen regarding their return.
Zalita v. Bush/ Zalita v. Gates
The first legal challenge brought by a 
Guantánamo detainee to an intended 
transfer to his native country, Libya, where he would likely face torture or execution.
3738Guantánamo  Case  index  (continued)
Abdah v. Bush 
Abdessalam v. Bush 
Abdulayev v. Gates 
Abdullah v. Bush 
Abdurahman, A. v. Gates Aboassy, v. Bush 
Ahmed “Doe” v. BushAhmed v. Bush 
Ahmed, Fayad Yahya v. Gates Akhouzada v. Bush 
Akhouzada, Abdul G. v. Gates 
Akhtiar v. Bush
Al Bahooth v. Bush 
Al Daini v. Bush
Al Daini, Omer v. Gates
Al Darbi, Ahmad v. Gates 
Al Darby v. Bush 
Al Halmandy v. Bush 
Al Harbi, Mohammed v. Gates 
Al Hawary v. Bush 
Al Hawary, Abbar v. Gates 
Al Khateeb, Mohammed  
 v. Gates 
Al Nakheelan v. Bush,  Al Odah v. Bush 
Al Qadir, Mohammed v. Gates 
Al Rashaidan v. Bush 
Al Salami v. Bush 
Al Sharbi v. Bush 
Al Subaie v. Bush 
Al Wirghi v. Bush 
Al Yafie v. Bush 
Al Yazidi, Ridah v. Gates
Al-Asadi v. Bush 
Al-Baidany v. Bush 
Albkri v. Bush 
Al-Delebany v. Bush 
Al Gatele v. Bush Alghatani v. Bush Al-Ghizzawi v. Bush 
Alhag v. Bush 
Alhag v. Gates 
Alhami v. Bush Al-Harbi v. Bush 
Al-Harbi v. Bush Al-Hela v. Bush 
Ali Ahmed v. Bush Ali Al Jayfi v. Bush 
Alkhemisi v. Bush 
Al-Maliki v. Bush 
Al-Marri v. Bush 
Almerfedi v. Bush 
Al-Mithali v. Bush 
Al-Mithali v. Gates 
Almjrd v. Bush 
Al-Mudafari v. Bush 
Al-Mudafari v. Gates 
Almurbati v. Bush 
Al-Rubaish v. Bush 
Al-Shabany v. Rumsfeld 
Al-Sharekh v. Bush 
Al-Shimrani v. Bush Al-Sopai v. Bush 
Al-Zarnouqi v. Bush 
Amin v. Bush 
Anam v. Bush 
Attash v. Bush 
Awad v. Bush 
Aweda v. Bush 
Aziz v. Bush
Aziz, Abdullah M. v. Gates 
Bacha v. Bush 
Barhoumi, Sufyian v. Gates 
Barkati v. Gates 
Batarfi v. Bush 
Begg v. Bush Boumediene v. Bush Deghayes v. Bush 
Dhiab v. Bush 
Dossari, Jumah v. Gates 
El-Banna v. Bush Elisher v. Bush 
Ezatullah v. Bush Gerab Alsaaei v. Bush 
Ghanem v. Bush Ghazy v. Bush 
Gherebi v. Bush 
Gul v. Bush 
Habib v. Bush 
Hadjarab, Nabil v. Gates 
Hakmat v. Bush 
Hakmat, Abdullah v. Gates 
Hamlily, Mustafa v. Gates 
Hamoodah v. Bush 
Hamoud v. Bush 
Hassan Said v. Gates 
Hatim v. Bush 
Hentif v. Bush 
Kabir v. Bush 
Kahn v. Gates Kerimbakiev v. Gates 
Khalid v. Bush 
Khalifh v. Bush 
Khalifh v. Gates 
Khan v. Bush 
Kiyemba v. Bush 
Kurnaz v. Bush 
Lai v. Bush 
Magram v. Bush 
Mammar v. Bush 
Matin v. Bush 
Mattan, Mohammed v. Gates 
Mohammed v. Bush 
Mohammed Othman v. BushMohammon v. Bush Mokit v. Bush Moosa v. Bush 
Nabil v. Bush 
Naseem v. Bush Naseer v. Bush 
Nasser, Abdulrahman v. Gates 
Noori v. Gates Obaydullah v. Gates Odah v. Bush 
Qasim v. Bush 
Qassim v. Bush Qayed v. Bush Rabbani v. Bush Rahmattullah v. Bush 
Rammi v. Bush 
Rasul v. Bush Razak v. Bush 
Razakah v. Bush 
Razakah v. Gates Rimi v. Bush Saib v. Bush 
Said v. Bush 
Salahi al. v. Bush Saleh v. Bush Sameur v. Bush 
Shafiq v. Bush 
Suliman v. Bush Thabid v. Bush 
Torjan v. Gates 
Toukh v. Bush Tourson v. Gates Tumani v. Bush Uthman v. Gates 
Wasim v. Bush 
Yaakoobi v. Bush Zaid v. Bush 
Zemiri v. Bush After our landmark Supreme Court victory in Rasul v. Bush in 2004, which established that Guantánamo detainees 
can challenge their detention in federal courts, CCR organized a network of pro bono lawyers to file  habeas corpus 
petitions and founded the Guantánamo Global Justice Initiative to coordinate this work. CCR continues to play a 
leadership role in the coordination of this tremendous effort and is co-counsel on the majority of cases filed. Below 
is a list of habeas and DTA petitions on which CCR is co-counsel this year.39Douglas Abbott 
Karen Abravanel Muneer Ahmad 
Shireen Ahmed 
Elizabeth Ainslie Natasha Akda Allen & Overy LLP 
Ismail Alsheik 
Alston & Bird Sarah Altschuller American University 
Washington College  
of Law International Human Rights Clinic 
Donald Anderson John AndersonSapna K. Anderson 
Gabriel Arana 
Jennifer Argabright Bridget Arimond Nadia Asancheyev 
Baher Azmy 
Baach Robinson  
& Lewis, PLLC
Rick Bailey Carrie Baker 
Baker & McKenzie 
Susan Baker ManningAnand Balakrishnan David Baluarte Scott Barker 
Baumann, DeSeve  
& Landau 
James W. Beane, Jr. 
Reagan Beck 
Doug Behr 
Jonathan BenderJeffrey A. Berger Ryan Bergsieker Joe Berman Mark Berman Catherin A. Bernard David Berz
William Bethune 
Bingham McCutchen  
LLP 
Birnberg Pierce  
& Partners 
Jonathan Blackman Keith Blackman Troy BlantonManique W. Bloom 
Ronald Blum 
Steve BocknekJames F. Bogan, III Emmet Bondurant Bondurant, Mixson  
& Elmore 
Louis Bonilla Matthew Boos Kevin Boris 
Dwight Bostwick 
Bracewell &  
Giuliani, LLP 
David Bradford Yvonne Bradley 
Alejandro Bras 
Elizabeth Braverman Alex Breckinridge William Brennan Brennan Center for  
Justice at NYU  
School of Law 
Brennan, Trainor, Billman  
& Bennett, LLP 
J. Patrick Briscoe Patricia Bronte Brooklyn Law School Christopher Brown Karma Brown Carol E. Bruce Mary Kate Brunell Lauren Brunswick 
Matthew Bryson 
Bryan Bullock Edmund Burke Burke, McPheeters,  
Bordner, & Estes 
Burns & Levinson LLP Antony Burt Mona Burton B. Brian Busey 
Howard R. Cabot 
Kelly A. Cameron Angela Campbell Charles H. Carpenter Bernie J. Casey 
Doug Cassel 
Anne Castle Don CatalanoD. Marcus Cave 
Anna Cayton-Holland 
Center for International 
Human Rights, North-western University School of Law 
Center for Justice and 
International Law 
Christopher Cestaro John Chamberlain John Chandler 
Erwin Chemerinsky
Jessica Chen Pamela Chepiga Anupama Chettri 
Brian Childs 
Adam Chiss Judith Brown Chomsky Louise Christian George M. ClarkGeorge ClarkeA. Stephens Clay Cleary Gottlieb Steen  
& Hamilton LLP
Clifford Chance US, LLP Rachel G. Clingman James Cohen 
Jerry Cohen 
Cohen, Milstein, Hausfeld 
& Toll, PLLC 
Joshua Colangelo-Bryan Jeff Colman 
Jenna Colvin
Ian Conner John Connolly Jon Connolly Matt Connolly 
Anupama Connor 
Aaron Cooper Lynne Cooper Michael Cooper 
Thom Cordell 
Covington &  
Burling LLC 
Jennifer Cowan Douglas Cox 
Mary Cox 
Randy Coyne Cramer & Minock, PLCSarah Crane Cori Crider 
William Crow
Alyssa Crow Deborah Croyle Paul Cumin 
Audrey Cummings 
Douglas Curtis David Cynamon Richard L. Cys Ronald Daignault George Daly Anitra Das Jeffrey L. Davis 
Davis Wright  
Tremaine LLP 
Debevoise &  
Plimpton LLP 
Dechert LLP 
Don Degnan Ambreen Delawalla Joshua W. Denbeaux Mark Denbeaux 
Denbeaux & Denbeaux 
Michael DeSanctis Matthew Devine Rebecca Dick Dickey & Campbell  
Law Firm, PLC 
David Dickman Dickstein Shapiro Morin 
& Oshinsky 
Claire Diegel James Dillon Bernhard DockeMatt Dodge Ronan Doherty 
Skye Donald 
Heather Lewis Donnell James Dorsey Dorsey & Whitney LLP Downs Rachlin  
Martin PLLC 
Elyse Dreyer Michael Drumke Duke University  
School of Law 
Theresa Duncan Loraine Dunn Sarah Dunn Melissa Durkee 
This year, CCR’s Guantánamo Global Justice Initiative was honored to have worked with over 600 lawyers and legal 
workers at over 100 law firms, law school clinics and other legal organizations who have filed habeas corpus petitions on behalf of Guantánamo detainees. We thank each and every one of these brave individuals and organizations for their unflagging commitment in representing their clients at Guantánamo Bay. Guantánamo Habeas Counsel40Thomas Durkin 
Durkin & Roberts Chris Dysard David East 
Roger A. Eddleman 
Denis Edney Edney Hattersley  
& Dolphin 
Amanda L. Edwards Edwards Angell Palmer 
& Dodge LLP 
Buz Eisenberg Jacob Eisler
David Elbaum 
Sarah El HashemBram Elias Robert Elliot 
Elliot Pishko  
Morgan P.A. 
Emory Law School
David L. Engerhardt Rebecca Engrav Connie EricsonJeff Ertel Esdaile Barrett & Esdaile 
Daniel Esrick 
Marc Falkoff George Farah Omar A. Farah
Erika C. Farrell 
Federal Defender  
Program for the  
Northern District  
of Georgia 
Federal Public  
Defenders Office, Southern District  
of Florida 
Jon Fee Warren Feldman Nathan FennessyJacqueline Ferrand Benjamin Field Jonathan Fine Mark FlemingMartin Flumenbaum
Murray Fogler 
Foley Hoag LLP Foliart, Huff,  
Ottaway & Bottom 
Fordham University 
School of Law 
Paul Fortino Dulce FosterTina M. Foster 
Nuri G. Frame 
Sarah FrancisDanile Francis Michael Franck 
Laurie Frankl 
Brian S. Fraser Fredrikson &  
Byron P.A. Eric M. Freedman Freedman Boyd  
Daniels Hollander  
& Goldberg PA 
Stewart D. Fried Agnieszka Fryszman 
Fulbright &  
Joworski LLP 
Ellen L. Frye 
Avi Garbow Allen Garrett 
Cynthia Garron 
Garvey Schubert Barer Zachary Gelber Bob Gensburg 
Gensburg Atwell,  
& Broderick 
George Washington  
Law School 
Georgetown University 
Law Center 
Ahmed Ghappour 
John J. Gibbons Gibbons P.C.Doug Gibson
John R. Gibson 
Jonathan Gifford Gilroy, Kammen & Hill Elizabeth P. Gilson 
Jeffrey Gleason 
Emily Goldberg Jenna Goldenberg Marc Goldman C. Frank Goldsmith, Jr. 
Goldsmith, Goldsmith  
& Dews, P.A. 
Jared Goldstein 
Leonard C. Goodman George Gordon 
H. Candace Gorman 
KC Goyer Robert Graham Jason J. Green 
Eldon V .C. Greenberg 
Ayo Griffin Darren Griffis Richard A. Grigg David Grossman 
Erica Grossman 
Nienke Grossman Harold Gurewitz Gurewitz & Raben PLC 
Abigail Gustafson
Jonathan P. Guy Dinh HaMelinda Haag Jonathan Hafetz
Sarah Haider 
Suhana S. Han Hugh Handeyside Matt Handley 
Osman Handoo 
Hangley Aronchick  
Segal & Pudlin 
Hartmann Doherty Rosa 
& Berman, LLC 
Sarah Havens Betsy Haws Heller Ehrman David Hickerson Jane Hill 
Tony Hill 
J. Hirsh Ellen Hochberg Hofstra Law School 
Jennifer Hojaiban 
John Holland Holland & Hart LLP Nancy Hollander Miranda Hooker 
James Hosking 
Erica Hovani Christopher Huber Jonathan Huber Gaillard T. Hunt 
Hunton & Williams 
Kristine Huskey Varda HussainSalah Husseini 
International Justice  
Network 
Gary A. Isaac
Guantánamo Habeas Counsel  (continued)
CCR team and habeas counsel in front of the Supreme Court on Boumediene argument day. From 
left: Mark Fleming (WilmerHale), Rob Kirsch (WilmerHale), Gary Isaac (Mayer Brown), Michael 
Ratner (CCR), Baher Azmy (Seton Hall), Wells Dixon (CCR), Gitanjali Gutierrez (CCR), Shayana  
Kadidal (CCR), Anant Raut (Weil Gotshal), Steve Oleskey (WilmerHale), Vincent Warren (CCR), Jes-sica Baen (CCR), Susan Hu (CCR), Pardiss Kebriaei (CCR), Emi MacLean (CCR), Liz Bradley (CCR)41Sarah Jackel 
Ketanji Jackson Beth Jacob 
Jessica Jacob 
Michael JacobsAndrew Jacobs Meetali Jain 
Jenner & Block 
Chenxi JiaoDerek Jinks Tom R. Johnson, Jr. Glenn Jones 
Kim Jones 
Paula JonesLisa M. Kaas Carol Kaltenbaugh Rick Kammen 
Steven J. Kane 
Matt Kaplan Christopher G.  
Karagheuzoff 
Jason Karasik Ramzi Kassem Rene KathawalaAlison Katon Neal Katyal 
Zachary Katznelson 
Joann Kauffman Samuel Kauffman Matthew B. Keller Keller and Heckman LLP 
Patti Kemp 
Paul Kemp Elizabeth Kendall Mahvish Khan 
Darold Killmer 
Killmer, Lane &  
Newman, LLP 
Kilpatrick Stockton LLP Rob Kirsch 
Daniel B. Kirschner 
Jan Kitchel Molly Kitchel Sarah Klee 
Donald Klein 
Jessica KleinMichael Y . Kleval Sarah Knapp Jason Knott 
Rob Knowles 
Estee Konor Neil Koslowe Kramer Levin Naftalis  
& Frankel LLP 
Kenneth Kreuscher Corwin Kruse Timothy KuhnerMadhuri Kumar
Amy Kurren 
Andrew KutasPhilip Allen Lacovara Sapna Lalmalani Seth Lamden 
Joe Landau 
Jackie Landells Jeffrey Lang Vini Lashay 
Tanya Lau 
Darren LaVerne Lavin, O’Neil, Ricci, 
Cedrone & DiSipio 
Paul A. Leder 
Allison Lefrak 
Laura Leitner Julie Lemmer Matthew Leonard Walter Lesnevich 
Lesnevich &  
Marzano-Lesnevich 
Lesser, Newman & 
Nasser, LLP 
Joshua Levine 
Jason Leviton Brian Lewis Eric LewisDarryl Li 
Emma Lindsay 
Gregory Lipper Elaina Loizou Looney & Grossman 
Louis Marjon
Ellen Lubell Cathy Lui John Lundquist Lawrence S. Lustberg 
Matthew Lyons 
MacArthur Justice 
Center, Northwestern University School  
of Law 
J. Triplett Mackintosh Matthew Maclean Hanna Madbak Brian Maddox
Brian Mahanna 
Daniel Malone Manatt, Phelps  
& Phillips LLP 
Howard Manchel 
Manchel, Wiggins  
& Kaye 
Margol & Pennington 
Jonathan Margolis 
Joe Margulies 
Peter Margulies Lou Marjon Diego Marquez David S. Marshall 
Larry Martin 
Julia Tarver Mason Tanisha Massie Ashok Mathai Johnisha Matthews 
Mayer Brown LLP
McCarter & English Cam McCord Bridget McCormack 
McDermott, Will  
& Emery
Tracy McDonald 
Stephen McFate Neil McGaraghan 
Nancy McGrath
Robert McKeehan Amy McMaster Joseph M. McMillan 
McNaul Ebel Nawrot  
& Helgren, PLLC Ruth McNiff 
Brian Meadors Emily Meazell 
Kristin Meister
Brian Mendelsohn Allison Menkes Eric Merrifield
Sonia Merzon 
Semra A. MesulamFrancesca L. Miceli Scott Michelman Brent Mickum, IV 
Issa Mikel 
Tatia Miller Miller & Chevalier 
Chartered
Sharon Mills 
Scott Minder 
Pam Minett John R. Minock Mitchell Mirviss 
John B. Missing 
Nicholas Mitchell Nicole Moen Michael E. Mone Michael E. Mone, Jr.
Christopher Moore 
Mariah Moran Chris Morgan J. Griffin MorganDan Mori 
Morrison & Foerster LLP 
Melissa Mortazavi Julian Davis Mortenson Daniel Moylan 
William Murane 
Catherine R. Murphy William Murphy Murphy & Shaffer Richard Murphy, Jr. 
Arnold Natali 
Usha Neelakantan Brian Neff Mari Newman 
Steven Newman 
William C. Newman Jim Nickovich Nixon Peabody LLP Northern Illinois  
University 
Siham Nurhussein W. Scott O’Connell Matthew O’Hara 
Stephen Oleskey 
Christina Olson Joseph O’Neil Oregon State  
University 
Orrick, Herrington & 
Sutcliffe, LLP 
Larry OttawayJoseph PaceAaron Marr Page 
Andrew Pak 
Kyle A. PalazzoloJohn Palmer Chintan Panchal 
Parlee McLaws LLP
Charles Patterson Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, 
Wharton & Garrison 
Gareth Peirce 
Rufus Pennington 
Pepper Hamilton LLP Perkins Coie Chip Peters Erin Peters 
Michael Petrusic 
Kit Pierson Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw 
Pittman LLP 
Jason Pinney Christian Pistilli Eve Pogoriler Sarah Pojanowski Erin Porter 
Kate Portlock 
Allyson Portney Cristina PosaRussell Post 
Michael Poulshock 
Wesley Powell 42Kevin Powers 
V . Paige Pratter Carlos Provencio Gail Pruitt Pryor, Robertson,  
Beasley, Smith & 
Karber PLLC 
Donald Pugliese 
Tom Pulham Robert D. Rachlin Angela Rafoth 
Sarah Ragland 
Jana Ramsey Michael Rapkin Noah H. Rashkind
Paul M. Rashkind 
Martha Rayner Reed SmithGail Regina Paul Reichler 
Abraham Rein 
Michael Reisman David Remes Jaimie Renner 
Stuart Rennert 
Reprieve J. Riaco Sara Rich 
Richards Kibbe &  
Orbe, LLP
Jeremy Robbins
Gwynn Roberson Janis Roberts 
Rick Roberts 
Michael Robinson Elizabeth Rodgers Rodgers, Powers & 
Schwartz, LLP 
Harold Rodriguez Marcus Rodriguez Roger Williams  
University 
Philip Rohlik John RothermichSamuel R. Rowley Sylvia Royce Louis Ruprecht Ruprecht, Hart &  
Weeks LLP 
Brent RushforthRheba Rutkowski Diana Rutowski Peter Ryan 
William Ryan, Jr. 
Lowell Sachnoff Daniel Sachs Seema Saifee Glenn Salvo 
Douglas B. Sanders 
B. J. Sanford Juliet Sarkessian Boyd Savage 
William Scanlan, Jr. 
Schiff Hardin LLP Schnader, Harrison,  
Segal & Lewis LLP 
Debra Schneider 
Paul Schoeman 
Carol Schroeder James C. Schroeder Daniel Schulof
David T. Schur
Eric Schwab Schwabe, Williamson  
& Wyatt 
Harvey Schwartz Alison Sclater Kristina ScotoSarah Selim Randy Sergent 
Seton Hall Law School, 
Center for Social 
Justice 
Amanda Shafer Berman Pratik Shah 
Benjamin Sharp 
Shearman &  
Sterling LLP 
Christian Sheehan 
Sheku Sheikholeslami 
Patrick Sheldon Deming Sherman Jessica Sherman Laura Shiltz Shook, Hardy &  
Bacon LLP 
David Shuford 
Cary Silverman Gia Simon 
Nicole Simon 
Simpson Thacher & 
Bartlett LLP
Charles Sipos 
Matthew Slater
Hilary Sledge David Sleigh 
Sleigh & Williams 
Marjorie M. Smith Michael Smith Sara Smolick 
John C. Snodgrass 
Ben Snowden Marina Sokolinsky 
Gemma Solimene 
Doug Sondgeroth Richard Soto Lynne Soutter 
Brian C. Spahn 
Douglas Spaulding Spears & Imes LLP 
Spivey & Grigg LLP 
Kent Spriggs Spriggs & Hollingsworth Spriggs Law Firm 
Clive A. Stafford-Smith 
Catherine Stahl Brent Starks 
Rebecca Starr 
Tara Steeley Michael J. SternhellJack Stoerger 
Jeffrey M. Strauss 
Lisa R. Strauss Mark S. Sullivan 
Patricia Sullivan 
Scott Sullivan Thomas Sullivan
Claudia Sullivan 
Sullivan &  
Cromwell LLP Timothy S. Susanin 
Alan Sussman Sutherland Asbill & 
Brennan LLP 
Julia SymonElizabeth Tanis 
Asmah Tareen 
Joel Taylor Doris Tennant Tennant Lubell, LLC Gregory P. Teran 
The West Law Firm
Gary Thompson Wade Thomson Eric A. Tirschwell 
Harry Trainor 
Charles M. Travis Robert Trenchard Michael W. Trinh Stephen M. Truitt 
Sozi Tulante 
Suzanne Turner University of Michigan 
Clinical Law Program 
University of Notre Dame University of Oklahoma 
College of Law 
University of Texas 
School of Law,  
National Security & Human Rights Clinic 
Andrew Vail Thea van der Zalm 
Veronica Vela 
Venable LLP Benjamin Vernia Angela C. Vigil Jack Vitayanon 
Danielle V oorhees 
Lori Wagner Jill Waldman Eliot Walker 
James (Bud) Walsh 
Terry Walsh Michael Ward Hadassa WaxmanSeth P. Waxman Bob Weaver 
Kate Weaver 
Weil Gotshal & Manges
Weinberg & Garber PC Robert Weiner Colleen Weinman 
Ian Weinstein 
Jamie Weitzel Jason C. Welch 
Gregory Welikson 
Stephen F. Wells Bill Wertheimer, Jr. Terry West 
Cody Weston 
Whiteford, Taylor  
& Preston 
Nathan Whitling 
Michael Whitlock 
Erin C. Wilcox Kristin Wilhlem 
Sabin Willett 
Jill M. Williamson WilmerHale Tom Wilner 
Elizabeth Wilson 
Rick Wilson Paul Winke 
Meghan Winokur 
Julie Withers Jo-Anne WolfsonPaul Wolfson 
Elton Wong 
Gordon Woodward Shawn Wrobel Jeffrey Wu 
Jessica Yager 
Yale Law School,  
National Litigation Project 
David Young John Zhou Patricia Zohn 
Jon Zulauf 
Zulauf & Chambliss Lisa Zycherman
Guantánamo Habeas Counsel  (continued)100 Blacks in Law  
Enforcement Who Care
Stephen Abraham
ACLU Human Rights Project
ACLU National Prison Project
ACLU National Technology and 
Liberty Project
ACLU Racial Justice ProgramCraig Acorn
Debo Adegbile
Advancement ProjectAfghanistan Human Rights  
Organization (AHRO)
Amna Akbar
Shereef Hadi Akeel
Akeel & Valentine P.C.Akin, Gump, Strauss,  
Hauer & Feld
Susan Akram
Iyad Alami
Laila Al-ArianAshlee AlbiesCathy Albisa
Alliance for Justice
Bob Alsdorf
Danny Alterman
Adrian Alvarez
American University  
Washington College of Law
Amnesty InternationalChris Anders
Carl AnduriRumzi Araj
Nan Aron
Ahilan ArulananthamBert and Barbara Aubrey
Hon. Jeffrion Aubry
Audre Lorde Project
Tracy AustinJohn Austria
Michael Avery
Erin Azar
Baach Robinson & Lewis PLLC
Radhika Balakrishnan
Janice BaldalutzDavid Baluarte
Andre Banks
Kevin Bankston
Patrick Baudouin
Catherine BeaneMyron Beldock
Beldock, Levine &  
Hoffman LLP
Jonathan Bennet
Phyllis BennisAntoine Bernard
Nancy Bernstein
Frida Berrigan
Sean Bettinger-López
Caroline Bettinger-LópezAnurima BhargavaChandra Bhatnagar
Douglas Bloom
Carolyn Patty Blum
Heidi Boghosian
Arlene Boop
Elena Borstein and  
Iain Whitecross
Boston University  
School of Law
Chesa Boudin
Andrew Boyd
Bob Boyle
Pamela BradshawMatt Brinckerhoff
Judith Brink
Malia Brink
Judith and Don BroderBronx Defenders
Tamir Z. Brown
Jessica Buchanan
Allan Buchman
Bureau d’Avocat  
International - Haiti
Susan BurkeBurke O’Neil LLC
Butler Rubin Saltarelli  
& Boyd LLP
Mirian A. BuhlElizabeth Burke 
Brian Byrd
CAAA V: Organizing  
Asian Communities
Caged PrisonersSusan Cameron
Campaign to Promote  
Equitable Telephone  
Charges (ETC)
Juan Cartagena
The Carter CenterCauses in Common
Marco Ceglie
Center for Community  
Alternatives
Center for Justice &  
Accountability (CJA)
Center for Justice and  
International Law (CEJIL)
Center for Reproductive RightsNathaniel CharnyMarco Chelo
Erwin Chemirinsky
Paul ChevignyEmily Chiang
Chicago Justice Project
Judith Brown Chomsky
Cindy ChupackCitizens United for  
Rehabilitation of Errants - New York Chapter  
(CURE-NY)
Civil Liberties Defense Center
Monique Weston ClagueMelanca D. Clark
Coalition for Parole  
Restoration (CPR)
Coalition for the Defense  
of Human Rights
Coalition for  
Women Prisoners
Coalition to Raise Minimum 
Standards at NYC Jails
Kendrick Cobb
Cindy Cohn
Marjorie Cohn 
David Cole
Sandy Coliver
Columbia University  
School of Law Human  
Rights Institute
Community Service SocietyBrian Concannon
Kristin Connor
Correctional Association
Council on American-Islamic 
Relations New York Chapter 
(CAIR-NY)
Kurt CoutainCovington & BurlingJennifer Cowan
Catherine E. Creeley
Culture ProjectCurtis, Mallet-Prevost,  
Colt & Mosle
Rudy and Betty Cypser
Daniel HeymanOver the past year, the Center for Constitutional Rights has worked with hundreds of attorneys, legal organizations, 
private law firms, clients and activists on our cases, campaigns and fundraising ef forts. CCR extends its deepest 
appreciation for all they have done as volunteer attorneys, cooperating attorneys, co-counsel and colleagues in the struggle for justice. Friends and Allies
4344Jamil Dakwar
Matt Daloisio
Ron Daniels
Adam Day
Sten de Geer
Vanessa Stich De SimoneKyle De Young
Davis Wright Tremaine
Debevoise & Plimpton, LLPDefending Dissent Foundation
Desis Rising Up and Moving 
(DRUM)
Detention Watch Network
Jeff Deutch
Wanda Best Deveaux
Anthony DiCaprioDLA Piper US LLP
Domestic Workers United
Alvin Dorfman
Richard Dorn
Drop the RockDrug Policy Alliance
Bani Duggal
Ann Cassie DuongDwa Famn
EarthRights  
International (ERI)
Matt EisenbrandtEdward J. Elder
Electronic Frontier  
Foundation
Assia ElgouacemSoffiyah Elijah
Ella’s Daughters
Eddie EllisEmery, Celli, Brinckerhoff  
& Abady LLP
Eve Ensler
Ethical Culture Society
European Center for  
Constitutional and  
Human Rights (ECCHR)
Jodie Evans and  
Max Palevsky Fabulous Independent Educated 
Radicals for Community  
Empowerment (FIERCE!)
Fair Rates for ME
Marc Falkoff
Families for FreedomFamilies Rally for  
Emancipation and  
Empowerment (FREE)
Dwa Fanm
Mike Farrell
Moira Feeney
Jake Feltham
Arwa Fidahusein
Walter Fields
Liz FinkRobert F. Fink
Martin Fisher
Five Towns Forum
Laura Flanders
Florida Legal ServicesAndrew Fois
Food Empowerment Project
Steve Fox Eric Freedman
Spencer Freedman
French League for  
Human Rights (LDH)
Daniel FriedmanSusan and Dick Gaffney
Mary Beth Gallagher
Janice GehlmeyerMary J. Geissman
Stephan Geras
Gibbons P.C.Alex Gibney
Cathe Giffuni
Global Exchange
Danny Glover
Glover Park GroupCurt Goering
Steven Goldberg
Sonia GoldsteinBill GoodmanMelissa GoodmanGoodman & Hurwitz
William Gould
Amanda Gourdine
Denise Graf
Michael GramerKate Greenwood
Colin Greer
Olivia GreerGuerilla Tactics Media (GTM)
Hadsell & Stormer
Jonathan Hafetz
Lisa Hajjar
Hamilton Fish
Scott Handleman
Christine HarringtonHarvard Human  
Rights Program 
Harvard Law School Human 
Rights Clinic
Katherine HawkinsIan Head
Rosemary B. Healy
Anne K. HeidelDominik Heinzer
Art Heitzer
Simon HellerRick Herz
Damon Hewitt
Ginny Hildebrand
Hip Hop Theater Festival
Paul HoffmanSarah Hogarth
Jeff Hogue
Adrienne HolderToni Holness
Leah Horowitz
Scott Horton
Sumi Hoshiko
Ina HowardMary Howell
Carolyn Hsu
Margaret HuangJayne HuckerbyHuman Rights FirstHuman Rights Watch
Aziz Huq
Chaumtoli Huq
Zaid Hydari 
Hyde - 30 Years is Enough! 
Campaign
Illinois Campaign for  
Telephone Justice
Immigrant Justice Solidarity 
Project (IJSP)
Institute for Justice and  
Democracy in Haiti
Institute for Policy Studies
Institute for the Black World  
21st Century
Interfaith Coalition of  
Advocates for Reentry  
and Employment (ICARE)
International Center for  
Transitional Justice (ICTJ)
International Federation for  
Human Rights (FIDH)
International Haiti Support 
Network 
International Solidarity  
Movement
Iraq Veterans for PeaceGary A. Isaac
Renee Isely
Kim Ives
Abdeen JabaraOmar Jadwat
Jameel Jaffer
Alan JenkinsKenn John
Cantrell Jones
Keith Jordan
Mario Joseph
Jessica JuarezJudson Memorial Church
Justice Committee
Justice Works  
CommunityFriends and Allies (continued)Juvenile Justice Project  
of Lousiana
Wolfgang Kaleck
Lindsey Kaley
Carolyn Kalos
Dana KaplanEliot Katz
Paul Keegan
Ateqah KhakiRazia Khan
Reilly Kiernan
Kim Paula Kirkley
C. Clark Kissinger
Java and Mark Kitrick 
James Klimaski
Klimaski & AssociatesRuth Kreinik
Frank KroghSarah Kunstler
Kunstler Fund
Murat Kurnaz
Vivien Labaton
Brandon Lacy Campos
James LaffertyRay LaForrest
Elena Landriscina
LAS Prisoners Rights ProjectDavid Lerner
Judy Lessing
Bob Levis
Richard Levy
Levy  , LP
Levy, Phillips &  
Konigsberg, LLP
Elizabeth LewisMegan LewisThomas Lindsay
Dahlia Lithwick
Qiao Liu
Jules Lobel
Carlos Lopez
Crystal LopezDana Lossia
Errol Louis
George LoewensteinNicholas Lusiani
Lawrence S. Lustberg
Cassandra Lyn
Lyrics To Go
Marcia Maack
Antoine Madelin
Moshe S. MaimonVladimir Makhlis
Medina MalagicMalcolm X Grassroots  
Movement (MXGM)
Sara Maldonado
Anjana Malhotra
David Mandel- Anthony
Glenn MartinMadeline Martinez
Mayer Brown LLP
Stanley McDermott, IIIIsabel McDonald
Nell McGarity
Alice McGrath
Tiffany McKinney Gardner
Shannon McNulty
Dana McPhall
Robert and Ellen MeerpolAri Melber
Pamela Merchant
Safe Streets / Strong Communities  is a New Orleans-based organization that is 
working towards a new criminal justice system and building collective power and leadership within 
targeted local communities. Safe Streets serves communities impacted by violence and police 
harassment and emphasizes building the leadership of police brutality victims, formerly incarcerated 
people and their loved ones. Members are primarily adult women family members of formerly and 
currently incarcerated people. 
In October of 2007, CCR partnered with Safe Streets/Strong Communities to host a national hearing 
in New Orleans examining the role of law enforcement in the reconstruction of the city. The hearing 
resulted in powerful and emotional testimony from community members, advocates and public policy 
experts describing how aggressive policing practices are blocking the right of return and seriously 
impeding the resettling process for the poor, youth and communities of color.
The post-Katrina reality for folks in low-income communities – communities of color – 
is one where we encounter law enforcement at the doors of our children’s’ schools, in our public housing, on day labor corners where people are trying to find work and in trying to access mental health care for our loved ones.
- Rosana Cruz, Co-Director of Safe Streets, speaking at New Orleans hearings
CCR Spotlight
4546Carl Messineo
Maren Messing
Danny Meyers
Jeanne Mirer
Mississippi Workers Center  
for Human Rights
Neera MohessCamelia Montalvo
Jonathan MooreMorning-After Pill  
Conspiracy
Morrison & Foerster
Jumana Musa
Rafael Mutis
Joanna Naples-Mitchell
The Nation InstituteNational Black Police  
Association
National Economic and Social 
Rights Initiative (NESRI)
National Hip Hop Political  
Convention
National HIRE NetworkNational Lawyers GuildNational Lawyers Guild,  
Bay Area Chapter
National Lawyers Guild,  
LA Chapter
National Lawyers Guild,  
Mass Defense Committee
National Lawyers Guild,  
NYC Chapter
National Organization for  
Defending Rights &  
Freedoms (HOOD–Yemen)
Eva Navon
NC Stop Torture Now
Taylor Negron
Neighborhood Defender  
Service of Harlem (NDSH)
Merry NeisnerAlice Nelson
Sarah NetburnNetroots NationNew York City AIDS Housing 
Network (NYCAHN)
New York City Law Review of  
the City University of New 
York School of Law
New York Coalition  
Against Torture
New York Coalition to Expand 
V oting Rights
New York Immigration  
Coalition
New York State Defenders  
Association
NodutdolGerald Norlander
Northwestern University  
School of Law
Northwestern Uiversity  
School of Law, Center  
for International Human Rights
NY Lawyers in the  
Public Interest (NYLPI)
NYU Center for Human Rights  
& Global Justice
NYU Human Rights ClinicOctober 22nd Coalition to  
Stop Police Brutality
Ricky and Cheri O’DonoghueBarbara Olshansky
William T. O’Neil
Kurt OpsahlMartha Lee Edmonds Owen
Monica Pa
Mel PackerSailaja Paidipaty
Palestine Solidarity  
Committee - Seattle Chapter
Palestinian Center for Human 
Rights
Mark PalmerEgizio Panetti
Carly PansullaVikram ParekhBoram ParkKathy Parker
Partnership for Civil Justice
Peoples’ Justice
Kay Perry
Katrina PflaumerC. William Phillips
Steven J. Phillips
Picture the HomelessPolitical Research  
Associates 
Miriam Pollet
Michael Poulshock
Achebe Powell
Emily Powers
Fred PrattMitzi Pratt
Prison Families Anonymous
Prison Families of  
New York, Inc.
Prison Moratorium ProjectPrisoners are People Too
Puffin Room Gallery
Janice PullinoJonathan H. Pyle
Queers for Economic Justice
Bill QuigleyRachel Corrie Foundation
Annie Rashidi-Mulumba
Ratner, DiCaprio  
& Chomsky LLP
Corin RedgraveLynn Redgrave
Vanessa Redgrave
Redstockings of the Women’s 
Liberation Movement
Cynthia ReedReentry.net
Norman Reimer
Republican Attorney  
Association  
(RA V – Germany)
Kate RheeStephen F. RohdeRights for Imprisoned People 
with Psychiatric Disabilities 
(RIPPD) 
Rights Working GroupRiverside Church
Jeffery RobinsonMarion Rodriguez
Rossana Rosado
Carl J. RosensteinGladys Miller-Rosenstein
Perry Rosenstein 
Robert Ross
Gabe Roth
Laura Rotolo
Tim Rountree
Shannon RoznerJames Rubin
Visuvananathan Rudrakumaran
Ellen Ryan
Alvie Sachs
Safe Streets/  
Strong Communities
Naomi SagerIvor SamsonSuzan Sanal
Douglas B. Sapola
Meg SatterthwaiteJeremy Scahill
Ann Marie Scalia
Dan Schenck
Schomburg Center for Research 
in Black Culture
Steven SchulmanKatie Schwartzmann
Seattle Univ School of LawSecond Chance Campaign  
of New Jersey
Liliana Segura
Steve Seliger
Seliger & ElkinDoris Shaffer
Moh Sharma 
Wallace ShawnMichel ShehadehFriends and Allies (continued)Julie Shelton
Ann Shepherd
Peter Shepherd
Elizabeth Shramko
Reggie Shuford
Michael SiegelJohn Sifton
Sikh Coalition
Marco SimonsAmardeep Singh
Amrit Singh
Lee, Joanne & Jessica Sinovoi
Gwynne L. Skinner
Alex SlaterClaudia Slovinsky
Prof. Ronald C. Slye
Alex Houston SmithCarol Sobel
Joshua A. Sohn
Jennifer Sokoler
Sonnenschein, Nath  
& Rosenthal
Cynthia SoohooRaji Sourani
Southern Legal CounselElizabeth SperberSusan Sperling
Jennifer Stark
Nancy Stearns
Irene A. Steiner
Beth StephensChristina Stephenson
Sarah J. Sterken
STOPMAXDavid Stovall
Nan Strauss
Street Smart Movement
Jeanne Sulzer
Martha SwanDavid Swanson
Sylvia Rivera Law Project 
(SRLP)
Ronald J. TabakKeiko Takayama
Vivien Tartter
Charles Tate
Mateo TaussigRJ Thompson
Lee Tien
Stacy TolchinSteven ToledoKatherine Toomey
Gabriel Torres Rivera
Torture Abolition and Survivors 
Support Coalition (TASSC)
Christine TramantanoSue Udry
United for Peace & Justice
U.S. Human Rights NetworkUyghur American Association
Vamos Unidos
Marc Van Der Hout
Mara Verheyden-Hilliard
Rima Vesely-FladVietnam Agent Orange Relief  
& Responsibility Campaign
Teresa VitelloSteve Vladeck
Vulcan Society
Diane Wachtell
Carole Wagner 
Ian WallachMariann Meier Wang
War Resisters League
Sean WardRoger WarehamEvelyn Warren
La Shawn Warren
Michael Warren
Brian Weeks
Leonard WeinglassKathleen White
Ian Whitecross
Christian WilliamsWilmer Hale
John H. Wilson
Michael Winger
Witness Against Torture
Jessica WoelfelNaomi Wolf
Women’s Liberation  
Birth Control Project
Elin WrzonckiAndrea Wuerdinger
Suzan Yasemin
Yearly Kos
Ron Yerxa Susie Zeiger
Dorothy Zellner
Kimberly ZelnickThe National Organization for Defending Rights and Freedoms 
(HOOD) has been working for years on behalf of the Yemeni men detained at Guantánamo.  
Their work has been a vital counterpart to CCR’s litigation and advocacy efforts.
Based in Yemen, HOOD is lobbying their government to negotiate with the United States for  
the men’s release and provides information to the press about the plight of Guantánamo  prisoners to raise public awareness and generate additional pressure on the government. The  organization serves as a lifeline for the families of prisoners, both in terms of helping them  find legal representation in the United States and providing them with information and emotional support through the years.
In January 2008, CCR attorneys traveled to Yemen to participate in an international conference  
focused on Yemeni prisoners at Guantánamo that was organized by HOOD and Reprieve.
CCR Spotlight
Executive Director of HOOD, Khaled al-Anesi, 
with his son and CCR staff attorneys (from left) Pardiss Kebriaei and Emi MacLean in Yemen
4748Our Donors  July 1 2007 - June 30 2008
Our planned giving program forms the bedrock of our efforts to build an endowment for CCR. By making CCR a part of 
your estate plan you can create an institutional legacy upholding the hard won victories of your lifetime and protecting them from future challenges and attack. By becoming a member of the Thelma Newman Society, you will join others committed to ensuring that CCR will be there to fight into the next generation. Please contact us if you have any questions about making a bequest, endowment, gift annuity or other form of estate gift.Ethel G. Ackley
Salah and Catherine  
 Al-Askari
Vicki A. AlexanderEvelyn AlloyRuth AndrewsCarol AscherRuth BardachPhilip BereanoGene C. BernardiHarvey BlendDavid M. BlockRobert H. BonthiusFrederick BriehlPeter BronerMary L. CarrMargaret R. de RiveraMarial DeloJeffrey M. DickemannGeorge and Minna DoskowCathy DreyfussWendy DwyerCarl H. FeldmanLeona FeyerAnne L. FilardoCurt J. FirestoneSolomon FisherCecily FoxMary J. GeissmanLise GiraudFrances GoldinDel S. Greenfield
†
Edward E. GoldmanEllen and Ellis HarrisMary E. Harvey
†
John Hayward Martin and Mildred Hird
Leo M. Hurvich
Martin and Carolyn KarcherGordon D. KentHilda KnoblochLinda Krupa
†
Elizabeth S. LandisHelen S. LaneJoan LewisEvelyn C. LundstromHilda MasonAlice G. McGrathBarbara MichaelJoseph MortonEva S. MoseleyJames OdlingWilliam ParsonsMahlon F. and  
 Lovel P. PerkinsDolores M. PriemDavid G. RichJack L. RihnIsadore and Eleanor Salkind
†
Michael A. SchlosserDoris ShafferRobert M. SiegelRosalie K. StahlMargot SteigmanJoseph SternBella Tanenbaum
†
Clio TaraziEthel TobachFlorence WagnerPeter WeissBarbara WestGinia D. WexlerJohn H. Wilson
Howard D. ZuckerThelma Newman Planned Giving Society
$50,000-$99,999
Gene C. Bernardi
Peter and Alice Broner
Fidelity Charitable Gift Fund
John Gilmore 
The Jewish Communal Fund
The San Francisco Foundation
Sol Tanenbaum†
The Vital Projects Fund, Inc.
The Wallace Global Fund$100,000 and above 
Anonymous (2)
The Atlantic Philanthropies (USA)
The CS Fund/Warsh-Mott Legacy
The Ford FoundationDel S. Greenfield
†
Jack P. TateThe Jack P. Tate Foundation IIThe HKH Foundation
The JEHT Foundation
Madison Community FoundationRichard B. and Marilyn L. MazessThe Oak Foundation 
The Ratner Family
The Vanguard Charitable  
Endowment ProgramFounders Circle  g i f t s  o f $1,000 a nD a b o v e
† deceased49$25,000-$49,999 
Anonymous (4)
The 1848 FoundationThe Alfred and Jane Ross  
Foundation
The Bardon-Cole FoundationJamal BarzinjiThe Charles Evans Hughes  
Memorial Foundation
The Common Counsel FoundationDow Jones & Company, Inc.The Funding Exchange National 
Community Funds
The Grodzins FundScott D. HandlemanThe Herb Block FoundationVictor and Lorraine HonigElizabeth S. Landis
Mar-Jac Poultry, Inc.
Katherine and David MooreNancy Meyer and Marc WeissAbigail Norman
The Normandie Foundation
The Puffin FoundationAlfred RossThe Samuel Rubin FoundationThe Scherman FoundationLouis Slesin 
Peter and Cora WeissWilliam B. Wiener, Jr.
The William B. Wiener,  
Jr. Foundation
John H. Wilson
$10,000-$24,999
Anonymous (5)Ethel G. Ackley
American Movie Classic Company
Eric and Cindy Arbanovella
Laurie Arbeiter and Jennifer Hobbs
Bert and Barbara Aubrey
The Blue Oak Foundation
Diane Boehm
Elizabeth A. Castelli
Whitfield Cobb
†
Margaret R. de RiveraDolores and Frank Emspak
The Epstein Teicher  
Philanthropies
Carl H. Feldman
The Firedoll Foundation
The Frances and Benjamin  
Benenson Foundation
Leo and Sherry Frumkin
The Glenmede Trust Co.,  
N.A.T. Funds
John and Kathryn Greenberg
Evelyn HaasMary E. Harvey
†
John B. Henry
Emily Honig
Iara Lee and George  
Gund III Foundation
The Jack J. and Ruth Inabu  
Fox Foundation Inc.
Chung Ja and Cassim M. Jadwat
Emily KunreutherThe Libra Foundation
Zella Luria
Rob McConnell and Maria DeCastroEva S. MoseleyRachel Mustin
Holly Myers and Edward Kirk Neely
The New-Land FoundationHenry NorrWendy R. Olesker and John Crow
Mitzi C. Raas
Susan SarandonShrewsbury Foundation
Barbara S. Starfield and  
Neil A. Holtzman
Adam and Jane Stein
Jean Stein
The Tides Foundation
Florence Wagner
Susan Weiler and Lynn GernertGene Bernardi  grew up with a keen awareness of the inequality and discrimination around 
her and fought against it by joining the fair housing movement and the free speech movement of 
the 1960s. One of Gene’s greatest accomplishments was initiating a class action sex discrimination 
lawsuit against the U.S. Forest Service which, after a 10-year fight, forced the Forest Service to hire women in administrative positions and as forest rangers. Gene first found CCR through reading about Abu Ghraib and Guantánamo. When she learned that CCR was representing these people who had 
been whisked away from their families, imprisoned and tortured, she became inspired to support this 
fight financially.
“I love that CCR takes on cases even if they might not win, 
because they feel so passionately that the issues must be addressed.  
Habeas corpus and the Constitution are the most important things to fight for!” 
– Gene C. Bernardi, CCR donor and Thelma Newman Planned Giving Society member
CCR Spotlight$5,000-$9,999
Anonymous (5)
Salah and Catherine Al-Askari
Franz and Marcia Allina
Joan Antonucci†
Rita L. and William J. BenderMartin D. Branning
Ida G. Braun
Virginia BrodyRachel Busch-Rubalcava
The Bydale Foundation
Nina Byers
The Christopher Reynolds 
Foundation
David Kimmel FoundationThomas Durst
The Fiduciary Trust Company  
International
James B. and Louise FrankelThe Friendship Fund
The Fritz Pappenheim Fund of  
the Tides Foundation
Mary J. GeissmanRandall D. Holmberg and  
Evelyn Yee
Lisa HonigThe Jeannette and H. Peter 
Kriendler Charitable Trust
Jewish Federation of Greater 
Seattle
Joan Antonucci Charitable Lead 
Annuity Trust
Joseph and Sally Handleman  
Foundation
Eugenia Kalnay
The Key FoundationTimothy J. Lee and  
Eleanor McBride
Joan Lewis
The Liberty Hill Foundation
Janet Loeb
†
Tom W. LyonsWilliam G. Mascioli
Maryanne MottPeter J. Neufeld and  
Adele Bernhard
The New World FoundationThe New York Community Trust
Richard L. PearlstonePriscilla J. McMillan  
Revocable Trust
Steve and Carolyn Purcell
Ronald and Deborah Ratner
Doris E. ReedThe Bright Horizons Fund  
of the Community Foundation of Santa Cruz
Saul and Amy Scheuer Cohen  
Family Foundation
Gail and Jonathan SchorschSilicon Valley Community 
Foundation
Steve Smaha
The Stewart R. Mott  
Charitable Trust
Alan and Victoria SussmanDolores S. Taller
The Tom Fund at the National  
Philanthropic Trust
George WallersteinThe Wyss Family Foundation
$2,500-$4,999
Anonymous (4)Alterman & Boop LLP
Daniel L. Alterman
Nabil M. and Ann S. AmerAngelo R. & Mary V . Cali  
Family Foundation Inc.
Richard Beale
Matthew A. Berlin and  
Simone Liebman
Ara and Linda BernardiThe Boston Foundation
Angela CaliJohn Caruso
John A. Chandler and  
Elizabeth V . TanisThe Chicago Community  
Foundation
Jeffrey D. Colman
Eddie Easterling
Shiva Eftekhari
The Elizabeth M. Gitt  
Foundation
Evan M. FalesRosemary Faulkner
Daniel and Anita Fine
Louis FisherRobert A. Friedman and  
Anita Davidson
Waleed K. and  
Hannah Gosaynie
Ivan GreenKathy Gruber and Fred Levy
James F. and Bettie C. Hannan
Winifred W. HirschJohn Hoffmeyer and  
Janet M. Corpus
Abdeen M. Jabara and  
Holly Maguigan
The John D. and Catherine  
T. MacArthur Foundation
Julie Kay and Tom FergusMarily KnieriemenRochelle Korman
William Lankford
Eileen and Paul F. Le FortBarry and Paula Litt
Mark Lopez and  
Leslie Spira Lopez
Susan E. ManuelDaniel Margolis
John B. and Martha S. Marks
Alice G. McGrath
Richard A. MoranMaxwell and Nicole Newman
Mary R. and Benjamin I. Page
The Philanthropic CollaborativeThe Posel Foundation
Robert and Patricia Ralph
Wayne RobertsWilliam L. and  
Sandra L. Rosenfeld
The Saint Paul FoundationEdwin E. Salpeter and  
Antonia Lhamo Shouse
Alfred H. Schwendtner and  
Carole Wagner
Seymour & Sylvia Rothchild 
Family 2004 Charitable  
Foundation
Donald and Doris ShafferWallace M. Shawn
Sidney Stern Memorial Trust
Morton Sobell and  
Nancy Gruber
Richard A. SobleCarolyn J. Sorensen
Lynn S. Stern
Clio TaraziMerry Tucker
Steven R. Van Bever
Anne C. WilsonWorkable Alternatives  
Foundation
Ellen Yaroshefsky
Barbara A. Zeluck
$1,000-$2,499
Anonymous (11)
Elizabeth Abbe
Leslie Abbey and Steve Dietz
Michelle and Bernard AisenbergTheresa F. Alt
J.W. Anderson
Ruth Andrews
Carol H. Arber
Barbara M. ArmentoJanet S. Arnold and  
Michael H. Rubin
The Arthur & Henrietta A. Sorin 
Charitable Trust
Bruce E. Barkley and Sonia BaurAmir Bar-Lev
James A. Becker
Charles L. and Leslie A. Berger
50CCR Donors
† deceased51Kay Berkson and  
Sidney Hollander
John D. Bernstein
Rick Best and Susan TaylorFrancella W. and  
Jose F. Betancourt
Raghu K. and  
Sushma Bhardwaj
Alexis and Michael BleichEmmet J. Bondurant
Laura J. Borst
Charles R. and Linda BrainardMartin M. Brod
Judith T. and Donald S. Broder
Allan and Muriel Brotsky
Tara A. Caffrey and  
Jeffrey J. Vroom
Capital Trust Company  
Of Delaware
Ira Carp
CAUSE
Laura and Richard Chasin
Marynancy ClaryDavid D. Cole and  
Cornelia T. L. Pillard
Community Foundation  
of Western Mass.David B. Cone and  
Kellie Stoddart
Michael CooperRhonda CopelonDan Coughlin and  
Elisabeth R. Benjamin
Michael Cowing
Charles M. Crane and  
Wendy Breuer
Brenda CravensCarlyle A. and  
Grace B. Crecelius
Robert A. CunninghamGeorge Daly
Datacap, Inc.
Emily Deferrari and  
Mel Packer
Madeline H. deLone and  
Robert L. Cohen
Michelle J. DePass
Roger R. Dittmann
James K. Donnell
Kevin DonovanDaniel L. and Lee M. Drake
Mark Drake
Robert Dubrow
Paul and Susan I. DurrantDiane Early and  
Daniel Gigone
Margaret L. Eberbach
Harrison Eiteljorg, IITony Elias
Peter and Stella Elliston
Stuart M. Elsberg
Wallace B. and  
Heike Marie Eubanks
Edward A. Everts and  
Deborah C. Davis
Robert M. Factor
The Fein Foundation
Robert Fertik and  
Antonia Stolper
Gregory H. Finger and  
Joan Hollister
Abraham FlaxmanRobert Fodor and  
Thurid H. Clark
Roma FoldyMike Forter
Amanda H. FrostKit Gage and Steven J. Metalitz
Stephen Gallant
David Gehrig
Sheila GeistLola and Isaiah Gellman
John J. Gibbons
Daniel Gillmor
Mary GleysteenSherna B. and Marvin Gluck
Janice Goodman
Jane S. Gould
Arrel T. Gray
Daniel Greenberg and  
Karen Nelson
Frank and Judith GreenbergLynn Greiner and  
John B. Midgley
Ariela Gross and  
Raphaela G. Goldman
Eliot Vaughn and Anne GuloyanSusan J. Haas and Keith J. PattiHanson Bridgett LLP
Edward Harris and  
Amy Madigan
The Helen Keeler Burke  
Charitable Foundation
Joseph Herron and  
Patricia Baird
Charles S. Hey-Maestre
Steven C. Hill and  
Jonathan HerzDick Mazess  grew up feeling that the government can and should do more for those in need 
rather than embracing military and economic imperialism. His support for protecting rights was 
forever changed by police violence against peacefully protesting students during the Vietnam War. He is concerned about the violation of privacy rights by massive internet data gathering and wiretapping, and also helped found an organization that encourages withholding votes for pro-war politicians.
Dick long admired the success of the Center for Constitutional Rights in bringing human rights  
violators to justice using the Alien Tort Statute, and enthusiastically and generously supports our lawsuits against mercenaries like CACI, Titan and Blackwater.
“This administration has privatized public services in order 
to provide political friends with huge profits at the expense of 
human lives. I made my gift to support the Blackwater cases because I feel we need  
to hold Blackwater accountable for the murder of innocent Iraqis.”
CCR Spotlight52Michael J. Hirschhorn and  
Jimena P. Martinez
Peter Hochschild
Christopher W. Hornig and  
Nancy J. Garruba
Ruth W. HubbardSteven HymanBetsy and Arthur IgerJewish Community Federation  
of Cleveland
Joseph Rosen FoundationWilhelm Joseph, Jr.William H. JosephsonWendy Kaminer and  
Woody Kaplan
Herschel and Margrit KaminskyMartin and Carolyn KarcherTerry L. KarlDonna Katzin and  
Alan Altschuler
Ira G. KawallerErnest E. and Nancy R. KeetTawfiq and Richel KhouryJerry KickensonJane J. KimJoyce Kirschner and  
Richard S. Aronson
Joanne Kliejunas and  
Irving Lubliner
Joanna KnoblerJoyce and Max KozloffDoug KreegerErika KreiderEdward M. Krishok and  
Peggy K. Hong
Mary U. and Ulrich E. KruseJoseph B. and Rachel KruskalRoger S. and Belle KuhnLuis and Lee LainerJudy LernerStephen LesserMark L. Levine and  
Stephanie von Hirschberg
George K. and Ann C. LevingerJudith Lichtenberg and  
David J. LubanPhilip and Elsa R. LichtenbergJules LobelGail K. Lopez-HenriquezWilliam MacauleyRamsay MacMullenMalcolm Cravens FoundationHubert and Rachelle MarshallMayer Brown LLPDaniel McIntyreGary McKellips
Robert H. and  
Ellen V . Meeropol
Juliet A. Melamid
Benjamin MellmanRobin G. MicheliDonald and Suzanne MillerRuthann B. and  
Warren H. Miller
Mahmoud and Laila MohamedRichard W. and  
Barbara F. Moore
Richard H. MorseMarianne Mosher and  
Thomas Freeman
Patricia F. MullahyJill W. Nelson and  
Thomas R. Bidell
The New Prospect FoundationColette Newman
Nancy J. Newman and  
Mark Walstrom
Louie D. Nikolaidis and  
Rachel Horowitz
Michael O. Nimkoff
Northeastern UniversityKaren O’KeefeJoshua OppenheimerIsabelle C. OsborneWayne OuttenStuart Ozer and Sumi HoshikoCynthia L. Pansing and  
Arlin S. Wasserman
Eve PellMahlon F. and Lovel P. PerkinsHanna PitkinTim Plenk and Janet AxelrodFrances R. PoselJames R. PotterFrances RachelStephen R. RasmussenBrian J. RatnerAdrienne RichLawrence and Janet A. RivkinJames Roberts and  
Patricia Calberson
Fredelle and John Robinson
Eve S. Rosahn and  
Marion Banzhaf
Alex J. and Carole Rosenberg
Elizabeth and  
Rolf W. Rosenthal
Jared RossmanAlbert RubenJoseph L. RubyGladys B. RustayCary SacksJack SawyerJulie SchecterAnne and Tom ScheuerRoberta SchneidermanWilliam J. and  
Katherine L. Schrenk
Edwin M. Schur and  
Joan Brodsky Schur
Steven Schwartz
William Seaman
Steve SeltzerElizabeth and Stephen ShaferCareen B. ShannonPeter and Elizabeth C. ShepherdAlbert D. Shuldiner and  
Emily B. Myers
Emily SkolnickMichelle D. SmithThe Stanley and Ethel Glen  
Family Foundation
Marilyn Stern and Elaine ReilyElizabeth and Byron StookeyClayton A. StruveSusan D. SusmanJudith A. Szepesi and  
Charles MerriamRichard TeitelbaumThe Open Society InstituteBonnie E. Thomson and  
Eugene Tillman
Marjorie and Melvin A. TraylorEdward R. TufteHazel Tulecke and  
William B. Houston
Barbara C. and  
Franklin M. Turner
James S. TyreRobert VitarelliJoachim V osgerauScott A. Wahrenbrock  
and Judith L. Fanshaw
Marshall and Deborah WaisDaniel F. WallowitzVincent Warren and  
Ann Marie Scalia
Cecille WassermanDaniel Weiss and  
Anne Stewart
Stanley S. and Muriel WeithornSabin and Martha WilletBarbara S. and Chris WilsonLeona G. WilsonMary Louise WilsonThe Winky FoundationMike Withey
Ann Yasuhara
Helene and Manoucher YektaiMichael D. YokellMichael F. Zweig and  
Kathy Chamberlain
$500-$999
Anonymous (6)
A & J Saks Foundation, Inc.Karen AbravanelThomas E. and Donna AmbrogiTeresa Amott
Carl E. and Sharon L. Anduri
Baker & McKenzie LLPMargo BaldwinThe Baltimore Family FundRainer C. BaumCCR Donors53Will Beatty
Douglas J. Bender and  
Emma B. Trejo
James M. Bergin and  
Ellen P. Lukens
Amanda Bergson-ShilcockAndrew J. Berlinger and  
Nancy C. Scerbo Berlinger
Steven BernhautRobert L. Black, Jr.Meredith A. BlauBeth Marie Bonora and  
Michael Laine
Emily L. Boochever and  
William J. Dana
M. E. BookbinderLila BraineEdward J. and  
Marion D. Bronson
Richard J. Brown Roger and Jane BuffettMiriam BuhlIsaac ButlerMichael E. Cahill
The California Wellness  
Foundation
John Callas
Calvert Social Investment  
Foundation
James T. Campen and  
Phyllis Ewen
Peter and Lucia CaseAva CheloffGeorge M. Clarke, III
Serina Clayton
Kay CloudRobert CohenThe Columbus FoundationMary Ellen Copeland and  
Edward M. Anthes
Asho I. CraineSusan CrileE. Patrick Curry and  
Susan B. Campbell
Mohammed and  
Marcia F. Daoudi
Dayton Foundation DepositoryLindsay DearbornRichard J. and Leanna DenealeBindu DesaiStuart DesserRiva DewittLewis and Edith S. Drabkin
Alan and Susan S. Dranitzke
Barry N. and  
Ismartilah Drummond
Barbara L. DudleyKingston Duff and  
Liz Schwerer Duff
Reginald DugardNorman C. Eddy and  
Rebecca Feuerstein
Susan L. Einbinder
Laurel and Eugene Eisner
Steven and Deborah ElkintonDavid EllisDiane FarsettaLenore Feigenbaum and  
Simon J. Klein
Robert R. FenichelEd and Ann FergusonJoan M. Ferrante
Jane C. Fessenden
Jerise FogelPaul D. Fogel and  
Ventura Y . Chalom
Jane and Eugene FosterFranklin E. and Alice FriedBernard Friedman and  
Lesley Hyatt
Ronald E. and  
Jacqueline Garrett
Susan GarrisonWilliam H. GavelisMaggie A. GeddesMary GeddesGeneral Board of Global  
Ministries
Patricia A. GermanKatja Glockner-DowKatherine Glover
Maxine S. Goad
Phil Goldsmith and  
Susan Newman
Carlos GoodmanSusan E. GoodmanEdmund W. and  
Susan G. Gordon
Claire GottfriedThe Gravestar FoundationThe Green Meadow Fund  
of the Maine Community Foundation
Allen and Nancy GreenleafHeidi Frey GreenwaldSimon Greer and  
Sharna G. Goldseker
Guilford PublicationsHans C. and Linda HaackeDwight HahnCollier M. Hands
Guy M. Harris
Rachel J. HarrisThomas L. and  
Dorothy W. Haskell
Paul Hathaway and Lynda 
Dailey
Agnese N. HauryMarjorie HeinsDick S. and Loretta Heiser
Louis R. Hellwig
Russell K. Henly and  
Martha Lee Turner
Louise S. HertzHans HimeleinZach HochstadtCatherine N. HolmesTimothy A. HolmesRuth HoltonHorizons Foundation
Robert N. and  
Charlene C. Hornick
Allen M. Howard
Raymond A. HryckoJ. W. IngemanInternational Humanities CenterJudy and Henry JacobsAlan JacobsJewish Community  
Endowment Fund
Jewish Fund for JusticeMaile N. JohnsonMarc E. JohnsonNorman I. JohnsonTim C. JohnsonKenneth M. JonesHenry S. Kahn and  
Mary Gillmor-Kahn
Amy Kaplan
Daniel M. Kaplan
Jeremiah KaplanPatrice KaskaNicholas KeenanMark KempsonGordon D. KentCharles L. and Anna KersteinNobal E. and Martha E. KingDonald D. and  
Margaret A. Kioseff
Hilda KnoblochDavid KormanMark KramerPhilip KramerJonathan KrampnerFred P. and  
Beverly P. Krasner
Fayette F. KrauseMerle and Phyllis Krause
James Kwak
Jeffrey LamkinJohn W. and Claudia LampertiLarry N. and  
Rodean K. Larson
J.D. LeftwichPhyllis LehmanTom LehrerThe Leonard Lieberman  
Family Foundation
David R. LewisWilliam L. LewisBetsy Lieberman and  
Richard Groomer
Ray LightstoneLucy R. LippardRichard and Rita G. LipsitzRalph LoefflerLeslie Lomas
Sivia W. Loria
M. Brinton Lykes and  
Catherine M. Mooney
Penelope L. MaceShirley MagidsonAnnie Makhijani
Elena S. ManitzasLaura C. and Robert S. MarinEnrico A. MartignoniAlice Anne Martineau and  
Olivia Bartlett
Warren E. and  
Joyce W. Mathews
Nergis MavalvalaPeter J. MayerA. Garrett McConnellDon McGeeBarbara J. MeislinMessing, Rudavsky & WelikyBarbara Michel
Sara Miles and Martha Baer
Joseph R. MillerRobert MillsJeanne E. and Franklin E. MirerHelen R. MooreEllen L. and  
George Mozurkewich
John MuellerMark Niehaus
Claes Oldenburg and  
Coosje Van Bruggen
The Omnibus Gallery, Inc.
Marina OshanaMartha Lee and  
Franklin C. Owen
Gordon O. and  
Elizabeth M. Packard
Caroline M. PaulDorothy Z. Peters
Gloria C. Phares and  
Richard Dannay
Suzanne Polen
Bruce K. PollockNancy R. PoselMarshall and Rosie PotamkinFlorence B. PrescottRoger and Joanne PughMargaret J. Randall and  
Barbara Byers
Kumar RaoJulie B. RauchMarcus Rediker and  
Wendy Z. GoldmanThe Richard R. Howe  
Foundation
Robert K. Goldman  
Family Trust
Steven D. and Joyce Robinson
John H. Rodgers
Jill and Ronald RohdePatricia RonanBarbara and Oren RootGeorge S. Rothbart and  
Ingrid Scheib-Rothbart
Dean G. RubyKyla and Ethan RymanDenyse SabaghSybil Sage
Naomi Sager
Arnold S. SaksJohn C. SchaeferClaudio L. SchnierSteve L. SchwartzRenata M. SchwebelSusan ScottLindsay SellersStanley and Betty Sheinbaum
Anthony Shih
Benjamin R. ShreckAlix Kates Shulman and  
Scott York
Victor W. and Ruth SidelSiegel & YeeHoward Silverman and  
Anne R. Sillis
Susan Simone and David BellinSkadden, Arps, Slate,  
Meagher & Flom LLP
Daniel SleatorMarjorie M. SmithMichael Steven Smith and  
Debby Smith
Russell SmithEmily A. Spieler and  
Gregory Wagner
John Spragens, Jr.
Mathy V . Stanislaus
Norton and Irene StarrNancy StearnsAdrian L. Steel, Jr.Lewis and Kitty SteelVictoria A. Steinitz and  
Elliot G. Mishler
Ian E. StockdaleThe Stonbely Family  
Foundation
Philip B. StoneElizabeth StroutAlice S. Sturm SutterLucy A. SuchmanDavid SuismanGeraldine SumterAgnes SweeneyRonald J. TabakMark TheuneC. Gomer Thomas and  
E. Jane Cameron
Martin ThomsonJean TocheJoe ToyoshimaMichael H. TraisonNancy TrowbridgeCharles F. TurnerRichard H. and Gail M. UllmanVictor K. and Barbara Ulmer
Marc Van Der Hout and  
Jodie LeWitter
Steven V ogel and  
Jane Henderson
Julia A. and James E. Wallace
Barry J. and Abby WarkMichael WaxBarbara S. WebsterAlan Matthew Weiner and  
Nancy Maizels
WESPAC Foundation, Inc.Brian WhiteJeffrey and Lucinda WilnerThomas B. WilnerJudith Wilson and Alec WysokerDouglas E. and  
Carol A. Wingeier
Barbara J. WinneStephen S. and  
Bettina L. Winter
Thomas and Carol WolfRobert R. and Blaikie WorthEitan K. YanichIra YankwittPeter W. YoungMary ZaslofskyRobert J. and Karen R. ZelnickMitchell H. and  
Jane Zimmerman
$250-$499
Anonymous (5)
David J. AalderksRobert and Miriam Abramovitz
Pearla Abrams
Stephen R. and Virginia AbramsMerritt and Barbara AbrashAlice K. Adams
America’s Charities
Max AndersonTom AngottiAndrew M. Ansorge and  
Laura S. Koopman
Barbra Apfelbaum and  
Michael Reuveni
Selma ArnoldGeorge S. and Jill S. AvruninJoyce E. Bacon
Rebecca Bakunin
Radhika Balakrishnan and  
David W. Gillcrist
Jeremy Barth
Beate K. Becker
Joseph and Eleanor BelserRuth G. and Carl S. BensonHoward A. and Estelle BernArthur and Anne Berndt
Greta Bertinot
Bethesda Friends Meeting:  
Religious Society of Friends
Bani BhattacharyaCatherine Bishop
Evelyn Blackman
Robert BloomHillary BobrowGeorge and Eleanor Bollag
Jessica Bonebright
Michael BoomBarton and Barbara BoyerJacqueline BoyntonRobert M. and  
Monica Bradbury
54CCR Donors55Eugenie R. Bradford
James BradleyKevi P. Brannelly
Belinda B. Breese
Michael BrightwoodMarina BroitmanLois V . Bromson
Brad and Liana Brooks-Rubin
Cynthia BrownRobert E. L. and  
Sylvie Maria Brown
Jennifer Burden
Arthur W. and Alice R. Burks
Harry A. Caddow, Jr.Jean Callahan and  
Eric Anderson
Ann Cammett
Phil M. Campbell
Vicente L. Caride and  
Melissa Marks
Henry Chalfant
Ken and Peg Champney
Meera CheriyanNoam ChomskyRenee D. Chotiner and  
Stuart W. Gardner
Neale W. ClappClearlogic ConsultingWallace B. ClelandMarilyn B. ClementHope CobbColchamiro Family  
Foundation Inc.
The Community Church of New 
York Unitarian Universalist
Janet M. Conn
Farok J. Contractor
Karen Cooper and  
George Griffi
Ralph V . and Ellen S. CoreCornell University
Deborah Crawford
William DenhamRichard A. DenisonRobert and Susan DeutschJoseph F. Doherty
Jeron E. and Marjorie Donalds
Larry D. Doores and  
Janet R. Wolfe
Sean C. Doyle
Shelby Drescher
Brendan DriscollDorothy A. DufourH. S. Dunn, Jr.Valerie Dunnam
Allan and Elizabeth Ecker
William EdmundsonPatricia H. EellsArthur EfronCamille EhrenbergBeatrice Eisman
Flint Ellsworth
Pamela D. EmersonRuth C. EmersonTraci L. Ext
Nancy Falk
Anne E. FlynnPamela Foa and Paul D. GuyerMurray FoglerArnold and Renee Frank
Nancy E. Frank
Steve FrankelBarbara FriedbergJoseph C. and Pearl G. GalePeter Gallagher
Sumeeta A. Gawande
Edward I. GeffnerMartin GellertPaula Gellman
Robert A. Gensburg
Ellen F. Gesmer and  
Alan S. Hyde
Frances Geteles-ShapiroJohn Gibson
Stephen Gimber
Richard A. and  
Carolyn GlicksteinHarriet S. Goldberg and  
Gregory C. Johnson
Ellen R. Goldman
Jean R. Goldman
Richard A. and Jill GollubGeorge M. GoodburnRobin Goodman
David S. Gordon
Debbie GordonWilliam H. Gordon and  
Katharine Clemens
Robert Gottlieb
Jan Greenberg
Marcelle GreenfieldColin and Frances GreerJohn GruntfestAlice L. Hageman and  
Aubrey N. Brown
Jerome HandlerDavid HarbaterSheldon andMargery Harnick
Jed Hartman
Elizabeth HeinemanPeter N. HellerBetty and Jackson HerringJean Hoffman
Honeybee Foundation
Stephen J. HrinyaCarol HryckoCaptain  Paul  Washington  is former president of the Vulcan Society, an organization 
of Black firefighters in New York City. He has worked for years to increase minority hiring within the 
New York City Fire Department, maintaining that the department’s entrance exam and other hiring 
practices unfairly exclude many Black candidates.
On behalf of the Vulcan Society and three individual Black firefighter candidates, CCR filed two  
Equal Opportunity Commission (EEOC) charges that found the test was discriminatory, sparking the U.S. Department of Justice to file suit against the City. In September 2007, CCR joined in the DOJ suit. 
The case, now called United States of America and Vulcan Society v. City of New York, charges that the 
FDNY’s test discriminates against Black applicants and has no relationship to firefighter job skills.
“We are 2.9% of the department in a city that is 27% Black,” says 
Washington. “If those numbers don’t wake the City up to the problem, maybe  
the prospect of millions of dollars in damages will.”
CCR SpotlightJeff Hummel and  
Beatrice Gandara
Kevin M. Hunt and  
Margaret Downing
Xinh Huynh
I Do FoundationIrene Ippolito
Peter Israel
Zeljko IvanekLawrence R. Jacobs and  
Julie A. Schumacher
Stella Jacobs
Omar C. Jadwat
Roberta JaffeMargaret JahnGail K. JohnsonBen and Kathleen JoneElizabeth D. Jones
Jeffrey A. Jones
Warren Jones and Marian GeeMarie I. Jordan and  
Joseph P. Lyons
Lee Joseph
Antje Katcher
Caryn B. KauffmanAlka Khushalani
Jennifer L. Klein and  
James Berger
Peter and Jane Knobler
Saul M. KohnBonnie Korman
Robert L. Kort
Maurice and Lorraine KosstrinByron KremenakJane and Ladis KristofRichard Laine
Sidney Landau
Lynne LaneJeffrey LangJanet L. LarsonDarlene D. Lasher
Elizabeth W. Lawrence
Steve LawrenzWilliam E. LeavittJohn and Sue LeonardIda J. Lewenstein
Donald Lipmanson
Matthew LondonAnthony R. LortsEvelyn C. LundstromMary W. Lunt
Marcia T. Maack
Nancy MacLeanKathryn MajidRichard Makdisi and  
Lindsay Wheeler
Jerome H. ManheimMarymount Manhattan CollegeBonnie L. MaslinWilliam H. and Judith  
W. Matchett
Lelia MatthewsMarc Mauer and  
Barbara Francisco
Robert J. and Maryann MaxwellWilliam McBride
Megan McCaslin
Richard C. and  
Francesca A. McCleary
Delbert McCombsNelder Medrud, Jr.
Jennifer E. Meeropol
Martin and Margaret MelkonianPamela M. Merchant and  
Kirby Sack
Carol J. and Donald MerrickMichael MessingerAlvin and Edna MeyerPaul Meyer-Strom
Marvin and Marline Miller
Mae K. MillstoneLynn and Arthur R. MinkKaren B. MitznerKaren Mock
James Moran
Joseph MorenoJ. Malcolm MorrisDenis D. MosgofianPeter and Gail S. Mott
Lisa Naftolin
Suzanne NelsonJamie and Anne O’ConnellCraig OettingerN. Patricia Oldham
Eric Orlin
Edward H. and Chorale P. PageJulie ParadisGeorge L. ParkerLee Pasackow
Timothy Patterson
Robert and Ruth PeckDonald C. and Edith PelzHirsch Perlman
Charlotte Phillips and  
Oliver Fein
Lynette B. Phillips
Jeremy PikserJohn W. Pilgrim and  
Petra E. Janopaul
Norm PoireHertha Poje-AmmoumiSandy PolishukBarbara B. PolkJohn A. Pollack
Dianne Post
Frances D. PotterKatharine M. Preston and  
John Bingham
Bennett M. Pudlin and  
Margaret Ann Judd
John QuimbyFrances Leon Quintana and  
Joel K. Swadesh
Alan RabinowitzJoni Rabinowitz and John HaerJoanna M. Rankin and  
Mary Fillmore
Andrea RasmussenMartha RaynerJeffrey C. and Bettiann ReeseGeorge RenningerRobert A. and Mary J. Resnik
David Richter
The RMF FoundationRoberta RobanHerbert W. RobinsonLisa Robinson
Anne E. Rodman
The Rose FoundationPhilip RosenbergJanet R. RossJohn Rubin
Michael Rufo and  
Marcie A. RubelVirginia C. Rusch
Dewitt SageSigrid Salo
Lisa J. Samuelson
Regina Sandler-PhillipsPankaj SarinJames A. Schamus and  
Nancy Kricorian
Gordon Schiff and  
Mardge Cohen
Alan SchiffmannSteven A. and Janet H. Schneider
Robert E. Schoen and  
Nancy Bernstein
Ruth and Charles B. Schultz
Keith SchwabKimberly SchwabMichael Schwalbe
Meryl Schwartz
Joan W. ScottRobert B. and Nancy ScottBeth ShamrockAnn and Ahmad Shirazi
Eugene and Marina Shpirt
Franklin SiegelBrenna L. Silberstein
Jaswinder Pal Singh and  
Silvia Ercolani
Becky S. and Hugh F. Smart
Carl and Jane SmithCarol Smith and Joseph Esposito
Charlotte Smith
Stephen S. SmithMarc A. SnyderRebecca SolnitCarolyn Sonfield
Douglas K. Spaulding
Sandra M. Squire FluckErwin P. and Pearl F. StallerBen R. Stavis and Marjatta LyyraDavid J. Steichen, Jr.
Bert Stover and Teresa Holder
R. P. SuttenMartha F. SwanDaniel B. SzyldFrances H. Taylor and  
Iris Biblowitz
John Thackray
56CCR Donors57William Thomas
John L. ThorstenbergJoseph and Cornelia C. Tierney
Kenneth E. Tilsen
Murray TobakHugh R. TobinHarriet B. Todd
Robert Traver
Grace TrewarthaRandall H. Trigg and  
Caitlin Stanton
Michael W. Trinh
Selma and William Tucker
David B. TurnerRobert TwomblyCharles W. and Letitia UffordChristine A. Vassallo
Lisa Vives
Mark D. Wainger and  
Rhoda Han Pu Woo
Doris B. Walker
Mary Jane Wallace
Joan M. WarburgJudith P. Ward and  
Bernard D. Tuchman
Janet B. Warzyn
Richard F. Watt
J. Richard and Margaret WeaverElisabeth WeberEdmund and  
Mary Brizius Weingart
Richard A. and Carol WeinstockDolores WeltyLawrence WeschlerJohn Wetherhold
Richard P. and Tobey M. Wiebe
Barbara B. WilleElizabeth S. WilliamsJohn P. WilsonPatricia Winer
Lincoln and  
Wilma C. Wolfenstein
Neville Woodruff
Judith Yanowitz and  
Harry S. Hochheiser
Steven J. YellinMichael A. ZagoneThomas ZaslavskyGeorge and Sondra ZeidensteinFrank ZephyrHoward D. Zucker
$101-$249
Anonymous (21)
Emily AchtenbergMiriam AdamsHarold AhrensLawrence AlbertsCharles K. Alexander, IIDeborah AllenNorman AltstedterAnnamaria AmentaThe American Baptist Churches  
of Massachusetts
Amnesty International  
Local Group 702
Stephen C. and  
Betty Ann Anderson
Penelope E. AndrewsR. S. AnthonyStewart ApplinRona Z. ArmillasPatrick and Cheri BakerChristian BalintecBob BammanVictor BarallRuth BardachSara E. BeinertEdith and Alice BellEdda M. BenedekAlvin BennettWilliam BerleyJerry BernhardIris E. BiblowitzAlison BlackduckStanley and Naomi BleifeldFred BloomBlum & Poe, Inc.Carolyn Patty BlumEllen Beth Bogolub and  
Neil Friedman
Robert H. Bonthius and  
C. Frances Truitt
Jeanne BornsteinElena Borstein and  
 Iain Whitecross
Edna BosletJoan G. and Jack BotwinickEric R. BoucherJan BoudartRenee L. BowserElizabeth P. Brenner and  
Thomas B. Stibolt
Dan A. BrombergJune L. BrumerJohn Brundage and  
Harriet Parsons
Naomi BurnsMaxine BurressJerrold S. and  
Barbara H. Buttrey
James ByrnesRenee CafieroJohn B. and Ann F. CaronWilliam J. CarryKicab Castaneda-MendezEugenia CayceMortimer H. Chambers, Jr.Gordon A. ChapmanStephen R. ChapmanJulian D. and Mildred ChazinJames R. and Roshan ChristensenMonique W. ClagueJoanne M. CollierTony ConradJim and Cecilia A. ConroyMargaret Corrigall and  
Joseph Bogacz
William CowlinJason M. CoxGary Cozette and Joe LadaBarbara Cuneo and  
Alan Kesselhaut
Eric CutterJohn and Diane DalsimerAnya E. DarrowErnest Simon and  
Bianca Iano Davis
Sidney and Selma DavisThomas E. DeCourseyJames M. DePasqualeJake DeSantisBetty DevalcourtShirley DiamondGerald DickinsonDavid B. DunningBarbara H. DupeeJeanne M. DursiLorraine DuvallGlenn EdwardsRay and Marilyn EllingBrad P. Engdahl and  
Patricia L. Layton
Ron EricksonSaralee E. EvansAnthony EwingMoneim and Lieselotte FadaliMartha S. and Donald FarleyRosemary FarrarHarriet A. FeinbergNancy J. FeldmanWilliam L. and  
Donna M. Fellinger
Marylou FerraraHoward B. FeuersteinWendy FieringMarie A. FinstonCurry and Bonnie FirstNancy FleischerMichael D. FleshmanDonovan FongChristie S. FountainEdward A. and Sally I. FoxTovia G. and William FreedmanMaria Cecilia Freeman and  
Donald K. Larkin
William H. FrelickMarilyn FrenchChris FridenPaul FriedlanderSheryl P. GardnerWilliam R. GarnerEdward GersonMimi GilpinDavid C. GlickJoan and Bert GoldingCCR Donors
Wietze Adema
Marilyn Haft and Jay AdlersbergAngela AllynErik AndersonMargaret AutreyJesse BaenMiriel BedellSandra Gale Behrle Stoughton BellSteven M. BernsteinLiz and Joe BiancoBrewster Bingham Sarah and Howie BoweEsther BronerMekayla Beaver and Greg BrownEdward Cabot 
Jean Callahan
Mike CarvalhoFrank and Joan Cassidy
Stewart Cauley
CCR Board and Staff
CCR’s 40th Anniversary
Nick Chester
Moky ChristDavid ColeJesse ColemanWilliam ConradPolly Greenberg and Donald DalyJudy D’AmoreAndres DrobnyGladys DrobnyDorothy DutkyPatty EdwardsRichard A. EvansJason and Michelle FarrarRuth Fiske Roma Foldy Don Larkin and Cecilia FreemanMatt FriedlanderTim FriedlanderThe Fund for Independence  
in Journalism Beatrice GandaraNeal I. GantcherKaren Ginsburg and  
Jeremy Elkins 
David GoldbeckRafi GoldmanBill GoodmanJim GormleyJanet Leser GrahamBaby Oscar Greenberg George Gulick Emily HartingRichard HauserDavid Henkel, Sr.Susan Kirchoff, David  
Boldric, and Pat Hewett
Deborah HodgesWanda HoeltingSonja Holm
Olivia Grace Horn
Andrew Hummel
Eric Hummel
Gary Isaac 
Omar JadwatJackson JaegerLouis Jones William JosephsonDiane and Gil KalishJoel Flaxman and Rachel KaminsSonia Bettez and Janice KandoTerese Katz The Kauffman FamilySeth KertzerPeter and Debi KierstMurat KurnazTamar LawJulius LevyRaven LipmansonBob LowensteinRobert A. LowensteinMichael Ludwig Sarah LyonsJoseph Marguiles
Alice McGrath
John C. McLucas
Priscilla Johnson McMillan
Edward Buhl and Lynn Minton
Jose Morin’s 50th Birthday 
Carolyn and George Mossman
Barbara Ellen Smith and  
Wolfgang Natter
Ruth and Jess NemtzowElisabeth Cappuyns and  
Russell Nicholls
Bud and Paula OgrenMary Ann Oros
Rand Park Family
Michael J. Parker
Sybille Pearson
Gretchen Hermann and Lory PeckGeorgia Philios
Stephen Pilcher 
Lara Quint
Genevieve Thiers and  
Daniel Ratner
Michael Ratner
Steffy Reader
Kenneth F. Reed, Jr.
George Reid Joseph Reines
The Rose Family
Zachary Rose-Lewis 
Barbara Rosenblit
Stuart Rosenberg Anna Levine and  
Andrew Rosenblum
Harriet Rosenfeld
Lowell Sachnoff
Christa SavinoStuart Schaar
Amy and Chris Schaefer
Debora Scheiber
Steve and Tanya Schlemmer
Jeffrey Schwartz
Wells Dixon and Alison SclaterLaurel Sereboff and  
Matthew Freedman 
Nancy Shea
Brian SheppardHerb ShoreJohn Randall and Micaela SiedelVeva Silva Bobbi SingerPaul S. SmithDouglas K. SpauldingJennifer StanleySally StanleyNancy StearnsTim Christ and  
Melissa Steevessteev
Judith Stewart
Evan Romer and Mary Sweeney
Sean TaylorMarc Sapir and Sheila Thorne
Eric Van Buskirk
Jim and Margaret Vickers
Jim Ramnaraine and  
Tina Wade
Mary Jane Wallace
Esther WangCindy Chupack and Ian Wallach George WarburgVincent WarrenArthur A. WassermanMaggie Christ and  
Will Wedge
Peter and Cora WeissMatthias Plieninger and  
Elke Weyel
Owen WilliamsChris WilsonBrian Shi and Miranda WorthenKathy Weingarten and  
Hilary Worthen
Melissa Waters and  
Ben Worthen
Owen ZingraffThose listed below had donations made to CCR in their honor by thoughtful friends, family members or organizations that wanted to make a  
meaningful gift with lasting impact. Many of these donations were in lieu of birthday, wedding or holiday gifts, or in commemoration of a special 
occasion. We thank both the donor and the recipient for sharing their support and for introducing new people to CCR’s work.
5859Jared Goldstein
Camille GomezWilliam H. GoodmanRobert E. GoodrichPatricia M. Gracian and  
Mikail K. Syeed
Spencer B. Graves and  
Betsy Wolf-Graves
John C. Gray, Jr.Harold GreenblattJeremy and  
Maggie Scott Greenfield
Edward B. and  
Mary Louise Grevatt
William and Sharon GrossDavid GrusinWilliam M. HabeebKathleen Hager and  
Arthur A. Wasserman
Albert L. and Virginia T. HaleH. K. Hall, Jr.Neil HamlettHedda HaningLaura HanksRobert B. and Kristi HardinLeora T. HarrisBartlett and Margaret HarveyMary J. HaydenKeith Hefner and Diana AutinJenny HeinzHorace HeitmanChristopher L. HenleyHolly HenryDavid G. HermannDaniel N. and Natalie HertzJohn and Rachel HeumanRobert Hickler and Ann LedererGregory HipwellMartin and Mildred HirdAmy HochDavid K. and Judith A. HoffmanSarah HogarthPhilip HornikElizabeth L. HubermanRuth D. HunterSyed HusainStanley T. HutterKatin ImesAnne Irving and Armin T. WrightJoel and Helen R. IsaacsonKevin and Adrienne JamesCatherine JonesShayana KadidalAlfred E. and Mary S. KahnJane Ruth Kaplan and  
Donatello Borato
Stephanie KaplanJay M. KappraffArnold KawanoSeymour KellermanRichard KellyKenneth KingElizabeth B. KinneyManfred and Gloria KirchheimerStefi L. Kirschner and  
Gilbert Z. Schneider
Peter S. KlostermanPhilip O. KochLawrence Koplik and  
Sarah Roberts
Ellen L. Koteen and  
Diane N. Palladino
Kanan KrishnanEric KruhRobert E. and Francoise KulpRobert P. KunreutherLouise LamphereRobert E. and Helen S. LaneErnest T. LarsonLillian LaskinSheldon LaskinElizabeth A. LeaderSusan L. LeeWilliam J. and Ellen S. LeiboldDaniel K. LeongJudy Lessing Popkin and  
Henry Popkin
Jerry D. LevineAlbert and Lulu Lee LevyAnn D. LevyRosalind LichterTheodore M. LievermanEmily M. LindellDavid A. LoebAnthony LoeppertJohn R. LongNancy LukensLorraine LymanJames and Gladys LynchMaribeth S. LynnPhilip J. and Carol J. LyonsRic MacDowellBrian MachidaJune MakelaPaul A. Makurath, Jr.Margaret A. MalloySusan B. ManningGene Marchi and Travis SmithDiane D. MarksStephen E. MarstonPeter W. MartinAndrea MasleyAlan MaximukEileen M. McCarthyGary E. McDoleLeila McDowel-HeadSteven McKinney and  
Jane Shofer
Nancy and William F. McLoughlinLynn M. McWhoodCheren MeadeRichard C. MehlShanti Menon and Hari ChenglathCarlin Meyer and Peter BienstockGerald Meyer and Luis RomeroBruce and Jane O. MillerJacqueline MillerJoseph MillerDavid MischDavid B. MitchellThomas C. MitchellCheri MontaguCharles MooreMadelyn F. MoralesJohn MorganValerie R. Mullen
Denis Berger
Robert and Fran BoehmRosemarie Castelli
Barbara Clark
Thomas R. DaleStella DegenhardtMyra ElsonLouise HalperBeth Harding
Rose G. Jacobs
Alfred KnoblerMartha KormanLeah LauterArthur MessierIsabel Needham Bliss
Ben Nichols
Gloria M. Pasin-GoldVictor RabinowitzJune RasmussenMorton StavisSylvia Stein
Irene Sucher Bader
Blackwater VictimsPaula Weiss
Friends, family and loved ones made gifts to CCR in memory of the people listed below. By designating CCR for support (often instead of  
flowers), donors both promote their own social justice values and recognize that the individual being honored shared these values and would  
want the work to continue after them. Thomas V . Muller
Kathryn L. Mulvey
Laura S. Murra
Jason A. Neidleman
Donald M. Neill
Bruce D. Nestor and  
Susana De Leon
Greta Newman
John S. Nichols
Rael Nidess
William K. Nisbet
Peter D. Noerdlinger
Hans Noll
John O’Hyun Kim and  
 J. Neiderhauser
Olaf S. and Sondra S. OlsenHelen M. Ortmann
Herbert I. and Sarah Oshrain
Norman Oslik and  
Madeleine Golde
Janet W. Owens
Nancy M. PageKristin Parker
Sally and Arthur L. Pasette
Lowell C. Paul
Andrew Pavelchek
Steven Pederson
Paul Peloquin
Rosalind Petchesky
Suzanne D. and Robert J. Petrucci
Edgar G. and Pauline PetryP’NAI OR of Portland
Christopher Porro
Isabel R. Potter
Brian Pridham
Jim Radford
Susan G. Radner
Vicki Rajendra and  
R. S. Krishnaswamy
Deborah RandNathan RasmussenJames Reif
Margaret A. and David Reuther
Nina Reznick
David G. Rich
Joyce L. Richardson
Kathleen L. Richardson
Stanley and  
Shirley Blanc Romaine
Harriet Rosenfeld
Gerald F. and  
Concetta V . Ross
Karen Rothman
Marie H. Rothman
Nan Rubin
R. A. RyanJohn J. Saemann
Suzanne Salzinger and  
John Antrobus
Franz and Phoebe J. Samelson
Katharine Sangree
Marc Sapir and Sheila Thorne
Gloria W. SaylerVivian Schatz
Steve Schlemmer
Sybil E. Schlesinger and  
Steven Rosenberg
Martin Schoenhals
Manuel and  
Bonnie Schonhorn
Gary Schreiner
Robert SchwabLeon F. Seltzer
Nydia Shahjahan
Ilyas Shaikh
Katherine Shao
Karen Shatzkin and  
Michael E. Breecher
Carol Ruth Sheinfeld and  
Yoshifumi Tanaka
Marcia R. Silver and  
Martin F. KohnSusan A. Silverstein
Beth J. Singer
Elmer D. and Patricia Sitkin
Victor Skorapa, Jr.
William H. and Ursula Slavick
Mark Slobin
Barbara S. Smith
Margaret M. Smith
Rosalind B. Smith
Ruth P. Smith
Ted Smoot
Jeannette Smyth
Anthony Sobieski and  
Katharine Berton
Amy F. SolasRene Solomon
Stanley Sorscher and  
Judith M. Arms
John D. Spence and  
W. Katherine Yih
Cary Stegman
Robert A. and  
Elaine Stein
Henry J. and  
Pamela Pomerance Steiner
Amanda StentArthur Stern
Wayne Stinson
Susan M. Strasser
Joan Sturgis
Myles SussmanEvelyn P. Taylor
Howard and Nina Tolley
Milana Tomec
Michael Touger and  
Margaret Levitt
Betsy Towle Ordl
James T. B. and  
Caroline M. Tripp
Barbara S. Trist and  
Ellen BaranowskiTimothy F. Tucker
Connie W. Tyler
Thomas G. Urda
Dirk Van Loon
Sarah Vanderwicken
Reed L. and  
Jennifer J. Vickerman
Susan von Arx
Michael S. and  
Johanna H. Wald
Todd Walker
Keith Wall
Gail Walter
Myrna Walton
Lowell WaxmanChristopher Way
Tobias Wehrhan
Marvin J. Weinberger
Dean and Aviva Weiner
James M. and Lori Wellman
Carol Ann Wells and  
Theodore T. Hajjar
Leland M. and  
June Welsh
Charles C. and  
Ruth C. West
Craig WileyLawrence B. Williams
Sarah S. Willie
Cree M. Windus
Linda WintnerSteven J. Wolf
Richard M. Wolfe
Sheldon Wolfe
Liesel C. Wolff
Elizabeth A. Wolfskill
Rachel Wysoker
Mario Zelaya and  
Mary Vivian Zelaya
Lore A. ZutraunCCR Donors
This list includes gifts of over $100 made between July 1, 2007 and June 30, 2008. Gifts of $100 and under are greatly appreciated and go a long 
way toward enabling CCR to continue its work. If you made a gift during this period and your name is not on this list, please contact us so we may  
correct our files and acknowledge you in our next newsletter. Frequently, stock gifts are not traceable to the donor so please let us know to expect 
the stock transfer and we will be sure to credit it correctly.
60 
Net Assets as of June 30, 2007     $4,954,425
Change in Net Assets      $(482,218)
Net Assets as of June 30, 2008      $4,472,207
Planned Gifts     $253,645
Foundations     $2,555,555
Individuals     $1,475,930
Court awards and attorney fees     $349,882
Interest     $157,209
Other     $(67,193)
Total Revenue, Gains and Other Support     $4,725,028Revenue, Gains and Other Support
Litigation     $2,550,837
Education & Outreach     $1,385,033
Administration & General     $562,743
Fundraising     $708,633
Total Expenses     $5,207,246ExpensesFinancial  Report  July 1 2007 – June 30 2008*
Net Assets
For an independent evaluation of our financial health visit Charity Navigator at  
www.charitynavigator.org, which gave us a perfect four star rating 
*audited figures pending board approval.
6162Catherine Albisa
Radhika Balakrishnan
Ajamu Baraka
Karima Bennoune
Ann Cammett
Marilyn Clement
David Cole
Rhonda Copelon
Michelle DePass
Gregory H. Finger, Treasurer
Charles Hey-Maestre, Secretary
Abdeen Jabara
Wilhelm H. Joseph, Jr.Julie F. Kay
Judy Lerner (through 1/08)
Eric L. Lewis (through 8/07)
Robin Lloyd (through 9/07)
Jules Lobel, Vice-President
Michael Ratner, President
Alex Rosenberg, Vice-President
Franklin Siegel
Michael Smith
Richard A. Soble
Peter Weiss, Vice-President
Ellen YaroshefskyDiRe c t o Rs
Vincent Warren  
Executive Director
Kevi Brannelly  
Development Director
Carolyn Chambers  
Associate Executive Director
Annette Warren Dickerson  
Director of Education & Outreach 
Sam Miller  
 Interim Legal Director *Board  of Directors  and Staff  July 1 2007 - June 30 2008
bo aR D o f DiRe c t o Rs
CCR board member Radhika  Balakrishnan  is a Professor of Economics and  
International Studies at Marymount Manhattan College, where she coordinates the International 
Studies Program. This year, she organized a college-wide awareness and fund-raising campaign called “Beyond Guantánamo: Rescuing the Constitution. ”
Faculty from across the college assigned lessons including having students read material relating  
to Guantánamo, ranging from poetry to papers on constitutional issues. The program included a screening of the award-winning documentary “Taxi to the Dark Side” followed by a talk by CCR’s Executive Director, Vincent Warren. His talk drew an overflow crowd of students, faculty and staff.  Professors who brought their classes to the day’s events created follow-up assignments and had class discussions of the issues presented. The International Studies Club held a fundraiser that  continued throughout the semester, raising almost $400 for the Center for Constitutional Rights.
“CCR’s work is unique because it takes on cases that are too challenging and risky for 
others. Supporting this work and raising public awareness of these issues is critical.”
CCR Spotlight63Board  of Directors  and Staff  July 1 2007 - June 30 2008
Le g a L De p a Rt m e n t
Jessica Baen, Legal Worker
Liz Bradley, Legal Worker
Darius Charney, Staff Attorney
Andrea Costello, Staff Attorney
Chaneen Cummings, Legal Worker
Claire Dailey, Legal Worker
J. Wells Dixon, Staff Attorney
Kamau Franklin, Racial Justice Fellow
Katherine Gallagher, Staff Attorney
Jennifer Green, Senior Staff Attorney
Gitanjali Gutierrez, Staff Attorney
Susan Hu, Legal Worker
Shayana Kadidal, Senior Managing Attorney
Pardiss Kebriaei, Staff Attorney
Marc Krupanski, Legal Worker
Maria LaHood, Senior Staff Attorney
Emi MacLean, Staff Attorney
Rachel Meeropol, Staff Attorney
Matthew Strugar, Staff Attorney
Claire Tixeire, Legal Research Assistant
eDu c a t i o n  & o u tRe a c h  De p a Rt m e n t
Dana Kaplan, OSI Fellow (through 8/07)
C. Lynne Kates, E&O Associate
Lauren Melodia, E&O Associate
Joshua Rahtz, Research Assistant (through 8/07)
An-Tuan Williams, E&O AssistantDe v e Lo p m e n t  De p a Rt m e n t
Sara Beinert, Major Gifts Officer
Kevin Gay, Database Manager
Emily Harting, Foundations Relations Officer
Rachel Hill, Development Assistant*
Jose Monzon, Development Assistant
Jeremy Rye, Major Gifts Officer
co m m u n i c a t i o n s  De p a Rt m e n t
Owen Henkel, Web Communications and Multimedia  
Manager (through 6/08)
Qa’id Jacobs, Web Communications and Multimedia Manager
Lindsey Kaley, Intern/Assistant*
Jen Nessel, Communications Coordinator
Esther Wang, Communications Associate (through 6/08)
aDm i n i s t Ra t i v e  st a f f
Gregory Butterfield, Administrative Assistant
Orlando Gudino, Network Administrator
Lisa Levy, Executive Assistant
Jeffrey Weinrich, Finance Manager
Alberto White, Office Manager
co n s u Lt a n t s
Nicholas Coster, Graphic Design
Glover Park Group, Communications and Media
Sarah Hogarth, Project Management/Writer/Editor
Eliot Katz, Writer
Riptide Communications, Communications and Media
* Temporary Staff64In memoriam
Victor Rabinowitz 
Victor died in November at the age of 96, after 
devoting an astonishing 70 years as a lawyer 
to the defense of progressive causes. He was a 
stalwart in the fight against McCarthyism, and, far from exhausted, dedicated himself in the 
subsequent years to the civil rights, anti-war 
and anti-imperalist movements in the U.S. and abroad. For three decades, he lead his firm’s  
continuing representation of Cuba since the 
Revolution, and joined with his partner, Leonard Boudin, in litigating  numerous First Amendment cases on behalf of the National Emergency Civil 
Liberties Committee, which later merged with CCR. Victor was president  
of the National Lawyers Guild at one of its most critical junctures, and was mentor and friend to a countless number of younger lawyers, including many 
who have worked at CCR. 
Alfred Knobler
Our longtime friend and supporter Alfred Knobler passed away this year, at 
the age of 92. For over 20 years, Alf hosted parties for us at his home on Fire 
Island and introduced our work to many of his friends. His lifelong passion for 
social and racial justice was evident in his every act, and we are grateful that he chose to leave a legacy gift for CCR in his will.
Michael Maggio  
Michael Maggio, who brought to CCR the legendary case which opened U.S. courts to victims of overseas human rights abuses, died in February 2008 at the 
age of 60. Yale Law School’s Dean Harold Koh has called the case, Filártiga v. 
Peña-Irala , the “ Brown v. Board of Education ” of international human rights. 
Maggio was part of the Filártiga  team with CCR’s Peter Weiss and Rhonda 
Copelon, and worked with the Center on restoring U.S. citizenship for Margaret Randall. He was one of a handful of young lawyers who built the legal field of  immigrants’ rights into one of the most dynamic legal fields today.
The following CCR supporters 
passed away this year and many 
thoughtfully honored CCR with 
a bequest. It is always sad to lose 
a family member, but fortunately 
their ideals will live on in the work
they supported at CCR.
Denis Berger 
Lucille H. Burkholder 
Tona Cornette  
Garland M. Embrey 
Del S. Greenfield   
Geoff S. Hartman 
Mary E. Harvey   
J.T. Hefley    
Morton A. Hyman  
Sarah Kornacker 
Linda Krupa       
Lawrence Lader  
Henry H. Lawin 
John D. Lewis        
Russ Linton  
L.L. Lorance    
Hilda Mason    
Stewart R. Mott 
Frances Peterson       
Dawn E. Reke  
Yerda M. Robertson   
Mildred Roth   
Richard Schoenfeld      
Henriette Shader     
George Shenkar 
Bella Tanenbaum         
Jane VanDeBogart        
Sam Zaslavsky 
65Editor and Project Manager: Sarah Hogarth. Design: Nicholas Coster • nicholas@modino.com. Photo credits: p.2, Chris Casburi, p.8, Cori 
Crider/Reprieve Staff Attorney, p.10 © Jim Young/Reuters/Corbis, p.12, Jenny Brown, p.14, © John Zich/Corbis, p.16, © Les Stone/Sygma/Corbis, p.18, © Benjamin Lowy/Corbis, p.20, © Brooks Kraft/Corbis, p.22, © Shannon Stapleton/Reuters/Corbis, p.29 Robin Martin.www.CCRjustice.org
The Center for Constitutional Rights is a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization. On request, a copy of CCR’s latest annual report may be obtained  
from us or from the Office of the Attorney General of the State of New York, Charities Bureau, 120 Broadway, New York, NY 10271.666 broadway, 7 fl, new york, ny 10012
info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org