50 years on the front lines for social justice2016 Annual Report“Human rights cannot be achieved without 
struggle. Thank you for your solidarity—for standing with us, for seeking justice, and helping the sun of freedom rise. History will one day recognize your commitment and support of this work, and its pages will shine with your good deeds.” 
—Ghaleb Al-Bihani, CCR client detained without charge at 
Guantánamo since 2002This artwork was created in Guantánamo by CCR client Ghaleb Al-Bihani 
to commemorate CCR’s 50th anniversary.1Thank You, Michael Ratner  ......................................................... 2
Message from the Board Chair  .................................................... 4
Message from the Executive Director  .......................................... 5
Mass Incarceration  ....................................................................... 6
Abusive Immigration Practices  .................................................... 8
Guantánamo  ............................................................................... 10
Racial Injustice & Discriminatory Policing  ............................... 12
LGBTQI Persecution  ................................................................. 14
Criminalizing Dissent  ................................................................ 16
T
orture, War Crimes & Militarism  ............................................. 18
Government Surveillance & Muslim Profiling  .......................... 20
CCR in the News  ....................................................................... 22
Bertha Justice Institute  ............................................................... 24
Case Index  .................................................................................. 26
Partners in Litigation  .................................................................. 33
President’s Reception  ................................................................. 36
Thelma Newman Society  ........................................................... 38
CCR Donors  ............................................................................... 39
Financials  ................................................................................... 51
CCR Board and Staf
f ................................................................. 52
CCR 50 Y
ears in Pictures  ........................................................... 54
W
ays to Give  .............................................................................. 56Here’s what you did in 2016!  
Together we are a force for justice!2For nearly 45 years, Michael Ratner had a simple, 
coherent mission: defend and speak up for victims of human rights abuses all over the world. In formal terms, Michael served as a Staff Attorney, Legal Director and President of the Board of CCR, but in a more ethereal sense he was the light and the lead of CCR. 
Michael became activated during student protests 
at Columbia Law School in 1968, when the police violence he witnessed drove him to a life committed to social justice. He graduated first in his class at Columbia and clerked for the legendary Constance Baker Motley, the first African-American female federal judge. 
Michael said that on his first day at CCR in 1971, 
Bill Kunstler told him to pack his bags—there was a prisoner rebellion ongoing in upstate New York at Attica. He ultimately represented men killed and injured by state police. Michael learned from CCR luminaries Rhonda Copelon and Peter Weiss the promise of international human rights law and helped put CCR at the vanguard of creative strategies to achieve transnational justice—from the pioneering use of the Alien Tort Statute in 1979 to the principle of Universal Jurisdiction. 
Fiercely critical of U.S. militarism and foreign policy, Michael became closely allied with 
people’s movements in Cuba, Haiti, Nicaragua, Guatemala, Puerto Rico and elsewhere. With his legendary solidarity, he stood alongside people who he witnessed suffering first hand from U.S. violence and imperialism. With his legendary principle, he stood up in court where few others dared to—bringing the first challenge under the War Powers Resolution to war making in El Salvador, as well as a suit against U.S. officials on behalf of Nicaraguans raped, murdered and tortured by U.S.-backed contras. In 1991, along with his dear friend and law partner Jules Lobel, he led CCR’s challenge to the legality of the first Iraq War. Michael went after dictators, torturers, corporations, and the military, and he challenged the impunity of government officials everywhere. Mindful of the limits of law but the importance of the people’s voice, he, as Jules would say, dragged politics into the courtroom. 
And, his politics was almost always right, even if 
it took others a decade to realize it. Michael led a team that successfully challenged the first Bush administration decision to house HIV+ Haitian refugees at the U.S. Naval Base in Guantánamo Bay—a place the government said was beyond the reach of law. He therefore knew the stakes when he learned the second Bush administration would 
Thank you, Michael
Your Vision, Fearlessness, and Passion for Justice Live on at CCR
open another prison there for suspected Muslim 
terrorists. Michael made a compelling case for why CCR, alone among U.S. organizations, should take up the challenge to Guantánamo. In January 2002, just months after 9/11, CCR brought the first case, Rasul v. Bush . Michael did not think he would win, 
but moved forward on principle. And that principle ultimately prevailed when the Supreme Court ruled in 2004 that detainees could challenge their deten -
tions—that there can be no prison beyond the law.
As a result of this decision, Michael and CCR 
led the effort to recruit and train hundreds of lawyers from all over the country to represent 790 Guantánamo detainees. The creation of this group—sometimes referred to as the Guantánamo Bar Association—represents what has been called the greatest mass defense effort in U.S. history.
Michael is survived by the legacy he created at 
CCR. In the words of current Legal Director Baher Azmy speaking at CCR’s 50th Anniversary Celebration, “Michael was the most visionary, principled, strategic, fearless, passionate—and deeply humane and humble—advocate I have ever come across and likely ever will. I almost cannot understand how someone can be so vigorous in his challenge to power and yet so sweet and generous and unassuming—except to say that in his private life he modeled the broader world he wanted to see—one driven by love and kindness and respect for human dignity.” 
We miss you, Michael.
4“CCR is so very fortunate to stand with you as  
we embark on the next 50 years.”
For half a century CCR has worked hand in 
hand with social movements to effect radical change domestically and around the globe. But, we were born in the backroads of Mississippi. In 1966, African Americans had been met by violent resistance from the Klan and other racists to suppress black voting. CCR’s founders—Arthur Kinoy, Morty Stavis, Bill Kunstler, and Ben Smith—joined forces with Fannie Lou Hamer, Ella Baker and the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party. The struggle in Mississippi cast the mold for how CCR works. For 50 years we have been movement lawyers and advocates—as Arthur Kinoy always said, “We are the people’s lawyers!”
What does it mean to be “the people’s lawyers”—
to be “movement lawyers”? It’s meant using legal tools to bolster the overall organizing to gain the right to vote for African Americans in the South.
It’s meant being one of the first legal organizations 
to work with the reproductive rights movement to affirm a woman’s bodily autonomy, not merely the right of the doctor to practice medicine. Nancy Stearns and Rhonda Copelon challenged New York State’s law outlawing abortion in 1969. Their strategy was to let the female plaintiffs speak for themselves to the court—speaking truth to power, and thereby building power in and through women’s bodies.
It’s meant closing down the Clinton administration’s 
detention of HIV positive Haitians in Guantánamo. It’s meant going to the Supreme Court to establish the right of Guantánamo detainees to challenge their detention and then doing the long hard work to secure their release.It’s meant suing the Pope on behalf of Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests to hold the Vatican accountable for protecting and indemnifying sexual abuse by priests. It’s meant building and working alongside our activist communities to successfully challenge and shut down the NYPD’s stop and frisk policy. It’s meant taking on indefinite solitary confinement in the 
California prison system—as part of a broad and ambitious social movement to shut down mass incarceration and the prison industrial complex.
So much of this work was inspired 
and driven by Michael Ratner. Michael has been the brain, the heart, the vision, and the passion of CCR for a generation. We lost Michael in May, but his spirit will live on at the Center 
for Constitutional Rights. 
Whenever Ella Baker met someone new she asked 
them, “Now, who are your people?” For Ms. Baker the measure of a person could be judged by the company you keep. You are our people. After 50 years, CCR’s people continue to be our clients, staff, board, cooperating attorneys, donors and activists. You make up who we are and how we work. The depth and breadth of our success is thanks to the commitment of people like you. CCR is so very fortunate to stand with you as we embark on the next 50.
Thank you,
Katherine Franke
Message from the Board Chair5“In order to see where we are going, we not only  
must remember where we have been, but we must  
understand where we have been.” – Ella Baker
Happy 50th Birthday, CCR! Thank you for 
sharing in our mission to use litigation, public education, and advocacy to transform the social, cultural, legal, economic and political systems that support and maintain structural racism; structural gender oppression; oppressive economic structures; and oppressive systems of state power. As we embark on the next 50 years of battling the impact of unchecked individuals, corporations and governments, we are grateful to have you at our side.
Together, we are fighting the 
exercise of abusive power and building the power of affected communities and individuals. Together, we are fighting the most serious and unconscionable civil and human rights violations. The human impact of CCR’s work—the lives saved, the lives transformed—is extraordinary and touches the hearts of all of us who do this work. We are dedicated to highlighting the people and ideas that make positive change; to increase their contributions to our society and the world. We value the leadership of those most impacted by oppression and are committed to work in solidarity and respect for that leadership. We hold ourselves deeply accountable to our clients and the communities and movements that we serve.
This is a particularly exciting time for CCR. 
America is at a turning point. That is why we are pleased to announce the launch of a five-year $10 million fundraising initiative—The Michael Ratner Campaign for the Next Generation—to build the next generation of movement lawyers and activists, deepen CCR’s ability to act as the preeminent team of legal advisors to our partner social movements, and enhance our capacity and our network to spend more time in the field.
Thanks to you, CCR gives voice to the voiceless, 
hope to the disheartened. Your support of the Michael Ratner Campaign for the Next Generation will assure the future of this critically important work. Now more than ever we know how fortunate 
we are to hold a legacy of dedication to transforming power. Michael’s fierce heart and soul of freedom and justice live and breathe through CCR’s board, staff and thousands of activists in America and around the world. It is our responsibility to continue to expand the reach of social justice movements.
CCR only exists because of 
financial partners who are 
committed to fundamental civil and human rights. Together on the front lines for social justice, we will more broadly execute this important work and respond creatively and effectively to urgent, emerging and unexpected opportunities. The fight for social justice and human rights is often a long and difficult road. Your partnership makes it possible for CCR to keep fighting when others have given up. We will never give up.
Thank you for standing with us,
Vince Warren
Message from the Executive Director
CCR 50 Years Fighting for Justice6With your partnership, the Center continued 
our longstanding work on behalf of prisoners and improved the lives of tens of thousands of prisoners and their families in California. In 1971, Michael Ratner, the National Lawyers Guild, and CCR attorneys came to the defense of prisoners involved in the Attica Uprising, and in 1999, CCR launched a successful campaign to end 
The Beginning of the End for SolitaryYour generosity is helping to end indefinite longterm solitary confinement in California. As a result of this landmark settlement, 
and the incredible organizing of prison hunger strikers, hundreds of men held in solitary for a decade or more are being reunited with their families. Get the latest: CCRjustice.org/mass-incarceration
1965
Hamer v. CampbellRepresented Fannie Lou Hamer in a lawsuit to overturn elections based on discriminatory voter registration practices.1967Dombrowski v. EastlandHeld members of Congress and their counsel responsible for violations of civil rights.Landmark settlement ends longterm solitary confinement in California
James Dombrowski (left) and CCR founder  
Ben Smith
Fannie Lou HamerMass IncarcerationGeorge Franco23 Years in  
solitary confinementTodd Ashker
22 Years in  
solitary confinement
Sitawa Nantambu Jamaa25 Years  
in solitary confinement
Gabriel Reyes
17 Years in  
solitary confinement Paul Redd14 Years in  
solitary confinementJeffrey Franklin
23 years in  
solitary confinement7the exploitative telephone contract between New 
York State and MCI/Verizon that charged family members 630% more for collect calls from their loved ones in prison than the average consumer.
CCR’s landmark settlement last fall in Ashker 
v. Governor of California  is ending indefinite 
longterm solitary confinement in California. Six months after the settlement, California Department of Corrections (CDCR) had reviewed 1,126 people in solitary confinement, approved 929 to leave solitary, and actually transferred 781 into the general population.
When CCR filed the case in 2012, more than 
500 prisoners had been isolated in the Security Housing Unit (SHU) at Pelican Bay for over 10 years, and 78 had been there for more than 20 years. They spent 22½ to 24 hours every day in cramped, concrete, windowless cells, and were denied telephone calls, physical contact with visitors, and vocational, recreational, and educational programming. Hundreds of other prisoners throughout California have been held in similar SHU conditions.
As Jules Lobel, CCR’s Board President and 
lead attorney on the case, rightly said: “Today’s victories are the result of the extraordinary organizing the prisoners managed to accomplish despite extreme conditions.” Our work on behalf of prisoners continues with our challenge to highly restrictive and secretive Communications Management Units in federal prisons and ongoing monitoring of the Ashker  
settlement.
1969
DuVernay v. United StatesChallenged discrimination in the racial composition of draft boards.1969National Student Association v. HersheyProtected First Amendment rights of anti-war protesters and successfully challenged, in the D.C. Circuit Court, the punitive induction of anti-war students into the armed services.1969Soglin v. KaufmanProtected university students from expulsion for their lawful participation in anti-war activities.CCR works hard to build the power of 
those who have been imprisoned, support movements begun by prisoners and raise up their stories and voices in our work. This year, the Center’s Executive Director, Vince Warren, participated on a panel at the Tribeca Film Festival premiere of SOLITARY, directed by Kristi Jacobson, which gives an unprecedented glimpse into what life in solitary confinement looks like for inmates at the Red Onion State Prison in rural Virginia.Voices From Solitary
“I barely know how to describe my feelings. Surreal, inexpressible 
joy and yet bittersweet, because there we sat as if 15 years had not 
gone by.” 
Morty Stavis at Freedom Democratic Party meeting, Lowndes County Alabama – Dolores Canales, mother of former Pelican Bay SHU prisoner who was released from solitary confinement after a settlement in CCR’s case
CCR Executive Director Vince Warren speaks on a panel at the Tribeca Film Festival premiere of SOLITARY.
Sitawa Nantambu Jamaa25 Years  
in solitary confinement
Gabriel Reyes
17 Years in  
solitary confinementCCR 50 Years Fighting for Justice8Together we have fought and continue to fight to 
defend the rights of vulnerable immigrants and empower their communities.In the 1980s, CCR defended sanctuary workers—members of church groups who provided shelter, medical care, and protection for 
Profiting from Detention
Quotas mandate “guaranteed minimums” in immigration detention
1969
Powell v. McCormackFought in the Supreme Court to preserve voters’ choice of Adam Clayton Powell Jr. as their representative in Congress. Prevented Speaker of the House McCormack from unseating Rep. Powell.1970Stamler v. WillisChallenged the constitutionality of the House Un-American Activities Committee. Obtained a ruling in federal court that allowed those served with subpoenas from HUAC to challenge them on constitutional grounds.
Abusive Immigration Practices
Thanks to you, CCR is using Freedom of Information Act litigation to bolster efforts by grassroots immigrants’ rights groups to 
force government transparency about federal detention quotas, which create financial incentives for ICE to keep 34,000 beds filled—many of them with families, including children. Take a stand: CCRjustice.org/abusive-immigration-practices
Adam Clayton PowellCCR founder Arthur Kinoy, dragged from HUAC hearing by federal marshals9refugees from El Salvador and 
Guatemala—from government prosecution. After 9/11, the Center challenged the religious profiling and illegal detention of Muslim, South Asian, and Arab non-citizens.
Since 2009, appropriations 
bills passed by the U.S. Congress have required the funding of 34,000 immigration detention beds per day—many of them filled with families, including children, seeking refuge from violence in Central America. The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) have interpreted this funding provision as a requirement that those beds be filled at all times, through the use of local jails and correctional facilities as well as private, for-profit correctional corporations with enormous lobbying power. This results in a quota for detainees that has no parallel or precedent in the U.S. criminal justice system.
Through Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) 
requests and litigation, CCR has supported efforts by grassroots immigrants’ rights groups to force government transparency about the detention  
bed quota. CCR client Ahmer Abbasi was one of nearly a hundred other men detained after 9/11 as a “terrorism suspect” based solely on his race, religion, ethnicity, and immigration status, and abused in brutal detention conditions for the many months it took the FBI and CIA to clear him of any connection to terrorism. He was denied access to the outside world, arbitrarily and abusively strip-searched, subjected to sleep deprivation and interference with his religious practice, denied basic personal items like soap and toilet paper, and deprived of adequate food. 
In December 2015, the court stood by its 
decision to allow our case, which seeks to hold high-level Bush administration officials, including John Ashcroft, accountable for their role in ordering racial and religious profiling and abuse in detention, to proceed. 
Holding Ashcroft Accountable
“The days I spent behind bars were the worst days of my life. I was 
absolutely unaware of the charges…I know they knew from the first 
day that they got a wrong guy, but they kept me in custody long after that.” 
– Ahmer Iqbal Abbasi, CCR client in Turkmen v. Ashcroft
1970
Grand Jury CasesDefended the rights of witnesses against grand jury abuse; protected the confidentiality of attorney-client conversations (In re: Kinoy) and defended congressional aide from being jailed for contempt in the “Pentagon Papers Grand Jury” case (In re: Rodberg).1971Palmer v. ThompsonFought racial segregation in public swimming pools. Argued that the State should act affirmatively to end racial discrimination; lost in the Supreme Court. Public swimming pools were allowed to close rather than integrate.
CCR and Detention 
Watch Network report, “Banking on Detention”
Former Attorney General John Ashcroft
CCR founder Arthur Kinoy, dragged from HUAC hearing by federal marshalsCCR 50 Years Fighting for Justice10In 1993, CCR successfully closed the detention 
camp for HIV-positive Haitian refugees at Guantánamo Bay ending the government’s attempt to create a legal “no-man’s-land” beyond the reach of U.S. laws. Nine years later, the Center brought the very first case on behalf of the men and boys brought to Guantánamo in the early days of the Bush administration’s “War on Terror.” 
In 2004 and 2008, CCR won landmark decisions 
in the Supreme Court upholding the constitutional right for detainees at Guantánamo to challenge 
Life Outside GuantánamoYou make it possible for CCR to continue to support our clients even after they are released from Guantánamo, such as Djamel 
Ameziane (pictured above) who spent over a decade in the offshore prison before he was forcibly transferred to Algeria.  
Get involved: CCRjustice.org/guantanamo 
CCR clients express gratitude to all who refused to forget about themGuantánamo
1971
Wright v. MontgomeryCCR attorneys defended numerous participants and organized legal support for marchers who were arrested and harassed in connection with the historic Selma-to-Montgomery March in 1965.1972Jeanette Rankin Brigade v. Capitol PoliceProtected anti-war demonstrators’ right to demonstrate on Capitol Hill and struck down a statute that prohibited demonstrating, walking, or standing in groups on Capitol grounds.
Selma-to-Montgomery March11“When people are released we think about those who remain.  
It’ll be hard not to think of the other brothers. God willing, this  
place will close with the help of your hands.” –Mohammed Al-Hamiri, CCR client
their detentions before a neutral judge in a real 
court. 
Thanks to your unwavering support, in addition 
to revealing the travesty of the camp and securing the release of men held for years, we continue to fight to close the prison and resettle the men who remain there after 14 years and counting.
“I have been waiting a lifetime just to start my life 
again,” CCR client Fahd Ghazy once wrote. 
That day finally came for Fahd. In the months 
since his release to Oman last January, Fahd has moved into his own apartment and, after over a decade apart, he has finally been reunited with his mother, wife, daughter, and brothers.
In April, two more CCR clients, Tariq Ba Odah 
and Mohammed Al-Hamiri, were transferred to Saudi Arabia, where their families embraced them upon arrival.
Tariq had been on hunger strike for more than 
nine years to protest his indefinite detention. His case received worldwide attention as his weight hovered at just 74 pounds—half of his ideal body weight—during this past year. Now that Tariq is finally free, we are hopeful that he will receive the sophisticated medical care he desperately needs.
After spending 14 years in detention, Fahd, Tariq, and Mohammed are now rebuilding their lives 
outside Guantánamo. They express their deep gratitude to all of you who refused to forget about them and who courageously shared their stories and dreams for a life of freedom. 
We continue our strategic litigation and advocacy 
on behalf of our clients and seek new methods to challenge their detention and secure their release. This year, CCR represented five men in their Periodic Review Board (PRB) hearings. Though very resource intensive, PRBs are a required step before men can be transferred.
The Center endeavors to raise up the stories and voices of the men at Guantánamo in all of our work. Five CCR legal and advocacy staff contributed chapters to a new book examining President Obama’s failure to close Guantánamo: Obama’s Guantánamo: Stories from an Enduring Prison . This book provides another 
platform to further advocate for the closure of the prison and centers the human impact of Guantánamo in the discussion of the prison’s future. Obama’s Guantánamo  can be purchased 
online at NYU Press.
Stories from Within
1972
Abramowicz v. LefkowitzChallenged New York State law that restricted abortion; served as a model for lawsuits throughout the country challenging restrictive abortion laws. 1972United States v. DellingerDefended charges against the “Chicago 8” and won reversal of the conviction on appeal.
Abbie Hoffman, one of the  
Chicago 8 conspiracy defendants
CCR 50 Years Fighting for Justice12CCR was born out of the civil rights movement in 
1966 with our founders’ shared vision to work in service to movements, not just clients. The fight then, and 50 years later today, has been to fight racism and challenge white supremacy.In the 1960s, CCR organized legal support for and defended peaceful protestors beaten and arrested on the historic Selma-to-Montgomery march; litigated scores of Voting Rights Act cases; and led challenges to de facto segregation that held states 
The Path to National Police ReformWith your generous support, the Center is reforming the New York City Police Department’s unconstitutional stop-and-frisk 
practices. Learn more about how we’re continuing the work of the civil rights movement: CCRjustice.org/racial-injustice
Changing the culture of the country’s largest police department
1972
U.S. v. U.S. District CourtWon a unanimous U.S. Supreme Court decision invalidating warrantless “national security” wiretapping against domestic activists. 1973In re: WBAI v. FMDefended WBAI against grand jury subpoena for a note received from the Weather Underground.1972U.S. ex rel. Goodman v. KehlProtected WBAI against a subpoena for tapes based on reporter’s privilege and due process.Racial Injustice / Discriminatory Policing
13responsible for taking affirmative steps to achieve 
racial equality.
More recently we successfully challenged 
exploitive phone rates that prisoners’ families in New York State had to pay through our Telephone Justice Campaign; employment discrimination against teachers of color in NYC public schools; and racially discriminatory hiring practices in the New York City Fire Department.
Since winning Floyd v. City of New York , which 
found the New York City Police Department’s 
(NYPD) stop-and-frisk policy and practice unconstitutional and racially discriminatory, CCR has been hard at work to ensure court-ordered reforms are properly implemented and include meaningful input from affected communities. This year we have made substantive progress in the development of new policies and trainings for all NYPD officers and supervisors to reduce the number of unconstitutional and racially discriminatory stops. 
Our work to reform the NYPD will continue for 
years. With your support, CCR will continue to monitor and measure the situation and work to resolve issues that arise—until the NYPD respects the rights of all of the communities it is supposed to serve! Flint Water Crisis 
In March, the Sugar Law Center for Economic and Social Justice, a team of Michigan civil rights lawyers, and CCR filed an appeal in our case challenging the state’s controversial emergency manager law, which allows the state to replace locally elected mayors, city and town councils, and school boards in so-called “financially-distressed” municipalities and school districts with unelected emergency managers. More than 50 percent of Michigan’s Black residents have been placed under emergency manager rule, compared to only two percent of the state’s white population. Emergency managers in the city of Flint were directly responsible for switching the source of the city’s water supply to the contaminated Flint River, poisoning the city’s population.
“For young people in my neighborhood, getting stopped and frisked 
is a rite of passage...And we all feel the same way—degraded, 
harassed, violated and criminalized because we’re black or Latino.” 
– Nicholas Peart, CCR client in Floyd v. City of New York
1973
Hess v. SchlesingerDefended women’s autonomy within marriage. Struck down a Marine Corps rule which in effect treated women merely as extensions of their husbands.1974U.S. v. Banks and MeansDefended American Indian sovereignty at Wounded Knee; represented leaders in the American Indian Movement charged with conspiracy and assault in a standoff with the FBI. 1974Aikens v. AbelRepresented steelworkers against their union leadership and management when an “Experimental Negotiating Agreement” was signed, that prohibited the rank-and-file  from striking.
L to R: Plaintiff Russ Bellant, Flint resident Claire McClinton, 
and CCR Executive Director Vince Warren
Russell Means and Dennis Banks
CCR 50 Years Fighting for Justice14CCR has long had a deep commitment to 
protecting members of LGBTQI communities from discrimination, censorship, violence and persecution. In 1993, CCR sued the Peace Corps on behalf of a volunteer whose service was terminated because of his sexual orientation. That same year, we also sought to open NYC’s annual St. Patrick’s Day 
Exporting Anti-Gay HateWith your support, the Center is holding U.S.-based anti-gay extremist Scott Lively accountable for his active role in the 
persecution of the LGBTI community in Uganda. Take action: CCRjustice.org/sexual-and-gender-based-violence
Experts condemn persecution of LGBTI Ugandans in new reportsLGBTQI Persecution
1975
Douglas v. HollomanBanned forced sterilization and drafted guidelines to ensure that women had adequate and full information, in comprehensible language, about the effects of sterilization.
Joanne Little1973Kentucky Bar Association v. Taylor;  Taylor v. HayesProtected the independence of the Bar. Defended Louisville attorney who was held in contempt during a criminal trial, denied a lawyer and a hearing, not told the charges against him and thrown in jail without bail.1975Joanne Little CaseAssisted in the defense of Joanne Little, a prisoner who had killed her white jailer after he had tried to rape her, by documenting overwhelming racial prejudice on the part of the jury in her case. Ultimately, Little was acquitted. 15Parade to the Irish Gay and Lesbian Organization. 
Though unsuccessful at the time, it was an early challenge in a struggle that continued for over 20 years, with the ban on gay participants finally falling this year. 
In 1995, the Center released documents we had 
obtained under the Freedom of Information Act documenting the years-long surveillance of ACT U P.
In 2013, we successfully removed from the sex 
offender registry nearly 900 people who were forced to register as sex offenders as a result of convictions under homophobic sodomy laws.
Keeping in line with CCR’s historic work 
defending LGBTI rights, we currently represent Sexual Minorities Uganda (SMUG), a non-profit LGBTI advocacy organization in Uganda, in their suit against Scott Lively, a U.S.-based anti-gay extremist, for his role in the persecution of LGBTI people in Uganda, in particular his active participation in the conspiracy to strip away their fundamental rights.
In November 2015, SMUG produced three 
independent expert reports that document the ongoing persecution against the LGBTI community in Uganda and reveal the negative impact of Lively’s actions. According to SMUG’s Executive Director, Frank Mugisha: “These reports by renowned experts in their fields confirm what life is like for LGBTI Ugandans, from the dangers we face to the impact on our health and well-being every day.” 
The reports, which underscore the seriousness 
of the situation in Uganda for LGBTI people, illustrate just how harmful the politics of intolerance and exclusion are and why international law considers persecution to be one of the world’s most serious crimes.
Fighting Draconian HIV Statute 
in Missouri 
CCR has joined the Center for HIV Law and Policy (CHLP), along with 21 national and state organizations, in an amicus brief on behalf of Michael Johnson, a former Missouri college student sentenced to more than 30 years in prison for violating Missouri’s draconian HIV transmission and exposure statute.
1975
In re: Union Nacional de TrabajadoresDefended UNT’s right to a legally constituted trial by jury.1975Drinan v. FordAttempted to halt U.S. attacks on Cambodia through a challenge to presidential assertion of unilateral right to expand the war in Southeast Asia without congressional authorization.“...Religious and political leaders…have whipped up such hatred of 
people in the LGBTI community that LGBTI Ugandans are facing 
severe discrimination, harassment and violence.”  – Dr. Jennifer Leaning,
Director of the Francois-Xavier Bagnoud Center for Health and Human Rights at Harvard University
1975
State of New York v. Danny WhiteFought New York State’s attempts to evict Mohawk Indians from their land and challenged the jurisdiction of U.S. courts over American Indian land claims. Resulted in a settlement with the state.HIV
Crimeis aNOT
CCR founder Bill Kunstler
CCR 50 Years Fighting for Justice16Because of you and your support of the Center, our 
enduring commitment to protecting the right to dissent—and to speaking up for what is right, long before it is popular—continues.For the past 50 years, CCR has worked to prove that no one, no company, no country is above the law including upholding the right to dissent. Early on, CCR and its founders established the right to challenge the constitutionality of subpoenas to No Palestine Exception to Free Speech
Defending the right to dissent for U.S. human rights activists
1976
Andrews v. Drew Municipal School District (amicus)Protected the right of unwed mothers to teach in schools.1976NLRB v. Union Nacional de TrabajadoresDefended independentista union from NLRB enforcement orders.1977Horman v. KissingerExposed U.S. involvement in a coup by the Chilean junta in a lawsuit against U.S. officials present during the overthrow of Salvador Allende’s government in 1973; asserted their involvement in the disappearance, torture and murder of Charles Horman.Your partnership allows CCR to continue our longstanding work to protect the right to dissent. CCR and Palestine Legal released 
a report that documents for the first time the widespread and growing suppression of Palestinian human rights advocacy in the United States. Find out more: CCRjustice.org/palestinian-solidarityCriminalizing Dissent
Charles Horman
17In early 2016, civil rights group Color of 
Change (COC) approached CCR to partner in their advocacy on behalf of activists connected to the Black Lives Matter movement being surveilled by the government after mass protests commenced against police violence in response to the fatal shooting of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Missouri. With COC, we put together an expansive Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request to the FBI and DHS for any information pertaining to surveillance by these agencies. We hope this work will reveal the extent of law enforcement authorities’ suppression of First Amendment activity and provide activists with important tools to defend themselves and further the movement. the House Un-American Activities Committee; litigated on behalf of anti-war activists; defended witnesses against grand juries; represented the Chicago 8 and had their convictions overturned; and won landmark First Amendment cases in the Supreme Court.
CCR has long challenged impunity for the Israeli 
government’s violations of international law. In 2015, CCR and Palestine Legal released a report, The Palestine Exception to Free Speech: 
A Movement Under Attack in the U.S ., which 
documents for the first time the widespread and growing suppression of Palestinian human rights advocacy in the U.S. The report outlines the tactics that Israeli advocacy organizations, universities, government actors, and other institutions have used against activists and contains testimony from advocates who have been targeted for their speech or expression.
Soon after the report’s release, we achieved a 
settlement on behalf of Professor Steven Salaita, a Palestinian American who was fired from a tenure track job at the University of Illinois in retaliation for his personal tweets criticizing the Israeli government’s assault on Gaza in 2014. 
With you by our side, CCR’s longstanding work in 
support of Palestinian human rights and challenging Israeli violations of international law continues.
1977
State of Washington v. WanrowRepresenting Yvonne Wanrow, CCR won the first ever appeal of a murder conviction on the grounds of a woman’s right to self-defense against harm to self or child.1978Monell v. Department of Social ServicesOriginating as a successful challenge to forced maternity leave policies, forced local government accountability for unconstitutional acts for the first time and created the right to obtain damages from municipalities in such cases.“This settlement is a vindication for me, but more importantly, it is  
a victory for academic freedom and the First Amendment.“ 
– Professor Steven Salaita, CCR client in Salaita v. Kennedy
Defending Black Lives Matter 
Activists
Monell protest marchers
Yvonne Wanrow
CCR 50 Years Fighting for Justice18
With your partnership, we have long fought 
against torture in its many forms. 
Much of this work builds on CCR’s landmark 
victory in 1980 in Filártiga v. Peña-Irala , pioneering the human rights application of a previously little-used 1789 federal statute, the Alien Tort Statute (ATS), which gives foreign nationals the right to sue for wrongful actions that violate international law in U.S. courts if they Profiting from TortureYour support enables CCR to pursue accountability from U.S. government officials who authorized, enabled, and carried out 
torture around the world, and sue corporations for their role in the torture of prisoners at Abu Ghraib. Demand accountability: CCRjustice.org/torture-war-crimes-militarism
Abu Ghraib prisoners fight for their day in court
1979
U.S. v. BerkanWon criminal case on behalf of Judy Berkan, lawyer for protestors of the U.S. Navy bombing of Vieques, Puerto Rico. 1979Bruno v. CoddCompelled the NYPD to respond to domestic violence.1979Clavir v. U.S.Filed suit on behalf of political activists against the FBI for illegal surveillance and surreptitious break-ins of their home.
Judy Berkan
Torture, War Crimes, & Militarism / Corporate Human Rights Abuses19cannot find justice where the violation occurred. 
For many, this route is the only hope they have for justice.
Since 2004, CCR has been working with a team 
of private attorneys on behalf of hundreds of Iraqi plaintiffs on a number of lawsuits targeting private military contractors who profited from the horrific torture of Iraqi prisoners detained by the U.S. at the now infamous Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq.
In May, we argued that the well-documented 
torture of prisoners at Abu Ghraib and a private military contractor’s role in that torture is not a question best left to the political branches, as a lower court ruled last June. CCR attorneys urged the appeals court to reinstate our suit against CACI Premier Technology, Inc. for the company’s role in the torture and other abuse of Iraqi men at Abu Ghraib.
As a result of your longstanding and generous 
support we are able to take on some of the world’s most powerful individuals, against long odds, and for as long as it takes to achieve justice. CCR continues to fight for torture accountability within the U.S. courts, in international tribunals, and in the media.In March, retired U.S. General Geoffrey Miller, former commander of the prison at Guantánamo, was a no-show in a French court, despite having been served a subpoena to appear to answer accusations that he oversaw the torture of three French nationals at Guantánamo. CCR and the European Center for Constitutional and Human Rights submitted expert reports and other submissions in the proceedings. Through the principle of universal jurisdiction, which allows the national authorities of any state to investigate and prosecute people for serious international crimes even if they were committed in another country, CCR has actively pursued a half dozen cases in multiple countries seeking to investigate and prosecute those Bush administration officials who authorized, designed and implemented the U.S. torture program in absence of the political will to do so at home. 
Prosecuting Torture Abroad
“Although this is the fourth time our case has had to go to the Court 
of Appeals, I trust the American judicial system and I believe that 
I will achieve justice in the end. We will have our day in court and the story of Abu Ghraib will be told by me and other men who lived—and—survived it.” 
– Salah Al-Ejaili, CCR client in Al Shimari v. CACI
1980
Local 1330, U.S. Steelworkers of America v. U.S. Steel (amicus)Fought to keep steel plants open in Youngstown, Ohio.1980Harris v. McRaeChallenged the Hyde Amendment restricting poor women’s right to federal Medicaid funding for abortion, lost 5-4 in the Supreme Court.1980Filártiga v. Peña-IralaRevived Alien Tort Statute for lawsuits by non-citizens in U.S. courts challenging violations of international human rights. Won a suit on behalf of the family of Joelito Filártiga, who was tortured and killed by Paraguayan police.
Dolly Filártiga holding a 
picture of her son JoelitoRetired U.S. General  
Geoffrey Miller
CCR 50 Years Fighting for Justice20For over a decade your partnership with CCR has 
helped keep up the tireless fight seeking justice for those who are subject to domestic government abuses perpetuated in the name of the so-called “war on terror.” Our challenges to discriminatory profiling, torture, and illegal detentions of Muslims in the U.S. began in the days immediately after the tragic 9/11 attacks in 2001 when Muslim, South Asian, and Arab men were rounded up on the basis of their race, religion, 
No Muslim Exception to the Constitution
Case against NYPD for spying on New Jersey Muslims moves forwardGovernment Surveillance 
1981
Dotson v. City of Indianola, Miss.Compelled the city to comply with the Voting Rights Act.1982Crumsey v. Justice Knights of the Ku Klux KlanRevived a 19th century statute to win the first damages case against the KKK and secured an injunction against their campaign of assault, intimidation and harassment.1983Crockett v. ReaganChallenged U.S. military involvement in El Salvador in the first suit under the War Powers Resolution.
Three of the plaintiffs in CrumseyYour support is fueling the Center’s challenge to the NYPD’s blanket, unwarranted surveillance of Muslim communities in 
New Jersey. Find out more about this case and other efforts to fight discriminatory profiling, torture, and illegal detentions of Muslims in the U.S. after 9/11: CCRjustice.org/muslim-profiling21ethnicity, and immigration status and detained in 
extremely restrictive and abusive conditions.
Since then, we have challenged the segregation of 
Muslims in experimental prison units, targeting by the government to act as informants in their communities, and unwarranted and expansive “Muslim mapping” and religious surveillance programs.
In January 2015, CCR and our litigation partner 
Muslim Advocates were in court challenging the New York City Police Department’s (NYPD) blanket, suspicionless surveillance of Muslims in New Jersey. CCR attorneys argued that the court should reverse a federal district court’s 2014 dismissal of the case.
The NYPD justified the surveillance by asserting 
the crude stereotype that Muslims are predisposed to violence. CCR refuted this justification and contested the city’s shocking claim that surveillance—on the basis of religious identity alone—did not cause the plaintiffs any harm. 
Last October, the case was reinstated with a stirring 
and comprehensive decision, recognizing that New Jersey Muslims who have been subjected to surveillance by the NYPD stated a valid claim of discrimination on the basis of their religion, allowing the case to move forward. In a series of events around the country, CCR and Linda Sarsour, Executive Director of the Arab American Association of New York and co-founder of MPowerChange.org, joined with local allies and partner organizations in New York and Detroit to start conversations about countering Islamophobia in the U.S. These critical dialogues look at why we are seeing a surge in Islamophobia, how it is manifesting legally, the impact on Muslim communities, and how Muslim communities are challenging Islamophobia.
 Challenging the Rise of 
Islamophobia“No one should ever be spied on and treated like a suspect simply 
because of his or her faith, and today’s ruling paves the path to  
holding the NYPD accountable for ripping up the Constitution.” 
– Farhaj Hassan, CCR client in Hassan v. City of New York
1983
Soto v. Romero-BarceloBrought suit to uncover FBI involvement in the killing of young pro-independence activists at Cerro Maravilla, Puerto Rico. Led to substantial awards to plaintiffs, televised Puerto Rican Senate hearings and several convictions of police officers for obstruction of justice and perjury. 
1983Conyers v. ReaganChallenged the U.S. invasion of Grenada..
Televised Puerto Rican Senate hearings
L to R: Wahy-ud Deen Shareef, plaintiff in Hassan v. City of 
New York , Linda Sarsour, and CCR’s Baher Azmy
CCR 50 Years Fighting for Justice22
1983
Briggs v. GoodwinLed a team of lawyers in successfully defending leaders of the Vietnam Veterans Against the War and the Gainesville 8, who were prosecuted for conspiring to disrupt the 1972 Republican National Convention. 1983Nation v. HaigDefended the right of Americans to receive Cuban publications.
It’s been another banner year for the CCR 
Communications Department, thanks to your loyal support and participation. 
From solitary confinement to Guantánamo to 
Black Lives Matter, we made sure that the issues you care about were in the news, on social media, and in your in-box. With the new tools and possibilities on our redesigned website, we’re able to keep you informed and involved in more ways than ever. Our unique multichannel approach strategically combines an array of communications platforms to maximize the impact of your donation dollars. These include:
• Press releases  and press statements on breaking 
news developments• Media outreach to reporters, producers, and 
bookers throughout the year to keep our issues on their radars
• Op eds and blogs that help frame the issues • Frequent appearances  on Democracy Now!, 
The Gainesville 8Fahd Ghazy 
Released from Guantánamo
23
1984
Reagan v. WaldSought, with Leonard Boudin and the NECLC, to enjoin restrictions on travel to Cuba on the basis that such restrictions deprived people of the constitutional right to travel;  lost 5-4 in the Supreme Court.1984Sanchez v. ReaganChallenged U.S. officials’ support for torture, murder and rape in Nicaragua.MSNBC, and other shows 
that offer our distinctive and authoritative analysis 
• Videos  that connect to viewers 
with emotional impact • 24/7 social media that pushes 
our content out to additional audiences
• Frontlines of Justice , our 
weekly email newsletter that puts all the latest news in our cases in your in-box every Monday morning 
• The Daily Outrage , CCR’s 
own blog• Emails  on breaking news, 
upcoming events, and more • Our new and improved 
website  that connects all of our 
other communications media and offers tons of interactive features that allow you to find exactly what you need and share exactly what you want.
Our success is a result not just 
of your generous and faithful support, but also your direct participation. With each Facebook comment, retweet, website share, and email forward, you enable us to grow our audience and deepen our influence. 
Morty Stavis and Peter Weiss in Nicaragua
CCR in the News
Five Reasons Michael Ratner Was A BadassCCR 50 Years Fighting for Justice241985
McSurely v. McClellanWon damages from the U.S. government on behalf of Al and Margaret McSurely, two voting rights activists, for gross violation of their privacy and Fourth Amendment rights.1985U.S. v. Maria del Scorro Pardo de AguilarDefended sanctuary workers, members of church groups who provided shelter, medical care and protection for refugees from El Salvador and Guatemala, from government prosecution. 
#Law4BlackLives
Thanks to the generous support of the Bertha 
Foundation, the Wallace Action Fund, Open Society Foundations and the David Rockefeller Fund, CCR’s Bertha Justice Institute (BJI) is training the next generation of movement lawyers on a larger scale than ever before.
Last summer over 700 participants came 
together to envision radical change and continue building the legal arm of the burgeoning #BlackLivesMatter movement.
The #Law4BlackLives conference, organized by 
CCR’s BJI together with several co-sponsors, took place in Harlem, NYC, on July 31 and August 1, 2015. The convening was an historic gathering of lawyers, law students, legal workers, activists, artists and jailhouse lawyers prioritizing the voices and leadership of people of color.
Connecting past and present, law and action, 
vision and nuts and bolts, the conference featured plenaries, caucuses, workshops, panels, art, organizing spaces and more.
#Law4BlackLives explored how legal advocates 
can work collaboratively with activists and organizers on a range of issues—from defending the civil rights of protesters to drafting transformative local and federal policy to advancing innovative international human rights advocacy strategies. 
The convening also surfaced current legal needs 
from the ground, identified legal strategies, 
Hundreds of lawyers, law students, legal workers and jailhouse lawyers from around the country came together in Harlem, 
New York, last summer to help vision and build the legal arm of the Black Lives Matter movement.251985
CISPES v. FBIBrought suit after CCR’s Movement Support Network Campaign and Freedom of Information Act requests revealed massive spying on the El Salvador solidarity movement.1985Greenham Women Against Cruise Missiles v. ReaganFought nuclear weapons proliferation; sought to use the U.S. legal system to enjoin the United States from deploying first use nuclear missiles in Great Britain.
1986People v. Liberta (amicus)Struck down New York State’s marital rape exemption in its entirety.and brought together a community of like-
minded individuals to build a deeper collective understanding of how legal advocates can develop the power of movements.
CCR has played a crucial role in helping build 
legal infrastructure in Ferguson and Baltimore in the wake of the local uprisings after the police killings of Michael Brown and Freddie Gray. 
#Law4BlackLives is about continuing and 
broadening that work by bringing together the people who can—and are—making it happen! 
Unable to attend? Watch online at: www.
law4blacklives.org/ 
Training the Next Generation
CCR launched the BJI to build a new generation of lawyers and legal workers that have the vision, expertise and determination to create social change. Through the Bertha Fellowship, CCR hosts three emerging lawyers who are interested in gaining both practical experience and a theoretical understanding of how legal advocacy can create social change. Since 1987, the Center has run the Ella Baker Summer Internship Program, a training program named after the pioneering civil rights activist, which provides intensive experience working on CCR cases for first- and second-year law students.
Each month the BJI hosts a free screening of a cutting-edge, socially engaged documentary, harnessing the power of film to educate, activate, and build community.
Bertha Justice Institute 
Women’s Peace Camp at 
Greenham Common
CCR 50 Years Fighting for JusticeCase Index261986
Republic of the Philippines v. MarcosRecovered New York real estate bought with illicit funds by Philippine dictator.1986Kinoy v. MitchellChallenged warrantless wiretapping and massive surveillance of Arthur Kinoy in his role as lawyer for the United Electrical Workers.1987Jackson v. AllainFiled a federal class action lawsuit challenging racially discriminatory runoff elections in Mississippi.
Barhoumi v. Obama
Successful Periodic Review Board (PRB) representation of an 
Algerian citizen held at Guantánamo since 2002.
Al-Bihani v. Obama
Representing a Yemeni citizen held without charge at Guantánamo since 2002 and who was cleared for release in 2014.
Davliatov v. Obama
Habeas corpus case on behalf of Muhammadi Davliatov, who was detained without charge at Guantánamo for more than 13 years, despite being cleared for release for more than six years. 
Bergdahl v. Burke (Amicus)
Amicus brief in the case of U.S. Army Sergeant Bowe Bergdahl, a former Taliban prisoner in Afghanistan who was released in 2014 in exchange for the release of five Guantánamo prisoners.
Zahir Hamdoun: Periodic Review Board (PRB) 
Proceedings
Representing a Yemeni citizen who has been held without charge in 
Guantánamo since 2002 and who was cleared for release in 2015.
Mohammed Kamin: Periodic Review Board (PRB) 
Proceedings
PRB representation for Mohammed Kamin, an Afghan who has 
been detained at Guantánamo since 2004 and who was cleared for release in 2015.Ameziane v. Obama / Ameziane v. United States / 
Ameziane FOIA
Guantánamo habeas corpus petition in D.C. District Court, and 
human rights petition and request for precautionary measures before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR).
Al Qahtani v. Obama / CCR v. DoD, et al. (al Qahtani 
FOIA)
A habeas corpus petition on behalf of the only Guantánamo 
detainee who the government has openly admitted was tortured; FOIA litigation against the Department of Defense, the Department of Justice, the FBI, and the CIA for public release of videotapes that document torture of al Qahtani during interrogations.
Mohammed Al Hamiri v. Obama
Advocacy and legal representation of Mohammed Al Hamiri, who was released from Guantánamo to Saudi Arabia in April 2016 after more than 14 years of detention.
Al-Zahrani v. United States
IACHR petition filed on behalf of the families of Yasser Al-Zahrani and Salah Al Salami, who died at Guantánamo in 2006.
Celikgogus v. Rumsfeld / Allaithi v. Rumsfeld
Civil suit for damages filed on behalf of an Egyptian doctor who is now confined to a wheelchair due to the torture and mistreatment he experienced at Guantánamo.
Guantánamo
Viigil outside of the Southern District of New York federal courthouse 
with banner of CCR client Tariq Ba Odah
Mohamed Al Hamiri reunited with his family
Corazon Aquino, president of the Philippines, thanks CCR founder Morty Stavis (far right)Case Index271987
United States v. TurnerSecured the acquittal of voting rights activists charged with voter fraud and revealed a Justice Department campaign to intimidate activists who sought to ensure compliance with the 1965 Voting Rights Act. 
1988In the Matter of RandallWon right of poet Margaret Randall to regain her U.S. citizenship in the face of attacks by U.S. that she was ineligible because she was a Communist. GTMO IACHR General Precautionary Measures
Thematic hearing on U.S. Guantánamo detention policy.
Fahd Ghazy v. Obama
Litigation and advocacy on behalf of former juvenile detainee 
Fahd Ghazy, who was released from Guantánamo to Oman in January 2016 after more than 14 years of detention.
Khan Tumani v. Obama
Representation of father and son from Syria who were detained at Guantánamo for years without charge and resettled apart in 2009 and 2010, in efforts to seek accountability for their torture and remedy the collateral consequences of their detention. 
Othman v. Obama
Habeas corpus petition on behalf of Khaled Abd Elgabar Mohammed Othman, a Yemeni man detained at Guantánamo without charge until he was released to the United Arab Emirates in November 2015.
Khan v. Obama / Khan v. Gates / United States v. Khan
Representation of Guantánamo prisoner and victim of CIA torture Majid Khan.
Tariq Ba Odah v. Obama
Habeas petition and advocacy on behalf of long-time hunger striker Tariq Ba Odah, who was released from Guantánamo to Saudi Arabia in April 2016 after more than 14 years of detention.
Al Shimari v. CACI, et al.
A challenge to corporate impunity under the Alien Tort Statute (ATS) for war crimes and torture at Abu Ghraib prison on behalf of four Iraqi former detainees.
Doe v. Cisco Systems, Inc. (Amicus)
Amicus brief in ATS case bringing claims that U.S. technology company Cisco Systems, Inc. aided and abetted serious human rights abuses against Falun Gong practitioners in China.
In re South African Apartheid Litigation (Amicus)
Amicus briefs in a case seeking civil liability from multinational corporations for their role aiding and abetting the South African apartheid regime.
Adhikari v. Daoud & Partners, KBR, et al. (Amicus)
Amicus brief in post-Kiobel ATS corporate accountability case regarding migrant laborers illegally trafficked to work on a U.S. military base in Iraq for contractors.Corporate Accountability
Human rights activists, torture survivors, and Guantánamo attorneys rally at the White House to mark the 14th anniversary of the prisonHaunting image of an Iraqi prisoner being tortured at Abu Ghraib
Margaret RandallFrom left: Margaret Carey-McCray, Morton Stavis, Evelyn Turner, Albert Turner and J.L. ChestnutCCR 50 Years Fighting for JusticeCase Index281988
Haase v. WebsterChallenged Customs Service spying, seizure and copying of address books of travelers to Nicaragua.1988Martinez-Baca v. Suarez-MasonSought justice for victims of Argentine death squads under Alien Tort Statute.1988NOW v. TerryEstablished precedent for a buffer zone around abortion clinics, where anti-abortion “Operation Rescue” campaigners could not harass or intimidate women seeking medical services.
Al-Majalah Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Request
A FOIA request for information about a U.S. airstrike on a rural community in southwestern Yemen, in the al-Majalah region in 2009.
Hernández v. Mesa (Amicus)
Amicus brief in support of petitioners in Supreme Court case seeking accountability for cross-border shooting under Boumediene v. Bush decision.
SNAP v. the Pope, et al.
Legal submissions before international human rights bodies and advocacy on behalf of the Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests (SNAP) charging Vatican officials with enabling and concealing widespread and systematic sexual violence against children and vulnerable adults by Catholic clergy.
Accountability for U.S. Torture: France
Supporting action seeking accountability for U.S. torture brought in France under the principle of universal jurisdiction.
Accountability for U.S. Torture: Germany
Supporting action seeking accountability for U.S. torture brought in Germany under the principle of universal jurisdiction.Accountability for U.S. Torture: SpainActions seeking accountability for U.S. torture brought in Spain under the principle of universal jurisdiction.
Accountability for U.S. Torture: Canada
Action brought before the United Nations Committee Against 
Torture and in Canada under the principle of universal jurisdiction.
Mamani, et al. v. Sánchez de Lozada / Mamani, et al. v. 
Sánchez Berzaín
Federal lawsuit challenging government-ordered, extrajudicial 
killings in Bolivia.
Honduras: True Commission and CCR Freedom of 
Information Act (FOIA) Requests
FOIA requests to various U.S. government agencies regarding 
the 2009 military coup in Honduras.
Munoz Santos v. Thomas (Amicus)
Amicus brief in support of a successful petition for rehearing a panel decision, arguing that extradition to Mexico where probable cause determination was based in part on torture violates Article 15 of CAT, which is binding and enforceable in extradition proceedings.
International Human Rights
Protesting against “Operation 
Rescue”SNAP representatives in front of the United Nations in Geneva
The “Bush Six”Case Index291988
Palestine Information Office v. Schultz (amicus)Defended PIO’s right to disseminate information freely as guaranteed by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.1989Texas v. JohnsonWon decision in the Supreme Court and defended freedom of expression in flag burning case.1990County Redistricting CasesEnsured that electoral redistricting complied with federal standards set by the Voting Rights Act in more than a dozen cases brought in the South.Animal Legal Defense Fund, et al. v. Otter, et al.  
(Amicus)
Amicus brief supporting plaintiffs’ motion for summary judgment 
challenging Idaho’s “ag-gag” law.
United States v. Johnson
A federal prosecution, under the Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act, of two animal rights activists for allegedly liberating animals from fur farms.
Animal Legal Defense Fund, et al. v. Herbert, et al. 
(Amicus)
Amicus brief supporting plaintiffs’ motion for summary judgment 
invalidating Utah’s “ag-gag” law.
Animal Legal Defense Fund, et al. v. Wasden, et al. 
(Amicus)
Amicus brief supporting affirmance of lower court ruling that 
Idaho’s “ag-gag” law violates the First Amendment, on behalf of two journalism professors who are experts in undercover and participatory reporting.Bigwood v. Department of Defense
FOIA case on behalf of Jeremy Bigwood, an investigative journalist, against the Department of Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) for withholding materials regarding the U.S.’s role in the 2009 coup d’état in Honduras.
Georges v. UN (Amicus)
Amicus brief in support of Haitian victims of catastropic cholera outbreak in Haiti arguing that the UN should not have immunity for causing the outbreak.
Right to Heal
Advocacy and legal project challenging U.S. war crimes and promoting accountability and reparations for Iraqis, Afghans, and U.S. service members through international advocacy, Freedom of Information Act requests, and other efforts.
Advocacy before the UN Treaty Bodies and Special 
Procedures
Follow-up advocacy related to several CCR issues regarding the 
completion of treaty reviews by independent bodies, as well as before two special procedures—the Working Group of Experts on People of African Descent and the Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association—both of which issued findings and shared concern related to policing practices, police violence, surveillance of activists, and more.
Defending Dissent
William Kunstler and client Gregory Lee JohnsonCCR’s Amnah Almukhtar reads an excerpt from Against All Odds: Voices of Popular Struggle in Iraq and relates the book to her personal experienceCCR staff stand in solidarity with Kevin and Tyler, plaintiffs in United States v. Johnson who were indicted under the Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act CCR 50 Years Fighting for JusticeCase Index301990
Dellums v. BushChallenged George H. W. Bush’s attempt to declare war unilaterally, without congressional authorization, during the first Gulf War.1990Municipal At-Large CasesRid municipalities throughout the southern United States of this particular type of racially discriminatory voting system.1990U.S. v. EichmanDefended freedom of expression and won decision in the Supreme Court for the second time in flag burning case.Immigrant Defense Project (IDP), et al. v. Immigration 
Customs and Enforcement (ICE), et al.
FOIA request and litigation against DHS and ICE seeking 
information related to ICE’s home raids policies and arrest data as well as the particulars of a December 2011 ICE warrantless home raid.
Turkmen v. Ashcroft
Class action lawsuit challenging the 9/11 immigration detentions.
Detention Watch Network (DWN) v. Immigration 
Customs and Enforcement (ICE) and Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
FOIA request and litigation against DHS and ICE seeking 
information on both national and local immigration detention bed quotas.
Hassan v. City of New York
Challenge to NYPD’s suspicionless surveillance of Muslim Americans in New Jersey on the basis of their Muslim identity.
Tanvir v. Lynch (formerly Tanvir v. Holder)
A federal lawsuit that challenges the FBI’s abuse of the No-Fly List to coerce law-abiding American Muslims into spying on their religious communities.Ibrahim v. Department of Homeland Security (Amicus)
Amicus brief on behalf of Dr. Rahinah Ibrahim in support of payment of her attorney’s fees after her successful challenge to her erroneous placement on the No-Fly List and other terrorist watchlists.
Floyd, et al. v. City of New York, et al.
A federal class action lawsuit against the City of New York that successfully challenged the NYPD’s practice of racial profiling and unconstitutional stop and frisks, and that is implementing broad reforms to NYPD policing practices.
U.S. v. Ganias (Amicus)
Amicus brief in support of accountant Stavros Ganias, who challenged search warrant to seize computer data originally collected, copied and kept indefinitely pursuant to an earlier warrant directed to his clients.
Houser v. Pritzker
Class action lawsuit on behalf of African American and Latino plaintiffs whose applications for more than a million temporary jobs were rejected by the Census Bureau’s flawed screening process that unfairly used criminal background records to disqualify applicants.
Color of Change v. FBI, DOJ & DHS
FOIA request to federal law enforcement agencies for information on surveillance of Black Lives Matter protestors.
Policing, Profiling & Immigration Enforcement
Michael Ratner at a press  conference for Dellums v. BushCCR staff, co-counsel and clients in Tanvir v. LynchWhen CCR put the NYPD on trial for its stop and frisk practices, community members and activists showed up in supportCase Index311991
American Baptist Churches v. Thornburgh With the National Lawyers Guild and Marc Van der Hout, won asylum for Salvadoran and Guatemalan nationals fleeing persecution by U.S.-supported regimes.1991The Nation Magazine v. U.S. Department of DefenseChallenged government press restrictions during first Gulf War.1992Linder v. CaleroExposed U.S. support for the Contras in Nicaragua as responsible for the 1987 murder of Benjamin Linder, an American community worker. 1992 decision won the right to sue for personal injury for war crimes.Fahad Hashmi
Legal support to former Brooklyn College student who was 
unjustly prosecuted for material support for terrorism and held in solitary confinement and under Special Administrative Measures for years. 
Ashker v. Governor of California
A federal class action lawsuit that succesfully challenged prolonged solitary confinement as cruel and unusual punishment, and that is implementing substantial reforms to California confinement practices.
Moore v. Texas (Amicus)
Amicus brief challenging prolonged solitary confinement on death row.
Aref, et al. v. Lynch, et al.
A due process challenge to the Communications Management Units (CMUs), two highly restrictive federal prison units that segregate certain prisoners and severely limit and control their communications.
Jailhouse Lawyers Handbook
Free self-help legal manual for people in prison whose constitu-tional rights have been violated. Phillips, et al v. Snyder, et al.
Federal lawsuit challenging constitutionality of state-appointed “Emergency Managers” in predominantly Black and Brown communities of Michigan.
Gulino v. The Board of Education of the City of New 
York and the New York State Education Department
A class action lawsuit challenging the racially discriminatory 
impact of several standardized tests New York City used in a  
re-certification process for city public school teachers.
United States of America and Vulcan Society, Inc. v. 
City of New York
A federal class action lawsuit on behalf of the Vulcan Society and 
individual firefighters and firefighter applicants that successfully challenged the New York City Fire Department’s racially discrimi-natory hiring practices.
Prisoner & Detainee Justice Racial Justice
CCR’s landmark settlement in Ashker v. Governor of California is ending indefinite longterm solitary confinement in CaliforniaEngine 234 in Brooklyn, NY, is the FDNY’s first majority Black fire company since the successful settlement of our case against the FDNY on behalf of the Vulcan Society
Benjamin LinderCCR 50 Years Fighting for JusticeCase Index321992
AFSC v. BradyWon right to group travel to Vietnam and Cambodia. 1992Weinbaum v. CuomoChallenged New York State’s disparate funding of programs in its two public university systems; where the predominantly white SUNY system is funded at higher levels than the CUNY system, which serves mostly people of color. 1993Haitian Centers Council Inc. v. SaleSecured an order in federal court that closed detention camp at Guantánamo Bay for HIV-positive Haitian refugees.Davis, et al. v. Cox, et al.
Representing current and former Olympia Food Co-op board 
members who are being sued over their decision to boycott Israeli goods.
Salaita v. Kennedy, et al.
A lawsuit against the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign for firing Professor Steven Salaita from a tenured position over his tweets critical of Israel’s summer 2014 attack on Gaza.
CCR v. Department of Defense / Gaza Freedom Flotilla 
FOIA
A FOIA lawsuit seeking information regarding U.S. knowledge of, 
role in, and response to a deadly Israeli attack on a humanitarian flotilla to blockaded Gaza.
Palestine Legal
Advocacy and legislative work around suppression of Palestinian rights advocacy.
Brooklyn College Student Disciplinary Process
Representation of Brooklyn College Students for Justice in Palestine for charges stemming from a demonstration.U.S. v. Rasmea Odeh (Amicus)
Amicus brief arguing that post-traumatic stress from torture and sexual violence should have been considered by the court.
New York BDS Executive Order FOIL
New York Freedom of Information Law (FOIL) request seeking information on the decision-making process behind Governor Cuomo’s anti-BDS Executive Order.Palestinian Human Rights
Sexual Minorities Uganda v. Scott Lively
Federal lawsuit against a U.S.-based anti-gay extremist for his active role in the conspiracy to strip away fundamental rights from LGBTI people in Uganda, which constitutes persecution.
State of Missouri v. Michael L. Johnson (Amicus)
Amicus brief on behalf of Michael Johnson, a former Missouri college student sentenced to more than 30 years in prison for violating Missouri’s draconian HIV transmission and exposure statute. LGBTQI Rights
Protesting Haitian refugees being held at GuantánamoCCR represents Professor Steven Salaita (R) in a case challenging his termination in violation of the First Amendment
CCR, SMUG clients and allies packed the courthouse in Springfield, MA, at oral arguments in Scott Lively’s motion to dismiss our case against him331994
Helen Todd v. Sintong PanjaitanHeld Indonesian military official responsible for massacre in East Timor.1994Paul v. AvrilWon $41 million judgment against Haitian military dictator responsible for torturing political dissidents.1994Lebron v. AmtrakWon Supreme Court decision that struck down federal restriction of political artwork in New York’s Penn Station.Accountability for U.S. Torture: Canada
Canadian Centre for International Justice (CCIJ)
Accountability for U.S. Torture: France
European Center for Constitutional and Human Rights (ECCHR)
Accountability for U.S. Torture: Germany
European Center for Constitutional and Human Rights (ECCHR)
Accountability for U.S. Torture: Spain
European Center for Constitutional and Human Rights (ECCHR); Gonzalo Boye of Boye-Elbal y Asociados
Adhikari v. Daoud & Partners, KBR, et al. 
(Amicus)EarthRights International
Advocacy before the UN Treaty Bodies 
and Special ProceduresUS Human Rights Network, National Economic and Social Rights Initiative, American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), New York Civil Liberties Union (NYCLU), Malcolm X Grassroots Movement
Al Qahtani v. Obama / CCR v. DoD, et al. 
(al Qahtani FOIA)Ramzi Kassem; Sandra Babcock of Center for International Human Rights at Northwestern University School of Law; Lawrence Lustberg and Joseph A. Pace of Gibbons P .C.
Al Shimari v. CACI, et al.
Jeena Shah of Constitutional & Internation-al Human Rights Clinics at Rutgers School of Law-Newark; Robert P . LoBue, Peter Nelson, and Matthew Funk of Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler LLP; Mohammed Alomari; Shereef Akeel of Akeel &  
Valentine, PLC; John Zwerling of the Law Offices of John Kenneth Zwerling, P .C.Al-Bihani v. ObamaNational Organization for Defending Rights and Freedoms (HOOD)
Al-Majalah Freedom of Information Act 
RequestHina Shamsi of the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) National Security Project
Ameziane v. Obama / Ameziane v. 
United States / Ameziane FOIAAndrew J. Brouwer of Refugee Law Office; Sophie Weller; Jennifer Oscroft of Cornerstone Barristers; Francisco Quintana and Charles Abbott of Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL)
Animal Legal Defense Fund, et al. v. 
Herbert, et al. (Amicus)R. Shane Johnson of R. Shane Johnson, PLLC
Animal Legal Defense Fund, et al. v. 
Otter, et al. (Amicus)Michael Bartlett of Nevin, Benjamin, McKay & Bartlett, LLP
Aref, et al. v. Lynch, et al.
Gregory Silbert, Eileen Citron, John Gerba, Lara Trager, and Nathaniel West of Weil, Gotshal & Manges LLP; Kenneth A. Kreuscher
Ashker v. Governor of California
Jules Lobel; Weil, Gotshal & Manges LLP; Law Offices of Charles Carbone; Legal Services For Prisoners With Children; California Prison Focus; Siegel & Yee; Ellenberg & Hull; Bremer Law Group PLLC; Samuel R. Miller; Eva DeLair
Barhoumi v. Obama
Maj. Justin Swick (USAF) of Military Commissions Defense Organization; Richard Reiter; Jared KneitelBigwood v. Department of DefenseBarbara Moses of Civil Rights and Constitutional Litigation Clinic at Seton Hall University School of Law’s Center for Social Justice; Zachary Wolfe of the George Washington University
Brooklyn College Student Disciplinary 
ProcessRadhika Sainath of Palestine Legal; Alan Levine
Celikgogus v. Rumsfeld / Allaithi v. 
RumsfeldRussell P . Cohen, Jason Cabot, Emmanuel Fua, Kayvan Ghaffari, and Cathy Shuong of Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP
Color of Change v. FBI, DOJ & DHS
Color of Change
Davis, et al. v. Cox, et al.
Bruce Johnson and Brooke Howlett of Davis Wright Tremaine LLP; Barbara Harvey; Steven Goldberg
Davliatov v. Obama
Hinshaw & Culbertson LLP; Reed Smith LLP
Detention Watch Network v. Immigration 
Customs and Enforcement and Department of Homeland SecurityJenny-Brooke Condon of Seton Hall University School of Law’s Center for Social Justice; Detention Watch Network
Doe v. Cisco Systems, Inc. (Amicus)
EarthRights International
Fahad Hashmi
Jeanne Theoharis of Brooklyn College; Sally Eberhardt of Theaters Against War; No Separate Justice
Partners in Litigation
Penn Station circa 1994CCR 50 Years Fighting for Justice34Fahd Ghazy v. Obama
HOOD; New Media Advocacy Project; Witness Against Torture; Aja Monet; Saul Williams
Floyd, et al. v. City of New York, et al.
Jonathan Moore and Joshua Moskovitz of Beldock Levine & Hoffman LLP; Jenn Rolnick Borchetta of DEMOS; Communities United for Police Reform (CPR); Eric Hellerman, Gretchen Hoff Varner, Philip Irwin, Bruce Corey and Theresa Lin of Covington & Burling LLP
Georges v. UN (Amicus)
William Aceves of California Western School of Law; Sara Dávila-Ruhak of John Marshall Law School; Institute for Justice & Democracy in Haiti
GTMO IACHR General Precautionary 
MeasuresFrancisco Quintana and Charles Abbott of Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL)
Guantánamo Partners
Stephen Vladeck; Eugene Fidell; Eric Freedman; Jenifer Cowan of Debevoise and Plimpton; Ramzi Kassem of CUNY Law School; Office of the Federal Public Defender, District of Oregon; Military Commissions Defense Organization; David Remes; Jenner & Block LLP; Covington & Burling LLP; Debevoise & Plimpton LLP; Robert Kirsch; Sabin Willett; Katherine Porterfield; Ramzi Kassem; Creating Law Enforcement Accountability and Responsibility; Martha Rayner; Witness Against Torture; Amnesty International USA; Constitution Project; American Civil Liberties Union; National Coalition to Protect Civil Freedoms; HOODGulino v. The Board of Education of the City of New York and the New York State Education DepartmentRachel Stevens, Anthony Gill, Lane Earnest, Kate Green, Joshua Kane, and Valerie Ruppert of DLA Piper; Josh Sohn, Shauneida Navarrete, Robert Mantel, Mark Lee, Joe Parilla, and Elizabeth Wanunu of Watson Farley & Williams LLP; Joel Hellman; Samuel R. Miller
Hassan v. City of New York
Glenn Katon, Farhana Khera, Adil Haq, and Naheed Qureshi of Muslim Advocates; Lawrence Lustberg, Portia Pedro, and Joseph A. Pace of Gibbons, P .C.; Ravinder S. Bhalla of Florio, Perrucci, Steinhardt & Fader, LLC
Hernández v. Mesa (Amicus)
Brent M. Rosenthal of Rosenthal Weiner LLP
Houser v. Pritzker
Adam T. Klein, Lewis M. Steel, Ossai Miazad, Sally Abrahamsson, and Deirdre Aaron of Outten & Golden LLP; Ray P . McClain of Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights Under Law; Judith Whiting of Community Service Society; Robert T. Coulter of Indian Law Resource Center; Sharon Dietrich of Community Legal Services, Inc.; Jackson Chin of LatinoJustice PRLDEF; Samuel R. Miller
Ibrahim v. Department of Homeland 
Security (Amicus)ACLU of Southern California; Chet A. Kronenberg and JoAnne S. Jennings of Simpson Thacher & Bartlett LLP
Immigrant Defense Project, et al. v. 
Immigration Customs and Enforcement, et al.Immigrant Defense Project; Hispanic Interest Coalition of AlabamaIn re South African Apartheid Litigation (Amicus)EarthRights International
Jailhouse Lawyers Handbook
National Lawyers Guild
Khan v. Obama / Khan v. Gates / United 
States v. KhanKatya Jestin and Natalie Orpett of Jenner & Block LLP; LTC Jon Jackson and LT Tia Suplizio of Military Commissions Defense Organization; Anna Gallagher of Maggio + Kattar, P .C.; Sameer Khosa of Axis Law Chambers (Pakistan)
Mamani, et al. v. Sánchez de Lozada / 
Mamani, et al. v. Sánchez BerzaínJudith Chomsky; Beth Stephens; Steven Schulman, Edward Woods, Jonathan Slowik, and Mariya Hutson of Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP; Susan Farbstein, Thomas Becker, and Tyler Giannini of the International Human Rights Clinic at Harvard Law School; Jeremy Bollinger of Moss Bollinger LLP; Claret Vargas of the Center for Law, Justice and Society (Dejusticia); David Rudovsky of Kairys, Rudovsky, Messing & Feinberg, LLP; Paul Hoffman of Schonbrun, Seplow, Harris and Hoffman LLP; Ira Kurzban and Celso Perez of Kurzban, Kurzban, Weinger & Tetzoli
Mohammed Al Hamiri v. Obama
Jeff Butler of Clifford Chance LLP; Witness Against Torture; HOOD
Mohammed Kamin: Periodic Review 
Board ProceedingsPaul Rashkind of the Federal Public Defender of the Southern District of Florida; Maj. Reyes Flores, Theresa Champ, Clay West, and Rich Federico of Military Commissions Defense Organization
1995
Xuncax v. Gramajo; Ortiz v. GramajoHeld Guatemalan Minister of Defense responsible for torture, assault and false imprisonment. 1995StreetWatch v. National Railroad Passenger Corp.Won an injunction in federal court preventing Amtrak police from evicting or arresting those they suspected of being homeless where no criminal behavior was suspected.1998Salas v. United StatesRequired the U.S. to respond to an international tribunal for the first time with respect to allegations by ordinary citizens of gross human rights violations committed during U.S. invasion of Panama.
Partners in Litigation
Guatemalan Defense Minister Hector  
Gramajo, served with the lawsuit351998
Finley v. NEAChallenged the decency provision in government grants to artists; lost in an 8-1 Supreme Court decision.
1999Reno v. American-Arab Anti-Discrimination CommitteeChallenged selective enforcement of immigration laws in defense of Palestinian activists singled out for deportation because of their political beliefs.Partners in Litigation
Moore v. Texas (Amicus)
National Religious Campaign Against Torture; Reprieve; Eric L. Lewis, Jeffrey D. Robinson, and Esther Yong of Lewis Baach PLLC
Munoz Santos v. Thomas (Amicus)
Jennifer Pasquarella of American Civil Liberties Union Foundation of Southern California; Steven M. Watt of the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) Human Rights Program; Melissa Hooper of Human Rights First
New York BDS Executive Order FOIL
Dima Khalidi, Radhika Sanaith, and Rahul Saksena of Palestine Legal; Jewish Voice for Peace
Palestine Legal
Dima Khalidi, Liz Jackson, Radhika Sainath, Rahul Saksena, and Angela Campion of Palestine Legal; National Lawyers Guild; Jewish Voice for Peace; Institute for Middle East Understanding
Phillips, et al. v. Snyder, et al.
John Philo, Anthony Paris, and Stephanie Vaught of the Sugar Law Center; Bill Good-man and Julie Hurwitz of Goodman & Hur-witz, P .C.; Herbert Sanders of The Sanders Law Firm; Keith Flynn of Miller Cohen PLC; Cynthia Heenan and Alec Gibbs of Constitutional Litigation Associates; Mark P . Fancher, Michael J. Steinberg and Kary L. Moss of the ACLU Fund of Michigan
Right to Heal
Jeena Shah of Constitutional & International Human Rights Clinics at Rutgers School of Law-Newark; Federation of Workers Councils and Unions in Iraq; Iraq Veterans Against the War; Organization of Women’s Freedom in Iraq; Civilian Soldier Alliance; War Resisters League; MADRE; PAX; International Coalition to Ban Uranium WeaponsSalaita v. Kennedy, et al.Anand Swaminathan, Gretchen Helfrich, Steven Art, Jon Loevy and Art Loevy of Loevy & Loevy; Jonathan Romberg of Seton Hall University School of Law’s Center for Social Justice
Sexual Minorities Uganda v. Scott Lively
Jeena Shah of Constitutional & International Human Rights Clinics at Rutgers School of Law-Newark; Judith Chomsky; Mark Sullivan, Josh Colangelo-Bryan, Kaleb McNeely, and Dan Beebe of Dorsey & Whitney LLP; Luke Ryan of the Law Offices of Sasson Turnbull Ryan and Hoose; Christopher Betke of Coughlin-Betke, LLP
SNAP v. the Pope, et al.
Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests (SNAP); Bishop Accountability
State of Missouri v. Michael L. Johnson 
(Amicus)Center for HIV Law & Policy; ACLU of Missouri Foundation; Gibbons P .C.
Tanvir v. Lynch (formerly Tanvir v. 
Holder)Ramzi Kassem and Diala Shamas of Creating Law Enforcement Accountability and Responsibility of CUNY School of Law; Jennifer R. Cowan, Bob Shwartz, Rushmi Bhaskaran, Erica M. Davila, Christopher S. Ford, Erol Gulay, Rebecca Hekman, and Brandon H. Johnson of Debevoise & Plimpton
Tariq Ba Odah v. Obama
Sondra Crosby of the Boston University Schools of Medicine and Public Health; Jess Ghannam of University of California, San Francisco School of Medicine; Rami Bailony of the Enara Health Group; Witness Against Torture; Scott Roehm of the Constitution Project; David Rhode of Reuters; HOODTurkmen v. AshcroftNancy Kestenbaum, Jennifer Robbins, Joanne Sum-Ping, Matthew Q. Verdin, and David Zionts of Covington & Burling LLP; Michael Winger
U.S. v. Ganias (Amicus)
Alan R. Friedman, Samantha V . Ettari, and Noah Hertz-Bunzl of Kramer Levin Naftalis & Frankel LLP
U.S. v. Rasmea Odeh (Amicus)
International Rehabilitation Council for Torture Victims; Bellevue/NYU Program For Survivors of Torture; Public Committee Against Torture In Israel (PCATI); REDRESS; World Organization Against Torture
United States of America and Vulcan 
Society, Inc. v. City of New YorkRichard Levy, Dana Lossia, Robert Stroup, and Rebekah Cook-Mack of Levy Ratner, P .C.; Judy Scolnick of Scott + Scott LLP; The Vulcan Society
United States v. Johnson
Michael Deutsch of People’s Law Office; Lillian McCartin; Geoffrey Meyer of Federal Defender Program in Chicago
Zahir Hamdoun: Periodic Review Board 
(PRB) ProceedingsJohn Chandler
Karen Finley at a CCR benefitCCR 50 Years Fighting for Justice361999
Goosby v. Town of HempsteadContested Hempstead, NY’s at-large voting system, which was racially discriminatory; forced a transformation of the voting system.1999Reno v. American-Arab Anti-Discrimination CommitteeChallenged selective enforcement of immigration laws in defense of Palestinian activists singled out for deportation because of their political beliefs.
CCR’s annual President’s Reception celebrates our 
generous benefactors and allies who are indispensable partners in the fight for social justice. At this year’s President’s Reception, we were honored to present the 2016 CCR Founders’ Award to Jules Lobel. A distinguished litigator, legal scholar, author and CCR President, Jules has been a cooperating attorney at the Center for 20 years and served on the Board for three decades. Thank you!
Attorneys Randolph Scott-McLaughlin (in 
sunglasses) and Fred Brewington with their clients2016 President’s Reception371999
Campaign To Save Our Hospitals v. GiulianiWon case in the New York State Court of Appeals to prevent the takeover of public hospitals in New York City by for-profit private companies. 2000Doe v. KaradzicWon a $4.5 billion judgment against Bosnian-Serb leader for genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity. The 1995 Second Circuit decision in this case recognized that rape and sexual violence constitute torture
 and genocide.
Radovan KaradzicCCR 50 Years Fighting for Justice382001
Kiareldeen v. RenoChallenged the use of secret evidence in deportation trials.2003Daniels v. City of  New YorkChallenged racial profiling and forced the notorious NYPD Street Crime Unit to disband and established ongoing monitoring by CCR and the courts. 
Thelma Newman Planned Giving Society
We are pleased to thank our supporters who have made a lasting statement about their social justice values by including 
CCR in their estate plans. Thelma Newman was CCR co-founder Morty Stavis’ legal assistant at the United Electrical Workers. She was not a wealthy woman, but she gave an estate of $150,000 to further the work of CCR. If you have included CCR in your estate plan or have questions about making a bequest, endowment, charitable gift annuity, or other planned gift, please contact Theda Jackson-Mau at tjackson-mau@ccrjustice.org or 212.614.6448. Members of the Thelma Newman Planned Giving Society form the bedrock of our endowment. Your legacy ensures that CCR will continue the fight for justice and we are so grateful. Thank you!
Anonymous (3)
Ethel G. AckleySalah and  
Catherine Al-Askari
Elizabeth J. AlexanderVicki A. AlexanderEvelyn AlloyThomas and  
Donna Ambrogi
Barbra ApfelbaumCarol AscherDorothy AspinwallRuth BardachPhil BereanoGene C. BernardiDavid and Ellen BlockBelinda Lawrence BreeseFrederick and Betty BriehlMary CarrMatthew CooperPrudence CrowtherMargaret R. de RiveraShulamit DecktorTheresa Del PozzoMarial Delo 
†
Jeffrey M. DickemannGeorge and Minna DoskowCarol F. DriskoWendy J. DwyerPaul EastonMargaret L. EberbachDonald and Martha Farley 
†
Carl H. FeldmanGeorge and Mary FergerCurt FirestoneSolomon FisherCecily FoxPeter FrumkinMichele S. Garden and  
Lawrence Pruski
Mary J. GeissmanNona GlazerHarriet S. Goldberg and 
Gregory C. Johnson
Frances GoldinEd Goldman and  
Judith Riven
Jessea GreenmanMary Constance HallPeter HanauerBettie C. HannanEllen and Ellis Harris 
†
Chandra HauptmanMarjorie HeinsCaitlin K. HenryMartin and Mildred HirdTimothy A. HolmesSumi HoshikoMartin and  
Carolyn Karcher
Barbara KarwhiteJulie Kay and Tom FergusRichard Aronson and  
Joyce Kirschner
Fayette F. KrauseRobert E. LaneJanet L. LarsonSusan LeeJoan LewisDonald LipmansonEvelyn C. Lundstrom 
†
Zella LuriaRic MacDowellSusan E. ManuelGrant MarcusPriscilla J. McMillanJoyce MillerEva K. Millette CoombsJoseph MortonEva S. MoseleyJames OdlingSevero M. Ornstein and 
Laura Gould
Edward H. PageLovel P. PerkinsRachel PorterJeanne Audrey PowersDolores M. PriemAnn E. ReinhartDavid G. RichPamela A. RogersAlex J. and  
Carole RosenbergMarie Henderson RothmanJeremy RyePat R. SaxMichael A. SchlosserAnn ShapiroAntonia Shouse SalpeterRobert M. SiegelLinda K. SleffelRosalie K. StahlMargot SteigmanBarbara StewartMary B. StraussNancy and Bill StrongClio TaraziGlen C. ThamertEthel TobachMari VlastosFlorence WagnerDiana Dunn WalkerJonas WaxmanPeter WeissHenry WernerBarbara WestGinia Davis WexlerJohn H. WilsonEllen YaroshefskyEmerald YoungRichard H. Yurman
Ron Daniels and Susan Sarandon protesting 
the police murder of Amadou DialloFormer U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno512011
Murillo v. Micheletti Challenged the extrajudicial killing, crimes against humanity of murder and persecution, wrongful death and other gross human rights violations that occurred in Honduras under the authority and/or direction of Roberto Micheletti Baín.2011Goodman, et al. v. St. Paul, et al. Successfully challenged the targeting by law enforcement of journalists during the 2008 Republican National Convention, the unlawful arrests of the journalists, and the use of excessive force.2012Salah v. U.S. Department of TreasurySuccessfully challenged a U.S. citizen’s designation as a “Specially Designated Terrorist,” which was imposed without notice or an opportunity to be heard.
Financial Report  July 1, 2015–June 30, 2016 
n Grants and Contributions  $7,394,927
n Court A
wards and Attorney Fees  $2,331,863
n Investment Income  $80,460
n Other Income  $34,021
Government and Corporate Dona
tions  $0*
Other Income = Miscellaneous, Publications Income,  
and Speaker Feesn Program Services (Litigation and Advocacy)  
 Litigation  
  $3,953,231
 Advocacy  
  $1,715,058
n Supporting Ser
vices (Administration and Fundraising)
 Administration & General  
 $814,765
 Fundraising  
  $936,586Total Revenue, Gains 
and Other Support 
$9,841,271Total Expenses
$7,419,640
Program Services  $5 ,668,289
Supporting Services  $1,
751,351
Total Expenses  $7
,419,640Net Assets as of June 30, 2015  $6 ,907,083
Change in Net Assets  $2
,129,393
Net Assets as of June 30, 2016  $9
,036,476  Exp EnsEs  nET AssETs
CCR is a nonprofit charity that relies on individual and foundation support. 
Your dedication and generosity is indispensable in the fight for justice. Thank you!*
CCR Legal Director Baher Azmy 
with Amy GoodmanCCR 50 Years Fighting for Justice522013
National Day Laborer Organizing Network (NDLON) v. U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement Agency (ICE)Forced the U.S. government to release documents about the origins and implementation of the controversial Secure Communities (SCOMM) deportation and fingerprinting program. 
2012Al-Quraishi, et al. v. Nakhla  and L-3 ServicesA federal lawsuit against U.S.-based private contractor for their role in torture and other war crimes at Abu Ghraib and other prisons in Iraq.Board of Directors*
Katherine Franke, Chair
Katherine AceyLumumba Akinwole-BandeleLaila Al-ArianCatherine Albisa, Vice ChairHarry AnduzeRadhika Balakrishnan, TreasurerAjamu BarakaChandra Bhatnagar Judith ButlerElizabeth CastelliRosemary R. CorbettJean EntineSherry FrumkinLeila HessiniJulie F. Kay, SecretaryNsombi LambrightJules Lobel, PresidentGay J. McDougall
* July 1, 2015 - June 30, 2016
Management Team
Vincent Warren, Executive DirectorBaher Azmy, Legal Director Dorothee Benz, Communications Director Kevi Brannelly, Development Director Carolyn Chambers, Associate Executive DirectorAdministrative Staff
Amnah Almukhtar, IT and Administrative AssociateGregory Butterfield, Administrative ManagerOrlando Gudino, IT ManagerRue Hogarth, Part-Time Administrative AssistantLisa Levy, Human Resource Systems and Special Projects ManagerChase Quinn, Culture and Programs Associate – Executive Office Jeffrey Weinrich, Finance DirectorAlberto White, Office Manager
Communications
Lauren Gazzola, Communications Associate for Publications Jesse Harold, Web Communications and Multimedia ManagerJen Nessel, Communications CoordinatorCamilo Ramirez, Communications Associate for Social Media 
Development
Pam Bradshaw Fujii, Grant WriterDoug Edelson, Foundation Relations Officer (as of June 14, 2016)Kevin Gay, Database and Online Giving ManagerEmily Harting, Associate Director of Development, Foundations 
(through January 8, 2016)
Theda Jackson-Mau, Associate Director of Development Natalie Kerby, Temporary Grant WriterJosé Monzon, Development AssociateJeremy Rye, Major Gifts Officer CCR Board and Staff
Consultants
Riptide Communications, Communications and MediaKim Gerstman, Fundraising and DevelopmentElsa Rios and Joyce Klemperer of Strategies for Social Change,  
Strategic Planning and Organizational Development
Simone P. Joyaux, ACFRE, Adv Dip, Joyaux Associates and Tom 
Ahern, Ahern Communications
Pablo Alvarado of NDLON532013
Aguilar, et al. v. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), et al. Established new national policies governing the conduct of immigration agents during raids.2013Blum v. HolderChallenged the Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act (AETA) on behalf of five long-time animal rights activists whose speech and other activism had been chilled out of fear that they could be prosecuted as terrorists.Legal and Advocacy Department 
Alexis Agathocleous, Senior Staff Attorney;  
Deputy Legal Director
Maria LaHood, Senior Staff Attorney;  
Deputy Legal Director
Darius Charney, Senior Staff Attorney
Claire Dailey, Legal WorkerJ. Wells Dixon, Senior Staff AttorneyOmar Farah, Staff AttorneyKatherine Gallagher, Senior Staff AttorneyIan Head, Legal WorkerAliya Hussain, Advocacy Program Manager Shayana Kadidal, Senior Managing AttorneyPardiss Kebriaei, Senior Staff AttorneyRachel Meeropol, Senior Staff Attorney;  
Associate Director of Legal Training and Education
Zachery Morris, Bertha Justice Institute Fellow Ibraham Qatabi, Legal WorkerMeejin Richart, Advocacy and Events Associates Somalia Samuel, Bertha Justice Institute FellowGhita Schwarz, Senior Staff AttorneyPurvi Shah, Bertha Justice Institute Director Omar Shakir, Bertha Justice Institute Fellow Pamela Spees, Senior Staff AttorneyLeah Todd, Legal Worker and Legal Program AssociateAzure Wheeler, Temporary AttorneyAn-Tuan Williams, Bertha Justice Institute  
Program Associate
Nahal Zamani, Advocacy Program Manager
Pro Bono Services
Irene Steiner, Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & FeldJean-Luc Adrien
Franklin AlvarezJordan CohenJohn CusickJoseph Falcon-FreemanKelsey FeehanKate ForrestWyatt GjullinSayra GordilloWesley LaineStephanie LlanesOscar LondoñoRodline LouijeuneZachary ManfrediJackelyn MarianoKhyrstyn McGarryRuhan NagraShahrzad NoorbaloochiMark PhillipsThomas PowerStephanie RosendorfAya TasakiRhidaya TrivediRazeen Zaman
2015-16 Ella Bakers
Interns
Eunice BautistaLila CarpenterMorgane GarnierAmanda KoonsTraci KrasneBianca LoraBrie McLemoreLeila NashashibiAndrew NellisMeredith OsbornePooja PatelDaniel PeñaCharlotte PopeZoe PrattMarc RamirezSarah SacherShabnam SanliLinnea SchurigJohn Washington
Volunteers
Barbra ApfelbaumJacob BindmanMary J GeissmanJudy LuoMerry E. NeisnerMagaly PenaKumar RaoBettina ScholdanDaniel SongMargaret TobinCarole TravisDena WeissAzure Wheeler
2013
CCR v. Chief Judge LindFought to grant access to the trial evidence, including trial transcripts, in the court-martial of WikiLeaks leaker PFC Chelsea Manning; and challenged that substantive legal matters—including a pretrial publicity order—were argued and decided in secret.
Long-time animal rights activists 
and plaintiffs in BlumCCR 50 Years Fighting for Justice542014
Al-Aulaqi v. PanettaChallenged the drone killings by the United States of three U.S. citizens, including a 16-year-old, in Yemen.2013Floyd, et al. v. City of New York, et al.Landmark ruling found the New York City Police Department liable for a pattern and practice of racial profiling and unconstitutional stop-and-frisk practices. 
Abdulrahman Al-Aulaqi (right)CCR Executive Director Vince Warren, Floyd 
client Nicholas Peart and Mayor Bill de Blasio
552015
Ashker v. Governor of CaliforniaEnded indeterminate solitary confinement in the state of California, dramatically reducing the number of people in isolation.2015Hicks v. United StatesOverturned the first Military Commissions conviction of former Guantánamo detainee David Hicks who pled guilty to providing material support for terrorism in 2007 because he was tortured and desperate to be free from Guantánamo.
David Hicks
56CCR 50 Years  Fighting  for Justice
2016
Ba Odah v. ObamaHabeas corpus petition on behalf of Tariq Ba Odah, a Yemeni man who was detained at Guantánamo without charge from 2002-2016.2016Ghazy v. BushHabeas corpus petition on behalf of Fahd Ghazy, a Yemeni man who was detained at Guantánamo without charge from 2002-2016.Make an online gift at www.
CCRjustice.org/Donate. It’s fast, 
easy and secure, and your gift will go 
to work right away. Online gifts are a greener way to give –and reduce mailing expenses and supplies so more of your gift goes to the programs you care about. 
Consider making your gift 
recurring. These gifts provide CCR 
with a reliable, steady source of income 
support and are a “greener” way to give by reducing mailing expenses and supplies making it possible for us to plan better and take on more cases. Sign up online for a monthly or quarterly recurring gift at our website: www.CCRjustice.org/Donate. 
Include CCR in your will. Including 
CCR as a beneficiary in your will is an excellent way to make a statement about the values you held during your lifetime. You may choose to make a bequest to CCR of a specific dollar amount or for  a percentage of your estate. Call us at  212-614-6448 for more information.Make CCR your birthday gift! Ask 
friends and family to make gifts to CCR in your honor as your holiday/ birthday/anniversary/no-reason-at-all gift OR make gifts to CCR in honor of the folks on your shopping list. These gifts will pay tribute to our shared social justice values, while fueling CCR’s efforts to restore the Constitution and protect and extend human rights. 
Donate stock. If you sell depreciated 
stock and give the proceeds to CCR, you may be able to claim the loss on your taxes, as well as the charitable deduction. If you donate appreciated securities to CCR, you may avoid capital gains taxes and receive a charitable deduction. Please contact CCR at 212-614-6489 for stock transfer instructions. 
Host a house party to fundraise for 
CCR and to introduce friends and allies to CCR’s work. Attend a local event if CCR is in your neighborhood—and bring a friend! If you are on our email list you will receive invitations. Public events are listed on our calendar: www.CCRjustice.org/calendar.Ways to Support CCR
Stay up-to-date and share our news!  Follow @theCCR on Twitter and  
“Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook and bookmark CCR’s website: www.CCRjustice.org. Forward our newsletters and action alerts to your friends.
Fahd GhazyTariq Ba OdahThank you for standing with us on 
the front lines for social justice!
www.CCRjustice.org
The Center for Constitutional Rights is a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization. On request, a copy of CCR’s latest financial report may be obtained from us or from the Office of the Attorney 
General of the State of New York, Charities Bureau, 120 Broadway, New York, NY 10271.Research and Writing: Pam Bradshaw Fujii • Interior design: Nicholas Coster, nicholas@modino.com. 
Photo credits:  •p.4: Heidi Solander•p.8: (top) Steve Pavey•p.10: (top) Debi Cornwall •p.9: John Ashcroft: Gage Skidmore• p12: NYPD: Samantha Grace Lewis, Supreme Court: 
Daderot•p.14: NYC Pride: Andrew Hinderaker•p.16: Benedict Evans•p.17: Dorret via imagur•p.18: Chris Bartlett•p:20: Joe Piette•p.21: Jesse Harold • p.24-25, top courtesy of http://www.uandilabs.com/•p.26: GTMO: left, WitnessAgainstTorture•p. 27: GTMO left Stephen Melkisethian•p.30: NYPD on Trial: Kevin Gay•p.31: Solitary: Steve Rhodes•p.32: 
Salaita: Mike FergusonAAUP•p.33: Floyd: Pam Bradshaw Fujii•p.36-37: President’s Reception: Heidi Solander•p.46: Barre family, courtesy of Reprieve•p.48: 
Maher Arar: Bud 
Shultz• p.52: NDLON, Sarah Sturges for Yanick Salazar Photography•p.55: David Hicks: Adam Thomas (devdsp@flickr)
Collage includes work by: Jim Block, Nicholas Coster, Pam Bradshaw Fujii , Kevin Gay, Robin Martin Ginsburg, Douglas Gorenstein, Heidi Solander, Sarah Sturges for Yanick Salazar 
Photography, Yanick Salazar, Pamela Stamoulis. Thank you.
The Center for Constitutional Rights has been a part of virtually every 
movement for civil and human rights over the last five decades. Through litigation, public education, and advocacy, we work to transform the key social, cultural, legal, economic, and political systems that support and maintain institutional racism, patriarchy, oppressive economic structures, and abusive state power. The human impact of our work—the lives saved, the lives changed—is extraordinary and heartening. CCR gives voice to the people and ideas that make positive change. In and outside the courtroom, we fight for the most vulnerable while educating and mobilizing national and international citizens to address serious and unconscionable challenges.
Thank you for your support! Together, we are fighting the power of oppressive 
systems and building the power of movements and people. As we embark on the next 50 years, we are grateful to have you by our side. 
