 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VICTIMS OF TRAFFICKING  TORTURE & OTHER SERIOUS CRIMES
As of January 1, 2018, individuals who intend to file or have filed a U -Visa, T -Visa, and/or an  
Asylum application qualify for state funded public benefits:  
 
   
 
Medical Assistance  
(Med icaid/Medicare)  A state funded food program similar 
to SNAP/Food stamps  TANF Cash 
Assi stance  
   
   
The program through IL Department of Human Services (IL DHS) is referred to as Victims of  
Trafficking, Torture and Other Serious Crimes (VTTC).  
 
 In order  to apply, you must be:   
Within benefit specific income  Preparing to file or have filed one  
requirements  of the above visa applications  
9 years or older  A resident of Illinois    
BENEFIT SPECIFIC INCOME REQUIREMENTS   
 
Each type of public benefit has different requirements based on how much you earn, your age, 
disabilities, size of household, etc. The requirements include:  
 
Food Assistance: Gross Income Limit is 165% FPL & 200% FPL for those Age 60 or older 
OR Disabled  
Cash Assistance: Gross Income Lim it is 50% of FPL  
 
Medical Assistance: Gross Income Limit is 100% of FPL and must not be eligible to receive any 
other  medical program  
 
A household for an individual applying for the State Food Program includes: the primary applicant/ 
survivor, children und er 22 years old who live with the applicant/survivor, spouse/parent of children if 
they live in the household. Everyone else living with you who buys food separately is not part of your 
household.  
 
A household for an individual applying for TANF Cash and/o r Medicaid includes: the primary 
applicant/survivor, spouse of primary applicant/survivor, and applicant/survivor’s children under 19 
years old. Everyone else in the household must apply separately.  HOW TO APPLY  
  
1. Apply online via https://abe.illinois.gov . 
2. Upon completion of the application, upload the required documents needed to 
supplement the application. If you don’t have these readily available, you can submit 
after submission.  
a. Government issued Photo Governmen t Issued Photo ID (a passport is acceptable)  
b. Proof of income for all “earners” in household (paystubs, letter from your 
employer, W -2, taxes)  
c. Proof of residency (photo ID, lease, official mail, car insurance);  
d. Social Security numbers for all members of hou sehold who have one;  
e. Birth certificates for all members who have one;  
f. Sworn Statement from the client stating that you are eligible and plan to apply;  
g. Sworn statement from a service provider/attorney stating that you are eligible 
because of the visa for wh ich you are applying;  
h. If you’ve already filed, you can submit a receipt of your application.  
 
All VTTC benefits are being processed through the Special Units DHS office.  
 
Special Units will also handle any companion cases associated with the VTTC cases.  Upon 
submitting your application, send an email to DHS.FCS.VTTC@illinois.gov  with the 
application # and indicate that you applied for your client(s) for VTTC benefits. You can send 
supplemental documentation t hen. 
 
a. Sometimes, a local office gets the application before Special Units can pull it from the 
queue. In that event, the local office should accept the application and forward to 
Special Units for processing.    
 
  
PUBLIC CHARGE: VTTC food and medical assi stance are not considered as part of the 
public charge test. People who are applying for and have been granted asylum, a U -
Visa or a T -Visa are exempt from the test for public charge for inadmissability.          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Heartland Alliance | 208 South  LaSalle Street | Suite 1300 | Chicago, IL 60604   
WWW.HEARTLANDALLIANCE.ORG   