 
1  
United States of America: Compliance with the Optional 
Protocol on Convention on the Rights of the Child on the 
involvement of children in armed conflict 
 
Additional information for the Committee on the Rights of the Child 
April 15, 2008 
 
The following information is submitted by  Human Rights Watch to supplement the 
November 2007 submission by the US Campai gn to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers. It 
reflects new information and developments related to the United States and children 
involved in armed conflict between  November 2007 and April 2008.  
 
1) US Legislation Regar ding Child Soldiers:  
 
Criminalization of the recruitment and use of child soldiers:  
On December 19, 2007, the Child Soldier Accountability Act was adopted unanimously by the United States Senate. This legislation would amend the US 
criminal code to make the recruitment or use of children under age 15 a punishable 
crime, whether committed in the US or abroad, and to establish jurisdiction over US citizens or non-nationals present in the United States who commit this crime. 
Persons convicted of the crime could be sentenc ed for up to 20 years in prison, or if 
death results, to a life sentence. The Act also provides that individuals who recruit or use children under 15 as soldiers are inadmissible or deportable under the 
Immigration and Nationality Act.  
 
After its adoption by the Senate, the legislation was referred to the House of Representatives Committee on the Judiciary. On April 8, 2008, the Judiciary Sub-
committee on Crime, Terrorism and Homeland Security held a hearing on the Child 
Soldier Accountability Act, and heard te stimony from NGOs and a former child 
soldier regarding the legislation. Limiting US military assistance  to gover nment s involved  in he use of child  sold iers:   t
                                                     The Child Soldier Preve ntion Act of 2007, wo uld restrict five categories of US military 
assistance (International Military E ducatio n and Training, Foreign Military Financing, 
Foreign Military Sales, Direct Com mercial  Sales, and Exc ess Defense Articles) to 
governments that either  recruit and use child so ldiers in their armed forces, or 
support militias or paramilitary groups that recruit and use  child soldiers in violation 
of the Optional Protoc ol.  
 
The Child Soldiers Prevention Act was adop ted by the US House of Representatives 
on December 5, 2007 as part of a b roader anti-trafficking b ill.  As of Ap ril 15, 2008,  
the bill was still pending in the US Senate. 34 of the 100 members of the US Senate 
have officially co-spons ored the bill. 
 
In December 2007, Con gress adopted an  omnibus spending bill (the foreign 
operations appropriati ons bill) that incorporat ed a one-year provision  denying 
certain forms of US military assistance to  governments identified in the 2007 State 
Department Human Rig hts Reports as using child soldiers or supporting 
paramilitaries or militia s that use c hild so ldier s. Governments ident ified by the 2007 
report that also received US military assi stance included Burundi, Chad, Colombia, 
Congo, Côt e d'Ivoire, Sri Lanka, Su dan and Uganda.  
 
The US State Department’s most recent huma n rights reports, issued in March 2008, 
cited the use and recruitment of child sold iers by government forces or government-
supported groups in eight countries: Afgh anistan, Burma, Chad, DRC, Somalia, Sri 
Lanka, Sudan and Uganda. Accord ing to research by the Center for Defense 
Information, the United States provides military assistance to six of those eight 
countries: Afghanistan, Chad, DRC, Sri Lanka, Sudan and Uganda.1
 
Recomm endati on to th e Comm ittee on the Rights of the Child:  
 
• Welcome the initiative of Congress to  criminalize the recruitment and use of 
children under the age of 15. 
 
1 Center for D efens e Inform ation, US Militar y Assis tance and Govern ments an d Gov ernm ent-Supported Armed Groups usin g 
Child S oldiers 2002-2008 , http://www.cdi.org/PDFs/CS_ MilAssist 08.pdf (a ccessed A pril 14, 200 8).  
 2• Encourage the US government to explicitly support the proposed legislation 
to make the recruitment or use of chil d soldier s a punisha ble crime, w hether 
committed in the US or abroad, and by either US citizens or non-nationals.  
 
2) Prosecution of Guantanamo deta inees appr ehended before age 18:  
 
The United States has charged two Guan tanamo detaine es with alle ged crimes 
committed before age 18.  Omar Khadr, a Canadian national, has been charged with 
murder and  attempted murder in violation of the law of war, conspiracy, providin g 
material support for terrorism, and spying for acts related to an allege d attack 
against US troops in Afghanistan in July 2 002, when Khadr was 15.  The US also has 
charged Mohammad Jawad, an Afghani, fo r causing bodil y harm and attempted 
murder for allegedly throwing a grenade at a US military vehicle when he was eit her 
16 or 17 years old (he claims he wa s 16 at the time he was arrested). 
 
Both Khadr and Jawad have been detained at Guantanamo for over fi ve years. 
Throughout their detent ion, the United States has flouted international juvenile 
justice standards that provide for children to  be treated c onsistent w ith their unique 
vulnerability, capacity for rehabilitation, and lower degree of culpability. The United 
States also seeks to prosecute Khadr and Ja wad before a military tribunal that is not 
equipped t o address juvenile just ice standards as well as other fair trial 
requirements, and in a manner inc onsistent w ith its legal obligations to assist in the 
rehabilitation of forme r alleged chil d soldiers within its j urisdiction.  
 
On February  4, 2008, a military commission  in Guantanamo Bay held a hearing to 
consider whether the United States could proceed in prosecuting O mar Khadr for war 
crimes and other offenses before the co mmission. To date, the judge has not yet 
issued a rul ing. If these proceedings go forw ard, Khadr will become the first person 
in recent years to be tried by a western nation for alleged war crimes committed as a 
child.   
  
Prior to the February 2008 hearing, Khadr’s attorneys filed a motion for dismissal, 
arguing that the Military Commissions Act did no t have jurisdiction over juveniles.  In 
a motion dated January 25, 2008, the US  government responded that under the 
 3Optional Pr otocol, it w as prohibited from using child soldiers, but not from 
prosecuting them. It went further and claimed, “If anything, the Protocol obligate s 
the United States to prosecute Khadr” (e mphasis in original). It argu ed that 
prosecuting Khadr would constitute a “fea sible measure to prevent” and a “legal 
measure ne cessary to prohibit and criminaliz e” acts committed under Article 4 of the 
Optional Pr otocol.2 It al so argued that failing to prosecute Khadr would only 
encourage al Qaeda to continue recruiting  children: “Assuming, arguendo, that al 
Qaeda violated the Protocol by recr uiting and/or using Khadr to conduct terrorist 
activities, dismissing t he charges here would effectively condone tha t alleged 
violation by allowing Khadr to escape all liability for his actions and would further 
incentivize such violations.”3
 
On March 12, 2008 Mohammad Ja wad was arraigned before a Military Commissio n at 
Guantanamo Bay. His attorney has stated that during his five years in detention 
Jawad had only one visit from an Afghanistan delegation and no other contact wi th 
his family. Jawad, who speaks only Pashto, is considered “un-co-operative” by the 
administrat ion at the d etention facility at Guantanamo Bay and is housed in one of 
the more restrictive and high sec urity detentio n camps. It is unclear whether he w ill 
be fit to stand trial, or able to assist in his own defense. 
 
The United States fails to explain how pr osecuting children who were recruited in 
violation of the Optional Protoc ol constitu tes a n effective measure to end such c hild 
recruitment in furtherance of the Optional Protocol.  
 
Questions for th e Uni ted States :  
 
• How many detainees a t Guantanamo were apprehended and detained for 
alleged crimes committed before age 18? 
• What is the average len gth of their detention?  
• How many detainees a t Guantanamo are still under the a ge of 18?  
                                                      
2 United Stat es of Americ a v. O mar Ahmed Kh adr, D2 2 Gov ernm ent’s R espons e to the Defense’s Mot ion for Dism issal due to 
lack of juri sdictio n under the M CA in regard to juvenile crim es of a child soldi er, January 25, 2008, p. 8.  
3 Ibid. p. 9, footnot e 3.  
 4• What steps has the United States taken to implement inter national juvenile 
justice standards for juvenile detainees at Gua ntanamo?  
 
Recommenda tions for t he Co mmitt ee on the Rig hts of the Child:  
 
• Express deep concern over the US’ prolonged detention o f children at 
Guantanamo in violation of international justice justice sta ndards, and  the 
prosecution of former child soldier s before mil itary commissions that do not 
comply with internation al fair trail requirement s.  
• Express deep concern over the US a ssertion that the Optional Protocol 
obligates  the United St ates to prosecute former child soldiers for alleged 
crimes.  
• Recommen d that any former child soldiers charged with criminal offenses be 
detained an d tried in str ict compliance with int ernational juvenile just ice 
standards, with rehabilitation as a primary con sideration.  
 
3) US det ention of c hildren in Iraq: 
 
Human Rights Watch was informed by US officials in January 2008 t hat about 600 
children, all boys and most aged 16 and 17, were being detained by the Multinational 
Forces in Iraq (MNF-I).4 The Department of Defense states t hat these c hildren are 
apprehended for “imperative reasons of secu rity.” They are detained without cha rge, 
and given no access to legal assistance.  
 
Military offi cers conduct reviews of the ch ild’s detention a pproximately 1 week after 
arrest, after  30 days, and after 6 months. US officials have  acknowledged that no 
one with expertise on children is involved in the review process, and that the chil d is 
not allowed to be present at the first two hearings. UN staff are not allowed access to 
detainees. Human Rig hts Watch has no info rmation on whether children are allowed 
family visits.  
 
                                                      
4 Recent m edia rep orts s uggest t hat the cur rent num ber of d etained chi ldren m ay be closer to 500. S ee “ ”Iraqi d etainees 
refusin g to go h ome: US gene ral,” AFP,  March 23,  2008.  
 5The rate at which child ren were detained increased significantly between 2006 and 
2007. In 2006, US military arrested an av erage of 25 children per mont h; in 2007 
they arrested an averag e of 100 per  month. The US military has no policy regarding a 
minimum a ge for arrest, and some ch ildren ha ve been as young as 11 when 
detained.5  
 
According to recent media reports, adult de tainees in US f acilities spend an average 
of 331 days incarcerated before being released.6 Child detainees are reportedly held 
on average for 133 days , and their average age i s 16.7  
 
Children are detained at the US Camp Crop per near Baghdad’s international airport. 
According to US officials, child det ainees are separated from adults, but there ar e no 
real proced ures to sep arate very y oung or par ticularly vul nerable children from other 
child detainees.  
 
In August 2007, the US opened Dar al-Hik mah (House of Wisdom) at Camp Cropper 
with the sta ted intentio n to provide 600 detainees age 11-17 with educ ational 
services pending release or transfer to Iraqi c ustody. In February 2008, only 36 0 of 
the 620 chil d detainees at Camp Cropper reportedly were enrolled in classes at Dar 
al-Hikmah.8 US officials have told Human Right s Watch tha t children w ho were 
excluded fr om the program do not receive any other educa tional services.  
 
Questions for th e Uni ted States :  
 
• Over the past two years, how many children ha ve been det ained by M NF-I? 
How many are currently detained? Of those released, wha t was the 
average len gth of detention? Of thos e currently held, what is the average 
length of time that they have b een held? How many children have been 
                                                      
5 Martin Fletch er, “They have planted bombs and sh ot soldiers – now it is tim e for school,” Th e Times (London), Septe mber 15, 
2007. 
6 “Iraqi d etainees refusin g to go h ome: US gene ral,” AFP,  March 23,  2008.   
7 “From Bomber to Book worm in Ir aq’s Camp Cropper,” AFP, February 13, 2008. 
8 “From Bomber to Book worm in Ir aq’s Ca mp Cropper,” AFP, Fe bruary 13, 2008.  
 6  held for more than 6 months? Also request disaggregated information by 
age.  
• What assistance do children receive during interrogation and reviews?  
• What steps is the US ta king to comply  with international juvenile just ice 
standards, including the principle that children should only be detained 
as a last resort and for the shortest possible le ngth of time ?  
• Why won’t t he US give UNICEF access to child ren in detention?  
• How many children hav e been char ged with a criminal offense? What 
process is followed for such childr en?  
• To whom are children r eleased? What screening is done t o determine 
whether they would be appropriate  guardians for the children? Does the 
availability of an appr oved guardian  affect the decision to release the 
child? What  avenues are there for release if a child does not have any 
known family members that can care for them?  
• How many children are currently partic ipating in the Dar al-Hikmah (H ouse 
of Wisdom) program? W hat are the cr iteria for their participation or 
exclusion from the program? What is the average length of time children 
spend in the program?  
 
Recommenda tions for t he Co mmitt ee on the Rig hts of the Child:  
 
• Express deep concern over the US detention of children in I raq without charge 
and without compliance with internat ional juvenile justic e standards.  
• Recommend that the U nited States develop comprehensiv e policies regarding 
the treatment, rehabilitation and social reintegration of any children 
apprehended by US forces in armed conflict situations, and work with 
relevant NGOs, UN agencies or national authorities to ensure that det ention is 
only used as a last resort, and that children have access to education, 
vocational t raining, and other appr opriate assistance to facilitate their  
successful rehabilitation and social reintegration.   
• Recommen d that in cases where c hildren may  have committed crimin al 
offenses, ensure that c hildren are formally charged before a court, provided 
with legal counsel, and their case s adjudicated promptly and in full 
compliance with intern ational juvenile justice standards. Ensure that children 
 7are not transferred to Iraqi custody if th ere is risk that they  may be subjected 
to torture.  
• Urge the Un ited States t o give UNICEF imme diate and unre stricted access to 
detained children.  
 
4) US S upreme Co urt case regar ding bars to asylum for former  child sold iers:  
 
The US Immigration and Nationality Act prohibits the Secretary of Home land Security 
and the Attorney General from granting asylum to, or withholding removal of, a 
refugee who has “ordered, incited,  assisted, o r otherwise participated in the 
persecution of any pers on on account of ra ce, religion, nationality, membership in  a 
particular s ocial group,  or political opinion.”9   
 
In cases where such ac ts have been committed under thr eat or duress, the US courts 
have issued  conflicting decisions. For ex ample, the Court of Appeals for the Fifth 
Circuit held that coercion is irrelevant  to the application of this “persec utor 
exception,” and that even in sit uations where a n individual  was forced to participate 
or assist in persecution under threat of bo dily violence and death, that individua l is 
ineligible to  obtain asylum or withholding of re moval. In contrast, the Eighth Circuit 
Court of Appeals has held that individuals co erced by threat of death or torture into 
participating in atrocities are eligible for asylum in t he United States . 
 
On March 17, 2008, the US Supreme Court granted certiorari specific ally to deci de 
whether a p erson who was coerced by credible threats of death or torture to assist or 
participate in acts of persecution is  barre d from asylum under US immigration law. 
This case will have great relevance for form er child soldier s seeking a sylum who may 
have been f orced to participate in huma n rights abuses. As noted by the US 
Campaign to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers in its initial submiss ion, in at least two 
cases, the Department of Homeland Secu rity has opposed the asylum claims of 
former child soldiers on “persecuto r” grou nds, even thoug h in both ca ses, the child 
was forcibly recruited.  
 
                                                      
9 U.S. Immig ration and Nati onality A ct, § 208( b)(2)(A).    
 8Should the Supreme Court rule that coerci on cannot be used as a defense to the 
“persecutor” bar, many  former child soldiers w ill be ineligible for asylum in t he 
United States. The Sup reme Court is expected to take up this quest ion in its se ssion 
beginning in October 2008; a ruling is not li kely to be handed down until mid 2009.  
 
Questions for th e Uni ted States :  
• How many individuals have sought asyl um or refugee status in the Unites 
States at least partly on the grounds that they  were compelled to be child 
soldiers? 
• In how man y cases has the United States opposed such cl aims on 
“persecutor” grounds, including taking steps to overturn decisions to grant 
former child soldiers st atus?  
 
Recommenda tion for the Co mmittee on the Rig hts of the Child:  
 
• Express concern that former child s oldiers who have been forced to commit 
abuses under threat or duress may be re fused asylum in t he United S tates.  
• Recommend that the United States governments should take a position that 
the “persec utor” bar to asylum sho uld not apply to individuals who 
committed crimes as child soldier s.  
 9