 
 
1705 DeSales St. NW, 8th Floor, Washington, DC  20036 ● Tel. 20 2.628.0871 ●  
Fax 202.628.1091 ● www.sentencingproject.org  
 
 
The Honorable Jerrold Nadler  
Committee on the Judiciary  
U.S. Hous e of Representatives  
 Washington, DC 2051 5 The Honorable Jim Jordan  
Committee on the Judiciar y 
U.S. House of Representatives  
Washington, DC 2051 5 
July 20 , 2021  
 
RE: Pass the Eliminatin g a Quantifiably Unjust Application of the Law (EQUAL) Act  
 
Dear Chairman Nadler and Ranking Member Jordan,   
 
As the House Judiciary Committee prepares to mark up the Eliminating a Quantifiably Unjust 
Application of the Law (EQUAL) Act tomorrow, I write to express The Sentencing Project’s 
support for this bipartisan sentencing reform bill  that would finally eliminate the federal 
sentencing disparity between crack and powdered cocaine offenses. This issue has a long legacy 
that exemplifies for many Americans the worst extremes of the 50 -year -old War on Drugs and 
the racial injustice associa ted with federal mandatory minimums for drug offenses.  
 
Tomorrow’s markup comes almost 35 years after the passage of the Anti -Drug Abuse Act of 
1986, which imposed the same harsh penalties for one amount of crack cocaine and 100 times 
the same amount of p owder cocaine. At the time of the Anti -Drug Abuse Act’s passage, 
proponents of the law claimed the 100:1 sentencing disparity was necessary due to the 
allegedly “extra addictive” nature of crack. However, scientific research and decades of 
experience now m ake clear that the political hysteria surrounding crack cocaine was not only 
unwarranted but devastatingly harmful for Black communities.    
  
Broad bipartisan consensus regarding the injustice of the 100:1 disparity, fortunately, led 
Congress to approve th e Fair Sentencing Act of 2010 to reduce the disparity to 18:1, and the 
First Step Act of 2018 made this reform retroactive. However, the continued sentencing 
imbalance has maintained harsh mandatory minimums for low -level offending —primarily 
street -level s elling —and done little to improve public safety or curb the use or sale of cocaine in 
the United States.  
 
Meanwhile, the disproportionate sentences for crack cocaine have played a lead role in 
exemplifying racial injustice in our criminal legal system. In  2019, 81% of people convicted of 
crack cocaine offenses were Black, even though white and Latinx people have historically 
accounted for over 66% of crack cocaine users.   
 The EQUAL Act offers an opportunity to create a more proportionate, fair, and equit able 
criminal justice system by entirely eliminating the sentencing disparity between crack and 
powder cocaine, and applying these reforms retroactively. The bill would bring the federal 
justice system more in line with the vast majority of states that do not punish crack and powder 
cocaine differently.   
 
I congratulate the Committee for its work to advance bipartisan sentencing reform bills during 
the 117th Congress. The Sentencing Project urges you to pass the EQUAL Act out of 
committee —without any amendments that would limit its impact —to address widespr ead 
racial disparities in the criminal justice system.  
 
For questions, please contact Kara Gotsch, The Sentencing Project’s Deputy Director, at 
kgotsch@sentencingproject.org or 202 -628-0871, ext. 103.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Amy Fettig  
Executive Director  
