Submitted via Federal eRulemaking Portal  
 
July 15, 2020  
 
Lauren Alder Reid, Assistant Director,  
Office of Policy   
Executiv e Office for Immigration Review   
5107 Leesburg Pike, Suite 1800  
Falls Church, VA 22041  
 
Re: Public Comment Opposing  Proposed Rules  by DHS/USCIS and DOJ/EOIR  on 
Procedures for Asylum  and Withholding of Removal; Credible Fear and Reasonable Fear 
Review . RIN 1125 -AA94 /EOIR , Docket No. 18-0002 . 
 
Dear Ms. Alder Reid : 
 
The thirteen (13)  national torture treatment programs below respectfully submit this comment to 
oppose the  notice of proposed rule making  by the Department of Justice (DOJ) and Department 
of Homeland Security (DHS) on Rules on Procedures for Asylum and Withholding of Removal; 
Credible Fear and Reasonable Fear Review , EOIR  Docket No. 18-0002 , issued  on June 15 , 2020. 
 
The proposed rule will be extremely detrimental to survivors of torture, who comprise a 
shocking percentage of the U.S. refuge e and asylum seeking populat ions. It is yet another step by 
the administration to punish asylum seekers for pursuing  refuge in the United States. Torture 
survivors’ ability to obtain legal relief fairly and efficiently  is key to their mental health and 
wellbeing. This ru le will make it more difficult  for survivors  to obtain  asylum , hinder ing their 
healing and further exposing  them to re -traumatization . Most disturbing ly, this rule will lead to 
the return to danger of many who would merit humanitarian relief in violation of domestic and 
international law.     
 
For the reasons detailed in the comments that follow, the DOJ and DHS  should immediately 
withdraw their current p roposal and dedicate their efforts to advancing policies that safeguard 
individuals fleeing persecution, including torture.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit comments on this proposed rule.  Please do not hesitate 
to contact us with any questions o r for further information.  
 
 
Andrea Carcamo /s/       Scott Roehm /s/  
Andrea Carcamo                                                             Scott Roehm  
Senior Policy Counsel                                                     Washington Office Director  
acarcamo@cvt.org                                           sroehm@cvt.org     
 
 
 
 DETAILED COMMENTS in opposition to proposed r ules and procedures for asylum and 
withholding of removal; credible fear and reasonable fear r eview .  RIN 1125 -AA94 /EOIR , 
Docket No. 18-0002.    
 
The thirteen  undersigned torture t reatment p rograms welcome the opportunity to comment on the 
proposed rules —issued by the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) of the 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and Executive Office of Immigration Review (EOIR) 
of the Department of Justice (DOJ) —on procedures for asylum  and withholding of removal; 
credible fear and reason able fear review , EOIR Docket No. 18 -0002 (“the Proposed Rule,” or 
“the R ule”).  
 
The signatory organizations seek to advance the knowledge, technical capacities and resources 
devoted to the care of torture survivors living in the United States and act collectively to prevent 
torture worldwide.  
  
As experts in the provision of mental h ealth and other rehabilitation services to survivors of 
torture and other trauma, we are intimately familiar with the profound effects that this proposed 
rule will have on our clients, including making the  U.S. asylum pr ocess  overwhelming , and will 
lead to the return of persecuted and tortured individuals to danger .     
 
I. Background  
 
On June 15, 2020 USCI S (DHS ) and EOIR (DOJ) (“the a gencies ”) published jointly the notice 
of Proposed Rulemaking  that is the subject of this comment.  These regulatory changes seek to 
rewrite the laws adopted by Congress giving rise to the most sweeping changes to asylum since 
the 1996 overhaul of the Immigration and Nationality Act  through the  Illegal Immigration 
Reform and Immigration Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) . The Proposed Rule makes drastic 
changes to asylum and other humanitarian protection  procedures designed by Congress to ensure 
that the United States  can efficiently and eff ectively recognize individuals who are  refugees and 
deserve our protection. The proposed changes severely limit the number of individuals who will 
qualify for asylum by narrowing many of the elements within the refugee definition .  These 
changes will re -format asylum laws shaped by decades of wor k and analysis by judges  and other  
experts in the subject matter, many of whom are deeply familiar with the experiences  these 
individuals have  faced  and often meet  in person  in court with asylum seekers  who will meet  
death, violence or torture if removed.          
 
II. This rule is part of a larger scheme  by the administration to end asylum  
 
Through the establishment of policies, agreements, and dubious unilateral changes to well -settled 
asylum law, it is clear that the Trump administration seeks to prevent  individuals —especially, 
but not only, those arriving at our south ern border —from accessing the U.S. asylum process at all, much less actually obtaining asylum. These actions form the backdrop to the proposed rule  
and include the following:   
 
Blanket Ban for asylum seekers at the borders: On March 19, 2020 the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC) issued an order allowing the closure of the U.S. borders using 
COVID -19 as a public health justification.  DHS is currently summarily removing  those seeking 
protection at the border and between ports of entry  without implementing a procedure to 
determine whether they might qualify for humanitarian protection.    
 
Changing asylum immigration law : The attorney general certified to himself several 
immigration court cases and decided them in a way that upends longstanding law. In overruling 
Matter of A -B- and Matter of L -E-A-, the attorney general made it significantly more difficult 
for individuals  from Central America to win their asylum cases, since they largely rely on these 
two cases.  
 
Zero Tolerance leading to Family Separation:  The administration adopted a policy of 
pursuing criminal charges against every individual who crossed the border out side of a port of 
entry, then forcibly separated children from the parents who were subjected to criminal 
proceedings. Family separation was a cruel practice that traumatized both children and parents. It 
will have long lasting consequences for asylum seek ers and for the United States.1 
 
Asylum Ban 1.0:  In November 2018, the president issued a proclamation banning individuals 
who enter the United States between ports of entry from asylum.2 
 
Migrant Protection Protocols:  Established in January 2019, this pol icy forces asylum seekers 
to wait in dangerous Mexican border cities during the pendency of their cases. Besides placing 
asylum seekers in danger, it undermines their ability to obtain assistance of counsel, greatly 
diminishing their ability to win their c ase.3   
 
Asylum Ban 2.0:  In July 2019, the administration disqualified from asylum any individual who 
transited through a third country before arriving at the United States southern border. This 
disqualifies all but Mexican asylum seekers arriving at our s outhern border from asylum.4 
 
                                                           
1 Center for Victims of Torture. Asylum Fact 4. Available at  https://www.cvt.org/AsylumFact4  (last accessed on 
12/30/2019).  
2 https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2018/11/09/2018 -24594/aliens -subject -to-a-bar-on-entry -under -
certain -presidential -proclamations -procedures -for-protection . 
3 Human Rights First. Delivered to Danger: Illegal Remain in Mexico Policy Imperils Asylum Seekers’ Lives and 
Denies Due Process.  Available at  https://www.humanrightsfirst.org/sites/default/files/Delivered -to-Danger -August -
2019%20.pdf  (last accessed on 12/30/2019).  
4 https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2019/07/16/2019 -15246/asylum -eligibility -and-procedural -
modifications  Agreements with other countries:  The Trump administration has forced some countries  that are 
not safe  into entering into “safe third country” agreements —from which people are fleeing 
violence and persecution that these countri es’ governments cannot, or will not, effectively 
address —including El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras.     
 
Work Authorization Restrictions: The administration proposed to establish a fee  for work 
authorizations , and a separate r ule that  has been  finalized doubles the time an asylum seeker 
must wait before qualif ying for a work permit (from 150  days to 365 days) and imposes 
additional restrictions on eligibility. Yet a nother final rule  eliminates entirely the time limit 
previously imposed on USCIS to ad judicate work authorization applications, which implicitly 
authorizes the agency to delay any such adjudication indefinitely.     
 
III. Allowing only a 30 -day comment period does not provide adequate time for  
comprehensive comments.  
 
The Agencies have provided a wholly insufficient 30 -day timeframe to respond to what amounts 
to a complete overhaul of the U.S. asylum system.  Under the Administrative Procedures Act, the 
agencies have a duty: “(1) to ensure that agency regulations are tested via exposure to diverse 
public comment, (2) to ensure fairness to affected parties, and (3) to give affected parties an 
opportunity to develop evidence in the record to support their objections to the rule and thereby 
enhance the quality of judicial review.”5 The Rule is over 160 pages long with more than 60 of 
those pages being the proposed regulations themselves —including dense, technical language and 
sweeping new restrictions that have the power to send the most vulnerable back to their countries 
where they may face persecution, torture, or death. Any one of the sections of these regulations, 
standing alone, would merit 60 days for the public to fully absorb the magnitude of the proposed 
changes, perform research on the existing rule and its interpretation, and respon d thoughtfully. 
Instead, the agencies have allowed a mere 30 days to respond to multiple, unrelated changes to 
the asylum rules, issued in a single, massive  document.  
Under any circumstances, it would be wrong for the government to give such a short time p eriod 
to comment on changes that are this extensive , impactful, and dense , but the c hallenges to 
respond to the Rule  are magnified by the ongoing COVID -19 pandemic.  As individuals working 
on these issues struggle with child -care while working at home, sic k relatives, and the stress of 
the pandemic itself, it  is especially unfair  to only give 30 days to provide comment on a Rule  that 
will have devastating conseq uences for thousands  of individuals.     
For this procedural reason alone, we urge the administration to rescind the Proposed Rule. If it 
wishes to reissue the  Rule , it should grant the public at least 60 days to have adequate time to 
provide comprehensive comments.  Because of the prejudicial 30 -day public comment period, the 
                                                           
5 Capital Area Imm igrants’ Rights Coalition (CAIR) v. Trump , No. 19 -cv-2117, ECF No. 72, 24 -
25 (D.D.C. June 30, 2020) (internal citations omitted).  below comments cannot address every problematic provision.  But silence is not consent: the fact 
that we do not discuss a particular change does not mean we agree with it.  
IV. The rule has a  discriminatory  effect  
 
Under INA section 101(a)(42)(A), a refugee is: “any person who . . .is unable or unwilling to 
return to, and is unable or unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of, that country 
because of persecution or a well -founded fear of persecution on account of race, religion, 
nationality, membership in a particular soci al group, or political opinion.”  
 
The Rule  changes  the meaning of several of the elements within the definition of refugee, and 
those changes  appear  both to be done with  discriminatory intent and  would have a discriminatory  
effect.   
 
The Rule narrows  what constitutes political opinion, persecution, and membership in a particular 
social group  by creating new  definitions that significantly decre ase the number of instances 
where a person would meet a particular element  of the definition  of refugee  required  to obtain 
asylum .  The Rule then provides examples of instances when certain action s or scenarios would 
generally be insufficient to demonstrate  each revised element .  Some of these are : the attempted 
recruitment of the applicant by criminal, terrorist or pe rsecutor y groups  under particular social 
group; a political opinion that i s defined by generalized disapproval  of gangs absent expressive  
behavior ; and non -severe economic harm or property damage in the context of persecution.   
 
These proposed revisions appear targeted specifically at Central American asylum seekers , as the 
changes  would disproportionately exclude legitimate claims common to  asylum -seeking Centra l 
Americans.  Many escape their countries to avoid  recruitment effo rts by gangs,  and whose  
rejec tions to join most likely  lead to their deaths.  Under the new rule, t his scenario  would 
“generally be insufficient ” to meet the particular social group element .  Many wome n escape 
violence they experience at home and by soc iety just because they are women without the 
protection of their government s. The Rule explicitly states tha t gender is no t an act of 
persecution that would  merit protection .  Finally,  many others flee because  they cannot thrive 
due to  a war tax the gang charges to family busi nesses or families  to the point they can no long er 
provide for basic needs .  Under the new R ule, t his persecution might now be placed  in the 
category of “non-severe economic harm or property damage ” making it significa ntly more 
difficult for these individuals to obtain a sylum.    
 
V. The rule violates  domestic and  international law  
 
The rule abrogates the United States’ obligations under the 1951 Convention Relating to the 
Status of Refugees (the Refugee  Convention). The United States, while not a party to the 1951 Refugee Convention itself, did ratify the 1967 Protocol. In ratifying the 1967 Protocol, the 
United States bound itself to the obligations of the 1951 Refugee Convention as well.6  
The Refugee Convention states that “ no Contracting State shall expel or return (“refouler”) a 
refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where his life or freedom would 
be threatened on account of his race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social 
group or political opinion.”7  As previously mentioned, this rule signif icantly limits  the pool of 
individuals who will qualify for asylum based on , in large part,  the administration’s desire to 
keep individuals with certain nationalities  and ethnic ities from being able to receive 
humanitarian protection from the United States. As more individuals who would otherwise 
qualify for relief will be returned to their home countries —likely the one they fled —they face 
significant risk  of persecution upon return, an issue about which the U.N. High Commissioner 
for Refugees recently expressed  serious concern .  
 
VI. By changing the definition of torture,  the rule narrows  the pool of individuals 
who would qualify for protection under  CAT   
 
The United States signed the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or 
Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT) in 1988  and it was codified into U.S. law in 1998.8 
Article 3 of the Convention states that “No State Party shall expel, return ("refouler") or extradite 
a person to another State where there are substantial grounds for believing that he would be in 
danger of bei ng subjected to torture.”  Protection known as withholding or deferral of removal 
under the Convention Against Torture (CAT) provides critical protections for individuals who 
face torture in their country of origin and would be otherwise barred from asylum protections. 
The Proposed Rule modif ies the standard for protection under CAT to limit the accountability of 
governments as to the torturous conduct inflicted either at the hand of government actors directly 
or by private individuals  acting with the government’s acquiescence.  
 
In particular, the Proposed Rule requires asylum seekers pursuing protection under  CAT to prove 
that the perpetrator was not acting as a “rogue official” when torturing them, a burden that is 
wholly unreasonable —and in many, if not most, cases impossible —for torture survivors to 
satisfy. Additionally, the Rule provides that only a gover nment actor who is acting “under color 
of law” can acquiesce in torturous conduct by private actors. The definition of “acquiescence” 
currently requires a finding of actual knowledge or willful blindness; the Proposed Rule 
                                                           
6 UN General Assembly,  Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees , 31 January 1967,  United Nations, Treaty 
Series, vol. 606, p. 267,  Article 1, available at: https://www.refworld.org/docid/3ae6b3ae4.html . 
7 UN General Assembly,  Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees , 28 July 1951,  United Nations, Treaty 
Series, vol. 189, p. 137,  Article 33.1, available at: https://www.refworld.org/docid/3be01b964.html   
8 Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT), Dec. 10, 
1984, 1988 U.S.T. 202, 1465 U.N.T.S. 85 (enacted into U.S. Law on October 21, 1998 by Fiscal Year 1999 
Omnibus Consolidated and emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act, Pub. L. No. 104 -277, Div. G, Sub. B, 
Title XXI S2242 of the foreign Affairs Reform and Restructuring Act of 1998, Pub. L. No. 105 -277, 112 Stat. 2681 -
822 (1998)  redefines “willful blindness” to require that the official be “aware of a high probability of 
activity constituting torture and deliberately avoided learning the truth.” A reckless or negligent 
disregard for the truth is not enough; “the official or other person in question must have been  
charged with preventing the activity as part of his or her duties.”[1] The effect of these changes 
will be to deny relief under CAT to survivors who are clearly victims of CAT violations.   
The Rule  narrows the pool of individuals who would qualify for p rotection under CAT, which 
will lead to the refoulement  of individuals who will likely face torture as currently defined.  The 
Committee against Torture, which monitors implementation of CAT, has interpreted  the non-
refoulement  obligation to be “similarly absolute” as the prohibition on torture itself; in other 
words, “no exceptional circumstances whatsoever, whether a state of war or a threat of war, 
internal political i nstability or any other public emergency, may be invoked as a justification” for 
any exception to the obligation. In making these changes to the definition of torture, the 
administration is  taking an action that will almost surely lead to violation s of CAT.  
 
VII. The proposed rule will have profound health consequences for asylum -seeking 
torture and trauma survivors, will effectively bar many  of them from qualifying  
asylum, and will subject them to heightened risk of being re -victimized.   
 
The overwhelming majority of asylum seekers arrive to the United States having suffered 
traumatic experiences, whether in the country from which they fled or on the often -perilous 
journey in search of safe haven, with no more than the possessions they can carry.  According to 
the Department of Health and Human Services , research “sugg ests that 44% of refugees, asylees, 
and asylum seekers living in the U.S. have experienced torture. ” A high percentage of survivors 
of torture in the  U.S.—refugees and asylum seekers from around the world —have been 
separated from their families, sometimes by force and other times by necessity when clients must 
flee without warning to escape imminent danger.  
 
In addition to the dangerous impacts of the rule described above, it would also result in  many 
asylum seekers —and tort ure survivors among them —qualify ing only  for lesser forms of relief.  
For example, asylum seekers who stop at another country will only qualify for protection under 
withholding of removal or under CAT.  This means they will not be able to include family 
members in their application  leading to co ntinuous family separation  and will live in constant 
limbo as these types of relief don  not lead to citizenship.  
 
Clinicians and their colleagues from torture treatment programs across the United States engage 
with this population every day. They know fr om firs t-hand experience how important the ability 
to bring family  is for effective rehabil itation , as well as the immense contributions their clients 
continue to make to our society.  
 
                                                           
 The following clinicians offer their views  directly on the proposed rule : 
 
Anne Eichmeyer, MSW, LICSW , Psychotherapist,  at the Center for Victims of Torture  
I work with a female client who was raped and tortured (detained and physically beaten) 
by a military superior, reported his actions and was met with retaliation from other 
military officials.   She fled her country for safety, securing a visa to the United States 
where she had a family member.   On her way to t he US, she passed through another 
country where she had to receive medical treatment - this necessitated her to stay for over 
14 days in this second country.   She arrived in the US and applied for asylum within the 
one-year deadline.   She has waited close t o four years for her interview.   In the meantime, 
she is working as an essential health care worker during the COVID19 pandemic and has 
directly worked in nursing homes with outbreaks, continually putting her own life at 
risk.   
Emily Manaen, MSW, LICSW , Psychotherapist  at the Center for Victims of Torture  
This asylum rule  will have detrimental effects on asylum seekers.   As a psychotherapist 
at the Center for Victims of Torture, in St. Paul, MN, I have provided psychological 
treatment to many asylum se ekers, for whom the current system of asylum is already a 
difficult and painful process.   The Trump  administrations’ proposed rule  will cause 
incredible harm to many who have already suffered human rights abuses in their own 
countries.   For example, I pro vide psychotherapy treatment to an individual who was 
tortured in his home country by unidentified police officers.   Following an opposition 
protest, he was followed and beaten by a group of men he later recognized as police 
officers.   As a result of his t orture, he was rende red unconscious and suffered a traumatic 
brain i njury.   He fled his country on foot, leaving behind his children and loved ones, in 
order to find safety.   He experienced peril and further violence on his journey, through 
multiple countr ies, to the US border.   Once in the US, he applied for asylum within the 
one-year deadline and has been in the immigration process for multiple years now.   The 
uncertainty and length of the asylum process causes immense psychological distress for 
this person.  The new asylum rules will only add to his psychological distress.   He is but 
one ex ample of man y for whom this asylum rule  will cause harm.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Conclusion  
 
The administra tion must abstain from implementing the proposed rule, which will denigrate  the 
asylum system, asylum seekers generally, and survivors of torture specifically.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
Bellevue Program for Survivors of Torture  
Bilingual International Assistant Services  
Center for Survivors of Torture  
Center for Victims of Torture   
De Novo Center for Justice and Healing  
HealthRight International Human Rights Clinic  
International Rescue Committee, Denver  
Libertas Center for Human Rights  
Mount Sinai Human Rights Program  
Partnerships for Trauma Recovery  
Program for Torture Victims  
Torture Abolition a nd Survivors Support Coalition International  (TASSC)  
Utah Health & Human Rights  
 
 
 
 
 