Hope for Healing  
Information for Survivors  
of Sexual Assault in DetentionJust Detention International (JDI)  is an international 
human rights organization that seeks to put an end to sexual 
violence in all forms of detention. JDI works to: engender 
policies that ensure government accountability for prisoner 
rape; change flippant and ill-informed public attitudes toward 
sexual abuse behind bars; and promote access to services for 
survivors of this type of violence.  Y ou may contact JDI for 
more resources. 
Copyright 2009 © Just Detention International
Attributed reproduction of this report is encouraged.
This publication is provided for information only and does not constitute legal or medical advice. Nothing within this 
publication should be construed as a substitute for individualized legal, medical or psychological counsel. JUST DETENTION INTERNATIONAL
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340, Los Angeles, CA 90010
T el:  (213) 384-1400  •  Fax: (213) 384-1411
Email: info@justdetention.org
www.justdetention.org
Table of Contents
Introduction 1
Definitions 3
Myths and Realities 5
Common Reactions During an Assault 7
Rape Trauma Syndrome 9
Challenges of Incarceration 13
Decisions in the Aftermath 15
Defense Mechanisms and Coping Skills 17
Sex and Sexuality 21
Gender Roles 23
Y our Rights 25
References 27“Until I read the Just Detention International  material I had 
no idea that male rape victims shared so many of the same 
feelings about the experience. I really thought that I was 
some kind of freak because of the many things I did, thought, 
and felt now, and at the time of the experience . . . I want 
the thousands of raped men to know they are not alone. It 
wasn’t their fault and they can survive this. I am a survivor, 
and I become stronger every day. I hope that female rape 
victims can also find something in this that might comfort 
them. Rape is rape no matter who it happens to.” 
— David Introduction
Hope for Healing  is written for men  
and women who have survived  
sexual assault in prisons, jails or 
other forms of detention. The goals of 
this publication are to offer information 
about the impact of sexual abuse and to 
assist survivors in their efforts to heal 
from this devastating type of violence.  
Perhaps the most important message 
we wish to convey here is that it is pos -
sible to heal from sexual assault. At Just 
Detention International (JDI) we hear 
from survivors every day. Their stories 
are disturbing, filled with pain, anger, 
and sadness. At the same time, we sense 
the strength of all people who contact us. 
Their decision to write to JDI, to reach 
out for help, is in itself a sign that they 
have started the crucial healing process. 
In a note to survivors of prisoner rape, 
TJ Parsell, himself a survivor and JDI’s 
former President, says: 
“I was gang-raped at 17, on my first day 
in general population in a Michigan prison. 
Even though I felt hopeless at the time, I want 
you to know that there is hope. I was able to go on to live a healthy and productive life. I 
graduated from college, became a successful 
businessman, and I now advocate for the 
rights of prisoner rape survivors. I tell you 
this not to impress you, but to impress upon 
you that you too can recover from the horrific 
ordeal you have endured.”
Robin Darbyshire, also a survivor, echoes 
the same sense of hope. She writes:
“My life is not the same. I value it more 
today. Why, because if I had not gone through 
what I have, I would not have become an 
activist. Anyone can be assaulted. I was a concert 
promoter. I am educated. Sexual assault has 
nothing to do with sex—it deals with power 
and control. It does not play favorites as to 
education or color, and the only way to stop it 
is by breaking the silence and speaking up.
As a survivor of sexual violence in 
detention, you are not alone in what hap -
pened to you, or in how you feel. There 
are people who care about what you have 
endured and what you are going through 
now, as you are trying to heal. We hope 
that you will find Hope for Healing  infor -
mative and useful. There are people who care about what you have  
endured and what you are going through now,  
as you are trying to heal.
13Sexual violence takes several forms,  
all of which may have a profound  
impact on your life. Surviving an act 
of sexual violence takes strength, cour -
age, and skill. You, just like every human 
being, have the right to decide when 
and how you engage in sexual activity. 
No one deserves to be raped. If you have 
been sexually assaulted, the assault was 
not your fault.
Sexual Assault is:
•  Any sexual contact to which you  
did not consent. Legal terms and 
definitions differ state by state. Most 
people use “rape” to mean any kind 
of unwanted penetration. Sexual as -
sault is any type of forced or coerced 
sexual touching, with or without 
penetration. In this booklet, we will 
use sexual assault and rape inter -
changeably. You can use whatever 
words you think best describe your 
experience.•  An act of violence. It does not ex -
press love, lust or attraction.  
Rape expresses dominance, power, 
and control. Sexual assault is  
about domination and maintaining 
or establishing a hierarchy or  
ownership. 
•  A crime, and just like any violent 
crime, sexual assault is never the 
victim’s fault.
Sexual Harassment is:
•  Unwanted sexual advances that 
create fear or discomfort and make 
normal functioning impossible. 
Sexual harassment may be physical 
or verbal.
o Quid Pro Quo , or “this for that,” is 
when someone offers you something 
in exchange for doing what they ask.
o Hostile Environment  harassment 
happens when someone badgers you DefinitionsSexual assault is any type of forced or coerced sexual 
touching, with or without penetration. 
3to have sex, uses offensive language 
or exposes you to sexual material like 
jokes or pornography.
o Bystander or Third Party  harass -
ment means that you are forced 
to watch others being harassed or 
raped, are passed over for privileges 
because you said “no” or are forced 
to harass others.
Sexual Exploitation is:
•  When a person in a position of 
power or authority pushes you to do 
something sexual that you would not 
otherwise do. The perpetrator may 
be either another prisoner, such as in 
the case of protective pairing (when 
you hook up with a more powerful 
prisoner to get protection), or a  
corrections official or staff mem -
ber. An officer, counselor, therapist, 
clergy or doctor who even asks for 
a sexual relationship with a prisoner 
is engaging in sexual exploitation or 
misconduct.
•  While you are incarcerated, any 
sexual contact by an employee of the institution, whether or not you 
consent. All 50 states have passed 
laws that say that a staff person or 
officer cannot have any sexual con -
tact with you, even if you consent 
to it. In some states, you may be 
disciplined or get further charges 
for having sexual contact with a 
staff member.
Consent is:
•  Positive cooperation in act or atti -
tude pursuant to an exercise of free 
will. In other words, you must agree 
to the sexual contact and know ex -
actly what is happening and what the 
pros and cons of saying “yes” are. If 
you are unable to freely say “yes” or 
“no” to any sex act because of force, 
coercion, intimidation, threats, use of 
authority, false claims by the perpe -
trator or because you are under the 
influence of alcohol, street drugs, or 
medication, asleep or unconscious, 
or because of a disability, consent is 
not legally possible. Even if you said 
“yes” in the past, you still have the 
right to say “no” to any sexual act at 
any time. 
No one deserves to be raped. If you have been sexually 
assaulted, the sexual assault was not your fault.
4Myths and RealitiesRape can happen to anyone, no matter how strong,  
no matter how smart.
You are not responsible for the rapist’s behavior.  
The rape was not your fault. Most of us are taught to think that  
if we are smart, careful, and fol-  
low certain rules, we can stop 
something like sexual violence from hap -
pening to us. We want you to understand 
the facts about sexual assault, particularly 
behind bars, so you can begin to believe 
that you did not cause yourself to be 
attacked. Rape can happen to anyone, 
no matter how strong, no matter how 
smart. It takes a great deal of strength, 
intelligence, and courage to survive a 
sexual assault.
At JDI, we often hear the myth that 
being raped is worse for men, especially 
straight men. Some people think rape is 
worse for women or worse if the rapist is 
a stranger. The reality is that all rapes are devastating and violations of body, mind, 
and spirit. Sexual assault takes your feeling 
of control and safety away no matter who 
you are and no matter who the perpetra -
tor is. Every survivor has characteristics or 
previous experiences that impact the way 
the assault feels to her or him. 
Survivors often wonder what they did 
to cause a sexual assault to happen to 
them. Sometimes placing responsibility 
on yourself feels safer, as if by blaming 
yourself you can make sure it will never 
happen again. This does not really keep 
you safer because you did not cause the 
assault. Experiencing some feelings of 
guilt is normal, but you are not respon -
sible for the rapist’s behavior. The rape was 
not your fault. 
56It could never 
happen to me.  
Rapists are acting on impulse.  
A rapist is easy to spot in a crowd.  
  
If you do not  
“fight back” it is  
not really rape.  
 
 
 
 
Only rapists and 
child molesters get 
raped in prison. 
 
 
 
 
It’s just part of the punishment.  Anybody can be raped, regardless of age, 
gender, class, race, occupation, religion, 
sexual orientation or physical appearance.
Some rapists take any opportunity to assault 
someone, but many rapes are planned ahead  
of time.
A rapist looks like anyone else. Most rapists 
are young to middle-aged, straight men of 
any race, ethnicity or class. 
There are many ways to fight to survive. 
Some survivors “freeze” or “space out.” 
Deciding to be still or to pretend to “go 
along” with a rapist is another way to fight 
back and is not the same as consent. If you 
did not want it, it was sexual assault.
Non-violent, first-time offenders, youth, 
and inmates who are gay or transgender 
are targeted most often. People who are 
physically small or have a mental illness or 
disability or are incarcerated on charges for 
prostitution are also targeted.
Prisoner rape violates your constitutional 
rights under the 8th Amendment and is 
considered torture by international human 
rights law. No one deserves to be raped.  
It is not part of the punishment.Realities MythsEvery survivor is different and reacts  
in his or her own unique way to  
sexual violence. If you do not 
recognize yourself here, that does not 
mean your reaction was wrong. For most 
people, the main task during an assault is 
survival. Anything you did to live through 
the rape is valid. Some common reactions 
during a sexual assault are: 
•  Freezing:  The experience of being 
sexually assaulted is shocking. A rea -
sonable response for many survivors 
is to freeze, feeling unable to think, 
move or speak. When your life and 
safety are threatened, your fight-or-
flight reaction is triggered. If you are 
in a situation where either physically 
fighting or running is impossible or 
dangerous, the only option is to flee 
mentally. If you have been assaulted 
in the past, this reaction is even more 
likely. Freezing probably helped to 
keep you alive.
•  Yielding:  Another way many survi -
vors describe yielding is “giving in” or pretending to cooperate. Many 
survivors are able to figure out what 
the perpetrator wants and try to 
minimize injuries by seeming to go 
along with the rapist. There is no 
shame in deciding that you do not 
want to die or have serious physical 
injuries. The fact that you were able 
to think clearly enough to strategize 
is impressive in itself. 
•  Bargaining:  Some survivors will 
try to cut a deal during the assault. 
Bargaining might mean performing 
one sex act if the perpetrator agrees 
not to do another or convincing him 
to wear a condom. It might also be 
the beginning of entering into so-
called protective pairing (having sex 
in exchange for protection).
•  Physical Fighting:  There are many 
ways to fight. Anything you did to 
survive was fighting back. Some  
survivors have the reaction of 
screaming, pushing, kicking, scratch -
ing or hitting. The rapist who is not Common Reactions  
During an AssaultAnything you did to live through the rape is valid. For 
most people, the main task during an assault is survival.
7looking for a physical fight may give 
up. Many rapists are looking for a 
fight and will respond even more 
violently. You are the only one who 
was there and your instincts helped 
protect you. If you did fight off the 
attacker, you may feel empowered by 
that. But you may still have many  
of the feelings listed in the next sec -
tion. Attempted rape is also sexual 
assault.
•  T error and Disbelief:  Many survi -
vors experience feelings of extreme 
fear, helplessness, and hopelessness 
during an assault. A sexual assault 
is an experience where you have no control over what is happening to 
you. T error, which does not go away 
when the assault is over, is a normal 
reaction. 
•  Sexual Response:  It is normal to  
experience some physical response 
that usually signals sexual pleasure 
during a sexual assault. The physical 
response might be signs or feel -
ings of arousal or orgasm. A sexual 
response makes many survivors feel 
very ashamed, but does not mean 
you wanted or liked the sexual 
assault. Your body is designed to 
respond to touch. You have nothing 
to be ashamed of.
Y ou survived. That means you did everything right.“I didn’t want to go to the infirmary, because I was still so ashamed about 
what had happened to me, but I had to.  They gave me a test, and that’s 
when I got the devastating news. I was HIV-positive . . . Fighting for my 
life is now my full-time job.  They took my life, but they didn’t take my 
ability to live my life . . .  Every day I wake up and I’m just grateful that 
I’m still here.”
— Kendall
8Rape Trauma Syndrome (RTS)  
describes the feelings, thoughts,  
reactions or symptoms that fre -
quently occur after a sexual assault. Every 
survivor is unique and will experience 
RTS in his or her own way depending 
on previous experience with trauma, re -
sources, life experiences, and personality. 
Rape T rauma Syndrome is a type of Post 
T raumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). In 
fact, many mental health professionals use 
the term “PTSD” to describe “RTS.”  
Survivors often feel like they are “going 
crazy.” Healing takes time and sometimes 
the process is scary and overwhelming. 
With support you can heal. The hurt 
you feel in the immediate aftermath of an 
assault will not last forever. Remember, 
Rape T rauma Syndrome and Post T rau -
matic Stress Disorder are essentially  
normal reactions to an abnormal level 
of stress.
Rape Trauma Syndrome has three 
phases that last different lengths of time 
for each person. You might experience 
them in order, or you might find that you go back and forth.  They are called phases 
because they do not last forever.
Acute Crisis Phase
• The acute crisis usually occurs right 
after the assault or when the survi -
vor remembers or begins to think 
about the assault for the first time. 
The survivor’s life is disrupted 
and he or she is left feeling over -
whelmed, disoriented, and unable  
to cope. 
•  Unfortunately, this is also when sur -
vivors in detention are expected to 
report the crime, especially if there is 
hope of gathering physical evidence. 
Making such complicated decisions 
right now is often impossible. Most 
survivors are unable to process the 
assault, much less make decisions 
around telling and reporting. 
•  Survivors may experience a wide 
range of emotions, including fear, Rape Trauma SyndromeEvery survivor experiences Rape Trauma Syndrome in 
his or her own way depending on previous experience 
with trauma, resources, life experiences, and personality.
9anger, hurt, shock, sadness,  
self-blame, relief, and shame.
•  A survivor who is expressing his or 
her feelings may cry, laugh, shake or 
yell. A survivor who is controlling 
his or her emotions may feel numb 
or seem too quiet, matter of fact or 
even robotic. This does not mean the 
assault did not affect him or her.
•  Daily tasks become difficult to man -
age. Bathing, grooming, eating, and 
sleeping are often disrupted. Some 
survivors eat, sleep or bathe a lot 
more than usual while some are un -
able do any or all of these activities.
•  Concentration and decision-making 
are difficult or impossible. Survivors 
may have no energy or, on the other 
hand, may feel driven to stay very busy.
•  The assault is often relived in night -
mares, flashbacks, by replaying it or 
in unwanted thoughts that feel out of 
control. Sometimes the nightmares, 
flashbacks or thoughts can be so real 
that it feels like the rape is happening 
again.
•  Survivors experience “hyper-vigi -
lance,” which means being super 
alert or feeling jumpy and anxious. 
Hyper-vigilance is not paranoia. It 
is natural to be fearful because you 
should have been safe and you were 
not. You may feel afraid even in  
situations where you felt safe before. 
You may worry that you will never 
feel safe again. If you were assaulted by a corrections official, you may fear 
all officers or staff.  
Outward Adjustment 
Phase 
•  T o others it may look as if the sur -
vivor has adjusted. Survivors in the 
outward adjustment phase feel a need 
to “get back to normal” and go on 
with life. 
•  Grooming, eating, and other daily 
tasks may return to normal. How -
ever, trouble sleeping is still very 
common.
•  The intensity of emotions seems 
to fade. Nightmares and flashbacks 
probably still happen, but less often 
and the triggers have to be stronger.
•  You may decide to talk about the 
assault now, to ask for counseling, to 
tell someone about it or to ask for a 
housing change. You may also decide 
to repress, or try to forget about, the 
assault. Either way is your best attempt 
to regain control over your life.
•  Survivors often try to avoid any 
reminders of the assault. Unlike 
during the acute crisis phase, when 
everything was a reminder, avoidance 
might be possible if you are able to 
stay away from people, places or  
situations that bring up strong  
feelings.
Survivors often feel like they are “going crazy.” Healing 
takes time and sometimes the process is scary and 
overwhelming.  With support you can heal.
10•  Deep feelings may surface after the 
initial crisis has passed and you fully 
realize what has happened. Sad -
ness and hopelessness that look like 
depression are common. You may 
cry often, lose interest in activities or 
programs or even feel like hurting or 
killing yourself. If you are thinking 
about harming yourself, it is really 
important to talk to someone. 
•  Maybe you feel like you can function, 
but you are not really better. Many 
survivors describe this as “just exist -
ing” or feeling “like a robot.” 
•  Anger often comes up during out -
ward adjustment. You may feel angry 
with yourself, the perpetrator or your 
living situation. Some survivors feel 
angry with everything. Anger can be 
scary, especially if it is hard to find 
any healthy way to express it. Anger 
can also be the feeling that gives you 
the energy to heal.
•  Many survivors feel bad about them -
selves; they have lower self-esteem 
than before the assault. You may 
blame yourself or feel guilty or so 
ashamed that you begin to believe 
that you deserved to be assaulted.
•  After the initial crisis, it is normal to 
begin to question your sexual orien -
tation, your feelings about sexuality 
or your desire to be sexual again. Sex 
is a strong reminder of the assault 
and can be a difficult trigger. 
•  If you are in a situation where you 
are being assaulted regularly, you 
may not fully get to the outward 
adjustment stage until you are away 
from the abusive situation. You may 
feel like you are living somewhere 
between the first and second phases. Integration Phase
•  Many survivors report that they feel 
like they were one person before the 
assault and are another person after 
the assault. Integration is when you 
accept the sexual assault as part of your 
life experience and bring together 
the best aspects of those two halves 
of yourself in a way that works for you.
•  You have practiced positive ways to 
cope so that when strong or difficult 
feelings surface, they do not take over. 
Everything you have done and gone 
through since the rape is part of the 
journey to integration. 
•  Some survivors say that they like 
themselves and their lives better now 
than before the assault. That does not 
mean they are glad they were raped. It 
means that they take joy in their own 
healing process. They were able to 
take something terrible and make good 
come out of it.
•  The healing process after a sexual as -
sault may take months or years. 
•  Many survivors decide to help other 
survivors or to work for change in so -
ciety.  Activism can be a terrific way to 
further your own healing process and 
to give hope to other survivors.
Reactivation of Crisis
The second or third phases may be tem -
porarily interrupted by a reactivation 
of crisis. The feelings of the acute crisis 
phase seem to come back and can be trig -
gered by sights, smells, sounds, situations 
or memories. 
•  T riggers are like buttons to the 
trauma. At first, it may feel like  
everything is a trigger. As time goes 
11on, triggers will have to be much 
stronger to reactivate a crisis.
•  A reactivation of crisis is an important 
part of the healing process.  Every 
time you work back through the 
phases you will gain skills and strengths 
that improve your life and health. 
•  A reactivation of crisis does not mean 
you are back at square one of the 
healing process. All the good work 
you have done is still there. 
•  If you have experienced any other 
traumatic event, such as childhood 
abuse, you may find that you go into 
crisis about that as well as the recent 
sexual assault.
•  An important time to reach out for 
support is when a crisis is reactivated.
When the Assaults 
Keep Happening: 
Complex PTSD
Everything in the section on RTS can 
occur after one traumatic experience, 
yet you may be in a situation where you 
are being sexual assaulted, harassed or 
exploited on a daily basis. Some prisoners 
experience sexual slavery or are forced 
into prostitution over a period of time. 
Psychiatrist and activist Judith Her -
mann coined the term Complex PTSD  to 
describe what happens when someone 
survives repeated trauma. No one can 
survive prolonged abuse without having it 
change them in some way. When under 
the control of a perpetrator and unable 
to flee, even a very healthy person may 
experience:•  Feeling sad all the time, feeling 
hopeless enough to plan to hurt or 
kill yourself, feeling explosive anger 
or feeling numb.
•  Changes in thinking and memory, 
like forgetting all or part of a trau -
matic event, reliving traumatic 
events, blocking out chunks of time, 
and feeling detached (separate) from 
your thoughts or your body.
•  Seeing yourself as different and sepa -
rate from every other person, feeling 
helpless and believing that you are 
“marked” in some permanent way.
•  Thinking that the perpetrator is 
all-powerful, feeling obsessed with 
him or her or having intense revenge 
fantasies.
•  Relating to other people differently 
by isolating yourself, distrusting 
everyone or looking for someone to 
rescue you.
•  Seeing the world in new ways, such 
as losing faith, having a sense of 
impending doom (feeling like some -
thing awful is going to happen all 
the time), feeling disconnected from 
your family or community or not be -
ing able to handle everyday events.
The more times you have been as -
saulted, the more likely you are to believe 
that the abuse happened because of you. 
Many survivors of repeated trauma switch 
from thinking “it must have happened 
because of something I did” to “it hap -
pened because of who I am.” 
Remember that no one can force an -
other person to commit rape or assault. 
It is a choice the perpetrator made. Self-
blame does not keep you safer and it stops 
the healing process. 
12The daily trauma of being behind  
bars makes the stress of the rape  
even more difficult. You may be 
unable to move about freely, may have 
no privacy, and may have to live with the 
perpetrator. 
Deep feelings of shame are common 
for survivors of sexual assault. Most of 
us have a need to keep our most embar -
rassing or shameful moments private. In 
detention settings, secrets are usually very 
hard to keep and gossip spreads quickly. 
Many survivors are devastated to find 
that everyone seems to have heard the 
perpetrator’s, or some other untrue, ver -
sion of the assault.  
Some of the other challenges for sur -
vivors who are incarcerated are:
•  In prison or jail you have very little 
control over things to which most 
survivors are sensitive, like noise, 
light, and crowds. 
•  You may have to be alone more than 
is good for you or you may need to 
be alone and not be able to get any space. If you are feeling overwhelmed, 
being isolated can either be scary and 
dangerous or it can be a relief. If at 
all possible, reach out by writing to 
a loved one or to Just Detention In -
ternational, or by asking to talk with 
someone. Even if you do not want to 
talk about the rape, human contact 
can make a difference. 
•  You are expected to appear calm and 
follow directions at all times. When 
you are in a crisis and feeling dis -
oriented, irritable or anxious, it may 
seem impossible to go on as usual. 
•  You may feel so desperate that you 
think about provoking a dangerous 
situation to break the tension. 
•  Sharing or showing your feelings in 
any way might not be safe or may 
mark you as someone with a mental 
health problem or as a target for 
perpetrators.
•  You may have questions and fears 
about who will find out about the  Challenges of IncarcerationThe daily trauma of being behind bars makes the stress 
of the rape even more difficult.
13assault. Perhaps you worry about 
how the rape changes the way in -
mates or corrections officials  
think about you, impacts your  
review hearing or changes your op -
portunities in the facility.
•  You may have contracted a sexu -
ally transmitted disease or HIV or 
become pregnant as a result of the assault. If that is the case, fears about 
who will find out and how being as -
saulted will change your experience 
in the institution and your life on the 
outside are probably heightened.
Remember to be patient with yourself 
and to take time to think through your 
actions. T rust your judgment about what 
is safe and right for you.
Healing is possible. It won’t always hurt as much as it 
does right now.“ . . . the guard came to get me at 3 am . . . this he thought allowed 
him access to rape me.  And he did . . . Afterwards he offered me my 
paper jumpsuit and as I was putting it on another guard entered and 
became extremely suspicious. Y ou’d think this would have been enough 
to prosecute. But it hasn’t been.  An ‘inconclusive’ rape test conducted 
after my shower meant no follow up.
My hands have been tied. My life has not. I am married, I have three 
children now, and I am in school studying to be a Social Worker with a 
specialty in addictions rehabilitation.”
—Hope
14Finding ways to take care of yourself  
after a sexual assault is the first im-  
portant step in the healing process. 
You have some important decisions to 
make, even if the first decision may be 
that you are not ready to make them 
right now. Some of the things to think 
about are:
Medical attention
•  It is very important to get medical 
attention after an assault. You may 
be physically injured and in danger 
of infection or there may be a chance 
you were exposed to a sexually 
transmitted disease, or that you are 
pregnant. 
•  If you decide to tell medical staff 
within 72 hours of the assault, they 
often do a forensic exam to collect 
evidence and provide medical care. 
You may also ask for medicine to 
help prevent sexually transmitted disease or pregnancy and to be  
tested for HIV . 
•  You may be able to get medical  
care without saying what happened. 
In some institutions you are able to 
file a report about a sexual assault 
without giving the name of the per -
petrator. 
•  You have the right to take your 
time to decide what you want to 
do in case you are pregnant. It is 
never okay for someone to pres -
sure you to have an abortion or to 
carry the pregnancy to term. You 
may ask about your facility’s poli -
cies about emergency contraception 
(the “morning-after pill”), abortion, 
pregnancy, and caring for newborns, 
so that you have all the information 
you need before you make a deci -
sion. 
•  Many survivors experience  
stress-related illnesses like stomach 
problems and headaches. Decisions in the AftermathFinding ways to take care of yourself after a sexual  
assault is the first important step in the healing process.
15Deciding who to tell
•  You have the right to have control 
over your story. Sorting through  
who to tell about a sexual assault is 
an important step in the healing  
process. 
•  Many survivors do not tell anyone.  
It can be very scary to risk letting 
strong feelings out and to wait for 
another person’s reaction. 
•  The perpetrator may tell others his 
or her side of the story or someone 
else may spread rumors. If you had 
injuries that made it necessary for 
you to seek medical care, others may 
know too. Losing control of the  
disclosure process can be very  
painful.
•  Many survivors find themselves tell -
ing everyone, because at least that 
way the truth is being spread instead 
of rumors. Many survivors also hope 
that if they tell enough people, some -
one will help them. 
•  Think about who has been sup -
portive or fair to you in the past. In 
some institutions, clergy or mental 
health staff may keep conversations 
confidential. Maybe there is another 
prisoner who you trust, or a friend  
or loved one on the outside with 
whom you can correspond. 
•  Y ou may be able to call a local rape 
crisis center confidentially. Feel  
free to write to Just Detention Interna -
tional and request contact information 
for rape crisis centers in your state.
•  If you know you need a housing 
change, you may have to tell an of -
ficial that something happened. You 
can take some time to plan what you 
will say. Reporting Decisions
•  Deciding whether or not to report 
a sexual assault is very difficult for 
most survivors. Reporting may sim -
ply not be possible for you right now. 
Or, it may be the only way to stay 
alive. Only you know. 
•  The exact legal process will vary 
from state to state and institution 
to institution. Some of the relevant 
information may be in your inmate 
orientation packet.
•  You may be able to ask a mental 
health or other staff member ques -
tions about the process before decid -
ing whether to file a report. In most 
detention settings, staff members 
are required to report any crime that 
happens on their grounds, so ask 
general questions without giving any 
information if you are still undecided. 
•  All medical professionals are required 
to report to law enforcement when 
they treat injuries that are clearly 
from a crime. 
•  Many survivors see reporting as a 
good way to get some control back. 
On the other hand, you may have to 
tell your story many times and the pro-
cess can be both slow and unsatisfying.
•  Reporting is the only way that the 
institution will know that the rapist is 
dangerous and hopefully protect you 
and others from him or her. How -
ever, you are entitled to decide what 
is best or possible for you right now.
•  Writing in a journal is a good way to 
work through some of these difficult 
decisions.  If you do write in a journal 
and you feel safe keeping it, the journal 
can be a helpful record if you decide 
to file a formal report in the future.
16Defense mechanisms protect a  
person from emotional pain.  
You may use a defense mecha -
nism and not be aware of it. Survivors 
often know they are doing something dif -
ferently but are not sure why and may feel 
ashamed. When people are in impossible 
situations, with no way out, what they do 
to survive does not always look good or 
even make sense. At some point you will 
not need the defense mechanism anymore 
and you will use healthier ways to cope. 
Do not beat yourself up about it. 
Some of the common defense mecha -
nisms that survivors use are:
•  Pretending nothing happened or de -
nial.  Being raped can be so shocking 
that a survivor may not be able to find 
somewhere in his or her brain to put 
the experience. Some survivors call the rape something else or find a way 
to say it was not that bad and some 
literally put the fact that they were 
assaulted out of their heads. In prison 
or jail, denial might feel like the only 
possibility. Y ou may be able to pre -
tend you were never assaulted but still 
have the strong feelings of the acute 
crisis phase of RTS, which can be very 
confusing. Be patient and gentle with 
yourself. Do not try to force yourself 
to remember or to talk about what 
happened if you are not ready.
•  Suicidal thoughts/plans/actions.  If 
you are in a situation where you feel 
afraid and isolated and you see no 
way out, thinking about suicide may 
seem reasonable. Many survivors 
say that their feelings are so strong 
and hard to express, that they cannot 
imagine any other way to show how 
they are feeling. Please remember 
that if you die now, there is no hope of Defense Mechanisms  
and Coping SkillsAs you make progress in your healing process, you will 
learn new coping skills and find out what works best for you.
Defense Mechanisms
17healing. Even if you are not ready to 
talk about the sexual assault, please 
consider talking to someone you 
trust about your thoughts of killing 
yourself.
•  Self-harm.  Sometimes survivors 
cut, burn, hit or starve themselves. 
Self-harm can provide a release of 
tension. The physical pain can be a 
momentary relief from the emotional 
pain. The act of hurting yourself can 
also make you feel, for a moment, 
like you are back in control of your 
body. However, the self-harm very 
quickly makes most survivors feel 
more out of control and becomes a 
new problem. Please consider talking 
to someone if you are hurting your -
self. You deserve not to be hurt  
anymore.
•  Risky behavior.  For some survivors, 
creating danger is another way to try 
and commit suicide. Picking fights 
with other prisoners or officers, 
making escape attempts, stealing or 
reneging on a debt or promise are all 
ways of placing yourself in life-and-
death situations. For some survivors 
this relieves some of the feelings of 
helplessness because of the rush of 
getting into a dangerous situation 
and seeing if they can get out alive. 
•  Becoming more sexually active than 
before or deciding never to be sexual 
again.  Some survivors feel like they 
will never be able to feel good about 
being sexual again and some sur -
vivors start having much more sex 
than before the assault. Most people 
understand the first reaction and are 
confused by the second. For some 
survivors, it feels like saying “no” did not work, so it is hopeless or dangerous 
to try. For other survivors, going 
after sexual activity feels like the best 
way to be in control of not being 
raped again. Some survivors may try 
to have a positive sexual experience 
in order to erase the rape. 
•  Alcohol and other drug use.  Many 
survivors use alcohol and other  
drugs to numb their feelings, to get 
through the day or to be able to 
perform in a sexual slavery or prosti -
tution situation. Many survivors find 
that getting drunk or high helps them 
survive in the short-term, but the 
alcohol or drug use quickly becomes 
a problem that makes things worse 
and makes the survivor feel even more 
out of control. Support for recover -
ing from addictions may be available 
within your institution. Y ou can get 
the support of a group, whether you 
are ready to talk about the rape or 
not. Remember that the 12 Steps used 
in Alcoholics and Narcotics Anony -
mous were not written about healing 
from sexual assault, although they can 
be helpful for a sexual assault survivor 
who has an addiction.
•  Dissociating or spacing out.  Most 
survivors dissociate to some extent 
in response to stress, danger or very 
strong feelings. Spacing out can 
be the only way to “escape” when 
you are held captive, especially if 
you have survived multiple assaults. 
Mentally escaping can become a 
problem when it begins to happen 
often or is out of your control. If you 
find yourself missing chunks of time, 
ending up in places to which you do 
not remember going, or hearing that 
you did or said things you do not 
18remember, you may be dissociating. 
Seeking mental health help is im -
portant, when it feels safe to do so, if 
you are dissociating so much that it is 
interrupting your life. 
Coping Skills
Coping skills are tools used to process 
and deal with feelings. People are usu -
ally aware of using them and see them as 
a healthy and positive part of the healing 
process. As you make progress in your 
healing process, you will learn new cop -
ing skills and find out what works best 
for you.
Some examples of coping skills are:
•  T alking to someone.  One of the 
hardest parts of surviving a sexual 
assault is feeling alone and separate 
from everyone else. If you can find a 
supportive and understanding person 
to talk to, it can help you to work 
through your feelings, feel less alone, 
feel less “crazy,” and plan for your 
future. If you try to talk to someone 
and they have an unsupportive at -
titude or blame you for the assault, 
remember that their reaction has to 
do with their own thoughts and feel -
ings about rape; it has nothing to do 
with you. 
•  Writing or drawing.  A journal can 
be a great way to express feelings in a 
safe and private way. If you are afraid 
of what will happen if someone finds 
your journal, drawings can be an 
even more private way to express 
yourself. Some people tear up what 
they have written after they are fin -
ished. Writing letters to loved ones 
or supportive organizations can also 
be an important tool.•  Planning for your future.  It is said 
that the best revenge is living well. 
Many survivors find that pouring 
their energy into their own healing  
is the best coping skill. There may  
be educational programs you can  
join at your facility, or you can 
request access to books and educate 
yourself.
•  Exercising.  A sexual assault is a 
physical, as well as mental and spiri -
tual, violation. Exercising can help to 
work out some of the difficult  
feelings. It can also help you to feel 
more in control of your body.
•  Handling triggers.  Flashbacks,  
panic attacks, and unwanted thoughts 
after a sexual assault can be terrify -
ing. Below are some simple ways to 
try and deal with them in  
the moment:
Deep Breathing
1) Breathe in through your nose for a 
count of four. 
2) Hold your breath for a count of  
four.
3) Breathe out through your mouth  
for a count of four.
4) Hold your breath out for a count  
of four.
5) Repeat until your heart slows to  
normal and the feeling of panic  
eases.
    You may prefer to come up with a simple, 
calming phrase to repeat instead of 
counting, such as, “calm down, calm 
down.”   
1920A Safe Place
1) Get into a comfortable position and 
do the breathing exercise above.
2) Picture a place where you feel  
completely safe (it can be real or 
imaginary). Picture every detail 
about the place. What do you see? 
What do you hear? What do you 
feel? What do you smell? Are you 
alone? What are you doing? Spend 
some time imagining this place, so 
that you become very familiar with 
it. You may want to write about or 
draw the safe place. 
3) Come up with a cue that will help 
you to “visit” your safe place when 
you need to. The cue can be the 
word “stop,” tapping your hand, or 
anything that will help you avoid a 
panic attack. When you feel a panic 
attack or a flashback starting, use 
your cue to signal that it is time to 
picture your safe place. 
4) Continue to imagine the safe place 
until the flashback or anxiety has 
passed. 
5) Do another deep breathing exercise 
before going on with your day.Grounding
1) When you feel a flashback or panic 
attack coming on or you begin to 
have unwanted (intrusive) thoughts, 
say or think “STOP .”
2) Grab onto something solid (the arms 
of a chair, the table, the bed post or 
something comforting like a book or 
photograph) and answer the follow -
ing questions: Where am I? What is 
happening now? Repeat the answers 
at least twice. For example, I am in 
class. I am safe right now.
3) If you can, change what you are  
doing. For example, if you are  
listening to music or watching TV , 
turn it off or step away. If you are 
in a class or at work, draw/scribble 
something calming. If there is a  
safe person (another prisoner or  
a staff member), try to get near  
that person.
4) Make a plan for what you will  
do next.
5) T ell yourself that you handled this 
situation well.Rape is a crime and the perpetrator  
uses sexual acts as weapons. As a  
result, it can have a big impact on 
your feelings about sex and sexuality. It is 
important to remember that sexual assault 
is not about lust, attraction or miscom -
munication. The perpetrator used the 
rape to be in control and to make you 
feel powerless.  
•  Healing your sexuality is a process 
that will take time. Any sexual contact 
or feelings may be a trigger right 
now. Be patient with yourself.
•  Feeling safe and comfortable is nec -
essary for any healthy sexual activity. 
If at all possible, do not try to force 
yourself to be sexual when you do 
not really want to. If this is not a 
choice you can make right now,  
take any opportunity to have some 
control. Maybe you can avoid certain 
sex acts that are particularly difficult. 
It might be that asking for a housing 
change or protective custody is  
your only option, regardless of the 
consequences.•  Flashbacks to the assault during 
consensual sex or masturbation are 
very common. This can be confusing 
if you are engaging in something that 
is pleasurable. If you can stop what -
ever is happening right then, do so.  
•  If your body responded with sexual 
arousal or orgasm during the sexual 
assault, you may feel ashamed any 
time you have sexual feelings. Some 
survivors begin to fantasize about be -
ing out of control during sex or while 
masturbating to ease the shame, 
which is not a sign of any desire to be 
raped again.
•  Many survivors wonder about their 
sexual orientation, feeling like their 
sexuality has been so deeply wounded 
that their sexual orientation has 
changed. Sexual assault does not de -
termine sexual orientation. However, 
most survivors do go through a time 
when they question or explore dif -
ferent ways to feel good about being 
sexual. This is a normal and healthy 
part of the healing process. Sex and SexualityRape is a crime and the perpetrator uses  
sexual acts as weapons.
21•  Many survivors find that they be -
come more sexually active, includ -
ing through masturbation, after the 
assault. Increasing sexual activity may 
not be the reaction we expect, but it 
is normal. However, if the sexual ac -
tivity is a reaction to trauma, it may 
not feel like a real choice and may 
make the feelings of degradation and 
shame worse. •  Lesbian, gay, and bisexual survivors 
have many of the same feelings as 
straight people after a rape. Any kind 
of sex may be a trigger. However, les -
bian, gay, and bisexual survivors may 
have been targeted for a hate crime 
because of their sexual orientation. 
This discrimination can increase  
self-blame, self-hatred, and fear.
Sexual assault does not determine sexual orientation. 
However, most survivors do go through a time when 
they question or explore different ways to feel good 
about being sexual.
“As a prisoner, life is an on-going struggle. But as a transsexual prisoner 
the struggles are unlimited. I’ve done a majority of my life under and 
within the system, and know I am not the only one. . . I can’t erase nor 
change being and becoming a victim of rape, but I can, now, fight to 
change that others do not become victims as well . . . I realize that I am 
a wonderful person and it is not my fault what other people’s sicknesses 
are and were.  And it’s not your fault either . . . ”
— Latavia 
22Survivors of rape experience the as-  
sault and healing process in a very  
personal way. However, the crime 
occurs within a broader cultural context 
that accepts violence against certain 
groups of people. All parts of your iden -
tity, such as your race, ethnicity, sexual 
orientation, age, and particularly gender, 
will affect your experiences as a survivor 
of sexual assault. 
Rape is a highly personal crime in 
which you are treated like you do not 
matter. It is a deeply hurtful and dehu -
manizing experience for anyone. The 
feelings of disgrace and shame are deep. 
After an assault, survivors of all gender 
identities, races, and cultures tend to 
question who they are, what they want, 
and how to reorganize their very selves. 
Survivors do this successfully all the time. 
Healing is possible.
The following is intended to help you 
think about how your experience as a sur -
vivor is impacted by your understanding of 
gender roles and your gender identity. Men
•  Being raped is an assault against 
many commonly held stereotypes 
about what it means “to be a man.” 
Men are supposed to be able to fight 
anyone off. The need to be tough, 
invulnerable, and aggressive is drum-
med into many young boys. Boys 
who do not like or fit this mold are 
often subjected to sexual harassment 
and assault from a very young age. 
•  In detention settings, the need to be 
a tough guy is a matter of life and 
death. In prisons and jails, the defini -
tion of masculinity is even more 
violent and controlling than on the 
outside.
•  The sexual assault experience can 
lead a male survivor to question 
his identity as a man and leave him 
feeling as if he does not know how 
to behave even in simple situations. 
A survivor may react by taking on Gender RolesAll parts of your identity . . . particularly gender, will  
affect your experiences as a survivor of sexual assault. 
23extremely macho behaviors, to ap -
pear less vulnerable, or by taking on 
feminine attributes and dress in an 
attempt to protect himself. 
•  Part of the healing process will be to 
define for yourself a new, hopefully 
more affirming, version of masculin -
ity, including honoring the positive 
ways in which you have been strong.
Women
•  Most women are aware of the  
possibility of being raped from a 
young age. Women and girls are 
often told about the ways they can 
prevent sexual assault—by not wear -
ing certain clothes, not seeming 
sexual, never being drunk, not going 
out without a male escort, the list 
goes on. Unfortunately, such rules 
place the responsibility of preventing 
sexual assault on women and there -
fore also place the blame on  
female survivors.
•  Women and girls are frequently 
taught that all men want sex and it 
is the job of women to set the sexual 
limits. This leads women survivors 
to blame themselves for the assault 
and many to feel that they hate being 
women. Women often change their 
dress and appearance after an assault 
to appear less traditionally feminine. 
•  Women prisoners are very likely to 
be survivors of gender-based violence 
(sexual assault, domestic violence, sexual harassment or exploitation) 
prior to being incarcerated, which 
complicates the healing process.
•  Part of the healing process will be  
to acknowledge the strengths and 
survival skills that you already  
possess and prepare to use them for 
your benefit. 
Transgender People
•  T ransgender prisoners are at particu -
larly high risk for sexual assault. 
•  T ransgender people are very likely to 
think, and may have been told, that 
the rape happened because of who 
they are. This message often leads a 
survivor to feel like a bad person who 
deserves such treatment. 
•  T ransgender people are likely to have 
been targeted for sexual assault in the 
community as well. Multiple trau -
matic experiences compound each 
other and complicate healing. It is 
tough enough to survive the oppres -
sion that transgender people face, 
without additional trauma. 
•  Please remember that the assault did 
not happen because of who you are. 
It happened because someone else 
decided to commit a violent crime. 
•  Part of the healing process will be 
to honor your strengths and recog -
nize what a powerful person you can 
be on the other side of this time of 
turmoil. 
Healing is possible.
24As a survivor of sexual 
assault in detention, you 
have the right:
•  to be treated with respect by others;
•  to decide who to tell;
•  to decide how best to take care of 
yourself;
•  to ask questions about what will hap -
pen if you report and how to get medi -
cal care;
•  to be listened to and supported;
•  to have any fears of retaliation taken 
seriously;
•  to take your time to heal;
•  to feel all of your feelings;
•  to request a housing or cell change for 
your safety;
•  to request to speak with mental health 
staff;
•  to contact a support agency like Just 
Detention International or a rape crisis 
center;
•  to seek advice from a lawyer.If you file a formal report, 
you have the right:
•  to choose the person to whom you 
make the report;
•  to have a sexual assault victim advocate 
present at each stage of the process, 
from the medical exam to the  
sentencing;
•  in many states, to request that your 
name and information be kept confi -
dential;
•  to obtain reports/records about your 
assault;
•  to file a grievance if you have been 
discriminated against;
•  to decide later not to participate in 
court proceedings.
During the medical exam, 
you have the right:
•  to request that any non-essential 
people leave the room;
•  to have an advocate in the room;Y our RightsY ou have the right to decide what is best for you and 
what you need to do to survive and heal.
25•  to have all procedures, tests, and forms 
fully explained to you;
•  to refuse any part of the exam or to end 
the exam at any time;
•  to have copies of the exam reports;•  to receive medicine to prevent sexu -
ally transmitted disease or pregnancy. 
You also have the right to refuse this 
medicine;
•  to have a confidential HIV test.
Y ou have the right to explore your options and reject 
any that do not feel right or safe.
“I denied the incident for more than 11 years, until something my 
girlfriend told me triggered everything . . . I found a very compassionate 
psychiatrist who has extensive dealings with prisoner rape . . . I have 
decided that I will lend whatever help I can to other rape survivors. 
My name is Bill. 
I am a rape survivor.”
26References
Bass, Ellen, & Laura Davis. (1994). The Cour -
age to Heal: A Guide for Women Survivors of Child 
Sexual Abuse (Revised and Expanded Third Edi -
tion).  New York: Harper Collins.
Dumond, Robert W. (2001). The Impact and 
Recovery of Prisoner Rape.  Paper presentation at 
the National Conference “Not Part of the Penalty: 
Ending Prisoner Rape,” Washington, D.C.
Foa, Edna B., & Barbara Olasov Rothbaum. 
(1998). Treating the Trauma of Rape: Cognitive-Be -
havioral Therapy for PTSD. New York: Guilford.
Groth, A. Nicholas & B. A. Birnbaum. (1979). 
Men who Rape: The Psychology of the Offender. 
New York: Plenum.
Hensley, Christopher, Ed. (2002). Prison Sex: Prac -
tice and Policy.  Boulder: Lynne Rienner Publishers.
Herman, Judith. (1997). Trauma and Recovery: 
The Aftermath of Violence from Domestic Abuse to 
Political T error. New York: Basic Books.
Kupers, T erry, MD. (1999). Prison Madness: The 
Mental Health Crisis Behind Bars and What We 
Must Do About It. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Inc.
Lew, Mike. (2004). Victims No Longer: The Classic 
Guide for Men Recovering from Sexual Child Abuse 
(Second Edition). New York: Harper Collins.
Matsakis, Aphrodite. (1996). I Can’t Get Over It: 
A Handbook for Trauma Survivors.  Oakland: New 
Harbinger Publications.  Matsakis, Aphrodite. (2003). The Rape Recovery 
Handbook.  Oakland: New Harbinger Publications.  
McEvoy, Alan  (Ed.), Jeff D. Brookings (Ed.), 
& Debbie Rollo (Ed.). (1999). If He is Raped: 
A Guidebook for Partners, Spouses, Parents, and 
Friends. Holmes Beach, FL: Learning Publica -
tions, Inc.
The National Center for Victims of Crime.  
(1997).    Male Rape: A Fact Sheet. Last checked 
On 7/20/06. www.ncvc.org.
Pierce-Baker, Charlotte. (1998). Surviving the 
Silence: Black Women’s Stories of Rape. New York: 
Sidran Institute.
Rosenbloom, Dena, Mary Beth Williams, & 
Barbara E. Watkins. (1999). Life After Trauma: A 
Workbook for Healing.  New York: Guilford.
Rape Trauma Syndrome Packet . (2001) Sexual As -
sault Crisis Agency, Long Beach, California.
Smith, Brenda. (2002). An End to Silence: 
Prisoner’s Handbook on Identifying and Addressing 
Sexual Misconduct, Second Edition.  Washington, 
DC: American University.  
Whealin, Julie. Complex PTSD: A National 
Center for PTSD Fact Sheet. Last checked on 
7/20/06. www.ncptsd.va.gov.
Whealin, Julie. Men and Sexual Trauma: A Na -
tional Center for PTSD Fact Sheet.  Last checked 
on 7/20/06. www.ncptsd.va.gov.
27