Addressing Sexual Abuse in U.S. Detention Facilities  
Just Detention International (JDI)  
 
Key Recommendations1 for the  
Ninth Session of the Working Group on the UPR  
Human Rights Council  
1 - 12 November  2010  
United States of America  
 
Prisons, jails, and other detention facilities across the U.S. maintain dangerous policies and practices that 
have resulted in widespread sexual violence and other abuses. In a study published in August 2010, the 
U.S. Department of Justice’s Bureau of Just ice Statistics  (BJS)  found that at least 88,500 adult  inmates 
in U.S. facilities had been victimized at their current prison or jail during the p receding year – most of 
them by corrections staff.2 In other words , 4.4 percent  of inmates held in federal and state prisons  and 
3.1 percent of jail detainees  experienced  sexual abuse.3 In a previous BJS report, a  shocking 12 percent 
of detained youth also reported that they had experienced at least one instance of sexual abuse durin g the 
preceding  year.4 These numbe rs are mere snapshots, representing the individuals at a facility on the day 
of the survey; the total number of people abused in U.S. detention facilities every year is significantly 
higher.  
 
Consistent with these alarming  statistics, b oth the U.N. Committee Against Torture and the Human 
Rights Committee have identified sexual violence in detention as a serious problem in the U.S. 
Following their 2006 review of U.S. compliance with the Convention Against Torture and Other C ruel, 
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT) and the International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights (ICCPR) , both committee s commended the U.S. on the passage of the U.S. Prison Rape 
Elimination Act of 2003, while noting that more action was needed. The Committee  Against Torture 
detailed concerns about the government’s failure to prevent sexual abuse of gay and transgender inmates 
and the failure  to investigate instances of prisoner rape in a prompt and transparent manner.5 The Human 
Right s Committee expressed concern that male officers have full access to women’s detention quarters. 6  
 
Exacerbating the problem of sexual abuse in detention , few U.S. jurisdictions empower an independent 
oversight entity to monitor their corrections and detention facilities.  There is growing recognition 
internationally that prisons and jails must be transparent, and – in addition to having strong internal 
accountability mechanisms – must be open for external monitoring. The historical lack of transpar ency 
of U.S. detention systems has been a major contributing factor to human rights abuses, such as rape and 
other forms of sexual violence – precisely the kinds of abuses international monitoring systems are put 
in place to eliminate.  
                                                           
1 Adapted from Just Detention International’s (JDI) Submission to the United Nations Universal Periodic Review , (United 
States of America, 2010), available on -line at http://www.justdetention.org/pdf/JDI -UPR -report.pdf .  
2 ALLEN J. BECK, PAIGE M. HARRISON , BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS , SEXUAL VICTIMIZATION IN PRISONS AND JAILS 
REPORTED BY INMATES , 2008 -09 (2010).   
3 Id. 
4 ALLEN J. BECK, PAIGE  M. HARRISON , & PAUL  GUERINO , BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS , SEXUAL VICTIMIZATION IN 
JUVENILE FACILITIES REPORTED BY YOUTH , 2008 -09 (2010).  
5 Committee Against Torture, 36th Session, Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Parties under Article 19 of the 
Convention , CAT/C/USA/CO/2, at ¶ 32, 34. 
6 Human Rights Committee, 87th Session, Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Parties under Article 40 of the 
Covenant, CCPR/C/USA/CO/3/Rev.1, at ¶ 33.   
Just Detention International (JDI)  is a human rights organization that seeks to end sexual abuse in all 
forms of detention.  To ensure that the U.S. address es sexual abuse behind bars and increase s external 
oversight of its corrections and detention facilities , in compliance with its international human rights 
obligations , JDI makes the following recommendations :  
 
Adopt strong binding  standards to address prisoner rape : In keeping with the Committee  Against 
Torture’s  recommendation that the U.S. put in place measures to prevent sexual violence in detention ,7 
the U.S. should adopt without further delay the recommended national standards for the prevention, 
detection, response , and monitoring of sexual abuse in detention, as proposed by the National Prison 
Rape Elimination Commission  (NPREC) .8 Among other measures, the NPREC standards require 
incident reviews, data collection, and independent audits as means to ensure internal accountability and 
external scrutiny.  
Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention Against Torture  (OPCAT) : The OPCAT would provide 
urgently needed independent oversight of U.S. corrections and detention facilities.  With its collaborative 
approach to monitoring, whereby international and domestic entities visit detention facilities and 
confidentially propose recommendations to prevent torture and ill treatment , the OPCAT  would help 
ensur e that the U.S. meets its oblig ations under the CAT .  
 
Amend the Prison Litigation Reform Act (PLRA) : U.S. prisoners are virtually barred from challenging 
conditions of confinement that violate their constitutional rights , due to the complex procedural 
requirements and substantive deman ds of the Prison Litigation Reform Act (PLRA). Among the most 
problematic requirements  of the PLRA is that a “physical injury” must be established  for damages to be 
awarded; shockingly, courts have found that some forms of sexual assault do not constitute a physical 
injury.9 In accordance with the Committee Against Torture’s recommendation to amend the PLRA ,10 the 
U.S. Congress should enact the Priso n Abuse Remedies Act of 2009 , H.R. 4335 (PARA), which would 
help restore the crucial oversight role played by the courts in addressing violations of the constitutional 
rights of inmates . 
 
Permit Article 22 communications with the Committee  Against Torture : The U.S. should recognize the 
competence of the Committee Against Torture to consider communications from or on behalf of 
detainees once they have exhausted available avenues of relief within the U.S. legal system. Permitting 
Article 22 communications – which would require the U.S. to report in writing the steps it has taken in 
response to individual communications to the Committee Against Torture – would help address abuse s 
that often remain unresolved by the U.S. legal system.11 
                                                           
7 Committee Against Torture, 36th Session, Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Parties under Article 19 of the 
Convention , CAT/C/USA/CO/2, at ¶ 32, 34; Human Rights Committee, 87th Session, Consideration of Reports Submitted by 
States Parties under  Article 40 of the Covenant, CCPR/C/USA/CO/3/Rev.1, at ¶ 33.  
8 The NPREC was established  pursuant to the Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003 (PREA), a federal law which mandated 
the development of national binding standards to address sexual abuse in dete ntion.  
9 42 U.S.C. §1997e(e). See Hancock v. Payne , 2006 WL 21751 at *1, 3 (S.D. Miss., Jan. 4, 2006) (holding plaintiffs’ 
allegations of abuse, including that a staff member “sexually battered them by sodomy,” were barred  under §1997e(e) .) 
10 Committee Against Torture, supra  note 5, at ¶ 29.  
11 U.S. ratification  of the First Optional Protocol to the ICCPR, which provides an individual complaint mechanism, would 
further improve domestic accountability.  