 
 
 
Stop Prisoner Rape  
  
Submission to the House of Commons  
Standing Committee on Justice and Human Rights  
   
Bill C-9: An Act to Amend the Criminal Code 
(Conditional Sentence of Imprisonment) 
 
and  
 
Bill C-10: An Act to Amend the Criminal Code 
(Minimum Penalties for Offences Involving Firearms) 
and to Make a Consequential Amendment to Another 
Act 
   
September 2006 Stop Prisoner Rape 
Submission to the Justice and Human Rights Committee September 2006 1Table of Contents
 
 
I. Executive Summary……………………………………………..……….....2 
II. About Stop Prisoner Rape (SPR)………………………………………….4 
III. SPR’s Canada Initiative…………………………………………………....4 
IV. Mandatory Minimum Sentencing in the U.S. Has Failed………………..5  
V. Overcrowding Causes Violence Behind Bars and in the Community…..8  
 
VI. The Proposed Bills Would Lead to Dangerous Facilities……….………10  
 
VII. The Least Dangerous Offenders Wou ld Be the Most Affected………...13 
VIII.  Conclusion and Recommendations………………………………………15 
 Stop Prisoner Rape 
Submission to the Justice and Human Rights Committee September 2006 2 
I. Executive Summary 
Stop Prisoner Rape (SPR) submits this brie f to the Standing Committee on Justice and 
Human Rights of the House of Commons ur ging the Committee to oppose bill C-9, An 
Act to Amend the Criminal Code (Conditional Sentence of Imprisonment), and bill C-10, An Act to Amend the Criminal Code (Minimum Penalties for Offences Involving Firearms) and to Make a Consequential Amendment to Another Act.   Based in the United States, SPR is a human rights organization committed to ending sexual violence against men, women, an d children in all forms of detention. The 
organization recently conducted a fact-finding mission in Canada to assess what makes 
Canadian institutions generally safer than th eir U.S. counterparts. The SPR delegation 
determined that the manageable size of th e prison population, stemming directly from 
Canada’s reasoned laws that afford judges di scretion in sentencing, has played a critical 
role in maintaining safe facilities. 
 Enacting bills C-9 and C-10 would count eract the success of the Correctional 
Service of Canada (CSC) as well as the provincial correctional systems, and would 
tarnish Canada’s reputa tion as a world leader in the humane treatment of inmates. Bills 
C-9 and C-10, in essence, would each create  mandatory minimum sentencing schemes. 
C-9 is intended to incarcerate people who otherwise could have received a community 
sentence. C-10 will lengthen the sentences for defendants whom a judge believed deserved a minimal sentence.  As has become apparent in the United States, mandatory minimum sentences turn prisons and jails into warehouses. Rather th an reducing crime levels, these sentencing Stop Prisoner Rape 
Submission to the Justice and Human Rights Committee September 2006 3rules increase violence inside  facilities as well as outsi de. Crowded facilities are 
inherently dangerous facilities, and harsh sentencing laws inevitably crowd prisons and 
detention centers. The U.S. experience with  prison overcrowding has made it painfully 
clear that violence, particularly sexual violen ce, proliferates when correctional facilities 
house too many inmates. In addition, there is  a direct link between prison overcrowding 
and community violence. Virt ually all inmates are ultimately released, bringing their 
prison experiences, including learned violent behavior, back to their communities.  The experience of the U.S. illustrates the significant problems that may develop if Canada adopts the proposed harsh sentencing laws. Bills C-9 and C-10 would make the prison population in Canada increase signi ficantly, causing Canadian prisons and 
detention centers to become larger, more diffi cult to manage, and more violent. Notably, 
the prisoners affected by these laws woul d not be the most dangerous and violent 
offenders, but rather those for whom a judge identified factors that supported community 
supervision or a minimal prison term. These defendants are among the most vulnerable to 
abuse in prison, and have the greatest pros pect for rehabilitation in the community. 
 In light of the overwhelmingly ne gative impact of mandatory minimum 
sentencing laws in the U.S., Stop Pr isoner Rape urges the Committee to: 
1. Reject bills C-9 and C-10.   
2. Ensure that prisons and detention centers do not become overcrowded .  
3. Allow judges to retain discretion in sentencing.   
4. Prioritize rehabilitation and service prov ision in all correct ional facilities.   Stop Prisoner Rape 
Submission to the Justice and Human Rights Committee September 2006 4 
II. About Stop Prisoner Rape 
Stop Prisoner Rape (SPR) is a U.S.-based hum an rights organization dedicated to ending 
sexual violence against men, women, and child ren in all forms of detention. SPR has 
three core goals for its work: to advocat e for policies that ensure institutional 
accountability for prisoner rape; to transform ill-informed public attitudes about sexual 
violence in detention; and to promote acce ss to resources for those who have survived 
this form of abuse.   More than a quarter century after its inception, SPR remains the only organization 
in North America dedicated exclusively to the elimination of prisoner rape. SPR was 
instrumental in securing passage of the U. S. Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA), the 
first-ever federal law addr essing prisoner rape. Since PREA was signed into law in 
September 2003, SPR has led the call to en sure its meaningful implementation. 
 
III. SPR’s Canada Initiative 
In the North American context, prisoner ra pe is generally viewed as a U.S. problem, 
while Canada is rightfully held up as an ex ample of a country with  a significantly less 
violent correctional system. In May-June  2006, a delegation of SPR staff conducted a 
fact-finding mission in Canada to gather info rmation for a report on Canadian and U.S. 
corrections policies and practices that influe nce the prevalence of sexual violence behind 
bars.
1  
 The SPR delegation interviewed inmates a nd officials in three federal prisons for 
men – Millhaven Institution, Kingston Peniten tiary, and Collins Bay Institution – and the Stop Prisoner Rape 
Submission to the Justice and Human Rights Committee September 2006 5male and female sections of the Québec Dete ntion Centre in Québec City. The team also 
met with human rights advocates, staff from the Office of the Correctional Investigator, 
and officials at the CSC nati onal headquarters in Ottawa.  
 SPR concluded that CSC prisons are genera lly safer than their U.S. counterparts.  
While provincial facilities vary with respect to  the level of safety, overall, they appear to 
better protect detainees than American jails. At both the national and local levels, the difference primarily stems from the more ma nageable size of Canadian facilities and 
inmate populations. With few exceptions, Ca nadian correctional facilities are not 
overcrowded, while as a rule, American prison s and jails are. Over crowding in the U.S., 
stemming directly from the mass incarcer ation and lengthy prison terms caused by 
mandatory minimum sentencing schemes, is one of the main reasons why U.S. facilities are unmanageable and dangerous.  
IV. Mandatory Minimum Sentencing in the U.S. Has Failed  
The U.S. experience with sentencing laws that mandate imprisonment or increase the 
minimum length of incarceration has shown that  these limits on judicial discretion are 
costly and counterproductive.
2 Mandatory minimum sentences have defined U.S. federal 
and state sentencing laws for more than 20 years.3 During this time, prisons have become 
overcrowded and increasingly violent, crime rates have not consistently declined, and 
low-level offenders have been swept into th e violent culture of detention facilities. 
 Without any clear benefit to the rate s of violent crime, mandatory minimum 
sentences have caused the U.S. to incarcerate a larger percentage of  its population than 
any other country in the world.4 At any given time, more  than 2.2 million people are Stop Prisoner Rape 
Submission to the Justice and Human Rights Committee September 2006 6behind bars in the U.S. in a federa l facility, state pr ison or county jail.
5 Even accounting 
for differences in population size , the incarceration rate  in the U.S. is more than six times 
the rate in Canada.6 However, in 2000, the homicide rate in the U.S. remained three times 
higher than in Canada, the aggravated assaul t rate was more than double, and the robbery 
rate was 65% higher.7 
 Under mandatory minimum sentencing re gimes, the U.S. inmate population size 
has swelled at a rate far greater than population growth as a whole.8 Between 1974 and 
2001, when mandatory minimum sentencing was the norm, the number of inmates in federal and state prisons increased more than 600%, from 216,000 to 1,319,000.
9 The 
incarceration rate grew just as dramatic ally: from 149 inmates per 100,000 population to 
628 per 100,000 population.10 In this era of mandatory minimum sentences, more and 
more people have been imprisoned, even 00a s the crime rate has remained steady or 
dropped.11  
 Overcrowding plagues prisons and jails ac ross the U.S. The capacity to build and 
operate prisons could not keep pace with the skyrocketing incarceration rates. From 1982 
to 2003, total justice spending at the federal, state, a nd local levels increased 
approximately 432%, with corrections accounting for the largest increase.12 Nonetheless, 
according to the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statis tics, the prison systems of 24 states and the 
federal government were operating above capacity in 2004.13 For example, in that year, 
California housed nearly 158,000 prisoners in facilities designed to hold approximately 
80,000 – operating at 195% of capacity.14 Illinois prisons were operating at 138% of 
capacity in 2003.15 Federal U.S. prisons were operating at 140% of capacity in 2000.16 Stop Prisoner Rape 
Submission to the Justice and Human Rights Committee September 2006 7 While U.S. federal and state governments enacted harsh senten cing laws to “get 
tough on crime,” these laws have not served as  effective deterrents to crime. Numerous 
factors influence crime rates, such as demographic shifts, fluctuating economic 
conditions, changes in firearm availabili ty, the drug trade, and law enforcement 
practices.
17 Thus, while homicide and firearm-related offenses in the U.S. declined in the 
late 1990’s (after peaking to all-time hi ghs earlier that decade), mandatory minimum 
sentencing laws were not necessarily the reason for this decline.    In fact, after reviewing the research evaluating the effectiveness of mandatory 
drug and firearm laws in the U.S., criminal law professor Michael Tonry concluded that 
“enactment of mandatory penalties has either no demonstrable marginal deterrent effects 
or short-term effects that rapidly waste away.”
18 State-by-state comparisons illustrate the 
meager impact that mandatory sentences have had on reducing crime. Between 1991 and 2001, the incarceration rate increa sed as a direct result of mandatory minimum sentences, 
by 51.6% nationwide, 139.4% in Texas, a nd 10.9% in New York. During this same 
period, the crime rate dropped by 29.5% nationw ide, 34.1% in Texas, and 53.2% in New 
York. Thus, Texas expanded its prison populatio n at three times the rate of the country 
overall and its crime rate improved only sligh tly more than the national average, while 
New York’s prison population grew at a rate one-fifth the national average and its crime 
rate improved at twice the national rate.
19  
 In recent years, due to the high costs and minimal gains of mandatory minimum sentencing schemes, jurisdictions throughout th e United States have begun to reconsider 
those laws. In the 2003 legislative session alon e, 25 states modified their sentencing and 
corrections policies or otherwis e sought to lessen sentences.
20 Five of these states Stop Prisoner Rape 
Submission to the Justice and Human Rights Committee September 2006 8repealed or reduced mandatory minimum terms.
21 While largely motivated by budget 
deficits, policy makers have supported these reforms because they have come to realize that allowing judges to impose sentences that  respond to the specifi c circumstances of a 
crime and a defendant is more effective than  requiring them to impose pre-determined 
inflexible penalties.
22  
 Numerous judges have also expressed their objections to mandatory minimum 
sentences.23 As noted by the late Chief Justice William Rehnquist, a Reagan-appointee to 
the U.S. Supreme Court, mandatory minimum sentences are “perhaps a good example of 
the law of unintended consequences.”24 
 
V. Overcrowding Causes Violence Behind Bars and in the Community  
 
Unquestionably, mandatory minimum sentences in  the U.S. have led to massive increases 
in incarceration, irrespective of the crime rate. The skyr ocketing U.S. prison population 
resulting from these sentences has created mo re dangerous facilities across the country. 
The density of the prison population and the l ack of space for inmates are directly related 
to inmate misconduct and violence.25  
 The safety risks of overcrowding cannot  be overstated. The connection between 
overcrowding and sexual and physical violence in detention has been the subject of 
numerous lawsuits,26 academic studies,27 and human rights reports.28 Corrections officials 
and policy experts both in the U.S. and Canada  have repeatedly attr ibuted prison violence 
to overcrowded conditions.29  
 One of the most horrific results of th is overcrowding, and the focus of SPR’s 
work, is the rampant sexual abuse of prisoners  that permeates fac ilities housing too many Stop Prisoner Rape 
Submission to the Justice and Human Rights Committee September 2006 9inmates. In prisons and jails that are overc rowded, corrections officials cannot prevent 
sexual violence or adequately respond when  it occurs. Victims are left beaten and 
bloodied, are impregnated against their wi ll, and contract HIV and other sexually 
transmitted diseases. Prisoner rape survivors also suffer from long-term mental health 
problems,
30 and some may themselves turn to viol ence to prove to other prisoners that 
they can fight off aggressors.31 
 The increased violence in prisons ulti mately leads to more violence in the 
community too. As inmates return home, they br ing their violent experi ences with them. The 
U.S. Congress has recognized that societal violence is fueled by pr ison violence. In the 
Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003 (PREA),32 Congress found that “[p]rison rape 
endangers the public safety by making brutali zed inmates more likely to commit crimes 
when they are released.”33 Additionally, it notes th at “[p]rison rape in creases the level of 
homicides and other violence against inmates a nd staff, and the risk of insurrections and 
riots.”34 In the many letters it receives from survi vors of prisoner rape on a daily basis, SPR 
hears first-hand about the negative impact th at sexual abuse behind bars has had on their 
subsequent criminal behavior.   Survivors of sexual violence behind bars ar e forever affected by their experience, 
often resulting in drug addiction, suicide a ttempts, and problems with law enforcement. 
Survivor and former SPR President Tom Cahill attested to this downward spiral in his 
2005 testimony before the National Prison Rape  Elimination Commission, a bipartisan 
commission appointed by President Bush in  accordance with PREA. As Mr. Cahill 
explained: 
After I was released from jail, I tried to live a normal life, but the rape haunted 
me. I had flashbacks and nightmares. I wa s diagnosed with post-traumatic stress Stop Prisoner Rape 
Submission to the Justice and Human Rights Committee September 2006 10disorder. My marriage and my business faile d. I have been arre sted over and over 
again for acting out. I've had sexual problem s. I've been filled with anger for 
nearly 40 years.
35 
   
VI. The Proposed Bills Would Lead to Dangerous Facilities  
 
Bills C-9 and C-10 would lead to an influx of  inmates at Canadian prisons and detention 
centers. The incarceration of people who otherwise would have been diverted from 
prison, as proposed in bill C-9, and the longe r sentences proposed in bill C-10 would 
significantly increase the demand for prison beds. Even if the federal and provincial 
governments dedicate significant funds to build ing new facilities, overcrowding will have 
overwhelmed existing prisons and detention cen ters before new ones can be constructed 
and become operational.
36 
 The practices that have kept Canada ’s national and provincial correctional 
systems relatively safe, and which have helped turn Canadian facilities into international 
models, will be compromised by this overcro wding. During SPR’s recent visit to Canada, 
CSC officials uniformly agreed  that their success in maintaining order within CSC 
prisons was largely attributable to the comp aratively small size of these institutions and 
their inmate populations. CSC administrato rs specifically cited the manageable 
population size as critical to everything from appropriate ri sk assessment and security 
classification of inmates to being able to transfer inmates before a violent incident 
occurs.37 
One of the foremost reasons for the CS C’s effectiveness has been its detailed 
prisoner assessment and classification proce ss. Ensuring the safety of inmates and 
officers requires knowing which inmates are at  greatest risk for violence, either as Stop Prisoner Rape 
Submission to the Justice and Human Rights Committee September 2006 11perpetrator or victim. During SPR ’s visit to the CSC’s nationa l headquarters, Director of 
Research Larry Motiuk noted that the impre ssive assessment tools developed by the CSC 
would be rendered meaningless if there was not enough space to adequately apply them.
38 
The U.S. experience with mandatory mini mum sentences proves his point. Even 
in jurisdictions with proper classifica tion systems, overcrowding has caused U.S. 
corrections officials to abandon their prev ious practice of segregating vulnerable 
prisoners from predators. As a result, vul nerable non-violent inmates are frequently 
housed together with predatory ones and subj ected to violence that could have been 
prevented. Worse still, in U.S. prisons a nd jails, the alarming ove rcrowding has led to 
double-bunking (when more than one inmate is housed in a single cell) even in protective 
custody. As a result, inmates who have explic itly requested protec tion have instead found 
themselves subjected to rape and other act s of violence while housed in protective 
custody. 
 In addition to causing overcrowding, bills C-9 and C-10 would also make 
assessment more difficult by seriously limiting the amount of information available to 
Canadian reception facilities, to which inmate s are sent to be evaluated and classified 
after sentencing. With less discretion at se ntencing, defense attorneys will provide the 
courts with less information about mitigati ng factors, such as mental illness, drug 
addiction, and history of physical and/or sexua l abuse, as such information will have no 
impact on the sentence.39 This background is vital to the inmate assessment process at the 
reception facilities.40 Without it, these fac ilities will have to devote more resources to 
obtaining relevant information, and will need mo re time to acquire this data and develop 
the mandated individualized corrections plans for each inmate. This absence of relevant Stop Prisoner Rape 
Submission to the Justice and Human Rights Committee September 2006 12information coupled with the increased num ber of correction plans needed as more 
people are incarcerated, will create backlogs at  reception facilities throughout Canada.   
 The consequences of such backlogs can be dramatic. Warden Mike Ryan shared with SPR the problems that had plagued Millhaven Institution, Ontario’s reception 
facility, before his arrival th ere last year. As inmates waite d for extended periods to be 
assigned a security level, tran sferred to an appropriate inst itution, and provided with a 
corrections plan, they became restless and se rious safety breaches ensued, including 
numerous acts of physical viol ence and mass inmate protests.
41 With more people 
entering prison, and less information about each  prisoner upon intake, bills C-9 and C-10 
would cause similar backlogs throughout the country.  The CSC’s current focus on “dynamic security” has further helped maintain safety and order. Dynamic security require s corrections staff “to develop an ever 
increasing knowledge of the offender thr ough meaningful interaction, and thereby 
diminish the likelihood of unexpected beha vior on the part of those offenders.”
42 With 
higher incarceration rates, offici als would not be able to mon itor inmates with this level 
of detail. Officers in overcrowded prisons woul d, at best, be able to respond to inmate 
disturbances as they occur. They would lack the resources or ability to prevent incidents 
from arising.  One of the most important preventative m easures available to corrections officials 
is the ability to move a pris oner whose presence in a certain  facility, dorm or cell unit 
creates a safety risk to him or her, another in mate or corrections staff. As CSC Director of 
International Relations Dave Connor noted to SPR, by maintaining most CSC facilities at 
or below 90% capacity, problem inmates can be transferred quickly and appropriately, Stop Prisoner Rape 
Submission to the Justice and Human Rights Committee September 2006 13thereby avoiding pot ential problems.
43 The passage of bills C-9 and C-10 would increase 
the population size, such that the ability to transfer inmates will be greatly hampered. 
 Beyond such safety concerns, Canada has a statutory requiremen t that the “least 
restrictive measures” be imposed on all inmates, with an emphasis toward 
rehabilitation.44 The proposed legislation does not allo w for the least re strictive measure 
for many of the most vulnerable detainees. The mandatory imprisonment of bill C-9 and 
longer prison terms of bill C-10 are purely  punitive and would not ensure a positive 
readjustment to community living. Rather, without the judicial discretion to show 
leniency, individuals who are not  likely to re-offend would unnecessarily have to adjust 
to an institutional lifestyle and learn th e violent behaviors of the prison setting. 
 The higher numbers of inmates would also  frustrate rehabilitation efforts. More 
prisoners means more corrections plans, all of  which mandate participation in appropriate 
rehabilitative programs. The demand for treatment and educational and vocational 
services will dramatically increase. While on waiting lists for thes e services, prisoners 
will be idle, frustrated, and looking for outle ts to expend their energy. Without access to 
positive outlets, gang activity and other violence will likely proliferate.45 
 
VII. The Least Dangerous Offenders Would Be the Most Affected  
 
While the Canadian general public may belie ve that mandatory minimum sentencing 
laws will protect them from the most violent offenders, this perception is wrong. By imposing minimum terms of imprisonment, b ills C-9 and C-10 would only affect the low 
end of the sentencing range. The maximum sentences available by law would remain 
unchanged. As a result, truly vi olent recidivists and gang l eaders, who already receive Stop Prisoner Rape 
Submission to the Justice and Human Rights Committee September 2006 14lengthy sentences, would not be affected by C-9 and C-10. Rather, defendants with 
mitigating factors that support community supe rvision or minimal incarceration would be 
disproportionately punished. For these inmates,  the prosecutors’ decisions as to what 
crimes to charge would determine the senten ce, because judges will lack the power to 
consider circumstances that  disfavor imprisonment.  
 In accordance with its criminal jurisprude nce, Canada has appropriately afforded 
wide discretion to judges so that harsh pe nalties can be imposed on the most dangerous 
offenders while those posing less of a risk  to society can be rehabilitated in the 
community.
46 In addition to considering prior c onvictions, as already required under the 
Criminal Code,47 Canadian judges are authorized to assess the full range of factors that 
either support harsh punishment or encourag e leniency. By removi ng the possibility of 
leniency, bills C-9 and C-10 would render j udges powerless in shie lding those who are 
unlikely to become recidivist offenders a nd are most at risk for abuse in prison. 
 One of the true dangers of enhanced prosecutorial power and reduced judicial 
discretion is that the very pe ople intended to be punished mo re harshly are the ones most 
likely to benefit. Prosecutors offer favorab le plea offers to people who can provide 
information to them. While mid- and high-le vel gang leaders have the connections and 
the ability to negotiate for reduced charges, pe ople less connected to criminal enterprises, 
or at the bottom rungs of these ventures , suffer. In particul ar, women, who often 
participate in criminal activity at the behe st of an abusive part ner, tend to receive 
disproportionately harsh sentences.  Young, first-time offenders would also be  among the hardest hit by these bills, 
and are among the most vulnerable to pris oner rape and other acts of violence.
48 Research Stop Prisoner Rape 
Submission to the Justice and Human Rights Committee September 2006 15of U.S. inmates has shown that prisoners serv ing a firearm or firearm-related offense are 
disproportionately young.
49 Where Canadian judges can now order community 
supervision or a relatively low sentence to  someone charged with a firearm-related 
offense who is unlikely to become a career criminal, incarceration would be mandatory 
under bills C-9 and C-10. Upon entering prison unschooled in the ways of prison life, 
these first-time inmates would be likely ta rgets for abuse and prone to learn violent 
behavior as a means of protection.  The proposed legislation pur ports to respond to the gene ral public’s concern about 
gun crimes, but it targets far more than fi rearm offenses. Under bill C-9, individuals 
charged with crimes that are non-violent and/or are unlikely to result in future criminality will automatically be imprisoned, solely because a judge could  impose more than ten 
years incarceration for that type of crime in extreme circumstances.
50  
 
 VIII. Conclusion and Recommendations 
Rather than better protecting Canadians from violence, the passage of bills C-9 and C-10 
would ultimately result in more violent communities. Persistent violent offenders already receive harsh sentences under current Canadi an laws and would not be affected by 
increases in the required minimum terms. Ra ther, the prison population would swell with 
defendants for whom a judge identified mitigating factors and a strong potential for rehabilitation. These inmates would overcro wd facilities, creati ng conditions where 
violence proliferates. Upon their release, many of them would return to their communities with violent experiences and behaviors, and w ithout the tools for a law-abiding life that 
they could have acquired in community-based programs. Stop Prisoner Rape 
Submission to the Justice and Human Rights Committee September 2006 16 In light of what has been learned by th e U.S. experience with similar laws, Stop 
Prisoner Rape makes the following r ecommendations to the Committee: 
1. Reject bills C-9 and C-10.  Mandatory minimum sentencing laws in the United 
States have proven that such legislation is ineffective, costly, and dangerous. Rather 
than reducing violent crime, these laws will create more dangerous prisons, where violence is bound to proliferate and vu lnerable inmates will be victimized. 
2. Ensure that prisons and detention centers do not become overcrowded . The 
manageable size of the Canadian prison popul ation has been cent ral to the success 
of the CSC and the provincial  correctional systems in maintaining relatively safe 
facilities. Increased incarcer ation rates and prison terms, which would be the result 
of bills C-9 and C-10, can only undermine these efforts and damage Canada’s 
international reputation for having one of the world’s foremost correctional 
systems. 
3. Allow judges to retain sentencing discretion.  Lengthy prison terms should be 
reserved for the most serious offenders. A judge familiar with the circumstances and the particular defendant is best suite d to provide the case-by-case analysis to 
determine when prison is necessary, a nd when it will do more harm than good.  
4. Continue to prioritize rehabilitation and service provision in  all correctional 
facilities. Even with the harshe r terms proposed, virtua lly all inmates will 
eventually be released back to the comm unity. To maintain a serious commitment 
to reducing crime, rehabilitation must rema in a priority over excessive punishment. 
                                                
 
1 This report will be released in late 2006. 
2 For the sake of convenience, this submission will us e the phrase “mandatory minimum sentencing law” to 
refer to legislation such as C-9, in which people who otherwise would have served their sentence in the Stop Prisoner Rape 
Submission to the Justice and Human Rights Committee September 2006 17                                                                                                                                                
 
community are incarcerated, and C-10, in which people convicted of specified offenses are kept in prison 
longer.  
3 Forty-nine of the 50 states had mandatory minimum sentences for some crimes by 1983. See U.S.  
SENTENCING COMMISSION , SPECIAL REPORT TO THE CONGRESS : MANDATORY MINIMUM PENALTIES  
IN THE FEDERAL CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM  9 (1991). The federal government began adopting similar 
legislation for gun crimes in 1984. 18 U.S.C. §924(c). Unlike Canada, the U.S. has wholly separate 
criminal laws and procedures at the state and federal level. Federal crimes are limited to offenses against 
the country or interstate commerce, su ch as terrorism or importation of drugs. The vast majority of crimes, 
especially violent crimes, are state offenses. 
4 ROY WALMSLEY , KING’S COLLEGE LONDON , WORLD PRISON POPULATION LIST (6th ed. 2005). 
5 Id.; PAIGE M. HARRISON & ALLEN J. BECK, BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS , PRISONERS IN 2004 (2005). 
6 For every 100,000 people in Canada, 116 are incarcerated; for every 100,000 people in the U.S., 714 are 
incarcerated. See WALMSLEY , supra note 4.   
7 MAIRE GANNON , CANADIAN CENTRE FOR JUSTICE STATISTICS , CRIME COMPARISONS BETWEEN CANADA 
AND THE UNITED STATES , Catalogue No. 85-002, at 5 (2001) 
8 Alfred Blumstein & Allen J. Beck, Population Growth in U.S. Prisons, 1980-1996 , 26 C RIME & JUST. 17, 
18-19 (1999). 
9 THOMAS BONCZAR , BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS , PREVALENCE OF IMPRISONMENT IN U.S.  
POPULATION , 1974-2001 (2003). 
10 Id. 
11 Blumstein & Beck, supra  note 8, at 55 . 
12 KRISTEN HUGHES , BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS , JUSTICE EXPENDITURE AND EMPLOYMENT IN THE 
UNITED STATES , 2003 at 2 (2006). 
13 HARRISON & BECK, supra  note 5, at 7. 
14 CAL. DEP’T OF CORRECTIONS & REHABILITATION , CALIFORNIA PRISONERS AND PAROLEES 2004  at 7 
(2005).  
15 ROGER E. WALKER , ILL. DEP’T OF CORRECTIONS , 2003  STATISTICAL PRESENTATION  passim  (2004). 
16 JAMES J. STEPHAN & JENNIFER C. KARBERG , U.S.  DEP’T OF JUSTICE , CENSUS OF STATE AND FEDERAL 
CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES , 2000 at 4 (2003). 
17 JUSTICE KENNEDY COMMISSION , AMERICAN BAR ASSN., REPORT TO THE ABA  HOUSE OF DELEGATES  19-
20 and citations therein (2004). 
18 BARBARA S. VINCENT & PAUL J. HOFER , FEDERAL JUDICIAL CENTER , THE CONSEQUENCES OF 
MANDATORY MINIMUM PRISON TERMS : A SUMMARY OF RECENT FINDINGS  11 (1994) (quoting Michael 
Tonry, Mandatory Penalties, 16 C RIME & JUSTICE : A REVIEW OF RESEARCH  243-44 (Michael Tonry, ed. 
1990)).  In a review of mandatory minimum sentences for drug offenses, the U.S. Department of Justice came to a similar conclusion: “[t]he great majority of recidivism studies of State and all studies of Federal 
prison releasees report that the amount of time inmates serve in prison does not increase or decrease the 
likelihood of recidivism, whether recidivism is measured as a parole revocation, rearrest, reconviction, or return to prison.” Id. at 12 (quoting
 U.S.  DEP’T OF JUSTICE , AN ANALYSIS OF NON-VIOLENT DRUG 
OFFENDERS WITH MINIMAL CRIMINAL HISTORIES  42 (December 1993)). 
19 JUSTICE KENNEDY COMMISSION , supra note 18 , at 21. 
20 See JON WOOL & DON STEMEN , VERA INSTITUTE OF JUSTICE , CHANGING FORTUNES OR CHANGING 
ATTITUDES ? SENTENCING AND CORRECTIONS REFORMS IN 2003 (2004). 
21 Id. 
22 JUSTICE KENNEDY COMMISSION , supra note 18 , at 22. 
23 See, e.g., Hon. Anthony M. Kennedy, Justice of the U.S.  Supreme Court, Speech at the American Bar 
Association Annual Meeting, August 9, 2003 (available on-line at http://www.supremecourtu s.gov/publicinfo/speech es/sp_08-09-03.html
) (“I can accept neither the necessity 
nor the wisdom of federal mandatory minimum sentences. In too many cases, mandatory minimum 
sentences are unwise and unjust.”); Hon. Morris E. Lasker, District Judge, S.D.N.Y., Remarks Before the 
Symposium on Sentencing Guidelines, Sept. 9, 1997 (available on-line at 
http://www.vcl.org/Judges/Lasker_J.htm ) (“The enactment of mandatory minimums has been a perhaps 
understandable, but nevertheless misguided, political reactio n by Congress to fear by the public of the level 
and nature of crime in the past decade.”). Stop Prisoner Rape 
Submission to the Justice and Human Rights Committee September 2006 18                                                                                                                                                
 
24 William H. Rehnquist, Luncheon Address (June 18, 1993), in U.S.  SENTENCING COMMISSION , 
PROCEEDINGS OF THE INAUGURAL SYMPOSIUM ON CRIME AND PUNISHMENT IN THE UNITED STATES  286 
(1993). 
25 Christopher Hensley, Introduction: Life and Sex in Prison in PRISON SEX PRACTICE & POLICY  1, 5 
(Christopher Hensley ed., 2002). 
26 See, e.g ., Hutto v. Finney , 437 U.S. 678, 688 (1978); Hale v. Tallapoosa County , 50 F.3d 1579, 1583 
(11th Cir. 1995); Morgan v. District of Columbia , 824 F.2d 1049 (D.C.Cir.1987). 
27 See, e.g., CHRISTOPHER HENSLEY , PRISON SEX PRACTICE AND POLICY  5-6 (2002); D AVID HEILPERN , 
FEAR OR FAVOUR : SEXUAL ASSAULT OF YOUNG PRISONERS  82-84 (1998); Melvin Gutterman, The 
Contours of Eighth Amendment Prison Jurisprudence: Conditions of Confinement , 48 SMU  L. REV. 373, 
404 (1995). 
28 See, e.g., STOP PRISONER RAPE, IN THE SHADOWS : SEXUAL VIOLENCE IN U.S.  DETENTION FACILITIES  13 
(2006); C ONFRONTING CONFINEMENT : A REPORT OF THE COMMISSION ON SAFETY AND ABUSE IN 
AMERICA ’S PRISONS  23-27 (2006) (hereinafter “C ONFRONTING CONFINEMENT ”); H UMAN RIGHTS WATCH , 
NO ESCAPE : MALE RAPE IN U.S.  PRISONS 148-49 (2001). 
29 See, e.g.,  CONFRONTING CONFINEMENT , supra note 29, at 23-24; see also SPR interview with corrections 
staff at Millhaven Institution (May 30, 2006); SPR interview with corrections staff at Kingston Penitentiary 
(May 30, 2006); SPR interview with corrections staff at Collins Bay Institution (May 31, 2006), SPR interview with Larry Motiuk, CSC Director of Research  (May 29, 2006); SPR interview with Dave Connor, 
Director of International Relations Dave Connor (May 31, 2006). 
30 Robert W. Dumond & Doris A. Dumond, The Treatment of Sexual Assault Victims, in PRISON SEX 
POLICY AND PRACTICE 67, 71, 81-83  (Christopher Hensley ed., 2002); Terry A. Kupers, Mental Health in 
Men’s Prisons, in PRISON MASCULINITIES 192, 194 (Don Sabo, Terry A. Kupers & Willie London eds., 
2001); H UMAN RIGHTS WATCH , supra note 29, at 112-17.  
31 Julie Kunselman et al., Nonconsensual Sexual Behavior, in PRISON SEX POLICY AND PRACTICE 27, 38-40  
(Christopher Hensley ed., 2002); H UMAN RIGHTS WATCH , supra  note 29, at 118-20; D ANIEL LOCKWOOD , 
PRISON SEXUAL VIOLENCE  95 (1980). 
32 Pub. Law 108-79, 42 U.S.C. §§ 15601-15607. PREA is the first-ever U.S. law to acknowledge the acute 
human rights crisis of sexual violence in U.S. prisons and jails. It mandates analysis of the incidents and 
effects of prisoner rape, and authorizes funding fo r information, resources and services to protect 
individuals from sexual violence behind bars. 
33 42 U.S.C. § 15601(8). 
34 42 U.S.C. § 15601(10). 
35 The Cost of Victimization: Why Our Nation Must Confront Prison Rape: Hearing Before the National 
Prison Rape Elimination Commission (June 14, 2005) (statement of Tom Cahill).  
36 BILL SPELMAN , ROUNDTABLE OF THE URBAN INSTITUTE , THE DECLINE IN CRIME : WHY AND WHAT 
NEXT? (2000) (“If you decide to build more prisons, you will not have that prison capacity tomorrow. You 
will have that prison capacity in somewhere between fi ve and seven years from now, because you’ve got to 
do the architecture and engineering, you’ve got to construct the thing, you’ve got to staff it up, and so on. 
That means that if you’re making a decision today about whether to expand prisons or not, you’re not 
dealing with that number, you’re actually dealing with whatever that number is going to look like seven years from now.”). 
37 SPR interview with Larry Motiuk, supra  note 30; SPR interview with Dave Connor, supra note 30. 
38 SPR interview with Larry Motiuk, supra note 30. 
39 As discussed in the next section, the lack of judi cial discretion increases prosecutorial power.  To the 
extent that plea bargain agreements continue or  increase, the prosecution may compile information 
pertaining to what sentence it will support but this information will never become part of the court record. 
40 Indicative of the importance given to this information, the Corrections and Conditional Release Act 
(CCRA) requires that administration of sentences be ca rried out with “regard to all relevant available 
information, including the stated  reasons and recommendations of the sentencing judge [and] other 
information from the trial or sent encing process….”  CCRA § 4(b). 
41 SPR interview with Warden Mike Ryan , Millhaven Institution (May 30, 2006). 
42 Correctional Service Canada, Commissioner’s Directive No. 560 ¶ 2 (1987). 
43 SPR interview with Dave Connor, supra  note 30. Stop Prisoner Rape 
Submission to the Justice and Human Rights Committee September 2006 19                                                                                                                                                
 
44 CCRA §§ 3(b), 4(d); see also  Corrections and Conditional Release Regulations 102 (requiring 
development of individual correction plan for each inmate). 
45 Carla I. Barrett, Does the Prison Rape Elimination Act Ad equately Address the Problems Posed by 
Prison Overcrowding? If Not, What Will? , 39 N EW ENG. L. REV. 391 (2005) (citing Johnson v. Levine , 588 
F.2d 1378, 1380 (4th Cir. 1978); Campbell v. Cauthron , 623 F.2d 503, 505-06 (8th Cir, 1980)); see also  
Terry A. Kupers, Rape and the Prison Code, in PRISON MASCULINITIES  111, 113 (Don Sabo, Terry A. 
Kupers, and Willie London eds., 2001) (discussing laws uit in which overcrowding caused young man to be 
raped by two gang members while in protective custody). 
46 Canada Criminal Code § 718.3 (1), (2). 
47 Canada Criminal Code § 725. 
48 Christopher D. Man & John P. Cronan, Forecasting Sexual Abuse in Prisons: The Prison Subculture of 
Masculinity as a Backdrop for ‘Deliberate Indifference, ’ 92 J.  CRIM, L. & CRIMINOLOGY  127, 173 (2001) 
(reviewing prior research that showed that the criminal history of prisoner rape victims was generally non-
violent).  
49 See CAROLYN WOLF HARLOW , BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS , FIREARM USE BY  OFFENDERS  4 (2001) 
(reporting that, in 1997, 62.3 percent of state prisoners and 41.6 percent of federal prisoners serving gun 
sentences were under 25 years old). 
50 For example, many forgery and property offenses, while serious, are not violent but would become swept 
into the zeal to incarcerate. See, e.g., Canada Criminal Code §§ 367 (authorizing sentence of up to ten years 
for forgery), 376 (authorizing sentence of up to four teen years for counterfeiting a stamp or mark), 455 
(authorizing sentence of up to 14 years for clipping and uttering a clipped coin). 