In Our
Recommendations by Prisoner Rape Survivors 
to the National Prison Rape Elimination Commission
Stop Prisoner Rape
Experience
In Our Experience  
Recommendations by Prisoner Rape Survivors 
to the National Prison Rape Elimination Commission
Developed at Stop Prisoner Rape’s  
Prisoner Rape Survivor Summit
February 16-17, 2007
Los Angeles, California
STOP PRISONER RAPEStop Prisoner Rape (SPR)  is a national human rights organization that seeks 
to put an end to sexual violence in all forms of detention. SPR works to: engender 
policies that ensure government accountability for prisoner rape; change flippant 
and ill-informed public attitudes toward sexual abuse behind bars; and promote 
access to services for survivors of this type of violence.  
Attributed reproduction of this report is encouraged.
This publication is provided for information only and does not constitute legal or medical advice. 
Nothing within this publication should be construed as a substitute for individualized legal, medical 
or psychological counsel. 
Copyright 2007 © Stop Prisoner Rape
Cover:  The portraits of the Survivor Summit participants were taken by photographer 
James Stenson. Left to right, top to bottom: Chino Hardin, Garrett Cunningham, Erica 
Hejnar, Thomas Clinton, Bryson Martel, Jason Lydon, Keith DeBlasio, Esmeralda Soto 
(large photo), Michael Williams (bottom left corner).STOP PRISONER RAPE
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340, Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400  •  Fax: (213) 384-1411
Email: info@spr.org
www.spr.org
Table of Contents
Introduction  1
Survivor Recommendations 3
I. Classification and Technology  3
II. Screening and Training 6
III. Reporting and Data 8
IV. Investigations and Evidence Protocols 10
V. Medical and Mental Health Services 11
Appendix A:  13
Survivor Participants
Appendix B:  15
Bipartisan Commission Applauds  
First-Ever Prison Rape Survivor Summit4 In Our ExperienceIntroduction 1Since the passage of the Prison Rape 
Elimination Act (PREA) in 2003, 
Stop Prisoner Rape (SPR) has worked 
hard to ensure that survivors of sexual 
abuse in detention are actively involved 
in the implementation of the law. The 
National Prison Rape Elimination Com -
mission (NPREC), which was established 
by PREA, is responsible for developing 
national standards to address prisoner rape.
SPR believes that survivor input into the 
development of these standards is crucial 
to making them relevant, comprehensive, 
and effective. 
On February 16-17, 2007, SPR brought 
together a diverse group of survivors from 
around the country for its first Prisoner 
Rape Survivor Summit, which was held in 
Los Angeles. These courageous individu -
als gathered to share their stories, to hone 
their public speaking and advocacy skills, 
and, perhaps most importantly, to develop 
their own set of recommendations for the 
NPREC. (Brief biographies of the survivor 
participants can be found in Appendix A.) 
Also attending the Survivor Summit were: 
SPR staff members; prisoner rape experts 
Terry Kupers, Robert Dumond, and Doris 
Dumond; Allison Parker of the Vera Institute of Justice; journalist Christal Smith; and 
photographer James Stenson.
The recommendations below represent 
the viewpoints and ideas of the survivors 
themselves. While SPR staff and expert 
consultants served as facilitators, the Sur -
vivor Summit was designed to elicit input 
directly from the survivors to the NPREC. 
Several participants expressed how impor -
tant it was for them to participate in the 
development of binding standards that 
will help to protect other inmates from 
sexual violence. The survivors appreciated 
greatly the NPREC’s explicit commitment 
to taking their perspectives into account. 
Appendix B contains a statement of sup -
port (“Bipartisan Commission Applauds 
First-Ever Prison Rape Survivor Summit”) 
issued by the NPREC just prior to the 
Survivor Summit. 
The participants organized their recom -
mendations around several key topics: clas -
sification and technology; screening and 
training; reporting and data; investigations 
and evidence protocols; and medical and 
mental health services. While all the sur -
vivors shared most of the views expressed 
in this document, there were differences of Introduction2 In Our Experience•  Staff training on sexual assault should 
be thorough and ongoing.
•  Within 24 hours after a sexual assault 
medical exam, facility personnel should 
arrange for the survivor to have access 
to confidential mental health counsel -
ing by a rape crisis counselor or other 
mental health professional from outside 
the facility.
•   The standard for forensic evidence col -
lection and logging within corrections 
facilities should be the same as that 
applied by law enforcement agencies in 
the community.opinion about some of the recommenda -
tions. This is not surprising given that the 
survivors represent a range of backgrounds, 
had vastly different experiences in custody, 
and attempted in just two days to devise 
solutions to a widespread and systemic 
human rights problem. 
Highlights of the survivors’ recommen -
dations include:
• Corrections facilities should utilize 
a protocol for responding to in -
stances of sexual assault that is stan -
dardized throughout the country.  
The terms “prisoner rape,” “sexual violence,” and “sexual abuse” are used in -
terchangeably in this document. Similarly, terms such as “inmate” and “cor -
rections official” are intended to be inclusive and applicable to those detained 
within and working at all the facilities to which the Prison Rape Elimination 
Act applies, including federal and state prisons, jails, juvenile and immigration 
detention centers, police-lock-ups, and Native American facilities.Survivor Recommendations 3A.  Ensuring Safety from Sexual  
     Violence in Housing Units
The survivors recommended that:
•  All corrections systems should seek to 
decrease overcrowding, as too many 
people in too limited a space—espe -
cially when coupled with understaff -
ing—creates opportunities for sexual 
predators.
•  Corrections officials should identify 
likely sexual predators and promptly Survivor Recommendations
remove them from general population 
housing. 
• Whenever possible, inmates in the 
general population who are likely to 
be targeted for sexual abuse should be 
given the option of being housed in a 
single cell. 
•  All cells should have emergency call 
buttons. 
•  The movements of corrections officials 
should be tracked, by requiring them I. Classification and Technology
The survivors’ primary concern was to ensure that inmates who are particularly vulner -
able to sexual abuse are able to serve their time in a secure environment without being 
penalized or stigmatized. Vulnerable inmates include those who are: young; lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, transgender or queer (LGBTQ); small in stature; physically or mentally disabled; 
or lacking experience in the criminal justice system. The Survivor Summit participants 
emphasized that classification should be a dynamic process throughout a person’s incar -
ceration, and that housing decisions are particularly critical in the aftermath of a sexual 
assault. They felt that modern technology, such as cameras, should be used more effectively, 
including as a tool for classification. 4 In Our Experienceto use magnetic scan cards to enter 
and leave common areas, cells, and 
dormitories. 
•  Corrections facilities should utilize 
designs that increase lines of sight and 
hearing in housing units. 
•  Facility administrators, including war -
dens and other senior executive staff, 
should make a point of walking through 
housing units and other parts of their 
facilities unannounced and actively 
engaging with the inmates. 
B. Safe Housing Options for  
Vulnerable Inmates  
The survivors recommended that:
•  Classification should consist of careful 
screening to ensure that all vulnerable 
inmates are protected from potential 
sexual predators.
•  Inmates who self-identify as, or may be 
perceived to be, LGBTQ should have 
the option of being housed in a non-
punitive protective custody yard or 
“special needs” dorm separate from the 
general population. Other vulnerable 
inmates should also have this option. 
•  Housing assignments for transgender 
inmates should be determined on a 
case-by-case basis, rather than solely 
based on their birth gender. Whenever 
possible, transgender women should 
be given the option of being placed in 
women’s facilities, and transgender men 
in men’s facilities. 
•  Despite the general vulnerability of 
certain inmate groups, classification 
determinations should take into ac -
count each inmate’s propensity toward violence and level of experience in the 
criminal justice system. For example, a 
gay inmate who has a history of predato -
ry behavior or physical violence should 
not automatically be housed with other 
LGBTQ inmates who are considered a 
low security risk. 
•    Juveniles, including those adjudicated as 
adults, should not be housed with adults 
under any circumstances.
•   Corrections officials should consult with 
outside organizations that have regular 
contact with vulnerable inmates, or 
that focus on the prevention of sexual 
assault and domestic violence, to obtain 
feedback on the content and practical 
implementation of classification pro -
cedures. 
•  Corrections officials should enable in -
mates to establish advisory councils that 
provide feedback on ways to improve the 
classification process. These inmates 
should also be allowed to provide ori -
entation to new inmates.
C. Housing Determinations Following  
a Sexual Assault
The survivors recommended that:
•  Once a sexual assault has occurred, 
corrections officials should evalu -
ate whether the survivor and/or the 
assailant should be reclassified and 
moved.
•  Housing for inmates who fear sexual as -
sault or who have been assaulted should 
not involve isolation, punitive condi -
tions or discrimination in the form of 
loss of privileges or programming, as 
these practices greatly deter inmates 
from reporting sexual assault.Survivor Recommendations 5• Corrections facilities should not 
automatically place inmates who report 
sexual abuse on suicide watch, which 
can be traumatizing and humiliating. 
Evaluation for placement on suicide 
watch should be done carefully on a 
case-by-case basis in consultation with 
mental health staff.
•  When it is deemed necessary, placement 
in administrative segregation, protec -
tive custody or other restrictive hous -
ing units should occur in consultation 
with the survivor, and should last only 
as long as needed to protect him or her.  
Such placement should be reviewed 
every 24 hours to determine whether 
the survivor can be moved to a less 
restrictive unit.
•  Assailants—not survivors—should be 
transferred to administrative segrega -
tion or other restrictive housing follow -
ing an assault. 
•  Assailants placed in restrictive housing 
should not be placed in the protective 
custody or administrative segregation 
pods in which vulnerable inmates are 
housed. 
•  When the assailant is a staff member, 
he or she should be placed on leave or 
transferred to a position that does not 
involve contact with inmates while an 
investigation is conducted. 
•  Corrections authorities should maintain 
the survivor’s access to his or her normal 
activities as much as possible following 
an assault and avoid removing access to 
primary sources of emotional support, 
such as fellow workers or cellmates. D. The Role of Technology in Making 
Facilities Safer
The survivors recommended that: 
•  Cameras should never be a substitute for 
well-trained staff, but should be used 
to improve classification processes and 
assist corrections officials in monitoring 
the safety of inmates. Modern technolo -
gies have the capacity to alert officials 
to high-risk areas within a facility and 
to staff who may be complicit in or fail 
to intervene in sexual abuse occurring 
on their watch.
•  The use of cameras as a means of pre -
venting sexual assault and facilitating 
investigations should be increased, 
particularly in areas known to have a 
high incidence of sexual assaults, such 
as housing units and recreation yards. 
Cameras should also be placed inside 
guard stations in each housing unit.
•  Because cameras are ineffective unless 
they are properly monitored, all cameras 
should be observed both by corrections 
officials stationed in the units and by 
personnel in a central administrative 
office.
•   Mapping systems (either in computer -
ized or manual form) should be imple -
mented in all corrections facilities in 
order to track incidents of sexual abuse 
and to maintain statistics on the number 
of assaults that occur in each area of a 
facility. Such statistics are important in 
determining instances when reclassifi -
cation of inmates may be warranted. 6 In Our ExperienceII. Screening and Training
The survivors emphasized the importance of thoroughly screening all corrections staff 
as part of the recruitment process and of offering them regular mandatory sexual vio -
lence awareness training. They insisted that staff training should aim not only to impart 
information regarding policies and procedures but also to transform corrections culture, 
addressing in particular the “us vs. them” dynamic commonly found in detention settings. 
As one survivor stated, “we should take down the wall that dehumanizes prisoners.” While 
the importance of staff training constituted the bulk of the discussion, the survivors also 
emphasized the need for appropriate inmate training and orientation that addresses the 
problem of sexual violence.
 
The survivors recommended that:
• Applicants for employment involving 
inmate contact should be carefully 
screened, including a mental health 
screening and a criminal background 
check. In addition, steps should be taken 
to prevent nepotism in hiring.
•  The U.S. Department of Justice should 
establish a national database of allega -
tions and convictions of corrections 
personnel for sexual abuse in correc -
tions facilities and in the community. 
The database should be searchable by 
the official’s name, be accessible only to 
corrections agencies, and must preserve 
the confidentiality of survivors and wit -
nesses. 
•  Corrections agencies should send a clear 
message to staff that less serious forms 
of inappropriate conduct which often set 
the stage for sexual abuse to occur, such 
as the use of derogatory language, will 
not be tolerated.
•  Corrections personnel who use sexualized 
language, including homophobic and 
sexist terminology, or who engage in 
other offensive or discriminatory behav -
ior toward inmates, should be properly 
reprimanded after the first instance. 
If the behavior continues, the official 
should be terminated. •  Staff training on sexual assault should be 
thorough and ongoing. It should consist 
of an initial, comprehensive training, 
with subsequent refresher sessions on a 
regular basis, and culminate in manda -
tory closed-book exams. Staff who do 
not pass the exams should be required 
to undergo the training and exams again 
and, if the deficiency persists, face disci -
plinary measures. 
•  Basic sexual violence awareness train -
ing should include: a clear statement 
that sexual abuse of inmates is a crime; 
strategies for identifying and protect -
ing vulnerable groups from abuse; and 
instruction on all related facility policies 
and procedures.
•  Training programs should emphasize 
that corrections officials should use 
their power and authority over inmates 
responsibly. Specifically, training should 
include a focus on the importance of 
sensitivity and tolerance, particularly 
in working with inmates from diverse 
backgrounds, such as people of color, 
LGBTQ inmates, and the mentally ill. 
•  Staff training should emphasize the 
crucial role of “first responders” – the 
first person to whom an inmate discloses 
incidents or threats of sexual abuse. 
First responders should be prepared 
to handle reports of sexual abuse in a Survivor Recommendations 7compassionate and professional manner 
without improperly stepping into an 
investigatory role.
•  Training should prepare first respond -
ers to carry out the critical initial steps 
of receiving reports of abuse: bringing 
these reports to the attention of the ap -
propriate supervisory staff immediately; 
ensuring that any necessary emergency 
medical or mental health treatment is 
provided; and accurately informing the 
inmate about what will happen next. 
 
• Staff should be made familiar with the 
wide range of common responses to sex -
ual assault and the difficulty of reporting 
a sexual assault in detention, including 
the potential for re-traumatization.
• Staff training should incorporate the 
international human rights framework, 
highlighting the fundamental dignity of 
all inmates and their absolute right to be 
free from sexual violence. •  Training sessions should be conducted 
jointly with rape crisis counselors so that 
corrections officials understand how 
coordinated Sexual Assault Response 
Teams (SART) function. 
•  Former inmates who are survivors 
should be involved in trainings for 
corrections personnel, providing a first-
hand perspective on what it is like to 
experience sexual abuse in prison and 
to navigate the corrections environment 
and grievance process. Survivors should 
only participate in trainings at facilities 
outside of the jurisdiction where they 
were incarcerated. 
•  Orientation should be provided for all 
inmates, emphasizing the human digni -
ty of their fellow inmates, their inalien -
able human right not to be subjected to 
sexual assault or coercion, and how the 
system will respond to such abuse. 8 In Our ExperienceIII. Reporting and Data
The survivors cautioned that PREA’s zero-tolerance standard can only be realized if prison -
ers feel safe reporting abuse. Most cases of sexual violence in detention go unreported, 
allowing impunity to fester and leaving survivors of this type of violence without access to 
many of the services they need. The survivors attributed this serious underreporting to a 
profound lack of faith in the ability of corrections systems to address appropriately cases 
of rape and sexual abuse. In many instances, they said, those who do come forward with 
formal complaints find that they are not believed, that no valid investigation is undertaken 
or that the abuse is covered up. Several participants highlighted the fact that the internal 
complaint processes at the facilities in which they were held failed to ensure confidentiality 
and thus placed them at risk for retaliation and further abuse. 
The survivors recommended that:
• Reports of sexual abuse or threats there-
of should be handled in a truly confiden -
tial manner, such that only personnel 
who have an active role in an investiga -
tion have access to the information. 
• Corrections agencies should take all 
appropriate steps to ensure that inmates 
who report sexual violence are protected 
from retaliation by staff members who 
may be involved or complicit in the 
abuse. 
• Tamper-proof signs should be posted 
throughout every facility containing 
the following information: that the fa -
cility does not tolerate sexual coercion, 
harassment or abuse; that inmates have 
a right to confidential medical care and 
counseling if they have been victimized; 
and the various options for reporting 
sexual abuse confidentially.
• External oversight mechanisms are 
essential in addressing sexual violence 
in detention. Inmates who have been 
sexually assaulted should be able to take 
their complaints to an outside entity that 
is independent both of the facility and of 
the corrections agency that runs it.  
• It should be clearly communicated to inmates that they have the option of re -
porting sexual abuse in a variety of ways 
and that they are not required to report 
to corrections staff or other internal 
officials before seeking assistance from 
law enforcement or external moni -
toring bodies. This message should 
be included in inmate handbooks and 
on signs posted in the facility. 
•  Inmates who choose to report their 
abuse to facility staff should be able 
to file a formal complaint to any staff 
member, bypassing the usual chain of 
command, so that nobody is faced with 
the unacceptable scenario of having to 
report an assault to the perpetrator.
•  Survivors should never be forced to seek 
to resolve a sexual abuse-related griev -
ance involving a corrections official by 
speaking with that official before being 
allowed to file a formal complaint.
•  A private, secure line should be acces -
sible to inmates from phones in each unit 
of every corrections facility to either an 
external law enforcement agency, such 
as the state police, or an external over -
sight body, such as an ombudsperson’s 
or inspector general’s office. 
•  Toll-free phone numbers for local 
rape crisis agencies should be available Survivor Recommendations 9• Corrections agencies should exempt 
grievances alleging sexual assault from 
any institutional filing deadlines. 
• Corrections facilities should fully 
inform inmates of the need to fulfill 
administrative exhaustion requirements 
in order to pursue legal action for sexual 
abuse and other constitutional violations 
in detention.
•  An inmate advisory council should be 
established to work with corrections 
officials to ensure that inmates feel safe 
filing formal complaints. The council 
members should encourage reporting by 
conducting orientation sessions, and by 
assisting inmates who need help navigat -
ing the procedures for reporting abuse 
and seeking specific remedies such as 
housing transfers.
•  All allegations of sexual abuse should be 
entered into a national, publicly avail -
able and searchable database, omitting 
information that identifies survivors and 
witnesses.and made clearly visible in each unit 
on mounted tamper-resistant plaques. 
Inmates should be allowed to dial these 
numbers with confidentiality and at no 
charge. Corrections facilities should 
seek to enter into memoranda of under -
standing with local agencies to memori -
alize this collaboration.
•  Locked boxes for inmate grievances 
should be accessible to all inmates. Only 
senior investigative officials should have 
access to such boxes. In general popula -
tion, they should be located in areas that 
inmates visit frequently. However, they 
should also be placed in areas like in -
firmaries and recreation yards to which 
inmates who are not housed among the 
general population have access. The 
locked boxes should be designated for 
receiving complaints about a variety of 
issues, not only sexual abuse.
•  Corrections officials should ensure that 
the legal mail system is not subject to 
tampering or interference by correc -
tions personnel.10 In Our ExperienceThe survivors recommended that:
•  Sexual assault investigations, particularly 
those of abuse by corrections person -
nel, should be handled by independent 
officials from outside the corrections 
agency that runs the facility where the 
assault occurred. The investigators 
should operate as a part of a coordinated 
Sexual Assault Response Team (SART), 
along with medical staff and an external 
rape crisis advocate.
•  In corrections departments where al -
legations of sexual misconduct by 
employees are handled internally, an 
external, independent oversight agency 
should have the authority to conduct an 
independent review.
•  The standard for forensic evidence col -
lection and logging within corrections 
facilities should be the same as that ap -
plied by law enforcement agencies in the 
community, and should be standardized 
throughout the country. 
•  Whenever possible, corrections facili -
ties should have a trained on-site crime 
scene expert who is responsible for 
evidence collection. 
•  Investigative officials should have the 
discretion to restrict staff access to 
inmate reports of sexual abuse—an 
important means of preventing retali -
ation by staff about whom an inmate has 
expressed concerns.•  When a staff person is alleged to have 
sexually abused an inmate, he or she 
should be put on leave during the inves -
tigation or moved to a position where he 
or she will have no inmate contact. 
•  Corrections agencies should hold ac -
countable employees who fail to in -
tervene in instances of sexual abuse or 
coercion by inmate assailants.
•  Survivors of sexual assault should be 
provided a full overview of the investi -
gation process. Officials in charge of the 
investigation should keep the survivor 
apprised of its status and outcome.
•  Investigations of sexual abuse should 
focus on uncovering evidence of wrong -
doing by the assailant. If the inves -
tigation uncovers a minor violation 
of institutional rules by the survivor, 
the infraction should be overlooked in 
the interest of addressing the reported 
sexual assault. 
•  Corrections facilities should collaborate 
with local prosecutors, supporting the 
prosecution of sexual assault cases. 
•  When appropriate, sexual assaults of 
LGBTQ inmates should be prosecuted 
as hate crimes.
•  An inmate must never be required to 
participate in an investigation in order 
to make a formal report or to access 
medical or mental health services.IV. Investigations and Evidence Protocols
Many of the recommendations the su rvivors made regarding the handling of investiga -
tions of sexual abuse apply whether the assailant is an inmate or an official. However, 
the survivors were particularly concerned about the potential for conflict when correc -
tions staff investigate allegations of abuse by their peers. They expressed frustration that 
investigations into sexual abuse in detention are not consistently handled according to the 
same standards as crimes in the community. Survivor Recommendations 11V. Medical and Mental Health Services
The survivors called for cases of sexual assault behind bars to be treated with the same level 
of urgency, professionalism, and concern for the survivor’s well-being as has come to be 
expected in the community. In the aftermath of an assault, immediate access to medical 
services is essential, both to help survivors begin their recovery and to gather the kind of 
forensic evidence that is essential for the prosecution of this type of violence. In addition, 
the survivors emphasized that access to mental health care upon request is critical to long-
term well-being after a sexual assault. 
The survivors recommended that:
•  Sexual assault exams and related evi -
dence collection procedures should only 
be carried out with the survivor’s in -
formed, written consent, and should be 
conducted in conjunction with a Sexual 
Assault Response Team (SART) in order 
to ensure the integrity of the protocol 
and minimize the level of trauma for 
the victim. 
•  Corrections facilities should utilize a 
protocol for responding to instances 
of sexual assault that is standardized 
throughout the country.
•  SART teams responding to cases of sex -
ual assault in detention should include 
a rape crisis advocate, law enforcement 
representatives, and a Sexual Assault 
Nurse Examiner (SANE).
•  Sexual assault survivors should never be 
required to make a report of sexual abuse 
or to fill out documentation of any sort 
in order to access medical and mental 
health counseling services. 
•  The determination of whether a rape kit 
is needed should be made by a SANE, 
and not by corrections personnel or law 
enforcement. 
•  In order to maintain transparency, 
sexual assault examinations should be 
performed off-site at an independent 
medical facility whenever possible. •  Corrections facilities that conduct sexual 
assault examinations on-site should have 
medical staff who are trained in treating 
survivors of sexual assault on call at all 
times, and have state-of-the-art rape 
kits available. 
•  A trained victim advocate from a local 
rape crisis center should be present dur -
ing sexual assault exams and, whenever 
possible, corrections officials should be 
prohibited from entering the room dur -
ing the examination.
 
•  Within 24 hours after a sexual assault 
exam, facility personnel should arrange 
for the survivor to have access to con -
fidential mental health counseling by 
a rape crisis counselor or other mental 
health professional from outside the 
facility.
•  All facility mental health personnel 
should be trained in treating survivors 
of sexual assault and be allowed to offer 
confidential inmate counseling. 
•  Facility mental health staff should be 
alerted immediately when an instance of 
sexual abuse comes to light. A member 
of that staff should be on call around 
the clock. 
•  When an allegation of rape is made, 
medical staff should provide the survivor 
with information about sexually trans -
mitted diseases (STDs), including HIV, 
and pregnancy options. The assailant 12 In Our Experienceshould also be given information about 
STDs, and should be asked to consent 
to HIV testing.
•  HIV prophylactics and emergency con -
traception should be provided to survi -
vors; testing for HIV and other STDs 
(along with treatment and counseling) should be available to all inmates at any 
time upon request.
•  As part of re-entry planning, correc -
tions facilities should provide inmates 
with information about free or low-cost 
mental health care in the communities 
to which they are returning. 
 Appendix A 13Survivor Participants
 
While in the custody of the California 
Department of Corrections and Re -
habilitation, Thomas Clinton  was sexually 
assaulted by another inmate. After filing a 
report and being rebuffed by corrections 
staff, he suffered various forms of retalia -
tion as he attempted to navigate a difficult 
inmate grievance process. Since being 
released from custody, he has continued to 
fight for the rights of California inmates.
A corrections officer raped Garrett Cun -
ningham  while he was an inmate at a Texas 
state prison. Today, Mr. Cunningham 
runs a prison pen pal service and recently 
testified before the Texas Legislature at a 
hearing on a state law aimed at addressing 
sexual violence in Texas Department of 
Criminal Justice facilities.
Keith DeBlasio  was repeatedly raped by a 
gang member while housed in a dormitory 
with 150 other inmates at a federal prison 
in Michigan. Although he had told prison 
officials of his assailant’s threats, nothing 
was done to protect Mr. DeBlasio, who con -
tracted HIV as a result of the rapes. He has since become an advocate for prison 
reform and is the Executive Director of 
the non-profit organization AdvoCare, in 
West Virginia.
In her youth, Chino Hardin  was the 
victim of an attempted rape by an older 
inmate while incarcerated in a New York 
adult corrections institution. Today, Ms. 
Hardin works as a Workshop Coordinator 
with the Prison Moratorium Project and is 
a leading activist on prison issues in New 
York state. 
After being wrongfully arrested and taken 
to a Philadelphia lock-up, Erica Hejnar  
and her female friend were forced to per -
form sex acts on one another by a police 
officer. Although she faced tremendous 
barriers in her efforts to hold the Phila -
delphia Police Department accountable, a 
recent independent investigation substanti -
ated her allegations and the police officer 
was fired.
Jason Lydon  was arrested on a non-vio -
lent charge and placed in the custody of Appendix A14 In Our Experiencethe Federal Bureau of Prisons. He was 
subjected to a sexually abusive and humili -
ating strip search by a corrections officer. 
Since his release, Mr. Lydon has become 
an outspoken activist on behalf of LGBTQ 
prisoners and works as a pastor with the 
Community Church of Boston.
Bryson Martel  was raped by more than 
25 other inmates over the course of nine 
months during his incarceration at an Ar -
kansas state prison. He contracted HIV as a 
result of the attacks. Although he reported 
the attacks, prison officials failed to provide 
Mr. Martel, who weighed only 123 pounds 
at the time, safe housing. He currently lives 
in Michigan. 
An immigration official forced Esmer -
alda Soto , a transgender woman, to 
perform oral sex on him while she was in 
custody at an Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) detention facility in 
California. After reporting the abuse, Ms. 
Soto suffered various forms of retaliation 
and often feared for her life.  The official 
later resigned and was sentenced to four 
months in jail. Ms. Soto, who came to the 
U.S. seeking asylum, had also been raped 
by a male inmate while detained at a jail in 
her native Mexico. She currently resides in 
Southern California.
Michael Williams  was wrongfully con -
victed for the rape of his high school math 
tutor when he was 16 years old. He spent 
more than 24 years behind bars at the 
Louisiana State Penitentiary at Angola. 
On multiple occasions, corrections officers 
handcuffed Mr. Williams to the bars of 
his cell door, allowing other inmates to 
sexually assault him. Mr. Williams was 
exonerated in 2005 with the assistance of 
the Innocence Project. Appendix B 15For Immediate Release: 
Crime/Justice/Prisons Reporters and Editors 
February 15, 2007      Contact: Mark Glaze, 202-271-0982 
BIPARTISAN COMMISSION APPLAUDS FIRST-EVER
PRISON RAPE SURVIVOR SUMMIT 
Federal Panel Anticipates Important Input from “Stop Prisoner Rape” Conference 
Washington, D.C. – The National Prison Rape Elimination Commission (NPREC) today 
released the following statement lauding the Prison Rape Survivor Summit to be held in Los 
Angeles on February 16 and 17, 2007.  The event was organized by Stop Prisoner Rape 
(SPR), a national human rights organization dedi cated to ending sexual violence in detention. 
“We commend Stop Prisoner Rape for their invaluable efforts to hear and 
understand the unique challenges faced by the survivors of sexual violence 
behind bars.  SPR has been at the fore front of the national effort to prevent 
sexual assault in detention.  We thank them and all the participants in this 
important Prison Rape Survivor Summit for their brave and tireless work, and 
for giving voices to the victims of this serious problem. 
“Every year, 600,000 inmates are released into communities across the nation.  
Those who have been the victims of sexual assault – like all other victims of 
sexual abuse – will deal for the rest of their lives with its physical and 
psychological repercussions.  Preventing  prison rape, and helping those who 
have been victimized, must be a top priority in every detention facility in the 
United States.  Zero tolerance is the only acceptable standard. 
“We very much look forward to receiving the policy recommendations that will 
arise from this week’s event, and to cont inuing to work in partnership with SPR 
and others to ensure that our nation’s detention facilities protect the basic human 
dignity of all.” 
The National Prison Rape Elimination Commission was created by the Prison Rape 
Elimination Act of 2003 and charged with deve loping zero-tolerance national standards for 
enhancing the detection, prevention, reduction, and punishment of sexual violence behind 
bars.  Congress found that almost a million prisoners had been sexually assaulted in the 
twenty years prior to the passage of the Act.  The prisoners most likely to be assaulted are 
first-time, non-violent juvenile offenders.
Appendix B