T ortured & Detained
Survivor Stories of  
U.S. Immigration DetentionNOVEMBER 2013ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
CVT and TASSC would like to thank UUSC for their 
generous support. In addition, we would like to thank 
the individuals we interviewed and profiled for this 
report, as well as staff at the Florence Immigrant 
and Refugee Rights Project (FIRRP) in Florence, 
AZ; Casa Mariposa in T ucson, AZ; the Refugee and 
Immigrant Center for Education and Legal Services 
(RAICES) in San Antonio, TX; Casa Marinella in 
Austin, TX; and Ethiopian Community Support 
Services in Washington, D.C. The primary researcher 
and writer of this report is Annie Sovcik. Additional 
research and/or editing were provided by Scott 
Wright, Melina Milazzo, David Gangsei, Ann Willhoite, 
Marie Soueid, and Katherine Cosgrove. We would also 
like to thank Ruthie Epstein from the American Civil 
Liberties Union and Brittney Nystrom from Lutheran 
Immigration and Refugee Service for their helpful 
feedback and suggestions.
 ©2013, The Center for Victims of T orture, T orture 
Abolition Survivor Support Coalition, International, 
and Unitarian Universalist Service CommitteeThe Center for Victims of Torture (CVT)  is an 
international non-profit organization dedicated to 
healing survivors of torture and war atrocities and 
to work for a world without torture. CVT is present 
in fifteen countries, providing direct rehabilitation 
services at its healing sites in Minnesota, the Middle 
East, and Africa, and training or supporting partners 
in the United States and abroad who are working to 
prevent and treat torture. CVT advocates for human 
rights and an end to torture through CVT’s New 
T actics in Human Rights program and through our 
policy work in Washington, D.C.
www.cvt.org
The Torture Abolition and Survivor Support 
Coalition, International (TASSC) is the only 
organization in the United States founded by and for 
survivors of torture. TASSC operates independently 
of any political ideology, economic interest, 
governmental influence, or religion. TASSC members 
represent countries and ethnic groups from all parts 
of the world and advocate to abolish the practice of 
torture wherever it occurs.
www.tascc.orgThe Unitarian Universalist Service Committee 
(UUSC)  is a nonsectarian organization that advances 
human rights and social justice in the United States 
and around the world. UUSC envisions a world free 
from oppression and injustice, where all can realize 
their full human rights. Through a combination 
of advocacy, education, and partnerships with 
grassroots organizations, UUSC promotes economic 
rights, advances environmental justice, defends civil 
liberties, and preserves the rights of people in times 
of humanitarian crisis. 
www.uusc.org1
NOVEMBER 2013T ortured & Detained
Survivor Stories of  
U.S. Immigration Detention
CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION  ............................................................................................................................................... page 2
PURPOSE AND METHODOLOGY  .................................................................................................................... page 4
SURVIVOR JOURNEYS  .................................................................................................................................... page 5
WELCOME TO AMERICA  .................................................................................................................................. page 6
Apprehended & Detained: How Survivors of T orture End Up in Immigration Detention
Asylum Seekers in Expedited Removal
Conditions of Confinement at Holding Cells on U.S.  Border
CONFUSED AND ISOLATED  .......................................................................................................................... page 10
The Impact of Indefinite Detention
Exacerbating T rauma
Limitations on Access to Legal Counsel and Information
OTHER OPTIONS: ADDRESSING BARRIERS TO RELEASE AND COMMUNITY  SUPPORT  ...................... page 16
DHS/ICE Detention Reforms
Community Based Alternatives to Detention
BEYOND DETENTION  .................................................................................................................................... page 19
RECOMMENDATIONS  ................................................................................................................................... page 20
Welcome to America
Confused and Isolated
Other Options: Addressing Barriers to Release and Community Support
Beyond Detention2
NOVEMBER 2013INTRODUCTION
Fahran worked as a translator to the U.S. Army in 
Afghanistan. He fled to the United States after being 
targeted for this work. After several months of travel 
via planes, road, and rivers through Dubai, Brazil, 
Ecuador, Colombia, Central America, and Mexico, he 
arrived at the U.S. border. “I was tired, thirsty, hungry, 
and in bad health conditions, including cuts on my 
legs that were infected. I was put in a cell for 24 hours, 
given a little piece of bread and some water. The 
floor was cement. I was begging for help. ” In these 
conditions, he was interviewed by Border Patrol for 
three hours. He was taken to the Laredo Contract 
Detention Facility before being transferred to the 
South T exas Detention Center in Pearsall, TX, where 
he remained for 23 months before being granted 
asylum. During that time he kept thinking, “I was on 
the frontline for the United States. I left my family, my 
life, for safety. Now I’m in a cell. ” He recalls, “I was so 
ashamed to tell my family at home I was locked up. ”
After a journey that may be long and treacherous, 
survivors of torture who arrive at the U.S. border in 
search of asylum often believe they have reached a 
destination of safety and protection. As a party to the 
1967 Protocol to the 1951 United Nations Convention 
Relating to the Status of Refugees and the United 
Nations Convention Against T orture and Other Cruel, 
Inhuman and Degrading T reatment (CAT), the United 
States has committed itself to uphold the principle of 
non-refoulement and not return refugees to countries 
where their life or freedom would be threatened and 
where they are more likely than not to be tortured. 
The United States enshrined these principles into 
domestic law and established formal procedures for 
adjudicating applications for Asylum, Withholding of 
Removal and CAT protection. 
Beza, a Christian woman fleeing religious persecution 
in Eritrea, arrived at the U.S. port of entry at Hidalgo, 
TX, and asked for protection. “I was shocked, ” she 
explained. “I walked to the border to ask for asylum 
and was put into a small cell with eight people. There was a toilet in the middle. I was there for 24 hours with 
nothing—no blanket or mattress, just a cement bench. 
It was so cold. ”
As they flee for their lives, most survivors of torture 
carry the heavy weight of multiple and cumulative 
traumas in addition to the on-going traumatic 
experiences that can be associated with being a 
refugee. Receiving asylum in the United States can be 
a lifeline to safety and provide a path to healing but 
when asylum seekers arrive at a U.S. border or port 
of entry, they are frequently shocked at the treatment 
they endure upon reaching “safety” and “protection, ” 
as they are arrested, shackled, and confined. This 
report estimates that in less than three years – from 
October 2010 to February 2013 – the United States 
detained approximately 6,000 survivors of torture as 
they were seeking asylum protection.
In conducting interviews with asylum seekers and 
survivors of torture who have been held in immigration 
detention, the Center for Victims of T orture (CVT) 
and the T orture Abolition Survivor Support Coalition, 
International (TASSC) found that asylum seekers are 
often in disbelief that they have been criminalized by 
virtue of trying to find protection. They describe feeling 
dehumanized by the conditions under which they 
are held—both in short-term holding cells managed 
by U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) and in 
the detention centers used by U.S. Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement (ICE). They recall the utter state 
of confusion and isolation they feel as they are held 
with limited access to information about their situation 
and without knowledge of when—or if—they will be 
released. Moreover, while in custody, many suffer an 
on-going sense of dread at the possibility they may 
be returned to the country in which they experienced 
torture and/or other forms of persecution and/or in 
which they fear being subjected to future torture or 
other forms of persecution.
Detention is a daunting experience for anyone but 
particularly egregious for survivors of torture. For 
survivors, given the long-term impacts of torture 3
NOVEMBER 2013T o the Department of Homeland Security: 
•	Promulgate regulations establishing basic 
minimum standards of care at all U.S. Customs 
and Border Protection facilities; 
•	Clarify that placement in a secure alternative 
to detention program can be considered 
“custody” for purposes of mandatory detention 
requirements; and
•	Cease using actual jails and prisons for 
immigration detention purposes.
T o the Department of Justice: 
•	Expand the Legal Orientation Program to serve 
all detention facilities used by ICE and guarantee 
that all immigrants in detention receive a legal 
orientation presentation as soon as possible; and
•	Establish systems for government-funded 
counsel for survivors of torture and other 
particularly vulnerable immigrants in detention.
Given the extreme hardship, particularly in light of less 
expensive and more humane alternatives, survivors 
of torture should not be detained. Nevertheless, when 
they are, ICE should seek to facilitate their safe and 
supported release as soon as possible, including by 
ensuring they have access to legal information and 
legal counsel at every step along the way. and trauma, the fact of being detained at all is often 
retraumatizing. Further, particular elements inherent in 
the detention experience—including a profound sense 
of powerlessness and loss of control—may recapitulate 
the torture experience. Beyond this, the indefinite 
nature of immigration detention is a blanket over it all, 
contributing to severe, chronic emotional distress.
This report offers several recommendations of steps 
that Congress, the Department of Homeland Security 
and the Department of Justice can take to mitigate the 
harmful impact of detention on survivors of torture 
and improve the immigration detention system overall, 
including:
T o Congress: 
•	Provide the Executive Office for Immigration 
Review with adequate funding for nationwide 
expansion of the Legal Orientation Program and 
legal counsel programs;
•	Eliminate mandatory detention and cease 
mandating that U.S. Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement (ICE) detain a set number of 
individuals daily so that all detention decisions 
can be made on a case-by-case basis and 
alternatives to detention programs can be fully 
utilized; and 
•	Provide funding to support Community Based 
Alternative to Detention Programs to facilitate the 
safe and supported release of survivors of torture 
and reduce ICE’s overall reliance on detention. “As they flee for their lives, most survivors of torture carry the heavy 
weight of multiple and cumulative traumas in addition to the on-going 
traumatic experiences that can be associated with being a refugee. ”4
NOVEMBER 2013PURPOSE AND  
METHODOLOGY 
This report focuses on the personal and psychological 
aspects of the detention experience, from 
apprehension to release, and seeks to offer insights 
– through first-hand accounts to the extent possible 
– into what asylum seekers and survivors of torture 
are seeing, thinking, and feeling as they arrive in the 
United States, a perceived destination of “safety, ” and 
subsequently endure shock and confusion at being 
arrested and detained. This report does not attempt 
to provide a comprehensive assessment of the current 
state of the U.S. immigration detention system. The 
recommendations contained at the end focus on 
meeting the unique needs of survivors of torture but 
most would benefit the U.S. immigration detention 
system more broadly. 
The profiles in this report are comprised of self-
reported information from the 22 individuals 
we interviewed in June and July of 2013, though 
the accounts described here are all consistent 
with secondary research into U.S. immigration 
laws, procedures, and practices. The challenges 
interviewees reported are, likewise, consistent 
with other in-depth reports of the U.S. immigration 
detention system. Secondary research into trauma 
and its effects as well as interviews with clinicians 
from CVT provided additional perspectives into the particular impact detention has on survivors of 
torture. All participants consented to having their 
stories included in this report and used for public 
purposes. However, to protect individual identities 
we have changed all names and chose not to include 
any information that would make the individual easily 
identifiable. See Appendix A for a basic demographic 
breakdown of the individuals we interviewed.
In conducting interviews, we did not inquire into the 
individual’s experiences of torture or persecution but 
allowed them to share those aspects of their life as 
they determined. In the course of interviews, some 
participants specifically self-identified as survivors 
of torture while others did not offer information one 
way or another. All filed applications for asylum and 
indicated their primary reason for coming to the 
United States was to find safety—to flee persecution 
and/or torture. We determined that to inquire deeply 
into the reasons for which they fled their countries of 
origin would have been superfluous to the purpose 
of this report and could have risked retraumatizing 
the resilient survivors who generously shared their 
time, reflections, and trust. Without their openness—
to no personal benefit—a report like this would not 
be possible. As individuals they represent courage, 
resilience, and hope. They offer inspiring insights 
into the rich capacity of the human spirit to struggle, 
survive and persevere. We are humbled by their 
strength. 5
NOVEMBER 2013in this abhorrent human rights abuse—or being 
complicit in its practice—governments create a 
climate of fear that silences their residents, shatters 
trust, and suppresses civic engagement. Beyond that, 
torture is often indicative of broader human rights 
violations and abuses of power. Consequently, refugee 
survivors of torture are often fleeing situations in 
which genocide, war, military dictatorships, organized 
violence, massacres, disappearances, displacements, 
violent repression or other gross violations of human 
rights have occurred. 
The U.S. Department of Justice has estimated that 
there are over 500,000 survivors of torture in the 
United States.7 While the exact number of survivors 
of torture seeking asylum in the United States on an 
annual basis is not tracked, by applying the overall 
torture prevalence rate of 5-35% for refugees,8 it is 
reasonable to estimate that of the 29,484 refugees 
who were granted asylum in the United States in 
Fiscal Y ear 2012, up to 10,319 of them are survivors 
of torture.9 By applying the same formula to an 
estimated number of asylum seekers held in U.S. 
immigration detention, it is reasonable to estimate 
that in less than three years – from October 2010 
to February 2013 – the United States detained 
approximately 6,000 survivors of torture as they were 
seeking asylum protection.10SURVIVOR JOURNEYS
T orture is defined in U.S. law as an act “specifically 
intended to inflict severe physical or mental pain or 
suffering upon another person. ” 1 The legal definition 
requires the victim to be in the “custody or physical 
control” of another and the act must be committed “at 
the instigation or acquiescence of a public official. ”2 
Despite its universal condemnation and absolute 
prohibition, approximately 117 countries worldwide 
still practice torture.3 
T orture induces long-term suffering that leaves 
bodies and minds broken.4 Many of torture’s survivors 
remain captive to their traumatic past, suffering from 
deep feelings of shame, self-blame, guilt, humiliation 
and loss of control.5 They describe being haunted 
by intrusive memories, excessive rumination and 
nightmares, with repeated episodes of actively re-
experiencing past traumas. Survivors have often 
lost their sense of safety, feel unable to attach to 
meaningful relationships, question their sense of 
justice in the world, feel that their identity and role 
in society is erased, and grapple with existential 
questions about life. They struggle with sleep 
disorders, anxiety, chronic pain, irritability, startle 
responses, suicidal ideation, and depression. Many 
report feeling 
“dead” inside and 
may describe 
themselves as 
if they are living 
outside their 
body, physically 
and emotionally 
numb, socially 
estranged and 
profoundly alone. 
T orture instills 
“the fear of the 
unfathomable” 
into society.6 
By engaging “Refugee survivors 
of torture are often 
fleeing situations in 
which genocide, war, 
military dictatorships, 
organized violence, 
massacres, disap -
pearances, displace -
ments, violent repres -
sion or other gross 
violations of human 
rights have occurred. ”“It is reasonable to estimate that in 
less than three years–from October 
2010 to February 2013–the United 
States detained approximately 
6,000 survivors of torture as they 
were seeking asylum protection. ”6
NOVEMBER 2013WELCOME TO AMERICA
Helina walked up to U.S. Customs and Border 
Protection (CBP) officials at the San Ysidro, CA port 
of entry and asked for asylum, having fled Ethiopia for 
political reasons. She had spent several long months 
on a dangerous journey through Sudan, Dubai, Cuba, 
Ecuador, then traveling by land (walking, buses, train) 
and water through Colombia, Central America, and 
Mexico, before arriving in the United States. “When 
I started my journey, ” she reflected, “I thought there 
was democracy in America. I did not expect what I 
experienced. I expected when I asked for help, I would 
get it. First, it seemed like we were welcome but 
then we were not. ” She described being handcuffed, 
searched, given some paperwork, and taken into a 
cold room. “The room was cold. There was no shower. 
We couldn’t change our clothes. The bathroom was 
in the same small room. The toilet was steel and the 
room smelled like a toilet. There was a short wall but 
no privacy. Y ou could smell everything. The room was 
crowded and people kept coming and going. There 
was nowhere, except a cold steel stool, to sit or sleep. I 
was kept in that room for 7 days. ” 
As they flee for their lives, most survivors of torture 
carry the heavy weight of multiple and cumulative 
traumas in addition to the on-going traumatic 
experiences that can be associated with being a 
refugee and grieving the loss of a “normal” life, 
including separation from family, alienation from 
language or culture, loss of home or livelihood, and 
fear of the unknown. This ongoing trauma further 
challenges a person’s sense of self or feelings of 
connectedness to community, culture or the future.11 
Asylum in the United States can be a lifeline to 
safety and offer a path to healing, but, as survivors 
go through the asylum process and continue to live 
with the constant fear of being returned to their place 
of torture, the traumatic experiences continue. This 
trauma is particularly acute for survivors of torture 
who are detained upon arrival in the United States, a 
place of previously perceived “safety. ” When Pablo and his wife arrived at the U.S. port of 
entry, fleeing persecution in Colombia, they presented 
themselves to CBP officials and asked for asylum. 
“At the border, ” recalled Pablo, “Immigration tried to 
force us to sign some papers and go back to Mexico. 
We kept saying ‘we are here for help. ’” Pablo  and his 
wife were both handcuffed and taken to Laredo, TX, 
but were separated soon after. She was sent to a 
facility in T aylor, TX, while Pablo was shackled—hands, 
waist and feet—and put on a plane to another facility 
in Buffalo, NY. “I kept saying, ‘I’m here to apply for 
asylum in the United States. Why are you treating me 
this way?’ It was very traumatic to be arrested and 
separated like that. ” 
Apprehended & Detained: How Survivors of 
T orture End Up in Immigration Detention
T orture survivors seeking asylum protection in the 
United States may be detained upon arrival at an 
airport or border port of entry or may be apprehended 
on the border or in the interior of the United States. 
Under Section 235 of the Immigration and Nationality 
Act (INA) when a non-citizen is apprehended without 
proper documentation at a port of entry by CBP or 
within 100 miles of the border and 14 days of entry 
into the United States by either U.S. Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement (ICE) or Border Patrol, she 
is placed into Expedited Removal proceedings and 
deported without further hearings or review, unless 
she expresses a fear of return or an intention to apply 
for asylum.12 By contrast, when ICE apprehends a 
non-citizen without proper documentation in the 
interior of the United States, it generally issues a 
Notice to Appear (NTA) charging document and 
places the individual in removal proceedings before 
an immigration court, during which time the individual 
may be detained under INA Section 236. 
Under current law, an asylum seeker in Expedited 
Removal is held in mandatory detention until she 
passes a “credible fear” interview.13 This interview, 
which assesses whether the applicant has a significant 
possibility of establishing eligibility for asylum,14 is 
conducted by an Asylum Officer from U.S. Citizenship 7
NOVEMBER 2013and Immigration Services (USCIS). The interview may 
be conducted in person, by telephone or via video-
teleconferencing. USCIS says that the agency strives 
to complete 80% of credible fear interviews within 14 
days of a case being referred by ICE or CBP , though 
as asylum applicants at the border have increased 
significantly in the past year, demand on USCIS 
resources has also increased and wait times have 
gotten longer.15 
Asylum Seekers in Expedited Removal
An asylum seeker in Expedited Removal who is found 
to have a credible fear of persecution if returned to 
her home country is referred to immigration court 
for a full hearing on her asylum claim. At this point, 
she may be eligible for release on parole, bond, or 
recognizance, depending on a variety of factors. T o be 
eligible for parole, she must have been apprehended 
by CBP at a port of entry and classified as “arriving. ” 
In order to be released, she must prove her identity, 
demonstrate to the satisfaction of ICE she is not a risk 
to the safety of the community or national security, 
and establish she has sufficient community ties to 
not constitute risk of flight, including an address 
and place of residence.16 ICE’s parole decisions for 
“arriving” asylum seekers are not subject to review by 
an immigration judge or other independent court. 
Non-“arriving” asylum seekers—those apprehended 
between a port of entry or within 100 miles of the 
border and 14 days of entry into the United States—
are not eligible for parole but may be eligible for 
bond or release on recognizance. T o be released on 
bond, the individual generally must prove her identity, 
provide evidence of financial stability, demonstrate 
lack of criminal history, and show community ties, 
including an address and place of residence. By 
statue, the minimum amount a bond may be set by 
ICE or an immigration judge is $1,500 though the 
amount is often much higher.17 Given that many 
survivors of torture seeking asylum in the United 
States arrive with limited savings or only the clothes 
on their back, high bond amounts are the equivalent of being denied release if the amount is beyond any 
the individual could pay. ICE’s decisions on bond for 
non-“arriving” asylum seekers are subject to review, 
known as a “bond redetermination” hearing, by an 
immigration judge. 
There are no statutory limits to the amount of time 
a non-citizen may be held in immigration detention. 
When the steps described above go smoothly, asylum 
seekers tend to be released from detention within 
about four to six weeks of apprehension; however, 
others are kept in immigration detention for several 
months or even years, often because they lack a 
suitable housing option, cannot adequately prove their 
identity and/or are unable to afford the bond amount 
set by ICE or the immigration judge. This practice 
continues despite the availability and proven success 
of alternative to detention programs, discussed in 
greater detail under the “Other Options: Addressing 
Barriers to Release and Community Support” section 
of this report. Even when the individual has their 
documentation in order and a suitable housing option, 
detention time may be longer due to challenges with 
interagency coordination or delays resulting from 
backlogs at USCIS or in the immigration courts. 
CBP , ICE and USCIS are all agencies within the U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS), while the 
immigration courts are within the U.S. Department of 
Justice (DOJ), Executive Office for Immigration Review 
(EOIR). 
Conditions of Confinement at  
Holding Cells on U.S. Border
Rediet left Ethiopia after being imprisoned twice for 
her pro-democracy activities. She escaped from jail 
and fled to Kenya. From Kenya, a family friend made “There are no statutory limits to the 
amount of time a non-citizen may  
be held in immigration detention. ”8
NOVEMBER 2013arrangements for her to get to the United States. She 
traveled through Dubai, Russia, Cuba, and Ecuador. 
From Ecuador she traveled by boat, foot, and car to 
Mexico. She was detained for four months by Mexican 
immigration officials before traveling to the U.S. border 
and requesting asylum at the San Ysidro, CA, port of 
entry. “When we arrived at the border, the immigration 
said ‘welcome, ’ then they cuffed me on my wrists, 
waist and legs and put me in a small room. It was very 
crowded, ” she said. “There was no chair, nothing. I 
slept on the floor for three days. I was only wearing a 
t-shirt and some pants. It was very, very cold. The toilet 
was in the same room and you could see the camera 
watching you as you used it. The first day, they gave 
us no food or water. No one explained anything. We 
were just on that cold, cold floor. Nothing happened 
for three days. The smell was so bad—from the people 
with no shower and the toilet. It was terrible. The toilet 
that everyone uses is right next to the mattress where 
you put your head. For one week I had no shower, only 
one pair of pants, and one pair of underwear. ” 
Asylum seekers regularly express shock at the fact 
of being detained at all, particularly in the conditions 
in which they are held. They are in disbelief that 
they have been criminalized by virtue of trying to 
find protection. Research conducted by the United 
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) 
suggests, “[M]any asylum seekers are unaware of 
the detention policies of their destination countries, or indeed have little or no say about their journey or 
their final destination. ”18 In a 2011 report, Physicians 
for Human Rights (PHR) noted,  “[I]ndividuals who are 
detained by repressive regimes on account of their 
political activities tend to survive the experience with 
fewer short and long term health consequences than 
individuals who are shocked to find themselves in 
custody. ”19
Eden arrived at the U.S.-Mexico border after fleeing 
political persecution in Ethiopia. She was surprised 
by the conditions in which she was held. “I thought 
I’d be at some kind of camp, not a jail. I thought I’d be 
held in a place I would be free to walk around or go 
out. ” Instead, she found herself being forced to sign 
papers she didn’t understand, without the assistance 
of an interpreter, utterly confused about what was 
happening and why, while being crammed into a small, 
crowded room with other recently arrived migrants. 
“It was so cold, ” she described. “The room was very 
stinky – no one had showered. ” 
Habtamu fled Eritrea and walked up to a CBP agent 
at the port of entry at Brownsville, TX. He described, 
“The solider told me to go back and said ‘you have no 
right to be here. ’ Then another agent asked me if I was 
from Eritrea and they took me into a separate room to 
wait. After a few hours they gave me some food and 
water. I waited in that room for eight hours and was 
taken to an interview. I asked for an interpreter but the 
immigration officer said, ‘your English is good enough; 
they’re just easy questions. ’ And they interviewed me 
for over 1 ½ hours, all in English, then made me sign 
papers. ” After his interview at the border, Habtamu  
was held in a small cell with one other Eritrean man. 
He described the room as having one small “stretcher” 
bed so only one of them could lie down while the other 
spent the night on a small chair. The next afternoon, 
Habtamu and his cellmate were chained together and 
transported with a larger group of migrants to the Port 
Isabel Service Processing Center. Everyone had chains 
on their hands, waist, and legs. “I’m not a criminal, ” he 
expressed. “I didn’t expect to be held like a criminal. ” “It was very, very cold. The toilet 
was in the same room and you could 
see the camera watching as you 
used it. The first day, they gave us 
no food or water. No one explained 
anything. We were just on that cold, 
cold floor. Nothing happened for 
three days. ”9
NOVEMBER 2013In August 2013, Americans for Immigrant Justice 
issued a report on the conditions of the holding cells 
used by CBP on the border. The report states: “The 
temperature in the cells is so cold that CBP officers 
themselves refer to them as ‘hieleras, ’ or iceboxes, in 
Spanish. Detainees’ fingers and toes turn blue and 
their lips chap and split due to the cold. Blankets 
are not provided. These crowded hieleras have no 
mattresses, beds or chairs, and there is a single sink 
and toilet in plain view.   Detainees have no choice but 
to urinate and defecate in front of their cellmates…
Generally detainees don’t understand the papers 
they’re signing since most don’t speak or read English, 
and no translation is provided. ”20 
Elias, an Orthodox Christian man, was forcibly 
conscripted into the Eritrean army. When he attempted 
to leave the army so that he could attend university, 
he was imprisoned and tortured. Upon being released 
from prison, he was forced to leave Eritrea. After a 
treacherous journey from Sudan to Dubai, to Russia, 
then Cuba, through Ecuador, Colombia, Central 
America, and Mexico, he finally arrived in the United 
States. Upon apprehension, he was shackled to another 
man and taken to an office for an interview. “I told 
immigration why I left Eritrea and that I was seeking 
asylum. They couldn’t find an interpreter so they went 
on with my limited English. I understood some things 
but not everything. They made me sign documents but 
I didn’t understand what I was signing. ” He describes 
feeling scared, frustrated, and confused. “They told 
me they would take me to jail. I asked if I could make a 
phone call but they refused. ” 
Meron,  an Ethiopian woman who fled political 
persecution, described arriving at the port of entry, 
asking for asylum, and being held in a cell at the 
border for a full week. “The cell was very, very cold, ” 
she described. “I was only allowed one shower during 
the week and only allowed ‘outside’ for one hour per 
day. ” Outside was a concrete space with high walls 
on all sides and little sunlight. “They made me sign 
papers. There was no interpreter and I didn’t know 
what I was signing. ” Extreme 
temperatures 
can constitute a 
form of torture. 
In these cases, 
neither the 
intent nor the 
conditions 
themselves 
appear to 
amount to “cold” 
to the degree 
of “torture” or 
“cruel, inhuman 
and degrading 
treatment, ” 
but for someone who has been tortured it may be 
reminiscent of such experiences. As psychologist 
David Gangsei, International Clinical Advisor with 
the Center for Victims of T orture, explains, “Their 
subjective experience is being forced to endure 
prolonged physical discomfort. These kinds of 
uncomfortable conditions often trigger memories, 
thoughts and feelings from past experiences of torture 
or forced physical discomfort. It can create intense 
feelings of desperation that have a frantic quality to 
them. This can lead to deterioration in detainees’ 
mental and emotional condition, especially when you 
add the indefinite nature of the situation – that the 
person’s subjective experience at the time includes 
not knowing when or if it will ever end. ”21
Adama,  an asylee from Mali, arrived at the Laredo, TX, 
port of entry and walked up to a CBP agent. “I came 
on the bridge and I asked the United States for help, ” 
he said. He was handcuffed and leg-cuffed, then put 
into a room. They would not remove his shackles for 6 
more hours. They gave him papers and told him to fill 
out a form. “I was interviewed for 5 hours. They asked 
me about military training and explosives. I didn’t 
understand why they were asking me all of these 
questions. I kept telling them, ‘I’m here to ask you for 
asylum. ’ I asked for an attorney but they refused. They “Their subjective 
experience is be -
ing forced to endure 
prolonged physical 
discomfort. These 
kinds of uncomfort -
able conditions often 
trigger memories, 
thoughts and feelings 
from past experienc -
es of torture or forced 
physical discomfort. ”10
NOVEMBER 2013told me I had to answer all of their questions or I would 
get deported. I told them about all of my problems 
in Mali. I didn’t have anything to hide. ” After the 
interview, they took him to a holding cell at the border. 
“The room was very, very cold, ” he said. “I asked for a 
blanket or something but they refused. I complained 
about my pain. I pounded on the door and told them 
I couldn’t stay in that room any more. It was too cold. 
But they kept me there for two days. ”
CONFUSED AND  
ISOLATED
After a week in a holding cell at the border near 
San Ysidro, CA, Helina was transferred to the Eloy 
Detention Center in Florence, AZ. She described 
being shackled while in transit—hands, waist, feet, all 
connected by a chain. “The handcuffs were painful—
you couldn’t even use the bathroom. ” She described 
feeling like they were “treated like criminals” and not 
understanding what was happening. “We were told 
there was no space in the California jail so we were 
taken by bus, then plane to Arizona, then by bus to a 
place called Eloy. ” When they arrived, they were given 
uniforms and the shackles were removed. “I didn’t 
understand what was going on, where we were going, 
how long we would be there. I didn’t even know the 
time; I could only tell if it was day or night. ”
Asylum seekers report feeling demoralized by the 
conditions of confinement while in ICE custody, as 
they are kept in “pods” with other detainees for up 
to 23 hours a day, subjected to frequent “counts, ” 
given little to no real outdoor access, transported in 
shackles, transferred without explanation, held by jailers who do not speak their language, required to 
wear prison jumpsuits, and given very little access to 
information about where they are, what is happening, 
why it is happening, or what to expect. 
Juan,  an asylum seeker from Brazil, described 
detention as “mental torture. ” During that time, he 
said, “there was never anyone to explain anything – 
not immigration, not the county jail. ” During the years 
he spent in detention while he fought his case, Juan 
was transferred between different facilities several 
times. Each time he was transferred he was scared. “I 
didn’t know what they were doing. I didn’t understand 
why. ” He was not given any information, just woken up 
at 6:00AM and told he was being transferred. Then 
he would be put in shackles and transported to a 
different facility. ” He spent 2 years at the Pinal County 
Adult Detention Center in Florence, AZ. “At Pinal, ” he 
explained, “I didn’t see the sun for 2 years. ‘Outside’ 
was a room with walls but no roof. Y ou stay in one 
room the whole time, 24 hours a day. Y ou eat there, 
sleep there, use the bathroom there. ”
Detention is a daunting experience for anyone, 
but particularly egregious for survivors of torture. 
T o experience torture is to be dehumanized, 
psychologically dismantled, humiliated, forced to 
endure excruciating pain, and rendered powerless. 
For survivors, whose torture may have occurred while 
in a confinement setting, the immigration detention 
experience is often retraumatizing and may lead 
survivors to relive their horrid experiences of torture, 
including the profound sense of powerlessness 
and loss of sense of self, contributing to further 
psychological damage. 
“For survivors, whose torture may have occurred while in a confinement  
setting, the immigration detention experience is often retraumatizing and  
may lead survivors to relive their horrid experiences of torture, including the 
profound sense of powerlessness and loss of sense of self, contributing to  
further psychological damage. ”11
NOVEMBER 2013Fahran  spent 23 months at the South T exas Detention 
Center in Pearsall, TX. He spoke of the state he 
observed in other detainees. “I saw people who lost 
their minds. They couldn’t take it. It just became too 
much. One guy was not able to eat. He wouldn’t talk. 
He felt too much pressure; he started to breakdown. 
Then he just vanished from the dorms and we never 
knew what happened to him. ” 
According to the “Guidelines on the Applicable Criteria 
and Standards relating to the Detention of Asylum-
Seekers and Alternatives to Detention, ” released 
in 2012 by the United Nations High Commissioner 
for Refugees (UNHCR), “Detention can only be 
exceptionally resorted to for a legitimate purpose…
In the context of the detention of asylum-seekers, 
there are three purposes for which detention may 
be necessary in an individual case, and which are 
generally in line with international law, namely public 
order, public health or national security. ”22 
Rediet  recalled her sorrow during the 9 months she 
was detained at the Eloy Detention Center in Florence, 
AZ. “I kept asking myself, ‘what is the difference 
between Africa and America? Why do they detain me? 
They treat us just like a child, or worse, like an animal. 
Y ou are sleeping and then, BANG!, they wake you up. 
‘Hurry up, ’ they say. At night you are woken up again 
and again. The air conditioning is too cold. There is too 
much cold with nothing to wear. If you have money you 
can buy extra food or extra clothes but without money, 
you have nothing. ” The Impact of Indefinite Detention
Because most individuals who are detained for 
immigration purposes are “in proceedings” rather 
than serving a sentence for a specified period of 
time, as in the criminal justice system, the length of 
their detention depends on a variety of factors, most 
of which, such as when their court dates are set or 
deportation flights are arranged, are entirely outside 
of their control and are not clearly communicated 
or predictable. Individuals have limited access to 
information about their options or what they can do or 
expect at each stage. Further, the information they do 
receive may be in a language they do not understand 
or is written in such “legalese” it would be challenging 
for any layperson to decipher. 
Elias , an asylum seeker from Eritrea, described 
the challenges he faced in detention due to lack of 
communication. “The telephones were too expensive. 
I didn’t have money to make phone calls. ” He felt 
like he could never explain himself, which impacted 
his feeling of safety within the facility. He described 
feeling confused and isolated, never being able to get 
any information in a language he understood. “I didn’t 
know what to do or how to make things better. I didn’t 
know what I could do. ” His cell was crowded and had 
an open toilet for everyone. “We were not allowed 
outside except for one hour. I spent all my time in one 
room with many, many beds. T o get to the cafeteria, 
everyone lines up and walks. This was not something 
I expected. There wasn’t anyone for me to talk to; no 
one from my country; no one who spoke my language. ” 
He applied for bond but was denied due to lack of 
community ties. 
With no defined end to their stay in detention, 
detainees feel there is no guarantee there will ever 
be an end. “Imagine living with the constant question 
‘Am I ever going to get out of here?’” inquired “I kept asking myself, ‘what is the 
difference between Africa and  
America? Why do they detain me? 
They treat us just like a child, or 
worse, like an animal. ”
“Imagine living with the constant 
question ‘Am I ever going to get  
out of here?’”12
NOVEMBER 2013CVT’s David Gangsei, “and the demoralization that 
induces, along with the persistent feelings of threat—
even if not directly expressed but present in the 
environment itself?” In the context of everything that 
is happening—from apprehension at the border and 
throughout their time in detention—the indefinite 
nature of the detention experience is a destructive 
blanket over it all. 
As our interviews reveal, indefinite detention 
can cause severe, chronic emotional distress: 
hopelessness, debilitation, uncertainty, and 
powerlessness. These factors combine to recapitulate 
the torture experience – that sense of bad things 
happening or potentially happening and not knowing 
what will happen next. The harmful psychological and 
physical effects are often severe and can include:
•	Severe and chronic anxiety and dread;
•	Pathological levels of stress that have 
damaging effects on the core physiologic 
functions of the immune and cardiovascular 
systems, as well as on the central nervous 
system;
•	Depression and suicide;
•	Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD); and
•	Enduring personality changes and permanent 
estrangement from family and community that 
compromise any hope of the detainee regaining 
a normal life following release. ” 23
These effects are intensified in detainees who have 
been traumatized or tortured prior to commencement 
of indefinite detention. For survivors of torture, lack of control and having no sense of what will happen 
next re-stimulates the kinds of experiences they had 
while being tortured. According to a 2011 report from 
PHR, “[These harms] threaten to severely exacerbate 
existing severe physical and psychological symptoms, 
perpetuate mental suffering, and thereby foreclose 
any opportunity for healing. ”24 
Daniel , a refugee from Liberia, spent 5 months at the 
Pinal County Adult Detention Center in Florence, AZ, 
before being granted asylum. He spoke of the utter 
sense of powerlessness and agony. “Detention messes 
with your mind, ” he explained. “Y ou don’t know when it 
will end or how it will end or whether you will see your 
family again. Y ou have to hold onto your emotions. Y ou 
hear about other people getting deported. Y ou don’t 
know what will happen to you and there is no way to 
find out. ” He described his experiences as a child in 
the Liberian Civil War and his fear of being deported 
from the U.S. “Anyone that was forced to run away 
from his home has seen a lot of things, ” he explained. 
“I’ve seen so many dead bodies. People die in front of 
you. Life has been so hard. We grew up in war. We love 
the United States. I don’t want to go back [to Liberia]--
-I don’t know what to do or how to live there. ”
Even if the individual ultimately remains in detention 
for a relatively short period of time, at every stage the 
lack of information, lack of understanding, and lack of 
knowledge of how long she will be detained renders “In the context of everything that 
is happening—from apprehension 
at the border and throughout their 
time in detention—the indefinite na -
ture of the detention experience is a 
destructive blanket over it all. ”
“Even if the individual ultimately 
remains in detention for a relatively 
short period of time, at every stage 
the lack of information, lack of un -
derstanding, and lack of knowledge 
of how long she will be detained 
renders the subjective experience of 
detention as indefinite. ”13
NOVEMBER 2013the subjective experience of detention as indefinite. 
Realizing this makes the presence of an attorney – 
someone who may have some concrete information – 
that much more important. Nevertheless, the National 
Immigrant Justice Center found that 60 percent of 
those facing expulsion from the United States lack 
immigration counsel, with 84 percent of immigrants 
in detention going through proceedings without the 
assistance of legal counsel.25 Thus, the isolation of 
detention often leaves a survivor of torture to navigate 
the complex asylum process alone.
Habtamu,  an asylee from Eritrea, waited one month 
and two weeks for his credible fear interview. Then 
after the interview he waited another month for the 
results. “I couldn’t ask anyone. Time would pass. I was 
worried. There was no consistency. For some people, 
it would go fast. For others it would go slow. I couldn’t 
figure out why mine was so slow. The only information 
you got was from other people in detention. ” During 
that time, he was frustrated that there was no one to 
ask and nowhere to find answers. “The video was not 
helpful. The things that were written were not helpful. 
At the law library, you could try but it was too hard to 
get information. I called the list of pro bono lawyers and 
they all told me I had to pass my credible fear interview 
first. ” After passing credible fear, he was given ten 
days to present information that would establish his 
eligibility for release from detention on parole, but he 
didn’t have anywhere to go so he remained in detention 
for six months. Habtamu  eventually found a lawyer 
who helped him complete his asylum application, but 
he represented himself pro se. “Most Eritreans, ” he 
explained, “do not have money to hire a lawyer. ” 
Exacerbating Trauma
Multiple studies evaluating the detention of asylum 
seekers in various industrialized countries—including 
the United States, Denmark, Australia, the United 
Kingdom, and Canada—have demonstrated that 
detention, particularly given its indefinite nature 
for immigration purposes, exacerbates the severe 
mental health symptoms survivors of torture are suffering and can be independently traumatic.26 In a 
2003 study of asylum seekers in the United States, 
PHR found, “Detention can induce fear, isolation 
and hopelessness, and exacerbate the severe 
psychological distress frequently exhibited by asylum 
seekers who are already traumatized. ”27 The British 
Journal of Psychiatry conducted a review of studies 
worldwide and reported, “All studies found high levels 
of emotional distress among individuals who were 
in detention or who had been previously detained…
[There is] evidence that the findings relate in part 
to pre-detention trauma experiences, in addition to 
detention itself having an independent adverse effect 
on mental health. ”28 Beyond the short-term distress 
induced by detention, research has also found, “There 
is good evidence that such trauma [from detention] 
causes long-term mental health problems. ”29
After two days in a holding cell at the border, Adama 
spent two months in detention at the South T exas 
Detention Center in Pearsall, TX. “At the intake I had to 
stay in a cold, cold room, ” he said. “The air conditioner 
was so strong. Everyone was inside freezing. We 
were trapped in that cold room from 3:00PM to 
7:00AM the next morning. They gave us a uniform, 
just short sleeves and thin fabric, but refused to give 
us any blankets or jackets. At 7:00AM we went to a 
huge room with about 120 people. ” During those two 
months, he faced challenges in getting his religious 
diet request approved. “They had to send the request 
but it took one month to be approved. During that 
month there were meals I couldn’t eat. ” Even after his 
request was approved, he never felt like he got enough 
to eat. “We ate breakfast at 4:30AM; lunch at 10:30AM 
and dinner at 5:00PM. People with money could buy 
food and put it in their locker to eat later, but if you 
didn’t have money, you are so hungry. ” He described 
the challenge of getting medical attention for shoulder 
pain and a foot injury. “I was suffering a lot of pain. I 
needed attention for my shoulder pain and submitted 
a request but it took one week before I was called. ” 
Adama’s  observations revealed an intense feeling 
of powerlessness, as detainees are dependent on 14
NOVEMBER 2013the officers for everything and feel as if they are 
discriminated against, ignored, and disrespected. 
“I saw many ugly things, ” he reflected. “There is no 
respect from officers. Y ou are treated like a prisoner 
and threatened with solitary confinement. ” A man 
from his pod was taken to “solitary confinement” 
and did not return. Adama and his fellow detainees 
all believed it was because he wanted to go to the 
law library; it was rumored that he missed his court 
date while in segregation. Another man in Adama’s  
pod collapsed in the bathroom, started “tumbling” 
and “foaming at the mouth, ” then stopped moving. 
In his view, the officers did nothing until the other 
detainees started hollering, “He needs attention! He 
needs attention!” The man was unconscious when the 
paramedics “took him away. ” He, too, did not return. 
“Everyone thought he died, ” Adama said, “The guards 
said he didn’t but we all think he did. ”
ICE records do not indicate a death at the South T exas 
Detention Center during that period of time and this 
report is not implying that a death occurred. Rather, 
Adama’s impressions reveal much about his perception 
of safety and trust within the facility. For anyone in 
detention, there is a combination of the current trauma 
inherent in the detention experience and, for survivors 
of torture in particular, a re-stimulation of past traumas. 
The level of isolation, lack of information, and limited 
communication 
are all 
compounded 
by a perception 
of disrespect 
from the officers, 
and can make 
the detention 
environment 
one in which 
detainees feel 
under constant 
threat. This 
perception can be 
particularly acute for survivors of torture, who may recall their torture 
experience when they are exposed to various events 
that are not explained and leave them completely at the 
mercy of the authorities. From a torture rehabilitation 
perspective, say experts, “If loss of control is a 
critical factor in the development of traumatic stress 
symptoms, then effective treatment would need to 
involve strategies that focus on helping the torture 
survivor regain sense of control. ” 30
In addition to loss of control and a perception of 
threat, boredom is one of the consequences of the 
nature and structure of detention, which for survivors 
of trauma, can be very harmful. As David Gangsei 
explained, “Survivors of torture often struggle with 
finding meaning and a sense of purpose and value in 
their lives after that has been stripped away. When 
in detention – again add the blanket of the indefinite 
nature of it – those things are eroded. Boredom can 
translate into much more profound distress and even 
despair when there is nothing to connect with to give 
you a way out. People in this situation are vulnerable 
to experiencing profound levels of meaningless and 
despair, especially as the structures are set up in a 
way that people are treated in a way that discounts 
them as a person. ” 31 
Cedric , a refugee from Cameroon, was detained at 
the Pinal County Adult Detention Center in Florence, 
AZ, for 2 ½ years before being granted asylum. “It was 
mental torture, ” he describes. “Being in that place was 
mental torture. There was nothing to stimulate my 
mind. Y ou are around other people but it’s so lonely. 
Some people get along with others; others don’t care 
at all. ” He spoke of his constant fear of being deported 
and the increasing weight of that fear every day in 
detention. “Deporting a refugee is sending someone 
to die, ” he explained. “Y ou make a mistake and your 
sentence is death. ” 
In coping with trauma and, particularly, with the 
kinds of intrusive thoughts that are symptomatic 
of Post-T raumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), one of 
the ways survivors deal with this is to find ways to “The level of isolation, 
lack of information, 
and limited commu -
nication are all com -
pounded by a per -
ception of disrespect 
from the officers, and 
can make the deten -
tion environment one 
in which detainees 
feel under constant 
threat. ”15
NOVEMBER 2013actively engage in the present. Outside of detention, 
this could include anything from engaging with their 
community, doing or finding activities they enjoy, 
pursuing education or career aspirations, or taking 
steps toward stabilization, like finding housing, doing 
chores or learning how to navigate the bus system. 
“The detention environment suppresses all of these 
options—structurally deprives people of opportunity 
for initiative—leaving people without anything positive 
to engage with, ” says Gangsei. 32
Meron  described her loneliness. “I was so bored. All I 
could do was wonder about what was going to happen 
or when. I was so scared they were going to deport 
me. I was so lonely. I didn’t have any money to buy a 
phone card or make a call to my family. I missed them 
so much. I wanted to talk but I couldn’t. No one could 
come to visit me. I would see other people in my pod 
going to see visitors and would wish I could be happy 
like them. ” Without anything to distract her mind or 
make the time pass she agonized about the unknown. 
“I met people who had been there for two or three 
years. One lady had been there for two years and then 
was deported. I was so scared. ” 
Limitations on Access to Legal Counsel  
and Information
From apprehension to release, it is critical that all 
immigrants in detention are provided clear and reliable information and regular updates. Jesuit Refugee 
Service Europe conducted a study on alternatives 
to detention and concluded, “Governments that are 
frank and transparent with migrants, inform them 
of all conditions, procedures and opportunities, and 
offer comprehensive support may find that rates 
of compliance increase as migrants develop trust 
towards the authorities. Frontloading support does 
not mean accelerating immigration procedures but 
rather making sure that migrants are well-equipped 
from the start. ”33 While not a substitute for full legal 
representation, the Legal Orientation Program (LOP), 
operated by EOIR, can help fill this gap. LOP contracts 
with nonprofit organizations to educate groups of 
detainees at some detention facilities about basic 
immigration law and procedure.
Meron  described her confusion in detention. “I didn’t 
know anything. I didn’t know how to talk to anyone. ” 
After being held for approximately two weeks, Meron 
had a credible fear interview and a judge saw her after 
about a month. When she  eventually got connected to 
an attorney, she explained that things got much better. 
She described the sense of relief she felt in simply 
being able to ask her attorney some questions about 
what was going on or what to expect.
LOP provides a much-needed service that helps 
reduce anxiety and uncertainty amongst immigrants 
in detention. On an individual level, basic information 
about the process, even if it does not change the process 
itself or outcomes, can serve to support resilience 
and avoid retraumatization. On a systematic level, “Boredom can translate into much 
more profound distress and even de -
spair when there is nothing to con -
nect with to give you a way out. Peo -
ple in this situation are vulnerable 
to experiencing profound levels of 
meaningless and despair, especially 
as the structures are set up in a way 
that people are treated in a way that 
discounts them as a person. ”
“On an individual level, basic infor -
mation about the process, even if it 
does not change the process itself or 
outcomes, can serve to support resil -
ience and avoid retraumatization. “16
NOVEMBER 2013by helping 
individuals 
make informed 
decisions and 
connecting them 
to basic services, 
including 
potential 
alternative 
housing options 
or community resources, LOP results in fewer court 
hearings, less detention time and a reduction in court 
and detention costs. 
Helina  described feeling alone, full of fear and 
uncertainty while in detention but also spoke of the 
attorneys from the Florence Immigrant and Refugee 
Rights Project [the Florence Project], a non-profit legal 
service provider, with deep affection and appreciation. 
“When the Florence Project came they can help make 
your problems go away. Prior to talking with them, I 
didn’t understand what was happening. I knew of two 
people who stayed there for over a year – one Eritrean 
woman who cried all the time. I was terrified I would 
be there for all that time. Many others I met were there 
4-5 months. ” 
According to an April 2012 report submitted by EOIR 
to the Senate Committee on Appropriations, LOP 
reduced case processing times by an average of 
12 days when compared to individuals who did not 
receive LOP .34 Using an average cost per bed day 
of $112.83,35 EOIR’s analysis determined that in FY 
2011, LOP saved the federal government more than 
$19.9 million. After deducting the cost of providing 
LOP services, which cost approximately $70 per 
participant, the net savings to the government in FY 
2011 were more than $17 .8 million.36 Nevertheless, 
despite the obvious dual benefit of LOP to individuals 
and the immigration detention and court systems as 
a whole, this highly successful program is only funded 
to operate at 25 of the approximately 250 detention 
facilities used by ICE, reaching less than 30% of 
detainees in removal proceedings each year.Rediet spent nine months at the Eloy Detention 
Center in Florence, AZ, before being released and later 
granted asylum. She waited two months for a credible 
fear interview and, even after passing the interview, 
she was held in detention for seven more months 
because she didn’t have a sponsor. “After 3 months 
in detention I got a free lawyer through the Florence 
Project. I had a lot of pain from the worry. My lawyer 
said she would find a community for me and asked 
Casa Mariposa if they would take me. I had no family 
or other place to go. ” Rediet was released to Casa 
Mariposa, a T ucson-based alternative to detention 
shelter. After six more months an immigration judge 
in T ucson granted her asylum and she was able to 
petition for her husband and children to join her in the 
United States. “In Africa, ” she said, “they say there is 
freedom in America. One I got my asylum, it is good 
but before that it was too hard. I expected to be held 
for one or two days so that they could ask me some 
questions but not for so many months. ”
OTHER OPTIONS:  
ADDRESSING BARRIERS 
TO RELEASE AND  
COMMUNITY SUPPORT
Fahran  was detained for 23 months at the South 
T exas Detention Center in Pearsall, TX. He was offered 
a bond of $2,500 but unable to pay and without a 
sponsor or place to live, he remained in detention. 
At first, he decided to represent himself, “I didn’t 
think I needed a lawyer. My story was true and I had 
documentation. ” Although the immigration judge 
granted him asylum, the ICE trial attorney appealed 
the decision. Several months later, the Board of 
Immigration Appeals affirmed the immigration judge’s 
decision but the ICE trial attorney appealed again. 
Eventually, he contacted his brother in Sweden to 
ask for a loan to hire an attorney. “I was desperate. ” 
After being granted asylum, he was released and 
given temporary shelter at Casa Marianella in Austin, “From apprehension 
to release, it is critical 
that all immigrants 
in detention are pro -
vided clear and reli -
able information and 
regular updates. ”17
NOVEMBER 2013TX. “When I was released I only had the clothes I was 
wearing when I was arrested. They were dirty and had 
been in my backpack for two years. ” 
DHS/ICE Detention Reforms
As ICE’s detention capacity grew rapidly—doubling 
from 18,000 to over 33,000 between Fiscal Y ear 
2004 and Fiscal Y ear 2013, with the total number of 
immigrants passing through ICE custody increasing 
from 204,459 in Fiscal Y ear 2001, to 429,247 in 
Fiscal Y ear 2011,37 non-governmental organizations, 
the media, congressional inquiries and inspector 
general reports revealed chronic problems, including 
inadequate access to health care, deaths in detention, 
physical and sexual abuse, overcrowding, lack of 
proper nutrition, interference with the practice of 
religion, excessive use of segregation, and problems 
with access to telephones. Reports also demonstrated 
the lack of procedural safeguards in place to protect 
immigration detainees, including asylum seekers and 
survivors of torture, from arbitrary and prolonged 
detention, and highlighted the availability of 
underused but effective and less costly alternatives to 
detention.38 
Recognizing that the status quo was untenable, 
in 2009 DHS/ICE committed to overhaul the 
immigration detention system through taking steps to 
improve the management of its detention population 
and operations, advance the use of alternatives 
to detention, better manage special populations, 
enhance detainee medical care, and ensure 
accountability.39 DHS/ICE has taken some significant 
steps in its reform efforts, including by deploying 
an automatic Risk Classification Assessment 
instrument, implementing new parole guidance for 
arriving asylum seekers, issuing new directives on 
transfers and parental interests, launching an on-
line detainee locator system, revising its standards 
on use of segregation, and opening a “model” civil 
detention facility in Karnes County, TX.40 Nevertheless, 
four years after DHS/ICE announced its intention 
to transform the immigration detention system, it remains deeply flawed. In April 2013, the independent 
and bipartisan U.S. Commission on International 
Religious Freedom (USCIRF) issued a “Special Report, ” 
finding that “while ICE has made progress toward 
implementing the reforms it announced in 2009, the 
U.S. government continues to detain asylum seekers 
under inappropriate conditions in jails and jail-like 
facilities. ” 41 In addition, USCIRF found, “[F]urther 
improvements are needed to expand detainees’ 
access to legal information, representation, and in-
person hearings. ”42
Among the recent steps it has taken to improve the 
immigration detention system, ICE deployed an 
automatic Risk Classification Assessment instrument 
to “improve transparency and uniformity in detention 
custody and classification decisions. ” The instrument 
provides objective criteria to detention and release 
decisions, including classification level, if detained, 
and requires officers “determine whether there is 
any special vulnerability that may impact custody 
and classification determinations. ”43 The instrument 
takes past experience of trauma into consideration 
and offers an opportunity to conduct a prompt needs 
assessment of survivors of torture and facilitate their 
immediate safe and supported release, including by 
connecting them to a Community Based Alternative 
to Detention Program that can provide shelter, if 
necessary, and facilitate other services. “The instrument takes past experi -
ence of trauma into consideration 
and offers an opportunity to con -
duct a prompt needs assessment 
of survivors of torture and facilitate 
their immediate safe and supported 
release. ”18
NOVEMBER 2013Community Based Alternatives to Detention
Meron was detained at the South T exas Detention 
Center in Pearsall, TX, for three months. She had a 
credible fear interview within two weeks but after 
passing credible fear she was granted a $7 ,500 bond 
to be released. Without enough money to pay the 
bond or anywhere to live, she remained in detention. 
Eventually she was able to get a loan from a friend 
overseas to pay the bond and a fellow detainee offered 
to let her stay with her family. Her advice to U.S. 
policymakers: “If they can help people without family 
find somewhere to stay—at least give them some 
numbers of places they can call; some information for 
what they can do. ” 
As mentioned previously, there are no statutory limits 
to the amount of time an asylum seeker—or any non 
U.S. citizen—may be held in immigration detention. 
Asylum seekers who are detained for longer than four 
to six weeks under current parole and other release 
processes generally remain because they lack a 
suitable housing option, cannot adequately prove their 
identity and/or are unable to afford the bond amount 
set by ICE or the immigration judge. These barriers 
to release can be addressed through alternative to 
detention programs. 
The National Immigration Forum explained, “Less 
wasteful and equally effective alternatives to detention 
exist. Estimates from the Department of Homeland 
Security show that the costs of these alternatives can 
range from 70 cents to $17 per person per day. If only 
individuals convicted of serious crimes were detained and less expensive alternative methods were used to 
monitor the rest of the currently detained population, 
taxpayers could save more than $1.44 billion per year—
almost an 80 percent reduction in annual costs. ”44 
Furthermore, according to UNHCR, “Evidence shows 
that alternatives to detention work in practice, whether 
in the form of reporting requirements, designated 
residence or supervision in the community, for 
example. Research indicates, too, that asylum seekers 
consistently comply with conditions of their release 
from detention in over 90% of cases. ”45
BI Incorporated, the private company that ICE 
currently contracts with to manage its alternative 
to detention program, reported in 2010 that 93% 
of individuals actively enrolled in alternatives to 
detention attended their final court hearings and  
84% complied with removal orders. BI’s programs 
offer appearance assistance to help ensure 
participates comply with the requirements of their 
immigration proceedings and provide limited case 
management. Some participants are enrolled in 
intensive supervision programs that include  
electronic monitoring, GPS tracking and phone 
reporting. None of BI’s programs, however, offer 
shelter options.46
“Asylum seekers who are detained for longer than four to six weeks under  
current parole and other release processes generally remain because they 
lack a suitable housing option, cannot adequately prove their identity and/
or are unable to afford the bond amount set by ICE or the immigration judge. 
These barriers to release can be addressed through alternative to detention  
programs. ”“Research indicates, too, that asy -
lum seekers consistently comply 
with conditions of their release from 
detention in over 90% of cases. ”19
NOVEMBER 2013Lutheran immigration and Refugee Service (LIRS), 
coordinates a more holistic alternative to detention 
program that should serve as a model. This program 
is presently being piloted in partnership with ICE and 
more than 20 local non-profit organizations in seven 
communities nationwide. LIRS describes its program 
as aiming to “build infrastructures of available, 
accessible, acceptable and high-quality community-
based interventions to support compliance with 
conditions of release (e.g., appearances at removal 
hearings) in a manner that is more cost-effective 
than detention, respects human rights, improves 
integration and improves client health and welfare. ”47 
It notes, however, that full implementation of this 
initiative is primarily challenged by lack of funding, 
including as it impacts community outreach, data 
collection, and connecting clients with legal, medical, 
mental health, visitation, housing, education and 
employment services. ”48 
T o ensure that survivors of torture are not subject 
to indefinite or prolonged detention would require a 
combination of legislative and administrative reforms. 
These reforms should eliminate provisions in the 
law “mandating” detention, shift resources from 
detention to expand humane and effective alternatives 
to detention programs providing holistic support 
services, including community release programs, 
improve access to legal information, and improve due 
process and review standards. BEYOND DETENTION 
Across the United States, asylum seekers currently 
wait an average of 560 days before their cases are 
heard in the immigration courts.49 The most significant 
delays are for non-detained asylum seekers and 
immigrants, as detained cases move on an expedited 
docket. For each additional day a survivor of torture 
must wait for her case to be heard, it is one more 
day she lives in fear of being returned to the scene 
of her torture and it is one more day she may be 
separated from family members. During this time, 
she is living off of dwindling savings or the generosity 
of others because of restrictions on obtaining work 
authorization. Her housing may not be stable or 
available long-term, leaving her at risk of becoming 
homeless or forced to remain in a place she is unsafe 
or vulnerable to exploitation. For survivors of torture, 
this state of limbo may contribute to on-going trauma, 
while impeding their healing process and exacerbating 
symptoms of depression, anxiety, PTSD and other 
conditions they may be suffering as a result of their 
torture. 
Beyond detention, Congress and the Administration 
should implement legislative and policy changes—
including by providing additional funding where 
necessary—that would eliminate the backlogs in 
the immigration courts, reduce delays in asylum 
adjudications and allow asylum applicants to have their 
claims decided on their merits in a fair and efficient 
manner. 20
NOVEMBER 2013RECOMMENDATIONS
Welcome to America
•	The Department of Homeland Security  
should promulgate regulations establishing 
basic minimum standards of care at all U.S. 
Customs and Border Protection (CBP) facilities. 
Such regulations should: 
 »Ensure that all facilities maintain adequate 
lighting and temperature control;
 »Provide individuals in custody with basic 
information about immigration law and 
process, including information about where 
they are and what they may expect moving 
forward; 
 »Limit allowable time in CBP facilities to less 
than 48 hours; 
 »Require that all individuals in CBP custody 
receive potable water, regular nutritious and/
or medically appropriate meals, access to 
private bathroom facilities, basic toiletries 
and hygiene items. Individuals should 
be provided with a cot, clean linens, and 
blankets; 
 »Ensure that CBP holding rooms do not 
exceed capacity; 
 »Limit the use of shackles, including during 
transportation; 
 »Provide individuals with access to the 
telephone and allow them to make phone 
calls; and
 »Guarantee that interviews conducted 
with individuals are in a language they 
understand and they are not compelled to 
sign documents that have not been either 
translated or thoroughly explained to them in 
a language they understand. 
•	Congress  should authorize the U.S. 
Commission on International Religious Freedom 
to conduct a thorough study of Expedited 
Removal. This study would evaluate whether 
DHS and its components—CBP , ICE and USCIS—are following procedures designed to protect 
asylum seekers from return to persecution. 
Confused and Isolated
•	The Department of Justice, Executive 
Office for Immigration Review (EOIR) should 
expand the Legal Orientation Program (LOP) to 
serve all detention facilities used by Immigration 
and Customs Enforcement (ICE), guarantee 
that all immigrants in detention receive a legal 
orientation presentation as soon as possible, 
and establish systems for government-funded 
counsel for survivors of torture and other 
particularly vulnerable immigrants in detention. 
•	Congress  should provide EOIR with adequate 
funding for nationwide expansion of LOP and 
legal counsel programs. 
•	Congress  should eliminate mandatory 
detention in Sections 235 and 236 of the 
Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) and cease 
mandating that U.S. Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement (ICE) detain a set number of 
individuals daily so that all detention decisions 
can be made on a case-by-case basis and 
alternatives to detention programs can be fully 
utilized. 
•	The Department of Homeland Security  
should clarify that placement in a secure 
alternative to detention program can be 
considered “custody” for purposes of 
mandatory detention requirements.
•	The Department of Homeland Security 
and Department of Justice should promulgate 
joint regulations—and/or Congress  should pass 
legislation—to enhance protections against 
arbitrary or prolonged detention by allowing 
all immigrants in detention to have access to a 
custody review by an immigration judge.
•	The Department of Homeland Security  
should promulgate regulations codifying the 
directive: “Parole of Arriving Aliens Found to 
Have a Credible Fear of Persecution or T orture” 
and expand the scope of that process to also 
include non-arriving asylum seekers found to 
have a credible fear of persecution or torture. 21
NOVEMBER 2013•	The Department of Homeland Security, 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement  
should cease using actual jails and prisons for 
immigration detention purposes. As a general 
matter, survivors of torture should not be 
detained. However, in the limited circumstances 
in which detention is used as a last resort—
based on an individualized assessment that is 
subject to prompt review by an immigration 
court—survivors of torture should only be 
detained in facilities with conditions that provide 
a normalized environment. “Normalized” 
conditions allow for freedom of movement, 
provide educational and other programming, 
give individuals basic control over personal 
choices such as when or what to eat, ensure 
access to outdoors, guarantee privacy, permit 
detainees to wear their own—or civilian—
clothing, limit the use of shackles during 
transportation, etc. 
Other Options: Addressing Barriers to 
Release and Community Support
•	Congress  should provide funding to support 
Community Based Alternative to Detention 
Programs to facilitate the safe and supported 
release of survivors of torture and reduce DHS/
ICE’s overall reliance on detention. Community 
Based Alternative to Detention Programs 
would be managed by non-profit organizations 
and conduct screenings, provide appearance 
assistance, and offer a continuum of supervision 
and community support, depending on an 
assessment of each individual’s circumstances. 
Community support would include providing 
case management services, coordinating legal, 
social, mental health, medical or other services, 
and offering shelter options when necessary.
Beyond Detention
•	Congress  should address the shortage of 
immigration court resources by providing 
adequate funding to the Department of Justice, 
Executive Office for Immigration Review (EOIR) 
to increase the number of immigration judges, 
law clerks and support staff. •	Congress  should reduce the number 
of asylum cases being referred to the 
overburdened immigration courts that could 
otherwise be resolved by an Asylum Officer 
from U.S. Citizenship and Immigration 
Service (USCIS) by eliminating the one year 
filing deadline, a technical procedural barrier 
that delays the process and leads bona fide 
applicants to be denied asylum without regard 
to the merits of the claim or their fear of 
persecution, and by providing asylum seekers 
in expedited removal who have established a 
credible fear of persecution with a subsequent 
full interview and adjudication of their asylum 
claim by an Asylum Officer with USCIS 
rather than channeling them directly into 
an adversarial hearing in the overburdened 
immigration courts. 
•	Congress  should provide adequate funding to 
support the USCIS Asylum Division in order to 
avoid a growing backlog or extended wait-times 
for credible fear and/or asylum interviews. 
•	Congress  should increase funding to the 
T orture Victims Fund within the Department of 
Health and Human Services, Office of Refugee 
Resettlement to support torture survivor 
rehabilitation programs. These specialized 
programs have a proven track record of 
assisting torture survivors in gaining control of 
their lives, building confidence in their futures, 
reuniting with family members, improving their 
connectedness to the communities they live in, 
and reducing the incidence of serious health 
problems and dependence on emergency 
medical care. 22
NOVEMBER 2013APPENDIX A 
Basic Demographics of Interviewees
Countries of Origin 
of 22 Interviewees:Afghanistan, Brazil, Cameroon, Colombia, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Liberia, 
Mali, Mexico
Range of dates 
interviewees were 
held in immigration 
detention in the 
United States:Of the 22, 3 were in detention in July 2013 at the time they were 
interviewed. 19 were interviewed outside of detention. All were 
detained between 2009 and 2013 with 12 detained within the past 
year.
Immigration status 
of 22 Interviewees:17 were granted asylum by the immigration court between 2010 and 
2013, 5 still have pending cases. 
Range of time held in 
detention:Between one week and 7 years, with average length of stay being 250 
days days; almost 8 months.50 
Male/female 10 men, 12 women
Reasons for fleeing 21 cited “political” reasons for fleeing. 1 cited “religious” reasons 
(Christian).
Number who 
presented 
themselves at the 
border v. who were 
apprehended in the 
interior of the United 
States 15 walked up to a CBP agent at the port of entry to request asylum; 
4 were arrested either between a port of entry or near the border; 2 
were resettled as refugees when they were children and had criminal 
offenses (non-aggravated felonies) that put them into removal 
proceedings; 1 was arrested in the interior of the United States after 
his visa expired.
ICE facilities in 
which interviewees 
were held Arizona: Pinal County Adult Detention Center, Florence, AZ; Florence 
Service Processing Center, Florence, AZ; Eloy Detention Center, Eloy, 
AZ
California: Otay Detention Facility, San Diego, CA
Louisiana: Oakdale Federal Detention Center, Oaxdale, LA; South 
Louisiana Corrections Center, Basile, LA
New Y ork: Buffalo Federal Detention Facility, Buffalo, NY
T exas: T . Don Hutto Residential Center, T aylor, TX; Laredo Contract 
Detention Facility, Laredo, TX; South T exas Detention Facility, Pearsall, 
TX; Willacy Detention Center, Raymondville, TX (no longer used by 
ICE to detain immigrants); Port Isabel Service Processing Center, Los 
Fresnos, TX
Virginia: Immigration Centers of America-Farmville, Farmville, VA
Ports of Entry San Ysidro, CA; Hidalgo, TX; Brownsville, TX; Laredo, TXNOVEMBER 2013ENDNOTES
1 18 U.S. Code Section 2340.
2 Id.
3 Hearing Notice, T om Lantos Human Rights Commission, Healing 
the Wounds—T orture T reatment Centers Around the World (May 
21, 2009) available at  http:/ /tlhrc.house.gov/hearing_notice.
asp?id=1190. 
4 Quiroga, Jose, MD, and Jaranson, James MD, MA, MPH, “Politically-
motivated torture and its survivors: A desk study review of the 
literature, ” TORTURE JOURNAL, Volume 15, Number 2-3, at 27 
(2005), available at http:/ /www.irct.org/Default.aspx?ID=4743.
5 Id. at 29.  
6 Jennifer Windsor, Statement at Symposium, “T orture is a Weapon 
against Democracy: How the United States is Working to End 
T orture Globally” (Jun. 26, 2013) available at http:/ /apps.law.
georgetown.edu/webcasts/eventDetail.cfm?eventID=2041 at 00 58 
01.
7 United States Department of Justice, “Survivors of politically 
motivated torture: a large, growing, and invisible population of 
crime victims, ” (January 2000), available at: http:/ /www.ncjrs.gov/
ovc_archives/reports/motivatedtorture/torture.pdf. 
8 Basoglu, M, T orture and its Consequences , Cambridge: Cambridge 
U. Press (1992).
9 U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Office of Immigration 
Statistics, “Refugees and Asylees: 2012, ” (April 2013) available 
at http:/ /www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/ois_rfa_
fr_2012.pdf.
10 This number was derived by applying the torture prevalence 
rate of 5-35% found among refugees to the USCIS credible fear 
workload statistics on asylum seekers who have passed credible 
or reasonable fear. This number is significant for immigration 
detention purposes because pursuant to the expedited removal 
provisions in Section 235 of the Immigration and Nationality Act 
(INA), applicants for asylum are held in mandatory detention until 
they have established a credible fear of persecution. Therefore 
estimate of survivors of torture detained during expedited removal 
reflects the following breakdown of available U.S. government 
statistics: FY 2010 credible fear/reasonable fear: 3,721=SOT 
estimate: 186 (5%) to 1302 (35%); + FY 2011 credible fear/
reasonable fear: 4,721= SOT estimate: 236 (5%) to 1652 (35%); 
+ FY 2012 credible fear/reasonable fear: 11,754 = SOT estimate: 
587 (5%) to 3793 (35%); + FY 2013 credible fear/reasonable fear 
(Oct 2012 + 1st quarter of 2013): 7 ,771 = SOT estimate: 388 (5%) 
to 2719 (35%) + FY 2012 immigration court asylum completions at 
detention centers: 3409= SOT estimate: 170 (5%) to 1,193 (35%). 
T otal ranges between 1,567 (5%) and 10,659 (35%). See http:/ /
www.uscis.gov/portal/site/uscis/menuitem7543f6d1a/?vgnextoi
d=d2372376a3e5e210VgnVCM100000082ca60aRCRD&vgnextch
annel=d2372376a3e5e210VgnVCM100000082ca60aRCRD. Note 
, however, that relying entirely upon credible and reasonable fear 
statistics is incomplete as this only takes into account survivors who 
were apprehended on the border or at a port of entry and placed 
into expedited removal proceedings. The number is higher once 
you factor in asylum seekers in the interior of the United States 
who filed their asylum application as a defense to deportation and 
are detained while in removal proceedings. For example, the U.S. 
Department of Justice Executive Office for Immigration Review 
(EOIR) reports that in FY 2012 the immigration courts located at 
detention centers (which does not comprise the entire detained 
docket) received 2899 asylum applications and completed 3409; 
in FY 2011 the immigration courts located at detention centers 
received 2089 asylum applications and completed 1262; and in 
FY 2010 they received 1058 asylum applications and completed 
2194. Nevertheless, to avoid “double-counting” of asylum seekers 
who passed credible fear, the EOIR statistics are not included in the 
estimate. See http:/ /www.justice.gov/eoir/statspub.htm. 
11 See supra  note 4 at 25. 
12 INA Section 235(b)(1)(A)(i)-(iii).
13 INA Section 235(b)(1)(B)(iii)(IV)(stating, “Any alien subject to 
the procedures under this clause shall be detained pending a final 
determination of credible fear of persecution and, if found not to 
have such a fear, until removed. ”).
14 INA Section 235(b)(1)(B)(v)(stating, “[T]he term “credible fear 
of persecution” means that there is a significant possibility, taking into account the credibility of the statements made by the alien in 
support of the alien’s claim and such other facts as are known to 
the officer, that the alien could establish eligibility for asylum under 
section 208. ”).
15 Hearing on Border Security Oversight before H. Comm. on 
Oversight and Govt Reform , 113th Cong. (2013) (answers of 
Joseph Langlois, Associate Director of the Refugee, Asylum, 
and International Operations Directorate, U.S. Citizenship and 
Immigration Services) available at http:/ /oversight.house.gov/
hearing/border-security-oversight-part-iii-examining-asylum-
requests/. 
16 U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), “Parole of 
Arriving Aliens Found to Have a Credible Fear of Persecution or 
T orture, ” (December 2009), available at http:/ /www.ice.gov/doclib/
dro/pdf/11002.1-hd-parole_of_arriving_aliens_found_credible_fear.
pdf. 
17 INA Section 236(A)(2).
18 Edwards, Alice, “Detention Under Scrutiny, ” Forced Migration 
Review, Issue 44 at 5 (September 2013), available at http:/ /
www.fmreview.org/en/detention.pdf (citing Costello C & Kaytaz 
E, Building Empirical Research into Alternatives to Detention: 
Perceptions of Asylum-Seekers and Refugees in T oronto and 
Geneva , UNHCR Legal and Protection Policy Research Series (June 
2013), available at www.unhcr.org/51c1c5cf9.html.). 
19 Physicians for Human Rights, “Punishment Before Justice: 
Indefinite Detention in the U.S., ” at 11 (2011), available at https:/ /
s3.amazonaws.com/PHR_Reports/indefinite-detention-june2011.
pdf.
20 The “Hieleras”: A Report On Human & Civil Rights Abuses 
Committed by U.S. Customs & Border Protection (August 
2013), available at http:/ /aijustice.org/the-hieleras-a-report-on-
human-civil-rights-abuses-committed-by-u-s-customs-border-
protection-2/. 
21 Interview with David Gangsei, International Clinical Advisor, the 
Center for Victims of T orture (July 2013). [Hereinafter Gangsei 
Interview].
22 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), 
“Guidelines on the Applicable Criteria and Standards relating to 
the Detention of Asylum-Seekers and Alternatives to Detention, ” 
at 16-17 (2012), available at http:/ /www.unhcr.org/refworld/
docid/503489533b8.html (clarifying that public order includes 
to prevent absconding and/or in cases of likelihood of non-
cooperation, In connection with accelerated procedures for 
manifestly unfounded or clearly abusive claims, or for initial identity 
and/or security verification for a limited period of time as “such 
detention can only be justified where that information could not be 
obtained in the absence of detention. ”). 
23 See supra  note 19 at 2.
24 Id.
25 In a 2010 study, the National Immigrant Justice Center (NIJC) 
surveyed 150 immigration detention facilities, accounting for 98% 
of the system’s 32,000 detainee beds at the time, to determine 
accessibility of legal counsel. The survey results found that “80 
percent of detainees were held in facilities which were severely 
underserved by legal aid organizations, with more than 100 
detainees for every full-time NGO attorney providing legal services. 
More than a quarter of detainees were in facilities which were 
even more grossly underserved, where the ratio was 500 or more 
detainees per NGO attorney. A full 10 percent of detainees were 
held in facilities in which they had no access to NGO attorneys 
whatsoever. ” National Immigrant Justice Center, Isolated in 
Detention: Limited Access to Legal Counsel in Immigration 
Detention Facilities Jeopardizes a Fair Day in Court  (Sept. 2010), 4, 
8, available at: http:/ /www.immigrantjustice.org/policy-resources/
isolatedindetention/intro.html. 
26 “From Persecution to Prison, ” Physicians for Human Rights, at 
5 (2003), available at https:/ /s3.amazonaws.com/PHR_Reports/
persecution-to-prison-US-2003.pdf (finding, “Clinically significant 
symptoms of depression were present in 86% of detainees, 
anxiety was present in 77%, and PTSD in 50%. Further, study 
doctors documented that these levels of psychological distress 
worsened as the length of detention increased. While more than 
half (58%) of the asylum seekers interviewed reported having poor 
psychological health at the time that they fled their country, 70% 
stated that overall their mental health had worsened substantially 
while in detention. ”); Hallas P , Hansen AR, Staehr MA, et al., “Length 24
NOVEMBER 2013of stay in asylum centres and mental health in asylum seekers: 
a retrospective study from Denmark, ” BMC Public Health 7: 288 
(2007) (finding, “an increase in referrals for mental disorders with 
increased length of stay in asylum centres in a large, multiethnic 
population of asylum seekers. ”); Guy Coffey, Ida Kaplan, Robyn 
Sampson and Maria Montagna T ucci, “The meaning and mental 
health consequences of long-term immigration detention for people 
seeking asylum” Social Science and Medicine, 70 (12) June, 2070-
2079 (2010)(finding “asylum seekers in detention have high rates of 
depression and Post T raumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and that the 
extent of their mental ill health is correlated with the length of time 
spent in detention. ”); Medical Justice, “The Second T orture”: The 
immigration detention of torture survivors, ” at 4 (2012), available 
at http:/ /www.medicaljustice.org.uk/reports-a-intelligence/mj/
reports/2058-the-second-torture-the-immigration-detention-of-
torture-survivors-22052012155.html (explaining, “In the experience 
of Medical Justice, victims of torture are routinely detained. This 
is particularly problematic because this population often suffers 
both the mental and physical effects of their torture for many years 
afterwards. This, coupled with the trauma of being detained for an 
indefinite time period, the limbo of their legal status, the specific 
medical needs of this vulnerable population, language difficulties 
and isolation from a community can all be highly damaging and/
or injurious to one’s health. Immigration detainees have particular 
health needs, many of whom are afflicted with mental health 
problems. There is a growing body of evidence that notes that 
these problems can be associated with their experiences pre-flight 
(prior to coming to the UK); exacerbated by immigration detention; 
or indeed caused by immigration detention itself. ”); Cleveland, 
Janet, “Psychological Harm and the Case for Alternatives, ” Forced 
Migration Review, Issue 44 at 7 (September 2013), available 
at http:/ /www.fmreview.org/en/detention.pdf (noting, “after a 
relatively short imprisonment (average 31 days), 32% of detained 
asylum seekers reported clinically significant levels of posttraumatic 
stress symptoms, compared to 18% of their non-detained peers. 
Depression levels were 50% higher among detained than non-
detained participants, with 78% of detained asylum seekers 
reporting clinical levels of depressive symptoms compared with 
52% of non-detained asylum seekers. ”).
27 “From Persecution to Prison, ” Physicians for Human Rights, at 
1 (2003), available at https:/ /s3.amazonaws.com/PHR_Reports/
persecution-to-prison-US-2003.pdf.
28 Katy Robjant, Rita Hassan and Cornelius Katona “Mental health 
implications of detaining asylum seekers: systematic review” British 
Journal of Psychiatry, 194: 306-312 (2009).
29 Ward, T ony. “Long-term health costs of extended mandatory 
detention of asylum seekers, ” Y arra Institute for Religion and Social 
Policy, at 5 (October 2011), available at www.yarrainstitute.org.au 
(finding that “in addition to the high costs of maintaining detention 
facilities, there are significant additional costs as a result of 
prolonged detention for the long-term healthcare of former asylum 
seekers once they are released into the community. ”).
30 See supra note 4 at 48.
31 Gangsei Interview. 
32 Id. 
33 Amaral, Philip, “Immigration Detention: Looking at the 
Alternatives, ” Forced Migration Review, Issue 44 at 40, (September 
2013), available at http:/ /www.fmreview.org/en/detention.pdf 
(outlining six specific characteristics important for the well-
functioning of the alternatives to detention: i) access to housing, ii) 
comprehensive support, including one-to-one case management, 
social support, legal assistance, medical support, child care if 
necessary – that focus on one-to-one care; iii) regular up-to-date 
information; iv) access to qualified legal assistance; v) emphasis on 
all possible outcomes; and vi) provide all of the above at the onset of 
a person’s asylum or immigration case.) 
34 The April 4, 2012 EOIR report was transmitted on July 2, 2012 by 
the Department of Justice to the Chairwoman and Ranking Member 
of the Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on 
Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies pursuant to 
the requirements of the Conference Report accompanying the 
Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act, 2012 (P .L. 
112-55). 
35 National Immigration Forum, “The Math of Immigration Detention” 
(Aug. 2012), 2, available at http:/ /www.immigrationforum.org/
images/uploads/MathofImmigrationDetention.pdf (noting that using the current cost of detention, the net annual savings to the 
government from the LOP are more than $25 million).
36 Vera Institute of Justice, “Legal Orientation Program: Evaluation 
and Performance and Outcome Measurement Report, Phase II” 
(May 2008), available at http:/ /www.usdoj.gov/eoir/reports/
LOPEvaluation-final.pdf. 
37 National Immigration Forum, “The Math of Immigration 
Detention: Runaway Costs for Immigration Detention Do Not 
Add Up to Sensible Policies, ” at 1, (August 2013), available 
at http:/ /www.immigrationforum.org/images/uploads/
mathofimmigrationdetention.pdf.
38 National Immigration Forum, “Summary of Reports on 
Immigration Detention, ” July 2008 – October 2012, available 
at http:/ /www.immigrationforum.org/images/uploads/2010/
detentionreportsummaries.pdf. 
39 Press Release, “Secretary Napolitano and ICE Assistant Secretary 
Morton Announce New Immigration Detention Reform Initiatives, ” 
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (October 6, 2009), 
available at http:/ /www.dhs.gov/news/2009/10/06/new-
immigration-detention-reform-initiatives-announced. 
40 “Detention Reform Accomplishments, ” U.S. Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement (ICE), updates available at http:/ /www.ice.
gov/detention-reform/detention-reform.htm (last visited October 
2013). 
41 U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom (USCIRF), 
“Assessing the U.S. Government’s Detention of Asylum Seekers: 
Further Attention Needed to Fully Implement Reforms, ” (April 2013), 
available at http:/ /www.uscirf.gov/images/ERS-detention%20
reforms%20report%20April%202013.pdf (explaining, “The 2005 
USCIRF Study found that the overwhelming majority of asylum 
seekers detained before their credible fear interview, and even 
after being found to have a credible fear, were detained under 
inappropriate conditions, in penal or jail-like facilities. Penal 
detention conditions risk re-traumatizing asylum seekers, and may 
lead some to prematurely terminate their asylum applications and 
return to their countries of origin, despite having credible fear. In 
some facilities, asylum seekers were living alongside U.S. citizens 
serving criminal sentences or criminal aliens, despite ICE detention 
standards forbidding the co-mingling of non-criminal detainees 
with criminals. In addition, the Study found asylum seekers were 
required to wear prison uniforms and were handcuffed and shackled 
like criminals. A 2009 internal DHS report into its own immigration 
detention system also expressed concern about the detention of 
asylum seekers under penal conditions and recommended that 
such detainees be held under civil conditions. ”).
42 Id.
43 See supra  note 40. 
44 See supra  note 37 .
45 See supra  note 18 at 5 (citing Edwards A Back to Basics The 
Right to Liberty and Security of Person and “Alternatives to 
Detention” of Refugees, Asylum-Seekers, Stateless Persons and 
Other Migrants , UNHCR Legal and Protection Policy Research 
Series, PPLA/2011/01.Rev.1, April 2011, www.unhcr.org/refworld/
docid/4dc935fd2.html; International Detention Coalition, There are 
Alternatives, A Handbook for Preventing Unnecessary Immigration 
Detention , 2011, http:/ /idcoalition.org/cap/handbook.). 
46 BI Incorporated, Intensive Supervision Appearance Program II: 
An Alternatives to Detention Program for the U.S. Department of 
Homeland Security , (BI Incorporated, CY 2010).
47 Bremer, Megan, Haynes, Kimberly, Lynch Michael D., and Socha, 
Kerri, “New models for alternatives to detention in the US, ” Forced 
Migration Review, Issue 44 at 50, (September 2013), available at 
http:/ /www.fmreview.org/en/detention.pdf.
48 Id.
49 Immigration Court Backlog T ool,  T racImmigration, Syracuse 
University http:/ /trac.syr.edu/phptools/immigration/court_
backlog/ (last accessed July 22, 2013). 
50 This average was calculated without including the two outliers 
(one week and 7 years) or the three people who are currently in 
detention. 26
NOVEMBER 2013
