Reclaiming Hope, 
Dignity an D R
espect: 
syrian and i raqi tortur e s urvivors in JordanacKnoW le D gements
CVT would like to thank the courageous individuals 
who were interviewed for and profiled in this report.
This publication was supported by a grant from the 
Open Society Foundations. 
Photos: Agnes Montanari  
www.agnesmontanari.photoshelter.com2015 CVT  |  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  •  1
co ntents  
aBoU t tH e c ente R  fo R  Victims of to Rt UR e  ......................................................................... Page 2 
met
H
o
D
ology
 .................................................................................................................................... Page 3
e
X
ecU
ti
V
e
 
sU
mma
Ry
 
.......................................................................................................................  Page 6
p
atte
R
ns
 
of t
o
Rt
UR
e
 among
 
cV
t
’s
 
sy
R
ian
 
clients
 
 
......................................................  Page  8
p
atte
R
ns
 
of t
o
Rt
UR
e
 among
 
cV
t
’s
 
i
RaQ
i
 
clients
  
..........................................................  Page 17
ment
al H
ealt
H 
impac t  
................................................................................................................ Page 22
c
oncl Usion
  
.....................................................................................................................................  Page 33
R
ecommen
Da
tions
  
.......................................................................................................................  Page 34
 
e
n
D
notes
 
..........................................................................................................................................  Page 38
Reclaiming Hope, 
Dignity an D R
espect: 
syrian and i raqi tortur e s urvivors in Jordan2  •  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  |  2015 CVT
aBoUt c Vt
The Center for Victims of T ortureTM (CVT) provides heal-
ing services to survivors of torture and war atrocities at 
its clinics in the United States, the Middle East and Africa and engages in training and capacity building initiatives in support of torture survivor rehabilitation programs world-wide.  CVT engages in policy advocacy in fulfillment of its mission to heal the wounds of torture and end the practice worldwide.
In 2008, CVT began providing trauma rehabilitation ser -
vices to Iraqi refugees in Jordan. In 2012, with the influx of 
Syrian refugees fleeing war, the need for CVT’s services increased dramatically. With nearly 630,000 registered Syrian refugees in Jordan
1 and increasing numbers of Iraqis, 
CVT currently operates two clinics in Jordan—Amman and Zarqa. Over 80 percent of refugees in Jordan are living in urban settings, not in camps, though Zaatari camp near the Syrian-Jordanian border holds nearly 80,000 Syrian refugees and Azraq camp holds approximately 27 ,000 individuals.
2 CVT’s clinical staff members (psychosocial 
counselors, physical therapists and social workers) provide high-level specialized interventions for clients in ten-week group sessions. 
Potential clients are introduced to CVT in Jordan primarily 
through word-of-mouth from former clients. CVT also has a large referral network of legal, social and medical service providers to refer clients based on need. These partners refer refugees with a high level of need and low level of functionality to CVT for specialized mental health and  
physiotherapy interventions. 
CVT serves both asylum-seekers and refugees in Jordan, 
regardless of nationality. Refugees, as defined by the 1967 Protocol to the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, are those individuals who flee their country of origin due to a “well-founded fear of being persecuted” on account of “race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion” and are “unable  
[. . .] or unwilling to avail [themselves] of the protection of that country” because of such fear.
3 Asylum-seekers 
are those individuals who flee their countries of origin, but whose refugee status is not yet or cannot be deter -
mined.
4 Under its mandate, the UN High Commissioner for 
Refugees (UNHCR) designates individuals as refugees and asylum-seekers worldwide. Such individuals include those who are fleeing conflict or generalized violence or “other circumstances that have seriously disturbed public order and who, as a result, require international protection. ”
5 
Along with its government and humanitarian aid partners, UNHCR provides protection and services to individuals falling under its mandate.
6 Syrians displaced in the Middle 
East fall under a specially-designated category and are automatically presumed to be refugees upon initial regis-tration with UNHCR. Displaced Iraqis must go through the standard UNHCR refugee status determination process. In Jordan, CVT provides services to individuals who survived war trauma and/or torture outside of Jordan, regardless of refugee status. However, most of CVT’s clients are regis-tered as refugees or asylum-seekers with UNHCR. UNHCR estimates that by January 2016, there will be over one mil-lion refugees and asylum seekers registered in Jordan.
7 
Given that needs far exceed available resources, CVT must prioritize those clients with the highest level of need—those who display a low level of functioning and may benefit most from specialized intervention. After intake, clients participate in 10-week group cycles. Individual meetings with counselors are used as needed to supplement group participation. Children’s groups are divided by age and par -
ents are involved in the group sessions to varying degrees. Adult groups are generally separated by gender. With some adjustments according to the particularities of each group, CVT’s counselors guide clients through a 10-week cycle that provides a safe space for clients to heal from their traumatic experiences and improves their ability to function. •••
cVt pr ovides services to 
individuals who survived war trauma and/or torture outside of Jordan, regardless of refugee status. 2015 CVT  |  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  •  3
met H o Dol ogy  
selection m ethodology
In order to more systematically track human rights viola-
tions that CVT’s clients suffered in their home countries, lawyers from CVT’s office in Washington, D.C. conducted four trips to Jordan to collect testimonial accounts of the human rights abuses faced by former CVT clients. Interviews were entirely voluntary and were only conducted after the clients had completed CVT’s 10-week mental health and/or physical therapy program and had received a six-month follow-up with their CVT counselors to ensure that the clients were psychologically stable and prepared to share their story. 
T eams of counselors selected potential interviewees among 
CVT’s former client population of primary and secondary torture survivors
8 from Syria or Iraq based on whether 
the client was psychologically stable, interested in shar -
ing their personal story for public purposes and able to provide informed consent. Individuals who volunteered to participate in interviews were scheduled for one to two hour interviews in either Amman or Zarqa and were provided reimbursements for transportation costs. 
Counselors did not attend the individual interview sessions 
as long as clients felt comfortable meeting the attorneys alone along with an interpreter. The counselors, however, were in the office nearby in case the clients required follow-up or experienced discomfort or retraumatization in dis-cussing their experiences. interview methodology
CVT’s attorneys conducted 64 interviews during four sepa-rate trips to Jordan from January 2014 through October 2015. This report relies on those interviews with CVT’s Syrian and Iraqi clients. Several of the interviews conducted were with survivors of war trauma who were not tortured and did not have family members who were tortured or dis-appeared. Those interviews are excluded from this report, which aims to relay the human rights violations committed against primary or secondary torture survivors and their particular needs. 
This report relies on the definition of torture in the UN 
Convention against T orture, under which CVT’s international programs classify torture survivors. T orture thus entails (i) severe physical or mental pain or suffering (ii) intentionally inflicted (iii) for purposes of obtaining information or a con-fession, punishment, intimidation, coercion, or discrimina-tion of any kind (iv) by or with the consent or acquiescence of a public official or another person acting in official capac-ity, (v) not including pain or suffering arising from, inherent in, or incidental to lawful sanctions.
9
Clients included in the report range in age from five to late 60s. Children (up to 18 years old) were not interviewed; rather, attorneys conducted interviews with their parents. In one case, a father asked to be interviewed simultaneously with his 14-year-old daughter (a CVT client). This request was granted. Iraqi clients interviewed came primarily from three cities in Iraq—Baghdad, Kirkuk and Basra. They often say that they were targeted for sectarian reasons either by unknown perpetrators or local militias. Although a majority of CVT’s client’s and the general Syrian refugee population 
4  •  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  |  2015 CVT
Aleppo MosulErbil
Kirkuk
BaghdadIRAQSYRIA
JORDANAn Nasiriyah
Al BasraHoms
Damascus
Deraa
AmmanZarqaLatakia2015 CVT  |  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  •  5
are from Deraa, most Syrian interviewees and torture 
survivor clients are primarily from Homs, Damascus or Rif Dimashq and primarily cite the Syrian military and its affili-ates or intelligence services as their torturers. 
The interviews were structured chronologically starting 
with specific questions about the early stages of the Syrian or Iraqi conflict, focusing on the clients’ direct experiences of torture and the perpetrators, and ending with questions regarding their current situation as refugees in Jordan and thoughts about the future. Within this flexible, semi-structured approach, the interviews allowed the clients to elaborate on their experiences to the level of detail they chose and to address the issues they wished to highlight.
Interview highlights are included in the report after several 
stages of informed consent. First, counselors informed clients about the nature of the interview and potential public use of the information, obtaining verbal consent regarding participation. Attorneys then received (i) verbal informed consent of the clients prior to the interviews, ensuring that clients understood that the purpose of the interviews were for their stories to be shared publicly to support advocacy work and (ii) written informed consent in Arabic at the end of the interview to provide clients with the opportunity to reflect upon the information they provided, consider poten-tial risks and make an informed decision. On one occasion, the individual decided that after sharing her story with the attorney, she wanted the information to remain confidential. CVT respected that request and her story is not referenced in this report. Additionally, a number of clients asked for identifying information, such as locations, occupation or details about family members’ experiences of torture to be kept general or confidential. In all of these instances, the clients’ requests have been respected.
CVT is firmly committed to client confidentiality and pre-
serving the therapeutic relationship. Therefore, CVT guaran-tees to its clients that anything that was shared during their participation in CVT’s counseling, physical therapy or social work sessions would remain confidential, but information shared with attorneys could be made public. All of the names have been changed and some identifying informa-tion omitted for confidentiality and security purposes. All notes and details of interviews are on file with the authors. other Qualitative Data 
In addition to interviews with former clients, the content and recommendations of this report are also informed by the 10 discussion group sessions conducted by CVT staff in Jordan. CVT’s psychosocial counselors, physiotherapists and social workers gather on a monthly basis to share observations on human rights violations and challenges faced by clients in Jordan. These discussion groups bring together over 50 of CVT’s clinical staff members who have seen 3,036 Iraqi clients since 2008 and 1,829 Syrian clients since 2011. 
Staff members interact with Syrian and Iraqi clients as well 
as refugee families within the community on a daily basis. As a result, staff members are continuously taking in infor -
mation on the changing needs, fears and perceptions of the larger Syrian and Iraqi refugee communities related to their lived experiences and to their present circumstances in Jordan. When this report refers to “CVT clients, ” this infor -
mation comes from anecdotal evidence shared in monthly staff discussion groups. The terms “interviewees” or “clients interviewed” refer to those clients who shared their stories directly with U.S.-based CVT attorneys. 
Finally, the report is informed by extensive discussions 
with referral partner organizations working in Amman and Zaatari camp. These discussions have provided key con-textual information to ground CVT’s understanding of the situation in Jordan and its influence on the well-being of Syrian and Iraqi refugee communities. •••
 
cVt s taff members in Jordan have 
seen 3,036 
i
raqi clients since 2008 
and 1,829 
syrian client
s since 2011.6  •  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  |  2015 CVT
limitations 
CVT’s specialized high-level interventions make it unique 
among refugee service providers. CVT’s clients are a subset of the larger refugee population in Jordan. The experiences of this client population may be indicative of larger trends, though they also present an inherent selection bias. Clients seeking CVT’s services may either face more problems than the general refugee population or may be more capable of seeking out services than others. Thus, the interviews and observations that follow are based on a select portion of the larger refugee population in Jordan and may differ from the experiences of Syrian or Iraqi refugee populations in Lebanon, T urkey, Egypt or other parts of the region. 
The discussions that informed this report, however, led to 
the conclusion that the shortfalls in humanitarian assis-tance are similar among the Syrian refugee populations residing in the camps. The purpose of this report is to share trends among CVT’s client base and inform policies for the U.S. government, the Jordanian government, the United Nations and NGO partners moving forward. The narratives of Syrian and Iraqi clients provide a powerful, rich depiction of the types of torture experienced as a result of the ongo-ing protracted conflicts in Syria and Iraq. Additionally, the information shared by clients and staff illustrate the critical and emerging issues faced by Syrians and Iraqis that seek CVT’s services given the current situation in Jordan. •••eXe c Ut i V e sUm ma Ry 
Under international law, torture can be both a war crime and crime against humanity and may be an element of genocide. The long-standing prohibition against torture has not brought an end to the practice around the world. In few places has it been more widespread than in the context of the ongoing conflicts in Syria and Iraq. As the following dis-cussions illuminate, torture practices in the region include beatings, sexual violence, burning, electrocution, pulling fingernails and threats against family. 
In the following report, CVT shares trends that have 
emerged separately among its Syrian and Iraqi clients. Most of CVT’s clients who were imprisoned and tortured in Syria did not identify or report affiliation with opposition forces, demonstrations or political activities. Rather, they were caught up in generalized violence and round-ups in some of Syria’s largest cities. Though the majority of CVT’s Syrian clients are from Deraa on the Jordanian border, most of the torture survivors interviewed came from Homs, Damascus and Rif Dimashq. Interviewees rarely report being tortured to elicit certain information. Rather, the torture survivors believed that perpetrators wanted to intimidate and create pervasive fear. 
Because the borders between Jordan and Syria have been 
effectively closed since January 2015, most of the Syrian clients interviewed report entering Jordan between 2011 and 2014. Although fighting in Syria is complex, with nearly 1,000 different groups participating,
10 the primary torture 
perpetrator reported to CVT is the Syrian military and its affiliates or security and intelligence forces. Most survivors 
Refugees describe despising  
having to “beg” for money from the 
international community and  
prefer to provide for themselves.2015 CVT  |  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  •  7
reported being detained in government facilities, most nota-
bly intelligence prisons or intelligence-related sections of regular prisons in Homs and Damascus.
11 However, others 
reported being detained in makeshift or informal centers of confinement, including houses or markets. 
Clients expressed fears of returning to Syria due to the 
brutality from all sides of the conflict including the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), the Free Syrian Army (FSA) and other opposition forces. However, very few of the Syrian clients interviewed have been targeted by opposition forces or ISIS because they are either from territory not held by ISIS or fled ISIS-held areas prior to ISIS takeover. Instead, they recount stories of family members who are still in Syria and face threats, attacks or restrictions by ISIS. Clients thus express fears of returning to Syria because of potentially being targeted by ISIS. 
In Iraq, the reports of torture are much murkier. Clients 
rarely know who attacked them, but often know that threats or attacks were based on sectarianism. Interviews were conducted with CVT Iraqi clients from Baghdad, Kirkuk, Mosul and Basra. Most interviewees report they were attacked because they are from a minority group in their particular region—usually Sunnis, Christians and Sabeans. Although interviewees and other clients can rarely identify perpetrators definitively, they often cite local militias as perpetrating much of the violence and reiterate that they were attacked based on their religion with perpetrators taking advantage of the chaos and lack of government enforcement. 
The mental health effects that clients describe stemming 
from the abuse faced in Syria or Iraq include nightmares, trouble sleeping, constant paranoia, difficulty with concen-tration in simple daily tasks, fear of loud noises and planes, withdrawal and isolation. Clients are constantly plagued by symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder contributing to a low level of functioning even as they fled to the relative safety of Jordan. Exacerbating the situation has been the tense relationship with the host community that is strug -
gling to integrate the large influx of people, the increasing difficulty of obtaining appropriate services from the under -
funded international humanitarian community and the lack of legal work opportunities in Jordan. The recommendations in this report focus not only on the violations faced by CVT’s clients, but the mental health impacts of the torture and abuse they faced. T o combat the negative coping mechanisms and mental health effects that have plagued refugees in Jordan, more opportunities must be in place for refugees to live relatively normal lives. First and foremost, increased opportunities to provide for their families must be afforded. Refugees describe despis-ing having to “beg” for money from the international com-munity and preferred to provide for themselves. However, opportunities for refugees to obtain legal work authorization are incredibly limited in Jordan and most refugees are pre-vented from working. While some continue to work illegally, the pay is minimal and there are no protections. Rather, they are in constant fear of being discovered by Jordanian authorities and being sent to Azraq camp or deported. Some clients report sending their children to work instead of school because they are less likely to be deported if discovered. 
Importantly, the lack of communication by the international 
humanitarian community has also created a feeling of aban-donment and frustration, particularly among Iraqi refugees. Much of the international donor community earmarks aid for the Syrian refugee response.  Iraqi interviewees report being ignored or turned away by humanitarian aid provid-ers. Finally, the lengthiness of third country refugee resettle-ment processes has left many in limbo as they wait for a sign from the United States, Canada, Australia and other resettlement countries. Interviewees report waiting a year or more to hear anything when referred for resettlement; this is after several years of going through the application process with UNHCR. Improvements in communication and provision of services in all of these programs can go a long way to preventing the retraumatization of torture survivors and the general refugee population in Jordan. Despite the difficulties they face, CVT’s clients tell the stories not of victimhood, but of survival in the face of serious war crimes and crimes against humanity. •••
cVt ’s clients tell stories not of 
victimhood, but of survival in 
the face of serious war crimes and crimes against humanity.8  •  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  |  2015 CVT
patte Rn s  of 
t
o
RtU
Re 
among  
cVt’
s 
syRi
an 
clients
Throughout the 64 client interviews, certain patterns of  
torture in Syria have emerged. These patterns are con-
firmed by clinical staff observations in relation to the larger torture survivor population seeking CVT’s services in Jordan. Described below are the most common emerging themes and excerpts from client testimonials that illustrate those patterns. 
Arbitrariness
The overwhelming majority of clients interviewed who were tortured in Syria claim no part in the opposition movement. With no reported involvement in demonstrations, revolu-tion or armed groups, many interviewees were arbitrarily swept up in the violence and government crackdowns. They happened to be in the wrong place at the wrong time—often their own homes or at checkpoints. Others were only inci-dentally involved in opposition activities. 
Arbitrary detention is not well-defined under international 
law. The UN Human Rights Council’s Working Group on Arbitrary Detention determines that a detention is arbitrary if it falls into one of three categories: (i) “When it is clearly impossible to invoke any legal basis justifying the depriva-tion of liberty;” (ii) “When the deprivation of liberty results from the exercise of the rights or freedoms guaranteed by” several articles under the Universal Declaration of Human Rights or International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, such as freedoms of assembly, press, movement, expression, opinion, or association; or (iii) “When the total or partial non-observance of the international norms relating to a fair trial [. . .] is of such gravity as to give the deprivation of liberty an arbitrary character. ”
12 Under these 
standards, when individuals are held for no investigative purpose, or for exercising basic rights, or are given  
trials that lacked basic protections, their detention may  
be arbitrary. 
In Syria, many of the interviewees reported being arrested 
for no identifiable purpose other than being in their own homes when government troops arrived in their neighbor -
hoods. Men, women and children who were detained were all potential targets for torture. Those tortured were from different socioeconomic backgrounds and many were prominent in their communities as businesspeople,  
academics and professionals. 
When the revolution started in Deraa in 2011, Hamza13 
did not participate. One day in November, soldiers 
came into his neighborhood. He had stayed out of the 
protests near his home the night before, but soldiers 
came into his home and asked for his identity card. 
They arrested him and many other men in the neighbor -
hood. He was held in solitary confinement and subject 
to various methods of torture including throwing cold 
water at him while undressed and leaving him in a 
cold room. After several days, he was transferred to a 
room of about 40 to 50 men where he stayed for 10 
days. Eventually he was forced to sign papers confess-
ing that he helped men who attacked officers. Prison 
officials asked him about rebel activities, but he didn’t 
know anything. He was then transferred to a prison in 
Damascus, where he was held in solitary confinement, 
interrogated and beaten for six hours a day. He was 
forced to confess to supplying weapons to the rebels 
and participating in the revolution, which he did not do. 
Hamza was eventually transferred to the State Security 
Prison in Damascus and after days of interrogation, he 
was eventually cleared and released. 
i
brahim14 owned a shop in Deraa located near several 
security and intelligence branches on a main road. He 
was arrested in his shop on three separate occasions 
simply because of his shop’s location. Ibrahim was 
accused of informing opposition forces about the move-
ment of the regime and intelligence forces, something 
he claims no involvement in and says he was disgusted 
by the violence and brutality of both sides. While in 
prison, he was beaten with the barrel of a rifle on his 
mouth and still has broken teeth. He was blindfolded 
ibrahim was arrested on three 
s
eparate occasions simply because 
of his shop’s location near the 
security and intelligence branches.2015 CVT  |  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  •  9
and suspended from a ceiling for hours at a time. 
Guards threatened to hurt his wife. Ibrahim describes 
the psychological torture as worse than the physical 
torture. For weeks and months after, he describes expe-
riencing deep paranoia and a strong pain in his chest 
when he heard the sounds of ambulances or police cars. 
Qassem15 worked for a company that was accused of 
incidentally aiding demonstrations in the early months 
of the revolution. Shortly afterwards, he and several 
other employees of his company were arrested and 
taken to the Air Force Intelligence Branch. He con-
fessed, hoping for mercy, but instead was tortured for 
13 days straight. He was put in a tire and beaten and 
was electrocuted. He says he is lucky because only one 
of his nails was removed; many others had all of their 
nails removed. His family did not know where he was for 
nine months. When he was transferred to a local prison 
in Homs, he spent six months suffering from sexual 
and psychological humiliation. All of the prisoners were 
forced to strip naked and eat while they were kneeling 
with their hands behind their backs. Qassem was finally 
released when one of the prison officials in the local 
prison recognized him and alerted his family. The judge 
that eventually released him told him to leave Syria 
immediately. 
a
isha16 and her husband ran a charity in Homs. As 
the violence spread to their area in August 2011, she 
and her family did not participate in demonstrations. 
They watched as tanks and snipers rolled into their 
neighborhoods. They continued their charity work by 
taking injured people into their home to provide first 
aid. Aisha’s brother was killed and her mother was wounded, both by sniper shots. In October 2011, her 
disabled husband was detained for over 12 hours by 
security forces accusing them of being terrorists. They 
forced him out of his wheelchair and made him drag 
himself up seven flights of stairs. Upon being released, 
he told Aisha that he heard and saw people being tor -
tured at the security/intelligence office and was threat -
ened with physical torture himself. Officers threatened 
to hurt his wife and daughter and accused him of faking 
his disability. They humiliated him when they forced him 
to walk and he fell. Undeterred, the family continued to 
take injured people into their homes. When their home 
was bombed in November 2011, they fled to Damascus, 
where after a short while, her son was killed when tanks 
lined up outside their house. They unwillingly fled to 
Jordan shortly after. 
Demonstrating the arbitrariness with which torture was car -
ried out, some of the clients interviewed were even former 
government officials, had family that worked for the govern-ment or were associated with the ruling Baath Party. Several clients describe never taking part in protests, continuing their work in government jobs and despite this, still being arbitrarily detained and tortured. 
many interviewees reported being 
arr
ested for no identifiable purpose 
other than being in their own homes 
when government troops arrived.10  •   Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  |  2015 CVT
As an academic and philosopher in Homs, Khaled17 had 
written four books and over 30 other publications. He 
had a son who worked for the government and had been 
himself a member of the ruling Baath Party in the past. 
Khaled did not participate in the revolution.  In April 
2011, while sitting in his office, a security officer came 
in and arrested him. He was placed in solitary confine-
ment, in a room about one-half meter by two meters for 
eight days. Khaled’s son paid prison officials to give him 
water. He was given two small bottles for drinking and 
bathing per day. He would be taken out of his cell each 
day, undressed and beaten by three men. A fourth man 
would supervise. After eight days, he was transferred to 
the central prison in Homs where he stayed for a month 
until he was declared innocent [of false murder charges] 
and released, after paying the judge a hefty bribe. 
i
mad,18 a Syrian lawyer, worked in the legal affairs 
section of the Ministry of Communications. He did 
not take part in demonstrations, though some of his 
family members participated. He was first arrested 
after he fled Damascus with his family during clashes 
between the regime and the Free Syrian Army. When 
he went back to check on his home, he was arrested 
and accused of treason, but was let go when the chief 
security officer recognized him. Imad was trying to go 
back to work when he was stopped and arrested at an
irregular security checkpoint. He was kept alone in a 
dark, cold room and beaten with cables, wires and rods. 
He was hung and kicked. He was repeatedly questioned 
about people with his family name, a very large family 
in Deraa, which he says has over 200,000 members in 
Syria. He was eventually released, he suspects because 
they discovered he had no information and worked for 
the civil service. Some interviewees point out that their targeting might not 
have been entirely arbitrary, speculating it may have been connected to the sectarianism that took over Syria after the war broke out. Client interviewees describe, and most independent reports confirm, that sectarianism was not a particular concern in day-to-day life prior to the war. Syria’s population was nearly 90 percent Arab, made up of Sunnis, Christians, Alawis Shia and Druze. Kurds, Armenians, T urkmen and other ethnic minorities made up the other roughly 10 percent of the population.
19 Interviewees were 
quick to note that they all lived together peacefully prior to the conflict, but lament the sectarian character of the attacks after 2011.
20 What the sectarian subtext of the 
conflict means for future accountability and reconciliation remains unclear. But many Syrian interviewees were quick to note their desire for accountability for all sides of the conflict, including any of the opposition forces.
21 
mahmoud22 from Rif Dimashq explained that prior to 
the war, Syrians of all religious and ethnic groups lived 
side-by-side in the same communities. He said that 
when the revolution first started, it was like any other, 
people from all sects were in opposition or with the 
regime. But the regime directed its brutality at Sunnis; 
even those Sunnis who worked for the government  
were targeted. 
a
kram’s father was kidnapped at his workplace in a 
government-affiliated factory. He along with seven of his 
colleagues—all Sunnis—were arrested. His family hasn’t 
heard anything about him since he was kidnapped in 
2013. Akram’s mother told CVT that she believes her 
husband was only arrested because sectarianism, par -
ticularly between Sunnis and Alawis, had taken over.23 
Walid24 was arrested and tortured in prison for 45 days. 
He said that before the war, no one would ask who was 
Shia, Sunni or Alawi. His neighborhood in Homs was 
diverse and he got along with his Christian neighbor. 
This environment changed during the war. He noted 
that snipers were mostly Alawis. When he stopped at a 
checkpoint as he was fleeing Syria, he was cursed for 
being Sunni and the soldier threatened to cut off his 
hands and feet.
Walid said that before the war 
no one would ask who was 
s
hia, 
s
unni or 
a
lawi. 
t
his environ-
ment changed during the war.2015 CVT  |  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  •  11
12  •   Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  |  2015 CVT
Freedoms of assembly and speech suppressed
The few interviewees who had either participated in dem-
onstrations or attempted to document the events describe particularly brutal torture. They were often held in central intelligence prisons and faced harsh treatment until they were released—usually through hefty bribe payments. Their treatment indicates the well-documented intention to sup-press peaceful assembly
25 and stifle the press.26 
Kareem27 was a photographer who took photos of dem-
onstrations, but was not affiliated with the opposition. 
His wife and son were kidnapped and soon after, he was 
taken to what he describes as a “house” with several 
rooms. There, he was forced to watch the gang rape of 
his wife and the killing of his son as officers affiliated 
with the regime slit his throat with a knife. Kareem was 
electrocuted, suspended from the ceiling and beaten, 
and burned with cigarettes. Interrogators continued 
to ask him about names on their lists, but he fed them 
false information. He was beaten until he was uncon-
scious. When they discovered he was lying, they would 
beat him again. In the early months of the revolution, 
fouad28 and his 
four brothers were arrested for their participation in 
demonstrations. They had all received threatening texts 
prior to their arrest. He spent a year in an intelligence 
prison where he and others would be beaten until their 
teeth broke, exposed to electric shock, beat on the back 
and forced to watch the torture and rape of others, 
including men. He was forced to watch the beating to 
death of one prisoner. For the first 12 days, his interro-
gators attempted to ask him questions and get informa-
tion, but after that, they just beat him to punish him. 
Torture and targeting of children
Children have not escaped the brutality of torture in Syria. Many of the children who take part in CVT’s program in Jordan are deeply affected by trauma from war and mass atrocities. However, a select few are themselves survivors of torture. Some of CVT’s adult clients also report that their children were tortured and/or killed, even if the chil-dren themselves are not CVT clients. In several instances, parents sought CVT’s services to cope with the torture and severe war trauma endured by their children and their inability to protect them from such experiences. 
fatima’ s29 daughter was 12 years old when she was 
taken by Syrian troops from her home. Soldiers wanted 
her father who was a member of the Free Syrian Army. 
When they didn’t find him, they took her instead. The 
young girl was held for a few weeks until her father sur -
rendered to save his daughter. The FSA was able to free 
the children that were held but the father was 
Kareem, an independent  
photographer, was forced to  
watch the gang rape of his wife  
and killing of his son.2015 CVT  |  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  •  13
killed. Fatima’s daughter described being treated badly, 
seeing other children tortured and/or killed. 
Bushra’s30 17-year-old son was arrested in regime 
sweeps in Damascus in the middle of the night when 
regime forces entered their home. He was charged with 
trumped up terrorism charges and held for four months 
until Bushra was able to win his release by paying 
bribes. She does not know the details of his treatment, 
but knows he was treated badly. 
Multiple family members  
were arrested and tortured
For some of the interviewees many of their family members, 
usually males, were swept up in the arbitrary arrest, deten-tion and torture in places like Damascus and Homs. Entire families have been affected. Parents who lost one child said that they fled as quickly as possible to prevent the same fate from happening to their other children. 
Bushra, whose 17-year-old son was arrested, also saw 
the arrest of her 19-year-old son and her husband in 
the same sweep. Regime forces broke into their home 
in the middle of the night. They were taken along with 
other men and boys from the neighborhood, some as 
young as 13. None of them had reportedly participated 
in protests or in the revolution. Father and sons were 
dispersed and held in different places. They were finally 
released after four months when Bushra paid a bribe for 
their release. Her husband now suffers from knee prob-
lems because he was forced to kneel in a small crowded 
room for extended periods of time. He returned home 
with his teeth broken and thumbs fractured.
m
anal,31 a hospital employee who was arrested, forced 
to listen to the rape and torture of others and was 
threatened with gang rape herself, was not the only one 
in her family arrested and tortured. Her husband was 
arrested because he helped displaced civilians who had 
fled to Damascus from Homs by raising money and 
bringing them food, diapers and milk. This was only a 
short time before she was detained and tortured.ayman
,32 of Palestinian origin with Jordanian citizen-
ship, was born and raised in Damascus. When the war 
broke out, he warned his brothers not to get involved 
in opposition activity and even describes himself as 
supporting the regime at first. After he was hit by sniper 
bullets in his legs, he had to navigate checkpoints and 
regime hospitals to receive treatment. Shortly after, his 
youngest brother was arrested. Ayman and much of his 
family fled. When Ayman’s oldest brother returned to 
Syria to search for their youngest brother, he was also 
arrested and faced abusive treatment. He was forced to 
strip naked and shower in scalding water until his skin 
peeled. Ayman’s oldest brother was held in prison for a 
month and was deported to Jordan. There remains little 
word on their youngest brother with the most recent 
update that he was in a military court in 2015. 
Disappearances
In Syrian government prisons, political prisoners have been disappeared or brutally tortured, and the government attempted to cover up the treatment by claiming they died from natural causes, issuing death certificates to that effect. Other families still do not know what happened to their loved ones who disappeared and have not received any information from officials, despite repeated attempts. Human rights groups estimate that over 65,000 individu-als are still missing in Syria.
33 Cultural and family pressures 
urge individuals not to mourn for their missing loved ones because it indicates that they are dead.
34 Some clients have 
been missing family members for years. As the release of 55,000 photos by a defected Syrian military photographer confirms, thousands may have died in Syrian prisons.
35
Under international law, the families of the disappeared have a right to know the fate of their loved ones. The gov -
ernment is obligated to carry out a full investigation and provide the family with information. Because of the anxi-ety associated with not knowing the fate of close family members and loved ones, the families of the disappeared 
cultural and family pressures 
ur
ge individuals not to mourn for 
their missing loved ones because 
it indicates that they are dead.14  •   Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  |  2015 CVT
are often survivors of severe psychological pain and suffer -
ing. The UN Human Rights Committee has long regarded 
enforced disappearances as a violation of the prohibition against torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treat -
ment for the family.
36 Disappearance is one of the few 
continuous crimes under international law, meaning that the crime does not cease until the fate or whereabouts of the individual are released.
37 The European Court of Human 
Rights and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights both note that the mental anguish and distress associated with not knowing the fate of family members is a breach of the prohibition against torture and cruel, inhuman or degrad-ing treatment.
38 The experiences of CVT’s clients show 
that this assessment is also clinically correct and severe pain and suffering are associated with disappearances and a lack of genuine investigation. Many families still suffer from not knowing the fate and whereabouts of their loved ones. Others, who have had the bodies of their loved ones returned, do not know the truth about what happened  
to them. 
tar ek’s39 brother aided in the release of a man held 
hostage by the Free Syrian Army. In 2012, that brother 
was arrested for reasons that remain unclear to T arek. 
He was released after a few months only to be arrested 
again in 2013 and held in a military intelligence prison. 
When T arek and his family tried to find his brother, 
they were told he had died of a stroke and were given a 
death certificate to that effect. He was 42 years old and 
in good health. After the family went through parlia-
mentary contacts and paid money to retrieve the body, 
they saw that he had bruises everywhere and signs of 
torture.
When the revolution started, 
n
ayif40 was a government 
driver working in the telecommunications sector. He 
started transporting injured civilians to get medical 
help. When he was picked up by the secret services, he 
was brutally tortured in prison. During his two months 
in prison, he personally saw three people die from a combination of torture and illness. He describes seeing 
prison officials leave dead bodies in the prison for days. 
Eventually they were taken away, he suspects they were 
just dumped outside somewhere. 
In 2013, during the siege and bombardment of Homs, 
a
kram’s father was arrested. Akram was 8 years old at 
the time. His mother said her youngest daughter was 
born shortly after her husband’s disappearance. She 
tried everything to get information about him, but the 
police did not provide any information, only gave her 
pictures of mutilated bodies to look at and identify him, 
but he wasn’t among them. She thought that he might 
have been taken to another region where a lot of people 
are rumored to have been killed. The family fled to 
Jordan in late 2013. As a result of his father’s disappear -
ance and the war violence he’s been exposed to, Akram 
acts out and is often withdrawn and isolated. He has 
nightmares, trouble sleeping and wakes up screaming 
and crying. He also developed a stutter when he speaks. 
His mother laments, “They don’t even let me mourn for 
my husband or honor him. ” The ongoing uncertainty 
is a heavy burden for her and her children to continue 
carrying. 
i
man’s41 21-year-old son was in the Syrian army. From 
pieces of the story that they put together through unof -
ficial sources, his family understood that he defected 
from the army towards the beginning of the war and 
was killed in 2012. She and her husband begged to 
find him or find his body, but had a lot of trouble. They 
were told to retrieve his body from Tishreen Military 
Hospital, but despite looking around “like crazy people” 
they could not find him. They would scream out for him 
in the streets. They went back and forth for 15 days 
and were told to look through the morgue themselves, 
which they did to no avail. Finally, Iman saw an officer at 
the morgue on the computer and tried to look over his 
shoulder for any documentation of her son. The officer 
was dismissive, but told her that he was probably in one 
of the mass graves. 
“they don’t even let me mourn 
f
or my husband or honor him. ” 
t
he ongoing uncertainty is a 
heavy burden. 2015 CVT  |  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  •  15
16  •   Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  |  2015 CVT
Torture was often used for no  
investigative purpose, only to create fear
Clients report that methods of torture were usually carried 
out in combination leading to physical, psychological and social effects. Nearly all clients who report being tortured shared stories of being physically beaten, often on their feet or back, or while in forced stress positions. Suspension by arms from the ceiling is a commonly reported method as is being forced to hear or witness others being tortured or raped. Rape, roughly defined as “a physical invasion of a sexual nature, committed on a person under circumstances which are coercive, ” constitutes torture where all elements of the torture crime are fulfilled.
42 Women who were forced 
to witness the rape of others reported being told, “Y ou’re next. ” Clients recently reported a new method of torture by which they are forced to peel newly hard-boiled eggs and place them under their armpits, leading to muscle injuries. One common method of torture reported by clients involves being forced into a rubber tire and beaten. In several instances, clients reported severe beatings that resulted in nerve damage or paralysis. tar ek, whose brother died in prison, also recounted the 
stories of two other brothers who were arrested. His 
younger brother, a 30-year-old musician, was accused 
of composing a song against the regime, taken and tor -
tured for one month and five days. He was handcuffed, 
kicked in his face and knees. Another brother of his was 
also arrested. He was squeezed into a tire and beaten. 
Many interviewees said that the intent of their torturers were mainly to create fear and intimidation. They believe that their torturers were rarely interested in obtaining information. Interviewees were often eventually released because their families paid off the right officials. 
Hassan,43 who lived in Deraa when the revolution broke 
out, described himself as apolitical; he didn’t really 
support or oppose the regime. One day while riding 
alone on a motorbike near his village, he was arrested 
at a checkpoint and held for 40 days, “which felt like 40 
years. ” His fingernails were removed with pliers, which 
caused him to lose sensation in his fingers. His interro-
gators cursed at him, insulted him and drilled a hole into 
his leg with a power drill; he passed out from the pain. 
When he was released, he had lost 40 kilos (88 pounds) 
and his wife didn’t even recognize him. He recalls that 
the questions he and others were asked during their 
torture and interrogations were “Do you want to be 
president of Syria?” or “Are you a secret agent?”  
Hassan said they were not looking for any information. 
Just to torture. 
they were not looking for any 
inf
ormation. Just to torture.2015 CVT  |  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  •  17
manal w orked at a government-run hospital in 
Damascus when the fighting broke out. She described 
both her humanity and her professional integrity being 
tested when government officials or other medical 
professionals prevented her from helping wounded 
members of the opposition. After she left her job 
because it was no longer sustainable to turn a blind eye 
to injured patients, she was attacked by regime forces in 
her house and dragged out in her nightclothes. For days, 
she was held in a makeshift prison with other women 
and was forced to hear the cries of rape and torture. 
She was interrogated for only an hour and asked why 
she treated the opposition’s wounded. The interrogat -
ing lieutenant said very profane things and sent her 
back. Finally, when they took her to a room and told 
her she would be raped, she was forced to choose how 
many men would rape her; one was not an option. At 
that point, she had completely given in and was numb. 
Moments later, she was saved because her brothers 
paid off the prison officials to let her out.
laith44 participated in the demonstrations in Homs 
against the regime, but he was never arrested for that 
purpose. Instead, he was picked up at a regime check -
point and put in a prison where he was tortured daily. He 
described prisoners being forced to strip naked and line 
up against one another as the guards laughed at them 
and called them “gay. ” Other times he was suspended 
from the ceiling by chains. He was eventually accused of 
killing a police officer, which he said was absurd, but he 
was never interrogated. •••patte R ns of toRtU R e 
a
mong  
cVt’s 
iRaQi 
cl
ients  
The situation in Iraq is much murkier. After on-and-off 
periods of war since 1989, the most substantial emerging trend among Iraqi clients is that many have known nothing but war their whole lives. The chaos and ongoing violence has made virtually all ethnic and religious groups vulnerable to attack and perpetrators are increasingly difficult  
to ascertain. 
Unknown perpetrators
Illustrating the level to which the chaos in Iraq has caused immense suffering among civilians, the Iraqi clients interviewed can rarely definitively identify their torturers. Virtually no armed groups, government or opposition, are absolved of torture in Iraq. CVT’s clients describe perpetra-tors ranging from the government, to Shia militias such as Jaysh al Mahdi, Asaib Ahl Al Haq, Kataeb Hezbollah and Al Hashd al Shaabi, to Sunni militants such as the Islamic State of Iraq, a precursor to today’s ISIS. Y et many more say they don’t know exactly who targeted them and cite wide-spread violence in their communities carried out by local militias. When one client attempted to draw attention to the chaos and sectarianism taking over Iraq, he became a direct target of the local militia groups. 
yo ussef45 was a journalist in Basra working for various 
government and private newspapers. In 2011, Kataeb 
Hezbollah published a list of 50 journalists who would 
be targeted. Y oussef was towards the bottom of the 
list. When the first person on the list was killed, Y oussef 
fled to Syria for safety. He left Syria in 2012 when 
the situation deteriorated and returned to work as a 
journalist. He moved around a lot within Iraq because 
he felt unsafe. His older brother was killed in a spate 
of killings against Iraqi Sunnis, which he attributes to 
revenge killings for Shia killed in northern Iraq by ISIS. 
He started receiving phone calls and text messages 
from unknown people telling him that he must leave 
Basra. Around dusk in September 2013, a group of men 
knocked on his door and entered. They were in a car 
manal’s humanity and profes-
sional int
egrity were tested when 
she was prevented from helping 
wounded opposition members.18  •   Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  |  2015 CVT
that belonged to Iraqi intelligence, but the license plate 
was scratched out. Y oussef surmises that they were not 
Iraqi intelligence. The men attempted to grab him and 
started beating him with their guns on his head and legs 
and attempting to pull him into the car trunk. He started 
resisting and screaming. Neighbors who heard him 
came out of their homes and some fired warning shots 
into the air. This prevented the kidnapping. Y oussef says 
he doesn’t know exactly which group targeted him the 
second time. 
y
e hya ,46 a university professor, fled Iraq after years 
of attacks and threats by militants in his hometown. 
The first threats he faced were when cars stopped the 
church-run buses that transported him and others 
from the main city to their home village on a daily basis. 
Y ehya was grabbed by the militants and they tried to 
force him into the trunk of a car. He did not fit, so he was 
eventually allowed back on the bus. The Islamic State 
of Iraq demanded ransom for the rest of the kidnapped 
individuals. After these convoys were twice subjected 
to bombing incidents, Y ehya stopped taking the buses 
and took extra precautions when traveling to his job. Up 
through 2013, he would receive threatening phone calls 
from people identifying themselves as the Islamic State 
of Iraq. The incident that caused him to flee, however, 
was when he was called out by name as he was leaving 
the university and asked if he was Christian. One of the 
two men who approached him took out a gun, called 
him a “kafir” or infidel and a “corpse of a pig” saying 
they wanted to clean Iraq from these dirty people. 
They knew his house and his family. Y ehya begged for 
mercy; the man told him to leave Iraq or if he saw him 
again, he would kill him mercilessly. Y ehya sold all of his 
possessions, picked up his family and fled to Jordan 
immediately. samir47 often received threats calling him an infidel and 
notes telling him to leave his town in Basra. The incident 
that caused him to flee was an attempted kidnapping 
on his way to work one morning. He was walking out 
of his house when he was stopped by a white car. Four 
men came out of the car with their faces covered. They 
hit him in the face with a gun and tried to drag him into 
the car, but he resisted and started shouting. Neighbors 
started coming out of their houses and surrounding 
him. In the chaos, Samir was let go and the car left. He 
knew of many other Sunnis in Basra who were similarly 
targeted and said if the kidnappings were successful, 
they would be killed and found later under bridges and 
in garbage dumps. He doesn’t know who targeted him, 
but says there are many local militias that carry out 
such attacks. 
Minority groups targeted
The Iraqi clients interviewed for this report arrived in Jordan 
more recently; many over the past year. They are increas-ingly from minority communities—Sunnis, Sabeans and Christians. Although the targeting based on sectarian or ethnic identity is not new in Iraq, the ongoing struggles, fear of ISIS and seemingly endless violence has caused Iraqis to flee in greater numbers. UNHCR estimates that in 2014 about 21,502 Iraqis arrived as asylum-seekers in Jordan to bring the total to 49,350 Iraqis in Jordan in 2015. About 90 percent of Iraqis in Jordan are in Amman.
48 
fat en49 fled Iraq by the time she was 21. Her two broth-
ers and sister had all been kidnapped at different times. 
They were all tortured. Both of her brothers ended up in 
the hospital and her sister was able to escape her cap-
tors. Her father had received a letter directly addressed 
to him from Asaib Ahl El Haq threatening him to convert 
or leave Baghdad. In June 2013, militia members came 
to her house; she suspects they were members of Asaib 
Ahl El Haq. They trapped her husband, hit her son on his 
back, who was only a few months old at the time and hit 
her and tossed her around. She screamed, but none of 
the neighbors came to their aid. The militia members 
asked if they were Sabean, took all of the gold her hus-
band had for work, told them all Sabeans were “dirty, ” 
and insulted her. Her 3-year-old daughter witnessed all 
of these events. 
militia members asked fat en 
if she was 
sabe
an, took all of 
their gold, told them all 
sabe
ans 
were “dirty” and insulted her.2015 CVT  |  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  •  19
20  •   Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  |  2015 CVT
When m ustafa50 was taken to a hospital, he had been 
left for dead in a dumpster. He was kidnapped coming 
out of a Sunni mosque in Basra along with five or six 
others. About nine or 10 militia men grabbed them and 
beat them for hours. He had been slashed with a sword 
on his leg and had other marks of abuse on his body. He 
had passed out from the pain. After sustained beat -
ings, he and others were put in a dumpster and set on 
fire. After receiving treatment for his severe burns, he 
was released from the hospital. He moved to a differ -
ent village near Basra, but continued to receive written 
threats. He’s not sure exactly who targeted him, but 
says it’s because he’s Sunni as there are many Shia 
militias present in the area. 
m
ira51 doesn’t know where the threats against her and 
her family came from, but the threats followed them 
from Baghdad to Mosul. She says the militias found 
them everywhere. They told her husband that as long 
as he was Christian he was an infidel and threatened his 
wife and children.Targeting of children
As with CVT’s Syrian clients, among the most disturbing 
aspects of the violence described by clients in Iraq is the deliberate targeting of children. In particular, interviewees share stories of children being kidnapped out of their homes to extract money from the parents. 
Eleven-year-old a mal52 was kidnapped out of her 
parents’ home in Kirkuk. Armed militants entered their 
home, started breaking things and took their money. 
She doesn’t know where she was taken or who kid-
napped her. While she was in the house that she was 
taken to, an old woman grabbed her, put a knife to her 
throat, asked her for money and gold and asked about 
her family. Amal insisted they have nothing. Three days 
later, she was violently dragged and dropped off in 
another area in Kirkuk where Kurdish police picked her 
up and took her back to her family. Her father was also 
threatened by an unidentified “non-Arab person” who 
stopped him in the street and told him he had to convert 
to Islam (the family is Sabean) within three days. They 
left instantly after this, going to Baghdad and  
then Jordan. 
aft er sustained beatings,  
m
ustafa was put in a dumpster  
and set on fire.2015 CVT  |  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  •  21
Rami53 was around 13 years old when he was attacked 
outside of his parents’ home. He was walking to get 
bread for breakfast one morning when militia members 
approached him and a friend on the street. There were 
three men with their faces covered. They pulled out 
a knife and started stabbing Rami’s friend. The next 
thing he knew, one of the militiamen grabbed him and 
threw him to the ground. His head landed on the curb. 
He doesn’t know what happened after that because 
he woke up three days later in a hospital with paralysis 
along the left side of his body.
Government acquiescence 
to violence and abuse
When interviewees were asked whether they reported their 
attacks to the government, the most common answer was “the government is as afraid of the militias as we are. ” Most said that reporting to the government would be pointless. Few contribute stories of futile government help that failed to sufficiently protect them. Still others describe how local government officials turned a blind eye to the militias’ abuse. 
Under the Convention against T orture, to constitute torture, 
the abuse must be perpetrated by a government actor or the government authority must acquiesce to the abuse.
54 
Acquiescence exists “where State authorities or others act -
ing in official capacity . . . know or have reasonable grounds to believe that acts of torture or ill-treatment are being committed by non-State officials or private actors and they fail to exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate, prosecute and punish such non-State officials or private actors. ” In such situations, “the State bears responsibility. ”
55 
The stories of CVT clients illustrate significant government acquiescence in the abuse and ill-treatment across the vari-ous Iraqi regions. 
fat en, who was attacked in her home in Baghdad, said 
the militiamen who attacked told her not to bother tell-
ing the authorities. When she and her husband went to 
the local police, they only told her to leave Iraq and that 
they couldn’t do anything.y
e hya , the Iraqi professor whose bus convoy was 
repeatedly attacked between Mosul and his home 
village, said that after the first attack, they went to the 
local authorities for help, but the police did very little. 
The police told them that they should be thankful that 
most of the passengers are okay. They sent police cars 
to accompany other buses that were traveling that day 
from Mosul. 
yo
ussef , the journalist who was attacked outside his 
home and repeatedly threatened to leave Basra, said 
he never reported the kidnapping incident. He says 
many of the militias take advantage of their relationship 
with the local government to push their agendas, so he 
wouldn’t have been protected. Instead, he went to the 
journalists’ union for help applying for a visa and  
left Iraq. 
m
ustafa, who was nearly burned alive in a dumpster 
in Basra, said that he did not tell the police about the 
kidnapping, torture and burning. He said he has no faith 
in the government and that it doesn’t have any control 
over the local militias. When he tried to tell the police 
about the threatening notes he received, they did noth-
ing, but told him to go to court. 
n
ura,56 was kidnapped, sexually abused and called an 
infidel in Wasit. Many of her relatives were killed. When 
she went to the police to report her kidnapping, she 
says they laughed and told her it happened because her 
family were rich Sabeans. Nura insisted, however, that 
the militants did not ask for money, they told her she 
had to convert to Islam or she would be killed. •••
“...the government is as afraid 
of the militias as we are. ” 22  •   Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  |  2015 CVT
mental  He alt H impact
 
R
egardless of the identity of the perpetrators or interview -
ees’ socio-economic, religious or regional backgrounds, the 
mental health and social effects of torture are consistent. Clients report withdrawal, poor effects on the family—par -
ticularly children —anger, depression and pervasive fear. CVT’s group therapy sessions are mixed, and adult groups are divided by gender, age and in some circumstances, similarity of experiences. 
Breakdown of support  
systems, family and community
For many of CVT’s most severely affected clients from both Syria and Iraq, their torture leads to a breakdown of their community and family structures. It affects the ability and desire to communicate with family, friends and loved ones. The assault on the family caused by torture has led entire families to seek CVT’s services and contributes to the infor -
mal referral system among Iraqi and Syrian clients. 
After Hamza was severely beaten and held in solitary 
confinement for over a month in Damascus and Deraa 
prisons, he became uncomfortable with other people. 
He withdrew from social interactions and didn’t want 
anyone to visit. He would just spend time watching 
cartoons with his children.
Khadija57 from Damascus said that after the abuse 
she and her husband endured at the hands of Syrian 
soldiers, they couldn’t be intimate or even be close 
to one another. The soldiers had entered their home, 
started harassing her, tearing off her clothes and touch-
ing her inappropriately. The soldiers cursed at them and 
tore apart their house. Her husband, who is disabled, 
couldn’t stop them. In the moments after they left, she 
grabbed a shard of glass from the mirror to kill herself, 
but stopped when she thought of her son. She resented her husband for not being able to protect her and he 
was angry at and ashamed of himself. Both husband 
and wife eventually sought CVT’s services. 
m
ustafa, the Iraqi client who suffered burns on much of 
his body, says he suffered from nightmares and flash-
backs, couldn’t sleep until the sun came up and was so 
ashamed of his body that he couldn’t be intimate with 
his wife. 
saeed and m
ariam,58 an Iraqi couple, had several mem-
bers of their family kidnapped and they faced threats 
in Iraq. In 2006, they fled to Syria. When conditions in 
Syria worsened, they went back to Iraq to await visas to 
Jordan—a year they called the worst of their lives. They 
both expressed frustration at their situation in Jordan. 
Saeed says he feels “paralyzed” because he can’t sup-
port his kids. He says, “The man should be the source 
of strength for his family, but I feel I am the weakest. 
Instead of me helping them, my son must help me. ” 
Aggression, withdrawal and isolation of children
The impacts of torture on children are particularly severe. Parents describe both the war trauma and torture as mak -
ing kids more aggressive and unable to regulate their anger or emotions. Parents and staff also report that children are severely impacted by directly witnessing the abuse and tor -
ture of their parents. Many withdraw to themselves and do not want to interact with the outside world. Another ongoing problem reported is children’s inability to concentrate and attend school regularly. Other children exhibit debilitat -
ing fear that affects all of their daily interactions. Children refuse to go outside or in public areas and many become distrusting of others including neighbors and  
family members. 
samir’ s youngest son watched as his father was 
attacked outside of his house in Basra and four militia-
men attempted to kidnap him. He became scared and 
cried a lot. He was around 3 years old at the time. Even 
after their escape to Jordan, the young boy has barely 
spoken, despite receiving some services from local 
organizations. 
Khadija grabbed a shard of glass 
from the mirror to kill herself, but stopped when she thought of  
her son.2015 CVT  |  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  •  23
24  •   Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  |  2015 CVT
Qassem , who suffered for months in local and federal 
intelligence prisons in Homs, said that his oldest daugh-
ter has suffered greatly from the violence. She doesn’t 
communicate or play with her siblings or other children; 
she’s constantly isolated. Her school work suffers 
because she often forgets things. 
yo
ussef , the Iraqi journalist who was nearly kidnapped 
outside of his home, had a young witness to his abuse. 
His 6-year-old daughter was standing right behind him 
when he opened the door and she saw the entire attack 
on her father. She was scared and isolated, had night -
mares, constant fear and wet the bed. She didn’t want 
to go to school, even in Jordan, and constantly asked 
why this happened to her father. 
Hanan’s59 daughter was in her grandparent’s home 
when her father and four uncles were arrested. She wit -
nessed the police beating her father. Hanan described 
her daughter becoming a “completely different girl” 
after this incident. She had the impression every man 
was a threat and was afraid to walk in the street and was 
alarmed when people would come to their house. She 
even refused to go to the bathroom alone. Ongoing trauma, nightmares and depression
CVT’s clients report symptoms of post-traumatic stress 
disorder such as withdrawal, depression, fear, flashbacks and inability to perform daily activities. Clinical staff mem-bers observe that when one member of the household exhibits such symptoms, others begin to do so as well. For example, when children are fearful or isolated, parents often exhibit the same symptoms. When clients contemplate the future, they often become more depressed and melancholy. In addition, many experience psychosomatic symptoms that are common among torture survivors such as joint and muscle pain.
60 CVT clinicians observe that clients struggle 
to find hope in Jordan. 
Hassan, who suffered severe torture in Deraa and 
Damascus, said that he used to be terrified of even 
hearing the phone ring or hearing a knock on the door. 
He can still hear the screaming and the sounds of 
other people being tortured in the prison. He often has 
nightmares.
Kareem, the Syrian photographer, had scars all over his 
body after he was tortured. His psychological suffer -
ing has also been severe. He continues to suffer from 
flashbacks and wishes he had died before he had to see 
all of the torture and killing that happened. 
Clinicians report observing that some male clients have become particularly withdrawn. As their fear, pain or anger is internalized, they may take it out on their families and feel deep regret afterwards. Further, male clients may seek CVT’s services to better cope with the consequences of 
Hanan’s daughter became a 
“completely different girl” after she saw the police beating her father.2015 CVT  |  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  •  25
their torture and inability to control fear, pain or anger. In the 
words of one client, “I don’t want my family to be frightened by me. ”
61 Clinicians and clients report that others refuse to 
seek treatment despite the lasting effects of torture. 
fat en, a 22-year-old Iraqi client who was tortured along 
with her husband and son in their own home, says that 
she and her husband have many ongoing problems. 
He cannot work and is frustrated. She asks him to seek 
mental health services, but he insists that he is “not 
crazy. ”
After he was arrested and tortured, Zahra’s62  
husband became more and more angry. She says he 
often lost his temper and it became worse as their 
financial situation deteriorated. 
Conditions of flight and displacement  
exacerbate mental health effects
The conditions of flight and prolonged refuge in Jordan have had detrimental mental health impacts. Preexisting conditions exhibited by either CVT’s clients or their fam-ily members have been exacerbated by the mental health and psychosocial effects of the conflict. For many of CVT’s clients, Jordan was not their first displacement. They had been displaced several times inside Syria or Iraq, fled their cities or villages and attempted to retrieve their possessions only to find their homes and villages destroyed. 
At the border, conditions are difficult and have only gotten 
worse as the borders between Jordan and Syria are effec-tively closed. When clients reached Jordan, they often said that Jordanian soldiers treated them well and it was like “we reached heaven. ” But many were immediately ushered into Zaatari camp near the Syrian border. Even though clients acknowledge that medical, food and other services were readily available in the camp, they nonetheless described the conditions as unlivable and preferred to fend for them-selves in Jordan’s cities. However, they have found that there are many difficult restrictions outside the camps. Syrians and Iraqis cannot work in Jordan and many clients fear being sent to camps or deported if they are caught. Khadija’s husband, yas ser,63 also a CVT client, said the 
inability to work is “driving us crazy. ” International aid is 
drying up, he explained and his able-bodied son cannot 
work because if he gets caught, they are afraid he would 
be sent to a camp or deported. 
n
ayif said that life without work is too hard in Jordan. 
Rent is too high and assistance is too low. He suspects 
that it’s a reason some people are choosing to go back 
to Syria.
Refugees in Jordan encounter particular difficulty obtain-ing medical treatment and medicine at affordable prices and are frustrated when they are unable to pay for such treatment for themselves and their children. CVT clinicians report observing that when clients cannot obtain medica-tion or a necessary procedure, it becomes the dominant thing they think about and want to talk about in therapeutic sessions. 
yas ser, a disabled man in a wheelchair who suffers 
from high blood pressure and diabetes, has a lot of 
difficulty obtaining the appropriate medication. He says 
that although it was covered when they first arrived in 
Jordan, he had to buy it at full price for a long time and 
could not afford it.
Rami, the 20-year-old Iraqi who was almost completely 
paralyzed on one side of his body, said that doctors 
told him he required follow-up surgery after his first 
operation. He went to international medical service 
providers in Jordan who said that they prioritize burns 
and reconstructive surgery, but do not perform the kind 
of procedure he needs. He can neither afford private 
Jordanian medical facilities nor the medicine he needs 
prior to the surgery. 
clients complain about the lack 
o
f communication from the aid 
community and feeling ignored. 26  •   Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  |  2015 CVT
Many clients expressed a desire for better treatment from 
the international aid community. They understand and acknowledge the lack of resources, but feel that the many humanitarian aid providers treat them in a disrespectful and dismissive manner. Clients complain about the lack of com-munication from the aid community and feeling ignored. This has left many clients feeling like they have no support or stability in Jordan. 
nayif wants to send suggestions to UNHCR because of 
the poor c
ommunication. He says that many new arriv -
als are not getting aid, while UNHCR is still allocating aid 
for people who left Jordan. UNHCR’s complaint box is 
full and no one ever follows up, he says. 
yo
ussef , the Iraqi journalist, echoed the frustration 
with the international humanitarian aid community. He 
says treatment by UNHCR has often been brash and he 
has submitted some complaints about the treatment. 
The reason for such high illegal migration, he says, is 
because of the difficulty and barriers navigating the 
legal migration route. Because no one at UNHCR is even 
willing to listen, he assumes that their message is that 
he should just stay and die in Jordan.
saeed
 and 
m
ariam still do not understand why their 
application for resettlement was rejected. They insisted 
that they were never involved in politics and that Saeed 
even worked with the Americans. They seemed to be 
in great agony over this seemingly unjust decision and 
that they were not even given a reason. 
Most of all, clients want a place where there is a future  
for their children. For many of them, they cannot see that  
in Jordan. Bushra, whose husband and two of her sons were 
detained and tortured, said she just cares about her 
children’s future. Some of her children were still waiting 
for a spot in school. They’ve gone through their sav -
ings and spend most of their money on rent and basic 
services. She said that regardless of what she’s lost, she 
just wants to go where her children will be safest.
y
e hya , the Iraqi professor, said the only thing that keeps 
him alive now is his daughters. He lives for them and 
just wants them to live in a place where they don’t have 
to endure the war or trauma that he lived through. He 
said his wife “hasn’t had a single day of happiness since 
we got married” and wonders when they can start 
their life.
saeed
 and 
m
ariam have a 9-year-old boy and 5-year-
old twin girls. Their children have been displaced and 
lived in desolate conditions most of their lives. The 
couple said that they just want their children to have a 
future. “It’s like we’re in prison now, ” they said. 
As displacement increases, Syrian clients are increas-ingly hopeless for a safe return to Syria. This situation has deepened anger at the warring parties and depression among some clients. It has also contributed to an increas-ingly negative relationship with the host community. Clients describe being questioned by police or charged higher rates for rent because they are refugees. This tension is often manifested in schools and on the playground where Jordanian teachers and children tease and harass refu-gee children. Several clients reported withdrawing their children from Jordanian schools because of the negative treatment by their peers and teachers. Among Iraqi clients from minority religious groups, school attendance rates are particularly low because of fear of mistreatment. 
ibrahim, the storeowner from Deraa, said that he pulled 
his childr
en out of school in Jordan last year because 
they were treated very poorly and insulted by their 
teachers. He said they also missed a year of school in 
Syria, so this sets them back significantly. He hopes 
that this year in school will be better. 
iraqis must pay around $56 per  
child f
or school. 
s
uch a fee can be 
prohibitively expensive.2015 CVT  |  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  •  27
28  •   Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  |  2015 CVT
Earmarking of resources that disadvantages 
Iraqis and non-Syrian refugees
Syrian and Iraqi refugees face many similar restrictions. 
They rarely, if ever, are permitted to work legally in Jordan.64 
Syrian refugees report that rent prices continue to increase and are the single biggest expense they face.
65 Both Syrians 
and Iraqis face discrimination from the host community and children report harassment from teachers and students in schools. Syrians have faced constant cuts in food vouch-ers, the most recent in September 2015 that eliminated vouchers for 229,000 Syrians in Jordan.
66 Those who do 
receive food vouchers, now receive $21 per month, but at other points received as little as $13.50.
67 Still others report 
having financial assistance cut off with no warning or having humanitarian workers come to their homes to assess their level of need, but never providing any aid. What little aid or programming is afforded to refugees is often earmarked for Syrians, leaving Iraqis with even fewer options for support. Unlike Syrians, Iraqis in Jordan are not automatically classified as refugees. Rather, many torture survivors wait months to be registered with UNHCR and then spend months or even years as asylum-seekers before receiving refugee status, delaying their resettlement applications. 
mustafa, who was severely tortured and burned, 
meticulously document
ed his abuse. He has pictures of 
the scars and burns that remained on his body and has 
medical records from the treatment he received in Iraq 
and Jordan. However, he has not even received refugee 
status in Jordan and is still considered an asylum-
seeker despite being in Jordan since July 2014 and 
applying for refugee status over a year prior to his CVT 
interview date. Furthermore, the services available to non-Syrian refugees are increasingly limited. Iraqis report receiving no services at all despite facing similar work restrictions in Jordan. T o Iraqis, the gradual decreases of UNHCR’s services have left some individuals feeling like there is a conspiracy against them. Some Iraqi clients directly pointed out that Syrians are receiving services while they are being turned away. In the words of one client, “We are all refugees. Why is there a nationality distinction? We’re all suffering the same. ” 
samir’ s two sons, both under age 5, are not yet in 
school. His youngest son watched as his father was 
ambushed and beaten by local militia members outside 
of his house in Basra. The boy, who was 3 years old 
at the time, had not really spoken much since and his 
father was struggling to get services to help him. In 
Jordan, he registered his sons at a nursery run by a local 
church and was not originally asked about his national-
ity. When the school officials found out that the family 
was Iraqi, they refused to let the boys into the school, 
saying that they only serve Syrians. “Even a preschool 
that is associated with the church discriminates 
between Iraqis and Syrians?” Samir asked in disbelief. 
He says the incident continues to disturb him. 
y
e hya , the Iraqi professor, also describes being turned 
away for services by international aid organizations and 
told that Iraqis cannot be served. He pondered, “Do they 
think I have a well of petrol with me?”
Such stories of Iraqis being turned away from services because of funding restrictions are common, despite the high level of need. In addition, Iraqis must pay 40 JOD (around $56) per child for school; such a fee can be 
2015 CVT  |  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  •  29
prohibitively expensive and leaves some clients out of 
school for months or years.68 For health services, as of 
August 2015, Iraqis have to pay a foreigner rate at state-run medical facilities, rather than the original rates that corresponded to those of uninsured Jordanians.
69 Samir 
was quick to point out that it’s not just Iraqis, but Somalis, Sudanese and others who suffer an even worse fate. They face similar restrictions and are subject to racism and dis-crimination from the host community. Seeing the suffering of all refugee communities, he says he doesn’t understand why the international community doesn’t treat people with more kindness. CVT’s Jordanian staff members confirm these concerns. For Sudanese, they say that their situation gets no attention and no media outlets cover their suffering. Racism for Sudanese is creating a secondary trauma for them. 
Negative coping mechanisms
The conditions of displacement often lead to negative coping strategies, which leave refugees vulnerable to violence or exploitation. CVT’s counselors report that many families sell off all of their possessions and withdraw their children from school either to support their families or because they are afraid of going to school. Female-headed households, which are one third of the Syrian urban refugee families in Jordan, are particularly prone to negative coping mechanisms.
70 Clinical staff members observed that young 
females who are struggling to provide for their families also have high levels of difficulty maintaining hope for the future in therapeutic sessions. 
Sometimes, clients report that desperation leads their 
children to work to support the family, despite the children’s best interests and the parents’ better judgment, because they are less likely to be deported by Jordanian authorities if caught working. These conditions leave women and children susceptible to domestic violence as well as sexual violence from both the refugee and host communities. International observers report that girls who are out of school become more vulnerable to exploitation and early marriage.
71
amal, the young girl who was kidnapped in Kirkuk, 
is not in s
chool in Jordan. Her father says that she is 
scared to go to school and she will only leave the house 
with him. He wishes she would go to school and tries to 
convince her that she will be safe. 
n
ura and her family sold all of their belongings when 
they fled Iraq after she was kidnapped and sexually 
abused. Her 16-year-old daughter and 19-year-old 
daughter are not in school because they cannot afford 
it. She has already sold off all of her possessions, includ-
ing her wedding ring, to buy daily necessities. 
n
ayif is one of many Syrian clients who said his daugh-
ter should be at the university level now, but because 
they cannot afford it, she cannot go to school. 
i
man, whose oldest son was disappeared by the Syrian 
regime when he defected from the army, has married 
off her 16-year-old daughter. She admits that the only 
reason she is married and not in school is because of 
financial difficulties they face in Jordan. She says it’s 
“too early” for her to be married.
Desire to return
Where CVT’s Syrian and Iraqi clients diverged most sig -
nificantly was in their desire to return to their country of origin. Iraqi clients described years, even decades, of abuse, threats and war. Most were targeted for sectarian reasons and do not foresee a change in Iraq. Consequently, Iraqi clients are usually anxiously awaiting word from UNHCR or third countries on their resettlement application and find the waiting period unbearable.
sometime s, clients report  
that desperation leads their  
children to work to support the 
family, despite the children’s best interests and the parents’ better judgment, because they are less likely to be deported by Jordanian authorities if caught working.30  •   Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  |  2015 CVT
fat en’s brother and sister had both been kidnapped 
and tortured. She and her 1-year-old son had also 
been tortured by local militia members in her home in 
Baghdad. Faten said all she knew since she was a child 
is war. She had been internally displaced in Irbil with her 
family. She tried to integrate in Iraq by wearing hijab and 
Islamic dress, even though she’s Sabean, and her family 
was still targeted. She declared she doesn’t want to 
think about Iraq or hear the word Iraq ever again. 
Rami, a 20-year-old young man from Baghdad was 
attacked by militia members outside of his home. His 
father received continuous threats from militias to 
either convert or leave Iraq. The family is Sabean. Rami 
had to have an invasive surgery and continues to take 
necessary medication when he can afford it. He has 
trouble walking and has had some physical therapy for 
his left hand and leg. Asked if he would return to Iraq if 
it were safe, he said, “Not in a million years. There is no 
future there. I’ve known nothing but war all my life. ” 
Although Syrian clients similarly exhibit a level of hopeless-
ness related to the situation in Jordan, they continue to express a desire to eventually return to Syria, even if they no longer believe that it is realistic. When CVT started serving Syrian clients in 2011, many thought their displacement was temporary. Even those interviewed in early 2014 seemed intent on returning to their home country. By 2015, however, the situation for Syrians had changed. The most common response when asked about returning to Syria was, “Of course I would return. Who would want to leave their coun-try?” However, even those who expressed a desire to return and a love for their country seemed ready to move on. Most had applied for resettlement and hoped to find a place where they could restart their lives with their families. yas ser and Khadija both said they wish they could 
return to their country, but said there is nothing to 
return to. Their home was destroyed and their busi-
ness is gone. They rest their hopes now on a successful 
resettlement application. But even there, they are losing 
hope as they find it increasingly difficult to communi-
cate with UNHCR about the status of their application. 
Still, some clients report that because of their loss of agency or ability to support their families, they would rather go home and die in Syria. Return to Syria, for many clients, is a sure death sentence, if not at the hands of the govern-ment that targeted and tortured them, then at the hands of the militant groups that they hear horror stories about from family back home. Some interviewees even pondered whether they would live a more dignified existence amidst the war in Syria. One client said, “At least I would die in my country. ” T orture directly attacks the individual’s dignity and integrity. For many clients, the situation in Jordan only adds to the assault on one’s dignity by restricting their ability to care for themselves and their families, leaving them without agency. Some interviewees express a desire to return only to attempt to flee to Europe, because the risk of dying at sea or in Syria is better than living with no agency or opportu-nity in Jordan, but cite the high cost as prohibitive. It costs $3,400 - $5,700 to flee from Jordan to Europe.
72 
yo ussef , the Iraqi journalist from Basra, said that the 
danger of fleeing to Europe is not the problem. He would 
rather try his luck at the journey through sea than stay 
in Jordan. The only thing preventing him right now is  
the cost. 
i
man, the mother of four sons and one daughter, whose 
oldest was a defected soldier who was disappeared, 
says that things are so difficult, her husband often pro-
poses going to Zaatari camp. She said she would rather 
return to Syria, even if they have no home, which was 
likely destroyed. Living off the land in your own home, 
even bread and onion is enough, she explained. 
CVT’s counselors explain this discrepancy between Syrian and Iraqi clients as not only the result of prolonged war and violence in Iraq, but also the lack of aid and support that Iraqis are receiving from the host state and the humanitar -
ian aid community. 
some client s pondered whether they 
would live a more dignified existence 
amidst the war in 
syria.
 
one s
aid, 
“at le
ast 
i
 would die in my country. ”32  •   Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  |  2015 CVT
Resilience
Despite the torture and war trauma they have faced, CVT’s 
clients demonstrate the spectacular human capacity for resilience. Across the board, clients demonstrate an immense ability to overcome their traumatic experiences, provide for their families in the most difficult of circum-stances and provide support to one another. Nearly all of them express a desire to be able to work and fend for them-selves in Jordan without the need for international support. 
fadia73 was stopped in her car and shot at close range 
by regime forces while she was pregnant. She survived 
and escaped with her husband and children by jumping 
on the roofs from building to building until they finally 
reached an open farm area and were able to drive to 
Damascus and eventually to Jordan. Despite her ordeal, 
in Jordan, she volunteers for the Jordanian Women’s 
Union to coordinate services for Syrian families  
in Zarqa. 
tar
ek, whose three brothers were arrested, tortured, 
and one killed, is suffering from extreme back pain. He 
needs another surgery, but is the only provider in his 
family. He said he “hates going to NGOs and begging  
for support. ” 
In the interviews, CVT clients were quick to counter what may sound like complaints with affirmations of being thank -
ful for what they have. Clients said that hearing the stories of others and the struggles that they have been through allows them to reflect on their own lives. In nearly every client interview, after describing the violence, torture and displacement conditions that they and their families faced, clients would invoke God and reiterate their gratefulness for not being in a worse situation. Furthermore, many describe living on the prospect of hope. Despite their current situ-ation, they talk about still being hopeful for receiving an education and having a bright future. 
saad74 was under 20 years old when his younger 
brother was kidnapped by militias in southeastern Iraq. 
He was held for about two weeks and tortured. The 
militia sent pictures of his abuse to Saad’s family with 
a message warning them to leave Iraq. Because Saad 
and his family had been displaced in Iraq moving from 
their village to Tikrit and then traveling to Jordan, he had 
to stop his studies before completing high school. He 
struggled through school in Jordan because of finances 
and a difficult environment at home. However, Saad said 
that he is living on hope and wants to study to become 
a pilot. “There are ambitions and goals inside of me, but 
the paths and doors are closed. The eye can see it but 
the hand is short, ” he said. 
i
man, whose son was a disappeared Syrian army 
defector, said that despite losing everything and start-
ing at square one in Jordan, she still thanks God for 
what they have. 
While family units have been destroyed, the reversal of traditional family roles has also led to the empowerment of women within the family structure. CVT’s clinical staff observes that women and children are increasingly acting as caretakers and breadwinners. For some women, this can be empowering, particularly compared to their past roles. They are the ones increasingly seeking out aid for the families, seeking CVT’s services and supporting their families. •••
2015 CVT  |  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  •  33
concl Us ion
In the nearly five-year-long war that has plagued Syria, 
civilians have borne the brunt of the suffering. In addition to the indiscriminate bombing, sniper shootings and chemical weapons use, people fleeing from all over Syria report being arbitrarily detained and treated brutally. When resettling refugees, providing humanitarian aid for those fleeing and envisioning a ceasefire and eventual peace in Syria, the stories of these people should be at the forefront. Their experiences should not be forgotten when trials and other avenues to justice are carried out in Syria or abroad. The lasting effects of their torture and severe war trauma experi-ences have important consequences for reconciliation and reform on both the institutional and community level. Their voices must be integral to future reparations and peace-building efforts alike.
The suffering of Iraqi refugees has been ongoing for years. 
Many young Iraqis, now in their 30s, say they have never known a time when they lived without fear or war. Often displaced multiple times within Iraq or neighboring coun-tries before they finally fled to Jordan, they see return to Iraq as wholly improbable. Like their Syrian counterparts, Iraqi torture survivors report brutal treatment, kidnapping and attacks on their families. However, they are often unable to identify the perpetrators and report chaos and bands of militias taking over their villages, making the prospects for justice even more difficult. Iraqi clients’ lack of desire to return to Iraq complicates their involvement in eventu-ally participating in rebuilding their country and justice mechanisms. One thing, however, is clear: Iraqi refugees have faced severe human rights abuses and their suffering should not be forgotten when accountability and repara-tions are envisioned. What CVT has learned about the torture and trauma survi-vors in Iraq and Syria is the incredible resilience they exhibit in the face of unspeakable violence and difficult conditions of displacement. The lived experiences of torture as well as the lasting effects of torture shared in this report highlight the importance of specialized mental health provision in response to the crisis situations in Syria and Iraq. Clients express a desire for increased advocacy and urgent action from international actors as well as paths to justice in their home countries. Most importantly of all, they long for a future where their children can live free from war and des-peration, receive a good education, find viable employment and have a positive outlook for the future. •••
most importantly of all, they long 
f
or a future where their children 
can live free from war and des-
peration, receive a good education, find viable employment and have a positive outlook for the future.34  •   Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  |  2015 CVT
Re commen Da tions  
Refugee Response
Dono Rs:  
In its response to the humanitarian crisis in the region, 
the international community can and should do more to support refugees fleeing from various parts of the region. In doing so, aid should not be earmarked to distinguish between refugees based on nationality. 
•	 CVT
	
recommends
	
that
	
donors
	
contribute
	
to
	
the	
r
egional response in a way that allows actors on 
the ground to distribute aid based primarily on 
need and vulnerability.  
While basic necessities, such as food, shelter and medical care, cannot be ignored, mental health and psychosocial support (MHPSS) services must be a higher priority. Without appropriate and timely interventions, some refu-gees may develop chronic mental health problems, leading them to struggle with all the challenges other refugees face but also doing so while suffering deep despair, anxiety and depression. For some, this psychological pain can be debilitating, hindering their ability to function or provide for themselves or their children. Mental health care itself can be lifesaving, but integration of MHPSS care into humanitarian response also supports other life-saving efforts. 
•	 CVT
	
recommends
	
donors
	
invest
	
in
	
pro-
grams providing trauma rehabilitation and 
mHp
ss
 services, including through the U. s.
 
st
ate Department’s Bureau of 
po
pulation, 
Refugees, and 
mi
gration, U nHc
R and the 
U.n. V
oluntary 
fu
nd for Victims of 
to
rture. 
UnHcR:
  
As the international face of the refugee response, UNHCR 
faces both added challenges and responsibilities. Even as UNHCR is overwhelmed by the numbers and needs of refugees, it is still essential that refugees receive prompt and gracious communication from the organization. •	 CVT
	
recommends
	
improvement
	
in
	
commu -
nication regarding registration and resettle -
ment applications, including by offering regular updates and addressing individual concerns about reasons for denial.
It is unacceptable that many Iraqi torture survivors have waited more than a year to receive refugee status despite well-documented and obvious abuse and unwillingness to return to Iraq. 
•	 CVT
	
recommends
	
that
	
UNHCR
	
accelerate
	
the
	
pro-
cess for refugee status determinations for 
i
raqis. 
Re
settlement  
coUnt
Ri
es:
 
Though resettlement will likely be a durable solution avail-
able for only a very small percentage of the population, the international resettlement response to the Syrian and Iraqi crises has not been commensurate with the scope of the needs. Jordan, Lebanon and T urkey are hosting the overwhelming majority of the four million Syrian refugees and hundreds of thousands of Iraqis . The rapid influx risks destabilizing these refugee hosting states and applies significant strain on their social services. 
•	 CVT
	
recommends
	
that
	
traditional
	
resettlement 	
co
untries accelerate their response and increase 
allocations for individuals fleeing the violence in 
sy
ria and 
ir
aq.  
The United States can and should do more in the face of the 
widespread displacement in the Middle East. Processing for resettlement out of Jordan, T urkey, Iraq and Lebanon should continue and accelerate for both Syrian and Iraqis, as well as for highly vulnerable refugees from South Sudan, Somalia, Eritrea and elsewhere who are living in the region without options for other durable solutions. The United States has announced plans to resettle 10,000 Syrian refugees by the end of 2016 and to continue its resettle-ment of Iraqi refugees. CVT supports these ongoing efforts. However, given the severity of refugee needs globally and the scale of the Syrian refugee crisis in particular, U.S. resettlement efforts can and should be increased.2015 CVT  |  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  •  35
•	 CVT	calls	on	the	United	States	to	significantly 	 
b
olster the capacity of the U. s. R
efugee 
ad
missions 
pr
ogram. 
For some individuals, the mental health and psychosocial 
consequences of war trauma and torture do not disappear with time. In fact, the traumatic effects of torture can take months or years to develop and, in some instances, symp-toms of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and major depressive disorder do not present themselves until after an individual has found a place of safety and is no longer living in active “fight or flight” mode. For refugees, this point can follow resettlement to a third country, such as the United States. Likewise, for children in particular, grief and depression may resurface among refugee populations after resettlement. Furthermore, certain hardships in resettle-ment such as language barriers, family and community separation, discrimination and social isolation can have negative ramifications for mental health. 
•	 CVT
	
recommends
	
increasing
	
the
	
availability
	
of	
m
ental health services for survivors of torture and 
war trauma in their countries of resettlement. 
fo
r 
refugees being resettled to the United 
st
ates, this 
should come in part through increases in funding 
to the 
offi
ce of Refugee Resettlement’s 
su
rvivors 
of 
to
rture program.  
JoR
Dani
an 
goV
eRn
ment : 
Mo
st refugees in Jordan do not have legal work authoriza-
tion and many live in fear of deportation or forced relocation to Azraq or Zaatari camp if they work in the informal sec-tor. Without work authorization they are therefore entirely dependent on insufficient international aid. Most individuals desire to provide for themselves and their families and to contribute to their host economy. Resilience is hampered by excessive restrictions on movement and work from the host community. The ability to work can contribute to the individual and family resilience as well as to the Jordanian community. 
•	 CVT
	
recommends
	
that
	
the
	
Jordanian
	
government 	
d
evelop a plan to allow refugees access to income 
and work in the formal sector. tr ansitional Justice  
and 
ac
countability
Dono Rs: 
Humanit
arian assistance alone is not sufficient to address 
the challenges refugees face in the wake of mass atroci-
ties. Furthermore, it does not address the root causes of the fundamental breaches of human rights they face or victims’ rights to truth and justice. The narratives of Syrian and Iraqi clients provide a powerful, rich depiction of the types of torture experienced as a result of the protracted conflicts being waged in those countries. Until the conflict is resolved, Syrian refugees will continue to flood into neigh-boring countries and beyond. While the immediate needs of refugees must be addressed, the world cannot lose sight of the long-term healing, reconciliation and rebuilding of Syria and Iraq.
•	 CVT
	
recommends
	
continued
	
work
	
toward
	
a
	
politi -
cal solution to the 
sy
rian war that includes a vision 
for comprehensive accountability.  
With international military coalition involvement in Iraq 
and aid pouring in for support of the Iraqi government, the widespread terror sown by various Iraqi militias and criminal groups is unacceptable. The Iraqi government must reign in the militias that are fighting alongside it as well as those opposing it, including by holding accountable those militias that have caused widespread fear and terror where they have 
de facto  local control. 
•	 CVT
	
recommends
	
that
	
the
	
U.S.
	
government
	
utilize	
t
ools such as 
le
ahy 
la
w,75 which withholds assis -
tance from unaccountable security services units that commit gross violations of human rights, more effectively where they apply . 36  •   Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  |  2015 CVT
inte Rna tional  tRan sitional  J Us tice  acto Rs: 
The ment
al health effects of participating in justice mecha-
nisms such as truth commissions and prosecutions are not 
well-known. Aside from a few studies, the data is not com-prehensive on whether torture survivors and other victims of mass atrocities have benefitted from transitional justice mechanisms. However, it is clear that many individuals affected by war and torture do want their stories told and their voices heard, as evidenced by their willingness to par -
ticipate in CVT’s interviews. Therefore, such mechanisms should be formulated in a way that respects the mental health needs of the survivor-beneficiaries who will be par -
ticipating in, and at the cornerstone of, justice approaches. 
•	 CVT
	
recommends
	
a
	
comprehensive
	
review
	
of	
s
afe and effective victim participation in previ -
ous mechanisms of international transitional 
justice and accountability that looks specifically at the fulfillment of expectations of survivors and whether they feel that justice was carried out, with a view to making improvements. 
na
tional  
anD
 
inte Rna
tional  
political  
anD 
tRa
nsitional
 JU
stice
 
acto Rs:  
A
s legal and political actors inside and outside Iraq and 
Syria contemplate holding perpetrators of violence and mass atrocities accountable, purely political agendas must not be pursued at the risk of achieving justice for victims and survivors. 
•	 CVT
	
supports
	
developing
	
national,
	
regional
	
or	
i
nternational mechanisms, as appropriate, to 
hold perpetrators accountable and establishing 
culturally-tailored approaches that will allow for truth-telling and reconciliation as part of a long-term peacebuilding process. 
su
ch approaches 
should be developed with and by national actors and may include a combination of reparations, legal redress, rehabilitation, memorialization and storytelling, in addition to prosecutions and truth-telling. In Iraq, CVT’s clients paint a picture of ongoing war and violence that has roots stretching long before the current conflict between ISIS and the Iraqi government. Therefore, efforts at human rights documentation and accountability must not be limited to crimes perpetrated by ISIS. Such an approach to documenting abuse perpetrated in Iraq risks alienating a portion of the population and projecting an image of uneven justice, thus risking any efforts at reconcili-ation and comprehensive rebuilding. 
•	 CVT
	r
ecommends 	c
omprehensive 	d
ocumenta-
tion that includes torture and sexual violence 
perpetrated across 
ir
aq by all actors including 
government-affiliated groups, opposition forces and various local militias.
Disappearances are a continuous crime against not only the disappeared individual, but also the family. Often victims of disappearances may also be victims of torture. Their surviv -
ing family members are victims of torture where the state fails to investigate and provide information on the fate and whereabouts of the disappeared individual. Accountability for disappearances must take into account the complex nature of this crime, the right of the family to know the truth about their loved ones and the possible torture perpetrated against the disappeared individual. 
•	 CVT
	
recommends
	
addressing
	
the
	
legacy
	
of
	
disap -
pearances through full investigations into the 
treatment and whereabouts of the disappeared, reparations schemes and memorialization for the families, and providing them with the required sup -
port as they face unique challenges in rebuilding their lives.2015 CVT  |  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  •  37
38  •   Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  |  2015 CVT
1 UNHCR has r egistered 633,644 refugees in Jordan as 
of 17 November 2015, but the government estimates 
that the numbers of unregistered refugees would put the total closer to 1 million. See UN High Commissioner for Refugees, 
Syria Regional Refugee Response: 
Interagency Information Sharing Portal , last updated 
Nov. 17, 2015, available at  http:/ /data.unhcr.org/syrian-
refugees/country.php?id=107 . 
2 A s of 17 November 2015, UNHCR reports 79,140 people 
are in Zaatari camp and another 27 ,701 are registered in Azraq camp. 
See Id.  
3 1 951 Convention Relating to Status of Refugees, art. 
1, entered into force  Apr. 24, 1954, 189 U.N. T .S. 150 as 
incorporated by 1967 Protocol Relating to Status of Refugees, art. 1(2), 
entered into force  Oct. 4, 1967 , 606 
U. N .T.S. 2 67. 
4 UN High C ommissioner for Refugees, Note on the 
Mandate of the High Commissioner for Refugees , 
Oct. 2013, at 3-4 available at  http:/ /www.unhcr.
org/526a22cb6.html. 
5 Id. at 3. 
6 Id. at 4. (“The High Commissioner is primarily 
mandated to provide international protection and humanitarian assistance and to seek permanent solutions for persons within the Office’s core mandate responsibilities. ”). 
7 UN High C ommissioner for Refugees, “2015 UNHCR 
Operations Country Profile – Jordan, ” http:/ /www.unhcr.org/pages/49e486566.html. 
8 S econdary survivors are those who experience 
trauma through the torture of a close relative or acquaintance. See e.g., National Child T raumatic Stress Network, “What is Secondary T raumatic Stress?” http:/ /www.nctsn.org/resources/topics/secondary-traumatic-stress. 9 C onvention against T orture and Other Cruel, Inhuman 
or Degrading T reatment or Punishment art. 1, para. 1, G.A. Res. 39/46, 39 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 51), U.N. Doc. A/19/51 (1984), 
entered into force  June 26, 1987 
[hereinafter CAT].
10 S elcuk R. Sirin and Lauren Rogers-Sirin, Migration Policy 
Institute: Washington, D.C., The Educational and Mental 
Health Needs of Syrian Refugee Children , Oct. 2015, at 
4 (citing Thompson Reuters Foundation, “Syria’s Civil Wa r,” 
available at  http:/ /www.trust.org/spotlight/Syrias-
civil-war/?tab=briefing) [hereinafter Sirin Report].
11 Human Rights Watch, Syria: T orture Centers Revealed , 
Jul. 3, 2012, available at  https:/ /www.hrw.org/
news/2012/07/03/syria-torture-centers-revealed. 
12 UN Offic e of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, 
“Fact Sheet No. 26, The Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, ” at 4, 
available at  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/
Documents/Publications/FactSheet26en.pdf. 
13 Int erviewed May 2014. 
14 Int erviewed October 2015. 
15 Int erviewed October 2015. 
16 Int erviewed May 2014. 
17 Int erviewed May 2014.
18 Int erviewed May 2014. 
19 C entral Intelligence Agency, “The World Factbook: 
Syria, ” https:/ /www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/sy.html. 
20 Sirin R eport, supra  note 10, at 3 (noting that, historically, 
the diverse ethnic and religious groups coexisted peace-fully in Syria); Mark Urban, BBC, “Why there is more to Syria conflict than sectarianism, ” Jun. 4, 2013, http:/ /www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-22770219. 
2015 CVT  |  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  •  39
21 This is lar gely supported by qualitative research 
conducted by the Syrian Justice and Accountability 
Centre in its January 2015 report. See  Craig Charney, 
Syria Justice and Accountability Centre, “ Maybe We 
Can Reach a Solution” Syrian Perspectives on Local 
Initiatives for Peace, Justice, and Reconciliation , 2015 
available at  http:/ /33bjjc3l8q7dpgn6j1rg637f.wpen-
gine.netdna-cdn.com/wp-content/uploads/SJAC_Perceptions_2015.pdf. 
22 Int erviewed October 2015. 
23 Int erviewed October 2015. 
24 Int erviewed January 2014. 
25 P ress Release, UN Office of the High Commissioner for 
Human Rights, “Syria must stop using violent strategies against civilians, now, ” Aug. 5, 2011 
available at  http:/ /
www.ohchr.org/en/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=11281&LangID=E; 
26 P ress Release, UN Office of the High Commissioner for 
Human Rights, “Syria: UN experts raise alarm over arbi-trary detentions and likely use of torture, ” Feb. 21, 2012 
available at  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/
Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=11848&LangID=E 
27 Int erviewed January 2014. 
28 Int erviewed January 2014. 
29 Int erviewed December 2014. 
30 Int erviewed May 2014. 
31 Int erviewed October 2015. 
32 Int erviewed October 2015. 
33 Amne sty International, Between Prison and the Grave: 
Enforced Disappearances in Syria , Nov. 2015, at 13-14, 
available at  http:/ /www.amnesty.org.uk/sites/default/
files/embargoed_-_between_prison_and_the_grave_final.pdf 
34 V eronica Laveta, Center for Victims of T orture Healing 
and Human Rights Blog, “Jordan Counseling Group Session 7: Grief and Loss/Reconnecting with Memories of Lost Loved Ones, ” Oct. 23, 2015, http:/ /www.cvt.org/blog/healing-and-human-rights/jordan-counseling-group-session-7-grief-and-lossreconnecting-memories.
35 “ A Report into the credibility of certain evidence with 
regard to T orture and Execution of Persons Incarcerated by the current Syrian regime, ” 
available at  http:/ /static.
guim.co.uk/ni/1390226674736/syria-report-execution-tort.pdf.
36 UN Human Right s Committee, Comm. 542/1993, 
Katombe L. T shishimbi v. Zaire , Mar. 26, 1993, ¶ 5.5  
available at  http:/ /www1.umn.edu/humanrts/undocs/
html/VWS54256.htm. 37 UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary 
Disappearances, “General Comment on Enforced Disappearance as a Continuous Crime, ” 
avail-
able at  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/
Disappearances/GC-EDCC.pdf.
38 E uropean Court of Human Rights, No. 2565/94, Orhan 
v. T urkey , Jun. 18, 2002, ¶ 358-360 (“[T]he uncertainty 
and apprehension suffered by the applicant over a prolonged and continuing period [. . .] has clearly caused him severe mental distress and anguish consti-tuting inhuman treatment[.]”); Inter-American Court of Human Rights, 
Godínez Cruz Case, Compensatory 
Damages,  (Ser. C) No. 8, 1990, ¶ 48-49 (finding that the 
disappearance of the head of the family caused harmful psychological impacts on his family that entitled them to moral damages). 
39 Int erviewed May 2014. 
40 Int erviewed January 2014. 
41 Int erviewed October 2015. 
42 See  International Committee of the Red Cross, 
“International Humanitarian Law: Rule 93: Rape and Other forms of Sexual Violence, ” https:/ /www.icrc.org/customary-ihl/eng/docs/v1_rul_rule93 (citing International 
Criminal T ribunal for Rwanda,  Akayesu 
case , Judgment, Sept. 2, 1998, ¶ 598; International 
Criminal T ribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,  Delali case , 
Judgment, Nov. 16, 1998, ¶ 495-496). 
43 Int erviewed May 2014. 
44 Int erviewed January 2014. 
45 Int erviewed in October 2015. 
46 Int erviewed in October 2015. 
47 Int erviewed October 2015. 
48 UN High C ommissioner for Refugees, Assessment of 
Health Access of New Arrival Iraqi Refugees in Jordan ,  
Aug. 3, 2015, at 1 [hereinafter UNHCR Iraqi Health 
Assessment ].
49 Int erviewed October 2015. 
50 Int erviewed October 2015. 
51 Int erviewed December 2014. 
52 Int erviewed October 2015. 
53 Int erviewed October 2015. 
54 CAT, supra  note 9, art. 1. 
55 C ommittee against T orture, General Comment 2, 
CAT/C/GC/2 (Jan. 24, 2008) ¶ 8, available at  http:/ /
tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/TBSearch.aspx?Lang=en&T reatyID=1&DocT ypeID=11. 40  •   Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  |  2015 CVT
56 Int erviewed December 2014. 
57 Husb and and wife interviewed separately in  
October 2015. 
58 Husb and and wife interviewed together in  
December 2014. 
59  Int erviewed December 2014. 
60 Metin B asgolu, Ed., “T orture and its Consequences: 
Current T reatment Approaches, ” Cambridge University 
Press, 1992, summary available at  http:/ /www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1376516/?page=1. 
61 V eronica Laveta, Center for Victims of T orture Healing 
and Human Rights Blog, “Jordan Counseling Group Session Three: Mind Body Awareness, ” Sept. 28, 2015 http:/ /www.cvt.org/blog/healing-and-human-rights/jordan-counseling-group-session-three-mind-body-awareness#sthash.NYt91Hsj.htlwvqpp.dpuf.
62 Int erviewed December 2014. 
63 Husb and and wife interviewed separately in  
October 2015. 
64 Mer cy Corps, “Quick Facts: What you need to know 
about the Syria crisis, ” Sept. 2, 2015, https:/ /www.mer -
cycorps.org/articles/iraq-jordan-lebanon-syria-turkey/quick-facts-what-you-need-know-about-syria-crisis.
65 Nor wegian Refugee Council, No Place to Call Home: 
How Syria’s displaced millions struggle to keep a roof 
over their heads , June 2015, at 7 , available at  http:/ /
www.nrc.no/arch/img.aspx?file_id=9199720. 
66 A ssociated Press, The Guardian, “Lack of funds: World 
Food Programme drops aid to one-third of Syrian refugees, ” Sept. 4, 2015 http:/ /www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/05/lack-of-funds-world-food-pro-gramme-drops-aid-to-one-third-of-syrian-refugees.
67 W orld Food Programme, “Syria Emergency: Food 
Assistance, ” 2015 http:/ /www.wfp.org/emergencies/syria (“In October, as a result of new donor support, WFP has been able to increase the value loaded onto the electronic vouchers it uses to provide food assistance to extremely vulnerable Syrian refugees in Jordan and Lebanon to an average of US$21 per person per month – 80 percent of the full intended voucher value. This is a positive development as assistance was cut down to 50 percent on average during the previous months due to a severe lack of funding. ”)
68 UNHCR Iraqi Health Assessment, supra  note 48, at 5. 
69 Id. at 3. 70 UN High C ommissioner for Refugees, Living in the 
Shadows: Jordan Home Visits Report 2014 , at 7, avail-
able at  http:/ /unhcr.org/jordan2014urbanreport/home-
visit-report.pdf. 
71 Sirin R eport, supra  note 10, at 8. 
72 REA CH, “Migration trends and patterns of Syrian 
Asylum-seekers traveling to the EU, REACH Initiative, ” Sept. 28, 2015, at 6 
available at  http:/ /data.unhcr.org/
mediterranean/download.php?id=125. 
73  Int erviewed May 2014. 
74  Int erviewed December 2014. 
75 22 U .S.C. § 2378d (a-d) and Pub. L. 112-74 § 8058 
together make up the “Leahy Law. ” These two sections withhold assistance and training to “any unit of the security forces of a foreign country” if the Secretary of State and Secretary of Defense have credible informa-tion that the unit has “committed a gross violation of human rights. ” The assistance or training may only be restored once “all necessary corrective steps have been taken” including bringing the “responsible members of the security forces unit to justice. ”2015 CVT  |  Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect in Jordan  •  41
WWW.CVT.ORG 
CVT International Headquarters
2356 University Avenue West • Suite 430
St. Paul, MN 55114
 
CVT Washington, D.C. Office
1730 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW • 7th Floor
Washington, D.C. 20006
©2015 The Center for Victims of T orture