649 Dayton Avenue  St. Paul, MN  55104  612.436.4800  CVT@cvt.org   www.CVT.org  
April 2015   
Effects of Torture  
 
 
 
 
Torture is the deliberate and systematic dismantling of a person’s identity and humanity. Torture’s 
purpose is to destroy a sense of community, eliminate leaders and create a climate of fear.  
 
Beatings and psychologic al torture are the most common forms reported to  the Center for Victims of 
Torture ™ (CVT ). CVT clinicians have  documented  more sophisticated forms of torture over the years, 
especially methods of psychological torture, that do not leave physical scars. Th is makes it more difficult 
for survivors to seek redress or make asylum claims.  
 
CVT clients have  reported the following forms of torture : 
 
Physical Assaults , including beatings, p rolonged enforced standing, hanging, suffocation, burnings, 
electric shock, sexual assault and rape, and exposure to extreme heat or cold . 
 
Psychological Torture , including verbal abuses, threats against family, friends and loved ones, false 
accusations, f orced choices, mock executions, and being forced to witness torture, mutilation and 
murder of others . 
 
Deprivation of Humane Conditions , including deprivation of food and water, being held in isolation, 
restricted movement, blindfolding, sleep deprivation and withholding of medical care . 
 
Sensory Over -Stimulation , including exposure to constant noise, screams and voices, powerful lights 
and forced ingestion of drugs.  
  
Effects of Torture  
 Long -term physical effects of torture include scars, headaches, muscul oskeletal pains, foot 
pains, hearing loss, dental pain, visual problems, abdominal pains, cardiovascular/respiratory 
problems, sexual difficulties, and neurological damage.  
 Long -term psychological effects include difficulty concentrating, nightmares, insom nia, memory 
loss, fatigue, anxiety, depression and posttraumatic stress disorder .  
 
Psychological torture is D amaging  
 In CVT’s experience, psychological torture can be more damaging and cause more severe and 
long -lasting damage than the pain of physical to rture.  
 A study found that degrading treatment and psychological manipulation cause as much 
emotional suffering and long -term mental health harm as physical torture.1 
 
 
 
                                                 
1 Basogl u, et al. Torture vs Other Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment . Archives of General Psychiatry, Volume 64, March 
2007. PDF available a t: http://archpsyc.ama -assn.org/cgi/reprint/64/3/277  
649 Dayton Avenue  St. Paul, MN  55104  612.436.4800  CVT@cvt.org   www.CVT.org  
April 2015  Threats of Death or Injury  
 Survivors say mock executions left them feeling they were already dead.   
 Survivors relive these near -death experiences in their nightmares or flashbacks.  
 CVT clients have reported  that they pleaded with their torturers to kill them, preferring real 
death over the constant threat and intolerable pain it caus ed. 
 
Sexual Humiliation  
 Sexual humiliation leads to symptoms of post -traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and major 
depression; victims often have flashbacks or nightmares about their experiences; male and 
female victims feel shame, grief and fear.  
 Forced nake dness creates a power differential, stripping the victim s of their identities , inducing 
immediate shame and creating an environment where the threat of sexual and physical assault 
is always present.  
 At CVT , women clients say sexual humiliation is so shaming , they cannot admit it to their 
communities or families without fearing rejection.  
 Male victims feel degraded , especially if the perpetrator was female.  
 
Sensory Deprivation, I ncluding Solitary Confinement  
 All forms of sensory deprivation  can have profound and long -lasting psychological 
consequences.  
 Effects of solitary confinement include depression, anxiety, difficulty with concentration and 
memory, hypersensitivity to external stimuli, hallucinations, perception distortions, paranoia 
and problems with impulse control.  
 According to Physicians for Human Rights, T he Berlin Center treated East German ex-political 
prisoners who’d been subject ed to extended isolation, both  solitary confinement and sensory 
deprivation.  They reported inte rrogatio ns that lasted for days  along with other disorienting 
tactics and sleep deprivation.  In the Physicians for Human Rights’ report,  prisoners  described 
psychotic states, loss of confidence in their own perceptions, and extremely impaired cognitive 
functioning .2 
 
Sleep Deprivation3 
 Physicians for Human Rights note s that cognitive impairment is the primary, although not the 
only, negative psychological effect of s leep deprivation . 
 When deprived of sleep, Physicians for Human Rights state s that individuals may expe rience 
slowed response time and attention deficits. They may suffer from problem s with memory and 
speech or with ways of thinking, which can become overly -persevering or inflexible . It only takes 
a single night of sleep deprivation or a few nights with slee p restricted to five hours of sleep for 
some individuals to experience these  symptoms.  
 PHR also notes that cardiovascular problems including hypertension can result from s leep 
restrictions. (See Break Them Down  by Physicians for Human Rights, below.)  
 
 
 
 
 
2,3Physicians for Human Rights.  Break Them Down:  Systematic use of Psychological Torture by U.S. Forces . Available at: 
https://s3.amazonaws.com/PHR_Reports/break -them -down.pdf  
 