[I felt] doomed, like I was being banished … like you 
have the plague or that you are the worst thing on earth. 
Like you are set apart [from] everything else. I guess [I 
wanted to] feel like I was part of the human race —not 
like some animal.  
—Molly, placed in solitary at 16 in Michigan1 
 
Solitary confinement is the practice of isolating individu-
als in confined spaces for 22 to 24 hours a day. Re-
ferred to by many names, from segregation to room con-
finement, solitary confinement places its victims in con-
ditions of profound isolation and sensory deprivation for 
days, week, months, or years.  
 
With nearly 200,000 minors held in jails, prisons, and 
juvenile facilities on any given day, potentially thousands 
of children are subjected to solitary confinement.  
 
Whether it ’s used for a youth ’s protection in an adult 
prison or as punishment in a juvenile jail, the damaging 
effects of isolation pose a serious threat to the mental 
health, development, and lives of young people.  
 
 
Individuals in solitary confinement, particularly for pro-
longed periods of time, are known to be at risk of devel-
oping a host of psychological ailments.  
 
Isolation may lead to an elevated risk for paranoia, cog-
nitive deficits, ruminations, hallucinations, hypersensitivi-
ty to external stimuli and difficulties with impulse con-
trol.2 
 
Placement in isolation has been associated with feelings 
of hopelessness, irritability, aggression, suicidal ideation 
and a sense of impending emotional breakdown.3 
 
A study of prisoners who volunteered to spend a week in 
isolation observed declining EEG alpha frequency, sug-
gesting that even short -term isolation may alter brain 
activity.4 
 
These effects lead to an increased likelihood of self -
mutilation, attacks on staff, destruction of property and 
suicides.5  
 
Approximately half of all suicides among incarcerated 
children in juvenile facilities takes place while they are in 
room confinement, defined as a “behavioral sanction 
imposed on youth that restrict[s] movement for varying 
amounts of time. ”6   
 
Though most research has been conducted with respect 
to incarcerated adults, there is reason to believe isola-
tion may have disparate impacts on young people.7 
 
Neuroscience research indicates the brain continues to 
develop through young adulthood, with the prefrontal 
cortex, associated with self -control, working memory, 
and decision -making, among the last region of the brain 
to mature.8 
 
Exposure to stressors may disrupt normal development 
and functioning of the areas of these areas of the brain. 
It stands to reason isolation may cause even greater 
suffering and damage among young people than it does 
for adults.  
 
In 2003, the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency 
Prevention surveyed over 7,000 youth between the ages 
of 10 and 20 held in state and local juvenile facilities.  
 
The survey revealed 35 percent of youth reported expe-
riencing isolation. Of them, 87 percent were isolated for 
over two hours and 55 percent for more than 24 hours.9  
 
Teenagers tried and convicted as adults may be at even 
greater risk, often subjected to solitary confinement pur-
portedly for their own protection.  
 
A 2012 report by Human Rights Watch and the Ameri-
can Civil Liberties Union documented the widespread 
isolation of youth in jails and prisons, sometimes for sev-
eral months or even years. In some systems, isolation is 
virtually a given for juveniles.1 
 
With over 139,000 juveniles held in adult jails and pris-
ons as of 2010, there is considerable evidence that 
thousands of youth are being subjected to solitary con-
finement.  
 
 
In 1990, the United Nations General Assembly adopted 
the UN Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of 
their Liberty, which included a provision declaring: "All 
disciplinary measures constituting cruel, inhuman or de-
grading treatment shall be strictly prohibited, including 
corporal punishment, placement in a dark cell, closed or 
solitary confinement or any other punishment that may 
compromise the physical or mental health of the juvenile 
concerned."10 
 
In 2011, the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture, Juan E. 
Méndez, recommended a complete ban on the solitary 
confinement of juveniles, along with a limit of 15 days for 
adults.11 
 
2012, the American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry announced it “opposes the use of solitary 
confinement in correctional facilities for juveniles. ” The 
AACAP further recommended “any youth that is con-
fined for more than 24 hours must be evaluated by a 
mental health professional, such as a child and adoles-
cent psychiatrist when one is available. ”12 
 
In November 2014, the American Medical Association 
called for “restricting the use of isolation in juvenile cor-
rection facilities for only extraordinary circumstances. ”13 
 
 
Many state and local jurisdictions have enacted reforms 
to the use of solitary confinement on children, some-
times legislatively, though more often through litigation.  
 
States including Alaska, Colorado, Massachusetts, Mis-
sissippi, Montana, New York, Oklahoma and West Vir-
ginia have implemented restrictions on when and how 
isolation can be used, even outright bans.14 
 
One of the latest state to reform its practices was Illinois. 
In May 2015, the Illinois Department of Juvenile Justice 
settled a lawsuit with the ACLU  over the use of isolation 
in their juvenile correctional facilities.  
 
The department agreed to end punitive use of isolation, 
continue providing education and mental health pro-
gramming to juveniles separated from the general popu-
lation and provide segregated youths at least 8 hours of 
time outside of their rooms every day if they are separat-
ed for 24 hours or longer.15 
 
At the local level, also in May, Contra Costa County in 
California agreed to end isolation for punitive reasons 
and to only use room confinement for four hours at a 
time, with a focus on reintegrating youths into general 
population.16 
 
Some states, including Maine, have focused on more 
holistic interventions to address problematic behaviors 
by actively working with incarcerated youth to under-
stand and better control challenging behaviors. This ap-
proach helped Maine cut down on use of seclusion in 
youth facilities.17 
 
1. Ian Kysel (2012), Growing Up Locked Down: Youth in solitary con-
finement in jails and prisons across the United States. Human Rights 
Watch & American Civil Liberties Union.  
2. Grassian S. (2006), Psychiatric effects of solitary confinement. 
Wash Univ J Law Policy, 22:325 –383.  
3. Haney C. (2003), Mental health issues in long -term solitary and 
“supermax ” confinement. Crime and Delinquency, 49(1):124 –156.  
4. Gendreau, P. et al.. (1972), Changes in EEG Alpha Frequency and 
Evoked Response Latency During Solitary Confinement, 79 J. of Ab-
normal Psych, 54, 57 -58  
5. Haney, C. (1993),” Infamous punishment ”: The Psychological Con-
sequences of Isolation, National Prison Project Journal 8(2), 3 -7, 21.  
6. Hayes, L. (2009). Dept of Justice, Office of Juvenile Justice and 
Delinquency Prevention, Juvenile Suicide In Confinement: A National 
Survey , available at  https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/ojjdp/213691.pdf.   
7. American Civil Liberties Union. Two -Pager: Solitary Confinement 
and Isolation in Juvenile Correctional Facilities, available at https://
www.aclu.org/files/assets/Juvenile Solitary_Two Pager.pdf  
8. Burke, AS. (2011), Under construction: brain formation, culpability, 
and the criminal justice system, International Journal of Law and Psy-
chiatry, 34:381 –385. 
9.Dept of Justice Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Preven-
tion. (2010), Conditions of Confinement: Findings from the Survey of 
Youth In Residential Placement.   
10. United Nations General Assembly. Resolution 45/113. United 
Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty. 
December 14, 1990.  
11. Juan E. Méndez (2011). Interim report of the Special Rapporteur 
of the Human Rights Council on torture and other cruel, inhuman or 
degrading treatment or punishment  12. Am. Acad of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Policy Statements: 
Solitary Confinement of Juvenile Offenders (2012).  
13. American Medical Association (2014) Policy statement: Solitary 
confinement of juveniles in legal custody.  
14. American Civil Liberties Union. (2014), Alone & Afraid: Children 
held in solitary confinement and isolation in juvenile detention and 
correctional facilities.  
15.Bosman, J. (2015). Lawsuit leads to new limits on solitary confine-
ment at juvenile prisons in Illinois. New York Times, May 4.  
17. Simkins, S. et al. (2012), The Harmful Use of Isolation in Juvenile 
Facilities: the Need for Post -Disposition Representation, 38 Wash 
Univ J Law Policy 279 -81. 
 
 
Fact Sheet by Sal Rodriguez. © 2015.  
Photo © Steve Liss from “Children Behind Bars. ” www.steveliss.com.  
Please cite Solitary Watch and the original sources when quoting 
from this document.  
 
Solitary Watch is a web -based watchdog organization that investi-
gates, reports on, and disseminates information about solitary con-
finement in U.S. prisons and jails.  
 
Solitary Watch, PO Box 11374, Washington, DC 20008  
info@solitarywatch.org.  
 
www.solitarywatch.org  