  
Fact  Sheet:  
Psychological Effects of  
Solitary Confinement  News from a Nation in Lockdown  
www.solitarywatch.com  
“[Solitary confinement] units are virtual incubators of psy-
choses --seeding illness in otherwise healthy inmates and 
exacerbating illness in those already suffering from mental 
infirmities.”  
—Ruiz v. Johnson (2001)1 
Solitary confinement is the practice of isolating a prisoner 
in a closed cell for 23 to 24 hours a day —often for weeks or 
months, and sometimes for years or decades at a time. 
While precise data on nationwide utilization of the practice 
is elusive, we know that some 20,000 inmates are in soli-
tary confinement in America‘s supermax prisons, while tens 
of thousands more are held in isolation in other prisons and 
jails.2 
Solitary Confinement and Mental Health  
It’s a standard psychiatric concept, if you put people in 
isolation, they will go insane…. It’s a big problem in the 
California system, putting large numbers in the [Security 
Housing Units]… Most people in isolation will fall apart.”   
— Sandra Schank, staff psychiatrist, Mule Creek Prison3 
Since the 1970s, research has been amassed indicating that 
solitary confinement does alter neural and therefore psy-
chological states.  
One study found that those in solitary developed psychopa-
thologies at higher rates than those in the general popula-
tion (28% vs. 15%).4 
Another study of 20 prisoners who volunteered for a week 
of solitary confinement found that the prisoners exhibited 
decreased EEG activity, indicative of increased theta activi-
ty, which is related to stress, tension, and anxiety.5 
Prisoners in solitary confinement have been found to en-
gage in self -mutilation at rates higher than the general pop-
ulation.6 
Other research found that individuals released directly onto 
the streets had a higher recidivism rate compared to those 
who spent time in the general population after solitary con-
finement (64 vs. 41%).7 
Inmates released in Washington in the course of one year, 
controlling for criminal history and mental health, were 
more likely to commit felonies and crimes against individu-
als if they had been assigned to a supermax facility.8 
Suicide in Solitary  
In 2005, forty -four prisoners in the California prison sys-
tem committed suicide, 70% of whom were in solitary con-
finement.9 This has been a consistent trend. A national study of 401 jail 
suicides in 1986 found that two out of three were among 
those held in a control unit.10 
A 2007 study examining  attempted suicide in the prison 
system identified solitary confinement as a major factor in 
suicidal ideation and suicide attempts.  
"I started hearing voices and losing control of my own 
thoughts...I really started noticing more when I started 
being in the hole...It just started getting worse for me."  
—Participant 2211 
Mental Illness and Solitary Confinement  
“For these inmates, placing them in [solitary confinement] 
is the mental equivalent of putting an asthmatic in a place 
with little air.”12  
—Madrid v. Gomez (1996)  
An estimated 20% of all inmates in the nation‘s prison and 
jails are ―seriously mentally ill.‖13 To compound the prob-
lem, psychiatric resources are scarce in the overcrowded 
prison system.    
Behavior that stems from mental illness is often used as a 
justification to place mentally ill inmates in isolation units. 
As a result, America‘s lockdown units are becoming its new 
asylums. A 2003 report from Human Rights Watch found 
that one -third to one -half of prisoners in "secure housing 
units" and "special management units" suffered from men-
tal illness.1 
According research compiled by the American Psychiatric 
Association, clinicians ―generally  agree that  placement of 
inmates with serious  mental  illnesses  in settings  with 
‗extreme isolation‘ is  contraindicated because  many of the-
se inmates‘ psychiatric conditions  will clinically  deteriorate 
or not improve."14 
The inadequacy of prison system to deal with mentally ill-
ness results in a cycle wherein emotionally troubled inmates 
enter solitary confinement, anger builds as a result of isola-
tion, and eventually the inmate may lash out —resulting in 
an extended term in solitary.15 
Terry Kupers, a professor at the Wright Institute in Berkley, 
testified in a Wisconsin case that confinement of ―prisoners 
suffering from serious mental illnesses, or who are prone to 
serious mental illness or suicide,  is an extreme hazard to 
their mental health and wellbeing.  It causes irreparable 
emotional damage and psychiatric disability as well an ex-
treme mental anguish and suffering, and in some cases pre-
sents a risk of death by suicide.‖15 2 Pelican Bay State Prison  
Pelican Bay State Prison is a supermax prison in Del Norte  
California.  In 1993, the prison was subject of a suit filed 
on behalf of 3,600 prisoners alleging violations of rights 
and abuse.3  
Dr. Stuart Grassian submitted testimony resulting from 
his extensive interviews with PBSP prisoners, suggesting 
that solitary confinement induces a specific psychiatric 
disorder characterized by: hypersensitivity to external 
stimuli, hallucinations, panic attacks, cognitive deficits, 
obsessive thinking, paranoia, and impulse control prob-
lems.17 
Psychological assessments of Pelican Bay‘s solitary con-
fined prisoners indicate high rates of anxiety, nervous-
ness, obsessive ruminations, anger, violent fantasies, 
nightmares, trouble sleeping, as well as dizziness, perspir-
ing hands, and heart palpitations.18 
Future Directions  
 In some states, lawsuits brought by prisoners and their 
advocates have resulted in limits on the incarceration of 
mentally ill patients in solitary confinement.19 Even in 
states with outright bans, problems remain with the diag-
nosis of inmates‘ mental illnesses and the creation of hu-
mane alternatives to solitary confinement.  
For prisoners without underlying mental illness, the 
courts have largely ignored or condoned the use of solitary 
confinement, despite evidence of psychological harm.  
In 2006, the Commission on Safety and Abuse in Ameri-
ca's Prisons, following a yearlong investigation, called for 
dramatic reductions and reforms on the practice of soli-
tary confinement, noting the high recidivism rate and the 
viability of alternatives to solitary confinement.  
The Commission found that the ―increasing use of high -
security segregation is counter -productive, often causing   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
violence inside facilities and contributing to recidivism 
after release.‖  
The Commission recommended that prison administra-
tors:  
―1. Make segregation a last resort and a more productive 
form of confinement, and stop releasing people directly 
from segregation to the streets...  
2. End conditions of isolation: Ensure that segregated 
prisoners have regular and meaningful human contact...  
 3. Protect mentally ill prisoners...‖7 
1. Human Rights Watch (2003), Ill-Equipped: U.S. Prisons and Offend-
ers with Mental Illness 149 n. 513 (New York: Human Rights Watch.  
2. Naday, A., Freilich, J. & Mellow, Jeff. (2008), ―The Elusive Data on 
Supermax Confinement, ― The Prison Journal 88, 69.  
3. Ruiz v Johnson , 154 F.Supp.2d 975 (S.D.Tex.2001).  
4. Andersen, H. S., Sestoft, D. D., Lillebæk, T. T., Gabrielsen, G. G., 
Hemmingsen, R. R., & Kramp, P. P. (2000), ―A Longitudinal Study of 
Prisoners on Remand: Psychiatric Prevalence, Incidence and Psycho-
pathology in Solitary vs.Non -Solitary Confinement.‖  Acta Psychiatrica 
Scandinavica , 102(1), 19.   
 5. Gendreau, P., Freedman, N. and Wilde, G. (1972), ―Changes in EEG 
Alpha Frequency and Evoked Response Latency During Solitary Con-
finement,‖ Journal of Abnormal Psychology 79, 54, 57 -58 . 
6. Haney, C., & Lynch, Mona. (1997), ―Regulating Prisons of the Future: 
A Psychological Analysis of Supermax and Solitary Confinement.‖ New 
York University Review of Law and Social Change 23: 477 -570.  
7. Confronting Confinement: A Report of The Commission on Safety 
and Abuse in America's Prisons (2006), http://
www.prisoncommission.org/pdfs/Confronting_Confinement.pdf.  
8. Lovell, D. & Johnson, C. (2004), Felony and Violent Recidivism 
Among Supermax Prison Inmates in Washington State: A Pilot Study. 
University of Washington.  
9. Thompson, Don (2006), ―Convict Suicides in State Prison Hit Record 
High.‖ Associated Press, January 3.  
10. Hayes, L. & Rowan, J. (1988), National Study of Jail Suicides: Sev-
en Years Later . National Center on Institutions and Alternatives.  
 
 11. Suto, I. (2007), ―Inmates Who Attempted Suicide in Prison: A Qual-
itative Study.‖ School of Professional Psychology. Paper 46.  
12. Madrid v. Gomez , 889 F.  Supp. 1146, 1265 (N.D. Cal. 1995) .  
13. American Psychiatric Association (2000), Psychiatric Services in 
Jails and Prisons, 2nd ed. (Washington, D.C.: APA).  
14. Work Group on  Schizophrenia (1997),  ―American Psychiat-
ric Association Practice Guidelines: Practice Guideline  for the Treat-
ment of Patients  with  Schizophrenia,‖  American Journal of Psychiatry 
154:1 –63.  
15. Haney, C. (1993),―‗Infamous punishment‘‖: The Psychological Con-
sequences of Isolation, National Prison Project Journal 8(2), 3 -7, 21.  
16. Kupers, Terry (2001).  ―Declaration of Terry A. Kupers, M.D., 
M.S.P.,‖ United States District Court for the Western District of Wis-
consin, Case No. 00 -C-421-C.  August 9.  
17. Grassian, Stuart (1993), "Psychiatric Effects of Solitary Confine-
ment," Madrid v. Gomez , 889F.Supp.1146 .  
18. Haney, Craig. (2003), ―Mental Health Issues in Long -Term Solitary 
and ‗Supermax‘ Confinement,‖ Crime & Delinquency 49(1):124 -56 . 
19. See Correctional Association of New York. States that Provide 
Mental Health Alternatives to Solitary Confinement. Fact Sheet.    
 
Fact Sheet by Sal Rodriguez, Solitary Watch Reporter/Researcher. 
©  2011. Please cite Solitary Watch and the original sources when 
quoting from this document.   
Contact information: Solitary Watch, PO Box 11374, Washington, DC 
20008 / solitarywatchnews@gmail.com.  
© by Todd (Hyung -Rae) Tarselli. who spent 9 years in  
 solitary confinement at Pennsylvania‘s SCI Greene.  