fact sheet  for advocates                                                                                       october  2018
Sexual Abuse in Detention:  
The Most Vulnerable Inmates
While anyone can be sexually abused in 
detention, we know that some people are 
at especially high risk. Staff and inmate 
perpetrators tend to target those who are 
the least likely to report — or to be believed 
or treated with compassion if they do. In 
particular, inmates who have mental illness, 
who identify or are perceived as LGBT, or 
who have experienced prior victimization are 
at high risk of sexual abuse.
Survivors of Prior Sexual Abuse
Many people who are incarcerated have 
suffered previous sexual abuse — but 
have never received the help they need to 
heal. Overall, at least one in six men has 
experienced sexual abuse at some time in 
their lives.1 Of women in jails, 86 percent 
are survivors of sexual abuse.2 Once in 
detention, survivors of prior sexual abuse 
are extremely vulnerable. They are six times 
more likely to be sexually abused by other inmates than the overall prison population. 
They are also twice as likely to be sexually 
abused by staff.3  
Several factors contribute to the 
vulnerability of survivors of previous sexual 
abuse. These survivors, especially those 
who were abused as children, may believe 
they should expect or tolerate abuse, or 
may not expect that staff, or anyone else, 
will help them. Perpetrators are skilled at 
testing people’s boundaries and identifying 
those who are unlikely to report or seek 
help. Predatory staff, in particular, know 
which inmates have been sexually abused, 
making it easier for them to target and 
groom vulnerable individuals.
Inmates with Mental Illness
People with mental illness are drastically 
overrepresented in U.S. prisons and jails. 
Some 36 percent of people in prison and 43 “For me, being sexually abused as a child made me an easy target. It was in our file, 
and the guards can see that. We are easy targets because we learn from a young age 
to keep our mouths shut. There are repercussions to telling. It is brainwashed into 
us. It was almost the norm because of how I grew up. I just felt like, ‘Well, here comes 
another one.’ ” — Robin, sexual abuse survivor who was raped by corrections officials
1 just detention international  october 2018  | fact  sheet2 fact sheet  for advocates                                      
percent of jail inmates have a mental health 
diagnosis.4 Notably, a person with a serious 
mental illness is three times more likely to 
find themselves in a prison or jail than in a 
hospital.5 In prisons, people with symptoms 
of mental illness are nine times more likely 
than those with no such symptoms to be 
assaulted by another inmate. In jails, 
these inmates are five times as likely as 
those with no symptoms to report inmate-
on-inmate abuse. Alarmingly, among 
people with mental illness who are sexually 
abused by other inmates, 80 percent are 
victimized repeatedly.6   
Most prisons and jails simply are not able 
to meet the needs of people with mental 
illness. Lacking the skills and training to 
intervene effectively with a person suffering 
from severe distress, corrections officials 
may dismiss reports from people who 
display psychotic symptoms. People with 
mental illness often disclose abuse in ways 
that seem confusing or unclear. Staff without 
adequate training may not know how to 
respond to such reports and may dismiss 
them as delusional. Perpetrators know that 
inmates with mental illness are unlikely to 
be believed if they report abuse, especially if 
they make repeated reports. 
LGBT Inmates
Lesbian, gay, and bisexual inmates are 
sexually abused by other inmates at a rate 
more than six times that of the general 
prison population, and by staff at more 
than twice the rate of other inmates .7 
Transgender inmates are even more 
vulnerable; 40 percent are sexually abused in detention, either by staff or 
inmates, which is nearly 10 times the rate of 
the general prison population.8  
Prison culture in men’s facilities is 
domina ted by hyper-masculine, homophobic 
attitudes among inmates and staff, which 
encourage predators to target anyone 
perceived as not living up to stereotypes 
of dominant male behavior. With rare 
exceptions, transgender women are placed 
in men’s institutions, where they are 
routinely mocked, humiliated, and abused 
by staff and inmates. Likewise, in women’s 
prisons, lesbians and gender nonconforming 
women are often singled out for staff 
sexual abuse and punishment. In addition, 
contrary to popular misconceptions, many 
women face abuse from other inmates — but 
corrections officials often do not recognize 
such violence among women, characterizing 
it as a “relationship problem” that does not 
demand the same kind of attention as other 
forms of abuse. 
Protecting Vulnerable Inmates
The Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA) 
requires corrections officials to screen 
inmates upon arrival in a facility. Staff must 
identify people who are at increased risk of 
sexual abuse, as well as those who are likely 
to be perpetrators, and make commonsense 
housing and programming decisions to 
prevent sexual abuse and keep vulnerable 
inmates safe.  3fact sheet  for advocates                   
just detention international  october 2018  | fact  sheetJDI Contact Information
Los Angeles Office
3325 Wilshire Boulevard, Suite 340  
Los Angeles, CA 90010
(p) 213-384-1400
D.C. Office
1900 L St. NW, Suite 601  
Washington, DC 20036
(p) 202-506-3333Endnotes
1. 1in6, “Information About Male Sexual Abuse 
& Assault,” available at: https://1in6.org/get-
information/the-1-in-6-statistic/
2. Overlooked: Women and Jails in an Era of Reform, 
available at: https://storage.googleapis.com/vera-
web-assets/downloads/Publications/overlooked-
women-and-jails-report/legacy_downloads/
overlooked-women-and-jails-report-updated.pdf
3. Allen J. Beck, et al., Sexual Victimization in Prisons 
and Jails Reported by Inmates, 2011-12  (Bureau of 
Justice Statistics, May 2013), available at: www.bjs.
gov/content/pub/pdf/svpjri1112.pdf
4. Ibid. 
5. E. Fuller Torey, M.D., et al., More Mentally Ill Persons 
Are in Jails and Prisons Than Hospitals: A Survey 
of the States  (The Treatment Advocate Center and 
National Sheriffs’ Association, May 2010), available 
at: http://www.treatmentadvocacycenter.org/
storage/documents/final_jails_v_hospitals_study.
pdf
6. Allen J. Beck, et al., Sexual Victimization in Prisons 
and Jails Reported by Inmates, 2011-12 (Bureau of 
Justice Statistics, May 2013), available at: www.bjs.
gov/content/pub/pdf/svpjri1112.pdf
7. Allen J. Beck, et al., Sexual Victimization in Prisons 
and Jails Reported by Inmates , 2011-12 (Bureau of 
Justice Statistics, May 2013), available at: www.bjs.
gov/content/pub/pdf/svpjri1112.pdf
8. Allen J. Beck, Sexual Victimization in Prisons and 
Jails Reported by Inmates, 2011-12: Supplemental 
Tables: Prevalence of Sexual Victimization Among 
Transgender Adult Inmates  (Bureau of Justice 
Statistics, December 2014), available at: https://
www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/svpjri1112_st.pdfThis project is supported by a grant awarded by the 
Office for Victims of Crime, U.S. Department of Justice. 
The opinions, findings, conclusions, and recommen -
dations expressed herein are those of the presenters 
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Depart -
ment of Justice, Office for Victims of Crime.
