1Juvenile corrections facilities 
are plagued by sexual violence. In a 
report released in June 2013, the Bu-
reau of Justice Statistics (BJS) found 
that roughly one in ten youth detainees 
were sexually abused at their current facil-
ity in the past year. A staggering 81 per-
cent of victimized youth were abused by a 
member of staff, and most were assaulted multiple times.
1
The good news is that rape crisis coun-selors can give direct, life-saving services 
to incarcerated youth. The Prison Rape 
Elimination Act (PREA) standards — a groundbreaking set of government regula-
tions issued in May 2012 — call on youth 
facilities to reach out to local service pro-
viders. This requirement creates new op-
portunities for advocates to help young survivors of sexual abuse heal.
Who Gets Locked Up in 
Youth Facilities, and Why
On any given day, there are roughly 80,000 
youth in juvenile detention facilities. Near-
ly two-thirds of youth are in for nonvio-
lent offenses, including parole violations, drugs, or truancy.
2 A significant number of 
youth detainees have a severe learning dis-
ability, mental illness, or alcohol or other 
drug addiction.3  
Youth with a history of prior sexual abuse are far more likely to become involved in the criminal justice system than those with 
no prior abuse.
4 Sexual abuse is devastat-ing to anyone, but teen survivors are especial-ly vulnerable to Post-Traumatic Stress Disor-
der, depression, and drug addiction. Lacking the skills and maturity to process the pain of 
sexual abuse, many young survivors act out 
their feelings, sometimes in ways that are 
dangerous — like starting fires, destroying 
property, or harming themselves. Such be-haviors are usually a cry for help; often, how-
ever, they land youth in detention. 
Juvenile Detention and Sexual Abuse
The juvenile justice system’s mission is to 
help troubled youth turn their lives around, 
through education, treatment, and counsel-
ing. Yet instead of getting help, a signifi-cant number of youth detainees are sexu-
ally abused. Disturbingly, the vast majority 
of abuse is committed by staff — the very 
people whose job is to keep youth safe. More 
appalling still, youth who are victimized by staff are more likely to be sexually abused at 
least eleven times than they are to be assault-
ed only once.
5
Contrary to conventional wisdom, most staff sexual misconduct is perpetrated by 
women. According to the BJS, more than 
nine in ten boys who reported sexual abuse  
said their abuser was a female staff member.
6 
Staff sexual abuse is the ultimate failure to  
uphold basic standards of professional  
conduct. The BJS found that more than  
half of all victimized youth reported that  
abusive staff members engaged in a range of  
unprofessional behavior, including giving 
them a special gift, treating them as a favor-No Safe Place: Sexual Violence 
in the Juvenile Justice System                                                                                       september 2013
just detention international  september 2013 | fact sheet“I experienced the most damag-
ing and emotionally devastat-
ing treatment of my life thus 
far when I was in a youth cor-
rectional facility.... I survived 
threats of violence, unwanted 
sexual touching, and verbal 
abuse that were severe beyond belief.”
-  Cyryna M. Pasion, Testimony  
to the National Prison Rape 
Elimination Commission,  
June 1, 2006J
2fact sheet                     
•	Make an effort to get to know the facility 
staff and administrators, and emphasize 
your shared goal of ensuring  that the fa-
cility is as safe as possible. Many correc-
tions officers will have never worked with 
a community program before, and some 
may worry that advocates will scrutinize 
how they do their jobs.
•	While most survivors of sexual abuse in 
the juvenile justice system have experi-
enced trauma prior to their incarceration, 
few are likely to have received counsel-
ing, either behind bars or in the commu-
nity. Your agency’s presence in the facility  
may be a young survivor’s first chance to seek help.
•	Be sure to know laws and agency polices 
governing child abuse reporting. Many 
states require service providers to report 
child abuse to the state’s child abuse reg-
istry. In addition, state laws differ regard-
ing the age of consent for services; in 
some states, survivors as young as 12 can 
give consent to counseling and medical care after a sexual assault. 
•	Many youth detainees have had life ex-periences that cause them to feel a deep 
distrust of adults. Expect that it will take 
time to gain their confidence and trust.Tips for Advocatesite, or sharing information about their per-
sonal lives.7
Some youth detainees are more vulnerable to sexual abuse than others. The two leading 
risk factors for abuse are having a history of 
victimization and being lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender (LGBT). Shockingly, roughly 
half of all youth who were sexually abused at 
a prior facility reported suffering yet more 
abuse at their current one.
8
Reporting sexual abuse is challenging for 
survivors in any setting. Many youth de-
tainees fear retaliation or not being tak-
en seriously. Another obstacle is the ex-treme isolation of many juvenile facilities, 
which means victimized youth often must 
make decisions about reporting and get-  
ting help without support from family and loved ones.
The PREA Standards
In August 2013, the national PREA stan-dards finally became binding on all state and 
local facilities, including youth detention centers.
9 These standards compel juvenile 
facilities to adopt concrete steps to protect young people in custody from sexual abuse. 
The PREA standards place strict limitations 
on staff viewing of youth of the opposite  
gender while they change clothes, shower, and use the bathroom. The standards also 
outline protections for vulnerable youth,  
including LGBT detainees and survivors  
of prior sexual abuse.
10
 The PREA standards call for an expanded 
role for outside advocates in helping youth 
behind bars. Under the standards, young sur-vivors must receive necessary medical treat-
ment and crisis intervention services, at no 
cost to them. Recognizing the key role of 
a coordinated response to sexual abuse, the 
standards require that facilities establish well-trained teams of first responders, medical and 
mental health staff, and investigators.
11
If fully implemented, the PREA standards 
will dramatically decrease sexual abuse in ju-
venile facilities, while ensuring that victim-
ized youth get the help that they need. 
Endnotes
1Allen J. Beck et al., Sexual Victimization in Juvenile Facilities Reported by Youth, 2012 (Bureau of Justice Statis-
tics, June 2013), available at http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/svjfry12.pdf .
2Sarah Hockenberry, Juveniles in Residential Placement, 2010 (Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Pre-
vention, June 2013), available at http://www.ncjj.org/pdf/CJRP/CJRP%202010.pdf .
3Jennie L. Shufelt and Joseph J. Cocozza, Youth with Mental Health Disorders in the Juvenile Justice System: Re-
sults from a Multi-State Prevalence Study (2006) and Eve Muller, The Juvenile Justice System and Youths with Dis-
abilities, in Forum (October 2005), available at www.projectforum.org/docs/The%20Juvenille%20Justice%20System%20and%20Youths%20with%20Disabilities.pdf . 
4See, e.g., Karen M. Abram et al., Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Trauma in Youth in Juvenile Detention, 61 
Archives of General Psychiatry 403 (2004).
5Beck et al, Sexual Victimization in Juvenile Facilities Reported by Youth, 2012.
6Ibid. 
7Ibid.
8Ibid.
9National Standards To Prevent, Detect, and Respond to Prison Rape, 28 CFR 115 (Department of Justice, 
2012), available at www.federalregister.gov/a/2012-12427.
10National Standards, §§ 115.241, 115.242. Additionally, adult facilities that hold youth under the age of 18 
must house them separately from adult inmates — without relying on the use of solitary confinement; see National Standards, §§ 115.14, 115.114.
11National Standards, §§ 115.364, 115.365, 115.371.
This project is supported by Grant No. 2011-TA-AX-K100, awarded by the Office on Violence Against Women, U.S. Department of Justice. The opinions, findings, conclusions, and recommendations expressed in this document are those of Just Detention International and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Department of Justice, Office on Violence Against Women.Headquarters
 
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010Tel:  (213) 384-1400Fax: (213) 384-1411
east Coast o ffiCe
1900 L Street NW,  Suite 601Washington, DC 20036Tel: (202) 506-3333Fax: (202) 506-7971
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.org
just detention international  september 2013 | fact sheetJust detention international   
is a health and human rights orga-
nization that seeks to end sexual abuse in all  forms of  detention.