just detention international  february 2009 | fact  sheetRape and other forms of 
sexual assault in detention 
are a particularly despicable 
violation of the inherent dignity 
and right to physical integrity of 
every human being; and accordingly 
constitute an act of torture.1 
 — United Nations  
Special Rapporteur on TorturePrisoner Rape is Torture  
Under International Lawfact sheet                                                                                       february 2009
The sexual assault of prisoners, 
whether perpetrated by correc -
tions officials or by other in -
mates, amounts to torture under 
international law. Torture is prohibited by 
international conventions and treaties, in -
cluding the Convention against Torture 
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or degrading 
Treatment or punishment (C aT)2 and the 
International Covenant on Civil and polit-
ical Rights (ICCpR),3 both of which have 
been ratified by the United States. 
The ICCpR provides that all people, 
including prisoners, have a broad range 
of civil and political rights, including that 
“[n]o one shall be subjected to torture or to 
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or 
punishment.”4 The C aT focuses specifically 
on this right and requires ratifying nations 
to take action to prevent acts of torture 
within their jurisdictions. The C aT also provides a definition of 
torture:
any act by which severe pain or suf -
fering, whether physical or mental, is 
intentionally inflicted on a person for 
such purposes as obtaining from him 
or a third person information or a 
confession, punishing him for an act 
he or a third person has committed, or 
intimidating him or a third person, or 
for any reason based on discrimination 
of any kind, when such pain or suffer -
ing is inflicted by or at the instigation 
of or with the consent or acquiescence 
of a public official or other person act -
ing in an official capacity.5 Sexual violence behind bars meets each 
element of this definition. Victims of prisoner 
rape are left beaten and bloodied, contract 
HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases,6 
and suffer severe psychological harm.7 
Sexual violence has been used as a tool to 
punish inmates for misbehavior, or to further 
marginalize vulnerable populations.8 even 
when corrections staff are not the perpetrators, 
some officials have set up inmate-on-inmate 
rape by intentionally housing vulnerable 
inmates with known predators. Furthermore, 
the failure of corrections officials to take 
appropriate steps to prevent and address 
prisoner rape amounts to state acquiescence 
in this type of abuse.
To ensure that the right to be free from tor -
ture is protected, both the ICCpR and the 
CaT have international bodies that monitor 
their implementation in signatory states. The 
CaT is monitored by the U.n. Commit -
tee against Torture (the C aT Committee), 
and the ICCpR is monitored by the Human Rights Committee. In 2006, the C aT Com
-
mittee and the Human Rights Committee reviewed U.S. compliance with the C aT and 
the ICCpR respectively. Both committees 
recognize sexual violence in detention as part 
of their mandate and have identified it as a 
serious problem in the U.S.
The C aT Committee commended certain 
U.S. initiatives, including the enactment of 
the prison Rape elimination act of 2003, 
which calls for a “zero-tolerance” standard for 
rape in U.S. detention facilities.9 However, 
the Committee detailed numerous concerns 
with U.S. policy and practice, including just detention international  february 2009 | fact  sheetfact sheet                      
just detention international  
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400
Fax: (213) 384-1411
East Coast Office
1025 Vermont Ave., NW,  Third Floor
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: (202) 580-6971
Fax: (202) 638-6056
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.orgEndnotesAbout Just Detention  
International (JDI)
just detention International ( JdI) is a 
human rights organization that seeks to 
end sexual abuse in all forms of detention. 
all of JdI ’s work takes place within the 
framework of international human rights 
laws and norms. The sexual assault of detain -
ees, whether committed by corrections staff 
or by inmates, is a crime and is recognized 
internationally as a form of torture.
JdI has three core goals for its work: to en -
sure government accountability for prisoner 
rape; to transform ill-informed public atti -
tudes about sexual violence in detention; and 
to promote access to resources for those who 
have survived this form of abuse.
 
JdI is concerned about the safety and well-
being of all detainees, including those held 
in adult prisons and jails, juvenile facilities, 
immigration detention centers, and police 
lock-ups, whether run by government agen -
cies or by private corporations on behalf of 
the government. 
When the government takes away someone’s 
freedom, it incurs a responsibility to pro -
tect that person’s safety. all inmates have 
the right be treated with dignity. no matter 
what crime someone has committed, sexual 
violence must never be part of the penalty.the failure to prevent sexual abuse of gay 
and transgender inmates and the failure to 
investigate instances of prisoner rape in a 
prompt and transparent manner.10 
The Human Rights Committee also com -
mended the adoption of pRea, but expressed 
concern that male officers continue to have 
full access to women’s detention quarters.11 
The Committee also noted its concern about 
widespread hate crimes committed against 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer 
(LGBTQ) individuals, including by law en -
forcement.12
The C aT Committee and the Human Rights 
Committee monitor compliance by relying 
on reports from the signatory countries and 
from advocacy groups that prepare ‘shadow 
reports.’13 To allow for more extensive prison oversight, an Optional protocol to the 
Convention against Torture (OpC aT) 
was developed. The U.S. has not yet signed 
the OpC aT, which establishes a system of 
regular visits undertaken by international and 
national bodies to places of detention in order 
to prevent torture and other forms of ill-
treatment.14 as sexual violence in detention 
rarely is reported, the additional oversight provided through the OpC aT is urgently 
needed in the U.S., to ensure a zero-tolerance 
approach to prisoner rape.15
The torture of inmates in U.S. detention 
facilities through sexual assault has long been allowed to occur with impunity. JdI calls 
on the U.S. to comply with the mandates of the C aT and the ICCpR, and to restore its 
standing as a human rights leader by ratifying the OpC aT.
1  Summary Record of the 21st meeting , U.n. eSCOR, Comm’n Hum. Rts, 48th Sess., ¶ 35, U.n. doc. e/
Cn.4/1992/SR.21 (1992).  
2  Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or degrading Treatment or punishment (“Convention 
against Torture”), G.a. Res.39/46, 39 U.n. Ga OR, 39th Sess., Supp. no. 51, at 197, U.n. doc. a/39/51 
(1984) (entered into force June 26, 1987 and ratified by the U.S. Oct. 14, 1994).3  International Covenant on Civil and political Rights, adopted dec. 16, 1966, 999 U.n.T.S. 171 (entered into 
force March 23, 1976 and ratified by the U.S. June 8, 1992).4  ICCpR, art. 7.5  Convention against Torture, art. 1.
6  For more information on the link between prisoner rape and infectious diseases, see Just detention International, 
Fact Sheet, Sexual abuse in detention is a p ublic Health Issue (2009).
7  Robert W. dumond & doris a. dumond, The Treatment of Sexual Assault Victims , in Prison  sex: Practice  
& P olicy  82 (Lynne Rienner publishers, Inc. ed., 2002); see also  Just detention International, Fact Sheet, 
Mental Health Consequences of Sexual Violence in detention (2009).8  In an academic study, funded by the California department of Corrections and Rehabilitation and conducted 
at six California men’s prisons, 67% of inmates who identified as LGBTQ reported having been sexually assaulted 
by another inmate during their incarceration. See Valerie Jenness, et al., Center for evidence Based Corrections, 
Violence in California Correctional Facilities: An Empirical Examination of Sexual Assault (2007).
9  Committee against Torture, 36th Session, Consideration of Reports Submitted by States parties under article 
19 of the Convention , CaT/C/USa/CO/2, at ¶¶ 9, 32 (citing the prison Rape elimination act, 42 U.S.C. § 
15601, et seq .).
10  Id. The concerns about sexual violence raised by the Committee against Torture are detailed further in a 
“shadow report” that Just detention International (then called Stop prisoner Rape) submitted to the Committee. 
See Stop p risoner Rape, In the Shadows: Sexual Violence in U.S. detention Facilities (2006).
11  Human Rights Committee, 87th Session, Consideration of Reports Submitted by States parties under article 
40 of the Covenant, CCpR/C/USa/CO/3/Rev.1, at ¶ 33.
12  Id. at ¶ 25. To learn more about the specific dangers of LGBTQ detainees, see Just detention International, 
Fact Sheet, LGBTQ detainees Chief Targets for Sexual abuse in detention (2009).13  as noted above, 
see endnote 10, JdI, under its former name Stop prisoner Rape, provided one such shadow 
report to the C aT Committee.  
14  Optional protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or degrading Treatment 
or punishment (“OpC aT”), G.a. Res. 57/199, U.n. doc. a/ReS/57/199 (dec. 18, 2002). To learn more about 
why the U.S. should ratify the OpC aT, see Just detention International, Fact Sheet, U.n. Optional protocol to 
the Convention against Torture (OpC aT) (2009).
15  For more information about why increased oversight is needed, see Just detention International, Fact Sheet, 
The n eed for p rison Oversight (2009).