just detention international  february 2009 | fact  sheetThe courthouse  door 
should not be barred to anyone 
that a corrections system failed 
to protect from sexual assault. 
 — The Commission on  
Safety and Abuse  
in America’s Prisons1The Prison Litigation Reform Act 
Obstructs Justice for Survivors 
of Sexual Abuse in Dententionfact sheet                                                                                       february 2009
Many prisoners who have en -
dured sexual abuse cannot 
hold corrections officials ac -
countable because of the 
Prison Litigation reform Act (PL rA), a 
federal law passed in 1996. Intended to lim -
it the number of frivolous lawsuits filed by 
inmates, the PL rA has instead greatly un -
dermined the crucial oversight role played 
by courts in addressing sexual assault and 
other constitutional violations in corrections facilities. JDI believes that congress must 
amend the PL rA as a matter of urgency. 
the PLr A’s most problematic provisions 
include:2
Exhaustion Requirement : Before filing suit, 
the PLr A requires an inmate to complete 
the facility’s internal administrative griev -
ance process; failure to do so is grounds 
for dismissal.3 While intended to provide 
corrections officials with the opportunity 
to resolve complaints without court inter -
vention, this provision has prevented scores 
of prisoner rape survivors from seeking re -
dress. Grievance procedures often impose 
filing deadlines as short as a few days, are 
inconsistently administered, and involve 
numerous confusing and unclear steps.4 An 
inmate must fully and properly navigate 
this system, even when it is clearly futile to 
do so,5 when there is a risk of retaliation by 
staff, or when there is an immediate threat 
to the inmate’s health or safety.6 
Allowing prison officials an initial oppor -
tunity to resolve a prisoner’s complaint, 
before it is brought before the courts, eases the burden on the country’s judicial system. however, the PLr A’s exhaustion require
-
ment provides an incentive for officials to 
maintain incoherent, unrealistic, and incon -
sistent grievance procedures, thereby ensur -
ing that inmates will not be able to meet the 
requirements to get into court. Moreover, 
some facilities’ procedures require that griev -
ances be submitted directly to a specific of -
ficer – without regard to whether that officer 
is implicated in the complaint. 
JDI recommends amending the PLr A’s ex -
haustion requirement so that complaints 
made outside of the chain of command for 
grievances (such as directly to a supervising 
officer, the warden, or an ombudsperson) are 
recognized. JDI also argues that, if an inmate 
did not submit a grievance before filing suit, 
the inmate and prison officials should have 
90 days to resolve the matter or the case will 
continue in court.
Physical Injury Requirement : While courts 
sometimes require that state officials take spe -
cific actions, or stop acting in a certain way, 
successful civil rights lawsuits often result in 
monetary damages as a way to compensate 
the victim and punish the wrongdoer. under 
the PLr A, however, an inmate cannot receive 
monetary damages unless she or he proves a 
“physical harm.”7 While it may seem obvious 
that sexual assault by default involves physical 
harm, some courts have held otherwise.8 JDI 
urges legislators to remove the physical injury requirement from the PLr A.
Fees for Indigent Prisoners : In most civil 
rights cases, a plaintiff who establishes poverty just detention international  february 2009 | fact  sheetfact sheet                      
just detention international  
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400
Fax: (213) 384-1411
East Coast Office
1025 Vermont Ave., NW,  Third Floor
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: (202) 580-6971
Fax: (202) 638-6056
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.orgEndnotesAbout Just Detention  
International (JDI)
just Detention International ( JDI) is a 
human rights organization that seeks to 
end sexual abuse in all forms of detention. 
All of JDI ’s work takes place within the 
framework of international human rights 
laws and norms. the sexual assault of detain -
ees, whether committed by corrections staff 
or by inmates, is a crime and is recognized 
internationally as a form of torture.
JDI has three core goals for its work: to en -
sure government accountability for prisoner 
rape; to transform ill-informed public atti -
tudes about sexual violence in detention; and 
to promote access to resources for those who 
have survived this form of abuse.
 
JDI is concerned about the safety and well-
being of all detainees, including those held 
in adult prisons and jails, juvenile facilities, 
immigration detention centers, and police 
lock-ups, whether run by government agen -
cies or by private corporations on behalf of 
the government. 
When the government takes away someone’s 
freedom, it incurs a responsibility to pro -
tect that person’s safety. All inmates have 
the right be treated with dignity. No matter 
what crime someone has committed, sexual 
violence must never be part of the penalty.does not have to pay the filing fee that is generally required to initiate a lawsuit. the 
PLr A, however, requires even indigent pris
-
oners to pay the full filing fee, which is col -
lected over time from the inmates’ accounts.9 
A prisoner who has had three lawsuits 
dismissed as “frivolous, malicious, or 
failing to state a claim on which relief 
can be granted” must pay the full filing 
fee as soon as a new complaint is filed in 
court, regardless of how much time has 
passed since the prior lawsuits and how 
meritorious the current claims are.10 the 
filing fee ranges from $350 to $450, imposing 
significant hardship on many inmates. JDI 
recommends that incarcerated litigants be 
treated the same as other litigants, and that filing fees not be used to prevent prisoners 
from seeking justice.
Application to Juvenile Detainees : the 
PLr A applies to all detainees in any type 
of corrections facility, including jails, private 
and publicly operated prisons, and juvenile 
detention facilities.11 the PLr A’s application 
to juvenile detainees is particularly troubling. 
Incarcerated youth, particularly those in 
adult prisons, are at heightened risk for 
sexual abuse, are less prone than adults to file 
lawsuits, and generally lack the sophistication 
to understand the processes associated with litigation. JDI believes that the PLr A should 
be limited to the inmates it was intended 
to target – adults in adult facilities who file 
frivolous lawsuits.
1  Confronting  Confinement , A r eport  of the Commission  on sAfety  And Abuse in AmeriCA ’s prisons  86 
(2006).
2  In addition to the provisions discussed below, the PLRA also requires judges to screen all complaints filed by 
prisoners requiring the state to respond, limits the ability of courts to monitor corrections systems with consent 
decrees, and restricts the amount of attorneys’ fees that a successful prisoner litigant can recover. More information 
about the PLRA, and current efforts to amend it, is available at http://www.savecoaltion.org (last visited Jan. 16, 
2009). 
3   42 U.S.C. § 1997e(a); see also Woodford v. Ngo , 548 u.s. 81, 89-90 (2006).
4  See, e.g., Minix v. Pazera, 2005 WL 1799538 at * 4 (N.D. Ind. July 25, 2005) (involving grievance deadline of 48 
hours).
5  See Mendez v. Herring , 2005 WL 3273555, at *2 (D. Ariz. Nov. 29, 2005) (holding that “futility” was no excuse 
for failing to exhaust, even though prison staff told the inmate that his rape could not be grieved through the 
prison’s process).
6  Jones v. Oaks Correctional Facility Health Services , 2005 WL 3312562 at *2 (W.D. Mich. Dec. 7, 2005) (stating 
that even a case that presents imminent danger of serious physical harm must be exhausted).
7   42 U.S.C. § 1997e(e).
8  See Hancock v. Payne , 2006 WL 21751 at *1, 3 (S.D. Miss. January 4, 2006) (holding that prisoners’ allegations 
that a staff member “sexually abused them by sodomy” did not qualify as a physical injury); M oya v. City of 
Albuquerque , No. 96-1257 DJS/RLP , Mem. Op. and Order (D.N.M. Nov. 17, 1997) (holding that male officers’ 
strip-searches of women prisoners did not result in physical injuries, even where one woman allegedly attempted 
suicide due to the trauma of the search).
9  28 U.S.C. § 1915(a), (b).
10  28 U.S.C. § 1915(g).
11  42 U.S.C. § 1997e(h).