1An may 17, 2012, the U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice released national 
standards1 aimed at eliminating 
sexual abuse in prisons, jails, youth deten-tion facilities, halfway houses, and police 
lock-ups. These standards were mandat-ed by the Prison Rape Elimination Act 
(PREA) of 2003. They require that correc-
tions facilities take concrete steps to pro-
tect inmates from sexual abuse – whether 
perpetrated by staff or by inmates.
2
The PREA standards affirm that it is the absolute responsibility of corrections 
agencies to protect inmates in their cus-
tody from sexual abuse. At the same time, they recognize the importance of outside 
agencies in supporting these efforts. In-
deed, under the PREA standards, cor-
rections agencies have to work with com-
munity organizations, such as rape crisis centers, to offer treatment and counseling 
to incarcerated survivors of sexual assault.
Strong partnerships between correc-
tions agencies and sexual assault service 
providers have the potential to improve 
dramatically the level of care provided to 
men, women, and children who are sexu-ally abused behind bars. 
Helping Survivors on the Inside
Sexual abuse in detention is a national  
crisis. A 2012 government study found 
that one in ten former state prisoners 
had been sexually abused during their most recent period of incarceration.
3 People who are sexually assaulted be-hind bars, like those who are abused in 
the community, suffer physical and emo-
tional pain that can persist for years.  
Despite the high levels of sexual abuse and its 
devastating impact on survivors, families, and 
communities, few corrections facilities have 
trained rape crisis counselors on staff. What’s 
more, most medical and mental health pro-fessionals working in corrections are prohib-
ited from keeping allegations of sexual abuse 
confidential. Information tends to spread fast in detention and most inmates have a 
well-founded fear of retaliation for reporting 
abuse. As a result, survivors are often reluc-
tant to seek help from corrections officials, 
especially if their abuser is a staff member. 
The PREA standards’ requirement that cor-
rections agencies partner with community organizations is central in the effort to pro-
tect inmates. By bringing community coun-
selors and advocates into detention facilities, these partnerships have the potential finally 
to break the devastating silence surrounding 
sexual violence behind bars.
According to the PREA standards, correc-
tions agencies also have to provide inmates 
with the contact information of local, state, 
and national victim service and rape crisis organizations.
4 Staff must ensure that those 
in their custody have “reasonable communi-
cation” with such organizations “in as confi-
dential a manner as possible.”5 The standards 
further require all facilities to disclose fully 
any facility rules that limit confidentiality, 
such as staff listening in on inmate calls.The Prison Rape Elimination 
Act Standards: An Overview for Community Service Providers                                                                                      june 2013
just detention international  june 2013 | fact sheet“Prisoner rape is not just a sta-
tistic for those of us who have 
lived through it — it is a life-
shattering experience. But the 
PREA standards have filled 
me with the hope that no one 
ever will have to experience 
what I went through.”
-  Frank, a survivor of sexual abuse 
at the Los Angeles County JailO
2fact sheet                     
•	Remember that the PREA standards af-
firm incarcerated survivors’ right to rape 
crisis services of the same quality as those 
available in the community. 
•	Invite local corrections officials to par-
ticipate in community sexual assault re-
sponse team (SART) meetings or other victim services coordinating committee 
gatherings. Such participation will help 
educate officials about sexual abuse, build relationships, and ensure that survivors 
receive the range of services to which 
they are entitled.
•	Think creatively about how to reach out 
to survivors in prisons, jails, and youth 
facilities: educational presentations and support groups are effective ways to let 
survivors know about your services. Re-
garding follow-up services, face-to-face meetings are always best, but sometimes 
telephone and mail are more realistic op-
tions for serving incarcerated survivors.  
•	Remember that a survivor does not lose 
the right to confidential services because 
he or she is incarcerated.Tips for AdvocatesMedical Care and Crisis Intervention
Under the PREA standards, any inmate who reports being sexually abused must 
be provided with timely, unimpeded ac-
cess to emergency medical treatment, crisis intervention services, and ongo-
ing medical and mental health care.
6  
 
The standards mandate that corrections facil-
ities develop a coordinated response to sexual abuse, including by establishing a team of 
first responders, medical and mental health 
staff, investigators, and facility leaders.
7  
This provision paves the way for community 
service providers to play a key role in caring 
for incarcerated survivors, both in the imme-
diate aftermath of a sexual assault and over 
the long term. 
Corrections facilities must offer all survi-
vors of sexual abuse a free medical forensic  
exam either on site or at a hospital. Facil-ity protocols for collecting evidence must be based on nationally recognized best practices,
8  
and exams should be performed by a quali-
fied medical professional, such as a Sex-
ual Assault Nurse Examiner (SANE).9 
The standards also require that survi-
vors have access to a victim advocate 
for emotional support, information, and  referrals at every stage of the process  
following a report, including accompaniment at the forensic medical examination and dur-ing any investigative interviews.
10 
The standards also mandate that corrections agencies provide inmates who are sexu-ally assaulted with information about, and  
access to, emergency contraception and care for possible sexually transmitted infections.
11 
Female survivors must be offered pregnancy 
tests and receive information about their 
right to lawful pregnancy-related medical services following a rape.
Consistent with providing a level of care  
to inmates that is similar to that in the 
outside community, the standards also  
require that survivors receive medical and 
mental health care and crisis interven-
tion services regardless of whether or not  
they name the abuser or file a report.
12
The PREA standards ensure that an inmate who has been sexually abused gets access to 
care and support services that are a lifeline in 
the aftermath of an assault. As such, they do more than mandate services; they send a clear 
message that all survivors of sexual assault, in-
cluding those in detention, need and deserve 
help to heal.
Endnotes
1National Standards To Prevent, Detect, and Respond to Prison Rape, 28 CFR 115, Department of Justice 
(2012), available at www.federalregister.gov/a/2012-12427.  
2The standards became binding on Bureau of Prisons facilities in August 2012; state and local facilities have 
until August 2013 to get in compliance. 
3Allen J. Beck and Candace Johnson, Sexual Victimization Reported by Former Prisoners, 2008 (Bureau of Justice 
Statistics, May 2012), 5.
4 Immigration detainees are entitled to have access to immigrant service agencies; National Standards, §115.53.
5National Standards, §115.253. Staff at juvenile facilities have to ensure that youth who report sexual abuse 
have “reasonable and confidential access” to an attorney and to their legal guardian; see National Standards,  
§115.353.
6National Standards, §§ 115.82, 115.182, 115.282, 115.382.
7Id., §§ 115.65, 115.165, 115.265, 115.365.
8Id., §§ 115.21, 115.121, 115.221, 115.321.
9If a Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner (SANE) or Sexual Assault Forensic Examiner (SAFE) is not available, 
facilities have to show that they tried to provide one, and must provide other qualified medical professionals to 
conduct the exam; see National Standards, §115.21.
10National Standards, §115.21.
12Lock-ups are exempt from this requirement.
11National Standards, §§ 115.83, 115.283, 115.383.
This project is supported by Grant No. 2011-TA-AX-K100, awarded by the Office on Violence Against Women, U.S. Department of Justice. The opinions, findings, conclusions, and recommendations expressed in this document are those of Just Detention International and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Department of Justice, Office on Violence Against Women.Headquarters
 
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010Tel:  (213) 384-1400Fax: (213) 384-1411
east Coast o ffiCe
1900 L Street NW,  Suite 601Washington, DC 20036Tel: (202) 506-3333Fax: (202) 506-7971
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.org
just detention international  june 2013 | fact sheetJust detention international   
is a health and human rights orga-
nization that seeks to end sexual abuse in all  forms of  detention.