 
 
 
The Sexual Abuse of  
Female Inmates in Ohio   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
      Stop Prisoner Rape    
 
Stop Prisoner Rape Report  
 
The Sexual Abuse of Female Inmates in 
Ohio 
 December 2003   Copyright 2003 Stop Prisoner Rape.  
Attributed reproduction of this repor t is encouraged.  
Printed in the United States of America.  
 
Cover image: The Ohio Reformatory for Women, Marysville, OH. Photo by the Ohio Department 
of Rehabilitation and Correction.  
 
Stop Prisoner Rape  
6303 Wilshire Blvd., Ste. 204  
Los Angeles, CA 90048  
Tel: (323) 653 -7867  
Fax: (323) 653 -7870  
info@spr.org  
 
Visit our website at www.spr.org  
 
To subscribe to the “Not Part of the Penalty” listserv, co -sponsored by Stop Prisoner Rape, 
Human Rights Watch, and the National Prison Project of the ACLU, visit 
http://www.topica.com/lists/notpartofthepenalty and click on “Join This List.”  
 
This report was made possible through the support of The Ford Foundation, the Fund for 
Nonviolence, and The David Rockefeller Fund, as well as the generosity of private donors.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stop Prisoner Rape is a national human rights organization that works to end sexual violence 
against men, women, and youth in all forms of detention.  
 
SPR offers hope in these three ways: by pushing for policies that ensure institution al 
accountability, by changing society’s attitudes towards prisoner rape, and by promoting access to 
resources for survivors of sexual assault behind bars.   Contents  
 
Introduction        1 
                  
Background        3 
 
The Allegations        5 
 
Media  Accounts of Sexual Abuse     7 
 
Further Investigation by SPR       8 
 
The Institutional Response in Ohio     10 
 
Conclusion        12 
 
Notes         13   
Introduction  
 
In the first decade of the twenty -first century, more women are at risk of being sexually a bused in 
American prisons than ever before. As incarceration rates for the general population have soared 
— from 750,000 incarcerated Americans in 19 85 to more than 2 million today1 — the rate for 
women has climbed even faster. In the last eight years, the  number of women in prison has 
increased by 42 perc ent, versus 27 percent for men.2  At year -end 2002, 97,491 women were 
incarcerated in federal or stat e prisons in the United States.3  
 
Once inside, many of these women are abused and traumatized by the of ficials and staff charged 
with their protection. In some women's facilities, rates of sexual abuse (typically of prisoners by 
corrections staff) have been fou nd to be as high as 27 percent.4  First -time offenders, young 
women, and mentally disabled women a re particularly vulnerable.5 In addition to the possibility of 
disease exposure that rape victims experience, female inmates have been impregnated as a 
result of staff sexual misconduct. Some of these women have then been further subjected to 
inappropriate  segregation and denial o f adequate healthcare services.6  
 
The exact extent of the problem remains unknown, as a culture of sile nce pervades the prison 
system.7 All too often, victims are too intimidated or humiliated to speak out. When rape or sexual 
abuse occurs, some corrections staff close ranks to protect the guilty among them. Administrators 
and government officials fail to hold perpetrators accountable for their actions. And an indifferent 
public looks away.  
 
For more than two decades, Stop Prisoner  Rape (SPR) has worked to end the abuse of people 
held in U.S. jails, prisons, and immigration detention centers. In its many years of work, SPR has 
found the systemic culture of silence to be remarkably persistent and widespread. In its entire 
time of exi stence, no prison employee had ever come to the organization willing to speak out 
publicly about the sexual abuse occurring inside American correctional facilities.  
 
That began to change, however, in December of 2002, when a former prison therapist named 
Tim Daniell called SPR. Until recently, he said, he had worked inside the Ohio Reformatory for 
Women (ORW), Ohio's central prison for women. While there, he had become aware of 
widespread and persistent sexual abuse of female inmates by corrections officers  and other 
prison employees.  
 
SPR investigated Daniell's claims, and in the course of doing so found still other former Ohio 
corrections employees who were willing to go on the record about the problems they had 
encountered. Mike Coffey, who spent seven y ears as a corrections officer at the Ohio 
Reformatory for Women, and his wife, Traci Douglass -Coffey, who worked at ORW as a nurse 
and health care administrator for the facility for nearly four years, both spoke candidly with SPR. 
They described a climate in which inappropriate sexual contact between staff and inmates was 
common, the punishment of inmates who reported abuse was routine, and efforts to discipline or 
prosecute staff for criminal sexual behavior were rare.  
 
These perspectives from former ORW staff are not the only cause for concern. SPR also spoke 
with women who had served time in Ohio facilities and found that they, too, described a climate of 
abuse. Inmates described a range of incidents, including violent encounters, threats and pressure 
to submit to sexual advances, trading sex for goods and favors, and relationships that were 
seemingly consensual. However, for women under near -total control of prison staff, the concept 
of “consenting” to sex is virtually meaningless (and Ohio law reflects this). The problems arising 
from this power imbalance are compounded by the past history of sexual abuse that many female 
inmates have endured.  
 
SPR learned that women who report sexual misconduct are routinely sent to solitary confinement, 
known as "the hole." This kind of isolation can be devastating in the aftermath of abuse, and the  unusually harsh conditions in the hole at ORW may compound the trauma. This use of isolation 
emboldens perpetrators who know that the practice discourages women from report ing abuse.   
 
Interviews with prison officials also suggest that institutional response to sexual assault is 
inadequate and inappropriate. Finally, the fact that 33 Ohio corrections staff members were fired 
in a single year for engaging in "inappropriate s exual activity" with prisoners8  points to a culture 
of widespread sexual abuse.  
 
In short, evidence from an unusually wide range of sources suggests that the Ohio Reformatory 
for Women has a problem with the sexual abuse of female inmates. Stop Prisoner R ape presents 
the evidence in this report in hopes that it will lead to greater scrutiny of the conditions for women 
behind bars in Ohio and a move toward much needed reform.  
  Background  
The Ohio Reformatory for Women  
 
The Ohio Reformatory for Women opene d in Marysville, Ohio in 1916. In the years since, several 
additional buildings have been erected alongside the original low stone structure, including a 
hospital, a psychiatric treatment facility, New Cottage, a unit for juveniles, and a segregation 
wing,  known as "the hole," for punishing inmates with time in solitary confinement. The complete 
facility sprawls in a 260 -acre compound surrounded by chain link fence, topped with razor wire, 
and patrolled by officers in pick -up trucks.  
 
The facility holds app roximately 1,800 inmates. While two smaller "pre -release centers" 
elsewhere in the state — the 610 -inmate Northeast Pre -release Center in Cleveland and the 465 -
inmate Franklin Pre -Release Center in Columbus — also hold prisoners, ORW is by far the 
largest correctional facility for women in Ohio. Its prisoners run the gamut from first -time inmates 
to serious offenders.  
 
What the female inmates have in common is a history of psychological trauma. A vast majority — 
95 percent according to one researcher — have  suffered sexual abus e prior to their 
incarceration.9 It is against this unfortunate backdrop that some staff members take advantage of 
their position of authority by engaging in sexual misconduct with inmates.  
 
ORW has a 271 -member security staff, and bo th male and female staff guard women. Cross -
gender guarding is prohibited under international human rights instruments, because it greatly 
increases the likeliho od of sexual abuse of inmates.10  In the United States, however, anti -
discrimination law prevent s officials from hiring only female officers for women's prisons.  
 
The Ohio state legislature provides oversight of the prison system through the Correctional 
Institution Inspection Committee (CIIC), which contains four members from the House and four 
from the Senate. Budget cuts led to the closure of the CIIC admini strative office from July 200111 
through October 2003.12 
 
 
Tim Daniell, Mike Coffey, Traci Douglass -Coffey  
 
Tim Daniell  was hired as a clinician in ORW's mental health department in 1998 at the ag e of 44. 
In 2000, he was promoted to Program Coordinator of the Intensive Prison Program, a rigorous 
boot camp -style program. In the course of his work, Daniell came to believe that a disturbing 
climate of sexual abuse existed at ORW. At first, he told him self that "the administration knew 
what was going on and was working on it."  
 
When the abusive conditions persisted, Daniell contacted his state representative, the Inspector 
General's Office, the Ohio Attorney General, and finally the Ohio Highway Patrol , charged with 
investigating criminal activity within the correctional system. Daniell says that none of the 
agencies he contacted followed up on his allegations.  
 
Instead, he learned that he was under investigation by the prison administration for improp erly 
keeping records. Investigators sealed his office with crime -scene tape and Daniell was 
transferred to a less desirable position, actions which he believes were intended as punishment 
for his attempt at whistleblowing. After a few months, he went on si ck leave, an d in August 2002 
he was fired.13   
 
Mike Coffey , 47, spent more than 20 years in the Army before retiring and coming to work as a 
corrections officer at ORW. In seven years at ORW, he witnessed a wide variety of sexual 
misconduct and a persisten t failure by administration to respond appropriately to reports of 
abuse. Discipline or prosecution of officers or staff who had sexual contact with inmates was rare, 
he said, and in some cases staff members accused of misconduct were even transferred to m ore 
desirable positions.    
Coffey was an outspoken critic of those who failed to follow the rules and abide by the law, 
making him unpopular with some members of the ORW staff and administration. He resigned 
from ORW in January 2003 for health reasons.14  
 
Traci Douglass -Coffey , 40, spent nearly four years at ORW, starting as a nurse in 1996 and 
eventually being promoted to the position of healthcare administrator. In her time at the facility, 
she tried hard to make a difference, but she was dismayed to see t hat inmates were sometimes 
just "treated like animals." She saw staff use excessive force with inmates and reported that 
inmates who were sent to the hole for reporting sexual misconduct were subjected to conditions 
that were "disgusting." Discipline for s taff and officers, on the other hand, was rare, often 
consisting of no more than paid leave. Unable to tolerate the lack of basic ethical standards at 
ORW, Douglass -Coffey resigned in July 2000.15   
  The Allegations  
Sexual Abuse and Harassment  
 
In a series  of conversations with SPR, Tim Daniell, Mike Coffey, and Traci Douglass -Coffey 
described ORW as a prison that operates amid a climate of fear, in which sexual abuse of 
prisoners by staff is commonplace.  
 
Daniell described the attitude among ORW correction s officers as one of mach ismo, swagger, 
and domination.16 He, Coffey, and Douglass -Coffey reported that staff members referred to 
inmates using derogatory terms like "hos" and "bitches."  They reported that some officers and 
staff members would abuse their authority, yell in inmates' faces, and punish them harshly for 
minor infractions.17 Coffey filed a report against one staff member for assigning nicknames to 
inmates with sexual innuendos.18   
  
The three former staff members concur that sexual misconduct by  staff occurred frequently. 
Coffey reported that sex between inmates and staff was the subject of almost daily discussion. 
Daniell said that the staff members routinely abused women inside of locked broom closets. 
Numerous staff members had keys to the clo sets, which were not under surveillance and could 
be locked from the inside. Coffey reported that staff members kept a mattress in a boiler room for 
the purpose of sexual misconduct, and he also knew of abuse taking place in the laundry room 
and closets.19   
 
Daniell also told of a female officer who frequently pulled an inmate from her cell after the 9 p.m. 
count to take her away to a secluded location. According to Daniell, a therapist within his own 
mental health department had sex with a patie nt in his o ffice.20  On another occasion, an officer 
was found to have had sex with two female inmates in the juvenile wing.  
 
Coffey witnessed an inmate wearing only underwear with an officer on the observation platform 
where inmates were not allowed. He knew of a uni t manager who received oral sex from an 
inmate in a supply room. Therapists and clergy were also sometimes involved in abuse, Coffey 
said, and he said that one therapist had a picture o f a nude inmate in his office.21  
 
Douglass -Coffey reported that "consen sual" relationships between inmates and male and female 
staff were common. Staff knew these relationships were illegal and an abuse of power, she said, 
but that did not stop the activity.22 
 
Failure to Respond Appropriately to Sexual Abuse  
 
The response at ORW to sexual misconduct and sexual assault was frequently inadequate. In 
Ohio, sex between corrections st aff and an inmate is a felony.23  Despite this legal standard, an 
individual who engaged in sexual misconduct often did not even lose his or her employ ment, 
much less face criminal prosecution, accordin g to all three whistleblowers.24   
 
Even in cases where an investigation did take place, evidence was mishandled. One investigator, 
Coffey reported, would sometimes take home and then claim to have lost for ensic evidence 
collect ed in cases of sexual assault.25   
 
Far more common than criminal prosecution were practices such as placing staff and officers  on 
paid administrative leave,26 or in more serious cases, pushing individuals to "resign under 
discipline," which meant that they lost their jobs  but did not face prosecution.27  
 
Most common, however, was the practice of simply transferring individuals suspected of 
misconduct to new positions, according to Coffey. In fact, Coffey said, the unwritten policy of 
"screw up and move up" seemed to be in effect, as staff caught engaging in inappropriate sexual 
behavior were in some cases transferre d to more desirable positions.28  
  By transferring perpetrators or quietly showing them the door, all three whistleblowers sa id, the 
Ohio Reformatory for Women demonstrated that there was lit tle risk in violating the law.29  The 
result, not surprisingly, was that, according to Coffey, ORW came to have the worst reputation of 
any facility among the Ohio corrections community. Coff ey called ORW "a bad blemish" on the 
integrity of the statewide system.30   
 
Punishment and Intimidation  
 
While ORW employees faced little discipline for misconduct, inmates who had the courage to 
report abuse were generally intimidated and subjected to so litary confinement in the hole, 
sometimes for weeks at a time, accordin g to the former staff members.31 Douglass -Coffey said 
that, in addition to enduring isolation, conditions in segregation were sometimes "disgusting," 
"dirty," and "dismal," with feces an d blood smeared on walls. For women in the hole, telephone 
and visitation privileges are restricted, outside time is reduced to short periods in a walled -in 
cage, and conversations with others are limited  to yelling through the vents.32   
 
Douglass -Coffey s aid the practice of placing inmates in segregation after they reported abuse 
was justified by the administration as an effort to protect inmates. In practice, however, the policy 
had the effect of encouraging inmates "to keep their mouths shut, " she said.33  Coffey said he 
also felt the use of segregation was intended to "harass inmates," explaining that the women 
would be left  in hole "until they'd break."34 
  Media Accounts of Sexual Abuse  
 
The allegations of Tim Daniell, Mike Coffey, and Traci Douglass -Coffey are supported by several 
years of media reports on conditions in Ohio prisons — accounts in newspapers such as The 
Columbus Dispatch, Cleveland Scene, Plain Dealer, and The Herald -Dispatch — that document a 
recurring problem with sexual abuse and sexua l misconduct behind bars throughout the state. As 
was mentioned earlier, in the last year alone, 33 staff members in the state prison system were 
fired for engaging in "inappropriate se xual activity" with prisoners.35 In August, it was reported that 
the man  responsible for investigating sexual abuse of female inmates at Ohio's Northeast Pre -
Release Center has himself faced several claims of se xual harassment by co -workers.36  
 
In July of this year, Anthony Peterson, a 40 -year-old corrections officer at the Fr anklin Pre -
Release Center, was suspended after a 26 -year-old inmate revealed that she was pregnant with 
his child. The Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and Correction reportedly waited a week after 
learning of the pregnancy before taking action, an d then suspended him with pay.37  In 2000, 28 -
year-old Sean Bannerman, a corrections officer at the Northeast Pre -Release Center, was 
charged with sexual battery for having sexual relationships with two prisoners. A fellow guard, 32 -
year-old Earl Morris, was repor tedly indicted for complicity to commit gross sexual imposition for 
helping Banner man conduct the relationships.38  
 
In 1998, a 30 -year-old inmate reportedly sued ORW after she was raped by a corrections officer 
and then punished for reporting the incident.  The victim said that an officer came into her cell at 
night, turned off the lights, and fondled her breasts. The following night he returned and raped 
her. She reported the incident an d was isolated in segregation.39   
 
County facilities in Ohio have seen problems as well. This January, two women testified at the 
trial of corrections officer Lester McNary, 35, that they had had sex with him while inmates at the 
Medina County Jail. One of the women further alleged that McNary had forced he r to have sex.40  
In 2002, corrections officer Jason Jenkins, an employee of the Lawrence County jail, was 
charged with participating in a sexual act with a prison er in a cellblock at the jail.41  
 
These news accounts reinforce SPR's concern that the crimes described by the wh istleblowers 
are a regular occurrence rather than an anomaly.  
  Further Investigation by SPR  
 
During the course of SPR's own investigation, face -to-face and telephone interviews were 
conducted with a range of individuals including prison officials, former inmates, and prison rights 
advocates. This research also confirmed many of the whistleblowers' allegations.  
 
• Prisoner Amy Hale* told SPR she was sexually assaulted at the Northeast Pre -Release 
Center in 2001 by a corrections officer who entered her cell,  hit her in the face, and raped 
her. Retaliation for reporting rape is so commonplace that, after she reported the attack, 
she was transferred for her protection to ORW. However, the staff at ORW were informed 
of what had happened. Hale reported serious ha rassment at ORW, beginning with four 
officers making comments about her, including one who said, "Oh, that's the bitch who 
told, I know her."  
 
Hale says that seven to eight male correctional officers subsequently entered her cell, put 
a towel around her ne ck, and screamed at her, saying, among other things, "Listen bitch, 
do you know we can kill you? The only person you can call on is God." The officers held 
her down on the bed, choked her, and spat in her face. Gagging, and about to pass out, 
Hale believed  that she was going to die. In the course of the assault one of Hale's fingers 
was dislocated.  
 
After the incident, Hale told SPR, staff continued to harass her, joking about the fact that 
she was afraid, and that she had begged for her life while being a ttacked.  
 
• Former inmate Michelle Baker, who was incarcerated at ORW from 1995 to 2000, told 
SPR that corrections staff members regularly traded make -up, perfume, and fast food for 
sex. She said that if family members complained to the Highway Patrol abou t an inmate's 
sexual abuse, the inmate would be locked up incommunicado in the hole, stripped of 
basic privileges, and forbidden to talk to anyone inside or outside of the prison.  
 
• Marjorie Simmons,* who served nine years at ORW, also told SPR that corre ctions 
officers in the prison routinely exchanged favors for sex. She also reported that prisoners 
who complained of sexual abuse were sent to the hole, and described it as noisy and 
dirty with no heat, a place where prisoners were served cold food and wer e allowed to 
shower only once every two or three days. Simmons said staff would also retaliate 
against inmates by "tearing up your room" or "making restrictions" on an arbitrary basis. 
Simmons described the atmosphere as a climate of fear where some staff members 
make inmates' lives "a living hell."  
 
• In Ohio, state law forbids sexual relations between prisoners and corrections employees, 
and sexual battery is a third -degree felony punishable by one to five years in prison and a 
$10,000 fine. Criminal pro secution of ORW staff members, however, has been rare, 
despite the firing of dozens of correctional employees for inappropriate sexual activity.42  
One result of this approach is that the details of most investigations into sexual abuse are 
not matters of p ublic record. Those cases which do go to trial, however, offer an 
illuminating insight into the circumstances of prison sexual abuse.  
 
On January 17, 2001, 21 -year-old Katherine Kershaw* alleged to prison officials that five 
days earlier she had been alone  cleaning a hallway in the juvenile wing at ORW when a 
corrections officer named Jerome Willis told her to come with him into an empty cell, 
where he put her in a headlock, covered her mouth, and raped her. Kershaw's shoulder 
hurt from being pinned, and sh e bled vaginally for four days.  
  
Soon after Kershaw made her complaint, another inmate reported that she had seen 
Willis having sex with prisoner Alicia Burnett* in a shower area within the juvenile wing. 
When investigators questioned Burnett, she initia lly denied having intercourse with Willis,  and only after failing a polygraph test finally admitted that she had lied because she was 
afraid that friends of Willis would harm her if she told the truth.  
 
Willis was arrested, and charged with four counts of sexual battery. One of those counts 
was ultimately dismissed, and Willis was found no t guilty of the other charges.43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Names of some inmates have been changed.   The Institutional Response  
A Problem of Deni al 
 
As other human rights groups have noted, a contributing factor to the pervasiveness of sexual 
abuse behind bars is the tendency of officials to  deny that the problem exists.44  In Ohio, this 
culture of silence and denial is conspicuous.  
 
The director o f the Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and Correction, Reginald Wilkinson, has 
repeatedly made public statements denying that any problem exists and discouraging 
suggestions for reform. In December of 2002, Wilkinson published an op -ed piece in The 
Cincin nati Enquirer specifically to argue that federal legislation to prevent prisoner rape should 
not be passed. Wilkinson wrote that he believes data on sexual assault in prison to be "highly 
exaggerated" and based on "disingenuous data  (self reporting)."45   
 
In July, after the United States House and Senate unanimously passed the Prison Rape 
Elimination Act of 2003, the legislation Wilkinson had opposed, Wilkinson told The Washington 
Post that the idea that rape occurs commonly in pris on is "a flat -out lie."46  He also told National 
Public Radio's All Things Considered that "We know, I know that [the incidence of sexual abuse] 
is nowhere near what the legisl ation characterized it to be."47  
 
Wilkinson did not offer any evidence to support these claims. Objective,  university -led social 
science data on this issue, however, contradicts his assertions. Cindy Struckman -Johnson of the 
University of South Dakota investigated sexual abuse of female prisoners in Midwestern facilities 
and found that in one facility, 27% of inmates had experienced a coerced sexual incident. Even in 
the best -performing facility, Struckman -Johnson found, 7% of inmates ha d experienced sexual 
coercion.48   
 
Wilkinson is the director of the sixth -largest prison system in the country and serves as t he 
president of the Association of State Correctional Administrators. His dismissive attitude is one of 
the most irresponsible positions an American corrections official has publicly asserted on the 
issue of sexual assault behind bars in recent memory, and  it sends a message to Ohio 
corrections staff members that abuse can be committed with impunity.  
 
On an operational level, aspects of Ohio's correctional system are also disturbing.  In the course 
of its investigation into the whistleblowers’ allegations,  SPR interviewed ORW Warden Deborah 
Timmerman -Cooper and Toni Brooks, the North Regional Director of the Ohio Department of 
Rehabilitation and Correction. Timmerman -Cooper confirmed that prisoners who complained of 
sexual abuse were transferred to segregat ion, losing their privileges while there. She justified this 
policy by saying that it was necessary in order to protect the inmate while officials investigated the 
incident, but could not explain why those inmates should be stripped of basic privileges and  
locked in isolation for 23 hours a day.  
 
Timmerman -Cooper and Brooks told SPR that sexual misconduct is handled properly at ORW. 
But their claims often contradicted the experience of the staff members who worked there. For 
example, Timmerman -Cooper assert ed that women who report sexual abuse are routinely 
provided with a medical exam, even if time has passed since the incident.49  But Douglass -Coffey 
said that no inmates to her knowledge were sent to the medical staff for such exams during her 
four years as  a nurse  and healthcare administrator.50   
 
SPR also asked why the prison buildings had closets with lockable, solid doors, since these 
provide ready venues for sexual abuse. The warden at first contended that locked doors on 
closets aren't a problem. Later  in the conversation, however, she admitted that the administration 
had considered replacing solid doors with barred gates, but that the fire marshal had rejected the 
idea. Timmerman -Cooper confirmed that there are no security camer as in or near utility cl osets.51  
 
Brooks and Timmerman -Cooper claimed that the Highway Patrol is routinely called as outside law 
enforcement in cases of sexual misconduct.52 This, too, runs counter to the assertions by former  staff and inmates who agree that it was virtually unhea rd of for ORW officials to treat the sexual 
abuse of the women in their care as a crime.  
  Conclusion  
 
In summary, SPR has found extensive and credible evidence that an environment consistently 
conducive to sexual abuse exists at the Ohio Reformatory for W omen and that a pattern of abuse 
may exist at other Ohio women's facilities. ORW does have some procedures in place to respond 
to abuse. However, these procedures are inadequate, counterproductive, and in some cases 
cruel.  
 
The isolation and punishment of inmates who report sexual assault is a practice that punishes 
victims and encourages staff misconduct. In Ohio, it is a policy that has fostered a climate of 
abuse and intimidation and undercut respect for human rights. Buildings that are not designed for 
safe operation are also an invitation to sexual assault, as are administrative attitudes that foster 
indifference and denial.  
 
The decision of Tim Daniell, Mike Coffey, and Traci Douglass -Coffey to come forward about the 
abuse they witnessed has helped sh ed light on these attitudes and practices. It has also provided 
internal corroboration of a problem that has been suggested by years of news accounts 
describing rape, sexual assault, and inappropriate segregation. While Ohio prison officials are on 
record denying the existence of a problem, we hope that the incidents recounted in this report will 
encourage greater scrutiny of that claim and a movement toward substantive reform.   Notes  
 
                                                   1 Fox Butterfield, Study Finds 2.6% Increase in U.S. Priso n Population, N.Y. TIMES, July 28, 
2003.  2 Press Release, U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, U.S. Prison Population 
Rises 2.6 Percent During 2002 (July 27, 2003), at 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/pressreleases/BJS03114.htm (last visited Aug . 13, 2003).  3 Id. 4 Cindy Struckman -Johnson & David Struckman -Johnson, Sexual Coercion Reported by Women 
in Three Midwestern Prisons, 39 J. SEX RESEARCH 3, 5 (August 2002), available at 
http://www.spr.org/pdf/Struckman021.pdf.  5 NOWHERE TO HIDE: RETALIATI ON AGAINST WOMEN IN MICHIGAN STATE PRISONS 
(Human Rights Watch), 1998, available at http://www.hrw.org/reports98/women/#TopOfPage . 6 See, e.g., Joanne Wasserman, Prison Rapes 'Routine,' NEW YOR K DAILY NEWS, Jan. 28, 
2003, available at http://www.spr.org/en/news/2003/0128.html; Abuse of Power in Prison, 
MILWAUKEE JOURNAL SENTINEL, Feb. 3, 2003, available at 
http://www.spr.org/en/news/2003/0203.html.  7 Kevin Hoffman, Authority Problem: Guards are Finding Romance at the City's Women's Prison. 
That's Not a Good Thing, SCENE, Mar. 12, 2003 (In Ohio, Bennie Kelly, warden of the Northeast 
Pre-Release Center, was quoted as saying "There's a code of silence with the union." Asked 
whether that meant that o fficers cover up crimes for each other, he replied, "I do believe that they 
support each other").  8 Inmate's Pregnancy Investigated; Officer Placed on Leave, COLUMBUS DISPATCH, July 22, 
2003 [hereinafter Dispatch].  9 Criminal Activity Linked to Abuse in Wo men's Past, COLUMBUS DISPATCH, Mar. 26, 2000.  10 The United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners specify that 
"Women prisoners shall be attended only by women officers" and that "No male member of the 
staff shale enter the part of t he institution set aside for women unless accompanied by a woman 
officer." Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, adopted 31 July 1957, 
U.N.E.S.C. Res. 663 C (XXIV), available at http://www.unhchr.ch/html/menu3/b/h_comp34.htm.  11 Press Relea se, Correctional Institution Inspection Committee, Elimination of Funding for the 
Office of the CIIC (June 29, 2001), at http://www.ciic.state.oh.us/statusletter.htm (last visited Aug. 
13, 2003).  12 Press Release, Correctional Institution Inspection Committ ee, Reopening of the Correctional 
Institutions Inspection Committee  (Oct. 15, 2003), at http://www.ciic.state.oh.us/restartmemo.pdf 
(last visited Oct. 30, 2003).  13 Interview with Tim Daniell, former prison therapist, Ohio Reformatory for Women, in Columbu s, 
OH (Feb. 9, 2003) [hereinafter Daniell].  14 Telephone interview with Mike Coffey, former corrections officer, Ohio Reformatory for Women 
(Nov. 20, 2003) [hereinafter Coffey].  15 Telephone interview with Traci Douglass -Coffey, former health care administra tor, Ohio 
Reformatory for Women (Nov. 25, 2003) [hereinafter Douglass -Coffey].  16 Daniell, supra note 13.  17 Daniell, supra note 13; Coffey, supra note 14; Douglass -Coffey, supra note 15.  18 Coffey, supra note 14.  19 Daniell, supra note 13; Coffey, supra note 14; Douglass -Coffey, supra note 15.  20 Daniell, supra note 13.  21 Coffey, supra note 14.  22 Douglass -Coffey, supra note 15.  23 Ohio Rev. Code Ann. §2907.03 (2003).  24 Daniell, supra note 13; Coffey, supra note 14; Douglass -Coffey, supra note 15.  25 Daniell, supr a note 13; Coffey, supra note 14.  26 Douglass -Coffey, supra note 15.  27 Daniell, supra note 13.  28 Coffey, supra note 14.  29 Daniell, supra note 13; Coffey, supra note 14; Douglass -Coffey, supra note 15.  30 Coffey, supra note 14.                                                                                                                                                          31 Coffey, supra note 14; Dougla ss-Coffey, supra note 15.  32 Coffey, supra note 14; Douglass -Coffey, supra note 15.  33 Douglass -Coffey, supra note 15.  34 Coffey, supra note 14; Douglass -Coffey, supra note 15.  35 Dispatch, supra note 8.  36 Kevin Hoffman, Fox in the Jailhouse? A Sex -Abuse Inves tigator is Investigated for … Sexual 
Harassment, SCENE, Aug. 6, 2003.  37 Penny Moore, Corrections Officer Failed to Report His '01 Arrest, COLUMBUS DISPATCH, 
July 25, 2003.  38 Women's Prison Guards Charged; One Allegedly Had Sex With Inmates, PLAIN DEALER, 
Mar. 9, 2000.  39 Woman Sues Prison, Says That Guard Raped Her, PLAIN DEALER, Oct. 9, 1998.  40 Women Testify in Sex Trial, PLAIN DEALER, Jan. 9, 2003.  41 Corrections Officer Indicted in Sexual Battery of Inmate, THE HERALD -DISPATCH, Apr. 11, 
2002.  42 Dispatch, s upra note 8.  43 Ohio State Highway Patrol, Report of Investigation, Case No. 01 -00624 -0500 (Jan. 17, 2000).  44 See Human Rights Watch, ALL TOO FAMILIAR: SEXUAL ABUSE OF WOMEN IN U.S. 
STATE PRISONS, December 1996, available at http://hrw.org/reports/1996/Us1. htm#_1_2.  45 Reginald Wilkinson, Federal Prison Rape Law is Not Needed, THE CINCINNATI ENQUIRER, 
Dec. 26, 2002.  46 Neely Tucker, Reform Plan Targets Prison Rape, THE WASHINGTON POST, July 26, 2003, 
available at http://www.spr.org/en/news/2003/0726.html.  47 Wendy Kaufman, Profile: Efforts to Define and End Prison Rape, All Things Considered, 
National Public Radio, Oct. 29, 2003, available at http://www.spr.org/en/sprnews/2003/1029.html.  48 Struckman -Johnson & Struckman -Johnson, supra note 4, at 5.  49 Interview wi th Deborah Timmerman -Cooper, Warden, Ohio Reformatory for Women, in 
Columbus, OH (Feb. 10, 2003) [hereinafter Timmerman -Cooper].  50 Douglass -Coffey, supra note 15.  51 Timmerman -Cooper, supra note 49.  52 Interview with Toni Brooks, North Regional Director, Ohi o Department of Rehabilitation and 
Correction, in Columbus, OH (Feb. 10, 2003); Timmerman -Cooper, supra note 49.  