1When the government takes 
away someone’s freedom, it 
takes on an absolute responsi-
bility to keep that person safe. 
Yet U.S. prisons and jails are plagued by 
sexual violence. According to the Bureau 
of Justice Statistics, roughly 200,000 in-
mates were sexually abused in 2012 alone. 
Despite widespread belief to the contrary, 
detention facilities can end sexual violence 
within their walls. In May 2012, the De-partment of Justice released national stan-
dards to address this abuse. These land-
mark standards – mandated by the Prison 
Rape Elimination Act (PREA) of 2003 
– are an important human rights tool that lay out concrete, commonsense steps for 
detention facilities to keep inmates safe. 
Taken as a whole, the PREA standards aim 
to stimulate corrections culture change, 
creating prison environments where every report of sexual abuse is taken seriously 
and every inmate is treated with dignity 
and respect.
Key PREA Provisions:
•	Inmate	 education. Inmate education 
plays a crucial role in promoting a safe 
environment and raising awareness 
among inmates. The standards, therefore,  
require facilities to train inmates on 
their right to be free from sexual  
abuse, how to report abuse, and how to get help in the aftermath of an assault.
•	Partnerships	 with	local	organizations. 	
Community-based providers have the potential to deliver quality crisis counsel-ing and health services to people who are 
locked up. Yet historically inmates have not had access to this care. The PREA 
standards insist that prisons and jails work 
with outside service providers, paving the 
way for prisoner rape survivors to get the 
same level of care as rape survivors in the community.   
•	Staff	training. 	 The safest U.S. detention 
facilities have committed leaders and staff  
members who are trained on sexual abuse 
prevention and response. Accordingly,  
the PREA standards prioritize staff train-
ing, with an emphasis on how to protect 
vulnerable inmates. 
•	Safe	housing	 for	inmates. 	 By screen-
ing new inmates for known risk factors 
such as prior sexual abuse, prisons and 
jails can reduce drastically the incidence of rape. The PREA standards state that 
all detention facilities must assess an  
inmate’s likelihood for being abused –  
or for being abusive – before making  
housing decisions. 
•	Protections	 for	transgender	 inmates. 	
In nearly all U.S. detention facilities,  
inmates are housed based on their birth gender – a policy that has left transgen-
der inmates extremely vulnerable to sexual  
abuse and harassment, as transgender  
women nearly always are housed in men’s  
facilities. Under the PREA standards,  
facilities must take into account how best to ensure a transgender inmate’s health and safety – and not just genital status – in 
making housing decisions. How Detention Facilities Can  
Stop Sexual Abuse Behind Bars                                                                                      september 2013
just detention international  SEPTEMBER 2013 | fact sheetW•	Cross-gender	 pat-down	 searches	 and	
viewing. 	 A significant number of inmates 
report being sexually abused or harassed 
during cross-gender pat-down searches or while showering. The standards ban cross-
gender pat-downs of women inmates – but 
not of male inmates. 
•	Zero	 tolerance. Detention facilities are 
often closed, secretive institutions where 
abuse and harassment flourish, while  
reporting is discouraged, or even punished. 
The PREA standards require that every 
facility develop a written policy affirm-
ing its zero tolerance for sexual abuse and  
harassment. 
Headquarters  
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010Tel:  (213) 384-1400Fax: (213) 384-1411
east Coast o ffiCe
1900 L Street NW,  Suite 601Washington, DC 20036Tel: (202) 506-3333Fax: (202) 506-7971
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.orgJust detention international   
is a health and human rights organi-
zation that seeks to end sexual abuse in all  forms of  detention.