just detention international  february 2009  | fact  sheetThe protection  of 
persons deprived of their 
liberty against torture and 
other cruel, inhuman or degrading 
treatment or punishment can be 
strengthened by non-judicial means 
of a preventive nature, based on 
regular visits to places of detention.
 — Preamble, Optional Protocol 
to the Convention Against 
Torture and Other Cruel,  
Inhuman or Degrading  
Treatment or PunishmentU.N. Optional Protocol to the 
Convention Against Torturefact sheet                                                                                      february 2009
There is growing   recogni -
tion internationally that prisons 
and jails must be transparent, 
have strong internal accountabil -
ity mechanisms, and be open for external 
monitoring. compared to canada, the eu-
ropean Union, and south Africa, for exam -
ple, the U.s. is lagging dangerously behind 
in allowing the vigorous scrutiny needed to protect inmates from abuse. in particular, 
the U.s. has not signed the optional pro
-
tocol to the convention Against torture 
(opc At),1 which requires establishing an 
independent, national body that conducts 
regular visits to prisons and other correc -
tions settings with the aim of preventing 
torture. 
Unlike other international treaties, 2 the 
opc At focuses on preventing torture, 
rather than responding to abuses that 
have occurred.3 it also establishes a 
collaborative approach to monitoring 
whereby international and domestic 
entities visit detention facilities and 
confidentially propose recommendations to 
better prevent torture, without the public 
shaming component common in human 
rights instruments.4 
the opc At does not impose new 
obligations on ratifying states, but instead 
creates a system for monitoring the 
requirements already in place through the convention Against torture. By ratifying 
the opc At, the U.s. would give consent 
for the U.n. subcommittee on prevention 
of torture (spt ) and a national preventive 
mechanism (npM) to conduct regular, periodic visits to places of detention. in addition to inspecting facilities, these 
visitors have the right to interview any 
detainee, with or without witnesses, and 
have access to records, rules, and other 
relevant documents.5 
the spt is composed of ten experts from 
a variety of professional backgrounds and 
nationalities who conduct scheduled visits 
to detention facilities and provide assistance and advice in developing each npM.
6 the 
npM is established by the signatory and 
can be designed in whatever manner best 
suits the needs and capacity of that country, 
so long as it is independent and capable of 
conducting regular visits and providing 
recommendations.7 Unlike the spt, the 
npM is also empowered to propose or 
comment on draft legislation.8 
the federalist structure of the United states – whereby federal, state, and local 
jurisdictions each retain governmental 
powers and run their own detention facilities 
– creates unique challenges to establishing an npM. however, the opc At 
provides for flexibility in how the npM 
is developed, including relying on human 
rights commissions, ombudspersons, non-
governmental organizations, or composite 
mechanisms combining elements of such 
entities.9 several countries with federalist 
or decentralized governmental structures, such as Mexico, the United Kingdom, south 
Africa, Argentina, and switzerland have 
already ratified or signed the opc At.
10
ratifying the opc At, and establishing 
an npM to provide domestic oversight, 
would help restore the moral authority of just detention international  february 2009 | fact  sheetfact sheet                      
Endnotes
1  optional protocol to the convention Against torture and other cruel, inhuman or 
Degrading treatment or punishment (“opc At”), g.A. res. 57/199, U.n. Doc. A/
res/57/199 (Dec. 18, 2002).
2   the U.s. is a party to the convention Against torture and other cruel, inhuman or 
Degrading treatment or punishment, g.A. res.39/46, 39 U.n. gAor, 39th sess., supp. no. 
51, at 197, U.n. Doc. A/39/51 (1984) (entered into force June 26, 1987 and ratified by the U.s. 
oct. 14, 1994), and the international covenant on civil and political rights, adopted Dec. 16, 
1966, 999 U.n.t .s. 171 (entered into force March 23, 1976 and ratified by the U.s. June 8, 
1992).  to learn more about these treaties and their relevance to sexual violence in detention, 
see Just Detention international, Fact s heet, s exual Violence in Detention is torture (2009).
3    Inter -Amer IcAn Inst Itute  of HumAn  rIgH ts And tHe AssocIA tIon for tHe Prevent Ion 
of torture , oPtIon Al Protocol  to tHe unIted nAtIons convent Ion AgAInst  torture  
And otHer  cruel , InHumAn  And degr AdIng  treA tment  or PunIsHment : A mAnu Al for 
Prevent Ion 28 (2005) (hereinafter “ oPc At m Anu Al”).
4   Id.
5   opc At, Arts. 14, 20.
6   opc At, Arts. 5, 11.
7   opc At, Arts. 17, 18.
8   opc At, Art. 19(c).
9   oPc At m Anu Al, supra note 3,   at 133.
10  Association for the prevention of torture, implementation of the optional protocol to the 
convention against torture and other cruel, inhuman or Degrading treatment or punishment 
(opc At) in Federal and other Decentralized states, Discussion paper for the international 
seminar “ the optional protocol to the Un convention against torture and Federal states: 
challenges and p ossible s olutions” 3 (2008).
11  See, e.g., Bob woodward, Detainee Tortured, Says U.S. Official, WAsH. Post, Jan. 14, 2009, at 
A1; eric Lichtblau & scott shane, Report Details Dissent on Guantánamo Tactics, n.Y. times, 
May 21, 2008; s eymour hirsch,  Torture at Abu Ghraib, tHe neW Yorker , May 10, 2004.
12  to learn more about the need for external oversight generally, see Just Detention international, 
Fact s heet, the n eed for p rison o versight (2009).About Just Detention  
International (JDI)
Just Detention international ( JDi) is a 
human rights organization that seeks to 
end sexual abuse in all forms of detention. 
All of JDi ’s work takes place within the 
framework of international human rights 
laws and norms. the sexual assault of detain -
ees, whether committed by corrections staff 
or by inmates, is a crime and is recognized 
internationally as a form of torture.
JDi has three core goals for its work: to en -
sure government accountability for prisoner 
rape; to transform ill-informed public atti -
tudes about sexual violence in detention; and 
to promote access to resources for those who 
have survived this form of abuse.
 
JDi is concerned about the safety and well-
being of all detainees, including those held 
in adult prisons and jails, juvenile facilities, 
immigration detention centers, and police 
lock-ups, whether run by government agen -
cies or by private corporations on behalf of 
the government. when the government takes away someone’s 
freedom, it incurs a responsibility to pro -
tect that person’s safety. All inmates have 
the right be treated with dignity. no matter 
what crime someone has committed, sexual 
violence must never be part of the penalty.
Just detention international  
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400
Fax: (213) 384-1411
East Coast Office
1025 Vermont Ave., NW,  Third Floor
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: (202) 580-6971
Fax: (202) 638-6056
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.orgthe U.s. and constitute a key step forward 
in the effort to end sexual violence and other forms of abuse in U.s. detention 
facilities. over the past few years, the U.s. 
has come under increased scrutiny for its 
mistreatment of detainees abroad, including 
the sexual degradation of inmates.11 sadly, 
sexual violence remains rampant in domestic 
facilities – and incarcerated survivors rarely 
have safe options for reporting their abuse.
sexual violence and other forms of torture 
in U.s. detention are able to flourish in large 
part because detention facilities are subject 
to little to no external oversight. while some 
jurisdictions provide for external monitoring by an inspector general or ombudsperson, in 
most systems complaints of abuse and policy 
reviews are handled internally.12 As a result, 
even in the most dangerous facilities, inmate 
accounts of abuse are habitually ignored and 
officers are encouraged to retain the status 
quo. 
ratification of the opc At would improve 
prison transparency and accountability, both 
of which are significantly lacking and urgently 
needed in U.s. detention facilities. external 
monitoring by an international entity and 
a mandated domestic body would make 
facilities safer for detainees and staff alike by 
preventing sexual and other forms of abuse. 