just detention international  february 2009  | fact  sheetGetting raped 
destroys you from the inside 
out, and it takes a part of 
you and puts it where you can’t  
reach it.
 — Christopher,
survivor of sexual 
violence in detention1Mental Health Consequences  
of Sexual Violence in Detentionfact sheet                                                                                      february 2009
Sexual violence  is dev -
astating in any setting; survivors 
healing from such abuse in de -
tention face extreme challenges. 
an urgent lack of confidential counseling, 
high rates of violence and infectious dis -
eases in corrections facilities, and restric -
tions posed by incarceration cause many 
prisoner rape survivors to suffer in silence.  
in the short term, survivors of sexual violence 
often experience guilt, shame, fear, anxiety, 
tension, an exaggerated startle response, 
depression, anger, impaired memory and 
concentration, and/or rapid mood swings.2 
For many survivors, sleeping and eating 
patterns are negatively affected, along with 
the ability to complete every-day tasks. in the absence of adequate mental health 
counseling in the wake of a sexual assault, 
incarcerated survivors are at high risk 
for developing long-term psychological 
problems, such as post-traumatic stress 
disorder ( ptSd), depression, addiction, 
and suicidal ideation.3 prisoners who suffer 
multiple assaults and/or are under the long-
term control of a perpetrator or group of perpetrators may develop complex ptSd 
– severe psychological harm stemming 
from prolonged, repeated trauma.4
the long-term impact of an assault is 
significantly affected by the extent to 
which an individual has support from 
loved ones or professionals, prior incidents 
of trauma, pre-assault coping mechanisms, and pre-existing mental illness. inmates 
frequently lack a support system, have 
often experienced childhood sexual abuse, and suffer mental illness at much higher 
rates than the general population,5 making 
them especially vulnerable to serious post-
rape trauma. 
Many prisoners who report a sexual assault 
are subjected to insensitive questioning 
soon after the attack. Some corrections 
staff respond to requests for help with 
indifference and jokes. Such inappropriate 
reactions can cause inmates to suffer so-
called “second rape,” with an emotional 
impact equal to that of the sexual assault.6 
to make matters worse, survivors of sexual 
violence behind bars have access only to 
scant, if any, mental health counseling. psychiatrist terry Kupers, an expert on 
mental health behind bars, explains that, “[b]ecause ptSd is not on the correction 
department’s list of ‘major mental 
illnesses,’ … it is often wrongly treated as 
undeserving of urgent attention.”7
to the extent that any post-trauma 
counseling is available, it is usually neither confidential nor safe. counseling sessions 
often occur in view or earshot of corrections 
officials, who may have participated or 
acquiesced in the assault. Moreover, once 
an inmate shares information about being 
attacked, the counselor is obliged to report the abuse to prison administrators. as a 
result, a prisoner seeking mental health 
assistance becomes a “snitch,” risking 
serious retaliation from the perpetrator of the assault, and possibly others. not 
surprisingly, experts nationwide agree that 
prisoner rape is one of the nation’s most 
seriously under-reported crimes.8just detention international  february 2009 | fact  sheetfact sheet                      
Endnotes
1  this survivor’s first-hand account of his experience is posted on Just detention international’s 
website at http://www.justdetention.org/en/survivortestimony/stories/christopher_tx.aspx.
2  Judith  herman , trauma  and recovery : the aftermath  of violence  from  domestic  
abuse to Political  terror  (1997) ; Jenny petrak, The Psychological Impact of Sexual Assault in 
the trauma  of  sexual  assault : treatment , Prevention  and Practice   19 ( Jenny petrak 
& Barbara Hedge, eds., 2002).
3  Jessica Hamblen, What is ptSd? a Handout From the national center For ptSd , available 
on-line at  http://www.ncptsd.va.gov/ncmain/ncdocs/handouts/handout_What%20is%20ptSd .
pdf (last visited February 5, 2009).
4  herman , supra note 2.
5  approximately 11 percent of the general population have the symptoms of a mental disorder, 
compared with 40 percent of jail inmates and 30 percent of prisoners. See doris J. J ames  & 
lauren  e. G laze , bureau  of Justice  statistics , mental  health  Problems  of Prison  
and Jail inmates  3 (2006).
6  aPhrodite  matsakis , i c an’t Get over it 90-91 (1996).
7  terry a. Kupers, Mental Health in Men’s Prisons, in Prison  masculinities  194 ( don Sabo, 
terry a. Kupers, & Willie l ondon, eds., 2001).
8  terry a. Kupers, Rape and the Prison Code, in Prison  masculinities  111-17 ( don Sabo, 
terry a. Kupers, & Willie l ondon, eds., 2001).
9  in 2004, H iv prevalence inside prisons was more than four times higher than in american 
society overall. See Susan okie, Sex, Drugs, Prisons and HIV , 356 new enG. J. med. 105 (2007). 
For more information, see Just detention international, Fact Sheet, Sexual abuse in detention 
is a p ublic Health issue (2009).About Just Detention  
International (JDI)
Just detention international ( Jdi) is a 
human rights organization that seeks to 
end sexual abuse in all forms of detention. 
all of Jdi ’s work takes place within the 
framework of international human rights 
laws and norms. the sexual assault of detain -
ees, whether committed by corrections staff 
or by inmates, is a crime and is recognized 
internationally as a form of torture.
Jdi has three core goals for its work: to en -
sure government accountability for prisoner 
rape; to transform ill-informed public atti -
tudes about sexual violence in detention; and 
to promote access to resources for those who 
have survived this form of abuse.
 
Jdi is concerned about the safety and well-
being of all detainees, including those held 
in adult prisons and jails, juvenile facilities, 
immigration detention centers, and police 
lock-ups, whether run by government agen -
cies or by private corporations on behalf of 
the government. 
When the government takes away someone’s 
freedom, it incurs a responsibility to pro -
tect that person’s safety. all inmates have 
the right be treated with dignity. no matter 
what crime someone has committed, sexual 
violence must never be part of the penalty.
Just detention international  
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400
Fax: (213) 384-1411
East Coast Office
1025 Vermont Ave., NW,  Third Floor
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: (202) 580-6971
Fax: (202) 638-6056
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.orgthe restrictions that form part of incarceration 
tend to make the stress of a sexual assault 
more acute. incarcerated survivors are unable 
to move about freely, lack privacy, and 
may have to share living quarters with the perpetrator. they cannot control the aspects 
of their environment to which most survivors 
are sensitive, such as noise, light, and crowds. communication with safe support systems 
— such as family on the outside — may be 
nonexistent or at the very least difficult.
prisoner rape survivors are also at grave 
risk for contracting H iv and other sexually 
transmitted diseases.9 in some states, H iv 
testing is only available if an inmate files a 
formal report detailing the abuse. Whether in prison or in the community, sex -
ual assault is a traumatizing event. However, 
corrections systems could respond better to 
sexual violence in their facilities by providing 
all inmates with access to confidential rape 
crisis counseling, comprehensive testing and 
treatment for sexually transmitted diseases, 
and housing options that protect survivors 
from perpetrators without limiting their ac -
cess to programmatic and rehabilitative ser -
vices. in addition to offering much needed care in 
the aftermath of an assault, such mechanisms 
would encourage inmates to speak out about 
the abuses they experience, without fear of re -
taliation and further abuse.