fact sheet  for advocates                                                                                       october  2018
The Very Basics about Sexual Abuse 
in Detention
U.S. detention facilities are plagued by 
sexual abuse. Every year, a staggering 
200,000 adults and children are sexually 
abused behind bars. The majority of 
survivors are abused not once, but again 
and again. About half of all assaults are 
committed by staff — the very people whose 
job it is to keep inmates safe. But prisoner 
rape is not an inevitable part of incarceration. 
On the contrary, when corrections leaders 
embrace safe practices and hold perpetrators 
accountable, this violence can be stopped.   
The Nature of Sexual Abuse Behind Bars  
Sexual abuse in detention occurs in all 
types of detention facilities — including 
adult prisons and jails; juvenile detention 
facilities; police lockups and short-term 
holding cells; and halfway houses. Both 
men’s and women’s facilities are afflicted by 
this violence; as are facilities for boys and 
for girls. Staff abuse occurs with alarming 
frequency in all facilities, but especially in 
youth detention; an astonishing 80 percent 
of all sexual abuse in juvenile detention 
facilities is perpetrated by staff.1 While staff 
sexual misconduct represents the ultimate corrections failure, it is the responsibility 
of officials to prevent any sexual violence in 
their institution.  
As in the community, sexual abuse and 
harassment behind bars includes a range 
of behaviors, from rape and abusive pat 
searches to derogatory language about 
a person’s gender or sexual orientation. 
Fundamentally, all forms of this violence are 
about exerting dominance over someone 
else. While consensual relationships 
between inmates do exist — though they are 
against the rules — inmates cannot consent 
to sexual activity with staff; any time a staff 
member has sexual contact with an inmate, 
it is abuse. Staff have total control over the 
people in their custody and, further skewing 
the power dynamic, many prisoners live with 
extreme deprivation. Some staff predators 
take advantage of this imbalance by 
demanding sex in return for basic items that 
are scarce in detention.  
The power differential is even more extreme 
in juvenile detention. Staff abusers often 
“groom” potential victims, attempting to 
gain their trust by asking for or sharing 
1 just detention international  october 2018  | fact  sheet2fact sheet  for advocates                                      
overly personal information and crossing 
appropriate professional boundaries.  Nearly 
one in three youth who were victimized by 
staff said that their abuser had given them a 
gift prior to the assault; about half said that 
their abuser sent them personal letters 
and photos.    
In both adult and youth facilities, the vast 
majority of sexual abuse goes unreported. 
Many survivors choose not to come forward 
because they fear that nothing will be done 
or that no one will believe them — especially 
when the perpetrator is a member of staff. 
It can also be extremely dangerous to report 
abuse. Retaliation is widespread, and 
prisoners who are labeled “snitches” are 
often targeted, by staff and by other inmates, 
for further abuse. While some facilities are 
starting to provide safe, confidential ways 
to report, speaking out remains risky. In 
many facilities, the default response to an 
allegation is to place the survivor in solitary 
confinement, a practice that can have 
devastating mental health consequences.  
Vulnerable Inmates  
Anyone can be a target of sexual abuse or 
sexual harassment in detention. However, 
some people are at greater risk than 
others. LGBT people are among those 
most vulnerable to such abuse. In its most 
recent inmate surveys, the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics (BJS) found that in a 12-month 
period roughly one in eight LGBT prisoners,2    
and one in three transgender prisoners,3  
were preyed upon by another inmate. The 
appallingly high rates of sexual abuse 
facing LGBT people are a direct result of the rampant sexism and homophobia behind 
bars, particularly among staff. Many officials 
simply look the other way when a LGBT 
inmate is assaulted, either because they 
assume what happened was consensual  
or they blame LGBT people for their  
own victimization.  
The other primary risk factors for sexual 
abuse behind bars are prior sexual abuse 
and mental illness. Inmates who have been 
abused in the past — either in a previous 
facility or in the community — are six 
times more likely to suffer abuse by other 
prisoners and twice as likely to be abused 
by staff.4 The effects of previous trauma 
often lead such prisoners to believe that 
they will not be able to get help for further 
abuse, or even that they are not entitled 
to help — which perpetrators use to their 
advantage. Prisoners with a mental illness5 
are also exceptionally vulnerable. They are 
an astonishing nine times more likely to 
be sexually assaulted than people who do 
not have a mental illness.  They are also 
often considered less credible by officials, 
even though having a mental illness has no 
correlation with filing a false report.    
A Cultural Issue  
For many years, the prevailing view among 
corrections officials was that prisoner rape 
was not a problem in their facilities. If this 
abuse did happen, they claimed, it was 
simply an inevitable consequence of locking 
up “bad people.”  But these views are 
starting to change, thanks in large part to 
national standards mandated by the Prison 
Rape Elimination Act (PREA).6 The PREA standards have resulted in tens of thousands 
of corrections staff receiving training on 
sexual abuse prevention and response, 
including on sensitive communication with 
LGBT prisoners. Also, ensuring that prisoners 
are safe from sexual abuse is now explicitly 
written into the job description of high-
ranking corrections officials nationwide.7   
A parallel shift is happening in popular 
culture. Once a staple of comedy routines, 
“don’t drop the soap” jokes are increasingly 
frowned upon. This growing awareness is 
a credit to the advocacy of prisoner rape 
survivors, like Rodney Roussell. As Rodney 
stated in a landmark New York Times 
documentary, “If we can stop making 
jokes about prisoner rape, someone else 
won’t have to go through this one day. 
Prisoners are people, and no person 
deserves abuse.”8  
Sexual Abuse is a Crisis That Can Be 
Stopped  
 
Despite recent progress, prisoner rape is 
still widespread. Scores of prisons and 
jails remain dangerous; sexual abuse 
allegations are widely ignored or improperly 
investigated; and perpetrators act with 
impunity. Even worse, detention facilities 
are subjected to little meaningful outside 
scrutiny. Fortunately, sexual abuse in 
detention is not an inherent part of prison 
life. Using the PREA standards as a tool, 
some corrections leaders are running safer 
facilities, where prisoners are treated with 
dignity and no one is considered above the 
law. To end prisoner rape once and for all, 
corrections leaders everywhere will have to 
3fact sheet  for advocates                   
commit to promoting a culture that prioritizes 
accountability and human rights.   
No matter what crime a person may have 
committed, rape is not part of the penalty.
just detention international  october 2018  | fact  sheet4fact sheet  for advocates                   
JDI Contact Information
Los Angeles Office
3325 Wilshire Boulevard, Suite 340  
Los Angeles, CA 90010
(p) 213-384-1400
D.C. Office
1900 L St. NW, Suite 601  
Washington, DC 20036
(p) 202-506-3333Endnotes
1. Allen J. Beck et al., Sexual Victimization in Juvenile 
Facilities Reported by Youth, 2012  (Bureau of Justice 
Statistics, June 2013), available at: http://www.bjs.
gov/content/pub/pdf/svjfry12.pdf
2.  Allen J. Beck, et al, Sexual Victimization in Prisons 
and Jails Reported by Inmates, 2011-12  (Bureau of 
Justice Statistics, May 2013), available at:  www.bjs.
gov/content/pub/pdf/svpjri1112.pdf
3.  Beck, Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails 
— Supplemental Tables: Prevalence of Sexual 
Victimization Among Transgender Adult Inmates 
(Bureau of Justice Statistics, December 2014), 
available at: www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/
svpjri1112_st.pdf
4.  Beck et al, Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails 
Reported by Inmates , 2011-12 
5.  Ibid. 
6.  National Standards To Prevent, Detect, and 
Respond to Prison Rape, 28 CFR 115 (Department 
of Justice, 2012), available at: www.federalregister.
gov/a/2012-12427
7.  National Standards, “Zero Tolerance; PREA 
Coordinator,” (§§ 115.11, 115.111, 115.211, 
115.311)
8.  Rodney Roussell, “The Rape Jokes We Still Laugh 
At,” The New York Times , July 9, 2018, available at:  
nytimes.com/2018/07/09/opinion/contributors/
the-rape-jokes-we-still-laugh-at.htmlThis project is supported by a grant awarded by the 
Office for Victims of Crime, U.S. Department of Jus -
tice. The opinions, findings, conclusions, and recom -
mendations expressed herein are those of the pre -
senters and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
Department of Justice, Office for Victims of Crime.
