1Ahile anyone can be sexu-
ally assaulted in detention, 
transgender inmates are ex-
ceptionally vulnerable to this 
form of violence. One study of California 
prisoners found that 59 percent of trans-
gender women housed in men’s prisons 
had been sexually abused while incarcerat-
ed, as compared to 4 percent of non-trans-gender inmates in men’s prisons.
1 Making 
matters worse, transgender inmates often 
face prejudice and discrimination in the 
aftermath of an assault.
The Basics about the Transgender 
Community
People who are transgender have a gender 
identity that is different from their as-
signed sex at birth. Everyone has a gender 
identity – a sense of being male or female (and for some, neither male nor female). A 
transgender woman is someone who was 
identified as male at birth but whose gen-
der identity is female and lives, or desires 
to live, her life as a woman. A transgender man is someone who was identified as fe-
male at birth but whose gender identity is 
male and lives, or desires to live, his life as a man. Gender identity and sexual orien-
tation are not the same thing – a trans-
gender person may identify as lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, or heterosexual. 
The federal government and almost every 
state recognize transgender people’s right 
to change their name and to have identifi-cation documents with the gender marker that matches their gender identity.
2  Despite 
that right, grave misconceptions about what 
it means to be transgender are common, in 
detention facilities and in society as a whole. Some think that transgender people’s “true” 
sex or gender is the one they were assigned at 
birth. Others believe that transgender people 
only become “real men” or “real women” after 
they have had surgery, failing to recognize that each person transitions in their own way 
and that someone’s gender identity always is 
that person’s “true” gender. 
Most transgender people face discrimination. 
Many are rejected by their families, denied 
housing, and verbally abused simply for be-
ing themselves. Transgender people also have a very hard time finding a job; employ-
ment discrimination forces many to become 
involved in the street economy and in sur-vival crime.
3  Widespread bias and ignorance 
among law enforcement and other officials 
mean that transgender people are dispro-
portionately subjected to arrest and, in turn, imprisonment.
4
Transgender People in Detention
In most cases, corrections agencies make gender classifications based on genitalia and 
not a person’s gender identity. As such, trans-
gender women are held in men’s facilities and called “he”; transgender men are held in 
women’s facilities and called “she.”
5
Transgender inmates face unique challenges 
and extreme danger, fuelled by hostile and ill-
informed notions among officials and prison-Targets for Abuse: Transgender 
Inmates and Prisoner Rape                                                                                      march 2013
just detention international  march 2013 | fact sheet“My rape crisis counselor was 
the first person to see me as a 
woman, apart from the people 
who wanted to abuse me.”
-  Michelle, a transgender survivor  
of sexual abuse behind barsWTwo transgender women inmates in a men’s jail.  
© Axel Koester/Corbis
2fact sheet                     
•	Seek out an appropriate advocacy orga-
nization and request training for your 
staff. The membership list of the National 
Coalition of Anti-Violence Projects is a 
good place to start for regional resources: 
www.ncavp.org/AVPs/default.aspx.
•	Remember that transgender detainees 
have likely faced significant discrimina-
tion, harassment, and violence before 
they contact you, and that they may fear the same reaction from your agency.
•	Listen carefully and use the same language 
as the client for pronouns, relationships, 
and names. The words that transgender 
people use to describe themselves vary, 
but you should use their language. If in 
doubt, be comfortable asking simple, clar-
ifying questions – transgender people, as 
other clients, will appreciate your candor.  
•	Do not let a mistake in your language stop you from helping the survivor. 
Apologize and continue to offer help.
•	Respect the privacy of transgender peo-
ple. Only ask questions about his or her 
body and medical history if it is necessary for your crisis counseling.Tips for Advocatesers alike. In many cases, the gender identity 
of transgender inmates is simply ignored and 
they are denied gender-appropriate clothing 
and hygiene products. Because transgender women are typically housed in men’s facili-
ties, they often have to shower and change 
their clothes in front of male inmates and 
staff. Once targeted for abuse, the majority 
of transgender survivors are subjected to re-peated sexual assaults.
6
Transgender inmates are frequently unable to get the health care they need, especially care 
related to their gender transition, resulting in 
significant medical and emotional problems. Many are also cut off from the outside world, 
as visitation policies in prisons and jails typi-
cally do not recognize transgender inmates’ 
chosen families as relatives. For those who al-
ready have been rejected by their birth fami-lies, such policies can lead to an acute sense 
of isolation. 
The health and wellbeing of transgender in-
mates is further affected by relentless verbal 
abuse by staff and other inmates. Sexual abuse 
thrives in prisons and jails in which staff al-
low, or participate in, the degradation of in-mates on the basis of their gender identity. 
Widespread use of epithets creates a hostile 
environment for transgender people and any-one who is gender non-conforming. Because 
of their masculine appearance, transgender 
men (and gender non-conforming women) held in women’s facilities are often incorrect-ly identified as safety threats or aggressors. 
When transgender inmates report sexual 
violence they are frequently blamed for the abuse by staff members, who may feel that 
transgender inmates deserve to be victim-
ized, that they “are asking for it.” 
In many facilities, officials have a stand-
ing policy to house transgender inmates in 
solitary confinement, either as soon as they 
enter a facility or after they have been sexu-ally assaulted. Sometimes officials make such 
housing decisions in an attempt to protect 
transgender people; other times the isolation itself is used as a form of abuse. Regardless 
of the intent, solitary confinement causes sig-
nificant emotional distress. Inmates who are 
locked down in a tiny cell for 23 hours a day 
are cut off from vital services and programs. Not surprisingly, many transgender rape sur-
vivors suffer in silence, afraid that speaking 
out will result in isolation. 
Because of the unique challenges facing 
transgender inmates, and their extreme vul-
nerability to sexual violence, rape crisis ser-
vice providers play a particularly important role in promoting their health. As Michelle 
described in the opening quote, counselors 
are sometimes the only people who will treat transgender detainees with respect, recognize 
their gender identity as their true gender, and 
care about their safety.
7
Endnotes
1Valerie Jenness et al., Violence in California Correctional Facilities: An Empirical Examination of Sexual Assault  
(Irvine: Center for Evidence-Based Corrections, University of California, 2007), 3. 
2 Jami Kathleen Taylor, “Transgender Identities and Public Policy in the United States: The Relevance for 
Public Administration,” Administration & Society vol. 39 (2007): 837-8. 
3 In a recent survey, the percentage of transgender people who were unemployed was double that of the national 
average. See Jaime M. Grant et al., Injustice at Every Turn A Report of the National: Transgender Discrimination 
Survey (Washington: National Center for Transgender Equality and National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, 2011), 55.
4 Ibid., 158.
5 More information about transgender people can be found in JDI’s forthcoming Advocate’s Manual (due in 
2013).    
6 For first-person testimony from transgender survivors, visit JDI’s website: www.justdetention.org; such ac-
counts of abuse can also be found in a joint report by JDI and the ACLU National Prison Project, Still in Danger: The Ongoing Threat of Sexual Violence against Transgender Prisoners (Los Angeles: 2005), 6.
7 For more information on new protections for transgender detainees required by the Prison Rape Elimination 
Act, see JDI’s factsheet, The Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA) Standards: An Overview for Community Service Providers, 2013.
This project is supported by Grant No. 2011-TA-AX-K100, awarded by the Office on Violence Against Women, U.S. 
Department of Justice. The opinions, findings, conclusions, and recommendations expressed in this document are those of Just Detention International and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Department of Justice, Office on Violence Against Women.Headquarters
 
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010Tel:  (213) 384-1400Fax: (213) 384-1411
east Coast o ffiCe
1900 L Street NW,  Suite 601Washington, DC 20036Tel: (202) 506-3333Fax: (202) 506-7971
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.org
just detention international  march 2013 | fact sheetJust detention international   
is a health and human rights orga-
nization that seeks to end sexual abuse in all  forms of  detention.