  
AAIA  
 
Association on American Indian Affairs  
 
2016 Annual Report  
 
 
Protecting Sovereignty  
 
Preserving Culture  
 
Educating Youth  2 Table of Contents   
2016:  The Issues  
Table of Contents                                                                              
 
AAIA  - Impacting Lives  
 
Letter from the President   
 
                                                                                               
Leadership  
 Board of Directors  
 Council of Advisors          
 Staff  
 
Executive Director’s Report                                                                              
Protect Sovereignty, Constitutional, Legal and Human Rights and Natural 
Resources   
 Indian Child Welfare Act   
 AAIA Stands Against Dakota Access Pipeline (DAPL)     
 Juvenile Justice  
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Sustain and Perpetuate Cultures and Languages   
 International Repatriation Project    
    
Improve Health, Education, and Economic and Community Development  
 Scholarships     
 Youth Summer Camps      
   
Public Education                                                                                       
 Newsletter  
 Annual Meeting of the Members Event  
   
Financial Information                                                                                      
 Statement of Financial Position   
 Statement of Activities   
       
How You Can He lp                                                                                          
  
Contact Information                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Page  2 
 
 3 
 
 4 
 
 
 5 
 
  
 
 
  8  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 9 
  
 
 12 
 
  
 
 13 
  
 
 
 
 14 
 
 
 
 17 
 
 18
  3 AAIA: Impacting Lives 1922 -2016  
We Were There — As the oldest Native American service and advocacy 
organization in the United States, the Association on American Indian Affairs 
(AAIA) has impacted the lives of Native American and Alaska Natives in many 
ways over the past 94 years.  From helping the Pueblo people keep their land 
and water rights in the 1920’s, to the scholarships provided to Native college 
students in the 1940’s, to the Field Nursing Program in the 1950’s which sent 
nurses to reservations, to helping Alaska Natives to protect their lands and 
hunting and fishing rights in the 1960’s, to the studies that were done in the 
1970’s which led to the Indian Child Welfare Act, AAIA was there.   
In the 1980’s we were still there working to establish the Tribal Governmental 
Tax Status Act, and in the 1990’s we were there to gain enactment of the Native 
American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act and ensure its implementation 
and helped to protect sacred lands.  In the 2000’s we were there too —making 
sure that tribes have access to funding for their child welfare programs, fighting 
for the right to use eagles and other birds for sacred ceremonies, providing 
funding so Native children can attend summer camps that focus on cultural 
preservation and health education, and helping to change the process by which 
tribes are federally recognized among other things.  As we move into our 9th 
decade of providing services to Native Americans and Alaska Natives, we will 
continue to be here to impact Indian Country for future generations.  
AAIA is governed by an all -Native Board of Directors from across the country 
representing a diversity of tribes, geography and areas of expertise.  We work in 
close cooperation with Native Americans and other organizations that have 
similar missions in determining which issues will be pursued and the amount of 
emphasis to be placed on each issue.  Our national advocacy work and grass 
roots initiatives fall into three main categories:  youth/education, cultural 
preservation and sovereignty.  4 A Letter from the President   
AAIA:  Who we are in a snapshot  
 
Dear Friends,  
 
I am proud to present this Annual Report of 2016.  AAIA is the oldest Native American 
advocacy and service organization, having been founded in 1922.  Preserving Native cultures 
while promoting self -determination and the well -being of Indian and Alaska Native children 
and families is a priority for our organization and has been for most of our long history.  During 
2016, AAIA continued to focus on Preservation of Tribal Cultures (international repatriation 
and sacred sites protection), Promoting Sovereignty (federal recognition reform) and Youth/
Education (scholarships, summer camps, juvenile justice and Indian child welfare advocacy 
training, research and legal assistance).  
 
On September 24 -25, AAIA was able to meet one of the major goals of its International 
Repatriation Project by bringing together Native Nations to discuss International Repatriation.  
AAIA hosted its second annual Indigenous International Repatriation Conference at the Isleta 
Pueblo Resort & Casino, a beautiful venue owned by the Pueblo of Isleta in New Mexico.  
 
The work AAIA undertakes is possible because we are an independent organization.  This work 
is done in partnership with Native communities and other Native and non -Native NGOs, 
wherever possible.  Individual, tribal, corporate and other non -profit contributors make possible 
the flexibility we have to put our resources where they are most needed.  Thus, we are able to 
work on issues and problems that are vitally important to Indian people, communities and 
tribes, but which don’t get the attention that they need and deserve.  
 
Thank you for your continued support to make possible our important assistance to Indian 
Country.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Faith Roessel  
President  
Navajo  
5 Jonathan Perry  
Wampanoag  Leadership  
Board of Directors  
 
AAIA is governed by an All -Native Board of Directors representing all regions of the coun-
try.  The collective wealth of knowledge and expertise in diverse areas makes AAIA’s Board 
well suited to develop policies that benefit all Native peoples  
 
 
 
 
No Picture  
Faith Roessel  
President  Alfred R. Ketzler, Sr.  
Vice President  
Athabascan  Frank Ettawageshik  
Treasurer  
Elke Chenevey  
Omaha  Dee Ann DeRoin, MD  
Nominating Chair  
Ioway  John Echohawk  
Pawnee  
Sarah Kastelic  
Alutiiq  
Bradford R. Keeler  
Secretary  
Cheriena Ben  
Choctaw  6 
Leadership  
Council of Advisors  
 
 
In 2013 AAIA was pleased 
to expand its Advisory 
Board into a Council of 
Advisors.  Based largely in 
New York where AAIA was 
established and 
incorporated, the Council is 
comprised of individuals 
who are interested in 
furthering the work of the 
Association.  They hold a 
wealth of knowledge and 
various interests, and are 
prominent in their own 
fields.  The Council’s main 
initiatives consist of raising 
the profile of the 
Association’s work, 
assisting in planning our 
fundraising events, and 
helping AAIA to network 
with individuals who can 
assist AAIA 
programmatically and 
financially.   
Howard B. Teich, Chair  
 
Nadema Agard, Cherokee  
 
Gail Bruce  
 
Kimberly Guerrero, Colville/Salish -Kootenai/Cherokee  
 
John Haworth, Cherokee  
 
Dennis Hirschfelder  
 
Peter Johnson  
 
Alli Joseph, Shinnecock  
 
Hattie Kauffman, Nez Perce  
 
Kerry Kennedy  
 
Dr. Francesca Kress  
 
Mary Kathryn Nagle, Cherokee  
 
Gloria Steinem  
 
Curtis Zunigha, Delaware  
 
 
 
 
  
Furthering 
the work  
of the  
Association  7 Leadership  
Staff & Volunteers  
 
 
 
Staff  
 
Kimberly A. Dutcher, Executive Director, Navajo  
 
Honor Keeler, Director of International Repatriation Project, Cherokee  
 
Betsy Detlefs, Finance & Payroll manager (Cherokee)  
 
Although AAIA received very little funding from federal grants in 2016 we have been able to 
obtain valuable staff members through federal programs such as the AmeriCorps VISTA  
Program and the Federal Work Study Program. We are also very fortunate to have  dedicated  
volunteers to review applications for our scholarship program and help with fundraising events.  
 
Volunteers  
 
Cynthia Rudder  
 
Robin Wachenfeld  8 EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR’S REPORT  
Indian Child Welfare  
 
 Indian Child Welfare Act  
 
The Association on American Indian Affairs (AAIA) works to promote the well -being of Indian 
children and families by ensuring the child welfare system preserves the connection between 
Indian children and their families, extended families, communities and cultures. In 2014 and 
2015, AAIA began development of an Indian Child Welfare Tribal -State Agreement report with 
funding from Casey Family Programs. Throughout 2016, AAIA contacted states and Tribes to 
gather all ICWA Tribal -State Agreements that were currently in effect and began drafting a 
finalizing it report. The final report will be published by AAIA in 2017.  
 
 Adoption Project  
 
AAIA has been working with the National Indian Child Welfare Association (NICWA) on a 
project to review practices by the private adoption industry in regards to Indian children. The 
first objective of the Project was to compile state adoption data and laws, policies and practices 
relevant to ICWA and the adoption of Indian children. A joint report with our partner NICWA 
was developed in 2016 on state adoption statutes, with NICWA providing an analysis of U.S. 
adoption sources and AAIA providing an overview of U.S. adoption statutes. NICWA and 
AAIA continue to work together to determine the best strategy for releasing the report in 2017.  
 
AAIA Stands Against the Dakota Access Pipeline (DAPL)  
 
In a November 30, 2016 letter to then U.S. Attorney General Loretta Lynch, the AAIA Board of 
Members condemned the action of Morton County, North Dakota law enforcement against the 
Water Protectors opposing the Dakota Access Pipeline and called upon the U.S. Department of 
Justice to immediately investigate the actions of the Morton County law enforcement.  On 
December 4, 2016 the Army Corp of Engineers announced that it would not issue an easement 
for the oil project to cross Lake Oahe.  Instead the agency will undertake additional National 
Environmental Policy Act analysis regarding potential impacts and alternate routes.  The project 
is halted for now, but the easement was the final federal approval/action necessary for Energy 
Transfer Partners, LP to complete construction on the 1,170 mile pipeline.   
  
Juvenile Justice  
 
Native youth are incarcerated at a higher and disproportionate rate than other youth, and for 
many reasons, spend more time in detention than non -Native youth.  AAIA’s work has been 
focused on promoting appropriate and safe alternatives to incarceration for Native youth, 
whether they are involved with tribal, state, or local systems.  In April AAIA traveled to 
Choctaw, Mississippi as part of its continuing work with the Annie E. Casey Foundation’s 
Juvenile Detention Alternatives Initiative (JDAI), a comprehensive detention reform model 
which reduces reliance on juvenile incarceration and creates a fairer, more effective juvenile 
justice system.  
 Protecting Sovereignty, Constitutional, Legal and  
Human Rights and Natural Resources  9 The purpose of the AAIA site visit was to gather quantitative and qualitative data about the 
Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indian’s (MBCI) JDAI project.  MBCI is the first tribal nation to 
implement JDAI.  MBCI’s experience implementing JDAI in a tribal context is unique, and 
lessons learned will be informative for other tribal nations addressing juvenile justice reform in 
general. In November AAIA completed and submitted its survey of JDAI sites to the Annie E.  
Casey Foundation and identified best practices in Indian Country for Native youth in its 
accompanying report. In December AAIA reported on its findings on the MBCI site, 
chronicling the accomplishments, successes, challenges, and lessons learned through MBCI’s 
adaptation of the JDAI model.  These findings will help to inform tribal nations addressing 
juvenile justice reform as well as those involved in juvenile justice about the lessons learned to 
date from MBCI’s project.   
  
Sustain and Perpetuate Cultures and  Languages  
 
International Repatriation Project  
 
During 2016 AAIA made significant progress heightening awareness about the protection of 
sacred places and the important human rights issue of international repatriation: the return of 
Ancestors and cultural objects to their rightful tribes and communities.  Since 2014, AAIA has 
worked diligently to address four major goals expressed by members of the Working Group on 
International Repatriation whose members include representatives from across Native Nations 
and other Indigenous Peoples: 1 - Education about international repatriation to tribal, national, 
and international communities; 2 - Guidance on international repatriation for Native Nations and 
their Peoples; 3 - Bringing together Native Nations to discuss international repatriation and 
develop an outcome document and protocols; and 4 - Development of a database so that Native 
Nations may find their Ancestors and cultural items in international and private collections.  
 
Second Annual Indigenous International Repatriation Conference, Shifting the Burden  
 
The Second Annual AAIA Indigenous International Repatriation Conference, Shifting the 
Burden , was held September 26 -27 in Albuquerque, New Mexico, at Isleta Resort & Casino.  A 
diverse and expert group of presenters spoke on a variety of topics that related to international 
repatriation and the trafficking of Native American Ancestors, funerary objects, sacred items, 
and cultural patrimony.  Keynote speaker, Professor Rebecca Tsosie (Yaqui), Regents Professor 
of Law and Special Advisor to the Provost for Diversity and Inclusion at the University of 
Arizona’s James E. Rodgers College of Law, gave an impassioned address about the 
importance of ending the trade of Indigenous Ancestors and cultural items around the world, 
and shifting the burden away from Indigenous Peoples who have suffered the losses of their 
Ancestors and cultural items taken from burial places and communities without their 
permission.  
 
In addition to presenters from American Indian tribes, Te Herekiekie Herewini (Māori) from 
the Te Papa Museum’s International Repatriation Programme in New Zealand and Professor 
Daryle Rigney from the Ngarrindjeri Nation in Australia presented on efforts by their own 
Indigenous communities to repatriate their Ancestors and cultural items from international 
institutions.  Representatives from international museums also attended to learn about 
Indigenous perspectives on international repatriation and to discuss repatriations that had 
occurred from their museums.  All emphasized the  importance of the Indigenous consultation 
process and the need for institutional changes to adopt international repatriation policies that 
involve input from Indigenous Peoples.  
  10 Presentations were also given on proposed legislation in Congress to prevent the ongoing 
trafficking of Native American Ancestors and cultural items, and the need for investigations to 
be concluded to gather data from tribal communities and the federal government to shut down 
illegal activity.  Tribal representatives discussed the importance of implementing Intertribal 
Investigative Units throughout the country.  Toward the end of the conference, Indigenous 
Peoples representatives had the opportunity to meet with each other to express shared concerns 
about continuing trafficking on federal, state, and private lands; the needs for repatriating 
internationally; and the ongoing issues tribes have surrounding the lack of meaningful 
consultations with agencies, federally funded institutions, and other museums.  After the 
conclusion of the Conference, federal government representatives held a listening session on 
international repatriation with the tribes.  
 
AAIA’s Second Indigenous International Repatriation Conference, Shifting the Burden , had 
three times the number of tribal and indigenous elders and leaders, government representatives, 
educators, scholars, museum professionals, and others attend than our inaugural conference.  
Participants provided positive feedback and the Conference was deemed a success by all.  
 
Education and Guidance On International Repatriation  
 
AAIA presents at the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI):  AAIA presented 
“International Developments in International Repatriation”  during the “International 
Advocacy to Protect Tribal Sovereignty”  session, and moderated the session, “Protecting Our 
Cultural Resources: An Overview of Current Efforts”  during NCAI’s Mid -Year Conference 
June 27 -30, 2016 in Spokane, Washington.  Presenters included: Kurt Riley, Governor, Pueblo 
of Acoma, who spoke about the international repatriation efforts of the Acoma Pueblo; Regina 
Whiteskunk and Charles Wilkinson, who spoke about the Bears Ears Coalition and National 
Monument designation; and government representatives who spoke on cultural resources, 
consultation policies, and the repatriation of children from the Carlisle Indian School.  
 
AAIA also attended NCAI’s 73rd Annual Convention and Marketplace in Phoenix, Arizona on 
October 9 -14, 2016.  AAIA participated in the Department of the Interior’s Listening Session 
on International Repatriation on October 9, and presented a Conference Outcome Document 
which summarized important issues garnered from AAIA’s Second Annual Indigenous 
International Repatriation Conference, Shifting the Burden .  AAIA also provided a legislative 
update for NCAI’s Human, Religious & Cultural Concerns Subcommittee on a joint Resolution, 
H. Con. Res. 122, Protection of the Right of Tribes to Stop the Export of Cultural and 
Traditional (PROTECT) Patrimony Resolution, S. Con. Res. 49/H. Con. Res. 122, and S. 3127, 
Safeguard Tribal Objects of Patrimony (STOP) legislation pending in Congress.  
 
The AAIA Granted Consultative Status at the United Nations:  During the summer AAIA was 
awarded special consultative status at the United Nations Economic and Social Council 
(ECOSOC) in recognition of its expertise in the area of international repatriation.  Consultative 
status permits AAIA to: designate observers at ECOSOC meetings; submit written statements 
to be circulated to the Secretary -General and the Council; and make oral statements in its area 
of expertise.  
 
 
 11 AAIA provides expert testimony at the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs Field Hearing : On 
October 18, 2016 AAIA testified before the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs in Albuquer-
que, New Mexico, on international repatriation and on the illegal trafficking of Native Ameri-
can Ancestors and cultural items.  AAIA’s testimony outlined specific recommendations: man-
dating centralized training across federal agencies for proper implementation and training on 
federal laws; a full investigation into the implementation of federal laws to reveal the extent of 
looting of Native American sacred places; a report to provide actionable steps to Congress and 
agencies to identify funding, appropriation, and legislative gaps to prevent trafficking and to 
ensure repatriation occurs from private and international collections; a mandate by Congress 
instructing agencies to develop a tribal consultation policy; and funding and appropriations cre-
ated by Congress to establish Intertribal Investigative Units throughout the country.  Several 
tribal leaders testified on behalf of their Native Nations regarding the sale of their cultural items 
at private auction houses overseas and the ongoing looting of their burial and sacred places.  In 
addition to the tribes, the Department of the Interior, Department of State, and the Department 
of Homeland Security provided perspectives on the ongoing illegal trafficking on federal lands.  
 
AAIA provides updates on International Repatriation to the United South & Eastern Tribes, Inc. 
(USET):  At the end of October in Cherokee, North Carolina, AAIA attended the USET Confer-
ence and provided updates regarding the Indigenous International Repatriation Conference and 
the October 18, 2016 Senate Committee on Indian Affairs field hearing.  During the Conference 
Chief Arvol Looking Horse (19th Generation Keeper of the White Buffalo Calf Woman Pipe) 
addressed the USET tribal leadership regarding the Dakota Access Pipeline Project and the 
need for tribes and others to come together in these efforts.  Many tribes, Indigenous Peoples, 
and others have gathered at the Sacred Stone camp in South Dakota to protect the water, buri-
als, and sacred places against the advancement of the Dakota Access Pipeline.  Burial and sa-
cred places have already been destroyed in the path of this pipeline.  
 
Database Development  
 
AAIA has participated in a 3 -year grant “Return, Reconcile, Renew”  with the Ngarrindjeri Na-
tion, Torres Strait Islander community, and the Kimberley Aboriginal law and Culture Centre 
(KALACC) which are Indigenous communities working in international repatriation in Austral-
ia, as well as the Australian National University and the Australian Government.  In July AAIA 
traveled to Melbourne, Australia to continue work on an Indigenous database that will help lo-
cate Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Ancestors and cultural items.  This research and cul-
turally sensitive database will help to address one of the greatest challenges of Indigenous com-
munities: finding Indigenous Ancestors and cultura l  items beyond their country’s borders.  12 Improve Health, Education, and  
Community Development  
Scholarships  
 
AAIA continued its history of assisting Native American college students reach their 
educational goals by providing graduate and undergraduate scholarships. Scholarships were 
awarded to students from federally recognized tribes as well as to those students from tribes that 
are not yet included on the list of federally recognized tribes.  
The AAIA awarded 27 graduate and undergraduate students a scholarship for the 2016 -2017 
academic year. The average scholarship award for the school year was $1,500 and $1,000 for 
emergency aid.  
 
Youth Summer Camps  
 
Each summer AAIA proudly sponsors summer camps serving Native American youth. The 
following organizations received grants from the AAIA to hold their 2016 summer youth 
camps:  
 
 Abinoojiiyag Center, Lac du Flambeau, WI  
 Columbia River Intertribal Fish Commission, Portland, OR  
 Kamiah Nimiipuu Health Clinic, Kamiah, ID  
 Department of Indian Work, Interfaith Action ofGreater Saint Paul, St. Paul MN  
 Pathkeepers for Indigenous Knowledge, Culpepper, VA  
 Pollen Circles, Inc., Window Rock, AZ  
 
  
13 Public Education  
 
Newsletter  
 
In 2016, AAIA published only an E -Newsletter, in December and August and temporarily 
discontinued the hard -copy newsletter, Indian Affairs . The newsletters highlight the work of the 
Association as well as provide articles about issues important to the Native community.  Please 
contact our Executive Office in Rockville, Maryland for subscriptions.   
 
Annual Meeting of the Members and Leader of Distinction Reception  
 
AAIA hosted its 94th Annual Meeting of Members on Saturday, September 24, 2016 at the 
Indian Pueblo Cultural Center Courtyard, Albuquerque, NM. The event  honored the New 
Mexico Congressional Delegation in recognition of their leadership on International 
Repatriation.  The event also paid special tribute to Joy Hanley (Navajo), AAIA Board 
Member, for her contributions to AAIA for over 37 years (1979 -2016).  
 
2016 Organizational Highlights   
 
The AAIA Executive Office moved suite number locations in July. The new Executive Office 
location is at:  966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 30 -A, Rockville, MD 20850.  14 Financial Information  
Statement of Financial Position -Assets - December 2016 & December 
2015 and Liabilities & Assets 2016 & 2015  
Current Assets    2016  2015  
Cash and cash equivalents   352,300  $   63,067  
Investments in marketable se-
curities      
Grants and contracts receiva-
ble    5,600  
Contributions receivable     
Other receivables      
Prepaid expenses    8,091   6,528  
Total current assets    360,391  $75,195  
Property and Equipment     
Furniture and equipment
   26,371  26,371  
Less accumulated depreciation   (26,371)  (22,394)  
Net Property and equipment    3,977  
Other Assets     
Investments - endowments
   479,428  501,856  
Security deposits   1,150  1,150  
Total other assets    480,578  503,006   
  840,969  $ 582,178  15 Financial Information  
Statement of Financial Position -Assets - December 2016& December 
2015 and Liabilities & Assets 2016 & 2015  
Current Liabilities    2016  2015  
Accounts payable    50,639  $   53,188   
Accrued wages    3,868      3,522   
Other accruals   1,027                   2,675   
Accrued vacation    5,088  5,088  
Total current liabilities   60,622  64,473  
Net Assets     
Unrestricted    67,499  (179,845)  
Temporarily restricted   158,318  44,727  
Permanently restricted   554,530  652,823  
Total net assets    780,347  517,705  
  840,969  $ 582,178  
    16 Financial Information  
Statement of Activities for the year ending 2016  
(with comparative totals for the year ending 2015)  
      2016        
Temporarily Permanently  
         
   
        
  Unrestricted       Restricted  Restricted  Total  2015  
 
Revenues, gains 
&  
other support       
Contributions  
and dues  73,534  13,300  - 86,834  145,878  
Legacies  325,458   - 325,458  8,970  
Grants  50,000  250,901  - 300,901  102,500  
Consulting   37,674  - 37,674  46,935  
Conference  
Registrations   28,606   28,606   
Investment in-
come   9,470  - 9,470  15,375  
Media sales  2,217   - 2,217  900 
Other income  2,776   - 2,776  9,274  
In-kind contribu-
tions  840  -   
Realized gains 
(losses) on invest-
ments   7,743  - 7,743  67,800  
Unrealized gains 
(losses) on  
investments  4,852   - 4,852  (79,233)  17 How You Can Help  
Consistent financial support helps AAIA continue to fund the programs described in this 
report. AAIA receives financial support through a number of avenues such as member 
contributions, on -line contributions, trusts, bequests, grants and foundations. Your support 
will help us to continue to work for the benefit of Native youth, families and communities 
through our policy and advocacy work and grass roots programming.  
 
 Membership - Your donation of $35 or more per year will assist us in providing programs 
that are vitally important to Native youth, families and communities. You will have the 
opportunity to receive program updates through our newsletter Indian Affairs, which is 
accessible online or as a hardcopy by request. You will also be invited to attend our 
Annual Meeting of the Members (which is open to the public) held in New York City, or 
to vote by proxy.  
 Spread the Word - Follow us on Facebook and Twitter and ask your family and friends to 
do the same and to join in supporting us too. You can also view our language program 
videos on YouTube and see our new language program website at 
www.aaialanguageprogram.org. Sign up for our monthly newsletter by visiting our 
website at www.indian -affairs.org and forward the information to family & friends.  
 On-Line Giving - Make a safe and secure donation on -line through Network for Good on 
our website at www.indian -affairs.org.  
 Monthly Gifts - Consider making a monthly gift to AAIA, which can be easily paid by 
credit card or automatically deducted from your bank account.  
 Matching Gift Program - Many companies offer Matching Gift Programs. Visit your 
Human Resources Department and ask if donations to AAIA can be matched and use 
their Matching Gifts Contribution form.  
 Join your workplace giving program and designate AAIA for your charitable 
contribution.  
 Bequests and Trusts - By remembering AAIA in your will, you can support Native youth, 
families and communities for years to come. Please consider contributions of a specific 
sum, a percentage of your estate or stocks and bonds in a bequest or trust to AAIA.  
 
Protecting Sovereignty  
 
Preserving Culture  
 
Educating Youth  
18 
     AAIA Executive Office   
 
966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 30 -B 
Rockville, MD  20850  
Phone:  240 -314-7155   *   Fax:  240 -314-7159  
E-Mail:  general.aaia@indian -affairs.org  
 
 
 
AAIA  
www.indian -affairs.org  
 
 
 
The Association on American Indian Affairs is a 501(c )(3) 
non-profit,  
publicly supported,  tax exempt corporation.  
 
Donations and contributions to AAIA are tax deductible to the extent 
provided by law.  FINANCIAL ADDE NDUM  
January 28, 2019  
 
 
 
