Association on American Indian Affairs
2019 Annual Report2019 Annual Report
The Association on American 
Indian Affairs is a 501(c)(3) 
non-profit membership 
organization dependent on 
contributors like you!www.indian-affairs.orgEnvisioning Our Future
 For the Next 100 years
Artwork by Gordon Lewis, Fort McDowell Yavapai NationThe Association on American Indian Affairs is the oldest non-profit 
serving Indian Country, formed in 1922 to change the destructive 
path of federal policy from assimilation, termination and allotment, 
to sovereignty, self-determination and self-sufficiency. Throughout 
its 97-year history, the Association has provided national advocacy 
on watershed issues that strengthen sovereignty and diverse Native 
cultures, while working at a grassroots level with Tribes to implement 
programs that affect real lives on the ground.
In 2019, the Association has been engaged in a comprehensive 
strategic planning process to prepare the organization for its next 
100 years of advocacy. By building internal capacity and efficient infrastructure around 
our cultural values, the Association will achieve its vision to ensure “A world where diverse 
Native American cultures and values are lived, protected and respected.”
One thing is very clear about our next 100 years:  We cannot continue into the next 
century without you. We need your commitment, we need your time, we need your 
advocacy, and most important, we need your financial support to continue the great 
path that the Association has laid down over the last 100 years. Now is the time to commit 
to the next 100 years of American Indian sovereignty, culture, education and capacity 
building. Now is the time we must envision what we want for our future and develop a 
robust strategy to carry it out!
Any support you can provide will fund programs that protect sovereignty, preserve 
culture, educate youth and build capacity on the ground. In addition, the Association 
seeks members of its Legacy Council to build a $10 million sustainable endowment to 
fund the Association’s 100 Year Endowment Campaign. Together we can affect the 
change necessary to heal and strengthen Indian Country for the next 100 years. As we 
look to our 100th year anniversary in 2022, we ask you to continue your journey with us 
to envision a stronger Indian Country and a diverse and respectful world. Take action to 
help us envision our future!
Take action to let our voices be heard for the next 100 years!
Thank you for your continued advocacy. 
Sincerely, 
 
Frank Ettawageshik, Odawa
President of the Board of Directors
Association on American Indian Affairs
Protecting Sovereignty • Preserving Culture 
Educating Youth • Building Capacity 
Since 1922  
Envisioning Our Future
For the Next 100 Years2019 ANNUAL REPORT1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
In Summary, Programs Supporting Cultural Sovereignty .........  2 
In Detail, Cultural Sovereignty Programs ......................  3
Indian Children and Youth ...............................  3
Repatriation ...........................................  8
Sacred Sites ..........................................  11
Public Education ......................................  13
Responsible Financial Activity ..............................  14
Commitment of Our Partners and Donors ...................  16 
Strong Governance  ......................................  19 
Board of Directors .....................................  20
ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN INDIAN AFFAIRS2
Envisioning Our Future
THROUGH OUR PROGRAMS
IN SUMMARY
Programs Supporting Cultural Sovereignty
SCHOLARSHIPS.  The Association responded to 519 inquiries from Native American students and schools 
regarding the Association’s Scholarship program and reviewed 370 applications for scholarships. Twenty 
seven undergraduate and graduate students from federally recognized and non-recognized Tribes, 
representing the Navajo Nation, Choctaw Nation, Santo Domingo Pueblo, Sault Ste Marie Tribe of Chippewa 
Indians, Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe, Muscogee (Creek) Nation, Tur tle Mountain Band of Chippewa, Sisseton-
Wahpeton Sioux Tribe, Laguna Pueblo, and Cochiti Pueblo received $27,750 in scholarships. Seven of these 
students graduated and the remainder continue their educational path!
SUMMER CAMPS. The Association granted funding to 10 Native Youth Summer Camps, serving 527 youth 
from Tribes across Indian Country, including Nimiipuu (Nez Perce), Yakama, Spokan, Umatilla, Sho-ban, 
Zuni, Navajo, Salt River Pima-Maricopa, Laguna, Chippewa Cree, Muckleshoot, Oglala Lakota, Citizen 
Band Potawatomi, White Mountain Apache, Cheyenne, Haliwa Saponi, Waccamaw Siouan, Sault St. 
Marie Chippewa, Ute Indian Tribe, Blackfeet, Diné, Hoopa, Karuk, Paiute, Pomo, Yurok, Washoe, Hopi, 
Apache, Quechan, Tewa, Pascua, Yaqui, Santa Domingo, Shoshone-Bannock, Eastern Shoshone, Ojibwe, 
Lakota, Nakota, Dakota, Pawnee, Choctaw, Carlanas Apache, Mescalero Apache, Si’can’gu, Ponca, 
Santee, Machica, Ni’ Hon’ Jin (Japanese), Beaver-Alaska, Big Sandy Rancheria, Fort McDermitt Paiute, Gila 
River, Ho-Chunk, Hualapai, Menominee, Oneida, Tataviam Band of Mission Indians, Mazahua-Racamuri, 
Huichol, and Odawa. 
100 YEAR CELEBRATION. Professor and renowned legal scholar Matthew Fletcher is drafting the Association’s 
100 Year History as an educational tool about federal Indian policy advancement and the work of the 
Association.  It will be released in 2022 during the Association’s 100 Year celebrations. The publisher will be 
Michigan State University Press.
REPATRIATION CONFERENCE.  The Association’s 5th Annual Repatriation Conference – Healing the Divide, 
was the biggest one yet with 190 registered participants representing Tribes, museums, foreign institutions 
and the federal government, as well as artists, auction houses and the public. The organization gave 40 
free or reduced registrations for Tribal participants to attend. 
LEGAL ADVOCACY.  The Association participated in multiple Amicus “friends of the court” briefs in court 
cases to protect the Indian Child Welfare Act and to protect Bears Ears National Monument. 
LEGISLATIVE ADVOCACY. The Association advocated for new legislation, including the Safeguarding Tribal 
Objects of Patrimony Act, and revisions to old legislation, such as the Native American Graves Protection 
and Repatriation Act, regarding the theft, looting and sale of Native American cultural heritage.2019 ANNUAL REPORT3
JUVENILE JUSTICE. The Association worked with the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians and the Annie 
E. Casey Foundation regarding the Juvenile Detention Alternatives Initiative, and began research into 
Indian Country juvenile justice programs and alternatives to detention.
COMMERCIAL SALE OF SENSITIVE CULTURAL HERITAGE.  The Association issued 63 Auction Alerts identifying 
3,721 potentially sensitive cultural and sacred items belonging to Tribes.
ANNUAL MEETING.  The Association held its 97th Annual Membership Meeting and Cultural Event at the 
Fort McDowell Yavapai Nation WeKoPa Resort & Conference Center, honoring important Native Elders 
and sharing songs and dances from the Pascua Yaqui, Yavapai, Salt River Pima-Maricopa and Gila River 
Nations. 
PUBLIC EDUCATION.  The Association provided public education through public symposiums, conferences 
and other events in New York City, Arlington, Virginia, Washington, D.C., Reno, Nevada, Seattle, Washington,  
Saginaw, Michigan, Milwaukee and Crandon, Wisconsin, Tucson and Phoenix, Arizona, Austin, Texas, 
Albuquerque, New Mexico, Philadelphia, Mississippi, San Diego, California, Melbourne and Brisbane, 
Australia and elsewhere.
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE. The A ssociation p rovided technical assistance to Tr ibal Nation H isto r ic Prese r vation 
Officers, cultural resource practitioners and museums and responded to 193 telephone and email inquiries 
regarding Native American cultural heritage items from Tribal and non-Tribal parties.
SOCIAL MEDIA.  The Association increased its Facebook page likes by 173% and grew its following on 
Twitter by approximately 22.2%, or 7.5 followers per day! Our website has increased month-over-month 
page views by 21.5%!
IN DETAIL
Cultural Sovereignty Programs
INDIAN CHILDREN AND YOUTH PROGRAMS
THE INDIAN CHILD WELFARE ACT
The Association is working to protect against the current legal attacks on the Indian Child Welfare Act, 
continuing its long history of ICWA advocacy. The Association began its advocacy regarding Indian child 
welfare issues in 1967. That work led directly to the enactment of the Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978. Prior 
to the Act, the integrity of the Indian family was being devastated by state and locally sanctioned child 
welfare and adoption agencies who were removing Indian children from their families at an alarming 
and disproportionate rate. The Association completed two studies in 1969 and 1974 exposing that 25-35% 
of all Indian children had been separated from their families and placed in foster homes, adoptive homes 
or institutions, and 90% of those placements were in non-Indian homes. ICWA was created in response 
to these statistics and designed to direct and guide certain decision-making activities that occur during 
Indian child custody proceedings in a state court in order to protect the relationship between the Indian 
child and Indian family and maintain the child’s rights to his or her cultural connections.ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN INDIAN AFFAIRS4
After 40 years of the law’s enactment, states are still slow to comply with ICWA, and private adoption 
agencies are often unregulated. Nationwide, American Indian and Alaska Native children are still 
removed from their homes at 2–3 times the rate of their white counterparts and often are not placed with 
relatives or other Indian families, even when such placements are available and appropriate. Native 
families are also the most likely to have children removed from their homes as a first resort, and the least 
likely to be offered family support interventions intended to keep children within the home. In private 
adoption systems where little state regulation is present, Indian children can face practitioners who 
focus on financial incentives, are operating from misguided understandings of what the law requires, 
and continue to believe that Indian families are inferior to others.
Research shows that there are long term benefits for Indian children to be raised with a distinct Tribal 
cultural identity. Recent epigenetic research shows how adult trauma is encoded in genes and expressed 
in their children. The way to heal this historical or intergenerational trauma is through enculturation 
– identifying and feeling pride about one’s culture and background. Further, large empirical studies 
have shown that using cultural practices are a protective factor for mental health in Native American 
children and adults. Moreover, research has supported the fact that child development is long term 
and not limited to early years; thus, children can love many people not just one or two parents and can 
form important relationships through all development stages. Options that allow for the reunification 
of an Indian child with a birth family and building many strong familial relationships produces stronger 
outcomes; whereas hiding the birth family from the child causes significant harm to that child and that 
child’s community. This is exactly what ICWA was developed to address.
Even though research shows the benefits of maintaining cultural and familial ties, there has been a 
growing effort bankrolled by the Goldwater Institute – a nonprofit right-wing think tank – which has 
launched a coordinated attack against ICWA alongside evangelical and anti-Indian-sovereignty 
groups, adoption advocates, and conservative organizations like the Cato Institute. According to the 
Goldwater Institute’s website, Goldwater’s chief executive and president, Darcy Olsen, learned about 
ICWA while receiving training to become a foster parent. Though she did not seek to adopt an Indian 
child, she made it her mission to attack ICWA by offering pro bono legal services to foster parents who 
were being “burdened” from fostering or adopting an Indian child due to ICWA.
This led to the Brackeen v. Zinke case in the Texas federal district court in which the states of Texas, 
Louisiana and Indiana, along with the Goldwater Institute, challenged ICWA as being an unconstitutional 
race-based statute. The Association, along with 123 Tribes and 13 other Tribal organization partners 
filed an amicus brief (friends of the court brief) supporting ICWA and Congress’ express Constitutional 
authority to legislate in Indian Affairs, along with 7 state amicus parties and law professors doing the 
same. In October 2018, the Texas judge found – for the first time in 40 years, and the first time ever in 
a federal Indian law case – that Congress did not have the power to pass ICWA finding ICWA was a 
race-based statute, among other things. This was an egregious miscarriage of justice, as Congress’ 
longstanding authority to pass legislation regarding Indians and Indian Tribes comes from the U.S. 
Constitution’s language regarding Indians and the political or government-to-government relationship 
between Tribes and the federal government.
The case was appealed to the Fifth Circuit and was argued in March 2019. The Association along with 
56 other Native organizations, 325 Tribal Nations, 21 states, 31 child welfare organizations, 7 members 
of Congress, and dozens of scholars of federal Indian law and constitutional law joined through further 
amicus briefs to support ICWA. As a result, in August 2019, the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals delivered 
a victory for Tribes, Native children and families by striking down the Texas judge’s decision. The Fifth 2019 ANNUAL REPORT5
Circuit found that ICWA is an appropriate exercise 
of the federal government’s political government-
to-government relationship with Tribes and Native 
peoples, and that ICWA did not unconstitutionally 
interfere with state child welfare systems. 
Unfortunately, the attack against ICWA in the courts is 
not over and we must still fight against the interests that 
seek to dismantle ICWA’s protection for Indian families. 
On November 7, 2019 the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals 
ordered the case to be reheard en banc (meaning that 
it will be heard before all the judges in the Fifth Circuit) 
and with oral argument. Oral argument was scheduled on January 22, 2020. On December 13, 2019 the 
Association, along with 58 other organizations and 486 federally recognized Tribes submitted another 
amicus brief to the Fifth Circuit supporting the constitutionality of ICWA. We anticipate strong support 
from the Fifth Circuit, though public education and continued advocacy is needed as the Goldwater 
Institute continues to bankroll other ICWA cases in state and federal courts all over the country.
The Association has partnered with other national Native organizations in the #ProtectICWA campaign 
and has been providing public education through speaking and publishing articles to make sure 
everyone understands that ICWA is the gold standard in child welfare, protects against centuries of 
harm to Indian children and families, and is still very much needed today.
ADOPTION INVESTIGATION PROJECT
The Association is in the development of a research project currently called the “Adoption Investigation 
Project” with partners from the Partnership for Native Children and Michigan State University Law School 
and others. The project is looking at how to best research and investigate how state adoption laws 
and the private adoption industry violates the Indian Child Welfare Act and removes Indian children 
permanently from their Tribal families and cultures. The Association seeks to maintain children’s rights 
to their indigenous cultures, beliefs and lifeways that supports child development and identity, and 
diminishes intergenerational and historic trauma. The Association continues this important work. 
JUVENILE JUSTICE AND ALTERNATIVES TO JUVENILE DETENTION
The Annie E. Casey Foundation has generously supported the Association’s efforts to build alternatives 
to Native youth incarceration and research important issues in juvenile justice in Indian Country. The 
Association has been working with the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians on their implementation of 
the first AECF Juvenile Detention Alternatives Initiative site. The Association has worked with the MBCI 
Community and leadership to explore how the Tribe provides alternatives to juvenile incarceration for 
their youth, what the Tribe needs to provide to support productive alternatives, and how data can 
feed the direction of how to best work with Native youth who may be caught in the cycle of breaking 
customs and laws within the community. The Association drafted a confidential report that surveyed the 
Choctaw Tribal community and Tribal juvenile justice officials and reported to the MBCI Tribal Council. 
The Association is also working in partnership with the Burns Institute on their implementation of a JDAI 
site at the Isleta Pueblo in New Mexico.
With the support of the AECF, the Association is further tackling a comprehensive survey of Indian 
Country juvenile justice programs and how the 574 federally recognized Tribes handle alternatives for 
youth detention. The large investigation will be performed in partnership with the National Congress of 
ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN INDIAN AFFAIRS6
American Indians, the National Indian Child Welfare Association, National American Indian Court Judges 
Association, National Indian Justice Center, and National Council of Juvenile and Family Court Judges and 
others. The research will assist the Association and AECF to develop stronger programming for Native youth, 
as well as provide information that will be helpful for congressional appropriations, Tribal leadership and 
individuals who work with Native youth and juvenile justice systems and programs.
UNDERGRADUATE AND GRADUATE SCHOLARSHIPS
The Association’s Scholarship program began in 1947, and from what we can 
gather, is the oldest college scholarship for Native American students! In the 
past four years, the Association has awarded 226 scholarships to 88 Native 
undergraduate and graduate students. Funding for the scholarship program 
comes from an endowment created by several estate gifts, which provides about 
$22,000 per year. The remaining funds for our Scholarship Program come from 
individual donors and general operating funds.
The Association’s Scholarship Program currently provides $1,500 per year ($750 
for Fall and $750 for Spring semesters) until the student graduates. To receive 
the scholarship, the Native American student must be recognized by his or her 
Tribal Nation (the Nation does not have to be acknowledged by the federal 
government) and show a continuing commitment to their community or Indian 
Country as a whole. The student will keep the scholarship until they graduate if 
they maintain a 2.5 grade point average and full-time status as a student. The 
Association has continued this seventy-year-old legacy program and is grateful 
for donors and contributors who believe that protecting sovereignty, preserving 
culture, educating youth and building capacity requires a higher education!
For 2019, funding allowed the Association to serve 27 students for the Spring 2019 and Fall 2019 semesters. 
The Association provided $27,500 in scholarships for 2019. The recipients of the Association’s Undergraduate 
and Graduate Scholarship Program were: 
Alexis Wagner
• William Allread - Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma, 
Stanford University Law School, Juris Doctorate
• Marcus Bear Eagle - Oglala Sioux (Lakota) Tribe 
University of California Los Angeles, Bachelor in 
American Indian Studies
• Jordan Cheresposy - Laguna Pueblo, Central 
New Mexico Community College, Bachelor of 
Arts in Business
• Kellen Claymore - Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe, 
Black Hills State University, Bachelor of Arts in 
Sociology and Psychology
• Rhianna Deschinny - Navajo Nation, University of 
New Mexico, Bachelor of Science in Psychology
• Shayla French - Sault Ste. Marie Tribe of 
Chippewa Indians, Michigan State University, 
Bachelor of Arts in Media and Information
• Jerome Garcia - Cochiti Pueblo, University of 
New Mexico, BA in Business Administration and 
Native American Studies• Lindsey Hancock * - Choctaw Nation of 
Oklahoma, Oklahoma State University - Pre-Med 
Physiology
• Nicholas Hill - Muscogee (Creek) Nation, 
University of Tulsa, Bachelor of Fine Arts
• Garett Holm * - Cherokee Nation, University of 
Arizona James E. Rogers College of Law - Juris 
Doctorate
• Lashai Jake - Navajo Nation, University of Utah, 
Master of Public Health and Social Work
• Ashley Lomay - Navajo Nation, Arizona State 
University, Bachelor of Arts in Business Law
• Lynn Martell - Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa 
Indians, University of North Dakota, Doctorate in 
Clinical Psychology 
• Joshua Max - Sisseton-Wahpeton Sioux Tribe, 
Institute of American Indian Arts, Master of Fine 
Arts in Creative Writing2019 ANNUAL REPORT7
NATIVE YOUTH SUMMER CAMPS
The Association began providing grants to Native Youth Summer Camps 
in 1963 as a powerful way that the Association can work to accomplish 
all its goals: to protect sovereignty, preserve culture, educate youth 
and build Tribal capacity. There is significant research that shows when 
young Native people are connected to their culture, they fare better 
mentally and emotionally than those who are not. Healthy and strong 
Native American youth will sustain strong Tribal cultures and protect 
Tribal sovereignty for years to come.
The Association provides funding for summer camps who are 
connecting Native youth with cultural experiences. Between 2003 and 
2019, the Association has granted $212,395 to 136 Native Youth Summer 
Camps! This year the Association provided funding for ten summer 
camps that provided educational opportunities regarding health and 
wellness, cultural practices and languages that served 527 youth from 
Tribes across Indian Country, including Nimiipuu (Nez Perce), Yakama, 
Spokan, Umatilla, Sho-ban, Zuni, Navajo, Salt River Pima-Maricopa, 
Laguna, Chippewa Cree, Muckleshoot, Oglala Lakota, Citizen Band 
Potawatomi, White Mountain Apache, Cheyenne, Haliwa Saponi, Waccamaw Siouan, Sault St. Marie 
Chippewa, Ute Indian Tribe, Blackfeet, Diné, Hoopa, Karuk, Paiute, Pomo, Yurok, Washoe, Hopi, Apache, 
Quechan, Tewa, Pascua, Yaqui, Santa Domingo, Shoshone-Bannock, Eastern Shoshone, Ojibwe, Lakota, 
Nakota, Dakota, Pawnee, Choctaw, Carlanas Apache, Mescalero Apache, Si’can’gu, Ponca, Santee, 
Machica, Ni’ Hon’ Jin (Japanese), Beaver-Alaska, Big Sandy Rancheria, Fort McDermitt Paiute, Gila 
River, Ho-Chunk, Hualapai, Menominee, Oneida, Tataviam Band of Mission Indians, Mazahua-Racamuri, 
Huichol, and Odawa. • Chambreigh Onesalt - Navajo Nation, University 
of New Mexico, Associate of Science in Human 
Nutrition 
• Jakeem Ray Paul - Navajo Nation, University of 
New Mexico, Bachelor of Science in Nursing
• Desiree Quintana - Santa Domingo Pueblo, 
Arizona State University, Associate of Science in 
Human Nutrition
• Simone Richardson  - Navajo Nation, Northern 
Arizona University, Bachelor of Science in Public 
Health
• Presleigh Smiley - Navajo Nation, University of 
New Mexico, Bachelor of Science in Nursing
• Cherish Tsosie - Navajo Nation, Fort Lewis 
College, Bachelor of Science in Environmental 
Science
• Ryann M. Unabia - Turtle Mountain Band of 
Chippewa Indians, Rush University, Master of 
Science in Nursing• Alexis Wagner * - Metlakatla Indian Community, 
University of Alaska Fairbanks – Bachelor of Arts 
in Rural Development
• Megan Warren * - Central Council of Tlingit 
and Haida Indian Tribes of Alaska, University of 
Alaska, Bachelor in Political Science and Law
• Stephani Watson * - Choctaw Nation of 
Oklahoma, Arizona State University Sandra 
Day O’Connor College of Law, Master of Legal 
Studies
• Shannon Wentworth - North Fork Rancheria of 
Mono Indians, San Joaquin College of Law, Juris 
Doctorate
• Taylor Yazzie - Navajo Nation, Northern Arizona 
University, Bachelor of Science in Education
• Terri Yellowhorse * - Navajo Nation, Academy 
of Art University, Bachelor in Media Arts and 
Animation
* 2019 GRADUATES
ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN INDIAN AFFAIRS8
THE FOLLOWING CAMPS RECEIVED GRANTS FROM THE ASSOCIATION FOR SUMMER 2019:
• Kamiah Nimiipuu Health Youth Wellness & Culture Camp, Kamiah, ID           
• Zuni Youth Enrichment Project, Zuni, NM        
• Pathkeepers 7th Annual Native Youth Leadership Camp, Culpeper, VA       
• American Indian Resource Center, Oakland, CA              
• American Indian Education Association, Phoenix, AZ       
• Herbal Garden Wellness Native Immersion Camp, Hartsel, CO                   
• The Living Well Traditionally Diabetes Prevention Youth Camp, Happy Jack, AZ
• Native Youth Summer Program: Camp TAMIT, San Fernando, CA     
• Dlóó’ Yázhí Day Camp, Thoreau, NM   
• Indigenous Youth Empowerment Program, East Lansing, MI     
Currently, the majority of our summer camp program is funded through a single donor: the Ben Plucknett 
Charitable Trust, and through other small individual donations. The Association sees a real need to develop 
a consistent national program throughout Indian Country that will address self-advocacy and build the 
Native youth voice, and provide pathways to higher education and careers. The Association is developing 
a detailed project design that will support its vision to develop this annual national opportunity for Native 
youth. If you would like to participate in the development of this national opportunity, or provide sponsorship, 
please contact the Association!
CULTURAL SOVEREIGNTY FELLOWSHIPS
The Association continued the Cultural Sovereignty Fellowship program in 2019. The Fellowship provides 
recent graduates of undergraduate, graduate and professional degree programs a paid fellowship with 
the Association for one year in the D.C. metro area. The Fellows are the programmatic powerhouse for 
the organization, and the fellowship aids in developing the Fellows’ skills in policy, advocacy, writing, 
communications and leadership in Indian Country. 
In 2019, the Association said good-bye to its first round of 2018 Fellows – Jessica Lee (Wichita/Kickapoo) and 
Eldred Lesansee (Pueblo), and hello to two new Fellows – Benjamin Cornelius (Oneida) and Nancy Deere-
Turney (Creek). The Fellows work on program matters for the Association and have the opportunity to work 
hands-on with Tribes to carry out the Association’s vision, mission and goals.
REPATRIATION
2019 FIFTH ANNUAL REPATRIATION CONFERENCE – HEALING THE DIVIDE
The Association hosted its Fifth Annual Repatriation Conference – Healing the Divide, at the Fort McDowell 
Yavapai Nation’s We-Ko-Pa Resort & Conference Center in Fountain Hills, Arizona on November 12-14, 
2019. The Association had a record number of registrations with 193 registered for the event. The event 
convened guests representing Tribal Nations, museums, federal agencies, foreign institutions, auction 
houses, collectors and the public. 
The annual Conference is an intense hands-on working experience where individuals and entities from 
many different backgrounds can come together and find community in the important healing work of 
repatriation. The meaning of the word repatriation is broadening at every year’s conference. Repatriation 
is not limited to the return of Ancestors, their burial belongings, sacred and cultural patrimony from 
institutions and federal agencies as provided under Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation 
Act. Repatriation also includes the return of all elements of culture including intellectual property, archival 
information, languages and songs, and sacred sites and places, all of which were discussed at this year’s 
Conference. 2019 ANNUAL REPORT9
The theme this year of “Healing the Divide” was developed to expand participation to anyone involved 
or interested in Native American cultural heritage, even when opinions differ. Fifty experts in their fields 
presented and shared their knowledge during three-days of interactive sessions about historic trauma and 
methods for community and individual healing. Participants were able to meet with museums, federal 
agencies and with partner Tribes in private spaces during the Conference for consultation meetings and 
other strategy development. At the final session of the Conference, all participants were able to help 
develop directions for efforts on repatriation issues over the next year. 
The Association has begun work on its 6th Annual Repatriation Conference – which will be commemorating 
the 30th Anniversary of NAGPRA. The 6th Annual Conference will take place in Denver, Colorado and will be 
in partnership with the University of Denver Museum of Anthropology. The Association will also be creating 
a national network of symposiums and public education opportunities that will be commemorating 
NAGPRA, developing strategies to strengthen NAGPRA, and bringing attention to important issues of 
cultural repatriation. 
INTERNATIONAL REPATRIATION
The Association continues to support individual Tribal efforts at repatriation from foreign institutions and 
building relationships with those foreign institutions to educate them on working with Native American 
Nations, concerns about international processes to effectuate the return of cultural heritage, and why 
repatriation is so necessary to the health of Indigenous communities. The Association does not share 
information about ongoing negotiations between Tribal Nations and international institutions.
The Association is currently performing independent investigations on foreign institutions’ collections and 
will be working with Tribes collectively to build a network of International Repatriation efforts for increased 
success, visibility and education for the public and foreign countries. The Association is also partnering with 
the International Indian Treaty Council on their efforts to create international mechanisms for repatriation 
from museums who are from United Nations countries. 
AUCTION HOUSES, DEALERS AND COLLECTORS
The Association has raised its voice loud against the sale and display of sensitive Native American cultural 
heritage, including Ancestral remains and burial belongings, as well as objects used for ceremony or that 
are considered sacred and held collectively or communally by a Tribe. As a tool to facilitate repatriation 
efforts of items held by private collectors, the Association issues alerts identifying items of potentially 
Angela Garcia-Lewis, Ellen Lofaro, Lydia Dean-Sutton and Anne Amati, 
Building a NAGPRA Community of Practice at the 5th Annual Repatriation ConferenceASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN INDIAN AFFAIRS10
sensitive nature originating from Tribes. These “Auction 
Alerts” inform our Tribal partners and other groups 
interested in repatriation and cultural preservation 
about upcoming auctions that contain potentially 
sensitive items. The Association provides a breakdown 
of what Tribes are potentially affected, highlights items 
that warrant a closer look, and provides information 
on the auctioneer and advice for how to proceed 
with removal from auction and potential repatriation. 
The Association also maintains a database with 
information on past auctions and is in the process of 
expanding the scope of auction data collection and 
retention to expand the valuable data on file that can 
be pulled when needed to assist our partners.  In 2019, 
the Association identified 3,721 potentially sensitive 
items for sale in domestic and international auctions, 
affecting approximately 150 Tribes. 
The Association’s efforts have shocked the antiquities dealers, who have been profiting on the sale of 
cultural heritage items that have been looted over the last 200 hundred years. Antiquities and artifacts 
dealers want to continue to profit through the sale of Native American burial, cultural and sacred 
patrimony and have developed a legal fund to threaten the Association’s advocacy. Even though the 
Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act provides for repatriation of items held by federal 
agencies and museums, other federal, state and Tribal laws may apply to private collections. These other 
laws and the origin of a cultural item are not vetted by auction houses as part of their good faith due 
diligence for their buyers. The only way to ensure that items can be sold legitimately and not run afoul of 
legal, professional or ethical concerns is through consultation with potentially affiliated Tribal governments 
and their representatives. If an auction house or dealer is not working with a Tribe regarding an item of 
“antiquity”, then it is suspect. The Association strongly recommends purchasers to focus their investment 
on contemporary Native artists and items that were made to be shared.
The Association worked with the National Congress of American Indians this year to pass  Resolution #REN-
19-031, “Auctioneers and Buyers Should Incorporate UNDRIP into Their Ethical Standards and Purchasing 
Practices of Indigenous Items and Collectors Should Support Contemporary Indigenous Artists.” The 
Resolution, which was approved by NCAI’s member Tribal Nations in June 2019, provides the following:
(1) Denounces the continued sale, trade, and display of Native American cultural heritage items without 
free, prior, and informed consent by Tribal Nations, as these acts violate the United Nations Declaration 
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP), other international treaties and mechanisms, certain state 
and federal laws, and tribal and customary laws; 
(2) Supports the improvement of auctioneer professional due diligence and ethical standards [through 
engagement of] potentially affected Tribal Nations through official Tribal government channels to 
determine whether cultural heritage items are rightfully on the market. Auctioneers, dealers, and collectors 
who are seeking to sell or display or loan items should also be accountable when seeking to sell, display, 
or handle cultural heritage items; 
(3) Opposes all forms of sale, collection, and display, or loan of cultural heritage items without the free 
prior and informed consent of Tribal Nations that is obtained through official Tribal government channels; 
Christine McCleave and Professor Rebecca Tsosie
at the 5th Annual Repatriation Conference
2019 ANNUAL REPORT11
(4) Urges collectors and auction-goers interested in purchasing Native American “artifacts” and “antiquities” 
to exercise cautious due diligence and to support contemporary American Indian and Alaska Native 
artists and their creations made for the art market and whose stories and creations are accessible and 
created to share.
The Association remains strong in its commitment to hold tight to our legal and advocacy statements, and 
work to bring Tribes, auction houses and collectors together to obtain information about objects that are 
slated for sale. The Association can also assist with donations of cultural heritage items back to Tribes as 
charitable contributions.
REPATRIATION WORKING GROUP
The Association’s voice on Repatriation efforts is guided by its Repatriation Working Group – a working group 
of Tribal practitioners, museums, lawyers and academics that work together to develop strategies that will 
support cultural preservation and the return of vital cultural items back to community. The Repatriation 
Working Group is a closed group that allows safe discussion about sensitive issues, as well as supports the 
development of strategy that will achieve success in matters involving NAGPRA, auction houses, collectors, 
museums and others who hold items that have been misappropriated due to a history of colonization and 
ignorance.
LEGISLATION TO SUPPORT REPATRIATION
With partners in both Tribal governments and museums, the Association analyzed amendments needed 
with the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act. The development of these potential 
amendments are being vetted through a working group of trusted Tribal leaders and practitioners, lawyers, 
museums and others. Because the Department of the Interior has had on hold its comprehensive review 
of the NAGPRA Regulations. The Association has not yet taken action on potential NAGPRA Amendments.
On September 19, 2019, during the Natural Resources Committee Subcommittee for Indigenous Peoples 
of the United States hearing, the Safeguard Tribal Objects of Patrimony Act (STOP) was discussed by 
members of congress, Tribal leaders, and others. The STOP Act’s goal is to put an end to the trafficking 
and international export of Tribal sensitive items. The Association supports the STOP Act and its goals. The 
Association is working with its partners and Congressional leadership to make sure that the STOP Act will 
be as effective as possible in achieving its goal of preventing international trafficking of sensitive items and 
returning these items when they do leave the United States. 
A small group of Tribal antiquities dealers has been opposing the Association’s and Tribes’ efforts to obtain 
stronger protections against the exportation of Native heritage because they want to maintain the ability 
to sell sensitive items. The real importance of this the STOP Act is to prevent Native heritage from being 
exported and sold where Tribes have a very difficult time with repatriation, and the burden should be on 
the holder of an item to prove its legitimacy. The STOP Act continues through amendments in 2019.
SACRED SITES
BEARS EARS NATIONAL MONUMENT
The Association has been working with Tribal leaders, the National Congress of American Indians, the 
Native American Rights Fund, and other individuals and entities to fight against the reduction of Bears Ears 
National Monument. On April 26, 2017, President Trump signed an executive order requiring the Secretary 
of the Interior to review all National Monuments designated under the Antiquities Act since 1996 that had 
over 100,000 acres or had been designated “without adequate public outreach.” The Bears Ears National 
Monument was established on December 28, 2016 by President Barack Obama and was the only NationalASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN INDIAN AFFAIRS12
Monument expressly named in the executive order. The Bears Ears Monument is considered sacred by 
Tribes and is covered by 100,000 plus significant cultural and sacred sites, structures and objects and 
environmental sanctity. Numerous Tribes worked together to support the proposal for the designation of 
Bears Ears as a protected National Monument.
On December 4, 2017, President Trump ordered 
a reduction to the size of Bears Ears, shrinking it 
to 15% of its original size. The revoked lands are 
to be opened up to “entry, location, selection, 
sale” and “disposition under all laws relating to 
mineral and geothermal leasing” and “location, 
entry and patent under mining laws” within 60 
days, essentially selling the sacred land to the 
highest bidder. The Native American Rights Fund 
(NARF) is suing President Trump on behalf of 
several Tribes. Other recreational, scientific and 
environmental groups have also filed litigation 
to stop the administration from acting on the 
diminishment. The Association has also joined 
the court fight to save Bears Ears. In partnership 
with the National Congress of American Indians, on November 19, 2018 the Association submitted an 
amicus (“friend of the court”) brief opposing the government’s recent motion to dismiss the Tribal Nations’ 
case. The brief highlights four issues. First, it describes Bears Ears’ cultural, spiritual, and archaeological 
importance—particularly for Tribes including many Pueblos of New Mexico that are not plaintiffs and 
thus otherwise would lack a voice in the proceeding. Second, the brief explains why President Trump’s 
decision revoking the Monument erodes progress the federal government has made toward supporting 
Tribal self-government by establishing a framework for the Tribal management of lands containing Tribal 
cultural heritage. Third, the brief explains how the Monument’s revocation, if upheld, would undermine the 
continued viability of all other national monuments intended to protect historic tribal landmarks. Fourth 
and finally, the brief examines the role that other laws play in protecting Tribal landmarks, structures, and 
objects; and in doing so, the brief illustrates that such laws cannot replace the protections that flow from 
designation as a national monument. The U.S. Department of Justice opposed our motion to file the amicus 
brief.
In March 2019, Judge Tanya S. Chutkan denied the Association’s motion, along with motions from two other 
pro-posed amici, a group of local elected officials and the Outdoor Alliance. She explained that, at this 
motion-to-dismiss stage, she wants amicus briefing only on the “limited issue” of whether “the Antiquities 
Act, and the Act alone, provided President Trump with the authority needed to decrease the size of 
the monument,” and that the Association’s proposed amicus brief instead “focus[es] primarily on … the 
potential injuries that may flow from President Trump’s December 4, 2017 Proclamation.” Judge Chutkan 
also noted, however, that if the case survives the government’s pending motion to dismiss (which it has!), 
the Association’s proposed brief could become relevant to the issues then before the court, at which time 
she may consider it.
The stakes remain high, as there is risk that, while this case is pending, Bears Ears’ sacred sites and objects 
will suffer irreparable damage. Indeed, it is possible that such damage has already occurred. Mining, in 
particular, poses a substantial threat: President Trump’s action left over 85% of Bears Ears open to prospecting 
2019 ANNUAL REPORT13
for hard-rock minerals without any federal oversight. But if the five Tribal Nations and other plaintiffs win in 
the end, the court is likely to declare Trump’s action unlawful and require his administration to recognize 
the Monument boundaries established by President Obama. For its part, the Association hopes that Bears 
Ears is fully restored, and soon.
The Association will continue to be a strong voice to protect Sacred Sites, participate in public comment for 
regulatory changes, and work with our partners to protect burial, cultural and religious areas throughout 
Tribal aboriginal territories. 
PUBLIC EDUCATION
MISSING AND MURDERED INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
Through the efforts of Cultural Sovereignty Fellow Jessica Lee, and volunteer Olivia Round, the Association 
started a webpage to provide comprehensive information and resources about Missing and Murdered 
Indigenous women, men and children. Much information about Missing and Murdered Indigenous Peoples 
is scattered and the Association developed this webpage to help centralize the information for individuals 
in need, as well as the general public. The webpage includes proposed federal and state legislation, 
articles, involved agencies and statistics about violence against Indigenous women, men and children.
HISTORY PROJECT
In 2022, the Association will be celebrating its 100-year anniversary of service to Indian Country! To 
commemorate this momentous milestone, the Association is developing its history for a book and short film 
that will tell about the struggles and victories of changing federal Indian policy over the last century from 
assimilation and termination to self-determination and sovereignty.
The Association began its advocacy in 1922 by working to defeat the Bursum Bill, a bill which would have 
allowed the state of New Mexico to steal lands from the Pueblo Nations and restrict their ability to partake 
in traditional practices. Some of the Association’s efforts that will be covered in the 100-year history will 
include this as well as: fighting to pass the Indian Reorganization Act, helping form the National Congress 
of American Indians, countering the federal policies of termination and relocation, the establishment of 
the first American Indian scholarships, fighting in courts to bring home one stolen child at a time from 
foster homes and developing the Indian Child Welfare Act, advocating for the Native American Graves 
Protection and Repatriation Act, protecting Taos Blue Lake, Pyramid Lake, Medicine Wheel and other 
sacred sites, and many other efforts to support Tribal sovereignty and to protect diverse Native American 
cultural practices.
The Association is very grateful to have the distinguished Matthew L.M. Fletcher (Grand Traverse Band of 
Ottawa and Chippewa) volunteering to author our history as a generous gift to the Association. Mr. Fletcher 
is a Professor of Law at Michigan State University College of Law and Director of the University’s Indigenous 
Law and Policy Center. His list of contributions to Indian Country is endless, but to name a few, he sits as a 
Judge on many Tribal Courts, and has authored numerous legal and academic articles. 
Many of the Association’s century-worth of records and history are housed at the Princeton University Mudd 
Manuscript Library in Princeton, New Jersey, where Professor Fletcher will conduct research about the 
Association. He will also be conducting interviews with current and former board members and directors 
of the Association to learn first-hand of the organization’s current past.
As the oldest non-profit serving Indian Country, the Association has a rich and inspiring history and we are 
excited for the opportunity to share it with the world—and utilize this history to lay the groundwork for the 
next 100 years of service to Indian Country!ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN INDIAN AFFAIRS14
Envisioning Our Future
THROUGH RESPONSIBLE FINANCIAL ACTIVITY
The Association’s income was up 31% from 2018’s $398,714 revenue (not including investment income), and 
program expenditures were 67% of total expenses for 2019. The Association’s continued growth in programs 
has showed stronger commitment through increases in restricted funding sources. However, there is room 
for improvement to develop sustainable sources of operations capital that will grow the capacity of the 
Association’s important programs in Indian Country for our next 100 years. 
Public donor contributions were 56% of total 
revenue and the largest source of revenue 
for the Association. Legacy gifts provided 
23% of revenue. The 5th Annual Repatriation 
Conference provided 19% revenue. 
Total expenses in 2019 were $527,478. The 
percentage of program costs were 67%, 
showing responsible spending while the 
Association was working to update its 
technology and media capacity. General 
and administrative costs were 28%. 
Fundraising expenses were 5%. 2019 ANNUAL REPORT15
The Association will continue to work towards more sustainable 
funding to move us into our 100th year of service to Indian Country. 
Public contributions are our most important resource and we are 
grateful for your support today – and to help build our capacity for 
the next 100 years! Thank you!
Total program expenses in 2019 were 
$384,604. Funds dedicated to the 
Repatriation and Sacred Sites Program 
were $182,857; program costs for the 
Indian Children and Youth Program were 
$29,789; and other program costs, including 
Scholarships, Summer Camps and Public 
Education were $171,958. 
The majority of the Association’s assets 
are restricted funds that can only be 
used for program purposes, and not for 
capacity building of the organization. These 
restricted assets include $582,793 held in 
an endowment for our Native American 
graduate and undergraduate scholarships. ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN INDIAN AFFAIRS16
THANK YOU TO OUR 2019 DONORS
No matter what level of contribution you are able to make, 
we cannot continue our efforts without your commitment! 
CULTURAL SOVEREIGNTY Level
More than $50,001
Forest County Potawatomi Tribe 
 
SELF-DETERMINATION Level
$25,001 - $50,000
Poarch Band of Creek Indians
FORTITUDE Level
$10,001 - $25,000
Nottawaseppi Huron Band of the Potawatomi
Tunica-Biloxi Tribe of Louisiana
 
ACCOUNTABILITY Level
$5,001 - $10,000 
Ben Plucknett Charitable Trust
Gila River Indian CommunityEvnisioning Our Future
THROUGH THE COMMITMENT OF OUR PARTNERS AND DONORS
2019 ANNUAL REPORT17
 RESPECT Level
$1000 - $5,000 
CAPACITY Level
$501 - $999 
Bradford Keeler           Ryan Connors          Bessemer Trust 
COMMUNITY Level
$250 - $500 
 
We give continued thanks to all of our donors, including the 319 Native and 
non-Native individuals who donated between $1-$249 this year! Thank you! 
Every dollar supports and strengthens Cultural Sovereignty for the next 100 years!Jason Sears
Jonathan J. Perry
Teresa Lu
Ralph D. Samuelson
John & Nancy Cassidy
Louise Wilde
Frank Mantei
Roger D. Hatch
Robert Halcomb
Joann Helm
John B. Lane
William Roberts
George Cloward
Richard F. PotthoffRoger Burnett
Megan Kahn
Carl Kohls
Rose Miron
Brian Fargo
Kristin Burke
Benjamin T White
Margot Sunshine
Sophia Kiang
Mary McGee
Nicholas Monroe
Lisa Narez
David Vicente 
Sisters of Charity of NazarethStanley Cook
Rosetta Stone Ltd.
San Manuel Band of Mission Indians
Dee Ann DeRoin
George Rozanski
The Minneapolis Foundation
Mr. and Mrs. Jonathan Jaeger
Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian CommunityTanana Chiefs Conference
Prairie Band Potawatomi Nation
Cultural Heritage Partners
Holly Vincent
Alfred & Betty Ketzler
AZ Society of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry
Native American Rights Fund
Mille Lacs Band of OjibweASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN INDIAN AFFAIRS18
Thank You!LIVING LEGACY DONORS
Thank you to the amazing and committed individuals and families that have left their 
lifetime legacies to support Indian Country programs!
 
 
What lifetime legacy would you like to leave to Indian Country? Please consider 
leaving a gift in your will or estate so that your commitment to the Association on 
American Indian Affairs and Indian Country may live on. Estate gifts can reduce 
(and even eliminate) the amount of estate taxes your beneficiaries will owe. Let us 
share your life with Indian Country!Lillian Pearl McCoy, 2002
John S. Hirschoff, 2002
Ruth Marie Tearney, 2003
Irene Burr, 2004
Sita Paulickpulle, 2004
Justin M. Wool, 2005
Agnes Scholl, 2005
Lili G. Sweat, 2005
Elizabeth B. Losey, 2005
Culbreth Sudler, Jr., 2006
Joe and Lucy Elder, 2006
Walter J. Zimmerman, 2006
Dorothy E. Hons, 2006
Gwendolin B. Keeny, 2006
Hazel M. Johnson, 2007
Lillian Frances Johnson, 2008
Muriel Williams, 2008
Gerda Stiller, 2008
Mary Wisner Taylor, 2009
Frederick H. Test, 2010
Louise Cook Holmes, 2010
John Herman, 2010Raymond A. Beplat, 2010
Harold Nelson, 2010
Margaret Lindstrom, 2011
Bernice H. Thiele, 2011
Paul F. Luenow, Jr., 2011
Muriel Terry Wilson, 2012
George P . Condon, 2013
Beverly B. Howell, 2013
Dorothy R. Sanford, 2013
Akabe Gulbankian, 2013
J. William Ingeman, 2014
Ghislaine D. Godenne, 2014
June M. Cogswell, 2015
Susan J. Goode, 2016
Elsa B. Motzer, 2016
Gloria E. Staab, 2016
Peggy Jo Diggins, 2016
Helen Mattin, 2017
Alan & Kim London, 2019
William Burke, 2019
H. Raymond Almy, 2019
Arlene Ann Sharp, 20192019 ANNUAL REPORT19
Envisioning Our Future
THROUGH STRONG GOVERNANCE
The Association on American Indian Affairs is governed by an all-Native Board of Directors from all 
over Indian Country. The Board of Directors provides oversight and direction for the programs and 
operations of the organization. The Board assesses the organization’s programs at least every two 
years and works to implement recommendations from the assessment to actively strengthen the 
health of the organization at every opportunity.
The Board meets at least four times per year, with at least two of those meetings face-to-face. In 
2019, the Board held four meetings, with two face-to-face meetings. On May 14-15, the Board met 
in Crandon, Wisconsin, in the Territory of the Forest County Potawatomi Tribe. On November 15, the 
Board met at the Fort McDowell Yavapai Nation WeKoPa Resort & Conference Center after the 
Fifth Annual Repatriation Conference and 97th Annual Membership Meeting and Cultural Event.
The Association’s Annual Membership Meeting is where members of the Association can take an 
active part in the governance of the organization by voting in new Board of Director members, 
adopt and revise bylaws and support other governance activities of the organization. This year, 
the Association’s 97th Annual Membership Meeting and Cultural Event was held at the WeKoPa 
Resort & Conference Center on November 13. During the membership meeting, members voted 
in two new Directors: Sandy White Hawk (Sincangu Lakota) and Rory Wheeler (Seneca). Shannon 
Keller O’Loughlin, Executive Director and Attorney for the Association updated membership on the 
history and current programs, as well as the financials of the organization. 
The Association also honored the fortitude and healing that has been brought to Indian Country 
by two important Elders: Leigh Kuwanwisiwma from Hopi Pueblo, and Barnaby Lewis from the 
Gila River Indian Community. Both Elders were presented with blankets from the Association, and 
members of their Nations, friends and family spoke about their years of advocacy on repatriation 
efforts.  
The 97th Annual Membership Meeting also shared music, song and dance from the area’s Tribal 
Nations, including the sacred Pascola and Deer Dancers of the Pasqua Yaqui Tribe Kolencia, 
Traditional Bird Dancers and Singers from the Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community, and 
the Maswadae Group from the Fort McDowell Yavapai Nation.ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN INDIAN AFFAIRS20
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Frank Ettawageshik, 
Odawa 
PresidentJonathan Perry, 
Wampanoag 
Vice President
Dee Ann DeRoin, MD, 
Ioway
SecretaryAlfred R. Ketzler, Sr., 
AthabascanJohn Echohawk, 
Pawnee
 Bradford R. Keeler, 
CherokeeJoseph Daniels, Sr., 
Potawatomi
Treasurer
Sandy White Hawk,
LakotaRory Wheeler,
SenecaSTAFF
Shannon Keller 
O’Loughlin
Choctaw 
Executive Director 
& AttorneyVan Tran – Program Assistant, & Scholarship and Summer Camp Coordinator
Michael Lightfield  – Finance Manager/Accountant 
Nancy Deere-Turney, Creek – Cultural Sovereignty Fellow
Ben Cornelius , Oneida – Cultural Sovereignty Fellow
Eldred Lesansee, Pueblo/Hopi – Cultural Sovereignty Fellow
Jessica Lee Govindu, Wichita/Kickapoo – Cultural Sovereignty Fellow
Kristy Garcia – Administrative Assistant
Jacob Wilentz  – Intern
Olivia Round – Intern 
Amanda Cassano  – Intern 
Misael Yanes – Intern
VOLUNTEERS
Anne Amati
Jaime Arsenault
Morgan Atkins
Tim Begay 
Raelynn Butler
Deanna Byrd 
Andrea Carmen
Melinda Casey
Beverly Crier
Allison Daniels
Clay Dumont
Marcella Ernest 
Kamakana Ferreira
Andrew Garcia Suzan Harjo
Larry Heady
Lourdes DeLeon
Michelle Holiday
Dr. Andrea Hunter
Brooke Johnson
John F.C. Johnson
William Johnson
Sarah Jones
Michelle Kahn-John 
Akilah Kinnison
Katie Klass
Lynda Knowles
Jaime LavalleeShannon Martin
Lea McChesney
Christine McCleave
Kathy M’Closkey
Andrew Meyer
Darren Modzelewski
Keone J. Nakoa
Albert Nelson
Lauren Norman-Brown
Kirk Perry
Lylliam Posadas
Vernon Roote
Martin Schultz
Todd ScissonsBrett Shelton       
Jodi Simkin
Aaron Sims
Jenny Slagle 
Greg Smith
Wendy Teeter
Rebecca Tsosie
Kaden Walksnice
David Weeden
Jael Whitney
Lisa Woodward
Mervin Wright 
Peter Yucupicio
COUNCIL OF ADVISORS
The Council holds a wealth of knowledge and various interests, and are prominent in their fields and are 
friends of Indian Country. The Council’s main initiatives consist of raising the profile of the Association’s 
work, assisting in planning fundraising events, and supporting the programs and initiatives of the 
Association.
Nadema Agard, Cherokee/Lakota/Powhattan
Gail Bruce
Kimberly Guerrero, Colville/Salish-Kootenai/
Cherokee
John Haworth, Cherokee
Dennis Hirschfelder
Peter Johnson
Alli Joseph, Shinnecock
Hattie Kauffman, Nez PerceKerry Kennedy
Dr. Francesca Kress
Mary Kathryn Nagle, Cherokee
Jody Naranjo, Pueblo
Martha Redbone, Cherokee/Choctaw
Gloria Steinem
Lynn Taylor-Corbett
Howard B. Teich
Curtis Zunigha, DelawareDonate at
www.Indian-Affairs.org
We are a 501(c)(3) public non-profit organization
Tax ID #: 13-162390
966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 30-A • Rockville, MD 20850
(240) 314-7155 • General.AAIA@Indian-Affairs.orgAssociation on American Indian Affairs
Protecting Sovereignty • Preserving Culture 
Educating Youth • Building Capacity 
Since 1922  
VISION
The vision of the Association is to create a world 
where diverse Native American cultures and 
values are lived, protected and respected.
MISSION
The mission of the Association is to lead 
the grassroots fight to protect 
Native American Cultural Sovereignty.
GOALS
The Association’s goals are to 
protect sovereignty, preserve culture, 
educate youth and build capacity.Letting Our Voices be Heard
 Through our Vision, Mission and Goals