  
AAIA  
 
Association on American Indian Affairs  
 
2014 Annual Report  
 
 
Protecting Sovereignty  
 
Preserving Culture  
 
Educating Youth  2 AAIA: Impacting Lives 1922 -2014  
We Were There — As the oldest Native American service and advocacy organization in the 
United States, the Association on American Indian Affairs (AAIA) has impacted the lives of 
Native American and Alaska Natives in many ways over the past 92 years.  From helping the 
Pueblo people keep their land and water rights in the 1920’s, to the scholarships provided to 
Native college students in the 1940’s, to the Field Nursing Program in the 1950’s which sent 
nurses to reservations, to helping Alaska Natives to protect their lands and hunting and fishing 
rights in the 1960’s, to the studies that were done in the 1970’s which led to the Indian Child 
Welfare Act, AAIA was there.   
In the 1980’s we were still there working to establish the Tribal Governmental Tax Status 
Act, and in the 1990’s we were there to gain enactment of the Native American Graves 
Protection and Repatriation Act and ensure its implementation and helped to protect sacred 
lands.  In the 2000’s we were there too —making sure that tribes have access to funding for 
their child welfare programs, fighting for the right to use eagles and other birds for sacred 
ceremonies, providing funding so Native children can attend summer camps that focus on 
cultural preservation and health education, and helping to change the process by which tribes 
are federally recognized among other things.  As we move into our 9th decade of providing 
services to Native Americans and Alaska Natives, we will continue to be here to impact 
Indian Country for future generations.  
AAIA is governed by an all -Native Board of Directors from across the country representing a 
diversity of tribes, geography and areas of expertise.  We work in close cooperation with 
Native Americans and other organizations that have similar missions in determining which 
issues will be pursued and the amount of emphasis to be placed on each issue.  Our national 
advocacy work and grass roots initiatives fall into three main categories:   
youth/education, cultural preservation and sovereignty.  
Tribal leaders from tribes not yet recognized by the federal government posed for a 
photo after signing  the Declaration on the Exercise of Inherent Sovereignty and 
Cooperation at the Who Decides You’re Real?  Fixing the Federal Recognition 
Process conference held at Arizona State University in January 2014.  3 A Letter from the President   
AAIA:  Who we are in a snapshot  
 
Dear Friends,  
 
I am proud to present this Annual Report of 2014.  Throughout the year, the Association on 
American Indian Affairs (AAIA) continued to work closely with tribes and other Indian and 
non-Indian organizations to address vital issues facing Indian tribes, families, children and 
communities.  
 
AAIA is the oldest Native American advocacy and service organization, having been founded 
in 1922.  Preserving Native cultures while promoting self -determination and the well -being of 
Indian and Alaska Native children and families is a priority for our organization and has been 
for most of our long history.  During 2014, AAIA continued to focus on Preservation of Tribal 
Cultures (international repatriation and sacred sites protection), Promoting Sovereignty (federal 
recognition reform) and Youth/Education (scholarships, summer camps, juvenile justice and 
Indian child welfare advocacy training, research and legal assistance).  This work was done in 
partnership with Native communities and other Native and non -Native NGOs, wherever 
possible.  
 
The work AAIA undertakes is possible because we are an independent organization.  Although 
our Board of Directors is made up of respected Indian people from Indian nations from all parts 
of the country, we are not a tribal membership organization.  Individual, tribal, corporate and 
other non -profit contributors make possible the flexibility we have to put our resources where 
they are most needed.  Thus, we are able to work on issues and problems that are vitally 
important to Indian people, communities and tribes, but which don’t get the attention that they 
need and deserve.  
 
Thank you for your continued support to make possible our important assistance to Indian 
Country.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
  
  
Alfred R. Ketzler, Sr., President  
Athabascan  
4 Table of Contents   
2014:  The Issues  
AAIA:  Impacting Lives                                                                              
 
A Letter from the President                                                                                     
      
Table of Contents                                                                                                 
  
Programs  
 
Sustain and Perpetuate Cultures and Languages  
 Sacred Sites/Religious Freedom   
 Native American Graves Protection & Repatriation Act (NAGPRA)                                                                           
 International Repatriation                                                                                                
                                                                                                      
Protect Sovereignty, Constitutional, Legal and Human Rights and Natural 
Resources  
 Federal Acknowledgement   
 Indian Child Welfare & Title IV -E   
 Juvenile Justice  
    
Improve Health, Education, and Economic and Community Development  
 Health  
 Scholarships     
 Youth Summer Camps      
   
Public Education  
 Newsletter and E -Newsletter  
 Annual Meeting of the Members and Native American Film & Music 
Event  
   
Financial Information  
 Statement of Financial Position   
 Statement of Activities   
       
Leadership  
 Board of Directors  
 Council of Advisors          
 Staff  
 
How You Can Help    
 
Contact Information                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Page  2 
 
 3 
 
 4 
 
 
 
 5 
 
 
 
 
 10 
 
 
 
 
 
 17 
 
 
 
 
 20 
 
 
 
 
 23 
 
 
 
 28 
 
 
 
 
 31 
 
 32 5 Sustain and Perpetuate Cultures and  Languages  
Religious Freedom  
 For many years, AAIA has worked to protect sacred sites with many positive results, 
including designation of the Bighorn Medicine Wheel Medicine Mountain sacred site as a 
National Historical Landmark based upon its traditional cultural value.  In 2014, we received a 
decision in a case in which we had joined in an amicus brief (sponsored by the National Trust 
for Historic Preservation) supporting the designation of Mount Taylor as a registered cultural 
property under the New Mexico Cultural Properties Act.  The New Mexico Supreme Court 
ruled that the process by which the site was designated was appropriate.  Although the 
designation does not provide complete protection for the mountain, it does trigger additional 
procedural requirements for proposed development which can help mitigate impacts from 
development on or near the site.  The particular development of concern is a uranium mine.   
We also reviewed and provided feedback to a pamphlet recently published by the National 
Trust entitled Preserving Native American Places: A Guide to Federal Laws and Policies that 
Help Protect Cultural Resources and Sacred Sites . 
 
 
Image of Mount Taylor, New Mexico  6 Sustain and Perpetuate Cultures and  Languages  
NAGPRA & International Repatriation  
Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA)  
 
 The repatriation of ancestral remains, funerary objects, sacred objects, and objects of 
cultural patrimony to tribes redresses a long standing human rights violation and helps to heal 
the historical trauma suffered by tribal communities and peoples caused by the looting of their 
ancestors’ grave sites and the loss of many sacred objects and cultural patrimony.  AAIA played 
an integral role in obtaining the enactment of the Native American Graves Protection and 
Repatriation Act (NAGPRA) in 1990 mandating repatriation by federal agencies and federally -
funded museums.  
 
 Promoting the full and effective implementation of NAGPRA continues to be one of 
AAIA’s goals.  For example, in 2014, we provided training to federal government employees at 
the Society of American Indian Government Employees convention.  We also filed an amicus  
brief in a case involving the remains of Jim Thorpe which are currently in a mausoleum in Jim 
Thorpe, Pennsylvania.  Some of his sons have been seeking to return his remains to Oklahoma, 
where he had wanted to be buried.  In the brief, we urged that the Third Circuit Court of 
Appeals reconsider a ruling that NAGPRA should not be applied to this case.  
 
International Repatriation by Honor Keeler, Director of the International Repatriation Project  
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
 The AAIA made several strides over 2014 in supporting a staffed International 
Repatriation Project. Honor Keeler ( Cherokee ) had discussed with the AAIA establishing an 
International Repatriation Project as part of ongoing efforts by Indigenous Peoples to find their 
Ancestors and cultural items in international repositories and bring them back to their 
communities. She began this initiative independently several years ago and with the support of 
a Working Group on International Repatriation, which she organized among tribes. The 
Working Group on International Repatriation, a grassroots group, now advises the International 
Repatriation Project. In 2014, the AAIA received a grant, which funded a full -time Director 
position and an office, which was opened in Rhode Island.   
 
INTERNATIONAL REPATRIATION PROJECT INITIATIVES  
 
 At the end of April, 2014, the AAIA hired Honor Keeler (Cherokee), as the Director of 
the International Repatriation Project. She was formerly a Visiting Assistant Professor at 
Wesleyan University, as well as the Repatriation Coordinator. She has published on 
international repatriation and worked with Native Nations and Indigenous Peoples on this issue 
for over a decade. Keeler brought this project to the AAIA, having investigated Native 
American collections in European Museums and forming the Working Group on International 
Repatriation with representatives across Native Nations.  7  The Project has begun to address four major immediate steps expressed by members of 
the Working Group on International Repatriation: 1) Education about international repatriation 
to tribal, national, and international communities; 2) Guidance on international repatriation for 
Native Nations and their peoples; 3) Bringing together Native Nations to discuss International 
Repatriation and to develop an outcome document and protocols; and 4) Developing a Database 
so that Native Nations may find their Ancestors and Cultural Items in international and private 
collections.  
 
Gaining Support Across Indian Country and Internationally  
 
 Keeler traveled to Australia in June 2014 to meet with Indigenous Peoples from Austra-
lia and New Zealand to solidify a partnership with them and investigate their very successful 
international repatriation programs for their peoples. This travel was made possible through an-
other grant issued through the Australian government called “ Return, Reconcile, and Renew ,” 
which will involve a three -year exchange among Indigenous Peoples to further efforts in inter-
national repatriation. The grant only covers travel expenses to and from Australia once a year. 
The trip was enormously successful, as our International Repatriation Program and those pro-
grams among Indigenous Peoples in Australia and New Zealand have agreed to alert each other 
of Ancestors and cultural items located in institutions, if they are found.  
 
 Keeler also traveled to Native Nations to discuss the International Repatriation Program 
and gain support among the tribes. Travel was made possible both through this grant and travel 
funds provided by other tribes. In June, Keeler traveled to the United South and Eastern Tribes 
(USET) conference in Maine to encourage Native Nations to pass a Resolution on International 
Repatriation at the Culture and Heritage Committee. Keeler also met with the Wabanaki Con-
federacy’s Repatriation Committee while in Maine and solidified support among the Aroostook 
Band of Micmac, Penobscot, Passamaquoddy, Maliseet, and other Wabanaki representatives. In 
July, Keeler met with the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians to cultivate support among EBCI 
repatriation representatives. At present, the EBCI and Cherokee Nation are considering Chero-
kee legislation on International Repatriation. Keeler is working with both tribes on this issue. In 
August, Keeler was invited by the Western Apache Repatriation Committee to present on Inter-
national Repatriation. The Apache Nations and the International Repatriation Project are col-
laborating on international initiatives to repatriate, and counter stereotypes about Native Ameri-
cans and common misconceptions museums and others have about repatriation. While in Ari-
zona, Keeler also met with individuals from Zuni, Navajo Nation, and was invited to the Hopi 
Tribe .    
 
Increasing Education about International Repatriation to Tribal, National, and International 
Communities  
 
 One of the primary concerns expressed by Working Group members is the need to in-
crease awareness of the human rights issues surrounding international repatriation.  Sustain and Perpetuate Cultures and  Languages  
International Repatriation  8 Sustain and Perpetuate Cultures and  Languages  
International Repatriation  
Support must be gained from within our communities, and on the national and international 
levels, to raise awareness, combat misconceptions about Native peoples, and promote 
repatriation. To do so, the Director began three primary initiatives, partnering with Native 
communities, students, and a filmmaker to address these issues. Keeler and students at 
Wesleyan University collaborated with Working Group members to create an international 
repatriation exhibit. The exhibit is meant to travel to Native Nations throughout the country, 
and provide a platform of tribal concerns to this topic. We are hopeful that the exhibit will then 
travel overseas.  
 
 In addition, Keeler collaborated with filmmaker Angelo Baca on creating a Public 
Service Announcement (PSA) on international repatriation. The first PSA was recently 
completed and can be viewed at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8_MKUrB4KPM  . Baca 
will also be working on gathering interviews on international repatriation to put together a 
documentary.  
 
Guidance and Education on International Repatriation for Native Nations and Their Peoples  
 
 The Project has completed an International Repatriation Guide for Native Nations, 
developed the International Repatriation blog to include documents and information that will be 
helpful to Native Nations, and increased social media presence to share breaking news stories 
and developments through Twitter and Facebook. The International Repatriation Guide will go 
live in 2015 and serve as a resource to Indigenous Peoples in international Repatriation. Social 
media fees were established as follows: Twitter --@Indrepatriation and Facebook:  https://
www.facebook.com/internationalrepatriation.  
 
Bringing together Native Nations to Discuss International Repatriation and Develop an Joint 
Resolution and Outcome Document  
 
 Another initiative that the International Repatriation Project has undertaken with Native 
Nations is the planning and development of an International Repatriation Planning Conference. 
The purpose of the conference will be to bring together as many tribes and traditionalists as 
possible to discuss international repatriation, and develop further steps and protocols moving 
forward for international repatriation from private and international collections. The AAIA is  
fundraising for the conference.  
  
Database Development  
 
 One of the primary barriers that Native Nations encounter in international repatriation is 
accessible and centralized information regarding the location of their Ancestors and cultural 
items in international collections. The International Repatriation Project, on an ongoing basis, is 
collecting information, not only on the presence of these Ancestors and cultural items in 
international collections, but archival information that will assist tribal communities with claims 
to repatriate. An assessment report of needs was completed and an international repatriation 9 Sustain and Perpetuate Cultures and  Languages  
International Repatriation  
 
Cases  
 
The Director of the International Repatriation Project is also available to assist tribes with inter-
national repatriation strategy development, and cases on a limited basis. At present, we are as-
sisting tribes with cases in the United Kingdom, Germany, Japan, and France. We would like to 
increase this presence with additional staff in the future to be available to work with tribal com-
munities. However, this will be dependent on additional funding.  10 Protecting Sovereignty, Constitutional, Legal and  
Human Rights and Natural Resources  
Federal Recognition  
 By obtaining Federal acknowledgment of their tribal status, Indian tribes are able to 
have their sovereign activities recognized by the federal government and they become eligible 
for a wide variety of federal programs that are available only to tribes recognized by the federal 
government.  Because federal recognition strengthens the ability of Indian tribes and their 
members to survive and thrive in the 21st century, we have long worked with federally 
unrecognized tribes seeking federal acknowledgement.  
 
Tragically, the process by which the federal government determines who should be 
recognized as “legitimate” tribes is broken.  The administrative process for federal 
acknowledgement of Indian tribes has become increasingly unreasonable, overwhelmingly 
expensive, and unjustifiably unpredictable and there have been massive delays (a decade or 
more) in processing petitions.  Successful applications once included only a couple of hundred 
pages of material.  Now, tens of thousands of pages of evidence are required, costing millions 
of dollars, and taking up to thirty -five years for final acknowledgment determinations. After 
pouring such resources into an intergenerational effort, many worthy tribes are still 
unreasonably denied.  
 We have been advocating for reform of this system to make it reasonable, fair and 
prompt for a number of years and have worked closely with NCAI’s Federal Recognition Task 
Force and the Alliance of Colonial Era Tribes, among others, to achieve this goal.  
 
In 2014, The Department of Interior published proposed changes to the federal 
acknowledgment regulations. Among the changes proposed in the draft were the following:  
 Utilizing 1934 as the date from which petitioning groups must demonstrate community 
and political influence  
 Elimination of the requirement that the community show that it has been recognized by 
outside, non -Indian sources since 1900  
 Providing for “expedited positive and negative findings”  
 Allowing for independent review by an administrative law judge  
 Clarifying the “reasonable likelihood” standard of proof  
 Allowing certain petitioners who have been denied under the previous regulations to re -
petition  
 11 Protecting Sovereignty, Constitutional, Legal and  
Human Rights and Natural Resources  
Federal Recognition  
In response to the proposal, AAIA worked closely with the Federal Acknowledgment 
Task Force at NCAI, the Alliance of Colonial Era Tribes, and attorneys working on federal ac-
knowledgment reform to assist tribes seeking to understand and respond to the proposed rules 
published by the Department of Interior.  AAIA also filed detailed comments directly.  In our 
comments, we noted that these changes would significantly improve the process, but that there 
were still some issues that were problematic, for example, the apparent veto power that the draft 
regulations would provide to certain third parties (e.g., the State of Connecticut) in terms of the 
ability of previously -denied petitioners to re -petition. AAIA is hopeful that regulations will be 
adopted that will significantly improve the system as a result of these efforts.  
 AAIA was also actively involved in and presented at a national conference on federal 
acknowledgment hosted by Arizona State University Sandra Day O’Conner College of Law.  
Many believe that it was the largest gathering of non -federally recognized tribes ever.  AAIA 
Board member Frank Ettawageshik was one of the conference co -chairs.  A Declaration on In-
herent Sovereignty and Cooperation was signed by 29 tribal leaders as an exercise of their in-
herent sovereign rights.  12 Protecting Sovereignty, Constitutional, Legal and Human 
Rights and Natural Resources  
Indian Child Welfare  
Indian Child Welfare Act:  
 
 AAIA has worked actively in the field of Indian child welfare for more than four 
decades.  AAIA studies and advocacy were the catalyst for the Indian Child Welfare Act of 
1978, an Act designed to provide legal protections to Indian children and families and promote 
tribal involvement in decision -making involving their children and families who are at risk.  
Since that time, we have worked to promote the full implementation of the ICWA and to assist 
tribes in obtaining adequate resources for their child welfare programs by successfully 
advocating for expanded tribal eligibility under Title IV -B of the Social Security Act which 
provides funding for child welfare services and Title IV -E (entitlement program for foster care 
and adoption assistance) in the Fostering Connections to Success Act of 2008.  
 
 Much of our work in 2014 involved follow -up to the United States Supreme Court 
decision of Adoptive Couple v. Baby Girl.   The case involved the adoption of a young Cherokee 
girl by a couple in South Carolina, over the objection of her father.  By a 5 -4 decision, the Court 
held that  
 the heightened standard of proof for termination of parental rights in ICWA does not apply 
when a parent has never had prior legal or physical custody (although Justice Breyer in his 
concurrence suggested that there may be exceptions to this rule),  
 active efforts are not required to prevent the breakup of an Indian family when a parent 
abandons a child before birth and has never had physical or legal custody of the child, 
although the section may apply to a non -custodial parent in other factual circumstances, 
and  
 adoption placement preferences are not triggered until a party within the placement 
preferences (relative, tribal member, or other Indian person) seeks to adopt the child.  
 
 We drafted and filed one of two national tribal amicus  briefs in that case in support of 
the father and Cherokee Nation.  
 
 This decision raises critical issues about how the ICWA will be applied by state courts 
across the country.  AAIA has been engaged in many ways in efforts to clarify the limited scope 
of the Supreme Court decision and provide ideas as to how tribal and family advocates can 
respond to the decision.  
 
 AAIA prepared scholarly, yet practical, articles about the case which have been 
published in the American Indian Law Journal and the Federal Lawyer magazine published by 
the Federal Bar Association.  We also made numerous presentations based upon the articles, 
including presentations at the Federal Bar Association annual Indian Law Conference, National 
Indian Child Welfare Association (NICWA) conference, Association of Administrators of the 
Interstate Compact on the Placement of Children (AAICPC) conference, an Indian Child 
Welfare and Juvenile Justice Conference in New Mexico and at a Montana Tribal -State ICWA 
Roundtable.  13 Protecting Sovereignty, Constitutional, Legal and  
Human Rights and Natural Resources  
Indian Child Welfare  
 In addition, as part of the response to the case, a process has started in the Department of 
the Interior to determine whether revised ICWA guidelines should be issued (the current Guide-
lines were issued in 1979) and whether binding ICWA regulations should be promulgated for 
the first time.  We have been actively working to encourage and assist the Department of Inte-
rior in this process.   
 
 AAIA was invited to testify before the Attorney General’s Task Force on American In-
dian and Alaska Native Children Exposed to Violence, met with many of the members of the 
Task Force individually about these issues, and had discussions with staff in the Department of 
Justice who finalized the report and recommendations for the Task Force.  We also took part in 
listening sessions held by the Department on the Interior concerning whether and how to 
strengthen their existing ICWA Guidelines and filed joint comments with the National Con-
gress of American Indians and National Indian Child Welfare Association to the Department on 
the Interior describing how the Department could strengthen their existing ICWA Guidelines.  
 
 Part of this process is determining whether the guidelines should be changed to binding 
regulations.  AAIA looked closely at this issue through a paper which provided for a compre-
hensive analysis of the federal government’s authority to enforce the ICWA pursuant to a con-
tract with Casey Family Programs.  It was included as part of our comments to the Department 
of Interior and the subject of various discussions with attorneys working for the federal govern-
ment, as well as with representatives of the Children’s Bureau in the Department of Health and 
Human Services.  In that document, among other things, we concluded that the federal govern-
ment has the authority to issue binding regulations.  
 
 We have also provided technical assistance to an attorney engaged in ICWA litigation.  
We example, we provided informal feedback to the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) in 
regard to a lawsuit that they have filed in South Dakota challenging a process in that state 
whereby state courts are refusing to review the legitimacy of removals of children for a period 
of up to 90 days after removal.   A federal court has issued a preliminary ruling finding that the 
allegations raise legitimate issues of due process and compliance with ICWA. We were also 
part of a small group that consulted with Alaska attorneys and the Department of Justice in re-
gard to an Alaska Supreme Court decision that would expand the holding of Baby Girl to re-
quire that a formal adoption petition be filed before the placement preferences are applied in a 
case that began with a state -initiated involuntary child welfare proceeding.  
 
 We have also continued our work on a variety of legislative issues, including proposals 
by the North Dakota Senators dealing with the issue of background checks, and our work with 
the Casey Family Programs National ICWA Work Group which is seeking to mobilize tribal 
leaders to promote the effective implementation of ICWA through advocacy and policy 
changes.  14 Protecting Sovereignty, Constitutional, Legal and  
Human Rights and Natural Resources  
Indian Child Welfare & Title IV -E 
 Finally, our Executive Director served on the Advisory Committee for the National 
Electronic Interstate Compact Enterprise (NEICE) project, administered by the American 
Public Human Services Association (APHSA).  The project is designed to develop an electronic 
process that will allow states to more effectively utilize the Interstate Compact on the 
Placement of Children (ICPC).  As a result of our participation, APHSA has agreed to add 
language to their user guide reminding the state employees utilizing the system that they will 
normally need to contact an Indian child’s tribe to determine whether ICWA applies to that 
child, since the tribe is the ultimate authority on whether the child is a member or eligible for 
membership in the tribe.  
 
Title IV -E 
 
 The implementation of the Title IV -E tribal provisions has continued to be a priority for 
our organization.  We completed a 123 page analysis of tribal -state Title IV -E agreements and a 
tribal -state agreement template pursuant to a Casey Family Programs contract entitled A Survey 
and Analysis of Select Title IV -E Tribal -State Agreements including Template of Promising 
Practices .  The document has been posted online on both our website and the Native American 
Rights Fund ICWA blog and information about it has appeared on other websites, including 
Turtle Talk.  We also made a presentation about the study at the annual conference of the 
National Indian Child Welfare Association.  
 
 We met with Senate staff and worked with NICWA to develop language for legislation 
on Title IV -E that was ultimately enacted into law.  Our language sought to make sure that 
restrictions on long -term foster case would not negatively impact options for tribes that involve 
the use of non -relative tribal homes as permanent placements.  The enacted legislation did not 
incorporate our proposed language, but did provide for a 3 year moratorium on the application 
of the new provision to tribal governments to give us time to develop an acceptable alternative.  
 
 As part of our testimony to the Attorney General’s Task Force discussed above, we also 
included ideas about how Title IV -E might be improved, particularly in terms of monitoring 
outcomes for Indian children and making the process for tribes to directly obtain Title IV -E 
funding more flexible.  We shared these ideas during our meeting with Commissioner of the 
Children’s Bureau and with White House staff.   We have also been cooperating with a study by 
the Government Accounting Office looking at the implementation of the Fostering Connections 
Act of 2008, specifically the tribal Title IV -E funding provisions that we were instrumental in 
obtaining.  
 
 Finally, in 2014, we provided feedback to the D.C. City Government in regard to their 
policies regarding transfer of Title IV -E cases to tribes and continued to provide IV -E training, 
including presentations at a Montana Tribal -State ICWA Roundtable and the Administration for 
Children and Families Region 8 Title IV -E Summit in Rapid City, South Dakota.  15 Protecting Sovereignty, Constitutional, Legal and  
Human Rights and Natural Resources  
Juvenile Justice  
 During the last few years, one of AAIA’s priorities has been to improve how juvenile 
justice systems operate in regard to Native Youth that come into those systems.  The focus has 
been both on assisting efforts to develop alternatives to incarceration, particularly in tribal 
communities, and to develop strategies to address the unequal and disproportionate treatment of 
Native youth in non -Native systems.  To these ends, we focused on two specific projects in 
2014.  
 
 One of our projects involved working with NICWA on a project to study the 
implementation and efficacy of a law adopted by the State of New Mexico that requires that 
tribes receive notice of all juvenile justice proceedings involving their members.  The purpose 
of the study is to determine how this law is working and whether it might be a model for other 
states that are seeking to reduce the disproportionate treatment of Native youth in their systems.  
To that end, we convened or participated in a series of meetings during 2014, including a large 
meeting which included tribal officials, tribal judges, a state Supreme Court justice, state court 
judges, probation officer and mental health professionals, a meeting with officials and key staff 
from the Navajo Nation, and the New Mexico tribal -state judicial consortium.  These meetings 
were followed by detailed interviews with tribal officials and judges, state employees and 
officials, and other interested stakeholders. Our final report and recommendations will be issued 
in March 2015.  
 
 Our other, long -standing, juvenile justice project involves working with the Annie E. 
Casey Foundation in connection with its Juvenile Detention Alternative Initiative (JDAI).  JDAI 
is a system that promotes a method of decision -making that promotes and emphasizes 
alternatives to incarceration for youth that have come into contact with the juvenile justice 
system.  In 2013, the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians (MBCI) became the first pilot site 
for what is being called “Tribal JDAI”.  The goal of Tribal JDAI is to utilize the principles of 
JDAI, but to modify them as needed to reflect the unique cultural and jurisdiction framework 
within which tribes operate.  
 
 In 2014, we continued our involvement in the process of implementing tribal JDAI.  We 
helped developed training materials and took part in training sessions with MBCI. We also 
developed an informational pamphlet on Tribal JDAI and presented about the work at the 
National American Indian Court Judges Association (NAICJA) conference.  In addition, we 
researched key implementation issues, including a detailed analysis of federal funding streams 
for tribal juvenile detention facilities.  
 
  16 Protecting Sovereignty, Constitutional, Legal and  
Human Rights and Natural Resources  
Juvenile Justice  
Juvenile Justice  
 
 As our juvenile justice work moved forward productively, we began to see potential 
synergies between the two projects.  A meeting was held in Albuquerque between the New 
Mexico Tribal -State Judicial Consortium and the Bernalillo County JDAI program in which we 
participated that Annie E. Casey Foundation representatives also attended.  At that meeting, it 
was suggested by tribal judges to AECF that tribal notification of juvenile justice proceedings 
involving their children be added to what is considered to be Best Practices in JDAI sites gener-
ally across the country.  This discussion is ongoing and we anticipate that it will a significant 
part of the work that we will be doing with AECF in 2015.  
 
 To advance all of this work, we convened a meeting in December of our Juvenile Justice 
Work Group.  This group of tribal leaders, tribal court judges, individuals who have knowledge 
about or experience working with juvenile issues in a tribal context, and individuals more 
broadly involved with efforts to develop alternatives to detention for juveniles through the Juve-
nile Detention Alternatives Initiative (JDAI) first met in 2011 and has been invaluable in ensur-
ing that our work in this area is tribally -informed and meaningful.  17 Improve Health, Education, and Economic and  
Community Development  
Health, Scholarships & Summer Camps  
Health  
 
We have been working with a project implemented by the Arc to develop materials about Fetal 
Alcohol Spectrum Disorder for medical professionals.  We helped the Arc reach out to and 
connect with medical professionals working in the field as part of their needs assessment and 
provided direct input to the ARC as well to ensure that the materials would be culturally -
sensitive and useful to people working with Native Americans.  We were also instrumental in 
connecting Arc staff with the Indian Health Service and particularly with Community Health 
Representatives (CHRs), who are often the front line staff in Indian country on these issues.  
 
Scholarships  
 
In 2014, AAIA continued to use former scholarship recipients as reviewers of scholarship 
applications. We are grateful for their support and assistance in service to their peers. 53 
students were funded for the 2014 -2015 school year, representing 19 graduate students and 34 
undergraduate students.  Five undergraduate women were the recipients of the new Owanah 
Anderson scholarship, which is a continuing two -year scholarship for female undergraduate 
students entering their Junior year.  
 
Youth Summer Camps  
 
 A record number of Summer Camp proposals were received in 2014 (17), of which 9 were 
funded.  Camp themes were diabetes prevention and other health related focuses; culture and 
language preservation. Many thanks to the funders of the Summer Camp Program, including the 
Ben Plucknett Charitable Trust and the Riverside Church as well as individual donors who have 
continued to support Native Youth through AAIA’s programs.  
 18 Improve Health, Education, and Economic and  
Community Development  
Scholarships  
 AAIA continued its history of assisting Native American college students reach their 
educational goals by providing scholarships to 53 students in 2014.  Scholarships are awarded to 
students from federally recognized tribes as well as to those students from tribes that are not yet 
included on the list of federally recognized tribes in the amount of $1,500 per school year, $750 per 
semester.  
 
Adolph Van Pelt Scholarship - 
Scholarships in the amount of $750 per semester are awarded to undergraduate students in any 
curriculum.  
 
Displaced Homemaker Scholarship - 
Scholarships in the amount of $750 per semester are awarded to undergraduate students in any 
curriculum who would not otherwise be able to complete their educational goals due to family 
responsibilities. Students who receive this award are generally older students who have returned to 
school after raising a family.  
 
Allogan Slagle Memorial Scholarship -  
Scholarships in the amount of $750 per semester are awarded to graduate and undergraduate students in 
any curriculum who are citizens of tribes that are not recognized by the federal government.   
 
Elizabeth and Sherman Asche Memorial Scholarship -  
Scholarships in the amount of $750 per semester are awarded to graduate or undergraduate students 
pursuing a degree in public health or science.  
 
Florence Young Memorial Scholarship - 
Scholarships in the amount of $750 per semester are awarded to graduate students pursuing a master’s 
degree in the arts, public health or law.   
 
Sequoyah Graduate Scholarship - 
Scholarships in the amount of $750 per semester are awarded to graduate students in any  
curriculum.   
 
David Risling Emergency Aid Scholarships -  
Funding was awarded to graduate and undergraduate students in any curriculum who have a sudden 
critical need that was not expected or that would prevent the student from attending school.   
 
 AAIA receives approximately 500 -550 applications per year from undergraduate and graduate 
students from federally recognized tribes as well as from student from those tribes that are not yet on 
the list of tribes recognized by the federal government.   
 
 AAIA’s scholarship review team is largely made up of former AAIA scholarship recipients 
who volunteer their time to assist us in the scholarship review process.  They have a strong desire to 
give back and to help other Native students reach their educational goals.  We are grateful to these 
dedicated volunteers who give of their time and talent to assist us.  Without their help, AAIA staff 
would have a much greater burden reviewing applicants.   19 
Improve Health, Education, and Economic and  
Community Development  
Youth Summer Camps  
 The Association on American Indian Affairs (AAIA) has been providing seed money 
for youth summer camps in the areas of cultural preservation, language preservation and health 
and wellness/diabetes education since the 1970’s. These camps are run by Native run organiza-
tions and tribes from across the country, and are designed to strengthen and preserve the 
uniqueness of the individual culture of the tribe by providing opportunities for their youth to 
learn traditional cultural practices from tribal elders and others with specific expertise, while 
preparing them to live in the 21st Century. Without these opportunities, many of these youth 
would not learn the traditions of their culture, nor would they achieve academically or in the 
larger society.  
 Many of the activities in which the youth participate, such as regalia making, archery, 
plant identification, and cooking, are meant to strengthen cultural ties. Native language is used 
to instruct many of the activities, allowing students to strengthen or learn their Native language. 
Healthy lifestyles are stressed, allowing campers to develop a strong sense of self -esteem, build 
good relationship skills, develop team building skills, and engage in healthy eating habits and 
physical exercise, all of which have been shown to lower the use of drugs and alcohol, prevent 
juvenile delinquency, and lower suicide rates as well as increase the likelihood that students 
will complete high school and go on to college. Tribes and Native run organizations that have 
existing youth summer camps apply to AAIA for seed grants to fund specific needs that, with-
out outside funding, would have to be eliminated or reduced. In drastic cases, if no outside 
funding is received, the camp may be cancelled. AAIA provides funding for critical portions of 
the camp such as transportation, supplies for activities, camp cooks, stipends for peer counsel-
ors and honorariums for elders whose wisdom and insight enables youth to learn the unique tra-
ditions of their cultures.  
Below are some of the photos which were received from some of the camps AAIA provided 
funding to during the 2014 summer camp season.  20 Public Education  
Newsletter and E -Newsletter  
AAIA continued to publish our bi -annual newsletter Indian Affairs , which highlights the work 
of the Association as well as articles about issues important to the Native community.  
Hardcopies, which are distributed in June and November, are available to individual members 
who make a contribution of $25 or more per year or commercially by subscription.  Please 
contact our Executive Office in Rockville, Maryland for  subscriptions.  AAIA also publishes a 
monthly online newsletter which may be obtained by signing up under Become a part of AAIA  
on our website at www.indian -affairs.org.  
 
AAIA 2014 E -Newsletters:  
 
February  
 Federal Acknowledgement  
 Who Decides You're Real?  
 
March  
 AAIA Report:  A Survey and Analysis of  
 Select Title IV -E Tribal -State Agreements  
 
April  
 AAIA’s Executive Director Testifies Before  
 Attorney General’s Task Force  
 
July 
 Comment Deadline on Proposed Changes to Federal Acknowledgement 
Regulations  
 
September  
 
 Follow -up to July 20 Comment Deadline  
 
October  
 AAIA Announces New Owanah Anderson Scholarship  
 
November  
 Upcoming AAIA Annual Meeting with Native Film and Music Event and Leaders 
of Distinction Reception  
 
December  
 Follow Up:  AAIA Annual Meeting with Native Film and Music Event and 
Leaders of Distinction Reception  
 AAIA Honors Northern Cheyenne Leader, Steve Brady, 1957 -2014  
 ACTION ALERT:  Apache Salt Flats & Apache Leap  
 Federal Government to Move Forward to  
 Assist Native American Youth —Compliance with ICWA  21 Public Education  
Annual Meeting of the Members, Native Film & Music Event and 
Leader of Distinction Reception  
 AAIA sponsored its 10th Annual Native American Film Showcase at the Walter Reade 
Theater in New York City in November 2014. The event, which was held in conjunction with 
our Annual Meeting of the Members, consisted of the documentary Playground of the Native 
Son, the story of the Hominy Indians football team. The film’s executive producer,  Celia 
Xavier, introduced the film and held a small question and answer session afterwards.  
 
 Program and financial updates were provided for the members during the meeting. A 
fundraising reception was held prior to the meeting at which AAIA proudly honored Chairman 
of the National Indian Gaming Association, Ernie Stevens, Jr., award winning Native recording 
artist and activist, Martha Redbone and Shaun Taylor -Corbett, who played Frankie Valli in the 
touring company of Jersey Boys and whose mother Lynn Taylor -Corbett is a member of 
AAIA’s Council of Advisors. Awards were presented by renowned Broadway  
choreographer Sergio Trujillo. Art was for sale by award winning Native artist and sculptor 
Diane Shenandoah. Ms. Redbone and Mr. Taylor -Corbett then held a small concert for those in 
attendance.  
From left to right: Ernie Stevens, Jr., Martha 
Redbone, Shaun Taylor -Corbett  Celia Xavier  
Martha Redbone and husband  
Shaun Taylor -Corbett  22 Financial Information  
Statement of Financial Position -Assets - December 2014 & December 
2013 and Liabilities & Assets 2014 & 2013  
 Current Assets    2014  2013  
Cash and cash equivalents   $   51,036  256,295  
Investments in marketable se-
curities    253,927  251,533  
Grants and contracts receiv-
able   53,124  3,198  
Contributions receivable   25,732     16,797  
Other receivables    12,708  -  
Prepaid expenses    10,224  6,527  
Total current assets    $406,751  $534,350  
Property and Equipment     
Furniture and equipment
   26,371  56,030  
Less accumulated depreciation   (17,556)  (36,125)  
Net Property and equipment   8,815  19,905  
Other Assets     
Investments - endowments
   652,853  652,853  
Security deposits   1,150      1,150  
Total other assets    654,003   654,003  
  $ 1,069,569  $ 1,208,258  23 Financial Information  
Statement of Financial Position -Assets - December 2014 & December 
2013 and Liabilities & Assets 2014 & 2013  
Current Liabilities      
Accounts payable    $ 37,300   113 
Accrued wages      3,473   10,951  
Other accruals        231  947 
Accrued vacation    24,051  13,996  
Total current liabilities   65,055  26,007  
Net Assets     
Unrestricted    145,591  455,003  
Temporarily restricted   206,100  74,425  
Permanently restricted   652,823  652,823  
Total net assets    1,004,514  1,182,251  
  $ 1,069,569  $ 1,208,258  
    24 Financial Information  
Statement of Activities for the year ending 2014  
(with comparative totals for the year ending 2013)  
      2014        
Temporarily Permanently  
         
   
        
  Unrestricted       Restricted  Restricted  Total  2013  
 
Revenues, gains 
&  
other support       
Contributions  
and dues  $      114,926  8,167  - 123,093  179,903  
Legacies  29,092  - - 29,092  383,237  
Grants  25,000  356,351  - 381,351  185,250  
Consulting  54,800  27,885  - 82,685  105,077  
Investment in-
come  5,725  12,832  - 18,557  16,662  
Media sales  3,569  - - 3,569  9,706  
Other income  2,293  - - 2,293  1,475  
In-kind contribu-
tions  727 28,825  - 29,552  18,075  
Realized gains 
(losses) on invest-
ments  28,165  63,147  - 91,312  84,237  
Unrealized gains 
(losses) on  
investments  (67,076)  - - (67,076)  62,931  25 Financial Information  
Statement of Activities for the year ending 2014  
(with comparative totals for the year ending 2013)  
      2014        
Temporarily | Permanently  
         
   
        
  Unrestricted       Restricted  Restricted  Total  2013  
Net assets released 
from restrictions       
Satisfaction of re-
strictions  $         365,532  (365,532)  - - - 
Total revenues, 
gains and other sup-
port 562,753  131,675  - 694,428  1,046,553  
Expenses       
Programs  568,120  - - 568,120  605,665  
General and admin-
istrative  89,904  - - 89,904  86,377  
Fundraising  214,141  - - 214,141  206,869  
Total expenses  872,165  - - 872,165  898,911  
Change in net assets  (309,412)  131,675  - (177,737)  147,642  
Net Assets, begin-
ning of year  455,003  74,425  652,823  1,182,251  1,034,609  
Change in net assets  (309,412)  131,675  - (177,737)  147,642  
Net assets, end of 
the year  145,591  206,100  652,823  1,004,514  1,182,251  26 Financial Information  
Statement of Activities for the year ending 2014  
(with comparative totals for the year ending 2013)  
Cash Flows From  Operating  
Activities   2014   2013  
Change in net assets   $        (177,737)   147,642  
Adjustments to reconcile to net 
cash provided by operating ac-
tivities      
Net realized gains and loses and 
unrealized appreciation on in-
vestments   (24,236)   (147,168)  
Loss on disposal of assets   3,235   - 
Depreciation   7,855   7,334  
Changes in operating assets  
and liabilities      
Grants receivable   (49,926)   44,153  
Contributions receivable   (8,935)   59,646  
Other receivables   (12,708)   - 
Prepaid expenses   (3,697)   69 
Accounts payable   37,187   (11,423)  
Accrued wages   (7,478)   (1,441)  
Other accruals   (716)   (195)  
Accrued vacation   10,055   (292)  
Net cash (used) provided by op-
erating activities   (227,101)   98,325  
Cash Flows From Investing  
Activities      
Investment sales and maturities   401,161   177,709  
Investment purchases   (379,319)   (41,726)  
Net cash provided by investing 
activities   21,842   135,963  
Change in cash   (205,259)   234,308  
Cash , beginning of year   256,295   21,987  
Cash , end of year   51,036   256,295  27 Financial Information  
Statement of Activities for the year ending 2014  
(with comparative totals for the year ending 2013)  
 
Programming Services   2014   2013  
Juvenile Justice   $             41,281   61,105  
International Repatriation   119,602   13,320  
Medicine Wheel   4,457   - 
Steve Brady Fund   750  - 
Adoption  
Project   40,000   - 
Scholarships   -  - 
Summer Camps   -  - 
     
Total   $           206,100   74,425  28  
Leadership 
in  
Action  Leadership  
Board of Directors  
AAIA is governed by an 
all-Native Board of 
Directors representing 
all regions of the 
country.  The collective 
wealth of knowledge 
and expertise in diverse 
areas makes AAIA’s 
Board well suited to 
develop policies that 
benefit all Native 
peoples.  
 
Alfred R. Ketzler, Sr.  
President  
Athabascan  Bradford R. Keeler  
Vice President  
Cherokee  Frank Ettawageshik  
Treasurer  
Odawa  
Elke Chenevey  
Omaha  Dee Ann DeRoin, MD  
Nominating Chair  
Ioway  John Echohawk  
Pawnee  
Sarah Kastelic  
Alutiiq  Joy Hanley  
Navajo  Jerry Flute  
Dakotah  
Faith Roessel  
Secretary  
Navajo  29 Leadership  
Staff & Volunteers  
Staff  
 
Jack F. Trope, Executive Director  
 
Lisa Wyzlic, Executive Assistant/  
Director of Scholarship Programs, Ottawa  
 
Erisel Cruz, Americorps Vista Member  
Social Media and Internet Development Coordinator; Office Assistant  
 
Mike Jones, Bookkeeper  
 
Foster Wabama, Federal Work Study,  
Office Assistant  
 
James Nelson, Federal Work Study,  
Office Assistant  
 
Ebony Cross, Federal Work Study,  
Office Assistant  
 
Abhishek Kumar, Federal Work Study,  
Office Assistant  
 
Benjamin Pachito, Legal Intern,  
Soboba Band of Luiseno  
 
Earl Evans, Development Director,  
Haliwa –Saponi  
 
Honor Keeler, Director of International Repatriation, Cherokee  
 
Dominic Henry, International Repatriation Fellow, Navajo  
 
Although AAIA received very little funding from federal grants in 2014, we have been able to 
obtain valuable staff members through federal programs such as the AmeriCorps VISTA  
Program and the Federal Work Study Program. We are also very fortunate to have  dedicated  
volunteers to review applications for our scholarship program and help with fundraising events.  
 
Volunteers  
 
Cynthia Rudder  
Robin Wachenfeld  30 
Leadership  
Council of Advisors  
 
 
In 2013 AAIA was pleased 
to expand its Advisory 
Board into a Council of 
Advisors.  Based largely in 
New York where AAIA was 
established and 
incorporated, the Council is 
comprised of individuals 
who are interested in 
furthering the work of the 
Association.  They hold a 
wealth of knowledge and 
various interests, and are 
prominent in their own 
fields.  The Council’s main 
initiatives consist of raising 
the profile of the 
Association’s work, 
assisting in planning our 
fundraising events, and 
helping AAIA to network 
with individuals who can 
assist AAIA 
programmatically and 
financially.   
Howard B. Teich, Chair  
 
Nadema Agard, Cherokee  
 
Gail Bruce  
 
Kimberly Guerrero, Colville/Salish -Kootenai/Cherokee  
 
John Haworth, Cherokee  
 
Dennis Hirschfelder  
 
Peter Johnson  
 
Alli Joseph, Shinnecock  
 
Hattie Kauffman, Nez Perce  
 
Kerry Kennedy  
 
Dr. Francesca Kress  
 
Mary Kathryn Nagle, Cherokee  
 
Gloria Steinem  
 
Curtis Zunigha, Delaware  
 
 
 
 
  
Furthering 
the work  
of the  
Association  31 How You Can Help  
Consistent financial support helps AAIA continue to fund the programs described in this 
report. AAIA receives financial support through a number of avenues such as member 
contributions, on -line contributions, trusts, bequests, grants and foundations. Your support 
will help us to continue to work for the benefit of Native youth, families and communities 
through our policy and advocacy work and grass roots programming.  
 
 Membership - Your donation of $25 or more per year will assist us in providing programs 
that are vitally important to Native youth, families and communities. You will have the 
opportunity to receive program updates through our newsletter Indian Affairs, which is 
accessible online or as a hardcopy by request. You will also be invited to attend our 
Annual Meeting of the Members (which is open to the public) held in New York City, or 
to vote by proxy.  
 Spread the Word - Follow us on Facebook and Twitter and ask your family and friends to 
do the same and to join in supporting us too. You can also view our language program 
videos on YouTube and see our new language program website at 
www.aaialanguageprogram.org. Sign up for our monthly e -newsletter by visiting our 
website at www.indian -affairs.org and forward the information to family & friends.  
 On-Line Giving - Make a safe and secure donation on -line through Network for Good on 
our website at www.indian -affairs.org.  
 Monthly Gifts - Consider making a monthly gift to AAIA, which can be easily paid by 
credit card or automatically deducted from your bank account.  
 Matching Gift Program - Many companies offer Matching Gift Programs. Visit your 
Human Resources Department and ask if donations to AAIA can be matched and use their 
Matching Gifts Contribution form.  
 Join your workplace giving program and designate AAIA for your charitable contribution.  
 Bequests and Trusts - By remembering AAIA in your will, you can support Native youth, 
families and communities for years to come. Please consider contributions of a specific 
sum, a percentage of your estate or stocks and bonds in a bequest or trust to AAIA.  
 
Protecting Sovereignty  
 
Preserving Culture  
 
Educating Youth  
32 
     AAIA Executive Office   
 
966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 12 -B 
Rockville, MD  20850  
Phone:  240 -314-7155   *   Fax:  240 -314-7159  
E-Mail:  general.aaia@verizon.net  
 
 AAIA Field Office  
P.O. Box 8  
Hollister, NC  27844  
 
International Repatriation Office  
1005 Main Street, Suite 1209  
Pawtucket, RI  02860  
Phone:  401 -727-1400  *  Fax:  401 -727-1403  
E-Mail:  hk.aaia@indian -affairs.org  
 
AAIA  
www.indian -affairs.org  
 
 
 
The Association on American Indian Affairs is a 501 ( c ) (3) 
non-profit,  
publicly supported,  tax exempt corporation.  
 
Donations and contributions to AAIA are tax deductible to the extent 
provided by law.  
AAIA meets all 20 Better 
Business Bureau Wise 
Giving Standards  
AAIA Is a Founding Member of 
the Native Ways Federation.   
AAIA Participtes in the Combined 
Federal Campaign.  CFC #12307  