Since 1972, Cultural Survival has been at the forefront of the international
indigenous rights movement. Cultural Survival's work has contributed to arevolution of empowerment for indigenous peoples around the world. Overthe past quarter century, indigenous peoples have discovered for themselvesthe power of advocacy at the local, state, and international levels. They havelearned to use publicity to draw attention to their plight, and to combineforces for mutual benefit. They have demonstrated that traditional culturalknowledge can save lives, resolve disputes, and enhance the quality of life forall of humanity. But well-financed and politically powerful obstacles abound.Indigenous peoples now seek ways to protect their cultural identity andsecure their political and cultural rights in the midst of globalization and the“war on terror.”
Cultural Survival must periodically revise its mission to better meet the needs
of indigenous peoples. In 2004, Cultural Survival undertook an extensivestrategic planning process. More than 100 people participated, includingboard members, staff, project coordinators, and indigenous people who arepartners in or the focus of Cultural Survival's work.
During the process we learned that while there is still a need to document
violations of indigenous peoples’ human rights, there is equally a need toshowcase the ways in which cultural diversity and the specialized knowledgepossessed by indigenous groups can benefit all of humanity. While there isstill a need to put pressure on governments to protect indigenous rights, therealso is a need to find new ways to understand and partner with governments,intergovernmental organizations, nongovernmental organizations, and corporate and religious interests to find solutions that simultaneously protectthe rights of indigenous peoples and serve the wider interests of humanity.While some indigenous communities still need direct assistance, there is amuch greater need to make available to indigenous peoples the technical,legal, and other expert assistance they seek to help themselves.BIANNUAL REPORT2004-2005
TABLE OF CONTENTS
2-3 M ESSAGE FROM THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
4-6 P ROGRAMS & A CTIVITIES
7-9 P UBLICATIONS
10 M EMBERSHIP & B AZAAR
11 I NTERN PROGRAM
12-13 B OARD OF DIRECTORS
14-15 P ROGRAM COUNCIL
16 S TAFF
17 F UNDERS
18-19 F INANCIAL REPORT
Cover
From top left clockwise:Mirian Masaquiza, Viktor Kaisiepo, RichardGrounds, Vincent Nmehielle, Hiparidi Top'tiro,Isabel Juarez Espinosa, and Ledama Olekina.
Back
From top to bottom:Lisa Odjig, Adelard Blackman, CamilaRodriguez, and Jim Peters.
Photos © J. Brown 
Copyright © 2005 Cultural Survival, Inc
www.cs.org
CULTURAL SURVIVALMMEESSSSAAGGEEFFRROOMMTTHHEEEEXXEECCUUTTIIVVEEDDIIRREECCTTOORRWhile Cultural Survival's core mission to 
promote the rights, voices, and visions ofindigenous peoples did not change, the strategic planning process transformed theways in which the organization is achievingits mission. Today, the organization's twostrategic goals are:
 To increase global understanding of
indigenous peoples' rights, cultures, andconcerns
 To partner with indigenous peoples to
advocate for their human rights, and toempower indigenous peoples to be betterself-advocates
As we look ahead to 2006, Cultural Survival is launching new “train the trainers” capacity-building programs,
consolidating and increasing the support it provides to its indigenous partners, and expanding and professionalizing its human rights documentation and advocacy activities. Cultural Survival also continues toimprove and expand the dissemination of its publications—
Cultural Survival Quarterly , Cultural Survival
Voices , and the Weekly Indigenous News —to effectively educate key policy makers and support indigenous
peoples in their own advocacy work. Today, Cultural Survival’s work is guided by a predominately indigenousProgram Council and carried out by program staff working in partnership with indigenous communities andorganizations. 
This Biannual Report, which covers both the 2003-04 and 2004-05 fiscal years, describes the new programs and
activities that have been instituted, as well as the long-standing projects and publications that continue toaddress indigenous peoples’ most pressing needs. Even more detail about Cultural Survival's work can be foundon our newly updated website: www.cs.org.
These are exciting times, both for the worldwide indigenous rights movement and for Cultural Survival. The
rising capacity of indigenous peoples around the world to meet the challenges they face is an enormous sourceof inspiration. Cultural Survival is privileged to belong to and support this great global alliance.
Ellen L. Lutz
Executive Director
ANNUAL REPORT 2004-05
Victoria Tauli-Corpuz, Program Council member and Permanent Forum
President, at the UNPFII meeting in NYC.
3 Photo © J. BrownPPRROOGGRRAAMMSS&&  AACCTTIIVVIITTIIEESS
2005 marked a major shift in the direction of Cultural Survival’s operations. Many former Special Projects
became successful, independent entities, and Cultural Survival embarked on several new programs andactivities to support indigenous peoples and their communities. This report covers new initiatives, continuingprograms, and former Special Projects, all of which remain true to our mission: promoting the rights, voices,and visions of indigenous peoples.
GGuuaatteemmaallaa  RRaaddiioo  PPrroojjeecctt  --  GGuuaatteemmaallaa
The Guatemala Radio Project is a collaborative
community broadcasting initiative betweenCultural Survival and seven Guatemalan radio organization partners. The project works to protectindigenous free speech by ensuring thatcommunity radio—a vital source of news,information, and education—remains accessible toGuatemala’s indigenous populace. The GuatemalaRadio Project has four major goals: (1) to press forlegislation that will protect community radiobandwidth from encroachment by commercial orother special interests; (2) to train indigenousjournalists to produce timely, relevant content forbroadcast; (3) to assist community radio stations toobtain needed equipment; and (4) to providecapacity-building training for the radio associationpartners so the project can become self-sustaining.TTootteemm  PPeeoopplleess  PPrreesseerrvvaattiioonn  PPrroojjeecctt  --  MMoonnggoolliiaa//RRuussssiiaa
Cultural Survival’s Totem Peoples Preservation
Project helps ensure the survival of indigenousnomadic reindeer herding peoples in easternSiberia and Mongolia whose culture is indeliblylinked to their livestock and lands. The project hashelped stabilize the region’s reindeer populationand increase herds in Tyva, Russia and Mongolia.It facilitates indigenous rights workshops and agreements to advance indigenous sovereignty,protect ethno-cultural habitat, and reduce outsideinfluences that degrade traditional lifestyles, cultures, and their environments. It also works toadvance the Sayan Cross Trans-Boundary PeacePark Initiative, which aims to link indigenous communities on both sides of the Siberian-Mongolian border. A fourth cultural exchange thatbrings together indigenous people from Siberia,Mongolia, the United States, and Canada isplanned for the summer of 2006.
Antonio Garcia Contez reads Cultural Survival Voices at Radio
Sembrador, San Pedro La Laguna, Guatemala.
4CULTURAL SURVIVAL
The Totem Project delegation at the International Reindeer
Herders Congress in Yakutia, Russia.
Photo © D.R. PlumleyPhoto © A. PortalewskaBBrriiddggiinngg  tthhee  GGaapp::  LLaaww  vvss..  RReeaalliittyy  --  tthhee  AAmmeerriiccaass
Cultural Survival, in collaboration with the
University of Arizona and the U.N. SpecialRapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights andFundamental Freedoms of Indigenous Peoples, isworking to identify effective approaches to bridgethe gap between national and international humanrights law and the realities on the ground forindigenous peoples. Strategies for selected countries in the Americas will be developed at anOctober 2005 expert seminar in Tucson, Arizona.
EEnnddaannggeerreedd  LLaanngguuaaggee  PPrreesseerrvvaattiioonn  --  UUnniitteedd  SSttaatteess
As the first phase of a program to disseminate “best
practices” on preserving endangered languages inNorth America, Cultural Survival is collaboratingwith the Euchee Language Project in Sapulpa,Oklahoma to evaluate and disseminate the learning from its work.
HHuummaann  RRiigghhttss  DDooccuummeennttaattiioonn  --  CCoolloommbbiiaa
More than 600 indigenous leaders and community
members have been assassinated and some 20,000have been displaced over the last four years as aresult of Colombia’s raging civil war. CulturalSurvival is helping to raise awareness about thisassault against indigenous communities that arecaught in the crossfire, and is assisting Colombianindigenous rights organizations to raise funds totrain indigenous activists to document humanrights violations that threaten their communitiesand cultures.
IIttuurrii  FFoorreesstt  PPeeoopplleess  PPrroojjeecctt  --  DDeemmooccrraattiicc
RReeppuubblliicc  ooff  CCoonnggoo
The Ituri Forest Peoples Fund enables the Efe
and Lese people to provide their children withprimary education, including basic literacy, andensures the availability of health care servicesthrough the building of a school and a healthcare clinic.AAssssiissttaannccee  ttoo  MMaaaassaaii  NNoonn--GGoovveerrnnmmeennttaall
O
Orrggaanniizzaattiioonnss  --  KKeennyyaa
Cultural Survival works with two Maasai 
non-governmental organizations in Kenya that provide education for Maasai girls and undertakelocal development initiatives and legal action torecover traditional lands. Maasai EducationDiscovery (MED) helps the Maasai of Kenya andTanzania, especially women and girls, achieve sustainable livelihoods and gain greater access toeducational opportunities. Cultural Survival alsoprovides assistance and legal support to SimbaMaasai Outreach Organization (SIMOO), a community-based nonprofit organization workingwith Maasai in Kajiado District, Kenya. SIMOOimproves the living standards of poor communitymembers through integrated development, capacitybuilding, and advocacy about land rights, women’sempowerment, education and culture, food security, and water.
ccoonnttiinnuueedd  nneexxtt  ppaaggee
5ANNUAL REPORT 2004-05
Leah Mankura and Lydia Soipei Nampaso, students at Maasai
Education Discovery in Kenya.
Photo © L. OlekinaAAssssiissttaannccee  ttoo  tthhee  XXaavvaannttee  WWaarrãã  --  BBrraazziill
Cultural Survival assists the Xavante Warã
Association, a non-governmental organization thatrepresents the Xavante peoples of the SangradouroIndigenous Territory in Mato Grosso, Brazil, in itswork to conserve 
'Ro, a Xavante concept that 
integrates indigenous cultural and spiritual lifewith the natural 
cerrado (savannah) environment.
Projects focus on the documentation of traditionalknowledge and its transmission across generations,and on protecting the 
cerrado from environmental
damage caused by large, mono-crop soy plantations.
EErrssaarrii  TTuurrkkmmeenn  WWeeaavviinngg  PPrroojjeecctt  --  PPaakkiissttaann
The Ersari Turkmen Weaving Project benefits
Turkmen refugees from Afghanistan living inPakistan. This project keeps alive the vegetabledying, hand-spinning, and weaving traditions ofthe Ersari Turkmen, and channels the proceedsfrom rug sales into educational programs for theErsari people. Cultural Survival features Ersarirugs at its multiple cultural bazaars.BBllaacckk  MMeessaa  WWeeaavveerrss  ffoorr  LLiiffee  aanndd  LLaanndd  --  UUSSAA
Black Mesa Weavers for Life and Land betters the
economic and social conditions of the BlackMesa Diné (Navajo) by protecting traditionallifeways based on sheep herding and the sale ofwool and weavings. In addition to receiving fairprices for their products, the Black Mesa Weavershave received grants to develop solar-poweredwells as sources of sustainable energy. This project is in the process of becoming an independent organization.
TTiibbeett  PPrroojje
ecctt  --  NNeeppaall  aanndd  TTiibbeett
The Tibet Project generates funds through the
production and sale of traditional and contemporary Tibetan carpets woven in Nepal.The funds are used to support education, reforestation, and other projects that benefitTibetan communities in Tibet, India, Nepal, andthe United States. In FY 2005, Cultural Survivalassisted its partners to form Machik, an independent nonprofit organization.
DDjjeennnnéé  PPrroojjeecctt  --  MMaallii
The Djenné Project aided indigenous people 
living downstream from the Talo Dam Project tobecome active partners in the dam-planningprocess. A study by Cultural Survival and ClarkUniversity experts on large dams helped persuade the government of Mali and theAfrican Development Bank to redesign the damto improve water management. The DjennéProject was successfully completed in FY 2004.PPRROOGGRRAAMMSS&&  AACCTTIIVVIITTIIEESSCCOONNTTIINNUUEEDD
6CULTURAL SURVIVAL
Hiparidi Top'tiro speaks at Cultural Survival.
Photo © J. BrownIInnddiiggeennoouuss  EEdduuccaattiioonn  aanndd  tthhee  PPrroossppeeccttss  ffoorr  CCuullttuurraall  SSuurrvviivvaall
WWiinntteerr  22000044  --  2277..44
Education is crucial to indigenous peoples' struggles for autonomy and self-
determination. This issue of the Cultural Survival Quarterly examines the challenges
indigenous peoples face in obtaining education that enables them to navigate in thecontemporary world while maintaining their identities and cultures.
IInnddiiggeennoouuss  LLaannddss  oorr  NNaattiioonnaall  PPaarrkkss??
SSpprriinngg  22000044  --  2288..11
Indigenous peoples throughout the world face many threats to their lands and
territories, as well as to their cultural integrity. The articles in this 
Cultural Survival
Quarterly demonstrate the ways in which indigenous peoples continue to actively
engage the conservation community to ensure that national parks and other protectedareas do not violate their rights.
WWoorrllddss  TTrraannssffoorrmmeedd::  IInnddiiggeennoouuss  PPeeoopplleess''  HHeeaalltthh  iinn  CChhaannggiinngg  RRaaiinnffoorreessttss
SSuummmmeerr  22000044  --  2288..22
In this issue of the 
Cultural Survival Quarterly , contributors working in each of the
major rainforest areas of the world explore the effects of ecological and social change onthe health and well-being of rainforest indigenous peoples. This exploration was donewith the hope that it will contribute to the empowerment of rainforest indigenouspeoples as they struggle to improve their lives in an out of balance world.
TThhee  IInntteerrnnaattiioonnaall  DDeeccaaddee  ooff  tthhee  WWoorrlldd''ss  IInnddiiggeennoouuss  PPeeooppllee
FFaallll  22000044  --  2288..33
As the first International Decade of the World's Indigenous People (1995-2004) drew to
a close, indigenous peoples unanimously reported that the progress made was faroutweighed by the challenges that remain. By celebrating the successes and examiningthe failures of the past decade, this issue of the 
Cultural Survival Quarterly brings the
concerns of indigenous peoples to the fore so that the objectives of the InternationalDecade can be realized before another decade passes. 
CCuullttuurraall  SSuurrvviivvaall  QQuuaarrtteerrllyyPPUUBBLLIICCAATTIIOONNSS
7ANNUAL REPORT 2004-05WWoommeenn  tthhee  WWoorrlldd  MMuusstt  HHeeaarr
WWiinntteerr  22000055  --  2288..44
In this issue of the Cultural Survival Quarterly , indigenous women share their stories
and challenge mono-dimensional understanding of the women's rights andindigenous rights movements. Although they are doubly discriminated against,indigenous women demonstrate that their experience, traditional knowledge, anddetermination can help resolve some of the world’s most intractable problems.
IInnddiiggeennoouuss  PPeeoopplleess  aanndd  VViioolleenntt  CCoonnfflliicctt
SSpprriinngg  22000055  --  2299..11
This issue offers a multi-dimensional, contemporary examination of indigenous peoples
and conflict involving states and other outside interests. The articles both confirm andchallenge scholarly wisdom about the root causes of violent conflict involvingindigenous peoples, and highlight concrete steps that the international community cantake toward achieving peaceful conflict resolution. 
IInnddiiggeennoouuss  PPeeoopplleess  BBrriiddggiinngg  tthhee  DDiiggiit
taall  DDiivviiddee
SSuummmmeerr  22000055  --  2299..22
In today's technologically rich and dependent world, indigenous peoples fully
understand the importance of new technologies. In anticipation of the secondmeeting of the World Summit on the Information Society in November 2005, thisissue of the 
Cultural Survival Quarterly declares and endorses indigenous peoples'
intention of being included in the digital revolution.
FFaaiirr  TTrraaddee  &&  IInnddiiggeennoouuss  PPeeoopplleess
FFaallll  22000055  --  2299..33
This issue reports on Cultural Survival’s findings from research on the impact of fair
trade on indigenous producers. Based on extensive staff interviews with indigenouscoffee and craft producers in Guatemala and their fair trade partners in the United States,the study concludes that for fair trade to be truly fair for indigenous producers, theymust have greater knowledge of how fair trade works and more involvement in allaspects of their business partnerships. 
8CULTURAL SURVIVAL
In 2005, Cultural Survival began translating Cultural Survival Voices , its semi-annual newspaper,
into Russian, French, and Spanish-language editions. As a result, Voices now reaches thousands of
indigenous peoples and policy makers throughout the world.
 75,000 copies of English-language Voices were distributed in FY 2004 and FY 2005.
 10,000 copies of the Spring 2004 issue were distributed in Russian; 10,000 in French; 
and 20,000 in Spanish.
WWEEBBSSIITTEE&&  WWEEEEKKLLYYIINNDDIIGGEENNOOUUSSNNEEWWSS
 1,800 subscribers now receive the 
Weekly Indigenous News .
 A link to the Weekly Indigenous News
appears on the websites of our mediapartners: DevelopmentGateway.org,OneWorld.net, and IPSnews.net.
Russian Edition
French EditionSpanish EditionCCuullttuurraall  SSuurrvviivvaall  VVooiicceess
Cultural Survival launched a new version of its
website, www.cs.org, in the summer of 2005.Among the features of the improved site are easiernavigation, more detailed information aboutCultural Survival’s programs, and more prominentaccess to articles from all of Cultural Survival’spublications. The website also includes a “What’sNew” home page section for breaking news. Theaverage weekly number of new subscribers to the
Weekly Indigenous News increased five-fold since
the new site was launched.
ANNUAL REPORT 2004-059From left to right: Alice Lopez, a Mashpee Wampanoag, performs at the summer bazaar; Hand blown Guatemalan glass;
Shoppers peruse carvings from Kenya; Textiles from India.
CCUULLTTUURRAALLSSUURRVVIIVVAALLBBAAZZAAAARRSS
 Cultural Survival’s annual winter bazaar in Cambridge, Massachusetts, has become a community
institution, annually drawing more than 8,000 customers and participants.
 In 2005, more than 4,000 people attended the fifth annual summer bazaar in Tiverton, Rhode
Island, making it the most successful summer bazaar to date.
 Due to the proven success of the bazaars as membership-generating opportunities, Cultural
Survival will host 12 bazaars in the New England area during FY 2006.Members are Cultural Survival’s lifeblood. In the past two years, more than 1,200 new members
joined the organization. Cultural Survival’s 4,300 members from more than 150 countries form acommunity of individuals and organizations concerned with the rights of indigenous peoples.Members include indigenous people, anthropologists, professors, researchers, college students,activists, and interested members of the public. Over the past year Cultural Survival strengthenedties to indigenous organizations around the world through the compilation of an indigenousorganizations database, which is actively maintained on the Cultural Survival website: www.cs.org.MMEEMMBBEERRSSHHIIPP
Photos © A. Portalewska & J. Brown
10CULTURAL SURVIVALIINNTTEERRNNPPRROOGGRRAAMM
"Prior to interning at Cultural Survival, I [had] a superficial knowledge of the desires of indigenous groups
and the responses of state governments. My researching and reporting of the distressing harms on indigenouscommunities has inspired a deeper passion for remedying the social cries of injustice and has instigated agreater cultural awareness." 
Kristin Kelley, Dartmouth University student and former Cultural Survival intern 
Cultural Survival's interns are actively involved in allareas of the organization’s work, and play an integralrole in day-to-day operations. Cultural Survival offersinternships in three departments: 
 Research and Publications 
 Fund Raising and Events  International Indigenous and Human Rights Law 
In FY 2004 and 2005, Cultural Survival hosted 68
interns, and featured more than 40 speakers in itsintern lunch series.
Left: Dave Favreau talks to members at the
summer bazaar in Tiverton, RI.Top: Rachel Ballester discusses Maasairights in Kenya with CS Program Councilmember Ledama Olekina.
Photos © J. Brown
ANNUAL REPORT 2004-0511Cultural Survival is governed by a Board of Directors that serves as Cultural Survival's legal
accountability mechanism, and bears all the responsibilities of Boards of Directors in the United Statesand in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. The Board of Directors meets four times per year.
In 2004, Cultural Survival created a Program Council to guide the organization in its programmatic
activities. The Program Council, whose members are predominantly indigenous, is made up of 14individuals with the knowledge, experience, and skills to assist the organization to evaluate CulturalSurvival’s current programs, set policy on complex program-related issues, and identify potential areasfor new programs.GGOOVVEERRNNAANNCCEE
BBOOAARRDDOOFFDDIIRREECCTTOORRSS
PPRREESSIIDDEENNTT
DDaavviidd  MMaayybbuurryy--LLeewwiissis a retired professor of anthropology at Harvard University. He co-founded Cultural
Survival in 1972 with his wife, Pia, and serves as its founding president. He received his doctorate in anthropology from Oxford University.
CCHHAAIIRRMMAANN  OOFF  TTHHEE  BBOOAARRDD
PP..  RRaannggaannaatthh  NNaayyaakkis the chief executive officer of Cytel Software. He has more than 24 years of senior-level
management experience in technology and management consulting, and holds a doctorate in mechanical engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
TTRREEAASSUURREERR
SSaarraahh  FFuulllleerris the president of Decision Resources, Inc., an international publishing and consulting firm. She
previously served as vice president of Arthur D. Little, Inc., and president of Arthur D. Little Decision Resources. 
CC
LLEERRKK
KKaattyy  MMoorraanndirects the Healing Forest Conservancy, a nonprofit organization that promotes the U.N.
Biodiversity Convention. She previously served as a congressional aide and press secretary in the U.S. House ofRepresentatives.
BBOOAARRDD  OOFF  DDIIRREECCTTOORRSS  
WWaaddee  DDaavviissis an explorer-in-residence at the National Geographic Foundation. He is the author of numerous
books and more than 50 scientific articles. He received his doctorate in ethnobotany from Harvard University.
WWeessttyy  AA..  EEggmmoonnttwas the president of the International Institute of Boston for nine years. He previously served
as the director of the Greater Boston Food Bank and hosted and produced a public television program.
12CULTURAL SURVIVALLLeesstteerr  JJ..  FFaaggeenn  is a partner in the Boston-based law firm Goulston & Storrs, PC.  He advises both nonprofit
and for profit businesses and has served on the boards of several cultural organizations.  He received his lawdegree from Columbia University.
JJaammeess  HHoowweeis a professor of anthropology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. His research focuses
on political and historical anthropology, indigenous-state relations, and the impact of missionaries. Hereceived his doctorate in anthropology from the University of Pennsylvania.
JJeeaann  JJaacckkssoonnchairs the Department of Anthropology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Her books,
articles, and courses focus on medical anthropology, social and ethnic identity, gender issues, and indigenousmobilization in Colombia. She received her doctorate in anthropology from Stanford University.
CCeecciilliiaa  LLeennkkis vice president of information technology for Decision Resources. She has developed numerous
national and international Internet initiatives in the areas of science, health, and science education. Lenkreceived her doctorate in biology at Harvard University.
SSaallllyy  EEnnggllee  MMeerrrryyis the Marion Butler McLean Professor in the History of Ideas Department of Anthropology
at Wellesley College, as well as the co-director of the Peace and Justice Studies Program. She received her doctorate in anthropology from Brandeis University.
CChhrriiss  RRaaiinniieerr, a documentary photographer, has had photographs published in 
Life, Time , Smithsonian
Magazine , The New Yorker , The New York Times , and various National Geographic publications. From 1980
to 1985, Rainier was a photographic assistant to the late Ansel Adams.
VViiccttoorriiaa  TTaauullii--CCoorrppuuzz, a Kankana-ey Igorot from the Cordillera region of the Philippines, is executive director
of the Tebtebba Foundation (Indigenous Peoples' International Centre for Policy Research and Education). Sheis the Chairperson of the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, Chairperson-Rapporteur ofthe Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations, Convener of the Asian Indigenous Women’s Network, andCommissioner for the International Labor Organization World Commission on the Social Dimension ofGlobalization.
CChhrriiss  WWaalltteerris the founder and president of Yayla Tribal Rugs, Inc., and the founder of Barakat, Inc., a 
nonprofit corporation that benefits weaving communities and environmental protection in Asia. He is thefounder and coordinator of projects for the protection of Ersari Turkmen refugees from Northern Afghanistanand Tibetan refugees living in Nepal and India.
[As of September 1, 2005]
ANNUAL REPORT 2004-0513
Yanomami illustrations by Cica Fittipaldi reproduced with kind permission of Comissao Pro-Yanomami.IIssaabbeell  JJuuaarreezz  EEssppiinnoossaa, a Maya from Chiapas, Mexico, was one of the first indigenous women ever to appear
on stage in Chiapas. She co-founded a Maya women's theater cooperative, la FOMMA (Fortaleza de la MujerMaya, or Strength of the Maya Woman) and is one of Mexico's first indigenous women playwrights. 
RRiicchhaarrdd  GGrroouunnddss, a Euchee, directs the Euchee Language Project, a language reclamation project in which
Euchee-speaking elders teach Euchee to community leaders and youth. He is a leading proponent of theInternational Year for Endangered Languages. He received his doctorate in theology from PrincetonUniversity.
JJaammeess  HHoowweeis a professor of anthropology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. A specialist on the
Kuna of Panama, his research focuses on political and historical anthropology, indigenous-state relations, andthe impact of missionaries. 
JJeeaann  JJaacckkssoonnchairs the Department of Anthropology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. She carried
out her fieldwork in Guatemala, Mexico, and the Vaupes region of Colombia. Her books, articles, and teaching focus on medical anthropology, social and ethnic identity, gender issues, and indigenous mobilization in Colombia. 
VViikkttoorr  KKaaiissiieeppoo, a Biak from West Papua, represents the Papuan Presidium Council in Europe, the United
States, and at the United Nations. He was a consultant for the World Bank Grants Facility for IndigenousPeoples and is active in a wide range of indigenous rights campaigns.
PPRROOGGRRAAMMCCOOUUNNCCIILL
14CULTURAL SURVIVALPhotos © J. BrownWWiillttoonn  LLiittttlleecchhiilldd, a Cree, has represented indigenous peoples in organizations such as the United Nations and
the International Labor Organization for more than 20 years. He is vice president of the Indigenous Parliamentof the Americas and is the founder of the International Organization of Indigenous Resource Development. Apracticing lawyer and member of the Law Society of Alberta, he was named an honorary chief of the Cree forbeing the first treaty Indian from Alberta to graduate from law school.
TThheeooddoorree  MMaaccddoonnaalldd,,  JJrr.., Cultural Survival’s former program director, teaches anthropology and human rights
at Harvard University. He specializes in indigenous peoples of the Andes and Central America, and on humanrights, development, and local responses to induced social and environmental change and ethnic conflict.
MMiirriiaann  MMaassaaqquuiizzaa, a Kichwa from Salasaca, Ecuador, is a member of the Confederación Nacional de
Organizaciones Campesinas, Indígenas y Negras (Confederation of Indigenous Peoples, Afro-Ecuadorians andRural Organizations, FENOCIN). She is the Associate Social Affairs Officer for the Secretariat of the U.N.Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. 
VViinncceenntt  OO..  NNmmeehhiieellllee, an Ikwerre from the Niger Delta region of Nigeria, is an associate professor of law at the
University of the Witwatersrand School of Law, Johannesburg, South Africa. He currently is on leave while serving as the Prncipal Defender of the Special Court for Sierra Leone. He holds a doctorate in international andcomparative law from George Washington University.
LLeeddaammaa  OOlleek
kiinnaa, a Maasai from Kenya, is president of Maasai Education Discovery, a nonprofit organization
based in Kenya. Through his work, he raises awareness of educational problems for Maasai and helps Maasaigirls attain an education. 
MMaarryy  AAnnnnee  SSaauullteaches world cultures and religions at North Reading High School in North Reading,
Massachusetts. She is on the board of directors of Documentary Educational Resources and provides oversightand direction for Cultural Survival’s educational efforts. She has a doctorate in anthropology from BostonUniversity.
JJoohhnn  SSccootttt, an Iningai from Australia, was involved in establishing the Secretariat for the U.N. Permanent
Forum on Indigenous Issues. He currently works at the Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity inMontreal. 
SStteellllaa  TTaammaanngg, a Tamang from Nepal, was Chair of the International Indigenous Women’s Caucus at the third
session of the U.N. Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, is the Chair of the South Asia Indigenous Women’sForum, and an advisor of Nepal Tamang Women Ghedung. She founded Bikalpa Gyan Kendra in Nepal to contribute to students' education and livelihood by combining academic learning with practical training. 
VViiccttoorriiaa  TTaauullii--CCoorrppuuzz, a Kankana-ey Igorot from the Cordillera region of the Philippines, is executive director
of the Tebtebba Foundation (Indigenous Peoples' International Centre for Policy Research and Education). Sheis the Chairperson of the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, Chairperson-Rapporteur ofthe Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations, Convener of the Asian Indigenous Women’s Network, andCommissioner for the International Labor Organization World Commission on the Social Dimension ofGlobalization.
15ANNUAL REPORT 2004-0516CULTURAL SURVIVALSarah Albrecht, Administrative Assistant
*Jamie Brown, Graphic Design and IT Specialist*Mark Camp, Director of Operations*Clare Dowd, Director of Development*Sofia Flynn, Accounting*Jenn Goodman, Program and Development 
Assistant
Sarah Hay, Publications Distribution and 
Advertising Coordinator
Sara Johnson-Steffey, Grants CoordinatorSandeep Kindo, Coordinator of the Cultural 
Survival Law Initiative
*Ellen L. Lutz, Executive DirectorZivile Maciukaite, Asia Research*Lisa Matthews, News and Education Coordinator*Pia Maybury-Lewis, Intern Program and Bazaar CoordinatorIan S. McIntosh, Senior EditorKate O’Mara, Weekly Indigenous News Editor*Agnes Portaleweska, Membership CoordinatorTara Tidwell Cullen, Managing Editor-Cultural Survival QuarterlyJames Williams, Special Projects Manager
* Indicates staff as of September 1, 2005
Cultural Survival staff, board, and program council members at the
Program Council meeting in New York City, NY.SSTTAAFFFF
Photo © J. Brown
Cultural Survival gratefully acknowledges the pro bono legal services of its counsel, Goulston & Storrs, PC.FFoouunnddaattiioonnss,,  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss,,  
aanndd  OOrrggaanniizzaattiioonnss
Adelard & Valeda Lea Roy 
Foundation
Arizona State MuseumBarakatThe Boston FoundationThe Charlotte Forsythe Fund, a 
fund of the Headwaters Fund 
The Cottonwood FoundationThe Christensen FundDean’s BeansDecision Resources FoundationEl Norte FoundationEqual ExchangeFord FoundationFuller Museum of ArtGoulston & Storrs, PCGrace Jones Richardson TrustThe Greenville FoundationInavale Foundation, Inc.Jessie Smith Noyes FoundationJRS Dryfoos Charitable Lead Trust Julia & Seymour Gross 
Foundation, Inc.
Museum of Northern Arizona  National Endowment for  
Democracy
The Navajo NationNordlys Foundation, Inc. Peace Development Fund The Plus Valia FoundationReebok Human Rights Foundation Rochester Institute of TechnologyThe Roy A. Hunt FoundationSaul & Amy Scheuer Cohen Family 
Foundation
Toward Sustainability FoundationUniversity of ArizonaUtah State University
Winky FoundationBBeenneeffaaccttoorrss**
Anonymous
Charity E. AlkerLester AndersonHeinrich Bauer VerlagRyan BobkoAlicia J. Campi Asho Craine William E. CrawfordWilliam H. CrockerJohn R. DobbynMarjorie A. DolbeerChris DonahueWesty & Susan EgmontPeter T. EllisonLester J. FagenMartha B. FreemanSarah FullerWilliam & Jeanie GrausteinMorris HalleElizabeth H. HarrisonArthur HertzbergKarin HolserJames HoweJean E. JacksonKarl JohansgtAgeliki & Charles M. KeilThomas F. KingLouise LamphereRichard M. LeeRichard F. LemanCecilia LenkHal LitoffJesse MarkowDavid & Pia Maybury-LewisConstance McAninchBruce P. MerrillSally E. Merry
P. Ranganath NayakMichael O. NimkoffNancy S. NordhoffDr. Achola Pala OkeyoNicholas J. PierottiKatharine M. PrestonJordan S. PriceJerome Regier Barbara Rogoff Estate of Joni RossBart RyanAmanda M. RydenMary SawabiniDan ScheibPatti J. SchultzMats SextonRajeev ShahPeter L. SheldonSusan ShermanKristina L. Simmons & Michael 
Sheridan
William SkinnerHenry SteinerCynthia H. SunderlandMartha Claire TompkinsIrma TurtleChristopher WalterPatricia WhittierPhilip D. YoungTimothy Zajac
FFUUNNDDEERRSS
* Donors who gave $1000+
ANNUAL REPORT 2004-051718CULTURAL SURVIVALPublications
EducationProgramFund RaisingGeneral Administration
Total$215,264
$81,095
$962,190$171,278$132,103
$1,561,93014%
5%
62%11%
8%FFIISSCCAALLYYEEAARR22000044
EExxppeennsseess
Education
5%
Fund Raising
11%General
Administration8%Program
62%Publications
14%
AuditedGeneral Contributions 
& Subscriptions
Contributions & revenue
restricted for programs
Bazaars & Events (net)Interest & Other IncomePublishingGrant Revenue
Total$449,881
$962,190
$64,723
$62,988$23,248$81,525
$1,644,55527%
59%
4%
4%1%5%FFIINNAANNCCIIAALLRREEPPOORRTT
FFIISSCCAALLYYEEAARR22000044
IInnccoommee
General Contributions 
& Subscriptions27%
Interest & Other
Income 4%
Publishing 
1%Contributions & revenue
restricted for programs59%Bazaars & Events (net)
4%
AuditedGrant Revenue5%ANNUAL REPORT 2004-0519FFIISSCCAALLYYEEAARR22000055
EExxppeennsseess
Publications
EducationProgramFund RaisingGeneral Administration
Total$264,086
$20,689
$765,196$116,723$114,211
$1,280,90520%
2%
60%
9%9%
Program60%Education
2%
Publications
20%
General Administration
9%
Fund Raising
9%
AuditedFFIISSCCAALLYYEEAARR22000055
IInnccoommee
AuditedGeneral Contributions 
& Subscriptions
Contributions & revenue
restricted for programs
Bazaars & Events (net)Interest & Other IncomePublishingGrant Revenue
Total$509,030
$765,196
$69,084
$74,092$14,978$99,474
$1,531,85433%
50%
4%
5%1%7%
General Contributions & Subscriptions33%
Interest & Other
Income 5%
Publishing 
1%Contributions & revenue
restricted for programs50%Bazaars & Events (net)
4%
Grant Revenue
7%Cultural Survival
215 Prospect Street
Cambridge, MA 02139 USAPhone: (617) 441-5400Fax: (617) 441-5417culturalsurvival@cs.orgwww.cs.org
Cultural Survival is a 501(c)(3)federal tax-exemption organization.