OFFICERS
EXECUTTVE DIRECTOR
John E. Echohawk. /)/1ilL'/
LITICATION ]\TANACEl\IENT
CO ]\I I\{ I'I'TEE
K. Jcrome Goltschalk
NrclodY ${.Cov. a)Larl.d
Natalir Lrndrcth (lxi idJdrl
DIRECTOR OF DEVELOPMENT
Nlorgan O'Brien
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFTCER
Nlichael Kenncd]
CORPORATE SECRETARYNative American Rights Fund
1506 Broadway, Boulder, Colorado 80302-6296
(303) 447 -87 60 FAX (303) 443-777 6
www.narf.org
November 23,2016
The Honorable Loretta Lynch
Attorney General
United States Department of Justice
950 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20530
Dear Attorney General Lynch,
On behalf of the Native American Rights Fund, our tribal clients, attomeys and staff, I write you
today to express our outrage after seeing live feed videos on social media of the violent militarized
response of the Morton County Sherriff s Department and other law enforcement against the Water
Protectors who are protesting the Dakota Access Pipeline (DAPL) project near Cannon Ball, North
Dakota. As you may be aware, the path of the DAPL was directed away from non-Indian
populations towards the Standing Rock Sioux Reservation and under Lake Oahe, the primary source
of clean water for the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe. This fateful decision was made by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers without prior meaningful government-to-government consultation. As a result,
DAPL workers have already destroyed countless Native sacred sites and burial grounds along its
Path.
The Standing Rock Sioux Tribe has consistently maintained that they were never asked to engage in
meaningful consultations with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers regarding the placement of the
pipeline. On Novemb er 74, 2016, in the wake of the litigation filed by the Tribe, and the myriad of
concems raised by a host of other Tribal Nations, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers issued a
statement conceding that additional analysis of the DAPL project is necessary. The U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers has now invited the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe to engage in the formal
coniultation process as required by law and issued an edict that, during this period of consultation, no
construction of the DAPL under Lake Oahe can occur without a federal easement. Rather than
comply with this edict, DAPL and its parent company Energy Transfer Partners have chosen to defy
the United States government, have bull-dozed their way forward to the edge of Lake Oahe, and have
unnecessarily raised tensions on the ground in North Dakota.
On the evening of November Z},many of my colleagues and I watched in horror as live stream social
media videos of Water Protectors being attacked by police as they tried to remove burned out cars
and debris blocking the Highway 1806 Back Water Bridge. Morton County Sheruiff s Department
NATIONAL SUPPORT COMMITTEE
Willis, t hillil/,r . Xtary Wyntrq R,i.lillrrrr'BOARD OF DIRECTORS
CHAIRNI,A.N
Moses K. Haia III,,\'i?ti\e Ha||Eiiail
VICE.CHAIRMAN
Robert Mcchee, Poarch Band of Creek lndians
CORPORATE TREASURER
"fex Hall, Three Af/ilited Tribes
Larry N. Olinger, /!t1 (lhilk Rud al (ilhilillt hil{ktilt
S(ephen R. Le*is. Gila Riter lndiatl Comm,tiltty
Anita Mitchetl.,Ltuckleshoot Indian Tribe
Julie Roberts-Hyslop, Nathe l/illage of Tanana
Gary Hayes, Ute Mountaiil Ute
Richard J. Peterson, Tlingit dnd Hoi.la Inditot Tibes
Peter M. Pino, Pueblo of Zia
Michael Colbert Smilh, Chickasah Nation
Kurt \'. BlueDog, Sisseton-lltahpeton Siour
.Iefferson Keel. ari.kdsa\r Ndtionpurposefully aimed water cannons, shot rubber bullets and threw concussion grenades directly at
people. Over 300 people were injured that night including one young woman who had her arm so
severely injured by a concussion grenade that doctors may be forced to amputate it. More than 500
others were treated for hypothermia. First-hand accounts, video and photographs show that these
"non-lethal weapons" were being directed at individuals, sometimes directly in their faces, and at
close range. Given that temperatures that night were well below 25 degrees Fahrenheit, the use of
water cannons, and the use of rubber bullets and concussion grenades in this situation should be
viewed as an unnecessary, excessive use of deadly force against unarmed people. These Water
Protectors are being attacked and arrested for exercising their First Amendment rights and we urge
you to fully investigate the events of November 20 and take immediate steps to protect and safeguard
these American citizens and their constitutional right to assemble and protest.
We are deeply disturbed by the blatant disregard for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' decision and
the patent violation of the Water Protectors' Constitutional rights. As Native Americans, many of us
have either been to Standing Rock to stand in solidarity with the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe and/or
have relatives in the camp and on the front lines. We are appalled by the criminal acts of violence
that have befallen the native and non-native Water Protectors as the result of the militarization of the
police force in this situation- particularly given that it is being used to protect a private company on
federal lands. Native peoples demand action on the part of the federal government, thus we urgently
request that you to use your powers as Attorney General of the United States to do everything
possible can to prevent fuither escalation of the violence being visited upon the Water Protectors. A
solid first step would be a public announcement of your intent to fully investigate the acts of violence
and tactics being used by the Morton County Sherriff s office against the Water Protectors and allies
of the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe and, where warranted, bring criminal charges for violations of
federal criminal civil rights laws.
We would appreciate a prompt response and we are willing to assist the Department of Justice in any
way we can.
Executive Director
CC:The Hon. Bernie Sanders, Senator (VT)
The Hon. Raul Ruiz, M.D. (36th Dist., CA)
Karen Diver, Special Assistant to the President, Native American Affairs
Kenneth Kahn, Chairman, Santa Ynez Band of Chumash lndiansJohn E.