Annual Report 2010
Supreme Court
GTMOResettlement
Legal AdvocacyLegal AdvocacyU.N. Advocacy
DelegationClient
CCR Client
Legal Advocacy
BothOur Mission
The Center for Constitutional Rights is a 
non-profit legal and educational organization 
dedicated to advancing and protecting the rights 
guaranteed by the United States Constitution 
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 
Founded in 1966 by attorneys who represented 
civil rights movements in the South, 
CCR is committed to the creative use of law 
as a positive force for social change .Letter from the President 2  
Letter from the Executive Director  3 
Material Support 4 
Guantánamo 6 
International Human Rights 8 
Policing and Prisons 14 
Immigrant Justice 16 
Employment Discrimination 18  
Right to Dissent 20  
Movement Support 22 
CCR Media 24 
Letter from the Legal Director 26  
Case Index 27  
Friends and Allies 37  
2010 President’s Reception 42 
CCR Donors 43 
Board of Directors and Staff 56 
Financial Report 58 
In Memoriam 59 
Rhonda Copelon Remembered 60 CCR Annual Report 20102I look back on this last year at CCR with 
amazement. For those of us with progressive 
politics and who believe in social justice, we 
are not in the best of times. Justice and equal -
ity have paid a high cost for years and years of conservative and moderate  
appointments to the courts and an  
irresponsible “war-time” deference to the executive branch. Constitutional rights have been eviscerated by claims 
of national security. A vocal, well fund -
ed Right-wing has politicians with good 
intentions running scared. Despite this toxic environment, CCR has had a 
remarkable year in fighting for and—
more often than not, prevailing—in key struggles to protect fundamental  
rights and advance the ideals of a  
more just society. 
We remain deep in the trenches in our Guantánamo work. 
Our disappointment at the administration’s failure to close 
the prison and charge or release the remaining detainees is palpable. Our Guantánamo team is everywhere: at Guan -
tánamo, at a secure facility in Maryland, in Europe to find countries for resettlement and traveling to distant countries 
to ensure released detainees are not harassed and can begin 
their lives again after years on hold. We are deeply troubled by a future in which the legacy of Guantánamo—military commissions, trials of child soldiers, the use of coerced  
evidence and preventive detention—becomes the norm,  
at least for some. 
International human rights remain a major focus of our  
work and the Center has won important victories in our cases against military contractors in Iraq. Since the U.S.  government refuses to hold high level officials accountable 
for the U.S. torture program, CCR has become involved in 
two official criminal investigations in Spain which could well lead to, finally, trials of the Bush “torture team.” As our Guantánamo work begins to wind down, we have built up our involvement in 
other important areas. A good example is our 
racial and economic justice docket which has expanded significantly this year. In addition  
to our ongoing work fighting racial  
profiling and employment discrimina -
tion and in defending the right to  
political dissent, we have increased  our work with movements defending  
undocumented workers and their 
families. The attacks on this community have been vicious and often racist. CCR and our clients are fighting back, 
using the courts, the Freedom of Infor -
mation Act and with our lawyers in the 
streets defending people’s rights. CCR 
is true to our motto: on the front lines  
for social justice .
There is of course a lot more that I hope you enjoy  
reading about in the following pages, but I want to close  
with a sad note about the loss of our beloved colleague Rhonda Copelon. She and I began at CCR together in 1971 and she was always more original, more risk-taking, more motivated and harder working (if you can believe this) than 
the rest of us. Her work and her spirit are deeply entwined 
with all that we do today. Rhonda had one last challenge for us, one intended to improve the world. By establishing the Copelon Fund for Gender Justice and requiring a match of 
this gift, she has challenged all of us to join in contributing to 
her legacy of human rights for all and enabling CCR to be the organization that helps create that change.
Letter from the President
Michael RatnerJustice and equality 
have paid a high cost for years and years of conservative and mod -
erate appointments to the courts...
—CCR President,  
 Michael Ratner.3CCR is moving aggressively into the 
future because justice demands it. In 
a rapidly changing world and political 
landscape, CCR cannot afford to rely on our past work to chart cutting edges for the future. Our successes can  
seem fleeting in the face of political 
retrenchment; and our defeats often indicate that the courts are more  comfortable preserving the status quo 
than they are in implementing justice.
One setback this year was Holder v. 
Humanitarian Law Project (HLP) , a case  
CCR argued in the Supreme Court  challenging the “material support”  statutes, including a portion of the 
USA PATRIOT Act. By ruling against 
our clients—organizations which were attempting peaceful humanitarian work—the Supreme Court criminalized 
speech and exposed peace activists 
to prosecution if the groups they work with are, rightly or wrongly, labeled  as terrorist organizations by the  
government. 
Beyond what this loss signals for  
activists, the Roberts Court has thrown 
down the gauntlet for all of us who believe in justice. In this last term alone, the Court expanded First Amendment rights for huge corporations in Citizens 
United v. FEC , while restricting them 
for peace activists in HLP . Moreover, 
the newest Justice, Elena Kagan, has 
quietly recused herself from more 
than half of the cases on the upcoming 
docket, tipping the balance towards the conservatives on those cases. This will 
be a tough year.
But CCR remains undaunted by the 
challenges of hostile courts, an anemic 
Congress and surreptitious attempts 
to expand power by the Executive. For example, this year we filed Aref v. Holder  challenging the federal prison 
system’s experiment in social isolation at two secretly-created prisons called “Communications Management Units” (CMU’s). The government claims that 
CMU’s are designed for dangerous 
terrorists and other high-risk inmates. Yet, CCR found that many CMU prison -
ers were sent there for their religious beliefs, unpopular political views, or in retaliation for challenging other rights violations in the federal prison system. 
U.S. complicity in human rights  
violations does not stop at our borders. In the last several months we have 
traveled around the world to challenge 
some of the most intractable issues of this political moment. We went to: 
South Africa to work with the shack 
dwellers’ movement that resists evic -
tions; Haiti to provide a human rights framework for rebuilding the country; Uganda to explore challenges to perse -
cution on the basis of sexual orientation 
and gender identity (spurred on and 
promoted by U.S. based evangelicals) and proposed legislation that includes 
the death penalty for same gender  
sex and prison sentences for people who don’t report LGBT people to the 
authorities; and Honduras, where we 
met with resistance leaders challeng -
ing the coup of democratically-elected José Manuel Zelaya to explore how to 
expose U.S. involvement in that event.
 Securing justice and human rights in the current political environment 
requires innovation. Our work in this 
upcoming year will require CCR to “run to the fire” on a number of fronts; from defending the Constitution to building a 
human rights framework into U.S. law. 
Moving forward, CCR will be building our work on gender issues, and with 
LGBT, poor, immigrant, of color and 
other communities under attack, to build our shared vision of social justice. On all of these issues, CCR will be there 
pushing the envelope toward justice 
and we are grateful for your partnership and support every step of the way.
Vincent WarrenLetter from the Executive Director
Securing justice and human rights in the current political  
environment requires innovation.  
—CCR Executive Director, Vincent Warren.4In a devastating blow to the First Amendment, the U.S.  
Supreme Court allowed the government to criminalize speech 
in Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project . The decision allows  
human rights advocates and peacemakers who teach  
nonviolent dispute-resolution to be prosecuted as terrorists. 
The material support provisions of the Antiterrorism and  
Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 and related laws, includ -
ing a portion of the USA PATRIOT Act, allow the government 
to bar virtually any association with groups it considers  
to be “foreign terrorist organizations.” Through three  administrations, the government has claimed that activities 
like distributing literature and providing human rights training to blacklisted organizations constitute providing “services,” 
and are therefore equivalent to “providing material support 
to a terrorist organization”—punishable by 15 years in prison.
These provisions criminalize activities that are intended solely 
to promote lawful and non-violent actions of a designated  
organization. The statute imposes guilt by association by  
punishing moral innocents not for their own acts, but for the 
acts of the groups they have worked with to build peace  
movements or for humanitarian projects. The statute does  
not require intent to further illegal activity, and it gives the  
executive vast discretionary power to label groups as “terror-
ist,” turning these groups’ benevolent supporters into outlaws. 
        Material SupportCCR originally filed this case in 1998 on behalf of orga -
nizations and individuals who wanted to support lawful, 
political, and humanitarian activities of two designated 
groups. The Humanitarian Law Project sought to help the 
Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) learn methods to resolve 
disputes peacefully under international law, and sought 
to undertake human rights monitoring in Kurdish parts 
of Turkey. In addition, several Tamil-American groups wanted to provide medical and humanitarian assistance to 
victims of the 2004 tsunami in coastal areas of Sri Lanka, 
where the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) acted 
as the functioning government. Both the LTTE and the 
PKK were designated as “foreign terrorist organizations” 
by the State Department, and the U.S. took the position 
that these humanitarian efforts would be criminal acts.
Multiple lower court rulings had previously found key 
aspects of the material support statute to be unconstitu -
tional. However, in June 2010, the Supreme Court  disagreed, ruling that the provisions do not violate the 
First Amendment “even if the supporters meant to 
promote only the groups’ nonviolent ends,” making this the only ruling holding that it can be a crime to advocate 
lawful, nonviolent activity.
The ruling also creates serious questions for public  
interest lawyers who want to represent blacklisted clients. Nearly ten years ago, CCR began working to ensure 
access to U.S. courts for Guantánamo detainees. Even 
though the Court ultimately agreed with us in Rasul , and 
then again in Boumediene , much of the work leading to 
those decisions might have been prohibited under this 
new ruling. 
History will show that, once again, CCR and our team 
stood up for important principles. We will continue to do so even when victory in the cause of justice is elusive.  
More information on these cases is available at:   
http://ccrjustice.org/hlpHolder v. HLP: The ImplicationsThe First Amendment “was fashioned to assure  
unfettered interchange of ideas for the bringing 
about of political and social changes desired by  
the people.”  
- Justice Breyer , dissent opinion in Holder v. Humanitarian  
Law Project , quoting New York Times Co v. Sullivan (1964).The Supreme Court decision in Holder v. Humanitarian 
Law Project  criminalizes human rights advocacy  
and changes peace-building work into “terrorism”—
punishable by 15 years in prison. 
The decision criminalizes pure political activity—
exactly the form of free speech that the First Amend-ment was designed to protect—even when furthering only lawful and nonviolent ends. The implications are deeply disturbing: the right to exchange information and ideas without restriction, and the protection of free speech and association rights, are the foundations of a democratic society and a prerequisite for any peace and reconciliation process.
Invoking the fear of “terrorism,” the Court deferred 
to Congress, allowing legislators wide leeway to limit First Amendment activity. The “support” at issue  
here did not include the provision of funds, military training or technology. Rather, the activities barred are exclusively peaceful and humanitarian. This decision illustrates all too clearly how the “terrorism” label has been leveraged to curtail peaceful political expression. 
This ruling allows for the prosecution of groups and 
individuals working towards building peace and  
stability in war-ravaged parts of the world. The risk  of serious criminal charges will profoundly chill  
desperately needed humanitarian work in crisis zones.  
The decision also fails to clarify the law’s boundaries  to give clear and fair warning to those attempting to  
address some of the world’s most pressing problems. 
CCR will continue to pressure Congress and the Obama 
administration to change the material support laws  
to ensure that humanitarian groups may engage in 
human rights advocacy, training in nonviolent conflict 
resolution, and humanitarian assistance in crisis zones without fear of criminal prosecution.
56men whose cases have been heard have been ordered 
released. However, fewer than half of those men  
have actually been freed, due to government  
intransigence and failures in the administration’s  
resettlement efforts. 
In other litigation, CCR represents current and former 
Guantánamo detainees and their families—including the families of two men who died in the prison—in  
civil cases seeking redress for torture and mistreatment. 
The Center is also working with other human rights 
groups to investigate whether the CIA engaged in 
illegal human-subject experimentation on detainees. 
Details of our active Guantánamo-related cases can  
be seen beginning on page 27 of this annual report.
January 11, 2010 marked the beginning of the  
ninth year of detentions without charge or trial at 
Guantánamo. CCR believes that the men still  
imprisoned should be immediately charged in federal 
Obama’s Guantánamo
It was an encouraging sign when, as one of his first major acts in office,  
President Obama signed an executive order promising to close Guantánamo  
within a year. But that promise was soon abandoned. Instead of closing the  
prison, the new administration has extended many of the worst aspects of the 
Guantánamo system, including indefinite detention without charge or trial,  
illegitimate military commissions, and the inexcusable delay of court-ordered  
releases. Grave psychological and physical abuses continue at Guantánamo  
today, including forced tube-feedings, beatings and solitary confinement so  severe and prolonged that it amounts to torture.
The shameful legacy of Guantánamo remains: the U.S. government rounded up 
nearly 800 boys and men, labeled them “the worst of the worst,” and threw them 
into an island prison beyond the rule of law and without any means to challenge 
their detention. It is now clear that the vast majority should never have been 
picked up. Most were simply in the wrong place at the wrong time, captured by Afghan warlords or hungry villagers and sold to the U.S. for substantial bounties. 
Litigation
It has been over eight years since CCR filed the first habeas petitions for  Guantánamo detainees. Through Supreme Court arguments and congressional 
debates, CCR has been there, along with over 500 pro bono lawyers from across 
the country. Habeas cases continue to move through the courts, and most of the 
courts or released. There should be no third category of  men held in indefinite detention—and there must be  
accountability for crimes committed against the detainees, 
both to secure justice and to ensure that torture and other  
serious human rights abuses do not continue into the future. 
CCR will keep fighting with creativity and persistence until 
Guantánamo is safely closed, detainees are released and  
resettled, and the policies and programs that created this  
international symbol of human rights abuse are eradicated. Guantánamo
This is Obama’s Guantánamo now. He has failed 
in his pledge to close the prison due to a lack of leadership, consistently attempting to keep cases out of the courts and bowing to partisan fear mongering.
–CCR Executive Director Vincent Warren.Many of the men remaining at  
Guantánamo cannot be returned to  
their home countries because of the  
risk of indefinite detention, torture,  
or summary execution often because  
of the stigma of having been in  
Guantánamo or because they belong  
to a persecuted political, religious, or 
ethnic minority. One of CCR’s priorities this year has been to help safely resettle men who have been released and to prevent involuntary repatriations to countries where individuals face harm.
CCR has been pursuing a variety  
of advocacy strategies to secure appro -
priate placements. The Center has a staff 
attorney stationed in London who has been conducting intensive diplomatic advocacy to encourage European  
governments to take action on our  
clients’ behalf. There have been  
successes: men have been resettled safely in France, Spain, Portugal, Ireland, Belgium, Bermuda, Albania, Switzerland and Palau. Last year, we also expanded our resettlement efforts  in Latin America and other regions. 
While many countries have expressed a 
willingness to take released detainees, the United States’ refusal to allow any of these men to be released onto U.S. territory has been a major obstacle to the diplomatic process of convincing other nations to welcome them. The largest remaining group at  
Guantánamo are men from Yemen,  most of whom have been cleared for release but cannot be sent home due  
to the U.S. government’s ban on all repatriations to that country. These obstacles will have to be overcome in order to achieve meaningful progress towards closing the prison. 
CCR’s advocacy on behalf of Guantána -
mo detainees spans district and appellate 
court litigation, international advocacy, resettlement assistance, and legislative and media advocacy to secure the best possible resolution for our clients and to address the underlying legal and policy issues highlighted by their cases.
Working for Safe Release and ResettlementJanuary 22, 2009. President Barack Obama signing an executive order promising to close the prison at Guantánamo “no later than 1 year from the date of this order.”
78Spanish Investigation  
into U.S. Torture
Finding little support for investigation by the Obama  
administration, CCR is seeking to hold former high-ranking 
U.S. officials accountable for their roles in the U.S. torture 
program internationally, under the principle of universal  
jurisdiction. CCR filed briefs in two investigations pending  
in the National Court of Spain.
One case examines whether criminal charges are warranted 
against Bush administration lawyers, the “Bush Six,” for  
creating the legal justification underpinning of the U.S. torture 
program. CCR has sought expert status for this investigation 
based on our years of experience working with, and seeking 
justice for, survivors of these policies.
The second investigation focuses on the torture and abuse of four former Guantánamo detainees with links to Spain and 
potentially encompasses torture and abuse that took place in Iraq, Afghanistan and CIA black sites, as well as Guantánamo. 
CCR is seeking to become a party to the proceedings, and has 
submitted information from our cases representing  people 
tortured or otherwise abused in Guantánamo, in Abu Ghraib 
and at other U.S.-run detention facilities in Iraq.
CCR has accumulated a wealth of knowledge from leading  
the battle to challenge Guantánamo and representing people 
who have been subjected to every facet of the U.S. torture 
program, from indefinite detention and torture, to extraordi -
nary rendition and CIA ghost detention. Prosecuting the  high-ranking former officials responsible for torture would 
provide the strongest possible deterrent against future  
administrations going down this dark path again.
International Human RightsThey beat him regularly, 
and, on three occasions,  
subjected him to electric shock treatments. “It feels  
like your eyes will explode.”- detained and tortured at 
Abu Ghraib for a year.Rendition to Torture: Maher Arar
Since 2004, CCR has represented Maher Arar in his lawsuit against 
former Attorney General John Ashcroft and other U.S. officials—the 
first legal challenge to the government’s practice of “extraordinary 
rendition,” the forced transfer of a person to another country to be 
arbitrarily detained, interrogated and tortured. 
Mr. Arar was detained in 2002 while changing planes at JFK Airport. 
The Bush administration labeled him a member of Al Qaeda and sent him not to his home in Canada, but into the hands of intelligence  
authorities in Syria, where he was detained and tortured for nearly  
a year in a small underground cell. When the Syrian government  
released him, it stated they found no connection to any criminal  
activity. Unlike the U.S., the Canadian government conducted an  
official investigation which found that Mr. Arar had no connection  
to terrorism and has issued an apology and compensation for  Canada’s role. 
CCR’s lawsuit, Arar v. Ashcroft , was dismissed by the Court of  
Appeals in November 2009 and, sadly, the Supreme Court denied  
our request for review ending his case in the U.S. courts. The Obama 
administration opposed Mr. Arar’s Supreme Court petition,  
arguing that U.S. officials should not be held accountable by the courts even if those officials did conspire to send Mr. Arar to torture. 
This follows the Obama administration’s new “transfer policy”  
recommendations that continue to permit rendition.
The Obama administration still refuses to remove Mr. Arar from its  
terrorism watch list or to hold anyone involved in his case account -
able. CCR will continue to pursue every available avenue towards 
securing an official U.S. apology to Mr. Arar, and to end the U.S. 
practice of rendition.
When Healers Harm
Despite the health professions’ recognized duty to “do no harm,” 
doctors and psychologists have played a key role in the U.S. torture 
program. Health professionals crafted and justified torture tactics; 
inflicted pain; oversaw abuse; and enabled, covered up and turned a 
blind eye to cruel treatment. For more information on CCR’s ongoing 
campaign to hold health professionals accountable for torture, visit: 
www.whenhealersharm.org .Universal Jurisdiction:  
Bridging the Impunity Gap
Universal jurisdiction is a mechanism that al -
lows a country to prosecute people for certain 
crimes, even if those crimes were committed in another country and by non-nationals. The underlying principle is that some crimes—including genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and torture—are of such excep -
tional gravity that they are considered an attack on humanity as a whole. Accountability should not be dependent on the willingness of the government where the crimes occurred, or where nationals reside, to prosecute those responsible.
Former heads of state and high government 
officials cannot assume they have immunity  
if they are guilty of crimes of this nature.  
Every nation has an obligation to prosecute the alleged perpetrators of such serious  
international crimes, or to turn them over  
to another country for prosecution. 
Since the first public revelations regarding  
the Bush administration’s torture program,  
the Center for Constitutional Rights has 
worked to expose details of the policy and to hold high-level officials, along with those who provided legal justifications, accountable for their role as architects of the torture programs in Guantánamo, Iraq, secret CIA sites and elsewhere. Because the U.S. has so far failed to prosecute anyone up the chain of command for these abuses, CCR and our allies have been pursuing justice in other countries—first in Germany, then France, and currently in Spain. When torture and abuse are not prop -
erly investigated where they occur, universal jurisdiction may be the only resort to assure that survivors of these crimes can have their voices heard, and to secure accountability for high-level officials who caused these victims such grave harm.
Both the Obama and Bush administrations have actively sought to block all efforts on behalf of victims of the  
detention, interrogation and torture policies from having their day in court...Spain, therefore, can and indeed, 
must, exercise its jurisdiction... –CCR’s submission to the Spanish court urging them to investigate the U.S. torture program.Military Contractors
The U.S. government continues to increase its reliance  
upon private military contractors to perform functions that 
traditionally have been the exclusive domain of government. 
These contractors operate without many of the accountabil -
ity mechanisms that would apply to the military and they  
participate in controversial activities, including drone  
bombings and even a CIA assassination program. They  
are used across the globe, including for “humanitarian”  
efforts throughout Africa and in post-earthquake Haiti.  
In Afghanistan and Iraq, there have been nearly 20 percent  more private contractors than uniformed personnel, making 
these wars the most outsourced and privatized in U.S. history. CCR has been representing Iraqis in litigation against U.S. 
contractors since 2004, demanding that private military contractors who commit grave human rights abuses be  
held accountable. Contractors have responded by claiming 
the “government contractor defense,” arguing that,  
because they were contracted by the U.S. government, 
they shouldn’t be held liable for violations they commit 
while purportedly performing their duties—even war 
crimes that would clearly be punishable if committed by a soldier. While we’ve had some successes, no federal court 
has yet addressed the actual torture and misconduct that 
that these contractors have perpetrated against hundreds 
of Iraqi civilians.
International Human Rights
Blackwater trains active and inactive members of the  
U.S. military at their facilities in North Carolina.
10Blackwater Cases
In January 2010, CCR and co-counsel won an important 
settlement in cases against Blackwater Worldwide (recently 
renamed Xe Services) for firing on civilians on at least two 
occasions in Baghdad. Abtan v. Prince and Albazzaz v. 
Prince  alleged that heavily armed Blackwater guards fired 
on Iraqi civilians near Al Watahba Square in Baghdad  in September 2007 , and several days later killed 17 and 
injured many more Iraqi civilians in Nisoor Square. 
In addition to securing compensation for the families of 
those killed and wounded in Blackwater’s attacks, these 
cases provided a way for our clients to tell their stories and helped expose the ways in which Blackwater has thus far 
operated largely outside of any system of accountability.
Torture in Iraq
CCR is co-counsel on three cases against 
private military contractors for torture 
and other unlawful acts committed while 
providing interrogation and translation 
services at detention centers throughout 
Iraq, including the notorious Abu Ghraib 
prison. The cases— Saleh v. Titan,  
Al-Quraishi v. Nakhla and L-3 and  Al Shi -mari v. CACI —represent nearly 340 Iraqi civilians.  
Saleh  was the first lawsuit filed on behalf of Iraqis who  
were tortured and otherwise abused in U.S.-run prisons. 
The Supreme Court will decide on whether to hear the case 
this fall—it would be the first time the high court addresses contractor liability in Iraq.
Stand Down
CCR’s campaign, “Stand Down: End Human Rights  
Abuse by Military Contractors,” seeks to close the serious 
accountability gaps that surround these corporations. As 
part of this work, we helped build support for the Stop Out -
sourcing Security (SOS) Act, to phase out private military contractors in war zones. To get involved with the Stand 
Down campaign, visit CCRjustice.org/stand-down
The U.S. must end its reliance on private military  
contractors to conduct war—and we must all work to  
hold these corporations, and those who run them,  
accountable for human rights violations. 
U.S. Human Rights Record to be Reviewed at the UN
11Blackwater founder Erik Prince “views himself 
as a Christian crusader tasked with eliminating 
Muslims and the Islamic faith from the globe,” 
and Prince’s companies “encouraged and  rewarded the destruction of Iraqi life.” 
–former Blackwater employee in an affidavit.
The human rights record of the United States will be reviewed for the first time in November 2010 as  
part of the Universal Periodic Review process undertaken by the UN Human Rights Council. CCR 
co-submitted a report on the U.S. failure to ensure accountability when corporations, including private government contractors, commit human rights abuses ranging from human trafficking to murder . 
The report cites numerous examples where private companies are accused of serious human rights abuses, including:• torture and extrajudicial killings committed by private military contractors in Iraq
• the use of forced labor and child labor by Bridgestone in Liberia
• human trafficking of Nepali laborers by Kellogg Brown & Root
• war crimes by Caterpillar
• complicity in war crimes by Chiquita
The report concludes that the framework to hold corporations accountable is piecemeal at best, and that the U.S. government has failed in its obligations to protect against corporate abuses—and to provide an effective remedy for such abuses when they occur. The full report is available at:  
CCRjustice.org/files/upr-usa-2010.pdf12
Gaza Freedom Flotilla
In May 2010, a flotilla of six vessels seeking to deliver  
humanitarian aid to Gaza was attacked by Israeli forces,  
killing nine people and injuring over 60. The attack took  
place in international waters, in violation of international law.
The flotilla was intended as a nonviolent protest of Israel’s  
illegal blockade of Gaza which has resulted in denial of 
basic necessities like food and medicine to Palestinians  
for over four years. The ships were carrying over 700  
international activists from nearly 40 countries, as well  
as urgently needed medical and rebuilding supplies.
The Center has filed eight Freedom of Information  
Act (FOIA) requests seeking details of the United States 
government’s knowledge of and response to the attack and information regarding U.S. policy towards the blockade.Sixteen U.S. citizens were part of the flotilla, one of whom was killed on the Mavi Marmara . U.S. citizens were injured, 
detained and had their property—including computers, video and photographic equipment, all of which contained 
potential evidence for investigations into the attack—seized 
by Israel. CCR joined with other rights groups in condemn -
ing the action, outlining its illegality, and demanding the U.S. 
insist that Israel preserve and return the seized property 
unaltered.  CCR has also called for an independent  
and impartial investigation into the attack on the flotilla.
Israel’s blockade of Gaza has been internationally  
condemned as illegal and unjust. It has been found to be a 
form of prohibited “collective punishment” by United Nations 
representatives. CCR has consistently condemned the  
blockade and the humanitarian crisis it has caused in Gaza.International Human Rights
Palestinians prepare to receive the Gaza Freedom Flotilla on May 30, 2010 
—the day before an Israeli attack on the aid convoy left 9 people dead. Mamilla Cemetery
Mamilla Cemetery is an ancient Muslim burial ground 
and holy site believed to date back to the 7th century, 
when companions of the Prophet Muhammad were 
reportedly buried there. It was an active burial ground 
until 1948, when the new State of Israel seized the  
western part of Jerusalem. The cemetery was then taken 
over by the Israeli government; Muslim authorities have 
not been allowed to maintain the cemetery since. 
CCR represents human rights groups and Palestinian  
families who have ancestors buried in the ancient 
Ma’man Allah (Mamilla) Muslim cemetery in Jerusalem, in petitions filed with several international bodies. The 
Israeli government and the Simon Wiesenthal Center 
have destroyed a portion of Mamilla Cemetery in order 
to build the “Center for Human Dignity—Museum  
of Tolerance”—disinterring hundreds of graves and  
leaving the whereabouts of countless other human  
remains unknown. CCR supports the families in their  call for the international community to denounce this 
desecration of an historic Muslim cemetery in Jerusalem.
The petitions demand that Israel halt construction of 
the museum, disclose the whereabouts of the missing 
remains and rebury them at Mamilla, and preserve and 
protect Mamilla Cemetery. For additional information, please visit: CCRjustice.org/ourcases/current-cases/
mamilla.CCR’s legal team is recognized for its expertise in 
many areas, including international human rights.  
In addition to bringing lawsuits, we are frequently asked to contribute to cases by submitting an amicus brief, meaning literally “friend of the court.” An  
amicus is submitted by a non-party to a lawsuit who has a strong interest in the subject matter or a unique perspective or expertise which could inform the court’s decision. In some cases a judge requests an amicus as an expert opinion on a particular legal topic. These briefs can have a profound impact on the outcome of a case, as well as educate the courts on complicated areas of law.  
This year CCR filed amicus briefs in U.S. and  
international courts on issues ranging from  
discriminatory employment testing to First  
Amendment issues. One area where the Center  
draws on our substantial expertise is international 
human rights and humanitarian law. 
Human rights briefs submitted by CCR this year 
included:
• A Supreme Court amicus arguing that life in prison 
without parole for juveniles is indecent and  
excessive punishment under international law. Relying in part on our human rights arguments, the Court ruled that a life-without-parole sentence for juvenile offenders convicted of a non-homicide crime was unconstitutional.
• Two amicus briefs regarding the Ogoni 9 in  
Nigeria: one arguing that their executions  
constituted extrajudicial killings under  
international law, and another regarding the legal  
definitions of crimes against humanity; arbitrary arrest and detention; and cruel, inhuman or  
degrading treatment or punishment.
• An amicus filed at the Inter-American Court of Human Rights (IACHR) regarding the disappear -
ances, rapes, and murders of young women and girls in Ciudad Juárez, Mexico. The IACHR found Mexico in violation of human rights obligations and ordered remedial measures and reparations. Advancing International LawA U.S. citizen was killed, others were injured, detained and had property taken. 
Serious questions remain about the U.S. involvement and response to Israel’s  
attack on the Gaza Freedom Flotilla. – CCR  Senior Staff Attorney Katherine Gallagher.
Tombstones in Mamilla Cemetery, Jerusalem.
1314Communications  
Management Units
In 2006 and 2008, the Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) 
secretly created two prison units—in Terre Haute, IN and 
Marion, IL—to segregate targeted prisoners in the federal 
system. The BOP claims these “Communications Manage -
ment Units” (CMU’s) are intended to hold dangerous  terrorists and other high-risk inmates. In fact, CMU inmates 
have all been deemed appropriate for medium-security 
facilities and have apparently been sent to these isolation units due to their religious beliefs, their unpopular political 
views, or in retaliation for challenging rights violations in  
the federal prison system. Over two-thirds of the CMU 
population is Muslim even though Muslims represent only 
six percent of the general federal prison population. 
CMU prisoners face harsh restrictions on communications, 
including complete bans on any physical contact with visiting family. Interactions with other prisoners and phone 
calls are also severely limited. Prisoners are sent to CMU’s 
without any explanation or opportunity to appeal—a  due process violation that allows for racial and religious 
profiling, as well as retaliation for protesting prison  
conditions. Created without the legally required  
opportunity for public comment, these isolation units  
have been shrouded in secrecy since their inception. 
In March 2010, CCR filed Aref v. Holder on behalf of several 
CMU prisoners and their family members, challenging the 
discriminatory policies and harsh conditions of these units 
and the circumstances under which they were established. 
Within a month of our filing, the BOP opened up CMU  
policies for public comment—three years after the fact. CCR then worked with allies to flood the Bureau of Prisons with 
public feedback. To view some of these comments, or to get more information on this case, visit CCRjustice.org/cmu.
Policing and PrisonsThe Federal Prison in Terre Haute, Indiana where an 
experimental prison unit was secretly opened in 2006.The Center has long been active in the movement to end racial 
profiling. Our lawsuit, Floyd v. City of New York , grows out of the 
landmark settlement in CCR’s earlier case, Daniels v. City of New York  (1999), which required the New York City Police Department 
to maintain detailed demographic data on their stop-and-frisk activity. The litigation has provided CCR with over 10 years worth 
of data that clearly demonstrates racial profiling and an increase in 
unconstitutional stop-and-frisks by the NYPD.
In related education and advocacy work, CCR is partnering with  
a wide range of grassroots groups in New York as part of the 
Coalition for Community Safety, developing public education  
materials and advocating for accountability mechanisms that 
would address all aspects of police misconduct. CCR’s Education 
and Outreach team has testified at hearings and shared data with city and state committees working on police reform. 
Jailhouse Lawyer Handbook
CCR, in partnership with the National Lawyers Guild, continues to distribute the Jailhouse Lawyer’s Handbook free to prisoners in 
the U.S. The handbook explains how to bring a federal lawsuit to 
fight mistreatment and poor conditions in prison, and is available 
for download on our website at:  
CCRjustice.org/jailhouselawhandbookThe Center for Constitutional Rights has always 
looked for creative ways to do social justice  
lawyering. Our willingness to work in tandem  
with political movements and to incorporate 
non-litigation strategies into our work can lead to impressive victories and new ways of thinking.
This past year saw an example of such an  
approach when CCR challenged inequities in  
the criminal justice system in New Orleans.  
Taking the lead from local advocates who have 
long decried flagrant constitutional violations  
experienced by people arrested in NOLA, we  
created a project to observe the first appearance  
before a judge in every Orleans Parish criminal court for 60 straight days. 
CCR’s study documented systematic violations of 
people’s rights. For example, the court routinely rushed through first appearances, spending an  
average of only 100 seconds per arrestee. And in 83 percent of the cases we observed the court did not make the constitutionally required probable cause determinations.
At the request of the Orleans Public Defenders, 
CCR submitted an amicus brief in State of  
Louisiana v. Wallace , a case in which the accused 
was held longer than constitutionally allowed before being brought before a judge. Contrary to the government’s assertion, the data made it clear to the judges that the problem was widespread and egregious, prompting the court to issue a scathing unanimous decision mandating that judges conduct probable cause determinations of all arrested people within 48 hours or immediately release them without bail. This decision has had an  
immediate and profound impact on protecting  
the rights of anyone arrested in New Orleans. 
More information on this case and results of  
the survey are available at:
CCRjustice.org/la-v-wallace-first-appearancesCreative Lawyering:  
New Orleans First  
Appearances Survey
Racial Profiling in New York CityStop-and-Frisks by NYPD
15Between 65 and 72 percent of CMU prisoners are Muslim men. This stark over-representation indicates  
that these units were created to allow for the restrictive segregation of Muslim prisoners, based on the  
discriminatory belief that they are more likely to pose a security threat.  – CCR Staff Attorney Alexis Agathocleous.
FrisksStops
Total number of people stopped/frisked in New York City
Total number of Black and Hispanic people stopped/frisked in New York City16Targeting Immigrants
Recently we have seen an increase in the targeting 
of people based on perceived immigration status by 
involving local jurisdictions in immigration enforce -
ment. In Arizona and across the nation, the results have been disastrous—producing programs that destroy the 
public trust that police departments rely on to investigate 
crimes, and that make immigrants far more likely to be the 
targets of crime.
This year, CCR expanded our Immigrant Justice work  
to include fighting the new “Secure Communities”  
program which increases the involvement of local  
entities in immigration enforcement (see sidebar).  We  
are also providing ongoing legal support to the growing 
immigrants’ rights movement (see Movement Support page 22), advocating on behalf of immigration detainees 
experiencing abuse and harsh conditions, and providing 
direct legal representation in select immigration cases. 
We are proud to be getting more deeply involved in one 
of the most important civil rights issues of our time.
Post-9/11 Immigrant Round-Ups
In November 2009, CCR won a $1.26 million settlement for five men who were unlawfully detained and abused 
at Brooklyn’s notorious Metropolitan Detention Center 
(MDC) after being rounded up in the reactionary  
immigration sweeps that followed the attacks of  
September 11, 2001.
CCR first filed Turkmen v. Ashcroft in 2002 on behalf 
of non-citizens who were held for up to nine months on 
minor immigration charges at MDC and in New Jersey’s 
Passaic County Jail. These men had been swept up in 
a wave of racial and religious profiling of South Asian, 
Arab, and Muslim non-citizens during the hysteria that 
gripped the country in the aftermath of 9/11. Thousands 
of people were held as suspected terrorists until cleared of any connection to terrorism, and then deported. While imprisoned, they were subjected to horrendous confinement conditions and religious, verbal, and physical abuse.
The settlement is an historic victory for our clients and a key 
first step toward ensuring that these kind of round-ups,  
motivated by racial and ethnic bias, are not repeated. CCR 
also remains committed to ensuring that those most respon -
sible for these policies—the high-level Bush administration  
architects of the post-9/11 sweeps—are held accountable 
Immigrant Justice17for their actions. Toward that end, the Center is seeking to add 
six new plaintiffs and to continue the Turkmen  case. In light 
of an extremely high threshold—set by the Supreme Court last year in a related case—for holding high-level government 
officials accountable, we are also seeking to supplement the 
complaint with details, compiled during our eight years of  
litigating Turkmen , that directly tie former Attorney General 
John Ashcroft, FBI Director Robert Mueller, and former INS 
Commissioner James Ziglar to the illegal round-ups and abuse.
We were deprived of our rights and abused 
simply because of our religion and the color 
of our skin. After seven long years, I am  
relieved to be able to try to rebuild my life…. I sincerely hope this will never happen again.
–Yasser Ebrahim, regarding Turkmen v. Ashcroft  
settlement agreement.In March 2008, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) 
launched “Secure Communities” (S-Comm), a little-known data-sharing program which links state and local entities in the enforcement of federal immigration law. Like Arizona’s controversial law SB1070, this program has the effect of increasing racial profiling, creating distrust between police and immigrant communities, and stripping immigrants of due process rights.
The program requires fingerprint checks through immigration databases 
for all arrestees, even when criminal charges are minor, later dismissed, or the result of an unlawful arrest. By running immigration checks on presumptively innocent arrestees, the program functions as a dragnet funneling people into an unfair detention and deportation process. 
S-Comm deployment has been growing rapidly and officials want  
to expand it nationwide by 2013. Since its inception in 2008, over 3 
million people have been subjected to S-Comm queries, including at least 5,900 U.S. citizens.  
CCR and our co-counsel have filed a Freedom of Information Act 
(FOIA) lawsuit on behalf of the National Day Laborer Organizing  
Network, seeking comprehensive information about the program and  
its implementation. The suit was filed during a weeklong national  
campaign of coordinated actions. CCR and our partners are calling  
on local, county, and state  
officials to terminate or refuse to sign S-Comm agreements and to prohibit police and other public agencies from asking for proof of immigra -
tion status or citizenship. 
More information on our 
campaign to uncover the truth about police and ICE collaboration is available at  
www.uncoverthetruth.orgICE “Secure Communities” Program:  
Another Immigration Dragnet 
A woman being arrested during an  
immigrants’ rights protest in Arizona.18
CCR has a series of employment discrimination cases on behalf of 
women and minorities who are being unfairly discriminated against in 
the job market and at work: on behalf of Black and Latino teachers in 
New York State, Black firefighters in New York City and Chicago and 
Census worker applicants nationwide. 
Challenging Unfair Employment Tests
For years, CCR has partnered with the Vulcan Society, the  
organization of Black firefighters in New York City, to challenge  
discrimination in recruitment of firefighters. New York City has the 
least diverse fire department of any major city in America—about  
90 percent white even though Blacks and Latinos comprise more  
than 50 percent of the city’s population.We’re glad to see the justice  
system verify what we’ve known 
for the longest time, that the Fire 
Department is hostile to hiring 
Blacks. We hope this means 145 
years of racism in the New York 
City Fire Department will now 
come to an end.
Paul Washington, past President  
of the Vulcan Society.CCR Senior Managing Attorney Shayana Kadidal addresses the media with (from right) CCR Staff Attorney  
Darius Charney, Vulcan Society members John Coombs (President), Paul Washington (former President),  
Duery Smith and co-counsel Richard Levy after a court appearance in U.S. and Vulcan Society v. City of New York. 
Employment DiscriminationThe central issue in the case, U.S. and Vulcan Society v. 
City of New York , is whether the skills measured by the Fire 
Department of New York’s (FDNY’s) written exam have any relationship to skills necessary to be a good firefighter—the 
courts have concluded that they do not. Rulings in this case 
have proven that the exams had a discriminatory impact on 
Black and Latino firefighter applicants and that the FDNY 
had engaged in a decades-long practice of intentional discrimination against Black applicants. The FDNY must 
now hire Blacks and Latinos on a priority basis over the next 
several hiring cycles and institute a new, non-discriminatory 
way of ranking applicants who pass the test. This is an  
enormous victory for racial justice that will have broad  
impact on the hiring practices of cities across the country. 
Indeed, CCR and our allies filed a Supreme Court amicus 
this year in a similar case, Lewis v. City of Chicago ,  
challenging the civil service exam used by the Chicago Fire Department. That exam has also been shown to have had 
a disparate impact on Black applicants. A May 2010 victory 
in the Supreme Court has sent the case back to the district 
court for ongoing proceedings.
CCR is also continuing our long-standing class action  lawsuit on behalf of public school teachers of color who  
are challenging the use of two standardized teacher  
certification tests and licensing rules that have deprived 
them of equal salaries, pensions, benefits, and seniority—
yet kept them in the classroom as temporary employees: 
Gulino v. The Board of Education of the City of New York .
U.S. Census: Hiring Discrimination
The U.S. Census Bureau hired over a million temporary employees this year for the 2010 census. Unfortunately, 
they used racially-biased arrest records as a strike against 
applicants, requiring them to produce “official court  
documentation” for any past arrest, regardless of the nature 
of the arrest, whether a conviction resulted, its relationship 
to the job or how long ago it happened. This requirement 
eliminated 93 percent of applicants and hit minorities the hardest.
CCR and co-counsel filed Johnson v. Locke to stop the  
government from continuing to use such biased  
employment screening procedures and seeking damages 
for those applicants for work during the 2010 census who  
were harmed by these policies. 
19Under federal law employers must refrain from any  
employment practice that “causes a disparate impact on the 
basis of race, color, religion, sex or national origin.” It is not necessary that there be an intention to discriminate—although when intentional discrimination is found, as in our case rep -
resenting Black firefighters against the City of New York, the penalties are stronger. An exception to this principle can only be made for a job-related requirement, such as a language test for a translator job.
Historically, civil service tests have often had a disparate 
impact on applicants of color. Defenders of these tests have asked: “Aren’t the people who do best on these tests the most qualified? Why hire less qualified applicants?” In too many instances, however, these test have no actual bearing on the job and are not a good predictor of future job performance. 
Employment tests must be properly validated to prove they 
measure the skills needed for a particular job, and do not  
illegally favor a particular ethnic group. In many cases, including CCR’s cases (described on this page), they were not. There are many reasons why a test may have a disparate impact on candidates of color, including the way the tests are administered, access to test preparation materials and to other people in the field who might help with study, or simply by  using content geared towards white applicants. When a test has been shown to have a disparate impact on people of color and has been shown to have an insufficient correlation to job performance, then the continued use of that test can act purely as a barrier to keep people of color out of good jobs. CCR  
has been hugely successful in our fight against racially  
discriminatory testing—an important part of the struggle  
for racial and economic justice and fulfillment of the  
Constitution’s guarantee of equal protection of all.Discriminatory Testing
The Green Scare
CCR is defending animal rights activists targeted under the 
Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act (AETA) and its precursor, 
the Animal Enterprise Protection Act (AEPA). The AETA 
criminalizes a broad swath of First Amendment activities.  
In what has become known as the “Green Scare,”  
these prosecutions seek to chill activism by criminalizing 
otherwise-protected activities and speech, and by  
enhancing criminal penalties through charging activists as “domestic terrorists” for picketing, chalking sidewalks, 
chanting, leafleting or maintaining a website.
In United States v. Buddenberg , activists (the AETA 4) faced 
10 years imprisonment for charges of  ”animal enterprise 
terrorism” and conspiracy for allegedly picketing on the 
front lawn of a professor involved in research on animals.
Kevin Olliff was prosecuted for speech in support of  
allegedly illegal acts by the Animal Liberation Front (ALF), but not with participating in those acts. California v. Kevin Olliff sought a gang enhancement penalty, calling the ALF  a criminal street gang. In January 2010, the judge ruled  
that the ALF is not a “gang” because it primarily engages  
in protected speech, not criminal activity. Kevin pled no 
contest to the remaining counts and is expected to be 
released in October 2010. 
In United States v. Stop Huntingdon Animal Cruelty ,  
the defendants known as the SHAC 7 were convicted of 
“terrorism” under the AEPA for website postings and  
organizing demonstrations. In June 2010, their appeal  
was denied, leaving in place four-to-six-year sentences. 
These Green Scare prosecutions—equating animal rights 
protests with terrorism—are a threat to everyone who values their right to political expression. More information 
on these cases and CCR’s campaign to abolish the AETA is 
available at:  CCRjustice.org/anti-aeta .Right to Dissent
Police use tear gas against a crowd of students  
gathered in Pittsburgh to protest the G-20 summit. Mass Protests
The September 2009 Pittsburgh meetings of the G-20  
saw the continuing practice of deliberate and coordinated  
disruption of lawful political protests through heavy  
surveillance, brutal force and mass arrests that effectively 
suspended the First and Fourth Amendments and  
suppressed the right to dissent.
When finance officials from 20 countries met in Pittsburgh to 
set worldwide economic policies, several thousand people 
came to protest the undemocratic process and the unfair  
distribution of the world’s wealth. Thousands of police de -
ployed a staggering array of weapons against the protesters.
CCR and co-counsel filed two cases on behalf of G-20 
protesters. CODEPINK Pittsburgh Women for Peace v. U.S. Secret Service won an expanded protest zone for groups 
who had been refused permits or received overly restricted 
permits. Seeds of Peace v. City of Pittsburgh unsuccessfully attempted 
to stop police harassment of activists distributing free food. In Caligiuri v. Pittsburgh , CCR  
also successfully challenged the unconstitutional and  unconscionable use of tasers against peaceful  
demonstrators who were already being restrained by police.
The Crackdown on Journalists  
During the 2008 Republican National Convention (RNC) in 
Minnesota, numerous members of the media were arrested, 
detained and assaulted while attempting to cover the  
convention and the protests around it. 
CCR represents three journalists—Amy Goodman, Sharif 
Abdel Kouddous and Nicole Salazar—from the nationally 
renowned progressive news show, Democracy Now! , in  
a lawsuit charging law enforcement with illegally interfering 
with media reporting. The three were arrested and  
brutalized while doing their job. The case, Goodman v.  
St. Paul , seeks to protect the First Amendment rights of 
journalists, and also raises important questions about  the specific targeting of journalists and federal-local  
collaboration in policing and surveillance.
When Congress passed a budget act cutting off 
the Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now (ACORN) from federal funding, CCR immediately stepped up to defend them. ACORN’s success as a grassroots organization had put it in the crosshairs of conservative  
political forces that were threatened by the group’s advocacy for such progressive causes as affordable housing and a living wage, and by ACORN’s tireless commitment to registering  
low-income voters.
CCR went to court and won an injunction to stop 
Congress from legislatively punishing ACORN without proper investigation or due process, an action constituting an unlawful “bill of attainder.” 
A bill of attainder is a punitive legislative act that 
singles out an individual or group without the safeguards of a judicial hearing. The prohibition against bills of attainder was included as a  
fundamental piece of the Constitution by the Founders, who were angry over the way the  
British Parliament had used similar bills to  
punish political rivals and popular movements.  
So unacceptable were these acts that they served as a major motivator for the American Revolution. Bill of attainder clause claims are rare—another example of CCR’s creative use of the law in  
pursuit of social justice.  
Despite two successful rulings, the government 
has appealed and the decision is stayed pending the outcome. CCR hopes that our ongoing support will help enable ACORN to continue its important work and help protect other progressive groups from being unfairly targeted in the future.Defending ACORN from Right-Wing AttacksClaiming fear of a terrorist attack, authorities militarize our towns, scare our people  
away, stop daily life and quash our constitutional rights. 
– CCR Legal Director Bill Quigley at the G-20 in Pittsburgh.
2122  Movement  Support
The Center for Constitutional Rights was founded to provide  
support to social justice movements. Our commitment to this 
principle is evident in every aspect of our work, but particularly 
in what we call “movement support.” In this past year, this has 
included:  
• Hosting the Coalition for Community Safety: community  
groups working to fight police misconduct in New York City. CCR provides a part-time staff person and has funded Know 
Your Rights murals and Cop Watch community billboards and 
produced t-shirts and literature that have been distributed 
throughout NYC.
• Advocating on behalf of Fahad Hashmi, a U.S. citizen who was 
held in pre-trial solitary confinement for almost three years in New York City under Special Administrative Measures (SAM’s).  
CCR is working to end the draconian use of SAM’s and extended 
solitary confinement in his and other cases.
• Providing the New Sanctuary Movement with ongoing legal 
support for protesters who engage in civil disobedience as part 
of the growing immigrant’s rights movement. 
• Facilitating a large coalition to flood the Bureau of Prisons with public feedback around the establishment of two experimental 
Photos (counter-clockwise from top left): Activists with Take Back the Land, 
a land rights organization based in Miami; CCR Staff Attorney, Sunita Patel, 
legal observing at an immigrants’ rights protest in Arizona; CCR staff (outside 
right and left) with activists from the shack-dwellers’ movement in South Africa; New Sanctuary Movement activist and Haitian immigrant, Jean 
Montrevil, speaks to supporters after being released from Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement custody; International Federation for Human Rights 23prison units, called Communications Management Units, which 
unfairly target certain prisoners for isolation and segregation.
• Updating and distributing our classic pamphlet, If an Agent 
Knocks , which provides practical advice to activists likely to be 
targeted by FBI agents or other federal investigators.
• Organizing the U.S. premiere of a documentary film about  
the 2009 military coup d’etat in Honduras and the powerful 
resistance movement that has risen up.
Increasingly, this work reaches across international borders. This 
year, CCR staff travelled to South Africa to meet with Abahlali 
baseMjondolo, the South African shack-dwellers’ movement; 
to Haiti to assist in developing a human rights framework for the reconstruction efforts; to Uganda to strategize around how to 
fight the severe repression of the LGBT community there; and to 
Honduras to explore how we can be of assistance to the resistance 
movement that is working to restore democracy after the 2009 
U.S. supported coup d’état . CCR is also an active member of the 
International Federation on Human Rights (FIDH), a federation of 116 human rights organizations in nearly 100 countries, working closely with them on accountability for the U.S. torture program, 
corporate human rights abuse, protecting human rights defend -
ers, and resettlement for Guantánamo detainees.   Movement  Support
(FIDH) board members attending an FIDH International Congress in Armenia, 
from left: Arnold Tsunga (of Zimbabwe), CCR Senior Staff Attorney Katherine 
Gallagher and Paul Nsapu Mukulu (of the Democratic Republic of Congo); 
CCR publication, If an Agent Knocks ; Protest outside the Honduran embassy 
in New York on the first anniversary of the Honduran coup d’etat; Filmmaker 
Katia Lara celebrates the U.S. premiere of her film: We Are not Afraid: Inside 
the Coup in Honduras ( Quien Dijo Miedo: Honduras de un Golpe ).
CCR has a unique political analysis to add to the public 
debate on many of today’s most pressing issues. Because we need a progressive voice to counter the all-too-often deafening rhetoric and disinformation of the Right, we move our work beyond the courtroom and into the court of public opinion. We are able to put pressure those in power through media exposure and involve others in our work through social networking. 
For many people the web is the prime source for news, 
so we regularly write posts for popular sites including AlterNet , CounterPunch  and The Huffington Post , and 
work closely with progressive bloggers at sites including Salon , Slate , Daily Kos , Firedog Lake , The Washington 
Independent , and Talking Points Memo . At this year’s  
national blogger convention Netroots Nation, CCR  
hosted well covered panels on the use and abuses of private contractors and on the intersection of racial  
profiling, immigration and criminal justice.
We developed stories covering our stop-and-frisk  
suit against the New York Police Department and the 
startling revelations from the data we obtained through court order: ABC ran a multi-part story, and The New York Times published a front page investigative report as well as a scathing Bob Herbert column. We garnered major national coverage of our ACORN suit, which helped reveal the true facts, ulterior motives and consti -
tutional issues involved. And CCR’s work was covered in several Times  editorials including one on our case chal -
lenging the hiring practices of the U.S. Census and one on our prison telephone case in the New York courts. 
From C-SPAN to CNN, whether discussing the closing of 
Guantánamo or our Supreme Court case, Holder v. HLP , 
or analyzing Supreme Court nominations, CCR has been on the national radar. You may have heard us on NPR and public radio around the country, as well as countless local shows on Urban Radio Network, Pacifica stations, and mainstream outlets like Voice of America. 
Many of you have seen CCR staff, often with our clients 
and allies, as guests on Amy Goodman’s  Democracy Now!  program. Over the past decade the courts have too 
frequently accepted any assertion of national security to avoid hearing cases: the role of monitor and check on our government has fallen to the public. For that we need media coverage and a free press (see our case Goodman v. St. Paul )—and CCR is there to fight for both.CCR In the News
24CCR Executive Director Vincent Warren moderating the Culture  
Project’s sold-out event, Blueprint for Accountability, here with  
Jeremy Scahill (left) and General Ricardo Sanchez (right).
CCR Legal Director Bill Quigley speaking to a reporter at an  
immigrants’ rights protest in New York City. CCR is available for 
interviews on all our issues: contact us at press@ccrjustice.org.CCR Staff Attorney, Darius Charney, speaks to ABC News about 
racial profiling and arrest quotas within the New York City Police Department.
Below is just a sampling of the CCR videos available at  
CCRjustice.org. 
1Noor Elashi, daughter of a man being held in a  
Communications Management Unit, speaking about the 
difficult and unfair circumstances of her father’s treatment. 
These experimental prison units single out certain prisoners, mostly Muslims, for severe social and physical isolation.  
2A statement from Mohammed Sulaymon Barre, recorded 
shortly after his release from Guantánamo in December 
2009, urging the United States to close the prison as quickly 
as possible and issue an apology to the men that were held there.  
3Members of grassroots community organizations: 
Juntos, New Sanctuary Movement and the Philadelphia 
Storytelling Project, describe how most of them or their 
family members have been arrested by local police and turned over to Immigration Customs Enforcement (ICE). CCR is a member of the coalition working to end discrimination 
against and targeting of immigrants: uncoverthetruth.org.  
4CCR Senior Staff Attorney Maria LaHood speaks about 
CCR client Maher Arar and attempts to hold U.S. govern -
ment officials responsible for their role in sending Mr. Arar 
to Syria where he was tortured.  5Mazwi Nzimande, 
Chairperson of Abahlali baseMjondolo Youth League, a land 
rights organization in South Africa—one of many organizers 
and activists that CCR met with during a fact finding delega -
tion covering housing rights. This is one of over 70 videos available at youtube.com/user/CCRMedia. If you like the 
video be sure to give it a good rating and recommend to  
your friends.
Other Ways to Follow/Join CCR
friend CCR on FB and refer others
@theCCR follow, tweet and retweet!
subscribe to CCRmedia and see all our  
new videos
CCR on the Web
251
2
3
4 526Friends:
As you look over the following case 
summaries, I hope you will believe, as I do, that CCR had an amazing 
year. We continued to strengthen 
our commitment to human rights 
advocacy and to working with  
community organizations— remaining true to our history of  
social justice litigation to assist 
those who are most on the margins.  
We had many victories. To name 
just a few: we secured a major settlement for the  families of Iraqis who were injured or killed by  
Blackwater. Our Guantánamo team secured the release 
of clients who had been unjustly detained for years. We 
challenged the Right-wing campaign to discredit and 
defund ACORN. We won a first of its kind immigration ruling in the Second Circuit and secured a major settle -
ment against the U.S. on behalf of South Asian, Arab and Muslim non-citizens who were rounded up, abused and detained after 9/11. We also won major victories  
for the Vulcan Society —an organization of Black  
firefighters in New York City —helping to clear the way 
for a much more diverse New York Fire Department.
Frustratingly, several cases confirmed our worst fears 
about current U.S. courts, where we find too many  
conservative judges and an over-willingness to defer to government. Justice was denied in the U.S. when the 
Supreme Court refused to hear our case for Maher Arar, 
who was rendered to Syria by U.S. officials. We lost the Humanitarian Law Project (HLP) material support case 
in the Supreme Court, and the New York high court 
ruled against our claims for families who overpaid unjust 
telephone connection fees to talk to loved ones in New 
York prisons. CCR has been litigating Arar , HLP  and 
the prison telephone cases for years—so these losses 
were particularly painful. We also failed to get a reversal 
of the conviction of Camilo Mejia-Castillo, a man of conscience who was the first Iraq war veteran to openly refuse to re-deploy. Given that CCR does not shy away 
from taking on difficult cases, we must 
be ready to accept a few losses—but it 
is difficult nonetheless.
CCR took on an impressive amount 
 of new work this year. Here is a  
sampling: we applied to join the  Spanish investigation into the U.S. 
torture program in our ongoing quest 
for accountability for those U.S. leaders who ordered 
the torture of prisoners; we filed civil rights actions on 
behalf of Amy Goodman and two Democracy Now! 
producers, arising out of their arrests at the 2008  
Republican National Convention; we filed Freedom of 
Information Act requests to reveal U.S. knowledge of the attack on the solidarity flotilla to Palestine and we 
joined with the National Day Laborer Organizing  
Network in challenging the “Secure Communities”  program, which is so hard on immigrants. We also  
defended animal rights activists whose First  
Amendment rights to protest were being criminalized 
and fought for the right to protest at the G-20 meetings 
in Pittsburgh.  
Personally, I learned a tremendous amount during the 
past year. CCR has a strong staff, an active board, great co-counsel, amazing volunteers, and the crucial support 
of donors—a combination that makes all of this work 
possible, and that also makes possible the hope for a  better future.
Justice and peace,
Bill QuigleyLetter from the Legal Director
27Guantánamo  
Habeas Cases
Al Qahtani v. Obama
Habeas petition for Mohammed al 
Qahtani, who suffered physical and  psychological torture when he was subjected to the extraordinarily abusive “First Special Interrogation Plan,”  a regime of “systematic enhanced interrogation techniques” personally authorized by Donald Rumsfeld. 
Status: Pending in D.C. District Court.
Ameziane v. Obama
Habeas petition on behalf of Djamel Ameziane, an Algerian man who  
requires urgent resettlement  
protection. Mr. Ameziane has never been charged with any crime and  
fears forced repatriation to Algeria, a  
country he fled to escape escalating  
instability and oppression. Mr.  
Ameziane has been at Guantánamo since 2002, where he has suffered abuse and solitary confinement.
Status: Pending in D.C. District Court.  
Mr. Ameziane also has a sealed application pending before the U.S. Supreme Court.
Barre v. Obama
Habeas petition filed on behalf of  
Mohammed Sulaymon Barre, a citizen  of Somalia, who had been living in  Pakistan under the mandate protection of the U.N. High Commissioner  for Refugees. Mr. Barre was never charged with any crime, but was told that since he was from Somalia, which had no functioning government to take him back, he would be at Guantánamo “for a long time.”
Status: After CCR filed its response, the  
government cleared Mr. Barre for transfer  to Somaliland, an autonomous region in northwestern Somalia. He arrived in  December 2009, where he is now living with his family and has returned to studying (and hoping soon to teach) agriculture.  Mr. Barre’s habeas corpus petition was  dismissed as moot in the D.C. District  Court following his release, but CCR has  appealed the dismissal to the D.C. Circuit and continues to pursue the case to clear  Mr. Barre’s name.
Khan v. Obama
Habeas petition filed on behalf of  
Majid Khan, who was held and  tortured in CIA secret detention  for several years prior to his transfer to Guantánamo. Because the government has classified Khan’s experiences in CIA detention, access to our client is subject to extraordinary security and censorship procedures.
Status: Pending in D.C. District Court.
Khantumani v. Obama
Habeas petition filed on behalf of  Syrian father and son, Abdul Nasser  and Muhammed Khantumani.  Muhammed was still a juvenile when he came into U.S. custody and was  detained apart from his father for the  duration of his detention. Both men were held without charge or judicial review for over seven years. CCR  undertook extensive diplomatic and advocacy efforts to find safe third  counties for resettlement of these men, who cannot safely return to Syria.
Status: After seven and a half years of  
unlawful detention, Muhammed was  released and resettled in Portugal in  August 2009. His father continues to be detained without charge. CCR is continuing to work towards safe resettlement for  Abdul Nasser Khantumani and will support ongoing reintegration and family unification efforts for both men.Below is an index of cases and amicus briefs that CCR litigated or filed during this past year. In addition, we are continuously 
developing new cases, working closely with progressive attorneys and other organizations on a host of constitutional and 
human rights issues and providing support and expertise to many movements and organizations who may not have a case 
represented below. 
Extended family of Mohammed Sulaymon 
Barre in front of Mr. Barre’s home, Borao, Somaliland.GuantánamoCase Index28Kiyemba v. Obama (Kiyemba I)
Consolidated habeas petition for ethnic 
Uighurs: captured by bounty hunters in Afghanistan and Pakistan, sold to the U.S. military and then transferred to Guantánamo. Despite being found to not be enemy combatants and ordered released by a U.S. federal judge,  
some of the Uighurs still remain in Guantánamo awaiting resettlement in  
a safe third country.
Status: In 2008, 17 Uighurs were ordered 
brought to the U.S. for purpose of release; the D. C. Court of Appeals reversed; a petition for certiorari review in the Supreme Court was granted, but in March, after a government-engineered resettlement offer in Switzerland for the last Uighur with no prior resettlement offer, the Supreme Court remanded the case, and the Court of Appeals affirmed its prior ruling. Since June 2009, four of the original seventeen men have been successfully resettled in Bermuda, six temporarily in Palau, and two in Switzerland.
Kiyemba v. Obama (Kiyemba II)
Nine ethnic Uighurs held at Guantána-
mo filed a habeas corpus petition and sought a requirement that the govern-ment give 30 days notice before trans-ferring them out of Guantánamo to give time to appeal any transfer to a country where they might face death, torture, or further imprisonment.
Status: The D.C. Circuit Court held that  
in the circumstances of this case, judges  may not review executive branch  decisions regarding when or where to  transfer detainees and that detainees are  not entitled to advance notice of such  transfers. In March 2010 the Supreme  Court declined to review this ruling.Othman v. Obama
Habeas petition for Khaled Abd El-
gabar Mohammed Othman of Yemen.  Yemenis comprise well over one-third of the nearly 200 men still detained at Guantánamo. In December 2009, the Obama administration indefinitely  suspended all repatriations to Yemen.
Status: Pending in D.C. district court.
Taher v. Obama
Habeas petition for Mohammed Taher, a citizen of Yemen. Taher was one of a group of students arrested in Pakistan in early 2002. In habeas challenges by other men seized with Taher during the raid, the district court has consistently found in favor of the detainee.
Status: After over seven years of unlawful 
detention, Taher was released and repatri-ated to Yemen in December 2009 along with five other Yemenis. The Obama administra-tion instituted its suspension of all transfers to Yemen just days after his return. Zalita v. Obama
Habeas petition involving the first legal 
challenge brought by a Guantánamo detainee to an intended transfer to his native country, Libya, where he would likely face torture or execution.
Status: After CCR filed its motion for  
judgment in the habeas case, the government 
cleared our client for transfer, and the State Department convinced Albania to resettle him. Three CCR staffers visited him in  
Tirana during the first days of his transition to freedom in February 2010. He now has refugee status in Albania.
Guantánamo  
Civil Cases
Al Laithi v. Rumsfeld
Civil suit for damages filed on behalf of 
an Egyptian doctor who is now confined to a wheelchair due to the torture and mistreatment he experienced at  Guantánamo.
Status: The government moved to dismiss  
in light of the Supreme Court’s refusal to  review the Court of Appeals’ decision in Rasul v. Rumsfeld (see below).
Al-Zahrani v. Rumsfeld
Civil suit on behalf of the families and 
estates of Yasser Al-Zahrani and of Salah Ali Abdullah Al-Salami, men who died  at Guantánamo under suspicious circum-stances in June 2006 along with a third man, Mani Al-Utaybi. The military has consistently maintained that the deaths were the result of suicide. 
Status: In January 2010, Harper’s magazine 
reported the accounts of four soldiers who were stationed at Guantánamo at the time of the deaths which strongly suggest that 
One of CCR’s three clients in Kiyemba v. 
Obama who were granted temporary  resettlement in Palau. Guantánamo  (continued)Case Index29the men died not as the result of suicide, but 
were killed at a secret site at Guantánamo. While the district court had dismissed the case on our original complaint, CCR filed a 
motion for reconsideration in March 2010 on 
the basis of the new evidence, and we are 
awaiting a ruling on that motion.
Ameziane v. United States
First ever Inter-American Commission 
on Human Rights (IACHR) petition and request for precautionary measures filed on behalf of a Guantánamo detainee, 
Djamel Ameziane, an Algerian man  
who has been severely abused at 
Guantánamo and is at risk of continued serious harm if forcibly transferred to Algeria. He is seeking third country resettlement.
Status: Urgent precautionary measures 
granted in August 2008; petition pending before the IACHR.
Celikgogus v. Rumsfeld
Civil suit for damages against Donald 
Rumsfeld and others responsible for  the detention, torture, and mistreatment of five men illegally detained in  Guantánamo for years, including two men detained for more than four years and released years after being classified as non-enemy combatants.
Status: The government moved to dismiss 
in light of the Supreme Court’s refusal to review the Court of Appeals’ decision in Rasul v. Rumsfeld (see below); petition is fully briefed and awaiting decision by the district court.
United States v. Ghailani (amicus)
Ahmed Ghailani was indicted in 1998 in 
connection with the bombings of two U.S. embassies in East Africa. He was captured in 2004, held in secret CIA detention, and eventually transferred to Guantánamo in September 2006, where he was held without access to counsel until 2008. He was transferred to New York in June 2009 for trial. On invitation of the court, CCR submitted an amicus brief arguing that Ghailani’s indictment should be dismissed because the years-long delay in bringing him to trial violated his fundamental right to a speedy trial protected by the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, the Speedy Trial Act, and the U.S. Constitution.
Status: The district court denied Ghailani’s 
motion to dismiss his indictment on speedy trial grounds in July 2010.
U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services Office for Human 
Research Protections (OHRP)  
Complaint against the CIA
An administrative complaint by a  
coalition of human rights groups, requesting a formal investigation into whether the Central Intelligence  Agency engaged in illegal human  subject research and experimentation  on detainees.
Status: Filed in June 2010.
Rasul v. Rumsfeld
Civil suit against former Secretary of  Defense Donald Rumsfeld on behalf  of four British former detainees seeking damages for their arbitrary detention and torture while detained at  Guantánamo.
Status: Court of Appeals dismissed all claims; 
Supreme Court reversed for reconsideration in light of Boumediene v. Bush; Court of  Appeals again dismissed all claims on sovereign immunity and qualified immunity grounds; petition for certiorari review in Supreme Court was denied in December, ending the case.
Named plaintiffs in CCR’s two Guantánamo Supreme Court cases: Shafiq Rasul 
(left) and Lakhdar Boumediene (right)—shown here in Paris the day after his  release from Guantánamo. Immediately after our historic victory in Rasul v. 
Bush, CCR filed new habeas petitions which eventually became the consoli -
dated cases of Al Odah v. United States and Boumediene v. Bush, resulting in a second victory in June 2008. Together these cases established that Guantánamo detainees have the right to challenge their detention in U.S. courts.Case Index
30Human Rights Abuse  
by Military Contractors 
in Iraq
Al Shimari v. CACI, Al-Quraishi  
v. Nakhla and L-3, Saleh v. Titan
Lawsuits on behalf of nearly 340 Iraqi 
civilian detainees alleging that individual military contractors and the corpora-tions that hired them (CACI and L-3), 
participated in a torture conspiracy at 
Abu Ghraib and other detention facilities 
in Iraq.
Status:  Following dismissal of the case 
against both CACI and Titan/L-3 Services by the D.C. Court of Appeals in September 2009, the plaintiffs in Saleh filed a petition for certiorari with the Supreme Court, which is pending. In Al Shimari, CACI’s motion to dismiss was denied; CACI has filed a petition for appeal; oral argument is scheduled for October 2010. In Al-Quraishi, defendants’ motions to dismiss were argued; a decision is pending.
Estate of Himoud Saed Abtan  
v. Erik Prince
Suing the private military contractor 
Blackwater on behalf of Iraqi  plaintiffs injured or killed when  Blackwater shooters opened fire  at Nisoor Square in Baghdad,  September 2007.
Status: Following denial of Blackwater’s 
motion to dismiss in October 2009, plaintiffs reached a settlement with Blackwater,  ending the litigation.Estate of Ali Hussamaldeen  
Albazzaz v. Erik Prince
Suing the private military contractor 
Blackwater and its founder Erik Prince on behalf of two Iraqi civilians killed near Al Watahba Square in Baghdad in September 2007.
Status: Following denial of Blackwater’s 
motion to dismiss in October 2009, plaintiffs reached a settlement with Blackwater, end-ing the litigation.
International  
Human Rights
Balintulo v. Daimler (amicus) 
Case against American and German 
corporations for providing the South African apartheid regime with products and services that advance human rights abuses, including apartheid, torture, and extrajudicial killing.
Status: Defendants’ interlocutory appeal 
is pending in the Second Circuit, after the district court allowed plaintiffs’ claims to proceed. Campo Algodonero v. United  
Mexican States (amicus)
Urging the Inter-American Court of  
Human Rights (IACHR) to determine that the longstanding failure to investi-gate, prosecute, or prevent disappear-ances, rapes, and murders of young women and girls in Ciudad Juárez violates Mexico’s obligations under the American Convention, the Convention Belem do Para, and international human rights norms. 
Status: In December 2009, the IACHR 
found Mexico in violation of human rights obligations, including under the American Convention of Human Rights, finding that Mexico has an affirmative duty to respond to violence against women by private actors. The court ordered Mexico to comply with a broad set of remedial measures including a national memorial, renewed investigations and reparations of over $200,000 each to the families in the suit.
Two of nearly 340 CCR clients suing private military contractors for participating in a torture 
conspiracy at Abu Ghraib and other detention facilities in Iraq. T hese photographs and the one 
on p. 8 are part of a series by Chris Bartlett that can be seen at www .detaineeproject.org.International Human Rights31Freedom of Information Act 
(FOIA) Requests Regarding Israeli Attack on Flotilla Delivering Aid to 
Gaza
FOIA requests to U.S. agencies relating 
to the May 31, 2010 attack by Israel on a flotilla of six vessels in international waters seeking to deliver humanitarian 
aid to Gaza, and U.S. policy towards the 
blockade of Gaza. 
Status: Filed in June 2010.
Mamani v. Sanchez de Lozada
Mamani v. Sanchez Berzain
Cases against former President and 
former Minister of Defense of Bolivia for their roles in the killing of civilians during popular protests against the Bolivian government in September and October 2003.
Status: Decision on whether defendants 
can appeal from the district court’s order allowing plaintiffs’ Alien Tort Statute claims to proceed is pending in the Eleventh Circuit.  
Movsesian v. Versicherung   
(amicus)
Heirs of victims of the Armenian  
genocide suing German corporations  for unpaid insurance benefits.
Status: Plaintiffs’ petition for rehearing is 
pending before the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals.
ICC v. Jean-Pierre Bemba (amicus) 
Brief on behalf of international torture 
experts and human rights groups calling on the International Criminal Court to confirm a charge that counts rape and other sexual violence as torture in the case of Jean-Pierre Bemba, who is  accused of leading a terror campaign  in the Central African Republic. 
Status:  Motion to file an amicus was denied; 
trial is scheduled to start in July 2010.Petition for Urgent Action on  
Human Rights Violations by  
Israel: Desecration of the Ma’man 
Allah (Mamilla) Muslim Cemetery  in Jerusalem
Descendants of people buried in Mamil-
la cemetery in Jerusalem seeking urgent action to halt construction of a “Museum of Tolerance” on top of the cemetery, to re-bury the removed remains, to protect the cemetery from further destruction, and to preserve it as an historical site.
Status:  Petition and addendum are pending 
before United Nations bodies. 
Presbyterian Church of Sudan v. 
Talisman Energy, Inc. (amicus)
Case against Talisman Energy, Inc. 
for aiding and abetting the Sudanese government in a campaign of genocide and torture against non-Muslim African people in Southern Sudan in order to quell dissent and expand their oil  exploration in the region.
Status:  The Second Circuit affirmed the 
dismissal. A petition for review is pending  at the Supreme Court.U.S. v. Roy M. Belfast (amicus) 
Charles Taylor, Jr. appealed his  
conviction for torture in Liberia in  the first prosecution under the U.S. criminal torture statute. CCR, as amicus, opposed the appeal, arguing that the criminal torture statute is constitutional and applies to the defendant.
Status:  Defendant’s appeal is pending  
before the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals.  
Corporate Human  
Rights Abuse
Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum 
(amicus)
CCR filed a brief arguing that the execu-
tions of the Ogoni 9 in Nigeria constitute extrajudicial killings under international law and another brief regarding the legal definitions of crimes against humanity, arbitrary arrest and detention, and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Status: Appellate decision is pending in the 
Second Circuit.
Wiwa v. Royal Dutch Shell
Wiwa v. Anderson
Wiwa v. Shell Petroleum  
Development Company
CCR filed this case in 1996 and was 
joined by other organizations and attor-neys over the course of the 13-year-long battle on behalf of Ogoni human rights defenders and their relatives suing  Shell for complicity in torture, arbitrary detention and extrajudicial killings  in Nigeria.
Status: Settled on the eve of trial for $15.5 
million to compensate plaintiffs and to  establish a trust fund to benefit the  Ogoni people. 
Gaza flotilla ship, the Mavi Marmara, display-
ing Turkish and Palestinian flags and a banner that reads: “This is a humanitarian aid ship” in 
four languages. Nine passengers were killed 
and over 60 injured after Israeli commandos boarded and opened fire.32Policing and Prisons
Aref v. Holder
Challenging policies and conditions at 
two experimental prison units called Communications Management Units or “CMU’s.” These prisons unfairly target certain prisoners for severe social and physical isolation.
Status: Filed in D.C. District Court in March 
2010.
Floyd v. The City of New York
Class action lawsuit against the New 
York City Police Department challenging widespread racial profiling and unconsti-tutional stop-and-frisk practices.
Status: In discovery—CCR has documented 
a significant rise in the number of, and persistent racial disparity in, stop-and-frisks conducted by the NYPD.Graham v. Florida (amicus) 
Sullivan v. Florida (amicus)
An amicus brief that argues that  
under international law, life in prison without parole is indecent and exces-sive punishment for juveniles under 18. 
The United States was the only country 
in the world that continued to impose 
sentences of life without parole against juveniles.
Status: In May 2010, the Supreme Court 
ruled that the imposition of a life without parole sentence on a juvenile offender  convicted of a non-homicide crime violated  the Eighth  Amendment’s prohibition of  cruel and inhuman punishment. The  majority opinion relied in part on the  arguments put forth in this amicus brief.
Louisiana v. Wallace (amicus)
An amicus brief that was the result of 
a campaign and survey coordinated by CCR to observe every New Orleans criminal court first appearance for 60 straight days. The survey found routine and systemic constitutional and statutory violations.
Status: The Louisiana Supreme Court  
ruled unanimously in November that New Orleans criminal court judges must hold a probable cause determination of all arrested people still in custody within 48 hours, or immediately release them on their own recognizance.
Walton v. New York State Depart-
ment of Correctional Services  
(NYSDOCS) and MCI/Verizon
Challenging the NYSDOCS monopoly 
telephone contract with MCI/Verizon that forced family members to pay exorbitant phone rates to speak with incarcerated family members.
Status: The Court of Appeals ruled against 
plaintiffs in November 2009, dismissing  the constitutional challenges even while  stating that the opinion “should not be  
misinterpreted as an endorsement of the 
former DOCS policy.” 
Wright v. Corrections  
Corporation of America  
(FCC Rule-making Petition)
Petitioning the FCC to regulate interstate 
prison telephone calls to ensure fair and reasonable rates for prisoners and their families.
Status: Awaiting FCC action on the Petition 
for Rule-making.
Immigrant Justice 
Cardenas Abreu v. Holder
Petition to review a Board of Immigration 
Appeals precedent decision that  ordered a deportation based on a  criminal conviction that is not yet final.
Status: In May 2010 the U.S. Court of  
Appeals for the Second Circuit granted Mr. Cardenas’ petition for review. The case is on remand to the Board of Immigration Appeals for further review and consideration.
National Day Laborer Organizing 
Network v. Department of  
Homeland Security
Freedom of Information Act case seek-
ing documents relating to Immigration and Customs Enforcement’s secretive “Secure Communities” program which further involves state and local entities in 
CCR client Kifah Jayyousi with his daughter, 
before being transferred to the Communi-cations Management Units where he is no 
longer allowed contact visits with his family.Racial and Economic JusticeCase Index33the enforcement of federal immigration 
law and institutes immigration  fingerprint checks upon arrest—without requiring any criminal conviction. 
Status: Filed in April 2010. U.S. government 
has produced limited documents.
Turkmen v. Ashcroft
Class action lawsuit seeking to hold  
former Attorney General John Ashcroft and other high-level officials account-able for unlawful racial profiling, mass detentions, and abusive treatment  of South Asian, Arab, and Muslim  non-citizens after 9/11.
Status: Five of the seven named plaintiffs 
have settled their claims for $1.26 Million. In June 2010 the magistrate judge recommend-ed that CCR receive permission to amend the complaint and add new plaintiffs. 
Employment  
Discrimination
Gulino v. The Board of Education 
of the City of New York 
Class action on behalf of public school 
teachers of color who are challenging discriminatory tests and licensing rules.Status: Second Circuit Court of Appeals  
remanded to the district court with instruc-tions to reevaluate the challenged tests.  The district court asked the parties to submit written briefs on, among other things, the legality of the exams; awaiting a decision.
Johnson v. Locke
A lawsuit to stop the government from 
using racially-biased arrest records as a strike against applicants for temporary positions with the U.S. Census Bureau.
Status: Filed in April 2010. The Census  
Bureau has filed a motion to dismiss;  plaintiffs’ response is due in August 2010.
Lewis v. City of Chicago (amicus)
A Title VII case brought on behalf  
of Black firefighter applicants  challenging the civil service exam used to hire firefighters for the Chicago Fire Department. The test had a disparate impact on Black applicants. 
Status: After the plaintiffs won in the district 
court, the case was dismissed by the Court of Appeals, ruling that plaintiffs had not filed their EEOC charge within the statute of limitations. In May 2010, the Supreme Court reversed the Seventh Circuit, ruling that plaintiffs were entitled to the relief granted by the district court.
United States of America and  
Vulcan Society v. City of New York
Challenging discriminatory hiring  
practices of the NYC Fire Department  on behalf of an association of Black  firefighters and individual class repre-sentatives. The NYC Fire Department is the least racially diverse of any major U.S. city—3.4 percent Black, in a city that is 27 percent  Black.
Status: In January 2010, the district court 
granted summary judgment in the Vulcans and individual plaintiffs’ favor on their  intentional discrimination claims against  the City, but granted summary judgment  in favor of defendants on the intentional  discrimination claims against Mayor Bloomberg and Commissioner Scoppetta. The case is now in the remedial phase.
Left: Sarahi Uribe, National Organizer for the National Day Laborer Organizing Network and Coordinator for the Uncover the Truth Campaign, 
raising her fist prior to arrest in Phoenix at protests against Arizona’s racist SB1070. Right: CCR Staff Attorney Rachel Meeropol with Turkmen v. Ashcroft clients Hany Ibrahim and Yasser Ebrahim and former CCR Staff Attorney Matthew Strugar in Alexandria, Egypt (right to left).Torture and Rendition
ACLU, CCR, et al. v. Department  
of Defense
Freedom of Information Act lawsuit 
charging that government agencies  illegally withheld records sought  concerning the abuse of detainees in U.S. military custody.
Status: Litigation pending in the Southern 
District of New York and the Second Circuit Court of Appeals.
Amnesty International, CCR, et al. 
v. CIA, Department of Defense,  
et al.
Freedom of Information Act lawsuit 
seeking information about renditions and “disappeared” detainees, including those at CIA ”ghost” sites and  unregistered prisoners.
Status: Over 6,000 pages of documents from 
the Department of Defense, Department of State and Central Intelligence Agency have been released—litigation is ongoing.
Arar v. Ashcroft
Challenging the extraordinary rendition 
of Maher Arar and seeking accountability from Ashcroft, Mueller and other U.S. officials for sending Canadian citizen Arar to Syria to be tortured.
Status: Arar’s Petition for Certiorari was  
denied by the Supreme Court, ending his case in the courts. Spanish Investigation into the  
U.S. Torture Program
Efforts in Spain to hold former  
high-ranking U.S. officials accountable for their individual roles in directing, implementing or planning the U.S. torture program, under the principle of universal jurisdiction. CCR has made filings in two cases, in an effort to ensure that victims have their day in court and that the individuals behind the programs that tortured and otherwise seriously abused detainees are prosecuted. 
Status: Victims and human rights advocates 
filed criminal complaints in Spain in 2009. In one case CCR is seeking to intervene and become a party and in the other (the “Bush 6” case against six former administration lawyers) CCR co-submitted an expert report on universal jurisdiction. The two ongoing investigations are pending in the National Court of Spain.Challenging the  
Material Support  
Statutes
Holder v. Humanitarian  
Law Project 
Series of cases challenging material 
support statutes, including a portion of the USA PATRIOT Act, which make it a crime to provide support, including  humanitarian aid, literature distribution and peaceful political advocacy, to  any entity that the government has  designated as a “terrorist” group.
Status: After initial partial victory in the lower 
court, holding significant parts of the statute unconstitutional on vagueness grounds, the Supreme Court held in June 2010, that the statute’s prohibitions on “expert advice,” “training,” “service,” and “personnel” were not vague, and did not violate speech or associational rights as applied to plaintiffs’ intended activities.
34
Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project client Dr. Ralph Fertig (center) with the legal team on the 
day of the Supreme Court argument. From left: Richard Taranto, Sara Corris, Amanda Shanor, Larry Schwartztol, Shayana Kadidal, Dr. Ralph Fertig, Jules Lobel, David Cole, Carol Sobel, 
Nancy Chang, Clifford Chen.Government MisconductCase IndexDefending Dissent
Association of Community  
Organizations for Reform Now 
(ACORN) v. U.S.
This case challenges Congress’s uncon-
stitutional defunding of ACORN, charg-ing Congress with violating the bill of attainder provision in the U.S. Consti-
tution, violating the Fifth Amendment 
right to due process, and infringing on 
the First Amendment right to freedom of association by targeting ACORN-affiliated and allied organizations.  
Status: Filed in November 2009, the 
federal district court in Brooklyn granted a preliminary injunction in December, and a permanent injunction in March after Congress passed additional defunding legislation. The case is now on appeal in the Second Circuit.
California v. Kevin Olliff
Defending an activist who faces 10 
felony charges for First Amendment-protected political speech and par-ticipation in a long-running campaign against primate research in the Univer-sity of California. The indictment also sought a gang enhancement penalty, alleging that the Animal Liberation Front (ALF) is a criminal street gang.
Status: At a pre-trial hearing in January 
2010, the judge threw out half of Olliff’s charges, holding that the ALF is not a “gang” because it primarily engages in pro-tected speech, not criminal activity. Olliff pled no contest to the remaining counts, and is currently in prison. He is expected to be released in October 2010. Caligiuri v. Pittsburgh
Challenging the unconstitutional use 
of tasers against peaceful demonstra-tors at an anti-war demonstration in Pittsburgh. The Pittsburgh police  used tasers unnecessarily, without notice, and where the person was already being restrained by the  police. 
Status: This case settled successfully 
 in June 2010. 
CODEPINK Pittsburgh Women 
for Peace v. U.S. Secret Service
Federal lawsuit to protect the First 
Amendment rights of peace, social justice and environmental justice groups to dissent and protest at and around the G-20 summit, held in  
Pittsburgh in September 2009.  
Federal, state and local agencies  
had refused permits to many  
protest groups and restricted the Humanitarian Law Project v.  
Department of the Treasury
Challenge to similar restrictions under the 
Global Terrorism Sanctions Regulations, the International Emergency Economic Powers Act statute and a post-9/11  executive order.
Status: Motion for reconsideration of Ninth  
Circuit loss is pending, following Supreme Court ruling in Holder v. HLP (see above).
Illegal Government  
Surveillance
CCR v. Bush
Challenging NSA warrantless domestic 
electronic surveillance, asserting that it violates FISA and the First and Fourth Amendments. Lawsuit is on behalf of CCR attorneys, seeking to protect our clients’ right to confidential attorney-client  communications.
Status: Congress amended the FISA statute 
in mid-2008; the case remains pending in the Northern District of California.
Wilner v. NSA and DOJ
FOIA lawsuit to determine if the  
government has engaged in warrantless wiretapping of CCR attorneys and  Guantánamo habeas counsel.
Status: Supreme Court petition for review 
pending on our request for records of surveil-lance of CCR Guantánamo attorneys.
Cuba
Sanders v. Szubin
Challenging the U.S. government’s 
requirements for individuals to provide potentially self-incriminating information, under threat of civil penalties, as part of the U.S. embargo against Cuba. 
Status: Filed in July 2009. The government filed 
its answer in November 2009.
35
CCR legal team stands with ACORN clients 
after an historic ruling that Congress’ de-funding of ACORN was unconstitutional.Defending the Right  
to Political Dissent
(continued over)36ones approved to areas outside of the 
area where the G-20 was to be held. 
Status: Successfully settled in part by winning 
an expanded protest zone, and lost in part when the district court denied injunctive relief. 
Frazier v. Florida Department  
of Education (amicus)
An amicus brief requesting the Supreme 
Court to hear this case to defend the well-established right of students to abstain from reciting the pledge of  allegiance in school.
Status: The Supreme Court declined to hear 
the case in October 2009, leaving intact the Eleventh Circuit decision which allows Florida to require written parental permission before excusing a student from reciting the pledge in school.Goodman v. St. Paul
On behalf of three Democracy Now! 
journalists who were arrested during  the 2008 Republican National  Convention, this lawsuit charges law enforcement agencies with unlawful  arrests and unreasonable use of force, and violating the journalists’ First Amendment rights as members of the press to report on matters of public concern and the public actions of law enforcement. 
Status: Filed in the U.S. District Court for  
the District of Minnesota in May 2010.
Seeds of Peace v. City of  
Pittsburgh
Seeking an injunction to stop police  
harassment of a group of activists  providing free food to protestors in  the days before the 2009 G-20 summit  in Pittsburgh.
Status: District court denied the injunction 
and the case was dismissed.United States v. Buddenberg
Defending four animal rights activists 
who are being charged under the Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act with conspiracy to commit animal enterprise terrorism for First Amendment–protected political activity including protesting, chalking the sidewalk, chanting and leafleting.
Status: Oral argument on our motion to dis-
miss the indictment was heard in June 2010. 
United States v. Camilo  
Mejia-Castillo
A petition filed on behalf of Camilo 
Mejia, a former Staff Sergeant with the Florida National Guard who was the  first Iraq war veteran to openly refuse to re-deploy.  Mr. Mejia seeks reversal of his conviction, restoration of his rank, and back pay.
Status: In January 2010, the U.S. Court of 
Appeals for the Armed Forces refused to hear the appeal, ending the case.
United States v. Stop Huntingdon 
Animal Cruelty (SHAC7) (amicus)
An amicus brief in support of animal 
rights activists convicted of violating  the Animal Enterprise Protection Act  for website postings and organizing demonstrations.
Status: The Third Circuit affirmed the  
convictions in late 2009. CCR filed an  amicus brief urging the circuit to rehear the case en banc. That petition was denied in June, leaving the four to six-year sentences to stand. 
CCR client Amy Goodman of Democracy 
Now! speaking at CCR’s President’s  Reception about her arrest at the  
Republican National Convention.
Animal rights activist, Kevin Olliff, 
 was arrested in April 2009 for First  Amendment-protected protest activity.Case Index
Defending the Right to Political Dissent (continued)Friends and Allies
Abahlali baseMjondolo
ACLU of PennsylvaniaACORNMichael AdamsDebo AdegbileSuzanne AdelyVictor Agosto
Shereef Akeel
Aktion BundesschlussAshlee AlbiesCatherine AlbisaAmerican University,   Washington College of  
 Law, International Human   
 Rights Clinic
Amnesty InternationalChris AndersHarry AnduzePouneh AravandRonit Arié
Nan Aron
Ahilan ArulanathamBarbara AubreyAudre Lorde ProjectJohn AustriaMichael AveryBaach Robinson & Lewis PLLCSandra BabcockJanice BadaluceBaker & McKenzie LLPRadhika BalakrishnanNatasha BannanAjamu Baraka
Nigel Barrella
Chris BartlettMonika BatraJack BeckBeldock Levine and  Hoffman LLP
Bellevue/NYU Program for    Survivors of Torture
Benjamin Cardozo Immigration  
 Justice Clinic
Karima BennouneAntoine BernhardAlison BernsteinFrida BerriganAnurima BhargavaChandra BhatnagarBingham McCutchen LLPJoshua BirchJonathan I. BlackmanBlackwater Watch
Bob Bloom
Robert Jay BloomJocelyn BogdanHeidi BoghosianVictoria BoltonTrudy BondJennifer BorchettaKaren BorgAlexandria BraboyEmma BradfordBrennan Center for Justice   at NYU School of Law
Yael Bromberg
Andrew J. Brouwer
David BrownAllan BuchmanCharlotte BunchBureau des Avocats   Internationaux (BAI)
Susan BurkeAntonio BustamanteButler Rubin Saltarelli &   Boyd LLP
Shahid ButtarBrian ByrdJean Callahan
Ann Cammett
Campaign to Preserve   Mamilla Jerusalem  
 Cemetery
Joshua CarrinAnnie CastellaniMichael CatesAntonia CedroneCenter for International   Human Rights, Northwestern  
 University School of Law
Center for Justice &   Accountability (CJA)Center for Justice and   International Law (CEJIL)
Centre for Applied   Legal Studies
Centre for Human Rights of   the University of Pretoria
John ChandlerNathaniel CharnyMarco CheloClifford Y . Chen
Judith Chomsky
Nusrat ChoudhuryCindy ChupackCitizen SoldierCivil Liberties Defense CenterRamsey ClarkGeorge ClarkeCleary Gottlieb Steen &   Hamilton LLP
Coalition for an Ethical   Psychology
Coalition for Parole   Restoration (CPR)
Coalition for the Defense of   Human Rights
Coalition to Raise Minimum   Standards at NYC Jails
CODEPINK Women for PeaceRussell P . CohenCohen Milstein Sellers &   Toll PLLC 
David ColeSandy ColiverCommunity Church   of New York
Community Service SocietySophia ConroyThe Constitution ProjectCoordination Southern Africa   (KOSA - Germany)
Rhonda CopelonCorrectional Association of NYSara CorrisAndrea CousinsCovington & Burling LLPCatherine Creely
Cori Crider
Megan CrowleyDeborah CroyleCuba Travel ProjectCulture ProjectJamil DakwarMatthew DaloisioGeorge DalyRon DanielsAlina Das Niki DasarathyThomas DaviesJeffrey Davis
Martha Davis
DC Prisoners’ ProjectDefending Dissent FoundationAleta DellenbackMaddy DeLone Cait De Mott GradySonia De SampignyKavita DesaiDetention Watch NetworkAlexia DeVincentisAnthony DiCaprioAngelia DickensDLA Piper
The Center for Constitutional Rights is grateful for the support of the hundreds of attorneys, legal organizations, private law 
firms, clients and activists who have been so vital to our cases, campaigns and fundraising efforts over the past year. CCR extends its deepest appreciation for all they have done as volunteer attorneys, cooperating attorneys, co-counsel and colleagues in the struggle for justice.
37CCR would like to express our tremendous gratitude to the 
hundreds of lawyers, legal workers, firms and law students who have contributed their time on behalf of Guantánamo detainees. Though too numerous to be included by name here, these dedicated volunteers are essential to our  ongoing efforts to close the prison at Guantánamo and either release and resettle or provide fair trials for for those 
who remain there. Thank you for your courage and support.38Domestic Workers United
Double Cross VodkaTerrence DoughertyDrop the RockDrug Policy AllianceThomas DuaneEarthRights International (ERI)
Ecumenical Service for  
 Advocacy Work on Southern  
 Africa (KASA - Germany)
Educators for Civil LibertiesEl Comité de Familiares de    Detenidos Desaparecidos en  
 Honduras (COFADEH)
Noor ElashiLaurie ElkinTod EnsignBurcin ErenEthical Culture SocietyEuropean Center for  
 Constitutional and Human  
 Rights (ECCHR)
Fabulous Independent  
 Educated Radicals for   
 Community Empowerment  
 (FIERCE!)
Families for FreedomFamilies Rally for Emancipation   and Empowerment (FREE)
Jamie FellnerRalph FertigOmar C. FigueroaMichael Figura
Jonathan Fine
Davida FingerGregory H. FingerBrian J. FischerAl FishmanBen FishmanSharon FlahertyLaura FlandersLaura Flaviah-WuLouis FontFont & Glazer Alysson FordCaroline Fredrickson
Free Gaza Movement
Spencer FreedmanGarvey Schubert BarerGaza Freedom MarchJanice GehlmeyerMary GeissmanGeorgetown University   Law Center
Frances Geteles-ShapiroRana GhalebTyler GianniniJohn GibbonsGibbons P .C.
John Gilmore
Elizabeth P . GilsonLeah GitterGlobal WitnessSarah GoetzEmily GoldbergDeborah GoldenEliza GoldenCarla GoldsteinTania GomezBill GoodmanMelissa GoodmanGoodman & Hurwitz, P .C.
Grassroots Leadership
Kali Saveria GrechJennie GreenEldon GreenbergAlana GreerJenny GrossbardBob GuildHiba HafizLisa HajjarJulie HallGillian M. HansenHarvard Human Rights   Program
Jelani HatcherDiane HawkinsKatherine HawkinsSteve HawkinsKathryn HeffronRebecca HeineggMarjorie HeinsArt HeitzerEric HellermanMadeleine HenslerElizabeth HernandezDamon HewittDaniel Heyman
Nyasa Hickey
Carolyn HicksJaribu HillMorgan HillJulianne HoffenbergBenjamin HoffmanPaul L. HoffmanTaylor HoffmanRue HogarthHonduras Solidarity NetworkScott HortonMargaret HuangJayne Huckerby
Human Rights First
Human Rights WatchRuth HunterChaumtoli HuqJulie HurwitzIl CollettivoImmigrant Defense ProjectImmigrant Justice   Solidarity Project
Immigration EqualityInstitute for Justice and   Democracy in Haiti (IJDH)
Institute for Justice and  
 Reconciliation
Institute for Policy Studies
Institute for Redress and   Recovery at Santa Clara  
 University
Interfaith Coalition of   Advocates for Reentry  
 and Employment (ICARE)
International Center for   Transitional Justice (ICTJ)
International Federation for    Human Rights (FIDH)
International Network for   
 Economic, Social and  
 Cultural Rights (ESCR-Net)
International Rights Advocates 
Irving R. Kaufman Fellowship   - HLS Bernard Koteen Office  
 of Public Interest Advising 
Phillip IrwinRenee IselyElias IsquithAbdeen JabaraJackman & AssociatesMarianne JacksonOmar Jadwat
Jameel Jaffer
Meena JaganathSunny JainSuleika JaouadAlan JenkinsJenner & BlockJonathan JeremiasKatya JestinSandra JohnsonKeith JordanWilhelm H. Joseph, Jr.Judson Memorial ChurchJustice Committee
Juvenile Justice Project  
 of Louisiana
Wolfgang KaleckCarolyn KalosJoy KanwarCraig KaplanDana KaplanJulie F . KayPaul KeeganAllen KellerKate KellyBridget KesslerAteqah Khaki
Dima Khalidi
Doane KiechelMichael KieschnickKing & SpauldingKim Paula KirkleyAnita KirpalaniRachel KleinmanJennifer KostyuMakane KouyateKramer Levin Naftalis &  Frankel LLP
Ruth KreinikKenneth A. Kreuscher
Frank Krogh
Marc KrupanskiRadha KuppalliLeonard KurzIra KurzbanDror LadinElena LandriscinaAlex LarriuexLatin American Working Group Darren LaVerneLawyers Earthquake   Response Network (LERN)
Naiara Leite da Silva
Kirsten Levingston
Richard LevyLevy Ratner P .C.Eric LewisShirley LinDahlia Lithwick
CCR’s Friends and Allies39Paula and Barry Litt
Jules LobelBenjamin LockeTerry LodgeLoyola University New Orleans   College of Law
Lawrence Lustberg
Joanne Maccri
Emi MacLeanLisa MagarrellMake the Road, NYMAKSA (Mainzer Arbeitskreis   Südliches Afrika – Germany)
Malcolm X Grassroots   Movement (MXGM)
Anjana MalhotraSusan Baker ManningPeter MarkowitzMelissa MarksFrank Marotta
Tomas Maruri
Maurice and Jane Sugar Law   Center for Economic and   
 Social Justice
Briana McCallAlison McCraryHelen McDermottNeil McGaraghanMedico International Ari MelberMertz Gilmore FoundationMetro New York Religious    Campaign Against Torture  
 (NYRCAT)
Danny MeyersMelina MilazzoSteven Miles
Katherine Miller
Monica MillerSam MillerMiller & Chevalier CHTDSusan MisnerSam MitchellInca MohammedPaul M. MonteleoniChristopher P . MooreJonathan MooreTamara MorgenthauJanine MornaMorrison & Foerster
Rahul Mukhi
Jumana MusaMuslim Justice InitiativeRafael MutisNational Day Laborer   Organizing Network  
 (NDLON)
National HIRE NetworkNational Immigration Project   of the National Lawyers GuildNational Lawyers Guild   – National Office
National Lawyers Guild   – NYC Chapter
National Organization for   Defending Rights and  
 Freedoms (HOOD)
NC Stop Torture NowMerry NeisnerBruce NestorNetroots NationNew Sanctuary CoalitionNew York Civil Liberties Union   (NYCLU)
New York Coalition   Against Torture
New York State   Defenders Association
Chris NewmanBlinne Ni Ghralaigh
Rachel (Terri) Nilliasca
Nixon Peabody LLPNo More GuantánamosNo Private ArmiesTomas Joseph NolanNorth Carolina Stop   Torture Now
Northern Manhattan Coalition   for Immigrant Rights
Northwestern University    School of Law’s Center for  
 International Human Rights
NYU Washington Square   Legal Services
October 22nd Coalition to   Stop Police Brutality
Noelle O’Donnell
Ricky and Cheri O’Donoghue
Office of the Chief Defense   Counsel, Military Commissions
Zara Ohiorhenuan Barbara OlshanskyBrad OlsonOrrick LLPRamona OrtegaVijay PadmanabhanAaron Marr PagePalestinian Center for Human   Rights (PCHR)
Vikram Parekh
Helene Parker
Jill PasquarellaRoopal PatelDori PaulinoJulia PeckPeoples’ JusticeJoshua E.S. PhillipsWilliam PhillipsPhysicians for Human RightsJerome Piana
Ruth Kreinik  and Doug Sapola  are stalwart CCR volunteers. 
Over the past few years, they have helped with countless mailings 
including new member packets, donor updates, thank you notes, and 
event invitations. Their efforts have helped us keep our supporters informed and engaged. After learning of CCR through Michael Ratner’s 
appearances on Democracy Now! , Ruth emailed CCR and “the rest is 
history.” Doug came to CCR following a discussion on Guantánamo at 
the New York Public Library. “I had been looking for something to do, so 
I decided to devote energy where something is working.”
CCR’s mission appeals to me. Every little mailing I do 
makes a difference. Someone has to do this stuff. 
-Ruth Kreinik
If I can come in and do this without costing you anything 
besides a sandwich and chips, so that people who give financially know what’s going on, that’s important. -Doug Sapola
CCR SpotlightCCR’s Friends and Allies
40Jason S. Pinney
Ashley PlattPolice Transparency &   Accountability Project 
Katherine PorterfieldPortland Law CollectiveFred Pratt
Public Good
PuenteCarolyn and Steve PurcellQuixote CenterLeila RachidiAshu RaiMax RameauHanalei RamosDavid RankinRankin & TaylorKaren RanucciMichael RatnerNathaniel Raymond
Red Baraat
The Redress Trust (REDRESS)Lauren ReganKatja RehmPaul RehmSteven ReisnerReprieveResist AFRICOMRights for Imprisoned   People with Psychiatric  
 Disabilities (RIPPD) 
Rights Working GroupJenny Rivera
The Riverside Church
Perrie BlumAlex RobinsonMarion RodriguezMindy RosemanAlex RosenbergBen RosenfeldRobert A. RosenfeldCarl RosensteinJosh RosenthalSuzanne RossLen RubensteinJames Rubin
Visuvanathan Rudrakumaran
Cate RussellRheba RutkowskiStephen RutkowskiKathryn SabbethSafe Streets/  Strong Communities
Naomi SagerSeema SaifeeYanick SalazarDouglas B. SapolaMargaret Satterthwaite
Jeremy Scahill
Ann Marie ScaliaSchnader Harrison Segal   & Lewis LLP
School of the Americas WatchSteven SchulmanMark SchwartzLarry SchwartztolScott & ScottRandy Scott-McLaughlinLiliana SeguraStephen SeligerSeliger & Elkin Ltd.
September 11th Families for  
 Peaceful Tomorrows
J. Tony SerraRita SethiSex Workers’ Project   - Urban Justice Center
Meera ShahParomita ShahPurvi ShahSvati ShahKelsey W. ShannonAmanda ShanorSteve Shapiro
Patrick A. Sheldon
Julie SheltonAnn ShepherdPeter ShepherdSholay ProductionsReggie ShufordFazeela SiddiquiFranklin SiegelThe Sikh CoalitionSikhula SonkeGregory SilbertKaylie SimonAmrit Singh
Skirball Foundation
Claudia SlovinskyAmalea SmirniotopolousAlexandra Houston SmithClive Stafford SmithMichael Steven SmithCarol A. SobelRichard A. SobleJoshua SohnSokolski & ZekariaStephen SoldzElisabeth Springer
Nancy Stearns
Jeffrey SteinArlene SteinbergIrene A. SteinerBeth StephensFrances Carter StephensMichael J. SternhellFisher StevensAudrey StewartMichele StormsTed StraussVivian StrombergMatthew Strugar
Sarah Sturges
Suffolk Law SchoolJaouad Suleika Gavin SullivanJoanne Sum-PingCaitlin SwainLeigh SylvanSylvia Rivera Law Project Jenny SynanTake Back the LandBeth TanisRichard G. TarantoMark Taylor
Daniel B. Tehrani
Nomi TeutschNikki ThanosTheaters Against War (THAW)Gerald ThompsonJames McNair ThompsonEric A. TirschwellKatherine ToomeyAtif ToorGabriel Torres RiveraTorture Abolition and Survivors  
 Support Coalition (TASSC)
Somil Trivedi
Natalie Truong
Liz TuccilloUC Berkeley Human   Rights Center
Howard UllmanUrban Justice CenterSarahi UribeU.S. Human Rights NetworkElica VafieMarc Van Der HautManny VargasVenceremos Brigade
Veterans for Peace
Angela C. VigilDeja VishnyDavid VladeckLenee VossVulcan SocietyIan WallachJoshua WeeksWeil, Gotshal & Manges LLPLeonard WeinglassPeter Weiss Andrew WeissmannSophie Weller
Welthaus Bielefeld 
Western Cape Anti-Eviction   Campaign
Western Shoshone   Defense Project
Adrienne WheelerIsaac WheelerEmilee WhitehurstSabin WillettJohn WilsonMichael WingerWitness Against TortureBen Wizner
Naomi Wolf
Women for Justice in Southern   Africa (FfG - Germany)
Gordon WoodwardWorld Organization for   Human Rights USA
Mel WulfJayashri WyattIris XuEllen YaroshefskyPrashant YerramalliDaphna ZekariaDorothy Zellner
Weiqi Zhang41The Center for Constitutional Rights is pleased to announce the establishment of the 
Gregory H. Finger Racial Justice Fellowship. The fellowship honors our former Executive Director, long-serving Board member, and current Board Chair, Greg Finger, and gives students the opportunity to work at CCR on cutting-edge legal work. The fellowship will be offered starting in the Summer of 2011 to a second year law or other student with a strong commitment to public interest law and/or advocacy, and a demonstrated interest in working on CCR’s broad ranging racial justice docket.
 The stipend is intended to increase diversity within the fellowship program and support 
students who would otherwise not be able to participate for financial reasons. People of color and people from low income communities will be particularly encouraged to apply. 
We are honored to celebrate Greg’s lifelong commitment to youth, public service, and 
CCR’s mandate to “train the next generation of people’s lawyers,” and his vision for social justice and education. This year, the Center for Constitutional 
Rights lost our dear friend, former staff attorney, and long time Board member and Vice-President, Rhonda Copelon. We are grateful that Rhonda was able to join us to celebrate the creation of the Copelon Fund for Gender Justice. Just weeks before her passing, surrounded by friends, family and former students, Rhonda announced her legacy gift and shared her reasons for establishing this fund at the Center: her belief that CCR is unique—selecting cases that others might not and litigating them in ways that others won’t. 
Rhonda’s gift had a challenge—a  
required “match” through which Rhonda has called on all of us who cared about her and this work, to help fulfill her dream of continuing and deepening the work she began at the Center by establishing a dedicated funding source. She has challenged us at the Center to think of new and innovative cases and to rethink the way we do cases and she has challenged her community to join her to help make her vision a reality.
The CFGJ is dedicated to deepening 
CCR’s historic commitment to cutting-edge gender litigation and advocacy. The fund will support work on issues affecting women and lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender communi -
ties; focus on the intersection of race and class; address economic and social rights; and defend women and LGBT communities under attack by religious fundamentalists and evangelicals in the U.S. and abroad.
CCR’s Friends and Allies
The Center for Constitutional Rights is pleased to announce two new funds created this year by Board members; both were estab -
lished to help create a better world for future generations in ways we can only begin to imagine. Rhonda Copelon’s fund will deepen 
our gender justice work, and Gregory Finger’s fellowship fund will help CCR train the next generation of people’s advocates.Creating a Better World for Future Generations
Gregory H. Finger Racial Justice FellowshipCopelon Fund for Gender Justice
Rhonda Copelon discusses the Copelon 
Fund for Gender Justice at a luncheon in her honor on April 20, 2010.
Gregory  Finger at CCR’s 2007  
President’s Reception in New York.Rhonda has left CCR with both a gift and a challenge—the opportunity 
to continue the groundbreaking work in which she played such a vital and brilliant role and at the same time explore new and creative ways to advance a progressive vision of gender justice. –Pam Spees, CCR Staff Attorney
This Fellowship belongs at CCR because the creative use of law for  progressive social change is one of our guiding principles and the Center continues to lead the fight for racial justice. It is with a great deal of pride that I have watched CCR ‘graduates’ move on, carrying their CCR ‘lessons’ with them, and make an impact in the world. –Gregory Finger42President’s Reception 2010
This year’s President’s Reception, held in New York City, 
was an opportunity to celebrate victories and thank our 
generous benefactors who are indispensable partners in 
protecting and advancing fundamental rights for all.
We honored donors Holly Myers and Kirk Neely, who 
have embraced CCR’s mission and supported the Center for nearly 20 years. They have contributed enormously to 
CCR’s growth and are personally involved in refugee and 
women’s health care issues. 
CCR also recognized the Vulcan Society and the legal 
teams at Levy Ratner and Scott & Scott for their pro bono work on our case, U.S. and Vulcan Society v. City of New 
York . The Vulcan Society, a fraternal order of Black  
firefighters, has been working for decades to end racially 
discriminatory hiring practices of the New York City Fire 
Department. Our team won three landmark victories this 
year that will result in improved diversity within the FDNY. 
Amy Goodman, host and executive producer of Democra -
cy Now! , was a special guest. Goodman spoke about being 
arrested outside the 2008 Republican National Convention 
in Minnesota, along with two of her colleagues. CCR repre -
sents the three journalists in Goodman v. St. Paul , charging 
federal and local law enforcement with interfering with media reporting at the convention protests.
CCR donor honoree Holly Myers with CCR client Amy Goodman of 
Democracy Now!.
CCR’s Legal Director, Bill Quigley and President, Michael Ratner with 
supporter Ellen Ray.
Members of the Vulcan Society and the legal teams at Levy Ratner 
(Richard Levy, Dana Lossia and Robert Stroup) and Scott & Scott (David Scott and Judy Scolnick) accepting CCR’s Pro Bono Social 
Change Award.
Members of the Vulcan Society (left to right) John Coombs, Michael 
Marshall, Paul Washington (center-right) Duery Smith (background) join CCR Executive Director Vincent Warren (center-left) and Board 
Chair Gregory Finger (far right).43Our planned giving program forms the bedrock of our efforts to build an endowment for CCR and to create an institutional  
legacy dedicated to upholding the hard-won victories of your lifetime and protecting them from future attacks. By becoming  
a member of the Thelma Newman Society, you will join others committed to ensuring that CCR will be there to fight into the  
next generation. Please contact us if you have any questions about making a bequest, endowment, gift annuity, or other form  
of estate gift, or to let us know that you have included CCR in your estate plan.CCR Donors  July 1 2009 - June 30 2010
CCR SpotlightSumi Hoshiko , a longtime CCR supporter and a Thelma Newman 
Planned Giving Society member, is a passionate promoter of human rights. 
Her admiration of CCR led her to host a house party and arrange a speaking 
engagement for our Executive Director, Vincent Warren, to introduce the Center’s work to her friends and neighbors. She says, “Not everyone can 
do the cases CCR does. As an epidemiologist, it’s not my field. By support -
ing CCR, I can be effective on the issues I really care about.” Recently Sumi 
revised her estate plan and decided to include CCR in her trust. 
People are sometimes apprehensive about making their will 
or trust when they aren’t ill or elderly, but it is a good feeling 
to think about your life and your legacy. I thought about how 
much I care about civil rights and the right to dissent, and by making CCR a beneficiary of my trust, I am able to make a meaningful contribution. – Sumi HoshikoEthel G. Ackley
Salah and Catherine Al-Askari
Vicki A. Alexander
Evelyn AlloyThomas E. and  
 Donna Ambrogi
Carol Ascher
Ruth Bardach
Philip BereanoGene C. Bernardi
Harvey Blend
David M. BlockRobert H. BonthiusFrederick BriehlPeter Broner
Mary L. Carr
Matthew CooperMargaret R. de Rivera
Shulamit Decktor
Theresa Del PozzoMarial Delo
Jeffrey M. Dickemann
George and Minna DoskowWendy DwyerCarl H. Feldman
George and Mary Ferger
Leona FeyerAlbert C. FilardoCurt J. Firestone
Solomon Fisher
Cecily FoxMary J. Geissman
Nona Glazer
Frances GoldinEdward E. GoldmanEllen and Ellis HarrisJohn Hayward
Marjorie Heins
Martin and Mildred HirdTimothy A. Holmes
Sumi Hoshiko
Martin and Carolyn KarcherGordon D. Kent
†
Joyce Kirschner and  
 Richard Aronson
Hilda KnoblochElizabeth S. Landis
Helen S. Lane
Janet L. LarsonSusan Lee
Joan Lewis
Evelyn C. LundstromGrant Marcus
Norman Masonson
Alice G. McGrath
†
Priscilla J. McMillanJoseph MortonEva S. Moseley
James Odling
Edward H. PageWilliam ParsonsMahlon F . and Lovel P . Perkins
Rachel Porter
Jeanne Audrey PowersDolores M. PriemDavid G. Rich
Jack L. Rihn
Marie H. RothmanMichael A. SchlosserAnn ShapiroAntonia Shouse Salpeter
Robert M. Siegel
Linda Sleffel
Rosalie K. Stahl
Margot SteigmanJoseph SternBarbara StewartClio Tarazi
Ethel Tobach
Mari VlastosFlorence Wagner
Peter Weiss
Barbara WestGinia D. WexlerJohn H. Wilson
Ellen Yaroshefsky
Howard D. Zucker
†
and the many members who 
have chosen to be anonymousThelma Newman Planned Giving Society
deceased †$100,000 and above
Anonymous
The Atlantic Philanthropies (USA)Charles N. Mason, Jr. TrustThe CS Fund/Warsh-Mott LegacyFidelity Charitable Gift FundThe Ford Foundation
Lise and Raymond Giraud 
†
The HKH Foundation
The Oak FoundationThe Open Society InstituteThe Vanguard Charitable   Endowment Program
The Vital Projects Fund, Inc.
$50,000-99,999
AnonymousThe Angelina FundThe Critical Art Ensemble Defense FundThe Jewish Communal FundThe Kaphan FoundationShel KaphanSteven Kurtz and Lucia SommerThe Normandie FoundationThe Ratner FamilyThe Tides FoundationThe Wallace Global FundSamuel Wiener, Jr.
$25,000-49,999
AnonymousThe 1848 FoundationThe Charles Evans Hughes   Memorial Foundation
The Common Counsel Foundationcraigslist Charitable FundCREDO MobileRobert A. Friedman and Anita DavidsonLeo and Sherry FrumkinThe Funding Exchange National   Community Funds
Muriel Goldring 
†
Gould Family FoundationVictor and Lorraine HonigInternational Institute of Islamic ThoughtThe John Merck FundZella LuriaNancy Meyer and Marc WeissKatherine and David MooreSandra PolishukRockefeller Family FundRosetta W. Harris Charitable Lead TrustSamuel Rubin FoundationPeter and Cora Weiss
$10,000-24,999
AnonymousThe Alfred and Jane Ross FoundationEric and Cindy ArbanovellaLaurie Arbeiter and Jennifer HobbsFrederick BenensonThe Blue Oak FoundationDiane BoehmThe Epstein Teicher PhilanthropiesLois B. FeinblattThe Firedoll FoundationThe Frances and Benjamin   Benenson Foundation
The Grodzins FundScott D. HandlemanMarjorie HeinsJohn B. and Sarah L. HenryThe Liberty Hill FoundationThe Libra FoundationThe Lois and Irving Blum   Foundation Inc.
Mildred LopezNorman MasonsonMicrosoft Matching Gifts ProgramHolly Myers and Kirk NeelyThe New Prospect FoundationMatthew J. and Barbara O’HaraSteve and Carolyn PurcellRalph E. Ogden Foundation, Inc.Reed Smith LLPThe Richard A. Busemeyer   Atheist Foundation
Alfred and Jane RossThe Bright Horizons Fund of the   Tides Foundation
Donald ShafferSilicon Valley Community FoundationLouis SlesinThe Spingold FoundationBeatrice SternSteven R. VanBeverBettie Wallace 
†
William B. Wiener, Jr.The William B. Wiener, Jr. FoundationJohn H. Wilson$5,000-9,999
AnonymousFranz and Marcia AllinaThe Altschul FoundationAra and Linda BernardiThe Boston FoundationMartin BranningVirginia BrodyKaren BurkhardtElizabeth A. CastelliDavid DanaDavid Kimmel FoundationThe Elizabeth M. Gitt FoundationRosemary FaulknerGregory H. Finger and Joan HollisterSolomon FisherFowey Light FundJames B. and Louise FrankelThe Fritz and Yvonne Pappenheim   Fund of the Tides Foundation
Daniel Greenberg and Karen NelsonSusan J. Haas and Keith J. PattiRichard S. Hobish and   Florence Wiener
The Key FoundationWilliam D. KirbyEmily KunreutherLandau Family FoundationLee & Luis Lainer Family FoundationThomas A. LehrerJoan LewisRob McConnell and Maria DeCastroMaryanne MottHenry NorrRobert C. Paul 
†
Richard L. PearlstoneM. William Pomerance 
†
The Posel FoundationMitzi C. RaasThe San Francisco FoundationAdam and Jane SteinThe Stewart R. Mott Charitable TrustMerry TuckerNina UntermyerNancy K. ViolaGeorge WallersteinWilliam Lehrer Charitable FundChic WolkBarbara Adler Zeluck
†Founders Circle  Gifts of $1,000 and above
deceased  †CCR Donors
44$2,500-4,999
Anonymous
Salah and Catherine Al-AskariRita L. and William J. BenderJohn D. Bernstein
David M. and Ellen M. Block
Ida G. Braun
John Caruso
John A. Chandler and Elizabeth V . TanisThe Chicago Community Foundation
L. Sandra Coliver
Brenda Cravens
Cathy Dreyfuss
Corrina Fales
Evan M. Fales
Daniel and Anita Fine
Adelaide Gomer
Janice Goodman
Patricia B. Greenwald
Collier M. Hands
Lisa Honig
Jewish Federation of Greater Seattle
The John D. and Catherine  
 T. MacArthur Foundation
Jon and Katherine Dart   Charitable Foundation
Barbara I. and John I. Kennedy
Marily K. Knieriemen
Barry Lando
Eileen and Paul F . Le Fort
Barry and Paula Litt
Malcolm Cravens Foundation
Robin Martin
William G. Mascioli
Joseph MortonNetwork for Good
Stuart Ozer
Mary R. and Benjamin I. Page
Mahlon F . and Lovel P . Perkins
Rosalind PetcheskyFrances R. Posel
Rights and Democracy
William L. and Sandra L. Rosenfeld
Saints Wearing Glasses
Seymour & Sylvia Rothchild Family  
 2004 Charitable Foundation
Wallace M. Shawn
Lawrence E. Silverton
Emily Skolnick
Morton Sobell and Nancy Gruber
Richard A. Soble
Alan and Victoria SussmanLiz TuccilloWendy Vanden Heuvel
Ian Wallach and Cindy Chupack
Vincent Warren and Ann Marie Scalia
Workable Alternatives Foundation
$1,000-2,499
Anonymous
Leslie Abbey and Steve Dietz
Bruce and Yoko Allen
Theresa F . AltDonna Katzin Altschuler and   Alan Altschuler
Nabil M. and Ann S. AmerMark AmsterdamHarry Anduze Montano
George Appell
Carol Hope ArberJanet S. Arnold and Michael H. RubinSally Arnold and Christine Weir
Radhika Balakrishnan and  
 David W. Gillcrist
Cindy Barber and Horace Horton
Bruce E. Barkley and Sonia Baur
Richard BealeThe Beavertides FoundationMedea Benjamin and Kevin Danaher
Francella W. and Jose F . Betancourt
Chandra Bhatnagar and Sunita PatelElizabeth BranchBelinda Breese
Judith T. and Donald S. Broder
Peter and Alice BronerAllan and Muriel BrotskyJohn Callas
James T. Campen and Phyllis Ewen
Laura and Richard ChasinDavid D. Cole and Cornelia T. L. Pillard
Jeffrey D. Colman
The Columbus FoundationThe Community Foundation   of Santa Cruz
Rhonda Copelon 
†
Jeremy CowanGrace B. Crecelius
Lynn-Marie Crider
E. Patrick Curry and Susan B. CampbellEmily Deferrari and Mel Packer
Madeline H. deLone and Robert L. Cohen
Roger DittmannRussell D. D’Oench and Tani TakagiJames K. Donnell
Kevin DonovanLarry D. Doores and Janet R. WolfeDaniel L. and Lee M. Drake
Martin J. DreyfussSarah J. Duncan and  
 Thomas F . McDougal
Paul Durrant
Diane Early and Daniel GigoneNorman C. Eddy and Rebecca Feuerstein
Shiva Eftekhari
Susan L. EinbinderNora Eisenberg and James Halper
Harrison Eiteljorg, II
Peter and Stella EllistonStuart M. ElsbergSolveig Eskedahl
Wallace B. and Heike Eubanks
Robert M. FactorThe Fein Foundation
Ed and Ann Ferguson
Robert Fodor and Thurid H. ClarkRoma B. FoldyFriedman Family Foundation
Eleanor Friedman and Jonathan Cohen
Stephen GallantMary J. Geissman
Lola and Isaiah
† Gellman
Paula Gellman
Daniel Gillmor
Givingexpress Online From   American Express
Sherna B. and Marvin Gluck
Richard M. Goodman
Google Matching Gifts ProgramWaleed K. and Hannah Gosaynie
Arrel Gray
Richard A. GriggGina HarmanGuy M. Harris
Jonathan A. Herz and Steven C. Hill
Hewlett-Packard CompanyRosemary R. Hicks
Michael J. Hirschhorn and  
 Jimena P . Martinez
John Hoffmeyer and Janet M. Corpus
Randall D. Holmberg and Evelyn Yee
Catherine N. and Stephen D. Holmes
Timothy A. Holmes
Honeybee Foundation
Allen M. Howard
Ruth W. Hubbard
Steven and Miriam Hyman
Abdeen M. Jabara and  
 Holly Maguigan
Jewish Community Endowment Fund
45Jewish Community Federation  
 of Cleveland
Wilhelm Joseph, Jr.William Josephson and Barbara Haws
Henry S. Kahn and Mary Gillmor-Kahn
Eugenia Kalnay
Wendy Kaminer and Woody Kaplan
James M. and Andrea M. Kane
Martin and Carolyn Karcher
Ira G. KawallerJulie Kay and Tom Fergus
Ernest E. and Nancy R. Keet
Charles L. and Anna Kerstein
Imad Khalidi
Jerry Kickenson
Ashish Kilam
Joyce Kirschner and Richard S. Aronson
Joanne Kliejunas and Irving LublinerRochelle Korman
Melodee Kornacker
Fayette F . Krause
Merle and Phyllis Krause
Doug and Wendy Kreeger
Edward M. Krishok and Peggy K. Hong
Joseph B. and Rachel Kruskal
Roger S. and Belle Kuhn
Sylvia LawTimothy J. Lee and Eleanor McBride
The LEF Foundation
Phyllis B. and John Lehman
Daniel Levin
Eric L. Lewis and Emily Spitzer
William L. Lewis
Judith Lichtenberg and David J. Luban
Philip and Elsa R. Lichtenberg
Robin LloydJules Lobel and Karen Engro
Leslie Lomas
Gail K. Lopez-Henriquez
Ramsay MacMullen
Susan E. Manuel
Hubert and Rachelle Marshall
Bonnie L. Maslin
Priscilla J. McMillan
Robert H. and Ellen V . Meeropol
Barbara J. Meislin
Juliet A. MelamidCarrie Menkel-Meadow and  
 Robert Meadow
Robert E. and Cama C. Merritt
Alice MillerDonald and Suzanne Miller
Shelley and Joe Miller
Mae K. Millstone 
†
Richard W. and Barbara F . MooreRichard A. Moran
Morgan Stanley Smith Barney  
 Global Impact Fund, Inc.
Richard H. MorsePatricia F . Mullahy
National Philanthropic TrustJill W. Nelson and Thomas R. Bidell
New Directions Foundation
The New York Community Trust
Colette Newman
Mark Niehaus
Louie D. Nikolaidis and Rachel Horowitz
Gregory O’Kelly
Isabelle C. Osborne
Ed Outlaw
Gloria C. Phares and Richard Dannay
The Philanthropic Collaborative
Nancy Pick
Hanna F . Pitkin
William P . and Debra Dupre Quigley
Robert and Patricia Ralph
Brian J. RatnerClaire Reed
Lawrence and Janet A. RivkinThe RMF Foundation
Christy RobbJohn H. Rodgers
Roseben Fund
Alex J. and Carole RosenbergRolf W. and Elizabeth Rosenthal
Albert RubenGladys B. Rustay
Marc Sapir and Sheila ThorneJack Sawyer
Julie Schecter
Daniel Schlozman
Robert E. Schoen and Nancy Bernstein
William J. and Katherine L. Schrenk
Edwin M. Schur and Joan Brodsky Schur
Schwab Charitable Fund
Steven Schwartz
William Seaman
Steve SeltzerElizabeth and Stephen Shafer
Peter and Elizabeth C. ShepherdMary and Henry N. Shoiket
Albert D. Shuldiner and Emily B. Myers
Michael Steven Smith and Debby Smith
Michelle D. Smith
Romaine Gustava Solbert
Emily A. Spieler and Gregory Wagner
Barbara S. Starfield and Neil A. HoltzmanLewis M. and Kitty Steel
Linda Stein
Amanda StentLynn S. Stern
Elizabeth and Byron Stookey
Clayton A. StruveSusan D. SusmanClio TaraziBonnie E. Thomson and Eugene Tillman
Martin ThomsonHazel Tulecke and William B. HoustonBarbara C. and Franklin M. Turner
James S. Tyre
Victor K. and Barbara UlmerMarshall and Deborah WaisStephen Waite
James E. Wallace
Barbara S. WebsterDaniel Weiss and Anne Stewart
Sabin and Marta Willett
The Winky FoundationLincoln and Wilma C. WolfensteinEllen Yaroshefsky
Ann Yasuhara
Michael D. YokellSandra A. Zagarell
Susan Fein Zawel
Michael F . Zweig and Kathy Chamberlain
$500-999
Anonymous
A & J Saks Foundation, Inc.
Abbott Fund
Karen AbravanelAdobe Systems Incorporated
Cathy Albisa
Neil Altman
Grace Ambrose
The Arthur & Henrietta A.   Sorin Charitable Trust
Margo BaldwinThe Baltimore Family Fund
Michael Beer
Myron Beldock and Karen DippoldJudith E. Belsky
Douglas J. Bender and Emma B. Trejo
Charles L. and Leslie A. Berger
James M. Bergin and Ellen P . Lukens
Matthew A. Berlin and Simone LiebmanBikram Yoga Harlem
The Bill Smith Memorial Fund  
 of the Liberty Hill Foundation
George and Eleanor Bollag
Beth Marie Bonora and Michael Laine
Lila Braine
Jonathan Brown
deceased  †CCR Donors
46Tara A. Caffrey and Jeffrey J. Vroom
Michael E. Cahill
Steve Callas
Calvert Social Investment Foundation
Ann Cammett and Marcia Gallo
Capital Trust Company Of Delaware
Ira Carp
Rachel CharnyHope Cobb
Timothy Coffey
The Community Foundation   of Western Mass.
Community Shares of MinnesotaDavid B. Cone and Kellie StoddartJanet M. Conn
Michael Cooper
Mary Ellen Copeland and  
 Edward M. Anthes
Barbara Cuneo and Alan Kesselhaut
Robert A. Cunningham
David Cynamon
The David and Sylvia   Teitelbaum Fund, Inc.
David P . Dean and  Catherine M. Bergmann
Richard J. and Leanna Deneale
Bindu Desai
Riva DewittAnnette Warren Dickerson
Jonathan and Kate Dixon
Jeron E. and Marjorie B. DonaldsJ. Kenneth Donnelly and  
 Catherine M. Bishop
George and Minna DoskowDavid Dow
Lewis and Edith S. DrabkinBarry N. and Ismartilah DrummondRobert Dubrow and Melinda A. Tuhus
Bernice B. Elkin
Leonard and Helen Evelev
Ruth H. A. Fallenbaum and  
 Zeese Papanikolas
Lenore Feigenbaum and Simon J. KleinWendy FieringFoodworks Incorporated
Maria C. Freeman and Donald K. Larkin
Allen M. Howard 
†
Julian N. Gaa and Ruth Y . Gaa-SpanoKit Gage and Steven J. Metalitz
William R. Garner
Ronald E. and Jacqueline GarrettNancy Garruba
The Glenmede Trust Co., N.A.T. Funds
The Green Meadow Fund of   the Maine Community Foundation
Frank and Judith GreenbergLynn Greiner and John B. Midgley
Kathy Gruber and Fred Levy
Eliot Vaughn and Anne GuloyanEvelyn HaasAlbert L. and Virginia T. Hale
Paul Hathaway and Lynda Dailey
Joseph Herron and Patricia Baird
Charles S. Hey-Maestre
Hans HimeleinZach Hochstadt and Sadie Honey
Kevin M. Hunt and Margaret Downing
J. William IngemanZeljko Ivanek
Chung-Ja and Cassim M. Jadwat
Ralph A. and Bonnie C. Johnson
Kenneth M. Jones and Carol KouryWarren Jones and Marian Gee
Joseph Rosen FoundationHerschel and Margrit Kaminsky
Terry Karl
Patrice Kaska
Mark Kempson
Donald D. and Margaret A. Kioseff
Joyce and Max Kozloff
Karen Krahulik and Susan AlleePhilip Kramer
Nancy Kricorian and James A. Schamus
John W. and Claudia LampertiEllen Leahy
The Lederer Foundation
Judy LernerStephen O. Lesser
George K. and Ann C. Levinger
Ida J. LewensteinDavid R. Lewis
Eleanor J. Lewis
Richard and Rita G. Lipsitz
George F . Loewenstein and Donna Harsch
Marsha L. Love and Maarten BoslandM. Brinton Lykes and   Catherine M. Mooney
Lorraine LymanRichard Makdisi and Lindsay Wheeler
Jerome H. Manheim
Elena S. ManitzasAlice Martineau and Olivia Bartlett
Warren E. and Joyce W. Mathews
Mayerson Stutman Abramowitz, LLPHarold Mayerson
Richard C. and Francesca A. McCleary
Nelder and Mariagnes A. Medrud
Martin and Margaret Melkonian
47
CCR Spotlight John Gilmore  is an expert in computers and networking who has led  
several startups, and became a philanthropist. He identifies as a libertarian, and 
says that the common threads he shares with CCR are the rule of law and civil  
liberties, especially Guantánamo and our Cuba Travel Project. When we took the 
first Guantánamo case to the Supreme Court, John began supporting that work 
in a big way. In addition to his generous support of the Center, he has funded the 
education of several released detainees. At a recent CCR event in San Francisco, he urged the guests to join him in supporting CCR:  
If you see the government as both the problem and the solution  
you are missing a lot of opportunities to solve social problems.  
Give money to CCR which is actually working to stop the wars,  
stop wiretapping, and stop illegal jails. – John GilmoreBarbara Michel
Cora Miles
Karen Mock
Charles MooreDavid J. Moore
Helen R. Moore
Denis D. Mosgofian and Lori Liederman
Peter D. and Gail S. Mott
John MuellerThomas V . Muller
Edward S. Munyak
Rachel MustinPeter J. Neufeld and Adele Bernhard
Nancy J. Newman and Mark Walstrom
Thomas B. and Johannah Newman
Michael O. Nimkoff
The O Live FundClaes OldenburgEdward H. Page
Cynthia L. Pansing and Arlin S. Wasserman
Patricia J. PattersonEve Pell
The Pew Charitable Trusts
Tim Plenk and Janet Axelrod
Bruce K. Pollock
Ellyn and James PolshekNancy R. Posel
Marshall and Rosie Potamkin
Kurt PrestonBennett M. Pudlin and Margaret A. Judd
Julie B. Rauch
Marcus Rediker and Wendy Z. GoldmanJoyce L. Richardson
Wayne Roberts
Lisa Robinson
Jill and Ronald Rohde
Barbara and Oren RootEve S. Rosahn and Marion Banzhaf
Rosalie & Melvin Kolbert  
 Philanthropic Fund
The Rose FoundationPerry and Gladys RosensteinGeorge S. Rothbart and  
 Ingrid Scheib-Rothbart
Dean G. Ruby
Phillip M. Runkel
Lowell Sachnoff
Naomi Sager
Arnold S. Saks
Gordon Schiff and Mardge CohenDeborah Schifter and Alan SchiffmannSol Schwartz
Renata Schwebel
Susan L. SheinfeldAntonia Shouse SalpeterBenjamin R. Shreck
Alix Kates Shulman and Scott York
Franklin SiegelSusan Simone and David Bellin
Alex Slater
Dorothy Slater-Brown
Carol Smith
Cherida SmithRussell Smith
Stephen Smith
Douglas K. SpauldingJohn Spragens, Jr.
Ben R. Stavis and Marjatta Lyyra
Nancy Stearns
Ian E. Stockdale
The Stonbely Family FoundationDaniel StoneElizabeth Strout
David Suisman
Murray TobakMichael Touger and Margaret Levitt
Nancy M. Trowbridge
Truist
United Jewish Foundation  
 of Metropolitan Detroit
Steven Vogel and Jane Henderson
Daniel J. and Judith Walkowitz
Geraldine WallmanJoan M. Warburg
Michael Wax
Alan M. Weiner and Nancy MaizelsThe Weithorn and  
 Ehrmann Families Foundation
Jeffrey and Lucinda WilnerJo-Anne Wolfson
Yellow Springs Friends MeetingMitchell H. and Jane Zimmerman
$250-499
Anonymous
David J. AalderksMilton and Olivia Abelson
Robert and Miriam Abramovitz
Merritt and Barbara AbrashWilliam H. AbrashkinEmory W. and Marilyn M. Ackley
Alice K. Adams
Harold AhrensNorman AltstedterAmerican Friends Service CommitteeWilliam L. and Diane P . Ames
Aris Anagnos
Stuart H. AndersonClifford AndoAndrew M. Ansorge and Laura S. KoopmanM.L. ArmstrongBella D. August and Everett Williams
Judy A. Austermiller and Warren R. Betty
Jaime S. and Christine AustriaKent AutreyGeorge S. and Jill S. AvruninAjamu Baraka
Victor Barall
Bo BarkerRainer C. BaumWill Beatty
Mekayla Beaver and Gregory K. Brown
Mirriel Bedell and Judy D’AmoreSara E. BeinertMary and Robert BelenkyRuth G. and Carl S. Benson
Dale L. Berry
Rick Best and Susan TaylorBethesda Friends Meeting:   Religious Society of Friends
Bani BhattacharyaHelga K. BilikJonathan BinesHarvey BlendCarolyn Patty Blum and Harry W. Chotiner
M.E. Bookbinder
Eve BorensteinRenee L. BowserBarton and Barbara Boyer
Kevi P . Brannelly
J. Patrick BriscoeBrad and Liana Brooks-RubinBernice R. BulgatzBarbara L. Byers and Margaret Randall
Thomas Caffrey
Renee CafieroPhil M. CampbellVicente L. Caride and Melissa Marks
Alan Carlson
Courtney B. CazdenCenter for Educational InitiativesWaifun Becky Chan and   Kurt Breuninger
Ava CheloffThe Chicago CompanyRenee D. Chotiner and Stuart W. GardnerThe Community Church of  
 New York Unitarian Universalist
Jim and Cecilia A. Conroy
William CowlinAsho I. CraineDolores and Jo Crespo
Susan Crile
CUNY Law School
deceased  †CCR Donors
48Ryan Danks
Anya DarrowSusan Davidoff
Mary Davis
Dayton Foundation DepositoryLindsay DearbornShulamit Decktor
Kenneth Deed
Richard A. DenisonStuart DesserGerald DickinsonJoseph F . Doherty
Hildegard Dorrer
Alan and Susan S. DranitzkeBarbara L. DudleyDavid B. Dunning
Margaret L. Eberbach
Camille EhrenbergMichael EhrlichColin EislerLaurel and Eugene Eisner
Steven and Deborah Elkinton
Flint EllsworthPeter ErlinderSaralee E. Evans
Anthony Ewing
Traci L. ExtMoneim and Lieselotte FadaliDorothy FadimanJoan M. Ferrante
Stuart M. Flashman
Sandra M. FluckPaul D. Fogel and Ventura Y . ChalomMurray Fogler
Angela and Jeremy Foster
Ann FridlindAmanda FrostJoseph C. and Pearl G. GaleKatherine Gallagher
William H. Gavelis
Edward I. GeffnerMartin GellertMargo R. George and Catherine Karrass
Jamie W. German
Patricia GermanFrances Geteles-ShapiroWilliam J. GilsonHerbert P . Gleason
Richard A. and Carolyn Glickstein
Maxine S. GoadRichard A. and Jill GollubWilliam H. Goodman
Claire Gottfried
Kurt and Sorel Gottfried
49Aaron Altman
Babette BartonSara E. BeinertStephen L. BlackHolly Bray and   Tad Witherington
Sylvia and Jack Broughton
Nancy and John Burkoff
Mirna CardonaElizabeth A. CastelliAndrew CraneMichael DalyJennifer DavisMichael DeutschAdine Duron and   Durston Saylor 
Elaine and   Morton Elenbogen
Ben Elson and   Bridget Sharkey 
Samuel FarberRosemary Farrell and   Bob Price
John GeissmanSusan and Eli GilbertThalia GonzalezWilliam H. GoodmanJames GormleyJennie M. GreenGerald HartingNatalie HertzEric Jacobson
Omar Jadwat and  
 Molly Doherty
Reilly KiernanBernhard Kroeger Steven and Julissa LargeVane LashuaPhilip LichtenbergLilian LiflanderSanford LitvackBob Lucore and Nora CarrollTony MarkulisIan McTaggartMariagnes Aya Medrud
Bob and Barbara Moffett
J. Griffin MorganChristopher R. MuenzerJohn A. MuenzerLinnea NelsonJoyce Carol OatesRachel OgletreeSandra OgrenHelene ParkerSunita PatelSybille PearsonBent Perlmutt
Doris Peterson
Justin Robert PidotMichael PogoloffFrances R. PoselLisa PresleyGail PruittWilliam P . QuigleyMichael D. RatnerClaire ReedEvan Romer and   Mary Sweeney
Alex J. RosenbergMaura Roth-Gormley
Mark Rudd and  
 Marla Painter
John J. SaemannChris and Amy SchaeferSteven SchneiderZack SchulmanBrian SheppardJoy ShigakiFranklin SiegelDeirdre SmithMarilyn SneadMike Stein
Tim Stenovec
Student Affairs,   Ramapo College
Sharon SwackerNomi TeutschGabe TobiasTompkins County   Workers Center
Barry TrachtenbergGillian WarmflashRichard W. WeiskopfPeter WeissBlanche Wiesen Cook  
 and Clare M. Coss
Dorothy M. Winkler
Kevin M. WinklerEllen Yaroshefsky
In honor of
Those listed below had donations made to CCR in their honor by thoughtful friends, family members or organizations  
that want these gifts to have a meaningful and lasting impact. Many of these donations were in lieu of birthday, wedding  
or holiday gifts, or in commemoration of a special occasion. We thank both the donor and the recipient for sharing their  
support and for introducing new people to CCR’s work.Elizabeth P . Greenberg
Marcelle GreenfieldSimon Greer and Sharna G. Goldseker
Ruthe S. and Arnold Grubin
Hans C. and Linda HaackeAlice L. Hageman and Aubrey N. BrownDavid Harbater
James Hargrove
Jed HartmanStephen A. HayesJenny HeinzPeter Henner
Edward S. and Mary W. Herman
David G. HerrmannNeil and Louise S. HertzVirginia S. Hildebrand and Jan Neffke
Shelley Holm
Richard R. and Elizabeth C. HoweStephen J. HrinyaPeter IsraelOmar Jadwat and Molly Doherty
Roberta Jaffe
Margaret JahnEllen JamesGail K. Johnson
Marc E. Johnson
Brian P . JohnstonLee T. JosephTemma E. KaplanAntje Katcher
Lynn M. Kelly and Kent Y . Hirozawa
Peg KeyesAlka KhushalaniPaul L. Kingsley and Rembert Brimm Kingsley
Elizabeth B. Kinney
Hilda KnoblochMaurice and Lorraine KosstrinRosemarie KozdronFred P . and Beverly P . KrasnerJane and Ladis Kristof
Robert P . Kunreuther
Karin Kunstler Goldman and Neal GoldmanRachel KyteGloria Lamont
William E. Leavitt
William J and Ellen S. LeiboldThe Leo J. & Celia Carlin FundEve Levy
Richard A. Levy and Jane R. Hirschmann
Charlotte and Martin LichtermanRuth Galen and David LindyMatthew London
William Lorentz
Sivia LoriaAnnie MakhijaniGene Marchi and Travis SmithLaura C. and Robert S. MarinSuzy MarksWilliam H. and Judith W. Matchett
Marc Mauer and Barbara Francisco
Alan MaximukRobert J. and Maryann MaxwellPeter J. Mayer
The McGraw-Hill Companies  
 Employee Giving Campaign
Medco Health SolutionsMichael and Heli MeltsnerBeth and David P . Meshke
Carlin Meyer
George MichaelBruce K. and Jane O. MillerMarvin and Marline Miller
Lynn and Arthur R. Mink
Ronald MooreSheevaun MoranJose Luis Morin and Jeanette Guillen-MorinDavid Morris
Stephen Morris
Kathryn L. MulveyGuy and Tamara NelsonRobert C. Newman
Hans Noll
Craig OettingerBarbara J. Olshansky and Craig A. AcornSanford M. OrlowHerbert I. and Sarah Oshrain
Lynn Paltrow
Barbara ParsonsSteven PedersonDonald C. and Edith Pelz
The Pershing Square Foundation
Luke PertersonAnne PeticolasFlorence B. PrescottChristopher H. and Cynthia F . PyleJohn I. Quimby
Frances Quintana and Joel K. Swadesh
Judy RabinovitzAlan RabinowitzJim Radford
Susan G. Radner
Doris E. ReedMarsha L. RespessAdrienne Rich
Roberta Roban
Herbert W. RobinsonPaula RogovinFlorence Wagman Roisman
Dennis A. Rosenblitt and Arlene M. Pitman
Carl J. RosensteinJanet R. RossMatthew RothschildJesse and Polly RothsteinMary M. and William H. RussellBert Sacks
Howard D. Sacks
Sigrid SaloSuzanne Salzinger and John AntrobusRegina Sandler-Phillips
Margaret Satterthwaite
Giuseppina ScaliaJohn C. SchaeferSteven A. and Janet H. SchneiderManuel and Bonnie Schonhorn
Gail and Jonathan Schorsch
Ellen Schrecker and Marvin GettelmanRuth and Charles B. SchultzMichael Schwalbe
Steve L. Schwartz
Robert A. Scott and Carole ArtigianiRuth K. SelbyRupa ShahKaren Shatzkin and Michael E. Breecher
Stanley and Betty Sheinbaum
Anthony ShihBrian ShilinglawAmy Shipman
Ann and Ahmad Shirazi
Robert M. SiegelMelvin V . and Giulla SimpsonJaswinder Singh and Silvia ErcolaniMiriam and Jack Sirott
David Skinner
Victor Skorapa, Jr.Daniel SleatorBarbara S. Smith
Carl and Jane Smith
Carol Smith and Joseph EspositoMarjorie M. SmithCarolyn SonfieldMichael S. SorgenTimothy Sozen
Jerold M. and Judy Starr
Jens StengerMark StephensMelvyn T. Stevens
Bert Stover and Teresa Holder
Alice Sturm SutterLucy A. SuchmanCharles J. Sugnet
Harsh P . Sule and Katharine Larsen
Myles SussmanCarlyn Syvanen and Stephen F . VauseDaniel B. Szyld
Walter Teague
Mark TheuneShamus ThorntonJohn L. Thorstenberg
deceased  †CCR Donors
5051In memory of
Friends, family and loved ones made gifts to CCR in memory of those listed below. By designating CCR for support (often 
instead of flowers or on the occasion of the anniversary of a passing), donors both promote their own social justice values and recognize that the individual being honored shared these values and would be proud of the work continuing.
Olivia I. Abelson
Pearla Abramis
Leon Bereano
Robert BoehmWade P . Brummal
Marilyn B. Clement
Rhonda CopelonRuth C. Emerson
Ruth Fales
Marsha FishmanPeggy Friedman
Larry Funsten
Isaiah GellmanJohn Forest GooseyH. Richard Holt
Mary Hunter Turner
Leo M. Hurvich and   Dorothea Jameson Hurvich
Herman JordanGordon D. KentSol D. Kirsch
William Kunstler
George LenchnerJohn Leonard
Felix Mansour
George F . MarkhamAlice McGrathKelley Mink
Irma Oestreicher
Rebecka PetersPaul Reimer
Sarah Richards
Richard RoastKenneth Rosen
Edith Rosenthal
Irene and Joe RybyEdwin Salpeter
Doris Shaffer
Maggie ShoemakerRichard SnyderMorty Stavis
Maurice A. Telemaque
Patrick Temple WestArvo Van Alstyne
Germana Volterra
Richard WagnerJulia A. Wallace
Elton Warren
Howard ZinnHoward D. Zucker
Marjorie B. ZuckerKenneth E. Tilsen
Robert TraverRandall H. Trigg and Caitlin Stanton
Sue Lee K. Troutman
Maria Celina TrzepaczSelma and William TuckerDavid B. Turner
Charles W. and Letitia Ufford
Richard H. and Gail M. UllmanThomas Van BurenMarc Van Der Hout and Jodie Le WitterStephen F . Vause and Carlyn Syvanen
The Vermont Community Foundation
Benedict VigliettaTodd WalkerJennifer WarburgJohn WashburnChris Way
David R. and Joan Weimer
Hazel WeiserLawrence WeschlerJohn Wetherhold
Anne Widmark
Sarah WillieCamilo Wilson
Ellen J. Winner and David A. Lewis
Barbara WinslowHilary WinslowWilliam J. WittJeremy Woodburn
Neville Woodruff
Robert R. and Blaikie F . WorthEitan YanichJudith Yanowitz and Harry S. HochheiserMary Zaslofsky
Jeanette Zelhof
Robert J. and Karen R. Zelnick
$101-249
AnonymousAbbott Laboratories Employee   Giving Campaign
Emily AchtenbergAndrew AckermanRita C. AddessaSusan S. Addiss
Robert Aisenberg
Alan and Margot AlexanderCharles AllanEthan D. and Sandra D. AlyeaThomas E. and Donna Ambrogi
America’s Charities
William and Kendall S. AnthonyBarbra Apfelbaum and Michael ReuveniDaniele Armaleo and Laurie Fox
Barbara Mains Armento
Sona AronianJames AveraIvan A. BackerPatrick and Cheri Baker
Bill J. and Katheryn M. Ballard
Martha BaskinLenore BeakyEdith and Alice BellCliffith Bennette
James M. Berger
Andrew J. Berlinger and   Nancy C. Scerbo Berlinger
Arthur and Anne BerndtJerry Bernhard
MaryLu Bilek
Richard BlackAlexis and Michael BleichStanley and Naomi Bleifeld
Sheila Bloom
Paul D. BoasStephen M. BornJeanne BornsteinJoan G. and Jack BotwinickDorian Breuer
Robert S. Briggs and Virginia I. Lohr
Dan A. BrombergAngela BrooksJohn Brundage and Harriet ParsonsAllan Buchman
William Burke
David Michael BurkoffArthur W. and Alice R. Burks
Antonio W . Burr and Diane di Mauro 
CA, Inc.Lynne and George CarvellJim Cassidy
Thomas A. Censke
Carolyn ChambersGordon A. ChapmanChantal and Gregory L. CherlinSteve and Laurel Chessin
Michele M. Chollet and Daniel J. DevineJames R. and Roshan Christensen
Antonie K. Churg and Enrique De Los Santos
Ranya CohenFarok J. ContractorChristie Cooper
Sandi E. Cooper
Juliette Ramirez and Micaela CorazonMary F . CounihanDeborah CrawfordRobert Crews
Marla J. Crites
William CromwickLori CronynGillian M. Dale
Elizabeth K. and Scott G. Danielson
Peter and Phyllis DaviesThomas E. DeCourseyWalter DitmanAlvin and Rochelle Dorfman
Gregory V . and Lan Driscoll
H. Stewart DunnDavid J. EckArthur Efron
Pamela D. Emerson
Brad P . Engdahl and Patricia L. LaytonSamuel I. EskenaziMatthew EvangelistaAnne H. Evans
Thomas R. Evans
Martha S. and Donald FarleyStephen FeinHarriet A. Feinberg
Nancy J. Feldman
Andrew FieldsAmy E. Fine and Chester W. HartmanJanet L. and Charles J. FinesilverNancy Fleischer
Pat L. Flierl
Anne E. FlynnKenneth FogartyDonovan Fong
Nancy E. and John M. Foster
Edward A. FoxTovia G. and William FreedmanHerbert FreemanFlorence Friedman
Sakiko Fukuda-parr
David F . FunkhouserGregory T. and Gladys S. FurnessGabe Kremer Teen Tzedakah Fund
Sheryl P . Gardner
Sheila GeistEllen F . Gesmer and Alan S. HydeMichael T. GilmoreMimi GilpinStephen GimberLeah Gitter
Amy Gladstein
David C. GlickFred and Rose GliennaHarriet S. Goldberg and Gregory C. Johnson
Jean R. Goldman
Phil Goldsmith and Susan NewmanGoodrich Quality Theatres Inc.David S. GordonGerald E. and Sheila R. Gould
Maria Graterol
Corwin Greenberg and Parvati Maggie GraisRonald GreleEdward B. and Mary Louise Grevatt
William and Sharon Gross
Lloyd H. and Mary Ellen GuptillKathleen A. Hager and Arthur A. WassermanJohn L. HammondPeter Hanauer
William T. Hardison, Jr.
Pam HarmsGail Harper and Francis FlynnLeora T. Harris
Mark Jonathan and Susan Harris
Marguerite H.V . HasbrouckJames W. Hauser and Katharine A. HunterMary Jean HaydenKeith Hefner and Diana Autin
Horace Heitman
Louis R. HellwigChristopher L. HenleyRussell K. Henly and Martha Lee Turner
Dale and Stephen Hoffman
Ingrid HogleMadelon HolderSue HooverRichard A. Horvitz
Raymond A. Hrycko
Julie Y . HungarChaumtoli HuqKabeer Hussain
Stanley Trezevant Hutter
Joan B. IndusiWilliam and Harriet IseckeGloria JacobsStella Jacobs
Jewish Community Endowment Foundation
Scott Johnson and Marla StoneMarie I. Jordan and Joseph P . LyonsJust Give
Alfred E. and Mary S. Kahn
Rachel Kahn-HutJane Kaplan and Donatello BoratoStephanie KaplanJay M. KappraffKathleen Karakassis and David MigdalReena Karani
Margo Kasdan and Martin Fiebert
Anne KastorJoanna B. KatzCaryn B. Kauffman
Seymour Kellerman
Martin King and Cheryl GrunbockJames KinsmanBernard C. KirchhoffDavid Klafter and Suzette Abbott
Peter S. Klosterman
Rivko KnoxLawrence Koplik and Sarah RobertsBonnie Korman and Robert Bishop
Robert L. Kort
Jonathan KrampnerRuth KreinikSaul KripkeRobert E. and Francoise Kulp
Marty Kurzfeld
Richard F . and Rita La MonicaSteve LaBashLouise Lamphere
Erica Landis
David J. LansnerSteve LawrenzJames LeasSusan Lee
Martin and Gita Lefstein
Dale and Gail LehmanShari LeinwandBetty Levinson
Robert Z. Lewis
Julia LeydaElisabeth LinderJennifer Lindsey and Richard M. WessonDonald Lipmanson
David A. Loeb
Leonard and Rosemarie LorensenFrancis LorsonDana Lossia and Rahul Mukhi
Mary Waterman Lunt
Russell LyonsA. Kent and Kathleen MacDougallRic MacDowellPaul A. Makurath, Jr.
Lou Marjon
Rose A. MarkhamKatherine K. MarshallStephen E. Marston
Michael Mason
Elaine MatthewsJames McCabeMary McCall
deceased  †CCR Donors
52Eileen M. McCarthy
Delbert McCombsThomas McCulloch
Nancy and William F . McLoughlin
Robert McMahon and Susan J. BrumbaughCheren MeadeJennifer E. Meeropol
Richard C. Mehl
Terry MeyerPaul MichabofskyJoyce MillerGrace Mitchell
Thomas C. Mitchell
Philip C. MonradJohn MorganMary Morgan
Katharine B. and Kenneth Mountcastle
John J. and Darlene MurninDory S. MyersJason A. NeidlemanElizabeth A. Newell
John Spicer Nichols
Ralph NielsenBarry J. and Ellen NigroshWilliam K. NisbetH. Toni NortonJames O’Connell
Mahmoud Ohadiesfahani
Karen OkeefeDavid OlivenbaumScott Oliver
Martin Orner
Ramona OrtegaNancy J. and Scott M. Oskow-SchoenbrodNorman Oslik and Madeleine GoldeNancy M. Page
Jeff Parish, III
George L. ParkerTimothy PattersonLowell C. Paul
Dorothy Z. Peters
Suzanne D. and Robert J. PetrucciStephen PewDavid PhilipsBarry Phillips and N. Ryan
Charlotte Phillips and Oliver Fein
Charles PigottJohanna M. and Thomas F . Plaut
Matthias Plieninger and Elke Weyel
John A. PollackJames G. Pope and Nancy S. MarksFrederic Pratt and Cheri Carr
Susan S. Rabe
Joni Rabinowitz and John HaerJean RabovskyElizabeth RadleyDeborah RandJoanna M. Rankin and Mary FillmoreDaniel L. Raphael
Martha Rayner
Gertrude ReaganHelen Reed-GrayPaul Rehm and Katja Sander-Rehm
Stephanie Remington
George RenningerNina ReznickDoris C. RhoadesDavid G. Rich
Ronald A. and Susan Robboy
Steven D. and Joyce RobinsonCraig RoseHenry W. Rosenberg and Katherine M. Hicks
Paul C. Rosenblatt
Ellen RossGerald F . and Concetta V . RossMerrick T. RosseinMarcie A. Rubel and Mike Rufo
David Rudovsky
Jennifer RyanJeremy RyeJohn J. SaemannDewitt and Marcia SageMaria J. Saldana
Joseph Salerno
Don Sarason and Mary H. JenningsJuliet SarkessianPatricia R. Sax and Kay Taylor
Samuel A. and Suzanne Scharff
Vivian SchatzMatthew SchellSybil E. Schlesinger and Steven RosenbergMichael A. Schlosser
Ann M. Schneider
Adam and Kate SchwartzMarilyn SearcyDeborah G. Senft
David Shayer and Lisa Post
Elizabeth T. SheererWay Shen and Chris GeorgeJoel A. ShufroStephen Shuttleworth
Susan Silverstein
Sisters of Saint DominicElmer D. and Patricia Sitkin
Calvin L. Skaggs
Hugh SmartDavid SmithRosalind B. Smith
Marc A. Snyder
Elizabeth E. and Irwin D. SollingerStanley Sorscher and Judith M. ArmsAlexis SouleJohn D. Spence and W. Katherine YihAnn I. SprayregenRobert A. and Elaine I. Stein
Henry J. and Pamela Pomerance Steiner
Victoria A. Steinitz and Elliot G. MishlerWayne StinsonCal Stone
Mary L. Sutphin
Martha F . SwanAlice C. and Arthur R. SwiftFrances H. Taylor and Iris BiblowitzAnne R. Teicher and Sy Rutkin
Eleanor Wong Telemaque
Teresa ThompsonAlan C. ThomsonJean Toche
Lee H. Tockman
Vivian TodiniHoward and Nina TolleyBetsy Towle OrdlBernard Tuchman
Robert Twombly
Noah UllmanUnited Way California Capital RegionJames A. Van SwedenChristine A. VassalloMary K. Voss
Peggy D. Watson and Victor Teich
Lowell WaxmanAlexis WaysbergMarvin J. Weinberger
Edmund and Mary Weingart
Leland M. and June WelshCarolyn M. WelshhansHenry Werner and Holly ThauBarbara West
Charles C. and Ruth C. West
Hilda Mader WilcoxDaryl T. WilliamsLawrence B. Williams
John P . Wilson
Marie C. WilsonPatricia WinerLinda WintnerSteven J. Wolf
Charles B. Woodbury
John C. WoolumRachel Wysoker
Kate Yavenditti
Wayne N. YoungLeonard and Ellen ZablowJohn T. Zagula
Ellen Zaltzberg and Nomi Lichtenstein
Howard D. Zucker 
†
5354Anonymous • Chris Adams • M. Eloise Adams • Miriam S. and Stephen M. Adams • Robert C. Adams † • Jane H. and Michael P . Adas • The 
Agape Foundation • Gerard A. Aglioni and Polly Levin • Edwin Aiken • Peter D. and Margery Albertson • Charles K. Alexander, II •  Elizabeth 
Alexander • Jane Alexander • Margaret W. and Allen H. Alexander • Bernadene V . Allen  • Dean and Alice Allen • Deborah Allen • Genevieve 
Allen •  John Allman • William C. Altham • Susan D. Amussen and David E. Underdown • Clifford E. Anderson • Helene M. and James Ander-
son • Louise Anderson • Carl E. and Sharon L. Anduri • Rita Archibald • Rona Zelnick Armillas • Alice Aronow • Arlene S. Ash • T. Whit and 
Jean L. Athey • Gail Auster • Hussein and Nayi Awass • Richard Bachmann • Thomas Bannister and Lourene Miovski • Herb Bardavid • Curt 
Barger • John Barker and Fan Cheng • Jean D. Barrett and David A. Ruhnke • Richard H. and Joanne L. Barsanti • Keith D. Barton • Patricia Bass 
• Mischa Becker • William P . Beckwith • Malcolm H. and Nancy Bell • Nick Bell • Edda M. Benedek • Alvin Bennett • Nathaniel and Mary M. 
Bercovitz • Daniel Berger • Amanda Bergson-Shilcock • Hy A. and Anita R. Bershad • Jaime Biderman and Lauren Leroy • Stephanie G. and 
Jacob G. Birnberg • Helen C. Black • Evelyn Blackman • Meredith A. and Bill Blau • Ellen Bogolub and Neil Friedman • Fraser Bonnell • William 
M. and Ruth R. Boothby •  Leslie Bornstein •  Eric R. Boucher • Linda Boyd • Robert M. and Monica Bradbury • Martha Bragin • Pamela Brennan 
• Eileen Brenner • Elizabeth P . Brenner and Thomas B. Stibolt •  Karen Brodkin • Daniel Brooks • Robert E.L. and Sylvie Brown • E. Wayles 
Browne • Thomas W. Browne • Robert H. and Helene Browning •  June L. Brumer • Daniel J. Brustein • William and Irmgrad Buckel • Cathleen 
Burnett •  LaVerne Butler • Jerrold S. and Barbara H. Buttrey • Patricia Cain • Blair and Josephine Campbell • Don R. Cantrell • Andrew Carlon 
• The Carmel Hill Fund • John B. and Ann F . Caron • William R. and Judith Castle • Michael Cavanaugh • David and Christine Chang • Wendy 
Chavkin • Chelsea Green Publishing • Neale W. Clapp • George S. Cleaver and Erin Y . Lee • Wallace B. Cleland • Rosemary K. Coffey •  Joseph 
D. and Cathy J. Cohen • Robert F . Cohen and Kathleen Abate • Virginia and Douglas Cole • Lee Colleton • Ross Collier • Kenneth Collins •  Eli 
Bernard and Helen Comay • Jane C. and John G. Comfort • Amy Conger and Robert B. Herschler • Martha R. Conley • Mark Cook • Ralph V . 
and Ellen S. Core • Jason M. Cox • Charles M. Crane and Wendy Breuer • Jim and Ann I. Crawford • William and Mary H. Crotty • Prudence 
Crowther • Peter Curia and Cheri Van Sant • Esther D. Curtwright • Marion S. and Arthur D. Damick • Mary Daniels • Ron D. Daniels •  Ernest 
Simon and Bianca Iano Davis • Hal Davis • Judith and Malcom Davis • Norman and Shirley S. Davis • Charles Day • Paul Day-Lucore • Peter 
De Rege and Alison Hyslop • Ariadne DeCarvalho • Dale Stull and Peter M. Demy • Joan B. Dible •  Masada Disenhouse • Richard Doberstein 
• Jane Dolkart • Stephen N. and Phyllis B. Dorsi • Jim Douglas and Sasha Harmon • Kingman S. and Susan U. Douglass •  Lee Draper •  Carol F . 
Drisko •  Lory Dryden and Thomas V . Potts • Diane Dubose • P . Benjamin Duke and Polly Rimer Duke • Carolyn Dulchinos • Cheryl L. Dunn • 
Barbara H. Dupee •  Steven B. Dutky • Steven Dytman • Leslie Ebert • Edmonds Unitarian Universalist Church • Charles and Lois B. Edwards 
• Michael C. and Tracy Bachrach Ehlers • Philip Eidelson • Norman Eisner and Zelda Aronstein • Jacqueline J. and Tareck Ralph Elass • Reem 
Elghonimi • Earl S. and Marilyn A. Elias • Ray and Marilyn Elling • Roger Ellingson • David Ellis • Julie Elson •  Mary Taggart Emeny and Hunter 
Ingalls • Dolores and Frank Emspak • Steve and Amy Eppler-Epstein • Susan Epstein • Gerald and Sandra Eskin • Caroline L. Everts • Hillary 
Exter • Hossam E. and S.H. Fadel •  Jeffrey A. Fagan and Connie S. Fishman • James Faris • Carolyn Federoff • Martin R. Feinman • Salvatore 
Ferarello • Beatrice Ferleger • Doris Bye Ferm • Jane C. Fessenden •  Wallace and Nannette B. Feurzeig • Belden Fields • Davida Finger • 
Curry and Bonnie First • Alan L. Fisher • Edward O. and Marianne B. Fisher •  Laurel Fletcher • Jane Foster • Steve Frankel • William H. Frelick 
• Kenneth Fremont • Paul Friedlande r • Judith C. and Louis A. Friedman •  Timur Friedman • Gabriela Mora Fruchtbaum • Sonia Gabrielson • 
Soumya Ganapathy • Gay Gardner • Georgene A. Gardner •  Reena Geevarghese •  John Gerassi • John Gibson •  Elizabeth P . Gilson and Joel 
Cogen • Mark Ginsburg • Mary G. Gleysteen • John B. and Patricia P . Glore • Tom Goetzl • Frederick S. Golan and Anne M. Kenney • Dan 
Goldberg and Melissa Jacobs • Suzanne Goldberg •  Peter Goldberger and Anna M. Durbin •  Ellen R. Goldman •  Jeremy P . Goldman • Susan 
D. Goldman •  Nate Goldshlag • Margaret P . and William W. Goldsmith • Edmund W. and Susan G. Gordon • Michael Gottfried • Gene J. and 
Virginia Grabiner • Michelle Granas • Vera Grant • Robert S. Green • Stuart J. and Kathleen A. Greenberg • Harold Greenblatt • Newton H. 
Gresser  • Atina Grossman • Kimberly A. Groves •  Tom Grunfeld • Margaret and David Gullette •  Jean L. Guttman • Karen W. Guzak • Henri-
etta Gwaltney • Katherine Hall • Dee Dee Halleck •  Hilary Hamilton • Thomas Hamilton • Hedda Haning • Laura Hanks •  Katharine Hanson • 
Paul R. Hanson and Betsy A. Lambie • Harriet P . Harper • Alice Kessler Harris and Bertram Silverman • Christopher Harrison • Paul Harrison • 
Gerald and Barbara Harting • Bartlett and Margaret Harvey •  Syed Shamsul Hasan • Connie Hawkins • Mark A. and Jane D. Heald • Healey and 
Hornack P .C. • Virginia P . Held • Peter Niels Heller •  Elizabeth Hendrickson • Martin Henner • Betty and Jackson Herring • Christopher Hess 
• Susan J. Hessel • Jerry C. Higley and Loretta H. Ball •  William Hildebrand • Martin and Mildred Hird • Charles J. Hitchcock and Deborah M. 
Snyder • David K. and Judith A. Hoffman • Taylor Hoffman • Sherrill Hogen • Penny Holland • Samuel S. and Mary M. Holland • Yvonne M. 
Homeyer •  Stephen Hopkins •  Zoia Horn and R. Dean Galloway • Carole R. Horowitz and Richard L. Last • C. Douglas Hostetter and Barbara 
E. Smolow • Todd B. Hotchkiss • James and Rhoda Howard • Jennifer Huang • Elizabeth L. Huberman • Donald G. Hudson • Richard Hudson 
• Geoff Huggins • John Hurd •  Deena Hurwitz •  Kristine Huskey • Janet Huston • David Igasaki • Philip Ikomi • Elizabeth Imholz • Carl Im-
parato • Joel and Helen R. Isaacson • Judy and Henry Jacobs • Kevin and Adrienne James • The Jewish Federation of Greater Philadelphia • 
Corinne B. Johnson • Harmer and Judith Johnson •  Ben and Kathleen Jone • Jeffrey A. Jones • Lynn Jones •  David Joyce • Robert F . Joyce • 
David Kadish • Robert G. Kahl • Ruth G. Kahn • Louis Kampf • Wendy Kaplan • Rhoda H. Karpatkin • Arnold Kawano • Lynda Keating • Er-
nece B. Kelly • Gregory Kelly • Judith Kelly • Kevin B. Kelly • Walter Kendall • Elizabeth L. Kennedy and Barbara J. Prebis •  Linda Kerber • 
James Kerwin and Gretchen E. Steadry • Billy Kessler • Joan D. and Arthur J. Kidnay • Edwin King • Jennifer L. Klein and James Berger • Robert 
Z. Klein and Nancy K. Vandewart • Eric Klinger • Wolf M. Knapp • Daniel L. Kniesner • Caroline M. and Sara H. Knight • Peter and Jane Knobler 
• Sharon L. Knopp and Ingolf Vogeler • Philip O. Koch • Stephen Koczian • James T. Kofron, Jr. • Barbara Kolsun • Richard Koretz and Judy E. 
Bauer • Ellen L. Koteen and Diane N. Palladino • Gerald A. and Nancy A. Krause • Dennis J. and Estelle I. Krumholz • Carol Kurtz • Carole C. 
and Jean Philippe Labrousse • Burritt S. Lacy, Jr. • Louise Ladd • Anthony Lamorticella • Elizabeth S. Landis • Brian Larson • Robert J. Lavenberg 
• Lester J. Le Viness •  Elizabeth A. Leader •  Barbara and Alexander Leaf • John A. Lee • J.D. Leftwich • William A. Leight • Thomas M. Leim-$100
deceased  †CCR Donors55This list includes gifts of $100 and over made between July 1, 2009 and June 30, 2010. All gifts are greatly appreciated and collectively allow 
CCR to continue our work; unfortunately, space limitations prohibit us from listing every gift. Many stock transfers come to us without  
attribution, untraceable to the donor, so if your gift of stock (or any kind of gift) is not listed, please contact us so that we may correct our files 
and acknowledge you in our next newsletter.kuhler • Mary Lellouche • Peter C. and Christine Lesley Lent •  Edward Leonard • Sue Leonard • Ilene S. Lerner • Zelda Leslie •  Judy Lessing • 
Robert Levey • Claire and Lawrence Levine • Jerry D. Levine • Albert and Lulu Lee Levy • Claudia Levy • Daniel J. Levy • Sondra Lewis and 
Manny Etlinger • Raven and Russell M. Lidman •  Robert Ray and Kathy Sue Lieberman • Theodore M. Lieverman • Jeffrey D. Lifson and Aloha 
E. Keylor • Bruce and Louise Lincoln • Lucy R. Lippard •  Carol F . L. Liu • Ann and John Livengood • Nancy S. Lovejoy • Sylvia and Raymond 
Lubow • Ellen Luks • Renate Lunn and Josh Lerner • Andrea Lurie • Sara Luther and John Neumaier • Ellen L. Lutz • Maribeth S. Lynn • Sandra 
N. and David B. Lyons • Robert D. Mabbs • Joan and Wally MacDonald • Jeanette D. and Daniel J. Macero • Brian Machida • John P . MacKen-
zie • Theodore G. Macklin • Peter Magnuson • Louise R. and Michael P . Malakoff • Ira B. Malin and Janet B. Serle •  Emily M. Maloney •  Paul 
Michael Mann •  Peter and Frances Marcuse • Mary B. Marx •  Clara R. and Bernard Maslow • Doris L. and Meyer Master • Steven M. McAl-
lister • Leon R. and Judith McCulloh • Scott Mcdonough • Lynn M. McWhood • Marcos Meconi • Howard D. and Mameve S. Medwed •  
Isa-Kae Meksin • Tanya Melich • William P . Menza •  Pamela M. Merchant and Kirby Sack •  John Metcalf • Zeena Meurer •  Gerald Meyer and 
Luis Romero • Howard and Barbara Meyers • Richard Migliore • Lawrence Miller and Mary Jane Halliday •  Vann Miller •  Andrew C. and Helen 
S. Mills • John Mineka • Ralph E. Miner • L. David Mirkin • Julie Moentk • Donna Moffat • Paul R. Monroe • Marilyn Montenegro  • Claudia 
Shropshire Morcom • Kayren B. Morrill • Frank Morrow • Lawrence B. and Claire K. Morse • Jerome B. Moss • Norman Mullen • John H. Muse 
• Judy and Roy Nakadegawa • Andrea E. Nash •  Antonia Nash • Carl Navaro • Donald M. Neill • Marilyn Neimark and Alisa Solomon • Robert 
M. Nelson • Ronald Neschis  •  Bruce D. Nestor and Susana De Leon • Greta Newman • John S. and Margaret Newton • Molly Nolan • Regina 
Nugent •  Rudi H. and Laureen K. Nussbaum • Lucienne O’Keefe • Patricia Oldham • Eileen C. Olmsted • David R. Oran and Silvia M. Arrom • 
Marina Oshana • Richard Paisner and Christie Wiener • Cynthia Papermaster • Patrick Patterson and Maria Wilkens • Frank Paysen • Bruce 
Pearson •  Paul Peloquin •  Kira Perov and Bill Viola • Suzanne S. and Robert T. Petersson • Edgar G. and Pauline Petry • Katrina C. Pflaumer • 
Lemoine D. Pierce • Edward D. and Bernadine Pillar • Jay Plotkin •  Wendy Pollock • Stephen Pomerance • Louise B. Popkin • Robert and 
Marcia Popper • James Porter, Jr. • Thomas V . Potts and Lory Dryden • Kevin Powers • Joan C. and Charles W. Pratt • Bonnie Preston • Caitlin 
Price • Robert J. Quartell and Florence D’Emilia • Vicki Rajendra and R.S. Krishnaswamy • Joe L. Randles • Amelie L. Ratliff • Realty RTO •  Jef-
frey C. and Bettiann Reese • Kenneth C. Regal and Judith A. Ruszkowski • William D. Reilly • Nancy Reimer • Judy R. and Jeffrey L. Reynolds 
• Paul D. Rheingold •  Albert D. Rich • Matthew Riley •  Steven Riskin • Evelyn Robb • Maria C. Rodriguez • Phyllis and Oriando Rodriguez • 
Fritz Rohrlich • George Roman • Theodore Romer • Ben Romney •  Sheila Ronsen •  Bernice M. and Seymour L. Rosen • Carl F . Rosen and Jo-
sefina Yanguas • Lawrence Rosenberg and Judith Somberg • Susan Rosenberg •  Leslie A. Rosenfeld • R. William Rosenfeld and Suzanne M. 
Rubel •  Anton B. Rosenthal • Margery S. Rosenthal • Barry Rosenzweig • Beth Rosner • Robert Roth and Judith Lerner • Sara Rothstein • 
Linda Rousseau •  Laura Rowland • Lewis and Esther Rowland •  Ted and Eileen Rowland • Eva and William Rumpf • Jane P . Rundell • Gail Runk 
• Antonio D. and Theresa M. Ruscitti • Meryl Salzinger • Gloria and Robert Samuels • Rachel E. Sanborn • Miriam and David M. Sanders • 
Donald E. Sanderson • Lawrence Schiff • Bethel Schlau and Cary Appenzeller • Paul G. Schmidt • Henry Schreiber • Gary Schreiner • Anne 
Schwartz  • Herman Schwartz • Marc and Anne Schwartz • Steve A. and Nancy H. Schwerner •  Joan W. Scott • Susan Seehusen • Gabrielle 
Semel and Mark Levitan •  Lew D. Serbin • Grace Sevy •  William Seward • Ronald D. Shannon and Margaret L. Wallace • Daniel Shapiro •  
Peter Shaw and Jessica Ly •  Carol M. Shea • Susannah Sheffer • Al Shehadi • Irene Shigaki • Anne Shirinian-Orlando and Denis P . Orlando • 
Mary Jan Shor • Victor W. and Ruth Sidel • Norman Siegel • Lisa Siegman and John K. Young • Peter Simmons • Christopher Simpson • Mat-
thew Siroka • Peggy Skinner • Blanche J. and Eugene D. Skurnick • Linda Sleffel • Sippio Small •  Maureen Smith •  Ruth Proskauer Smith† • 
Ted Smoot • Anthony Sobieski and Katharine Berton • Sidney J. and Ethel B. Socolar •  Denise Soffel • Rebecca Solnit • Renee Solomon • Fred 
J. Solowey and Kathryn L. Ries • Lawrence and Alice Spatz •  Peter D.L. Stansky • Kenneth S. Star •  Burton Steck •  Cary Stegman • Michael 
Steinberg • Susan Stenovec • Helen Stephenson • Anne Fausto Sterling • Arthur Stern •  Ellen P . and Thomas H. Stevenson • Paula Stober • 
Eric Stockel • Roger A. Stoll • Samuel Stoloff • Mary B. Strauss •  Douglas and Margie Jean A. Sturm • Thomas P . Sullivan • Susan Swartz • 
Marie T. and Daniel A. Switkes • Jennifer Szalai • Dolores S. Taller • Vivien C. Tartter • Kelly F . Taylor • Sheila P . and H. Gordon Taylor • 
Zephyr Teachout • Eugene TeSelle • Dianne V . Thiel • C. Gomer Thomas and E. Jane Cameron • Benjamin Thompson • Jerome S. and Hazel 
Tobis • Harriet B. Todd • Joseph and Minette Tolciss • Corin Trachtman • George Trevor • Barbara S. Trist and Ellen Baranowski • Ann Tully • 
Dominick Tuminaro • Albert C. and Robin L. Ulmer • Mark Underwood • United Jewish Federation of Great Pittsburgh Foundation • Gregory P . 
and Sharon A. Urban • Jill van Berg •  John and Mira Van Doren • Veterans for Peace, Inc. • Lisa Vives • Michael S. and Johanna H. Wald • 
Katherine Waldbauer and Ronald L. Henry • Steven H. and Rita Waldbaum • Gordon G. Waldron •  James F . and Jacquelyn M. Walsh • Francis 
M. Walters • Myrna Walton • Stephen Wangh •  Arthur O. Waskow and Phyllis O. Berman • Steve Wasserman •  Kevin A. Waterbury • Carol 
A. Watson • J. Richard and Margaret Weaver • Bernard and Leonora Weintraub •  Vincent L. Weis • Joel Weisberg and Janet Watchman • 
Martha Weiss • Verity Weston-Truby and T. James Truby •  John L. and Linda Wetherby • Sue K. and Philip Wheaton •  Brian White • David A. 
White  •  Lee Wallis Whiting • Frances and Henry N. Whittelsey • Wilderness Works • Hope D. Williams • Judith Wilson and Alec Wysoker • 
Richard C. Winant • Robert F . and Ingrid Wing • Dorothy M. Winkler • Stephen S. and Bettina L. Winter • William L. Wipfler • Richard M. Wolfe  
• Elizabeth Ann Wolfskill • A. Wolper • Barbara Wood • Jonathan A. Woodbridge • Gregg Wright • Jerome Wujek • Laurence and Muriel Wyatt 
• Derek Yoshimura • Peter W. Young • Samuel Young • Mona Younis • George and Gertrude Yourke • June Zaccone • Christina Zampas •  
Arlene S. Zaucha • June Zeitlin • Loy Zimmerman • Howard Zinn† • Martine Zundmanis • Burton and Sally Zwiebach56CCR Staff
Directors
Vincent Warren, Executive Director
Kevi Brannelly, Development Director / 
Interim Communications Director
Carolyn Chambers, Associate Executive Director
Annette Warren Dickerson,  
Director of Education & Outreach
William Quigley, Legal Director
Administrative Staff
Gregory Butterfield, Administrative Manager
Orlando Gudino, Network Administrator
Lisa Levy, Executive Assistant
Jeffrey Weinrich, Finance Director
Alberto White, Office Manager
Communications Department
Jen Nessel, Communications Coordinator
Alison Roh Park, Communications Associate
Development Department
Sara Beinert, Major Gifts Officer
Kevin Gay, Database Administrator
Emily Harting, Foundations Relations Officer
Eliot Katz, Grant Writer
Christine Kim, Development Associate
Jose Monzon, Development Assistant
Jeremy Rye, Major Gifts Officer
Education & Outreach Department
Qa’id Jacobs, Web Communications and  
 Multimedia Manager
Leili Kashani, E&O Associate
Lauren Melodia, E&O Associate (through 7/09)
Deborah Popowski, Kaufman-Skirball Fellow  
(through 9/09)
Laura Raymond, E&O Associate
An-Tuan Williams, E&O Assistant
Nahal Zamani, E&O AssociateLegal Department
Alexis Agathocleous, Staff Attorney
Jessica Baen, Legal Worker (through 7/09)
Liz Bradley, Legal Worker
Darius Charney, Staff Attorney
Claire Dailey, Legal Worker
J. Wells Dixon, Senior Staff Attorney
Katherine Gallagher, Senior Staff Attorney
Jennifer Green, Senior Staff Attorney (through 8/09)
Gitanjali Gutierrez, Staff Attorney
Ian Head, Legal Worker
Tamara Jafar, Legal Worker
Shayana Kadidal, Senior Managing Attorney
Pardiss Kebriaei, Staff Attorney
Menna Khalil, Legal Worker (through 5/10)
Marc Krupanski, Legal Worker (through 7/09)
Maria LaHood, Senior Staff Attorney
Rachel Meeropol, Staff Attorney
Carolyn O’Neil, Assistant to Legal Director
Sunita Patel, Staff Attorney
Ibraham Qatabi, Legal Worker
Anjana Samant, Staff Attorney
Pamela Spees, Senior Staff Attorney
Claire Tixeire, Legal Research Associate
Consultants
Riptide Communications, Communications and Media
Sarah Hogarth, Project Manager/Writer/Editor
Sophie Weller, Guantánamo Resettlement Liaison57Catherine Albisa, Vice-Chair  
(beginning March 2010)
Harry Anduze
Radhika Balakrishnan, Treasurer
Ajamu Baraka
Karima Bennoune
Chandra Bhatnagar
Ann Cammett
David Cole
Rhonda Copelon†, Vice-President
Gregory H. Finger, Board Chair  
(beginning March 2010)Abdeen Jabara
Wilhelm H. Joseph, Jr.
Julie F . Kay, Secretary  
(beginning March 2010)
Jules Lobel, Vice-President
Michael Ratner, President 
Alex Rosenberg, Vice-President
Franklin Siegel
Michael Steven Smith
Richard A. Soble
Peter Weiss, Vice-President
Ellen Yaroshefsky
Internships
Elica Vafaie  is a first generation Iranian-American and grew up in California  
where she now attends UC Davis Martin Luther King Jr. School of Law. She is active  
in promoting civil and human rights for the Middle Eastern community and immigrants. 
Prior to law school, Elica worked at a non-profit organization providing client services  
and Know Your Rights training to the Middle Eastern community. Elica began following 
CCR’s work as a result of our groundbreaking post- 9/11 work. 
My experience as an Ella Baker Fellow has been invaluable. I have 
learned how social movements fit together, about effectively utilizing  
legal and non-legal tools, and how to do social justice work sustainably. This experience, coupled with the legal skills I’ve gained working on immigrants’ rights issues and cases to hold government officials accountable for torture have made this summer truly remarkable.  
– Elica VafaieEach summer, CCR’s Ella Baker Fellowship Program offers 
outstanding law students the opportunity to join our staff attorneys and learn how to become effective movement lawyers. The program strives to exemplify Ella Baker’s firm 
commitment to mentoring and developing young leaders 
to carry the mantle of the struggle for social justice through the generations. Throughout the year, CCR also hosts undergraduate and law students who assist with cases and campaigns, and our International Scholars program brings law students, legal scholars and lawyers from around the globe to work with CCR attorneys on constitutional, interna-
tional and human rights litigation. These interns and fellows 
are an important part of the CCR community and contribute tremendously to the organization. 
CCR Board of Directors 
deceased  †58
Financial Report  July 1 2009 – June 30 2010*
Expenses
Program: Litigation, Education and Outreach $4,596,474
Development $815,519
Administration & General $622,267
Total Expenses $6,034,260Revenue, Gains and Support
Net AssetsFoundations  (including Donor Advised Funds)  $3,447,139
Individuals (including Planned Gifts)  $2,206,850
Court Awards and Attorney Fees $1,587,903
Interest $56,818
Other  $(117,465)
Total Revenue, Gains and Other Support $7,181,245
Net Assets as of June 30 2009      $6,556,500
Change in Net Assets      $1,318,218
Net Assets as of June 30 2010      $7,874,718
*audited figures pending board approval.59In Memoriam
The following CCR supporters passed away 
this year. Many thoughtfully honored CCR 
with a bequest and several were active 
friends of the Center—regularly attending events, volunteering time, hosting house 
parties. They will all be missed greatly. Jack Fox shared with his wife, Ruth Inabu Fox, 
a life-long commitment to fighting social injustice and 
many years of support for the Center for Constitutional Rights. Born into an immigrant Jewish family in New York, Jack experienced first-hand the restrictive policies that denied Jews admission to medical school. He was active in the anti-fascist campaign against Franco during the Spanish Civil War and developed a class conscious-ness that guided him throughout his life. He became a union organizer for  
the cannery workers and then served in the armed forces in World War II.  He earned his doctorate at the University of Colorado and became a leading biochemist at Sloan Kettering Institute, developing anti-cancer drugs that are still used today. He fought McCarthyism and racism. He and Ruth used the Fox family resources to support the work of SNCC, the anti-Vietnam war movement and, in particular, the work of CCR.
Alice G. McGrath , a dear friend 
of the Center, passed away in November 2009 at 92. Alice was radicalized by the 1942 trial of 22 young Mexican Americans, who were convicted en masse of a murder they did not commit. The infamous “Sleepy Lagoon” trial, and Alice’s tireless efforts to free these men, were later immortalized in the play and movie, Zoot Suit. Alice remained a dedicated 
social justice advocate, leading over 80 humanitarian trips to Nicaragua and developing several pro bono bar association programs. Alice was a stalwart supporter of CCR for over 20 years, a member of our Thelma Newman Planned Giving Society, and frequently spoke to our Ella Baker Fellows as part of their summer training. A remarkable and inspirational woman, Alice’s energy and spirit will be greatly missed.
Julia Wallace was a long-time supporter of CCR, stemming from 
her lifelong commitment to justice. She came by it early. Her father, as superin-tendent of schools, successfully pushed for compliance with the 1954 Supreme Court desegregation decision. After her marriage  
to Jim Wallace in 1958, Julia took an active part in helping to run a fair housing organization in Buffalo, NY . In Cambridge, MA, Julia was a prime mover in her church’s role in the Sanctuary movement, providing a platform for an undocumented political refugee from El Salvador to tell her story. We lost Julia January 3rd of this year, but her quiet commitment to justice  
carries on every day in the work of CCR. Pearla Abramis
Robert C. Adams
 Rita Arditti
Marilyn B. Clement
 Rhonda Copelon
 Adrian W. DeWind
 Margaret Eberle
Ruth C. Emerson
Estelle M. Epstein
Marilyn French
Bernard Friendlich
Isaiah Gellman
 John F . Goosey
Jane S. Gould
Gordon D. Kent
Sol D. Kirsch
George Lenchner
George F . Markham
 Carmen C. Mayer
 Irma Oestreicher
 Edward M. Opton
W. A. Raab
Paul Reimer
Ruth P . Smith
 Richard Snyder
Richard Wagner
 Mildred Weitz
Barbara Adler Zeluck 
Howard Zinn
Howard D. Zucker
It is always sad to lose a member of our 
community, but their ideals will live on 
in the work they supported at CCR.60Rhonda Copelon
A great loss was suffered by CCR this past year with the death from 
ovarian cancer of our Vice-President, Rhonda Copelon, on May 6, 2010.
Rhonda graduated from Yale Law School in 1970, a fact she never 
referred to because she considered it elitist. (She also objected to anyone, including herself, being called “lead counsel.”) After clerking for a federal judge, she joined CCR as a staff attorney. In her 12 years at CCR, she left an indelible imprint on the institution. Questions like “How does this case affect women?”, “What fundamental rights are involved here?” and “Have we really, really explored all the available avenues to success (because we absolutely have to win this case)?”  are asked daily at CCR and can be traced back to her gracious but persistent modus operandi .
Rhonda is often given credit for teaching that “women’s rights are  human rights.” She would be inclined to minimize her role in this regard, because she was a firm believer in and avid defender of 
human rights for all people. The two huge Supreme Court cases, of which she and her colleagues lost one ( Harris v. McRae ) and won one ( Filártiga v. Peña-Irala ) on the same 
day—involved, respectively, women’s right to Medicaid coverage of abortions and the torture to death of a young Paraguayan man. Her work at CCR also included illegal surveillance, gender and race discrimination and, in Horman v. Kissinger , holding high 
government officials accountable for complicity in crimes against humanity.
In 1983 she co-founded CUNY Law School, where she remained a revered professor 
and director of the International Women’s Human Rights Clinic until shortly before her death. She emerged as a world leader in the use of law to recognize women’s rights, and to realize human rights for everyone. On any given day she could be found radicalizing a document emerging from a conference in Tokyo, San Jose, Santiago, 
Vienna, Copenhagen or elsewhere, by making sure it says something about  domestic violence as torture and rape as a war crime.
Rhonda never wavered in her dedication to CCR where she remained active as a 
board member, Vice-President, and consultant. We are honored and grateful that she has entrusted us with continuing her legacy by establishing the Copelon Fund for Gender Justice which will support new work at the Center focusing on the intersection of gender, class, race and LGBTQ issues.
To her clients like Dolly Filártiga and Joyce Horman and to countless others she 
was a dear friend, and to dry academics and treaty-drafting diplomats she was a formidable goad. Yes, we will miss her, but to those of us who worked with her and loved her she will always be presente.
—Peter Weiss, CCR Vice-President
The Center for Constitutional Rights is a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization. On request, a copy of CCR’s latest financial report may be obtained  
from us or from the Office of the Attorney General of the State of New York, Charities Bureau, 120 Broadway, New York, NY 10271.www.CCRjustice.org
666 broadway, 7 fl, new york, ny 10012
212-614-6489    
email: info@CCRjustice.org 
Editor and Project Manager: Sarah Hogarth. Design: Nicholas Coster•nicholas@modino.com. Photo credits: p.4, Young woman: Maddelana Flores de Leon, 
© Nicholas Coster, p.6, Obama, © Larry Downing/Reuters/Corbis, p.8, Detainee, © Chris Bartlett www.detaineeproject.org, p.10, Blackwater, © Benjamin Lowy/Corbis, p.12, Gaza Flotilla, © Yasser Qudih/Xinhua Press/Corbis, p.13 Mamilla Cemetery, courtesy of Campaign to Preserve Mamilla Jerusalem Cem-etery, p.14, Policing and Prisons, AFP/Getty Images, p.16, Immigrant Justice, © DARREN HAUCK/epa/Corbis, p.18, Vulcans, Qa’id Jacobs, p.19, Application Test © Nicholas Coster, p.20, Riot Police, Getty Images, p. 22, Housing is a Human Right, courtesy of  Take Back the Land Campaign,  Jean Montrevil, © www.newsanctuarymovement.org, p.23, FIDH, courtesy of www.fidh.org, If an Agent Knocks © Nicholas Coster, Honduran protestor, by Laura Raymond,  
We Are not Afraid: Inside the Coup in Honduras, by Laura Raymond, p.24, Blueprint for Accountability, courtesy of spontaneousbeauty.com, p. 27, Barre, Photo courtesy of Reprieve, p.30, Detainees, © Chris Bartlett www.detaineeproject.org, p.36, Amy Goodman, by Yanick Salazar, p.41, Rhonda Copelon, by Qa’id Jacobs, Greg Finger, by Robin Martin, p. 42, President’s Reception, top two images, Yanick Salazar, bottom two images, Sarah Sturges for Yanick Salazar Photography, p.60, Rhonda Copelon, bottom left, Jim Block.International
Albania
Algeria	ArmeniaAustria,	ViennaBelgium	
Bermuda	
BoliviaCanada,	Calgary	Canada,	Toronto	Cape	VerdeCentral	African	RepublicCosta	RicaCubaCuba,	Guantánamo
Egypt	
Finland	Germany,	BerlinHaiti	HondurasIraqIreland	IsraelLuxembourg	
Mexico,	Mexico	City
NepalNetherlands,	The	HagueNigeriaOccupied	Palestinian	TerritoriesPakistan	PalauPortugalSaudi	ArabiaSomaliland	South	Africa
Spain,	Madrid
Sri	LankaSudanSwedenSwitzerland,	Geneva	Turkey	UgandaUnited	Kingdom
Yemen	
Trial
Client ReleasedUnited	States
Albuquerque,	NM	
Boston,	MABrattleboro,	VTBrooklyn,	NYChicago,	IL
Colorado
Detroit,	MIFloridaGeorgiaKeene,	NHLas	Vegas,	NVLos	Angeles,	CAMadison,	WIManchester,	NH
Marcy,	NY
Marion,	ILMilwaukee,	WIMinneapolis,	MNNew	HampshireNew	Haven,	CT	New	Orleans,	LANew	York,	NYNorthfield,	MN
Oakland,	CA
Philadelphia,	PA	Phoenix,	AZPittsburgh,	PAPortland,	ORRock	Creek,	WV	Sacramento,	CA	St.	Paul,	MNSan	Francisco,	CA
Seattle,	WA	
Terre	Haute,	INToledo,	OHWashington,	DCCoalition
This	map	highlights	some	of	CCR’s	work	over	the	past	year,		
for	full	coverage	see	inside	or	visit	us	online	at	CCRjustice.org.