1
2018 Annual Report
DISMANTLING
INSTITUTIONAL  RACISM 
PATRIARCHY
STRUCTURAL ECONOMIC INJUSTICE 
OPPRESSIVE STATE POWER2© 2019 CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS   
666 BROADWAY FL 7
NEW YORK, NY 10012  
212.614.6448         
ccrjustice.org
SHAPES & MARKS
Our shapes and marks are an 
extension of the brush stroke 
in our logo and they play a 
signiﬁcant role in our brand 
identity. Please reference our 
brand guide to see rules for 
their use and examples for how 
they can be used in context.
Shapes should most frequently 
be used in combination with 
headline treatments that use 
our display font, Timmons NY. 
The shapes:
·  Can also be used to create 
   framing devices.
·  Should be used in smart 
    ways to convey meaning—
    not decoratively (e.g. as 
    a pattern).
·  Can be used individually or 
    in groups.
·  Can be used instead of 
    photography. 
·  Should be scaled 
   proportionally. Brushmarks 
   can be scaled 
   unproportionally to be 
   made slightly thicker 
   or thinner.
Drawing new shapes and 
marks should be limited. If the 
need arises, be sure that new 
shapes maintain consistency 
in their line widths and 
proportions.OPPRESSIVE STATE POWER
SHAPES & MARKS
Our shapes and marks are an 
extension of the brush stroke 
in our logo and they play a 
signiﬁcant role in our brand 
identity. Please reference our 
brand guide to see rules for 
their use and examples for how 
they can be used in context.
Shapes should most frequently 
be used in combination with 
headline treatments that use 
our display font, Timmons NY. 
The shapes:
·  Can also be used to create 
   framing devices.
·  Should be used in smart 
    ways to convey meaning—
    not decoratively (e.g. as 
    a pattern).
·  Can be used individually or 
    in groups.
·  Can be used instead of 
    photography. 
·  Should be scaled 
   proportionally. Brushmarks 
   can be scaled 
   unproportionally to be 
   made slightly thicker 
   or thinner.
Drawing new shapes and 
marks should be limited. If the 
need arises, be sure that new 
shapes maintain consistency 
in their line widths and 
proportions.INSTITUTIONAL RACISM
SHAPES & MARKS
Our shapes and marks are an 
extension of the brush stroke 
in our logo and they play a 
signiﬁcant role in our brand 
identity. Please reference our 
brand guide to see rules for 
their use and examples for how 
they can be used in context.
Shapes should most frequently 
be used in combination with 
headline treatments that use 
our display font, Timmons NY. 
The shapes:
·  Can also be used to create 
   framing devices.
·  Should be used in smart 
    ways to convey meaning—
    not decoratively (e.g. as 
    a pattern).
·  Can be used individually or 
    in groups.
·  Can be used instead of 
    photography. 
·  Should be scaled 
   proportionally. Brushmarks 
   can be scaled 
   unproportionally to be 
   made slightly thicker 
   or thinner.
Drawing new shapes and 
marks should be limited. If the 
need arises, be sure that new 
shapes maintain consistency 
in their line widths and 
proportions.
PATRIARCHY
SHAPES & MARKS
Our shapes and marks are an 
extension of the brush stroke 
in our logo and they play a 
signiﬁcant role in our brand 
identity. Please reference our 
brand guide to see rules for 
their use and examples for how 
they can be used in context.
Shapes should most frequently 
be used in combination with 
headline treatments that use 
our display font, Timmons NY. 
The shapes:
·  Can also be used to create 
   framing devices.
·  Should be used in smart 
    ways to convey meaning—
    not decoratively (e.g. as 
    a pattern).
·  Can be used individually or 
    in groups.
·  Can be used instead of 
    photography. 
·  Should be scaled 
   proportionally. Brushmarks 
   can be scaled 
   unproportionally to be 
   made slightly thicker 
   or thinner.
Drawing new shapes and 
marks should be limited. If the 
need arises, be sure that new 
shapes maintain consistency 
in their line widths and 
proportions.
STRUCTURAL ECONOMIC INJUSTICE
TAGLINE
Our tagline complements our 
name and logo. It’s a brief, 
evocative, and memorable 
phrase that boldly declares 
who we are and what we stand 
for. The tagline explicitly 
communicates our relentless 
commitment to achieve justice 
and serves as a call to action 
that inspires people to stand 
up and join our ﬁght against 
oppression. 
When reproducing our tagline 
in our signature headline 
typeface, Timmons NY, use 
these vector graphics—never 
type it out youself. The tagline 
should always appear in our 
primary palette—so in red, 
black, or white typography.
Two orientations of the tagline 
have been saved as individual 
ﬁles in a variety of diﬀerent 
formats and colors, but more 
orientations can be made 
using the vector art provided 
here.
The tagline can also be typeset 
in GT Pressura, in sentence 
case, in a variety of weights. In 
these instances it may be 
typed out with live text.
VISION
The Center for Constitutional Rights fights for a world 
without oppression—where people use their power to achieve 
justice and guarantee the rights of all. 
MISSION
The Center for Constitutional Rights stands with social justice 
movements and communities under threat—fusing litigation, 
advocacy, and narrative shifting to dismantle systems of 
oppression regardless of the risk.1TABLE OF CONTENTS
Here’s what you did in 2018!
Together, we are a force for justice!
MESSAGE FROM THE BOARD CHAIR
MESSAGE FROM THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
INSTITUTIONAL RACISM: Dismantling White Supremacy
PATRIARCHY : Fighting Gender Oppression
OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC STRUCTURES: Combatting Abusive Corporate Power
ABUSIVE  STATE POWER: Challenging Unjust Government Policies
THE CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS IN THE NEWS
BUILDING THE NEXT GENERATION OF MOVEMENT LAWYERS
Bertha Justice Fellowship Program  / Ella Baker Internship Program
CASE INDEX
CCR CELEBRATES CHANGEMAKERS RECEPTION
A SPLENDID BODY OF TIGERISH PEOPLE RECEPTION
FINANCIAL REPORT
WELCOME TO NEW BOARD MEMBERS
BOARD, STAFF, ELLA BAKERS, INTERNS, VOLUNTEERS
WAYS TO SUPPORT THE CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS
ATTRIBUTIONS2
3
4
9
13
16
26
28
31
43
44
45
46
47
49
502The Center for Constitutional Rights' roots was born 52 years ago 
in the Mississippi Delta. We represented Fannie Lou Hamer and 
the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party in the struggle to secure 
the right to vote for African Americans. We went on to open an 
office in Greenville, Mississippi, and for over 20 years the Center 
for Constitutional Rights used that foundation to wage a radical, 
strategic, and movement-based fight to defend the right to vote, 
combat racist policing, and stand up for low-income workers of 
color. We even sued the Klan and won! We were forced to close that 
office in the 1990s, but we never backed away from a commitment 
to working with social movements in the South. Why? Because in so 
many respects the South in general, and Mississippi in particular, is 
the incubator for white supremacy in this country. The seeds get 
planted there and then propagate throughout the entire U.S. 
As Ella Baker taught us: In order to see where we are going, we 
must remember where we have been. For this reason, last February 
the Center for Constitutional Rights' board and staff returned to 
Mississippi to make good on a pledge that we would not abandon our 
allies there. Vic McT eer, Judge Margaret McCrary, and Jaribu Hill – 
former Center for Constitutional Rights lawyers who led our work in 
the 1980s and 90s – welcomed us back to Jackson and Greenville, 
and laid out for us the devastating need for increased legal resources 
in the region – not just a national group parachuting in, extracting 
stories and plaintiffs, and then heading back home, but sustained 
local engagement with the community.
As chair of the Center for Constitutional Rights' board, I am delighted 
to share the news that we’re going back to the South. We’re already 
underway in launching  – actually relaunching  – the Center for 
Constitutional Rights South, and in making a significant commitment 
of people, time, and resources to build new capacity regionally in the 
South.   
Of course, when we closed the Greenville office, our Southern work 
did not come to a halt. A couple of years ago we won a significant 
victory for women in Louisiana, ending a system by which they were 
selectively prosecuted under the state’s sodomy statute and put on 
the sex offender registry. Right now, we’re working hand-in-hand 
with racial and environmental justice activists in Louisiana to block 
the Bayou Bridge pipleline. In November, Vince Warren, the Center 
for Constitutional Rights’ executive director, Omar Farah, one of 
our senior staff attorneys, and I were hosted by our board member 
Colette Pichon Battle, of the Gulf Coast Center for Law and Policy, 
on a tour of the Louisiana Delta South of New Orleans, to the land of the United Houma Nation. We met with the current and former 
Houma Chiefs as well as other tribal leadership and witnessed the 
devastating consequences of rising seas on the traditional homeland 
of the Houma people. They are among the first “climate refugees” in 
the U.S. – a people being forcefully relocated to land on which they 
have no history or tradition because of government and corporate 
policies that have resulted in the flooding of their homeland. 
With the Center for Constitutional Rights South initiative we are 
now planning a much more engaged presence by rekindling our 
longstanding alliances and building new ones so that we can help 
enhance social justice infrastructure in the region. 
Of course, our other national and global work continues, with 
greater ferocity than ever. The Center for Constitutional Rights  is 
working at the Southern border in partnership with local advocates, 
such as El Otro Lado, fighting the federal government’s refusal to 
recognize the rights of refugees seeking asylum. We initiated new 
litigation challenging racist police stops in Buffalo, New York. Our 
advocates traveled to Yemen to document the outrageous reality of 
the Trump Administration’s Muslim Ban, denying refuge in the U.S. 
to people fleeing a horrendous war zone. And we won important 
court victories against oil pipeline companies that are destroying the 
environment and people’s lives at Standing Rock and in Louisiana. 
Finally, as you may notice from this year’s annual report, we’ve 
refreshed our look. We’ve got a new logo, tagline, and key messages 
that are compelling and eye catching, and which allow us to talk 
and showcase our work in a fresh, persuasive way. With this new 
look, we’re trying to reach new audiences, primarily unaffiliated 
progressives who are aligned with the Center for Constitutional 
Rights' values and history, and are outraged at the politics of 
hatred, greed, nationalism, corruption, and authoritarianism that 
increasingly characterizes public and civic life both in the U.S and 
globally. T ake a look at the Center for Constitutional Rights ’ new 
swagger – I think you’ll agree that we’re looking better than ever. 
I extend my heartfelt thanks to all of the Center for Constitutional 
Rights'  supporters: our donors, our movement partners, and our 
allies in the struggle for a more just and kind world. We’re ready for 
the fight. Indeed, that’s our new tagline: Justice T akes a Fight!! 
MESSAGE FROM THE BOARD CHAIR
KATHERINE FRANKE
3
In April, I was deported from Israel. Our board president, Katherine 
Franke, and I were leading the Center for Constitutional Rights’ 
second delegation to Palestine to meet with Palestinian and Israeli 
lawyers and activists. When we arrived at Ben Gurion International 
Airport in T el Aviv with the twelve other delegates – a cross section of 
progressive activists, lawyers, and artists – we were pulled from the 
delegation by Israeli security, interrogated about our political beliefs, 
separated from each other, with some of us put into detention cells, 
and detained for 14 hours before being put on a plane and sent back 
to New York. I shared a cell with travelers from different countries 
who had languished in lock-up for days and had no idea when they 
would be released.  
I didn’t know the exact hour I would be freed, but I knew I was going 
home, which is more than can be said for the people with whom I 
shared a cell, the many Palestinian people who seek to be reunified 
with their families, or our clients currently in Guantánamo and 
in immigrant detention. I wasn’t beaten like Fannie Lou Hamer in 
Mississippi. I wasn’t teargassed like my friends in Ferguson. I wasn’t 
shot at like my colleagues at Standing Rock. And I wasn’t tortured 
like our clients in Abu Ghraib. In short, the state of Israel gave me 
only a small taste of what repressive state power doles out across 
the world. There are many takeaways from my experience. The two 
most important are, first, that human rights and justice are often 
subject to whim and have to be constantly fought for, particularly on 
behalf of those who are the most vulnerable to abusive systems of 
oppression. Second, when people do fight for justice, there is always 
a powerful push back from those in power. Thus, our core mission 
to stand with social justice movements, human rights defenders, and 
those who protest human rights abuses regardless of the substantial 
risks they face is more important today than ever.
We are two years into the Trump administration and, yes, it is as 
bad as we thought it would be. The administration and its allies are 
working overtime to strengthen the tools of oppression, rewrite the 
rules, weaken international legal systems and stack the domestic 
ones. But at the Center for Constitutional Rights , we’re working 
overtime as well. In our view, there is great cause for hope despite the darkness of the current age. When an organization is committed 
to transforming the systems that maintain structural racism, 
structural gender oppression, economic oppression, and abusive 
state power, as the Center for Constitutional Rights is, it can always 
make clear and positive impacts no matter what they throw at us. 
When an organization sees social change as its client and dismantling 
oppressive power as its issue, as the Center for Constitutional 
Rights  does, it can work both domestically and internationally; it 
can draw the connections between its racial and religious profiling 
work, its immigration work, and its work challenging the overreach 
of executive power. And when an organization works closely with 
the people committed to change, like the Center for Constitutional 
Rights  does, it can support the important work of environmental 
activists, LGBTQI communities, Black organizers, and undocumented 
and Native communities who actually make change happen. Most 
organizations strive to do one of these things, but I’m proud to say 
that the Center for Constitutional Rights  works to do all of them, and 
more.
 
Because of all of this, we have a lot of very good news to share in this 
report. We pledged to be a formidable foe to the new and deepening 
assaults on justice as long as our supporters stood with us, and you 
indeed remained by our side. Thank you. Once again, through your 
generosity, you are demonstrating what is possible when people 
use their power to achieve justice for all.  This has been an excellent 
year for the Center for Constitutional Rights. We have achieved 
groundbreaking results on behalf of communities under constant 
siege and built stronger ties with the progressive movements 
fighting alongside them. I hope you will join me in taking great pride 
in the contents of this report and the work it represents. None of this 
work would be possible without you.  
In gratitude and solidarity,
MESSAGE FROM THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
VINCE WARREN4
INSTITUTIONAL RACISM
Dismantling White Supremacy
“Well, if one really wishes to know how justice is 
administered in a country, one does not question 
the policemen, the lawyers, the judges, or the 
protected members of the middle class. One goes 
to the unprotected—those, precisely, who need 
the law’s protection most!—and listens to their 
testimony. Ask any Mexican, any Puerto Rican, any 
Black man, any poor person—ask the wretched 
how they fare in the halls of justice, and then you 
will know, not whether or not the country is just, 
but whether or not it has any love for justice, or 
any concept of it. It is certain, in any case, that 
ignorance, allied with power, is the most ferocious 
enemy justice can have. ” 
– James Baldwin
5
We want to thank our supporters for allowing the Center for Constitutional Rights to 
continue the bold civil rights legacy that was the seed of our organization more than 50 years 
ago.  In 2018, we brought new challenges initiated by communities who are the target of racist 
policies and practices.  Our longstanding and new cases moved forward successfully because 
of you.
Transforming the Police State
For years, police officers in St. Louis and surrounding Missouri counties have been given the power to arrest and 
detain residents without probable cause or judicial oversight by issuing what they call a “wanted. ”  A wanted is, 
essentially, the equivalent of a statewide arrest warrant that permits summary arrest and 24-hour detention without 
the safeguards of the warrant process.  Wanteds, used for serious state-level crimes and minor code violations 
alike, including traffic offenses, are part of the pernicious race- and class-based law enforcement practices that have 
gone largely unchecked in the St. Louis area despite the intense scrutiny that accompanied the killing of Michael 
Brown four years ago.  In a state of six million people, two million wanteds have been issued, leading to innumerable 
unconstitutional arrests of Black residents.  In 2016,  the Center for Constitutional Rights  joined a class action 
lawsuit, Furlow v. Belmar,  with Arch City Defenders of St. Louis, a grassroots poverty law and criminal defense 
organization, to challenge this unconstitutional practice.  The suit’s lead petitioner, Dwayne Furlow, was pulled over 
for traffic infractions – including having his temporary dealer’s plates displayed in the front of his car instead of the 
back – and then arrested and detained after police ran his name and discovered an old wanted that had been issued 
simply because Mr. Furlow had refused to answer an officer’s question in connection with a minor dispute with his 
neighbor.  The wanteds practice causes low-income residents and people of color to fear leaving their house for 
routine life activities because they can be subject to such arbitrary and summary arrest and detention. This case is in 
the late stages of discovery, and oral argument on class certification and cross motions for summary judgment took 
place February 28.  At the judge’s request, we subsequently submitted a briefing on the question of whether it is 
constitutional under the Fourth Amendment to detain someone solely for purposes of interrogation.  We await the 
court’s ruling.  INSTITUTIONAL RACISM
Dismantling White Supremacy6Confronting Racist and Economically-Driven Traffic Enforcement Practices 
In June, t he Center for Constitutional Rights  joined with the National Center for Law and Economic Justice and the 
Western New York Law Center to file a federal class action lawsuit, Black Love Resists in the Rust v. City of Buffalo , 
on behalf of residents of Buffalo, New York, who are suing the City for a traffic enforcement program designed to 
ensnare poor and Black and Latinx residents.  The plaintiffs are Black Love Resists in the Rust, a grassroots racial 
justice and police accountability organization, and individual Black Buffalo residents who are demanding an end 
to vehicle checkpoints and abusive traffic-ticketing practices targeting the poor neighborhoods on Buffalo’s highly 
segregated East Side.  Not only do the checkpoints target and demean people of color, they are economically 
exploitative.  Since 2015, when the State of New York allowed Buffalo to keep all of the revenue from traffic tickets, 
Buffalo police officers dramatically increased the number of tickets they issued and added significant revenue ($4 
PROVIDING ACTIVISTS WITH IMPORTANT TOOLS 
AND INFORMATION TO FURTHER THE MOVEMENT
              COINTELPRO 2.0:  The RACE PAPER
In July 2016, the Center for Constitutional Rights 
and Color of Change filed a Freedom of Information 
Act (FOIA) request seeking information from the U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and the FBI 
on the surveillance and monitoring of Black activists.  
After DHS and the FBI refused to comply with our FOIA 
request, a district court judge ordered the agencies to 
turn over all relevant documents.  The hundreds of pages 
of emails, reports, policies and other documents we 
discovered confirm the targeted surveillance that many 
Black activists and organizers around the country have 
reported and raise troubling questions about the agency’s 
approach to Black people engaging in protected First 
Amendment activity.   One set of documents show how 
federal agencies characterized Black protestors as “Black 
Supremacist Extremists” and portrayed protected First 
Amendment protest activity as violence-inciting in order 
to provide justification for the surveillance of activists.  
Among those documents publicly released was a report 
entitled “Growing Frequency of Race-Related Domestic 
T errorist Violence, ” referred to by DHS as the “Race Paper. ” 
The “Race Paper” was sent to us in completely redacted 
form.  When we sued to uncover its contents, the court 
unfortunately ruled against us. However, its existence 
provides another opportunity to push lawmakers to stop 
the blatant government surveillance and criminalization of 
Black organizing.
SHAPES & MARKS
Our shapes and marks are an 
extension of the brush stroke 
in our logo and they play a 
signiﬁcant role in our brand 
identity. Please reference our 
brand guide to see rules for 
their use and examples for how 
they can be used in context.
Shapes should most frequently 
be used in combination with 
headline treatments that use 
our display font, Timmons NY. 
The shapes:
·  Can also be used to create 
   framing devices.
·  Should be used in smart 
    ways to convey meaning—
    not decoratively (e.g. as 
    a pattern).
·  Can be used individually or 
    in groups.
·  Can be used instead of 
    photography. 
·  Should be scaled 
   proportionally. Brushmarks 
   can be scaled 
   unproportionally to be 
   made slightly thicker 
   or thinner.
Drawing new shapes and 
marks should be limited. If the 
need arises, be sure that new 
shapes maintain consistency 
in their line widths and 
proportions.                   
 
 
 
 
Briefing Guide: The DHS “Race Paper”  
 
Color of Change (COC), the Center for Constitutional Rights  (CCR),  and the Kramer Law Clinic  are 
currently litigating under the  Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) to uncover how the FBI and 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) are monitoring and surveilling public protests  
regarding  police violence, racial justice , and the Movement for Black Lives  (M4BL) . Between 
May and December of  2017, DHS and the FBI  turned over hundreds of pages of emails, reports, 
policies , and surveillance documents to us. While many of these documents were  fully or 
partially  redacted, it is clear from their substance that the FBI  and DHS (including their  sub-
agencies ) are surveilling the M4BL as well as  Black activists  and organizers , reinforcing  a law 
enforcement narrative that broadly criminalizes Black protestors.  
 
One of the most concerning documents turned over to us is a fully -redacted report referred to as 
“the Race Paper.” On March 16, the Center for Constitutional Rights  and the Kramer Law Clinic 
filed a motion  in federal court in order to force DHS to turn over an unredacted version of the 
document.  
 
Email: The “Race Paper”  
The DHS Office  of Intelligence and Analysis ( “I&A”) produced several emails sent in early 2017 
between their personnel concerning a document they referred to as “the Race Paper.” Each 
email attached a separate version of the document, and some emails contain some feedback 
from DHS personnel on the struc ture of the document, call for in -person meetings to discuss 
the paper, and expressly mention “drivers” and “indicators.”  
 
All versions of the “Race P aper” itself were produced to us, but in completely redacted form – 
nothing, not even the official title of the document, is visible. DHS claims the document is 
exempt from release to the public under certain statutes. Considering the documents are all 
fully black out , we are thus left to speculate,  as to why DHS would prepare a document it refers 
to only as “the Race Paper ” and then closely guard its contents, even to the point of concealing 
its actual title and a basic description.  
 
LINKS:   
 Redacted ve rsion of the “Race Paper” (Bates IA 508 -516)  
 Race Paper Email (Bates IA 259 -70) 
  INSTITUTIONAL RACISM
Dismantling White Supremacy
67million in 2017 alone) to the city budget. Buffalo’s use of this program to balance the City’s budget on the backs 
of low-income people of color whom it has historically deprived of economic resources is a form of racialized 
economic exploitation.  The checkpoints block off residents’ streets and prevent them from traveling in and out of 
their neighborhoods without being stopped and possibly searched as they go about their daily activities, such as 
going to work or school.  One resident had checkpoints setup directly in front of her driveway on many occasions 
requiring her to go through a roadblock just to enter or exit her home. Thousands have had their licenses suspended 
because they could not pay the substantial fines accrued from all of the tickets they received.  One Black Buffalo 
driver received four expensive tickets during one traffic stop for having tinted windows—one ticket for each window.  
This lawsuit represents the Center for Constitutional Rights’ long-term goals of dismantling structural racism and 
economic injustice.
 INSTITUTIONAL RACISM
Dismantling White Supremacy
During the press conference to announce the filing of Black Love Resists in the Rust v. City of Buffal o, Dorethea Franklin, one of the 
plaintiffs, explains how the Buffalo Police Department has been targeting Black and poor communities for money.8Reforming the NYPD
In July, the court-appointed 
facilitator issued his final report and 
recommendations for community-
generated reforms in the Center for 
Constitutional Rights’ landmark class-
action lawsuit Floyd v. City of New York . 
Less than a month later, Judge Analisa 
T orres issued two orders stemming 
from the facilitator’s recommendations. 
The first instructed the New York Police 
Department (NYPD) to begin a pilot 
program for electronically recording 
all police-citizen low-level investigative 
encounters to study the potential 
benefits and costs of implementing 
the requirement department-wide. 
The second ordered the NYPD to create an additional pilot program that would record many of those encounters 
on officers’ body-worn cameras. Our work to change the NYPD’s culture of hostility to Black and Latinx people is 
far from complete.  We continue to work with the Department to develop new procedures and training materials 
for NYPD investigations of racial profiling complaints, the NYPD’s handling of substantiated civilian complaints, and 
internal NYPD monitoring of the constitutionality of officer stop-and-frisk activity.   
Replanting and Rebuilding the Center for Constitutional Rights' Roots 
in the Crucible of White Supremacy
In February 2018,  the Center for 
Constitutional Rights Board of 
Directors traveled to Greenville and 
Jackson, Mississippi, to reconnect 
with our work and allies there.  
Mississippi is the programmatic 
birthplace of the Center for 
Constitutional Rights, Greenville 
was the home of our southern 
office which operated for more than 
20 years, during which time we 
engaged in groundbreaking work 
with movements across the south.  
Our goal is to rekindle longtime 
partnerships and build new ones 
with groups and people on the 
ground who continue to do the work 
necessary to dismantle the unique 
forms of oppression that manifest in 
the American South. 
 INSTITUTIONAL RACISM
Dismantling White Supremacy
Center for Constitutional Rights Board and Staff at Fanny Lou Hamer Monument in Ruleville, 
Mississippi, February 20189
PATRIARCHY
Fighting Gender Oppression
"There is no such thing as a single-
issue struggle because WE DO NOT 
LIVE SINGLE-ISSUE LIVES. "
- Audre Lorde
10Stopping the Export of Hate
Our path-breaking lawsuit on behalf of Sexual 
Minorities Uganda (SMUG), a non-profit LGBTQI 
advocacy organization in Uganda, against 
Massachusetts-based anti-gay extremist Scott 
Lively ( Sexual Minorities Uganda v. Scott Lively ), 
was ongoing this year. In a scathing ruling, the 
court granted Lively the dismissal he sought 
but made clear it was on the basis of a technical, 
jurisdictional ground, while at the same time 
validating—in the strongest terms—SMUG’s 
central claims as to Lively’s active participation in 
the conspiracy to strip away fundamental rights 
of LBTQI people in Uganda. In an effort to erase 
the court’s damning language excoriating his 
persecution of LGBTQI people, Lively appealed 
his victory. The move failed. In August, the First 
Circuit Court of Appeals denied his appeal.  The 
record of his bigotry and persecution will remain 
intact. The work of SMUG and the Center for 
Constitutional Rights  will go on as we look to 
use our experience in this case in support of the 
ongoing fights against the export of hate and 
persecution.
Demanding Vatican Accountability for 
Sexual Violence and Torture  
For the past eight years, the Center for Constitutional Rights has worked closely with the Survivors Network of 
those Abused by Priests (SNAP) to hold the Vatican accountable for practices and policies that enable widespread 
rape and sexual violence by Catholic clergy ( SNAP v. the Pope ).  Following this summer’s release of a grand jury 
report detailing pervasive sexual violence across the state and a cover-up by senior leaders of the Catholic Church in 
Pennsylvania and at the Vatican, the Center for Constitutional Rights  and SNAP sent a letter to the U.S. Department 
of Justice demanding a full-scale, nationwide investigation of those responsible for the system that has enabled such 
crimes.  We also joined SNAP and the global human rights organization Ending Clergy Abuse in a protest and press 
conference outside the Vatican embassy in Washington, D.C. to demand the release of church files.  Additionally, we 
called upon the Vatican to condemn any suggestion by some church officials that rape and sexual violence against 
children is linked to or caused by sexual orientation of either the victim or the offender.  We thank our supporters who have made possible the Center for Constitutional Rights’ 
efforts to expand our role in the fight for gender justice and to deepen our work as fierce 
allies of survivors of sexual violence and other torture.
PATRIARCHY
Fighting Gender Oppression11Ending Discrimination in the Public and 
Private Spheres 
In the landmark 2003 decision in Lawrence v. T exas , 
the United States Supreme Court declared that state 
statutes criminalizing sodomy are unconstitutional, in 
part because of the broader stigma such laws project 
onto same-sex couples.  But more than a decade later, 
Mississippi still has an “Unnatural Intercourse” statute 
on the books — and is enforcing it by requiring people 
with convictions under this statute to register as 
sex offenders.  Doe v. Hood  argues that Mississippi’s 
Unnatural Intercourse statute, as well as its sex offender 
registration requirement, is unconstitutional, violating 
both due process and equal protection principles.
In 2013, the Center for Constitutional Rights  
successfully challenged Louisiana’s requirement that 
people convicted under the Crime Against Nature by 
Solicitation (CANS) statute register as sex offenders. 
Our work resulted in the removal of more than 800 
people from Louisiana’s sex offender registry, alleviating 
the onerous and humiliating conditions it imposed, 
predominantly upon poor people of color.  Doe v. Hood  
similarly challenges the application of Mississippi’s 
unconstitutional Unnatural Intercourse statute to those 
with CANS convictions from Louisiana.
The Center for Constitutional Rights  and co-counsel 
filed our complaint in October 2016. In May 2018, 
we reached a partial settlement to remove from the 
Mississippi sex offender registry four plaintiffs and 
26 others who had out-of-state convictions under the 
Louisiana CANS statute. These 30 women and men were 
able to start new lives having expunged the unlawful 
requirement that they register. The case continues in 
the name of one plaintiff, Arthur Doe, whose guilty plea 
to Unnatural Intercourse in Mississippi dates to 1978. 
In May, we also filed a motion for summary judgment 
to strike down the statute and to remove Arthur Doe 
from the registry on due process and equal protection 
grounds. 
On October 1, the court issued an order stating that 
Mississippi’s statute “appears to be unconstitutional” 
and that Doe “should not be subject to the stigmatizing 
requirements imposed by” the Mississippi Sex Offender 
Registry, but questioned whether Doe needed to undo IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF MISSISSIPPI
NORTHERN DIVISION
ARTHUR DOE; BRENDA DOE; CAROL DOE; 
DIANA DOE; and ELIZABETH DOEPLAINTIFFS
V. CAUSE NO. 3:16 -CV-789-CWR -FKB 
JIM HOOD; MARSHALL FISHER; 
CHARLIE HILL; COLONEL CHRIS 
GILLARD; and LT. COLONEL LARRY 
WAGGONERDEFENDANTS
ORDER
In 1978, Arthur Doe1pleaded guilty to violating Mississippi’s “Unnatural Intercourse” 
law. Miss. Code Ann. § 97- 29-59. The statute prohibits oral and anal sex, or what is also known 
as sodomy. As a result of his conviction, Doe was later required to register as a sex offende r.
In Lawrence v. Texas , 539 U.S. 558 (2003), the Supreme Court held that a Texas statute, 
criminalizing same -sex sodomy, violated the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. 
That decision overruled Bowers v. Hardwick , 478 U.S. 186 (1986), in which the Supreme Court 
had upheld the constitutionality of a Georgia statute that criminalized sodomy.
Fifteen years later, Mississippi continues to enforce its pre -Lawrence prohibition on 
“unnatural intercourse.” Mississippi requires persons convicted under t he statute, or an 
equivalent out -of-state offense, to register with the Mississippi Sex Offender Registry (MSOR). 
Doe asserts that the anti -sodomy law is unconstitutional on its face and as applied to him 
under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Ame ndment. Alternatively, he argues that his 
inclusion on the MSOR violates the Equal Protection Clause. Mississippi responds that 
                                                           
1The Court granted Plaintiffs’ Motion to Proceed Under Pseudonyms. See June 2, 2017 Order.Case 3:16-cv-00789-CWR-FKB   Document 147   Filed 10/01/18   Page 1 of 21PATRIARCHY
Fighting Gender Oppression12his conviction in state court prior to seeking relief in federal 
court. A hearing on the parties’ motions for summary 
judgment was held on October 10, 2017 and we continue 
to await a decision. 
The Center for Constitutional Rights Family, Past 
and Present, Honored for Gender Justice Work
Center for Constitutional Rights  Senior Staff Attorneys 
Katherine Gallagher and Pam Spees and their mentor and 
former Center for Constitutional Rights  Staff Attorney 
and Board Member, the late Rhonda Copelon, were 
inducted onto the International Criminal Court’s (ICC) 
inaugural Gender Justice Wall. Along with friend, colleague 
and client, the late Barbara Blaine, who founded the 
Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests (SNAP), 
their names will be inscribed on the installation, which will 
be permanently housed at the ICC’s headquarters in The 
Hague.  
Those selected for this prestigious honor were chosen 
because their work contributed to advances in the gender 
justice field over the past 125 years.  
Copelon spearheaded much of the Center for 
Constitutional Rights ’ early reproductive justice work, was 
one of the lead attorneys in the first human rights case 
brought under the Alien T ort Statute, and went on to found 
the International Women’s Human Rights Clinic at CUNY 
School of Law and the Women’s Caucus for Gender Justice, 
which provided the legal support for a gender perspective 
in the negotiations of the treaty that established the ICC.  
Pam had served as program director of the Women’s 
Caucus, where she played an important role in having 
the prosecution of crimes of sexual and gender violence 
become a basic part of the treaty that established the ICC.  
With Pam, Barbara Blaine, and SNAP , Katie has worked to 
have widespread rape and other forms of sexual violence 
within the Catholic Church recognized as torture and a 
crime against humanity. She is also working to solidify such 
legal principles at international institutions. 
Rhonda Copelon
Katherine Gallagher
Pamela Spees
Barbara BlainePATRIARCHY
Fighting Gender Oppression13
“When morality 
comes up against 
profit, it is seldom 
that profit loses. ” 
– Shirley Chisholm OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC 
STRUCTURES
13
Combating Abusive 
Corporate Power14Much of the Center for Constitutional Rights’ work in 2018 challenging the outsized power 
of corporations and the ensuing injustices involved field work by our staff.  None of it would 
have been possible without a critical substantial investment by you and other dedicated 
supporters.
No Bayou Bridge Pipeline
No Bayou Bridge Pipeline is a Center for Constitutional Rights'  
litigation and advocacy project to help communities and groups 
in Louisiana halt a proposed oil pipeline set to run through 
some of the state’s most sensitive and important wetlands and 
sources of drinking water. Energy Transfer Partners (ETP), 
the company behind the Dakota Access Pipeline (DAPL), is in 
the process of constructing a 162-mile pipeline in Louisiana 
that would run through 11 parishes and cut across 700 
waterways, including the Atchafalaya Basin, disproportionately 
affecting Black and indigenous communities. T he Center for 
Constitutional Rights  has joined local faith leaders, fishermen, 
conservationists, and advocates for environmental and 
social justice in their united opposition to the pipeline.  Our 
public records requests have revealed that Louisiana state 
intelligence officers surveilled community groups opposed 
to the pipeline, and that ETP had access to, and coordinated 
efforts with, high-level government employees. Emails released 
through this request also revealed that Louisiana officials are aligned with a growing national trend of surveillance 
intended to intimidate those who exercise their First Amendment rights. The Center for Constitutional Rights  is 
also representing activists opposing the pipeline who have been charged under a new law that punishes protests at 
pipeline construction sites with felonies and up to five years’ imprisonment. We are also defending landowners in a 
significant case brought by the pipeline company in which they are trying to seize their land.
Pushing Back on Lawsuits Aimed at 
Silencing Protest—You Can’t Sue a 
Movement!
Large corporations are again turning to Strategic 
Lawsuits Against Public Participation (SLAPPs) to 
silence criticism and chill protest against their harmful 
practices by individual activists and nonprofits. A 
favorite tool used in these suits is the Racketeer 
Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO), 
which was designed to make it easier for the 
government to sue the Mafia, but now is being used 
to recast activists as organized criminals and cripple 
their ability to organize against abusive corporate a 
acts.  In August, the Center for Constitutional Rights 
OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC STRUCTURES
Combating Abusive 
Corporate Power
Local community members held a rally demanding 
an evacuation route for residents in the area from the 
continuing construction of the Bayou Bridge Pipeline, 
September 2018. T aken by the Louisiana Bucket Brigade, 
the Center for Constitutional Rights’ client in our No 
Bayou Bridge Pipeline litigation and advocacy project.
Center for Constitutional Rights Managing Attorney Shane Kadidal 
speaks at a New York rally to launch the national Protect the Protest 
task force, September 2018. T aken by Protect the Protest.15defeated an effort by Energy Transfer Partners and 
Trump's law firm, Kasowitz Benson T orres LLP , to 
sue the Earth First! movement in a far-fetched and 
sprawling case against a number of environmental 
groups and activists. Earth First! is the name of 
a philosophy of environmental activism based on 
biocentrism, direct action to protect the Earth, 
and refusing to compromise with earth-destroying 
corporations. The Center for Constitutional Rights 
represents the Earth First! Journal in district court 
in North Dakota and won dismissal of Earth First! 
from the case because you can't sue a movement, 
idea, or philosophy. 
Confronting Corporate Human Rights 
Violations Inside the Courtroom
In 2008, the Center for Constitutional Rights filed 
a federal lawsuit, Al Shimari v. CACI , on behalf 
of four Iraqi civilians who were tortured at the 
notorious Abu Ghraib prison. Hired by the U.S. 
government to perform interrogation services, 
CACI Premier T echnology, Inc. conspired to commit 
torture and other war crimes at the prison. Despite 
CACI’s many efforts to have the case dismissed, 
the Center for Constitutional Rights is headed 
to trial April 23, 2019. This year brought two 
successes. Following victories before the Fourth 
Circuit and the district court, where our plaintiffs’ 
international human rights claims brought 
under the Alien T ort Statute (ATS) were found to 
sufficiently “touch and concern” the United States 
as to warrant being heard in a U.S. court, and that 
claims of illegal conduct, including torture and 
war crimes, do not raise a “political question. ” In 
February, the district court affirmed that our clients 
had sufficient evidence to support their claims 
of torture, war crimes, and cruel, inhuman, and 
degrading treatment.  And in July, the court ruled 
that the recent U.S. Supreme Court case, Jesner v. 
Arab Bank , did not bar our case against a domestic 
corporation. ( the Center for Constitutional Rights  
had filed an amicus brief in Jesner) . 
CONFRONTING CORPORATE HUMAN RIGHTS 
VIOLATIONS OUTSIDE THE COURTROOM
 
The Center for Constitutional Rights has 
been active in trying to hold corporations 
accountable for human rights abuses, be they 
military contractors who conspired to torture 
detainees at Abu Ghraib or perpetrators of 
wanton pollution of communities.
T o that end, we have advised those 
advocating for a new U.N. treaty to regulate 
corporations with respect to international 
human rights violations, pressing for 
provisions that would restrict the undue 
influence that corporations have over 
the policy and law making process – a 
phenomenon known as ‘corporate capture. ' 
We support local fights against corporate 
capture in places like Louisiana, where we 
have revealed how oil companies engage 
in secretive lobbying efforts, leverage 
connections to develop special access to 
decision makers, and have a revolving door 
of company staff working inside public 
agencies. We are building on these activities 
by convening strategy gatherings for allied 
organizations, progressive lawyers, and 
movement partners to collectively develop 
a deeper and more sustained strategy for 
directly addressing the impacts of trade 
associations and other vested money 
interests in the democratic process.  OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC STRUCTURES
Combating Abusive 
Corporate Power16Fighting for Asylum Seekers: When the State Criminalizes Refugees 
Dating back to at least 2016, the Center for Constitutional Rights  and other immigrants’ rights advocates received 
reports that the U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) was unlawfully turning away asylum seekers along 
the U.S.-Mexico border. Every year, many of thousands of people flee state-sponsored or gang violence in Central 
America and Mexico and seek safe haven in the U.S. In response, CBP callously and unlawfully turns away these 
asylum seekers to face violence or death. In July 2017, the Center for Constitutional Rights, along with American 
Immigration Council and Latham & Watkins LLP , filed Al Otro Lado v. Kelly , a class action lawsuit against officials at 
the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and CBP in federal court in California. In September 2018, the 
court ruled that our lawsuit could proceed, affirming our claim that DHS and CBP officials have the obligation to 
process asylum seekers and that they would be held liable if our allegations were proven true. The judge further 
held that those asylum seekers can proceed with legal action against high-level officials for not fulfilling their 
responsibilities under domestic and international law. It was a momentous ruling. We look forward to the possibility 
of finding information that may uncover many policy-level decisions that stem directly from Trump's nativist vision 
for America."I SUSPECT THAT MORE 
PEOPLE HAVE GONE TO 
THEIR DEATHS THROUGH 
A LEGAL SYSTEM  than 
through all the illegalities 
in the history of man:  six 
million people in Europe 
during the Third Reich.   
Legal.   Sacco and Vanzetti.   
Legal.  The hundreds of 
great trials throughout the 
South where black men 
were condemned to death.  
All legal.  Jesus. 
Legal.  Socrates.  
Legal...All tyrants 
learn that it is 
far better to do 
this thing through some 
semblance of legality 
than to do it without that 
pretense. " 
- Bill Kunstler
Activists and organizers need very strong 
partnerships to challenge abuses of power by 
government institutions, which have virtually 
endless resources to beat back those who seek to 
hold them accountable. This is where the Center 
for Constitutional Rights’ supporters are like no 
other; you are resolute in your solidarity with the 
most vulnerable communities and people in the 
biggest fights of their lives. You make sure that the 
Center for Constitutional Rights has the capacity 
to be as relentless in our fight for social change as 
our adversaries are in maintaining their systems of 
oppression.  ABUSIVE STATE POWER
Challenging Unjust
Government Policies17Seeking Justice for the Victims of 
Extrajudicial Killings
After a historic trial in April, a federal jury found the 
former president of Bolivia and his minister of defense 
responsible for the 2003 killings of 58 civilians – many 
of them indigenous people—in a military crackdown 
to suppress popular protests against government 
policies, including plans to privatize the country’s 
natural gas reserves by selling them to foreign 
corporations. The verdict in Mamani v. Sánchez de 
Lozada and Sánchez Berzaín  came after a ten-year 
legal battle spearheaded by family members of those 
killed in what is known in Bolivia as the “Gas War. ” Both 
the former Bolivian president, Gonzalo Sánchez de 
Lozada, and his former defense minister, José Carlos 
Sánchez Berzaín, have lived in the United States since 
they fled Bolivia following the massacre in 2003. All nine plaintiffs, survivors of loved ones killed, attended the trial, 
marking the first time in U.S. history a former head of state has sat before his accusers in a U.S. human rights trial. 
After the Center for Constitutional Rights  and our co-counsel conducted a four-week trial in Fort Lauderdale, FL, the 
jury awarded $10 million in compensatory damages to the plaintiffs. The defendants filed a motion asking the court 
to set aside the jury’s findings — which, remarkably, the judge granted. The plaintiffs have appealed, and the Center 
for Constitutional Rights will continue to represent them along with co-counsel, Harvard Law School’s International 
Human Rights Clinic; and the law firms of Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld, LLP; Schonbrun, Seplow, Harris & 
Hoffman, LLP; and Akerman LLP . Additionally, lawyers, Judith Chomsky and Beth Stephens, from the Center for Law, 
Justice and Society (Dejusticia) are cooperating attorneys.
Demanding Justice: Abusive State Power Trampling on Religious Freedom 
We challenged the FBI’s use of the “No-Fly List” to coerce law-abiding Muslim Americans into spying on their 
religious communities in our lawsuit T anvir v. T anzin . 
In May, a panel of the Second Circuit Court of Appeals 
reinstated the lawsuit against 16 FBI agents in a landmark 
decision that provides an important tool to protect 
Muslims and other religious minorities from discrimination 
by federal officials. The ruling ensures that individuals may 
sue individual federal officials for money damages under 
the Religious Freedom Restoration Act for acts of religious 
discrimination.
On April 5, the Center for Constitutional Rights  and 
our co-counsel, Muslim Advocates and Gibbons P .C., 
announced a landmark settlement in Hassan v. City of 
New Y ork , a federal lawsuit that challenged the New York 
Police Department’s suspicionless surveillance of Muslim 
Americans in New Jersey solely because of their Muslim 
ABUSIVE STATE POWER
Challenging Unjust 
Government Policies
T anvir v. T anzin  co-counsel (faculty from CUNY School of Law’s 
CLEAR Project and attorneys from Debevoise & Plimpton LLP), 
current and former CUNY students, Center for Constitutional 
Rights Legal Director Baher Azmy, and Center for Constitutional 
Rights Senior Managing Attorney Shane Kadidal.18identity. In a Pulitzer Prize-winning series of stories released in 2011, the Associated Press revealed that after 
the 9/11 attacks, the NYPD established a sprawling and secretive human mapping and surveillance program that 
targeted American Muslim communities in New York, New Jersey, and beyond. The litigation produced a landmark 
appellate court ruling likening the City’s specious terrorism-prevention justification for Muslim surveillance to the 
treatment of Japanese-Americans in World War II, and calling such blatant discrimination unconstitutional.
Fighting Indefinite Solitary Confinement 
Ashker v. Governor of California  is a federal class action lawsuit on behalf of prisoners in the Security Housing Unit 
(SHU) at California’s Pelican Bay State Prison who spent a decade or more in solitary confinement. In 2015, after 
years of intensive litigation, the Center for Constitutional Rights  reached a landmark settlement with the State of 
California which effectively ended the state’s policy of indefinite solitary confinement and brought broad public 
awareness to this issue as a human rights violation. Since the settlement, the Center for Constitutional Rights has 
continued to work with our legal partners and the prisoner representatives to monitor the California Department 
of Corrections and Rehabilitation’s (CDCR’s) compliance. While over 1,200 individuals have been moved from 
solitary confinement into the general population, our work in monitoring the CDCR’s compliance with the settlement 
continues. 
In July, we won a motion arguing that CDCR had 
violated the settlement agreement by transferring our 
class members from solitary confinement into general 
population units that have very similar conditions to those 
we fought against. We are currently in court designing a 
remedy, and we won the right for our clients to be there 
with us to take part in the negotiation. 
At the same time, we are seeking to ensure the court’s 
protection of our clients on other grounds. In 2017, at 
the close of the initial two-year monitoring period, our 
investigation revealed that, despite the reforms required 
by the settlement, CDCR was continuing to violate 
the constitutional rights of Ashker  class members by 
systemically misusing confidential information to return 
class members to solitary and denying our clients a fair 
opportunity for parole. Consequently, in November we 
filed a motion to enable us to conduct an additional year 
of monitoring and court supervision and to order CDCR 
to remedy the continuing constitutional violations. After 
that motion was filed, we were granted another order 
from the court stating that CDCR had failed to produce 
all the documents required by the settlement which then 
required CDCR to produce thousands of additional pages 
of rule violation reports. We used this new evidence to file 
a supplemental brief this past July, documenting a huge 
number of additional due process violations in CDCR’s use 
of confidential information. A decision on our request for 
an extended monitoring period is expected soon. STATE-SANCTIONED TORTURE
Mental Health Consequences 
Following Release from  
Long-Term Solitary ConÞnement 
in California 
Consultative Report Prepared for the 
Center for Constitutional Rights 
Human Rights in Trauma Mental Health Lab, Stanford University  
 Mental Health Consequences 
Following Release from  
Long-Term Solitary ConÞnement 
in California 
Consultative Report Prepared for the 
Center for Constitutional Rights 
Human Rights in Trauma Mental Health Lab, Stanford University  
 
ABUSIVE STATE POWER
Challenging Unjust 
Government Policies19
ADVOCATING FOR PALESTINIANS’ RIGHTS 
We fight for the rights of Palestinians inside and outside 
the courtroom.  In court, we are defending the right 
of Olympia Coop board members to boycott Israeli 
goods and the right of Fordham students to create a 
Students for Justice in Palestine chapter on campus.  
Meanwhile, in the United Nations we have been 
pushing for the development of a database that would 
publicly list the companies working in settlements in 
the occupied Palestinian territory.  Despite the Trump 
administration’s efforts to limit such public information, 
this database would create transparency and an 
important pressure point on private actors to respect 
international law.
We convene our partners to raise awareness and 
coordinate strategy.  In December 2017, we co-
sponsored a discussion during the International 
Criminal Court’s (ICC) Assembly of States Parties 
session at the United Nations. The panel, “The Situation 
of Palestine: A T est for the ICC, ” elaborated upon the 
challenges faced by those supporting the opening of 
an investigation by the ICC into crimes committed by 
Israeli actors on the territory of Palestine. The Center 
for Constitutional Rights set out the case for war 
crimes rising out of Israel’s 2014 military attack on 
Gaza and the inhumane 11-year closure of Gaza, and 
stressed the urgent need to open an investigation into 
these actions.
In addition, the Center for Constitutional Rights is supporting the building of cross-
movement solidarity between Palestinian rights advocates and other communities we 
work with, including activists in the First Nations, racial justice, feminist, Puerto Rican and 
immigrant rights communities. We seek to build shared analysis while offering support 
to these communities’ cross-movement actions. We work with partners in making calls 
for accountability for violations of international law, such as demanding that U.S. officials 
investigate Israel’s use of lethal force against Palestinian protesters during the Great 
March of Return, and condemning the Trump Administration’s recognition of Jerusalem 
as the capital of Israel and moving the U.S. Embassy there.ABUSIVE STATE POWER
Challenging Unjust 
Government Policies
1920The Center for Constitutional Rights  is on the frontlines of efforts advocating for the rights of prisoners in the U.S. 
and abroad. In addition to our path-breaking litigation from Pelican Bay to Guantánamo, we have issued reports that 
shed light on abusive practices and regularly engage with coalitions seeking to end inhumane prison conditions.
Addressing the impact of long-term solitary confinement, the Center for Constitutional Rights  and the Stanford 
University Human Rights in Trauma Mental Health Lab published a report, “Mental Health Consequences 
Following Release from Long-T erm Solitary Confinement in California. ” The November 2017 report detailed the 
myriad and significant ways former inmates have been harmed by long-term isolation. This report supports our 
clients' experiences in equating such desolation with torture. We have shared this report with various groups and 
government officials, including state corrections departments, in order to document the shattering physiological and 
psychological effects of solitary confinement.
Addressing accountability for torture, we worked with dozens of national and grassroots organizations to protest the 
appointment of Gina Haspel to head the CIA. She had a direct role in the Bush-era torture program, sanctioning the 
torture of detainees at secret black sites and destroying tapes that documented their abuse. During her confirmation 
hearings in May, we co-sponsored a protest in Washington, D.C. that showcased her role in the torture of Muslim 
men abroad and spoke at a press conference with members of Congress. 
SEEKING JUSTICE FOR PALESTINIANS
Palestine Delegation:   The Center for Constitutional 
Rights and Interfaith Peace-Builders/Eyewitness 
Palestine conducted a very successful delegation 
from April 28-May 6, despite the denial of entry 
into Israel and detention of executive director Vince 
Warren and board president, Katherine Franke. The 
delegation was co-led by Jamil Dakwar (ACLU) and 
the Center for Constitutional Rights' attorney Diala 
Shamas — and proceeded with 12 other participants, 
predominantly Black and Brown social justice leaders.  
Dubbed the #JusticeDelegation, the group included 
T ara Houska, tribal rights attorney and National 
Campaigns Director of Honor the Earth; Ash-Lee 
Woodard Henderson, Co-Executive Director of 
the Highlander Center; Chase Iron Eyes, civil rights 
lawyer and member of the Standing Rock Sioux 
tribe; T amika Mallory, National Co-Chair for the 
Women’s March; Justin Hansford, Director of the 
Thurgood Marshall Center at Howard University; 
and Natasha Bannan, President of the National 
Lawyers Guild and the Center for Constitutional 
Rights board member.  This was the Center for 
Constitutional Rights' second delegation to 
Palestine and Israel.   
ABUSIVE STATE POWER
Challenging Unjust 
Government Policies
Members of the #JusticeDelegation and Center for 
Constitutional Rights staff at Palestine is Everywhere at 
DCTV in New York: a night of cultural resistance and a 
celebration of committing to work in the U.S. to support the 
realization of the rights of Palestinians, June 2018. (T op 
row, left to right: Center for Constitutional Rights Board 
Members Natasha Lycia Ora Bannan and Justin Hansford, 
Ash Lee Henderson, Center for Constitutional Rights 
Executive Director Vince Warren, Center for Constitutional 
Rights Advocacy Program Manager Dominic Renfrey. 
Bottom row; Jamil Dakwar, Chase Iron Eyes, Center for 
Constitutional Rights Staff Attorney Diala Shamas. T aken by 
Jordan E. Photography.21Challenging Trump’s Guantánamo 
For more than 17 years, the Center for Constitutional Rights has been at 
the forefront of the legal battle against indefinite detention and torture at 
Guantánamo, directly representing dozens of detainees in habeas cases, 
Periodic Review Boards, damages lawsuits, before military commissions, 
and engaging in advocacy to shut the prison camp. The Center for 
Constitutional Rights  lawyers regularly travel to the base to meet with 
our clients. T oday, 40 men are still being held at Guantánamo. Of these, 
approximately 70 percent have never been charged with a crime. Trump 
has made clear his intention to keep Guantánamo open and his desire to 
expand it by transferring new prisoners there. This is no surprise given his 
deep-seated racism and well documented antipathy toward Muslims – all 
the prisoners at Guantánamo are foreign-born Muslim men. 
On January 11, 2018, the 16th anniversary of the opening of Guantánamo, 
the Center for Constitutional Rights , Reprieve, and co-counsel filed the 
first major challenge to Trump’s continued detention of men at the prison. 
Our motion, on behalf of 11 individuals, argues that Trump’s proclamation 
that he will not release any detainees during his administration, regardless 
of their circumstances, is arbitrary and unlawful, and amounts to 
“perpetual detention for detention’s sake. ” For detainees like the Center for 
Constitutional Rights  client Sharqawi Al Hajj, a torture survivor who is in 
poor health, continued detention may mean a death sentence. 
The motion argues that prolonged, indefinite detention is unconst itutional 
because any legitimate rationale for initially detaining these men has long 
since expired; that it violates due process; and that detention policies are 
no longer grounded in some tailored national security rationale connected 
to a particular detainee’s facts but instead are rooted in Trump’s raw 
antipathy towards Muslims. Our primary goals remain the same – we 
demand the release of all remaining prisoners the government does not 
intend to charge, the transfer of military commission cases to federal 
courts, and the complete closure of the Guantánamo prison.DAVIS V.  COX: 
“A victory for everyone 
who supports the right 
to boycott. ”   In March, a 
Washington State court 
ended a seven-year 
litigation battle against 
former volunteer board 
members of the Olympia 
Food Co-op over their 
decision to boycott Israeli 
goods.  The court granted 
the motion for summary 
judgment from the former 
board members, who were 
represented by the Center 
for Constitutional Rights 
and co-counsel Davis 
Wright Tremaine. Plaintiffs 
have appealed.    
AWAD V.  FORDHAM:  
In January, in a Manhattan 
courtroom filled to 
capacity, the Center for 
Constitutional Rights, 
Palestine Legal, and 
cooperating counsel 
Alan Levine argued a 
preliminary injunction 
motion and Fordham’s 
motion to dismiss on behalf 
of four students Fordham 
University prevented from 
forming a Students for 
Justice in Palestine club, 
because the university 
thought it would be 
"polarizing. " No decision has 
yet been made in this case.   
ABUSIVE STATE POWER
Challenging Unjust 
Government Policies
L -R: Center for Constitutional Rights clients, former Olympia Food Co-op board members, 
Brooke Howlett and Bruce Johnson (co-counsel at Davis Wright Tremaine), and Deputy 
Legal Director Maria LaHood outside Thurston County Superior Court in Olympia, WA, 
after winning our summary judgment motion in Davis v. Cox, March 2018 .22We continue to raise awareness around the indefinite 
detention of prisoners at Guantánamo through a variety of 
means, including public education events.
In October 2017, we collaborated with Debi Cornwall, the 
prominent conceptual documentary artist, on the launch of her 
book, Welcome to Camp America,  which provides a glimpse into 
everyday life at Guantánamo Bay and the growing diaspora of 
former prisoners. We held two public events that examined 
the prison through the lens of art, activism, and the law. 
Two of our clients and former Guantánamo prisoners, 
Djamel Ameziane and Ghaleb Al-Bihani, exhibited their art, 
alongside works of other released and still-detained men, 
at a powerful exhibit, “Ode to the Sea, ” shown at John Jay 
College. The exhibit garnered significant attention, from 
CBS Sunday Morning to arts-based publications like Artsy. 
Because of positive coverage of the exhibit and its artists, 
the Trump administr ation banned any more artwork from 
leaving the prison. T he Center for Constitutional Rights  
partnered with other detainee attorneys on a letter to the 
Department of Defense urging prison authorities to reverse 
the policy, conducted media work to bring attention to the 
current conditions at the base, and hosted a closing panel and 
reception for the exhibit in January.
“For many years we were pictured as monsters…the worst 
of the worst, and I am sure many Americans believed that. 
Displaying the artwork is a way to show that we are people 
who have feelings, who are creative, that we are human 
beings. ”—Djamel Ameziane, former Guantánamo prisone r 
represented by the Center for Constitutional Rights .
Artistic expression offers a humane view into the interior lives 
of our clients, as well as an engaging way to communicate our 
clients’ experiences to the public. We will continue to use this 
expressive vehicle to highlight the humanity of our clients and 
the injustices that state power can unleash.  ART AND ACTIVISM ON GUANTÁNAMO
ABUSIVE STATE POWER
Challenging Unjust 
Government Policies
Artwork by CCR clients and former prisoners 
Djamel Ameziane and Ghaleb Al-Bihani23"Thirteen years ago, your country brought me here 
because of accusations about who I was and what 
I did. Confessions were beaten out of me in those 
secret prisons. ... …Your president says there will be 
no more transfers from here. Am I going to die here?”
SHARQAWI AL HAJJ
Newsweek
Will I die at Guantánamo  Bay? 
After 15 years without charges, I deserve justice.
January 11, 2018
ABUSIVE STATE POWER
Challenging Unjust 
Government Policies
L -R: Center for Constitutional Rights staff: Pardiss Kebriaei, Omar Farah, Baher Azmy, Aliya Hussain, and co-counsel 
Martha Rayner rally outside the White House to accompany the Guantánamo  mass habeas filing on the 16th anniversary 
of the opening of Guantánamo, January 2018. T aken by Justin Norman.24
“The indefinite detention of Muslim men 
and boys without charge or fair trial may 
have been normalized. But it is not normal, 
and it is not just, and it must end.”
Yemeni American Justice Initiative (YAJI)
Although Yemeni Americans represent a significant immigrant population in the United States, they have historically 
been underserved. The Center for Constitutional Rights ’s Yemeni American Justice Initiative aims to fill this gap by 
assessing the Yemeni community’s legal and advocacy needs, identifying opportunities for intervention, engaging 
in advocacy and litigation to support communities, and strengthening the connections between the community and 
organizations positioned to assist and empower it. Currently, thousands of Yemenis – mostly children and spouses 
seeking to be reunited with loved 
ones who are U.S. citizens and green 
card holders  – are stranded abroad, 
banned from entering this country, 
and deprived of meaningful legal 
recourse. Many are escaping war and a 
humanitarian crisis in Yemen. In many 
ways, this manifestation of Trump’s 
Muslim Ban follows from already-
entrenched immigration and law-
enforcement policies targeting Yemeni 
communities. 
ABUSIVE STATE POWER
Challenging Unjust 
Government Policies
Aliya Hana Hussain
Advocacy Program Manager
T een Vogue,  9/11’s Anniversary Means 
17 Years Since the Guantánamo Prison 
Opened, September, 2018
2018 Ella Baker Interns at Yemeni American community press conference and Window 
Dressing the Muslim Ban Report launch, Foley Square, New York, 2018. 25WHAT IS THE MUSLIM BAN’S 
“WAIVER PROCESS”?
In January, the Center for 
Constitutional Rights  and Muslim 
Advocates filed a FOIA request 
demanding documents from 
federal agencies related to the 
purported waiver scheme that 
has become the only avenue 
for relief for dozens of Iranian, 
Syrian, and Yemeni families 
seeking entry to the U.S. Despite 
the administration’s claim that 
the waiver process would be 
“robust, ” we have documented 
reports of mass denials to people 
who should, according to the 
administration’s guidelines, be 
eligible for a waiver, casting doubt 
on whether a meaningful process 
exists at all, or whether it is, in 
fact, left up to consular discretion 
as alleged. 
"Thousands or millions of people's 
lives now depend on this waiver 
process. It's become their only 
hope...It's quite possible there isn't 
a waiver process along the lines of 
what's been described to us."  
Diala Shamas
Center for Constitutional 
Rights  Staff Attorney 
New York Times , Trump’s Travel 
Ban; How it Works and Who is 
Affected,  July 2018Window Dressing the Muslim Ban , a report by the 
Center for Constitutional Rights and the Rule of Law 
Clinic at Yale Law School, documents the impact of 
the Muslim Ban on Yemeni nationals applying for 
immigrant visas to the United States, the mass denial 
of waivers, and the resulting hardships inflicted upon 
Yemenis and Yemeni Americans. 
The report garnered 
significant media 
attention. Released days 
before the Supreme 
Court issued its decision 
in Hawaii v. Trump , which 
upheld Trump’s Muslim 
Ban, Justice Breyer 
quoted the report in his 
dissent, as part of the 
evidence before him that 
called into question the 
government’s purported 
National Security 
justification for the Ban. 
“Another report similarly indicates that the U.S.  
Embassy in Djibouti, which processes visa applications 
for citizens of Yemen, received instructions to grant 
waivers 'only in rare cases of imminent danger, ' with 
one consular officer reportedly telling an applicant 
that “‘[e]ven for infants, we would need to see some 
evidence of a congenital heart defect or another 
medical issue of that degree of difficulty that .  .  .  would 
likely lead to the child’s developmental harm or death. '” 
The report features stories of individuals affected by 
the ban, like Mr. Ali Alsuraymi. Ali’s visa ordeal began 
in 2002 and he was subjected to years of delays, only 
to receive a denial in 2018 pursuant to the Ban. By 
including this broader context to the Ban, the Center 
for Constitutional Rights framed it as only the latest 
iteration of a long history of unjust exclusion of Yemeni 
immigrants.
WINDOW DRESSING THE MUSLIM BAN:
Stories of W aivers and Mass Denials From Yemeni-American Families Stuck in Limbo
RULE OF LAW CLINIC
YALE LAW SCHOOLABUSIVE STATE POWER
Challenging Unjust 
Government Policies26The Center for Constitutional Rights Communications Department has had an 
incredible year, spreading our unapologetically radical perspective—on issues 
from Guantánamo, to immigration, to policing, and more—to thousands of 
readers and viewers on traditional and social media, and expanding our use of 
new media such as videos and podcasts to reach new audiences. 
Our strategies include: 
• Press releases and statements on breaking news that get to reporters’ 
inboxes first 
• Our new podcast, The Activist Files,  which features the stories of people 
on the front lines fighting for justice, including activists, lawyers, and 
artists 
• Staying connected with reporters, producers, and bookers to keep them 
informed of our range of issues
• Op-eds from our clients and legal team offering radical thought 
leadership on the pages of major newspapers from the New York Times  to 
the Washington Post
• Frequent appearances on MSNBC, Al Jazeera, Democracy Now! and 
more, bringing our distinctive analysis to TV audiences
• Facebook live streams to bring our thousands of supporters into the 
conversation during and after hearings, press conferences, and actions  
• Growing engagement on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, and our new 
Instagram account  
• Frontlines of Justice , our weekly email newsletter that brings you the 
Center for Constitutional Rights ’ latest every Monday 
• The Daily Outrage , the Center for Constitutional Rights'  blog
• Emails on breaking news, upcoming events, and more  
Your continued support enables the Center for Constitutional Rights  to keep 
amplifying our uniquely radical perspective through diverse media channels, 
shift public onion on our critical issues, and expand our audiences. THE CENTER FOR 
CONSTITUTIONAL 
RIGHTS 
IN THE NEWS
                
 
Dolly Filartiga 
 
Oct 24, 2017, From  
Should the U.S. Supreme Court be the court of the w orld? In the 18th century, two feuding Frenchmen 
inspired a one-sentence law that helped launch Amer ican human rights litigation into the 20th century.  
The Alien Tort Statute allowed a Paraguayan woman t o find justice for a terrible crime committed in he r 
homeland. But as America reached further and furthe r out into the world, the court was forced to confr ont 
the contradictions in our country’s ideology: sympa thy vs. sovereignty. Earlier this month, the Suprem e 
Court heard arguments in Jesner v. Arab Bank , a case that could reshape the way America respond s to 
human rights abuses abroad. Does the A.T.S. secure human rights or is it a dangerous overreach? 
The key voices: 
• Ken Saro-Wiwa Jr., son of activist Ken 
Saro-Wiwa Sr. 
• Dolly Filártiga, sister of Joelito Filártiga 
• Paloma Calles, daughter of Dolly Filártiga 
• Peter Weiss , lawyer at the Center for 
Constitutional Rights who represented 
Dolly Filártiga in Filártiga v. Peña-Irala  
• Katherine Gallagher , lawyer at the Center 
for Constitutional Rights 
• Paul Hoffman, lawyer who represented 
Kiobel in Kiobel v. Royal Dutch 
Petroleum 
• John Bellinger , former legal adviser for 
the U.S. Department of State and the 
National Security Council 
• William Casto , professor at Texas Tech 
University School of Law  
• Eric Posner , professor at University of 
Chicago Law School 
• Samuel Moyn , professor at Yale 
University 
• René Horst , professor at Appalachian 
State University 
The key cases: 
• 1984: Filártiga v. Peña-Irala 
• 2013: Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum  
• 2017: Jesner v. Arab Bank  
The key links: 
• Center for Constitutional Rights  
 
 



 
 
Fri 16 Feb 2018 
 
  
 
27
NOOR ZAFAR28The Bertha Justice Fellowship Program is a two-year program for emerging 
lawyers (0-2 years out of law school) who are interested in gaining both practical 
experience working on Center for Constitutional Rights cases and a theoretical 
understanding of how legal advocacy can create social change. The Center for 
Constitutional Rights hosts four new Bertha Justice Fellows every two years. 
The Bertha Justice Fellows are assigned to work alongside lawyers in one of our three 
docket areas: (1) Guantánamo Global Justice Initiative; (2) Government Misconduct/
Racial Justice; and (3) International Human Rights.  There are also opportunities to do 
work that straddles different dockets.
Bertha Justice Fellows at the Center for Constitutional Rights  are sponsored by 
the Bertha Foundation, which hosts emerging lawyers at legal organizations across 
the world. In addition to gaining legal experience on the Center for Constitutional 
Rights'  cases, Bertha Justice Fellows at the Center for Constitutional Rights  have 
had opportunities to: (1) attend regional and international meetings, (2) network 
with lawyers from around the world, and (3) receive additional mentoring and non-
traditional training in leadership, media and advocacy, activism, and movement building.
A new group of Bertha Justice Fellows started their time with the Center for 
Constitutional Rights  in September 2018 and will be with us through September 2020. 
Lupe Aguirre  is a proud daughter and sister of immigrants and is dedicated to serving 
the immigrant-led movement for justice, dignity, and opportunity. Prior to the Center 
for Constitutional Rights , she worked with the National Immigration Law Center, 
ACLU of Southern California, Esperanza Immigrant Rights Project, Berkeley Law’s 
International Human Rights Clinic, and the Empire Justice Center.  Astha Sharma 
Pokharel  graduated from NYU School of Law. While there, she was a student 
advocate in the Global Justice Clinic and the Immigrant Rights Clinic, as well as an Ella 
Baker intern at the Center for Constitutional Rights . She comes back to the Center 
for Constitutional Rights  from Namati in Washington, D.C., where she was a Global 
Programs Fellow.  Astha is from Kathmandu and grew up in Rome, Italy.  Aya Saed  
graduated with a law degree from Harvard and a master’s in public affairs from the 
Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University.  
She was born in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia to Sudanese parents, and migrated to the United 
States in 1999 to escape political and economic turmoil at home.  She was among 30 
recipients recently selected to receive the Paul & Daisy Soros Fellowships for New 
Americans.  Brittany Thomas  graduated from the University of Miami Law School.  
Prior to law school, Brittany worked with Missourians for Alternatives to the Death 
Penalty, where she promoted nonviolence and advocated for defendants’ rights.  
Brittany also served as a HOPE Summer Public Interest Fellow with The Legal Aid 
Society of New York in the Criminal Division. 
The Center for Constitutional Rights ’ Bertha Justice Fellows are at the heart of our 
mission to train the next generation of radical movement lawyers.
Lupe Aguirre
Astha Sharma Pokharel
Aya Saed
Brittany ThomasBUILDING THE NEXT GENERATION OF MOVEMENT LAWYERS 
BERTHA JUSTICE FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM29The Center for Constitutional Rights created the Ella Baker Summer Internship Program in 1987 to honor 
the legacy of Ella Baker, a hero of the civil rights movement, and to train the next generation of social justice 
lawyers. Through our program, interns gain practical litigation experience and sharpen their theoretical 
understanding of the relationship between social change, organizing, and lawyering. Ella Baker Interns also 
become connected to a global community of social justice law students and lawyers through our Ella Baker 
Alumni Network. 
Find out more about two of our 2017 Ella Baker Interns below. Their fresh perspectives and commitment to 
dedicating their lives to the fight for social justice give us hope for the future!
Carlos A. Castro
Carlos A. Castro has a background serving indigent clients and working in 
a public defender’s office. He graduated from the Santa Clara University in 
Santa Clara, California with a degree in history, and started providing Spanish 
translation services for Community Legal Services in East Palo Alto, where he 
still volunteers.
After enrolling at the Santa 
Clara University School of 
Law, he worked and interned 
at various law offices and 
organizations, including the 
Homicide Division at the 
Santa Clara County, Office 
of the Public Defender. 
At the division, he helped in trial preparation, administrative 
assistance, investigations, and also provided courtroom assistance.
During his internship at the Center for Constitutional Rights  in the 
summer of 2017, Carlos worked on Awad v. Fordham University,  a 
case against Fordham for not allowing students to form a Students 
for Justice in Palestine organization; Al Otro Lado v. Kelly , our 
class action lawsuit challenging Customs and Border Protection’s 
unlawful practice of denying asylum seekers access to the asylum 
process; and our multi-pronged fight seeking accountability for 
torture in various cases.
Since his fellowship at the Center for Constitutional Rights , Carlos has been an extern at K. & G. Alexander 
Community Law Center’s consumer law clinic, the Office of Staff Attorneys at the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth 
Circuit, and the Central Capital Staff at the Supreme Court of California. BUILDING THE NEXT GENERATION OF MOVEMENT LAWYERS 
ELLA BAKER INTERNSHIP PROGRAM
“The lessons I learned and the 
people that I met during my time 
at the Center for Constitutional 
Rights have been a lasting influence 
in my professional and personal 
decision-making. I’m very grateful 
for having the opportunity to work 
with the amazing staff and fellow 
Ella Baker interns at the Center for 
Constitutional Rights. ”
30Jilisa Milton
Jilisa Milton is a community-organizer-turned-law-student with a 
background in advocating for immigrants and an interest in policing matters. 
After graduating from the University of Alabama with a degree in social 
work, she served for two years in AmeriCorps. While there, she assisted 
in organizing service learning trips for groups to learn about the many 
challenges that undocumented immigrants face.
As a student at the University of Alabama School of Law, Jilisa interned 
at the Adelante Alabama Workers Center in Hoover, where she helped 
detained immigrants get released and fought for the closure of a poorly-
run local detention center. As a law student, she took courses that melded 
her interest in social justice and using the law to activate reforms. She also 
became a core member of the Black Lives Matter–Birmingham Chapter.
During her internship at the Center for Constitutional Rights , Jilisa worked 
on Floyd v. City of New York , our case concerning stops and frisks in New York 
City, and Color of Change v. DHS and FBI  which aimed to release information 
about any surveillance conducted against Movement for Black Lives 
activists.  She also researched sex offender registries.
Since her internship, Jilisa has interned with the Equal Justice Initiative in 
Montgomery and received a Haywood Burns Fellowship from the National 
Lawyers Guild. 
"My experience at the Center for Constitutional Rights was very impactful.  It was inspiring to work 
with experienced attorneys who have done groundbreaking work, but who also have a philosophy 
grounded in community-centered litigation. I learned a lot from their skill and their fearless 
ambition, and the way that they responded immediately and intentionally when they felt compelled 
to act. My time there made me feel like I was a part of a family of like-minded people who cared 
about my success and my growth as a creative lawyer.
31CASE/PROJECT 
NAME  CASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
INSTITUTIONAL RACISM
Floyd v. City of New 
YorkFederal class action lawsuit against the City 
of New York that successfully challenged 
the NYPD’s practice of racial profiling and 
unconstitutional stop and frisks, and that is 
now implementing broad reforms to NYPD 
policing practices.Jonathan Moore and Luna 
Droubi of Beldock Levine 
& Hoffman LLP; Jenn 
Rolnick Borchetta of Bronx 
Defenders; Communities 
United for Police Reform 
(CPR)
Furlow v. Belmar Federal class action lawsuit challenging the 
so-called Wanteds system as used in St. Louis 
County, Missouri, because it routinely leads 
to unconstitutional arrests of predominantly 
Black residents.Arch City Defenders (St. 
Louis); Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, 
Wharton & Garrison LLP
Color of Change v. FBI, 
DOJ & DHSFOIA litigation against federal law 
enforcement agencies, seeking information 
on their surveillance of Movement for Black 
Lives' activists.Color of Change; Avidan 
Cover of the Civil Rights and 
Human Rights Clinic at Case 
Western University School of 
LawCASE I INDEX
Dennis Banks, CCR client in U.S. vs. Banks in 1974. T aken by Maddy Miller.32CASE/PROJECT 
NAME  CASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
Phillips v. Snyder 
(formerly Bellant v. 
Snyder)Federal lawsuit challenging constitutionality 
of state-appointed “Emergency Managers” 
that took away local democratic processes in 
predominantly Black and Brown communities 
of Michigan.John Philo, Anthony Paris, 
and Stephanie Vaught of 
Sugar Law Center; Bill 
Goodman and Julie Hurwitz 
of Goodman & Hurwitz, 
P .C.; Herbert Sanders of The 
Sanders Law Firm; Keith 
Flynn of Miller Cohen PLC; 
Cynthia Heenan and Alec 
Gibbs of Constitutional 
Litigation Associates; Mark P . 
Fancher, Michael J. Steinberg 
and Kary L. Moss of the ACLU 
Fund of Michigan; Samuel 
Bagenstos of University of 
Michigan Law School
Gulino v. Board of 
Education of the City of 
New York and the New 
York State Education 
DepartmentFederal class action lawsuit that successfully 
challenged the racially discriminatory impact 
of several standardized tests New York City 
used in a re-certification process for city 
public school teachers, and developing large 
back-pay award for class members.DLA Piper; Josh Sohn of 
Watson Farley & Williams 
LLP;  Samuel R. Miller
CCR Staff celebrate their victory in reuniting a father and his young son separated under Trump's asylum ban, October 2018.33CASE/PROJECT 
NAME  CASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
United States of 
America and Vulcan 
Society, Inc. v. City of 
New YorkFederal class action lawsuit on behalf of the 
Vulcan Society of Black firefighters, individual 
firefighters, and firefighter applicants who 
successfully challenged the New York City 
Fire Department’s racially discriminatory 
hiring  and promotions practices.Richard Levy, Dana Lossia, 
Robert Stroup, and Rebekah 
Cook-Mack of Levy Ratner, 
P .C.; Judy Scolnick of Scott + 
Scott LLP; The Vulcan Society
Black Love Resists in 
the Rust v. BuffaloFederal class action lawsuit challenging 
racially-discriminatory and economically- 
exploitative traffic checkpoints in 
predominantly Black and Brown 
neighborhoods in Buffalo.National Center for Law and 
Economic Justice, Western 
New York Law Center, Black 
Love Resists; Covington & 
Burling LLP
Puerto Rico Freedom of 
Information Act (FOIA) 
RequestsSeries of FOIA requests for information about 
the controversial and anti-democratic fiscal 
control board established in 2016 to address 
Puerto Rico’s debt crisis  pursuant the Puerto 
Rico Oversight, Management, and Economic 
Stability Act (PROMESA).Natasha Lycia Ora Bannan 
of LatinoJustice PRLDEF; 
Carla Minet of Centro de 
Periodismo Investigativo 
(Center for Investigative 
Journalism)
PATRIARCHY
Sexual Minorities 
Uganda v. Scott LivelyFederal lawsuit against a U.S.-based anti-gay 
extremist for his active role in the conspiracy 
to strip away fundamental rights from 
LGBTQI people in Uganda, which constitutes 
the crime against humanity of persecution 
under international law.Jeena Shah; Judith Chomsky; 
Dorsey & Whitney LLP; Luke 
Ryan of the Law Offices of 
Sasson Turnbull Ryan and 
Hoose; Christopher Betke of 
Coughlin-Betke, LLP
State of Missouri v. 
Michael L. Johnson 
(Amicus)Amicus brief on behalf of Michael Johnson, a 
former Missouri college student sentenced 
to more than 30 years in prison for violating 
Missouri’s draconian HIV transmission and 
exposure statute. Center for HIV Law & Policy; 
ACLU of Missouri Foundation
Doe v. Hood Federal lawsuit challenging Mississippi’s 
ongoing enforcement of its sodomy statute 
through required sex offender registration, 
over a decade after such statutes were struck 
down by the Supreme Court.Jacob W. Howard; Robert B. 
McDuff; Matthew Strugar34CASE/PROJECT 
NAME  CASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
Survivors Network of 
those Abused by Priests 
(SNAP) v. the PopeLegal submissions before international 
human rights bodies and advocacy on behalf 
of the Survivors Network of those Abused 
by Priests (SNAP) charging Vatican officials 
with enabling and concealing widespread and 
systematic sexual violence against children 
and vulnerable adults by Catholic clergy.Survivors Network of those 
Abused by Priests (SNAP); 
Bishop Accountability; Ending 
Clergy Abuse (ECA)
OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC STRUCTURES
Energy Transfer Equity, 
v. Greenpeace, Earth 
First! Defending Earth First! Journal in SLAPP 
(Strategic lawsuit against public participation) 
brought by pipeline company designed to 
harass environmental activists.Greenpeace, Earth Rights 
International
Center for 
Constitutional Rights 
v. St. Charles Parish 
Sheriff’s OfficeA case brought under the Louisiana public 
records law seeking the release of records 
relating to the travel to Standing Rock of 
the sheriff, who served as president of 
the National Sheriffs Association, and his 
employees, as well as communications with 
the pipeline company and private security 
firms.Bill Quigley
Atchafalaya 
Basinkeeper, Louisiana 
Bucket Brigade, and 
350 New Orleans v. 
Bayou Bridge Pipeline, 
LLCA case brought to enforce the Louisiana public 
records against a pipeline company, which 
has been delegated the power of eminent 
domain, seeking records concerning their land 
expropriations across the 162 mile route of 
the pipeline.Bill Quigley
Yemeni-American community press 
conference and Window Dressing 
the Muslim Ban report launch, 
Foley Square, New York, June, 
2018. T aken by A A photography 
(Anwar Alomaisi).35CASE/PROJECT 
NAME  CASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
Louisiana Bucket 
Brigade v. Office of the 
GovernorCase brought under the Louisiana public 
records law against Louisiana Governor John 
Bel Edwards seeking records of meetings 
and communications with representatives 
of pipeline companies involved in the Bayou 
Bridge Pipeline project.   Bill Quigley
Louisiana Bucket 
Brigade v. Mayor of St. 
GabrielCase brought under the Louisiana public 
records law against the mayor of the town of 
St. Gabriel for records relating to the zoning 
board.Bill Quigley
Bayou Bridge Pipeline, 
LLC, v. 38.00 Acres, 
More or Less, Located 
in St. Martin ParishRepresenting landowners in Louisiana who 
are challenging the exercise of eminent 
domain by private oil pipeline company.Bill Quigley, Misha Mitchell of 
Atchafalaya Basinkeeper
Al Shimari v. CACI Federal lawsuit on behalf of four Iraqi torture 
victims against U.S.-based government 
contractor CACI Premier T echnology, Inc. 
challenging corporate impunity under the 
Alien T ort Statute for war crimes and torture 
at Abu Ghraib prison.Shereef Akeel; Mohammed 
Alomari of Patterson Belknap 
Webb & Tyler LLP , Jeena 
Shah, John Zwerling
Senior Staff Attorney Pardiss Kebriaei speaks at the Center for Constitutional Rights press conference and coalition rally in D.C. for the 
16th Anniversary of Gitmo, January 11, 2018.36CASE/PROJECT 
NAME  CASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
ABUSIVE STATE POWER
Immigrant Defense 
Project (IDP) v. 
Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement 
(ICE)FOIA litigation against Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS) and Immigration 
and Customs Enforcement (ICE) seeking 
information related to ICE’s home raids 
policies and arrest data.Immigrant Defense Project; 
Hispanic Interest Coalition of 
Alabama
Jailhouse Lawyers 
HandbookThe Jailhouse Lawyers Handbook (JLH) is 
a resource for prisoners who wish to file a 
federal lawsuit addressing poor conditions in 
prison or abuse by prison staff. We distribute 
approximately 10,000 copies of it per year in 
response to direct requests for the handbook 
or requests for help with the issues it covers.National Lawyers Guild
Ziglar v. Abassi 
(formerly Turkman v. 
Ashcroft)Class action lawsuit challenging abuse of 
Muslim, Arab, and South Asian men following 
9/11 immigration sweeps.Michael Winger; Alexander 
Reinert; Covington & Burling 
LLP
Al Otro Lado v. Nielsen Class action lawsuit against officials at DHS 
and Customs and Border Protection (CBP) 
challenging CBP’s unlawful practice of 
depriving asylum seekers along the Mexican 
border access to the U.S. asylum process.Al Otro Lado; American 
Immigration Council; Latham 
& Watkins LLP
Hassan v. City of New 
YorkSuccessful challenge to NYPD’s suspicionless 
surveillance of American Muslims in New 
Jersey on the basis of their Muslim identity.Muslim Advocates; Lawrence 
Lustberg of Gibbons, P .C.; 
Ravinder S. Bhalla of Florio, 
Perrucci, Steinhardt & Fader, 
LLC
T anvir v. T anzin 
(formerly T anvir v. 
Holder)Challenge to the FBI’s abuse of the No-Fly 
List to coerce law-abiding American Muslims 
into spying on their religious communities.Ramzi Kassem of Creating 
Law Enforcement 
Accountability and 
Responsibility at CUNY 
School of Law (CLEAR) ; 
Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
Muslim Ban Waiver 
FOIAFOIA request to obtain documents that would 
provide much-needed clarity on the process 
to obtain a waiver to the Muslim Ban.Muslim Advocates37CASE/PROJECT 
NAME  CASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
Detention Watch 
Network (DWN) v. 
Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement 
(ICE) and Department 
of Homeland Security 
(DHS)FOIA litigation that obtained documents 
regarding private prison industry’s role 
in controversial immigrant detention 
quotas; established right to information in 
government contracts with private entities.Detention Watch Network; 
Jennifer B. London of Seton 
Hall University School of Law 
Clinic 
Animal Legal Defense 
Fund v. Herbert 
(Amicus)Amicus  brief supporting plaintiffs’ successful 
motion for summary judgment invalidating 
Utah’s “ag-gag” law, which targeted animal 
rights activists in violation of the First 
Amendment.R. Shane Johnson
Animal Legal Defense 
Fund v. Wasden 
(Amicus)Amicus  brief to Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals 
supporting affirmation of lower court ruling 
that Idaho’s “ag-gag” law violates the First 
Amendment, on behalf of two journalism 
professors.
Davis v. Cox Defense of former Olympia Food Co-op board 
members who were sued over the decision to 
boycott Israeli goods.Davis Wright Tremaine LLP; 
Barbara Harvey; Steven 
Goldberg
Palestine Movement 
SupportAdvocacy and legislative work challenging 
suppression of Palestinian rights advocacy.Palestine Legal; National 
Lawyers Guild; Jewish Voice 
for Peace; Institute for Middle 
East Understanding
Awad v. Fordham 
UniversityLawsuit challenging Fordham University’s 
decision to deny students’ application to start 
a Students for Justice in Palestine (SJP) club 
on campus.  Palestine Legal; Alan Levine
CCR v. Department 
of Defense / Gaza 
Freedom Flotilla FOIAFOIA lawsuit that obtained documents 
regarding U.S. knowledge of and role in a 
deadly Israeli attack on a humanitarian flotilla 
to Gaza.
Bronner v. Duggan Representation of Professor Steven Salaita 
in a lawsuit brought against him and the 
American Studies Association (ASA) for the 
ASA’s resolution to call for a boycott of Israeli 
academic institutions.Whiteford, T aylor & Preston; 
Mark Kleiman38CASE/PROJECT 
NAME  CASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
Barhoumi v. Trump Successful Periodic Review Board (PRB) 
representation of an Algerian citizen held at 
Guantánamo since 2002.Maj. Justin Swick (USAF) 
of Military Commissions 
Defense Organization; 
Richard Reiter; Jared Kneitel
Ameziane v. United 
States / Ameziane FOIAHuman rights petition and request for 
precautionary measures before the Inter-
American Commission on Human Rights 
(IACHR) urging the IACHR to declare that 
the U.S. government violated Ameziane’s 
human rights and to prescribe relief, including 
a public apology.  FOIA action seeking 
information about alleged government policy 
of keeping seized detainee property.Andrew J. Brouwer of 
Refugee Law Office; Sophie 
Weller;  Jennifer Oscroft 
of Cornerstone Barristers; 
Francisco Quintana and Elsa 
Meany of Center for Justice 
and International Law (CEJIL)
Al Qahtani v. Trump Habeas corpus petition on behalf of the only 
Guantánamo detainee  the government has 
openly admitted to torturing.Ramzi Kassem of CUNY 
School of Law; Sandra 
Babcock of Cornell Law 
School; Lawrence Lustberg of 
Gibbons P .C.
Khan v. Trump / Khan 
v. Gates / United States 
v. KhanRepresentation of Guantánamo prisoner 
Majid Khan, who was charged in military 
commissions and a victim of the CIA torture 
program.Katya Jestin and Natalie 
Orpett of Jenner & Block 
LLP; LTC Jon Jackson; LCDR 
Jared Hernandez; Military 
Commissions Defense 
Organization; Anna Gallagher 
of Maggio + Kattar, P .C.; 
Sameer Khosa of Axis Law 
Chambers (Pakistan)39CASE/PROJECT 
NAME  CASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
Duran v. Trump Habeas corpus case on behalf of a native 
of Somalia who was captured in Djibouti, 
rendered to the CIA in March 2004, and sent 
to Guantánamo in September 2006, where he 
has since been held indefinitely and without 
charge.
Guantánamo partners John Chandler; Eugene Fidell; 
Eric Freedman; Stephen 
Vladeck; Ramzi Kassem; 
Office of the Federal Public 
Defender, District of Oregon; 
Military Commissions 
Defense Organization; 
David Remes; Jenner & 
Block LLP; Covington & 
Burling LLP; Debevoise & 
Plimpton LLP; Robert Kirsch; 
Sabin Willett; Dr. Katherine 
Porterfield; Martha Rayner; 
Witness Against T orture; 
Amnesty International 
USA; Constitution Project; 
American Civil Liberties 
Union; Reprieve; National 
Coalition to Protect Civil 
Freedoms; Center for Victims 
of T orture; Gibbons P .C.
Advocacy Program 
Manager Aliya 
Hana Hussain at 
Guantanamo 16th 
Anniversary rally 
in D.C., January 
11, 2018. T aken 
by Witness Against 
T orture.40CASE/PROJECT 
NAME  CASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
Al Hajj v. Trump (Mass 
Habeas)Motion on behalf of 11 Guantánamo 
detainees challenging the legality of Trump’s 
Guantánamo  policy to foreclose possibility of 
any prisoner releases, regardless of individual 
circumstances.George M. Clarke III, Esq.; 
Clive Stafford-Smith, Shelby 
Sullivan Bennis, REPRIEVE; 
Thomas A. Durkin; Martha 
Rayner of Fordham University 
School of Law; Mari Newman 
and Dari W. Killmer of 
Killmer, Lane & Newman, LLP; 
Stephen M. Truitt; Charles 
H. Carpenter of Carpenter 
Law Firm PLC; Agnieszka M. 
Fryszman of Cohen, Milstein, 
Sellers & T oll PLLC; Law 
office of H. Candace Gorman; 
Darin Thompson; Office of 
the Federal Public Defender, 
Cleveland, Ohio; Professor 
Joseph Margulies of Cornell 
University School of Law; 
George Brent Mickum IV 
Esq., Erin Herro Esq.; Mark 
Denbeaux, Charles Church, 
Robin Waters of Denbeaux 
& Denbeaux; Amanda L. 
Jacobsen of University of 
Copenhagen, Faculty of Law 
Members of 
the Louisiana 
Bucket Brigade 
protesting. T aken 
by Louisiana 
Bucket Brigade.41CASE/PROJECT 
NAME  CASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
Ashker v. Governor of 
CaliforniaClass action lawsuit that challenged 
prolonged solitary confinement as cruel and 
unusual punishment.  Jules Lobel; Weil, Gotshal 
& Manges LLP; Law Offices 
of Charles Carbone; Legal 
Services For Prisoners With 
Children; California Prison 
Focus; Siegel & Yee; Ellenberg 
& Hull; Bremer Law Group 
PLLC; Samuel R. Miller; Eva 
DeLair
Aref v. Barr (formerly 
Aref v. Sessions)Federal lawsuit challenging Communications 
Management Units (CMUs), two highly 
restrictive federal prison units that segregate 
certain prisoners and severely limit and 
control their communications.Weil, Gotshal & Manges LLP; 
Kenneth A. Kreuscher
Accountability for U.S. 
T orture: FranceSupporting action seeking accountability for 
U.S. torture, brought in France under the 
principle of universal jurisdiction.European Center for 
Constitutional and Human 
Rights (ECCHR)
Accountability for U.S. 
T orture: GermanySupporting action seeking accountability for 
U.S. torture, brought in Germany under the 
principle of universal jurisdiction.European Center for 
Constitutional and Human 
Rights (ECCHR)
Accountability for U.S. 
T orture: SpainActions seeking accountability for U.S. 
torture, brought in Spain under the principle 
of universal jurisdiction.European Center for 
Constitutional and Human 
Rights (ECCHR); Gonzalo 
Boye of Boye-Elbal y 
Asociados
International 
Criminal Court: 
Palestine Preliminary 
ExaminationSubmission on the closure of Gaza as a crime 
against humanity – persecution. Palestinian Center for Human 
Rights; Al-Haq; Al Mezan
CCR Client Salah Hassan on his 
torture by U.S. forces inside Abu 
Ghraib, May 2014.42CASE/PROJECT 
NAME  CASE DESCRIPTION PARTNERS
Mamani v. Sánchez de 
Lozada / Mamani v. 
Sánchez BerzaínFederal lawsuit against former president 
and former defense minister of Bolivia for 
extrajudicial killings of indigineous Bolivians.Judith Chomsky; Beth 
Stephens; Akin Gump Strauss 
Hauer & Feld LLP; Susan 
Farbstein, Thomas Becker, 
and Tyler Giannini of the 
International Human Rights 
Clinic at Harvard Law School; 
Claret Vargas of the Center 
for Law, Justice and Society 
(Dejusticia); Paul Hoffman of 
Schonbrun, Seplow, Harris 
and Hoffman LLP; Ira Kurzban 
and Celso Perez of Kurzban, 
Kurzban, Weinger & T etzoli  
 
Honduras: True 
Commission and CCR 
Freedom of Information Act 
(FOIA) RequestsFOIA requests to various U.S. government 
agencies regarding the 2009 military coup in 
Honduras.
Jesner v. Arab Bank 
(Amicus)Amicus  brief to the U.S. Supreme Court arguing 
that the Alien T ort Statute applies to corporations 
to broadly remedy all violations of international 
law and is not just limited to cases involving 
terrorism.
,
Plaintiffs, co-counsel Muslim Advocates, and CCR attorneys at a victory celebration after reaching a settlement in Hassan v. City of New York,  
April 2018. T aken by Kolin Mendez Photography.
43CCR CELEBRATES CHANGEMAKERS RECEPTION
On November 8, 2017, we held our inaugural CCR 
Celebrates Changemakers reception in Manhattan because 
we believe, “If you have an activist, a lawyer, and a storyteller, you 
can change the world."   
The 2017 Changemakers Awards went to Opal T ometi, 
a Nigerian-American strategist, writer, and community 
organizer, who co-founded #BlackLivesMatter (BLM); 
Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler, a law firm with a strong 
commitment to public service, which has been an invaluable 
partner to the Center for Constitutional Rights  in our path-
breaking lawsuit Al Shimari v. CACI ; and Mariam Ghani, whose 
multi-media work looks at places, spaces, and moments 
where social, political, and cultural structures take on visible 
forms.  
The evening included a cocktail reception with the ABRAZOS 
Orchestra, the Changemakers Awards ceremony, a dynamic 
conversation with the Changemakers, and a musical 
performance by Ani Cordero.  
We are very grateful to our generous event sponsors who 
helped make the evening possible: Patterson Belknap Webb 
& Tyler, Outen & Golden, Paul Weiss, and Lowenstein Sandler.
Center for Constitutional Rights Board Member Gay 
McDougallMonifa Akinwole-Bandele, Adasa Akinwole-Bandele, and Center for 
Constitutional Rights Board Member Lumumba Akinwole-Bandele
Vince Warren, Mariam Ghani, Robert LoBue of 
Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler, and Opal T ometi44A SPLENDID BODY OF 
TIGERISH PEOPLE RECEPTION
On May 9, 2018 in New York City, we held our annual thank you reception for our generous supporters, “A Splendid 
Body of Tigerish People,”  whose name evolved from a description of the Center for Constitutional Rights by Alexander 
Cockburn of The Village Voice .  
We had a festive celebration at Midtown Loft & T errace, and presented two awards: the CCR Founders Award to 
Ellen Yaroshefsky and the CCR Radical Leadership Award to Ravi Ragbir. Ellen is a relentless defender of human 
rights and longtime friend, donor, partner, and leader of the Center for Constitutional Rights. Ravi has led the 
fight for immigrants’ rights and oppressed communities with compassion, courage, and empathy.  Ellen’s and Ravi’s 
leadership serve as an inspiration to the Center for Constitutional Rights and all of those who stand with us in 
the struggle for justice. Their bravery and creativity embody our history and mission, and exemplify how we must 
continue to build its future. 
Center for Constitutional Rights staff, board members, and awardees (Board Chair Katherine Franke, Senior Legal Worker Ian Head, 
Radical Leadership Awardee Ravi Ragbir, Executive Director Vince Warren, Founders Awardee Ellen Yaroshefsky, Board Secretary 
Rosemary Corbett).
Center for Constitutional Rights Radical 
Leadership Awardee  Ravi RagbirCenter for Constitutional Rights Founders 
Awardee Ellen YaroshefskyCenter for Constitutional Rights Board 
Members Amanda Alexander and 
Katherine Acey45FINANCIAL REPORT
EXPENSES NET ASSETS
Program Services = $6,169,899 Net Assets as of June 30, 2017 = $21,459,451
Supporting Services = $1,990,388 Change in Net Assets = $5,461,509
T otal Expenses = $8,160,287 Net Assets as of June 30, 2018 = $26,920,960
** The Center for Constitutional Rights is a nonprofit charity
that relies on individual and foundation support.
Your dedication and generosity is indispensable in the fight for justice. Thank you!75+25+H65+20+10+5+HT otal Expenses
8,160,287T otal Revenue, 
Gains and Other 
Support
13,564,491
n Program Services
Litigation   $4,202,863
Advocacy   $1,967,036
n Suppporting Services
Administration and General $847,813
Fundraising   $1,142,575n Grants and Contributions       $10,637,377
n Court Awards and Attorney Fees              $2,522,273 
n Net Investment Income               $217,841
n Net Realized Gains on Investment Transactions   $130,355
n Other Income                                       $56,645
       Government and Corporate Donations**      046WELCOME TO NEW BOARD MEMBERS
Leonardo M. Aldridge
Leo is a criminal defense 
attorney in private 
practice in San Juan, 
Puerto Rico. He previously 
served as a trial attorney 
at Brooklyn Defender 
Services and a federal 
public defender in Puerto 
Rico.  Before law school 
Leo worked as a journalist 
with The Associated Press 
and several newspapers.  
He was a close friend and 
protogé of former Center 
for Constitutional Rights 
board member and ally 
Charlie Hey-Maestre, 
and sees joining the 
Center for Constitutional 
Rights' board as part 
of continuing Charlie's 
legacy.Amanda Alexander
Amanda is an assistant 
professor in the 
Department of Afro-
American Studies, a 
postdoctoral scholar in 
Law at the University 
of Michigan, and a 
member of the Michigan 
Society of Fellows.  She 
is a nationally recognized 
scholar of race and social 
justice, the founding 
Executive Director 
of the Detroit Justice 
Center, and has worked 
at the intersection 
of racial justice and 
community development 
in Detroit, New York, 
and South Africa for 
more than a decade. 
As a 2013-2015 Soros 
Justice Fellow, Amanda 
launched the Prison & 
Family Justice Project at 
University of Michigan 
Law School to provide 
legal representation to 
incarcerated parents 
and advocate for families 
divided by the prison and 
foster care systems.  She 
is also on the steering 
committee for Law 
for Black Lives.  Her 
relationship to the Center 
for Constitutional Rights 
is deep and long standing, 
having been an Ella Baker 
intern while in law school.Natasha Lycia Ora 
Bannan
Natasha is associate 
counsel at LatinoJustice 
PRLDEF (Puerto Rican 
Legal Defense and 
Education Fund), focusing 
on working with low-
wage Latina immigrant 
workers as part of the 
organization’s economic 
justice platform, legal 
support in the face of the 
economic crisis in Puerto 
Rico, and human rights 
advocacy before regional 
and international bodies. 
Natasha has worked on 
gender and racial justice 
issues, including access 
to reproductive health, 
sexual violence, and 
violence against women 
in conflict zones. Prior 
to joining LatinoJustice 
PRLDEF, she worked 
in the International 
Women's Human Rights 
Clinic at CUNY School 
of Law and at the Center 
for Reproductive Rights. 
Natasha also serves as 
President of the National 
Lawyers Guild, is a 
member of the New York 
City Bar Association’s 
T ask Force on Puerto 
Rico and Inter-American 
Affairs Committee, and 
is a board member of 
MADRE.
Marjorie Fine
Margie has over twenty 
years of experience 
leading grantmaking 
institutions. She currently 
works as a development 
consultant to social 
benefit organizations 
and grantmakers, and 
previously served for 
more than a decade 
(1993-2005) as executive 
director of the Unitarian 
Universalist Veatch 
Program at Shelter Rock, 
a national faith-based 
social justice grantmaker. 
Prior to her tenure at 
the Veatch Program, she 
was executive director 
of the North Star Fund, 
a public foundation 
serving the New York City 
progressive community. 
She serves on the board of 
the National Committee 
for Responsive 
Philanthropy and on the 
board of the North Star 
Fund.47BOARD, STAFF, ELLA BAKERS, 
INTERNS, VOLUNTEERS
BOARD
Katherine Acey
Treasurer
Lumumba Akinwole-Bandele
Laila Al-Arian
Nominations Chair
Leonardo M. Aldridge 
(as of June 2018)
Amanda Alexander 
(as of June 2018)
Natasha Lycia Ora Bannan 
(as of June 2018)
Colette Pichon Battle
Judith Butler 
(through June 2018)
Elizabeth Castelli 
(through June 2018)
Rosemary R. Corbett
Secretary
Lisa Crooms-Robinson
Michelle DePass
Jean Entine
Marjorie Fine 
(as of June 2018)
Katherine Franke
Board Chair
Leila Hessini
Vice Chair
Nsombi Lambright
Monami Maulik
Gay J. McDougallSTAFF 
Management T eam
Vincent Warren
Executive Director
Baher Azmy
Legal Director 
Chandra Hayslett
Communications Director 
Theda Jackson-Mau
Director of Development 
Maria LaHood
Deputy Legal Director
Grace Lile
Director of Operations 
Jeffrey Weinrich
Finance Director
Operations
Gregory Butterfield
Finance Manager
Orlando Gudino
IT Manager
Nabilah Islam
T emporary Administrative Assistant 
(through June 2018)
Sasha Jamieson
Operations Manager 
(through June 2018)
Lisa Levy
Senior Human Resources Manager
Edwin Santana
Administrative Associate, 
Operations (as of June 2018)
Lynette Seymour
Executive AssistantAnderson T averas
IT Associate 
(as of February 2018)
Jahmall Weekes
IT Associate 
(through November 2017)
Alberto White, Office Manager
Communications
Claire Comiskey
T emporary Communications Associate
Lauren Gazzola
Communications Associate for Publications 
Charles Greene
Web Communications and Multimedia Manager 
Jen Nessel
Communications Coordinator
Alessandra Perotti
Digital Engagement Manager
Development
Doug Edelson
Foundation Relations Officer 
Amy Greenstein
Associate Director of Development 
(as of August 2017)
Jasmine Jacobs
Donor Relations Associate 
Rob Santiago
Senior Major Gifts Officer 
Daniel Strum
Database and Online Giving Manager 
Charisse Waugh
Grant Writer48BOARD, STAFF, ELLA BAKERS, 
INTERNS, VOLUNTEERS
Legal and Advocacy Department 
Darius Charney
Senior Staff Attorney
Claire Dailey
Legal Worker
J. Wells Dixon
Senior Staff Attorney
Omar Farah
Senior Staff Attorney
Katherine Gallagher
Senior Staff Attorney
Angelo Guisado
Staff Attorney 
Ian Head
Senior Legal Worker
Aliya Hussain
Advocacy Program Manager
 
Shayana Kadidal
Senior Managing Attorney
Pardiss Kebriaei
Senior Staff Attorney
Stephanie Llanes
Bertha Justice Fellow 
Rachel Meeropol
Senior Staff Attorney and Associate 
Director of Legal Education
Ruhan Nagra
Bertha Justice Fellow 
(through October 2017)
Obi Nwabuzor
Events Associate
Afrika Owes
Administrative Assistant, Legal 
& AdvocacyIbraham Qatabi
Legal Worker
Dominic Renfrey
Advocacy Program Manager
Ghita Schwarz
Senior Staff Attorney
Diala Shamas
Staff Attorney
Pamela Spees
Senior Staff Attorney
Leah T odd
Senior Legal Worker 
Azure Wheeler
T emporary Attorney 
(through April 13, 2018)
Britney Wilson
Bertha Justice Fellow
 
Noor Zafar
Bertha Justice Fellow 
Nahal Zamani
Advocacy Program Manager
2017-2018 Ella Bakers
Carlos Castro
Chelsea Donaldson
Wesley Dozier
T aqwa Elhindi
Sahiba Gill
Princess Masilungan
Jilisa Milton
Ka Ying Karen Ng
Isedua Oribhabor
Rosa Saavedra-Vanacore
Aya Saed
Christian SnowInterns
Suraiya Zubair Banu
Geroline Castillo
Hannah Khalifeh
Nomalanga Shields
Sumesh Shiwakoty
Samah Mcgona Sisay
Volunteers
Sima Aljallad
Lorenzo G. DiSilvio
Merry Neisner
Madeleine Reichman
Ethel Pura Santa Ana Vara
Margaret T obin49WAYS TO SUPPORT THE CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS!
DONATE STOCK.  If you sell depreciated stock and 
give the proceeds to the Center for Constitutional 
Rights  you may be able to claim the loss on your 
taxes, as well as the charitable deduction. If you 
donate appreciated securities to the Center for 
Constitutional Rights , you may avoid capital gains 
taxes and receive a charitable deduction.  For stock 
transfer information, go to www.CCRjustice.org/
gifts-stocksfunds.
HOST A HOUSE PARTY  to introduce friends 
and allies to the Center for Constitutional Rights ’ 
work. Now more than ever, we need your help 
in expanding our reach to those who care about 
freedom and justice.  Help us connect to those in 
your network who share these values.
ATTEND A LOCAL EVENT  if the Center for 
Constitutional Rights  is in your neighborhood—and 
bring a friend! If you are on our email list, you will 
receive invitations. Public events are listed on our 
calendar at www.CCRjustice.org/calendar.
STA Y UP-TO-DATE AND SHARE OUR NEWS!  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for 
Constitutional Rights” on Facebook, Instagram, 
and LinkedIn, and bookmark the Center for 
Constitutional Rights’s website: www.CCRjustice.
org. Share our newsletters, action alerts, and 
appeals with your friends.MAKE AN ONLINE GIFT at www.CCRjustice.org/
Donate. It’s fast, easy and secure, and your gift will 
go to work right away. Online gifts are a quicker and 
greener way to give.
JOIN THE JUSTICE SUSTAINERS . These gifts 
provide the Center for Constitutional Rights with a 
reliable, steady source of income, making it possible 
for us to plan, leverage and allocate resources 
in a way that means more hope for our clients, 
more support for movements, more justice and 
accountability.  Sign up online to give monthly at our 
website: www.CCRjustice.org/Donate. 
INCLUDE THE CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL 
RIGHTS IN YOUR WILL.  Including the Center for 
Constitutional Rights  as a beneficiary in your will 
is an excellent way to make a statement about the 
values you held during your lifetime, while ensuring 
that the Center will be here for the long haul. You 
may choose to make a bequest of a specific dollar 
amount or a percentage of your estate. 
MAKE THE CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL 
RIGHTS YOUR BIRTHDA Y GIFT! Ask friends and 
family to make gifts to the Center for Constitutional 
Rights  in your honor as your holiday/ birthday/
anniversary/no-reason-at-all gift OR make gifts to 
the Center for Constitutional Rights  in honor of 
the folks on your shopping list. These gifts will pay 
tribute to our shared social justice values and build 
our audience, while fueling our  efforts to restore the 
Constitution and protect and extend human rights. 
 For more information on any of 
the above, please contact Theda 
Jackson-Mau, 
the Center for Constitutional 
Rights' Director of Development 
at 212-614-6448 
or tjackson-mau@ccrjustice.org 
We are calling on you.
JOIN FORCES  with activists, lawyers, and storytellers 
to fight oppression and build power. 
You have a role to play. Donate. Act. Share.50ATTRIBUTIONS
Research and writing: Sharon Adarlo, sharonadarlo@gmail.com
Design: Kathryn Bowser, kathrynbowser@gmail.com
Photo credits:
Cover: Spenser - Unsplash.com
P . 4: James Baldwin photo  - NARA   Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 license
P . 4: Photo by Heather Mount on Unsplash
P . 5: Jamelle Bouie and used under Creative Commons Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 2.0 Generic
P . 8: T op photo, Kathryn Bowser, used with permission
P . 9: MarijaRadovic - Thinkstock.com
P . 9: Audre Lorde photo - Elsa Dorfman and used under Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported
P . 13: Alyssa Kibiloski - Unsplash.com
P .  13: Shirley Chisholm photo  - Thomas J. O'Halloran, U.S. News & World Reports, and used under Creative Commons CC0 1.0 
 Universal Public Domain Dedication
P . 15: Patrick Hendry - Unsplash.com
P . 17: Vera Bolkovic and used under Creative Commons Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 2.0 Generic
P . 19: Zefart -Thinkstock.com
P. 23: Mugshot included in Department of Defense Detainee Files
P . 24: John Moore - Getty Images51
SHAPES & MARKS
Our shapes and marks are an 
extension of the brush stroke 
in our logo and they play a 
signiﬁcant role in our brand 
identity. Please reference our 
brand guide to see rules for 
their use and examples for how 
they can be used in context.
Shapes should most frequently 
be used in combination with 
headline treatments that use 
our display font, Timmons NY. 
The shapes:
·  Can also be used to create 
   framing devices.
·  Should be used in smart 
    ways to convey meaning—
    not decoratively (e.g. as 
    a pattern).
·  Can be used individually or 
    in groups.
·  Can be used instead of 
    photography. 
·  Should be scaled 
   proportionally. Brushmarks 
   can be scaled 
   unproportionally to be 
   made slightly thicker 
   or thinner.
Drawing new shapes and 
marks should be limited. If the 
need arises, be sure that new 
shapes maintain consistency 
in their line widths and 
proportions.
SHAPES & MARKS
Our shapes and marks are an 
extension of the brush stroke 
in our logo and they play a 
signiﬁcant role in our brand 
identity. Please reference our 
brand guide to see rules for 
their use and examples for how 
they can be used in context.
Shapes should most frequently 
be used in combination with 
headline treatments that use 
our display font, Timmons NY. 
The shapes:
·  Can also be used to create 
   framing devices.
·  Should be used in smart 
    ways to convey meaning—
    not decoratively (e.g. as 
    a pattern).
·  Can be used individually or 
    in groups.
·  Can be used instead of 
    photography. 
·  Should be scaled 
   proportionally. Brushmarks 
   can be scaled 
   unproportionally to be 
   made slightly thicker 
   or thinner.
Drawing new shapes and 
marks should be limited. If the 
need arises, be sure that new 
shapes maintain consistency 
in their line widths and 
proportions.
SHAPES & MARKS
Our shapes and marks are an 
extension of the brush stroke 
in our logo and they play a 
signiﬁcant role in our brand 
identity. Please reference our 
brand guide to see rules for 
their use and examples for how 
they can be used in context.
Shapes should most frequently 
be used in combination with 
headline treatments that use 
our display font, Timmons NY. 
The shapes:
·  Can also be used to create 
   framing devices.
·  Should be used in smart 
    ways to convey meaning—
    not decoratively (e.g. as 
    a pattern).
·  Can be used individually or 
    in groups.
·  Can be used instead of 
    photography. 
·  Should be scaled 
   proportionally. Brushmarks 
   can be scaled 
   unproportionally to be 
   made slightly thicker 
   or thinner.
Drawing new shapes and 
marks should be limited. If the 
need arises, be sure that new 
shapes maintain consistency 
in their line widths and 
proportions.
SHAPES & MARKS
Our shapes and marks are an 
extension of the brush stroke 
in our logo and they play a 
signiﬁcant role in our brand 
identity. Please reference our 
brand guide to see rules for 
their use and examples for how 
they can be used in context.
Shapes should most frequently 
be used in combination with 
headline treatments that use 
our display font, Timmons NY. 
The shapes:
·  Can also be used to create 
   framing devices.
·  Should be used in smart 
    ways to convey meaning—
    not decoratively (e.g. as 
    a pattern).
·  Can be used individually or 
    in groups.
·  Can be used instead of 
    photography. 
·  Should be scaled 
   proportionally. Brushmarks 
   can be scaled 
   unproportionally to be 
   made slightly thicker 
   or thinner.
Drawing new shapes and 
marks should be limited. If the 
need arises, be sure that new 
shapes maintain consistency 
in their line widths and 
proportions.OPPRESSIVE STATE POWER
INSTITUTIONAL RACISM
PATRIARCHYSTRUCTURAL ECONOMIC INJUSTICE52
CCR staff at a retreat at Storm King Art Center, August 2018.CCR board and staff in Mississippi, February 2018Now, more than ever, 
we are thankful to have you at our side!
53The Center for Constitutional Rights is grateful 
for your dedication and partnership. You make 
it possible for us to think big and to stake out 
daring positions.  
Because of you, our litigation and advocacy is 
holistic, fearless, and relentless.  
T ogether, we are transforming the power 
structures that oppress vulnerable 
communities, building the strength of social 
justice movements, and training the next 
generation of movement lawyers and activists.
Thank you!
www.CCRjustice.org54
© 2019 CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS   
666 BROADWAY FL 7
NEW YORK, NY 10012  
212.614.6448         
ccrjustice.org