20
Annual Report
1  Bush defending domestic surveillance 
without warrants during a visit to the ultra-secret National Security Agency  at Fort Meade in January 2006.
2  Supreme Court upheld the “material support” laws in a 2010 decision criminalizing the provision of any assistance to groups on the government’s “blacklist” even when support is solely to promote lawful and non-violent activities. CCR brought Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project to challenge this on behalf of a group that wanted to provide training in human rights advocacy and peacemaking to a blacklisted group in Turkey. 
3  First detainees are transferred to Guantánamo in January 2002. In February 2002, CCR filed the first habeas petitions, arguing that indefinite detention without due process is a violation of U.S. and international law. In 2004 the Supreme Court agreed, ruling that detainees do have access to U.S. courts to challenge their detention (Rasul v. Bush).4  In 2010, Obama authorized the targeted killing of a U.S. citizen in Yemen, by the CIA and secret military forces. CCR and the ACLU brought a challenge to that practice in Al-Aulaqi v. Obama, arguing that lethal force is only permissible after due process or in the face of an imminent threat. Case dismissed December 2010 on procedural grounds without addressing its merits.
5  A protestor opposing AZ’s controversial SB 1070 is arrested outside Sheriff Arpaio’s office in July 2010. CCR is active in the growing immigrants’ rights movement to challenge racist legislation like SB 1070  and the national “Secure Communities” immigration enforcement expansion, through movement support, advocacy and FOIA litigation: NDLON v. U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement Agency.
6  The Supreme Court addressed important civil and human rights issues during this past decade. CCR was at the Court defending habeas corpus in two Guantánamo cases (Rasul v. Bush and Boumediene v. Bush) and once in a challenge to the material support statute (Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project). 7  CCR is challenging the expansion of the U.S. prison industry with litigation on behalf of immigrants caught up in the post 9/11 round-ups (Turkmen v. Ashcroft) and prisoners targeted for isolation based on race, religion or political activities (Aref v. Holder).
8  CCR filed CCR v. Bush to challenge the NSA’s warrantless spying on people within the U.S. just weeks after the program was revealed in December 2005. The case continues as CCR v. Obama, seeking to have any records obtained through the illegal program destroyed. 
9  Shocking images of torture and abuse of prisoners at Abu-Ghraib prison became public in April 2004. CCR represents over 340 Iraqis suing private military contractors for participating in a torture conspiracy there and at facilities throughout Iraq (Al Shimari v. CACI , Al-Quraishi v. Nakhla and L-3 and Saleh v. Titan) 10  During this past decade the Right has seized upon the trauma and fear to undermine the rights heretofore unquestioned and enshrined in the Constitution. 
11  Coffins of U.S. soldiers killed in Iraq aboard a cargo plane in February 2003. The Bush administration delayed the release of this and other photos depicting the human cost of war for over a year. The U.S.-led wars in Iraq and Afghanistan have killed over 6,000 U.S. soldiers and over 150,000 civilians to date.
12  Obama’s photo replaces one of George Bush at Guantánamo on January 20, 2009. Obama has failed in his promise to close the prison within one year, and nearly 3 years into his presidency, has further entrenched the harmful legal principles that surround it. CCR has represented men detained at Guantánamo since 2002 and continues to demand that the prison be shut immediately and that all the men there be tried or safely released. 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 6 12
Cover photo credits: 1) © Brooks Kraft/Corbis. 2) Nicholas Coster. 4) Nicholas Coster. 5) © DARREN HAUCK/epa/Corbis. 12) ©Getty Images. 13) Free Gaza movement. 14) © Brooks Kraft/Corbis. 15) © Shannon Stapleton/
Reuters/Corbis. 16) Thomas Hawk@Flickr. 17) AFP/Getty Images. 20) © Bud Shultz. 22) Mark Wilson/Getty Images. 23) © Jim Young/Reuters/Corbis. 24) © Greenpeace/Corbis/Sygma. 26) Nicholas Coster.
Click on the case names for more information! 1Ten years ago, I watched as two planes flew into the World 
Trade Center. New Yorkers were terrified, shocked and sad -
dened as our city became a pungent morgue. When the Bush administration began to talk of war, CCR argued that these 
attacks should be treated as crimes and suspects tried in regular courts.
Unfortunately, war was the response. Congress gave the President the 
authority to make war against almost any nation, group or individual anywhere in the world. We waged war in Afghanistan, Iraq, Pakistan, Yemen and Somalia including through targeted assassinations and drones. These wars have now killed thousands of Americans and per -
haps hundreds of thousands of others. This war paradigm and its misuse led to Guantánamo, secret “ghost” detention sites, indefinite detention, military commissions, rendition, and the suspension of habeas corpus. It was also used to justify a dra -
matic curtailing of domestic civil rights: illegal wiretapping, increased repression of dissent, and a culture of government secrecy. In 2002, CCR made the courageous decision to represent the first  
detainees and in the years following, was able to get hundreds of lawyers to Guantánamo. Lawyer visits helped to break the silence of incommunicado detention that fostered torture and forced an exami -
nation of who was there—not the worst of the worst, but hundreds picked up without cause. Six hundred men were freed. Today, 171 men remain at Guantánamo despite Obama’s promise to close it. The underlying policies that surround Guantánamo have in general been adopted by President Obama. Practices claimed as emergency exceptions after 9/11 are now a permanent part of our legal landscape. Ten years after 9/11 we can say with certainty that CCR has made a real difference—taking on the most challenging issues of the day and lessening some of the government’s draconian practices.  Despite increasing repression here at home, U.S. wars around the world, Guantánamo, and the impoverishment of billions, we see great hope as millions take to the streets in Tunisia, Egypt, Syria and here at home in Wisconsin. None of us can predict the outcome of this new activism, but we remain firmly on the side of the oppressed. After almost ten years as President of CCR, I am relinquishing that job, but not my deep involvement with the organization that has been my legal and political home for 40 years. A wonderful new President is stepping forward: Jules Lobel. Jules is a long-time board member, Vice-President, professor at University of Pittsburgh Law School and a major CCR litigator. He won an important Supreme Court challenge to solitary confinement practices at an Ohio “supermax” prison, litigated many of the 1980’s Central America war cases with CCR and came close to stopping the 1991 invasion of Iraq—with a lawsuit no less. I am thrilled to have my longtime friend and smart, radical colleague as CCR’s new President. 
Michael Ratner
Letter from the President
2As the nation marks a decade’s passing since the 9/11 
attacks, we at CCR are reflecting on the many changes to the world, our nation and this organization as a result of the right-wing forces that seized upon this tragedy 
to implement massive changes to our democratic systems. CCR has done amazing work over these years to push back forcefully and eloquently against the Bush administration’s illegal executive power grab. We’ve also done key work to urge the Obama administration to renounce the power that Bush claimed and to return it to the other branches of government and the people. It has been a tremendous and high stakes fight. Through it all, CCR has not wavered in our principles. 
True to form, we take on the hard cases and the hard issues, taking 
positions that are the right ones, but often ones that Congress, the president, the courts and other people in America aren’t quite ready to hear yet. To me that’s not a sign of failure, that’s a sign of strength. If the cases that we bring and the positions we advocate for were easy and noncontroversial, everyone else would be pushing them. But, in a world where power is currency and currency is power, there can be no shying away from what is right and what is just. CCR will always stand up for what is right and just, as forcefully and directly as we can.
Looking at the timeline on the following pages gives you a sense of 
what CCR and our supporters have been up against, what we’ve accomplished together, how lonely it can be, and how the quest for justice isn’t just a moment but rather, to paraphrase Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., is an arc that must be built upon and moved forward.In February 2002, just six weeks after the first detainees were brought to Guantánamo, we filed our first habeas petition, Rasul v. Bush . In 
2011, nearly 600 men have been released from Guantánamo. CCR continues to work with them as they rebuild their lives and to advocate on behalf of the 171 men that unjustly remain  
at the prison. 
In April 2002, we filed Turkmen v. Ashcroft on behalf of Arab and 
Muslim men who were rounded up in racial profiling dragnets and subjected to abuse and detention, eventually winning a settlement on their behalf. In 2011, we filed a fourth complaint in that case with new evidence of high-level government officials’ complicity in those abuses. In 2005, we filed lawsuits against the Bush administration’s illegal and warrantless wiretapping program and just this year we filed an appeal asking the government to destroy any records of surveillance of CCR attorneys. 
While we stay active in the defense of our liberties and human 
rights, one clear battle is the protection of our right to dissent—to preserve and expand the First Amendment space within which  
people oppose unjust government or corporate conduct. This becomes increasingly important as governments and corporations continue to see themselves as above the law or create law that makes it more difficult for people to hold them accountable. To define the path into this work, CCR released Hell No: Your Right to Dissent in Twenty-First Century America . Authored by Michael 
Ratner and Margaret Ratner Kunstler with a preface by me, Hell No 
is an essential guide for anyone who is politically active and fed up in the post-9/11 world.
Letter from the Executive Director
3The field has shifted in the last 10 years. Because of our work, Guantánamo has 
gone from a place where the “evil-doers” are sent to a site of national shame, 
but Barack Obama has yet to close it. Obama has taken steps to curtail U.S. torture, but has refused to hold the torture team accountable. He paid lip  
service to pulling the troops out of Iraq and Afghanistan, but unleashed a tor -
rent of drone strikes and launched new illegal wars. Immigration enforcement has reached an all-time high, including deporting Haitian nationals to their home country in a time of widespread cholera. The government has erected experimental segregation prisons that house activists and Muslims.
CCR’s work will be as strong as ever in response to these shifts. We believe 
justice is not only necessary, it is possible. We take on these issues because without us, our clients would be left with no legal way to challenge or speak out about what is being done to them. As a result, we take on the hardest  
cases in the most difficult settings—no matter how big or powerful the  
defendant is. You can always rely on CCR to be where the edges of injustice and human dignity meet, using creative advocacy strategies to fight alongside those who have the least access to justice.
We are thrilled to have you standing by our side as we take on these chal-
lenges. You honor us with your support as we look forward to another  
extraordinary year of using law creatively as a positive force for social change.
Vincent WarrenIn the decade since 9/11 two presidents, with the complicity of Congress 
and at times the courts, have so severely eroded U.S. democracy that only a widespread and determined effort by the 4th branch of government, the people, could hope to restore it. The timeline on the following pages shows significant moments in this erosion and some of the ways that CCR has consistently fought back.
Within days of the attacks, the “war on terror” paradigm was invoked to 
justify a radical expansion of executive power and in an attempt to place the president outside of the law. Bush and Obama have both perpetuated a state of endless war against an undefined enemy, and claimed that it confers on them the power to kill, capture or detain anyone, anywhere in the world and to justify impunity and ongoing secrecy about U.S. torture, wiretapping, renditions, secret detentions and repression of dissent—all the while using the “state secrets” doctrine to keep the details of these programs out of view of the courts and the public. 
In the end, the test of our democracy is whether or not we look at the actions 
that were taken in our name and demand that our government end the lawlessness, hold high-level officials accountable and put the presidency back in the constitutional box. At every step of the way CCR, acting as the people’s lawyers, has been there to fight these fights. This is a painful anniversary in many ways. Let us also make it the occasion when together we say, “Enough is enough!” 
The 9/11 Decade4
Aug 30, 2004
CCR attorney Gitanjali Gutierrez becomes the first civilian habeas lawyer allowed into Guantánamo Bay
Sept 18, 2001Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Terrorists (AUMF) enacted
Oct 7, 2001War in Afghanistan begins
Nov 13, 2001Bush’s executive order authorizes military commissions for terrorism suspects
Feb 2002CCR files the first habeas petitions for Guantánamo detainees (Rasul v. Bush)
Aug 1, 2002 Lawyers John Yoo and Jay Bybee submit their first “torture memo” to the CIA and Department of Defense
Feb 5, 2003Colin Powell briefs the UN on Iraqi  “weapons of mass destruction”
Sept 2002Maher Arar is detained at  JFK Airport in New York and sent to Syria to be tortured under the U.S. extraor-dinary rendition program (Arar v. Ashcroft)
Apr 28, 2004Abu Ghraib abuse scandal breaks on 60 Minutes, followed by a New Yorker article one week later(Al Shimari v. CACI, Al-Quraishi v.  
Nakhla and L-3 and Saleh v. Titan) 
May 2, 2003Bush announces “mission accomplished” in Iraq
Mar 20, 2003Iraq war begins 
Jun 28, 2004Supreme Court rules that Guantánamo detainees do have access to U.S. Courts to challenge their detention (Rasul v. Bush)
Dec 30, 2005Detainee Treatment Act (DTA) of 2005 bars access to federal courts for Guantánamo detainees
Dec 15, 2005A NY Times story reveals that for four years the National Security Agency (NSA) had been eavesdrop-ping on people within the U.S. without warrants (CCR v. Bush)
Jan 3, 2006 Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act (AETA) enacted (United States v. Buddenberg)  
Jun 29, 2006Supreme Court rules that military commissions violate military law and the Geneva Conventions (Hamdan v. Rumsfeld)
Oct 26, 2001USA Patriot Act enacted
Sept 11, 2001Roundups of non-citizens begin
Oct 17, 2006Military Commissions Act (MCA) of 2006 authorizes trial by military commission, for any foreigner the government detains any-where and labels an “enemy combatant” and allows the use of secret evidence and statements obtained through coercion
Jan 11, 2002First 20 men are brought to  a detention facility at  Guantánamo Bay, Cuba
Sept 11, 2001Attacks on the World Trade Center, the Pentagon and Flight 93
and how CCR Challenged the Decline of U.S. Democracy
Sept 14, 2001First 9/11 immigration detainee arrives at Metropolitan Detention Center in Brooklyn (Turkmen v. Ashcroft)
The 9/11 Decade
Click on the case names for more information! 5
Nov 14, 2006
Criminal complaint filed in Germany  against high-ranking U.S. officials for war crimes and torture (German War Crimes Complaint)
Dec 11, 2006First 17 men are transferred to an experimental Com-munications Management Unit (CMU) prison at Terre Haute, IN (Aref v. Holder)
Sept 9, 2007Blackwater shooters open fire on a crowd of civilians in Al Watahba Square in  Baghdad (Albazzaz v. Prince)
Sept 16, 2007Blackwater massacre kills 17 Iraqis at Nisoor Square in Baghdad (Abtan v. Prince)
Mar 2008  
Department of Homeland Security launches “Secure Communities” program making local police partici-pate in the immigration de-portation system (NDLON v. Immigration and Customs Enforcement Agency)
Feb 27, 2008General Prosecutor of Paris dismisses  
the criminal complaint against Rumsfeld, arguing immunity for acts he committed while in office
Jun 12, 2008 Supreme Court rules that the MCA of  2006 unconstitutionally limited Guantá-namo detainees’ access to the courts  and reestablishes that they are entitled to access U.S. civilian courts (Boumediene v. Bush/Al Odah v. Bush)
Mar 20, 2008Second CMU prison opens in Marion, IL after the first reaches capacity (Aref v. Holder)
Apr 27, 2009Spanish Judge opens an investigation into the torture and abuse of four former Guantánamo detainees
Sept 15, 2009Congress votes to defund ACORN and affiliated organi -
zations (ACORN v. United States)
Oct 8, 2009Military Commissions Act of 2009 modifies the procedures for MCA trials but retains their basic structure
Early 2010Obama authorizes the  targeted killing of U.S. citizen Anwar Al-Aulaqi by the CIA and secret military forces (Al-Aulaqi v. Obama and ACLU and CCR v. Geithner)
Jun 21, 2010 Supreme Court upholds the “material support” laws (Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project)
Feb 5, 2011George Bush cancels trip to Switzerland to avoid potential prosecution for torture (Bush Torture Indictment)
Oct 26, 2007Criminal complaint filed in France charg-ing Donald Rumsfeld with ordering and authorizing torture (French War Crimes Complaint Against Rumsfeld)
Dec 15, 2009 Obama announces plan to use a prison in Thomson, IL to transfer and hold Guantá-namo detainees indefinitely
Jan 22, 2009Obama announces that the prison at Guantánamo will  be closed within one year
Mar 17, 2009Criminal complaint filed in Spain against the “Bush Six” lawyers for complicity in torture at Guantánamo and other U.S.-run prisons overseas (Spanish Investigation into U.S. Torture Policies)
Click on the case names for more information! 7Nearly ten years ago, the Bush adminis -
tration built the prison at Guantánamo  
because they believed it would be out of 
the reach of U.S. courts, signaling to the 
world their intention to conduct interrogations and proceedings that violate U.S. and international law. 
Today, 171 men remain in Guantánamo with no end 
in sight. More detainees have now died there than have been charged with a crime and many of the worst  
legal theories that surround it have become a perma -
nent part of our legal landscape. President Obama has reneged on his promise to close Guantánamo in one year, reinstated deeply flawed mil-itary commissions as the sole venue for prosecutions of detainees, and approved the continued use of ques-tionable interrogation tactics. He has even proposed permanent preventive detention for those whom he claims “cannot be tried” but considers “too dangerous to release,” suggesting that the U.S. may keep some prisoners potentially forever without any formal legal proceeding. For its part, Congress has eviscerated  Supreme Court victories through new legislation, barred the release of detainees into the United States, prohibited prosecutions from being conducted on U.S. soil and set up barriers to repatriation of detain-ees or their safe resettlement to third countries.
CCR has been aggressively challenging these policies 
since 2002, winning some important legal victories in -
cluding access for lawyers to detainees, affirming the fundamental right to habeas corpus and mandating better and healthier conditions of confinement. Over 600 men have been released. 
However, no detainee has yet been released on the 
order of a U.S. judge, even after winning their habeas cases. Not once in the past decade has a court evalu -
ated the facts in a case alleging torture, or ruled on the legality of torturing individuals in offshore detention. Government lawyers continue to argue that federal courts lack jurisdiction due to national security con -
siderations, in effect claiming that the government can  
arbitrarily label someone an “enemy combatant,”  
torture or kill that individual and then cover it up, with -
out any legal accountability whatsoever. 
In the face of these many challenges, CCR refuses to 
give up on the men remaining at Guantánamo or the constitutional principles that are gravely undermined by the prison’s existence. Our resettlement advocacy work on behalf of the men who remain there or who need ongoing assistance post-release will continue  
unabated. Perhaps most importantly, the Center is continuing to demand that Guantánamo be closed with justice and calling for an end to the war paradigm that underpins it.
Guantánamo
The world has completely changed from worse to worst during the last ten  
years, especially for human rights, and especially in the United States.  America is the great power in the world, dictating to others about equity  between societies and their citizens, yet it fails to implement even one  percent of justice in its own backyard.
Muhammed Khan Tumani was held at Guantánamo Bay without charge or judicial review for over  
seven years. (Khan Tumani v. Obama, see p. 30)
Protests marking the ninth anniversary of Guantánamo, January 11, 2011.
ClickInternational Human Rights9
The Center for Constitutional Rights has played 
a pivotal role in the development and use of the Alien Tort Statute (ATS) which allows non-U.S. citizens to sue for violations of the “law of na -
tions” or a treaty of the United States in U.S. courts. In 1979, CCR brought a case under the long forgotten ATS, winning the landmark Filártiga decision—a breakthrough in the development of Universal Jurisdiction. This im -
portant legal principle recognizes that some acts are so heinous that culpability must follow you anywhere in the world. Crimes that fall under this jurisdiction are so seri -
ous that they are an attack on humanity as a whole and it is in everyone’s interest that they are punished.
The ATS is a powerful tool through which foreign vic -
tims of human rights abuses can seek civil remedies in 
U.S. courts. CCR’s ATS case against Radovan Karadz ˘ic for genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity committed in Bosnia-Herzegovina in the early 90s first established that an individual not working for any gov -
ernment can be liable for human rights violations. Since then, CCR has further expanded the application of the ATS to cases involving human rights violations abetted or committed by corporations.This past year, CCR has litigated ATS cases relating to human rights violations in Honduras, Iraq, Bolivia and Nigeria. The Center also uses our expertise in this area of law to conduct training and education around the evolution of the ATS, related statutes and current is -
sues and strategic considerations. 
CCR goes beyond U.S. courts and jurisdiction by uti -
lizing international bodies including the United Nations 
and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and works to incorporate the norms of international human rights law into the U.S. legal and political land -
scape. The Center strives to incorporate a human rights framework into our work and is an active participant in the international human rights community. CCR em -
ploys these and other innovative strategies to seek ac -
countability for human rights violations.
CCR’s founding mission includes protecting the rights 
guaranteed by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. This dedication leads us to support activists and social movements in diverse regions of the world in their calls for peace with justice and accountability and to expose the role of the U.S. government and private corporations in perpetuating human rights atrocities and fostering political environments that sacrifice hu -
man rights in favor of U.S. political influence or corpo -
rate profits. How is forgiveness possible if there is no investigation, sanction nor reparation 
—when there is impunity? As family members of people who were forcibly disap-peared for political and ideological reasons, we know full well that reconciliation is not reached through forgiveness and forgetting of atrocities. We need truth and justice to move forward.
Bertha Oliva, Director of El Comité de Familiares de Detenidos Desaparecidos en Honduras (COFADEH), is  
partnering with CCR in seeking accountability for atrocities committed during the June 2009 Honduran military coup. (Murillo v. Micheletti Baín, see p. 36)
Tent City in Port-au-Prince, Haiti.
Click11
and the courts have uncritically accepted the war -
time paradigm. Obama has made it clear that he does 
not intend to return this power and has failed to fully  
investigate the deaths of people who have died in detention at Guantánamo and other U.S.-run off-shore prisons. To date, no victim of the U.S. torture program has received any relief from U.S. courts and most have been shut out of court entirely. 
The Obama administration has not only failed to 
close Guantánamo as promised, he has proposed bringing indefinite detentions without charge to the United States and has approved targeted killings of U.S. citizens without any judicial process.Since the U.S. government has made it clear that it will not live up to its responsibility to investigate the criminal acts of officials in the previous administra -
tion, CCR will continue to employ creative approach -
es and seek international venues willing to conduct investigations and hold the high-level officials and architects of the U.S. torture program accountable for their crimes. CCR has pursued the U.S. torture team throughout Europe, including in Germany, France, Switzerland and an ongoing investigation in Spain, and is working with the world-wide human rights community to end impunity for torture and war crimes, especially when they are committed by the most powerful people in the world. The overzealous response by the Bush administration to the events of 9/11 
has destroyed my life and the lives of many innocent people. I call on President Obama to immediately open a criminal investigation into whether George Bush and his aides were responsible for the rendition and torture program part of which still exists today. President Obama tells us to look forward, but we must look at the past in order to plan for a better future.
Maher Arar was rendered by U.S. officials to Syria where he was tortured and detained for a year.  
(Arar v. Ashcroft, see p. 33)U.S. Human Rights Record 
Within weeks of the attacks in Septem-
ber 2001, the Bush administration 
made the decision, with Congress’ blessing, to treat these attacks as acts 
of war instead of as serious crimes. That fateful choice to distrust our legal institutions has cost this country dearly. In the ten years since, the war paradigm has been used to justify a huge expansion of executive power and extreme levels of government secrecy.  Secrecy and power breed torture and abuse—and that is exactly what happened. 
The Bush administration announced their view that the 
law simply doesn’t apply to the president when he’s acting as commander in chief. They claimed the power to send people overseas to be tortured, to create secret “black sites” run by the CIA to detain and torture people and to indefinitely detain without trial hundreds of men at Guantánamo Bay. Bush also claimed the authority to declare unilaterally that people captured and placed in these prisons were subject neither to the Geneva Con -
ventions nor the protections of the U.S. Constitution.
Today, the separation of powers concept has been  
distorted to allow an amassing of presidential power, 
Click13The use of private military contractors in Iraq 
and Afghanistan reached unprecedented levels under the Bush administration and President Obama has continued down this 
dangerous path. Despite widespread criticism and reports of waste, fraud and human rights abuse, the number of contractors hired by the U.S. in those coun -
tries continues to rise and now exceeds the number of uniformed soldiers. These private contractors have fulfilled roles that include such core military functions as participation in interrogations of prisoners and  
intelligence gathering, and they are generally paid far higher rates than U.S. service personnel. 
Some of these companies and their employees have 
been implicated in serious human rights violations, in -
cluding the torture and other abuse of Iraqi civilian de -
tainees, at U.S.-run detention centers and elsewhere in Iraq and Afghanistan. However, impunity for these crimes has become the norm. To date, no private mili -
tary contractor has been held accountable for their role in the torture and other serious abuse of detain -
ees at Abu Ghraib or other detention centers in Iraq.In ongoing litigation on behalf of former Iraqi detain-ees in which CCR serves as co-counsel, contractors have argued derivative immunity or the so-called “government contractor defense” claiming that they are shielded from liability because they were hired by the U.S. government. When it was recently invited by the Supreme Court to weigh in on a case by Iraqi torture survivors against two private military contrac-tors implicated in Abu Ghraib, the Obama administra-tion argued that the courthouse doors should remain closed to the torture survivors, allowing the contrac-tors to avoid civil liability. 
The inappropriate use of private contractors has be -
come a global concern as they market their services to 
governments and NGOs around the world. Outsourc -
ing government functions to private companies does an end run around public oversight and accountabil -
ity and creates an environment ripe for human rights abuse. Whether hired to work in Iraq and Afghani -
stan, or to patrol the streets of New Orleans after  
Hurricane Katrina, these modern day mercenaries must be held accountable when they violate the law.
CCR will continue working to hold military contrac-
tors accountable for human rights abuses and to end reliance on private contractors to conduct war,  
including by supporting the Stop Outsourcing Secu-rity Act now pending in Congress. The Center also adds its voice to the growing movement to end the perpetual war-making that is used to justify their use and calls on the U.S. government to support hold-ing corporations accountable for abuses committed against people anywhere.
They put me in a room and they put my son in a cage in front of me.  
The soldier said ‘confess that you know terrorists or I will send you to  a place where they will rape you. They will do things to you that you  could never imagine’.
Detained at Abu Ghraib from January to July 2004, this woman (pictured left) is one of nearly 340 CCR  
clients suing private military contractors for participating in a torture conspiracy at detention facilities in Iraq.  (Al Shimari v. CACI, Al-Quraishi v. Nakhla and L-3 and Saleh v. Titan, see p. 32)
Corporate Human Rights Abuse
Click15
The economic and political disenfranchise -
ment of poor people and people of color in 
the United States is continuing to grow with escalating attacks on unions and the rights of 
workers. This past year, an inspiring broad-based so -
cial movement has arisen in response, as unions and their supporters have organized large protests in Wis -
consin, Michigan, Ohio and elsewhere.
In Michigan, the drive to disenfranchise poor peo -
ple has become so radical that it has undermined  
democracy at its core—with local governments or city  
agencies being disempowered, and control given 
to unelected executives or even private companies. A new law gives the Governor’s office the power  
to appoint so-called “emergency financial manag -
ers” for any of a broad, vague set of criteria. These  
managers then take over the entire operations of local communities or school districts, replacing elected of -
ficials. To date, emergency financial managers have been appointed over the cities of Benton Harbor, Ecorse, and Pontiac and over the public school system in Detroit. These are among the most economically devastated areas in the nation and all but one are also majority Black communities.Once appointed, the emergency manager is given unchecked power over virtually all operations of  
local government, including the ability to unilater -
ally fire elected officials, repeal local laws, enact new ones and even to violate city charters. As part of the right wing’s attack on organized labor, managers can  
undo collectively bargained contracts of public  
employees and privatize services. The financially struggling communities end up footing the bill since all costs of the program, including the salaries of the man -
agers and their staff, are charged to the municipality.  
Declaring “financial emergencies” as a means to dis -
enfranchise entire communities is but a new appli -
cation of a time-tested system of economic disparity disempowering poor people and people of color. Women and racial minorities often experience  
layers of discrimination, including being unfair -
ly treated or disproportionately excluded from well-paid public sector jobs. CCR has a series of long-term cases fighting entrenched racial and gen -
der-based employment discrimination on behalf of teachers and firefighters.
The Center for Constitutional Rights will continue to 
expose and challenge unfair employment practices while standing firmly on the side of local communities’ democratic rights and the rights of workers to collec -
tive bargaining in the struggle for racial and economic justice for all. The emergency manager law creates a new form of local government run by  
an unelected official who rules by decree. It’s not about fiscal responsibility. It’s about punishing working people and communities of color for the economic downturn that was caused by Wall Street and big corporations. We’re talking about depriving people of the right to a democratically-elected government, crushing unions and silencing progressive voices.
Edith Lee-Payne is a longtime Detroit resident and activist who is challenging Michigan’s emergency manager law. 
(Brown v. Snyder, see p. 40)Racial and Economic Justice
Protest against emergency financial managers outside the Michigan Capitol in Lansing, March 2011.
Click17Gender-based discrimination persists as 
a global crisis. Women perform over 60 percent of the world’s work but earn only 10 percent of the world’s income, 
and violence against women and girls remains among the most widespread of human rights abuses. Women and members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer (LGBTQ) communities experience layers of  human rights violations, burdened by disproportionate rates of poverty, impacted by racism and violence and singled out for unfair treatment by police and the crimi-nal legal system. In recent years, the U.S.-based LGBTQ movement has made inroads into mainstream society through national campaigns around marriage equality and military service, while the voices of already mar-ginalized LGBTQ and gender non-conforming people have been largely left out of the public conversation.
The Center for Constitutional Rights has a long  
history of pushing the boundaries of gender justice le-gal work, bringing its first major women’s rights case in 1969 when women’s rights litigation was still largely uncharted territory. CCR filed the first challenge to New York’s abortion ban that framed it as a women’s rights issue (as opposed to doctors’ rights). The Cen-ter’s groundbreaking feminist legal work continued to break down barriers, bringing women’s experiences of domestic violence into the courtroom in self-defense cases, defending the reproductive rights of women in the workforce and contributing to the evolution of international law to recognize that rape is torture and, when systematic and widespread, a tool of genocide.
Much of this work happened under the leadership 
of former CCR staff attorney turned long-time Board member and Vice President, Rhonda Copelon. Sad -
ly, we lost Rhonda in 2010, but her legacy continues through her creation of the Copelon Fund for Gender Justice which has seeded a new generation of innova-tive legal work at CCR around issues of gender, gender identity and sexuality. 
From this platform, CCR has embarked on an expansion 
of our gender justice work, deepening partnerships with our movement allies and activists that are fighting gender-based discrimination and violence and participating in the international movement for gender justice. This past year, this work brought CCR to Haiti, Honduras, Uganda and Louisiana. We look forward to working with our partners in this struggle to strategically broaden our work in this area and maximize the impact of the unique contributions that CCR brings to these important issues.
Gender Justice 
Women who have struggled with addiction, violence, trauma and poverty all  
of their lives are now even more shut out of accessing public services because  of this statute—all for just offering certain kinds of sex for money. It is time  for them to be able to walk their kids to school and access both gainful  employment and safe housing.
Deon Haywood, Executive Director of Women with a Vision in New Orleans, which led a successful campaign to 
repeal the requirement that anyone convicted under the solicitation provision of Louisiana’s Crime against Nature statute must register as a sex offender. (Doe v. Jindal, see p. 38)
A meeting of the Frente Nacional de Resistencia Popular (FNRP) in Honduras in December 2009. Women’s groups play a leadership role in the FNRP and are organizing against gender-based violence and oppression in Honduras.
ClickImmigrant Justice19
Within days of the September 11 attacks, 
the Bush administration began rounding up non-citizens, mostly Arab or South Asian men, on the pretext of 
minor immigration violations and holding them until the FBI cleared them of links to terrorism. Some of these detainees were kept in solitary confinement, subjected to physical and verbal abuse, and not allowed to communicate with attorneys, families or friends. 
The already harsh immigration “reforms” instituted in 
the 1990’s by the Clinton administration laid the legal groundwork for this this blatant racial and religious profiling of non-citizens. The last decade has seen these divisive policies taken even further with mount -
ing anti-immigrant rhetoric and a heightened national hysteria against anyone who appears “foreign” and, more recently, through Obama’s push to make local law enforcement into an arm of the federal immigra -
tion detention and deportation system.
Using local police to arrest, detain and deport immigrants, 
even without a conviction, exacerbates the impact of the racism that permeates the criminal legal system, undermines public trust within these communities and discourages people from turning to the police, even to report crimes such as domestic violence.  
 Secure Communities (S-Comm), 287(g), and the Criminal Alien Program—the Obama administration’s  
signature immigration enforcement programs—all rely on heavy involvement from local law enforcement to siphon immigrants into the immigration detention system and ultimately through deportation proceedings. S-Comm is an Immigration and Customs Enforcement Agency (ICE) program that automatically feeds information collected by local police into the ICE and FBI databases. Each time a local, state, or tribal police officer conducts a routine criminal background check, they automatically transfer that individual’s personal information to ICE.Documents disclosed this past year through CCR’s Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) litigation reveal that S-Comm is one component that will feed infor -
mation into a larger FBI information-collection project. The planned Next Generation Identification (NGI) project is intended to build a large biometric database that far exceeds the FBI’s current fingerprint data -
base, creating a biometric data warehouse including iris scans and automated facial recognition ability.
CCR will persist with seeking accountability for post-
9/11 round-ups and support the growing grassroots movement that is organizing to fight dangerous  
immigration and police collaborations and raising the visibility of the communities most impacted by these racist policies. 
I was in my twenties and full of energy when my life was suddenly shattered.  
A Muslim with a background in aerospace, I was detained by U.S. officials under  the preventive detention policy. For seven months I was held incommunicado, beaten and ill-treated. The irony is that this ill-treatment, this torture, did not  take place in Guantánamo or Abu-Ghraib, but in Brooklyn.
Benamar Benatta was held in immigration detention for nearly five years. ( Turkmen v. Ashcroft, see p. 39)
Click21
Policing & Prisons
The United States has the highest incarceration 
rate in the world. As our prison population continues to grow, the prison industry has transformed the economies of rural towns to 
be dependent on continued mass incarceration. The criminal legal system is rife with racism at every stage of the process and police violence and racial profiling persist in police departments across the country.
CCR has long been a leader in the movement to combat 
racial profiling including through ongoing litigation and monitoring of the New York City Police Department’s use of unconstitutional stop-and-frisks. The Center re -
leased a major report in October 2010, finding a pat-tern of unconstitutional stops that disproportionally af -
fect Black and Latino New Yorkers. Most of these stops occur in Black and Hispanic neighborhoods, and the main factor for determining who gets stopped, even after controlling for crime rates, is race. The data con-firm what people in communities of color have known for years—that Blacks and Latinos are treated more harshly, are more likely to be arrested rather than is-sued a summons and are more likely to have force used against them than Whites.
While racial profiling of Blacks and Latinos is not new, 
the endless war paradigm has added a new dimension. This trend is reflected in the creation of a new genera-tion of “national security” prisons that target Muslims, political prisoners and prison activists who work to  defend the rights of other prisoners. In 2006 and 2008, the Bureau of Prisons secretly created two experimen -
tal prison units called “Communications Management Units.” These units are designed to isolate certain prisoners from other prisoners and the outside world, banning them from any physical contact with visitors, including family members, and subjecting them to severe restrictions on access to phone calls and work and educational opportunities. Upwards of two-thirds of the prisoners in these units are Muslim—an over-representation of at least 1000%. Many of the remain-ing prisoners have unpopular political views, including environmental activists designated as “eco-terrorists.”
The national security state’s obsession with potential 
future crimes is a reactionary approach based on fear and prejudice and must not be used to justify unfair targeting of prisoners based on race, religion or po-litical beliefs. The Center for Constitutional Rights will continue to be active in the struggle against racial pro -
filing and other police misconduct and in defense of the human rights of all prisoners.
New York City, August 2011. Stop-and-frisks in New York City are at an all-time high and 87 percent of those stopped are Black or Latino.Our visits are non-contact and behind an inch of glass. There is no embrace  
or holding hands; no chance to express your love for the people who are  standing by you as you serve your sentence. This month [June, 2010], it will  be two years since the last time I was able to hug my wife or even hold hands.  It feels like torture.
Daniel McGowan continues to be held at the Communications Management Unit in Terre Haute, Indiana. (Aref v. 
Holder, see p. 37)
ClickDefending Dissent23
Over the course of this past decade, we 
have seen the endless war paradigm and the corresponding national security state be used to justify a vast expansion of  
political repression and the silencing of dissent inside the United States. The government has fostered a gen-eralized fear of an undefined enemy and marshaled that fear against political movements and voices of op-position to the U.S. government or its actions. In 2001, Bush declared “Either you are with us, or you are with the terrorists” and what followed was a decade where dissenters and whistleblowers were routinely labeled “terrorists” or a “threat to national security.”
A 2010 Supreme Court ruling in a CCR case, Holder 
v. Humanitarian Law Project (HLP), reinforces this ap-
proach. The case challenged the “material support” 
statute which makes it a crime to provide support—even in the form of humanitarian aid, literature distri-bution or peaceful political advocacy—to any entity that the government has designated as a “terrorist” group. The Court held that human rights advocates who provide training and assistance in the nonviolent resolution of disputes could be prosecuted as ter-rorists. This is the first time the Court has ruled that  advocating lawful, nonviolent activity can be a crime even when the goal is to discourage violence.
In 2006, the Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act (AETA) 
was pushed through Congress by a powerful lobby of industry groups and corporations. It criminalizes a broad swath of First Amendment activities includ -
ing protests, boycotts, picketing, whistleblowing and even internet research, if any of that work harms the profits of a business that has anything to do with ani -
mal products. The Act targets animal rights activists, but uses language so broad that it could be used to prosecute labor activists who organize a successful boycott of Walmart or picket a cafeteria.This fear-led legal culture has led to a general accep-tance of higher levels of surveillance and infiltration of peaceful groups. As organizers increasingly utilize  internet and cell phone technologies, they are also  being subjected to new types of law enforcement spy-ing and disruption. We continue to see harsh policing tactics used against protestors. Even members of the media have not been exempt from unlawful arrests and police intimidation when covering political protests.
CCR believes dissent is necessary for a functional  
democracy and is dedicated to defending the  right to protest government policies through a comprehensive approach of litigation, media advo-cacy and public education . 
The SHAC 7 case shook my faith in constitutional protections, as established 
freedoms were easily sacrificed in service of powerful interests. When we were charged as “domestic terrorists,” CCR was one of very few organizations willing to support us. Animal rights activists are routinely shunned by progressive orga-nizations, but CCR immediately understood how important it is to protect free speech for all political activists.
Lauren Gazzola, a SHAC 7 member, was convicted of violating the Animal Enterprise Protection Act and served over 
three years in prison for website postings, public speeches and organizing demonstrations. (U.S. v. SHAC 7, see p. 42)
Protestor outside the Republican National Convention in St. Paul, Minnesota in 2008.
Click24In 2011, CCR has undergone an exciting change—
elevating a key part of our mission “to train the next generation of people’s lawyers” with the creation of the Social Justice Institute. Thanks to the generosity 
of the Bertha Foundation, CCR has the resources to ex -
pand this program in the U.S. and internationally, and we couldn’t be more excited. With this expanded program we will train this generation, and the next generation, of human rights/social justice/public interest lawyers and activists. 
To date, this component of our mission has been met 
through the Center’s Ella Baker program. For 24 years, CCR has taken great care selecting and preparing more than 280 progressive and talented lawyers to go into communities around the world, to partner with grassroots groups and individuals at the front lines, and to fight for those with the least access to justice. Ella Baker students have, to date, worked out of CCR’s offices in New York with CCR attorneys and staff. Ella Baker program graduates include CCR’s Executive Director, Vince Warren, and two of CCR’s current staff attorneys, Rachel Meeropol and Sunita Patel, both of whom work on the Center’s Government Misconduct and Racial Justice docket, in addition to several former staff. Following their experiences at CCR, Ella Bakers have gone on to become top notch lawyers, law professors, politicians, academy-award nominated filmmakers, writers, members of presidential administrations, and heads of other progressive organizations.
In the Summer of 2011, with the generous support of the 
Bertha Foundation, we created two satellite sites for the Ella Baker program—in New Orleans, Louisiana (working with CCR Legal Director, Bill Quigley) and in Port-au-Prince, Haiti working with CCR’s partner organization, the Institute for Justice and Democracy in Haiti (IJDH) at their Haiti-based affiliate, the Bureau des Avocats Internationaux (BAI). Both of these programs were highly successful, with the students in New Orleans and Port-au-Prince operating in conjunction with the Ella Baker students at CCR. Over the next five years, we plan to further expand the Ella Baker program to operate year-round and in additional locations around the country and the world.The SJI will also include other completely new and inno -
vative initiatives to increase our training capacity beyond law school students. This will include CCR Fellowship positions for recent law school graduates to work at CCR and begin their career trajectory in a social justice/hu -
man rights law setting. We will also be expanding the ways in which we provide training and empowerment to others outside the intern/fellow context through what we are currently calling “CCR University”: a series of workshops and trainings for practicing attorneys and other advocates to be launched in 2013 with CLEs and other conferences. 
The Center is deeply grateful for this exciting new part -
nership with the Bertha Foundation, which will help us 
further our mission to train the next generation to cre -
atively use the law for social change. 
I fell in love with CCR when I happened to be visiting Michael Ratner on the last 
day of the Ella Baker program. On a whim we popped into the meeting where the 
students were summing up their experiences. Two hours later we both were crying as were each of the students and teachers. The summer had changed their lives. Michael and I agreed that one summer program was not enough. We needed lots  
of summer programs, winter programs, and spring and fall ones too.
Tony Tabatznik, The Bertha Foundation The Social Justice InstituteThe 2011 students and staff that worked at 
the Gillis Long Poverty Law Center  
at Loyola University New Orleans (from left): Marc Florman, Mariel Block, Angela Davis, Margaret Garrett, Davida Finger and CCR Legal Director Bill Quigley.
“I learned a ton about law and legal 
work this summer. I also learned a lot about the New Orleans social justice community and about exciting work going on around the world. Perhaps most importantly, from working with these attorneys this summer I learned that I like this work, that I want to stay in law school, and I want to continue learning how to use this tool—law—for 
justice.”–Angela DavisThe Bureau des Avocats Internationaux  (BAI) is 
the Haitian affiliate of the Institute for Justice and De -
mocracy in Haiti (IJDH), a U.S.-based organization which 
is partnering with CCR. The 2011 interns and staff (left to right, back row): Natalie Nozile, Bea Lindstrom, Iringo Hockley, Katie La Monica (middle row): Josue Augusma, Meena Jagannath, Natacha Doliscar, Marie Esther Felix Valcourt, Mario Joseph, Jocelyn Brooks, Techeler Boucher (front row): Greger Calhan and Katz Henry-Michel.
“BAI and IJDH were wonderful places to work—I 
learned so much from my colleagues and from being on the ground. Seeing the situation in Haiti with my own eyes was absolutely invaluable to understanding the issues I was working on and motivating me to continue working for social justice with my legal education.”–Jocelyn Brooks
Tanuja Dudnath
Tanuja Dudnath is a rising 
third-year student at Seton Hall University School of Law. Tanuja’s interest in human rights and interna-tional law stemmed from her experience growing up in the developing country Guyana, where ethnic violence regularly plagues the communities. Prior to law school, Tanuja was a legal assistant at the Center for Reproductive Rights, where she worked on various UN advocacy projects and on cases dealing with issues such as maternal mortal-ity, abortion rights and access to contraceptives. 
“My experience as an Ella Baker Fellow 
gave me invaluable hands-on experi -
ence working on groundbreaking cases and provided me with the fundamental tools and skills necessary for a career advancing social justice and equality. A key lesson offered by this program is the importance of robust community advocacy and organizing together with strategic litigation as a vehicle for truly successful social change.”
25
 26
CCR Supports LGBTQ Youth
Murder at Guantánamo
1
5
 4
8
 9
 10
10
6
 7
2
 3
Click on the videos to watch online27
15
14
12
13
11T he Center for Constitutional Rights has continued its 
long
standing commitment to supporting movements 
for social change by strengthening and expanding our 
relationships with domestic and international human 
rights defenders and sharing our unique perspective and ex -
pertise with various partners. These photos provide a snapshot view of CCR’s work in this area over the past year.
1 CCR staff meet with women in post-earthquake Haiti to 
discu
ss ways to combat gender-based violence.
2 CCR co-hosted a book release discussion with Joey  
Mogu
l (left) and Andrea Ritchie, two of the co-authors of 
Queer (In)Justice: The Criminalization of LGBT People in the United States .
3 CCR interns participate in a demonstration in front of the 
Whit
e House on January 11, 2011—marking the ninth year 
since the first detainees were transferred to Guantánamo. 
4 Several CCR staff members created an “It Gets Better” 
vide
o to show support and solidarity with LGBTQ youth. 
Shown here is Chase Quinn, Administrative Assistant.
5 A supporter of the Frente Nacional de Resistencia 
Popu
lar (FNRP) in Honduras. CCR made many fact-finding 
missions to Honduras since the June 2009 coup in support of the FNRP and the Honduran social movement. 
6 CCR hosted an event with Yemeni activist Tawakkul  
Karm
an in September 2010, speaking about the social  
movement in Yemen. In the year since, she has become known as ‘the face’ of the uprising against the authoritarian regime of President Ali Abdullah Saleh.
7 CCR co-produced “Insecure Communities” to raise aware
ness about the human impact of the misguided Secure 
Communities program which makes local law enforcement agencies into an arm of the immigration deportation system. 
8 Pam Spees, CCR Senior Staff Attorney, joined  
hundr
eds of international women’s human rights activists at 
the first Gender Justice of the Americas Conference in Miami. The meeting brought together women’s and human rights activists, leaders from feminist networks and scholars from countries throughout the region to focus on revitalizing and challenging the transnational dialogue on sexuality, violence and reproductive and human rights.
9 CCR Attorney Katherine Gallagher appeared on  
Demo
cracy Now! to discuss investigations in Spain of the 
“Bush 6,” Bush administration lawyers who are implicated in the U.S. torture program.
10 Pardiss Kebriaei, CCR attorney, in a “video fact-sheet” 
discu
ssing suspicious deaths at Guantánamo as part of  
CCR’s public education and advocacy around Al-Zahrani v. Rumsfeld.
11 CCR ran an ad on the CBS Times Square JumboTron 
abou
t the NYPD’s practice of race-based stop-and-frisks that 
disproportionately target young men of color, the homeless, and LGBTQ and gender-non-conforming youth. 
12  and  13              Some of the many blog pieces on the Huffing -
ton Post by CCR Executive Director, Vince Warren and Legal Director Bill Quigley. 
14 CCR produces numerous publications. This year we 
tran
slated If an Agent Knocks into three additional languages: 
Spanish, Arabic and Urdu.
15 Hell No: Your Right to Dissent in Twenty-First Century 
Americ
a, by CCR President Michael Ratner and former Staff 
Attorney Margaret Ratner Kunstler, examines the criminaliza -
tion of dissent in the U.S., from the surveillance and jailing of activists, to labeling protestors as “terrorists.”Movement Support
Click on the images28Letter from the Legal Director
As you look through the case descrip -
tions on the following pages, you 
will see that CCR has had another busy year using the law creatively for 
progressive social change.
The Center is unwavering in our work on behalf 
of the 171 men who remain at Guantánamo,  
continuing our legal and diplomatic advocacy to shut down the prison and seeking justice for 
the many abuses that occurred there and at other U.S.-run detention facilities. We continue to chase the Bush torture team throughout Europe, with ongoing investigations in Spain and a new effort in Switzerland. In fact, we believe George W. Bush cancelled his trip to Switzerland this year out of fear of a possible criminal indictment, which CCR had prepared with the support of a broad coalition of activists from around the world.
I am particularly proud of the courageous stand the Center took this year against 
the targeted killing of U.S. citizen and Muslim cleric Anwar al-Aulaqi, who the U.S. is openly trying to assassinate in Yemen. Such targeted killings are illegal, immoral, and unwise.
I travelled to Haiti with CCR delegations twice this year, working to end gender-
based violence, mass evictions from camps, and U.S. deportations. We are also going after the leaders of the 2009 coup in Honduras and supporting the social movement there in their struggle for truth, justice, and accountability for human rights abuses.
CCR brought a new challenge to Michigan’s “emergency manager” law, which 
disenfranchises low-income communities of color. In Louisiana, we won impor -tant victories against a draconian statute that targets poor women and gender non-conforming people by requiring sex-offender registration for certain types of prostitution convictions. 
Our work on behalf of Black firefighters in New York City produced important 
victories this year, forcing the fire department to overhaul its hiring practices in order to hire more people of color. The Center has also been an active member of a grassroots-led movement to end the Secure Communities program, which makes local police departments into an arm of the federal immigration deporta -
tion system. CCR continues to be a leader in the struggle to end racial profiling by police and in challenging new experimental prisons that cruelly isolate certain prisoners based on race, ethnicity, or political views.
On a personal note, I have decided to return to my home in New Orleans and 
continue the struggle from there. I will continue my alliance with the Center and look forward to ongoing legal and political work together. I am thrilled that the talented and dedicated Baher Azmy is taking up the post of Legal Director. Baher has worked closely with the Center for years in the fight against indefinite execu -
tive detention, extraordinary rendition, and torture.
The past ten years have been dangerous ones. I am proud of the work CCR has 
done and continues to do, fighting for justice, peace, freedom, and human rights at home and abroad. I have made many friends and learned much in my time in NYC with CCR. No organization is more committed to justice through the law.
Bill Quigley
29Guantánamo Habeas Cases
Al-Bihani v. Obama
Post-habeas challenge to the indefinite 
detention of Ghaleb Nassar Al-Bihani, a citizen of Yemen held at Guantánamo for nine years without charge or trial. Mr. Al-Bihani’s habeas petition was denied by the trial court based on a finding that he was an assistant cook for a group as -
sociated with Taliban. The ruling was twice upheld by the D.C. Circuit, once by a three-judge panel which concluded in part that international law does not ap -
ply in U.S. courts, and again by a majority of judges on the court which concluded that the panel’s international law ruling was unnecessary but that Mr. Al-Bihani is nonetheless detainable. The Supreme Court declined to review the case. 
Status: Habeas petition denied; advocacy 
challenging indefinite detention is pend-ing. CCRjustice.org/Al-Bihani-v-ObamaAl Qahtani v. Obama
Habeas petition for Mohammed al Qa-
htani, who suffered physical and psycho -
logical torture when he was subjected to the extraordinarily abusive “First Special Interrogation Plan,” a regime of “system -
atic enhanced interrogation techniques” personally authorized by Donald Rums-feld. This torture program violated both domestic and international law, and leaves U.S. officials open to war crimes charges.
Status: Pending.
CCRjustice.org/Al-Qahtani-v-ObamaAmeziane v. Obama
Habeas petition on behalf of Djamel Ame -
ziane, an Algerian man who requires ur -
gent resettlement protection to keep the 
U.S. government from returning him to Algeria, a country he fled nearly 20 years ago to escape violence, instability and op -
pression. Mr. Ameziane has never been charged with any crime and has been at Guantánamo since 2002, where he has suffered various abuses including pro-found isolation in solitary confinement.
Status: Stayed. CCRjustice.org/AmezianeBarre v. Obama
Habeas petition filed on behalf of Mo -
hammed Sulaymon Barre, a citizen of Somalia, who had been living in Pakistan under the mandate protection of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees. Mr. Barre was never charged with any crime, but was told that since he was from Somalia, which had no functioning government to take him back, he would be at Guantánamo “for a long time.” Mr. Barre was transferred to the Republic of Somaliland in December 2009, and has sought to continue to litigate his habeas case post-transfer in an effort to clear his name.
Status: Dismissed post-transfer; 
appeal pending in the D.C. Circuit.CCRjustice.org/Barre
Khan v. Obama
Habeas petition filed on behalf of Majid 
Khan, who was held and tortured in CIA secret detention for several years prior to his transfer to Guantánamo. The public knows nothing about what happened to Khan because the government has clas -
sified his experiences in CIA detention. These extraordinary security measures impact the public’s ability to know what is being done in its name and limits CCR’s ability to advocate on behalf of our client.
Status: Stayed.
CCRjustice.org/Khan-v-ObamaCCR Litigation
Djamel Ameziane is an Algerian refugee who has 
been detained in Guantánamo Bay since 2002.
Parents of Mohammed Sulaymon Barre. Mr. Barre was imprisoned in Guantánamo for nearly eight years before joining his family in Somaliland in 2009. He was never charged with a crime and  is continuing his habeas case in order to clear  his name.
Click on the case descriptions and photos for more information! 30Khan Tumani v. Obama
Habeas petition filed on behalf of Syrian 
father and son, Abdul Nasser and Mu -
hammed Khan Tumani. Muhammed was a juvenile when he came into U.S. custo -
dy and was separated from his father for the duration of his detention. Both were held without charge or judicial review for over seven years. CCR undertook exten -
sive diplomatic and advocacy efforts to find safe third countries for resettlement of these men, who cannot safely return to Syria.
Status: Muhammed was resettled in Por -
tugal in August 2009; his father’s release 
came one year later, when he was resettled in Cape Verde in July 2010. Father and son remain separated and have not been al -
lowed to travel or see each other to date.CCRjustice.org/Khantumani
Kiyemba v. Obama (Kiyemba I and III)
Coordinated habeas petitions filed on be -
half of seventeen Uighurs held at Guan -
tánamo, who won their cases in 2008. 
Unable to return to their home country of China for fear of torture and persecu-tion, and without anywhere else to go, 
a federal judge ordered the Uighurs re -leased into the United States. 
The D.C. 
Circuit reversed in Kiyemba I, and the 
Supreme Court granted review to con -
sider whether a habeas court has power to order actual release from custody. The Uighurs were then offered resettlement in third countries, which all but five of them accepted, and the Supreme Court vacated Kiyemba I and remanded. In Kiyemba III, the D.C. Circuit reinstated Kiyemba I. The Supreme Court declined review of Kiyemba III.
Status: Five Uighurs remain at Guantá-
namo three years after their exoneration, with no remedy for their indefinite deten-tion, which the court determined was unlawful.  CCRjustice.org/Kiyemba-v-Obama
Kiyemba v. Obama (Kiyemba II)
Nine Uighurs held at Guantánamo filed 
habeas petitions challenging their de-tention and sought orders requiring the government to provide 30 days’ notice before transferring them. The district court entered the requested orders. The D.C. Circuit reversed in Kiyemba II, hold -
ing that the district court has no power to bar the transfer of a Guantánamo de -
tainee on the ground that he might face death, torture, or further imprisonment in the recipient country. The Supreme Court declined review of Kiyemba II.Status: Guantánamo detainees may be 
transferred without prior notice; two de-tainees have since been forcibly repatriat-ed to Algeria, despite their fears of torture and persecution in that country. CCRjustice.org/Kiyemba-v-Obama
Othman v. Obama 
Habeas petition for Khaled Abd Elgabar 
Mohammed Othman of Yemen. Yemenis comprise well over one-third of the near-ly 200 men still detained at Guantánamo. In December 2009, the Obama adminis -
tration indefinitely suspended all repa -
triations to Yemen.
Status: The district court stayed Othman’s 
case in late 2008. CCRjustice.org/Othman-v-ObamaZalita v. Obama
Habeas petition involving the first legal 
challenge brought by a Guantánamo detainee to an intended transfer to his native country, Libya, where he would likely have faced torture or execution.
Status: The government agreed to release 
our client after we filed a motion for judg-ment on the record, and in February 2010 he was transferred to Albania, where he now lives as a refugee. Meanwhile, the district court dismissed his post-release attempt to clear his name.CCRjustice.org/Zalita-v-Obama
Leili Kashani, CCR’s Advocacy Program Manager 
for Human Rights and Guantánamo Global  Justice, announcing a “Close Guantánamo  with Justice Now” joint statement in front of  the White House on January 11, 2011.CCR Litigation
Guantánamo Habeas Cases
Uighur detainees show a protest sign to members of the media at Camp Iguana, Guantánamo.
Click on the case descriptions and photos for more information! 31Guantánamo Civil Cases
Al Laithi v. Rumsfeld
Civil suit for damages on behalf of an Egyp -
tian doctor who is now confined to a wheel -
chair due to the torture and mistreatment 
he experienced at Guantánamo.
Status: The government has moved to dismiss in light of the Supreme Court’s refusal to review the Court of Appeals’ decision in Rasul v. Rumsfeld. The motion to dismiss is pending.CCRjustice.org/AlLaithi-v-Rumsfeld
Al-Zahrani v. Rumsfeld
Civil suit brought by the families of Yas-
ser Al-Zahrani of Saudi Arabia and Salah Ali Abdullah Ahmed Al-Salami of Yemen, who died at Guantánamo in June 2006 along with a third man, Mani Al-Utaybi. While the military claims that the deaths were suicides, four soldiers stationed at Guantánamo at the time have come for -
ward with evidence of a cover-up of the actual cause and circumstances of the deaths. Their accounts suggest that the men may have been killed at a secret site at Guantánamo.
Status: The district court held that the 
claims were barred by national security factors, and that the defendants were additionally protected by immunity. The case is currently on appeal in the Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit.CCRjustice.org/Al-Zahrani-v-Rumsfeld
Ameziane v. United States
First Inter-American Commission on Hu -
man Rights (IACHR) petition and request 
for precautionary measures filed on be -
half of Guantánamo detainee Djamel Ameziane, an Algerian man who has been severely abused at Guantánamo and who fears persecution if forcibly transferred to Algeria. He is seeking safe third-country resettlement.
Status: Precautionary measures issued in 
August 2008; merits petition is pending.CCRjustice.org/AmezianeCelikgogus v. Rumsfeld
Civil suit for damages against Donald 
Rumsfeld and others responsible for the detention, torture and mistreatment of five men illegally detained in Guan -
tánamo for years, including two men detained for more than four years and released years after being classified as non-enemy combatants.
Status: The government moved to dismiss 
in light of the Supreme Court’s refusal to review the Court of Appeals’ decision in Rasul v. Rumsfeld. The motion to dismiss is pending.CCRjustice.org/Celikgogus-v-Rumsfeld
United States v. Ghailani (amicus)
Ahmed Ghailani was indicted in 1998 in 
connection with the bombings of two U.S. embassies in East Africa. He was captured in 2004, held in secret CIA detention, and eventually transferred to Guantánamo in September 2006, where he was held without access to counsel until charged before a military commis -
sion in 2008. He was transferred to New York in June 2009 for trial on his pending indictment. On invitation of the court, CCR submitted an amicus brief argu -
ing that Ghailani’s indictment should be dismissed, because the years-long delay  
in bringing him to trial violated his funda -
mental right to a speedy trial protected by the Federal Rules of Criminal Proce-dure, the Speedy Trial Act, and the U.S. Constitution.
Status: The court rejected Ghailani’s 
speedy trial challenge; he was later convicted of conspiracy, acquitted of 284 other charges, and sentenced to life imprisonment. CCRjustice.org/Ghailani-verdict
Talal Al-Zahrani (left) and his son Yasser  
Al-Zahrani. Yasser was 21 when he died at  Guantánamo in 2006.
Click on the case descriptions and photos for more information! 32Corporate Human  
Rights Abuse
Al Shimari v. CACI
Al-Quraishi v. Nakhla and L-3Saleh v. Titan
Three lawsuits on behalf of nearly 340 
Iraqi civilian detainees, alleging that pri-vate military contractors and the corpo -
rations that hired them (CACI and L-3) participated in a torture conspiracy at Abu Ghraib and other detention facilities in Iraq.
Status: In March 2011, the Fourth Circuit 
ordered that both the Al Shimari and Al-Quraishi cases be held in abeyance pend -
ing the outcome of a U.S. Supreme Court petition in Saleh v. Titan. The Court denied 
the Saleh plaintiffs’ petition for certiorari in June 2011, thereby ending that case. Ap -
peals in the two remaining cases are pend -
ing.CCRjustice.org/Al-Shimari-v-CACICCRjustice.org/Al-Quraishi-v-Nakhla-L3CCRjustice.org/Saleh-v-TitanBalintulo v. Daimler (amicus)
Case against American and German cor -
porations for providing the South African 
apartheid regime with products and ser-vices that advanced human rights abuses including apartheid, torture and extraju -
dicial killing. CCR’s brief emphasized the critical role of the Alien Tort Statute (ATS) in enforcing international human rights, including the right of victims to a remedy. 
Status: Appeal is pending. 
CCRjustice.org/apartheid-amicusKiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum (amicus)
Arguing that corporations can be li -
able under the Alien Tort Statute (ATS) 
because international law is primar -
ily enforced through domestic remedies and domestic federal law permits suits against corporations.
Status: After a Second Circuit dismissal, 
plaintiffs filed a petition for certiorari to the Supreme Court, which is currently pending. CCRjustice.org/Wiwa
Movsesian v. Versicherung (amicus)
Heirs of victims of the Armenian geno -
cide suing German corporations for 
unpaid insurance owed to their rela -
tives. CCR’s amicus argues that the case should be permitted to move forward under California law and not be barred by the foreign affairs doctrine.
Status: Defendants’ petition for rehear-
ing en banc is pending before the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. CCR joined EarthRights International in filing an am-icus in 2009 and a second one in February 2011 for the rehearing.CCRjustice.org/Movsesian-v-Versicherung Presbyterian Church of Sudan v. Talisman Energy, Inc. (amicus)
Case against Talisman Energy, Inc. for 
aiding and abetting the Sudanese gov -
ernment in a campaign of genocide and torture against non-Muslim African peo -
ple in Southern Sudan aimed at quelling dissent and expanding oil exploration.
Status: Plaintiffs’ petition for certiorari to 
the Supreme Court following dismissal of their case by the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit was denied in October 2010. CCRjustice.org/Church-of-Sudan-v-Talisman
Wiwa v. Royal Dutch Shell
Wiwa v. AndersonWiwa v. Shell Petroleum Development Company
Case filed by CCR in 1996 and joined by 
other organizations and co-counsel over the course of the 13-year-long battle on behalf of Ogoni human rights defenders and their relatives suing Shell for com -
plicity in torture, arbitrary detention and extrajudicial killings in Nigeria.
Status: CCR continues to monitor the 
$15.5 million settlement compensating plaintiffs and establishing a trust fund to benefit the Ogoni people.CCRjustice.org/WiwaCCR Litigation
Mr. Al-Janabi, a plaintiff in Al-Quraishi v. Nakhla 
and L-3, was held and tortured at Abu Ghraib prison for nearly a year.
Click on the case descriptions and photos for more information! 33Torture
Amnesty International, CCR, et al.
 v. CIA, Department of Defense, et al.
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) 
lawsuit against the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), Department of Defense, Department of Justice, Department of State and Department of Homeland Se -
curity seeking information about rendi -
tions; secret detention, including those at CIA “ghost” sites and facilities with un -
registered prisoners; and torture.
Status: The case is currently pending.
CCRjustice.org/GhostFOIA
ACLU, CCR, et al. v. Department  
of Defense
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) law -
suit charging that U.S. government agen -
cies illegally withheld records sought 
concerning the torture and abuse of de -
tainees in American military custody.
Status: The district court litigation has 
ended, and an appeal of the district court’s final ruling is now pending before the Second Circuit Court of Appeals.CCRjustice.org/CCR-v-DOD-tortureArar v. Ashcroft
Seeking redress and accountability for 
the U.S. government’s extraordinary rendition of Canadian citizen Maher Arar to Syria to be tortured. 
Status: Mr. Arar’s petition for certiorari 
was denied by the Supreme Court. CCR continues to seek accountability for his torture and to advocate for the U.S. to apologize and remove him from the  watch list.CCRjustice.org/ArarBush Torture Indictment (Switzerland)
A criminal indictment against George W. 
Bush for torture. Originally prepared to be filed in Switzerland during a sched -
uled visit by the former president, the document serves as a template for filing cases if he travels to any of the 149 coun-tries that have ratified the Convention Against Torture (CAT). Supported by more than 60 human rights organizations and by prominent individuals, the indict -
ment presents fundamental aspects of the case against Bush for torture, a pre-liminary legal analysis of his liability for torture, and a response to some antici -
pated defenses. 
Status: This planned filing of two cases in 
Geneva, Switzerland by individual torture survivors was called off when Bush can-celled his trip to Switzerland in February 2011. CCRjustice.org/Bush-torture-indictment-Switzerland
Spanish Investigation into the U.S.  
Torture Program
Given the refusal of the U.S. govern -
ment to conduct meaningful investiga -
tions into the Bush administration tor -
ture program, CCR continues its efforts 
to find alternate legal venues under the principle of universal jurisdiction in order to ensure that victims have their day in court and that the individuals behind the programs that tortured and abused de -
tainees are prosecuted. The Center has made filings in two cases in Spain that seek to hold former high-ranking U.S. officials accountable for their individual roles in directing, implementing or plan -
ning the U.S. torture program.
Status: CCR’s subpoena request for 
Geoffrey Miller, former commander at Guantánamo, is pending in the ongo-ing investigation into the global torture program currently before Judge Ruz. The case against the “Bush Six” (lawyers from the Bush administration implicated in the torture program) was closed by Judge Velasco in April 2011. An appeal to reopen the case is pending.CCRjustice.org/Spain-US-torture-case
Request to the International Criminal 
Court (ICC) for an Investigation of  Vatican Officials for Torture, Rape and Sexual Violence
Filing at the ICC on behalf of the Survi -
vors Network of those Abused by Priests 
(SNAP) requesting an investigation and prosecution of high-level Vatican offi-cials for the widespread and systematic torture, rape and other sexual violence committed by priests and others associ-ated with the Catholic Church as crimes against humanity. SNAP is seeking  
accountability for church officials, includ-
Maher Arar has become an outspoken human 
rights advocate. The United States continues to refuse to even apologize for rendering him to torture in Syria. 
Click on the case descriptions and photos for more information! 34-ing Joseph A. Ratzinger (now Pope 
Benedict XVI), who knew of or had am -
ple reason to know of widespread sexual violence by priests and others within the church, and either ignored or took steps to conceal the offenses, obstructed jus -
tice in national legal systems and trans -
ferred known offenders to other loca -
tions where they continued to commit rape and other acts of torture and sexual violence.
Status: Sealed communication filed in 
May 2011.CCRjustice.org/ICCvaticanprosecutionTargeted Killings
ACLU and CCR v. Geithner
Lawsuit against the U.S. Treasury De -
partment Secretary and the Office of 
Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) director challenging the legality and constitution -
ality of a licensing scheme that required attorneys to apply for a special license prior to being allowed to provide un -
compensated representation to, or for the benefit of, someone the government labeled a “specially designated global terrorist” or risk criminal sanctions. The lawsuit charged that the regulations vio -
lated the First and Fifth Amendments, and the separation of powers.
Status: As a result of the lawsuit, the 
government granted a license to CCR and the ACLU to represent Nasser Al-Aulaqi, the father of Anwar Al-Aulaqi, in a lawsuit challenging the Obama administration’s authorization for the targeted killing of his son, and changed the regulations to allow uncompensated attorneys to provide representation to designated individu-als without first seeking a government license. The case was then voluntarily dismissed.CCRjustice.org/Al-Aulaqi-v-ObamaAl-Aulaqi v. Obama
Lawsuit on behalf of Nasser Al-Aulaqi 
challenging the Obama administration’s decision to authorize the targeted killing of his son, U.S. citizen Anwar Al-Aulaqi, by the CIA and secret military forces. CCR and the ACLU argued that any tar-geting of Al-Aulaqi, who is believed to be in Yemen, outside of any armed con -
flict, must be governed by the U.S. Con -
stitution and international human rights law, under which the use of lethal force is only permissible after due process or as a last resort in the face of an imminent threat of deadly harm.
Status: The case was dismissed on stand-
ing and “political question” grounds by the district court in December 2010.CCRjustice.org/Al-Aulaqi-v-ObamaHaiti
IACHR Precautionary Measures on U.S. Deportations (Haiti)
In January 2011, CCR and partner organi -
zations filed an emergency petition with 
the Inter-American Commission on Hu -
man Rights (IACHR) to halt the roundup, detention and imminent deportation by the U.S. of hundreds of Haitian nationals being sent back to disease-ridden deten -
tion facilities in post-earthquake Haiti. Petition argues deporting people to Haiti while it is still reeling from the devastat -
ing 2010 earthquake, and is burdened with a massive cholera epidemic, politi -
cal unrest, and rampant street violence, will result in serious human rights viola-tions, including deprivations of the rights to life, family, and due process, and free -
dom from cruel or unusual punishment.
Status: In February 2011, the IACHR grant -
ed our request for precautionary measures 
and urged the U.S. to suspend deporta -
tions of the five Haitians named in our peti -
tion. In May 2011, the IACHR expanded the precautionary measures to cover an additional 33 people facing deportation to Haiti. As of this printing, the United States is still actively removing people to Haiti.CCRjustice.org/Haiti-IACHR-removalsCCR Litigation
Members of Survivors Network of those Abused 
by Priests (SNAP) holding photos of themselves and other children who were abused by clergy.
Click on the case descriptions and photos for more information! 35IACHR Precautionary Measures  
on Forced Evictions (Haiti)
Hundreds of thousands of people who 
are still living in inadequate camps af -
ter the 2010 earthquake in Haiti are threatened with forced eviction by the Haitian government. These illegal evic -
tions are being carried out in displace -
ment camps across the country, leaving already displaced people in even more vulnerable circumstances. CCR and our partner organizations filed a request for precautionary measures with the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) in November 2010.
Status: In November 2010, the Commis-
sion granted petitioners’ request and urged Haiti to implement a moratorium to stop the evictions. The government of Haiti failed to respond to the Commis-sion’s inquiries or implement the mora-torium. In June 2011, CCR and partner organizations submitted an update on the conditions to the Commission, renewed our requests for precautionary measures, and asked that the newly elected govern-ment of President Michel Martelly be directed to implement the moratorium and associated procedures. The organizations await the Commission’s response even as illegal forced evictions have increased dramatically.CCRjustice.org/Haiti-IACHR-evictionsIACHR Precautionary Measures on Gender Based Violence (Haiti)
In October 2010, CCR joined with wom -
en’s groups and advocates in Haiti as well 
as with U.S.-based organizations in filing a request to the Inter-American Com -
mission on Human Rights (IACHR) for precautionary measures urgently need -
ed to prevent the ongoing rape, sexual violence, and death of women, girls and women’s human rights defenders living in 22 camps in Port-au-Prince, Haiti.
Status: The IACHR granted the request in 
January 2011, adopting the recommen-dations requested by the human rights groups: that the Haitian government take immediate measures to prevent sexual violence against women and girls in dis-placement camps.CCRjustice.org/Haiti-IACHR-gender-violenceHonduras
Bigwood v. Department of Defense
Case representing investigative journal-
ist Jeremy Bigwood in a Freedom of Infor -
mation Act (FOIA) lawsuit over requests for materials from the U.S. government regarding various U.S. interests, actors or agencies and their knowledge of or role in the 2009 coup d’état in Honduras. CCR supports his efforts, in conjunction with the Comisión de Verdad (see be -
low), to understand how and why the coup took place, to ensure accountabil -
ity for human rights violations stemming from it and to achieve genuine truth and reconciliation in Honduras. This case charges the Department of Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency with withholding information that should have been handed over under earlier FOIA requests.
Status: Filed in March 2011, awaiting re-
sponse.CCRjustice.org/Honduras-FOIA
Honduras True Commission FOIAs
In June 2010, the Human Rights Platform 
of Honduras created the True Commis -
sion (Comisión de Verdad) to respond to the need for a thorough and indepen -
dent inquiry into the 2009 coup d’etat 
Jeena Shah of the Institute for Justice & Democ-
racy in Haiti with CCR Executive Director Vince Warren during a human rights delegation to Haiti. 
CCR Legal Director Bill Quigley, with CCR staff members Sunita Patel (left) and Laura Raymond, visited a tent city in Port-Au-Prince, Haiti to con -
duct human rights trainings. 
Click on the case descriptions and photos for more information! 36and to the inadequacies of the coup gov -
ernment’s appointed Truth and Recon-
ciliation Commission. The commission is investigating human rights violations, in-cluding conducting extensive interviews with victims or their survivors. Its goal is to make a full analysis of what led up to the coup and to explore the historical significance of the overthrow of Presi -
dent Manuel Zelaya. 
Status: On March 24, 2011, CCR filed a 
series of FOIA requests on behalf of the True Commission for information from the Department of Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency. CCRjustice.org/Honduras-FOIAMurillo v. Micheletti Baín
Suing Roberto Micheletti Baín, former 
president of the Honduran National Con -
gress who took power immediately fol -
lowing the 2009 military coup, on behalf of the family of Isis Obed Murillo who was killed during a peaceful demonstra-tion protesting the coup. The suit seeks accountability for extrajudicial killing, crimes against humanity, wrongful death and other human rights violations that occurred in Honduras under the author-ity and/or direction of Micheletti. 
Status: Filed in June 2011. 
CCRjustice.org/Honduras-coupBolivia
Mamani v. Sánchez de LozadaMamani v. Sánchez Berzaín
Cases against former president and for -
mer minister of defense of Bolivia for 
their roles in the killing of civilians dur -
ing popular protests against the Bolivian government in September and October 2003.
Status: Oral argument was heard in May 
2011 in the Eleventh Circuit Court of Ap-peals; decision pending.CCRjustice.org/Mamani-v-Sanchez
Palestine
CCR v. Department of Defense et al. 
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) law -
suit seeking the release of U.S. agency 
records relating to the May 31, 2010 at -
tack by Israel on a flotilla of six vessels in international waters seeking to deliver humanitarian aid to Gaza, and regard-ing U.S. policy towards the blockade of Gaza.
Status: Filed in May 2011.
CCRjustice.org/flotillaPetition for Urgent Action on HumanRights Violations by Israel: Desecration of the Ma’man Allah (Mamilla) Muslim Cemetery in Jerusalem
Descendants of people buried in the 
historic Muslim Mamilla Cemetery in Jerusalem seeking to halt construction of a “Museum of Tolerance” atop the cemetery by the Los Angeles-based Si -
mon Wiesenthal Center, to re-bury the removed remains, and to protect and preserve the remaining cemetery.
Status: Construction of the “Museum of 
Tolerance” was given final approval; CCR continues to appeal to the international community to help stop desecration of the cemetery. CCRjustice.org/MamillaCCR Litigation
Gaza flotilla ship, the Mavi Marmara, displaying 
Turkish and Palestinian flags and a banner that reads: “This is a humanitarian aid ship” in four languages. Nine passengers were killed and over 60 injured after Israeli commandos boarded and opened fire.
 Silvia Mencías holds a photo of her son Isis Obed Murillo who was killed by Honduran military forces. CCR represents his parents in a lawsuit against Roberto Micheletti Baín who took power immediately following the 2009 military coup.
Marchers show their support for the Frente  Nacional de Resistencia Popular (FNRP), the popular resistance movement that arose in  opposition to the military coup in Honduras.
Click on the case descriptions and photos for more information! 37Government Misconduct
CCR v. Bush
Challenging NSA warrantless domestic 
electronic surveillance, asserting that it violates the Foreign Intelligence Surveil-lance Act (FISA) and the First and Fourth Amendments. The lawsuit is on behalf of CCR attorneys seeking to protect our cli -
ents’ right to confidential attorney-client communications.
Status: In January 2011, the district judge 
dismissed all plaintiffs’ claims. Plaintiffs have appealed, and the case will be briefed to the Ninth Circuit starting in August 2011.CCRjustice.org/CCR-v-Obama
Ibrahim v. Department of Homeland  
Security (amicus)
Because of her inclusion on the federal 
government’s “no-fly list,” Stanford doc -
toral student Rahinah Ibrahim was arrest -
ed when she showed up to board a flight to Malaysia. Now living in Malaysia, she sued to have her name removed from the list but the district court dismissed her claims, agreeing with the government’s argument that as a non-citizen no longer living inside the United States, Ibrahim had no constitutional rights. CCR signed onto an amicus brief arguing that non-citizens outside of the United States are not categorically outside the protection of the U.S. Constitution.
Status: The Court of Appeals for the Ninth 
Circuit heard argument in the case in May 2011.CCRjustice.org/Ibrahim-v-DHS
Sanders v. Szubin
Challenging the U.S. government’s re -
quirement for individuals to provide po -
tentially self-incriminating information, 
under threat of civil penalties, as part of the U.S. embargo against Cuba. Return -
ing travelers are required to fill out a form asking whether they spent money in Cuba. Lying on the form is itself a crime, while admitting to spending money in Cuba is in violation of the embargo, and refusing to fill out the questionnaire can result in thousands of dollars in fines. 
Status: Briefs seeking judgment on the 
papers filed by both sides in July 2011; awaiting ruling.CCRjustice.org/Sanders-v-Szubin
Wilner v. NSA and DOJ
FOIA lawsuit to determine whether the 
government has engaged in warrantless wiretapping of CCR attorneys and Guan -
tánamo habeas counsel.
Status: In October 2010, the Supreme 
Court denied the plaintiffs’ petition for certiorari. CCRjustice.org/WilnerPolicing and Prisons
Aref v. Holder
Challenging policies and conditions at 
two experimental prison units called Communications Management Units (CMU’s) that unconstitutionally target certain prisoners for severe social isola -
tion, including a complete ban on any physical contact with visiting friends and family and restricted access to phone calls, work, and educational opportuni -
ties. Over two-thirds of these prisoners are Muslim—an over-representation of at least 1,000 percent—and many others have unpopular political views, includ-ing environmental activists designated as “eco-terrorists.” CMU prisoners are not informed of the allegations that led to their transfer nor are they allowed an opportunity to refute them. Many expect to serve their entire sentences under these harsh conditions. The secret and arbitrary nature of the decision to trans-fer a prisoner to a CMU has allowed for a pattern of racial and religious discrimina -
tion and retaliation for engaging in First Amendment-protected political activity. 
Status: In March 2011, the court denied 
defendants’ motion to dismiss in part, and granted it in part, allowing plaintiffs to proceed on their procedural due process and retaliation claims. The case is now in discovery. CCRjustice.org/Aref-v-Holder
Yassin Aref was designated to a Communications 
Management Unit (CMU) in May 2007, and held there until April 2011. He continues to challenge the lack of due process associated with CMU designation in Aref v. Holder.
Click on the case descriptions and photos for more information! 38Doe v. Jindal
Challenging a Louisiana law that requires 
sex offender registration for individuals convicted of Crime against Nature by Solicitation, a statute that targeted so -
licitation of oral or anal sex for a fee and treated it more harshly than a prostitution conviction. Sex offender designation im -
pacts access to housing, employment, social services and even shelter in the event of an emergency or natural disas -
ter; and also requires the person to carry a state ID with the words “SEX OFFEND -
ER” in orange letters—a modern day “scarlet letter.” This archaic law singled out non-procreative sex acts associated with homosexuality for harsher punish -
ment, and disproportionately affected women, African Americans, members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgen -
der communities, and poor people. 
Status: In June 2011, after an advocacy 
campaign led by community group Wom-en with a Vision, CCR and other com-munity partners, the Louisiana Legislature equalized all penalties for convictions un-der this statute with those for prostitution, and eliminated the sex offender registra-tion requirement going forward. The new legislation does not, however, provide relief to the hundreds of people currently on the registry due to past conviction un-der this statute. The litigation continues in order to ensure that this relief will extend to those with older convictions. CCRjustice.org/ScarletLetter
Floyd v. City of New York
A follow-up class action lawsuit build -
ing on an earlier CCR case, Daniels v. 
City of New York , in which the court or -
dered the New York City Police Depart-
ment (NYPD) to record, citywide, the racial makeup of every person stopped by police so that this data could be re -
ported to CCR. This case challenges the widespread racial profiling and uncon -stitutional stop-and-frisk practices docu-mented by the data produced by Dan-
iels. These NYPD practices have led to a dramatic increase in the number of sus -
picion-less stop-and-frisks occurring per year in the city, with the majority of stops taking place in communities of color. In 2010, the total number of these stops hit an all-time high—a shocking 87% of those stopped were Black or Latino. 
Status: In February 2011, the City filed 
for partial summary judgment and CCR is awaiting a decision from the court.CCRjustice.org/Floyd-v-NYCGlik v. Cunniffe (amicus)
Amicus brief arguing that concerned in -
dividuals and Copwatch groups have a 
First Amendment right to record public police activity.
Status: Filed January 2011; awaiting ruling.
CCRjustice.org/Glik-v-Cunniffe
NLG & CCR v. Johnson
Suing the Virginia Department of Cor-
rections for restricting access to the Jailhouse Lawyers Handbook, a free self-help legal guide for prisoners co-au -
thored by CCR and the National Lawyers Guild. 
Status: Successfully settled in February 
2011 with an agreement to remove all restrictions and to place five copies in the libraries of each facility under the control of the Virginia Department of Corrections. CCRjustice.org/JailhouseLaw
Puiatti v. Buss (amicus) 
Supreme Court amicus brief filed on be -
half of CCR urging the Court to review 
the death sentence of Carl Puiatti, who was tried and sentenced along with a co-defendant, in violation of the con-stitutional requirement that a jury con-sider each defendant as an individual before imposing a sentence of death. Individualized determinations are es -
sential in capital sentencing to ensure CCR Litigation
The Jailhouse Lawyers Handbook is distributed 
for free to prisoners and prison law libraries across the country. It can be dowloaded at  
jailhouselaw.org.
CCR Staff Attorney Alexis Agathocleous (left) with Deon Haywood, Executive Director of Women with a Vision (center front) and CCR Legal Director Bill Quigley, at the filing of Doe v. 
Jindal in New Orleans.
Click on the case descriptions and photos for more information! 39that mitigating evidence—such as facts 
about the defendants’ circumstances or background—can be given meaningful consideration. Jurors are known to be far more likely to sentence criminal defen -
dants to death when co-defendants are jointly tried. 
Status: In June 2011, the Supreme Court 
declined to review the case.CCRjustice.org/Puiatti-v-Buss
Wright v. Corrections Corporation 
of America (FCC Rule-making Petition)
Petitioning the FCC to regulate interstate 
prison telephone calls to ensure fair and reasonable rates for prisoners and their families.
Status: The petition is under consideration 
by the FCC.CCRjustice.org/Wright-v-CCAImmigrant Justice
Cardenas Abreu v. Holder
Petition challenging a Board of Immigra -
tion Appeals (BIA) decision allowing a 
deportation based on a criminal convic -
tion to be carried out before all appeals in the criminal case are final. 
Status: In May 2011 the case was deemed 
moot by the BIA after Mr. Cardenas’ crimi-nal appeal was affirmed.CCRjustice.org/Cardenas-v-Holder
National Day Laborer Organizing 
Network (NDLON) v. U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement Agency
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) 
lawsuit seeking documents relating to Immigration and Customs Enforce -
ment’s secretive “Secure Communities” (S-Comm) data sharing program which drastically increases the involvement of state and local entities in the federal immigration detention and deporta -
tion system. This controversial pro -
gram institutes immigration fingerprint checks for all arrestees, even when charges are minor, and without requir -
ing a criminal conviction. A broad co -
alition of activists across the country has mobilized against the program, or -ganizing walkouts and arrests during  
S-Comm hearings, rallies, and petitions to  
President Obama.
Status: Document production continues 
and the parties are litigating exemptions applied by the defendant agencies.CCRjustice.org/secure-communities
Ragbir v. Holder (amicus)
Supporting Ravidath Ragbir’s appeal of 
a deportation order and requesting that his immigration case be sent back to the Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) with instructions to apply the new and broad -er evidentiary standards which were es -
tablished in 2009.
Status: Amicus filed at the Supreme Court 
in May 2011, in support of Mr. Ragbir’s  request that the Court hear his case. CCRjustice.org/Ragbir-v-Holder
Turkmen v. Ashcroft
Class action lawsuit seeking to hold for -
mer Attorney General John Ashcroft and 
other high-level officials accountable for unlawful racial profiling, mass detention, and abusive treatment of South Asian, Arab, and Muslim non-U.S. citizens after 9/11. In 2009 five of CCR’s clients won
(From left) CCR Staff Attorney Rachel Meeropol, 
CCR Staff Attorney Sunita Patel and co-counsel Michael Winger outside the courthouse after oral arguments in Turkmen v. Ashcroft.
From left: CCR Executive Director Vince Warren, National Organizer for NDLON Sarahi Uribe, NDLON Executive Director Pablo Alvarado and CCR Staff Attorney Sunita Patel awarding NDLON with the 2011 Ally for Social Change Award. 
Click on the case descriptions and photos for more information! 40an important $1.26 million settlement 
from the U.S. government. In 2011 CCR has continued its efforts to hold high-level Bush administration architects of the post-9/11 sweeps accountable for their actions by filing a new complaint in the case. The latest complaint includes detailed allegations directly tying John Ashcroft, FBI Director Robert Mueller and former INS Commissioner James Ziglar to illegal roundups and abuse based on information that CCR compiled through discovery and depositions dur -
ing our years of Turkmen litigation. The 
defendants, who vigorously opposed CCR’s right to continue the case on be -
half of new clients, have moved to dis -
miss the entire case once again on quali -
fied immunity grounds.
Status: Oral argument on defendants’ 
motions to dismiss was heard in March of 2011; awaiting ruling. CCRjustice.org/Turkmen-v-AshcroftRacial & Economic Justice
Brown v. Snyder 
Challenging the Michigan law that allows 
the Governor to appoint so-called “emer -
gency managers” to take control of local government or school districts, replacing elected officials. Having nearly unlim -
ited and unilateral authority, emergency managers can make or change any local laws, sell off public assets, take on public debt, lay off workers and repeal collec -
tive bargaining agreements. The lawsuit charges Michigan Governor Rick Snyder and the Legislature with implementing an unconstitutional power grab that ef -
fectively silences and disenfranchises citizens. 
Status: Filed in June 2011.
CCRjustice.org/Brown-v-Snyder
Gulino v. Board of Education of the City 
of New York
Class action lawsuit on behalf of public 
school teachers of color who are chal -
lenging discriminatory tests and licens -
ing rules which stripped them of their permanent teaching licenses, seniority, and in some cases their tenured teach -
ing positions, and resulted in drastic re -ductions in salary and benefits. Many of these teachers were retained, on a per diem basis, in the same teaching posi -
tions with the same course loads. 
Status: Judge ruled against plaintiffs; 
however Court of Appeals remanded the matter for reconsideration. Briefs on remand were filed in February 2010; awaiting decision. CCRjustice.org/Gulino-v-EdHarrington v. New York MetropolitanTransportation Authority (MTA) 
Suing the City of New York on behalf of 
a Sikh subway motorman who, follow -
ing the 9/11 attacks, was ordered by the transportation authority to either replace his turban with an MTA cap or choose a yard job out of public sight. The case was later consolidated with an action brought by the federal government chal -
lenging the MTA’s uniform requirements for violating the right of Muslim and Sikh employees to wear head coverings as a religious observance. 
Status: Parties are engaged in  
settlement talks. CCRjustice.org/Harrington-v-MTA
Johnson v. Locke
Lawsuit charging that the government’s 
use of arrest records as a strike against applicants for well-paid temporary posi-tions with the U.S. Census Bureau was racially discriminatory. Applicants were required to produce documentation for any past arrest, including minor charges and regardless of whether or not the ar-rest resulted in conviction or of how long ago it occurred. Using arrest records as an employment screening criteria com-pounds the already existing injustice of extreme racial disparity in the criminal CCR Litigation
Ms. Edith Lee-Payne, CCR client in Brown v. 
Snyder, speaking to the press after filing the case. In the background (left to right) are CCR Senior Staff Attorney Darius Charney, Sugar Law Center Legal Director John Philo, and another plaintiff in the case, Leslie Little.
Click on the case descriptions and photos for more information! 41legal system in which people of color are 
arrested at disproportionately high rates. 
Status: Litigation ongoing, awaiting ruling 
on proposed amended complaint.CCRjustice.org/Johnson-v-Locke
United States and Vulcan Society v. 
City of New York
Challenging racially discriminatory hiring 
practices of the NYC Fire Department (FDNY) on behalf of the Vulcan Society, an association of Black firefighters and individual class representatives. This case originated from two Equal Employ-ment Opportunity Commission charges filed by CCR in 2002 and 2005 and was ultimately referred to the U.S. Depart-ment of Justice, which sued the City for discrimination in the FDNY’s hiring pro -
cess. CCR joined the resulting new case on behalf of the Vulcan Society, charging the FDNY with intentionally discriminat -
ing against minority applicants. Continu -
ing to use a hiring process that is known to disproportionately disqualify minority applicants unfairly denies some of the best-paid and well respected public sec -
tor jobs to people of color. The NYC Fire Department is the least racially diverse of any major U.S. city—3.4 percent Black in a city that is 27 percent Black.
Status: Judge ruled in favor of the Vulcan 
Society firefighters in 2009 and 2010. A new entrance exam is under construction and trial is scheduled for August 2011 to determine what relief to grant.CCRjustice.org/VulcansDefending Dissent
Association of Community  Organizations for Reform Now (ACORN) v. United States
Challenging the unconstitutional de-
funding of ACORN, charging Congress with violating the bill of attainder pro -
vision in the U.S. Constitution and the right to due process and infringing on the First Amendment right to freedom of association by also targeting ACORN af -
filiated and allied organizations. A bill of attainder is a punitive legislative act that singles out an individual or group with -
out the safeguard of a judicial hearing. CCR recognized that allowing an effec -
tive grassroots-based social justice orga -
nization to be blacklisted by conservative politicians presents a serious threat to the U.S. social justice movement. 
Status: In August 2010, the U.S. Court of 
Appeals for the Second Circuit reversed the district court’s granting of a perma-nent injunction in favor of ACORN. CCR petitioned the U.S Supreme Court to hear the case, but in June 2011, it refused to  do so. CCRjustice.org/ACORNGoodman v. St. Paul
On behalf of three Democracy Now! 
journalists arrested during the 2008 Re-publican National Convention, this law -
suit charges law enforcement agencies with unlawful arrests and unreasonable use of force, and of violating the journal -
ists’ First Amendment rights as members of the press to report on matters of pub -
lic concern and the public actions of law enforcement.
Status: Lawsuit is ongoing; parties are 
exchanging documents and engaged in depositions. CCRjustice.org/Goodman
CCR Senior Staff Attorney Anjana Samant  
speaking at a press conference with Vulcan  Society member and CCR client Deury Smith. 
 Democracy Now! producer Sharif Abdel Koud-dous (seated right) under arrest at the Republican National Convention in St. Paul.
Click on the case descriptions and photos for more information! 42United States v. Buddenberg
Defending four animal rights activists be-
ing charged under the Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act with conspiracy to commit “animal enterprise terrorism” for First Amendment–protected political activi -
ties that include protesting, chalking the sidewalk, chanting and leafleting.
Status: In July of 2010 the district court 
granted CCR’s motion to dismiss the indictments. While the indictments were dismissed without prejudice, so far defen-dants have not been re-indicted. CCRjustice.org/US-v-BuddenbergUnited States v. Mejia-Castillo
A petition filed on behalf of Camilo 
Mejia, a former Staff Sergeant with the Florida National Guard who was the first Iraq war veteran to openly refuse to re-deploy based on his growing moral op -
position to the war and to specific orders given to his unit involving the abuse of detainees. Mr. Mejia seeks reversal of his conviction, restoration of his rank, and back pay.
Status: In January 2010, the Court of 
Appeals for the Armed Forces issued an order refusing to hear the appeal, ending the case. CCRjustice.org/US-v-Mejia
United States v. Stop Huntingdon  
Animal Cruelty (SHAC7) (amicus)
Amicus briefs on behalf of animal rights 
activists known as the SHAC7, who were indicted in 2004 for violating the Animal Enterprise Protection Act, based on their internet postings, public speeches and facilitation of demonstrations. Previous appeals were denied and the activists have served four to six-year sentences. The lower court acknowledged that much of the activists’ speech and advo-cacy, in itself, was protected by the First Amendment. Still, that same court decid -
ed that the activists’ “speeches, protests and web postings” could be criminalized as “implied threats,” given the broad his -torical context of an act of violence by animal rights activists in another country and of acts of property destruction in this country. The SHAC7 were not shown or even accused of having personally en -
gaged in any acts of violence or property destruction. CCR urged the Supreme Court to hear the case, arguing that the prosecution of activists for their speech at public demonstrations violates the First Amendment. 
Status: In March of 2011 the Supreme 
Court declined to review the case.CCRjustice.org/US-v-SHAC7Disability Justice
Civic Association of the Deaf v. City of New York
In 2010 the City of New York brought a 
motion to vacate a permanent injunction that CCR had secured in a 1995 class action lawsuit brought by the Civic As-sociation of the Deaf of New York City. The injunction prevented the City from removing street alarm boxes the Deaf and hard of hearing can use to summon emergency assistance from the street, and it halted a plan for the public to use pay telephones instead. The ruling found that replacing accessible alarm boxes with public telephones violated the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and established an important principle under Title II of the ADA that when gov -
ernment changes an existing service, the changes must not discriminate against people with disabilities.  
Status: In June 2010, the City of New York 
asked the court to vacate or modify the permanent injunction. The court heard arguments on June 3, 2011 and will rule later in the year.  CCRjustice.org/CAD-v-NYCCCR Litigation
Civic Association of the Deaf members with CCR 
legal team standing with street alarm box outside federal court in Manhattan following argument  on June 3, 2011.
CCR clients in United States v. Buddenberg. From left: Nathan Pope, Adriana Stumpo, Maryam Khajavi and Joseph Buddenberg.
Click on the case descriptions and photos for more information! 43ACLU and CCR v. Geithner (p.34)  
AmericAn  civil liberties  Union (AclU)
ACLU, CCR, et al. v. Department  
of Defense (p.33)
AmericAn  civil liberties  Union (AclU)
Gibbons  P .c.
ACORN v. United States  (p.41)
GoodmAn  & H Urwitz , P .c.
William Goodman
Julie Hurwitz
sAlles And scHw Artz
Arthur Schwartz
Jules Lobel
Al Laithi v. Rumsfeld  (p.31)
coHen milstein  sellers  & t oll, Pllc 
Kit A. Pierson
orrick, HerrinG ton & s Utcliffe  llP 
Russell P . Cohen
Robert A.Rosenfeld
Howard Ullman
Carolyn Patty Blum
Al Qahtani v. Obama (p.29)
center for internA tionAl  HUmAn  riGHts,  
 n ortHwestern  University  scHool  of lAw
Sandra Babcock
Gibbons  P .c.
Lawrence Lustberg
Ramzi KassemAl Shimari v. CACI  (p.32)
Akeel & v Alentine  Plc
Shereef Akeel
bUrke llc
Susan Burke
Katherine Hawkins
motley rice llc
Vincent Parrett
Al-Aulaqi v. Obama (p.34)
AllAwo lAw firm
Muhammed Allawo 
AmericAn  civil liberties  Union (AclU)
nAtionAl  orGAniz Ation for defendinG   
 r iGHts And freedoms  (Hood)
Al-Bihani v. Obama  (p.29)
Ahmed GhappourAl-Quraishi v. Nakhla and L-3 
(p.32)
Akeel & v Alentine  Plc
Shereef Akeel
bUrke llc
Susan Burke
Katherine Hawkins
motley rice llc
Vincent Parrett
Al-Zahrani v. Rumsfeld (p.31)
GoodmAn  & H Urwitz , P .c.
William Goodman
Johanna KalbAmeziane v. Obama (p.29)
JAckmAn  & A ssociA tes
Andrew J. Brouwer
Sophie WellerAmeziane v. United States 
(p.31)
center for JUstice  And internA tionAl  lAw
Annette Martínez Orabona
 
Amnesty International, CCR, et al. v. CIA, Department of Defense, et al. 
(p.33)
morrison  & f oerster  llP
David S. Brown
 Madeleine A. HenslerJamie A. LevittAnthony M. Radice
nyU w AsHinG ton sqUAre  leGAl services
Amna Akbar 
Margaret Satterthwaite
Aref v. Holder (p.37)
PortlAnd  lAw collective
Kenneth A. Kreuscher
weil, GotsHAl  & m AnGes  llP
Annie Castellani
Kavita DesaiGregory Silbert
Bigwood v. Department of Defense  
(p.35)
GeorGe  wAsHinG ton University  
Zachary WolfeBrown v. Snyder (p.40)
GoodmAn  & H Urwitz , P .c.
William Goodman
Julie Hurwitz
miller coHen, Plc
Keith Flynn
sAnders  lAw firm, P .c.
Herbert Sanders
sUGAr lAw center for economic  And  
 s ociAl JUstice
John Philo
Bush Torture Indictment  (Switzerland) 
(p.33)
eUroPeAn  center for constitUtionAl  And  
 HUmAn  riGHts (eccHr)
Michael Ratner
CCR v. Department of Defense et al. (Free Gaza Flotilla) 
(p.36)
University  of virGiniA  internA tionAl   
 HUmAn  riGHts lAw clinic
Deena Hurwitz
Celikgogus v. Rumsfeld (p.31)
coHen milstein  sellers  & t oll, Pllc 
Kit A. Pierson
orrick, HerrinG ton & s Utcliffe  llP 
Howard Ullman
Russell P . CohenRobert A. Rosenfeld
Carolyn Patty BlumThe Center for Constitutional Rights is grateful to the many cooperating attorneys, co-counsel and private law firms that joined with us in our legal work this past year.  
The people named in the list below were a critical part of our efforts to use the law in the struggle for social justice and human rights. We couldn’t do it without you.Co-Counsel
Click on the case names for more information! 44Civic Association of the Deaf v.  
City of New York (p.42)
broAcH & s tUlberG , llP
Amy F . Shulman
Robert B. Stulberg
new york lAwyers  for tHe PUblic interest
Aditi Kothekar Shah
syrAcUse  University  colleGe  of lAw,  
 d isAbility  riGHts clinic
Michael A. Schwartz
Franklin Siegel
Doe v. Jindal (p.38)
cleAry Gottlieb  steen & H Amilton  llP
Carmine D. Boccuzzi, Jr.
Anna F . Connolly
Katherine CooperKyle DandeletClair Bo KwonLauren Peacock
stUArt  H. s mitH lAw clinic & c enter for  
 s ociAl JUstice , loyolA  University  new  
 o rleAns  colleGe  of lAw
Davida Finger
William P . Quigley
Andrea J. Ritchie
Floyd v. City of New York  (p.38)
beldock , levine & H offmAn , llP
Jennifer Borchetta
Jonathan Moore
covinG ton & b UrlinG , llP
Eric Hellerman
Gretchen Hoff Varner
Taylor HoffmanPhilip IrwinGoodman v. St. Paul (p.41)
weil, GotsHAl  & m AnGes  llP
Christine T. Di Guglielmo
Serj Alex KhachaturianAlexander O. LevineJennifer M. OliverSteven A. Reiss
Albert T. GoinsBruce Nestor
Gulino v. Board of Education of the  
City of New York 
(p.40)
dlA P iPer
Anthony D. Gill
Joshua S. Sohn
Joel Hellman
Barbara OlshanskySteve Selinger
Harrington v. New York Metropolitan  
Transportation Authority 
(p.40)
lAw offices of rAvinder  sinGH bHAllA
Ravinder S. Bhalla
sikH coAlition
Amardeep Singh
IACHR Precautionary Measures on  
Forced Evictions (Haiti) (p.35)
bUreAU  des AvocA tes internA tionAUx  (bAi)
institUte  for JUstice  And democrAcy  in  
 HAiti (iJdH)
internA tionAl  HUmAn  riGHts lAw clinic  
 At AmericAn  University ’s wAsHinG ton  
 c olleGe  of lAw
yoU.me.we.IACHR Precautionary Measures on  
Gender Based Violence (Haiti) (p.35)
bUreAU  des AvocA tes internA tionAUx  (bAi)
cUny s cHool  of lAw internA tionAl   
 w omen’s HUmAn  riGHts clinic
institUte  for JUstice  And democrAcy   
 in HAiti (iJdH)
mAdre
morrison  & f oerster
women’s link worldwide
IACHR Precautionary Measures on  
U.S. Deportations (Haiti) (p.34)
AclU of florid A
florid A immiGrAnt  AdvocAcy  center
stUArt  H. s mitH lAw clinic & c enter for  
 s ociAl JUstice , loyolA  University  new  
 o rleAns  colleGe  of lAw
University  of miAmi immiGrA tion clinic
University  of miAmi internA tionAl  lAw clinic
Ibrahim v. Department of  
Homeland Security (p.37)
AsiAn lAw cAUcUs
Veena Dubal
binGHAm  mccUtcHen , llP
Sujal Shah
Johnson v. Locke (p.40)
commUnity  leGAl services  inc.
commUnity  service  society
indiAn  lAw resoUrce  center
lAtinoJUstice  Prldef
lAwyers ’ committee  for civil riGHts  
 Under lAw
oUtten  & G olden  llP
PUblic citizenKhan Tumani v. Obama (p.30)
GArvey  scHUbert  bArer
Eldon Greenberg
scHnAder  HArrison  seGAl & l ewis llP
Gordon Woodward
Sophie WellerKhan v. Obama 
(p.29)
Jenner  & b lock llP
Brian Fischer
Colleen Harrison
Katya JestinPaul M. MonteleoniNatalie OrpettAndrew WeissmannPrashant Yerramalli
Kiyemba v. Obama (Kiyemba I & III)  
(p.30)
bAker & m ckenzie llP
Angela C. Vigil 
binGHAm  mccUtcHen  llP
Susan Baker Manning
Neil McGaraghan
Jason S. Pinney  
Rheba RutkowskiSabin Willett
krAmer  levin nAftAlis & f rAnkel  llP
Leah Grossi
Darren LaVerne Sarah RosenSeema Saifee Michael J. SternhellEric A. Tirschwell
miller & c HevAlier cHtd
George Clarke
rePrieve
Cori Crider
Clive Stafford Smith
Elizabeth P . GilsonCo-Counsel
Click on the case names for more information! 45Kiyemba v. Obama (Kiyemba II)  (p.30)
binGHAm  mccUtcHen  llP
Susan Baker Manning
Neil McGaraghan
Jason S. Pinney  
Rheba Rutkowski
Sabin Willett
cleAry Gottlieb  steen & H Amilton  llP
Jonathan I. Blackman
Christopher P . Moore Rahul MukhiAaron Marr Page
Mamani v. Sánchez Berzaín and Mamani  
 v. Sánchez de Lozada 
(p.36)
Akin GUmP strAUss  HAUer & f eld llP
Meredith Bentley
Jeremy BollingerSteven SchulmanMichael SmallJohn Van Sickle
internA tionAl  HUmAn  riGHts clinic At  
 HArvArd lAw scHool
James Cavallaro
Susan FarbsteinTyler Giannini
kAirys, rUdovsky , messinG  & f einberG , llP
David Rudovsky
kUrzbAn , kUrzbAn , w einGer  & t etzoli
Geoffrey Hoffman
Ira Kurzban
scHonbrUn , desimone , sePlow , HArris  
 & H offmAn  llP
Paul Hoffman
Judith ChomskyJennie GreenBeth StephensMurillo v. Micheletti Baín (p.36)
Nikki Thanos
National Day Laborer Organizing  
Network v. U.S. Immigration and  
Customs Enforcement Agency (p.39)
immiGrA tion JUstice  clinic,  
 c Ardozo  scHool  of lAw
Bridget Kessler
Peter Markowitz
mAyer brown  llP
Norm Cerullo
Therese CraparoAnthony DianaLisa PlushJeremy SchildcroutPaula Tuffin
NLG & CCR v. Johnson 
(p.38)
Jeffrey FogelSteven Rosenfeld
Petition re Mamilla Cemetery  
in Jerusalem 
(p.36)
Dima KhalidiRichard LevyMichael RatnerMichael Steven SmithLeonard Weinglass 
†
Saleh v. Titan (p.32)
Akeel & v Alentine  Plc
Shereef Akeel
bUrke llc
Susan Burke
Katherine Hawkins
motley rice llc
Vincent ParrettSanders v. Szubin (p.37)
sokolski  & z ekAriA , P .c.
Daphna Zekaria
Spanish Investigation into the U.S.  
Torture Program (p.33)
boye-elbAl y AsociAdos
Gonzalo Boye
eUroPeAn  center for constitUtionAl   
 And HUmAn  riGHts (eccHr)
Wolfgang Kaleck
Andreas SchuellerGavin Sullivan
Turkmen v. Ashcroft 
(p.39)
covinG ton & b UrlinG  llP
C. William Phillips 
Pamela SawhneyJoanne Sum-PingMichael Winger 
United States and Vulcan Society v.  
City of New York 
(p.41)
levy rAtner, P .c.
Richard Levy
Dana LossiaRobert Stroup
scott And scott llP
Judy Scolnick
United States v. Buddenberg (p.42)
civil liberties  defense  center
Lauren Regan
lAw offices of JAmes mcnAir tHomPson
James McNair Thompson
nolAn, ArmstronG , & b Arton  llP
Emma Bradford
Tom NolanBob BloomOmar FigueroaKali S. GrechBen RosenfeldJ. Tony SerraMatthew Strugar
United States v. Mejia-Castillo  
(p.42)
citizen soldier
Tod Ensign
font & G lAzer
Louis Font
Ramsey ClarkWilner v. National Security Agency 
(p.37)
bUtler rUbin sAltArelli  & b oyd llP
Karen Borg
James Rubin
Mark Schwartz
University  of nortH cArolinA  lAw scHool
Kathryn Sabbeth
Wright v. Corrections  Corporation of America 
(p.39)
fletcHer , HeAld & H ildretH
Lee G. Petro
wAsHinG ton lAwyers ’ committee  for  
 c ivil riGHts And UrbAn AffAirs   
Phil Fornaci
Deborah GoldenStacey Litner
Zalita v. Obama 
(p.30)
sAH s cHAffHAUsen
Monique Bremi 
George DalyJeffrey DavisDominik Heinzer 
deceased  †
Click on the case names for more information! 46Mina Abdool 
Patricia AckermanAction Réfugiés Montréal Abdelhamid Afana Bina Ahmad Zohra Ahmed Mizue Aizeki Shahzad Akbar Catherine Albisa Amanda Alexander Nadia AlexisAlternative Chance Thomas & Donna Ambrogi
Amnesty International   
 Canada
Amnesty International   
 Portugal 
Chris Anders Harry Anduze Claudia AngelosAnglican Diocese of Montreal Pouneh Aravand Laurie Arbeiter Deborah ArcherArco Iris Nan Aron Huwaida Arraf Barbara Aubrey John Austria Michael AveryBADIL Murali Balaji Radhika Balakrishnan Kevin Bankston Natasha Ora Bannan Ajamu Baraka Andrew Bashi Kip Bastedo Monika Batra Thomas Bean Thomas Becker, Jr. David Beckwith William & Rita Bender Emily Benefer Phyllis Bennis Karima BennouneBerkeley Copwatch Antoine Bernard Alison Bernstein Frida Berrigan Felice Bezri Sahil Bhatia Chandra BhatnagarBig Duck Jeremy Bigwood Joshua Birch Barbara Blaine Mariel Block Robert Bloom Jocelyn Bogdan Heidi Boghosian Sascha Bollag Victoria Bolton Audrey Bomse Blaine Bookey Erling Borgen John Boston Ann & Mark Bradley Bill BraginBritDoc/ Good Pitch Victoria Brittain Jocelyn Brooks Charlotte Bunch Paul Butler Shahid Buttar Jason Cade Leslie CaganCage Prisoners Greger Calhan Ann CammettCanadian Council  
 for Refugees 
Laura Carey Shonna Carter Claudia Caryevschi Michael CatesCenter for Economic  
 and Policy Research
Center for Justice and  
 International Law (CEJIL)
Center for National  
 Security Studies (CNSS) 
Ellen Chapnick Nathaniel Charny Marco Chelo Erwin Chemerinsky Judith Chomsky Nusrat ChoudhuryCivic Association of the  
 Deaf of New York City 
David Clohessy Hannah Cochrane Rosa Cohen-Cruz Cindy Cohn Marjorie Cohn Tanya Coke David Cole Sandy Coliver
Comité de Familiares de   
 Detenidos Desaparecidos  
 en Honduras (COFADEH)
Committee in Solidarity  
 with the People of  
 El Salvador (CISPES)
Communities United  
 Against Police Brutality 
Brian Concannon Sophia ConroyConsejo Cívico de  
 Organizaciones Populares  
 e Indígenas de Honduras 
Peter Cook Andrea Costello Nicholas CosterCouncil on American  
 Islamic Relations
CREDO Mobile/ 
 Working Assets 
Joanna Cuevas IngramCulture Project Jamil Dakwar Aleta Dallenback Matthew Daloisio Ron Daniels Alina Das Niki Dasarathy Lauren Dasse Erin Davies Angela Davis Yasmin DavisDeaf Justice CoalitionDefending Dissent  
 Foundation 
Maddy DeLone Cait DeMott Grady Geronimo Desumala Janet Dickerson Ejim Dike Keith Donaghue Barbara Dorris George Doskow Amanda Doueihi Tanya Douglas Tanuja Dudnath Sarah Durham
EarthRights International   
 (ERI) 
Sally Eberhardt Brian EhrenpreisEl Equipo de Reflexión,  
 Investigación y  
 Comunicación (ERIC-SJ)
Electronic Frontier  
 Foundation (EFF) 
Deb Ellis Frank & Dolores Emspak Noura Erakat Robert M. Factor
Fanm Ayisyen Nan Miyami   
 (Haitian Women of Miami) 
Nina Farnia David Fathi Rosemary F . FaulknerFAVILEK Kelly-Marie Fay Rodriguez Maya Fegan Michelle FeiFellowship of Reconciliation Praveen Fernandes Fabrice Ferrier Ralph Fertig Michael Figura Davida Finger Gregory H. Finger
 †
First Amendment  
 Lawyers Association 
Laura FlandersFlorida Immigrant  
 Advocacy Center 
Marc Florman Caroline FredricksonFree Gaza Movement Eric Freedman Spencer FreedmanFrente Nacional de  
 Resistencia Popular (FNRP)
Friendship Office of  
 the Americas 
Sherry & Leo Frumkin Krystle Gan George Gardner, III Margaret Garrett Janice Gehlmeyer Mary J. Geissman Annie Gell Frances Geteles-Shapiro Jess Ghannam Chip Gibbons Cathe Giffuni John Gilmore Over the past year, the Center for Constitutional Rights has worked with hundreds of activists, attorneys, organizations and clients on our cases, campaigns and fundraising efforts. CCR 
extends its deepest appreciation for all they have done as allies in the struggle for justice.
deceased  †Friends and Allies47Leah Gitter 
Miriam Gohara Jesus Gonzales Janice Goodman Alana Greer Jennifer Gregg Lauren Gumbs Vanita Gupta Matthew Gurwitz Lisa Hajjar Ashley Hannon Rachel Harper Cole Harrison Gerald & Barbara HartingHarvard Human  
 Rights Program 
Dalia Hashad Lana Hassan Joseph Hayden Rebecca Heinegg Arthur Heitzer Vaughn Henry Julia Hernández Emil Herscher Charles Hey-Maestre Daniel Heyman Nyasa Hickey Carolyn Hicks Morgan Hill Jane Hirschmann Benjamin Hoffman Paul HoffmanSarah HogarthHonduras Solidarity  
 Network 
Scott Horton Sumi Hoshiko Susan Howard Margaret Huang Jayne Huckerby Joseph Huff-Hannon Alissa HullHuman Rights FirstHuman Rights Institute,  
 Columbia Law School
Human Rights Watch Idil IbrahamImmigrant Justice  
 Solidarity Project
Institute for Justice and  
 Democracy in Haiti (IJDH)
Institute for Policy Studies
Institute for Redress and   
 Recovery at Santa Clara   
 University
Interfaith Coalition of  
 Advocates for Reentry  
 and Employment (ICARE)
International Center for  
 Transitional Justice (ICTJ)
International Commission  
 of Jurists
International Federation  
 for Human Rights (FIDH)
International Gay and Lesbian  
 Human Rights Commission
International Network  
 for Economic, Social and   
 Cultural Rights (ESCR-Net) 
Gary Isaac Tarek Ismail Elias Isquith Abdeen Jabara Omar Jadwat Tamara Jafar Jameel Jaffer Meena Jagannath Sunny Jain Lisa Jaskol Keith Jordan Mario Joseph Wilhelm H. Joseph, Jr. Rosemary JoyceJudson Memorial ChurchJustice CommitteeJuvenile Justice Project  
 of Louisiana 
Joy Kanwar Craig Kaplan Hannah Kapp-Klote David Kato
† 
Julie F . Kay Allen Keller Ateqah Khaki Michael Kieschnick Sarai King Robert KirshKOFAVIVKONAMAVID Elizabeth Koob Isabelle Kostic Sharif Abdel Kouddous Makane Kouyate Ruth Kreinik Katia Lara Alex LarrieuxLatin American  
 Working Group
Lawyers Earthquake  
 Response Network (LERN) 
Christophe Le Maréchal Sergio Ledezma Reed Lee Naiara Leite DaSilva David Lerner Kirsten Levingston Bertha Lewis Dori Lewis Kelly Lewis Jane Li Becky Libed Jennifer Yul-san LiemLife After Guantánamo Project Beatrice Lindstrom Dahlia Lithwick Jason & Lika Litt Paula & Barry Litt Jules Lobel Ericka Lock Benjamin Locke David Loftis Jose LopezLoyola University New  
 Orleans Immigration Clinic 
Ana Lukatela Niko Lusiani Gerard LynnMADRE Joan MagoolaghanMake the Road, New YorkMalcolm X Grassroots  
 Movement (MXGM) 
Helen McDermott Irfan Mehmood Ari Melber Silvia Mencías Soche Meng Hope Metcalf
Metro New York Religious   
 Campaign Against Torture   
 (NYRCAT) 
Danny Meyers Lindsay MichaelsonMilwaukee Police  
 Accountability Coalition 
Bahar Mirhosseini Suzanne Mobley Dean Modino Joey Mogul Inca Mohamed Irfan Mohammad Jane MoisanMondoWeiss Janine Morna Eva Moseley Frank Mugisha 
Kathy Stavis  grew up hearing stories about CCR from an early age since her grandfather 
was one of the Center’s founders, Morty Stavis. From college at Wesleyan University where she 
minored in International Relations to her current degree program in Israel studying Conflict Reso -
lution and Mediation, Kathy has nurtured a deep interest in international affairs and peace studies. She volunteered at CCR nearly full-time for months, working with the international human rights team on torture casework, U.S. foreign policy research and reviewing Wikileaks documents.
 
“I’ve always admired CCR. After graduation, interning seemed like a great way to 
make a contribution and get some training in the field. It was a truly inspiring and fulfilling experience, since the attorneys invited me to work on exciting cases and even trusted me to forge ahead on new projects. I learned a great deal and gained new role models; CCR’s human rights attorneys are fearless, engaging and  endlessly devoted.”
CCR Spotlight
Kathy Stavis (bottom left) 
with FIDH intern Laura Trajber Waisbich (top left) and CCR Pegasus Scholar Jenny Oscroft.(right).48David Murillo
Muslim Justice Initiative Peter NacaratoNational Day Laborer  
 Organizing Network   
 (NDLON)
National Economic and Social  
 Rights Institute (NESRI)
National HIRE NetworkNational Lawyers Guild -  
 Detroit & Michigan Chapter
National Lawyers Guild -  
 National Office
National Lawyers Guild -  
 New York City Chapter
National Organization for  
 Defending Rights and  
 Freedoms (HOOD) 
Merry Neisner Linnea Nelson Matt NelsonNetroots NationNew York Civil Liberties  
 Union (NYCLU)
New York Coalition  
 Against Torture 
Craig Newmark Hung NguyenNo More GuantánamosNodutdol for Korean  
 Community Development 
Joshua NorkinNorth Carolina Stop  
 Torture Now
Northern Manhattan Coalition  
 for Immigrants Rights 
Mary Ellen O’ConnellOctober 22nd Coalition  
 to Stop Police Brutality
Office of the Chief Defense   
 Counsel, Office of  
 Military Commissions 
Ramona Ortega Alexis Ortiz Jenny OscroftPalestinian Center for  
 Human Rights (PCHR) 
Egizio Panetti Dennis Parker Rodolfo Pastor Roopal Patel Jane PeeblesPeoples’ Justice Logan Perkins Nicole PhillipsPhysicians for Human RightsPicture the Homeless Adrienne Pine Ashley PlattPolice Transparency &  
 Accountability Project 
Deborah Popowski Warren Popp Katherine PorterfieldPortland Copwatch Will PotterPoverty Initiative Fred Pratt Olivia Quinto The Rachel Corrie FoundationRadio Progreso Ashu Rai Nitya Ram Max Rameau Camilo RamirezRankin & Taylor Karen Ranucci Lizzy Ratner Michael Ratner Alexander Reinert Steven ReisnerReprieve Anne RichardsonRights Action
Rights for Imprisoned People  
 with Psychiatric Disabilities   
 (RIPPD) 
Rights Working Group Andrea J. Ritchie Joleen Rivera The Riverside Church Stephen Rohde Maria Romani Gabor Rona Alex Rosenberg Peter Rosenblum Josh Rosenthal Karmen Ross Laura Rovner Jordan Rubenstein Morgan RussellSafe Streets/Strong  
 Communities 
Naomi Sager Jessica Sanclemente Douglas B. Sapola Sally Saulvester Gabriel Sayegh Corey Saylor Jeremy Scahill Ann Marie Scalia Dan SchenckSchool of the Americas Watch Huberta G. Schroedel Randy Scott-McLaughlin Liliana Segura Brad Seligman Rita SethiSex Workers’ Project -  
 Urban Justice Center
Sexual Minorities  
 Uganda (SMUG) 
Jeena Shah Naureen Shah Svati Shah Adam Shapiro David Shapiro Robert Shary Ann Shepherd Peter ShepherdSholay Productions Reggie Shuford Franklin Siegel Julian Simcock Amrit SinghSkirball FoundationSleeping Giant Films Michael Steven Smith Richard A. Soble Lucia Sommer Jim Squire Colin Starger Kathy Stavis Nancy Stearns Irene Steiner Beth Stephens Michael Sternhell Bryan Stevenson Vivian StrombergSundiata Acoli Support  
 Coalition
Survivors Network of  
 those Abused by  
 Priests (SNAP) 
Caitlin Swain Christina Swarms Javid SyedSylvia Rivera Law Project Take Back the Land Bonnie Tenneriello Nikki ThanosTheaters Against  
 War (THAW) 
Jeanne Theoharis Aimee Thorne-Thomsen A Thousand Kites Margaret Tobin Candis Tolliver Atif Toor Gabriel Torres Rivera
Torture Abolition and   
 Survivors Support Coalition  
 (TASSC) 
Sue Lee Troutman The True Commission  
 (Comisión de Verdad) 
Natalie TruongU.S. Boat to GazaU.S. Human Rights  
 Network 
Sue UdryUnited National  
 Antiwar Coalition
University of Miami  
 Human Rights ClinicUniversity of Miami  
 Immigration Clinic
Urban Justice Center Elica Vafaie Maribel VasquezVenceremos Brigade Joan VermeulenVeterans for PeaceVulcan Society Laura Waisbich Hazel Weiser Peter Weiss Louise Weissman
Western Cape Anti-Eviction   
 Campaign
Western Shoshone  
 Defense Project 
Adrienne Wheeler Coya White Hat-Artichoker Sabin Willett John H. Wilson Elizabeth Wilson Witness Against TortureWitness for Peace Ben Wizner Naomi Wolf Chic WolkWomen with a VisionWorld Can’t Wait Andy Worthington Ann Wright Glover Wright Catheranne Wyly Ellen Yaroshefsky Milton Zelermyer Dorothy Zellner Marie Zieger Friends and Allies49Anonymous
Ethel G. AckleySalah and Catherine Al-AskariVicki A. AlexanderEvelyn AlloyThomas E. and  
 Donna Ambrogi
Carol AscherFrank and Blythe BaldwinRuth BardachPhilip BereanoGene C. BernardiHarvey BlendDavid M. BlockRobert H. BonthiusFrederick and Betty BriehlPeter BronerMary L. CarrMatthew CooperMargaret R. de RiveraShulamit DecktorTheresa Del PozzoMarial DeloJeffrey M. DickemannGeorge and Minna DoskowCarol F . DriskoWendy DwyerDonald and Martha FarleyCarl H. FeldmanGeorge and Mary FergerLeona FeyerAlbert C. FilardoGregory H. Finger 
†
Curt J. FirestoneSolomon FisherCecily FoxMary J. GeissmanNona GlazerFrances GoldinEdward E. GoldmanBettie C. HannanEllen and Ellis HarrisJohn HaywardMarjorie HeinsMartin and Mildred HirdTimothy A. HolmesSumi HoshikoMartin and Carolyn KarcherRichard Aronson  
 and Joyce Kirschner
Hilda KnoblochElizabeth S. LandisHelen S. LaneJanet L. LarsonSusan LeeJoan LewisDonald LipmansonEvelyn C. LundstromGrant MarcusNorman MasonsonPriscilla J. McMillan
Barbara MichaelEva K. Millette CoombsJoseph MortonEva S. MoseleyJames OdlingEdward H. PageWilliam ParsonsMahlon F . 
† and Lovel P . Perkins
Nyna B. PolumbaumRachel PorterJeanne Audrey PowersDolores M. PriemDavid G. RichJack L. Rihn
†
Marie Henderson RothmanMichael A. SchlosserAnn ShapiroAntonia Shouse SalpeterRobert M. SiegelLinda SleffelRosalie K. StahlMargot SteigmanJoseph Stern 
†Barbara Stewart
Clio TaraziEthel TobachMari VlastosFlorence WagnerPeter WeissBarbara WestGinia D. WexlerJohn H. WilsonEllen YaroshefskyRichard H. YurmanOur planned giving program forms the bedrock of our efforts to build an endowment for CCR and to create an institutional legacy dedicated to upholding the hard-won victories of your lifetime 
and protecting them from future attacks. By becoming a member of the Thelma Newman Society, you will join others committed to ensuring that CCR will be there to fight into the next generation. Please contact us if you have any questions about making a bequest, endowment, gift annuity, or other form of estate gift, or to let us know that you have included CCR in your estate plan.CCR Donors  July 1 2010 - June 30 2011
Thelma Newman Planned Giving Society
Donna and Tom Ambrogi  were introduced to CCR by our former 
executive director Marilyn Clement. They have since become major donors 
to the Center, joined our Thelma Newman Planned Giving Society, and host -
ed CCR Executive Director Vince Warren as a speaker at their retirement community several times. Donna came by her social justice values early—by age 7 she was already campaigning for Roosevelt. She graduated from law school at age 48 and started a statewide center on elder law. A resigned Jesuit priest and professor, Tom’s life was transformed by his discovery of liberation theology, which broadened his view of globalization justice issues. Their activism has taken them around the world, including Palestine/Israel, Central America and South Africa.
“In these latter years, we are consumed by our desire to help dry the terrible tears of the 
world. CCR’s issues are our issues. Justice and human rights mean everything to us.”
CCR Spotlight
deceased  †50$100,000 and above
Anonymous
The Atlantic Philanthropies (USA)The Bertha FoundationThe CS Fund/Warsh-Mott LegacyFidelity Charitable Gift FundGregory H. Finger
† and Joan Hollister
The Ford FoundationJo GoldmanSusan D. Goldman
Sylvia and Gilbert Goldman Memorial  
 Fund of the Tides Foundation
The HKH FoundationThe Kaphan FoundationShel KaphanRichard B. and Marilyn L. MazessThe Oak FoundationOpen Society FoundationsThe Tides FoundationThe Vanguard Charitable  
 Endowment Program
The Vital Projects Fund, Inc.The Wallace Global Fund
Mildred Weitz
†
$50,000-99,999
Anonymous
The 1848 FoundationC. Edwin Baker 2001 TrustCredo MobileShirley EvenitskyJohn GilmoreVincent McGeeThe Ratner Family
Victoria Ward$25,000-49,999
Anonymous
Laurie Arbeiter and Jennifer HobbsThe Bardon-Cole FoundationThe Charles Evans Hughes  
 Memorial Foundation
Charles N. Mason, Jr. TrustThe Common Counsel FoundationRobert A. Friedman and Anita DavidsonSherry and Leo FrumkinLise and Raymond Giraud
†
John and Kathryn GreenbergVictor and Lorraine HonigThe JKW FoundationZella LuriaNancy Meyer and Marc WeissThe Normandie FoundationPaul and Anne van Buren Fund  
 of the Maine Community Fdn
Steve and Carolyn PurcellRockefeller Family FundSamuel Rubin FoundationSilicon Valley Community Foundation
Jean Stein
$10,000-24,999
Anonymous
The Alfred and Jane Ross FoundationThe Altschul FoundationEric and Cindy ArbanovellaThe Baldwin Family Fund  
 for Peace and Justice
Frank C. and Blythe BaldwinCindy L. Barber and Horace HortonFrederick BenensonAra and Linda BernardiDiane BoehmCaipirinha FoundationDavid Kimmel FoundationThe Epstein Teicher PhilanthropiesLois Blum FeinblattThe Frances and Benjamin  
 Benenson Foundation
Marion E. GreeneJohn B. and Sarah L. HenryThe Herb Block FoundationLeo and Dorothea Hurvich
†
International Institute of Islamic ThoughtThe Jewish Communal FundNancy Kimmel ViolaThe LEF FoundationThe Libra FoundationThe Lois and Irving Blum Foundation Inc.Richard MannMicrosoft Matching Gifts ProgramMahlon F .
† and Lovel P . Perkins
Ralph E. Ogden Foundation, Inc.The Richard A. Busemeyer Atheist  
 Foundation
Alfred and Jane RossThe Bright Horizons Fund of the  
 Tides Foundation
The San Francisco FoundationThe Scherman Foundation, Inc.Barbara S. Starfield
† and Neil A. Holtzman
Beatrice SternThe Susan Sarandon Charitable FoundationJane VanDeBogart
†
William B. Wiener, Jr.The William B. Wiener, Jr. Foundation
John H. Wilson$5,000-9,999
Anonymous
Thomas E. and Donna AmbrogiBert and Barbara AubreyMedea Benjamin and Kevin DanaherKay Berkson and Sidney HollanderThe Blue Oak FoundationMartin BranningVirginia BrodyElizabeth A. CastelliL. Sandra ColiverChandler Davis and Natalie Zemon DavisEthel S. Paul TrustFoundation SourceFowey Light FundJames B. and Louise FrankelThe Fritz and Yvonne Pappenheim Fund  
 of the Tides Foundation
The Global Fund for WomenGobioff FoundationNeil GobioffThe Goodworks FundDaniel Greenberg and Karen NelsonThe Grodzins FundEric GutsteinSusan J. Haas and Keith J. PattiRichard S. Hobish and Florence WienerJoan Antonucci Charitable Lead  
 Annuity Trust
Ernest E. and Nancy R. KeetThe Key FoundationWilliam D. KirbyLuis and Lee LainerLandau Family FoundationLee & Luis Lainer Family FoundationJoan Lewis
deceased  †CCR Donors51Tom Wallace Lyons
Joseph MortonMaryanne MottHolly Myers and Kirk NeelyNational Philanthropic TrustRichard L. PearlstoneThe Peggy Meyerhoff Pearlstone  
 Foundation, Inc.
The Posel FoundationAnne PoselFrances R. PoselMitzi C. RaasRoseben FundSeymour & Sylvia Rothchild Family  
 2004 Charitable Foundation
Louis SlesinRichard A. SobleThe Spingold FoundationRonna Stamm and Paul LehmanAdam and Jane SteinThe Stewart R. Mott FoundationSteven R. VanBeverWendy Vanden HeuvelThe W. TrustGeorge Wallerstein 
Estelle Yelin
†
$2,500-4,999
Rita L. and William J. Bender
Boston Trust and Investment  
 Management Company
Ida G. BraunStefan and Laura BudacJames T. Campen and Phyllis EwenJohn CarusoLaura and Richard ChasinThe Chicago Community FoundationJohn Di StefanoRodney and Carole DriverShiva EftekhariThe Elizabeth M. Gitt FoundationEvan M. FalesRosemary F . FaulknerDaniel and Anita FineAdelaide GomerLisa HonigThe Jean and Richard Widmark FoundationWendy Kaminer and Woody KaplanWilliam LankfordEileen and Paul F . Le FortThe Liberty Hill FoundationPaula and Barry LittSusan E. ManuelCharles Victor and Mercidees McTeerMahmoud D. and Laila MohamedPatricia F . MullahyJill W. Nelson and Thomas R. BidellNetwork for GoodGregory O’KellyWayne OuttenRosalind PetcheskyClaire ReedWilliam L. and Sandra L. RosenfeldAlice RothchildSchwab Charitable FundAlfred H. Schwendtner and Carole WagnerWallace M. ShawnPeter and Elizabeth C. ShepherdNeville Roy SinghamAlan and Victoria SussmanMerry TuckerAnne Heath WidmarkWorkable Alternatives FoundationThe Wyss Family Foundation
Ned and Melissa Wyss
$1,000-2,499
Anonymous
Leslie Abbey and Steve DietzEthel G. AckleySalah and Catherine Al-AskariBruce and Yoko Uehara AllenTheresa F . AltDonna Katzin Altschuler and Alan AltschulerNabil M. and Ann S. AmerAmerican Citizens to Impeach  
 Bush and Cheney
Aris AnagnosHeather Andersen and Leslie ChristianHarry Anduze MontanoJanet S. Arnold and Michael H. RubinClaudine BacherMargo BaldwinRainer C. BaumDouglas J. Bender and Emma B. TrejoMatthew A. Berlin and Simone LiebmanFrancella W. and Jose F . BetancourtCharles R. and Linda BrainardBelinda Lawrence BreesePeter and Alice BronerEdward J. and Marion D. BronsonAllan and Muriel BrotskySue BryantSteve and Barbara CallasIra CarpWaifun Becky Chan and Kurt BreuningerJudy and Gerry ClarkDavid D. Cole and Cornelia T. L. PillardDavid B. Cone and Kellie StoddartConservestMichael A. CooperCraig R. and Cynthia B. CorrieCharles M. Crane and Wendy BreuerBrenda CravensShel Kaphan  retired from Amazon.com in 1999 and founded the Kaphan Foundation a few years later. He 
decided to make his first grant to CCR because “as I was doing research on issues I care about, I consistently 
saw that CCR were the lawyers working on those issues.” He has since become a major supporter of the  
Center, brought his friends together for a dinner to learn about CCR, and became personally involved by  
giving a presentation to our staff on how news sources like Wikileaks are important for our democracy.  
“I support CCR because their focus is really on the most difficult cases that other people  
won’t touch. I believe it is important for people to support constitutional rights, even for those individuals who are the least sympathetic. If you don’t, you are giving the victory to people who want to see our system of government fail.”
CCR Spotlight52Grace B. Crecelius
Lynn-Marie CriderE. Patrick Curry and Susan B. CampbellEmily Deferrari and Mel PackerMadeline H. deLone and Robert L. CohenThe Diamondston FoundationRoger DittmannDLA Piper FoundationRussell D. D’Oench and Tani TakagiJames K. DonnellKevin DonovanLarry D. Doores and Janet R. WolfeDaniel L. and Lee M. DrakeSarah J. Duncan and Thomas F . McDougalPaul DurrantDiane Early and Daniel GigoneEddie EasterlingMargaret L. EberbachMargaret Eberle
†
Harrison Eiteljorg, IIThe Elias FoundationSolveig EskedahlWallace B. and Heike EubanksRobert M. FactorRobert Fertik and Antonia StolperAbraham FlaxmanRobert Fodor and Thurid H. ClarkRoma B. FoldyFriedman Family FoundationEleanor Friedman and Jonathan CohenThe Funding Exchange National  
 Community Funds
Janet GallagherMargaret A. GeddesSherna B. and Marvin GluckArrel Gray
Anne and Vaughn
† Guloyan
Collier M. Hands
Gina HarmanGail HarperRobert and Claire HeronRichard Hesik and Barbara JohnsHewlett-Packard CompanyRosemary R. HicksSteven C. Hill and Jonathan Avram HerzMichael J. Hirschhorn and Jimena P . MartinezJohn Hoffmeyer and Janet M. CorpusRandall D. Holmberg and Evelyn YeeCatherine N. and Stephen D. HolmesTimothy A. HolmesJoyce M. HormanRuth Wald HubbardSteven and Miriam HymanZeljko IvanekAbdeen M. Jabara and Holly MaguiganJewish Federation of ClevelandWarren and Marian A. JonesWilhelm Joseph, Jr.Just GiveHenry S. Kahn and Mary Gillmor-KahnEugenia KalnayHerschel and Margrit KaminskyMartin and Carolyn KarcherPatrice KaskaKatz, Marshall & Banks, LLPIra G. KawallerJulie Kay and Tom FergusDavid and Anita KellerBarbara I. and John I. KennedyCharles L. and Anna KersteinJerry KickensonDonald D. and Margaret A. KioseffRichard Aronson and Joyce KirschnerMarily Kay KnieriemenJoanna KnoblerDavid KormanRochelle KormanKaren Krahulik and Susan AlleeFayette F . KrauseMerle and Phyllis KrauseDoug and Wendy KreegerEdward M. Krishok and Peggy K. HongJoseph B. and Rachel KruskalKay Lehman SchlozmanPhyllis B. and John LehmanEric L. Lewis and Emily SpitzerWilliam L. LewisJudith Lichtenberg and David J. LubanPhilip and Elsa R. LichtenbergRobin LloydGail K. Lopez-HenriquezM. Brinton Lykes and Catherine M. MooneyHubert and Rachelle MarshallWilliam G. MascioliWarren E. and Joyce W. MathewsThe McKenzie River Gathering FoundationRobert H. and Ellen V . MeeropolRichard C. MehlBenjamin Mellman and Ann ChungDonald and Suzanne MillerShelley and Joseph R. MillerDaphna H. MitchellKaren MockRichard W. and Barbara F . MooreMorgan Stanley Smith Barney Global  
 Impact Fund, Inc.
Mother Jones Fund of the Peace  
 Development Fund
Judy and Roy NakadegawaNew Directions FoundationThe New York Community TrustMark NiehausLouie D. Nikolaidis and Rachel HorowitzHans NollYosh NoroHenry NorrIsabelle C. OsborneKathleen L. Oser
†
The Overbrook FoundationStuart OzerWilliam ParsonsGloria C. Phares and Richard DannayThe Philanthropic CollaborativeSandra PolishukWilliam P . and Debra Dupre QuigleyBrian J. RatnerMarcus Rediker and Wendy Z. GoldmanJack L. Rihn
†“Being a lawyer means many things, but the soul-
building work of being a lawyer is representing unpopular clients in cases that implicate critical constitutional and civil rights issues. And CCR is engaged in this soul-building work every day.” 
Katya Jestin accepting the Pro Bono Service Award granted to the New York office of Jenner & Block LLP for their pro bono partnership with the Center including as amicus curiae in United 
States v. Ahmed Ghailani and co-counsel for Guantánamo detainee Majid Khan.
deceased  †CCR Donors53Dorothy Rinaldo
Lawrence and Janet A. RivkinThe RMF FoundationTim RobbinsJames Roberts and Patricia CalbersonMarion Q. RobinsonJohn H. RodgersAlex J. and Carole RosenbergRolf W. and Elizabeth RosenthalJudith RothchildAlbert RubenDean Graham RubyJoseph L. RubyGladys B. RustayMarc Sapir and Sheila ThorneGilbert and Alicia SaucedoJack SawyerJulie SchecterWilliam J. and Katherine L. SchrenkEdwin M. Schur and Joan Brodsky SchurSteven SchwartzSusan ScottWilliam SeamanSteve SeltzerElizabeth and Stephen ShaferAntonia Shouse SalpeterAlbert D. Shuldiner and Emily B. MyersSidney Stern Memorial TrustFranklin SiegelSingh FoundationRomaine Gustava SolbertAnn W. SpeckmanEmily A. Spieler and Gregory WagnerJames SquireNancy StearnsLewis M. and Kitty SteelAmanda StentMarilyn R. Stern and Elaine ReilyDaniel StoneElizabeth and Byron StookeyClayton A. StruveSusan D. SusmanMyles SussmanClio TaraziBonnie E. Thomson and Eugene TillmanMartin ThomsonMartha Claire TompkinsHazel Tulecke and William B. HoustonBarbara C. and Franklin M. TurnerJames S. TyreStephen WaiteDaniel J. and Judith WalkowitzBarbara S. WebsterDaniel Weiss and Anne StewartPeter and Cora WeissWhite Cedar FundSabin and Marta WillettThe Winky FoundationIrving M.
† and Evelyn Z. Wolfe
Lincoln and Wilma C. WolfensteinChic WolkRichard K. WorthingtonEllen YaroshefskyAnn YasuharaSandra A. ZagarellMichael F . Zweig  
 and Kathy Chamberlain
$500-999
AnonymousA & J Saks Foundation, Inc.Abbott Laboratories Employee  
 Giving Campaign
Joseph W. AndersonCarol Hope ArberSally Arnold and Christine WeirThe Arthur & Henrietta A. Sorin  
 Charitable Trust
Atlantic tomorrowsoffice.comJudy A. Austermiller and Warren R. BettyRadhika Balakrishnan and David W. GillcristThe Baltimore Family FundCynthia BanasRichard BealeMekayla Beaver and Gregory K. BrownMischa BeckerMyron Beldock and Karen DippoldJudith E. BelskyTerry BennettJames M. Bergin and Ellen P . LukensPeggy BillingsGeorge and Eleanor BollagEve BorensteinLila BraineDavid and Patty BroilesJonathan Brown and Brynnen FordEdmund B. BurkettMichael E. CahillWes CallenderCapital Trust Company Of DelawareTim Caro and Monique Borgerhoff MulderDavid R. ChipmanThe Community Foundation of Santa CruzThe Community Foundation of  
 Western Mass.
Community Shares of MinnesotaJanet M. ConnMary Ellen Copeland and Edward M. AnthesJohn M. Crew and Sheila E. GadsdenDavid CynamonThe David and Sylvia Teitelbaum Fund, Inc.David P . Dean and Catherine M. BergmannRiva DewittAnnette W. DickersonJonathan and Kate DixonJeron E. and Marjorie B. DonaldsJ. Kenneth Donnelly and Catherine M. BishopDavid DowLewis and Edith S. DrabkinAlan and Susan S. DranitzkeBarry N. and Ismartilah DrummondRobert Dubrow and Melinda A. TuhusCamille EhrenbergSusan L. EinbinderNorman Eisner and Zelda AronsteinSteven ElkintonPeter and Cynthia EllisStuart M. ElsbergNancy FalkLenore Feigenbaum and Simon J. KleinEd and Ann FergusonJane FosterMaria C. Freeman and Donald K. LarkinBernard Friedman and Lesley HyattGay Ann GabbertKit Gage and Steven J. MetalitzCynthia Gallagher and Shaun ManchandRonald E. and Jacqueline GarrettNancy GarrubaMary J. GeissmanSheila GeistMartin GellertPaula GellmanDaniel GillmorTom GoetzlCarlos and Carrington GoodmanGoogle Matching Gifts ProgramBernard H. GordonWaleed K. and Hannah GosaynieThe Green Meadow Fund of the  
 Maine Community Foundation
Frank and Judith GreenbergAllen and Nancy GreenleafLynn Greiner and John B. MidgleyRuthe S. and Arnold GrubinEvelyn HaasGuy M. HarrisPaul Hathaway and Lynda DaileyJenny HeinzBetty and Jackson Herring54David G. Herrmann
Joseph Herron and Patricia BairdWinifred W. HirschZach Hochstadt and Sadie HoneyHoneybee FoundationAllen M. HowardAlice S. HuangHudson Charitable FundKevin M. Hunt and Margaret DowningChung-Ja and Cassim M. JadwatJewish Community Endowment FundThe Jewish Community FoundationNorman JohnsonKenneth M. Jones and Carol KouryTerry Lynn KarlMark KempsonAshish KilamJoanne Kliejunas and Irving LublinerRoger S. and Belle KuhnMichael M. LaineJohn W. and Claudia LampertiThe Lederer FoundationTimothy J. Lee and Eleanor McBrideJudy LernerGeorge K. and Ann C. LevingerDavid R. LewisRichard and Rita G. LipsitzEdward E. LisbergFrancis LorsonLorraine LymanRamsay MacMullenRichard Makdisi and Lindsay WheelerMalcolm Cravens FoundationElena S. ManitzasEnrico A. MartignoniAlice Anne Martineau and Olivia BartlettRay McgovernNelder and Mariagnes Aya MedrudBarbara J. MeislinMartin and Margaret MelkonianMichael and Heli MeltsnerRobert E. and Cama C. MerrittBeth and David P . MeshkeDavid J. MooreHelen R. MooreJohn MorganRichard H. MorseJohn MuellerSahr MuhammedAllyThe New Prospect FoundationThomas B. and Johannah NewmanRobert OstertagEve PellNancy PickTim Plenk and Janet AxelrodNancy R. PoselMarshall and Rosie PotamkinMary Elizabeth PrattBennett M. Pudlin and Margaret Ann JuddMargaret J. Randall and Barbara ByersJulia B. RauchAnn E. ReinhartJoyce L. RichardsonSteven RiskinJill and Ronald RohdeBarbara and Oren RootEve S. RosahnThe Rose Foundation For Communities  
 And The Environment
Stephen Rose and Christina CernaSarah Rosenwald VaretGeorge S. Rothbart and Ingrid  
 Scheib-Rothbart
Michael RufoLowell SachnoffNaomi SagerThe Saint Paul FoundationArnold S. SaksBrian SandlinGordon Schiff and Mardge CohenSteve L. SchwartzRenata Manasse SchwebelEvan D. and Janet ShaadSusan L. SheinfeldBenjamin R. ShreckAlan SierotyPeter SillsChristopher SimpsonMiriam and Jack SirottSkadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLPDorothy Slater-BrownSteve SmahaCherida Collins SmithStephen Samuel SmithCarolyn J. SorensenSpeckman Law Group PLLCErwin P . and Pearl F . StallerNancy E. StanleyBen R. Stavis and Marjatta LyyraLinda Stein and Helen HardacreIan E. StockdaleThe Stonbely Family FoundationDavid SuismanThe T. Rowe Price ProgramZephyr TeachoutRichard TeitelbaumMurray TobakMichael Touger and Margaret LevittRichard H. and Gail M. UllmanVictor K. and Barbara UlmerIan Wallach and Cindy ChupackGeraldine WallmanJoan M. WarburgMichael J. and Sandra M. WaxAlan M. Weiner and Nancy MaizelsJohn WetherholdRichard P . and Tobey M. WiebeBlanche Wiesen Cook and Clare M. CossJeffrey and Lucinda WilnerThomas and Carol WolfMiranda Worthen and Brian ShillinglawAnn WrightFrank O. WyseNoah ZatzMitchell H. and Jane Zimmerman
$250-499
AnonymousDavid J. AalderksMilton AbelsonRobert and Miriam AbramovitzMerritt and Barbara AbrashWilliam H. AbrashkinAndrew AckermanAlice K. AdamsHarold AhrensSabreen AkhterCharles K. Alexander, IINorman AltstedterEthan D. and Sandra D. AlyeaAndrew M. Ansorge and Laura S. KoopmanBarbra Apfelbaum and Michael ReuveniBarbara Mains ArmentoGail AusterKent AutreyGeorge S. and Jill S. AvruninPatrick and Cheri BakerWill BeattyEsther M. BeebeSara E. BeinertAlvin BennettRuth G. and Carl S. BensonEstelle A. and Howard A. BernDale L. BerryBethesda Friends Meeting: Religious  
 Society of Friends
Jean-David Beyer
deceased  †CCR Donors55Bani Bhattacharya
Evelyn BlackmanHarvey BlendCarolyn Patty Blum and Harry W. ChotinerLinda and Mitchel S. BollagFraser BonnellBarton and Barbara BoyerBill BraginKevi P . BrannellyLois V . BromsonRobert E. L. and Sylvie Maria BrownPaula BryanCalvert Social Investment FoundationAnn Cammett and Marcia GalloAndrea CharlesAva CheloffEllen Chesler and Matthew J. MallowRenee D. Chotiner and Stuart W. GardnerWallace B. ClelandThe Columbus FoundationThe Compton FoundationJim and Cecilia A. ConroyFarok J. ContractorWilliam Carl CromwickRobert A. CunninghamAnya Elizabeth DarrowSusan DavidoffMary DavisThomas E. DeCourseyKenneth DeedMeera DeoDickstein Shapiro, LLPGeorge and Minna DoskowDavid B. DunningGlenn EdwardsMichael EhrlichPeter ErlinderSaralee E. EvansTraci L. ExtDavid F . FunkhouserWilliam R. GarnerWilliam H. GavelisGeneral Board of Global MinistriesMargo R. George and Catherine KarrassFrances Geteles-ShapiroTerry H. GilbertWilliam J. Gilson and Georgia WeverHerbert P . GleasonFrederick S. Golan and Anne M. KenneyRichard A. Gollub and Rita A. Clark-GollubClaire GottfriedKurt and Sorel GottfriedJeffrey C. Grant and Mercedes FernandezMarcelle GreenfieldSimon Greer and Sharna G. GoldsekerRonald J. GreleRichard A. GriggLauren GumbsHans C. and Linda HaackeAlice L. Hageman and Aubrey N. BrownPeter HanauerDavid HarbaterJed HartmanEmily HauptmannMary Jean HaydenKeith Hefner and Diana AutinLouis R. HellwigDavid Henkel and Cleo GriffithEdward S. and Mary W. HermanHighland Park United Methodist ChurchMartin and Mildred HirdDale and Stephen HoffmanMadelon HolderRichard R. Howe FoundationRichard R. and Elizabeth C. HoweHP Company FoundationStephen J. HrinyaRaymond A. HryckoRuth D. HunterJ. Leon Curtis, Jr.Omar Jadwat and Molly DohertyRoberta JaffeGail K. JohnsonBrian P . JohnstonJoseph Rosen FoundationLee T. JosephKaren JuddWendy KaplanRobert KehrDavid L. KelstonAlka KhushalaniPaul L. Kingsley and Rembert Brimm KingsleyPeter and Donna KirchheimerHeinz J. Klug and Gay SeidmanFred P . and Beverly P . KrasnerRobert P . KunreutherLouise LamphereRobert J. LavenbergWilliam E. LeavittIda J. LewensteinJason and Lika LittDavid A. LoebMatthew LondonWilliam LorentzMarsha L. Love and Maarten BoslandDouglas K. MacdonaldRic MacDowellAnnie MakhijaniJerome H. ManheimBonnie L. MaslinMichael MasonWilliam H. and Judith W. MatchettMarc Mauer and Barbara FranciscoAlan MaximukRobert J. and Maryann MaxwellRichard C. and Francesca A. McClearyThomas McCullochJamie McGlorin-KingNancy and William F . McLoughlinCora MilesBruce K. and Jane O. MillerMarvin and Marline MillerGrace MitchellCharles O. Moore
“We have challenged municipalities all 
across the country and have prevailed  because we combined litigation with orga-nizing. When that comes together perfectly, we win. We are uncovering the truth and disseminating information and throughout the country so many organizers, in small 
 
cities and big cities, are spearheading  campaigns to stop the collaboration  between local police and federal agents.”
Pablo Alvarado of National Day Laborer Organizing Network (NDLON), this year’s recipient of the Ally for Social Change Award honoring NDLON for their strong partnership with CCR.
56Jose Luis Morin and  
 Jeanette Guillen-Morin
J. Malcolm and Mary Morris
Stephen Morris
Peter D. and Gail S. Mott
Kathryn L. Mulvey
Edward S. Munyak
Guy and Tamara Nelson
Robert C. Newman
Mary Ellen O’Connel
Craig Oettinger
Karen Okeefe
Claes Oldenburg
John R. and Mary R. Oleson
Olaf S. and Sondra S. Olsen
Eric Orlin
Sanford M. Orlow
Nancy Otter
Edward H. Page
Cynthia L. Pansing and  
 Arlin S. W asserman
Barbara ParsonsCaroline Margaret Belcarra Paul
Donald C. and Edith Pelz
Dorothy Z. Peters
Pfizer Foundation Matching  
 Gifts P rogram
David A. Philips
Charlotte Phillips and Oliver Fein
Barbara B. Polk
Bruce K. Pollock
Ellyn and James Polshek
Florence B. Prescott
Christopher H. and Cynthia F . Pyle
Frances Leon Quintana  
 and Joel K. Swadesh
Jim RadfordSusan G. Radner
Deborah RandPaul W. Rehm and  
 K atja Sander-Rehm
George Renninger
Roberta Roban
Herbert W. Robinson
R. Andrew Rock
Paula Rogovin
Stephen F . Rohde and  
 W endy A. Herzog
Florence Wagman RoismanDennis A. Rosenblitt and  
 Arlene M. P itman
Carl J. RosensteinMatthew and Jean Rothschild
Phillip M. Runkel
Ann Salmirs
Elizabeth Schneider
Steven A. and Janet H. Schneider
Nicholas Schneir
Gail and Jonathan Schorsch
Ellen Schrecker  
 and Marvin Gettelman
Ruth and Charles B. Schultz
Michael Schwalbe
Anne and Bennett M. Schwartz
Meryl Schwartz
Rupa Shah
Suzanne Sherbell
Ann and Ahmad Shirazi
Robert M. Siegel
Susan Simone and David Bellin
Melvin V . and Giulia Simpson
Victor Skorapa, Jr.
Daniel Sleator
Barbara S. Smith
Carl and Jane Smith
Carol Smith and Joseph Esposito
Marjorie M. Smith
Ted SmootRebecca Solnit
Carolyn Sonfield
Timothy Sozen
Paul M. SpohrJulie Steinberger
Victoria A. Steinitz  
 and Elliot G. Mishler
Jens Stenger
Melvyn T. Stevens
Andrew C. Stone
Bert Stover and Teresa Holder
Nancy and Bill Strong
Lucy A. Suchman
Charles J. Sugnet
Harsh P . Sule and Katharine Larsen
Richard P . Sutter
Susan Swartz
Carlyn Syvanen  
 and Stephen F . Vause
Evelyn P . Taylor
Michael C. Thielmann
Emily Thomas
William Thomas
Shamus Thornton
Joseph and Cornelia C. Tierney
Jean Toche
Robert Traver
Randall H. Trigg and Caitlin Stanton
Sue Lee K. Troutman
Maria Celina Trzepacz
Liz Tuccillo
Selma and William Tucker
David B. Turner
Robert Twombly
United Church of Christ -  
 Justice and W itness Ministries
United Way California  
 Capital Region
Willard Uphaus†Nick VasquezBenedict Viglietta
Steven Vogel and Jane Henderson
Jennifer Warburg
John Washburn
Chris Way
David R. and Joan Weimer
Jeffrey Weinrich
James M. and Lori Wellman
Carolyn M. Welshhans
Lawrence Weschler
Olof B. Widlund
Lawrence B. Williams
Judith Wilson and Alec Wysoker
Ellen J. Winner and David A. Lewis
Barbara Winslow
William J. Witt
Jo-Anne Wolfson
Andrea Wolper
Neville WoodruffMichael Woods
John C. Woolum
Robert R. and Blaikie F . Worth
Judith Yanowitz  
 and Harry S. Hochheiser
Karen K. and John R. Yearsley
Peter W. Young
Robert J. and Karen R. Zelnick
Thomas Zimoski
$101-249
Anonymous
Emily AchtenbergEmory W. and Marilyn M. Ackley
Jane Alavi
Gregory and Hanita AlexanderMargaret W. and Allen H. AlexanderWilliam C. Altham
Daniella AmbrosinoAmeriprise FinancialCharles Amjad-Ali
Susan D. Amussen  
 and David E. Underdown
Clifford E. AndersonTom AngottiWilliam and Kendall S. Anthony
Rona Zelnick Armillas
Jared BadgerMartha BaskinLenore Beaky
Christina Benacci
David BerkmanJerry BernhardSteven BernhautNicole Bertran
Jonathan Bines
Stephanie G. and Jacob G. BirnbergMary J. BisharatRenee L. Bowser
Robert M. and Monica Bradbury
Sally BreiterPamela BrennanPeg BrennanEileen Brenner
Robert S. Briggs and Virginia I. Lohr
Angela BrooksElizabeth R. BrownThomas W. Browne
Matthew J. and Greta J. Bruns
William BurkeArthur W. and Alice R. BurksJeannine D. BurkyAntonio W. Burr and Diane di Mauro
James Byrnes
CA, Inc.Renee CafieroRay Cage
deceased  CCR Donors57Alan Carlson
Lynne and George CarvellJim CassidyMichael CavanaughThomas A. CenskeDarlene Ceremello  
 and Jessea Grennman
Gordon A. ChapmanAtessa ChehraziChantal and Gregory L. CherlinPatricia ChernoffSara P . and Ralph C. ChernoffRyan ChesleySarah ChesterMichele M. Chollet  
 and Daniel J. Devine
Noam ChomskyJames R. and Roshan ChristensenAntonie K. Churg  
 and Enrique De Los Santos
Marynancy ClaryRanya CohenDavid M. ColbertVirginia and Douglas Cole
The Community Church of New York  
 Unitarian Universalist
Sandi E. CooperRalph V . and Ellen S. CoreEdward F . CorwinWilliam CowlinMarla J. CritesLori CronynPrudence CrowtherLea CsalaJohn CurryGillian M. DaleBarbara DaltonElizabeth K. and Scott G. DanielsonSam B. and Mary Ann DavisBarbara E. DawsonDale Stull and Peter M. DemyEjim DikeJ. Wells Dixon and Alison SclaterJoseph F . DohertyAlvin and Rochelle DorfmanBarbara L. DudleyChristopher DuganH. Stewart DunnJeanne M. DursiLeslie EbertDavid J. EckRobert M. Elliot  
 and Suzanne Reynolds
Mary Taggart Emeny  
 and Hunter Ingalls
Brian EstlinMatthew EvangelistaAnne H. EvansDorothy and James FadimanRuth Hedy Anne Fallenbaum  
 and Zeese Papanikolas
Janice N. and James R. FallsDonald and Martha FarleyHarriet A. FeinbergNancy J. FeldmanJoan M. FerranteWendy FieringDolly Filartiga and Diego CallesJanet L. and Charles J. FinesilverCurry and Bonnie FirstTessa FischerDora FisherRichard and Miriam FlacksStuart M. FlashmanNancy FleischerPat L. FlierlSandra M. FluckErica G. FoldyDonovan FongThe Ford Foundation Matching  
 Gift Program
Ryan FosterEdward A. FoxJosh FraidsternSteve FrankelJane M. and Howard Bruce FranklinTovia G. and William FreedmanHerbert FreemanWilliam H. FrelickTimur FriedmanGeorge Friemoth and Dale SorensenGregory T. and Gladys S. FurnessGabe Kremer Teen Tzedakah FundSheryl P . GardnerDaniele GerardAdrienne GermainJamie W. GermanAyesha E. GillMimi GilpinElizabeth P . Gilson and Joel CogenLeah GitterNona GlazerDavid C. GlickRichard A. and Carolyn GlicksteinHarriet S. Goldberg  
 and Gregory C. Johnson
Joan and Bert GoldingPhil Goldsmith and Susan NewmanElizabeth GolubitskyGoodrich Quality Theatres Inc.Michelle GranasElizabeth P . GreenbergGregory GriffinWilliam and Sharon GrossKathy Gruber and Fred LevyJohn W. Grula and Joan DepewMargaret and David GulletteLloyd H. and Mary Ellen GuptillElaine HagopianTheodore T. Hajjar  
 and Carol Ann Wells
H. K. Hall, Jr.John L. HammondJames HargroveSyed Shamsul HasanSameer S. and Juliette S. HassanJulester S. HasteJames W. Hauser  
 and Katharine A. Hunter
Mark A. and Jane D. HealdRobert W. HegartyMargaret L. HempelChristopher L. HenleyRussell K. Henly  
 and Martha Lee Turner
John and Rachel HeumanDavid HirschJean HoffmannIngrid HogleElizabeth L. HubermanJulie Y . HungarKabeer HussainStanley Trezevant HutterBetsy and Arthur IgerJoan B. IndusiIronlightWilliam and Harriet IseckeJudy and Henry JacobsStella JacobsLisa JaskolJewish Community  
 Endowment Foundation
Joan & Wally McDonald Fund of  
 the Peace Development Fund
Corinne B. JohnsonJeffrey A. Jones“CCR just keeps doing things that impress me and that make me feel 
useful as well. By keeping track of the Bush and Obama administra-tions’ human rights records (so I don’t have to), CCR has helped me know when and where to protest. From Guantánamo to immigration and civil liberties, CCR allows me to live without the helplessness I feel each time I encounter the next government offensive on the rights of the powerless.”
Zella Luria received CCR’s Philanthropic Partnership Award in gratitude for her financial support of CCR for more than 15 years.
58Carolyn Jordan and Harry R. Fair
Francine C. Justa  
 and Morris Kornbluth
Jane Ruth Kaplan  
 and Donatello Borato
Stephanie KaplanAntje KatcherJ. Kehaulani KauanuiFred KeenSeymour KellermanPeg KeyesMartin King and Cheryl GrunbockJames KinsmanPeter S. KlostermanMike KnefatySarah KnightHilda KnoblochRivko KnoxPhilip O. KochLawrence Koplik and Sarah RobertsBonnie Korman and Robert BishopEllen L. Koteen and  
 Diane N. Palladino
Lawrence Krantz and Diane PittmanSaul KripkeJane and Ladis KristofDennis J. and Estelle I. KrumholzMarty KurzfeldSteve Peter LaBashJeffrey LamkinAnthony LamorticellaEllen LeahySusan LeeMartin S. and Gita M. LefsteinWilliam J and Ellen S. LeiboldLynda LeighThomas M. LeimkuhlerShari LeinwandDaniel Kiam Kwong LeongJoe LervoldZelda LeslieDebbie Peters and Gerson T LesserDaniel J. LevyJulia LeydaPearl A. and Israel LindenbaumDonald LipmansonYing-Jen Lo and Shih-Lin LuLeonard and Rosemarie LorensenSivia LoriaNancy S. LovejoyMary Waterman LuntRussell LyonsJeanette D. and Daniel J. MaceroJune MakelaMarjory MarschingMary B. MarxSallie MarxSheldon MaskinElaine MatthewsPeter J. MayerJames McCabeKevin McCafferyMary Gayle McCallEileen M. McCarthyDelbert McCombs
Alexis Agathocleous
Aaron AltmanLauren AmsterdamVallyn AndersonBabette BartonCarey BatesMaryalice Bigham-HughesNick BonnellRobin BonnellKaren BourgeoisMarilyn CahnClare M. CossChandler DavisCarolyn DennisMonika DessereauJ. Wells DixonDavid P . ElkintonTom ElkintonMark C. FlemingRoma B. FoldyPat ForrestOliver FowlkesAbigail GauntSheila GeistCharles GoetzlJames GormleyAshley GrantLeah HammerquistWill HammerquistFarid HarounJoan HartmanFahad HashmiDinah HayseDonnell HerringtonManfred HirschheimerJosh HubbardGregory HuberJenifer HuntRuth D. HunterHoward JaskolStephen JonesVirginia JonesBarbara J. KidderRodney KingSarah KoehlNoah W. E. KormanBernhard KroegerMarti LewisCharles MaxwellJoseph McDermottDaniel McGowanLes MetzSuzanne Noel
Meghan PakesMary Anne PiskulichRachel PotasznikWilliam P . QuigleySofia RahmanRoberto RamirezMichael D. RatnerAlex J. RosenbergJoshua M. RosenthalSteve SchlemmerJoy ShigakiHerbert B. ShoreAndy SleddBrad SmallPamela SpeesGlenn StebbinsRose StimsonThe Filler FamilyIrene TibertBarry TrachtenbergJackie WagnerRichard W. WeiskopfPeter WeissBlanche Wiesen CookRobert WinklerRebecca Woods
In honor of
Those listed below had donations made to CCR in their honor by thoughtful friends, family members or organizations that wanted to make a meaningful gift with lasting impact. 
Many of these donations were in lieu of birthday, wedding or holiday gifts, or in commemoration of a special occasion. We thank both the donor and the recipient for sharing their support and for introducing new people to CCR’s work.
deceased  †CCR Donors59Suzanne McElwee
Steven McKinney and Jane ShoferCarlin MeyerBarton MeyersPaul Meyer-StromPaul MichabofskyElizabeth J. MillerJoyce MillerRalph E. MinerLynn and Arthur R. MinkL. David MirkinThomas C. MitchellDonna L. and Sean C. MoffatMarilyn MontenegroJohn MoranJames MoschellaJerome B. MossThomas V . MullerDory S. MyersCharles NeidichCharles D. Nelson and  
 Susan P . Croissant
John Spicer NicholsWilliam K. NisbetH. Toni NortonJames O’ConnellLucienne O’KeefeScott OliverMartin OrnerPaul O’RorkeHelen M. OrtmannMarina Oshana and David CoppNorman Oslik and Madeleine GoldeJim D. OswaldNancy M. PageWilliam Scott PappertTimothy PattersonLowell C. PaulRobert and Ruth PeckSteven PedersonErika PetersenSuzanne D. and Robert J. PetrucciCindy PiesterRichard PollakLouise B. PopkinRobert and Marcia PopperRachel PorterKurt PrestonHomer E. PriceDolores M. PriemPublic Interest Investigations, Inc.Robert J. Quartell  
 and Florence D’Emilia
Carolyn QuenonJohn I. QuimbyKathy QuinnAlan and Andrea RabinowitzJean RabovskyElizabeth RadleyJoanna M. Rankin and Mary FillmoreDaniel L. RaphaelStephanie RemingtonWesley ReutimannNina ReznickDavid G. RichAnne RichardsonMatthew RileyLourdes A. Rivera  
 and Charles Robert Winn
Ronald A. and Susan Hirtz RobboyMaria C. Rodriguez-PaganPaul RogersonFritz RohrlichLeslie RondinCraig D. RoseJeffrey Rosenberg  
 and Sally Stanley
Paul C. RosenblattLeslie A. RosenfeldMargery S. RosenthalBarry RosenzweigBeth RosnerDavid Rosner and Kathlyn ConwayGerald F . and Concetta V . RossJesse
† and Polly Rothstein
Linda RousseauLewis and Esther RowlandJohn RubinEva and William RumpfJeremy Michael Aaron RyeBert SacksHoward D. SacksJohn J. SaemannDewitt and Marcia Ghriskey SageNancy F . and Stefan SageSuzanne Salzinger  
 and John Antrobus
San Francisco Women’s CenterGail A. and M. H. SangreeDouglas C. and Karen SargentJuliet SarkessianJonathan F . SaxtonSamuel A. and Suzanne ScharffVivian SchatzAlan ScheinineMatthew SchellSybil E. Schlesinger  
 and Steven Rosenberg
Michael A. SchlosserHenry SchreiberAdam and Kate SchwartzNorman R. and Marjorie M. ScottMarilyn SearcyGrace SevyDavid Shayer and Lisa PostMary and Henry N. ShoiketAlix Kates Shulman and Scott YorkStephen ShuttleworthDorothy E. Siegel  
 and Michael R. Abram
Peggy SkinnerBlanche J. and Eugene D. SkurnickLinda SleffelMarc A. SnyderAnthony Sobieski  
 and Katharine Berton
Elizabeth E. and Irwin D. SollingerRenee SolomonStanley Sorscher and Judith M. ArmsKenneth S. StarState Of WashingtonHenry J. and  
 Pamela Pomerance Steiner
Steven and Jeanne StellmanSusan StenovecEvelyn SternWayne StinsonSally A. StixCal StoneBertram and Lynne Y . StriebDouglas and Margie Jean A. SturmMary L. SutphinAlice C. and Arthur R. SwiftDaniel B. SzyldRonald J. TabakHarold TaggartIgor TandetnikCharles A. Tate and Louis PutzelKelly F . TaylorEleanor Wong TelemaqueC. Gomer Thomas  
 and E. Jane Cameron
Thomson Reuters Workplace  
 Giving Campaign
Alan C. ThomsonHoward and Nina TolleyBetsy D. TowleBernard TuchmanKathryn Turnipseed  
 and Tamara Saimons
Noah UllmanLisa VivesJonas WaxmanLowell WaxmanMarvin J. WeinbergerDavid A. Weiner and Sally KuxBarbara WestBrian C. White  
 and Esther M. Gokhale
David A. WhiteFrances and Henry N. WhittelseyDaryl T. WilliamsMary Williams-Izett  
 and Jeffrey Kay Smith
Sarah WillieJack L. and Mary P . WillisPatricia WinerJeanne WinnerLinda WintnerNancy WitstineSteven J. WolfRichard M. WolfeArnold C. Woodrich, Jr.Rachel WysokerWayne N. YoungLeonard and Ellen ZablowJune ZacconeJohn T. ZagulaEllen Zaltzberg  
 and Nomi Lichtenstein
Margaret ZierdtBennet D. Zurofsky  
 and Susan J. Vercheak
Burton and Sally Zwiebach60$100
A-C Anonymous • Seymour Abrahamson • Barbara Abramo† • Karen Abravanel • Patricia Ackerman • Miriam S. and Stephen M. Adams • Rita C. 
Addessa • Susan S. Addiss • Edwin Aiken • Sheila B. and Alfred J. Ainbinder • Cathy Albisa • Jess L. Alford • Deborah Allen • Genevieve Allen • 
Daniel Altman • America’s Charities • Mark Amsterdam • Bridget Anderson • Glen Anderson • Louise Anderson • Stuart H. Anderson • Penelope E. Andrews • Carl E. and Sharon L. Anduri • R. S. Anthony • Rita Archibald • Daniele Armaleo and Laurie Fox • T. Whit and Jean L. Athey  • Eugene 
Auerbach • James Avera • Richard Bachmann • Ivan A. Backer • Lee Baker • Harvey Barlow • Jean D. Barrett and David A. Ruhnke • Richard H. and Joanne L. Barsanti • Keith D. Barton • T. and E.C. Bastasch • Joan W. Bazar • Ashleigh Bechtel • William P . Beckwith • Derrick A. Bell • Edith and Alice Bell • Malcolm H. and Nancy Bell • Nick Bell • Jessica Benjamin • Cliffith Bennette • Nathaniel and Mary M. Bercovitz • Sid and Kathleen Berkowitz • Craig J. Bernardini • Ricardo and Michele Bertran • Beyer: Buyer Home Evaluations Service, LLC • Jaime Biderman and Lauren Leroy • Robert M. Biesemeyer • Stephen L. Black • 
Jonilyn Blandy • Meredith A. and Bill Blau • David Boehm • Scott Bohning • Max and Margot Bollock • 
Joan G. and Jack Botwinick • Linda Boyd • Timothy J. Brennan • Elizabeth P . Brenner and Thomas B. Stibolt  • Frank Brezel • Renate Bridenthal • 
Brad and Liana Brooks-Rubin • Frieda S. Brown • Daniel J. Brustein • Charlotte Bunch and Roxanna Carrillo • Rachel Burd • Cathleen Burnett • Jerrold S. and Barbara H. Buttrey • Barton Byg • Elizabeth Cabot • Blair and Josephine Campbell • Ida Campbell • William Carson • Vito Castro • Michael Cates • Thompson Chambers • Florence Chan • Michelle Chen • Steve A. and Laurel Chessin • Bell G. and Paul Chevigny • Neale W. Clapp • Joseph D. and Cathy J. Cohen • Phyllis L. Cohen • Robert F . Cohen and Kathleen Abate  • Cindy Cohn • Stephen Cole • Walter and 
Gretchen Collins • Christopher Cooley • Mary F . Counihan • Jason M. Cox • Peter Curia and Cheri Van Sant • Esther D. Curtwright • D-G Carolyn and Augustin D’Almeida • Barbara Dargatz • Peter and Phyllis Davies • Ernest Simon and Bianca Iano Davis • Judith and Malcom Davis • Paul Day-Lucore • Shulamit Decktor • Jeanmarie Demay • Robert Denison • James and Casey Dexter-Lee • Gerald Dickinson • Greg Dinger • Christine Dinsmore • Masada Disenhouse • Richard Doberstein • Rebecca Doggett • Ellen Dorsey • Stephen N. and Phyllis B. Dorsi • Jim Douglas and Alexandra J. Harmon • Kingman S. and Susan U. Douglass • Ruth M. Drake • 
Carol F . Drisko • Basim Dubaybo • Robin J. Dunitz • Charles and Lois 
B. Edwards • Arthur Efron • Philip Eidelson • Hester Eisenstein and Michael Tanzer • Bernice B. Elkin • Ray and Marilyn Elling • Julie Elson • T. David Epley • Steve and Amy Eppler-Epstein • Peter R. and Christine Eriksen • Brad Evans • Caroline L. Everts • Garold and Joyce Faber • Jeffrey A. Fagan and Connie S. Fishman  • James W. and Carolyn V . Falk  • Carolyn Federoff • Martin R. Feinman • Salvatore Ferarello • Beatrice Ferleger • 
Doris Bye Ferm • Jane C. Fessenden • A. Belden Fields and Jane Morhaz • Amy E. Fine and Chester W. Hartman  • Karl M. Finger • Joyce M. Fish • 
Alan L. Fisher • Barb Fraser • Elliot Fratkin and Martha A. Nathan • Matthew M. Freedman • Paul Friedlander • Margaret Fung • G-J Elizabeth Gaines and John D. Mason • Gardiner Democratic Committee • Georgene A. Gardner • William E. Gefell • Lola Gellman • Mildred L. George • John Gerassi • Russell Ginns • Mark Ginsburg • Amy Gladstein • Jonathon P . Glassman • Jim Gleckler • Mary G. Gleysteen • Kayla E. Gluck • Cecile Goldberg Levine • Dan Goldberg and Melissa Jacobs • Peter Goldberger and Anna M. Durbin • Jeremy P . Goldman • Rachel Goldstein • James E. Gonzales, II • Kathy Goos and Barry A. Werth  • James Gordon • Michael and Roberta R. Gordon • Michael Gottfried • Robert Gould • Gene J. and 
Virginia Grabiner • Stuart J. and Kathleen A. Greenberg • Philip I. and Gloria Greenblat •
 Harold Greenblatt • Brigit Greeson-Alvarez • Newton H. 
Gresser • Elizabeth P . Groom • Atina Grossman • Sofia Gruskin • Martin Gugino • S. F . and E. F . Gumbs • Henrietta Gwaltney • Christopher J. Halkides • Katherine Hall • Frederic S. Halper 
†• Louise A. and Frederic S. Halper • Thomas W. and Katherine B. Halton • Kenneth Hammond • 
Hedda Haning • Laura Hanks • Paul R. Hanson and Betsy A. Lambie • William T. Hardison, Jr.  • Robert W. Harmon • Pam Harms • Harriet P . Harper 
• Alice Kessler Harris and Bertram Silverman • Gerald and Barbara Harting • Marguerite H. V . Hasbrouck • Frances Hasso • Richard Hatch • Elizabeth C. Heard • Joseph E. and Joan G. Heckel • Dick S. and Loretta Heiser • Peter Niels Heller • Ellen Hertzmark and S.M. Gedwiser • Susan J. Hessel • Vy Higginsen • Virginia S. Hildebrand and Jan Neffke • Charles J. Hitchcock and Deborah M. Snyder • David K. and Judith A. Hoffman • Rick and Libby Hoffman • Taylor Hoffman • Sherrill Hogen • Christine Holden • Penny Holland • Samuel S. and Mary M. Holland • Wayne Holm • Tedd B. and Linda Hope • Carole R. Horowitz and Richard L. Last • Richard A. Horvitz • Claudia Hosch • Sumi Hoshiko • Todd B. Hotchkiss and Katherine T. Araki • Robert S. and Susan Harvey Houston • Florence Howe • Babe Howell • John B. Howell • Richard Hudson • Geoff Huggins • Kristine Huskey • David Igasaki • Elizabeth Imholz • J. William Ingeman • Harold M. Isbell • David Jaffe and Amie B. Kennedy • Steven Jervis • The Jewish Federation of Greater Philadelphia
 • The Cecile Goldberg Levine Philanthropic Fund of the Jewish Community Foundation of the Jewish 
Federation of Greater Pittsburgh  • Jennifer Jinot • Ben and Kathleen Jone • Kenneth Jones • Lynn K. and Mark M. Jones  • Kiara Jordan • Kenneth In memory of
Friends, family and loved ones made gifts to CCR in 
memory of the people listed below. By designating CCR for support (often instead of flowers), donors both promote their own social justice values and recognize that the individual being honored shared these values and would want the work to continue after them. 
Olivia Abelson
Samuel AlemayehuRobert BedellRobert BoehmWade BrummalDov BukHaywood BurnsJoannie ChangRhonda CopelonThomas DaleDorothy DayRuth FalesGregory FingerJoan FitzpatrickTillie FontDavid FriedlanderIsaiah GellmanPeisakh GersteinDaniel Gordon-LevittSpalding GrayLouise HalperAnna HoffmanLeo HurvichArthur KinoyAlfred KnoblerJonah LevyQueen Lilio’ukalaniMaury LindenKelley MinkRaymond MylesBenjamin NicholsMahlon PerkinsRebecka PetersTom PettitErnest PollakRichard RoastAlexandra RobertsKenneth RosenEdwin SalpeterDoris ShafferMaggie ShoemakerIrwin SilberJudith SocolovMarty StavisMaurice TelemaquePaul van BurenElton WarrenLeonard WeinglassAnne WysokerSam ZaslofskyHoward ZinnHoward Zucker
deceased  †CCR Donors61This list includes gifts of $100 and over made between July 1, 2010 and June 30, 2011. All gifts are greatly appreciated and collectively allow CCR to continue our work; unfortunately, space limitations prohibit us  
from listing every gift. Many stock transfers come to us without attribution, untraceable to the donor, so if your gift of stock (or any kind of gift) is not listed, please contact us so that we may correct our files and  
acknowledge you in our next newsletter.Joseph  • K-N Robert G. Kahl • Ruth G. Kahn • David Kairys and Antje Mattheus • Temma E. Kaplan • Rhoda H. Karpatkin • Lynda Keating • Judith A. Kelley • Ernece B. Kelly • Gregory Kelly • Hugh J. Kelly • 
Elizabeth L. Kennedy and Barbara J. Prebis  • James Kerwin and Gretchen E. Steadry • Billy Kessler • Joan D. and Arthur J. Kidnay • Stefi L. Kirschner and Gilbert Z. Schneider • Robert Z. Klein and Nancy K. 
Vandewart • Rachel Kleinman • Eric Klinger • Wolf M. Knapp • Daniel L. Kniesner • Peter and Jane Knobler • Stephen Koczian • James T. Kofron, Jr.  • Barbara Kolsun • Kathleen Koning • Karen Jo Koonan • 
Richard Koretz and Judy E. Bauer • Michael Kozelsky • Gerald A. and Nancy A. Krause • Ruth Kreinik • Mathilde Krim • Bernhard Kroeger • Duane W. and Mary Alyce Krohnke • Richard F . and Rita La Monica • 
Theodore Ladewski • Gloria Lamont • Hy and Rita Lampe • Carol and John J. Landi • Erica and Bernard Landis • Robert B. and Nathalee Lapidus • Lawrence A. Lawver • Lester J. Le Viness • John A. Lee • J.D. and Katherine Ann Leftwich • Mary Lellouche • Lesly Lempert • Robert Levey • Daniel Levin • Cathy J. Levine • Claire and Lawrence Levine • Richard Levinson and Phyllis Walt • James Levitt • Lisa Levy • Marcia Levy 
• Esther L. Lewis • Robert Z. Lewis • John B. and Jeanne W. Licata • Raven and Russell M. Lidman • Robert Ray and Kathy Sue Lieberman • Theodore M. Lieverman • Jeffrey D. Lifson and Aloha E. Keylor • Bruce and Louise Lincoln • Elisabeth Linder • Joel Lindsey
 • Lucy R. Lippard • Leon and Rhoda Litwack • Stanley and Maria Lofchie • Sylvia and Raymond Lubow • Tony Lucchesi • Ellen Luks • Carol A. Lynch • Maribeth 
S. Lynn • Sandra N. and David B. Lyons • Robert D. Mabbs • Diane and Kent Macafee • Arthur MacEwan • Cara Maggioni • Peter Magnuson • Ira B. Malin and Janet B. Serle • Lian Mann • Lloyd and Alice B. Marcus • Hope Marston • L. Camille Massey • Bill Mc Laughlin • Steven M. McAllister • Leon R. and Judith McCulloh • Nan McCurdy • Sarah McKee • Bernard J. and Joan M. McNelis • Lynn M. McWhood  • 
Howard D. and Mameve S. Medwed • Jennifer E. Meeropol • Isa-Kae Meksin • Joan Mellen • William P . Menza • Pamela M. Merchant and Kirby Sack  • Patricia Messick • Michael Millard • Eva K. Millette Coombs 
• Andrew C. and Helen S. Mills • John Mineka • Rick and Holly Mines • Lourene Miovski • Margaret S. Misch • Stephen Moody • Ronald and Linda Moore • Claudia Shropshire Morcom • Mary E. Moriarty and Robert Kirkman • Harriet Morris • Alan B. and Anne S. Morrison • Rebecca Morrow • Lawrence B. and Claire K. Morse • Denis D. Mosgofian and Lori Liederman • Holly L. Mosher • Andrew Moss • Katharine B. and Kenneth Mountcastle • Norman Mullen • Valerie R. Mullen • John J. and Darlene Murnin • George Murray • John H. Muse • Antonia Nash • Juanita Neilands • Marilyn Kleinberg Neimark and Alisa Solomon  • 
Robert M. Nelson • New York City People’s Life Fund • John S. and Margaret Newton • Rael Nidess •
 Ralph Nielsen • Annette Niemtzow and Eve Ellis • Clay Norrbom and Jennifer Eikren • William J. and Patricia C. 
Nottingham • Julie Novkov • Regina Nugent • Rudi H. and Laureen K. Nussbaum • O-S Samuel P . Oast, III • Anne O’Berry • Sheevaun O’Connor Moran • OdysseyRe • Richard M. Ohmann • Margaret Okuzumi • Patricia Oldham • David Olivenbaum • David R. Oran and Silvia M. Arrom • Herbert I. and Sarah Oshrain • Alicia Ostriker • John M. and Suzanne C. Otter • Martha Lee and Franklin C. Owen • Patty Lee Parmalee • Caitlin Parry • Patricia J. Patterson • Bradley Scott Pauley and Chadney Ann Duncan-Pauley  • Frank Paysen • Jane Peebles and Linda Flournoy • H. Milton Peek • Cliff Peery • Paul Peloquin • Kira Perov and Bill Viola 
• Edgar G. and Pauline Petry • Stephen Pew • Katrina C. Pflaumer • Charles Allen Pigott • Robert Plunkett • Raphael L Podolsky • John A. Pollack • Wendy Pollock • Roberta L. Ponce-Barger • James Porter, Jr.  • 
Joan Marie Powell • Richard M. Powell • Marjorie Green Power • Joan C. and Charles W. Pratt • Melissa Pressley • James Preston • Laura Punnett • Racing Thoughts, Inc. • Nancy Rader and Richard B. Norgaard • 
J. Patterson Rae and Melissa Greenspan • Corinne Rafferty and Dale Wiehoff  • Gertrude Reagan • Helen Reed-Gray • James Reif • William D. Reilly • Nancy Reimer • Judy R. and Jeffrey L. Reynolds • Doris C. 
Rhoades • Michael Rice • Albert D. Rich • Kathleen L. Richardson • Mary Ellen T. Rinehardt • Susan Robinson and Dave Peterson • Leonard Rodberg • Terry Rogers
 • Jan Roll-Mederos and Fernando Mederos • 
Theodore Romer • Ben Romney • Sheila Ronsen • Bernice M. and Seymour L. Rosen • Carl F . Rosen and Josefina Maria Yanguas • Carl Rosenberg • Henry W. Rosenberg and Katherine M. Hicks • Lawrence 
Rosenberg and Judith Somberg • R. William Rosenfeld and Suzanne M. Rubel  • Anton B. Rosenthal • Marguerite Rosenthal • Nancy and William Ross • Merrick T. Rossein • Andrew L. Roth and Elizabeth A. Boyd 
• Karen Rothman • Dwight N. and Robin Rousu • Jane P . Rundell • Joel Russell • Jennifer Ryan • Angelo D. Sacerdote • Alison Salzinger • Gloria and Robert Samuels • Rachel E. Sanborn • Donald E. Sanderson • Don Erik Sarason and Mary H. Jennings • Patricia R. Sax and Kay Taylor • John C. Schaefer • Alison Goodwin Schiff • Edward L. Schiff and Betsy Pinover • Lawrence Schiff • Paul G. Schmidt • Steve and Honey Schnapp • Richard Schoen • Manuel and Bonnie Schonhorn • Sally Schultz • Herman Schwartz • Marc and Anne Schwartz • Frederick A.O. Schwarz and Frederica Perera  • Steve A. and Nancy H. Schwerner • 
Joan W. Scott • Sara J. and Henry M. Seiden • Ruth K. Selby • Lew D. Serbin • Jill M. Severson • Estelle and Ralph Shabetai • Peter Shaw and Jessica Ly  • Sallie Shawl • Carol M. Shea • Anne Shirinian-Orlando 
and Denis P . Orlando • Victor W. and Ruth Sidel • Norman Siegel • Lisa Siegman and John K. Young • Susan Ann Silverstein • Peter Simmons • Frank Siwiec • David Skinner • William H. and Ursula Slavick • Abbe Smith • David Smith • Jennifer Smith • Maureen Smith • Raymond D. Smith and Anne Allbright Smith • Rosalind B. Smith • James E. Snodgrass and Eugene A. Keuning
 • James M. Sober • Denise Soffel • Fred J. 
Solowey and Kathryn L. Ries • Neal Sonnett • Alexis Soule • John D. Spence and W. Katherine Yih  • Vera Spohr Cohen • John Spragens, Jr. • William and Karen Stansbery  • Burton Steck • Barbara J. Steinberg • 
Michael Steinberg • Mae Stephen • Anne Fausto Sterling • Paula Stober • Ian A.F . Stokes and Nancy Zimny • Roger A. Stoll • Samuel Stoloff • Uri Strauss • Alice Sturm Sutter • Barbara Styrt • Alan Sukoenig • Marge Sussman and Cindy Shamban • William Sweeney • Shana Swiss • Javid Syed • Joe Synan • 
 
Vivien C. Tartter • T-Z Sheila P . and H. Gordon Taylor • Anne R. Teicher and Sy Rutkin • Dianne V . Thiel • 
Teresa Thompson • Anne C. Tiracchia • Jerome S. and Hazel Tobis • Harriet B. Todd • Joseph and Minette Tolciss • Lana Touchstone • Barbara S. Trist • Albert C. and Robin L. Ulmer • Mark Underwood • Gregory P . and Sharon A. Urban • Thomas G. Urda • Thomas Vacanti • Judith Van Allen • Marc Van Der Hout and Jodie Le Witter  • Manny D. Vargas • Jorge A. Vazquez and Carmen A. Perez • Julie H. Veit • Lisa M. Vidigal 
and Antony P . Falco • Samuel Waite • Michael S. and Johanna H. Wald  • Katherine Waldbauer and Ronald L. Henry • Gordon G. Waldron • Carolyn Walker • James F . and Jacquelyn M. Walsh • Francis M. Walters 
• Arthur O. Waskow and Phyllis O. Berman  • Carol A. Watson • David M. Watt • Julia and Johannes Weertman • Ilene S. Weinreb • Joel Weisberg and Janet Watchman  • 
 Michele Weiss and Rachel Corky • Marti 
Weithman • Holly Wells • Leland M. and June Welsh • Charles C. and Ruth C. West • Verity A.J. Weston-Truby and T. James Truby • Sue K. and Philip Wheaton • Alan L. White • Meredith White • Hope D. 
Williams • William Williston • Richard C. Winant • William L. Wipfler  • Elizabeth Ann Wolfskill • Jonathan A. Woodbridge and Diane Steingart  • Fred Woods • Bayard Woodworth • Sarah R. Wunsch • Muriel Ann 
and Laurence Wyatt • Eleanor Yavarone • Kate Yavenditti • Mary Yelenick • George and Gertrude Gray Yourke • Mary Zaslofsky • Arlene S. Zaucha • Nikki Zeichner • 
Maurice and Marilyn Zeitlin • H. Berrien 
Zettler • Mara Zimmerman and John W. Kessler62Directors
Vincent Warren, Executive Director
Kevi Brannelly, Development Director / 
Interim Communications Director
Carolyn Chambers, Associate Executive 
Director
Annette Warren Dickerson, Director of 
Education & Outreach
William Quigley, Legal Director 
(through April 2011)
Administrative Staff
Gregory Butterfield, Administrative Manager
Orlando Gudino, IT ManagerLisa Levy, Human Resource Systems and 
Special Projects Manager
Chase Quinn, Administrative AssistantJeffrey Weinrich, Finance DirectorAlberto White, Office Manager
Communications Department
Jen Nessel, Communications Coordinator
Alison Roh Park, Communications 
AssociateDevelopment Department
Sara Beinert, Associate Director of Development, Individual Giving
Kevin Gay, Database and Online 
Giving Manager
Emily Harting, Associate Director 
of Development, Foundations
Eliot Katz, Grant WriterChristine Kim, Annual Fund ManagerJosé Monzon, Development AssociateJeremy Rye, Major Gifts Officer
Education & Outreach Department
Loyda Colon, Coordinator, Coalition 
for Community Safety
Qa’id Jacobs, Web Communications 
and Multimedia Manager
Leili Kashani, Advocacy Program
Manager, Human Rights and  Guantánamo Global Justice
Laura Raymond, Advocacy Program 
Manager, International Human Rights
An-Tuan Williams, E&O Administrative 
Associate
Nahal Zamani, Advocacy Program 
Manager, Government Misconduct  and Racial JusticeLegal Department
Alexis Agathocleous, Staff Attorney
Liz Bradley, Legal WorkerDarius Charney, Senior Staff AttorneyClaire Dailey, Legal WorkerJ. Wells Dixon, Senior Staff AttorneyKatherine Gallagher, 
Senior Staff Attorney
Gitanjali Gutierrez, Senior Staff AttorneyIan Head, Legal WorkerAliya Hussain, Legal WorkerShayana Kadidal, Senior Managing
 Attorney
Pardiss Kebriaei, Staff AttorneyMaria LaHood, Senior Staff AttorneyRachel Meeropol, Staff AttorneySunita Patel, Staff AttorneyIbraham Qatabi, Legal WorkerAnjana Samant, Senior Staff AttorneyPamela Spees, Senior Staff AttorneyClaire Tixeire, Legal Research AssociateLeah Todd, Assistant to Legal Director
Consultants
Riptide Communications,  
Communications and Media
Sarah K. Hogarth, Project Manager/
Writer/Editor
Sophie Weller, Guantánamo 
Resettlement LiaisonCatherine Albisa,  
Vice-Chair 
Harry Anduze
Radhika Balakrishnan,  
Treasurer
Ajamu Baraka
Karima Bennoune
Chandra Bhatnagar
Ann Cammett
David Cole
Gregory H. Finger†, 
Chair
Abdeen Jabara
Wilhelm H. Joseph, Jr.
Julie F . Kay,  
Secretary 
Jules Lobel,  
Vice-President
Michael Ratner,  
President 
Alex Rosenberg,  
Vice-President
Franklin Siegel
Michael Smith
Richard A. Soble
Peter Weiss,  
Vice-President
Ellen YaroshefskyCCR Staff
deceased  †CCR Board of Directors 63Financial Report  July 1 2010 – June 30 2011*
Expenses
Program: Litigation, Education and Outreach  $5,118,092
Development  $880,153
Administration & General  $668,758
Total Expenses  $6,667,003
Revenue, Gains and Support
Net Assets
Net Assets as of June 30 2010      $7,874,718
Change in Net Assets      $-148,615
Net Assets as of June 30 2011      $7,726,103
*audited figures pending board approval.Foundations (including Donor Advised Funds)  $4,204,156
Individuals (including Planned Gifts)  $1,914,700
Court Awards and Attorney Fees  $39,081
Investment Income (after fees)  $51,970
Other  $77,138
Total Revenue, Gains and Other Support  $6,287,045
For an independent evaluation of our  
financial health and accountability, visit  
CharityNavigator.org which has given CCR  
a four-star rating for the 6th year in a row.
Click to visit our Charity Navigator page64Mahlon Perkins
Mahlon F. Perkins, Jr. was a dear 
friend and ally to CCR. A volun -
teer attorney for more than 11 years, he worked on numerous cases, including recovering real estate from former Philippines dictator Ferdinand Marcos and 
defending Alan Thomson, whose Soviet-American friendship group was targeted by the FBI. Mahlon worked as an anti-trust lawyer before arriving at CCR as a retired partner. With his wife Lovel, he was a stalwart supporter of CCR for over 35 years and a member of CCR’s Founders Circle and Thelma Newman Planned Giving Society. His pas -
sion for social justice and his generous spirit will be greatly missed.The following CCR supporters 
passed away this year and many thoughtfully honored CCR with a bequest. It is always sad to lose a member of our community, but their ideals will live on in the work they supported at CCR.
Leonard Weinglass
This year the CCR  
community lost one 
of the greatest radical lawyers of our time. Len Weinglass took on many of the toughest political cases, including repre -
senting Kathy Boudin, the Chicago 7, Angela Davis, Mumia Abu Jamal and the Cuban 5. He was co-counsel with CCR over the years, including a 20-year battle on behalf of the LA 8 and recently with the Center’s ongoing work to defend the Mamilla Muslim cemetery in Jerusalem. CCR is honored to have had him as a dear friend and ally in the struggle for justice.George August
Robert Bedell
Esther Broner
Martin J. Dreyfuss
David Friedlander
Peisakh Gerstein
Bartlett Harvey
Anna Hoffman
Maryalice Bigham-Hughes
Tom Pettit
Norman Redlich
Jack L. Rihn
Joan Ruskin
Irwin Silber
Judith Socolov
Joseph Stern
Mildred Boehner Stout
Irene TowbinThis year CCR lost a dear friend and Board 
Chair, Gregory H. Finger. Over the span of his 39 year relationship with CCR, Greg worked tirelessly to promote democratic principles and social justice. He served as CCR’s second Executive Director begin -
ning in 1971, joined the Board in 1976 and served as Secretary, Treasurer and Chair of the Executive Committee before becoming Board Chair in 2010.
In addition to the incalculable number of hours spent as a volunteer for CCR, Greg was a dedicated counselor and program director at Camp Thoreau in Walkill, NY and established Camp Thoreau-in-Vermont, which he directed until 2004. In 1972 he joined the Shawangunk Fire Company where he served six years as Chief and 12 years as an elected Fire Commissioner. He was also a civic leader in the town of Gardiner, NY.
Greg was deeply committed to the connection between education 
and progressive social change. Last year Greg and his wife, Joan Hollister, launched the Gregory H. Finger Racial Justice Fellow -
ship to provide a stipend for a student to spend a summer working at CCR on racial justice issues. CCR is honored to celebrate and remember Greg for his dedication to social justice and his commit -
ment to “train the next generation of people’s lawyers.”
Greg’s tenacious spirit and compassionate nature left an indelible 
mark in all the areas he worked in and on those of us who had the honor of working alongside him. He was truly irreplaceable and will be deeply missed. 
Eliot Vaughn Guloyan
E. Vaughn Guloyan had 
two passions: music and social justice. In his early years he was trained to be a concert musician, but eventually had a career as a psycholo -
gist. He taught psychology at Northeastern University for 25 years before retiring. Even when confined to a wheelchair due to a spi -
nal cord injury, he stayed active by exploring music and reading about social justice issues online. It was then that he discovered the Center’s work and decided to contribute. With his wife, Anne, Vaughn was a  
supporter of CCR for 23 years.
Gregory H. FingerIn Memoriam13  The Gaza flotilla ship, the Mavi Marmara.  
In May 2010, 9 people were killed and over 60 injured when Israeli commandos boarded the ship. CCR is suing U.S. agencies for information about the attacks and challenging U.S. policies that perpetuate the blockade of Gaza (CCR v. Department of Defense).
14  Bush claimed a dramatic expansion of executive power, including war-making powers, in the endless “war on terror”  and aggressive use of the “state secrets privilege” to keep the courts from weighing in. Congress acquiesced, and Obama has continued this pattern. 
15  Riot police fire rubber bullets and tear gas at demonstrators during protests at Free Trade Area of the Americas meetings in Miami 2003. CCR uses the law to expose and oppose harsh policing tactics and to defend the right to dissent. 
16  Police violence and racial profiling is still rampant across the country. CCR continues to lead the struggle for racial justice with our ongoing organizing and litigation, including our landmark case challenging biased policing, Floyd v. City of New York. 17  Iraqi and foreign mercenary members of  a private security company stand on the rooftop of a house in Baghdad as a U.S. Blackhawk helicopter flies over. CCR works to end the increasing use of private military contractors for functions traditionally performed by government employees or members of the military. 
18  Congress cut funding to ACORN through  a federal budget provision in December 2009. CCR filed Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now (ACORN) v. United States, charging Congress with violating the violating the bill of attainder provision in the U.S. Constitution. CCR alone recognized that allowing conservative politicians to blacklist a group like ACORN presents a serious threat to the social justice movement.
19  When the levees failed in New Orleans after Katrina, thousands of residents, mostly people of color, were left to fend for themselves as the waters rose, submerging over 80 percent of the city.20  Syrian-Canadian Maher Arar was detained at JFK Airport and sent to Syria to be tortured under the U.S. rendition program. CCR litigated Arar v. Ashcroft for eight years, but the U.S. justice system utterly failed him, refusing even to apologize and keeping him on the watch-list. Canada has cleared his name, apologized, and compen-sated him.
21  The catastrophic earthquake in Haiti took some 200,000 lives and rendered 1.5 million people homeless. CCR has been actively working to defend the rights of Haitians, particularly Haitian women, living in the camps. 
22  Guantánamo Bay, May 9, 2006. Handcuffs attached to the floor at the foot of a chair used for interrogation inside the maximum security Camp 5 at Camp Delta.
23  Government secrecy was a hallmark of the Bush administration which invoked the “state secrets privilege” continually to prevent challenges to government policies from being heard in court and to cover up criminal activity by government officials and contractors. Obama has failed to change course.  
24  CCR recently settled a thirteen-year-long court battle charging Shell Oil and its affiliates with complicity in human rights abuses against the Ogoni people in Nigeria.
25  CCR Executive Director Vincent Warren with our FDNY clients, members of the Vulcan Society. United States and Vulcan Society v. City of New York is one of several ongoing cases where CCR is challenging racially discriminatory hiring practices which block access to well paid city jobs.
26  Alberto Gonzales is one of the “Bush Six” lawyers who authored the torture memos and who CCR believes should be investigated for war crimes. CCR has led efforts in Germany, France, Spain and Switzerland to hold accountable the high-level architects of the U.S. torture program.
 
27  CCR successfully ended the usurious NY State prison phone system that charged collect calls to prisoners 600% more than was charged for any other collect call. 
13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
25 26 2722 23 24
Project Manager and Editor: Sarah K. Hogarth•sarahkhogarth.com. Design: Nicholas Coster•nicholas@modino.com. Photo credits: p.6: Guantánamo, © Getty Images. p.10: U.S. Human Rights Record, © Jack Pitney /Demotix/
Demotix/Corbis. p.12: Corporate Human Rights Abuse, © Chris Bartlett www.detaineeproject.org. p.14: Racial and Economic Justice, ASSOCIATED PRESS. p.16: Gender Justice, AFP/Getty Images. p.18: Immigrant Justice, © Jim West/ZUMA Press/Corbis. p.20: Policing & Prisons, © Bryan Smith/ZUMA Press/Corbis. p.22: Defending Dissent, © Damir Sagolj/Reuters/Corbis. p.24: GTMO protest and Frank Mugisha, by Sarah K. Hogarth. p.29: Barre family, courtesy of Reprieve. p.30: Uighurs, © Getty Images. GTMO protest, by Sarah K. Hogarth. p.33, Maher Arar, © Bud Shultz. p. 36: Gaza flotilla ship, Free Gaza movement. p.39: left, by Sarah Sturges for Yanick Salazar Photography, right, by Jen Nessel. p. 40: © Wade Rosenthal. p.42: Civic Association of the Deaf , © Jefferson Siegel. p. 51: © Annie Laurie Malarkey. p.52: by Gary Randall for Yanick Salazar Photography. p.55: by Yanick Salazar. p. 64: Gregory H. Finger, by Yanick Salazar.
The Center for Constitutional Rights is a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization.  On request, a copy of CCR’s latest financial report may be obtained from us or from the Office of the Attorney General of the  State of New York, Charities 
Bureau, 120 Broadway, New York, NY 10271.
Click on the case nameswww.CCRjustice.org
666 broadway, 7 fl, new york, ny 10012
