1People with mental illnesses  
are drastically overrepresented in 
U.S. prisons and jails. In a recent 
study, the Bureau of Justice Sta -
tistics (BJS) found that 36 percent of pris -
oners and 43 percent of jail inmates had 
a mental health disorder.1 A person with 
a serious mental health problem is more 
than three times more likely to wind up in 
a prison or jail than a hospital.2
Once behind bars, people with mental 
illness rarely receive adequate care. Even 
worse, many are targeted for sexual abuse. 
In its 2013 study on adult facilities, the 
BJS found that prisoners showing symp -
toms of severe psychological distress were 
nine times more likely than those with no  
such symptoms to be sexually abused by 
another inmate. Among jail inmates, peo -
ple who exhibited such symptoms were 
preyed upon at five times the rate of those 
who did not.3
Mental Illness and Incarceration
The overincarceration of the mentally ill  
is largely the result of a policy shift that  
began in the 1950s. Back then, people 
with  erious psychiatric disorders were 
mostly treated in state-run mental hos -
pitals. Many of these facilities were over -
crowded and had appalling conditions; 
with the emergence of new medications 
for mental illness, policymakers consid -
ered it sensible to shut them down. But 
the closing of psychiatric hospitals — a 
policy known as deinstitutionalization — left many thousands of people who needed 
help without access to services. 
Deinstitutionalization is the chief factor be -
hind the dramatic rise in incarceration rates 
for the mentally ill. Contrary to widespread 
belief, most people who have a mental dis -
order are not violent. Many are locked up for 
minor offenses, like theft, drug use, or dis -
turbing the peace. It is often the case that a 
mentally ill person’s offense is related directly 
to his or her illness. For example, studies have 
found that people with paranoid schizophre -
nia frequently are arrested for trespassing, 
disorderly conduct, and other nonviolent 
charges that encompass behaviors associated 
with their disease.4
Prisons and jails have become de facto psy -
chiatric hospitals, yet few have the trained 
staff or the resources to offer adequate men -
tal health care. Corrections mental health 
staff describe having caseloads that include 
hundreds of inmates. As a result, many  
inmates who desperately need help simply  
go untreated.
The Vulnerability of Mentally Ill Inmates 
In detention, just as in the community, cer -
tain groups of people are more vulnerable 
to sexual abuse than others. For example, 
inmates who are young, LGBT, or who  
are perceived to be “feminine” are at a high 
risk for abuse. Perpetrators also target in-  
mates who they feel confident won’t speak 
out — or won’t be believed if they do. The 
alarming vulnerability of people with mental Mental Illness and 
Sexual Abuse Behind Bars                                                                                      september 2013
just detention international  september 2013 | fact  sheet“There’s no therapy for rape 
victims in prison. The prison 
system is incompetent to handle 
the mentally ill, and in fact 
causes the mental illness that it 
should be treating.”
-  Scott, a survivor of sexual abuse 
in an Illinois prisonP
© California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation2fact sheet                     
•	People who are severely mentally ill often 
have trouble focusing and may experi -
ence intrusive thoughts — two common 
trauma reactions. Many mentally ill in -
mates are also on powerful medications 
that cause unpleasant side effects, includ -
ing slowed or slurred speech and memo -
ry problems. This can combine to make 
survivors’ accounts seem rambling, out 
of order, or incoherent. Be patient with 
the survivors. Allow ample time for them 
to share their story. Use simple language, 
and repeat back what you hear to check 
that you understand.  
•	Be aware that many people with mental 
illnesses have been told repeatedly that 
they lack credibility. Listening without 
judgment can go a long way toward es -
tablishing trust.
•	If a survivor says things that seem to be 
part of a delusion, remember that your 
role is not to investigate. Respond sup -
portively to the feelings you perceive, not 
to the content of a delusion.
•	People can and do live successfully with 
mental illness and do heal from sexual 
abuse. It is important to share this mes -
sage of hope with all survivors.Tips for Advocatesillness is clear. The BJS found that, of the in -
mates with serious psychological distress who 
were sexually abused by another inmate, a  
staggering 80 percent were assaulted more 
than once.5
Sadly, abusers have good reason to think that 
people with mental illness won’t be taken se -
riously if they report sexual abuse. Their pleas 
for help are too often seen as lacking cred -
ibility. Speaking out is difficult, and often 
dangerous, for any inmate regardless of their 
mental health. But for inmates with psycho -
logical disorders, the obstacles to getting help 
are even greater. 
Prisoner rape is a crime that has a devastat -
ing physical and emotional impact. For peo -
ple with mental illness, the trauma of sexual 
abuse interacts with the symptoms of their 
mental health problems, making the effects 
more severe and longer lasting. Worse still, 
being victimized is itself a leading risk fac -
tor for further abuse.  Thus, many mentally ill 
inmates are trapped in a vicious cycle where 
their illness makes them more vulnerable 
to abuse which, in turn, exacerbates their  
illness. Additionally, the default reaction of  
most detention facilities to reports of sexual 
abuse — to isolate survivors — can further traumatize people with mental illness, in -
creasing their feelings of fear, depression, and 
suicidal ideation.
The Role of Mental Health Providers
Fortunately, the Department of Justice’s Pris -
on Rape Elimination Act (PREA) standards 
— which are binding on prisons, jails, youth 
facilities, lockups, and halfway houses — will 
help ensure that mentally ill inmates get the 
support that they need and deserve.
The PREA standards mandate that any in -
mate who reports sexual abuse be provided 
with emergency medical services and ongoing 
mental health care. The standards also require 
facilities to give inmates the option to report 
abuse to a third party, and they pave the way 
for trained community advocates to deliver 
services inside facilities.
Crucially, the standards explicitly recognize 
that people with mental health problems  
are vulnerable to prisoner rape. Under the 
standards, facilities have to ask inmates  
about their history of mental illness — and 
other risk factors — and to take that infor -
mation into account in housing and program -
ming decisions.6
Endnotes
1Allen J. Beck, et al, Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by Inmates, 2011-12  (Bureau of Justice 
Statistics, May 2013), available at www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/svpjri1112.pdf .
2E. Fuller Torey, M.D, et al, More Mentally Ill Persons Are in Jails and Prisons Than Hospitals: A Survey of the States  
(The Treatment Advocate Center and National Sheriffs’ Association, May 2010), available at http://www.treat -
mentadvocacycenter.org/storage/documents/final_jails_v_hospitals_study.pdf .
3Allen J. Beck, et al, Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by Inmates, 2011-12  (Bureau of Justice 
Statistics, May 2013), available at www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/svpjri1112.pdf .
4PBS Frontline, “Deinstitutionalization: A Psychiatric Titanic,” from The New Asylums, available at  
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/asylums/special/excerpt.html .
5Allen J. Beck, et al, Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by Inmates, 2011-12  (Bureau of Justice 
Statistics, May 2013), available at www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/svpjri1112.pdf .
6National Standards To Prevent, Detect, and Respond to Prison Rape, 28 CFR 115 (Department of Justice, 
2012), §§ 115.41, available at www.federalregister.gov/a/2012-12427 .
This project is supported by Grant No. 2011-TA-AX-K100, awarded by the Office on Violence Against Women, U.S. 
Department of Justice. The opinions, findings, conclusions, and recommendations expressed in this document are those 
of Just Detention International and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Department of Justice, Office on Violence 
Against Women.HEADQUARTERS  
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400
Fax: (213) 384-1411
EAST COAST OFFICE
1900 L Street NW,  Suite 601
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: (202) 506-3333
Fax: (202) 506-7971
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.org
just detention international  september 2013 | fact  sheetJUST DETENTION INTERNATIONAL   
is a health and human rights orga -
nization that seeks to end sexual 
abuse in all  forms of  detention.