1P risoner rape is a national hu-
man rights crisis. A recent govern-
ment report estimates that roughly  
            200,000 people are sexually abused 
behind bars in a year.1 Fortunately, inmates 
enjoy the same constitutional protections 
to which every citizen is entitled and pris-
oner rape, whether perpetrated by correc-tions officials or other inmates, is recog-
nized as a crime nationally and in every 
state. Through civil and criminal laws,
2 
survivors and their advocates can hold 
perpetrators and corrections departments 
accountable for this violence.3
Even with these protections, however, it is very difficult for current and former 
inmates alike to get legal help in the af-
termath of a sexual assault. Few attorneys are willing to take on cases involving the 
sexual abuse of detainees. Similarly, police 
and prosecutors often treat crimes com-
mitted against prisoners less seriously, and 
as a result, very few perpetrators of sexual violence in detention are convicted. 
Community service providers can play an 
instrumental role in raising a broad aware-
ness – among rape survivors, police, and 
prosecutors – of the right to be free from 
sexual abuse in detention and the impor-
tance of holding perpetrators accountable. 
Civil Law and Sexual 
Abuse in Detention
The Eighth Amendment to the U.S. Con-
stitution, which prohibits cruel and un-usual punishment, is the primary legal tool 
available to rape survivors who seek to hold 
officials and corrections departments ac-
countable under civil law. In 1994, the U.S. 
Supreme Court affirmed that prisoner rape is a violation of the Eighth Amendment.
4
Prisoner rape survivors have brought success-ful civil lawsuits against corrections depart-
ments. In these cases, corrections officials were 
determined to be directly responsible – either intentionally or through neglect – for the  
emotional distress or injury caused to the in-mates in their care. For example, in 2009 the 
state of Michigan agreed to pay $100 mil-
lion to settle a class-action lawsuit brought by more than 500 women prisoners who were 
sexually assaulted by corrections officials.
5
However, inmates who wish to bring a law-
suit alleging sexual violence face significant 
hurdles, including those imposed by the Pris-
on Litigation Reform Act (PLRA).6 Under 
this law, before filing suit, inmates must fol-
low the facility’s internal grievance process, 
which often consists of an onerous set of pro-cedures that would be difficult for anyone to 
follow, let alone a traumatized survivor.
7
Fortunately, one of the PLRA’s most prob-
lematic provisions – the so-called “physi-
cal injury requirement” – was addressed by 
Congress when it reauthorized the Violence Against Women Act. Whereas previously an 
inmate could seek monetary damages only by 
proving “physical harm,” the revised law al-
lows civil action by inmates in cases of docu-
mented physical or sexual abuse.
8Sexual Abuse in  
Detention and the Law                                                                                      july 2013
just detention international  july 2013 | fact sheet“As a victim, I know first-hand 
the horrors of sexual violence, 
its debilitating consequences, 
and what is needed to put an 
end to it. It is hard to imagine 
that there is little or no legal 
representation or advocacy as-
sistance available to those of us in desperate need of support.”
-  Jay, a survivor of prisoner rape in 
a Florida facilityP
 Gabriel London2fact sheet                     
•	Familiarize yourself with your state’s 
criminal sexual conduct and staff sexual 
misconduct laws.
•	Inform survivors that there are civil and criminal laws protecting them from 
sexual abuse in detention. Consider pro-
viding accompaniment for incarcerated 
survivors when they meet with law en-
forcement and prosecutors, as you might 
for survivors in the community.
•	Affirm survivors’ right to be free from 
sexual abuse regardless of their custody 
status.
•	Refer survivors seeking legal assistance to a lawyer, preferably one who has experi-
ence with sexual assault cases.
•	Provide training for local law enforce-
ment, corrections officials, and prosecu-
tors on the basics of the crisis of sexual 
abuse in detention, including why this 
violence must be taken seriously. Legal Tips for AdvocatesCriminal Law and 
Sexual Abuse in Detention
Rape, sexual assault, and sexual battery are 
crimes when they occur in corrections facili-
ties, just as in the outside community. A person 
does not give up the right to be free from sex-ual violence after being arrested or placed in a 
detention facility. Child abuse laws give youth 
in custody particularly strong legal protections 
against sexual assault. Most states have also 
put into place laws that specifically address staff sexual misconduct in juvenile facilities.
9 
 
Every state has laws prohibiting sexual con-
tact between staff and inmates, in addition to federal laws targeting this abuse.
10 The 
severity of the penalty varies from state to 
state, as does whether or not convicted per-
petrators must register as sex offenders.11  Unfortunately, few of these state laws apply  
to probation or parole officers or to the staff   
of community corrections facilities, like half-
way houses. Alarmingly, survivors of abuse  
can be charged themselves in such cases. Ne-vada’s criminal code, for instance, permits inmates to be prosecuted for “voluntarily” 
engaging in sexual contact with corrections 
staff.
12 What this law fails to recognize,  
however, is that sex is never consensual when 
one person holds the key, literally, to the  
other’s freedom. 
Survivors of sexual abuse have a right to seek 
justice, whether they are incarcerated or not. 
With an increased awareness of inmates’ basic 
right to be free from sexual abuse, community service providers can help survivors to heal 
and to hold perpetrators accountable.
13
Endnotes
1 Allen J. Beck and Candace Johnson, Sexual Victimization Reported by Former Prisoners, 2008 (Bureau of 
Justice Statistics, May 2012), 5; available at www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/svrfsp08.pdf . 
2 Civil laws deal with disputes in which an aggrieved party seeks compensation. Criminal law is a body of rules 
that defines conduct prohibited by the government, typically classified as either a misdemeanor or felony. 
3 The Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA) of 2003 mandated the development of national standards to ad-
dress the problem, but the law itself did not create any new criminal laws or grounds on which a survivor could 
use to bring a civil lawsuit. 
4 See Farmer v. Brennan, 511 U.S. 825 (1994).
5 Jeff Seidel and Dawson Bell, “$100 million ends prisoner sex-abuse suit: Women started their legal fight in
1996,” Detroit Free Press, July 16, 2009, www.freep.com/article/20090716/NEWS06/101250006/-100-mil-lion-ends-prisoner-sex-abuse-suit.
6 42 U. S. C. §1997(e). 
7 42 U.S.C. § 1997e(a); see also Woodford v. Ngo, 548 U.S. 81, 89-90 (2006).
8 This distinction is crucial. While it may seem obvious that sexual assault, by its very definition, causes physical 
harm, some courts have held otherwise. 
9 NIC/WCL Project on Addressing Prison Rape, Fifty-State Survey of Criminal Laws Prohibiting Sexual 
Abuse of Individuals in Custody, August 2009, www.wcl.american.edu/endsilence/documents/50StateSurveyofSSMLawsFINAL2009Update.pdf .
10 Ibid; for federal criminal law, see 18 U.S.C.S. § 2246 at “Definitions,” cited in Brenda Smith and Jaime 
Yarussi, Legal Response to Sexual Violence in Custody: State Criminal Laws Prohibiting Staff Sexual Abuse of Individuals under Custodial Supervision (The NIC/WCL Project on Addressing Prison Rape,  2009), p. 2.
11 For more information on sex offender registration for perpetrators of staff sexual misconduct, see this Brenda 
Smith and Mary Pavlik’s White Paper, Legal Responses to Sexual Violence in Custody Sex Offender Registra-tion Statutes  (The NIC/WCL Project on Addressing Prison Rape, 2012), www.wcl.american.edu/endsilence/documents/WHITEPAPER_SexOffenderRegistration.pdf?rd=1.
12 Nev. Rev. Stat. Ann § 212.187(1) (West 2008). Some states used to allow corrections staff to use an inmate’s 
“consent” as a defense against a criminal charge; fortunately, these states have since stricken those provisions. However, in some states today a staff member who uses this defense successfully might be charged with sexual misconduct – which is a misdemeanor, unlike rape.  
13 Visit JDI’s website,www.justdetention.org, for a variety of resources for prisoner rape survivors, including 
JDI’s Resource Guide for Survivors of Sexual Abuse Behind Bars, which has a comprehensive list of victim and legal service organizations that can give support to survivors and to their loved ones. The resource guide can be found at www.justdetention.org/en/resourceguides.aspx.
This project is supported by Grant No. 2011-TA-AX-K100, awarded by the Office on Violence Against Women, U.S. 
Department of Justice. The opinions, findings, conclusions, and recommendations expressed in this document are those of Just Detention International and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Department of Justice, Office on Violence Against Women.
just detention international  july 2013 | fact sheetheadquarters
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400
Fax: (213) 384-1411
east Coast o ffiCe
1900 L Street NW,  Suite 601Washington, DC 20036
Tel: (202) 506-3333
Fax: (202) 506-7971
south afriCa offiC e
66 Grant Avenue (corner Nellie)2
nd Floor, Norwood Place
Norwood, Johannesburg, GT 2192
South Africa
Tel: +27 11 728 6299
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.orgJust detention international   
is a health and human rights orga-
nization that seeks to end sexual abuse in all  forms of  detention.