1Of the 2.3 million people be-
hind bars in the U.S. on any 
given day, a disproportionate 
number were sexually abused prior to their 
incarceration. Many survivors of past as-
saults - particularly women and children 
- become targets for yet more abuse when 
they are locked up, at the hands of staff or 
other inmates.  
Inmates with a history of sexual violence 
who are victimized yet again while behind bars often face a particularly difficult road 
to recovery. Fortunately, new government 
regulations will help ensure that facilities 
protect survivors of past sexual abuse – and 
provide victim advocates with the tools they need to support them.
Unsafe Behind Bars
Sexual violence pervades U.S. prisons and jails, with well over 200,000 people sub-
jected to this type of abuse every year, 
most of them repeatedly. In at least half of all cases of sexual abuse in detention, the 
perpetrators are corrections officials.
1
In men’s and women’s facilities alike, prior 
sexual abuse is one of the chief factors 
that increase an inmate’s vulnerability to 
further assaults. Sexual predators inside prisons and jails target detainees who they 
believe are more likely to acquiesce to their 
demands and who are less likely to speak 
out about the abuse – and to be taken se-
riously if they do. People who have suf-fered repeated sexual victimization often blame themselves, and many of them have had experiences that lead them to think that they will not be believed or protected if they 
come forward. These beliefs are well-found-
ed; a majority of reports of sexual abuse in  
detention do not result in any disciplinary ac-tion against the perpetrator.
2
Worse still, women and children who have survived sexual abuse in the com-
munity are especially likely to be incarcer-
ated. Many studies of women’s facilities have found upwards of 50 percent of in-
mates reporting prior sexual abuse.
3 The 
mental health director at Fluvanna Correc-tional Center for Women, which has one 
of the nation’s highest sexual abuse rates,  
said that 80 percent of its inmates likely suf-
fered from PTSD, likening the facility to a 
“big trauma wing.”
4
The majority of youth in detention, particu-larly girls, were also subjected to trauma prior 
to their detention, including sexual abuse. In 
a 2010 study of a girls facility, 60 percent of detainees reported being raped or threatened 
with rape before being locked up.
5
There are good reasons for survivors of sex-
ual abuse in detention to fear filing a for-
mal complaint, in no small part because the 
people targeting them are often members of staff, the very people who hold the keys, 
literally, to their freedom. Rather than relive 
the shame of being called a liar - or worse, 
face retaliation for speaking out - many pris-
oner rape survivors decide that reporting the abuse is not worth the risks.Vulnerable Detainees: Survivors 
of Previous Sexual Abuse                                                                                      april 2013
just detention international  april 2013 | fact sheet“I was abused badly as a child - 
mentally, physically, and sexu-
ally. Sharing my story with 
others empowers me as a sur-
vivor. I want people to know 
I am the face of a prison rape 
survivor - and not a prison 
rape victim.”
-  Ca’Linda, survivor of sexual abuse 
in prison and in the communityO
2fact sheet                     
•	Remember that many aspects of daily life 
in detention can be triggers for survivors 
of prior sexual abuse. These include: pat 
and strip searches, lack of privacy, place-
ment in solitary confinement, and lack 
of control over light, noise, and living  
conditions.
•	If a current client is arrested, consid-er continuing to provide support via 
mail, telephone, or in-person, resources  
permitting.
•	Address previous as well as recent trauma when working with survivors of sexual 
abuse behind bars, keeping in mind that this is likely the first time they have 
sought help.
•	Affirm the strength and resiliency of sur-
vivors of multiple assaults and acknowl-
edge that their survival skills can help 
them cope. Tips for AdvocatesObstacles to Healing
Rape causes physical and emotional suffer-
ing that is both acute and long-lasting. Sur-
vivors of sexual abuse commonly suffer from 
depression and anxiety disorders, drug addic-tions, and suicidal thoughts, the symptoms of 
which tend to worsen with every successive 
traumatic experience; in the case of sexual 
abuse in detention, the vast majority of sur-
vivors are victimized repeatedly. The plight of survivors behind bars is further compounded 
by the dire lack of resources - including 
trained medical staff and counselors - avail-able inside prisons. Because so few survivors 
report their abuse, most are unable to access 
even the scarce resources that are offered. 
 
Most detention facilities also severely restrict 
prisoners’ access to written materials and 
support networks that can help them heal, such as community-based service providers, 
internet-based resources, and contact with 
loved ones. Because almost all communica-tion is monitored in prison, most survivors 
do not feel safe reaching out for help. As a 
result, in the U.S. today, most people who are 
raped behind bars suffer in silence.
The National PREA Standards
In May 2012, the U.S. Department of Justice 
published national standards to end the crisis 
of sexual violence in detention. These stan-
dards, mandated by the Prison Rape Elimi-nation Act (PREA) of 2003, require that 
prisons, jails, and other detention facilities adopt concrete measures to protect inmates in their care. These measures include, among 
others, better training for staff on how to 
prevent and respond to sexual abuse, guaran-
teed access to safe and confidential report-ing channels for survivors of abuse, and safer 
housing placements for at-risk inmates.
6 
 The standards acknowledge the height-
ened vulnerability of inmates with a his-tory of sexual victimization. They man-
date that all prisons, as part of their intake 
process, ask incoming inmates about prior 
sexual abuse. Such information is to be 
used - along with other factors that may put a person at risk, like being lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, transgender or intersex - to en-
sure that new inmates are housed safely.  
Facilities also must offer new inmates who 
disclose prior abuse the option to see a medi-
cal practitioner or counselor.  Crucially, the 
standards affirm that any disclosures about 
an inmate’s history be shared solely with those staff - like a doctor or case manager - 
who may need such information to provide 
him or her with better care.  
The PREA standards require that incarcer-
ated survivors receive the help that they need, including access to a rape crisis counselor, 
free of charge and regardless of whether they 
name the perpetrator or participate in an in-
vestigation. For many survivors of previous 
abuse, some of whom have been living with trauma for decades, access to a community-
based counsellor while behind bars will be 
their first opportunity ever to get help.
Endnotes
1Alan J. Beck and Candace Johnson, Sexual Victimization Reported by Former Prisoners, 2008 (Bureau of Justice 
Statistics, May 2012), 8.
2Ibid., 31.
3For example, a 2008 survey of three women’s prisons in Ohio showed that 70 percent of inmates reported be-
ing sexually abused prior to their incarceration. See Cathy McDaniels-Wilson and Joanne Belknap, “Extensive 
Sexual Violation and Sexual Abuse Histories of Incarcerated Women,” Violence Against Women, Vol.14, No.10 (October 2008), 1118.  
4Report on Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails by the Review Panel on Prison Rape, edited by G.J. Mazza 
(Department of Justice, April 2012), 26.
5Prevalence and Impact of Childhood Maltreatment in Incarcerated Youth, American Journal of Orthopsy-
chiatry, 2010, Vol. 80, No. 3, 343–349 
6National Standards To Prevent, Detect, and Respond to Prison Rape, Federal Register Vol. 77, No. 119,  (Depart-
ment of Justice, June 2012): 37105-37232, available at www.federalregister.gov/a/2012-12427.   
This project is supported by Grant No. 2011-TA-AX-K100, awarded by the Office on Violence Against Women, U.S. 
Department of Justice. The opinions, findings, conclusions, and recommendations expressed in this document are those of Just Detention International and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Department of Justice, Office on Violence Against Women.Headquarters
 
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010Tel:  (213) 384-1400Fax: (213) 384-1411
east Coast o ffiCe
1900 L Street NW,  Suite 601Washington, DC 20036Tel: (202) 506-3333Fax: (202) 506-7971
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.org
just detention international  april 2013 | fact sheetJust detention international   
is a health and human rights orga-
nization that seeks to end sexual abuse in all  forms of  detention.