fact sheet  for advocates                                                                                       october  2018
The Basics About the 
Prison Rape Elimination Act
The Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA) of 
2003 was the result of years of advocacy by 
prisoner rape survivors and their allies. One 
of the earliest and most effective proponents 
of a law to address sexual abuse in detention 
was JDI President Tom Cahill, a survivor of 
gang rape in a Texas jail in 1968. Thanks 
to Cahill’s tireless efforts, the belief that it 
was the government’s responsibility to stop 
this crisis gained traction among elected 
officials, most notably Representative Frank 
Wolf. Moved by Tom’s story, Wolf went on to 
become one of PREA’s original co-sponsors, 
along with Representative Bobby Scott and 
Senators Ted Kennedy and Jeff Sessions. 
PREA received bipartisan support and passed 
unanimously in Congress; it was signed into 
law by President George W. Bush.1 
What the Law Says
PREA affirms that prisoner rape constitutes a 
crisis, and it directs federal, state, and local 
corrections agencies to make it a priority to 
stop this violence. The law’s architects also 
recognized that there was scant research 
about rape in detention. Accordingly, PREA 
requires nationwide data collection on the problem, including surveys with inmates 
about sexual victimization. These surveys, 
which were conducted anonymously by the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), confirmed 
that sexual abuse is widespread in detention 
facilities across the U.S.2 
Crucially, the BJS data also revealed that 
while sexual abuse thrives in many facilities, 
it is virtually absent in others. To explore why 
rates of sexual abuse differ so dramatically, 
PREA established the Review Panel on Prison 
Rape. The Panel was tasked with reviewing 
the policies and practices of the facilities 
found by BJS to have the highest and lowest 
levels rates of sexual abuse. The Panel’s 
findings have underscored the vital role of 
strong, committed leaders in protecting the 
rights of the people in their care.3 
As one of its core provisions, PREA called 
for national standards to address sexual 
abuse in detention. To inform this work, the 
National Prison Elimination Commission 
(NPREC) — established by PREA and 
charged with developing the standards 
— held a series of groundbreaking public 
hearings that featured expert testimony 
1 just detention international  october 2018  | fact  sheetfact sheet  for advocates                                      
from corrections officials, advocates, and 
survivors. In 2009, NPREC released a report 
on its findings and submitted draft standards 
to the Department of Justice.4 
The PREA Standards 
The Department of Justice released final 
PREA standards in 2012; the rules are 
binding on prisons and jails, police lockups, 
juvenile detention facilities, and community 
confinement facilities.5 
The standards are a set of commonsense 
measures that spell out minimum 
requirements for agencies to adopt to 
protect the people in their care. They 
represent solid corrections practice and, 
if fully implemented, have the potential to 
dramatically reduce sexual abuse inside 
facilities. For example, the PREA standards 
require facilities to establish a policy of 
zero tolerance for sexual abuse; train staff 
on sexual abuse prevention and response; 
provide safe housing based on assessments 
of inmates’ risk of being sexually abused; 
provide survivors of sexual abuse with 
multiple ways to report; and ensure that 
survivors can get appropriate medical and 
mental health care. 
Notably, the PREA standards also require 
facilities to ensure that people in their 
custody have access to outside victim 
advocates who can provide emotional 
support services related to sexual abuse. 
The support outlined in the PREA standards 
includes crisis intervention via telephone 
or mail and advocacy during forensic 
medical examinations and investigatory interviews. Facilities must enable inmates 
to communicate with victim advocates in 
“as confidential a manner as possible.” 
Further, the standards state that facilities 
must work to formalize these arrangements 
by establishing written agreements with 
community-based service providers. The 
PREA standards also pave the way for 
corrections agencies to develop multi-
disciplinary sexual assault response teams 
(SARTs), which can play a central role in 
addressing this abuse inside prisons and 
jails. Taken together, these provisions lay a 
strong foundation for effective medical and 
mental health services that help survivors 
heal and increase safety overall for staff and 
inmates alike.   
2fact sheet  for advocates                   
JDI Contact Information
Los Angeles Office
3325 Wilshire Boulevard, Suite 340  
Los Angeles, CA 90010
(p) 213-384-1400
D.C. Office
1900 L St. NW, Suite 601  
Washington, DC 20036
(p) 202-506-3333Endnotes
1.  The Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003, Public Law 
108–79 (September 4, 2003), available at: https://
www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/PLAW-108publ79/
pdf/PLAW-108publ79.pdf  
2.  Bureau of Justice Statistics, National Inmate 
Surveys , available at: https://www.bjs.gov/index.
cfm?ty=dcdetail&iid=278
3.  Review Panel on Prison Rape, Report on Sexual 
Victimization in Prisons and Jails  (Department of 
Justice, April 2012), available at: https://ojp.gov/
reviewpanel/pdfs/prea_finalreport_2012.pdf  
4. National Prison Rape Elimination Commission, 
National Prison Rape Elimination Commission 
Report (June 2009), available at www.ncjrs.gov/
pdffiles1/226680.pdf
5. National Standards To Prevent, Detect, and 
Respond to Prison Rape, 28 CFR 115 (Department 
of Justice, 2012), available at: www.federalregister.
gov/a/2012-12427
3 just detention international  october 2018  | fact  sheetThis project is supported by a grant awarded by the 
Office for Victims of Crime, U.S. Department of Justice. 
The opinions, findings, conclusions, and recommenda -
tions expressed herein are those of the presenters and 
do not necessarily reflect the views of the Department of 
Justice, Office for Victims of Crime.
