just detention international  february 2009  | fact  sheetThe majority of victims 
are homosexuals and the 
department [of corrections] 
just pushes the cases under the rug as 
something that the gay community 
deserves. When did we lose our right  
to say no?
 — Survivor of sexual  
abuse in detention1LGBTQ Detainees Chief Targets 
for Sexual Abuse in Detentionfact sheet                                                                                      february 2009
Sexual abuse  of lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, transgender, and queer 
(lGbt Q) inmates constitutes 
one of the most rampant and 
ignored human rights violations in the u.s. 
today. in a 2007 academic study, funded by 
the California Department of Corrections and rehabilitation and conducted at 
six California men’s prisons, 67 percent of inmates who identified as lGbt Q 
reported having been sexually assaulted by 
another inmate during their incarceration, 
a rate that was 15 times higher than for 
the inmate population overall.2 of the 
hundreds of survivors who contact jDi 
every year, approximately 20 percent self-
identifiy as gay, bisexual or transgender. 
With little or no institutional protection, 
victims of sexual violence are left beaten and bloodied, contract hiV and other sexually 
transmitted diseases, and suffer severe 
psychological harm.3 lGbtQ inmates are 
frequently labeled as ‘queens,’ ‘punks,’ or 
‘bitches’ for the duration of their detention, 
permanently marking them as targets.4
the initial assault is often just the begin -
ning of a prisoner rape survivor’s ordeal. survivors can be abused relentlessly by the 
same assailants, sometimes for long periods 
of time, and marked as fair game for at -
tacks by other detainees. one study found 
that nearly 75 percent of prisoner rape sur -
vivors in men’s facilities and 57 percent of 
survivors in women’s facilities were sexu -
ally abused more than once, and 30 percent 
of all prisoner rape survivors endured six or 
more assaults.5 in the worst cases, gay and 
transgender prisoners become sex slaves, are treated like the perpetrators’ property, 
and sold to others within the facility. 
For lGbt Q survivors, the trauma is 
heightened by the institutional apathy and 
homophobia they regularly face.6 Correc -
tions staff tend to confuse homosexual -
ity and transgender status with consent to 
rape, and trivialize the problem. lGbt Q 
inmates frequently describe officials ignor -
ing or even laughing at reports of sexual violence. to make matters worse, lGbt Q 
inmates who report abuse are often sub -
jected to further attacks, humiliating strip 
searches, and punitive segregation. 
the homophobic culture of corrections is 
compounded by policies that do not take 
into account the specific concerns of 
lGbtQ prisoners. For example, transgen -
der women are typically housed with men, 
in accordance with their birth gender, and 
are required to shower and submit to strip 
searches in front of male officers and in -
mates. in addition, gay and transgender in -
mates often seek protective custody because 
of their heightened risk for abuse, only to 
be placed in solitary confinement, locked in 
a cell for 23 hours a day, and losing access 
to programming and other services. 
simple preventative measures can be taken 
to protect lGbt Q inmates. For example, 
considering sexual orientation and gen -
der identity in housing and classification 
decisions, providing corrections officials 
with sensitivity training, and ensuring that 
inmates who report sexual abuse are pro -
tected from further attacks would vastly 
improve l Gbt Q inmate safety.7just detention international  february 2009 | fact  sheetfact sheet                      
Endnotes
1  excerpt from letter sent by the survivor to just Detention international.
2 Valerie jenness et al., Center for evidence-based Corrections, Violence in California 
Correctional Facilities: An Empirical Examination of Sexual Assault  (2007).
3  For more information about the repercussions of sexual violence in detention generally, see 
just Detention international, Fact sheet, the basics about sexual abuse in u.s. Detention 
(2009); just Detention international, Fact sheet, mental health Consequences of sexual 
Violence in Detention (2009).4  Cindy struckman-johnson & David struckman-johnson, 
A Comparison of Sexual Coercion 
Experiences Reported by Men and Women in Prison, 21 J. of Interpersonal  VIolence  1531, 1599 
(2006); Christopher D. man & john P . Cronan, Forecasting Sexual Abuse in Prisons: The Prison 
Subculture of Masculinity as a Backdrop for “Deliberate Indifference,” J. crIm. & crImInology  
127, 153-54 (2001) .
5  Cindy struckman-johnson & David struckman-johnson, A Comparison of Sexual Coercion 
Experiences Reported by Men and Women in Prison, 21 J. of Interpersonal  VIolence  1531, 
1599 (2006).6 helen eigenberg, 
Correctional Officers and their Perceptions of Homosexuality, Rape, and 
Prostitution in Male Prison s, 80 Prison j. 415 (2000); Cindy struckman-johnson et al., Sexual 
Coercion Reported by Men and Women in Prison,  33 j. sex res. 67 (1996).
7  to see a complete list of policy recommendations that would improve lGbt Q inmate 
safety, see just Detention international, Call for Change: Protecting the rights of lGbt Q 
Detainees, available at  http://www.justdetention.org/pdf/Call_for_Change1.pdf (last visited 
February 6, 2009).About Just Detention  
International (JDI)
Just Detention international ( jDi) is a 
human rights organization that seeks to 
end sexual abuse in all forms of detention. 
all of jDi ’s work takes place within the 
framework of international human rights 
laws and norms. the sexual assault of detain -
ees, whether committed by corrections staff 
or by inmates, is a crime and is recognized 
internationally as a form of torture.
jDi has three core goals for its work: to en -
sure government accountability for prisoner 
rape; to transform ill-informed public atti -
tudes about sexual violence in detention; and 
to promote access to resources for those who 
have survived this form of abuse.
 
jDi is concerned about the safety and well-
being of all detainees, including those held 
in adult prisons and jails, juvenile facilities, 
immigration detention centers, and police 
lock-ups, whether run by government agen -
cies or by private corporations on behalf of 
the government. 
When the government takes away someone’s 
freedom, it incurs a responsibility to pro -
tect that person’s safety. all inmates have 
the right be treated with dignity. No matter 
what crime someone has committed, sexual 
violence must never be part of the penalty.
Just detention international  
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400
Fax: (213) 384-1411
East Coast Office
1025 Vermont Ave., NW,  Third Floor
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: (202) 580-6971
Fax: (202) 638-6056
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.org