Fact Sheet
M a n d a t o r y
D e t e n t i o n
Timeline
U.S. Law1 9 8 8
Mandatory detention provision is
enacted into U.S. law.
AEDPA and IIRIRA1 9 9 6
Congress passes AEDPA and IIRIRA,
two laws which drastically expand the
category of people subject to
mandatory detention.
September 112 0 0 1
In response to 9/11, Congress further
expands the category of people subject
to mandatory detention and starts
ratcheting up race-based enforcement
programs.What is mandatory detention?
Mandatory detention is the statutorily required practice of
automatically imprisoning an individual without any consideration of
their individual circumstances. Current U.S. immigration policies
require that whole categories of non-citizens must be detained by
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) while removal
proceedings are pending against them without entitlement to a bond
hearing or any other way to secure their release.
Section 235 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA)
imposes mandatory detention on asylum seekers during
credible fear and asylum proceedings[1] and requires the
use of expedited removal[2], under which people arriving
in the country must be detained without bond while their
cases are reviewed.
  
 
Section 236(c) of the INA also imposes mandatory
detention on certain noncitizens who have had contact
with the criminal legal system, regardless of the
seriousness of the offense or the fact that they have
already completed any sentence for the offense. Their
family and community ties or the strength of their legal
case also cannot be considered. Misdemeanor crimes
including shoplifting or petty drug possession can trigger
mandatory detention under this provision.New Guidelines2 0 1 1
The Obama administration announces
new prosecutorial discretion guidelines
and relief for some immigrants.
However, the new guidelines have no
impact on immigrants subject to
mandatory detention.
Trump2 0 1 7
President Trump issued an executive
order expanding the use of expedited
removal to its full statutory extent.There are two types of mandatory detention:
ICE still retains full discretion to unilaterally decide to release people subject to mandatory
detention, but it chooses not to in the majority of cases.
[1] 8 U.S.C. § 1225(b)(1)(B).
[2] 8 U.S.C. § 1225(b)(2)(A).
TIMELINEWho is subject to mandatory detention?
Any non-citizen can end up being subject to mandatory detention, including legal permanent residents who have
lived in the U.S their entire lives, asylum seekers, torture survivors, single mothers, the sick and the elderly. Due to
the stark racial disparities in the criminal legal system and the disproportionate targeting of Black and Brown people
for arrest, incarceration, and deportation, mandatory detention disproportionately impacts Black and Brown
immigrants. Due to this disproportionate impact, half of all Black immigrants detained pending removal proceedings
are targeted for deportation by ICE on criminal grounds and thus likely to be subject to mandatory detention.
How has mandatory detention expanded in the United States and who benefits?
The practice of mandatory detention has existed since 1988, but it was not until the passage of two laws in 1996, the
Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act (AEDPA) and the Illegal Immigration and Immigrant Responsibility Act
(IIRIRA), that the scope of mandatory detention grew dramatically. These 1996 laws labeled a wide range of crimes as
“aggravated felonies” and expanded the classification of “crimes involving moral turpitude,” both of which trigger
mandatory detention. IIRIRA also created expedited removal, a process through which asylum seekers apprehended
by immigration authorities are mandatorily detained until they pass their credible fear interview with an asylum
officer. The government has also systematically refused to release asylum seekers even after their detention is no
longer required by law. The expansion of mandatory immigration detention in the 1996 laws reflected the long
history of racism, anti-Blackness, and criminalization of communities of color in the United States, including modern
campaigns like the “War on Drugs” that started in the 1970s and the 1994 Crime Bill.
 
Private prison corporations and those invested in for-profit incarceration benefit the most from mandatory detention
and its expansion. Nearly 80% of people detained each day in ICE custody are detained in private detention facilities
run by big companies like CoreCivic and GEO Group, which each earn more than a billion dollars every year keeping
people behind bars. These companies also spend several million dollars a year lobbying officials in state, local and
federal government to support laws and policies that will increase the number of people subject to detention - like
mandatory detention - and therefore the demand for their services. 
$2.8 Billion
Money Congress
spent in Fiscal Year
2021 to lock up
immigrants.190,000
The approximate number
of people detained in
Fiscal Year 2021, a nearly
300% increase since the
passage of AEDPA and
IIRIRA in 1996.Over 66%
Approximate percentage of
immigrants detained under
mandatory detention on a
given day in Fiscal Year
2021. ICE expects this
number to continue to rise.219 Deaths
The number of
people known to
have died in ICE
custody since 2003.Mandatory Detention by the Numbers
How does mandatory detention affect individuals and communities?
Mandatory detention leads to the long-term incarceration of people
with pending immigration cases. Although ICE retains discretion to
release people held under mandatory detention, the statutory
provisions allow ICE to claim its hands are tied by the law. Given ICE’s
unwillingness to release people, the increasingly backlogged and
delayed immigration courts, and already lengthy and complicated legal
processes involved, people often spend years behind bars while fighting
their cases.
 
Immigrants subject to any period of ICE detention, including mandatory
detention, suffer notoriously inhumane conditions. Beyond the
psychological trauma of incarceration, human rights violations are
rampant in ICE detention, including poor medical care, physical and
verbal abuse, and punitive use of solitary confinement. People in ICE
detention are isolated from their communities and often transferred to
facilities far from where they were originally detained, making family
visits and access to counsel nearly impossible. Ultimately, ICE detention
facilitates deportation: people in mandatory detention often endure
these conditions for longer periods of time and some even give up
promising claims to stay in the U.S. because they can no longer bear
being detained.
 
Mandatory detention takes parents away from their children, sows fear
in neighborhoods across the country, and often has dire psychological
and physical repercussions for people even if they are eventually
released. Incarceration and family separation can also cause financial,
food, housing, and employment insecurity for family members.
 
In the community, immigration enforcement and raids funnel people
into immigration detention, and the increasing number of people subject
to mandatory detention creates pressure to add more capacity to the
system. As a result, local communities are incentivized to become prison
towns, despite studies which show the long-term negative effects of
prisons on local economies. The growth and entrenching of the
immigration detention system destabilizes communities, undermines
public safety, and erodes trust in government bodies.
Backlogged  Courts
Inhumane Conditions
Family Separation
Prison Towns
Physical and verbal abuse
Psychological trauma
Poor medical care
Solitary confinement
Human rights violations
Employment insecurity
Food insecurity
Housing insecurity
Erodes trust in government bodies
Destabilizes communities
Undermines public safety
Complicated legal processes
Years behind barsTIMELINE
 Why should we end mandatory detention?
All immigration detention is inhumane and abusive, and the United States must eliminate immigration detention
altogether. Ending mandatory detention would be a significant step toward this ultimate goal.
 
Many people of color are mandatorily detained as a result of contact with the criminal justice system, further
cementing the racism in the carceral system and strengthening the detention and surveillance of communities of
color. Mandatory detention also imposes a cruel double punishment on individuals in detention because of past
criminal convictions. They have completed their criminal sentences and are then detained by ICE simply because of
where they were born. This additional punishment is often devastating and harsh because there is no definite release
date from ICE detention.
 
In 2003, the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of mandatory detention while individuals are in deportation
proceedings. However, there is a growing consensus in the courts that when mandatory detention results in
incarceration for long periods of time, it is no longer constitutional. The Supreme Court will likely reconsider this
issue at some point in the future. There is also a good argument that mandatory detention violates the international
human rights law prohibition against arbitrary detention. This prohibition is codified in the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, which the United States has signed and ratified.
 
Mandatory detention impacts over 200,000 immigrants every year. In order to bring justice and fairness to the
immigration system, mandatory detention must be repealed. Without the repeal, immigrants will never have a fair
opportunity to pursue their right to live in the U.S. and stay with their families and communities.
  