A Survivor at the Southern Border 
Grapples with Isolation 
It was her first day volunteering 
at the El Paso Processing Center. 
Andrea Cárcamo-Cavazos, 
immigration attorney and CVT 
senior policy counsel, spent a week 
this past summer assisting asylum 
seekers detained at the southern 
border. As she walked through the 
processing center, she was struck 
by how much it felt like a prison. 
The room where she waited to meet 
with a detainee didn’t even have 
handles on the door. “I panicked,” 
she said, “failing then to understand 
how much worse it must feel for a 
detainee whose stay is indefinite. 
Suddenly, a man in a blue jumpsui t
walked in.” 
Andrea told the man that she 
and the colleague who accompanied 
her had come to help him with 
his credible fear interview, a pre- 
screening that determines whether 
an individual is qualified to apply 
for asylum. They launched into a 
series of questions, starting with 
why the man had fled Honduras. 
“Instead of starting by telling us that he’d been persecuted,” Andrea 
recalled, “he told us the story of 
how his parents met. He said he 
was the product of their love for 
each other.” 
The man continued, recounting 
memories of being bullied as a child, 
mainly for playing with girls and 
his lack of machismo. The teasing 
persisted, in fact worsened, as he 
got older. The man dropped out of 
school. Going to the police wasn’t 
an option; they shamed him for 
similar reasons. Later, his own family 
tried to kill him. They knew he 
was gay. 
The man said to Andrea, “I did 
not choose to be born this way,” 
and pulled at his jumpsuit. It seemed 
to her that he was trying to tear 
something away from his body. 
“Silently,” she said, “I wondered 
how the United States could justify 
keeping this man, and others in 
similar circumstances, behind bars.” 
Andrea consulted with Las 
Americas, the nonprofit that hosted 
(see page 4)
INSIDE 
2Letter from the Executive Director 
3“I Can Open Up My Shell” — A Story of Hope as T old by a Survivor 
4Ways to Support Healing and Hope for Survivors 
Restoring 
the Dignity of 
the Human Spirit 
The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
VOLUME 29, ISSUE 5 •WWW.CVT.ORG 
THE sto rycloth 
SEPTEMBER 2019 
Illustration by Amanda Scheid 2Letter from the Executive Director 
Dear Friend, 
President Trump and certain officials in his administration have 
been steadily working to increase harm upon already-traumatized 
individuals and families seeking safety in the United States. Asylum 
seekers at our southern border are facing egregious human rights 
violations on a daily basis—violations that continue to worsen with 
this administration’s policies. 
It issued a new rule attempting to bar asylum seekers principally from Central America. 
The rule would require that they establish they were denied asylum in a third country en route 
to the United States. A significant number are survivors of torture and other types of severe 
trauma, and for many this rule is a death sentence. Like other despicable and deliberately cruel 
Trump policies, the rule violates both U.S. and international law. 
In partnership with more than a dozen refugee and human rights organizations, CVT has 
endorsed a plan that offers real solutions to the humanitarian crisis at our southern border, 
protecting refugees and restoring order from the chaos President Trump has created. 
This comprehensive plan recommends strategies involving diplomacy and aid, public-private 
initiatives, alternatives to detention, and reinstituting timely and fair adjudications, to alleviate 
the crisis. Four key areas must be addressed: 
1. Taking on what is driving families and children to flee from Honduras, Guatemala 
and El Salvador—including deadly violence, torture and other human rights abuses, 
climate displacement, and wretched poverty. 
2. Expanding the capacity of countries in the region to host refugees seeking asylum so 
that more families and children will be able to find protection in those countries. 
3. Managing the arrival of people seeking asylum in the United States effectively, and 
with a genuine humanitarian response that upholds U.S. law and restores order. 
4. Fixing the asylum and immigration court systems to provide fair and timely decisions 
and reverse Trump administration policies that rig the system against asylum seekers. 
Our voices have never been more vital as human rights defenders and advocates for torture 
survivors and terrified asylum seekers and refugees. I am more grateful than I can express to have 
you at our side as we strive to create a better future for the world’s most vulnerable and hurting 
people. 
With my thanks, 
Curt Goering ...................................................... 
Curt Goering 
Every time I hear their steps, I 
feel my breath run away from 
me. The jailers pull us out of 
that tiny, stinking cell, naked, into 
an arena. We are forced to stand 
on our naked feet in the middle 
of February for more than half a 
day. A harsh, random beating is 
delivered to any whose feet betray 
them, allowing them to fall. 
“Look at this daring man, how 
he stares at me. I will teach you a 
lesson you will remember for the 
rest of your life!” the interrogator 
said. Those were the last words I 
heard before I lost everything and 
closed my shell tightly on myself. 
The shell that I still wear. The shell 
that I doubt will ever open again. 
Did Thomas Edison know when 
he invented electricity that it 
would be applied with vengeance 
on people like me? What an absurd 
thought, as I sit on this electric 
chair, a cap strapped to my head, 
about to burn me beyond reason. 
With every new scream of current, 
I felt each cell of my body cursing 
its fate that it belonged to this body. I was screaming and begging, 
but to whom? 
In that tiny room, my knees 
were closer to me than ever. One 
meter long, one meter high. They 
forced me into a tightly bound 
position, closing myself on myself. 
And when they took me out, I 
could not convince my knees to 
hold me. The result was an un- 
expected beating, and the jailer 
forced my knees into position 
although I was not able to stand. 
Two years have passed since I 
left that prison. I am far removed 
from the people around me, 100 
light-years of thoughts and emo -
tions between me and everyone 
in the world. My mind flounders 
from thought to thought, with no 
connection. Even my body flounders. 
My steps are clumsy and unsure. 
My balance, inside and out, has 
evaporated. 
The sound of a door slamming 
freezes me. I can’t get my breath. 
It seems like I haven’t breathed in 
a lifetime. My life since that time 
has been like waking into a body 
that does not belong to me. How 
can I understand what has hap -
pened? How can I go through 
these menial tasks of daily life? I 
have lost everything, even myself. 
How can a person mourn the loss 
of itself? 
It was around this time that I 
walked through the doors of CVT. 
The journey I would take in this 
place began from the first welcome 
at the reception and continued 
through the long process of therapy. 
I learned that trauma is not about the event itself, but rather its 
effect on my brain and my nerves. 
My body, mind, and spirit. And 
even on my capacity to have 
relationships. 
CVT creates a space where the 
safety begins at first contact. Yes, 
I reached the bottom of myself 
through my journey in the jail 
before I started to trust myself 
again. Little by little, I have begun 
to feel safe in my body. At CVT, I 
discovered that, despite the horror 
and the loss, I am resilient. It’s my 
innermost self that will support 
me through this process; and 
gradually, slowly, I find I can open 
up my shell to the external world. 
*Some details have been changed 
for security and confidentiality. 
3“I can open up my shell …” 
A story of hope as told by a survivor* 
Farah Al-Dweik, senior physiotherapist, 
CVT Jordan, describing a client’s 
experience. 
How can I understand 
what has happened? 
I have lost everything, 
even myself. How can 
a person mourn the 
loss of itself? 2356 University Avenue W, Suite 430 
St. Paul, MN 55114 
www.cvt.org 
© 20 19 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it. 19-NE5 The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE Ways to Support Healing and Hope for Survivors 
Charitable Contributions —To help survivors heal and 
advocate for an end to torture worldwide, CVT relies on the 
generosity of our supporters. Your gifts restore the dignity 
of the human spirit and we thank you for also considering 
the many ways you can further support CVT. 
Circle of Hope, CVT’s Monthly Giving Program —By 
providing a reliable, continuous source of funding, members 
of our Circle of Hope sustain all of CVT’s healing care and 
advocacy. Monthly giving is hassle-free and decreases 
administrative costs so that more of your generous 
support helps survivors directly as they rebuild their lives.
Workplace Giving and Corporate Matching Gifts —
Designating CVT as the recipient of employer-matched 
charitable giving is an easy way to leverage your generosity.
You may be able to arrange a simple payroll deduction and some companies will match your donations, doubling or 
even tripling your impact in healing survivors and working 
for an end to torture.
Planning Your Legacy —You don’t have to be wealthy to 
leave a legacy of hope for survivors with a bequest in your 
will or another planned gift. There are many ways you can 
extend your support of CVT where you can benefit as well
and spare your loved ones complex probate procedures 
and costly taxes. For more information on making a planned 
gift to the Center for Victims of Torture, please contact Anna 
Zaros at 612.436.4859 or giving@cvt.org .
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a check to 2356 
University Avenue W, Suite 430, St. Paul, MN 55114 or call
612.436.4808 for other ways to give. Thank you for your 
ongoing commitment to healing the wounds of torture.(from page 1)
her, about how to appease the 
man’s anxiety. He said he feared 
discrimination from the other 
detainees. She learned quickly that 
he was right to feel this way. If ICE 
officers discovered that the man was 
gay, it could result in him being 
thrown in solitary confinement. 
According to a Department of 
Homeland Security whistleblower, 
ICE subjects immigrant detainees 
to indefinite stretches of isolation 
for reasons other than misconduct, 
like when a detainee openly identifies 
as gay. “At CVT, we know that 
solitary confinement is often a 
front for torture,” Andrea said. 
“Isolation denies a detainee contact 
with other human beings, a form 
of sensory deprivation  that can 
have profound and long-lasting 
psychological consequences, 
including severe anxiety and 
hallucinations.” Survivors at CVT face a similar 
kind of anguish, and even risk 
being re-traumatized, as they wait 
for a decision on their asylum 
cases. Fear for his life forced Jon, 
a young man in his 40s, to make 
the excruciating decision to leave 
his wife and four children behind 
in central Africa. He found his way 
to the United States. However, as 
the years have slowly passed while 
he waits for asylum, Jon has seen 
a worsening of his depression. 
The extensive delays and sepa -
ration from loved ones make 
complete recovery difficult. He 
describes leading a life “not fully 
alive,” with little expression of joy 
as he has no options but to remain 
far from loved ones. The isolation 
is sometimes too much to bear. 
For the man in El Paso, solitary 
confinement would only compound 
the isolation he’s grappled with his 
entire life. “It’s also one of many A Survivor at the Southern Border Grapples with Isolation 
unacceptable immigration detention 
practices the U.S. allows, such as 
paying detainees one dollar for a 
full day’s work,” notes Andrea. 
“Instead of fixing or calling atten -
tion to these practices, many of our 
lawmakers continue to support 
funding ICE while maintaining 
little oversight. Individuals running 
away from harm are detained as 
criminals, and Americans are 
paying for it.” 
Fortunately, at Andrea’s sugges -
tion, the man met with a social 
worker and confided in her about 
his predicament. He was therefore 
able to avoid solitary confinement. 
However, Andrea is well aware 
that other detainees—specifically 
those who are in the midst of 
coping with severe depression and 
loneliness—might not be so lucky. 
By Sabrina Crews, marketing and 
communications specialist