INSIDE 
2Letter from the Executive Director, Curt Goering 
3Students Walk in Solidarity with Survivors in Kenya 
3“You can’t clap with one hand...” 
4Multiply Help and Hope in the Season of Giving The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE 
The Center for Victims of Torture TM 
kicked off its Call to Reject 
Torture with a declaration signed 
by over 100 prominent leaders 
including Former Secretaries of 
Defense Chuck Hagel and William 
Cohen. 
These influential Americans are 
diverse in their political views but 
agree that our nation should never 
use torture again. The declaration 
reads: 
“We, the undersigned, call on 
all of our fellow Americans and 
public officials to reject torture 
unequivocally and without 
exception, in keeping with 
American law and values.” 
About the campaign, Executive 
Director Curt Goering said “We are 
calling upon all Americans to reject 
torture and for public officials to 
adhere to legal bans on torture. It 
is essential that the American people 
know the truth about torture and 
its real impact.” 
The campaign challenges the dangerous and false rhetoric that 
has dominated the public discourse, 
countering it with the facts about 
torture. 
•  Torture is illegal: Torture is a 
crime under international and 
domestic law. It is never allowed, 
including in time of war, national 
emergency or national security. 
•  Torture is immoral: Torture violates 
the inherent dignity of human 
beings and violates spiritual integrity. 
•  Torture makes us less safe: 
Torture strengthens the resolve of 
adversaries, alienates partners, and 
makes America a human rights 
violator. 
“By having campaign leaders in 
foreign policy, national security, 
military and faith sectors, we will 
solidify the bipartisan opposition to 
America ever again using torture,” 
Goering affirmed. 
Through the campaign CVT is 
making clear to the American people 
that the primary purpose of torture CVT Launches A 
Call to Reject Torture Campaign VOLUME 26, ISSUE 4 •WWW.CVT.ORG 
Restoring 
the Dignity of 
the Human Spirit 
THE sto rycloth 
NOVEMBER 2016 
is intimidation, control, and breaking 
an individual’s will. It instills fear 
and silences dissent, violating the 
core values and principles of the 
nation’s founding. 
Go to www.cvt.org/rejecttorture 
to sign the declaration and see 
more materials to help spread 
the word to neighbors and family. 2Letter from the Executive Director 
We live in concerning times. Although we face a new world following 
the presidential election, CVT will not waver in our commitment to heal 
the wounds of torture on individuals, families and communities, and to 
end the use of torture, no matter who is committing it. 
With more than 65 million people now forcibly displaced from 
their homes, the most since records have been kept, and with the high 
percentage of refugees who are torture survivors (30%, by many 
estimates), the need for our work has never been greater. 
CVT has and will expand to meet this great need. 
In 2015, we opened our doors to survivors in Atlanta, Georgia, in partnership with the 
International Rescue Committee (IRC). Combining the services offered by the IRC — an inter -
national humanitarian and refugee resettlement services provider — with CVT’s interdisciplinary 
healing care allows newly-resettled refugees to receive the full spectrum of services they need. 
In addition to our international healing reach in Ethiopia, Kenya, Uganda and Jordan, 
we’ve just launched two expansion initiatives in the Middle East .
But we won’t stop there. This September, CVT adopted a new strategic plan for 2017- 
2019 which calls for CVT to focus on expansion, strengthening of other torture rehabilitation 
organizations, policy influence on the prevention of and accountability for torture, and lastly, 
strengthening our own organizational capacity. In the coming year, hope will be restored for 
more than 25,000 survivors: nearly 5,000 people who were themselves tortured or subjected 
to other gross human rights violations, and more than 20,000 family members who were 
profoundly affected by the abuse of a loved one. 
We couldn’t do this work without you. During this season of giving, I’m especially 
grateful for your continued commitment and generosity to help us expand our work to meet 
the growing needs of survivors worldwide. 
Thank you for all you do to make the world a better place. 
With many thanks, 
Curt Goering 
Executive Director 
P.S. To make your 2016 tax deductible donation, return the enclosed envelope or 
visit www.cvt.org/donate today! ...................................................... 
Curt Goering 
3Students Walk in Solidarity with Survivors in Kenya 
When they learned about the 
lives of refugees living in 
Dadaab, Kenya, and CVT’s 
healing center for torture survivors 
there, the students at Washington 
High School in Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin, were inspired to help. 
The students learned about the 
challenges of camp life, its limited 
resources and opportunities and 
what it’s like for those who have 
experienced trauma to begin taking 
steps to rebuild their lives. They 
decided to hold a walk-a-thon at 
the school last May to raise money 
for CV T—no small undertaking, 
given significant local economic 
challenges and given the fact that 
many of the students’ families were 
not able to sponsor walkers with 
pledges.  
But this determined group of 
ninth-graders wasn’t going to give up, even when they were met with 
hail and sleet the day of the walk. 
Undaunted, the student walkers set 
out on the school’s track that dark 
wintery day, soon to be joined by 
baseball players whose game had 
just been rained out.  
“Several started doing laps for 
Dadaab against brutal northwest 
wind and four hours later were still 
on the track,” teacher Shari Michael 
remembers. “Adults showed up 
with cars idling and checks in hand. 
Our ESL teacher tracked nine miles 
and lots of stories of past and 
present students who’ve spent time 
in Dadaab.” Students tracked laps 
by tying a ribbon per lap on the 
football field fence, and the following 
Monday, they wore signs proudly 
proclaiming, “I WALKED.” 
In addition to the walk-a-thon, 
the students also raised funds for CVT’s work in Dadaab through a 
pottery painting fundraiser, and 
earlier this summer, CVT received 
a donation of more than $840 from 
the school. Curt Goering, CVT 
executive director, sent a letter of 
gratitude and admiration to the 
students, saying, “Your dedication 
and perseverance are to be admired 
and held up as an example to other 
students: you are all, every one of 
you, heroes in our eyes.” 
I oversee our program of 
rehabilitative care in two refugee 
camps: Adi Harush and Mai Ayni. 
I’d like to tell you the story of a 
client I worked with recently. For 
his privacy, I will call him Tesfaye. 
Tesfaye’s elder brother fled their 
home and came to Mai Ayni camp. 
When he was able, Tesfaye followed 
in his brother’s footsteps and made 
the journey to the camp. However, 
when Tesfaye arrived, his elder 
brother had already left on a 
secondary migration, seeking 
passage to a better life elsewhere. 
Tesfaye was a teenager and alone. Not long after he arrived, a 
widespread grieving process began 
going on. ISIS had released video -
tapes of beheadings of migrants, 
and these horrifying images were 
felt deeply by those living in the 
camps. It was a time of great 
mourning within the community. 
Tesfaye, too, watched the 
videos. There, he saw that one of 
the people shown being beheaded 
was his elder brother. When Tesfaye 
saw this, he collapsed, unconscious. 
He was revived and began 
recovering from this shock. But 
then, Tesfaye’s behavior started to “You can’t clap with one hand...” 
An excerpt of a speech given by Job Onyango, a psychotherapist/trainer at 
CVT Ethiopia, at CVT’s Restoring Hope Breakfast on October 4, 2016 change. He withdrew and became 
isolated. At other times, he was 
aggressive. He found himself crying 
easily. He began having nightmares 
and flashbacks of images from the 
video. 
A caretaker who looked after 
children in the camp noticed what 
was going on and referred Tesfaye 
to CVT. The counselors did an 
assessment and had him join the 
group counseling cycle. At first, 
Tesfaye found interacting with the 
group very difficult. He was not 
able to interact and engage with the 
others; often, he would simply shut 
down and cry. There were many 
days when I would arrive for work 
at the center and find him just sitting 
outside, alone. 
But he continued to show up for 
See page 4 Students hung inspirational message at track 649 Dayton Avenue 
St. Paul, MN  551 04
www .cv t.org 
© 20 16 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it. 17-NA5 The 
CENTER for 
VICTIMS of 
TORTURE Multiply Help and Hope in the Season of Giving 
Give a Gift of Hope 
As we near the end of 2016, CVT is 
especially thankful for our loyal and 
compassionate donors. If you haven’t 
made your tax-deductible gift this year, 
make sure to donate before December 
31 to claim your charitable deduction. 
If you’re able to make an additional 
donation, please know that we’ll be 
deeply grateful to receive whatever 
level of support you can provide.  
Your annual support is an inspira -
tion to all of us — and gives hope to 
survivors around the world. 
Workplace Giving and 
Corporate Matching Gifts 
If your employer has a workplace- 
giving program or will match your 
charitable contributions, designating 
CVT as the recipient is a convenient 
and easy way to support all of our healing care. Some companies will 
allow you to make a simple payroll 
deduction, and others will match your 
donations, doubling or even tripling 
your impact.  
Combined Federal Campaign 
If you are a federal employee, 
you can support CVT through the 
Combined Federal Campaign (CFC). 
Each of the 200-plus campaigns sets its 
own application deadline, so contact 
your local campaign office for informa -
tion about open enrollment. Look for 
CFC number 11943 and designate the 
Center for Victims of Torture for your 
CFC contribution. 
REMINDER: Your contributions to 
CVT are tax-deductible. In order to 
claim a charitable deduction on your 
2016 tax returns, gifts must be received 
by December 31, 2016. Contact CVT at 1-877-265-8775 
or giving@cvt.org to learn more about 
any of these giving options! 
Planning Your Legacy 
You might not have previously 
considered how you can extend your 
support for the Center for Victims of 
Torture beyond your lifetime and leave 
a legacy of hope for torture survivors. 
You don’t have to be wealthy to make 
a meaningful gift, and there are many 
ways you can personally benefit from 
a planned gift. Careful planning now 
saves your loved ones from complex 
probate procedures and costly taxes. A 
bequest is a gift that keeps on giving! 
For more information on making a 
planned gift to the Center for Victims 
of Torture, please contact Fawn 
Bernhardt-Norvell at (612) 612-436- 
4888 or giving@cvt.org. From page 3 
the 8 weeks of counseling sessions. 
He listened to the counselors and 
the counseling supervisors. He 
gradually began to make progress. 
He told us he was starting to sleep 
regularly. He began for the first 
time to make friends inside the 
group and outside. I could see that 
he was beginning to have hope for 
the future. 
Today, Tesfaye is living with 
relatives. I see him often riding a 
bicycle in the camp, and he is on 
the cycling team of Mai Ayni. This 
is quite an accomplishment; cycling is very competitive in Eritrea and 
this is one of the top teams in the 
world, with goals of racing in the 
Tour de France. Tesfaye is living 
like other refugees in the camp and 
finding value and meaning in life 
again. 
There is enormous hope for 
survivors. The group counseling 
model we use brings healing and new 
support networks for survivors. As 
one of my clients said to me, “You 
can’t clap with one hand.” When 
survivors work through CVT’s 
counseling cycle, they come together, 
they let go of the isolation caused “You can’t clap with one hand...” 
by torture and trauma, and they 
lift each other up and go back and 
function well in the community. 
We can’t clap with one hand. I’m 
grateful for all of you and I thank 
you for your support. 
..................................................................................................... 