Before the war in the
Democratic Republic of Congo,“Robert” lived a good life.
His small business and farming
activities provided a solid incomefor his family. Because he was asuccessful businessman, though,the military targeted and abusedhim. When Robert tried to stopsoldiers from looting his home, he was severely beaten. He andhis family fled to safety in Zambia.
After six years in a refugee
camp, Robert and his familyreturned home. Overwhelmed by grief and memories of his traumatic past, he isolated himself
in his house. In spite of communityand family support, he attemptedsuicide.   
A CVT counselor, Jacques
Cansa, began visiting Robert athome. Slowly, Robert began totalk about his past.  
“During the counseling sessions
he discovered how happy he waswhen he played with his children,when he prayed and when he wasactive working,” said Jacques.After joining a therapy group,Robert began plans to rebuild hisfarm and the business he hadbefore the war. 
“We have seen an incredible
change in the economic, socialand family activity of this manwhich shows his psychologicalrecovery and the feeling of hope,”said Jacques. “Every time we [sawhim] he told us how happy andgrateful he was for the work thatwe do.”
See page 3Winter 2010, Volume 20, Issue 1    A Publication of the Center for Victims of Torture    www.cvt.org       
INSIDE
2Letter from the Executive Director
4Volunteer Profile: Jim Callahan
4Renewals Create Healing and Hope Rebuilding Lives: Stories from Jordan, the
Democratic Republic of Congo & Minnesota
Our mission: To heal the wounds of 
torture on individuals, their families 
and their communities, and to 
stop torture worldwide.Lumière Kasawa and Pascal Kimfwende
counsel torture survivors at the CVTclinic in the DRC.From humble beginnings in a small office in a St. Paul hospital, CVT has expanded its
work around the world. In 25 years, we have healed more than 18,000 torture survivorsfrom 60 countries.
Today, men and women who have endured torture 
find hope and healing at our clinics in Sierra Leone, theDemocratic Republic of Congo, Jordan and the United States. The stories of these four clients reflect the resilience and hope that make healing possible. 
Please note that all identifying names and details have been changed.
PHOTO BY EDIE LEWISON2Letter from the Executive Director
Extending care to torture survivors who have suffered the unimaginable
can help people experience happiness and joy once again. 
This newsletter shares the stories of four clients. With effective care, many
clients, like Robert in the Democratic Republic of Congo, can rediscover the happiness of playing with their children, actively working and being a part of a community. They can make plans for their future—like Alfred from central Africa who’s enrolled in college in Minnesota. Or Laela from Iraq whose self-confidence was revived.
We have touched the lives of more than 18,000 torture survivors. Since our founding nearly 
25 years ago, the new lives that opened up for these individuals were made possible by your gifts.Thank you. 
CVT will grow again this year. In addition to our centers in Sierra Leone, the Democratic Republic
of Congo and Jordan, this year our overseas work will expand to Uganda, Zimbabwe and Syria. 
Yet, vast numbers of survivors cannot receive care because of insufficient resources. With the
number of survivors on the rise and funding for services falling further behind, your support makesa real difference. 
On Christmas Day, Americans came face to face with imminent danger from terrorism again. 
In response, misguided voices have called for a return to torture policies. One cable television punditsaid U.S. officials should deny the attempted plane bomber pain medication for his bad burns. One poll shows 58 percent of Americans “say waterboarding and other aggressive interrogation
techniques should be used to gain information from the terrorist who attempted to bomb an airlineron Christmas Day.” 
But we know that torture is ineffective in collecting actionable intelligence. In fact, it hinders
our ability to convince people to come to us with valuable information. If the U.S. had kept in placepolicies of torture and cruelty, would the father of Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, the attemptedChristmas Day bomber, have identified his son as a concern to the U.S. government? 
The Executive Order that President Obama signed a year ago was meant to ensure that the United
States would not go down that path again. CVT continues to educate our elected leaders to makesure that our nation does not return to policies that involve the use of torture and cruelty. Youknow you can count on us to stand up to the voices calling for a return to such shameful policies.
Thank you for speaking up against torture—wherever it 
happens—and for all that you do to help our clients regain their lives and experience joy again. 
Sincerely,
Douglas A. JohnsonDouglas A. Johnson
January 22, 2010,
marked the one-yearanniversary of President Obama signing an ExecutiveOrder banning tortureand cruelty.
PHOTO BY JAY PREMACK /wwwjaypremack.comWhen “Roseline” arrived in
Minnesota, she was so depressed
and frightened that she was unable
to leave her house to apply for asy-lum. During her first appointmentat CVT, Roseline sobbed uncon-trollably. In follow-up meetings,she continued to be guarded,depressed and disengaged frompeople. She could barely speak.
“Roseline” sought help from
CVT for the torture she enduredafter attending a political rallyand supporting an opposition candidate in her home country 
in West Africa. 
“As with many of our clients,
her despair, hopelessness and fearwere palpable,” recalled CVT psychologist, Dr. Jean Choe. 
But when Roseline joined the
women’s counseling group, shebegan to make friends and trustothers. She completed her GEDcertificate and participated inother educational opportunities inthe community.  She soon beganvolunteering in a hospital thateventually hired her. “She regained
her self-confidence and self-worth.She shared with us how she nowhas hope for the future,” observedJean. “She began to brighten andcome alive before our eyes.” 
Roseline is now enrolled in 
college and has meaningful rela-tionships with others. Her exampleinspires other women survivors.“She offers a lot of hope andresilience to other survivors andpeople she encounters,” said Jean.
3Stories from Jordan, the Democratic
Republic of Congo & Minnesota
When “Alfred” began receiving
care at CVT, he was withdrawn
and despondent. “His immobi-
lization permeated the room,”said CVT psychologist Dr. AndreaNorthwood, who facilitated themen’s counseling group Alfredattended.
Alfred came to Minnesota
from central Africa on a studentvisa to attend college. But thetorture he endured for speaking
out against his govern-ment haunted him.Debilitated by depres-sion, he withdrew fromhis classes. He appliedfor political asylum butthe continual delays inprocessing his applica-
tion exacerbated hisfeelings of hopelessness.Witnessing other men in his
counseling group rebuild theirlives, while he awaited approvalof his asylum application, wasdiscouraging. Yet his hope for a new life remained. The groupcounseling sessions reassuredAlfred that he was not alone inhis experience and emotions. Helearned to manage his nightmaresand anxiety.
When Alfred was finally granted
asylum, a new life opened up forhim. He started volunteering at acommunity organization thateventually hired him. He qualifiedfor financial aid and enrolled incollege again. Now, Alfred hasbecome friends with other studentson campus and is a leader in thelocal central African community.  From page 1
Psychosocial counselors Maysa’ 
Al-Hmouz and Mariam Al-Salahatwork at CVT’s Amman, Jordan clinic.
PHOTO BY SAAD AL-GHOUL
At her initial appointment
in our clinic in Amman, Jordan,
“Laela” cried hysterically. To hide
her physical scars, she stood andsat in unnatural positions thatworsened her pain. She had survivedunspeakable physical and psycho-logical torture, including rape, inher hometown in Iraq. 
To relieve her depression, post-
traumatic stress disorder and physicalpain, Laela visited CVT’s clinic forcounseling and physical therapy.After several months, CVT staffnoticed changes. She began smiling.She learned how to ask for helpand grew more self-assured. Lessashamed of her scars, she startedmoving more confidently as shecontinued to rebuild her life.
Dr. Andrea 
Northwood
PHOTO © CVTThe stories of these clients are typical of the 2,500 survivors we served
last year. With the care of our mental health counselors, survivors dorecover from their emotional pain. They reclaim their lives. Because of
the ongoing commitment of supporters and partners in healing, we can
continue the critical mission of healing the wounds of torture.On a winter evening in 2009,
twelve CVT donors met for dinner in St. Paul with a special
agenda—to discuss ways to promotecharitable bequests to CVT and create a legacy of hope and healing. 
Jim Callahan, a volunteer and
long-time supporter, hosted theevent. He had recently added CVTto his will and wanted to connectwith other legacy donors who madethe same commitment.  
“Torture is not going to go
away,” said Jim, “so CVT needs the resources to care for survivorsfor the long-term.” 
Jim’s financial commitment 
to CVT grew out of witnessing survivors rebuild their lives. As a
befriender for more than 15 years,he accompanies clients to eventsand on outings to help them adjustto their new community. “Torturesurvivors need to be welcomed toour country. And if I can give themsome help, that’s great!” said Jim.
Over time, Jim’s new friends
open up and share aspects of theirlives. “I took one client to theMinnesota state capitol and he said,‘Oh, we could never do this in mycountry!’” Jim shared. He isenriched by his new friends’ storiesfrom their home countries andlessons on their cultures. 
“We’re always going to haveVolunteer Jim Callahan promotes
legacy of giving and healing
Restoring the dignity of the human spirit
717 EAST RIVER PARKWAY    www .cvt.org     
MINNEAPOLIS, MN 55455 cvt@cvt.orgToll Free 1-877-265-8775    © 2010 Center for Victims of Torture
All rights reserved. Please contact CVT for permissionto reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.
10-NA5At the beginning of each year, 
we ask you to renew your commitment to healing the
wounds of torture on individuals,their families and their communities.Renewal gifts made early in theyear have a big impact because theyprovide financial support for ourwork in the coming months. 
Because of your generosity, we
will care for over 2,000 torture survivors in 2010. In addition,renewal gifts will provide essentialsupport for CVT’s public policyand advocacy work. Your gift willchange lives; your gift will save lives.
So, when you receive yourrenewal request please respond 
generously. And remember, you canalways donate online by visitingwww.cvt.org . Each gift to CVT is 
a gift of hope for a survivor likeLaela, Robert, or Roseline, whosestories you read in this newsletter.Because of your commitment, theseamazing people are walking on thepath to peaceful and healthy lives.
Please call us toll-free at 1-877-
265-8775 if you have any questionsabout your support of CVT or tomake a gift over the phone. 
Thank you for your commitment
to restoring the dignity of thehuman spirit. 
Your Annual Renewal Creates Healing and Hope
Retired music professor Jim Callahan
is building a legacy of healing.
Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Your generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVTwelcomes all types of donations.
Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery of healing services.
Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
In-Kind Donations of specific items
improve the lives of survivors.
Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send 
a check to 717 East River Parkway,Minneapolis, MN 55455, or call 1-877-265-8775 for other ways to give.Thank you for your ongoing commitmentto healing the wounds of torture.
PHOTO BY C.C. STROM
torture survivors among us,” said
Jim. “That’s why it’s so importantfor all of us to do what we can torelieve their suffering and build apermanent legacy of healing.”