The
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE
Iwanted to die more than anythingelse in life,” said Oba. Oba isfrom the northern part of the
Democratic Republic of Congowhere tribal differences broughtabout war. He lost his parents andseveral siblings to groups of gunmen.
He shared his story with JudithTwala, a psychotherapist and trainer at our Dadaab, Kenya, project where we are working in the world’s largest refugee camp.
“The aim of the gunmen is to kill
citizens and to fight the government,
but their main goal is to torture,leave citizens feeling helpless andvulnerable, to kill and disempowerpeople,” shared Oba.
Oba and his neighbors tried to
flee but were thwarted. “The government officials traced us andafter discovering where we had beenheld hostage, they threw explosives,and so many people died there,”said Oba. “As I tried to escape,some of the explosives landed onmy foot, and I got serious injuries.Most of us continued running forour lives regardless of the injuries[we] sustained.”
On his way to seeking safety in
Kenya, Oba was picked up by agood Samaritan, sparing him thelong walk. When he arrived inDadaab, a nurse referred him toCVT for counseling.
Since 2011, we have been helping
survivors living in the Dadaabrefugee camps in northeasternA Journey to Hope: Oba’s StoryVOLUME  25, ISSUE 1•WWW.CVT.ORG
I N S I D E
2Letter from the Executive Director,  Curt Goering
4Warming the Hearts of a Volunteer and Children
4Annual Renewal Brings Hope and Healing
Restoring the Dignity of the Human SpiritI N S I D E    
THEstorycloth
MARCH 2015
Judith Twala,  psychotherapist and
trainer in Dadaab,  Kenya PHOTO © CVTKenya. While the vast majority ofthe 340,000 refugees are Somalis,others, like Oba, have fled violencein the Congo, South Sudan,
Ethiopia and Eritrea.
During our time in Dadaab, we
have trained 44 local counselorswho have used their new skills tocare for nearly 1,100 survivors.Counseling  is provided in a complex
on the edge of one of the refugeecamps in Dadaab. It is a quiet andunusually shady corner of the over-crowded camps. Most survivorsattend small group counseling sessions that meet for about tenweeks. Groups are divided into different populations of eitheradult men or women. Individualswith severe trauma symptomsreceive private individual  counseling,
with many joining small groupcounseling when they are able.
The Dadaab camps are crowded,
with tents just feet apart from eachother. This closeness, however,makes the camp conducive for 
See page 3
Survivor’s  name  has  been  changed  to protect  his identity.117765_IDM_S5_V02_FINAL  2/23/15  4:09 PM  Page 12Letter from the Executive Director
As we begin the new year, we have much to celebrate and much more
to do.
As you know, for more than four years, CVT organized and led 
meetings of a coalition of human rights and civil liberties organizations 
in Washington, D.C., working for the public release of the CIA torture 
report. Our leadership derives from our experience rebuilding the lives 
of 30,000 survivors worldwide, and the unique voice we bring to policy 
advocacy on torture.
On December 9, the Senate Intelligence Committee released the executive summary of its 
landmark report on the CIA’s use of torture in post-9/11 counterterrorism operations.Within  its
500-plus pages, it exposes a shameful chapter in American history by describing an  unlawful and
deceitful CIA torture program that was far more brutal and extensive than was previously disclosed.
The release of the executive summary is a partial victory for transparency, reform and
accountability for the crime of torture committed in our names and in the name of national security.
We are grateful to you for supporting us as we sought the truth.
Yet, we know our work is far from over. Torture proponents and apologists, like former 
Vice President Dick Cheney, continue to try to discredit the report and, even more grotesquely, to
defend torture and deny it ever happened.
This year, CVT will continue to pursue transparency, reform and accountability. We’ll work for
the full release of the 6,000-plus page CIA torture report. We’ll work for legislation to strengthen
Congressional oversight to make sure the CIA never uses torture as an interrogation tactic again.
And we’ll work for full accountability for  those who authorized or ordered torture.
Your participation in our advocacy efforts is now as important as ever. Working together,  we
can undo some of the damage to U.S. human rights policy that has been shredded by the U.S. 
government’s sanction of torture. Please take a moment to visit www.CVT.org/TortureReport  to
learn about ways you can be involved. 
Our work in Washington is made possible by the generous contributions of people like you.
Thank you for your continued support and your commitment to a world free from torture.
Sincerely, 
Curt Goering
Executive Director
P.S.Your support is critical to our ongoing work in addressing the United States’ use of torture. 
I ask you to please renew your annual support today so that we can make sure that these 
brutal and unlawful acts are never repeated.......................................................
Curt  Goering
117765_IDM_S5_V01_FINAL  2/18/15  7:44 AM  Page 23A Journey  to Hope
From page 1
counselors to visit survivors in their
homes. “Some of the survivors in
the counseling groups  are quite 
vulnerable and alienated because
of their traumatic pasts or the 
current social dynamics of the
camp,” explained Judith. “The
counselors can stop by their homes
between group meetings to support
them as needed. It’s also a good
way to check in on other family
members who might need care.” 
The local counselors also 
organize and hold small and large
outreach events. Through this 
outreach, men and women learn
about the effects of torture and
how they can better cope with 
their circumstances, or request help
from CVT. 
To connect with the younger
population, we’ve worked with
partners to hold soccer games.
More than 800 young people have
attended these games. “The young
people really enjoy the competitions.And it’s a time when we can reach
them with basic information about
managing emotions,  the effects of
torture and coping skills,” shared
Judith.
Recently, the counselors began
adding physical therapy into the
group counseling sessions.  “We’ve
lengthened our counseling groups
by 15 minutes to include some
physical activity like stretches,”
said Judith. “These stretches and
exercises are helping the survivors
with some of their physical pain
and limitations. And the increased
movement supports their mental
health.” 
For survivors like Oba, the
counseling groups  can change their
lives. Through his group, Oba
found a bit of peace. “I am happy 
I came to CVT where staff treat me
so well and listen to me without
hurrying me … Since I joined the
group, suicidal thoughts have gone,
and I have learned from other
group members to be hopeful andgrateful that I am alive.”
“Every time I see and listen to
Oba, I feel motivated to continue
with this essential service of healing
torture and war trauma survivors,”
said Judith.
CVT’s activities in Dadaab are
financed by the United States
Department  of State’s Bureau 
of Population,  Refugees and
Migration  and the United Nations
Voluntary Fund  for Victims of
Torture. Additional  funding is  
provided by the United Methodist
Women. Staff residences  and office
facilities at CVT’s Dadaab healing
center were constructed,  in part,
through a generous  gift from Al
and Diane Kaneb.
Dadaab counseling  staff take a break between  
trainings and group therapy.
PHOTO © SARAH FARAH  Michael Kamau, mental health supervisor  and
trainer in Dadaab, Kenya.
PHOTO © CVT“I have  learned  from
other  group  members
to be hopeful  and  
grateful  that  I am alive. ”117765_IDM_S5_V01_FINAL  2/18/15  7:44 AM  Page 3working skills while working in a
family-owned cabinet shop. He and
his wife, Mary, raised seven children,
and now have seven grandchildren
and three great-grandchildren.
“It just warms my heart that the
dollhouses can be used for therapy
for the kids,” said Dick. 
.....................................................................................................For more than 20 years, Dick
Woolf has been building doll-
houses and toys for the people 
in his life, including his former
neighbor, CVT volunteer Cynthia
McArthur. When the request for a
dollhouse in our healing center
arose, Cynthia contacted  Dick.
Dick readily agreed, first build-
ing a house with a peaked roof, 
and then one with a flat roof to
resemble homes in the Middle East.
The houses were transported to
Jordan with our staff and are now
used regularly at our two centers.
The local counselors use thehouses with children in both group
and individual counseling sessions.
The children whose parents are
receiving counseling enjoy them  as
well. “The houses make the children’s
rooms feel more welcoming and
comforting,” said Sarah Trevathan,
clinical services manager. “The
therapeutic rooms can feel a little
stark, and the houses help to put 
the children at ease.” 
“I’m just thrilled to pieces that
someone could make some good of
it,” said Dick. Dick was an over-
the-road truck driver for most of
his career but learned his wood-
649 Dayton Avenue
St. Paul, MN  55104
www.cvt.org
© 2015 Center for Victims of  Torture    All rights reserved.  
Please contact CVT for permission  to reproduce  this newsletter  or any part of it.15-NA5For many people, the beginning of
the year is a time for renewal and
planning. With countless torture
survivors around the world, we’ve
been planning our work to broaden
our healing care and bring an end to
torture worldwide. And we’re hoping
we can rely on your early renewal of
support to help us do this.
In the coming year, we expect to
bring hope to thousands of survivors
and their family members around 
the world. We’ll continue caring for
survivors of the Syrian crisis who
now live in Jordan and those in
Ethiopia who fled from abusive and
repressive regimes. In Kenya, we’re
bringing healing to  survivors from
several regions of Africa who now
live in Dadaab and Nairobi. And in
Uganda,we’ll be broadening our
work with survivors of the war 
with the Lord’s Resistance Army.
In the U.S., your renewal supports
our work to bring transparency and
accountability to the horrific actsdocumented in the CIA torture
report, provides care for local 
survivors and allows us to share 
our expertise with professionals
around the world.
Your early support provides the
financial foundation we need for our
work throughout the year. So when
you receive your renewal request,
please don’t hesitate.Your gift is
urgently needed to heal lives and
send a message of hope. You can 
also renew your annual support
online via our secure server by 
visiting www.CVT.org and  clicking
“DONATE NOW.” Our Web site
also makes it easy for you to become
a member of our monthly giving 
program, the Circle of Hope. 
Please feel free to call us toll-free
at 1-877-265-8775 if you wish to use
your credit card or if you have any
questions. And thank you, once
again, for your generous partnership
with CVT.Annual Renewal Brings Hope and HealingMake a Difference  
in the Life of a Survivor
Your generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVT
welcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainersallow for 
ongoing planning and delivery 
of healing services.
•Planned Givingcontinues your
legacy of support. 
•Gifts of Stocksupport survivors
while offering tax benefits to
donors.
•In-Kind Donationsof specific
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Giftscelebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,
MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775  for
other ways to give. Thank you for your
ongoing commitmentto  healing the
wounds of torture.Warming the Hearts of 
a Volunteer and Children
The
CENTERfor
VICTIMSof
TORTURE
PHOTO © AMY-JO VERSOLATO117765_IDM_S5_V01_FINAL  2/18/15  7:44 AM  Page 4