From lush Central and West
Africa to a bustling urban center
in the Middle East to the U.S.
capital and the open skies of
America’s heartland,employees,
clients, volunteers,and supporters
of the Center for Victims of Torture 
gathered on June 26 to speak out
against torture and honor survivors
of torture. 
June 26 is recognized as United
Nations International Day in
Support of Victims of Torture—markingthe anniversary of the UN
Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhumanor Degrading
Treatment or Punishment going
into effect. For more than ten years
CVT has commemorated the day
with special events, speeches and
marches. This year spirited gatherings
in the Democratic Republic of
Congo, Sierra Leone, Jordan,
Washington D.C.,and Minnesota
celebrated the resilience of torture
survivors and the hope for a world
without torture. 
The Democratic Republic of Congo
In Pweto in the Democratic
Republic of Congo CVT staff 
organized a motorized caravan
to raise awareness of the health
consequences of torture and CVT’s
healing services. The caravan traveled
through the center of Pweto,stopping
in four communities.
Nearly 100 people gathered at
CVT offices to listen to speeches bythe police chief, non-governmental
representatives and local officials.
Community members asked ques-
tions about torture, its effects and
CVT’s work. Attendees shared a
meal in the afternoon followed by
an impromptu soccer game. 
That evening,psychosocial
counselors spoke on a local radio
program about CVT’s healing 
programs and the importance of 
the UN Convention. Summer 2009, Volume 19, Issue 3    •A Publication of the Center for Victims of Torture    •www.cvt.org       
INSIDE
2Message from the Executive Director
4International Volunteers Contribute to CVT
4Small Gifts Make a Big Difference Speaking Out Against Torture on June 26
Our mission: To heal the wounds of 
torture on individuals, their families 
and their communities, and to 
stop torture worldwide.
In Sierra Leone, CVT staff, community
dignitaries and partners marched
against torture, among them Chief
Mark Kamara, Calaba Town, Sierra
Leone. See page 3Harry McPherson, former Special Counsel
to President Lyndon B. Johnson, Alberto
Mora, former General Counsel to the
United States Navy and 2007 Eclipse Award
recipient, and William H. Taft, IV, former
Legal Counsel to the State Department, 
at the Washington, D.C. reception.
PHOTO © SIMONE VAN DER KAADEN
PHOTO © JAY PREMACK / www.jaypremack.com2Letter from the Executive Director
Last month, we commemorated UN International Day in Support 
of Victims of Torture (June 26th). As we do every year, we celebrated 
the incredible resilience of survivors. The courageous individuals who 
overcome the unimaginable continue to inspire us with their strength, 
perseverance and extraordinary capacity to let their spirits endure.  
We marked this occasion with events at our healing centers in Minnesota, Sierra Leone, the
Democratic Republic of Congo and Jordan. We also hosted our annual reception in Washington,
D.C., where we honored Senator Richard Durbin (D-IL) with our Eclipse Award in recognition of
his opposition to the torture and cruel treatment of prisoners held in U.S. counterterrorism efforts.
We also presented awards to Harry McPherson, former Special Counsel to President Lyndon
Johnson, and William H. Taft,IV, former Legal Counsel to the State Department, for their leadership
last year in our Campaign to Ban Torture and their long-standing work against the use of torture.
We were honored to have Alberto Mora, former General Counsel to the United States Navy 
and our 2007 Eclipse Award honoree, speak at the Washington event. Other signatories of the
Declaration of Principles for a Presidential Executive Order on Prisoner Treatment, Torture and
Crueltywere in attendance, including retired Brigadier General Stephen N. Xenakis, retired 
Colonel Lawrence Wilkerson, and former National Security Advisor Anthony Lake.
The annual reception in Washington is part of our ongoing effort to create new allies against
torture and new resources to heal survivors. In May I met with senior White House staff and
shared proposals for actions that would build on President Obama’s January executive order banning
torture. I outlined some ideas for highlighting America’s historic bipartisan commitment to healing
torture survivors and for taking steps to lead a renewed effort to prevent torture. 
We were particularly pleased when President Obama announced the Administration’s 
commitment to one of those proposals. On June 26,the President directed the State Department
to solicit information from our diplomatic missions overseas about effective policies and programs
for stopping torture and assisting its victims. We will
monitor this and other promising efforts and look for
ways to continue to advance our shared commitment 
to ending torture worldwide. 
Thank you for supporting our efforts to end 
torture, and for being part of the healing community
that helps torture survivors reclaim their lives.
Sincerely,
Douglas A. JohnsonDouglas A. Johnson
PHOTO ©JAY PREMACK / www.jaypremack.com
Douglas A. Johnson, CVT executive director 
(left) and John Cairns, chair of CVT’s board of 
directors (right) present Senator Richard 
Durbin (D-IL) with the Eclipse Award.Sierra Leone
In Sierra Leone, CVT organized
a school competition sponsoredby
the U.S. Embassy in Freetown.
Throughout the month of June
students spoke out against torture
and celebrated hope and healing
through drama, poetry and dance. 
The June 26 events began with 
a march consisting of200 invited
community dignitaries, partners
and staff,accompanied by a police
brass band, to demonstrate against
torture. At the CVT offices in
Aberdeen,activities included music,
student and community performances,
speeches and testimonies. Attendees
ended the commemoration with a
symbolic candle lighting ceremony.
Jordan
To reflect CVT’s efforts to work
hand-in-hand against torture, CVT
staff in Amman, Jordan designed an
office mural with their handprints.
Through radio and television inter-
views, CVT reached out to Iraqi
refugeesliving in Amman who may
be suffering from torture and war
trauma. Staffmembers detailed theservices provided by CVT and
emphasized that the wounds inflictedby torture and war trauma could 
be healed.
To raise awareness of the effects
of torture and the availability of
CVT services within Amman’s Iraqi
refugee community on June 26 and
beyond, a poster competition was
launched. Participants were asked
to submit designs of healing that
appeal to Iraqis.  
Washington, D.C.
In Washington, D.C.,Senator
Richard Durbin (D-IL) received the
Eclipse Award for his work opposing
the torture and cruel treatment of
prisoners held in U.S. counter-
terrorism efforts. Legislative staff,
human rights advocates, retired 
military leaders, and national security
experts attended CVT’s annual
reception. Special awards were given
to Harry McPherson and William
H. Taft,IV for their outstanding
work against the use of torture by
U.S. personnel and for their leader-
ship in CVT’s successful effort to
secure a Presidential executive order
banning torture.
Minneapolis, Minnesota
At the Minneapolis Healing
Center, CVT clients, staff, volunteers
and supporters knit their hopes
together into an artistic weaving,
listened to volunteers and supportersspeak about their commitment to
CVT,and enjoyed African dance
and food.Carl Nelson, president of the
Greater Minnesota Association of
Evangelicals, spoke at the event.
“Today is a day when all of us
stand up to support survivors of
torture,” declared Nelson. “Victims
of torture from around the world
live here in Minnesota now—they
are our neighbors.”
Mark Hiemenz, CVT supporter
and Community Relations Director
of Ameriprise Financial,askedattendees to commit to supporting
survivors of torture and CVT’swork for a torture-free world.
“Often, people talk about the need
for closure when there is difficulty
and pain,” said Hiemenz. “But I
think equally important is opening—opening up hearts and lives to abetter tomorrow.”
The many events on June 26
demonstrate the hope for a brighter
future. Around the world, men,
women and children spoke out
against torture on this important
day. With the support of so many
people, CVT persists inits life-
changing work of healing the
wounds of torture on individuals,families and communities and creating a world free of torture.
3
Speaking Out Against Torture
CVT supporters knit their hopes together
into an artistic weaving in Minneapolis.
PHOTO © STEPHANIE HYNES / www. stephaniehynes.com
CVT staff in Amman, Jordan created a
mural to reflect working hand-in-hand
against torture.
In Pweto, DRC, a motorized caravan
raised awareness of the effects of
torture.
PHOTO © CARLOS ACEVESPHOTO © CVTFrom page 1Each year CVT touches torture 
survivors and treatment centers 
in over 25 countries with direct
healing services, training programs
and organizational support. This
global work is supported by volunteers
around the world, including Chandrika
Gadiewasam and Henrik Petaisto.
Chandrika Gadiewasam, who lives
in Sri Lanka, designed the invitationfor the June 26commemoration ofUN International Day in Support of
Victims of Torture in Washington,
D.C. Working half-way around theworld from CVT’s Minneapolis head-
quarters, she designed the invitationwithin a few weeks. 
Gadiewasam, whose hobbies
include creative arts and graphicdesign, works as a librarian at a localnon-governmental organizationinvolved in human rights and good
governance advocacy work. 
While researchingorganizations
that work with war-affected popula-
tions, Gadiewasamdiscovered CVT
and responded to a request for graphic
design volunteers. “It seemed like an
excellent opportunity to link interna-
tionally for a good cause,” said
Gadiewasam of becoming a volunteer.
Henrik Petaisto, now based in
Finland,first learned of CVT as aMinnesota high school student. Drawn
to CVT because of his interest in
human rights, Petaisto helped with a
food drive for CVT’s New Neighbors/Hidden Scars project and organized
materials for a conference.
But Petaisto’s extended familyInternational Volunteers Contribute to CVT
Restoring the dignity of the human spirit
717 EAST RIVER PARKWAY    www. cvt.org     
MINNEAPOLIS, MN 55455 cvt@cvt.org
Toll Free 1-877-265-8775    © 2009 Center for Victims of Torture
All rights reserved. Please contact CVT for permission
to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.
9-NC5On June 26th, CVT observed
United Nations InternationalDay in Support of Victims of
Torture. And in keeping with thespirit and intent of this occasion forthe world to remember those whohave survived unspeakable abuse,our goal is to secure commitmentsfrom 100 individuals who agree tomake a monthly gift of $26. This
will give us $2,600 each month—
more than $31,000 each year—toexpand our work on behalf of 
victims of torture. 
Your monthly commitment will
ensure a dependable financial foun-
dation for CVT to continue bringing
hope and healing to thousands of
torture survivors worldwide.By
becoming a monthly sustainer, you
help decrease our administrativecosts and ensure that more of your
donation helps torture survivorsdirectly. 
Please consider joining Circle 
of Hopeby making a gift of $26 a
month to symbolize your commitmentto supporting torture survivors.Your monthly gift—coupled with
gifts from other Circle of Hope
members—will make a big difference
in helping to relieve the suffering of
torture survivors and work for an
end to torture.  
You can obtain the Circle of
Hope enrollment form at the Make
a Difference section of our Web site
www.cvt.org. You’re also welcome
to call Ashley Bennettat 1-877-265-
8775, or e-mail cvt@cvt.org 
for more 
information.Small gifts make a big differenceand college opportunities ledhim to
relocate to Finland. Despite moving
last winter, he has continued volun-
teering for CVT by assisting on several
Web-based projects. Petaisto’s educa-
tion plans include teaching English.
“I have an interest in different cultures
and how we communicate with each
other,” said Petaisto. 
CVT relies on volunteers around
the world to support its work. “Having
a strong network of volunteers,not
only in Minnesota but across the
globe,reflects the local and interna-tional nature of CVT’s work,” said
Beth Wickum, director of volunteer
services. “It’s inspiring to consider
the ripple effect that each volunteer
creates, not only in the extraordinary
services they provide but in how
their dedication to CVT’s mission
affects others they meet around the
world.”
Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Your generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVT
welcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for 
on-going planning and delivery 
of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits to
donors.
•In-Kind Donations of specific items
improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send 
a check to 717 East River Parkway,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, or call 
1-877-265-8775 for other ways to give.
Thank you for your ongoing commitment
to healing the wounds of torture.
 