Earlier this year CVT launched 
its newest healing project in theDadaab refugee camps outside
of Dadaab, Kenya. Twenty yearsago, the camps opened to Somalisfleeing war and torture in theirhomeland. Built for 90,000 individ-uals, the camps are now home tomore than 380,000, with thousandsmore arriving each month. 
Community leaders in the
refugee camp estimate that at least85 percent of long-term refugeesexperienced war-related violencedirectly. These men and women mayhave endured amputations by rebelforces or random bullet sprays, orwitnessed atrocities such as murders.CVT is bringing healing to 
survivors through individual andgroup counseling. Country Director,Alieu Sannoh, a veteran of CVT’sprojects in Guinea, Liberia and theDemocratic Republic of Congo, isleading the project.
“We have been learning how
traumatized people are. Nearly allof the refugees walked over 50 kilo-meters through the desert to reachthe camps,” said Alieu. “Thosewith physical or mental disabilitiesare highly stigmatized by the com-munity, making it very difficult andeven more traumatic to get the helpthey need. Many people prefer justto suffer silently at home.” While the refugees have escaped
the rampant violence of civil war,the memories of their traumaticexperiences haunt them. They relyon humanitarian organizations fortheir basic needs and frequently livein makeshift dwellings. The campsare extremely crowded and some-times violent. There are few methodsfor the refugees to earn income.Each day, several hundred additionalrefugees arrive on foot at the campsthat are now officially closed to newrefugees. Those who do not alreadyhave family members settled in thecamp are forced to live outside ofthe camp boundaries.
Group counseling has begun to
bring hope and healing to the mostsurvivors possible. “Some clientswho would not even leave theirhomes are now coming to our center on days they don’t have sessions, simply to sit in our gardenas they feel safe, calm and welcomethere,” said Shirley Gillan, CVTpsychotherapist and trainer inDadaab. “One man refused to leavehis house when we first met him.But after a few afternoons sitting inour garden, he announced, ‘I am
July/August 2011, Volume 21, Issue 4    A Publication of the Center for Victims of Torture    www.cvt.org       
INSIDE
2Letter from the Executive Director
4Jo Dah—Rebuilding Lives throughout Africa 
4Honor Friends and Family by helping CVTOur mission: T o heal the wounds of 
torture on individuals, their families 
and their communities, and to 
stop torture worldwide.See page 3
Mal Warwick Associates/MD, Inc. Form: Newsletter Draft: FINAL
Job #: CVT11 ND Size: 11 x 17” flat  4pp, 1sh Stock: 70# white offset, recycled Fold: half, then half again
Date: 07/18/11 Ink: 4/4, 4cp Bleeds: 4Healing in the Dadaab Refugee Camps
Nina Asutsa 
(right) is the FieldAdministrator andOmar MohamedDuhul is the FieldAssistant. They areresponsible for thedaily administrationof the Dadaab project.
PHOTOS © KATIE MELINE
2Letter from the Executive Director
In the immediate aftermath of the capture and killing of Osama bin
Laden, torture apologists and proponents began swarming the media withcries for the return of torture and cruel treatment of prisoners. Yet, we knowhow little they understand what torture is and how it is used in the world.  
CVT answered their claims with a strong voice that torture is always 
wrong and must never be part of our national security policy.  
In early May, CVT and Human Rights First organized this letter to President Obama 
signed by more than 40 military, national security and foreign policy leaders:
Dear Mr. President:
In light of the debate following the death of Osama bin Laden, we urge you to 
make an unequivocal statement that torture is illegal, immoral, and un-American. The use of torture undermines our national security and intelligence gathering efforts. The United States must lead by our core principles and condemn torture.  
Prior to the start of his confirmation hearing, CVT sent a letter to Secretary of Defense 
nominee Leon E. Panetta urging him to provide “a clear condemnation of the use of torture andcruel treatment of prisoners by the U.S. and a commitment to uphold human rights in all DefenseDepartment and U.S. intelligence community activities.”
It is likely those advocating for the return of torture will continue to speak out in times of
intelligence-gathering breakthroughs and breakdowns. However, I hope they will listen to thesewords from a speech against torture delivered by Senator John McCain on the floor of the U.S.Senate: “As I’ve said many times before, and still maintain, this is not about the terrorists. It’s about us.”  
Senator McCain is right. It is about who we are.Thank you for your continued support and involvement in our work to stop torture.
Sincerely,
Douglas A. JohnsonDouglas A. Johnson
......................................................
T orture is always wrong
and must never be part of our nationalsecurity policy. 
© CHUCK FELIX/WWW.FREEDIGITALPHOTOS.NETgoing for a walk’ and took a walk
around the camp. He now evengoes to the market.”
Paraprofessional psychosocial
counselors (PSCs) are learning theeffects of torture, the healing processand how to lead counseling groups.Nearly all of the PSCs are Somalimen who are refugees living in thecamp. Hiring women has beenchallenging because within theSomali culture, women typicallyfocus on raising children and maintaining the home. During theirtraining, the PSCs learned how toconduct counseling sessions forwomen, while still following Somali cultural norms.
“We don’t want their culture to
be violated,” said Alieu, of learningto work within a more conservativeculture than previous projects inAfrica. “We’re learning to workthrough their frames so their cultureis respected, but women can receivecare as well.” 
Shirley and Fardin Shadab,
another psychotherapist and trainer,have begun meeting with refugeeleaders to educate them on theeffects of torture and how CVTcanhelp those who are still suffering.Working through the refugee leadership structure is important to building relationships. “People rely on their local leaders,” explainedAlieu. “You need to let people feel respected andimportant.” Because thecamp is structured as a
3From page 1 community, the local leaders are
aware of the men and women whoare suffering the most.
CVT will offer counseling to 300
men and women in the upcomingyear. Those who are most trauma-tized will receive individual counsel-ing from Shirley and Fardin beforejoining a therapy group. In addition,PSCs will visit the homes of survivorsto offer support to family members. 
Working in the Camp
Life in the dry, sandy refugee
camps is extremely challenging for relief workers as well, with temperatures frequently above 100degrees Fahrenheit. Working in thecamps is physically and emotionallydraining because of the countlesstraumatized men and women andpoor facilities. Shirley and Fardinare conducting training sessions forstaff of nongovernmental organiza-tions on the effects of torture andwar trauma and how aid workerscan be affected by the constantexposure to traumatic stories andexperiences. 
Logistics, data, administrative
and finance staff have been hiredfrom throughout Kenya. Due to a shortage of usable land in the NGO compounds, CVT hasbeen unable to construct its ownfacilities. Instead, Shirley andHealing in the Dadaab Refugee Camps
Jackson Nzusyo Mutovi, data officer,
Simon Katee, finance officer, and Katie Meline, international services program coordinator, cool off from the 100 degree Fahrenheit Kenyan heat.PHOTO © CVT
Hussein Abdi Khalif drives CVT’s only vehiclefor transporting staffand materials aroundthe camp.
PHOTO © KATIE MELINEFardin live in rooms provided by
another NGO while the Kenyannational staff resides in tents behindCVT’s borrowed office space. Eachday, the CVT vehicle joins the NGOcaravan to safely bring Shirley andFardin, along with two PSCs wholive in town, into the camp forcounseling sessions with survivors,training programs and meetingswith refugee leaders.
Each new international project
has its own individual challenges.In the Dadaab refugee camps, theCVT staff is trying to find betterways for PSCs to communicate bycell phone and travel by bicycle sothat more survivors can receive thecare they so desperately need. Withonly one vehicle, it is difficult totransport materials and staff to andfrom the camps. Building officesthat can provide a private and comforting sanctuary for healing in the camps will be an added challenge later this year. It is onlywith your support that we’ll be able to bring hope and healing tothe refugees still suffering from thedevastation of war and torture.Joseph Dah fled the civil war in
his native homeland as a youngman, walking from Monrovia,
Liberia, to Guinea. En route, hisbrother was shot by a rebel faction.But Jo continued to Guinea, wherehe lived with a friend before movinginto a refugee camp. In the camp, Joworked for other nongovernmentalorganizations before joining CVTas a psychosocial counselor (PSC)in 2003. 
In 2005 Jo returned to Liberia 
to work with CVT as the databaseofficer. “I felt that I would havebeen killed, too, if I returned toLiberia earlier,” said Jo. “But mybackground as a PSC helped me to overcome such feelings, and Ireturned to contribute towards thereconstruction of my nation and myown family.” Jo served in other
administrative positions in Liberia,providing overall coordination tokeep the project running smoothly.
When the Liberia project closed
in 2008, Jo joined the CVT projectin Lubumbashi in the DemocraticRepublic of Congo. As FieldCoordinator, he provides generalproject management and oversightof logistics, finances and communi-cation.
“Our hard working clinical staff
listen to unspeakable stories formany years,” said Jo. “They worktirelessly to help people move forward positively.” Jo witnessesthese transformations of survivors.“I saw one of my former clientsfrom Guinea in Liberia doing someincome-generating activities inLofa. She told me, ‘CVT helped me
to get my life back, and I am nowcaring for people.’”
Outside of his work, Jo enjoys
making new friends, learning aboutdifferent cultures, reading andstudying current affairs. Somedayhe would like to return to hishomeland. “No one can betterrebuild Liberia than the Liberians,”he declared.
Jo Dah: Rebuilding Lives throughout Africa
© 2011 Center for Victims of Torture
All rights reserved. Please contact CVT for permissionto reproduce this newsletter or any part of it.
11-ND5Many of our supporters choose to
support the Center for Victimsof Torture in very creative ways
each year by asking friends, familymembers and neighbors to maketribute gifts to CVT—or by makingtribute gifts themselves—when celebrating a birthday, anniversary,wedding or other occasion.
If you have a special event coming
up, consider suggesting your guestsmake a personal contribution to the Center for Victims of Tortureinstead of bringing a gift. It’s agreat way for friends of CVT tosupport our work and to introduceothers to our mission of healingtorture survivors and working for
an end to torture.  
Other supporters have named
CVT as the beneficiary organizationwhen making a gift in memory of a loved one who has passed. 
For each tribute gift, we send
acknowledgements to the honoreeor their family and to the generousdonor who is supporting our work.
Please visit our Web site at
www.cvt.org or contact Ashley at1-877-265-8775 or agotreau@cvt.orgfor more information about makinga tribute gift to CVT—or to make a contribution in memory of or inhonor of a loved one.What Do Weddings, Birthdays and 
Anniversaries Have in Common?Make a Difference 
in the Life of a Survivor
Y our generous support brings healing
to torture survivors worldwide. CVTwelcomes all types of donations.
•Monthly Sustainers allow for 
ongoing planning and delivery of healing services.
•Planned Giving continues your
legacy of support. 
•Gifts of Stock support survivors
while offering tax benefits todonors.
•In-Kind Donations of specific
items improve the lives of survivors.
•Tribute Gifts celebrate events or
memorialize loved ones.
Donate online at www.cvt.org, send a
check to 649 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul,MN 55104, or call 1-877-265-8775 forother ways to give. Thank you for yourongoing commitment to healing thewounds of torture.
PHOTO © CVT
The CENTER for 
VICTIMS of TORTURE
Restoring the Dignity of the Human Spirit
649 Dayton Avenue   St. Paul, MN  55104
www.cvt.org............................Jo Dah with DRC Country Director Maki
Katoh (left) and psychotherapist/trainer Jane Reilly (right).
.................................................................................................