INSIDE 
2Letter from the Executive Director
3My Bubble 
4How You Can Help More Survivors Rediscover Hope 
4A New Benefit for CVT Supporters The 
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE 
VOLUME 31, ISSUE 2 •WWW.CVT.ORG 
Restoring 
the Dignity of 
the Human Spirit
T H E sto rycloth 
F E B RUA RY 2 0 2 1 
For four years, our country was 
led by a president who demon- 
ized families guilty of nothing 
more than fleeing torture and 
violence and seeking a fresh start in 
the United States. And while we’re 
finally free of President Trump, it 
will take years of hard work to 
repair the damage he inflicted on 
our refugee and asylum systems. 
In these early weeks of the Biden 
administration, CVT is working 
closely with coalition partners to 
restore and further improve the 
processing of refugees through 
resettlement and asylum . Already 
we’re making important progress 
on issues like increasing refugee 
admissions, which were, in effect, 
almost entirely eliminated in the last 
year of the Trump administration. 
But with the help of dedicated 
friends like you, we’re aiming much 
higher than simply repairing the 
damage of the Trump years. We 
have an opportunity to transform 
the U.S. immigration system into 
something that supports thriving 
families, communities and local economies while remaining a 
beacon to those seeking safety. 
We can undo not just the past 
four years of the Trump administra -
tion’s cruelty but three decades of 
an enforcement-only approach to 
immigration that has had devastating 
consequences on millions of alread y
traumatized families and on our 
country’s highest ideals. 
We must re-envision the immi -
gration system for the long term 
so that no family or child is ever 
subjected to the dehumanization 
of the past four years. 
Specifically, we’re pushing to decriminalize immigration by 
ending prosecutions for migration- 
related offenses. 
We need to reimagine the role 
of immigration courts by creating 
an independent immigration court 
system that ensures due process for 
immigrants in removal proceedings 
and provides access to counsel. 
We’re also working to end family 
detention, apply a presumption of 
release for immigrants and invest in 
community-based case management 
programs. 
And finally, we’re working with 
(see page 3) 
Bringing Fresh Hope to 
Families Fleeing Torture and Violence 2Letter from the Executive Director
Dear Friend, 
It’s with deeply mixed emotions that I have decided, after serving as 
CVT’s executive director for more than nine years, that I will be stepping 
down in July of this year. 
This has been a difficult decision for me. It has been a great privilege 
to serve in this post and, especially, to share this work with dedicated CVT members like you. 
I’m so proud that during my nine years with CVT, with your generous support, our impact 
in the world has grown tremendously: 
•We’ve opened new healing centers in the U.S., Africa and the Middle East, and are 
now rebuilding the lives and restoring the hope of nearly 30,000 survivors and family 
members each year—more than double the number of people we help annually 
compared to just nine years ago. 
•We’ve expanded our capacity development programming and extended it to both 
colleague torture rehabilitation programs and human rights defenders worldwide. 
•We’ve built a robust research and monitoring/evaluation department and conducted 
a sophisticated study that conclusively documented the effectiveness of our approach 
to healing survivors. 
•We’ve engaged in new advocacy efforts on refugee and asylum policy, including from 
our new U.S. center in Georgia, and have led collective advocacy on many national 
security and human rights issues through coalition efforts in Washington, D.C. 
•Our budget has grown from less than $11 million annually when I arrived to this 
year’s figure of $26.5 million. The staff has more than doubled, too—now totaling 
more than 450 worldwide. 
And we’re not done growing either. As mentioned elsewhere in this issue, we’re expanding 
our presence along the U.S.-Mexico border, and we’re launching new initiatives in the Middle 
East and Northern Africa. I will be forever grateful for CVT’s dedicated supporters whose caring 
generosity makes such incredible hope and healing possible. 
I am committed to doing everything I can to ensure a smooth transition so that CVT's vital, 
life-changing and life-saving work continues uninterrupted by this change. The Board of Directors 
is organizing a search committee, and in the coming days we’ll begin the process to select the next 
executive director. 
While I am stepping down as executive director of CVT in July, I will never step away 
from the beacon of hope this great organization carries throughout the world … and I know 
you won’t either. 
With my deepest appreciation, 
Curt Goering, Executive Director ...................................................... 
Curt Goering 
Noor Al-Sagher, a psychologist a t
CVT Jordan, writes about the 
traumatic events experienced by 
her clients and the unique effects 
that has on her personally. 
“They blindfolded my brother 
and father and took them away.” 
… “I heard cries for help at the 
door. It was my brother’s wife, who 
was trying to escape hell with my 
brother. My brother was driving 
away from the clash until a sniper’s 
bullet from a nearby roof blocked 
his path. I cannot forget his blood 
scattered all over her clothes.” … 
“Several minutes after the arrival 
of the wounded and the dead at 
the hospital where I worked, I did 
not imagine that my four-year-old 
daughter would be one of these 
bodies.” … “I spent a week trying 
to help someone beside me, whose 
voice I could not distinguish, nor could I see his face since I was 
beaten and tortured until my 
eyes got swollen shut. Suddenly, 
he fell silent and was no longer in 
pain. The next morning I was able 
to open my eyes to see my brother’s 
body lying beside me.” 
During five years of direct work 
with torture victims at CVT, I have 
listened to and experienced many 
heart-breaking stories like the ones 
above. And I have discovered that 
it’s possible to witness an event I 
didn’t actually experience, to smell 
the smells, to see the people … and 
to feel the trauma. 
These stories and so many more 
became part of my own memory. 
It was difficult for me to go back 
to repeatedly listen to the same 
story from a different person. This 
brought up a lot of difficult and 
complex feelings. It was a massacre 
3My Bubble 
(from page one) 
allies on Capitol Hill on ambitious 
legislation like the Refugee Protection 
Act, which would expand and 
modernize our refugee and asylum 
systems and ensure that our 
government treats people fleeing 
torture, violence and persecution 
with the compassion they deserve. 
Even while our advocacy efforts 
are moving forward, we’re also 
expanding our reach to meet the 
overwhelming need for our care all 
around the world. We have new 
healing centers under development 
in northern Iraq, and we’re seeking 
funding to establish new centers in 
North America, Central America, 
South America and Africa as well. We are also investing new 
resources along the U.S.-Mexico 
border, where so many families 
fleeing violence will continue to 
suffer from President Trump’s cruelty 
for the foreseeable future. Last year, 
we completed an in-depth assessment 
of the crisis at the border, which 
confirmed three urgent needs: 
•  Mental health care for asylum 
seekers stranded in Mexico first 
by the Trump administration’s 
“Remain in Mexico” policy and 
then by the administration’s closure 
of the border under the guise of 
controlling COVID. 
•  Secondary trauma and 
resilience training and support for 
legal services providers and humani -Fresh Hope to Fleeing Families and it was as 
if I’d become 
an eyewitness 
to the horror 
experienced by 
every client. 
Empathy 
and work with 
my clients has 
always been 
part of my noble 
cause, but I 
realized that 
I also needed 
self-care. I needed my own bubble 
that can bring out empathy and 
support but also serve as a buffer 
for conveying difficult feelings and 
storing them inside me. 
As a psychologist, this bubble 
helps me better serve our clients 
who have suffered so much but 
still, somehow, find the strength to 
move forward. And I am so grateful 
for the compassionate generosity 
of people like you who ensure that 
our clients don’t take that journey 
alone. 
tarian workers who assist asylum 
seekers on both sides of the border. 
•  A larger pool of health and 
mental health professionals willing 
to conduct forensic evaluations to 
support asylum petitions. 
Following that assessment, we 
designed and implemented a second- 
ary trauma and resilience training 
and support project for attorneys 
in the San Diego and Rio Grande 
Valley areas. With additional funding, 
we plan to provide mental health 
care directly to asylum seekers. 
For four years, much of CVT’s 
efforts have been focused on keeping 
bad things from happening, as we 
battled one outrage from the Trump 
administration after another. Now, 
we have an opportunity to move 
forward into the more just and 
compassionate future supporters 
like you envision for our country. 
Noor Al-Sagher 2356 University Avenue W, Suite 430 
St. Paul, MN 55114 
www.cvt.org 
© 2021 Center for Victims of Torture    All rights reserved. 
Please contact CVT for permission to reproduce this newsletter or any part of it. The 
CENTER for
VICTIMS of
TORTURE 
21-NB5 How You Can Help More Survivors Rediscover Hope 
Your caring generosity helps CVT give torture survivors 
the care they need to heal their wounds, rebuild their 
lives and rediscover joy and hope in the future. Here 
are some ways you can magnify your impact and help 
even more survivors. 
Employer-Matching. Many employers will match 
charitable giving from their employees, doubling or 
even tripling their contributions. Contact your employer’s 
human resources department to find out whether this 
is a way you can leverage your impact. 
Monthly Giving. Rather than donating once a year, or a 
few times throughout the year, many of our supporters 
choose instead to join the CVT Circle of Hope by having 
a smaller gift charged every month to a credit card or 
transferred electronically from a checking account. 
As a Circle of Hope member, you will help provide 
a stable source of reliable funding, reduce our 
administrative costs and ensure that even more of 
your donation supports life-changing rehabilitative 
care. You will receive an annual statement in January 
with all of your donations for the previous year. And, 
of course, you can change, suspend or cancel your 
giving at any time. To join the Circle of Hope , contact 
Anna Zaros, at azaros@cvt.org or (612) 436-4859. Legacy Giving. Many donors who do not have the 
resources to make gifts of a certain size during their 
lifetime s find it possible to do so through their estate 
planning. A gift of this kind will extend your legacy of 
hope to future torture survivors while also offering 
potential financial benefits to you and your loved 
ones, including sparing them complex probate 
procedures and costly taxes. 
• Bequest — M aking a bequest to CVT through your 
will or living trust is one of the simplest ways to 
create a legacy gift to CVT. A bequest can be modified 
or canceled at any time, and it can be for a specified 
amount or percentage of your estate. 
• Life Insurance or Retirement Plan Beneficiary — 
Another simple way to leave a lasting impact to survivors 
of torture is by naming CVT a beneficiary of your life 
insurance, IRA or other retirement account. 
• Qualified Charitable Distribution from an IRA — 
If you are 70½ years of age, you can make a qualified 
charitable distribution to CVT from your Individual 
Retirement Account (IRA). 
For more information on any of these options or 
other ways to make a legacy gift to the Center for 
Victims of Torture, please contact Anna Zaros at 
(612) 436-4859 or azaros@cvt.org . Of course, you 
should always consult with your attorney, accountant 
or financial planner to ensure that your gift fits your 
personal situation. 
To make an immediate gift, visit us online at www.cvt.org ,
send a check to 2356 University Avenue W, Suite 430, 
St. Paul, MN 55114, or call (612) 436-4808. Thank 
you for your ongoing commitment to healing the 
wounds of torture. A New Benefit for CVT Supporters 
CVT is partnering with FreeWill to provide a valuable 
online tool to help you create an estate plan for free,
and give the gift of compassion for generations to 
come. This tool makes it fast, easy and cost-free to 
write your will—it takes 20 minutes or less and is 
legal in all 50 states! Visit FreeWill.com/CVT to 
write a free will and create a legacy of hope for 
the future. 