LEAVE NO 
MARKS
ENHANCED
INTERROG ATION 
TECHNIQUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY  
August 2007© 2007, Physicians for Human Rights and Human Rights First.  
All rights reserved.
ISBN: 1-879707-53-5 
Design: Glenn Ruga/Visual CommunicationsThis report is the product of collaboration between 
Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) and Human 
Rights First (HRF), two non-governmental orga -
nizations with extensive experience in research, anal -
ysis, and advocacy directed toward ending torture and 
defending human dignity. 
Physicians for Human Rights draws on the expertise 
of health professionals and analysts who are experts 
on the physical and psychological effects of torture and 
medical ethics. 
 Human Rights First marshals the legal expertise of 
specialists familiar with the relevant case law and legal 
history. 
Both Human Rights First and Physicians for Human 
Rights have been on the forefront of the fight against 
torture for decades. 
Physicians for Human Rights has a 20-year track 
record of documenting torture around the world, including 
in Turkey, Chile, Chechnya, Kosovo, Israel, Chiapas, and 
Mexico. PHR was one of the lead authors of the Istanbul 
Protocol on documenting torture, adopted by the United 
Nations in 1999. In 2005, PHR produced a report titled 
Break Them Down, the first comprehensive review of the 
systematic use of psychological torture by U.S. forces. 
 PHR has extensive expertise in evaluating survivors of 
torture as well as experience with prisoner health issues. 
PHR has successfully organized and mobilized thousands 
of health professionals and helped to secure the lead -
ership of the major health professional associations to 
develop ethical guidelines related to interrogation that 
protect against the misuse of medicine and science in 
the abuse of prisoners. PHR’s work, including the US 
Health Professionals’ Call to Prevent Torture and Abuse 
of Detainees in U.S. Custody that was signed by more 
than 1200 health professionals nationwide, contributed 
to the adoption of ethical standards by the American 
Medical Association, the World Medical Association, and 
the American Psychiatric Association prohibiting direct 
participation of physicians in interrogations. PHR has 
also provided support and guidance to a growing move -
ment of concerned psychologists for similar standards 
for the American Psychological Association.For nearly 30 years, Human Rights First has been a 
leader in the fight against torture and other forms of official 
cruelty. HRF was instrumental in proposing, drafting and 
campaigning for the Torture Victims Protection Act (TVPA) 
and played an active role in pressing for U.S. ratification of 
the Convention Against Torture and other forms of Cruel, 
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and for 
the adoption of a 1994 federal statute that makes torture 
a felony. As part of its End Torture Now Campaign, HRF 
led a successful effort to support passage of the McCain 
Amendment in 2005 banning cruel, inhuman, or degrading 
treatment by U.S. personnel of all detainees in U.S. custody 
anywhere. In response to the Administration’s proposal on 
the Military Commissions Act of 2006, HRF organized retired 
military leaders who urged the U.S. Senate to reject a provi -
sion of the Act that would have downgraded the Geneva 
Conventions’ standards for humane treatment. 
Human Rights First has published a number of reports 
on U.S. detention and interrogation policies and prac -
tices, including Behind the Wire (2005), an update of HRF’s 
2004 report Ending Secret Detentions , which assessed 
the nature and scope of the United States’ worldwide 
detention system and how this system facilitated abuse of 
detainees, and Command’s Responsibility: Detainee Deaths 
in U.S. Custody in Iraq and Afghanistan, a study of the gaps 
in U.S. government investigations into, and accountability 
for torture and abuse.
Physicians for Human Rights
Washington Office  
1156 15th Street, Suite 1001  
Washington, DC 20005-1705
Tel. (202) 728.5335
www.physiciansforhumanrights.org
Human Rights First
Washington Office
100 Maryland Avenue, NE  
Suite 500  
Washington, DC 20002-5625  
Tel: (202) 547.5692  
www.humanrightsfirst.orgPhysicians for human rights anD  
human rights first
iiiivGlossaryandListofAcronyms 
 Document Glossary  ........................ vi
 Medical Glossary  ......................... viii
 List of Acronyms  ......................... viii
 Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix
I.ExecutiveSummary  ....................... 1
II.Introduction .............................. 5
III.TheEnhancedInterrogationMethods
 1. Stress Positions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
 2. Beating  .............................. 12
 3. Temperature Manipulation  .............. 15
 4. Waterboarding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
 5. Threats of Harm to Person,  
  Family or Friends  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
 6. Sleep Deprivation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
 7. Sensory Bombardment: Noise and Light  . .24
 8. Violent Shaking  ....................... 26
 9. Sexual Humiliation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
 10. Prolonged Isolation and  
  Sensory Deprivation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
IV.ConclusionandRecommendations ....35
AppendixA:IntroductiontoU.S.Lawon
TortureandCruelTreatment
 Torture Convention Implementation Act  
  of 1994 (the Torture Act)  ................. 37
 Torture Victims Protection Act of 1991 and  
  the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act  
  of 1976  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
 U.S. Immigration Regulations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
 War Crimes Act  .......................... 38 
  “Torture” under the WCA  ................. 39
  “Cruel or Inhuman Treatment”  
  under the WCA  ......................... 39
  Culpability Requirement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
 Detainee Treatment Act of 2005  ............. 40
 Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions  .41
AppendixB:OverviewoftheMedical
ConsequencesofTortureandCruel
Treatment
 Psychological Trauma  
  The Common Denominator  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
  Posttraumatic Stress Disorder  . . . . . . . . . . . 44
  Major Depression and Self-harming  
  Behavior  .............................. 45
  Damaged Self-concept and  
  Foreshortened Future  ................... 45
  Psychosis  ............................. 46
 Physical Consequences  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46contents
v Document glossary
U.S.ArmyFieldManual:  U.S. Army Field Manuals are 
published by the U.S. Army Publishing Directorate. They 
contain detailed information and how-tos  for procedures 
important to U.S. military personnel serving in the field. 
For example, FM 34-52 (superseded by FM 2-22.3) 
provides doctrinal guidance, techniques, and procedures 
that govern collection of human intelligence according 
to the army’s needs. Under current law, the Army Field 
Manual on Intelligence Interrogation (FM 2-22.3) governs 
all interrogations by military personnel and all interroga -
tions by any U.S. personnel in a military facility.
Common Article3oftheGenevaConventions:  An article 
found in all four Geneva Conventions, Common Article 
3 defines core obligations to be respected in all armed 
conflicts and not just in wars between countries. It prohibits 
violence to life and person including murder, mutilation, 
cruel treatment and torture, outrages upon personal 
dignity, and in particular humiliating and degrading 
treatment. From 1997-2006, the War Crimes Act (WCA) 
criminalized all violations of Common Article 3. However, 
Congress passed the Military Commissions Act (MCA) in 
2006 which narrowed the WCA so that it now criminal -
izes only specific “grave breaches” of Common Article 3, 
including “torture” and “cruel or inhuman treatment.” 
TheDetainee Treatment Actof2005(DTA):  Part of the 
Department of Defense Appropriations Act of 2006 (Title 
X, H.R. 2863), the Act prohibits the “cruel, inhuman, or 
degrading treatment or punishment” (acts that violate the 
Fifth, Eighth, and Fourteenth Amendments) of detainees 
and provides for “uniform standards” for interrogation 
(it limits the military to interrogation techniques autho -
rized by the Army Field Manual). The Act also removed the 
federal courts’ jurisdiction over detainees seeking to chal -
lenge the legality of their detention, stating that “no court, 
justice or judge shall have jurisdiction to hear or consider” 
applications on behalf of Guantanamo detainees. 
MilitaryCommissions Actof2006(MCA):  Enacted after 
the Supreme Court’s 2006 decision in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld , 
the MCA gave military commissions jurisdiction over “any 
alien unlawful enemy combatants,” a broadly defined category applicable to non-U.S. citizens. The MCA narrows 
the War Crimes Act so that it criminalizes only specifically 
enumerated war crimes referred to as “grave breaches” 
of Common Article 3, such as “torture” and “cruel or 
inhuman treatment.” “Torture” is defined in the MCA as 
“an act specifically intended to inflict severe physical or 
mental pain or suffering (other than pain or suffering inci -
dental to lawful sanctions) upon another person within his 
custody or physical control for the purpose of obtaining 
information or a confession, punishment, intimidation, 
coercion, or any reason based on discrimination of any 
kind.” “Cruel or inhuman treatment” is defined in the MCA 
as “an act intended to inflict severe or serious physical or 
mental pain or suffering including serious physical abuse, 
upon another within his custody or control.”
TortureVictimsProtection Actof1991(TVPA):  The TVPA 
permits civil actions for damages to be brought against indi -
viduals who engage in torture or extrajudicial killing. Both 
the TVPA and U.S. immigration regulations use definitions 
of torture similar to that in the War Crimes Act and Torture 
Act. Court opinions interpreting the TVPA and immigration 
regulations provide guidance on the type of treatment U.S. 
federal courts have found to constitute torture.
TheForeignSovereign Immunities Actof1976(FSIA):  The 
FSIA limits how foreign governments and governmental 
entities can be sued in U.S. courts. Generally, a State or 
State instrumentality is immune from suit, unless one of 
the exceptions laid out in the FSIA applies. The FSIA uses 
the TVPA definition of torture to define an exception to the 
general sovereign immunity provided by the Act. 
TheTorture Act: (18 U.S.C. §§ 2340 and 2340A) Also 
known by its longer form title, the Torture Convention 
Implementation Act of 1994, the Torture Act implements 
the United States’ obligation under the UNCAT to crimi -
nalize acts of torture, subject to the United States’ reser -
vation that it interprets its obligations in accordance with 
U.S. Constitutional standards. The Torture Act’s defini -
tion of “torture” requires that an individual specifically 
intend that his act inflict severe physical or mental pain 
and criminalizes conduct by U.S. nationals that occurs 
outside the United States. glossary anD list of a cronyms
viviiUnitedNations Convention Against Torture(UNCAT):  
The convention was adopted and opened for signature 
and ratification by the General Assembly on December 
10, 1984, and it came into force on June 26, 1987. UNCAT 
prohibits torture, as well as cruel, inhuman or degrading 
treatment, committed by state actors or those acting with 
the consent or acquiescence of the state, “for the purpose 
of obtaining information or a confession, or to punish on 
suspicion of a crime, or to intimidate or coerce.” UNCAT 
does not permit the use of torture in any “exceptional 
circumstances whatsoever, whether a state of war or a 
threat of war, internal political instability or any other 
public emergency.” 
WarCrimesAct(WCA):  The WCA criminalizes “torture” 
and “cruel or inhuman treatment.” Amended by the MCA 
to criminalize defined “grave breaches” of Common 
Article 3, the WCA applies to acts committed “inside or 
outside the United States” in any circumstance “where 
the person committing such war crime or the victim of 
such war crime is a member of the Armed Forces of the 
United States or a national of the United States.” To date, 
no individual has been prosecuted under the WCA 
KUBARK Manual:  Produced by the CIA in 1963 (and 
declassified in 1997), the KUBARK Counterintelligence 
Interrogation Manual served as a comprehensive guide 
for training interrogators in exploitation techniques 
including, among other things, “coercive counterintel -
ligence interrogation of resistant sources.” The manual 
describes the qualifications of a successful interrogator, 
and reviews the theory of non-coercive and coercive tech -
niques for “breaking” a prisoner. Using modern behav -
ioral psychology, the manual goes step-by-step through 
the entire process of counter-intelligence interrogation 
operations, from legal considerations to selecting the 
right interrogator.Survival, Evasion, Resistance, EscapeTraining (SERE):  
SERE is a U.S. military training program in survival skills, 
evading capture, recovery and surviving captivity. The 
training is reported to provide a realistic simulation 
of harsh and abusive coercive techniques. It has been 
alleged from multiple sources that psychologists who 
help direct the SERE curriculum advised the military at 
Guantanamo Bay , Abu Ghraib and other sites on interro -
gation techniques and that SERE training methods were 
“reverse-engineered” into military and CIA interrogation 
techniques. Several SERE techniques are identical to the 
CIA’s “enhanced” interrogation methods employed by the 
military at Guantánamo and in Iraq. 
Fifth,EighthandFourteenth Amendments tothe
Constitution oftheUnitedStatesofAmerica:  The 
Supreme Court has stated that the protection of human 
dignity is a primary function of the Fifth, Eighth and 
Fourteenth Amendments, and that violations of “human 
dignity” can be unconstitutional even absent any pain 
or injury. The Supreme Court has long considered 
prisoner treatment to violate the Fifth and Fourteenth 
Amendments if the treatment “shocks the conscience.” 
The Eighth Amendment standards have been incorpo -
rated into the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendment due 
process analysis by the Court, which determined that 
individuals detained by the state who have not been 
convicted by a court enjoy at least the same level of rights 
as convicted criminals do.medical glossary
Depression:  Depression is a serious medical illness 
where the person experiences intense sadness , 
melancholia  or despair  that has advanced to the 
point of being disruptive to an individual’s social 
functioning and/or activities of daily living. Symptoms 
can include sadness, loss of interest or pleasure in 
activities previously enjoyed, weight change, difficulty 
sleeping or oversleeping, energy loss, feelings of 
worthlessness, and thoughts of death or suicide. 
Extreme depression can culminate in its sufferers 
attempting or committing suicide .
PeritraumaticDissociation(i.e.amnesia,
depersonalization,andderealization):  Peritraumatic 
dissociation is characterized by disassociative 
responses that occur at the time of trauma, such 
as depersonalization, derealization, amnesia, or 
fugue states. Theorists suggest that it is a defensive 
process in which an individual develops the capacity 
to separate himself from the psychic and physical 
pain associated with exposure to trauma. This 
disassociative capacity is thought to be later used by 
the individual in future painful circumstances such 
as activated trauma memories to down-regulate the 
experience of acute psychological stress.
Psychosis:  is a generic psychiatric  term for a mental 
state  involving a loss of contact with reality . It is a mental 
disorder, with or without organic damage, characterized 
by derangement of personality and loss of contact with 
reality and causing deterioration of normal social func -
tioning. People experiencing a psychotic episode may 
report hallucinations  or delusional beliefs  (e.g., gran -
diose or paranoid  delusions), and may exhibit personality  
changes and disorganized thinking . Psychosis is a loss of 
contact with reality, typically including delusions (false 
ideas about what is taking place or who one is) and hallu -
cinations (seeing or hearing things which aren’t there), 
an impairment in the ability to carry out daily activities.
Posttraumatic StressDisorder (PTSD):  PTSD is a term 
for certain severe psychological  consequences of expo -
sure to stressful , highly traumatic events. Clinically, such 
events involve actual or threatened death, serious phys -
ical injury, or a threat to physical and/or psychological 
integrity, to a degree that usual psychological defenses  
are incapable of coping  with the impact. PTSD symp -
toms can include the following: nightmares , flashbacks , 
emotional detachment  or numbing of feelings ( dissocia -
tion), insomnia , avoidance of triggers, loss of appetite, irritability , hypervigilance , memory loss , excessive startle 
response , depression , and anxiety . It is also possible for 
a person suffering from PTSD to exhibit clinical depres -
sion (or bipolar disorder ), general anxiety disorder , and 
a variety of addictions . PTSD may be triggered by violent 
personal assaults, natural or human-caused disasters, 
accidents, or military combat. 
Somatization:  Somatization disorder is a chronic condi -
tion where physical symptoms are caused by psycho -
logical problems, and no underlying physical problem 
can be identified. The disorder is marked by multiple 
physical complaints that persist for years, involving any 
body system. Most frequently, the complaints involve 
chronic pain and problems with the digestive system, 
the nervous system, and the reproductive system. The 
symptoms often are severe enough to interfere with work 
and relationships. 
list of acronyms
CIA: Central Intelligence Agency   
CIDT: Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment
DoD: Department of Defense
DTA: Detainee Treatment Act of 2005
FBI: Federal Bureau of Investigation
FSIA: Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976
HRF: Human Rights First
ICRC: International Committee of the Red Cross
KGB:  Komitet Gosudarstvennoy Bezopasnosti
MCA: Military Commissions Act of 2006
OIG: Pentagon’s Office of the Inspector General
OLC: Office of Legal Counsel, Department of Justice
PHR: Physicians for Human Rights
POW:  Prisoner of War
PTSD: Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
SERE: Survival, Evasion, Resistance, and Escape 
training
SOP: Standard Operating Procedure
TVPA: Torture Victims Protection Act of 1991
WCA: War Crimes Act
viiiixThis report was researched and written by Scott 
Allen, MD, Physicians for Human Rights (PHR), 
Columbia Medicine as a Profession Fellow; Devon 
Chaffee, JD, Human Rights First (HRF), Kroll Family 
Human Rights Fellow; and Farnoosh Hashemian, MPH, 
Research Associate (PHR). John Bradshaw, JD, Director 
of Public Policy (PHR); Elisa Massimino, JD, Washington 
Director (HRF); and Paul Rocklin, JD, Senior Program 
Associate (PHR) offered crucial guidance throughout.
Maureen Byrnes, MPA, Executive Director (HRF); 
Heiner Bielefeldt, Director of the German Institute for 
Human Rights; Frank Davidoff, MD, Vice President, Board 
of Directors (PHR); Justice Richard J. Goldstone, Justice 
of the South African Constitutional Court, Retired, Board 
of Directors (PHR); Leonard Rubenstein, JD, Executive 
Director (PHR); and Hina Shamsi, JD, Deputy Director 
and Senior Counsel, Law and Security Program (HRF) 
reviewed the report.
This report has benefited from reviews by leading 
psychologists and medical professionals. We appreciate 
the detailed comments of Vincent Iacopino, MD, PhD, 
Senior Medical Advisor (PHR); Uwe Jacobs, PhD, Director, 
Survivors International; Allen Keller, MD, Program Director of the Bellevue/NYU Program for Survivors of 
Torture; Christian Pross, MD, Center for the Treatment of 
Torture Victims, Berlin, Germany; and Stephen Xenakis, 
MD, Brigadier General (Ret), U.S. Army. 
Avi Cover, Senior Counsel, Law and Security Program 
(HRF); Nathaniel Raymond, Senior Communications 
Strategist (PHR); and Juda Strawczynski, LLB, Research 
Fellow (PHR), gave invaluable advice on the report’s 
content and structure. Alicia Yamin, JD, MPH, former 
Director of Research and Investigations (PHR) and 
Susannah Sirkin, Deputy Director (PHR), offered feedback 
and comments in the initial phases of the report. Barbara 
Ayotte, Director of Communications (PHR), reviewed, 
edited, and prepared the report for publication.
PHR and HRF are also grateful to the following indi -
viduals who conducted desk research and fact checking: 
Peter Chai; Margret Chang; Abigail Clark; Joanne Cossitt, 
MA, MPH; Amy Hsu; Sareh Rajaee; Jack Rusley; Chris 
Shim; Robert Velasco; and Judith Welling, JD. 
Support for this report was provided by: The Arca 
Foundation; The Atlantic Philanthropies; The Herb Block 
Foundation; The JEHT Foundation; The John Merck Fund; 
and The Overbrook Foundation.Acknowledgements“The absence of physical evidence should not be 
construed to suggest that torture did not occur, since 
such acts of violence against persons frequently leave 
no marks or permanent scars.”
Istanbul Protocol: Manual on the Effective Investigation and Documentation 
of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or 
Punishment, 48, U.N. Doc HR/P/PT/8/Rev.1 (Aug. 9, 1999)
xLEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 1All U.S. personnel who engage in the CIA’s so-called 
“enhanced” interrogation techniques and similarly 
abusive techniques are at serious risk of violating 
U.S. law. As detailed below, under U.S. law the severity of 
physical pain or mental harm caused by an interrogation 
technique is key to determining whether the technique 
can be considered torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading 
treatment. An extensive body of medical literature, derived 
from the treatment and study of torture survivors world -
wide, demonstrates that the “enhanced” techniques are 
likely to cause significant physical and mental harm to 
detainees. As a result, officials and interrogators who 
authorize and participate in interrogations using these 
techniques face a substantial risk of criminal liability 
under the provisions prohibiting “torture” and “cruel or 
inhuman treatment” in the U.S. War Crimes Act (WCA), as 
amended by the Military Commissions Act of 2006 (MCA),1 
and under The Torture Convention Implementation Act of 
1994 (the Torture Act).2 Many of these interrogation tech -
niques may also be prohibited by the Detainee Treatment 
Act of 2005 (DTA).3 To protect U.S. officials and personnel 
from potential criminal liability and to ensure that all U.S. 
personnel adhere to U.S. law, these techniques should 
not be authorized. 
the cia “enhanced” interrogation 
methods 
On July 20, 2007, President George W. Bush issued an exec -
utive order interpreting the application of Common Article 
3 of the Geneva Conventions to a program of detention 
and interrogation by the CIA.4 The order does not clarify 
what techniques the CIA can and cannot lawfully engage 
in. Press accounts, citing anonymous Administration offi -
1 Military Commissions Act of 2006, 18 U.S.C. § 2441 (2006).
2  Torture Act, 18 U.S.C.A. § 2340 (2004) (prohibits the infliction of “severe 
physical or mental pain and suffering,” including “prolonged mental 
harm,” in terms virtually identical to the MCA’s provision prohibiting 
“torture.”). 
3 Detainee Treatment Act of 2005, 42 U.S.C.S § 2000dd (2006).
4  Executive Order, July 20, 2007, available at http://www.whitehouse.
gov/news/releases/2007/07/20070720-4.html. cials, suggest that at least one of the “enhanced” tech -
niques, waterboarding, may no longer be used. The fact 
that the Administration officials may have ruled out some 
“enhanced” techniques, though, raises serious ques -
tions about whether the CIA guidelines implementing the 
Executive Order will permit Agency interrogators to resume 
the other techniques previously authorized.5
While the details of the CIA’s “enhanced” interrogation 
program remain classified, credible reports have disclosed 
several of the techniques that were authorized in March 
2002 for use in the program, including waterboarding 
(mock drowning), exposure to extreme cold (including 
induced hypothermia), stress positions, extreme sensory 
deprivation and overload, shaking, striking, prolonged 
sleep deprivation, and isolation, among others.6 Without 
identifying specifically approved techniques, the President 
has, in the past, publicly endorsed “alternative interro -
gation methods” and declared that the MCA, which he 
signed into law in October 2006, allows the CIA “program” 
to continue.7 The new executive order fails explicitly to 
rule out the use of the “enhanced” techniques that the 
CIA authorized in March 2002. 
The executive order does state clearly that any program 
of detention and interrogation approved by the Director of 
5  Editorial, A Return to Abuse: President Bush authorizes secret — 
and harsh — interrogation methods for the CIA. , Wa s h. Po s t, July 25, 
2007, available at http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/
article/2007/07/24/ AR2007072401965.html. 
6  See, e.g. , Dana Priest, CIA Puts Harsh Tactics On Hold; Memo on Methods 
Of Interrogation Had Wide Review, Wa s h. Po s t, June 27, 2004, available at 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/ac2/wp-dyn/A8534-2004Jun26?languag
e=printer  (According to the Washington Post article, the enhanced inter -
rogation techniques were approved by Justice Department and National 
Security Council lawyers in 2002, briefed to key congressional leaders, 
and required the authorization of CIA Director George J. Tenet for use); 
Brian Ross & Richard Esposito, CIA’s Harsh Interrogation Techniques 
Described, aBC N eWs oNl iNe, Nov. 18, 2005, available at http://abcnews.
go.com/WNT/Investigation/story?id=1322866 .
7  Press Release, White House, George Bush, President of the United 
States, President Bush Signs Military Commissions Act of 2006 
(October 17, 2006), available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/
releases/2006/10/20061017-1.html  (The methods and techniques 
reportedly used in the CIA program have also been referred to as 
“enhanced interrogation methods” by anonymous senior CIA officials); 
See Priest, s upra note 6.
1i. executive summary2 EXECUTIVE SUMMARYCentral Intelligence may not include any acts prohibited 
by the War Crimes Act or the Torture Act. Yet a close anal -
ysis of the War Crimes Act and other U.S. law, informed 
by medical and psychological expertise, reveals that 
these “enhanced” interrogation techniques, may consti -
tute “torture” and/or “cruel or inhuman treatment” and, 
consequently, authorization of their use under the execu -
tive order would place interrogators at serious legal risk 
of prosecution for war crimes or other violations. 
A recently declassified report by the Pentagon’s Office 
of the Inspector General (OIG) revealed that these tech -
niques were based in large part on techniques of torture 
and cruelty used by the U.S military in its Survival, 
Evasion, Resistance, and Escape (SERE) program. The 
SERE program was intended to train personnel to resist 
interrogation under such abuse if captured.8  According 
to the OIG, these techniques were transformed, with 
the assistance of military psychologists, into “standard 
operating procedure” (SOP) for interrogations at the 
Guantánamo Bay detention facility.   This Guantánamo 
SOP, the OIG reports, also was brought to Afghanistan 
and Iraq and, according to media reports, provided a basis 
for techniques used by CIA personnel, also with assis -
tance from psychologists.9  The origin of these techniques 
is directly related to the focus of this report. They were 
designed to inflict physical and psychological harm for 
the purpose of breaking down interrogation subjects. This 
report describes the nature and extent of that harm and 
the legal consequences to interrogators of employing 
techniques that cause it. 
violations of the war crimes act, 
the t orture act and the Detainee 
treatment act
The recent amendments to the War Crimes Act estab -
lish as war crimes “grave breaches” of Common Article 
3 of the Geneva Conventions,10 including “torture” and 
“cruel or inhuman treatment.”11 “Torture” is character -
ized, in pertinent part, as “an act specifically intended to 
8  Office of the Inspector Gen.of the Dept. of Def. Report No. 06-INTEL-10, 
Review of DoD-Directed Investigations of Detainee Abuse (U) (August 
25, 2006) (declassfied May 18th, 2007), available at http://www.fas.org/
irp/agency/dod/abuse.pdf.
9  Mark Benjamin, The CIA’s Torture Teachers , Salon.com, June 21, 2007, http://
www.salon.com/news/feature/2007/06/21/cia_sere/index_np.html.
10  Hamdan v. Rumsfeld , 126 S. Ct. 2749 (2006) (holding that Common 
Article 3 applies to alleged members of Al qaeda and the Taliban).
11 Military Commissions Act of 2006, 18 U.S.C.A. §2441 (2006).inflict severe physical or mental pain or suffering .”12 The 
separate war crime of “cruel or inhuman treatment,” is 
defined as “an act intended to inflict severe or serious
physical or mental pain or suffering .”13 
For the crime of torture under the WCA14 and the 
Torture Act,15 severe mental pain or suffering is defined 
as “the  prolonged  mental harm caused by or resulting 
from” several specified actions, including “the inten -
tional infliction or threatened infliction of severe physical 
pain or suffering” and “the administration or application, 
or threatened administration or application, of mind-
altering substances or other procedures calculated to 
disrupt profoundly the senses or the personality.”16
For the WCA crime of “cruel or inhuman treatment,” 
serious  mental pain or suffering is defined as “the 
serious and non-transitory  mental harm (which need not 
be prolonged) caused by or resulting from” the same 
specified actions.17 
The Detainee Treatment Act requires that “no person 
in the custody or under the physical control of the United 
States Government, regardless of nationality or physical 
location, shall be subject to torture or cruel, inhuman, or 
degrading treatment or punishment (CIDT).”18 The DTA 
defines CIDT as conduct prohibited by the Fifth, Eighth, 
and Fourteenth Amendments to the U.S. Constitution. 
adverse Physical and mental 
consequences
Medical literature clearly establishes that tactics such as 
the CIA’s reported “enhanced” interrogation techniques 
cause the types of physical and mental anguish that are 
criminalized under the WCA and other laws. In a letter 
sent to Senator John McCain during the height of the MCA 
debate, several leading medical and psychological experts, 
including current and past presidents of the American 
Psychiatric Association and the American Psychological 
Association, conveyed this collective knowledge: 
12 Id. (emphasis added).
13 Id. (emphasis added).
14  Military Commissions Act of 2006, §5(b)(2)(A) (“the term ‘severe 
mental pain or suffering’ shall be applied … in accordance with the 
meaning given that term in section 2340(2) of this title”).
15  Torture Act, 18 U.S.C.A. § 2340(2) (2004) (defining the term “severe 
mental pain or suffering”).
16  Torture Act, 18 U.S.C.A. § 2340 (2004), amended by Military 
Commissions Act,  18 U.S.C.A. § 2441(d)(2)(E)(ii) (2006).
17 Id.
18 Detainee Treatment Act of 2005, 42 U.S.C.A. § 2000dd (2006).LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 3There must be no mistake about the brutality of the 
“enhanced interrogation methods” reportedly used by 
the CIA. Prolonged sleep deprivation, induced hypo -
thermia, stress positions, shaking, sensory depriva -
tion and overload, and water-boarding (which may still 
be authorized), among other reported techniques, can 
have a devastating impact on the victim’s physical and 
mental health.19 
The pain and suffering arising from the individual 
and combined use of waterboarding, hitting, induced 
hypothermia, prolonged bombardment with loud music 
and flashing lights, stress positions, total and long-term 
isolation, and other “enhanced” interrogation techniques 
is directly related to the purpose of these techniques: to 
“break” detainees, mentally and physically.20 The medical 
consequences of such abuse have been well-documented 
through years of research and treatment of survivors of 
violence and severe trauma. 
Some of the enhanced techniques, particularly water-
boarding, hitting, induced hypothermia, and stress posi -
tions are capable of causing “severe” or “serious” physical 
pain and suffering, the intentional infliction of which 
violates the “torture” and “cruel or inhuman treatment” 
provisions of the WCA. Each of the techniques can also 
cause significant psychological harm. According to one 
recent study, in fact, the significance of the harm caused by 
non-physical, psychological abuse is virtually identical to 
the significance of the harm caused by physical abuse.21 
This mental harm can take many different forms, 
including: 
•  Posttraumatic stress disorder  (PTSD), manifested in: 
prolonged, recurring flashbacks and nightmares; 
significant impairment and instability in life functions; 
suicidal ideation; and weakened physical health, among 
19  Letter from Allen S. Keller, Program Dir., Bellevue/NYU Program 
for Survivors of Torture, Gerald P. Koocher, President, American 
Psychological Association, Burton J. Lee, Physician to the President 
for George H.W. Bush, Bradley D. Olson, Chair, Divisions for Social 
Justice, American Psychological Association, Pedro Ruiz, President of 
the American Psychiatric Association, Steven S. Sharfstein, Immediate 
Past President, American Psychiatric Association, Brigadier 
General Stephen N. Xenakis, (Ret. U.S.A) and Philip G. Zimbardo, 
Prof. Emeritus, Stanford & past President, American Psychological 
Association, to Sen. John McCain (Sept. 21, 2006), available at http://
physiciansforhumanrights.org/library/news-2006-09-22.html.
20  Physicians  f o r hu m a n  ri g h t s , Br e a k th e m DoWn: th e sy s t e m a t i c  us e o f 
Ps y c h o l o g i c a l  to r t u r e  By u.s. fo r c e s  48-72 (2005), available at  http://
physiciansforhumanrights.org/library/report-2005-may.html  [here -
inafter PHR Br e a k th e m DoWn].
21  See generally M. Basoglu, et al., Torture vs Other Cruel, Inhuman, and 
Degrading Treatment: Is the Distinction Real or Apparent?  64 ar c h i v e s  
ge n. Ps y c h i a t r y  277 (2007).other consequences.22 Rates of PTSD range from 45% 
to 92% of torture survivors, subjected to both physical 
and mental torture.23
•  Depressive disorder,  manifested in self-destruc -
tive and suicidal thoughts and behavior, and other 
characteristics.24
•  Psychosis , in the form of delusions, bizarre ideations 
and behaviors, perceptual distortions, and paranoia, 
among other manifestations.25
These techniques, moreover, are generally used 
in combination26 — prolonged isolation, for example, 
combined with sleep deprivation, light and sound 
bombardment, and exposure to cold — compounding 
their devastating psychological impact. 
22  See generally am. Psychiatric  as s’n, D i a g n o s t i c  a nD st a t. ma n u a l  o f 
me n t a l  Di s o r De r s (4th ed. 2000) [hereinafter APA ma n u a l ] (serves as 
the main diagnostic reference of mental health professionals in 
the United States of America); Office of the U.N. High Comm’r for 
Human Rights, Istanbul Protocol: Manual on the Effective Investigation 
and Documentation of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading 
Treatment or Punishment , 48, u.n. D o c hr/P/Pt/8/r e v.1 (Aug. 9, 1999), 
available at http://www.ohchr.org/english/about/publications/docs/
8rev1.pdf  [hereinafter is t a n Bu l Pr o t o c o l ] (The UN Commission on 
Human Rights in April, 2000, and the General Assembly in December, 
2000, adopted resolution 55/89, the “Principles on the effective inves -
tigation and documentation of torture and other cruel, inhuman 
or degrading treatment or punishment”, commonly known as the 
Istanbul Protocol. The Istanbul Protocol is intended to provide interna -
tional guidelines for the assessment of victims who allege torture and 
ill-treatment and describes the fundamental principles of any viable 
investigation into incidents of torture. The manual was the result of 
three years of work of more than 75 experts in law, health and human 
rights, representing 40 organizations or institutions from 15 coun -
tries);  Ronald C. Kessler, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: The Burden to 
the Individual and to Society , 61 J. cl i n. Ps y c h i a t r y  4 (2000), available at 
http://www.lawandpsychiatry.com/html/Costs%20of%20PTSD.pdf.
23  Pia A. Moisander & Erik Edston, Torture and its sequel — a comparison 
between victims from six countries , fo r e n s i c  sc i. in t’l, Nov. 26, 2003, 
at 133, 133-140.
24 Richard F. Mollica, Surviving Torture , 351 neW en g. J. m eD. 5 (2004).
25 is t a n Bu l Pr o t o c o l , supra note 22, at 48.
26  maJ. ge n. ge o r g e  r. fa y, ar 15-6 in v e s t i g a t i o n  o f in t e l l i g e n c e  activities  
a t aBu gh r a i B, Aug. 2004,  at 9-10, available at http://www4.army.mil/
ocpa/reports/ar15-6/AR15-6.pdf  [herinafter fa y rePo r t]; see also  Phr 
Br e a k th e m DoWn, supra note 20, at 7.4 EXECUTIVE SUMMARYthe legal risk under u.s. law27 
Given this body of medical and psychological knowledge, 
officials who authorize these techniques place themselves 
and those who engage in them at significant risk: namely, 
that in future trials involving the War Crimes Act and other 
legal prohibition described in this report, courts will be 
presented with credible and compelling evidence of harm, 
provided by medical and psychological experts skilled in 
the documentation of physical and psychological conse -
quences of torture and ill-treatment, in accordance with 
internationally accepted protocols.28 
It is the responsibility of the Executive Branch to 
ensure that its agents abide by the law. If instead it 
purports to authorize acts that violate the law, agents 
who carry out those acts will be put at risk of prosecution 
for serious crimes. 
conclusion and recommendations
This report demonstrates that “enhanced” techniques 
of interrogation, whether practiced alone or in combi -
nation, may cause severe physical and mental pain. In 
fact, the use of multiple techniques of “enhanced” inter -
rogation virtually assures the infliction of severe physical 
and mental pain upon detainees. Given this knowledge, 
U.S. policy makers and interrogation personnel should 
understand that if such methods are practiced, it would 
be reasonable for courts to conclude that the resulting 
harm was inflicted intentionally. 
The interrogation techniques analyzed above — and 
other techniques that have comparable medical conse -
quences — implicate legal prohibitions and could result in 
27  This report focuses on the legality of “enhanced” interrogation tech -
niques under U.S. law. But it is important to note that even if the use 
of techniques that cause serious or severe physical or mental pain 
or suffering is found not to violate U.S. law or if there are found to be 
valid defenses to such violations under domestic law, their use may 
nonetheless subject interrogators to criminal prosecution interna -
tionally by countries with universal jurisdiction over the commission 
of war crimes. 
28 See generally  is t a n Bu l Pr o t o c o l , supra  note 22.felony criminal prosecutions. It is therefore inappropriate 
for any such techniques to be used by U.S. personnel in 
interrogations, and it is the responsibility of U.S. policy 
makers to ensure that the use of such techniques is 
effectively precluded. 
In issuing interrogation policy, the United States 
should refrain from repeating the mistake of allowing 
euphemistic descriptions of interrogation techniques to 
stretch the line between permissible and impermissible 
treatment. Instead, all U.S. agencies should firmly adhere 
to a single standard of humane treatment that protects 
the lives and health of individuals in U.S. custody.
RecommendationstotheExecutiveBranch
1.  Prohibit the “enhanced” interrogation techniques, 
in order to protect U.S. officials and personnel from 
potential criminal liability and to ensure that all U.S. 
personnel adhere to U.S. law.
2.  Prohibit the use of any other method that, alone or in 
combination with other interrogation methods, pres -
ents a significant risk of causing serious or severe 
physical and/or mental pain or suffering. 
3.  Instruct all U.S. interrogators in effective, legal, non-
harmful methods of interrogation. 
4.  Declassify and release all documents, from all rele -
vant U.S. agencies, which contain information on U.S. 
interrogation policy and practice, including but not 
limited to the “enhanced” interrogation methods. 
RecommendationstotheU.S.Congress
1.  Clarify existing language in the MCA, which under a 
reasonable interpretation currently prohibits the use 
of the “enhanced” techniques, by explicitly listing the 
techniques, forbidding them, and making clear that 
they remain criminal. 
2.  Establish a single standard for detainee treatment 
and interrogation practices to be followed by all U.S. 
personnel, including CIA personnel. LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 5 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 5Defenders of the use of severely coercive treatment 
in interrogation settings argue that such techniques 
are “aggressive” and “tough” but not particularly 
harmful. Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld was 
reported to dismiss concerns about the use of prolonged 
standing by noting that he himself spent most of the 
day standing at a desk.29 Others have compared some 
permitted sexualized techniques to those used by college 
fraternities in hazing practices.30 Some have even “tested” 
techniques such as waterboarding under controlled condi -
tions and falsely concluded that the technique is not that 
harmful.31 Such arguments fail to acknowledge the actual 
context in which abuse takes place and the cumulative 
effects associated with the use of multiple techniques of 
interrogation. Moreover, they ignore the fact that these 
techniques have been historically designed and used 
by the CIA and other U.S. personnel to cause states of 
debility, dependency and dread in the detainee.
29  Douglas Jehl, Files Show Rumsfeld Rejected Some Efforts to Toughen 
Prison Rules , N.Y.  ti m e s, June 23, 2004 (In a memorandum presented 
to the defense secretary on Nov. 27, 2002, Secretary Rumsfeld recom -
mended the approval of a number of interrogation techniques for use 
at Guantanamo, including ‘‘the use of stress positions (like standing), 
for a maximum of four hours.’’ He further added a handwritten post -
script to the memo: ‘‘I stand for 8-10 hours a day. Why is standing 
limited to 4 hours?’’ Mr. Rumsfeld did not distinguish the difference 
in his working style and the experience of prisoners who are forced 
to maintain a painful standing position for prolonged periods of time. 
Prolonged standing can increase the risk of blood clots forming in 
the leg veins with the consequent possibility of pulmonary emboli, 
which can be fatal. However in Mr. Rumsfeld’s case he is able to walk 
around, creating a “muscle pump” in the legs which moves the blood 
around actively, thus preventing clots.). 
30  See The Rush Limbaugh Show: “It’s Not About Us; This Is War!”  (WABC 
radio broadcast May 4, 2004), available at  http://mediamatters.org/
items/200405050003  (Rush Limbaugh describes the torture of Iraqis: 
U.S. guards were “having a good time,” “blow[ing] some steam off.”).
31  Steve Harrigan, a Fox News correspondent, underwent what he described 
as three ”phase[s]” of ”waterboarding,” on camera and concluded that 
the technique is ”a pretty efficient mechanism to get someone to talk 
and then still have them alive and healthy within minutes.” On the 
Record with Greta Van Susteren: (FOX News television broadcast Nov. 
3, 2006); see also mediamatters.org, Fox News correspondent on his 
on-air “waterboarding” (Nov. 6, 2006), available at  http://mediamatters.
org/items/200611060004  (describing Harrigan’s conclusion and adding 
that psychologists have asserted that ‘such forms of near-asphyxiation’ 
can lead to long-term psychological damage,”) In fact, an extensive body of medical and psycholog -
ical literature and experience with victims of torture and 
abuse show that although “enhanced” interrogation tech -
niques may not result in visible scars, they often cause 
severe and long-lasting physical and mental harm. This 
is directly related to the purpose of these techniques: 
to “break” detainees, mentally and physically.32 The 
medical consequences of such abuse have been well-
documented through years of research and treatment of 
survivors of violence and severe trauma.33 According to a 
recent study, abuse during captivity that does not empha -
size physical pain — such as psychological manipulation, 
forms of deprivation, humiliation and stress positions 
— causes as much mental pain and traumatic stress as 
does torture designed to inflict physical pain.34 
32  See generally Phr B r e a k th e m DoWn, supra  note 20; P. Perera, Physical 
methods of torture and their sequelae: a Sri Lankan perspective , 14 J. 
fo r e n s i c  le g a l meD.146 (2007), Medical records of 100 victims of torture 
were examined between 1998 and 2001. The objective of this study was to 
describe in a medico-legal perspective the physical techniques of torture 
seen in Sri Lanka. Altogether 68 techniques of torture had been used 
on these victims. They included assault with blunt and sharp weapons, 
burns with lighted cigarettes, ‘dry submarino’, kicking, ‘wet submarino’, 
‘hanging’, electric torture, ‘falaka’ and many more. Fifty-two percent of 
the victims had only a single physical complaint whereas 48% had multiple 
complaints. Most frequent complaints were chest pain (25 victims), head -
ache (16), impaired hearing (7), backache (5), impaired vision (5), pain 
in the soles (4). However, only 18% of victims had any physical residual 
effects, highlighting the typical objective of torture, which is inflicting 
maximum pain without causing serious injury or death.
33  Similar to research of victims of organized violence, epidemiological 
studies of torture survivors are difficult to conduct and have limita -
tions such as small sample size and lack of control groups. 
34  See generally M. Basoglu et al. , supra  note 21; Metin Basoglu and 
colleagues interviewed 279 survivors of torture from Sarajevo, Luka, 
Rijeka, and Belgrade between 2000 and 2002. The survivors (average age 
44.4, 86.4 percent men) were asked which of 54 war-related stressors 
and 46 different forms of torture they had experienced. Distress and loss 
of control for each event, and overall during the torture was measured. 
Clinicians also assessed the survivors for PTSD and other psychiatric 
conditions. The participants reported an average of 19.3 types of torture. 
Seventy five percent of the survivors had PTSD related to their torture at 
some point in their lives, 55.7% had current PTSD, 17% were currently 
depressed and 17.4% had a past episode of major depression. In order to 
examine the relative cumulative impact of physical vs nonphysical torture 
stressors in mental health outcome, the researchers divided events into 
3 broad categories of non-physical torture only, non-physical torture and 
beating, and non-physical plus physical torture. The study found that the 
severity of long-term adverse mental effects is unrelated to whether the ii. introDuction6 INTRODUCTIONA study of healthy well-trained military men partici -
pating in Prisoner of War survivor school training reveals 
that even a five hour experience of simulated ill treat -
ment of a Prisoner of War (POW) (including mock inter -
rogations and dilemmas designed to test the soldier’s 
ability to avoid exploitation by captors) leads to symptoms 
of peritraumatic dissociation (i.e. amnesia, depersonal -
ization, and derealization symptoms experienced during 
and for a short time immediately after exposure to a 
traumatic event.) Further, exposure to a highly stressful 
experience of being placed in a mock POW environment 
was associated with an increase in such symptoms in 
nearly all participants.35 These findings are consistent 
with experiences of other healthy American soldiers who 
participated in Army Survival Training.36
torture or degrading treatment is physical or psychological and it could be 
determined by perceived uncontrollability and distress associated with the 
stressor . The authors concluded that aggressive interrogation techniques 
or detention procedures that are considered “psychological” manipulations 
do not appear to be substantially different from physical torture in terms 
of the extent of mental suffering they cause, the underlying mechanisms 
of traumatic stress and their long-term traumatic effects. 
35  See generally Jarle Eid & Charles A. Morgan, III., Dissociation, Hardiness, 
and Performance in Military Cadets Participating in Survival Training , 171 
mil. meD. 436 (2006), Experiencing peritraumatic dissociation has been asso -
ciated with subsequent development of posttraumatic stress disorder . This 
study examined the relationship between peritraumatic dissociation, hardi -
ness, and military performance in 80 Norwegian Navy officer cadets after a 
simulated prisoner of war (POW) exercise. The POW exercise is conducted 
in two phases: in phase one -”mild stress” survival training which lasts for 
5 hours- subjects are exposed to an educational program and a personal 
experience with a POW situation such as being detained, blindfolded, going 
through a brief registration, and 5-10 minute simulated interrogation. Phase 
2 — a 1-week field exercise — includes a simulated operation during which 
soldiers are given little food, are sleep deprived, and experience a “high 
stress” 24-hour POW simulation component. In the “high stress” session, 
the soldiers experience the shock of capture, confinement, are blindfolded, 
deprived from food and sleep, and go through a stress-intense interroga -
tion questioning by trained interrogators. The Study found that the cadets 
reported symptoms of peritraumatic amnesia, depersonalization, and dere -
alization in response to a mild stress experience and exhibited a significant 
increase in such symptoms when subsequently exposed to a highly stressful 
experience of being placed in a mock POW camp.
36  Charles A. Morgan, III et al., Symptoms of Dissociation in Humans 
Experiencing Acute, Uncontrollable Stress: A prospective investigation , 
158 am. J. P s y c h i a t r y  1239 (2001), This study was designed to assess 
the nature and prevalence of dissociative symptoms (disruptions of inte -
grated functions of consciousness such as memory, identity and percep -
tion of the environment — which is termed emotional numbing, one of 
the hallmarks of PTSD disorder) in healthy soldiers experiencing acute, 
uncontrollable stress during U.S. Army survival training. The survival 
course is 19 days long and includes a low-stress classroom phase and 
a highly stressful experiential phase. During the experiential phase, 
soldiers are confronted with a variety of stressors, including semistarva -
tion, sleep deprivation, lack of control over personal hygiene, and external 
control over movement, social contact, and communication. Symptoms of 
dissociation were prevalent among healthy subjects as 96% of subjects 
reported dissociative symptoms in response to acute stress.“Enhanced” techniques must be evaluated in the 
context in which they are used, including the highly 
controlled detention and interrogation environment 
used to exploit helplessness and vulnerability, and may 
have individualized consequences. A highly controlled 
and threatening environment, prolonged intense fear, 
denial of autonomy, and dependency on interrogators 
that precede interrogation, exacerbates the adverse 
psychological impact of harsh interrogation and deten -
tion practices on detainees. 
The techniques of establishing control over another 
person are based upon systematic, repetitive inflic -
tion of psychological trauma. By design, the aggressive 
interrogation techniques are intended to instill fear and 
helplessness and to inflict pain without leaving physical 
marks. The level of fear experienced by an individual 
subjected to threatening and aggressive techniques is 
related to the conditions of detention. 
Detainees held in U.S. detention facilities in the war 
on terror may perceive a real threat to their lives. (In 
contrast, there is not credible fear of death among mili -
tary personnel who are exposed to simulated interroga -
tion experiences.) The perception of fear for one’s life and 
bodily integrity in this setting is not without basis: over 
100 detainees have died while in U.S. custody.37 From 
2002 to 2005, as many as 12 detainees are believed to 
have died as a consequence of abuse sustained while 
in confinement.38 Other aggressive techniques, such 
as forced nakedness, aim to humiliate, intimidate, and 
destabilize the detainee and carry the threat of rape and 
injury. Medical evidence demonstrates that forced nudity 
may be experienced as comparable to rape since it often 
carries an implicit threat of rape and mutilation.39 
37  See generally Scott A. Allen et al., Deaths of Detainees in the Custody 
of U.S. Forces in Iraq and Afghanistan from 2002 to 2005 , 8 meDs c aPe 
ge n. meD. 46 (2006), http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/547787_1 , 
Researchers reviewed all known detainee deaths between 2002 and 
early 2005 based on reports obtained from the Department of Defense 
(DoD) through a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request and media 
accounts. Cases of death of detainees in U.S. custody (105 in Iraq, 7 in 
Afghanistan) were identified. Causes of death included homicide (43), 
enemy mortar attacks (36), natural causes (20), unknown (9), accidental 
or natural (4). Combination of blunt trauma and use of restraint has 
been implicated in the deaths of several detainees held by U.S. forces 
in the war on terror .
38  hi n a sh a m s i , hu m a n  ri g h t’s fi r s t, co m m a n D’s resPonsi Bility: De t a i n e e  De a t h s  
in u.s. c u s t o Dy in ir a q a nD af g h a n i s t a n  5 (Deborah Pearlstein ed. 2006).
39  JuDi t h leWi s he r m a n , tr a u m a  a nD re c o v e r y : th e af t e r m a t h  o f vi o l e n c e  
— f r o m  Do m e s t i c  aBu s e t o Political  te r r o r  33-95 (1992), The author 
introduces the severe psychological harm that occurs with prolonged, 
repeated trauma and compares and finds similarities by survivors of 
captivity, rape, and battle. She discusses in details the use of violence 
and terror as means of social control. She notes that survivors of LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 7 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 7Traumatic experiences can also be highly culture-bound, 
both in what is perceived as a trauma and how the individual 
responds. Different individuals from different cultures can 
react differently to the same stressor.40 Research indicates 
that the meaning of torture and trauma is shaped by social 
support and religious, cultural and political beliefs.41 For 
example, it was known that Muslim Arabs would be particu -
larly vulnerable to gender-based and sexualized coercive 
techniques such as forced nakedness for cultural and reli -
gious reasons.42 Although the physical response to extreme 
stress manifests in an adrenaline response, the particular 
psychological reactions to trauma are influenced by cultural 
norms and the individual meanings assigned to trauma, 
injury and loss.43
chronic victimization who experience a prolonged period of total control 
by another person such as being in captivity; experience alterations in 
emotional regulation and self-perception; alterations in the perception 
of the perpetrator; alterations in consciousness, such as forgetting trau -
matic events, reliving traumatic events, or having episodes in which one 
feels detached from one’s mental processes or body; and alterations in 
relations with others, including isolation, distrust, or a repeated search 
for a rescuer and finally alterations in one’s system of meanings.
40  See generally J.D. Kinzie et al., A cross-cultural study of reactivation 
of posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms: American and Cambodian 
psychophysiological response to viewing traumatic video scenes , 186 
J. Nervous & Mental Disease 670 (1998), The objectives of this study 
were a) to determine whether physiological hyperarousal (measured 
by increased heart rate) to standard traumatic videotapes occurs in 
patients with PTSD cross-culturally, and b) to determine whether an 
increased heart rate is a specific response to the patient’s own trau -
matic event or a more generalized hyperarousal state. Five brief video -
tape scenes of traumatic events (hurricane, auto accident, Cambodian 
refugee camp, domestic violence, and Vietnam War) were shown to two 
patient groups with PTSD (Vietnam veterans and Cambodian refugees) 
and three control groups (Vietnam veterans, Cambodian refugees, and 
non-patient Americans). Observations of subjects’ behavior, subjective 
ratings of distress, and heart rate change were recorded and evaluated. 
The results indicated that Cambodians with PTSD had the most reactions 
as measured by behavior and heart rate changes. The authors concluded 
that the response in PTSD patients to reactivation scenes is complex and 
probably relates to type and degree of trauma, as well as to culture.
41  See generally T.H. Holtz, Refugee trauma versus torture trauma: a retro -
spective controlled cohort study of Tibetan refugees , 186 J. Nervous & 
Mental Disease 24 (1998), A retrospective cohort study of 35 Tibetan 
refugees arrested and tortured in Tibet matched with 35 controls was 
carried out in India. The prevalence of symptom scores in the clinical range 
for both cohorts was 41.4% for anxiety symptoms and 14.3% for depres -
sive symptoms. The torture survivors had a statistically significant higher 
proportion of elevated anxiety scores than did the nontortured cohort 
(54.3% vs. 28.6%, p =.05). The researchers found that political commit -
ment, Buddhist spirituality, social support in exile, and prior knowledge of 
and preparedness for confinement and torture in the imprisoned cohort 
served to foster resilience against psychological sequelae.
42  Seymour M. Hersh, The Gray Zone: How a secret Pentagon program 
came to Abu Ghraib , neW yo r k e r , May 24, 2004, available at http://www.
newyorker.com/archive/2004/05/24/040524fa_fact.
43  Jerome Kroll, Posttraumatic Symptoms and the Complexity of Responses 
to Trauma , 290 J. a m. m eD. as s’n 667 (2003).Furthermore, harmful, or potentially harmful, tech -
niques are almost always used in combination and are 
prolonged, amplifying the risk of physical and psycho -
logical harm.44 Sleep deprivation, for example, may be 
combined with isolation and/or temperature manipula -
tion. Prolonged standing may follow striking or slap -
ping. Being subjected to prolonged repeated trauma 
and terror during detention increases the risk of phys -
ical and long-term psychological harm. For example, 
prolonged standing (immobility) when it follows blunt 
trauma can increase the risk of blood clot formation in 
the legs, a condition that can result in fatal pulmonary 
emboli. 
 Pre-existing medical and psychiatric conditions can 
also increase the risk of harm from techniques that 
may appear at first to be relatively benign. Individual 
factors render some people more susceptible to PTSD 
than others. Researchers have identified several specific 
psychosocial risk factors for PTSD, including a history of 
exposure to traumatic events, exposure to multiple trau -
matic events, exposure to childhood sexual or physical 
trauma, and the subjective experience of fear for one’s 
life.45 A threat of harm to a detainee who suffers from 
depression and posttraumatic stress disorder from 
earlier traumas — often found in populations at time of 
44  See generally  fa y rePo r t, supra  note 26; See also Phr B r e a k th e m DoWn, 
supra  note 20, at 48-72.
45  See generally N. Breslau et al., Previous Exposure to Trauma and PTSD 
Effects of Subsequent Trauma:Results from the Detroit Area Survey of 
Trauma , 156 am. J. P s y c h i a t r y  902 (1999), A representative sample of 
2,181 individuals were interviewed by telephone to record lifetime history 
of traumatic events. PTSD was assessed with respect to a randomly 
selected index trauma from the list of events reported by each respondent. 
History of any previous exposure to traumatic events was associated with a 
greater risk of PTSD from the index trauma. Multiple previous events had 
a stronger effect than a single previous event. The authors concluded that 
previous exposure to trauma signals a greater risk of PTSD from subse -
quent trauma. E. B. Foa et al., Symptomatology and psychopathology of 
mental health problems after disaster , 67 J. Clinical Psychiatry 15 (2006), 
This article reviews the symptomology and psychopathalogy of major 
trauma experienced by disaster victims. John R. Freedy et al., The 
Psychological Adjustment of Recent Crime Victims in the Criminal Justice 
System , 9 J in t e r Pe r s o n a l  vi o l e n c e  450 (1994), The authors examined 
PTSD and victim service utilization among 251 crime victims and family 
members recently involved in the criminal justice system. About one 
half of the participants met PTSD diagnostic criteria during their life -
time. Victims of more violent crimes—who sustained physical injuries, 
who perceived that they would be seriously injured, and who perceived 
their lives were threatened—were more likely to suffer from PTSD than 
victims who did not have these characteristics.  F. H. Norris et al., 60,000 
disaster victims speak: Part I. An empirical review of the empirical litera -
ture 1981-2001 , 65 Ps y c h i a t r y  207 (2002), The review of 160 studies of 
disaster victims identified a number of risk factors for adverse outcomes 
such as PTSD, including the severity of exposure to trauma, secondary 
stressors such as financial difficulties, prior psychiatric illness, and dete -
riorating psychosocial resources.8 INTRODUCTIONwar — can have profound and long lasting consequences 
for the detainee.46 
Leading medical and psychological experts, including 
the American Psychiatric Association and the American 
Psychological Association, declared in a letter sent to 
Senator John McCain in the fall of 2006 that “there must 
be no mistake about the brutality of the “enhanced” inter -
rogation techniques reportedly used by the CIA” that 
“have a devastating impact on the victim’s physical and 
mental health.”47  
the legal risk under u.s. law
The medical and psychological evidence indicates that the 
use of “enhanced” interrogation techniques frequently 
causes detainees severe and long-lasting physical and/or 
mental harm and may therefore be illegal under U.S. law. 
Given this body of medical and psychological knowledge, 
officials who authorize these techniques place them -
selves and those who engage in them at significant risk: 
namely, that in future trials involving the War Crimes Act 
and other applicable laws, courts will be presented with 
credible and compelling evidence of harm, provided by 
medical and psychological experts skilled in the docu -
46  See generally Chris R. Brewin & Andrews B. Valentine, Meta-analysis 
of risk factors for posttraumatic stress disorder in trauma-exposed 
adults , 68 J. co n s u l t i n g  & c linical  Ps y c h o l . 748 (2000), Literature on 
risk factors that affect the onset of lifetime PTSD has been summarized 
in a meta-analysis by Brewin and colleagues. Pretrauma vulnerability 
such as personal psychiatric history, family psychiatric history, and 
reported childhood abuse predicted PTSD more consistently, regard -
less of the population studied or the methods of evaluation used. Further, 
factors such as trauma severity, lack of social support, and additional 
life stress, increased the risk of developing PTSD after exposure to trau -
matic event.
47  Press Release, PHR and Seven Leading Health Professionals Call for 
Prohibition of Abusive CIA Interrogation Tactics in Detainee Treatment 
and Trial Bill (Sept. 22, 2006), available at  http://physiciansforhuman -
rights.org/library/news-2006-09-22.html .mentation of physical and psychological consequences 
of torture and ill-treatment, in accordance with interna -
tionally accepted protocols.48 
This report assesses the legality of the “enhanced” 
interrogation techniques under U.S. laws that prohibit 
torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, 
including U.S. laws implementing its international legal 
obligations. The sources of law described in this report 
include the War Crimes Act, the Torture Act, the Detainee 
Treatment Act (which prohibits conduct in violation of 
the Fifth, Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments of the 
U.S. Constitution), Common Article 3 of the Geneva 
Conventions and the U.N. Convention Against Torture. 
Where they provide guidance on, or illustration of, the 
types of conduct the courts have determined to consti -
tute torture or cruel, inhuman and degrading treat -
ment, the report also describes judicial decisions that 
interpret and apply the Torture Victims Protection Act, 
the Federal Sovereign Immunities Act and immigration 
regulations.49
Existing statutory language, under a reasonable inter -
pretation, prohibits the use of these techniques. The U.S. 
Congress should further clarify this language by explic -
itly listing the techniques, forbidding them, and making 
clear that they remain criminal. 
48 See generally  is t a n Bu l Pr o t o c o l , supra  note 22.
49  The report’s primary focus is on the legality of the “enhanced” inter -
rogation techniques under U.S. domestic statutes, including statutes 
implementing its international law obligations. It is important to note, 
however, that the United States also remains bound by its full obli -
gations under international law, some of which contain a broader 
range of prohibitions than domestic statutes provide. A key example 
is Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions, which bans “outrages 
upon personal dignity.” Even though “outrages upon personal dignity” 
are not included among the “grave breaches” of Common Article 
3 that are criminalized by the War Crimes Act, Common Article 3 
remains in effect as a binding legal obligation of the United States.LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 9 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 9 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 9This chapter provides a comprehensive legal and 
medical analysis of ten “enhanced” interrogation 
techniques and similar forms of abuse, particularly 
psychological techniques, reportedly authorized and used 
by U.S. personnel. It analyzes the definitions and elements 
of war crimes, as well as other applicable legal prohibi -
tions, in light of an extensive body of evidence in the medical 
literature documenting the serious harmful consequences 
of these techniques. The medical and psychological harm 
described, can be “severe” or “serious,” “prolonged” or 
“non-transitory,” in the language of the “torture” and 
“cruel or inhuman treatment” provisions of War Crimes 
Act. This harm may be markedly exacerbated when the 
techniques are used in combination.50
1. stress Positions
The prisoner is forced to maintain painful physical 
positions, such as forced standing, and awkward 
sitting or suspension of the body from a chain or other 
implement, for prolonged periods of time. 
In the 1950s, the CIA commissioned a report that 
described techniques used by the Soviet KGB during 
interrogations. One of the most common tactics KGB 
interrogators used to “pressure” prisoners was requiring 
them to “stand throughout the interrogation session or 
to maintain some other physical position which becomes 
painful.”51 The report noted that “[a]ny fixed position 
which is maintained over a long period of time ultimately 
produces excruciating pain.”52 In vivid terms, the report 
also describes the consequences: less than a day of 
forced standing, for example, can cause “the ankles and 
50  In addressing certain techniques, based on the existing relevant 
medical literature, the report focuses on the physical or mental pain 
or both. This does not mean that the authors have concluded that any 
of the techniques below have only mental or physical consequences, 
but separate analysis is a result of the medical research available. 
51  Central Intelligence Agency, Communist Control Techniques: An 
Analysis of the Methods Used by Communist State Police in the Arrest, 
Interrogation, and Indoctrination of Persons Regarded as “Enemies of 
the State ,” at 36 (Apr. 2, 1956), http://www.americantorture.com/docu -
ments/cold_war/01.pdf  (last visited July 26, 2007). 
52 Id. feet of the prisoner to swell to twice their circumference,” 
“the skin to becomes tense and intensely painful,” and 
“large blisters develop which break and exude watery 
serum”, and usually the prisoner develops, “a delirious 
state … delusions and visual hallucinations.53 
Members of the U.S. military themselves have been 
victims of this treatment in past conflicts, with terrible 
consequences. Marine Colonel Frank H. Schwable, who 
was captured by the Chinese military during the Korean 
War, reported that he was forced by his interrogator to sit 
in “unnatural positions” for long periods, which caused 
him extreme pain. Because of this coercion, Colonel 
Schwable made a detailed false confession.54
 The United States has historically criticized other 
nations for using stress positions including in 2002, when 
the CIA was reportedly authorized to use them. Indeed, as 
recently as March 2007, the U.S. State Department criti -
cized Jordan for subjecting detainees to “forced standing 
in painful positions for prolonged periods.”55 
Despite the extensive literature documenting the use 
of stress positions by repressive regimes, and evidence 
about the physical pain and suffering they cause, in 2002 
CIA interrogators were reportedly authorized to force pris -
oners to stand, handcuffed and with their feet shackled 
to an eye bolt in the floor  for more than 40 hours.56 This 
practice known as “short shackling” was reportedly 
used on detainees in military custody in Guantánamo 
Bay.57 Senior military officials similarly authorized mili -
tary interrogators to use forced standing on detainees 
53 Id. at 37 . 
54  5 mo n t r o s s  ly n n e t a l., u.s. ma r i n e  co rPs, hi s t o r y  o f u.s. ma r i n e  
oPe r a t i o n s  in ko r e a 1950-1953, at 430  (1972).
55  See e.g. Bu r e a u  o f De m o c r a c y , hu m a n  ri g h t s , a nD laBo r, u.s. DePt. o f 
st a t e, co u n t r y  rePo r t s o n hu m a n  ri g h t s  Pr a c t i c e s -2006 (2007), available 
at http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/.
56  Ross & Esposito, supra note 6  (“Prisoners are forced to stand, hand -
cuffed and with their feet shackled to an eye bolt in the floor for more 
than 40 hours.”).
57  ge n. ra nDa l l sc h m i Dt & B r i g. ge n. Jo h n fu r l o W, u.s. ar m y, in v e s t i g a t i o n  
i n t o fBi al l e g a t i o n s  o f De t a i n e e  aBu s e a t gu a n t a n a m o  Ba y, cuBa De t e n t i o n  
facility  12 (2005) [hereinafter th e sc h m i Dt rePo r t]iii. the enhanceD interrogation methoDs10 THE ENHANCED INTERROGATION METHODSin Guantánamo in 200258 and in Iraq in 200359 in memos 
that have since been rescinded.
Stress positions appear to have been used in both Iraq 
and Afghanistan. In a 2004 report to senior U.S. military 
officials, the International Committee of the Red Cross 
(ICRC) reported that one of the most frequent allegations 
by detainees in Iraq was”[b]eing forced to remain for 
prolonged periods in stress positions such as squatting 
or standing with or without the arms lifted.”60 In at least 
a few cases, stress positions resulted in, or contributed 
to (together with other abuse), detainee deaths.61 
According to the Department of Defense’s own records, 
obtained by Physicians for Human Rights, the combined 
use of stress positions and blunt force led to the death of 
two Afghan detainees at Bagram, Afghanistan.62 Based on 
the military’s documents one man died from an embolism 
that the medical examiner “attributed to blows that he 
received combined with immobility due to restraint.”63 The 
58  Memorandum from William Haynes, Gen. Counsel of the Dept. of Def. to 
Donald Rumsfeld, Sec’y of Def. (Jan. 15, 2003) (approved by Secretary of 
Defense Rumsfeld) (Dec. 2, 2002), available at http://www.humanrights -
first.org/us_law/etn/pdf/dod-memos-120202.pdf  [hereinafter Haynes 
Memo] (authorizing the use of stress positions (like standing), for a 
maximum of four hours. Haynes memo attaches a memo from General 
James Hill (Oct. 25, 2002), a memo from Maj. Gen. Michael Dunlavey 
(Oct. 11, 2002), a memo (legal review) by Lt. Col. Diane Beaver (Oct. 11, 
2002) and a Request for Approval for Counter-Resistance Strategies 
from Lt. Col. Jerald Phifer (Oct. 11, 2002)).
59  Memorandum from General Ricardo Sanchez to Combined Joint Task 
Force Seven and the Commander, 205th Intelligence Brigade 4 (Sept. 
10, 2003), available at  http://www.humanrightsfirst.info/pdf/06124-
etn-sep-10-sanchez-memo.pdf .
60  in t e r n a t i o n a l  co m m i t t e e  o f t h e reD cr o s s, rePo r t o f t h e co m m i t t e e  o f t h e 
reD cr o s s (icrc) o n t h e tr e a t m e n t  By t h e coalition  fo r c e s  o f Pr i s o n e r s  
o f Wa r a nD ot h e r Pr o t e c t e D Pe r s o n s  By t h e ge n e v a  co n v e n t i o n s  in ir a q 
Du r i n g  ar r e s t , in t e r n m e n t , a nD in t e r r o g a t i o n  12 (2004), available at  
http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/library/report/2004/icrc_
report_iraq_feb2004.htm  [hereinafter ICRC  rePo r t] (The ICRC report 
was submitted in confidence to the head of the Coalition Provisional 
Authority Paul Bremer and Lt-Gen. Ricardo Sanchez in February 
2004. The Wall Street Journal made excerpts of the confidential 
report available to the public on May 7, 2004. The report describes 
ICRC’s observations of serious violations of international humani -
tarian law by Coalition Forces in Iraq between March and November 
2003. It describes frequent detainee allegations of being “attached 
repeatedly, for several hours each time, with handcuffs to the bars 
of their cell door in humiliating (i.e. naked or in underwear) and/or 
uncomfortable position[s] causing physical pain” and “[b]eing forced 
to remain for prolonged periods in stress positions such as squatting 
or standing with or without the arms lifted.”). 
61  sh a m s i , supra  note  38, at 10. 
62  See, e.g. , Office of the Armed Forces Med. Examiner, Final Report 
of Postmortem Examination , (Dec. 6-8, 2002) (Autopsy, Habibullah), 
http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/041905/ m001_203.pdf at 
19-28 (last visited July 26, 2007) [hereinafter Autopsy, Habibullah].
63 Id.other died from aggravation of a coronary artery condi -
tion “brought on by complications that arose from blows 
that he received from the stress [of] being restrained in a 
standing position.”64
Human Rights First has reported on a case in Iraq, 
in November 2003, in which Iraqi General Abed Hamid 
Mowhoush was suffocated to death after a U.S. Army 
Officer forced Mowhoush head first into a sleeping bag, 
wrapped him in an electronic cord, and sat on him.65 At 
his court-martial, the officer argued that he believed that 
“the sleeping bag technique” was an example of a “stress 
position” authorized in a September 2003 memo from 
General Ricardo Sanchez, then the head of U.S. forces 
in Iraq, which specifically permitted “the use of stress 
positions including sitting, standing, kneeling, etc.”66 
CIA employees were alleged to have been involved in 
Mowhoush’s interrogation, but to date no charges have 
been brought. 
The CIA was allegedly involved in two other cases, 
in 2003 and 2004, in which detainees died after they 
were placed in stress positions. Within five minutes of 
being gagged and tied by his hands to the top of his cell’s 
doorframe, Iraqi army officer Abdul Jameel was dead.67 
Another Iraqi, Manadel al-Jamadi died within an hour 
after he was shackled, with his hands behind his back, 
to a window five feet from the ground.68 Both Jameel and 
Al-Jamadi were beaten before they were placed in stress 
positions, but medical examiners found the immediate 
cause of death was likely suffocation from the stress 
positions. 
 It is important to note that stress positions have been 
used in combination with other techniques of abuse. For 
example stress positions appear to have been used to 
facilitate beating, to develop a sense of debility, depen -
dency, and helplessness, and to result in humiliation 
when detainees are not provided access to toilet facili -
ties and are forced to soil themselves. 
64  Information Paper: Afghanistan and Iraq Detainee Abuse, Document 
#: DOD006762 Date of Record: 2004-05-03, available at  http://www.
aclu.org/projects/foiasearch/pdf/DOD006762.pdf.
65 sh a m s i , supra  note  38, at 8.
66  Memorandum from Lewis E. Welshofer Jr., Chief Warrant Officer Third 
Class, U.S. Army to Commander 82d ABN DIV, Champion Base, Iraq 2 
(Feb. 11, 2004), available at http://www.lchr.org/pdf/mem-dic021104.
pdf (Welshofer further argued that confinement in a sleeping bag 
should not prevent breathing as he explains: “in fact detainees would 
probably be able to breathe better in the sleeping bag than they 
would in the sandbag-hooded conditions in which they are frequently 
brought to the facility.”).
67 sh a m s i , supra  note  38, at 10.
68  Id. at 11.LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 11 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 11 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 11PhysicalPainandSuffering
Stress positions result in a number of physical effects that 
can be long lasting or even permanent, such as nerve, 
joint and circulatory damage. These effects are relevant 
to the determination of whether such positions constitute 
“torture” or “cruel or inhuman treatment.” In one review 
of refugees examined in a Danish forensic medical clinic, 
a majority of refugees who had been exposed to suspen -
sion demonstrated signs and symptoms of joint injuries 
and nerve lesions.69
As mentioned above, prolonged standing may result 
in blood clots in the legs (deep vein thrombosis) which 
may subsequently travel to the lungs as pulmonary 
embolism. Pulmonary embolism can be fatal, and the 
risk is increased when immobility follows blunt trauma. 
Deaths due to prolonged restraint in prison settings have 
occurred in both civilian and military settings.70
In addition to circulatory effects, prolonged standing 
can result in musculoskeletal (muscle and joint) foot 
and back pain, and can result in damage to peripheral 
nerves. Such nerve damage can result in decreased 
motor sensation, and decrease the ability of an indi -
vidual to feel warmth, cold, or vibrations.71 Prolonged 
69  P. M. Leth & J. Banner, Forensic Medical Examination of Refugees 
Who Claim to Have Been Tortured , 26 am. J. fo r e n s i c  meD. & P a t h o l o g y  
125 (2005), Fifty nine torture victims from around the world underwent 
medical examination at the Department of Forensic Medicine, University 
of Aarhus, Denmark between 1996 and 2002. Aftereffects of torture could 
be documented in 70%. Twenty-five percent (9/35) of the patients who 
claimed to have been suspended had scars after the lines, typically at the 
wrists and ankles. Fifty-three percent (19/35) had signs and symptoms 
of joint injuries or nerve lesions. 
70  See generally Allen, supra  note 37, Combination of blunt trauma and use 
of restraint has been implicated in the deaths of several detainees held 
by U.S. forces in the war on terror . Mullah Habibullah died on December 
2, 2002 at Bagram, Afghanistan following beating and physical restraint. 
Cause of death by autopsy was pulmonary embolism and blunt trauma.  
Andrew A. Skolnick, Prison Deaths Spotlight How Boards Handle 
Impaired, Disciplined Physicians , 280 J. am. meD. as s’n 1387 (1998), 
The death of Michael Valent, a 29 year old schizophrenic inmate of the 
Utah State Prison, is described. After Mr . Valent stopped taking medica -
tion and his mental health deteriorated, he was ordered into a prison 
restraint chair by the prison psychiatrist. He remained restrained for 
16 hours. On release from the chair, he collapsed and died from blood 
clots that formed in his legs during his extended immobility and then 
traveled to his lungs.
71  See generally John McCulloch, Health risks associated with prolonged 
standing , 19 J. P r e v e n t i o n , as s e s s m e n t  & r eha Bilitation  201 (2002), 
Prolonged standing contributes to chronic venous insufficiency, preterm 
birth in pregnant women, and musculoskeletal pain including foot and 
back pain. Venous insufficiency leads to varicose veins and burning 
sensations in the lower extremities. Peripheral neuropathy can also 
result, causing decreased motor sensation, decreased warmth and 
cold sensation and reduced vibration sensation. Prolonged standing 
refers to spending over fifty percent of the time during a full work shift 
in standing position.standing also carries the risk of fainting, which can result 
in significant blunt force trauma including head injury 
and fractures. 
LegalAnalysis
Although the literature on adverse mental health conse -
quences of being subjected to stress positions is rela -
tively limited, the array of harmful physical medical 
effects known to be caused by stress positions support 
the conclusion that stress positions constitute a pros -
ecutable act of “torture” or “cruel or inhuman treatment” 
intended to cause “severe” or “serious” physical pain 
under the War Crimes Act.72 
U.S. federal courts have also labeled the use of 
stress positions — such as being chained to a cot or 
a wall — as torture for purposes of civil liability.73 The 
Ninth Circuit quoted one plaintiff who was found to be 
tortured by the Filipino military as stating that while he 
was shackled to his cot he experienced “extreme pain, 
almost indescribable[.]”74 
Even if certain uses of stress positions were found 
to fall short of torture, they may constitute a prosecut -
able crime of “inhuman or cruel treatment” under the 
WCA if found to result in “serious” physical pain. The 
harm that can be caused by stress positions, including 
life threatening blood clots, chronic foot and back pain, 
and peripheral nerve damage, could be held to amount 
to “bodily injury that involves … extreme physical pain” 
meeting the WCA’s definition of “serious” physical pain.75 
Moreover, according to reports on U.S. interrogation 
practices, stress positions are almost always practiced 
in combination with other interrogation techniques and, 
therefore, their effects are likely to be amplified.
Supreme Court precedent suggests that the use of stress 
positions in interrogations against any detainee — regard -
less of citizenship or location — would likely violate the 
Detainee Treatment Act.76 In Hope v. Pelzer,  the Supreme 
72  War Crimes Act of 1996, 18 U.S.C.A § 2441(2006); Torture Act, 18 
U.S.C.A. § 2340 (2004).
73  See generally Cicippio v. Islamic Republic of Iran, 18 F.Supp.2d 62 (D. 
D.C. 1998) (chaining the plaintiff Frank Reed to a wall and shackling 
him in a painful position and not permitting him to stand erect among 
many other forms of mistreatment perpetrated by the Iranian govern -
ment that the Court found to constitute torture under the TVPA); Hilao 
v. Marco, 103 F.3d 789, 790 (9th Cir. 1996) (being chained to a cot 
for three days was listed among many other forms of mistreatment 
perpetrated by Filipino military against plaintiff Jose Maria Sison that 
were found to constitute torture under the TVPA).
74  Marco , 103 F.3d at 791. 
75 War Crimes Act of 1996, 18 U.S.C.A. § 2441(d)(2)D) (2006).
76 See generally 42 U.S.C.A. § 2000dd (2006).12 THE ENHANCED INTERROGATION METHODSCourt held that the plaintiff’s Eighth Amendment rights 
were violated when he was handcuffed to a hitching post for 
seven hours.77 The Court cited extensively to a Fifth Circuit 
decision in which the court had “no difficulty” holding that 
detainee punishments including “forcing inmates to stand, 
sit or lie on crates, stumps, or otherwise maintain awkward 
positions for prolonged periods” ran “afoul of the Eighth 
Amendment, offend contemporary concepts of decency, 
human dignity, and precepts of civilization which we profess 
to possess.”78 The Supreme Court found in Hope that there 
was “obvious cruelty inherent in the [hitching post] prac -
tice”79 citing a Department of Justice report that warned 
that the hitching post practice was unconstitutional and 
“potentially dangerous from a medical standpoint.”80 
More generally, the Supreme Court has repeatedly 
recognized the right of detainees to be free from unnec -
essary bodily restraint as a due process right protected by 
the Fourteenth Amendment.81 Such cases have involved 
restraining techniques such as the four point restraint 
of the involuntarily committed mental patient and pre-
trial detainee.82
2. Beating
The prisoner is subjected to forceful physical contact, 
either directly or through an instrument. 
77  See, e.g. , Hope v. Pelzer, 536 U.S. 730, 741 (2002).
78  Id. at 742 (citing Gates v. Collier, 501 F.2d 1291, 1306 (11th Cir. 
1974)).
79  Id. at  731.
80  Id. at 732. For more information about the Department of Justice 
report, see Austin v. Hopper, 15 F.Supp.2d 1210 at 1249 (1998).
81  Youngberg v. Romeo, 457 U.S. 307, 316 (1982) (holding that an individual 
has a substantive due process right to freedom from bodily restraint even 
if they are civilly committed or criminally incarcerated, in the case of an 
involuntarily committed mentally retarded individual who was subjected 
to prolonged and repeated restraint by a hospital); s ee, e.g. , Davis v. 
Rennie, 264 F.3d 86 (1st Cir . 2001) (upholding a §1983 claim for violation 
of a right to be free from unreasonable restraints and from excessive use 
of force against an involuntarily committed mental patient, and for the 
failure to intervene to prevent a violation of those rights); S.M. v. Feaver, 
No. 03-80567-CIV, 2004 WL 213198, at *3 (S.D. Fla. Jan. 22, 2004) (denying 
a motion to dismiss a §1983 claim based on plaintiff’s allegation that she 
was subjected to “the use of undue physical (four point restraints) and 
chemical (psychotropic) restraints” while involuntarily committed); But 
see Fuentes v. Wagner, 206 F.3d 335 (3rd Cir. 2000) cert. denied , 531 U.S. 
821 (2002)  (holding that putting a pre-trial detainee in a restraining chair 
for eight hours while releasing the detainee every two hours for a ten 
minute period of stretching, exercise and use of the toilet, and a meal, 
when faced with the detainee’s disruptive and violent behavior did not 
violate the detainees substantive due process rights).
82  See Davis , 264 F.3d at 92-93; Feaver , 2004 WL 213198, at *1; Fuentes , 
206 F.3d at 339-40.Historically, the United States has not only condemned 
the use of physical force, ranging from slaps to heavy 
blows, against prisoners of war, it has prosecuted 
such acts as war crimes. After World War II, Japanese 
interrogators were prosecuted for subjecting U.S. pris -
oners of war to beating.83 For example, in a report to 
the United Nations after the 1990-91 Gulf War, the first 
Bush Administration described “slapping” as a war crime 
committed by Iraqis against U.S. prisoners of war.84 
But starting in or around 2002, striking detainees was 
reportedly authorized and carried out by U.S. personnel 
during CIA and military interrogations. According to 
press reports, in mid-March 2002, CIA interrogators were 
specifically authorized to beat prisoners with their hands 
— in the form of the “attention slap” and “belly slap.”85 
In 2004 the International Committee of the Red Cross 
reported to senior U.S. military officials that detainees 
alleged being beating “with hard objects (including pistols 
and rifles), slapping, punching, [and] kicking with knees 
or feet on various parts of the body” during interroga -
tions in Iraq.86 In another report, Dilawar, a detainee held 
in Afghanistan who eventually died in U.S. custody, was 
struck over 100 times by U.S. military personnel causing 
extensive muscle breakdown and necrosis — the irre -
versible death of living tissue .87 
According to military documents and testimony from 
an army court-martial, CIA personnel were involved in 
the 2003 beating of Iraqi General Mowhoush; an autopsy 
showed that Mowhoush had “‘massive’ bruising and five 
broken ribs.”88 In another incident, a joint Navy SEAL 
and CIA team allegedly punched, kicked, and struck Iraqi 
detainee al-Jamadi, and a U.S. military autopsy found 
that “blunt force” injuries contributed to his death.89 
83  International Military Tribunal for the Far East, Final Judgment, at 
1061;  see generally  of f i c e o f t h e JuDg e aDv o c a t e  ge n., un i t e D st a t e s  ar m y, 
re v i e Ws o f t h e yo k o h a m a  3 c l a s s B a nD c Wa r cr i m e s  tr i a l s  By t h e u.s. 
8t h ar m y JuDg e aDv o c a t e , 1946-1949 , microformed on National Archives 
Microfilm Publication M1112 (1980).
84  Wa r cr i m e s  Do c u m e n t a t i o n  ce n t e r , in t e r n a t i o n a l  af f a i r s  Division , of f i c e o f 
t h e JuDg e aDv o c a t e  ge n., un i t e D st a t e s  ar m y, rePo r t o n ir a q i Wa r cr i m e s  
(De s e r t  sh i e l D/De s e r t  st o r m) 26 (1992) (declassified version).
85  Ross & Esposito, supra note 6.
86  ICRC rePo r t, supra note 60, § 3.1, at para. 25 (listing among “methods 
of ill-treatment most frequently alleged during interrogation” by 
detainees in Iraq “beatings with hard objects (including pistols and 
rifles), slapping, punching, kicking with knees or feet on various parts 
of the body (legs, sides, lower back, groin”).  
87  Twelve soldiers have been prosecuted for their involvement in 
Dilawar’s death. sh a m s i , supra note 38, at  15-16. 
88 Id. at 7.
89 Id. at 12.LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 13 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 13 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 13Despite the benign (and misleading) terms “attention 
slap” or “belly slap,” there should be no misapprehen -
sion about the severity of pain and suffering that can be 
inflicted by a blow — or repeated blows — to the face or 
abdomen with an open palm, nor about the degree of 
mental distress or trauma that can arise from such a 
beating. Indeed, after much of the detainee abuse became 
public, the military explicitly prohibited the use of applied 
beating or other forms of physical pain when it issued the 
new Army Field Manual, in September 2006.90 
PhysicalPainandSuffering
Beatings can be delivered in a variety of ways with 
different types of instruments, including the open palm. 
Most beating is known to lead to physical harm. Beating 
commonly results in blunt trauma — caused by the appli -
cation of force to the human body but not penetrating 
the skin. Blunt trauma inflicted by beating may result in 
bruises caused by bleeding from ruptured blood vessels. 
The absence of a bruise, however, does not mean signifi -
cant blunt trauma did not occur.91 The extent and severity 
of the trauma depend not only on the amount of force 
applied but also on where it is applied. Studies have 
observed the persistence of musculoskeletal pain (muscle 
and joint pain) caused by blunt trauma even a decade 
after the beating occurred.92 Forty-two percent (10/24) 
90  u.s. D eP’t o f ar m y, fi e lD ma n u a l  2-22.3 hu m a n  in t e l l i g e n c e  co l l e c t o r  
oPe r a t i o n s , at para. 5-75 (Sept.  6, 2006)  [hereinafter FM 2-22.3] 
(prohibiting the use of applying beating … or other forms of physical 
pain).
91 is t a n Bu l Pr o t o c o l , supra note 22, at 35.
92  Annemarie B. Thomsen et al., Chronic pain in torture survivors , 108 
fo r e n s i c  sc i. in t’l 155 (2000), Eighteen of forty torture victims from the 
Middle East treated at the Rehabilitation and Research Centre for Torture 
Victims in Copenhagen were evaluated for unresolved pain at an average 
of 14.9 years after the torture event. Twelve patients experienced pain 
at more than three locations. Nociceptive (pain arising from stimulation 
of nerve cells) and neuropathic pain (caused by injury or dysfunction 
of a peripheral nerve) were found in all patients. Specific syndromes 
were associated with beating and stress positions. Dorte Reff Olsen 
et al., Prevalent musculoskeletal pain as a correlate of previous expo -
sure to torture , 34 sc a n Di n a v i a n  J. P uB. he a l t h  496 (2006), Prevalence of 
musculoskeletal pain among refugees who were tortured in their home 
countries, both male and female from Lebanon, Iraq, Iran and Turkey, 
was examined. The mean time of imprisonment was 3.7 years. Beating 
and shoving were the most frequent forms of torture for these subjects 
(92%). Current musculoskeletal pain (almost a decade after their torture) 
correlated with the physical locations where they had been beaten. Dorte 
Reff Olsen et al., Prevalent pain and pain level among torture survivors , 
53 Da n i s h  meD Bu l l. 210 (2006), Sixty-nine refugees previously exposed 
to beating in their home country were interviewed at a Danish rehabilita -
tion clinic, ten years (on average) after the torture event. 89% reported 
pain in the head within the preceding 24 hours , 78% reported pain in the 
back and 59% reported pain in the feet. Pain in the feet was associated 
with beating in the feet. Pain in the back and head was associated with of the patients examined at a Danish forensic medical 
clinic who had reported beating to the feet complained 
of pain when walking moderate distances.93
Beating can also result in damage to the under -
lying muscle tissue. When released in sufficiently large 
amounts, breakdown products from damaged tissue can 
enter the circulation and result in life-threatening kidney 
failure in a condition known as rhabdomyolysis. A study 
of 34 victims of physical torture from India who presented 
with acute renal failure due to rhabdomyolysis found that 
all victims required renal dialysis. Five of the 34 (15%) 
died despite the initiation of renal dialysis.94
Open hand slapping is a form of beating. A slap diffuses 
the blunt trauma force over a greater area than a closed-
fist punch, but depending on where the slap is applied, 
it may nonetheless result in significant injury. Slaps 
delivered to vulnerable areas of the face including nose, 
eyes or mouth can result in severe pain and suffering, as 
well as soft tissue injury, bruising and lacerations. Facial 
bones may also be fractured, and a slap to the face may 
result in neck injury. 
MentalPainorSuffering
The mental effects of beating are also relevant in deter -
mining whether beating amounts to criminal acts of 
“torture” or “cruel or inhuman treatment.” A review of 
160 prisoners from six countries who had been subjected 
to cruel treatment found that, even with a short period 
of imprisonment, 100% of subjects reported beating and 
blunt force trauma among other techniques of abuse, and 
69-92% experienced symptoms of posttraumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD) with an average of 79.8% demonstrating 
suffocation. V. Lök et al., Bone scintigraphy as clue to previous torture , 
337 la n c e t  846 (1991), Bone scintigraphy and other medical diagnostic 
tests were performed on 62 patients who claimed to have been physically 
tortured. The authors were able to demonstrate after-effects of beat -
ings in torture victims showing remnants of hematomas in soft tissue 
and of periostal hematomas by bone scintigraphy.  v lö k e t a l., hu m a n  
ri g h t s  fo u n Da t i o n  o f tu r k e y , tr e a t m e n t  a nD reha Bilitation  ce n t e r s  rePo r t: 
Bo n e scintigra Phy a s a n e v iDe n c e o f Pr e v i o u s  t o r t u r e  91-96 (Human Rights 
Foundation of Turkey 1994).
93  P. M. Leth & J. Banner, Forensic Medical Examination of Refugees Who 
Claim to Have Been Tortured , 26 am. J. fo r e n s i c  meD. & P a t h o l o g y  125 
(2005), For details on this study see note 69 . V. Lök et al., Bone scintig -
raphy as clue to previous torture , 337 la n c e t , at 846-47 (1991), For the 
details on the study see note 92 . v lö k e t a l., hu m a n  ri g h t s  fo u n Da t i o n  
o f tu r k e y , tr e a t m e n t  a nD reha Bilitation  ce n t e r s  rePo r t: Bo n e scintigra Phy 
a s a n e v iDe n c e o f Pr e v i o u s  t o r t u r e  91-96 (Human Rights Foundation of 
Turkey 1994).
94  G. H. Malik et al., Further observations on acute renal failure following 
physical torture , 10 nePh r o l o g y  Dialysis  tr a n s Pl a n t a t i o n  198 (1995); G. 
H. Malik et al., Acute renal failure following physical torture , 63 nePh r o n  
434-37 (1993).14 THE ENHANCED INTERROGATION METHODSdiagnosis criteria for PTSD.”95 Moreover, beating is often 
used in combination with other forms of abuse to amplify 
its effects, such as forced nudity, blind folding, and stress 
positions. 
LegalAnalysis
The known medical consequences of beating support the 
conclusion that beating constitutes “cruel or inhuman 
treatment” intended to result in “serious physical pain or 
suffering” under the WCA. The blunt trauma, fractures, 
and persistence of musculoskeletal pain (muscle and 
joint pain) support the argument that beating is an act 
intended to inflict “bodily injury” that involves “extreme 
physical pain.”
The serious physical consequences of beating also 
help explain why U.S. federal courts have repeatedly 
cited beating as a form of torture intended to inflict 
“severe pain or suffering,” resulting in violations of the 
Torture Victims Protection Act.96 In Tachiona v. Mugabe , 
the district court awarded $6,000 in damages under the 
TVPA for torture which included beating the soles of the 
feet and hitting in the face.97 In Mehinovic v. Vuckovic, the 
court found beatings to result in severe physical pain and 
suffering under the TVPA in part because they caused the 
plaintiff to lose consciousness, may have broken his ribs 
and made him unable to eat.98 
Further, the known mental effects of beating are also 
relevant in determining whether beating amounts to a 
95  Pia A. Moisander & Erik Edston, Torture and its sequel — a comparison 
between victims from six countries , fo r e n s i c  sc i. in t’l, Nov. 26, 2003, 
at 133, 133-140, One hundred sixty torture victims from six different 
countries treated at the Centre for Trauma Victims in Stockholm. All 
160 had reported beating, among other torture techniques. One hundred 
twenty four underwent psychiatric evaluation. PTSD was diagnosed on 
the basis of a psychiatric interview and psychological tests. Prevalence 
of PTSD ranged from 69% to 92% with an average of 79.8%.  P. M. Leth 
& J. Banner, Forensic Medical Examination of Refugees Who Claim to 
Have Been Tortured , 26 am. J. fo r e n s i c  meD. & P a t h o l o g y  125 (2005), 
For the details on the study see note 69. 
96  Tachiona v. Mugabe, 234 F.  Supp. 2d 401, 420-423 (S.D. N.Y. 2002) 
(the court awarded $1,000,000 in compensatory and $5,000,000 in 
punitive damages under the TVPA for torture that resulted in the 
plaintiff’s death and which included beating the soles of Plaintiffs’ 
feet; beating Plaintiff with rods, rocks and iron bars; hitting Plaintiff 
in the face; and whipping Plaintiff with a fan belt from a car); Cabiri 
v. Assasie-Gyimah, 921 F. Supp. 1189, 1191, 1196 (S.D. N.Y. 1996) (a 
TVPA action in which the court held that beating committed during 
interrogations in combination with the application of electric shocks 
“[V]iolate[] a fundamental principle of the law of nations: the human 
right to be free from torture.” Id. at 1196). 
97  Tachiona , 234 F. Supp. 2d at 421.
98  Mehinovic v. Vuckovic, 198 F. Supp. 2d 1322, 1345 (N.D. Ga. 2002), 
overruled on other grounds , Aldana v. Del Monte Fresh Produce, N.A., 
Inc., 416 F.3d 1242 (11th Cir. 2005). criminal act of “torture” or “cruel or inhuman treatment.”99 
Beating constitutes “torture” or “cruel or inhuman treat -
ment” if it is intended to result in “severe” or “serious” 
“mental pain or suffering” respectively, under the WCA. 
Mental pain or suffering is “severe” or “serious” if it involves 
“prolonged” or “non-transitory” mental harm, respectively, 
and if it results from enumerated causes.100 
The posttraumatic stress disorder often suffered by 
the victims of beating likely constitutes “prolonged” and/
or “non-transitory” mental harm, and that harm likely 
results from either of two of the four causes enumerated 
in Torture Act and the War Crimes Act: 1) “the intentional 
infliction or threatened infliction of severe (or serious) 
physical pain or suffering;” or 2) “the threat of imminent 
death.”101 In Mehinovic v. Vuckovic  the district court found 
that defendants had subjected the plaintiffs to mental 
torture because the plaintiffs continued “to suffer long-
term psychological harm” such as “anxiety, nightmares, 
flashbacks, and difficulty sleeping” and because the 
beating caused the plaintiffs to “fear [] that they would be 
killed.”102 U.S. personnel who beat detainees with open 
palms risk causing similarly harmful consequences.
Beating of any individual is likely to be illegal under 
the Detainee Treatment Act, which prohibits conduct that 
violates the Fifth, Fourteenth, or Eight Amendments.103 
U.S. federal appeals courts have long held that beating 
during an interrogation violates the Fourteenth and Fifth 
Amendments regardless of whether the subject suffered 
physical injury.104 For instance, the Fifth Circuit held that 
“during interrogation no physical force is constitutionally 
permissible” where the plaintiff alleged the police violated 
his due process rights during an interrogation by “striking 
[him] in the mouth, swinging a fist near his face and striking 
the wall, pulling his hair, kicking him and stomping his 
99  War Crimes Act of 1994, 18 U.S.C.A. § 2441(d)(1) (2006).
100 War Crimes Act of 1994, 18 U.S.C.A. § 2441(d)(1) (2006).
101  War Crimes Act of 1994, 18 U.S.C.A. §2441(d)(1)(B) (2006); Torture 
Act, 18 U.S.C. § 2340 (2004). 
102  Mehinovic , 198 F. Supp.2d at 1334, 1346. 
103  Detainee Treatment Act of 2005, 42 U.S.C.A § 2000dd (2006).
104  Ware v. Reed, 709 F.2d 345, 351 (5th Cir. 1983) (holding that to use any 
physical force against a person “who is in the presence of the police 
for custodial interrogation, who poses no threat to their safety . . . 
constitutes a constitutional violation” Id. at 351); Gray v. Spillman, 
925 F.2d 90, 93 (4th Cir . 1991) (“It has long been held that beating and 
threatening a person in the course of custodial interrogation violates 
the Fifth and Fourteenth amendments of the Constitution. [Citations 
omitted.] The suggestion that an interrogee’s constitutional rights 
are transgressed only if he suffers physical injury demonstrates a 
fundamental. Id. at 93).LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 15 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 15 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 15feet.”105 More generally, the U.S. Supreme Court has recog -
nized that the right to bodily integrity106 and to be free from 
the intentional infliction of unnecessary pain is one of the 
most obvious and commonly recognized rights protected 
by the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments.107
3. temperature manipulation
The prisoner is exposed for prolonged periods to 
extreme heat or to extreme cold. 
Chinese interrogators subjected U.S. troops to extreme 
temperatures during the Korean War, eliciting false confes -
sions.108 The KGB reportedly held prisoners in cells that were 
deliberately too hot or too cold and also forced prisoners to 
strip down to their underwear in a frigid cell or to stand in 
cold water.109 The 2005 U.S. State Department reports on 
human rights practices categorized the practices in Syria 
and Turkey of “exposure to cold”110 and “alternately dousing 
victims with freezing water and beating them in extremely 
cold rooms” as torture.111 The 2006 reports categorized 
them as forms of “torture and abuse.” 112
A 2003 Department of Defense Memorandum, which 
has since been rescinded, authorized the use of environ -
mental manipulation by military interrogators in Iraq. 
The Department of Defense referred to exposure to cold 
weather or water as “legally available” to interrogators at 
Guantánamo Bay.113 The ICRC reported that detainees in 
the custody of Coalition Forces in Iraq frequently alleged 
105  Ware , 709 F.2d at 347, 351. 
106  See Albright v. Oliver, 510 U.S. 266, 272 (1994) (“The protections 
of substantive due process have for the most part been accorded 
to matters relating to marriage, family, procreation, and the right 
to bodily integrity.”); Washington v. Glucksberg, 521 U.S. 702, 719 
(1977).
107  See Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S. 651, 670 (1977).
108  ArDe n a. roWl e y, u.s. P r i s o n e r s  o f Wa r in t h e ko r e a n  Wa r: th e i r tr e a t m e n t  
a nD ha nDl i n g By t h e no r t h ko r e a n  a r m y a nD t h e ch i n e s e  co m m u n i s t  fo r c e s  
86(Turner Publishing Company 2002).
109  1 al e k s a n Dr so l z h e n i t s y n , th e gu l a g ar c h i Pe l a g o  113 (Harper & Row 
1973).
110  Bu r e a u  o f De m o c r a c y , hu m a n  ri g h t s , a nD laBo r, u.s. D ePt. o f st a t e, 
co u n t r y  rePo r t s o n hu m a n  ri g h t s  Pr a c t i c e s -2005 (2006), available at 
http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/.
111  Bu r e a u  o f De m o c r a c y , hu m a n  ri g h t s , a nD laBo r, u.s. D ePt. o f st a t e, 
co u n t r y  rePo r t s o n hu m a n  ri g h t s  Pr a c t i c e s -2005 (2006), available at 
http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/.
112  Bu r e a u  o f De m o c r a c y , hu m a n  ri g h t s , a nD laBo r, u.s. D ePt. o f st a t e, 
co u n t r y  rePo r t s o n hu m a n  ri g h t s  Pr a c t i c e s -2006 (2007), available at 
http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/.
113 ha y n e s  me m o, supra  note 58.being exposed to the sun and extreme heat during interro -
gations.114 According to an inquiry conducted by Brig. Gen. 
Richard P. Formica of the Army on the treatment of Iraqi 
detainees by Special Operations forces, some detainees 
were stripped naked, drenched with water and then inter -
rogated in air-conditioned rooms or in cold weather. General 
Formica reported that it appeared that Navy SEALs had used 
that technique in the case of one detainee who died after 
questioning in Mosul in 2004, though there were no specific 
allegations that the use of the technique was related to that 
death.115 Moreover, former interrogators have reported the 
use of extreme cold as part of interrogation techniques.116
U.S. Marine Major Roy H. Bley recounted his experi -
ence being subject to extreme cold by Chinese mili -
tary interrogators during the Korean War: “[I]t was 
necessary for me to keep moving around in the cell or I 
would have frozen, as the temperature was below zero 
degrees Fahrenheit. Half frozen and without sleep for 
many nights, I was worn both physically and mentally.” 
Major Bley eventually falsely confessed to participating 
in germ warfare.117
While the new Army Field Manual has explicitly prohib -
ited “inducing hypothermia or heat injury” it is unclear 
whether lesser extremes that nonetheless cause pain 
and suffering are prohibited or whether the CIA continues 
to use temperature manipulation in its interrogation 
practices.118 The CIA has reportedly authorized its inter -
rogators to subject detainees to the “cold cell,” exposing 
them to temperatures of 50° F while dousing them with 
cold water.119 A Human Rights First investigation into 
the deaths of nearly 100 detainees in U.S. custody found 
that at least one detainee in a CIA-run facility died from 
114  Ross & Esposito, supra note 6; ha y n e s  me m o, supra  note 58 (Stated that 
exposure to cold weather or water (with appropriate medical moni -
toring) may be legally available); icrc rePo r t, supra  note 60, at para. 25 
(Found that prolonged exposure to the sun while hooded over several 
hours, including during the hottest time of the day when temperatures 
could reach 50 degrees Celsius (122 degrees Fahrenheit) or higher was 
one of the most frequently alleged ill-treatment during interrogation 
of individuals in U.S. custody in Iraq).
115  ri c h a r D P. f o r m i c a , u.s. ar m y, ar t i c l e  15-6 in v e s t i g a t i o n  o f cJsotf  - aP 
[co mBi n eD Jo i n t sPe c i a l oPe r a t i o n s  ta s k fo r c e - a r aBi a n Pe n i n s u l a ] a nD 5t h 
sf [s Pe c i a l fo r c e s ] gr o u P De t e n t i o n  oPe r a t i o n  (2004), available at  http://
action.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/061906/FormicaReport.pdf .
116  See generally Steven Miles, Medical Ethics and the Interrogation of 
Guantánamo 063 , 7 am. J. B ioethics  5 (2007).
117  arDe n a. roWl e y, u.s. P r i s o n e r s  o f Wa r in t h e ko r e a n  Wa r 86 (Turner 
Publishing Company 2002). 
118 FM 2-22.3, supra  note 90, at para. 5-75.
119 Ross & Esposito, supra  note 6.16 THE ENHANCED INTERROGATION METHODSheat stroke after not being given enough water or proper 
care and at least one died from hypothermia after being 
chained to the floor without blankets.120
PhysicalPainandSuffering
Temperature manipulation has known effects on the 
body that are relevant for determining whether its use 
is permissible as an interrogation technique under 
U.S. law. Exposing a detainee to the cold can have 
serious health consequences even if the environmental 
temperature is well above freezing. The body is highly 
regulated to maintain core body temperature within a 
narrow range. Maintenance of this core temperature is 
essential to human survival. Hypothermia can have a 
number of adverse physical effects. Even moderate cold 
exposure can lead to significant shifts from the periph -
eral circulation to the body core, slowing heart function 
(including arrhythmias, ventricular fibrillation121 and 
cardiac arrest122), gastrointestinal function, and possibly 
a decreased resistance to infection. If the body tempera -
ture drops below 90˚F, there may be cognitive effects 
including amnesia. If the body temperature drops below 
86˚F, major organs can fail and death can occur.
Similar physical effects of exposure to cold have been 
described by Nazi doctors who conducted experiments 
on hypothermia in order to develop survival techniques 
for German pilots shot down over the North Sea. To simu -
late these conditions, hundreds of Dachau concentration 
camp inmates were immersed in vats of freezing water 
until their body temperatures fell to 79.7˚ F. Many died 
of exposure.123
120 sh a m s i , supra note 38, at 9.
121  E. L. Lloyd, Accidental hypothermia , 32 re s u s c i t a t i o n  111 (1996), Even in 
persons exposed to moderate cold (as opposed to freezing temperatures), 
vast intercompartmental fluid shifts occur due to peripheral vasoconstriction. 
If the rate of sequestered fluids exceeds the ability of the kidneys to remove 
it, fluid overload will result in cerebral or pulmonary edema or death. Active 
rewarming can result in mortality, and spontaneous rewarming can cause 
death as well. Rewarming is also associated with ventricular fibrillation, a 
dangerous heart arrhythmia that, untreated, leads to sudden death.
122  B. Plasier, Thoracic lavage in accidental hypothermia with cardiac arrest 
— report of a case and review of the literature , 66 re s u s c i t a t i o n  99 (2005), 
In a report of a successful resuscitation of a patient with hypothermia and 
cardiac arrest using thoracic lavage, the authors reviewed the English 
language literature of thirteen patients with hypothermia and cardiac 
arrest. Nine patients (64.3%) were found to be in ventricular fibrillation on 
presentation to the Emergency Department. Four patients (28.6%) died, 
and among the survivors, 8 had normal neurological outcome, two were 
left with residual neurological impairment.
123  Berryl Byman, Bitter Fruit: the Legacy of Nazi Medical Experiments  62 
Minn. Med. 580, 582-86 (1989). United States v. Brandt et al., 1 Trials 
of War Criminals Before the Nuremberg Military Tribunals Under 
Control Council Law 10, 27-74 (1947). In addition to immediate effects, hypothermia can 
result in prolonged adverse health consequences. The 
neurologic effects of hypothermia include mental slowing, 
diminished reflexes and eventually flaccid muscle tone. 
With exposure to temperatures below 32˚C (89.6˚F) 
patients develop amnesia and below 31˚C (87.8˚F) there 
may be loss of consciousness.124
Exposure to heat can result in elevations of core 
body temperature, particularly when access to water is 
limited.  Heat stroke is a life-threatening condition that 
can occur when the core temperature rises above 40˚ 
C (104˚ F).   Heat stroke is characterized as predominant 
central nervous system dysfunction resulting in delirium, 
convulsions and coma.  Even with aggressive and appro -
priate treatment, heat stroke is often fatal.125  
LegalAnalysis
All of the above immediate and long-term medical conse -
quences support the conclusion that temperature manip -
ulation can constitute a criminal act of “torture” or “cruel 
or inhuman treatment.” Under the plain language of the 
War Crimes Act, temperature manipulation would consti -
tute “cruel or inhuman treatment” to the extent that it is 
likely to result in “serious physical pain and suffering” 
defined as “bodily injury that involves … extreme physical 
pain.”126 While there is yet no case law interpreting the 
WCA language, legislative history suggests that Congress 
intended, at a minimum, that induced hypothermia or 
heat injury be criminalized under the MCA’s amendments 
to the War Crimes Act.127 
U.S. federal courts have also recognized exposure to 
extreme heat and cold as a form of torture when used 
124  Gregory J. Jurkovich, Environmental cold-induced injury , 87 su r g i c a l  
clinics  n. am. 247, viii (2007), The neurologic response to hypothermia 
is heralded by progressive loss of lucidity and deep tendon reflexes, and 
eventually by flaccid muscular tone. Patients go on to develop amnesia 
below 32˚C, below 31˚C they lose consciousness . 
125  A. Bouchama & J. Knochel, Heat Stroke  346 New Eng. J. Med. 1978 
(2002), Review article describes the consequences of heat stroke in 
humans. From 1979 to 1997, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) 
attributed 7000 deaths in the U.S   to heat stroke.   Heat stroke is 
frequently fatal, and survivors may suffer permanent neurologic injury.  
Heat stroke results from thermoregulatory failure coupled with an exag -
gerated acute-phase response.   The ensuing multi-organ injury results 
from a complex interplay among the cytotoxic effect of the heat and the 
inflammatory and coagulation responses of the host .
126 War Crimes Act of 1996, 18 U.S.C. 2441(d)(1)(B) (2006).
127  During the debate over the final version of the Military Commissions 
Act, Senators Durbin , Levin and Warner stated that they understood 
inducing hypothermia or heat injury to be criminal under the MCA’s 
amendments to the War Crimes Act. See 152 Cong. Rec. S10,235, 
S10,384, S10,390 (daily ed. Sept. 27, 2006); 152 Cong. Rec. S10, 384 
(daily ed. Sept. 27, 2006).LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 17 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 17 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 17in other countries, and have held that abuse involving 
such treatment creates a valid civil claim for damages 
under the TVPA and is a basis for asylum relief for refu -
gees.128 The D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals identified expo -
sure to the cold as a form of physical torture used by 
Hezbollah against an American citizen in Lebanon; plain -
tiff Joseph Cicippio was chained outdoors and exposed to 
the elements during winter which caused him to develop 
frostbite to his hands and feet.129 A U.S. federal district 
court described the method used under the Marcos 
regime in the Philippines of “[f]orcing a detainee while 
wet and naked to sit before an air conditioner often while 
sitting on a block of ice” as a “form of torture.”130
Relevant Fifth, Eighth, and Fourteenth Amendment 
jurisprudence suggests that the use of extreme tempera -
tures against detainees, regardless of their location or 
nationality, may violate the Detainee Treatment Act. The 
Fifth Circuit has specifically held that “turning the fan 
on inmates while naked and wet” constituted cruel and 
unusual punishment.131 More generally, the Supreme 
Court has held that a prisoner’s due process rights 
under the Fifth and Eighth Amendments include the 
government’s duty to provide clothing and shelter from 
the elements for individuals who the government has 
detained.132 Exposure to extreme temperatures arguably 
breaches the government’s constitutional duty to meet 
128  See, e.g., Lhanzom v. Gonzales, 430 F.3d 833, 848 (7th Cir. 2005) (listing 
exposure to the cold as a form of torture used by the government 
of China against Tibetans as stated in the U.S. State Department 
Report in case remanding a Board of Immigration Appeals opinion 
denying an asylum claim).
129  Cicippio v. Islamic Republic of Iran, 18 F.Supp. 2d 62, 64, 66 (D. D.C.) 
(1998) (holding that Plaintiff Joseph Cicippio allegations of abuse 
constituted torture and were therefore sufficient to support a claim 
under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act, 28 U.S.C. § 1605(e)).
130  In re Estate of Marcos Human Rights Litigation, 910 F.Supp. 1460, 
1463 (D. Haw. 1995).
131 Gates v. Collier, 501 F.2d 1291, 1306 (5th Cir. 1974).
132  DeShaney v. Winnebago, 489 U.S. 189, 199-200 (1989) ( “[W]hen the 
state takes a person into its custody and holds him there against 
his will, the constitution imposes upon it a corresponding duty to 
assume some responsibility for his safety and general well-being. 
[ ] The rationale for this principle is simple enough: when the State 
by the affirmative exercise of its power so restrains an individual’s 
liberty that it renders him unable to care for himself, and at the same 
time fails to provide for his basic human needs – e.g., food, clothing, 
shelter, medical care, and reasonable safety – it transgresses the 
substantive limits on state action set by the Eighth Amendment and 
the Due Process Clause.” Id.); Hope v. Pelzer 536 U.S. 730, 731 (2002) 
(citing unnecessary exposure to the heat of the sun as cruel and 
unusual punishment); Martino v. Carey, 563 F.Supp. 984, 999 (D. D.C. 
1983)  (holding that failure to maintain minimum requirements for 
human habitation in cells, such as heating in winter and cooling or 
ventilating in summer, violates Eighth Amendment.).detainees’ basic need for shelter and clothing. According 
to the Court, deliberate indifference to such basic needs 
of a detainee violates that detainee’s rights under the 
Fifth, Eighth, and Fourteenth Amendments.133 
4. w aterboarding (mock drowning)
The prisoner is strapped down and immobilized and 
water is poured over the face to create the sensation 
of asphyxiation or drowning.
The practice of waterboarding can be traced back to 
the Middle Ages, when it was used in the Spanish and 
Italian inquisitions during the 1500s.134 More recently, 
waterboarding was used by the brutal Khmer Rouge 
regime in Cambodia in the 1970s.135 In March of 2007 the 
U.S. State Department criticized Sri Lanka for engaging 
in techniques of torture such as “near-drowning.”136 In 
its reports on human rights practices in Tunisia 1996-
2004, the U.S. State Department criticized the practice 
of “submersion of the head in water” as torture.137 The 
reports from 2005 and 2006 categorize the Tunisia’s use 
of this practice as a form of “torture and other abuse.”138 
The United States has historically prosecuted water -
boarding as a war crime: in 1947, the United States 
convicted a Japanese military officer of a war crime and 
sentenced him to fifteen years of hard labor for using a 
form of waterboarding against a U.S. civilian.139 
In the form of waterboarding reportedly authorized 
for use by the CIA, “the prisoner is bound to an inclined 
board, feet raised and head slightly below the feet. 
133  DeShaney , 489 U.S. at 199-200; Hope , 536 U.S. at 731; Martino , 563 
F.Supp. at 999. 
134  Brian Ross, A partial history on waterboarding , aBc neWs.c o m, Nov. 
29, 2005, available at  http://abcnews.go.com/WNT/Investigation/  
story?id=1356870 . 
135 Id.
136  Bu r e a u  o f De m o c r a c y , hu m a n  ri g h t s , a nD laBo r, u.s. D ePt. o f st a t e, 
co u n t r y  rePo r t s o n hu m a n  ri g h t s  Pr a c t i c e s -2006 (2007), available at  
http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/.
137  Bu r e a u  o f De m o c r a c y , hu m a n  ri g h t s , a nD laBo r, u.s. D ePt. o f st a t e, 
co u n t r y  rePo r t s o n hu m a n  ri g h t s  Pr a c t i c e s -1996-1999 (1997-2000), 
available at http://www.state.gov/www/global/human_rights/hrp_
reports_mainhp.html ; Bu r e a u  o f De m o c r a c y , hu m a n  ri g h t s , a nD laBo r, 
u.s. D ePt. o f st a t e, co u n t r y  rePo r t s o n hu m a n  ri g h t s  Pr a c t i c e s -1999-
2004, available at http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt /.
138  un i t e D st a t e s  DePa r t m e n t  o f st a t e, Bu r e a u  o f De m o c r a c y , hu m a n  ri g h t s  a nD 
laBo r, co u n t r y  rePo r t s o n hu m a n  ri g h t s  Pr a c t i c e  – 2005-2006 (2006-
2007), available at  http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/.
139  Walter, Pincus, Waterboarding Historically Controversial: In 1947, the 
U.S. Called It a War Crime; in 1968, It Reportedly Caused an Investigation , 
Wa s h Po s t, Oct. 5, 2006 at A17.18 THE ENHANCED INTERROGATION METHODSCellophane or a towel is wrapped over the prisoner’s face 
and water is poured over him to simulate drowning.”140 In 
2002, the Department of Defense referred to the “use of a 
wet towel and dripping water to induce the misperception 
of suffocation” as potentially legally available to mili -
tary interrogators in a memo that was later rescinded.141 
The use of waterboarding in military interrogations was 
later explicitly banned by the new Army Field Manual, 
though the manual provides no description or definition 
of the act.142 According to Defense Department reports, 
personnel who served with the Special Operations forces 
unit in Iraq described that some detainees were stripped 
naked and cold water was used to cause the sensation 
of drowning.143
In his 1958 book, The Question, the journalist Henri 
Alleg described the experience of being subjected to 
waterboarding at the hands of French paratroopers 
during the Algerian war for independence. 
The rag soaked up rapidly. Water flowed everywhere: 
in my mouth, in my nose, all over my face. [ ] I tried, 
by contracting my throat, to take in as little water as 
possible and to resist suffocation by keeping air in 
my lungs for as long as I could. But I couldn’t hold on 
for more than a few moments. I had the impression 
of drowning, and a terrible agony, that of death itself, 
took possession of me[.]144
PhysicalPainorSuffering
During “simulated” drowning, hypoxia (shortage of oxygen 
in the body) caused by deprivation of adequate oxygen can 
and probably does occur. At the same time, a dramatic 
physiologic stress response, with tachycardia (rapid 
heart beat), hyperventilation (rapid respiratory rate) and 
labored breathing (airway obstruction and breathless -
ness) is almost unavoidable. The stress resulting from 
this technique could induce the obstruction of blood 
flow to the heart (cardiac ischemia) or irregular heart 
beat (arrhythmia) in vulnerable individuals. Brief oxygen 
deprivation can cause neurological damage. 
140  Ross & Esposito, supra  note 6  (“The prisoner is bound to an inclined 
board, feet raised and head slightly below the feet. Cellophane is 
wrapped over the prisoner’s face and water is poured over him.”).
141 ha y n e s  me m o, supra  note 58.
142 FM 2-22.3, supra  note 90, at para. 5-75.
143  Eric Schmitt, Marshall Carolyn, In Secret Unit’s ‘Black Room,’ A Grim 
Portrait of U.S. Abuse ; n.y. ti m e s, June 17, 2006.
144  al l e g, he n r i, th e qu e s t i o n  48 (John Calder trans., University of 
Nebraska Press 2006) (1958).Complications of near asphyxiation include bleeding 
into the skin (known as petechiae), nosebleeds, bleeding 
from the ears, congestion of the face, infections of the 
mouth, and acute or chronic respiratory problems. 145 
Studies show that even more than a decade after the 
event, survivors of suffocation torture continue to suffer 
from pain in the back and head.146 Breathing fluid into 
the lungs can result in aspiration pneumonia which can 
be fatal.
MentalPainorSuffering
Studies indicate that simulated drowning — calculated as 
it is to “disrupt profoundly the senses”— can also cause 
severe psychological harm, in violation of the “torture” 
and “cruel or inhuman treatment” provisions of the 
WCA.147 The experience of near-suffocation is also asso -
ciated with the development of predominantly respiratory 
panic attacks, high levels of depressive symptoms,148 and 
prolonged posttraumatic stress disorder.149 This litera -
145  is t a n Bu l Pr o t o c o l , supra note 22, at 41 .
146  Dorte Reff Olsen et al., Prevalent pain and pain level among torture 
survivors , 53 Da n i s h  meD Bu l l. 210-14 (2006),  For details on the study, 
see note 92.
147  C. Bouwer & D. J. Stein, Association of panic disorder with a history 
of traumatic suffocation , 154 am. J. P s y c h i a t r y  1566 (1997),  Recent 
research suggests that panic disorder results from a false suffocation 
alarm. Bouwer and Stein found that there was a significantly higher 
incidence of traumatic suffocation experiences (e.g., near-drowning and 
near-choking) in panic disorder patients (N = 176) than in psychiatric 
controls (N = 60), and that panic disorder patients with a history of trau -
matic suffocation were significantly more likely to have predominantly 
respiratory symptoms than those without such a history. In the majority 
of patients who had experienced traumatic suffocation this had been 
during accidental near drowning (N = 25). However, a smaller number 
of patients had experienced traumatic suffocation during deliberate 
torture (N = 8) or during rape (N = 1 ). In a case reported by the authors 
a 31 year old man with panic attacks characterized by predominantly 
respiratory symptoms reported that he had been tortured at the age 
of 18. A wet bag had been placed over his head repeatedly, leading to 
choking feelings, hyperventilation, and panic. At about age 20 the patient 
began to experience spontaneous panic attacks.
148  C. Bouwer & D. J. Stein, Panic disorder following torture by suffo -
cation is associated with predominantly respiratory symptoms,  29 
Ps y c h o l o g i c a l  meD. 233 (1999), The authors examined whether a 
near-suffocation experienced in certain kinds of torture is associated 
with the development of predominantly respiratory panic attacks. A 
sample of 14 South African patients who had experienced torture, 
were questioned about symptoms of panic disorder, posttraumatic 
stress disorder and depression. Patients with a history of torture by 
suffocation (N=8) were more likely than other patients to complain of 
predominantly respiratory symptoms during panic attacks (N=6). These 
patients also demonstrated higher levels of depressive symptoms. The 
authors noted that torture by suffocation is possibly associated with a 
specific symptomatic profile.
149  H. P. Kapfhammer et al., Posttraumatic stress disorder and health-
related quality of life in long-term survivors of acute respiratory distress LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 19 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 19 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 19ture is consistent with clinical experience: clinicians who 
treat torture survivors at the Bellevue/NYU Program for 
Survivors of Torture have observed that survivors of water 
torture and other forms of near-asphyxiation suffer from 
long-lasting trauma. 150 
LegalAnalysis
U.S. personnel who authorize or engage in water -
boarding will almost certainly commit the criminal act 
of torture under the WCA and the Torture Act and /or 
the crime of “cruel or inhuman treatment” under the 
WCA. Waterboarding unquestionably — and by design 
— results in both “severe” and “serious” physical pain 
and suffering. Although there is no case law inter -
preting the WCA, waterboarding would meet the plain 
language of the Act’s definition of “cruel or inhuman 
treatment” if it was intended to inflict “bodily injury that 
involves … extreme pain [and/or] a substantial risk of 
death.”151 Indeed, during the floor debate of the Military 
Commissions Act (which amended the WCA) Senators 
Durbin,152 McCain,153 Levin154 and Warner155 all made clear 
that they understood waterboarding to be criminalized 
by the Act’s amendments to the WCA.
U.S. federal courts have recognized the physical 
brutality of waterboarding in civil cases: the Ninth 
Circuit, for example, concluded that a plaintiff subjected 
to waterboarding by the Filipino military under Ferdinand 
syndrome , 161 am. J. P s y c h i a t r y  45 (2004), Forty-six patients who had 
suffered from acute respiratory distress syndrome for various medical 
reasons and had been treated according to a standardized treatment 
protocol in the intensive care unit were enrolled in this study and 
followed up for about eight years. The authors found that at the time of 
dismissal from the intensive care unit or hospital, 43.5% of the patients 
had PTSD and 8.7% had sub-PTSD. In a follow up evaluation (i.e., an 
average of 8 years after intensive care) 23.9% continued to suffer from 
full-blown PTSD, and 17.4% had sub-PTSD. The patients with PTSD 
demonstrated a pronounced tendency for somatization and anxiety. The 
authors concluded that long-term survivors of acute respiratory distress 
syndrome seem to face a major risk of PTSD and major impairments in 
health-related quality of life in the long term. 
150  For example, one torture survivor was unable to take showers and 
panicked when it rained. Jane Mayer, Outsourcing Torture , th e neW 
yo r k e r , February 14, 2005. 
151  Torture Act, 18 U.S.C. § 2340(2). 
152  152 Cong. Rec. S10,236 (daily ed. Sept. 28, 2006) (Statement by Sen. 
Durbin). 
153  152 Cong. Rec. S10, 413 (daily ed. Sept. 28, 2006) (Statement by Sen. 
McCain). 
154  152 Cong. Rec. S10, 384 (daily ed. Sept. 28, 2006) (Statement by 
Levin).
155  152 Cong. Rec. S10,390 (daily ed. Sept. 28, 2006) (Statement by Sen. 
Warner). Marcos had a cause of action for torture under the TVPA. 
The Ninth Circuit called it “water torture” where “all of 
[the plaintiff’s] limbs were shackled to a cot and a towel 
was placed over his nose and mouth; his interrogators 
then poured water down his nostrils so that he felt as 
though he were drowning.”156 
Medical findings suggest that waterboarding results in 
both “severe” and “serious” mental pain and suffering as 
defined by the WCA and the Torture Act. Studies suggest 
that waterboarding and other forms of torture by suffoca -
tion have been found to result in both “prolonged” and 
“non-transitory mental harm,” such as posttraumatic 
stress disorder. Waterboarding is designed to create the 
sensation of drowning and thus is likely “calculated to 
disrupt profoundly the senses or the personality.”157
Supreme Court constitutional jurisprudence also 
suggests that waterboarding violates the Detainee 
Treatment Act, particularly because it creates the physical 
sensation of suffocation. The Supreme Court has repeat -
edly recognized that the right to bodily integrity158 and to be 
free from the intentional infliction of unnecessary pain is 
one of the most obvious and commonly recognized rights 
protected by the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments.159 
Moreover, U.S. federal appeals courts have held that the 
use of any physical force against a person who is in the 
presence of the police for custodial interrogation and who 
poses no threat to the safety of the police violates Fifth and 
Fourteenth Amendment due process protections.160
156  Hilao v. Marco, 103 F.3d 789, 790 (9th Cir. 1996); See also In re  Estate 
of Marcos Human Rights Litigation, 910 F.Supp. 1460, 1463 (D. Haw. 
1995)  (describing many uses of suffocation used by the Marcos regime 
including “the ‘water cure’, where a cloth was placed over the detainee’s 
mouth and nose, and water poured over it producing a drowning sensa -
tion; “the ‘wet submarine’, where a detainee’s head was submerged in a 
toilet bowl full of excrement;” and “the ‘dry submarine’, where a plastic 
bag was placed over the detainee’s head producing suffocation.”).
157  War Crimes Act of 1996, 18 U.S.C. § 2441 (d)(2)(E); Torture Act, 18 
U.S.C. § 2340(2). 
158  See Albright v. Oliver, 510 U.S. 266, 272 (1994) (“The protections of 
substantive due process have for the most part been accorded to 
matters relating to marriage, family, procreation, and the right to bodily 
integrity.”); Washington v. Glucksberg, 521 U.S. 702, 719 (1977).
159 See Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S. 651, 670 (1977). 
160  Ware v. Reed, 709 F.2d 345, 351 (5th Cir. 1983) (recognizing that it is a 
constitutional violation to use any physical force against a person who is 
in the presence of the police for custodial interrogation and who poses no 
threat to their safety); Gray v. Spillman, 925 F.2d 90, 93 (Cir. 4th 1991) (“It 
has long been held that beating and threatening a person in the course of 
custodial interrogation violates the fifth and fourteenth amendments of 
the Constitution. [Citation omitted.] The suggestion that an interrogee’s 
constitutional rights are transgressed only if he suffers physical injury 
demonstrates a fundamental misconception of the fifth and fourteenth 
amendments, indeed, if not our system of criminal justice.”).20 THE ENHANCED INTERROGATION METHODS5. threats of harm to Person,  
family or f riends
The prisoner is threatened with harm against himself 
or against family or friends if he fails to cooperate 
with interrogators. 
Threats against a prisoner or a prisoner’s fami -
ly’s health and wellbeing were a common interroga -
tion method employed by Soviet police in the 1930s.161 
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, who was detained in the Soviet 
Gulag for eleven years, wrote of the effect of threats, 
“one could break even a totally fearless person through 
his concern for those he loved.”162 Iraqi forces during the 
first Gulf War threatened U.S. POWs by: pointing a pistol 
at a prisoner’s head; dry-firing a pistol in a prisoner’s 
mouth; conducting mock executions; and threatening 
prisoners with dismemberment and castration during 
interrogations. The United States asserted that these 
abuses constituted war crimes.163 In more recent years, 
the U.S. State Department has repeatedly called the use 
of threats against prisoners by Brazil, Egypt, Tunisia and 
Turkey a form of torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading 
treatment.164
In a 2004 report, the ICRC states that detainees in 
Iraq often alleged that interrogators used “[t]hreats of 
ill-treatment, reprisals against family members, immi -
nent execution or transfer to Guantánamo.”165 One sworn 
statement dated July 2003 made during an Army investi -
gation details an incident in which an Army captain took 
an Iraqi prisoner into the desert, interrogated him, made 
the detainee dig his own grave for two hours, threatened 
to kill him and had other soldiers stage a shooting of 
the man.166
The new Army Field Manual prohibits the use of certain 
threats against a person and their family in interroga -
tions, including implied threats of harsh interrogation 
161 so l z h e n i t s y n , supra  note 109, at  106. 
162 Id. 
163  Wa r cr i m e s  Do c u m e n t a t i o n  ce n t e r , in t e r n a t i o n a l  af f a i r s  Division , of f i c e  
o f t h e JuDg e aDv o c a t e  ge n., un i t e D st a t e s  ar m y, rePo r t o n ir a q i Wa r 
cr i m e s  (De s e r t  sh i e l D/De s e r t  st o r m ) 13, 21, 26, 27 (1992) (declassi -
fied version).
164  Bu r e a u  o f De m o c r a c y , hu m a n  ri g h t s , a nD laBo r, u.s. D ePt. o f st a t e, 
co u n t r y  rePo r t s o n hu m a n  ri g h t s  Pr a c t i c e s -2006, 2002 (2007, 2003), 
available at  http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/. 
165 ICRC rePo r t, supra note 60, at para. 25.
166  Sworn Statement; Document #: DOD006865-DOD006866, Date of 
Record: 2003-07-15, available at http://www.aclu.org/projects/foia -
search/pdf/DOD006865.pdf.by non-U.S. entities.167 However, the new manual also 
authorizes the “False Flag” technique that implies to a 
detainee that he is in the custody of others.168 
While interrogating Abed Hamed Mowhoush in Iraq, 
U.S. personnel threatened his fifteen-year-old son 
Mohammed. According to Mohammed, who was inter -
viewed by Human Rights First, U.S. personnel made 
Mowhoush believe his son would be executed if he did 
not answer questions, and then fired a bullet into the 
ground near Mohammed’s head within earshot of his 
father . Mohammed said that this was the last time he 
saw his father before he died from asphyxiation during 
an interrogation by U.S. personnel.169
MentalPainandSuffering
Studies have found that threats to an individual’s life or 
physical well-being or to the well-being of his family or 
friends can have a long-lasting psychological impact. 
Research demonstrates that these threats are known 
to induce extreme fear and loss of control, which are 
strongly associated with PTSD and major depression 
among trauma survivors.170 
Individuals who have been threatened with death often 
relive their near-death encounters in nightmares, flash -
167   FM 2-22.3, supra  note 90, at para. 8-70 (prohibits “implied or explicit 
threats that non-cooperation will result in harsh interrogation by 
non-U.S. entities”); Id. at para. 5-77 (“Other forms of impermis -
sible coercion may be more subtle, and may include threats to turn 
the individual over to others to be abused; … implying harm to the 
individual or his property. Other prohibited actions include implying 
a deprivation of applicable protections guaranteed by law because 
of a failure to cooperate; threatening to separate parents from 
their children; or forcing a protected person to guide U.S. forces in 
a dangerous area.”).
168 Id. at para. 8-69. 
169  Human Rights First Telephone Interview with Mohammed Mowhoush, 
son of Iraqi Maj. Gen. Abed Hamed Mowhoush (Nov. 9 & 14, 2005) 
(transcript on file with Human Rights First).
170  M. Basoglu et al., Psychiatric and cognitive effects of war in former 
Yugoslavia: association of lack of redress for trauma and posttraumatic 
stress reactions , 294 J. am. meD. as s’n 580 (2005), The study was a 
cross-sectional survey of 1358 war survivors who had experienced at 
least 1 war-related stressor (combat, torture, internal displacement, 
refugee experience, siege, and/or aerial bombardment) from 4 sites in 
former Yugoslavia. Control groups at 2 study sites were matched with 
survivors on sex, age, and education. Participants reported experiencing 
a mean of 12.6 war-related events (including 276 torture trauma), with 
22% and 33% having current and lifetime PTSD, respectively, and 10% 
with current major depression. The factor most strongly associated with 
PTSD and depression was fear and loss of control (odds ratio [OR]=2.91; 
OR= 2.3 respectively). The authors concluded that fear of threat to safety 
and loss of control over life appeared to be the most important predictor 
in developing PTSD and depression among severe trauma survivors.LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 21 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 21 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 21backs, and intrusive memories. These experiences can 
provoke feelings of intense anxiety that cause dysfunction 
at work and in family settings and, in more extreme cases, 
cause self harm.171 Mock executions and other situations 
where death is threatened cause victims to repeatedly 
experience their last moments before anticipated death, 
create a sense of complete unpredictability and uncertainty 
over the possibility of imminent death, and induce chronic 
fear and hopelessness.172 Studies also show that those who 
experience mock executions and death threats often suffer 
from PTSD symptoms, anxiety and depressive symptoms 
and increased frequency of suicidal behavior.173
LegalAnalysis
The long-lasting psychological damage described above 
bolsters the argument that credible threats of physical 
harm to a detainee or others constitute prosecutable 
acts of “torture” and/or “cruel or inhuman treatment.” 
Under the plain language of the WCA and the Torture Act, 
“prolonged” and “non-transitory” mental harm — PTSD 
and chronic fear and hopelessness — would constitute 
severe or serious mental pain or suffering if it results 
171 Phr B r e a k th e m DoWn, supra  note 20, at  45-55. 
172 Id.
173  See Marcello Ferrada-Noli et al.,  Suicidal behavior after severe trauma. 
Part 2: The association between methods of torture and of suicidal 
ideation in posttraumatic stress disorder , 11 J. tr a u m a t i c  st r e s s  103 
(1998), The authors aimed to assess prevalence of PTSD and psychiatric 
comorbidity and incidence of suicidal behavior among refugees with 
history of exposure to severe trauma. The stressors reported comprised 
both personal experience of and/or forced witnessing of combat atroci -
ties (including explosions or missile impacts in urban areas), imprison -
ment (including isolation), torture and inflicted pain, sexual violence, 
witnessing others’ suicide, and of summary and/or mock executions. Of 
the 149 refugees examined in this study, 104 (70%) had experienced at 
least one episode of torture under captivity. PTSD was diagnosed in 79% 
of all cases, other psychiatric illness in 16% and no mental pathology 
in 5%. Fifty percent of the sample reported suicidal behavior. Among 
the PTSD cases, 46% had diagnosis of depressive disorders, 29% had 
diagnosis of anxiety disorders, 56% reported suicidal behavior . J. B . 
Hooberman, Classifying the torture experiences of refugees living in 
the United States , 22 J. in t e r Pe r s o n a l  vi o l e n c e  108 (2007),  Data were 
collected from a convenience sample of 325 refugees and survivors 
of torture seeking services through the Bellevue Hospital/New York 
University Program for Survivors of Torture. Most participants reported 
having been subjected to beating. Rape and other forms of sexual 
assault were also common (reported by 18% and 11% of the sample, 
respectively). Forms of psychological torture frequently reported include 
harassment directed at participant or family members (reported by 90% 
and 85% of participants respectively), witnessing violence or torture 
against others (79%), and torture of family members (68%). Authors 
reported high prevalence of anxiety (81%), depressive symptoms (84.5%) 
and PTSD ( 45.7%) in the sample. The study found that anxiety and 
depressive symptom were significantly higher among women and those 
who experienced death threats. Symptoms of PTSD were also predicted 
by death threats, but were also influenced by the experience of rape, 
family torture experiences, religion, and age of participants.from the threat of death or severe physical pain or “the 
threat that another person will imminently be subjected 
to death, serious physical pain or suffering.”174 During 
the Senate floor debate of the Military Commissions Act, 
Senators Levin175 and Warner176 stated that they under -
stood the threat accompanying mock executions to be 
criminalized by the MCA’s amendments to the WCA. 
U.S. federal courts have found that specific, credible 
threats of death or physical injury — such as castration 
— constitute acts of torture for civil liability purposes.177 
(On the other hand, courts have found that more general -
ized threats fall short of torture.178) 
Although “verbal harassment or idle threats” alone 
may not be unlawful under the Detainee Treatment Act,179 
courts have found that credible verbal threats of the use 
of deadly force can constitute cruel and unusual treat -
ment that “shocks the conscience” in violation of the 
Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. For instance, U.S. 
federal appeals courts have found that pointing a loaded 
174  War Crimes Act of 1996, 18 U.S.C. § 2441(d)(2) (2006); Torture Act, 
18 U.S.C. § 2340(2) (2004). 
175  109 Cong. Rec. S10,384 (daily ed. Sept. 28, 2006) (Statement by Sen. 
Levin).
176  Cong. Rec. S10,390 (daily ed. Sept. 28, 2006) (Statement by Sen. 
Warner).
177  See e.g. Daliberti v. Republic of Iraq, 146 F.Supp.2d 19, 25 (D. D.C. 2001) 
(held that treatment “including holding him at gunpoint, threatening 
to injure him physically if he did not confess to espionage or other -
wise provide information, and incarcerating him in a room with no bed, 
window, light, electricity, water, toilet or adequate access to sanitary 
facilities, constituted torture” as defined by FSIA); Cicippio v. Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 18 F.Supp. 2d 62, 66 (D. D.C. 1998) (threat of castration 
was listed as a method of torture used by Iran against a U.S. citizen which 
allowed the victims to bring a civil suit for damages under FSIA). 
178  See Simpson v. Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, 326 F.3d 
230 (Cir. Ct. App. D.C. 2003) (held that Libyan authorities did not 
commit torture when they took the plaintiff off a cruise ship; sepa -
rated her from her husband and refused to tell her about her about 
his whereabouts and condition; and threatened to kill the plaintiff if 
she moved from the quarters where she was held).
179  Brown v. Hot, Sexy & Safer Productions, Inc ., 68 F.3d 525, 532 (11th 
Cir. 1995) (“Although we have not foreclosed the possibility that 
words or verbal harassment may constitute “conscious shocking” 
behavior in violation of substantive due process rights, ... our review 
of the case law indicates that the threshold for alleging such claims 
is high.”); Pittsley v. Warish, 927 F.2d 3, 7 (1st Cir.1991); see also  
Emmons v. McLaughlin, 874 F.2d 351 (6th Cir. 1989) (holding that 
threat of officer to a suspected drug dealer that he was “going to 
get you” did not amount to a substantive due process violation.); 
Collins v. Cundy, 603 F.2d 825, 827 (10th Cir. 1979) (allegations that 
sheriff laughed at prisoner and threatened to “hang him” was not 
sufficient to establish a constitutional violation); Lamar v. Steele, 698 
F.2d 1286 (5th Cir.) (holding that a claim based on “mere words” or 
“idle threats” is not sufficient to establish a violation of substantive 
due process).22 THE ENHANCED INTERROGATION METHODSweapon at a civilian without a legitimate law enforcement 
purpose violated the Fourteenth Amendment. 180 
6. sleep Deprivation
The prisoner is deprived of normal sleep for extended 
periods through the use of stress positions, sensory 
overload, or other techniques of interrupting normal 
sleep. 
Sleep deprivation is a well established form of 
abuse, used in breaking down interrogation subjects.181 
In describing the use of sleep deprivation by the Soviet 
police in the 1930s, Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn writes in The 
Gulag Archipelago , “[s]leeplessness befogs the reason, 
undermines the will, and the human being ceases to be 
himself, to be his own ‘I’.”182 Sleep deprivation was also 
used in the 1970s to interrogate political opponents by 
the military in Chile under General Augusto Pinochet.183 
Recently, the U.S. State Department has condemned 
Indonesia, Iran, Jordan, Libya, Saudi Arabia, and Turkey 
for using sleep deprivation as a form of torture or cruel, 
inhuman, or degrading treatment.184
In 2002, in a memo that has since been rescinded, 
the Department of Defense authorized the use of sleep 
deprivation for use on detainees in Guantánamo Bay in 
the form of 20 hour interrogations.185 The military inves -
tigation report documented a so-called “frequent-flyer” 
180  Hawkins v. Holloway, 316 F.3d 777, 787 (8th Cir. 2003) (holding that 
threatening deadly force as a means of oppressing those employed in 
his department” elevated “his conduct to the arbitrary and conscience 
shocking behavior prohibited by substantive due process.”); Robinson 
v. Solano County, 278 F.3d 1007, 1014 (9th Cir.2002) (discussing in 
dictum that an officer’s conduct in pointing a loaded weapon at 
a civilian without a legitimate law enforcement basis shocks the 
conscience); see also  Burton v. Livingston, 791 F.2d 97 (8th Cir. 1986) 
99, 100-101 (finding that a prisoner had stated a substantive due 
process claim when he alleged that a prison guard drew and pointed 
a loaded pistol at him and ordered him to run so that the guard would 
be justified in shooting him).
181  ce n t r a l  in t e l l i g e n c e  ag e n c y , kuBa r k co u n t e r i n t e l l i g e n c e  i n t e r r o g a t i o n  
87-92, (July 1963), available at  http://www.kimsoft.com/2000/kubark.
htm [hereinafter kuBa r k ma n u a l ]; Jo h n ma r k s, th e se a r c h  fo r th e 
“ma n c h u r i a n  ca nDiDa t e, t h e cia a nD mi nD c o n t r o l  – s e c r e t  hi s t o r y  o f 
Be h a v i o r a l  sc i e n c e s ” (W. W. Norton & Company 1991). 
182 so l z h e n i t s y n , supra  note 109, at 112.
183  Peter Kornbluh, Letter from Chile , th e na t i o n , Jan. 13, 2005 (quoting 
the Valech Commission report on investigations in abuses in Chile 
under Pinochet).
184  Bu r e a u  o f De m o c r a c y , hu m a n  ri g h t s , a nD laBo r, u.s. D ePt. o f st a t e, 
co u n t r y  rePo r t s o n hu m a n  ri g h t s  Pr a c t i c e s -2005 (2006), available at 
http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/.
185 ha y n e s  me m o, supra  note 58. program at Guantánamo in effect from 2003 and until 
March 2004 in which detainees were regularly moved 
from one cell to another at intervals of two to four hours 
to interrupt their sleep.186 The new Army Field Manual 
appears to permit some sleep deprivation, so long as four 
hours of continuous sleep are permitted during every 24 
hour period. The detainee can be sleep deprived in this 
manner for up to 30 consecutive days.187
The former Israeli Prime Minister, Menachem 
Begin, describes his experiences with sleep depri -
vation while being held in a Soviet prison:
In the head of the interrogated prisoner a haze begins 
to form. His spirit is wearied to death, his legs are 
unsteady, and he has one sole desire: to sleep, to sleep 
just a little, not to get up, to lie, to rest, to forget… Anyone 
who has experienced this desire knows that not even 
hunger or thirst are comparable with it…I came across 
prisoners who signed what they were ordered to sign, 
only to get what their interrogator promised them. He 
did not promise them their liberty. He promised them 
— if they signed — uninterrupted sleep! 188
MentalPainandSuffering
Sleep deprivation is inflicted for the purpose of destroying 
the subject’s capacity for psychological resistance.189 It 
causes significant cognitive impairments including defi -
cits in memory, learning, logical reasoning, complex 
verbal processing, and decision-making; sleep appears 
to play an important role in processes such as memory 
and insight formation.190 Sleep deprivation may also 
186 th e sc h m i Dt rePo r t, supra  note 57, at 10-11. 
187  FM 2-22.3, supra note 90, at M-30 (Use of separation must not 
preclude the detainee getting four hours of continuous sleep every 
24 hours).
188  Tom Malinowski , The logic of torture , Wa s h. Po s t, June 27, 2004 
(quoting Mr. Begin).
189 kuBa r k ma n u a l , supra  note 181, at 92-3.
190  D. J. Kim et al., The effect of total sleep deprivation on cognitive func -
tions in normal adult male subjects , 109 in t’l J. n e u r o s c i e n c e  127 (2001), 
In this study, 18 men were deprived of sleep for 24 hours. They were 
then evaluated by standardized neuropsychological tests. There were 
no differences in freedom from distractibility, tactile function, visual 
function, reading, writing, arithmetic and intellectual process func -
tion. However, cognitive functions such as motor, rhythm, receptive 
and expressive speech, memory and complex verbal arithmetic func -
tion were decreased after 24 hours of sleep deprivation. Y. Harrison 
& J. A. Horne, The impact of sleep deprivation on decision making: a 
revie w, 6 J. exPe r i m e n t a l  Ps y c h o l .: aP Pl i eD 236 (2000), A review of the 
medical literature reveals numerous adverse cognitive effects of sleep 
deprivation including impaired language skills-communication, lack of 
innovation, inflexibility of thought processes, inappropriate attention to LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 23 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 23 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 23result in decreases in psychomotor performance as well 
as alterations in mood.191 
In recent years, a growing body of research has 
emerged that points to the complex and bidirectional 
relationships between sleep disturbance and psychiatric 
disorders. For example, evidence suggests that sleep 
disturbance is not only a symptom of major depression192 
but it also independently affects the clinical outcome and 
the course of the disorder.193 Moreover, sleep disturbance 
seems to be associated with an independent increase in 
the risk of suicidal ideation and actions.194 
peripheral concerns or distractions, over-reliance on previous strate -
gies, unwillingness to try out novel strategies, unreliable memory for 
when events occurred, change in mood including loss of empathy for 
colleagues, and inability to deal with surprise and the unexpected.
191    H. R. Lieberman et al., Effects of caffeine, sleep loss, and stress on cognitive 
performance and mood during U.S. Navy SEAL trainin g Sea-Air-Land , 164 
Ps y c h o Ph a r m a c o l o g y  250 (2002), Sixty-eight U.S. Navy Sea-Air-Land (SEAL) 
trainees, randomly assigned to 100, 200 or 300 mg of caffeine following 72 
hours of sleep deprivation and continuous exposure to other stressors were 
subjected to cognitive testing. Virtually all cognitive and mood parameters 
were substantially degraded compared to pre-test baseline.
192  APA ma n u a l , supra note 22, Psychiatric disorders, in particular anxiety 
and depressive disorders, include the symptoms of sleep disturbance 
in their definition. 
193  Studies show that insomnia is associated with increased risk of 
depression, anxiety disorders, and alcoholism. M. Billiard & A. Bentley, 
Is insomnia best categorized as a symptom or a disease? , 5 sl e eP meDicine 
Supp . 1, S35 (2004), The study reviews the complex bidirectional relation -
ship between chronic insomnia and various conditions such as psychiatric 
disorders, medical disorders (e.g., chronic pain, respiratory dysfunction 
and movement disorders), circadian rhythm disorders and medication 
or substance use.   The authors highlight some of the major challenges 
for future research in classifying both primary insomnia and insomnia 
related to or associated with various conditions, and their relevance to 
primary care. Although forced sleep deprivation and insomnia are different 
since insomnia is a sleep disorder characterized by an inability to sleep 
despite the opportunity; and “sleep deprivation” is being deprived of the 
opportunity to go to sleep despite the ability, the two conditions are most 
likely to cause similar effects on the human body. 
194  N. Breslau et al., Sleep disturbance and psychiatric disorders: a longitu -
dinal epidemiological study of young adults , 39 Bi o l o g i c a l  Ps y c h i a t r y  411 
(1996), The study used data from a longitudinal epidemiological study of 
1200 young adults to assess whether sleep disturbance is associated with 
increased lifetime prevalence of psychiatric disorders. The study found 
that prior insomnia is a significant predictor of subsequent major depres -
sion. The authors argued that complaints of 2 weeks or more of insomnia 
nearly every night might be a useful indicator of subsequent onset of 
major depression.  M. Y. Aargun et al., Sleep disturbances and suicidal 
behavior in patients with major depression , 58 J. o f clinical  Ps y c h i a t r y  249 
(1997), The study examines the association between sleep disturbances 
and suicidal behavior in patients with major depression (N = 113). The 
patients with hypersomnia and insomnia had significantly higher scores 
on the suicide subscale than those without sleep disturbance. Further, 
the patients with insomnia and hypersomnia were significantly more 
likely to become suicidal than the others.  P. P. Chang et al., Insomnia in 
young men and subsequent depression , The Johns Hopkins Precursors 
Study , 146 am. J. ePiDe m i o l o g y  105 (1997), The research was a long-term Physical PainorSuffering
Even sleep restriction of four hours per night for less than 
a week can result in physical harm, including hyperten -
sion, cardiovascular disease, altered glucose tolerance 
and insulin resistance.195 Sleep deprivation can impair 
immune function and result in increased risk of infec -
tious diseases. 196 Further, chronic pain syndromes are 
associated with alterations in sleep continuity and sleep 
patterns. 197 
LegalAnalysis
The psychological impact of sleep deprivation supports 
the conclusion that it would constitute torture cruel or 
prospective study, used to study the relation between self-reported sleep 
disturbances and subsequent clinical depression and psychiatric distress. 
A total of 1,053 men provided information on sleep habits during medical 
school. For a median follow-up period of 34 years, 101 men developed 
clinical depression including 13 suicides. A greater risk of clinical depres -
sion was found among those who reported insomnia in medical school 
compared with those who did not. The authors suggest that insomnia in 
young men is indicative of a greater risk for subsequent clinical depression 
and psychiatric distress that persists for at least 30 years. 
195  G. G. Alvarez & N. T. Ayas, The impact of daily sleep duration on health: a 
review of the literature, 19 P r o g r e s s  in ca rDi o v a s c u l a r  nu r s i n g  56 (2004), 
Review article. Health consequences of sleep deprivation include cardiovas -
cular disease, diabetes, and hypertension. In one study cited [Spiegel et al] 
11 healthy men aged 18-27 years were subjected to six nights of four hours 
of sleep per night. During the sleep deprived period, subjects demonstrated 
impaired glucose intolerance, increased sympathetic nervous system 
activity, higher evening cortisol levels, and reduced appetite suppressing 
hormone levels. In another study [Meier-Ewert et al], partial sleep restric -
tion (4.2 hours of sleep per night) increased C-reactive protein levels, a 
marker of systemic inflammation and a risk factor for heart disease.
196  M. A. Carskadon, Sleep deprivation: health consequences and societal 
impact , 88 meD. clinics  n. am. 767 (2004),  In review of the multiple effects 
of sleep deprivation on individuals, their families and their communities, 
the authors cite the following adverse health effects: immune dysfunc -
tion, such as lowered titers following influenza immunization, decreased 
proportion of natural killer cells, and reduced lymphokine activated killer 
factor, reduced interleukin-2 production. Endocrine effects include 
altered cortisol release, altered glucose tolerance and insulin resistance, 
changes that can lead to obesity and diabetes mellitus.
197  S. H. Onen et al., The effects of total sleep deprivation, selective sleep 
interruption and sleep recovery on pain tolerance thresholds in healthy 
subjects , 10 J. sl e eP re s. 35 (2001), Nine healthy male volunteers were 
randomly assigned to undergo sleep deprivation in periods of six consecu -
tive laboratory nights.  Tolerance thresholds to mechanical and thermal 
pain were used using a standardized pressure device and a standardized 
heat device.   Sleep deprivation significantly increased mechanical (due to 
applied pressure) pain thresholds.  This study demonstrated an increase 
in pain sensitivity related to 40 hours of total sleep deprivation.  M. Haack 
& J. M. Mullington, Sustained sleep restriction reduces emotional and 
physical well-being , 119 Pa i n 56, (2005), Forty healthy subjects with a 
mean age of 26 were randomly assigned to an 8-hour sleep condition or 
a 4-hour sleep restricted condition over 12 nights. This study suggest that 
chronic insufficient sleep (across only 12 consecutive days) may contribute 
to the onset and amplification of pain and affect health by compromising 
optimistic outlook and psychosocial functioning.24 THE ENHANCED INTERROGATION METHODSinhuman treatment for the purposes of criminal prosecu -
tion. Sleep deprivation is known to cause mental harm 
— such as the deleterious psychological and neurological 
effects of depression and anxiety disorders — that is both 
prolonged and non-transitory. Sleep deprivation also is 
calculated to “disrupt the senses or personality” because 
it is designed to break down the subject’s resistance, 
affect mood, and disrupt memory. 
Moreover, known physical effects of sleep deprivation 
suggest that even its limited use may cause “severe” 
or “serious” physical harm and therefore may amount 
to “torture” or “cruel or inhuman treatment.” Indeed, 
during the floor debate of the MCA, Senator Durbin stated 
that the Act’s amendments to the WCA would criminalize 
prolonged sleep deprivation.198
U.S. federal courts have also recognized sleep depri -
vation by other countries as torture. One court concluded 
that deprivation of sleep over two days and three nights 
was a key element in the torture of religious dissidents by 
the Chinese police.199 The Board of Immigration Appeals 
has listed sleep deprivation as a common method of 
torture used by the Iranian government along with 
“suspension for long periods in contorted positions” and 
“burning with cigarettes.”200 
U.S. federal courts have repeatedly found instances 
of sleep deprivation to violate both the Eighth and 
Fourteenth Amendments. These decisions provide 
support for a finding that use of sleep deprivation violates 
the Detainee Treatment Act. The Supreme Court has 
held that a confession obtained by depriving a prisoner 
of sleep for 36 hours violated the individual’s right to due 
process.201 In that decision Justice Black wrote for the 
court “[i]t has been known since 1500 at least that depri -
vation of sleep is the most effective torture and certain to 
produce any confession desired.”202 Subsequently, U.S. 
federal courts have held that sleep deprivation consti -
tutes a violation of the Eighth Amendment’s protection 
198  152 Cong. Rec. S10,236 (daily ed. Sept. 27, 2006) (Statement by Sen. 
Durbin). 
199  Doe v. qi, 349 F.Supp.2d 1258, 1318 (N.D. Cal 2004) (citing sleep 
deprivation over “three days and two nights” as part of the Chinese 
police abuse of Plaintiff C that constituted torture). 
200  Matter of G-A-, 23 I&N Dec. 366, 370 (BIA 2002) (holding that it is 
more likely than not that the Petitioner would be tortured if returned 
to Iran).
201  Ashcraft v. Tennessee, 322 U.S. 143, 154 (1944); see also  Ashcraft 
v. Tennessee, 327 U.S. 274 (1946); see generally U.S. ex rel Wade v. 
Jackson, 256 F.2d 7 (2nd Cir. 1958) (depriving an arrestee of sleep for 
twenty-two hours as contributing to the violations of an individuals 
due process rights).
202  Ashcraft , 322 U.S. at n.6. from cruel and inhuman punishment because sleep is 
“considered a basic life necessity.”203
7. sensory Bombardment:  
noise and light
The prisoner is exposed to bright lights, flashing 
strobe lights and/or loud music for extended periods 
of time.
Sensory bombardment with light and noise can inflict 
extreme mental and physical harm, whether it is used as a 
discrete interrogation tool or to disrupt sleep. State police 
in the former Soviet Union used the technique routinely, 
barraging interrogation subjects with intense light. In its 
annual reports on Turkey’s human rights practices from 
1999 to 2002, the U.S. State Department condemned the 
Turkish authorities’ use of sensory bombardment with 
loud music as a form of torture.204 The State Department 
has also criticized Burma’s authoritarian military regime 
for interrogating prisoners for long periods of time under 
bright lights.205
The systematic use of sound and light bombardment by 
U.S. personnel has been extensively documented. Military 
guards and intelligence agents have confirmed that 
subjecting detainees to strobe lights was regularly used in 
interrogation procedures at Guantánamo Bay.206 The ICRC 
associated the use of constant, bright light and blaring 
musi c with sleep deprivation, and condemned the sensory 
assault allegedly inflicted by coalition forces in Iraq.207 
203  Merritt v. Hawk, 153 F.Supp.2d 1216, 1228 (D. Colo. 2001); see also  Keenan 
v. Hall, 83 F.3d 1083, 1091 (9th Cir. 1996) (held that constant illumination 
of plaintiff’s cell caused “grave sleep problems” could constitute a consti -
tutional violation); Hoptowit v. Spellman, 753 F.2d 779, 783 (8th Cir. 1983) 
(“[a]dequate lighting is one of the fundamental attributes of ‘adequate 
shelter’ required by the Eighth Amendment.”); LeMaire v. Maass, 745 
F.Supp. 623, 636 (D. Or.1990) (“[t]here is no legitimate penological justifi -
cation for requiring [inmates] to suffer physical and psychological harm 
by living in constant illumination. This practice is unconstitutional.”), 
vacated on other grounds , 12 F.3d 1444, 1458-59 (9th Cir.1993). 
204  Bu r e a u  o f De m o c r a c y , hu m a n  ri g h t s , a nD laBo r, u.s. D ePt. o f st a t e, 
co u n t r y  rePo r t s o n hu m a n  ri g h t s  Pr a c t i c e s - 1999-2002, 2006 (2000-
2003, 2007), available at  http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/. 
205  Bu r e a u  o f De m o c r a c y , hu m a n  ri g h t s , a nD laBo r, u.s. D ePt. o f st a t e, 
co u n t r y  rePo r t s o n hu m a n  ri g h t s  Pr a c t i c e s -2000-2001 (2001-2002), 
available at  http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/.
206  E-mail from Valerie E. Caproni (F.B.I.) (Aug. 16, 2004) (describing 
a detainee wrapped in an Israeli flag and bombarded with loud 
music and strobe lights), http://www.aclu.org/torturefoia/released/
FBI.121504.4737_4738.pdf (last visited July 24, 2005); Neil Lewis, 
Broad Use of Harsh Tactics Is Described at Cuba Base , n.y. ti m e s, 
October 17, 2004.
207 icrc r ePo r t, supra  note 60, at para. 27.LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 25 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 25 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 25Lt. Col. V. Stuart Couch, a Marine Corp pilot and veteran 
military prosecutor, recently described an example of 
light and sound bombardment in an interview with the 
Wall Street Journal . On a visit to Guantánamo in 2003, Col. 
Couch described his intense dismay when he witnessed a 
detainee shackled to the floor of a cell with heavy metal 
music blaring. The detainee was “rocking back and forth, 
mumbling as strobe lights flashed.” Col. Couch told the 
Journal  that “the treatment resembled the abuse he had 
been trained to resist if captured; he never expected 
Americans would be the ones employing it.”208
The new Army Field Manual on interrogations explic -
itly prohibits sensory deprivation but does not include 
information on the subject of sensory bombardment.
PhysicalandMentalPainandSuffering
Use of lights and loud music is intended to cause physi -
ologic distress and encourages disorientation and with -
drawal from reality as a defense. The body can interpret 
certain noises as danger signals, inducing the release 
of stress hormones which may increase the risk of heart 
disease or heart attack.209 Loud music can also cause 
hearing loss or ringing in the ears; t hese consequences 
can be both short term and chronic, with chronic tinnitus, 
or ringing in the ears, being more common.210 
Strobe lights may also induce a stress response with 
 increased heart rate according to data from studies.211 
208  Jess Bravin, The Conscience of the Colonel , Wa l l st. J. March 31, 
2007 at A1. (Col. Couch referred to the Survival, Evasion, Resistance 
and Escape (‘SERE”) training, in which U.S. personnel are trained 
to resist torture techniques, several of which are identical to the 
CIA’s “enhanced” interrogation techniques and tactics employed by 
the military at Guantánamo Bay and in Iraq. A number of published 
reports indicate that these SERE training techniques were “reverse-
engineered” into military and CIA interrogation techniques). 
209  H. Ising & B. Kruppa, Health Effects  caused by Noise: Evidence in the 
Literature from the Past 25 Years , 6 no i s e a nD he a l t h  5 (2004), A review 
of the literature finds that noises that might be perceived as danger 
signals, such as airplanes or heavy trucks that are heard induce the 
release of stress hormones and increase cardiovascular risk.
210  F.U. Metternich & T. Brusis, Acute hearing loss and tinnitus caused 
by amplified recreational music , 78 la r y n g o r h i n o o t o l o g i e  614 (1999), 
Short term exposure to loud music can result in acute hearing loss. A 
retrospective study reviews twenty-four patients who required rheologic 
therapy between 1994 and 1997 due to music related acoustic trauma. 
The majority of patients (67%) developed hearing loss on the basis of a 
one-time exposure at a rock or pop concert, 17% from discotheques, 
and 12% from parties. Tinnitus, a prolonged ringing in the ears, was 
even more common.
211  B. Nephew et al., Heart rate and behavior are regulated independently of 
cortisone following acute stressors  ge n. co mP. enDo c r i n o l  133, 173-180 
(2003); R. Emdad et al.,  Psychophysiologic sensitization to headlight glare 
among professional drivers with and without cardiovascular disease , 3 In studies involving professional drivers, headlight glare 
was shown to increase blood pressure, especially in 
drivers with underlying cardiac disease. Adverse effects 
of headlight glare in the laboratory include electrocor -
tical arousal, EEG desynchronization, a rise in diastolic 
blood pressure and even ventricular arrythmias, poten -
tially life threatening electrical rhythm disturbances of 
the heart.212 Loud noise and bright lights can also be used 
to interrupt sleep, resulting in sleep deprivation and its 
associated health effects.
LegalAnalysis
Exposure to lights and sounds may constitute “torture” 
or “cruel or inhuman treatment” under the Torture Act 
or the War Crimes Act if it causes severe or serious 
physical harm. At least one U.S. federal court has found 
that treatment that included keeping detainees under 
bright lights for 24 hours a day thereby preventing them 
from sleeping constituted cruel, inhuman or degrading 
treatment prohibited by international law.213
U.S. federal courts have found that exposure to extreme 
noise and light in detention and interrogations violates 
the Eighth Amendment, supporting the conclusion that 
such treatment may violate the Detainee Treatment Act. 214 
For example, courts have permitted prisoners to proceed 
J. oc c u Pa t i o n a l  he a l t h  Ps y c h o l . 147 (1998), Electroencephelographic 
(EEG) and cardiovascular response and recovery to simulated headlight 
glare was examined in four groups of male professional drivers, twelve 
with ischemic heart disease, twelve with hypertension and ten with 
borderline hypertension, thirty-four were healthy. They were compared 
to twenty-three non-professional driver controls. After glare exposure, 
the ischemic heart disease drivers showed the most pronounced rise in 
diastolic blood pressure. Anxiety and long work hours were associated 
with heightened central arousal.  
212  B. Nephew et al., supra note 211; R. Emdad et al., supra note 211. 
213    Jama v. I.N.S., 22 F.Supp.2d 353, 358 (D. N.J. 1998) (Found an action-(Found an action -
able claim for cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment under ATCA 
where detainees were kept under bright lights 24 hours a day and 
not permitted to sleep. Other mistreatment including being forced 
to live in filth and constant smell of human waste, packed in rooms 
with twenty to forty detainees, beaten, deprived of privacy, subjected 
to degrading comments from guards and sexual abuse.).
214  See Lucien v. Peters,  107 F.3d 873 (7th Cir. 1997) (“Allegations of 
excessive noise can support the objective element of an Eighth 
Amendment claim.”); Kost v. Kozakiewicz, 1 F.3d 176, 180 (3d Cir. 
1993) (Section 1983 challenge to conditions of confinement, including 
allegations of unbearable noise pollution causing inmates to suffer 
degenerative hearing, should not have been dismissed on ground 
that issues were addressed in context of previous class action suit); 
Williams v. Boles, 841 F.2d 181, 183 (7th Cir.1988) (incessant noise 
may cause agony even though it leaves no physical marks); Toussaint 
v. McCarthy, 801 F.2d 1080, 1110 (9th Cir.1986) (affirming scope of 
relief granted by district court for noise level in the prison; evidence 
showed that there was a “constant level of noise” which adversely 
affected the inmates’ hearing). 26 THE ENHANCED INTERROGATION METHODSwith their claims in cases where constant lighting of a cell 
resulted in loss of sleep and psychological harm.215 The 
Supreme Court also found that the use of a confession 
obtained by shining a bright light in the eyes of a subject in 
a 36 hour interrogation violated due process.216 U.S. federal 
appeals courts have found excessive noise to violate the 
Eighth Amendment, particularly when it adversely affects 
the hearing of the detainee.217 However, where constant 
illumination or noise results in no loss of sleep or other 
psychological or physical harm the courts have found no 
constitutional violation.218 
8. violent shaking 
 The interrogator forcefully shakes the prisoner . 
“Shaking” is a term of art for an established, violent 
interrogation method. The Israeli security forces 
commonly subjected detainees to this practice during 
interrogations until the Israeli Supreme Court outlawed 
shaking in 1999. The technique was described as “the 
forceful shaking of the suspect’s upper torso, back and 
forth, repeatedly, in a manner which causes the neck 
215  Keenan v. Hall, 83 F.3d 1083, 1089 (9th Cir. 1996) (recognizing that 
deprivation of outdoor exercise, excessive noise, 24 hour lighting, 
and inadequate ventilation, food, and water violate the Eighth 
Amendment rights of inmates); Merritt v. Hawk, 153 F.Supp.2d 1216 
(D. Colo. 2001); see also  Keenan v. Hall, 83 F.3d 1083, 1091 (9th Cir. 
1996) (held that where constant illumination of plaintiff’s cell caused 
“grave sleep problems” could constitute a constitutional violation); 
LeMaire v. Maass, 745 F.Supp. 623, 636 (D.Or.1990) (“[t]here is no 
legitimate penological justification for requiring [inmates] to suffer 
physical and psychological harm by living in constant illumination. 
This practice is unconstitutional.”), vacated on other grounds , 12 F.3d 
1444, 1458-59 (9th Cir.1993). 
216 See generally Ashcraft v. Tennessee, 322 U.S. 143 (1944).
217  See, e.g. , Toussaint v. McCarthy, 801 F.2d 1080, 1110 (9th Cir.1986) 
(affirming scope of relief granted by district court for noise level in 
the prison), cert. denied 481 U.S. 1069 (1987); But see Lundsford v. 
Bennet, 17 F.3d 1574, 1580 (1994) (holding that prisoners’ claims 
that they were subjected to loud noises over intercom and served 
poorly prepared food did not establish Eighth Amendment violation 
noting “the record contains no evidence that the noise levels posed 
a serious risk of injury to the plaintiffs”).
218  Rossell v. McFadden, No. 93-16967, 1994 WL 88615, at *1 (9th Cir. 
Mar. 16, 1994) (upholding the dismissal of an Eighth Amendment 
claim where plaintiff’s cell was lit from 4:30 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
because there “is no suggestion that [he] has suffered a significant 
medical condition as a result of the lighting in his cell”); Spivey v. 
Doria, No. 91-C4169, 1994 WL 97756, at *10 (N.D. Ill. Mar. 24, 1994) 
(holding that a pre-trial detainee failed to state a claim for a consti -
tutional violation where he only alleged that “the lights and noise 
interfere[d] with his sleep” not that he was “unable to sleep or that 
the sleep deprivation ha[d] caused him any harm.”).and head to dangle and vacillate rapidly.”219 When the 
Israeli Supreme Court banned the technique, it held 
that: “[p]lainly put, shaking is a prohibited investiga -
tion method. It harms the suspect’s body. It violates his 
dignity. It is a violent method which does not form part 
of a legal investigation. It surpasses that which is neces -
sary.”220 The U.N. Human Rights Committee similarly 
found that the violent shaking used in interrogations 
by the Israeli army constituted both torture and cruel, 
inhuman or degrading treatment and therefore violated 
the Convention Against Torture.221 
Violent shaking, euphemistically called the “atten -
tion grab,” reportedly has been authorized for use by 
CIA interrogators. The description of the method used 
by the CIA echoes that of the Israel security services: 
“[t]he interrogator forcefully grabs the shirt front of the 
prisoner and shakes him.”222 
The New York Times  recounted the experience of 
a man who gave his name only as George who 
was arrested by Israeli security services in 1995 
and subjected to violent shaking. According to the 
Times, an Israeli soldier  “seized him and violently 
rattled him back and forth, so that his head flopped 
uncontrollably, inflicting terrible pain to his spine and 
neck. [ ] He remembers passing out three times, and 
once he had to be carried to the doctor .”223  
PhysicalandMentalPainandSuffering
Because brain damage represents the greatest risk from 
violent shaking, its harmful consequences can extend 
to both physical and mental health. Violent shaking 
poses extreme danger of trauma to the brain through 
an acceleration-deceleration mechanism. In addition 
to causing retinal hemorrhages (bleeding of the retinal 
vessels due to tearing), violent shaking may cause intra -
cranial hemorrhage (bleeding of the brain), and cere -
bral edema (swelling of the brain), resulting in increased 
intracranial pressure and permanent neurologic deficits 
219 Anthony Lewis, A Light Unto the Nations , N.Y.  ti m e s, Sept. 14, 1999.
220  Public Committee against Torture in Israel v. the Government of 
Israel, 53(4) PD 817, Sept. 6, 1999, at para. 24, available at  http://www.
stoptorture.org.il/eng/images/uploaded/publications/18.pdf .
221  Concluding observations of the Committee against Torture: Israel. May, 9, 
1997, A/52/44, paras. 253-260, available at http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.
nsf/(Symbol)/69b6685c93d9f25180256498005063da?Opendocument .
222  Ross  & Esposito, supra  note 6. 
223  Serge Schmemann, In Israel, Coercing Prisoners Is Becoming Law of 
the Land , n.y. ti m e s, May 8, 1997, at A1.LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 27 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 27 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 27and/or death.224 These findings are similar to the more 
well known traumatic condition referred to as “shaken 
baby syndrome.”225 Increased pressure due to swelling 
or bleeding is a dangerous condition as the increased 
pressure within the limits of the rigid skull can result in 
the herniation of the brain, an often fatal complication 
in which brain matter is literally squeezed through the 
narrow intracranial space into the brainstem. 
Non-fatal brain trauma from violent shaking can 
potentially result in more subtle but clinically signifi -
cant cognitive impairment possibly due to diffuse axonal 
injury, injury to the brain cells themselves. 226 Non-fatal 
consequences of shaking may also include recurrent 
headaches, disorientation and mental status changes, all 
of which can become chronic.227 Violent shaking can also 
produce neck trauma, producing a whiplash mechanism 
of cervical strain. Cervical spine fracture with spinal cord 
compression may also occur, resulting in quadriplegia.
In one case report of a Palestinian man who died in 
the custody of Israeli security forces in 1995, forensic 
investigators concluded that the man died of inju -
ries he sustained during interrogation, specifically 
as a result of having been violently shaken. The man 
had suffered blunt force trauma to the upper chest 
and shoulders, acute sub-dural hemorrhage, diffuse 
axonal injury and retinal hemorrhages ultimately 
leading to his death. 228
224  T. D. Carrigan et al., Domestic violence: the shaken adult syndrome , J. 
ac c iDe n t & e m e r g e n c y  meDicine 138 (2000), A case of domestic violence is 
reported. A 34-year old woman victim of a domestic assault presented 
with a triad of injuries associated with the shaking of infants: retinal 
hemorrhages, subdural hematoma, and patterned bruising.
225  Physicians  f o r hu m a n  ri g h t s , is r a e l  a nD t h e oc c u Pi eD te r r i t o r i e s : shakiing  
a s a f o r m  o f t o r t u r e : De a t h in c u s t o Dy o f “aB D a l-s a m a D ha r i z a t ” 8 (1995), 
PHR report on the use of vigorous shaking by Israeli security officers as 
a method of interrogation. PHR doctors who performed an autopsy on 
Abd al-Samad Harizat concluded that the detainee had died as a result 
of trauma to brain due to shaking. The report argues that shaking is a 
form of torture and ill-treatment that can have a lethal outcome.
226  D. J. Pounder, Shaken adult syndrome , 18 am. J. fo r e n s i c  meD. & 
Pa t h o l o g y  321 (1997), Case report of a thirty-year-old Palestinian who 
collapsed while under interrogation by Israeli General Security Service 
and was declared brain dead three days later . Autopsy revealed extensive 
anterior chest and shoulder bruising and acute subdural hemorrhage 
but no other trauma. Shaking was postulated as the mechanism of 
injury, and Israeli investigators later confirmed this. Histopathologic 
examination of the brain demonstrated diffuse axonal injury and retinal 
hemorrhages. A.Moreno & M. Grodin, Torture and its neurological 
sequela , 40 sPi n a l co rD 213-223 (2002), A review of the literature 
describes nonfatal neurologic sequela of torture. Consequences include 
headaches, vertigo, loss of consciousness, and seizures.
227 is t a n Bu l Pr o t o c o l , supra note 22, at 38.
228  Physicians  f o r hu m a n  ri g h t s , is r a e l  a nD t h e oc c u Pi eD te r r i t o r i e s : shakiing  a s 
a f o r m o f t o r t u r e : De a t h in c u s t o Dy o f “aB D a l-s a m a D ha r i z a t ” 8 (Physicians LegalAnalysis
Violent shaking would seem clearly to violate the WCA’s 
torture provision when it results in severe physical pain 
or suffering. It also presents a significant risk of inflicting 
“serious” physical pain and suffering – in violation of the 
WCA’s “cruel or inhuman treatment” provision – through 
“bodily injury” ranging from headaches to paralysis. This 
“extreme physical pain” is a likely result of shaking and 
is consistent with the expected long term medical affects 
of such treatment. 
U.S. federal court opinions support the conclusion that 
the use of violent shaking in interrogations is prohib -
ited by the Detainee Treatment Act, even if the use of 
such techniques does not result in physical injury. U.S. 
federal appeals courts have held that the use of any 
physical force against a person who is in the presence 
of the police for custodial interrogation and who poses 
no threat to the safety of the police violates Fifth and 
Fourteenth Amendment due process protections.229 The 
Courts of Appeals for the Fifth and Fourth Circuits have 
also concluded that the use of force in interrogation is 
barred even if it results in no physical injury.230 
9. sexual humiliation
The prisoner is subjected to sexually humiliating 
behavior or forced to perform sexually humiliating 
acts, often in an attempt to exploit cultural and reli -
gious stereotypes regarding sexual behavior and 
induce feelings of shame, guilt and worthlessness. 
Sexual humiliation, such as locking a naked woman in 
a box with peep holes or having female interrogators strip 
in front of male prisoners, was used in Soviet interroga -
tions.231 In the 1960s, the CIA identified sexual humilia -
tion as an interrogation tactic used to strip its victims of 
for Human Rights 1995); D. J. Pounder, Shaken adult syndrome , 18 
am. J. f o r e n s i c  meD. & P a t h o l o g y  321 (1997).
229  Ware v. Reed, 709 F.2d 345, 351 (5th Cir .1983) (constitutional violation 
to use any physical force against a person who is in the presence of 
the police for custodial interrogation and who poses no threat to their 
safety); Gray v. Spillman, 925 F.2d 90, 93 (Cir . 4th 1991) (“It has long 
been held that beating and threatening a person in the course of custo -
dial interrogation violates the fifth and fourteenth amendments of the 
Constitution. [Citation omitted.] The suggestion that an interrogee’s 
constitutional rights are transgressed only if he suffers physical injury 
demonstrates a fundamental misconception of the fifth and fourteenth 
amendments, indeed, if not our system of criminal justice.”).
230 Reed, 709 F.2d 345 at 351; Spillman, 925 F.2d 90 at 93.
231 so l z h e n i t s y n , supra  note 109, at 105-06.28 THE ENHANCED INTERROGATION METHODStheir identities and make them feel powerless.232 The U.S. 
State Department has repeatedly criticized other govern -
ments, for example Egypt233 and Turkey,234 for subjecting 
detainees to torture by forcing them to strip in front of 
the opposite sex, subjecting them to sexual touching or 
insults, or threatening them with rape.
In 2002, in a memo that has since been revoked, 
the Department of Defense authorized the “removal 
of [detainees’] clothing” in military interrogations.235 A 
2005 U.S. Army investigation uncovered the infliction of 
sexual humiliation against detainees in Guantánamo Bay 
— such as having female interrogators attempt to physi -
cally seduce a Muslim detainee; forcing the detainee to 
wear a bra and placing women’s underwear on his head; 
leading him around on a leash; forcing him to perform 
dog tricks; stripping him naked; and calling him a homo -
sexual.236 The ICRC reported in 2004 that detainees 
alleged that they were forced to be naked and to wear 
women’s underwear.237 
According to released DOD files, one abuse inves -
tigation involved a photograph taken of a hooded and 
hand-cuffed detainee in a stress position with a U.S. 
soldier simulating sodomy on him with a broomstick.238 
232  Alfred W. McCoy, The Long Shadow of CIA Torture Research , 
co u n t e r Pu n c h , May 2, 2004, http://www.counterpunch.org/
mccoy05292004.html  (last visited July 24, 2007).
233  Bu r e a u  o f De m o c r a c y , hu m a n  ri g h t s , a nD laBo r, u.s. D ePt. o f st a t e, 
co u n t r y  rePo r t s o n hu m a n  ri g h t s  Pr a c t i c e s -2006 (2007), available at 
http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/.
234  Bu r e a u  o f De m o c r a c y , hu m a n  ri g h t s , a nD laBo r, u.s. D ePt. o f st a t e, 
co u n t r y  rePo r t s o n hu m a n  ri g h t s  Pr a c t i c e s -2000-2002, 2006 (2001-
2003, 2007), available at http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/. 
235  ha y n e s  me m o, supra  note 58. 
236  th e sc h m i Dt rePo r t, supra  note 57 (concluding that the treatment was 
worthy of no punishment since they fell under authorized techniques 
by Field Manual at the time they were used as “Futility” and “Ego 
Down” techniques).
237  icrc rePo r t, supra  note 60, at para. 25 (reporting frequently alleged 
“[a]cts of humiliation such as being made to stand naked against the 
wall of the cell with arms raised or with women’s underwear over 
the head for prolonged periods while being laughed at by guards, 
including female guards, and sometimes photographed in this 
position” and “[b]eing paraded naked outside cells in front of other 
persons deprived of their liberty, and guards, sometimes hooded or 
with women’s underwear over the head”).
238  Report of Proceedings by Investigating Officer / Board of Officers; 
Document #: DOD007031-DOD007184 (2004-03-01),  available at  
http://www.aclu.org/projects/foiasearch/pdf/DOD007035.pdf  
(Investigation shows that the detainees were not put into the 
stress positions for reasons of the photograph, but were already 
in these positions for interrogation purposes when the photo was 
taken. It also shows that officers did not follow appropriate protocol 
upon discovering the photo by not categorizing it as detainee In another released document FBI agents describe that 
during Ramadan in late 2002 in Guantánamo, a female 
agent applied lotion to a detainee, caressed him in a 
sexual manner, moved her hands to the detainee’s lap, 
and grabbed the detainee’s genitals.239
Partially in response to the detainee abuse uncovered 
in Iraq and Guantánamo, some forms of sexual humili -
ation are prohibited by the new Army Field Manual. 
240 These include: “forcing an individual to perform or 
simulate sexual acts or to pose in a sexual manner; 
exposing an individual to outrageously lewd and sexu -
ally provocative behavior” and “forced nakedness.”241 The 
CIA’s policy towards sexually humiliating detainees is 
currently undisclosed. 
MentalPainandSuffering
Sexual humiliation causes the detainee humiliation and 
indignity, and can result in lasting psychological damage. 
Clinicians who deal with torture survivors report that 
sexual humiliation often leads to posttraumatic stress 
disorder and major depression, and that victims often 
relive the humiliation long after their release through 
flashbacks and nightmares.242 They also find that sexu -
ally humiliating treatment emasculates male victims 
and destroys their sense of identity and autonomy.243 
J.P. Wilson, an internationally recognized expert in the 
field of PTSD, describes the extreme stress of sexual 
trauma as bringing about “a loss of self-continuity and 
self-sameness; a loss of coherent and cohesive sense 
of self.”244 
abuse and not reporting it to the chain of command. The soldiers 
involved claimed that they were not aware of the no photography 
allowed policies, and that they were under the impression that 
“photos could be taken in moderation” and that it was a “matter 
of discretion”.).
239  Letter from T. J. Harrington, Deputy Assistant Director, 
Counterterrorism to Major General Donald J. Ryder, DOA Criminal 
Investigation Command re: Suspected Mistreatment of detainees, 
Document #: DOJFBI001914-DOJFBI001916 (July 14, 2007), available 
at http://www.aclu.org/projects/foiasearch/pdf/DOJFBI001914.pdf .
240  The new Army Field Manual prohibits “forcing an individual to 
perform or simulate sexual acts or to pose in a sexual manner; 
exposing an individual to outrageously lewd and sexually provoca -
tive behavior” under any circumstances and “forcing the detainee 
to be naked, perform sexual acts, or pose in a sexual manner” in 
conjunction with intelligence interrogations. FM 2-22.3, supra note 
90, at 5-20.
241 Id. 
242 Phr B r e a k th e m DoWn, supra  note 20, at 56.
243  Id. 
244  J. P. W i l s o n , tr a u m a , t r a n s f o r m a t i o n , a nD he a l i n g : a n i n t e g r a t i v e  aP Pr o a c h  LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 29 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 29 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 29Sexual humiliation as an interrogation technique 
relies on perceived cultural and religious taboos to target 
the detainee’s sense of identity and, in men, presumed 
dominance as a male to humiliate and control the victim 
and induce the threat and fear of sexual abuse or physical 
assault.245 Survivors often experience feelings of intense 
shame, guilt, grief, fear, and social isolation. Victims who 
have been forced into humiliating acts can feel “respon -
sible for participating in their own degradation” resulting 
in intense and long lasting shame.246
The effect of sexual victimization in prisons and jails 
may be more devastating and debilitating, due to the 
unique structure of incarceration. In prison settings, 
victims may experience a systematic, repetitive inflic -
tion of psychological trauma, as well as the continua -
tion of terror, helplessness, fear and lack of autonomy.247 
For example, the worry and constant alertness to being 
victimized can result in a whole host of psycho-physi -
ological conditions which can lead to asthma, ulcers, 
colitis and hypertension.248
LegalAnalysis
The medical and psychological harm suffered by 
victims of sexual humiliation likely amounts to “severe” 
t o t h e o r y , r e s e a r c h , a nD Po s t-t r a u m a t i c  t h e r a Py (Brunner / Mazel 1989), 
Wilson reviews the theory and research studies about trauma and 
personal and environmental factors in the individual’s response to 
stress. He synthesized theoretical, biological, cultural and treatment 
aspects of posttraumatic stress disorder .
245  Interview by Soledad O’Brien of Former Army Sergeant Kayla 
Williams, author of the 2005 memoir, Love my ri f l e mo r e th a n yo u 
on CNN (Sept. 26, 2006) (“They stripped prisoners naked and then 
removed their blindfolds, so that I was the first thing they saw. And, 
then, we were supposed to mock them and degrade their manhood.); 
Phr B r e a k th e m DoWn, supra  note 20, at 56.
246  Uwe Jacobs, The price of torture , sa n fr a n c i s c o  ch r o n i c l e , March 2, 
2005.
247  W. R. Dumond, The Impact and Recovery of Prisoner Rape, A paper 
presented at the National Conference “Not Part of the Penalty: 
Ending Prisoner Rape in Washington, D.C.” (Oct. 19, 2001), http://
www.spr.org/pdf/Dumond.pdf  (last visited Jan. 2007), A compre -
hensive article that provides overview and history of sexual assault in 
incarceration settings and explores the long-term effects on victims 
of sexual assault. It further outlines effective interventions in treating 
sexual assault victims while incarcerated. 
248  R. C. McCorkle, Fear of victimization and symptoms of psychopa -
thology among prison inmates , 19 J. of f e n De r reha Bilitation , 27 (1993), 
Investigation of fear of victimization and mental health among 300 
Tennessee inmate men who were held in a maximum-security facility 
show that fear of victimization is a significant predictor of well being 
controlling for pre-existing disorders.  W. R. Dumond, The Impact 
and Recovery of Prisoner Rape, A paper presented at the National 
Conference “Not Part of the Penalty: Ending Prisoner Rape in 
Washington, D.C.” (Oct. 19, 2001), http://www.spr.org/pdf/Dumond.
pdf (last visited July 27, 2007), For details on the study, see note 247. or “serious” mental pain or suffering under the plain 
language of the Torture Act and the WCA definitions of 
“torture” or “cruel or inhuman treatment.” The flash -
backs, depression, and posttraumatic stress disorder 
that are caused by sexual humiliation likely constitute 
both “prolonged” and “non-transitory” mental harm. The 
legislative history of the WCA suggests that Congress 
intended to criminalize forcing detainees to be naked, 
perform sexual acts, or pose in a sexual manner.249 It 
may be more difficult to establish whether sexual humili -
ation involves one of the four enumerated predicate 
acts for a finding of liability under the Torture Act, in 
particular whether sexual humiliation constitutes “the 
administration or application, or threatened applica -
tion of mind-altering procedures calculated to disrupt 
profoundly the senses or the personality.”250 The term 
“disrupt profoundly the senses or the personality” is not 
used in health literature or anywhere else in U.S. law. 
Still, the likelihood that sexual humiliation used during 
interrogation is calculated to destroy the victim’s sense 
of self, identity, autonomy and masculinity supports the 
conclusion that sexual humiliation could be calculated 
to “disrupt profoundly … the personality.” Whether the 
disruption of the personality that sexual humiliation is 
calculated to cause is “profound” may depend on the 
manner in which humiliation techniques are employed 
in any given instance. 
In addition to the criminalizing of sexual humiliation 
under the WCA and the Torture Act, Common Article 3 
of the Geneva Conventions clearly prohibits it. Common 
Article 3 bars all “outrages upon personal dignity, in 
particular humiliating and degrading treatment.”251 The 
249  See 152 Cong. Rec. S10,390 (daily ed. Sept. 27, 2006) (statement of 
Sen. Warner); see also S10,384 (daily ed. Sept. 27, 2006) (statement 
of Sen. Levin).
250 Torture Act, 18 U.S.C. § 2340 (2006).
251  See Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of 
the Wounded and the Sick in Armed Forces in the Field art. 3, Aug. 
12, 1949, entered into force Oct. 21, 1950, 6 U.S.T. 3217 , 75 U.N.T.S. 
31, available at http://www.icrc.org/ihl.nsf/7c4d08d9b287a421 
41256739003e636b/fe20c3d903ce27e3c12 5641e004a92f3 ; Geneva 
Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded, Sick, and 
Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea art. 3, Aug. 12, 1949, 
entered into force Oct. 21, 1950, 6 U.S.T. 3217 , 75 U.N.T.S. 85, available 
at http://www.icrc.org/ihl.nsf/7c4d08d9b287a4 2141256739003e636 
b/44072487ec4c2 131c12 5641e0 04a9977 ; Geneva Convention Relative 
to the Treatment of Prisoners of War art. 3, Aug. 12, 1949, entered 
into force Oct. 21, 1950, 6 U.S.T. 3316 , 75 U.N.T.S. 135, available at 
http://www.icr7c4d08d9b287a42141256739003e636bc.org/ihl.nsf//
6fef854a3517b75ac125641e004a9e68; Geneva Convention Relative to 
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Times of War art. 3, Aug. 12, 1949, 
entered into force Oct. 21, 1950, 6 U.S.T. 3516 , 75 U.N.T.S. 287, available 
at http://www.icrc.org/ihl.nsf/7c4  d08d9b287a42141256739003e636b/
6756482d86146898c125641e004aa3c5.30 THE ENHANCED INTERROGATION METHODSInternational Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia 
has held that forcing detainees to dance naked clearly 
violates Common Article 3.252 U.S. federal courts have 
cited stripping people naked as a form of abuse that, 
combined with other mistreatment, can constitute torture 
under international law.253 
Supreme Court and lower court precedent strongly 
suggests that the use of sexual humiliation under 
most circumstances violates the Detainee Treatment 
Act. Several U.S. federal appeals courts have specifi -
cally held that acts of sexual humiliation — such as 
watching a member of the opposite sex urinate— violated 
the due process clause of the Fifth and Fourteenth 
Amendments.254 U.S. federal courts have also repeat -
edly found that forced nakedness — whether in solitary 
confinement or in forcing an inmate to walk in front of 
other prisoners — violates the Eighth Amendment.255 
One federal appeals court has stated that “clothing is 
252  Prosecutor v. Dragoljub Kunarac et al., Case No. IT-96-23-T and 
IT-96-23/1-T, Judgement (2001).
253  Abebe-Jira v. Negewo, 72 F.3d 844, 845 (11th Cir.1996) (holding that 
detaining the victim, forcing her to undress, binding her legs and 
arms, and whipping her on the legs and back with wire and threat -
ening her with death constituted torture.); Doe v. qi, 349 F.Supp.2d 
1258, 1315 (N.D. Cal 2004); Daliberti v. Republic of Iraq, 97 F.Supp.2d 
38, 45 (D. D.C. 2000) (holding that stripping the victim naked, blind -
folding him, and threatening him with electrocution by placing wires 
on his testicles constitutes torture). 
254  Haberthur v. City of Raymore, Missouri, 119 F.3d 720, 724 (8th Cir. 
1997) (holding that allegations that a police officer “reached his hand 
underneath [plaintiff’s] shirt and fondled a private erogenous area 
and moved his hands along and caressed her body while making 
sexually suggestive remarks” sufficiently allege deprivation of her 
substantive due process right. The Court stated that the conduct “was 
intrusive, demeaning, and violative of her personal integrity.”); Lillard 
v. Shelby County Bd. of Educ., 76 F.3d 716, 727 (6th Cir.1996) (holding 
that teacher’s fondling a student’s breast may violate the substantive 
due process right to bodily integrity); McWilliams v. Fairfax County Bd. 
of Supervisors, 72 F.3d 1191, 1193 (4th Cir.) (holding that substantive 
due process right violated when employee was forced to his knees, 
a finger was inserted in his mouth and a broomstick placed next to 
his clothed buttocks, and he was sexually fondled), cert. denied , 519 
U.S. 819 (1996); Sepulveda v. Ramirez, 967 F.2d 1413, 1415-16 (9th Cir . 
1992) (holding that parole officer not entitled to qualified immunity 
for depriving woman of clearly established due process right to bodily 
privacy by entering a bathroom stall and watching her urinate). 
255  Walker v. Johnson, 544 F.Supp. 345, 349 (D. Mich. 1982) (holding 
that it was a violation of the Eighth Amendment to force detainees 
to walk to showers naked, stating “[t]he naked walk to the shower 
elicits a feeling of degradation and sexual humiliation.”) aff’d, Walker 
v. Mintzes, 771 F.2d 920 (6th Cir. 1985); Johnson v. Williams, 788 
F.2d 1319 (8th Cir. 1986) (Eighth Amendment violation found where 
prisoner in quiet cell for eighteen hours on two occasions with no 
clothing or bedding); McGray v. Burrell, 516 F.2d 357 (4th Cir. 1975) 
(Eighth Amendment violation where prisoner in isolation cell for 
48 hours for mental observation with no clothing or bedding), cert. 
dismissed , 516 F.2d 357 (1976). a ‘basic necessity of human existence’ which cannot be 
deprived in the same manner as a privilege an inmate 
may enjoy.”256 The Supreme Court has also recognized 
that the protection of human dignity is a primary function 
of the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments.257 
10. Prolonged isolation and  
sensory Deprivation
Prolonged Isolation: The prisoner is denied contact 
with other human beings, including through segre -
gation from other prisoners, for prolonged periods 
of time. 
Sensory Deprivation: The prisoner is subjected to 
reduction or removal of stimuli from one or more of 
the senses for prolonged periods.
The use of solitary confinement in detention can be 
traced back to medieval practices of imprisonment 
used against alleged heretics during inquisitions.258 The 
Soviet KGB laid the foundation for the use of sensory 
deprivation in interrogations to induce mental disori -
entation or artificial psychosis.259 U.S. prisoners of war 
who were subjected to periods of solitary confinement 
by the Chinese suffered from persistent anxiety, suspi -
ciousness, confusion, and depression up to 40 years 
after they were returned home. In recent years, the U.S. 
State Department has repeatedly criticized the govern -
ment of Jordan for engaging in prolonged isolation as 
a form of torture.260
256  Maxwell v. Mason, 668 F.2d 361, 363, 365 (8th Cir.1981) (holding 
that even inmates in solitary confinement have a dignitary interest 
in being clothed where inmate was kept in his undershorts) (citing  
Finney v. Arkansas Board of Corrections, 505 F.2d 194, 207-8 (8th 
Cir. 1974))). 
257  Trop v. Dulls, 356 U.S. 86, 101 (1958) (plurality opinion) (“the basic 
concept underlying the eighth amendment is nothing less than the 
dignity of man”); Hope v. Pelzer, 536 U.S. 730 (2002) (the Court specifi -
cally emphasized the humiliation caused by depriving the prisoner 
of bathroom breaks while he was handcuffed to a hitching post as 
part of the Eight Amendment violation); Rochin v. California, 342 U.S. 
165, 174 (1952) (holding that pumping a man’s stomach in search of 
swallowed narcotics was means “so brutal and so offensive to human 
dignity” that it violated the Fourteenth Amendment). 
258  li nD ma r y Pa t e r s o n , th e Wo r l D o f tr o u BaDo u r s: meDi e v a l oc c i t a n  so c i e t y  
341(Cambridge University Press 1993) (describing the medieval prac -
tice of murus strictus  that involved keeping alleged heretics chained 
in isolated goals with no windows or visitors).
259  Jo h n co n r o y , un sPe a k a Bl e ac t s, orDi n a r y  Pe oPl e (Knopf 2000).
260  Bu r e a u  o f De m o c r a c y , hu m a n  ri g h t s , a nD laBo r, u.s. D ePt. o f st a t e, 
co u n t r y  rePo r t s o n hu m a n  ri g h t s  Pr a c t i c e s -2005, 2006 (2006, 2007), 
available at http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/.LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 31 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 31 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 31The Department of Defense authorized the use of 
sensory deprivation — in the form of deprivation of light 
and auditory stimuli and isolation extended beyond 30 
days — for use by the military in Guantánamo in 2002.261 
The ICRC reported that detainees in Iraq frequently 
alleged that they were subjected to isolation — often 
combined with other aggravating circumstances — 
during interrogation.262 
An FBI communication described a Guantánamo 
detainee who “had been subjected to intense isolation for 
over three months. During that time period [the detainee] 
was totally isolated (with the exception of occasional 
interrogations) in a cell that was always flooded with 
light. By late November, the detainee was evidencing 
behavior consistent with extreme psychological trauma 
(talking to non-existent people, reporting hearing voices, 
crouching in a corner of the cell covered with a sheet for 
hours on end.)” 263
The new Army Field Manual offers conflicting and 
confusing guidance on isolation and sensory deprivation, 
putting U.S. personnel at risk of violating the “torture” 
and “cruel or inhuman treatment” provisions of the WCA. 
While the new manual purports to prohibit sensory depri -
vation, it permits the use of isolation (termed “separa -
tion”) for up to 30 days (extendable) as an interrogation 
method. The Manual further permits the use of sensory 
deprivation tools – goggles, blindfolds, earmuffs – to 
enhance the perception and experience of separation 
and to “foster a feeling of futility.”264 This combination of 
isolation and deprivation of sound and light can result 
in mental pain and suffering equivalent to that arising 
from any other form of isolation and sensory deprivation, 
raising the very real risk that this guidance in the Army 
Field Manual could lead to WCA violations.265 
261  ha y n e s  me m o, supra  note 58 (deprivation of light and auditory 
stimuli).
262  icrc  rePo r t, supra  note 60, at para. 25 (“Being held in solitary 
confinement combined with threats (to intern the individual indefi -
nitely, to arrest other family members, to transfer the individual 
to Guantánamo), insufficient sleep, food or water deprivation, 
minimal access to showers (twice a week), denial of access to open 
air and prohibition of contacts with other persons deprived of their 
liberty.”).
263  Letter from T. J. Harrington, Deputy Assistant Director FBI 
Counterterrorism Division, to Major General Donald J. Ryder, DOA 
Criminal Investigation Command, Re: Suspected Mistreatment of 
detainees, Document #: DOJFBI001914-DOJFBI001916; Date of 
Record: 2004-07-14, available at http://www.aclu.org/projects/foia -
search/pdf/DOJFBI001914.pdf .
264 FM 2-22.3, supra  note 90, at para. M-26.
265  Id. (“when physical separation of detainees is not feasible, goggles or 
blindfolds and earmuffs may be utilized as a field expedient method MentalPainorSuffering
Sensory deprivation is a technique that is “calculated to 
disrupt profoundly the senses” and “the personality.” It 
tends not only to result in situations of complete depen -
dency on the interrogator but also leads to severe anxiety 
and often causes hallucinations.266 
Studies have demonstrated that even short-term 
isolation can result in: an inability to think or concen -
trate; anxiety; somatic complaints; temporal and spatial 
disorientation; deficiencies in task performance; hallu -
cinations; and loss of motor coordination.267 A number of 
experiments conducted at McGill University in the 1950s 
examined the effects of sensory deprivation and isola -
tion on human subjects. For example, in a 1954 study 
led by W.H. Bexton, subjects who were required to live in 
conditions devoid of all external stimulation (to the extent 
possible) suffered from hallucinations and trance-like 
conditions. In another landmark study in 1951, Donald 
Hebb and his colleagues placed subjects in an otherwise 
comfortable cubicle deprived of sensory stimulation by 
goggles, gloves, and ear muffs. Even though the subjects 
knew they would be well-compensated for participating 
in the study, many found the experience so intolerable 
that they terminated the experiment after the second or 
third day. After two to three days of such isolation, the 
subjects reported difficulties in concentration and seeing 
visual, kinesthetic (moving), and somasthetic (feeling) 
hallucinations.268 
The KUBARK Counterintelligence Interrogation 
Manual, the CIA’s secret manual on coercive questioning, 
describes human ex periments that involved sensory 
deprivation. One reported study designed to test the 
results of eliminating most sensory stimuli a nd masking 
others,269 involved 17 paid volunteers who spent between 
to general a perception of separation.”)
266  kuBa r k ma n u a l , supra note 181.
267    S. Graessner, Gesundheitliche Auswirkungen von Langzeithaft mit 
Isolation; Historische Wurzeln und Forderungen, in  Da s un s a g Ba r e 253-
269 ( A. Birck et al. eds., 2002). 
268  J.Sturgeon, The Psychology of Isolation  (unpublished article), avail -
able at  http://www.space.edu/LibraryResearch/undgrant.html , This 
paper examines the available literature from psychological experi -
ments and space analogs to examine the psychological impact of 
isolation and confinement in space on astronauts. The experiments 
described cited here are: D. P. sc h u l t z , Sensory Restriction: Effects 
on Behavior  (Academic Press 1965); W. H. Bexlon, et. al., Effects of 
Decreased Variation in the Sensory Environment , 8 ca n a Di a n J. P s y c h o l . 
70 (1954). 
269  Donald Wexler et al.,  Sensory Deprivation, 79 am. meD. as s’n ar c h i v e s  
ne u r o l o g y  & P s y c h i a t r y  225 (1958), This article reports an experiment 
designed to test the results of eliminating most sensory stimuli and 32 THE ENHANCED INTERROGATION METHODS1 hour and 38 minutes and 36 hours in a tank respirator 
with restrained movement. Although the established time 
limit was 36 hours and though all physical needs were 
taken care of, 11 people terminated the experiment early. 
The results of the sensory deprivation included inability 
to concentrate effectively, daydreaming and fantasy, illu -
sions, delusions, and hallucinations. It was concluded 
that the deprivation of sensory stimuli induces stress 
that may be unbearable for some subjects. Deprivation 
of stimuli causes some subjects progressively lose touch 
with reality, focus inwardly, and produce delusions, hallu -
cinations, and other pathological effects. 270 
It has long been known that severe restriction of envi -
ronmental and social stimulation and solitary confine -
ment have profound and long-lasting psychological 
consequences. This issue has been a major concern for 
patients in intensive care units, spinal patients immobi -
lized by the need for prolonged traction, astronauts, and 
super maximum security prison inmates. 
Studies have identified anxiety, depression, higher 
measures of anger, and low self-esteem as significant 
negative consequences of isolation among patients in 
clinical settings. 271 For persons in prolonged and profound 
solitary confinement in a prison environment, the symp -
toms associated with sensory deprivation are equally, if 
not more, destructive than the symptoms exhibited by 
patients in clinical settings. 
People who are exposed to isolation for the first time 
develop a group of symptoms that include “bewilder -
masking others. Paid volunteers spent periods from 1 hour and 38 
minutes to 36 hours in a tank-respirator . The results included inability 
to concentrate effectively, daydreaming and fantasy, illusions, delu -
sions, and hallucinations. The suitability of this procedure as a means 
of speeding up the effects of solitary confinement upon recalcitrant 
subjects has not been considered. 
270  kuBa r k ma n u a l , supra note 181 (describing Donald Wexler et al.,  
Sensory Deprivation, 79 am. meD. as s’n ar c h i v e s  ne u r o l o g y  & P s y c h i a t r y  
225 (1958)).
271  P. Kennedy & L.R. Hamilton, Psychological impact of the management of 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) in patients with spinal 
cord injury , 35 sPi n a l co rD 617 (1997), Management of MRSA infection 
includes immediate isolation of the patient. The authors assessed the 
psychological impact of isolation among spinal cord injured patients who 
are isolated as a result of being MRSA positive as an infection control 
procedure. The authors found that the isolated spinal cord injured patients 
were significantly more angry than the control group, and these isolated 
patients scored higher in all measures.  J. Gammon, The psychological 
consequences of source isolation: a review of the literature , 8 J. clinical  
nu r s i n g  13 (1999), Source isolation is implemented when a person who 
has an infection or infectious disease has to be segregated from others to 
prevent cross-infection to other people. This article defines and examines 
the historical developments of source isolation with and then discusses 
related research. It suggests that source isolation has detrimental effects 
on the psychological well-being of individuals. ment, anxiety, frustration, dejection, boredom, obses -
sive thoughts or ruminations, depression, and, in some 
cases, hallucination.”272 Consistently, longitudinal 
studies (research that follows subjects for a specific 
period of time) have found significantly higher risk for 
developing psychiatric disorders such as depression 
and adjustment disorders among solitary confine -
ment prisoners compared to non-solitary confinement  
prisoners.273 
Prolonged isolation has been demonstrated to 
result in increased stress, abnormal neuroendocrine 
function, changes in blood pressure and inflammatory 
stress responses.274 Social isolation has been asso -
ciated with higher risk of death from widely varying 
causes. For example, reports indicate the suicide 
rates in Texas and California prisons are on the rise, 
with the majority occurring among inmates in solitary 
confinement.275 
Findings from clinical research performed by promi -
nent psychologists such as Dr. Stuart Grassian and Dr. 
Craig Haney, highlight the destructive impact of solitary 
confinement. Effects include depression, anxiety, diffi -
culties with concentration and memory, hypersensi -
tivity to external stimuli, hallucinations and perceptual 
distortions, paranoia, suicidal thoughts and behavior, 
and problems with impulse control.276 
272 Phr B r e a k th e m DoWn, supra  note 20, at 10.
273  H. S. Andersen et al., A longitudinal study of prisoners on remand: 
repeated measures of psychopathology in the initial phase of solitary 
versus nonsolitary confinement , 26 in t’l J. l. & P s y c h i a t r y  165 (2003), 
This study compared outcomes of patients in prison in both solitary 
confinement (133 patients) and non-solitary confinement (95 patients) 
settings. Subjects were evaluated using standardized psychological 
instruments and blood tests. Subjects in solitary demonstrated higher 
levels of psychopathology than non-solitary patients’ tests. Subjects 
in solitary demonstrated higher levels of psychopathology than non-
solitary patients.  
274  A. Steptoe et al., Loneliness and neuroendocrine, cardiovascular, and 
inflammatory stress responses in middle-aged men and women , 29 
Ps y c h o n e u r o e n Do c r i n o l o g y  593 (2004), The revised UCLA loneliness scale 
was completed by 240 working men and women aged 47-59 years and 
related to affective state, neuroendocrine, cardiovascular and inflam -
matory responses. Loneliness scores were related to social isolation, 
low emotional support, depression, low self-esteem, and reported 
sleep problems. Lonely individuals displayed significantly greater 
fibrinogen and natural killer cell responses, both markers of systemic 
inflammation.  
275   Jeffrey Kluger, Are Prisons Driving Prisoners Mad? , ti m e s ma g a z i n e , 
Jan 26, 2007.
276  C. Haney, Mental  Health Issues in Long-Term Solitary and ‘Supermax’ 
Confinement , 49 cr i m e & D e l i n q u e n c y  124 (2003), This article discusses 
use of solitary-like confinement in “supermax” prisons and reviews the 
literature on the health effects of isolation. The author states, “There are LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 33 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 33 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 33According to Dr. Haney many of the negative effects 
of solitary confinement are analogous to the acute reac -
tions suffered by torture and trauma victims, including 
posttraumatic stress disorder and the kind of psychi -
atric consequences that plague victims of what are called 
“deprivation and constraint” torture techniques.
LegalAnalysis
The medical impact of sensory deprivation and prolonged 
isolation supports the conclusion that both techniques 
of interrogation may be considered prosecutable acts of 
“torture” or “cruel or inhuman treatment” under the WCA 
or Torture Act because they cause “severe” and “serious” 
mental pain and suffering. The lasting depression and 
posttraumatic stress disorder that victims of isolation 
suffer constitute the prolonged and/or non-transitory 
mental harm required for mental pain to be considered 
severe or serious. Moreover, isolation and sensory depri -
vation in interrogations is likely calculated to “disrupt the 
senses or personality.” The KUBARK manual recognizes 
that sensory deprivation was meant to induce regression 
and anxiety.277
U.S. federal court s have also found solitary confine -
ment — when used for prolonged periods of time and 
combined with other harsh treatment that may aggravate 
sensory deprivation, such as physical restraint or blind 
folding — to constitute torture under the U.S. Foreign 
Sovereign Immunities Act (FSIA).278 
Federal case law supports the conclusion that 
prolong ed isolation may violate the Detainee Treatment 
Act if the isolation results in sensory deprivation or is used 
in retaliation for failure to answer questions. Although the 
Supreme Court has held that solitary confinement under 
few if any forms of imprisonment that appear to produce so much psycho -
logical trauma and in which so many symptoms of psycho-pathology are 
manifested.” Adverse effects of isolation in prisons described in the litera -
ture include appetite and sleep disturbances, anxiety, panic, rage, loss of 
control, paranoia, hallucinations, self-mutilations, a sense of impending 
emotional breakdown, suicidal ideation and behavior, and hypertension 
among others. The authors conclude, “there is not a single published 
study of solitary or supermax-like confinement in which nonvoluntary 
confinement lasting for longer than 10 days — where participants were 
unable to terminate their isolation at will — that failed to result in negative 
psychological effects.”
277 kuBa r k ma n u a l , supra  note 181, at 87-90.
278  Cicippio v. Islamic Republic of Iran, 18 F.Supp.2d 62, 64-5 (D. D.C. 
1998) (holding that an individual who was held in solitary confine -
ment for two years, while blindfolded and chained to the wall or floor 
was tortured and his captures were therefore not immune under the 
FSIA); In re  Estate of Marcos Human Rights Litigation, 910 F.Supp. 
1460, 1463 (D. Haw. 1995) (listing solitary confinement “while hand-
cuffed or tied to a bed” as a form of torture used during “tactical 
interrogations” attempting to elicit information from detainees 
concerning opposition to the Marcos government).some circumstances may be justified for certain adminis -
trative and security reasons,279 solitary confinement may 
still violate a detainee’s rights if done for the purpose of 
facilitating interrogation. In 2000, the Fourth Circuit held 
that the district court properly concluded that plaintiff’s 
allegation that he was placed in solitary confinement for 
47 days after refusing to answer questions described 
“a violation of clearly established law.”280 The Seventh 
Circuit also held in 1972 that a plaintiff was entitled to 
recover damages against police for a due process viola -
tion of the Fourteenth Amendment when police subjected 
the plaintiff to an interrogat ion immediately after being 
released from 18 days in solitary confinement.281 
U.S. federal courts have also found that solitary 
confinement violates the Eighth Amendment when used 
for extensive duration.282 In one case, fourteen days of 
solitary confinement was found excessive.283 Courts are 
279  Sandin v. Conner, 515 U.S. 472 (1995) (holding that a convicted prison -
er’s segregation in solitary confinement for thirty days did not impli -
cate a liberty interest under a procedural due process analysis but 
reserved the plaintiff’s right to assert an Eig hth Amendment claim).
280  Evans v. Welch, No. 99-6716, 2000 WL 432390 (4th Cir. Apr. 20, 2000) 
(unpublished) (“Evans’ allegation that he was placed in solitary 
confinement as punishment for refusing to be interrogated describes 
a violation of clearly established law”) (citing Gray v. Spillman, 925 
F.2d 90, 93 (4th Cir . 1991) (holding that it is unconstitutional to punish 
a pre-trial detainee for refusing to answer questions); O’Bar v. Pinion, 
953 F.2d 74, 84-85 (4th Cir. 1991) (recognizing that administrative 
segregation can be a form of punishment); see also Bell v. Wolfish, 
441 U.S. 520, 535 (1979) (noting the general rule that it is unconsti -
tutional to inflict punishment on pre-trial detainees).
281  Duncan v. Nelson, 466 F.2d 939, 940, 944 (1972) cert. denied  93 S.Ct. 
116, 175 (1972) (plaintiff had been subjected to a form of solitary 
confinement “where he slept on the floor, received one meal a 
day, and saw neither family nor friends.” The court concluded that 
because the alleged violation occurred before Malloy v. Hogan , 378 
U.S. 1 (1964) was decided, the Plaintiff’s cause of action stood solely 
under the interpretation of the due process clause of the Fourteenth 
Amendment before the “Fifth Amendment’s privilege against self-
incrimination was incorporated therein.”).
282  See Hutto v. Finney, 437 U.S. 678, 686 (1978) (upheld a 30 day limit on 
solitary confinement set by the district court concluding that “the length 
of confinement cannot be ignored in deciding whether the confinement 
meets constitutional standards”); Bono v. Saxbe, 620 F.2d 609, 614 (7th 
Cir.1980); Sweet v. S.C. Dept. of Corrections, 529 F.2d 854, 861 (4th Cir. 
1975). But see Sostre v. McGinnis, 442 F.2d 178 (1971), overruled on 
other grounds, Procunier v. Martinez, 416 U.S. 396 (1974) (holding that 
segregated confinement for twelve months and eight days where he 
was provided a diet of 2,800 to 3,300 calories a day, adequate personal 
hygiene, the opportunity for exercise and for participation in group 
therapy, reading matter, and the constant possibility of communica -
tion with other segregated prisoners, until prisoner agreed to abide by 
prison rules, did not violate the Eighth Amendment). 
283  Maxwell v. Mason, 668 F.2d 361, 363 (8th Cir. 1981) (upheld district 
court finding that fourteen days in solitary confinement was excessive 
because it was “wholly inconsistent with the current minimum standard 
of respect for the dignity of human beings.”).34 THE ENHANCED INTERROGATION METHODSmore likely to hold solitary confinement to violate the 
Eighth Amendment if the confinement includes condi -
tions that aggravate sensory deprivation, such as such 
as extreme degrees of social isolation and the use of 
boxcar-like doors.284
284  See Bono v. Saxbe, 450 F.Supp. 934, 946-47 (E.D. Ill. 1978) (holding 
that the use of certain boxcar type doors on solitary confinement cells 
violated the Eighth Amendment because it increased the isolation and 
resulted in sensory deprivation and therefore “violates society’s stan -
dards of humanity and dignity, and results in the infliction of unneces -
sary pain and suffering”) aff’d in part and remanded in part , 620 F.2d 
609 (7th Cir.1980); Berch v. Stahl, 373 F.Supp. 412, 420 (D.C. N.C. 1974) 
(“[W]hen used to excess [solitary confinement] is implicitly denounced 
by contemporary society, which has directed other criminal sanctions 
for conduct sufficiently reprehensible to merit stiff discipline. [] Its 
severity as punishment is drastically increased when the isolation 
is accompanied by the ‘sensory deprivation’ which is, unnecessarily, 
attached to the isolation in the Mecklenburg jail. Not only are inmates 
of the ‘box’ and inmates of solid door cells barred from visual contact 
and effective voice communication with others, but the cells are [] bare 
and dimly lighted [.] Mental and emotional stability are thus threat -
ened, and mental health may be impaired. [citations omitted]. Jail and 
prison authorities are authorized to confine, but not to torture and 
de-humanize prisoners.”). LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 35 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 35 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 35This report demonstrates that “enhanced” tech -
niques of interrogation, whether practiced alone 
or in combination, may cause severe physical and 
mental pain. In fact, the use of multiple or “enhanced” 
interrogation virtually assures the infliction of severe 
physical and mental pain upon detainees. Given this 
knowledge, U.S. policy makers and interrogation 
personnel should understand that if such techniques are 
practiced, it would be reasonable for courts to conclude 
that the resulting harm was inflicted intentionally. 
The interrogation techniques analyzed above - and 
other techniques that have comparable medical conse -
quences - implicate legal prohibitions and could result in 
felony criminal prosecutions. It is therefore inappropriate 
that any such techniques be available for use by U.S. 
personnel in interrogations, and it is the responsibility of 
U.S. policy makers to ensure that the use of such tech -
niques is effectively precluded. 
In issuing interrogation policy, the United States 
should refrain from repeating the mistake of allowing 
euphemistic descriptions of interrogation techniques 
to stretch the line between permissible and impermis -
sible treatment. Instead, all U.S. agencies should firmly 
adhere to a single standard of humane treatment that is 
consistent with the law and protects the lives and health 
of individuals in U.S. custody.RecommendationstotheExecutiveBranch
1.  Prohibit the “enhanced” interrogation techniques, 
in order to protect U.S. officials and personnel from 
potential criminal liability and to ensure that all U.S. 
personnel adhere to U.S. law.
2.  Prohibit the use of any other method that, alone or in 
combination with other interrogation methods, pres -
ents a significant risk of causing serious or severe 
physical and/or mental pain or suffering. 
3.  Instruct all U.S. interrogators in effective, legal, non-
harmful methods of interrogation. 
4.  Declassify and release all documents, from all rele -
vant U.S. agencies, which contain information on U.S. 
interrogation policy and practice, including but not 
limited to the “enhanced” interrogation methods. 
RecommendationstotheU.S.Congress
1.  Clarify existing language in the MCA, which under a 
reasonable interpretation currently prohibits the use 
of the “enhanced” techniques, by explicitly listing the 
techniques, forbidding them, and making clear that 
they remain criminal. 
2.  Establish a single standard for detainee treatment 
and interrogation practices to be followed by all U.S. 
personnel, including CIA personnel. 
 iv. conclusion anD recommenD ationsLEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 37 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 37 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 37 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 37the t orture act
The United States enacted the Torture Convention 
Implementation Act of 1994 (the Torture Act) to 
implement its obligation to criminalize torture 
under Article 5 of the U.N. Convention Against Torture 
(subject to reservations, understandings and decla -
rations that the U.S. made at the time of ratification). 
The Torture Act applies to prohibited acts attempted or 
committed outside the United States, which is defined 
as, “the several States of the United States, the District 
of Columbia, and the commonwealths, territories, and 
possessions of the United States.”285 Therefore, any inter -
rogations conducted by U.S. officials outside of the United 
States, including at the U.S. Naval Base at Guantánamo 
Bay would likely be governed by the Torture Act because 
while it may be inside the territorial jurisdiction of the 
United States, it is neither a State, commonwealth, terri -
tory or possession of the United States.286 
The Torture Act’s criminal provisions apply to indi -
viduals who are either nationals of the United States or 
are present in the United States.287 The first and — so 
far — only indictment under the Torture Act was filed in 
December 2006 against the son of the former president 
of Liberia, Charles Taylor.288 
The Torture Act defines torture as an act “committed 
by a person acting under the color of law  specifically 
intended to inflict  severephysical ormentalpainor
suffering (other than pain or suffering incidental to 
lawful sanctions) upon another person within his custody 
or physical control.”289 
The meaning of the term “severe physical pain” is not 
defined by statute. U.S. federal courts have made findings 
of “severe physical pain” in cases interpreting immigra -
tion regulations and the Torture Victims Protection Act of 
285 Torture Act, 18 U.S.C. § 2340(3) (2004).
286 See Rasul v. Bush, 542 U.S. 466 (2004).
287 Torture Act, 18 U.S.C. § 2340A.
288  See United States of America v. Emmanuel, 207 WL 2002452 (S.D. Fla. 
July 5, 2007); Associated Press, Son of Ex-Liberian President Charged 
with Committing Torture , in t e r n a t i o n a l  he r a l D tr iBu n e, Dec. 6, 2006.
289  Torture Act, 18 U.S.C. § 2340(1) (emphasis added). 1991 (TVPA), which may provide guidance in interpreting 
the Torture Act, but there does not appear to be a clear 
legal test to determine when physical pain becomes 
severe. 
The term “severe mental pain and suffering” is defined 
as “prolonged mental harm caused by or resulting from” 
four enumerated acts: “(A) the intentional infliction or 
threatened infliction of severe physical pain or suffering; (B) 
the administration or application, or threatened adminis -
tration or application, of mind-altering substances or other 
procedures calculated to disrupt profoundly the senses or 
the personality; (C) the threat of imminent death; or (D) the 
threat that another person will imminently be subjected to 
death, severe physical pain or suffering, or the administra -
tion or application of mind-altering substances or other 
procedures calculated to disrupt profoundly the senses 
or personality.” As with “physical pain,” the term severe 
is not defined and the Torture Act also does not define 
when mental harm becomes “prolonged.” The Manual for 
Military Commissions, recently issued by the Pentagon to 
govern military commission proceedings under the MCA, 
states that prolonged mental harm “is a harm of some 
sustained duration, though not necessarily permanent in 
nature, such as a clinically identifiable mental disorder.”290 
This definition has not to date been tested before any court 
or tribunal.
Finally, the Torture Act requires that an individual 
specifically intend that his act inflict severe physical or 
mental pain, but what is meant by the term “specifically 
intend” remains unclear.291 “Specific intent” under U.S. 
domestic law has been said to describe “a state of mind 
which exists where circumstances indicate that an offender 
actively desired certain criminal consequences, or objec -
tively desired a specific result to follow his act or failure to 
act.”292 In 2002, the U.S. Department of Justice’s Office of 
Legal Counsel (OLC) issued a memo that narrowly inter -
preted the phrase “specifically intend” in the Torture Act as 
requiring that the infliction of severe pain be the defendant’s 
290 ma n u a l  f o r military  co m m i s s i o n s , M.C.M. (January 18, 2007)  at IV-9.
291 U.S. v. Baily, 444 U.S. 394, 405 (1980).
292 21 am. Ju r. 2D cr i m. l. § 128 (2006).aPP enDix a: intro Duction to u.s. law  
constraining interrogation38 APPENDIX A: INTRODUCTION TO U.S. LAW CONSTRAINING INTERROGATION“precise objective.”293 The OLC subsequently retracted that 
memo and replaced it with another memo that stated that 
“it would not be appropriate to rely on parsing the specific 
intent element of the statute to approve as lawful conduct 
that might otherwise amount to torture.”294
torture victims Protection act of 1991 
& the f oreign sovereign immunities act
The Torture Victims Protection Act of 1991 provides a 
civil right of action for damages to victims of torture 
against an individual who subjected them to torture 
“under the actual or apparent authority, or color of law, 
of any  foreign  nation.”295 While the TVPA does not create 
a right of action against U.S. personnel, judicial opinions 
interpreting the definition of torture under the TVPA have 
been used by the Department of Justice in its own legal 
opinions interpreting the kinds of treatment that could 
constitute torture under the Torture Act.296 Judicial opin -
ions could also be relevant in interpreting the similar 
definition of torture under the WCA. 
The definition of torture in the TVPA is similar to that 
in the Torture Act except that it has a purpose require -
ment, that the torture be committed “for such purposes 
as obtaining from that individual or a third person infor -
mation or a confession, punishing that individual for an 
act that individual or a third person has committed or is 
suspected of having committed, intimidating or coercing 
that individual or a third person, or for any reason based 
on discrimination of any kind.”297 Techniques used for 
interrogation or to discipline detainees would inherently 
fulfill this element of the TVPA definition. 
293  Memorandum for Alberto R. Gonzales Counsel to the President Re: 
Standards of Conduct for Interrogation under  18 u.s.c. §§ 2340-
2340a  (Aug. 1, 2002).
294  Memorandum for James B. Comey Deputy Attorney General Re: 
Legal Standards Applicable Under 18 U.S.C. §§ 2340—2340A, Office 
of Legal Counsel, U.S. Department of Justice 16 (Dec. 30, 2004) 
[hereinafter Levin Memo ] (“We do not believe it is useful to try to 
define the precise meaning of “specific intent” in section 2340. In 
light of the President’s directive that the United States not engage 
in torture, it would not be appropriate to rely on parsing the specific 
intent element of the statute to approve as lawful conduct that might 
otherwise amount to torture.”).
295  Torture Victims Protection Act of 1991, Pub. L. No. 102-256, 106 Stat. 
73 (codified at 28 U.S.C.A. § 1350 (2007)) (emphasis added).
296 Id. at 9.
297  U.S. federal courts have held that these enumerated purposes are 
not exhausted. See, e.g., Price v. Socialist People’s Libyan Arab 
Jamahiriya, 294 F.3d 82, 92 (D.C. Cir. 2002) (“As to the purposes for 
which abuse must be inflicted, it is clear from the text of the TVPA that 
the list of purposes provided was not meant to be exhaustive.”).Cases brought under the Foreign Sovereign Immunity 
Act (FSIA) of 1976 provide further guidance in how the 
courts interpret the TVPA’s definition of torture.298 FSIA 
uses the TVPA definition of torture to define an excep -
tion to the general immunity of sovereign states from 
lawsuits. 
u.s. immigration regulations
The Department of Justice has also used case law 
interpreting the definition of torture used in immigra -
tion regulations in interpreting the definition provided in 
the Torture Act. U.S. immigration regulations — which 
implement the United States’ obligations under the 
Convention Against Torture not to return individuals to 
countries where they are likely to be tortured — use a 
definition of torture very similar to that contained in the 
TVPA and the Torture Act.299 
war crimes act  
The War Crimes Act (WCA) provides U.S. courts with 
jurisdiction to try individuals for certain violations of the 
laws of war, including abuses of individuals detained by 
the United States in an armed conflict. From 1997, when 
the War Crimes Act was enacted, to 2006, any violation 
of Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions was 
a crime under U.S. domestic law. In September 2006, 
Congress passed the Military Commission Act (MCA) 
which amended the WCA by narrowing the scope of war 
crimes over which U.S. courts would have jurisdiction. 
The WCA now criminalizes only specifically enumer -
ated war crimes that the legislation refers to as “grave 
breaches” of Common Article 3, including the war crimes 
of “torture” and “cruel or inhuman treatment.” 
After the MCA, the WCA continues to apply to acts 
committed “inside or outside the United States” in any 
circumstance “where the person committing such war 
crime or the victim of such war crime is a member of the 
Armed Forces of the United States or a national of the 
United States.”300 No individual has yet been prosecuted 
under the War Crimes Act. 
298  See Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976, 28 U.S.C. § 1605(A)(7) 
(2007). 
299 8 C.F.R. § 208.18(a)(1) (2007).
300 War Crimes Act of 1996, 18 U.S.C. § 2441(a)-(b) (2007).LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 39 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 39 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 39 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 39“Torture”undertheWCA
The War Crimes Act definition of the crime of torture is 
similar to that in the Torture Act. The only difference is 
that the WCA includes a purpose requirement: an act of 
torture must be committed “for the purpose of obtaining 
information or a confession, punishment, intimidation, 
coercion, or any reason based on discrimination.”301 
U.S. federal courts have held, citing the ICTY, that the 
prohibited purpose need not be the predominant or sole 
purpose to meet the requisite element, but must be only 
part of the motivation behind the conduct.302 Like the 
Torture Act, the War Crimes Act uses the phrase “ specifi-
cally  intend” but in the context of the WCA, this phrase 
likely would be found to be referring to the enumerated 
purposes for which the severe pain must be inflicted, not 
to a specific intent to inflict severe pain or suffering.303 
“CruelorInhumanTreatment”undertheWCA
The Military Commissions Act of 2006 also established 
a new crime under the WCA of “cruel or inhuman treat -
ment.” “Cruel or inhuman treatment” is defined as “an 
act intended to inflict severe or serious physical or mental 
pain or suffering (other than pain or suffering incidental 
to lawful sanctions), including serious physical abuse, 
upon another within his custody or control.”304 Severe 
mental pain or suffering is the same standard as that 
used under the WCA crime of torture. 
Under the WCA, seriousphysical pain is defined as 
“bodily injury that involved — (I) a substantial risk of death; 
(II) extreme physical pain; (III) a burn or physical disfig -
urement of a serious nature (other than cuts, abrasions, 
301  War Crimes Act of 1996, 18 U.S.C. § 2441(d)(1)(A) (2007) (defines 
torture as “[t]he act of a person who commits, or conspires or 
attempts to commit, an act specifically intended to inflict severe 
physical or mental pain or suffering (other than pain or suffering inci -
dental to lawful sanctions) upon another person within his custody 
or physical control for the purpose of obtaining information or a 
confession, punishment, intimidation, coercion, or any reason based 
on discrimination of any kind.”).
302  Mehinovic v. Vuckovic, 198 F. Supp. 2d 1322. 1346 (N.D. Ga. 2002) 
(quoting the ICTY as stating “[I]n order for this requirement to be met, 
the prohibited purpose must simply be part of the motivation behind 
the conduct and need not be the predominating or sole purpose”).
303  See, e.g., u.s. D eP’t o f De f., th e ma n u a l  f o r military  co m m i s s i o n s , 
pt. IV, §11 (2007), available at  http://www.defenselink.mil/news/
d20070118MCM.pdf (In laying out the elements of torture the manual 
clarifies that the accused must only “intend” (as opposed to specifi -
cally intend) to “inflict severe physical or mental pain or suffering,” 
inferring that the term “specifically intended” refers only to the 
purpose that the accused must have of “obtaining information or a 
confession, punishment, intimidation, coercion, or any reason based 
on discrimination of any kind.”). 
304 War Crimes Act of 1996, 18 U.S.C. § 2441 (d)(1)(B) (2007).or bruises); or (IV) significant loss or impairment of the 
function of a bodily member, organ, or mental faculty.” 
In defining “ serious  mental pain or suffering” the 
MCA uses a slightly amended version of the Torture 
Act’s definition of “ severe  physical pain or suffering,” 
by replacing the word “severe” with “serious.” (Emphasis 
added.) Acts committed after the MCA’s enactment need 
not result in “prolonged mental harm,” as required by 
the Torture Act’s definition, but are criminal even if the 
mental harm they cause is only “serious and non-transi -
tory; the statute explicitly states that the harm need not 
be prolonged in order to trigger criminal liability.305 
The plain language and legislative history of the WCA 
amendment clearly indicate that for acts committed 
after the enactment of the MCA, a mental harm finding 
for “cruel or inhuman treatment” should require less 
than the statutory requirement for torture. Dictionaries 
define “transitory” as “existing or lasting only a short 
time; short-lived or temporary.”306 During the Senate 
floor debate of the final version of the MCA, Senator 
McCain emphasized that the “non-transitory” require -
ment applies to the duration of the harm not the act 
producing the harm.307 For a coercive interrogation tech -
nique used before the passage of the MCA to result in 
“serious mental pain,” therefore, the harm would need 
to have more than a brief duration, but does not have to 
last for an extended period. 308 
CulpabilityRequirement 
Under the WCA’s definition of “cruel or inhuman treat -
ment” the accused need only manifest a general intent 
to “inflict severe or serious physical or mental pain or 
suffering.”309 General intent crimes under U.S. domestic 
305   War Crimes Act of 1996, 18 U.S.C. § 2441 (d)(2)(E) (2007); Torture 
Act, 18 U.S.C. § 2340(2) (2004).
306  th e am e r i c a n  he r i t a g e  Dictionary  o f t h e en g l i s h  la n g u a g e  (4th ed. 
2002).
307  153 co n g. re c. S10,399 (daily ed. Sept. 27, 2006) (Statement of Sen. 
McCain).
308 Id. 
309  Absent qualifying language, the term “intent” in a criminal statute 
refers to general criminal intent. 21 am. Ju r. 2D cr i m. l. § 130 (2007); 
see United States v. Myers, 104 F.3d 76, 81 (5th Cir. 1997) cert. denied , 
520 U.S. 1218 (1997); United States v. Martinez, 49 F.3d 1398, 1401 
(9th Cir. 1995) cert. denied , 516 U.S. 1065 (1996); United States v. 
DeAndino, 958 F.2d 146, 148-49 (6th Cir . 1992); United States v. Lewis, 
780 F.2d 1140, 1142-43 (4th Cir. 1986); Moreover, an accepted canon 
of statutory construction provides that “[W]here Congress includes 
particular language in one section of a statute but omits it in another 
section of the same Act, it is generally presumed that Congress acts 
intentionally and purposely in the disparate inclusion or exclusion. ” 
INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421, 432 (1987).40 APPENDIX A: INTRODUCTION TO U.S. LAW CONSTRAINING INTERROGATIONlaw most often require the government to “prove only 
that the defendant intended to do the act in question and 
intended the reasonable and probable consequences of 
that act,” not “that the defendant intended to bring about 
a specific result.”310 
Furthermore, general intent may be inferred simply 
from the fact that the accused consciously committed 
the offending act.311 Therefore, to be guilty of “cruel or 
inhuman treatment” under the WCA, a crime that requires 
only general intent, the accused would only have to know 
that the “reasonable and probable consequences” of his 
act would be “severe or serious physical or mental pain 
or suffering,” and such knowledge may be inferred by 
the nature of the accused’s acts.312 
Detainee t reatment act
The Detainee Treatment Act of 2005 explicitly bars cruel, 
unusual and inhuman treatment or punishment prohib -
ited by the Fifth, Eighth, and/or Fourteenth Amendments 
against any individual in U.S. custody regardless of loca -
tion or nationality.313 The Military Commissions Act reaf -
firmed the requirements of the DTA and required the 
President to take action to ensure compliance with the 
MCA, “including through the establishment of adminis -
trative rules and procedures.”314
Courts have not yet interpreted the Detainee Treatment 
Act standard of treatment.315 However, there is substan -
tial jurisprudence interpreting the Fifth, Eight, and/or 
Fourteenth Amendments standards of treatment in the 
domestic context of convicted prisoners and pre-trial 
310  U.S. v. Francis, 164 F.3d 120 (1999); see also U.S. v. Gibbs, 182 F.3d 
408 (6th Cir. 1999); United States v. Cangiano, 491 F.2d 906, 910 (2d 
Cir.1974); see generally  21 am. Ju r. 2D cr i m. laW § 127 (2007).
311  21 am. Ju r. 2D cr i m. l. § 127 (2007). 
312  War Crimes Act of 1996, 18 U.S.C. § 2441(d)(1)(B).
313  Detainee Treatment Act of 2005, 42 U.S.C.S. § 2000dd (2006).
314  Military Commissions Act of 2006, 18 U.S.C. §2441 (2006).
315  Since the Fifth Amendment Self-Incrimination Clause was incor -
porated through the Fourteenth Amendment in 1969, the majority 
of cases challenging the constitutionality of coercive interrogation 
tactics have been resolved under a self-incrimination clause analysis. 
Although some would argue that this analysis may be less relevant to 
detainees who are labeled enemy combatants and detained without 
trial, such an argument has not yet been ruled on by the courts. The 
recent case law interpreting substantive due process rights in the 
context of detention consists largely of civil suits filed under section 
1983 of Title 42 of the U.S. code. To hold a government official liable 
under section 1983, the plaintiff must overcome the official’s absolute 
immunity by demonstrating that the official’s constitutional violation 
constituted a violation of “clearly established constitutional law.” 
See Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800, 807 (1982); U.S. v. Stanley, 
483 U.S. 669, 694 (1987).detainees. The Supreme Court has long considered pris -
oner treatment to violate substantive due process if the 
treatment “shocks the conscience,” “is bound to offend even 
hardened sensibilities,”316 or offends a “principle of justice 
so rooted in the traditions and conscience of our people 
as to be ranked as fundamental.”317 Among the funda -
mental rights of individuals in government custody that 
the Supreme Court has recognized are: the right to bodily 
integrity318 and to be free from the unnecessary intentional 
infliction of physical pain;319 the right to have one’s basic 
needs met;320 and the right to basic human dignity.321 
In two recent cases in which the Supreme Court 
analyzed whether allegedly wrongful government 
conduct “shocked the conscience” and therefore violated 
a prisoner’s substantive due process rights, the Court 
made reference to the government’s interest in under -
taking that conduct.322 In each case, the Court required 
316 Rochin v. People of California, 342 U.S. 165, 172 (1952). 
317  Brown v. Mississippi, 297 U.S. 278, 464 (1936) (holding that severely 
whipping three men until they confessed to murder violated the 
Fourteenth Amendment).
318  Albright v. Oliver, 510 U.S. 266 (1994) (“The protections of substantive 
due process have for the most part been accorded to matters relating 
to marriage, family, procreation, and the right to bodily integrity.”); 
Washington v. Glucksberg, 521 U.S. 702, 719 (1977).
319  County of Sacramento v. Lewis, 523 U.S. 833, 834 (1998) (“conduct 
deliberately intended to injure in some way is unjustifiable by any 
government interest is the sort of official action most likely to rise 
to the conscience-shocking level”) (citing Daniels v. Williams, 474 
U.S. 327, 331 (1986)).
320  Deshaney v. Winnebago County Dept of Soc. Serv’s, 489 U.S. 189, 
189 (1989) (“[W]hen the State takes a person into its custody and 
holds him there against his will, the Constitution imposes upon it 
a corresponding duty to assume some responsibility for his safety 
and general well-being. [ ] The rationale for this principle is simple 
enough: when the State by the affirmative exercise of its power so 
restrains an individual’s liberty that it renders him unable to care for 
himself, and at the same time fails to provide for his basic human 
needs —  e.g.,  food, clothing, shelter, medical care, and reasonable 
safety — it transgresses the substantive limits on state action set by 
the Eighth Amendment and the Due Process Clause.”)
321  Trop v. Dulls, 356 U.S. 86,  100 (1958) (plurality opinion) (“the basic 
concept underlying the eighth amendment is nothing less than the 
dignity of man”); Hope v. Pelzer, 536 U.S. 730 (2002) (the Court specif -
ically emphasized the humiliation caused by depriving the prisoner 
of bathroom breaks while he was handcuffed to a hitching post as 
part of the Eight Amendment violation); Rochin v. California, 342 U.S. 
165, 174 (1952) (holding that pumping a man’s stomach in search of 
swallowed narcotics was means “so brutal and so offensive to human 
dignity” that it violated the Fourteenth Amendment). 
322  County of Sacramento v. Lewis, 523 U.S. 833, 834 (1998) (“conduct 
deliberately intended to injure in some way unjustifiable by any 
government interest  is the sort of official action most likely to rise 
to the conscience-shocking level.”); Chavez v. Martinez, 538 U.S. 760, 
776 (2003) (Thomas, J., plurality opinion) (“the need to investigate LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 41 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 41 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 41 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 41the government interest to include an element of imme -
diacy of threat, of pressing, identifiable and actual harm 
— as opposed to a generalized security threat — in order 
to justify actions that would otherwise violate a detained 
individual’s fundamental rights.323 To the extent that the 
government interest may be relevant to DTA analysis, it 
is important to note the dearth of evidence that severely 
coercive interrogation techniques produce actionable 
intelligence information.324 
Eighth Amendment precedent is also relevant to 
analyzing the legality of interrogation techniques under 
the Detainee Treatment Act. The Supreme Court has held 
that the Eighth Amendment prohibits “grossly dispro -
portionate punishment”325 or “unnecessary and wanton” 
use of force or infliction of pain.326 Certain legal scholars 
have argued that the Eighth Amendment is not directly 
applicable to intelligence interrogation unless interroga -
tion techniques have a punitive aspect.327 However, the 
Eighth Amendment precedent is still likely to be relevant 
because the Supreme Court has incorporated its Eighth 
Amendment standards into its substantive due process 
analysis under the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. 
whether there had been police misconduct constituted a justifiable 
government interest given the risk that key evidence would have 
been lost if Martinez had died without the authorities ever hearing 
his side of the story.”) ;see alsoWashington v. Glucksberg, 521 US 
702, 721 (1997) (establishing a two part test to determine whether 
a statute violates a substantive due process right; first the court 
must determine if the statute infringes upon a “fundamental right” 
and if it does the court must determine whether the government’s 
infringement upon the fundamental right is “narrowly tailored to 
serve a compelling state interest.” )
323  Note that the Supreme Court cases Chavez,  Lewis and Whitley v. Albers  
all involved police officers confronted with situations such as a dying 
witness, a police chase and a prison riot all of which were clearly 
known to be situations requiring an immediate decision on the part 
of the police officer. Chavez , 538 U.S. at 760; Lewis , 523 U.S. at 853; 
Whitley v. Albers, 475 U.S. 312, 320 (1986).
324  See Educing Information, Interrogation Science and Art, Intelligence 
Science Board, Phase 1 Report (The Intelligence Sci. Bd. was estab -
lished to advise the Office of the Director of National Intelligence and 
Intelligence Community leaders); J. M. Arrigo, A Utilitarian Argument 
Against Interrogation of Terrorists , 10 sc i e n c e  a nD en g i n e e r i n g  et h i c s  
543-72 (2004), available at http://www.dia.mil/college/3866.pdf.
325 Solem v. Helm, 463 U.S. 277, 288 (1983).
326 Hudson v. McMillian, 503 U.S. 1, 7-9 (1992).
327  See al a n m. D e r s h o Wi t z, Wh y te r r o r i s m  Wo r k s : unDe r s t a n Di n g th e 
th r e a t , re sPo nDi n g to th e ch a l l e n g e  136 (2002) (arguing that Eighth 
Amendment jurisprudence is irrelevant to evaluating the permis -
sibility of interrogation methods); Jamie Mayerfeld, Playing by Our 
Own Rules: How U.S. Marginalization of International Human Rights Law 
Led to Torture , 20 ha r v. hu m. rt s.J. 89 (2007) (stating that the “Eighth 
Amendment, which governs the punishment of convicted criminals, 
does not apply” in the context of intelligence gathering in the name 
of national security.)The Court has held that the due process clause requires 
that individuals detained by the state who have not been 
convicted by a Court, such as pre-trial detainees and the 
civilly committed, enjoy at least the same level of rights as 
convicted criminals do under the Eighth Amendment.328 
Because most detainees interrogated by U.S. officials 
for intelligence purposes have not been convicted of 
any crime, an examination of their treatment under the 
due process analysis would likely incorporate Eighth 
Amendment standards even if the Eighth Amendment 
analysis was not applied directly.  
common article 3 of the geneva 
conventions
The United States is bound by its full obligations under 
Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions. The 
amendments to the War Crimes Act contained in the MCA, 
which narrowed the scope of conduct that constitutes a 
felony war crime under domestic law, do not change the 
United States legal obligations. The legislative history 
of the MCA makes clear, in fact, that all violations of 
Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions continue to 
be prohibited, even if they are not prosecutable as “grave 
breaches” under the WCA.329
Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions expressly 
applies to all detainees in a non-international armed 
conflict, and international tribunals have held it to be 
the minimum standard for treatment in the context of all 
armed conflict.330 Conduct prohibited by Common Article 3 
includes “torture,” “cruel treatment” and “outrages upon 
personal dignity, in particular, humiliating and degrading 
328  City of Revere v. Mass. Gen. Hospital, 463 U.S. 239, 244 (1983) (holding 
that “the due process rights of a [pre-trial detainee] are at least as 
great as the Eighth Amendment protections available to a convicted 
prisoner.”) (citing Bell v. Wolfish, 441 U.S. 520 (1979)).
329  See e.g. 152 co n g. re c. S10,409, (daily ed. Sept. 28, 2006) (statement 
of Sen. Biden).  (“First, our colleagues did the right thing by rejecting 
the attempt by the administration to reinterpret, by statute, Common 
Article III of the Geneva Conventions.”); 152 co n g. re c. S10,399, (daily 
ed. Sept. 28, 2006). (statement of Sen. Levin: “And would the Senator 
from Arizona agree with my view that section 8(a)(3) does not make 
lawful or give the President the authority to make lawful any tech -
nique that is not permitted by Common Article 3 or the Detainee 
Treatment Act?” Sen. McCain: “I do agree.” Sen. Warner: “I agree 
with both of my colleagues.”).
330  Prosecutor v. Tadic, Case No. IT-94-1-I, Decision on Defence Motion 
for Interlocutory Appeal on Jurisdiction, ¶ 137, (October 2, 1995); 
Prosecutor v. Blaskic, Case No. IT-95-14-T, In the Trial Chamber ¶ 
161 (March 3, 2000); Prosecutor v. Furundzija, Case No. IT-95-17/1-
T, In the Trial Chamber ¶ 132 (December 10, 1998); Prosecutor v. 
Delalic et al, Case No. IT-96-21-A, Judgment ¶ 143, 150 (Feb. 20, 
2001); The Prosecutor v. Mladen Naletilic and Vinko Martinovic, Case 
No. IT-98-34-T, Judgement ¶228 (March 31, 2003).42 APPENDIX A: INTRODUCTION TO U.S. LAW CONSTRAINING INTERROGATIONtreatment.” According to the ICRC Commentary to the 
Geneva Conventions, torture under Common Article 3 is 
“the infliction of suffering on a person in order to obtain 
from that person, or from another person, confessions 
or information.”331 International tribunals have defined 
“cruel treatment” as an act that “causes serious mental or 
physical suffering or injury or constitutes a serious attack 
on human dignity.”332 “Outrage upon personal dignity” 
has been defined as an act that causes “serious humilia -
tion or degradation to the victim” that must be so intense 
that the reasonable person would be outraged.”333 
331  in t’l co m m. reD cr o s s, co m m e n t a r y  o n t h e ge n e v a  co n v e n t i o n s  o f au g u s t  
12, 1949 , vo l. iv (1958). 
332  Prosector v. Delalic, Case No. IT-96-21-T, Judgment, ¶ 552 (Nov. 
16, 1998).
333  Prosecutor v. Aleksovski, Case No. IT-95-14/1-T, Judgment, ¶ 56 
(June 25 1999).While Common Article 3 definitions of torture and 
cruel treatment are arguably broader than those provided 
under U.S. law through the WCA, for the purpose of 
analyzing the legality of “enhanced interrogation tech -
niques” this report uses the WCA definitions of torture 
and cruel treatment. It is important, however, to note that 
“outrages upon personal dignity” is a separate standard 
to which the United States must adhere under its inter -
national legal obligations. LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 43 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 43 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 43 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 43Psychological trauma:  
the common Denominator
Psychological abuse is inherent in the concept 
of torture. Systematic, repetitive infliction of 
psychological trauma establishes control over 
another person. Methods of psychological control are 
designed to instill terror, pain, and helplessness and 
destroy a detainee’s sense of autonomy without direct 
use of physical violence. Such techniques include the 
use of sleep deprivation, sensory disorientation, forced 
self-induced pain, solitary confinement, mock execu -
tion, severe humiliation, mind-altering drugs and threats 
of violence — as well as the exploitation of personal or 
cultural phobias. The ultimate effect of these techniques 
is to convince the victim that the perpetrator is omnipo -
tent, that resistance is futile, and his life depends on 
absolute compliance. 
Although discussion of torture and other cruel, 
inhuman and degrading treatment of detainees can be 
divided into psychological and physical techniques, ulti -
mately all techniques that violate human dignity carry a 
high risk of psychological damage. Further, the distinc -
tion between harsh physical and psychological tech -
niques is artificial as most torture techniques involve 
both components.334 For example, the consequences of 
sexual torture, even in the absence of physical assault, 
are both physical and psychological. Torture is a means 
of denying an individual’s humanity. By reducing an indi -
vidual to a position of extreme helplessness and inducing 
a constant state of fear, torture often leads to a deteriora -
tion of cognitive, emotional and behavioral functions.335
Torture has devastating health consequences for phys -
ical, psychological, and social well-being. Many torture 
survivors suffer from debilitating psychological damage 
that stems from various combinations of intense and 
prolonged fear, shame, humiliation, horror, guilt, grief, 
and mental and physical exhaustion.336 Ample evidence 
from both uncontrolled and controlled studies document 
334  is t a n Bu l Pr o t o c o l , supra note 22, at 29. 
335 Id. at 45.
336 Phr B r e a k th e m DoWn, supra  note 20, at 48.that most torture survivors suffer an array of prolonged 
and serious psychiatric symptoms such as depression, 
anxiety disorders, somatic complaints such as headache 
and back pain, posttraumatic stress disorder, memory 
and concentration impairment, sleep disturbance and 
nightmares, sexual dysfunction, self-harming behaviors 
and personality changes.337 
337  C. Gorst-Unsworth & E. Goldenberg , Psychological sequelae of torture 
and organized violence suffered by refugees from Iraq . Trauma-related 
factors compared with social factors in exile , 172 British J. Psychiatry 
90 (1998), Eighty-four male Iraqi refugees were interviewed. Adverse 
events, level of social support were measured, and psychological 
morbidity were assessed. Fifty-five (65%) of the sample had suffered 
systematic torture during a period of detention. Further, participants 
reported a wide range of trauma including imprisonments, enforced 
combat, witnessing chemical attacks on civilians, scenes of violent death, 
massacre and execution of relatives. Social support was significantly 
associated with PTSD and depressive symptoms particularly among 
torture survivors. M. Van Ommeren et al., Psychiatric disorders among 
tortured Bhutanese refugees in Nepal , 58 ar c h i v e s  ge n. Ps y c h i a t r y  475 
(2001), A cross-sectional random survey was conducted among 418 
tortured and 392 nontortured Bhutanese refugees, matched for age and 
gender . The authors found that the torture survivors had higher lifetime 
and 12-month rates of ICD-10 (International Classification of Disease, 
Tenth edition) psychiatric disorders. Tortured refugees, compared to 
nontortured refugees, were more likely to report 12-month ICD-10 
PTSD (43% vs. 4%), dissociative disorders (18% vs. 3%), and persis -
tent somatoform pain disorder (51% vs. 28%). Almost three out of four 
of the tortured subjects and almost one-half of the nontortured refu -
gees had one disorder in the preceding 12 months, indicating a high 
rate of psychopathology among this population.  M. Van Ommeren et 
al., Lifetime events and posttraumatic stress disorder in 4 postcon -
flict settings , 286 J. am. meD. as s’n 62 (2001), Epidemiological survey 
conducted between 1997 and 1999 among 4 low-income populations who 
have experienced war, conflict, or mass violence in Algeria (n = 653), 
Cambodia (n = 610), Ethiopia (n = 1200), and Gaza (n = 585). In Ethiopia, 
25.5% of the respondents reported experiencing torture compared with 
15.0% in Gaza, 9.0% in Cambodia and 8.4% in Algeria. The rates of 
PTSD among the sample ranged from 37.4% in Algeria to 17.8% in Gaza. 
Torture was a risk factor for PTSD in all countries except Cambodia. In all 
three other countries likelihood of developing PTSD was approximately 
twice among torture survivors compared to non-torture participants. 
D. Silove et al., The impact of torture on post-traumatic stress symp -
toms in war-affected Tamil refugees and immigrants , 43 co mPr e h e n s i v e  
Ps y c h i a t r y  49 (2002). A. Keller & J. Gold, Survivors of Torture , in 1 
kaPl a n a nD saDo c k’s co mPr e h e n s i v e  te x tBo o k o f Ps y c h i a t r y  2400 (B. & V. 
Sadock eds., 8th ed. 2005). P. M. Leth & J. Banner, Forensic medical 
examination of refugees who claim to have been tortured , 26 am. J. o f 
fo r e n s i c  meD. & P a t h o l o g y  125 (2005), For the details on the study see 
note 69. Pia A. Moisander & Erik Edston, Torture and its sequel — a 
comparison between victims from six countries , 137 fo r e n s i c  sc i in t’l 
133, Nov. 26, 2003, One hundred sixty torture victims from six different aPPenDix B: overview of the  
meDical consequences of torture  
anD cruel treatment44 APPENDIX B: OVERVIEW OF THE MEDICAL CONSEqUENCES OF TORTURE AND CRUEL TREATMENTFeelings of helplessness, anger, guilt, and fear are 
common psychological reactions and often associated 
with major depression and posttraumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD). 338 Some experts contend that the consequences 
of torture go beyond psychiatric diagnosis. The psycho -
logical reactions to torture are undoubtedly very complex 
since the torture survivor may experience PTSD as a 
result of specific torture experiences; depression as a 
result of multiple losses associated with torture; physical 
symptoms resulting from the specific forms of torture; 
and the “existential dilemma” of surviving in a world in 
which torture is a reality. 339
PosttraumaticStressDisorder
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is one of the most 
common long-term consequences of torture. It is esti -
mated the rates of PTSD range from forty-five to ninety-
two percent across diverse samples of torture survivors.340 
countries treated at the Centre for Trauma Victims in Stockholm. All 160 
had reported beating, among other torture techniques. Sensory depriva -
tion by isolation and blindfolding was common in all countries except 
Uganda and Peru. Whipping with electric cords occurred frequently only 
in Iran and Syria. Rape was most often reported among the Ugandans. 
Genital torture was frequently alleged by patients from Bangladesh and 
Turkey. Suspension was common in all countries except for Uganda. 
Falaka, i.e. beating of the soles, and electric torture were common 
(>60%) in Bangladesh, Iran, Syria, and Turkey. Sharp injuries inflicted 
with knives and bayonets were often seen among the Bangladeshi and 
Ugandans. Burning injuries due to cigarettes were commonly seen only 
in patients from Bangladesh. Some techniques were found to be almost 
exclusive for each country: ‘‘water treatment’’ (Bangladesh), the ‘‘tyre’’ 
(Syria), ‘‘telephono’’ and ‘‘submarino’’ (Peru). One hundred twenty four 
underwent psychiatric evaluation. PTSD was diagnosed on the basis 
of a psychiatric interview and psychological tests. Prevalence of PTSD 
ranged from 69% to 92% with an average of 79.8%.
338  S. Turner & C. Goest-Unsworth, Psychological sequelae of torture: a 
descriptive model,  157 British  J. P s y c h i a t r y  485-80 (1990).
339 Id.
340  M. Van Ommeren et al., Psychiatric disorders among tortured 
Bhutanese refugees in Nepal, 58 ar c h. ge n. Ps y c h i a t r y  475 ( 2001), For 
the details on the study see note 318. Pia A. Moisander & Erik Edston, 
Torture and its sequel — a comparison between victims from six countries , 
137 fo r e n s i c  sc i e n c e  in t’l 133, Nov. 26, 2003, For the details on the study 
see note 95. A. Keller et al., Traumatic experiences and psychological 
distress in an urban refugee population seeking treatment services , 194 
J. ne r v o u s  & m e n t a l  Di s e a s e  188 (2006), Data were collected from a 
convenience sample of 325 refugees and survivors of torture seeking 
services through the Bellevue Hospital/New York University Program 
for Survivors of Torture. Most participants reported having been 
subjected to beating. Rape and other forms of sexual assault were 
also common (reported by 18% and 11% of the sample, respectively). 
Forms of psychological torture frequently reported include harass -
ment directed at either the participant or family members (reported 
by 90% and 85% of participants respectively), witnessing violence or 
torture against others (79%), and torture of family members (68%). 
Authors reported high prevalence of anxiety (81%), depressive symp -
toms (84.5%) and PTSD ( 45.7%) in the sample. Of note, the rate of PTSD among Americans between the 
ages of 18 and 54 is approximately 3.6 percent.341
The symptoms of PTSD fall into three main catego -
ries: 1) re-living the experience of the traumatic event, 
2) emotional numbing and detachment; and 3) hypervigi -
lance and chronic arousal. The DSM-IV requires a one-
month duration of symptoms for a diagnosis of PTSD. 
PTSD that endures for 3 months or more is considered 
to be chronic.342
Torture victims may continue to re-experience the 
trauma in the form of intrusive memories or flashbacks 
or recurrent nightmares. They may exhibit avoidance of 
any thought, conversation or activity that arouses recol -
lection of the trauma. Victims also may exhibit hyper -
arousal or hypervigilance, which may result in difficulty 
concentrating, irritability or outbursts of anger.343 
Studies show that more than one third of those who 
suffer from PTSD fail to recover even after many years.344 
Several studies conducted on POWs from World War II and 
the Korean War and on Holocaust survivors have confirmed 
the chronic nature of PTSD, which sometimes persists 40 
years after exposure to the severe trauma. 345 
341  R. C. Kessler et al.,  Prevalence, severity, and comorbidity of 12-month 
DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication . 62 
ar c h i v e s  ge n. Ps y c h i a t r y  6, 617-27 (2005),   U.S. National Comorbidity 
Survey Replication (NCS-R) is a nationally representative house -
hold face to face survey of English speakers 18 years and older in 
the coterminous United States. The survey was conducted between 
February 2001 and April 2003 and included 9282 respondents. The 
structured diagnostic interview assessed 12-month prevalence, 
severity, and comorbidity of DSM-IV mental disorders.
342 APA ma n u a l , supra note 22.
343 is t a n Bu l Pr o t o c o l , supra note 22, at 46.
344  R. C. Kessler et al., Posttraumatic stress disorder in the National 
Comorbidity Survey , 52 ar c h. ge n. Ps y c h i a t r y  1048-60, (1995), The data 
were obtained from a representative national sample of 5877 persons 
aged fifteen to fifty-four years as part of NCS, a survey designed to study 
the distribution, correlates, and consequences of psychiatric disorders 
in the United States. The authors reported a 7.8% lifetime prevalence 
of PTSD. PTSD is strongly comorbid with other lifetime DSM-III-R disor -
ders. Survival analysis shows, regardless of receiving professional treat -
ment, more than one third of people with an index episode of PTSD fail 
to recover even after many years.
345  Engdahl et al., Posttraumatic stress disorder in a community group of 
former prisoners of war: a normative response to severe trauma , 154 
am. J. o f Ps y c h i a t r y  1576 (1997), The study recruited a group of 262 
U.S. World War II and Korean War former POWs. These men had been 
exposed to the multiple traumas of combat, capture, and imprison -
ment, yet few had ever sought mental health treatment. More than half 
of the men (53%) met criteria for lifetime PTSD, and 29% met criteria 
for current PTSD. The most severely traumatized group (POWs held 
by the Japanese) had PTSD lifetime rates of 84% and current rates 
of 59%. The authors concluded that PTSD is a persistent, normative, 
and primary consequence of exposure to severe trauma.  R. A. Zeiss & 
H. R. Dickman, PTSD  40 years later: incidence and person-situation LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 45 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 45 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 45 LEAVE NO MARKS: ENHANCED INTERROGATION TECHNIqUES AND THE RISK OF CRIMINALITY 45Posttraumatic stress disorder can have a negative 
impact on the successful management of other chronic 
medical diseases, and therefore can impact physical 
health over the long term. For example, misdiagnosis 
or under-treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder 
has been associated with poor control of diabetes in 
Cambodian refugees. 346 Survivors of the Holocaust and 
concentration camps were observed to die at a higher 
rate than expected, and demonstrated higher rates of 
infectious diseases, cancer, cerebrovascular accidents 
and heart problems.347
MajorDepression andSelf-harming Behavior
Major depression and PTSD are widely acknowledged as 
the most common emotional and psychological forms 
of distress in torture survivors.348 Epidemiological find -
ings have disclosed that 56% of refugees subjected to 
prolonged traumatization such as torture suffer from both 
PTSD and a depressive disorder.349 Further, PTSD patients 
with depression report a higher frequency of suicidal 
correlates in former POWs , 45 J. clinical  Ps y c h o l . 80 (198), A 442 person 
sample of former POWs were examined for current and past difficulties 
with PTSD-related symptoms over the past forty years. Symptoms of 
severity consistent with a clinical diagnosis of PTSD were described by 
56% of the sample. Approximately 50% reported being seriously troubled 
by PTSD symptoms over the last forty years. The authors concluded that 
PTSD is a highly persistent phenomenon and that both situation and 
person variables contribute to the development and maintenance of 
PTSD. See also C.L. Port et al., A longitudinal and retrospective study 
of PTSD among older prisoners of war , 158 am. J. P s y c h i a t r y  11474 
(2001), The authors examined the retrospective symptom of PTSD dating 
back to shortly after repatriation and the longitudinal changes in PTSD 
symptom levels and prevalence rates over a four-year time period among 
American former POWs from World War II and the Korean War. The 
findings from both longitudinal and retrospective data support a PTSD 
symptom pattern of immediate onset and gradual decline, followed by 
increasing PTSD symptom levels among older trauma survivors. See R. 
Yehuda et al., Impact of cumulative lifetime trauma and recent stress on 
current posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms in holocaust survivors , 
152 am J. P s y c h i a t r y  1815 (1995), Lifetime trauma, recent stressful 
events, and presence and severity of PTSD were assessed in seventy-
two Holocaust survivors and nineteen comparison subjects. Fifty-five 
percent of survivors reported PTSD symptoms. The results show that 
presence and severity of PTSD symptoms in Holocaust survivors are 
related to current and cumulative lifetime trauma in addition to the 
Holocaust. The authors concluded that the additive impact of events 
in addition to the trauma must be considered in explaining the onset, 
persistence, and severity of PTSD.
346  R. F. Mollica , Surviving Torture , 351 neW en g. J. m eD. 5-7 (2004).
347  L. Eitenger & A. Strom, Mortality and morbidity after excessive stress , 
11 am. J. c o m m u n i t y  Ps y c h o l . 473-491 (1983).
348 R. F. Mollica , Surviving Torture , 351 neW en g. J. m eD. 5-7 (2004).
349  Marcello Ferrada-Noli et al.,  Suicidal behavior after severe trauma. 
Part 2: The association between methods of torture and of suicidal 
ideation in posttraumatic stress disorder , 11 J. tr a u m a t i c  st r e s s  103, 
113-24 (1998) ; For the details on the study see note 173.thoughts, whereas patients with PTSD alone manifest an 
increased frequency of suicidal attempts.350
Studies have consistently demonstrated that exposure 
to torture and life-threatening events are associated with 
suicidal behaviors. The intractable suffering associ -
ated with torture has been found to play a central role in 
increased self-destructive and suicidal behavior among 
traumatized refugees. In a study investigating suicidal 
behavior among refugees subjected to diverse forms of 
torture (including isolation, water torture, mock execution, 
and electric shock), 50% of the sample reported suicidal 
behavior.351 A study of former POWs found that 57% of 
Japanese-held POWs had suicidal thoughts, and 7% of the 
German-held POWs had attempted suicide.352 
Strikingly, researchers found that traumatized indi -
viduals expose themselves to situations reminiscent of 
their torture experience.353 Others found that the nature 
of the torture method the individual endures is reflected 
in the content of self-destructive and suicidal ideation. In 
a sample of 65 refugees who survived torture, one study 
revealed an association between the torture techniques 
and the methods used in suicide ideations or attempts. 
Blunt forced applied to head and body was associated 
with jumping from a height or in front of a train, water 
torture with drowning, or sharp force torture with self-
inflicted stabbing or cutting.354 
Damaged Self-concept and
ForeshortenedFuture
Torture victims may have a damaged self-concept (the 
individual has a subjective feeling of having been irrep -
arably damaged and having undergone an irreversible 
personality change) and a sense of foreshortened future 
350 Id.
351 Id. 
352 Id. 
353  See S. Momartin & M. Coello, Self-harming behaviour and dissociation 
in complex PTSD: Case study of a male tortured refugee , 16 to r t u r e  1 
(2006), Complicated and intense case study of a male survivor of severe 
torture, which included the reporting of multiple rapes. The study aimed 
to discuss anger, dissociation, re-enactment, reliving and extreme self-
harming behaviour of the patient in order to increase awareness of the 
serious issue of male rape, torture and its sequelae, in prison settings.
354  See Marcello Ferrada-Noli et al.,  supra note  156 at 113-24, The 
authors hypothesized that the predominant kind of stressful experi -
ence in PTSD patients might be reflected in their choice of method when 
pondering or attempting suicide. The study reports on sixty-five refugees 
with diagnoses of PTSD and manifest suicidal behavior (40% had suicide 
attempts; 29% a detailed suicide plan; 31% recurrent suicidal thoughts). 
Among torture survivors with PTSD symptoms, an association was found 
between the torture techniques that the victim had been exposed to and 
the suicide method used in ideation or attempts.46 APPENDIX B: OVERVIEW OF THE MEDICAL CONSEqUENCES OF TORTURE AND CRUEL TREATMENT(e.g., not expecting to have a career, marriage, children, 
or a normal life span).355 They may exhibit dissociation, 
a disruption in the integration of consciousness, self-
perception, memory and actions, depersonalization, a 
feeling of being detached from one’s self or body, or 
atypical behavior such as impulse control problems or 
engagement in high-risk behaviors.356
Psychosis
Although uncommon among survivors of torture, 
psychosis is among the most serious psychological 
consequences of torture, and may present itself in the 
form of delusions (including auditory, visual, tactile and 
olfactory), bizarre ideations and behaviors, illusions 
or perceptual distortions and paranoia. Other serious 
consequences include substance abuse and exacerba -
tions of prior mental illness.357
Other residual effects of torture include experiencing 
somatic complaints such as pain, headache or other 
physical complaints.358
Physical consequences
Empirical evidence has shown that the most impor -
tant physical consequences in torture survivors involve 
pain in multiple sites that is long-lasting. Most frequent 
pains experienced by the survivors are in the head, neck, 
355  aPa ma n u a l , supra note 22, at 424-29; is t a n Bu l Pr o t o c o l , supra note 
22, at 45.
356 is t a n Bu l Pr o t o c o l , supra note 22, at 45.
357 Id. at 44.
358 Id. shoulder girdle, and the lower back.359 These disabilities 
often remain years after release from detention and limit 
the survivors’ capacity to do anything other than light 
work. These pains have been associated with beating and 
painful stress positions, and confinement in cramped, 
damp, unsanitary conditions.360
It must be noted that torture is often designed to maxi -
mize stress and physical pain without  causing serious 
physical injury or death. In advocating for various aggres -
sive interrogation procedures, a working group estab -
lished in the Department of Defense by Secretary Donald 
Rumsfeld argued that the removal of prisoners’ clothing 
would create “a feeling of helplessness and dependence” 
and that slapping a prisoner — “a quick glancing slap 
to the fleshy part of the cheek or stomach” — could be 
useful “as shock measures.” 361
It is important to note that, “the absence of … physical 
evidence should not be construed to suggest that torture 
did not occur, since such acts of violence against persons 
frequently leave no marks or permanent scars.”362 
359  Amris K, Roche P. Pain and disability rating in torture survivors: 
preliminary findings. Poster session presented at the 10th World 
Congress on pain, IASP. San Diego, California, 2002.
360  am n e s t y  in t e r n a t i o n a l , gl i mPs e o f he l l: rePo r t s o n to r t u r e  Wo r l D WiDe 
(Forrest Duncan, ed., 1996 ). 
361 Jehl, supra  note 29.
362  Istanbul Protocol, supra  note 22, at 31.