www.tortureisamoralissue.org  
campaign@nrcat.org  
 
November 30, 2009 
  The Honorable Nancy Pelosi Speaker U.S. House of Representatives  The Honorable John Boehner Minority Leader U.S. House of Representatives    The Honorable Harry Reid Majority Leader U.S. Senate  The Honorable Mitch McConnell Minority Leader U.S. Senate 
 CC: All Members of Congress  Dear Members of Congress:  As leaders of major religious groups in the United  States, we are very aware of the importance of 
symbols in one's spiritual life.  So, too, are symb ols important in the spiritual life of a country. 
 Guantanamo is the symbol of our country's viola tion of our deepest values.  Regardless of how it 
is operated now compared to how it was operated in earlier years, it stands in the minds of 
hundreds of millions of people in our nation a nd around the globe as a place where America 
broke faith with itself and used to rture as an interrogation technique .  Torture is immoral, illegal, 
and never justifiable -- without exception. 
 Our government must close the detention center at Guantanamo  Bay now to help us heal 
spiritually and to put an end to this dark and e rrant chapter in our history.  For those detainees 
that must continue to be incarcerated, we belie ve that appropriate alternative sites can be 
identified.  We ask that you do everything in your power to help close Guantanamo -- now.  In faith,  Rev. Dr. Sharon E. Watkins General Minister and President Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)  Bishop Gregory Vaughn Palmer 
President, The Council of Bishops 
The United Methodist Church 
 
 Dr. Ingrid Mattson President Islamic Society of North America 
 
Archbishop Vicken Diocesan Legate 
Armenian Church of America 
  
 
National Religious Campaign Against Torture 
110 Maryland Ave NE, Suite 502, Washington, DC 20002  www.nrcat.org  
campaign@nrcat.org  
-2-
Rabbi Yael Ridberg 
President, Reconstructionist  
Rabbinical Association 
 Rev. Gradye Parsons 
Stated Clerk of the General Assembly 
Presbyterian Church, USA  
Rev. Geoffrey A. Black 
General Minister and President 
United Church of Christ  
 
Bishop Demetrios of Mokissos 
Chancellor 
Greek Orthodox Metropolis of Chicago 
 Joe Volk Executive Secretary Friends Committee on National Legislation 
 
J Ron Byler Acting Executive Director 
Mennonite Church USA Executive Leadership 
 Stanley J. Noffsinger  General Secretary 
Church of the Brethren 
 Rabbi Tirzah Firestone 
Co-chairs, Rabbis for Human Rights-North 
America  Dr. Sayyid M. Syeed National Director, Office for Interfaith  
and Community Alliances 
Islamic Society of North America  
Archbishop Nicolae Condrea 
Romanian Orthodox Archdiocese in the 
Americas 
 Rev. Dr. David P. Gushee President Evangelicals for Human Rights 
Distinguished University Professor of Christian 
Ethics, Mercer University  Rev. Dr. Michael Kinnamon General Secretary 
National Council of Churches 
 Suhag Shukla  Managing Director 
Hindu American Foundation 
 Rev. M. Linda Jaramillo 
Executive Minister, Justice and Witness 
Ministries , United Church of Christ 
 
Very Rev. Thomas Cassidy, SCJ 
President 
Conference of Major Superiors of Men  Jane Burke, SSND Executive Director Leadership Conference of Women Religious 
 
The Most Reverend Michael Seneco Presiding Bishop 
North American Old Catholic Church 
 Rev. Peter Morales President Unitarian Universalist Association of 
Congregations 
 
Steven Gerber Executive Director  Rabbis for Human Rights-North America 
 
Dr. George Hunsinger Professor of Theology Princeton Theological Seminary Founder, National Religious Campaign Against Torture 
 
Marie Dennis Co-President Pax Christi International  
Rev. Dr. Rick Schlosser 
Executive Director California Council of Churches  
National Religious Campaign Against Torture 
110 Maryland Ave NE, Suite 502, Washington, DC 20002  www.nrcat.org  
campaign@nrcat.org  
National Religious Campaign Against Torture 
110 Maryland Ave NE, Suite 502, Washington, DC 20002  
-3-
The Rev. Russell L. Meyer 
Executive Director Florida Council of Churches 
 
The Rev. Gary L. Harke Executive Director Pennsylvania Council of Churches  
The Reverend Dennis D. Sparks 
Executive Director West Virginia Council of Churches  Rabbi Ellen Lippmann  Co-chair  Rabbis for Human Rights-North America  David Lamarre-Vincent  Executive Director  New Hampshire Council of Churches   David Leslie  Executive Director Ecumenical Ministries of Oregon  The Rev. Jill Job Saxby Executive Director Maine Council of Churches  Scott D. Anderson Executive Director Wisconsin Council of Churches  Rev. Richard Cizik President The New Evangelicals, Inc.  Rick Love, Ph.D. Consultant for Christian-Muslim Relations  Dr. Glen Stassen Lewis B. Smedes Professor of Christian Ethics Fuller Theological Seminary Timothy Floyd Director, Law & Public Service Program and Professor, Mercer University  Dr. Cheryl Bridges Johns Professor of Christian Formation Pentecostal Theological Seminary  Rev. Peter Laarman Executive Director Progressive Christians Uniting  Rev. Peg Chemberlin Executive Director, Minnesota Council of Churches; President-Elect, National Council of Churches  Rev. Dr. Jim Antal Minister and President Massachusetts Conference  United Church of Christ  Rev. Stephen Miller Acting Executive Director New Mexico Conference of Churches  
Dr. Ron Sider 
President Evangelicals for Social Action  Rev. Brenda Lynn Kneece Executive Minister South Carolina Christian Action Council  Charlie Clements President and CEO Unitarian Universalist Service Committee  Jim Winkler General Secretary 
General Board of Church and Society 
The United Methodist Church   