                                           
Retire Ohio's death penalty: Paul E. Pfeifer  
By Paul E. Pfeifer  (Published January 26, 2011 ) 
Are we, the people of Ohio, well served by our continuing use of 
the death penalty?  
Before we try to answer that, let's take a quick look back at 
capital punishment in Ohio. In 1972, the U.S. Supreme Court 
declared Ohio's death penalty statute unconstitutional . In 1974, 
our state legislature revised Ohio's death penalty law, but the 
Supreme Court rejected that one as well. Then, in 1981, a new 
death penalty statute  was enacted, and this one passed 
constitutional review. We didn't resume executions in Ohio until 
1999 . Since then, 41 [53 - 2/2016 ] condemned mu rderers have 
been put to death; there are 157 [138 - 2/2016]  more awaiting 
execution on death row .  
There are very few people in this state more closely associated 
with the death penalty than am I. As a state se nator in 1981, I 
helped draft our current law. Now, for the past 18 years, I have 
served as a justice on the Ohio Supreme Court, where we render 
the final judgment on death penalty appeals.  
I helped craft the law, and I have helped enforce it. From my 
rather unique perspective, I have come to the conclusion that we 
are not well served by our ongoing attachment to capital 
punishment .  
Why the change? In short , because the death penalty law is not 
being applied as we originally intended.  
The statute that we wrote in 1981 was designed to pass 
constitutional review by the U.S. Supreme Court. That meant 
that it had to provide safeguards and extensive due process for 
accused murderers. We set out to enact a law that would give 
prosecutors the capability to seek capital punishment for the 
absolute worst offenders.  
Murder is a vile crime. But not all murders are the same, and we 
did not mean for all -- or even most -- murderers to be eligible 
for the death penalty. The law was meant to be employed only 
when a certain set of aggravating circumstances warranted 
execution. But over the years, the death penalty has come to be 
applied more pervasively than we ever intende d.  
We also wanted a review process implemented in which the 
Ohio Supreme Court, in addition to considering death penalty 
appeals, would monitor death sentences across the state to verify 
that they were being evenly and fairly applied. Simply put, that 
hasn't happened.  Thirty years ago, the public's support for the death penalty 
stemmed largely from decades of sentences that seemed too 
lenient for murderers. The fact that a convicted killer could be 
eligible for parole after serving only a fraction of his life 
sentence did not sit well, and rightly so.  
But in 2005, the Ohio 
legislature corrected that by 
passing a law that allowed 
prosecutors to seek a penalty of 
life without the possibility of 
parole rather than a death 
sentence. Since that law passed, 
we have seen the number of 
death sentences drop 
precipitously. Prosecutors and 
jurors have told us -- by their 
actions -- that life without the 
possibility of parole is a more desirable outcome to a murder 
trial than a death sentence.  
Part of the reason for that, I believe, is that even supporters of 
capital punishment feel uneasy about sitting on a jury that votes 
to take a human life. As George Orwell once said, "Most people 
approve of capital punishment, but most people wouldn't do the 
hangman's job."  
Make no mistake -- I am not arguing for leniency or sympathy. 
There are no good citizens on death row. These are people who 
have committed heinous crimes. When a villain murders, he not 
only ends one life, he irrevocably damages dozens of others. 
Murder has a  ripple effect that consumes all those who loved the 
victim.  
But life without parole now offers us a viable alternative to the 
death penalty, and it's an option that can satisfy our desire to 
punish killers for their crimes. There are, however, dozens of 
inmates on death row who were convicted before that option was 
available. How many of them would have been sentenced to 
death if the life -without -parole option had been available at the 
time? No one knows. All we know is that there are many people 
who will  be put to death because they were convicted at the 
wrong time.  
So, I ask: Do we want our state government -- and thus, by 
extension, all of us -- to be in the business of taking lives in what 
amounts to a death lottery? I can't imagine that's something 
about which most of us feel comfortable. And, thus, I believe the 
time has come to abolish the death penalty in Ohio.  
http://www.cleveland.com/opinion/index.ssf/2011/01/retire_ohios_death_penalty_pau.html  
Ohio Supreme Court Senior Justice Paul E. Pfeifer, who helped write the state's death 
penalty law in 1981 , called  for an en d to capital punishment in Ohio in this 2011 op -ed. 
He retired in 2016 after 24 years on the Bench.  He lives in Bucyrus and now serves as 
executive director of the Ohio Judicial Conference.   
 
 
Ohio's former prisons chi ef: 'The death penalty 
isn't worth fixing'               By Terry J. Collins, February  24, 2016 
It's been six years since I retired after more than three decades at 
the Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and Correction. I held 
various positions including warden, regional director, assistant 
director and then director. Included in my responsibilities was the 
participation in the execution of 33 men from 2001 to 2010.  
With each execution I asked myself: Did the extensive process of 
appeal s ensure we got it right? I often wondered if we made a 
mistake. My curiosity arose because I had walked people out of 
prison after years of incarceration who turned out to be innocent.  
Innocent People on Death Row  
Every year, more innocent prisoners walk  off death rows in the 
U.S.  -- 156 since 1972. These troubling trends tell us this is no 
anomaly. Ohio has executed 53 and exonerated nine men. I think 
about these statistics and am troubled by Ohio's track record. 
Why? Because I'll always remember Gary B eeman, Ohio's first 
death row exoneree, who walked out of prison to a new trial and 
freedom. Turns out Gary didn't commit the crime that sent him to 
Death Row.  
My concerns are not limited to the possibility of killing an 
innocent person. The death penalty is expensive, inefficient and 
takes far too long. I believe it only prolongs the pain and healing 
process for victims' families.  
As one who values fairness and equality as the bedrock of our 
legal system, I do not accept the argument that we only execute 
the worst of the worst. The offenders in our prisons I encountered 
who committed unimaginable crimes were usually not on Death 
Row. The vast majority of those on Death Row were convicted 
under Ohio's felony murder rule, for killing someone in process 
of ano ther crime such as robbery or kidnapping.  
Failed Public Policy  
A recently released study  examined Ohio's 53 executions. This 
study found that the  race of the victim and the county where the 
crime took place matter more than the severity of the crime. I 
think these disparities are important points of discussion 
regarding the use of the death penalty in Ohio.  I am not alone among corrections 
professi onals who consider the death 
penalty a failed public policy. My 
predecessor, former ODRC Director Dr. 
Reginald Wilkinson, also opposes 
executions. We've joined with other 
former corrections officials across our 
great nation asking legislators to end the 
death penalty. After being quoted in my 
local paper in Chillicothe about my concerns with capital 
punishment, I received calls from former colleagues thanking me 
for saying out loud what they could not.  
My concerns about the death penalty led me to join  Public Safety 
Officials on the Death Penalty,  an independent group of law 
enforcement officers, prosecutors, and corrections officials. 
We're ready to discuss concerns we share a bout the death penalty 
in this country so that policymakers may explore alternatives. 
Some of us oppose the death penalty while others support it 
under certain circumstances. We all recognize problems with the 
current death penalty, particularly that it di verts needed resources 
from policing and community safety.  
A Better Alternative  
I am pleased to stand with former Ohio Attorney General Jim 
Petro, another member of Public Safety Officials on the Death 
Penalty. He helped write Ohio's death penalty law as a  legislator 
and saw 18 executions as Ohio's chief prosecutor. Jim and I join 
a majority of Ohioans who believe the current sentencing 
alternative of life without parole  keeps Ohio communities safe. 
The sentence of life without parole is effectively severe and holds 
offenders accountable. Over 540 inmates are currently in custody 
of the Department of Correction  with sentences of life without 
parole.  
It is time for state officials to have serious and thoughtful 
conversations about whether Ohio's death penalty  remains 
necessary. A recent task force appointed by the Ohio Supreme 
Court made 56 recommendations to fix problems with the 
fairness and accuracy of Ohio's system.  
My experience tells me the death penalty isn't worth fixing. Our 
justice system will be mor e fair and effe ctive without the death 
penalt y. 
http://www.wcpo.com/news/opinion/ohios -former -prisons -chief -the-death -penalty -isnt-worth -fixing - 
Terry J. Collins was director of the Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and Correction 
from 2006 to 2010 and worked in the prison sy stem for nearly 33 years. He then 
actively spoke out as a member of  Ohioans to Stop Executions . He died 
unexpectedly on March 17, 2016, just weeks after this op -ed was published.  
       November 06, 2016                                      
Ohio legislators should enact proposed death -penal ty 
reforms: Bob Taft, former Ohio gove rnor (Opinion)  
When I ran for governor in 1998, I hadn't given a 
great deal of thought to the duty I would be 
assuming to review clemency requests in death 
penalty cases. I campaigned on education, job 
creation and environmental issues.  
However, as Governor I spent a lot of time 
reviewing the clemency cases that came before me. 
The death pen alty is irreversible, and I wanted to 
make certain there was no question about guilt and 
no procedural errors.  
At the time, the death penalty was an option I 
supported because it was pursuant to laws that had 
been enacted by the elected representatives of the 
people of Ohio. However, after reflecting on the 
cases I reviewed and the recommendations of the 
Ohio Supreme Court task force on the death 
penalty, I have come to have serious reservations 
about the effectiveness and necessity of capital 
punishment in  most cases where it has been applied.  
My first concern is that Ohio law allows the 
execution of individuals with serious mental illness. 
I believe this practice is not humane based on 
current standards of decency and the opinions of 
mental health experts across Ohio. Senate Bill 162 
would end this practice, and I urge state legislators 
to enact it at the earliest possible date.  
The legislature should also act to eliminate felony 
murders from the category of offenses to which the 
death sentence can be appli ed. These are murders in combination with other 
crimes often where 
murder was not the 
original intent, such as 
kidnapping, rape, 
aggravated arson, 
aggravated robbery, and 
aggravated burglary.  
Felony murder cases 
have accounted for the 
vast majority of deat h 
cases in Ohio, and they are a major cause of the 
substantial racial and geographic disparities in the 
use of capital punishment, casting doubt about 
whether our criminal justice system is providing 
"equal protection under the laws." Fewer than 7 
percent of felony murder cases result in a death 
sentence, which raises the issue of whether they are 
part of a "plea bargaining" strategy pursued by 
prosecutors.  
The Supreme Court Task Force on the 
Administration of Ohio's Death Penalty was 
comprised of judges, p rosecutors, defense attorneys, 
legislators, and legal experts. It completed its work 
in 2014 after a careful examination of Ohio's death 
penalty process; the two reforms I am endorsing are 
part of their recommendations.  
Now is the time for the Ohio General  Assembly to 
enact these reforms into law.  
 
Guest columnist Bob Taft served as the 67th governor of Ohio from 1999 -2007. He now teaches at the 
University of Dayton  
    September 10, 2016  
 Jim Petro commentary: Death penalty is in 
decline, but problems remain 
As Ohio attorney general, I 
oversaw 18 executions in accordance with Ohio law. As a  
state legislator before that, I helped write Ohio’s current 
death -penalty law. We thought maybe it would be a 
deterrent. Maybe the death penalty would provide cost 
savings to Ohio. What I know now is that we were wrong. 
What I am coming to understand is j ust how wrong we were, 
and what needs to be done to fix our mistake.  
My direct experience with executions makes me more than 
a mere spectator as Ohio continues to struggle with capital 
punishment. Since I left office in 2007, I’ve been following 
developmen ts and watching those most deeply engaged 
with it.  
Earlier this week, Ohioans to Stop Executions (OTSE) 
released its third report in as many years, providing 
perspectives on the status of Ohio’s death penalty. I am in 
agreement with the report, “A Relic of the Past: Ohio’s 
Dwindling Death Penalty,” which details a continuing 
decline in executions and new death sentences in Ohio 
while highlighting the disparities between counties that 
prosec ute death cases.  
In 2015, only one new death sentence was handed down. 
Cuyahoga and Summit counties, two jurisdictions 
responsible for more than 25 percent of death sentences, 
initiated zero new death penalty cases last year. In fact, new 
death sentences o verall were down for the fourth year in a 
row. There were three in 2014, four in 2013, and five in 
2012.  
It has become clear to me that what matters most is the 
personal predilections of a county prosecutor. Consider 
Cuyahoga County, which until 2012 was s eeking the death 
penalty in dozens of cases a year. Last year Cuyahoga 
County sought none. Crime rates did not plunge. There was 
a new prosecutor.  
On the other hand, consider Trumbull County, with one of 
the lowest homicide rates of Ohio counties which sen tence 
people to death. Trumbull County leads the state with the 
highest death -sentence -per-homicide rate. Why? Again, the 
personal preference of the county prosecutor matters most.  The new OTSE report addresses many other issues, 
including 13 wrongful conv ictions and exonerations in 
Ohio death cases. After serving as attorney general, my 
chief concern was that our state has sentenced individuals 
to death or lengthy prison sentences for crimes they did not 
commit. The National Registry of Exonerations report s that 
26 Ohioans were found guilty of murders they did not 
commit between 1975 and 2015. Half of these wrongfully 
convicted individuals — 13 of 26 — faced the death 
penalty, including Clarence Elkins, a man whose claim of 
innocence gained my support when I was attorney general.  
Most urgently in my view, the new report catalogs the 
reluctance of Ohio legislators to consider most of the 56 
recommendations made in 2014 by the Supreme Court 
Joint Task Force on the Administration of Ohio’s Death 
Penalty. The ch arge to that task force was to find ways to 
make Ohio’s death penalty more fair and accurate.  
Only a handful of the recommendations have been 
considered, and not those which would make the biggest 
difference. For example, the recommendation to narrow the 
felony murder rule would address much of Ohio’s disparity 
in death sentencing. Thirteen of the recommendations, 
individually and collectively, would go a long way toward 
preventing wrongful convictions. In failing to act, 
legislators effectively maintain th e status quo, which is a 
broken system that currently serves only the interest of 
Ohio prosecutors. That is a grave mistake.  
Another grave mistake is the terrible suggestion by the 
director of the Ohio Prosecuting Attorneys Association that 
Ohio adopt the gas chamber to conduct executions. I hope 
Gov. John Kasich and all Ohio legislators soundly reject 
that notion. It is offensive to the human experience and has 
no place in our great state.  
I am convinced that the death penalty is just not worth it 
any more , and I don’t think it can be fixed. Starting in 
January 2017, 28 Ohioans have execution dates. If we’re 
going to have the death penalty, then it must not be carried 
out until the legislature implements the task force’s reforms 
intended to ensure fairness and accuracy.  
Jim Petro served as Ohio Attorney General from 2003 to 2007.  
