THE TIME IS RIGHT FOR OHIO TO 
REPEAL ITS DEATH PENALTY
“There are a lot of things we do, and a lot of 
things we can do, that are more important as far 
as safety than the capital punishment debate.” 
GOVERNOR MIKE DEWINE
DEATH PENALTY CASE 
OUTCOMES 2014-2017
10% DEATH
90% LWOP 
OR LWPStatements and actions by elected officials signal that Ohioans are ready to move beyond the outdated 
and extreme death penalty, which doesn’t serve victims’ family members, saps precious state resources, 
and risks executing innocent persons.
Governor Mike DeWine entered his first term with over two dozen executions on the calendar and has 
reprieved every date that has come up. These reprieves occurred due to serious concerns about Ohio’s 
execution protocol. The Governor has also expressed increasing concern with the death penalty overall.AN OUTDATED PUNISHMENT
Ohio leaders have rightfully put a spotlight on a policy that accomplishes nothing but harm and needs 
to go.
Here’s what we know about Ohio’s death penalty: 
• Nine of out ten death cases in Ohio result in a sentence less 
than death.  
• The death penalty in Ohio is ten times more expensive than 
a non-death case. In 2019, the Ohio legislature allocated $4 
million to Pike County to help them carry out trials for a series 
of murders that occurred in 2016.  
• Our system is fallible. For every five executions that have taken 
place since Ohio’s reinstatement of the death penalty, 1 person 
has been exonerated.  
• There’s no reliable evidence that the death penalty is a 
deterrent to violent crime.  
• Instead of spending millions of Ohio tax dollars on a risky, 
expensive punishment that doesn’t keep us safe, we could be 
providing much needed counseling and other services for the 
families of murder victims.WWW.OTSE.ORG     |     740-877-7390DEATH PENALTY
    -25 STATES
GOVERNOR-IMPOSED 
MORATORIUM
    -3 STATESNO DEATH PENALTY
    -23 STATESSTRONG AND GROWING MOMENTUM FOR REPEAL
The momentum for repeal is strong – in Ohio and nationally.
• Polls in Ohio and across the nation consistently show Americans prefer a life without 
possibility of parole sentence over a death sentence.  
• Eleven states have abolished the death penalty since 2007, including Virginia just this year. 
That brings the number of states without the death penalty to 23.  
• 35 states either have no death penalty or have not had an execution in the last 10 years.  
• Death sentences and executions have been declining nationally and in Ohio for two 
decades, with rates plummeting in recent years.  
• New voices from conservatives, evangelical leaders, civil rights leaders, and even businesses 
are coming out in support for repeal.  
• In 2019, 11 states had Republican-sponsored repeal legislation. More than fifty Republican 
lawmakers signed onto these bills.  
• Last year, thirty five conservative leaders from Ohio signed a national statement in support 
of ending the death penalty  
• And so much more…
Ohio is critical to maintaining the momentum to repeal the death penalty in the United States. 
Ohioans have always been leaders, not followers – As Ohio goes, so goes the nation. Join us.