DEATH PENALTY REPEAL IN OHIO:
WHY CONSERVATIVES ARE LEADING THE CHARGE 
Ohio Conservatives Concerned About the Death Penalty (CCATDP-OH) is a network of political and 
social conservative Ohioans who question the alignment of capital punishment with conservative 
principles and values. Launched on February 18, 2020 in collaboration with Ohioans to Stop 
Executions (OTSE), CCATDP-Ohio is part of the national Conservatives Concerned About the Death 
Penalty network, which is active in 15 states.
WHY WE ARE CONCERNED
The death penalty is increasingly viewed as out of alignment with many core conservative principles 
such as limited government, fiscal responsibility, and protecting innocent life. 
• Some believe that a limited government and the 
death penalty don’t go together, especially when 
comparing the high costs of capital punishment to 
life without possibility of release. The death penalty 
costs millions more dollars than a system of life 
without parole – before a single appeal is even filed. 
And shortcuts could mean an irreversible mistake.  
• Some don’t trust the state to get it right. We already 
know that many innocent people have been 
sentenced to death, and for others it may already be 
too late.  
• Some are disturbed that the death penalty takes 
attention away from the needs of family members 
of murder victims, prolongs their pain, or wonder 
why we’re investing so much in a system that doesn’t keep us any safer than the alternatives.  
• Some believe that the death penalty contradicts our values about protecting life and targets the 
most vulnerable among us.
There has been a surge in conservative support for ending the death penalty, and Ohio is a big part of 
this momentum: 
• Over the last ten years there has been a six fold increase in the number of Republicans sponsoring 
death penalty repeal bills.  
• In 2019, 11 states had Republican-sponsored repeal legislation. More than fifty Republican 
lawmakers signed onto these bills.  
• More than 67% of the Republicans sponsoring death penalty repeal bills did so in conservative 
states, including Wyoming, Montana, and Kentucky.  
• In 2019, 250 prominent conservatives signed a national statement of support for ending the death 
penalty. This includes thirty five conservative leaders from Ohio - and that number is growing.  
• Evangelicals are also increasingly rejecting the death penalty. Many Evangelical leaders have 
publicly opposed executions in a number of capital cases and the National Association of 
Evangelicals has revised their previously pro-death penalty position to one that gives space for 
opposition to the death penalty and acknowledges its flaws. 
THIS MEANS FOR EVERY 5 EXECUTIONS 
IN OHIO, ONE PERSON WAS EXONERATED.SINCE 1976, OHIO HAS EXECUTED 56   
INDIVIDUALS AND HAS SEEN  
11 DEATH ROW EXONERATIONS . PROMINENT OHIO CONSERVATIVE VOICES:
“I’ve heard all the justifications — deterrence, support for 
victims, cost savings. And I know now they are all wrong, and 
those misguided arguments act as a smoke screen for the 
profound flaws that mark capital punishment.”
JIM PETRO
FORMER OHIO ATTORNEY GENERAL
“We believe that the sanctity of life should be protected more 
than anything else and when you give the government the power 
over life, you’re giving them the ultimate power, and we’ve seen 
throughout history in the US and the world where giving the 
government that much power can have devastating effects.”
REP. LAURA LANESE
R-GROVE CITY
“It is my Christian faith that has led me to oppose 
the death penalty. My belief is that life begins at 
conception and should only end at natural death,”
REP. CRAIG RIEDEL
R-DEFIANCE
“I felt that unless there really was a mistake in law or evidence 
that it should proceed pursuant to law. But having gone through 
that experience and having examined the death penalty after 
being out of office, I’m developing growing reservations about it.”
BOB TAFT
FORMER OHIO GOVERNOR
“Even the chance of someone being put to death who could be 
innocent, I believe, for pro-life people across the country,  
is enough to oppose the death penalty.”  
 
REP. NIRAJ ANTANI
R-MIAMISBURG
