To be meaningful, justice should be fair, accurate, and healing for crime survivors and 
their families. The death penalty is none of those things. Capital punishment prolongs 
pain for victims’ families, dragging them through an agonizing and lengthy process  
that holds out the false promise of healing through an execution - often resulting in a 
different sentence in the end.  THE FALSE PROMISE
HOW THE DEATH PENALTY 
FAILS  VICTIMS’ FAMILIES
A PAINFUL PROCESS
• In Ohio, people on death row serve an average of 17 years and two months, before execution. This 
long process is traumatizing for victims’ families, both because of the added time and stress that 
accompany capital cases and the high profile nature of these cases.   
• Without the death penalty in the mix, the healing process can begin sooner and families can grieve 
in private, outside the spotlight of news cameras.
 THE DEATH PENALTY IGNORES THE REAL 
NEEDS OF SURVIVING FAMILIES
• The death penalty’s cumbersome and 
expensive process diverts millions of 
dollars and attention from the critical 
services that victim’s family members 
need to help them heal, including 
specialized grief counseling, financial 
assistance, and ongoing support. The 
few services that are available are often 
provided through the prosecutor’s office, 
and when the criminal case is over, the 
services for the victim’s family members 
end, too.  
• In 2018 the Ohio’s victim compensation 
fund provided economic assistance to 
just 3.23% of the applications it accepted. 
Ohio ranks 46th out of the 50 states and 
District of Columbia. 
“Instead of spending millions on 
death penalty trials and decades 
of appeals, we should be investing 
in tools to reduce, prevent and 
solve crimes. If we care about 
victims’ families like mine, we 
should be prioritizing services 
that benefit all of us, instead of 
pouring millions into an arbitrarily 
applied death penalty.”
- JONATHAN MANNTHE DEATH PENALTY DIVIDES FAMILIES WHEN THEY NEED EACH OTHER MOST
• The death penalty has split families apart, forcing relatives with different perspectives on the issue 
to engage in a polarizing debate at the time when they need each other most.  
• In cases where the defendant and victim are related, families are even further torn apart. In a 
number of cases, for example, children must first cope with the murder of one parent and then 
suffer retraumatization when the other parent is executed for the crime.
CAN WE MAKE THE SYSTEM FASTER OR LESS STRESSFUL?  
• The death penalty is the nation’s only irreversible punishment. The process is longer because a life 
is on the line. Many of the extra procedures are legally mandated to reduce the risk of executing 
an innocent person.  
• Even these safeguards are not enough – at least 185 people have been exonerated from death row 
after waiting years or decades for the truth to come out. Streamlining the process would virtually 
guarantee the execution of an innocent person, which we know has happened before.  
• For every five executions in Ohio, the state has exonerated one person.  
• Nationally, that number is one in eight.
“My family could have used counseling and other kinds of support instead, which I 
believe would have helped our recovery and grief. Trained, certified, qualified mental 
health professionals must be available to any family experiencing homicide. They 
should be available to all, without disparity of access based on race, economics, 
geography, or prior unrelated encounters with law enforcement.”
- LASHAWN AJAMU