The thirteen recommendations to reduce wrongful convictions are: Thirteen of the 56 recommendations made by the Supreme Court Joint Task Force on the Administration of Ohio’s Death 
Penalty, when implemented, will help prevent future wrongful convictions. These include recommendations such as 
videotaping confessions, certifying crime labs, requiring unimpeachable evidence linking a defendant to a murder, 
disallowing jailhouse snitch testimony, requiring prosecutors to turn over evidence which may prove innocence, and more. 
It’s troubling that such simple requirements are not already enshrined in Ohio’s criminal code. 
13 Reforms to
Prevent Wrongful Convictions in Ohio
9 E. Long St. Suite 202 Columbus, OH 43215
Learn more at www.otse.org
1. Any in-custody interrogation shall be electronically recorded, or if not, statements are presumed involuntary. (Recommendation #1)
2. Require that each coroner’s ofﬁce become accredited or have at least one person on staff or under contract who is a fellow of that 
organization, or have a contract with an accredited crime lab to perform specialized services when the need arises. 
(Recommendation #2)
3. In a death-eligible case, excepting ﬁngerprint evidence, if evidence is not originally reviewed by an accredited lab, the defense has a 
right to testing in an accredited lab at state expense, and no reference will be made to the ﬁrst test (except to establish the evidence 
has been in the custody of the state). If testing of evidence prior to indictment will likely entail total consumption or destruction of 
evidence, the test must be performed in an accredited lab; and if it is to be tested after indictment, notice must ﬁrst be given to all parties. If this requirement is not followed, the evidence is presumptively inadmissible unless good cause is shown to the trial court. On 
the request of the prosecution in a death penalty case, defense forensic experts shall also be required to rely on testing by accredited 
labs. (Recommendation #3)
4. All crime labs in Ohio must be certiﬁed by a recognized agency deﬁned by the Ohio legislature. (Recommendation #4)
5. Adopt the 2003 ABA Guidelines for the Appointment and Performance of Defense Counsel in Death Penalty Cases (and train counsel 
and judges on these). (Recommendation #11)
6. Enact and fund a capital litigation fund to pay for all costs, fees, and expenses. (Recommendation #13)
7.  Increase funding to the Ofﬁce of the Ohio Public Defender to allow for additional hiring and training of qualiﬁed capital case 
attorneys who could be made available to all Ohio counties, except in circumstances where a conﬂict of interest arises. 
(Recommendation #14)
8. Implement and fund a statewide public defender system for representation in all levels of capital cases except when a conﬂict of 
interest arises, when Rule 20 qualiﬁed counsel shall be appointed. (Recommendation #15)
9. Enact legislation that Death can only be imposed if the state presented DNA, video, video-taped confession, or other compelling 
evidence that links the defendant to the murder. (Recommendation #17)
10. Bar a death sentence where the state relies solely on jailhouse informant testimony that is not independently corroborated at the 
guilt/innocence phase. (Recommendation #18)11. To address cross jurisdictional and racial discrepancy, creation of a Death Penalty Charging Committee at the Attorney General’s 
Ofﬁce to approve or disapprove of charges. (Recommendation #34)
12. Enact a court rule that mandates, for both the prosecution and defense, full and complete access in capital cases to evidence known 
to exist or with due diligence could be found to exist, with an opportunity to test such evidence – excluding work product, material 
protected under Rule 16, or inculpatory or privileged material. (Recommendation #37)
13. Require the prosecutor to present to the grand jury available exculpatory evidence of which the prosecutor is aware. 
(Recommendation #38)
Available at www.otse.org/recs
See all 56 recommendations
The nine men exonerated from Ohio’s death row spent a combined 207 years incarcerated for crimes they did not commit.
On average, Ohio death row exonerees spent over 21 years imprisoned before being freed."If the State of Ohio had its way, 
I'd be dead today"
9 E. Long St. Suite 202 Columbus, OH 43215
Learn more at www.otse.org
Gary Beeman was sentenced to death in 1976. His conviction was based on the perjured testimony of a prison 
escapee that Beeman’s lawyers were prevented from fully cross-examining. At his retrial, five witnesses 
testified that this star witness was, in fact, the killer and that Beeman was not involved. He was acquitted in 
1979.
Timothy Howard and Gary Lamar James were convicted of murdering security guard Berne Davis during 
the course of a bank robbery in 1976. They were released after new evidence was uncovered that had 
not been disclosed at the time of their trials, including conflicting witness statements and fingerprints. 
Their charges were dismissed in 2003. (Photos: Phil Long/AP Photo)Dale Johnston was sentenced to death in 1984 for the murders of Annette Cooper and Todd Schultz, his 
stepdaughter and her boyfriend. After undergoing hypnosis, a sole eyewitness identified Johnston as the 
killer. The only other primary witness provided boot print evidence that was later discredited. The authorities knew of four other eyewitnesses with a completely different story of the crime, but they never 
disclosed them to the defense. Johnston was released in 1990.
Derrick Jamison was sentenced to death in 1985 for the murder of Gary Mitchell, a Cincinnati bartender. 
Prosecutors withheld critical evidence that would have pointed to Jamison’s innocence, including eyewitness descriptions and statements that contradicted the story told by Jamison’s co-defendant. Jamison’s charges 
were dismissed in 2005, twenty years after he was sent to death row.
Ricky Jackson, Wiley  Bridgeman, and Kwame Ajamu (formerly Ronnie Bridgeman) were 
sentenced to death for the 1975 murder of Harold Franks. The state’s case rested on the 
witness testimony of a 12-year old who identified the three men as the perpetrators of the crime. In 2014, the witness recanted his testimony and admitted to being pressured by law 
enforcement to make the false identification.  (Photos: AP Photo)Joe D’Ambrosio was sentenced to death in 1989 for the murder of Anthony Klann. The federal district court 
overturned his conviction because the state had withheld evidence from the defense that pointed to his 
innocence. The court then barred his re-conviction trial due to further prosecutorial misconduct. D’Ambrosio’s 
charges were dismissed in 2012, twenty-three years after he was sent to death row.
