PeruDecember 1997Vol. 9, No. 4 (B)PERUTORTURE AND POLITICAL PERSECUTION IN PERUI. SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONSII. THE PREVALENCE OF TORTUREThe Scope of TortureThe Legal Prohibition of TortureIII. THE INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT: WEAKENED SAFEGUARDS AGAINSTTORTUREThe Continuing Use of Emergency PowersDenial of ICRC AccessEffects of the 1995 Amnesty LawMilitary JusticeCurtailment of Powers of Constitutional Monitoring BodiesThe Attorney General of the NationThe Constitutional CourtIV. TORTURE IN ALTO YURINAKIV. POLICE TORTURE: LEGAL CASESVI. DETENTION AND TORTURE OF ARMY INTELLIGENCE AGENTSVII. INTIMIDATION OF JOURNALISTS AND OPPOSITION PERSONALITIESVIII. ABUSES BY ARMED OPPOSITION GROUPSIX. UNITED STATES POLICYI. SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONSIn the past few years, the human rights panorama in Peru has brightenedconsiderably because of the decline in the massive "disappearances" andextrajudicial executions that has accompanied reduced political violence.Despite this positive trend, however, serious human rights violations continue,chief among them the use of torture. With the success of the Alberto Fujimoriadministration in substantially crippling the armed opposition groups'military capacity, counterinsurgency efforts are now conducted principallythrough a system of special anti-terrorism courts and military tribunals,backed by a ubiquitous intelligence apparatus. Institutionalized tortureplays a key role in this system. Torture is also routine in the interrogationof suspects in cases of common crime. The army has even used torture againstits own members who came under suspicion of endangering national security.Although President Fujimori says that he does not condone torture, hisadministration has made no effort to curtail it. To the contrary, it hasfacilitated torture by weakening constitutional guarantees in wide areasof the country and by undermining the autonomy and effectiveness of governmentbodies established to protect constitutional rights. It has also failedto enact legislation that would designate torture as a distinct offensewithin the penal code carrying a commensurate level of punishment. It hasattacked and intimidated the press for carrying stories critical of itshuman rights record.The security forces continue to confront two armed opposition groups,the Communist Party of Peru-Shining Path (Partido Comunista del Perú-SenderoLuminoso, PCP-SL), known as the Shining Path, and the Túpac AmaruRevolutionary Movement (Movimiento Revolucionario Túpac Amaru, MRTA),both of which consistently breach basic principles of international humanitarianlaw. The Shining Path commits selective assassinations of its civilianopponents and carries out indiscriminate attacks, killing and maiming civilians.The MRTA, on a lesser scale, has also resorted to executions and indiscriminateattacks, and has kidnaped civilians and taken them hostage for lucrativeransoms or to force the government into releasing imprisoned cadres.Both organizations have resorted to torture, usually as a prelude toexecution.The legal regime imposed to combat political violence facilitates torture.Detainees suspected of what Peruvian law defines as terrorist offensesmay be held for up to fifteen days by the police before they are chargedor released. Such detainees are usually handled by Peru's anti-terroristpolice, the National Directorate Against Terrorism (Dirección NacionalContra el Terrorismo, DINCOTE). DINCOTE may hold suspects incommunicadofor up to ten days without a court order. Torture typically occurs on policepremises while suspects are being held incommunicado and interrogated.It is used to extract signed declarations incriminating the victim andto obtain information. Reforms introduced in 1996 to safeguard detainees'rights while under interrogation, such as allowing them access to defenselawyers and requiring the presence of a public prosecutor when statementsare taken, have not eliminated torture. Many detainees are tortured bymilitary personnel before being handed over to the police. Public prosecutorsalso fail to supervise or monitor detention to protect the physical securityof detainees. These abuses take place most frequently in "emergency zones,"areas in which the police and army enjoy special powers under the emergencyregulations to combat Shining Path or the MRTA. For instance, they candetain suspects and conduct searches without a warrant.According to a study of cases by the Institute for Legal Defense (Institutode Defensa Legal, IDL), one of the most important Peruvian non-governmentalhuman rights groups, more than three out of four people accused of "terrorism"reported that they were tortured after arrest. When instances of torturecome to light periodically, the government calls them isolated cases andassures the public that they will be investigated and punished. The recordshows, however, that such pronouncements are usually hollow: torture casesare rarely punished. Although the compilation of comprehensive statisticsis difficult, Peruvian human rights groups estimate that at least 95 percentof the torture cases they document go unpunished. Those responsible areonly held accountable in special circumstances, such as when a case causesa public outcry, receives close press attention, or comes under the spotlightof international publicity.The role of torture in the government's counterinsurgency strategieswas demonstrated during the occupation of the residence of the Japaneseambassador by the MRTA, which began on December 17, 1996. In March 1997,before army commandos broke into the building and released seventy-onehostages held by the guerrillas, the Peruvian army detained more than fortycoffee growers in Alto Yurinaki, where they believed the MRTA guerrillacolumn responsible for the attack had originated. Over the next few days,the army reportedly tortured almost all of the detainees in an attemptto force them to incriminate themselves and their neighbors as membersof the MRTA. The army variously beat them, submerged them in tanks of water,made them stand without food in the sun for hours, and shocked them withelectricity. DINCOTE later ordered the release of all but one of the detaineesfor lack of evidence. Human Rights Watch/Americas, together with representativesof Peruvian human rights organizations, conducted investigations in thearea of the arrests, interviewing released detainees or members of theirfamilies. The testimonies of former detainees, their relatives, villageleaders, and provincial government authorities confirmed the systematicuse of torture during this operation, and the failure of the legal regimein force to protect the physical integrity of the victims or to punishthose responsible.In early April the country was stunned by reports based on a televisioninvestigation that army intelligence officials had brutally tortured oneof their own agents in the basement of army headquarters in Lima. Filmshot secretly in the military hospital showed the fingers and ankles ofthe agent, Leonor La Rosa, inflamed and scarred from burns reportedly inflictedwith a blowtorch. La Rosa had been under investigation after secret intelligenceplans to intimidate journalists and members of the opposition were leakedto the press. The body of another agent, a colleague of La Rosa's, wasdiscovered on a roadside north of Lima with its head and hands missing,after they had been severed apparently to avoid her identification.If Peru is to bring its counterinsurgency policy and crime fightingtactics into line with international human rights standards, it must introduceeffective measures to combat torture and impunity. Although Peru is a signatoryto international treaties against torture, neither its laws nor its practicemeet the standards required by international law. For example, tortureis still not classified as a specific crime in Peru. Cases of torture mustcurrently be prosecuted as "battery," and the low penalties provided uponconviction are inappropriate given the gravity of the crime. More importantly,the government fails to ensure that complaints of torture are investigatedadequately and those guilty held accountable.The persistence of torture in Peru is attributable, in part, to theweakness and lack of independence of entities responsible for ensuringrespect for the law and human rights. Despite repeated promises, PresidentFujimori has failed to restore fully the independence of the judiciary,shattered following the coup d'etat in 1992. Civilian judges still occupyprovisional posts in many parts of the country, subject to removal by acommittee dominated by a government appointee. Fearful for their jobs,many judges are unwilling to challenge police misconduct and accept asevidence confessions extracted under torture, a practice that is explicitlybanned under international law. Such confessions are also readily acceptedby the special "faceless" courts and military tribunals that try personsaccused of subversion and treason: the laws that govern these courts imposeadditional obstacles to judicial detection of torture by preventing membersof the police who conducted interrogations from appearing for cross-examination.Torture is committed with impunity. Few members of the military or policeare prosecuted for abusing detainees unless the victim dies from the torture.Moreover, they are rarely prosecuted by impartial and autonomous courts.Instead, military courts assert jurisdiction in torture cases in whichthe accused are members of the armed forces. Convictions in military courtsare rare, and when agents are convicted they are given sentences disproportionatelylight given the seriousness of the crime. Military courts also obstructand refuse to cooperate with investigations and prosecutions of torturecases by civilian authorities.Grave shortcomings in the effectiveness and independence of officialmonitoring bodies limit their ability to combat torture. In recent months,the ruling party, Change 90-New Majority (Cambio 90- Nueva Mayoría,C90-NM), which has a substantial majority in congress, has striven to maintaincontrol over institutions like the Public Ministry, which works withinthe Office of the Attorney General of the Nation to prosecute crimes, andthe Constitutional Court, which monitors observance of the constitution.The office of the Attorney General, which is responsible for overseeingthe independence of the courts and ensuring the correct administrationof justice, has had key powers removed and transferred to a single official,a government appointee, who is known to be a close ally of the president.In April 1997, the attorney general came under personal attack by the armedforces for seeking to enforce habeas corpus rulings affecting militaryjustice officials. In June 1997, three judges of the seven-member ConstitutionalCourt were dismissed after an impeachment spearheaded by C90-NM, whichassailed the judges for ruling that Fujimori's planned run for a secondre-election was unconstitutional. The court was left barely functioning,and could not continue to act effectively as a forum for the protectionof constitutional rights.The news media, which in early 1997 played a vital role in spotlightinghuman rights abuses, including torture, suffered a welter of governmentreprisals in the months that followed. Journalists who had covered torturecases were victims of physical threats and intimidation and selective prosecutionfor alleged tax debts. Channel 2 television, known as Frecuencia Latina,which broadcast the sensational report on the torture of La Rosa, cameunder persistent attack for its critical reporting. The government attemptedto intimidate the channel by subjecting it to an investigation for allegedevasion of tax or customs duty, a tactic also used against a radio station,a private clinic which had agreed to admit La Rosa, and one of the impeachedConstitutional Court judges. Baruch Ivcher Bronstein, Frecuencia Latina'smajority shareholder, a naturalized Israeli, was publicly denounced bythe armed forces and later deprived of his Peruvian nationality on speciouslegal grounds in a crude attempt to silence the station. Finally, a courtordered that Ivcher relinquish control of Frecuencia Latina to its minorityowners, provoking a walk-out by respected journalists.President Fujimori used his inaugural address at the annual GeneralAssembly of the Organization of American States to launch barbed criticismof the press and attacked a daily opposition newspaper in television spotspaid for by the Ministry of the Interior. These actions by government officialshelped to create at atmosphere in which physical attacks against journalistsappeared justified.The Defender of the People (Defensor del Pueblo), an ombudsman appointedby congress to protect and promote human rights, has managed to preservehis independence and has acted energetically in individual cases involvingtorture. Jorge Santistevan de Noriega, who heads the office of the Defenderof the People, told Human Rights Watch/Americas of the commitment of hisoffice to work toward major reforms that will benefit the treatment ofdetainees. Human Rights Watch/Americas welcomes this commitment and hopesthat it will be backed by the full cooperation of the Peruvian government.So far, while declaring its opposition to torture, the government hasfailed to take measures to stop it, although the extent of the practicehas been amply documented by the international bodies that monitor compliancewith the human rights treaties that Peru has signed. The Alto Yurinakicases, documented in this report's fifth chapter and widely covered inthe press, led to an assurance by Fujimori that allegations of torturewould be investigated. Despite their gravity and credibility, no investigationwas carried out. Although four officers allegedly responsible for the tortureof Leonor La Rosa were tried and convicted by a military court, the victimwas held incommunicado, harassed, and threatened. Politically motivatedassaults on the independence and effectiveness of institutions such asthe civilian judiciary and the attorney general's office have weakenedtheir ability to serve as a bulwark against abuses by the police and thearmed forces. In short, the government has treated human rights as an inconvenientencumbrance in the way of government policy; instead it must treat themas a central political objective.Recommendations to the Peruvian Government:The government should begin an immediate campaign to end the use oftorture by Peruvian security forces. Warnings should be issued throughthe chain of command that officers or personnel involved in torture orill-treatment of detainees will be strictly sanctioned and denounced tothe public prosecutor.The government should institute an immediate and impartial investigationinto the use of torture in Alto Yurinaki in March. Military personnel responsiblefor torture and those responsible for the operation during which it occurredshould be disciplined and prosecuted. The results of the inquiry shouldbe made public, and compensation and an official apology should be providedto the victims.The crime of torture should be individually and specifically includedin the Penal Code with penalties appropriate to its seriousness.The People's Defender should make recommendations to the governmentaimed at clarifying the legal limits of the jurisdiction of military courts.Military jurisdiction should be limited to military offenses, that is thosethat affect solely military values, such as desertion and disobedience.Crimes such as torture, even when committed by military personnel againstmilitary personnel, or on military premises, should be dealt with exclusivelyby civilian courts.Although the armed forces lack authority to conduct interrogations ofcivilian suspects, they regularly do so. This should be clearly prohibited,and those who breach the prohibition should be sanctioned.The Office of the Attorney General of the Nation should take measuresto improve the vigilance of provincial prosecutors in preventing the occurrenceof torture, and prosecutors who fail to attend interrogations and searchesshould be disciplined and sanctioned.The powers of faceless courts and military tribunals to try terrorismcases should be terminated and transferred to ordinary criminal courts.While courts should be guaranteed the necessary powers to try terroristsuspects effectively, such trials should always be conducted with fullrespect for the right of defense and the presumption of innocence.Current periods of incommunicado detention should be drastically reduced,and suspects should be placed under incommunicado detention only on theexpress instructions of the investigating judge. Judges must strictly superviseincommunicado detention to prevent illtreatment and should impose incommunicadodetention only when strictly necessary to protect the investigation.The government should investigate thoroughly and impartially the abductionsand violent attacks on members of the press, politicians, and other publicpersonalities documented in this report. Those responsible for these crimesshould be prosecuted and punished.A permanent parliamentary mechanism, such as a multi-party commission,should be established for an effective and impartial review of the activitiesof the intelligence services, to ensure that their work is conducted withfull respect for political and civil rights.The government should immediately restore unimpeded access to Peruvianprisons, detentions centers, and military installations to the InternationalCommittee of the Red Cross (ICRC). ICRC access can be an important impedimentto the torture or ill-treatment of detainees.Recommendations to the Shining Path and MRTA:The Shining Path and MRTA should reject categorically all actions thatviolate humanitarian law, including summary executions, indiscriminateattacks, hostage-taking, and torture.Recommendations to the United States:The Clinton administration should suspend all assistance to Peru's NationalIntelligence Service, which has reliably been reported to be involved innumerous human rights violations, including a campaign of harassment ofthe press and illegal phone-tapping. The United States should publiclydistance itself from the SIN's de facto chief, Vladimiro Montesinos, whois widely perceived in Lima to enjoy Washington's support.The administration should seek support from other members of the UnitedNations for the assignment of a special rapporteur or an independent expertto monitor and publicly report on the human rights situation in Peru.II. THE PREVALENCE OF TORTUREThe Scope of TortureGovernment forces rely heavily on torture and other human rights abusesin their efforts to defeat and dismantle the armed opposition groups, ShiningPath and the MRTA. Although substantially weakened and consequently lessactive, both groups continue to mount raids, ambushes, bombing attacks,and political assassinations. Most of these are carried out by ShiningPath in the jungle region of the Alto Huallaga, where the organizationhas its stronghold.On December 17, 1996, MRTA guerrillas entered the residence of the Japaneseambassador in Lima during an official reception, occupied the building,and for almost four months held seventy-two hostages, including governmentministers, judges, and foreign diplomats. Protracted negotiations to securetheir release and a peaceful solution of the crisis became deadlocked.On April 22, army and police commandos stormed the building, released thesurviving hostages, and killed all of the guerrillas.(1)A notable reduction in the number of extrajudicial executions and "disappearances"has accompanied the decline in the levels of political violence. In its1996 annual report, the National Human Rights Coordinator (CoordinadoraNacional de Derechos Humanos, Coordinadora), an umbrella group that includesforty-seven nongovernmental human rights groups, documented three casesof extrajudicial execution and three "disappearances" in 1996, comparedwith thirty-eight extrajudicial executions and twenty-five "disappearances"in 1994.(2) By November, 1997, Peruvianhuman rights groups had documented no new cases of extrajudicial executionsor "disappearances" during the year, promising to make 1997 the first yearfree of such abuses for more than a decade.Despite these improvements, however, the torture of detainees remainspervasive. The Coordinadora has documented a persistent pattern of tortureand ill-treatment of detainees across the entire country. In a report submittedto the United Nations Committee Against Torture (CAT) in April 1997, itpresented information on thirty-one selected cases, a small proportionof the cases registered by the organization over the years.(3)The cases documented occurred in the departments of Huánuco, SanMartín, Ucayali, Cajamarca, Ayacucho, Amazonas, La Libertad, andLima. Among the most seriously affected were Huánuco, San Martín,and Ucayali.According to data compiled by the IDL, an important Peruvian human rightsorganization that has provided legal representation to prisoners unjustlyaccused of terrorism, 78.2 percent of these male prisoners -- almost fourout of every five -- reported that they were subjected to torture or ill-treatmentafter their detention. The figure for women is only slightly lower: 70.6percent. Just over half the men who reported being tortured (51.3 percent)alleged that the abuse took place in detention centers run by DINCOTE,while 18.8 percent say they were tortured while in a military base. Morethan a quarter of the tortured men said they had been beaten, and an additional16.3 percent said they had been tortured more than once. The second-most-commontype of torture after beatings was water torture, known as the submarino,which consists of repeated immersion of the head in water sometimes lacedwith chemicals such as household detergent. Rape was the second-most-commonform of torture reported by women prisoners (8.5 percent), after beatings.(4)In 1995, the Center for Studies and Action for Peace (Centro de Estudiosy Acción por la Paz, CEAPAZ) carried out a survey of people betweenfifteen and eighteen years old who had been charged with or convicted ofa terrorist offense and who were in a prison or juvenile detention center.They found that out of a sample of 128 adolescents, eighty-three -- 65percent -- said they had been ill-treated during pre-trial detention. Sixtypeople -- 47 percent -- said they had been tortured.(5)Torture is reported with the greatest frequency in regions of the countrycontrolled by the military under state-of-emergency regulations.(6)In recent years, some military bases in particular have acquired notorietyas places of systematic torture. Such was the case in 1995 and 1996 withthe Marine bases of Huipoca and Aguaytía, in the province of Pucallpa.Several cases were reported in 1996 involving soldiers stationed in ornear Tocache, in the department of San Martín.(7)In 1994, an officer who had worked in several army bases in the AltoHuallaga region explained to the Coordinadora the most common types oftorture practiced by army intelligence officials there.(8)He described seven common techniques:The "grill:" the detainee is made to stretch out on a metal bed frameto which electric cables have been connected. The victim is tied with awire to the frame and doused with water while electric current is applied.The "submarine:" the detainee is introduced head-first into a tank ofwater, with his hands and feet tied.The "rag:" the detainee is made to lie on his back with his hands andfeet tied. His head is covered with a wet towel and water is poured ontop his head, half-drowning him.The "stick:" a stick is introduced into the anus, or in the case ofwomen, the anus and vagina.The "brawl:" the detainee is tied up and forced to lie on the floorwhile being beaten by at least ten soldiers until he loses consciousness."Hanging:" the detainee is hung by his forearms or wrists, after towelshave been tied around them to avoid leaving marks.The "magneto:" electricity is applied to the testicles.While in recent years most reports of torture have implicated membersof the armed forces in emergency zones, torture by DINCOTE has continued.DINCOTE, jointly with the Marines detained Fulberto Marceliano CuadrosSánchez, Luz Delicia Guadalupe Collantes and Silvia InésQuintana Leyva on January 17, 1996 during a raid on a shantytown in Callao,Lima. Cuadros was accused of being a member of the Shining Path after thetwo women were forced under torture with beatings and electricity to incriminatehim. Members of DINCOTE are alleged to have raped Nancy Patruska Del CampoCáceres, aged 23, after they detained her on May 7, 1997 and heldher incommunicado.(9)The Legal Prohibition of TortureMilitary personnel and the police face few internal or external constraintsto the use of torture in interrogating suspects: torture is not codifiedas a distinct offense; emergency powers facilitate its use; military courtjurisdiction over members of the military or police encourages impunity;monitoring institutions have been weakened and compromised.As a party to the United Nations Convention against Torture and OtherCruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment (the Convention againstTorture), Peru is obligated to "ensure that all acts of torture are offencesunder its criminal law"(10) and to "makethese offences punishable by appropriate penalties which take into accounttheir grave nature."(11) Peru has failedto do so. Peru's Constitution of 1993 prohibits torture,(12)but torture is not codified as a specific offence within the penal code.Under Peru's criminal law, acts of torture can only be prosecuted as violationsof more generic crimes such as "battery"(13)or "abuses of authority".(14) Neither reflectsthe nature or gravity of torture, nor were the relevant laws written toprovide commensurate punishment for cases of torture.International authorities have repeatedly urged Peru to adopt specificlegislation criminalizing acts of torture. In February 1994, the governmentsubmitted its first report to the CAT established under the United NationsConvention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatmentor Punishment to monitor states' compliance.(15)Following the hearing in Geneva on Peru's report, the CAT expressed profoundconcern about the extent of torture in Peru and the impunity enjoyed bythe perpetrators. It recommended in 1995, ". . . consideration should begiven to defining torture as an independent offence punishable by a penaltyappropriate to its seriousness."(16) TheUnited Nations Rapporteur on Torture, Nigel S. Rodley, noted in his reporton Peru in January 1996 that "the new Penal Code, in force since 1991,has not explicitly incorporated the offence of torture as such. The newcriminal legislation even repealed provisions punishing unlawful harassmentand coercion."(17)Peruvian legislators have long been aware of the need for legislationon torture. In April 1996, public concern provoked by the death in custodyof Mario Palomino García (see section VI of this report) led tothe presentation to Congress of several bills to outlaw torture. A billproposed by congressman Antero Flores Aráoz of the Popular ChristianParty, (Partido Popular Cristiano, PPC) on April 11, 1996, set the penaltyfor torture resulting in death at a minimum of twenty years' imprisonment.Another proposal by Carlos Chipoco of the opposition Union for Peru (Uniónpor el Perú, UPP) addresses torture together with other grave humanrights crimes such as enforced "disappearances." These proposals have remaineddormant since they were introduced a year ago. A sense of urgency did notreturn until the airing of the television interview of tortured army intelligenceagent Leonor La Rosa in April 1997. Soon after, the congressional JusticeCommission began debating a proposal drafted by a working group of lawyersand based on the Flores and Chipoco proposals, among others. As of thiswriting, however, the final text of an anti-torture bill has not been agreedupon.In addition to the Convention against Torture, Peru has also ratifiedseveral other international human rights instruments that prohibit torture,including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),(18)the American Convention on Human Rights,(19)and the Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture.(20)Under Peru's constitution, international treaties in force form part ofPeru's domestic law.(21)III. THE INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT: WEAKENED SAFEGUARDSAGAINST TORTUREThe Continuing Use of Emergency PowersThe torture of suspected guerrillas or collaborators occurs within aframework of counterinsurgency measures that both facilitate such abuseand shelter it from discovery or sanction. Despite the notable reductionof guerrilla activity over the last three years, large regions of the countryremain effectively under military rule. More than a fifth of the populationis still governed under emergency regulations that place civilian authoritiesunder military command and suspend certain civil rights and freedoms guaranteedunder Peru's constitution, such as the right not to be detained withouta written warrant, freedom of movement and assembly, and the inviolabilityof the home. Under international law, the government may legitimately maintainthese regulations only in times of "public emergency which threatens thelife of the nation. . . ."(22)In many zones still under emergency regulations, the current level ofpolitical violence does not pose such a grave threat as to warrant thesuspension of civil rights and individual guarantees. Even where securityconditions may justify emergency measures, the government may not interferewith the enjoyment of non-derogable rights, such as freedom from torture.While it is true that mechanisms to protect individual rights and ensurethe accountability of military and police personnel, like habeas corpusand the monitoring responsibilities of provincial prosecutors, remain formallyin force, in practice they function much less effectively when civilianauthorities are subject to military command. The reduced efficiency ofthese mechanisms increases the vulnerability of the population at largeto violations of non-derogable rights by greatly restricting the possibilityof legal redress.(23)The police possess expanded powers to investigate suspects and formulatecharges under the "antiterrorism law," announced in May 1992,(24)and the "treason law" of August 1992.(25)Detainees suspected of offenses under these laws may be held for fifteendays by the police before being placed at the disposal of a judge, whereasordinary detainees may be held only for twenty-four hours. In addition,the police have powers to place detainees in incommunicado detention forup to ten days without requiring a judge's authorization. Interrogationof suspects during the lengthy period of incommunicado detention is routinelyaccompanied by torture. The antiterrorist law established "faceless" courtsin which the identities of the judges, prosecutors and prosecution witnesseswere kept secret and the right to defense was restricted; those accusedunder the "treason law" were tried by faceless military tribunals usingsummary procedures that restrict rights related to legal defense even moreseverely. These courts routinely accepted coerced confessions as evidence.On October 15, 1997, the government terminated the mandate of the facelesscourts, which had attracted international as well as domestic condemnationfor their denial of due process and the right of defense. During the five-and-one-halfyears of their existence these courts had convicted more than a thousandpeople for security-related offenses, hundreds of whom are believed tobe innocent of any connection with terrorist groups and remain in jail.(26)In response to domestic and international criticism, in 1995 the Fujimorigovernment had already modified Peru's antiterrorist laws to eliminatesome of their most criticized aspects.(27)Decree Law 26248 restored the right to habeas corpus to people detainedunder the antiterrorism laws, which had been suspended under Decree Law25659. The suspension was in force for fifteen months, from August 1992until November 1993. Law 26447 restored the right of prisoners to haveaccess to a lawyer from the moment of detention and requires the presenceof a prosecutor during interrogations to ensure that the police respectlegal procedure. This measure limited the impact of incommunicado detention,although the prohibition of visits by family and relatives was maintained.The law also lessened the danger of children being tortured, by increasingthe age at which children might be tried for terrorist offenses from fifteento eighteen years of age.These reforms were an effort to defuse criticism of Peru's counterinsurgencypolicy, and they do not eliminate conditions that facilitate torture. DINCOTE,for example, is still empowered to hold suspects for up to fifteen daysbefore putting them at the disposal of a judge and prison facility. DINCOTE,not the judge or prosecutor, decides whether or not to hold prisoners incommunicado,and may still do so for periods of up to ten days. Many judges and prosecutorscontinue to have only provisional status and may be removed by a committeecontrolled by a government appointee, thus lacking the guarantees of tenurethat would encourage them to confront the army or the police in individualcases. Some prosecutors do not appear to understand the importance of theirrole as guarantors of due process or are afraid to exercise it effectively.This is evident from the numerous cases documented in this report, forexample, in which detainees insist that the prosecutor was not presentduring their interrogation, as required by law, even though the prosecutorsigned at the bottom of the suspect's statement. In one case, a prosecutorwas persuaded by army interrogators to don a military uniform to witnessa procedure in which a suspect was called on to "recognize" a stockpileof weapons; by appearing before the detainee in military uniform, he discouragedthe suspect from going against the orders of his interrogators.One provision of the antiterrorist law that has not been modified expresslyforbids the questioning in court of the police or military officials whoparticipated in the interrogation of the suspect. Introduced to protectthe security of police personnel, this rule drastically reduces the opportunitiesof the defense to prove irrregularities in the conduct of interrogationsand searches, or to confront police interrogators with evidence of torture.Military officials continue to violate the strict legal limitationson their powers of arrest and interrogation. According to Law 25475, thearmed forces may, in exceptional cases, detain terrorist suspects in areasonly where there is no police presence, but they are required to hand themover to the nearest police station immediately. The armed forces are notauthorizedto interrogate suspects, carry out searches, confront witnesses, or performany other investigative function.(28) However,they do so frequently. In the case of Alto Yurinaki, documented in thisreport, the army captured suspects, held them for up to five days, interrogatedthem, tortured them and used them as informers while combing the area formore suspects to arrest. When the detainees were finally handed over toDINCOTE in Pichanaki, army officers were present in the police stationand tried to intimidate the detainees into ratifying what they had declaredunder torture. In some cases documented by the IDL, judges in facelesscourts discounted confessions after finding that military personnel hadinterrogated and tortured the suspects into confessing to actions thatthey subsequently denied when later questioned--without torture--by thepolice or the prosecutor.(29) However,cases in which judges subsequently opened a prosecution against the torturersare virtually unknown.(30)Denial of ICRC AccessSince the December 17, 1996 takeover of the Japanese ambassador's residencein Lima by the MRTA, the Peruvian government has suspended its agreement,negotiated in early 1993, whereby the International Committee of the RedCross was granted regular and prompt access to all detainees held on suspicionof politically motivated crimes in Peru. President Fujimori rebuffed ICRCPresident Cornelio Sommaruga, who visited Lima in August 1997 in an effortto have the humanitarian organization's access restored.Visits by the ICRC, which communicates its findings privately to thegovernment responsible, have proven effective in reducing the incidenceof ill-treatment, including torture and the forcible "disappearance" ofdetainees. The continued denial of ICRC access underlines the government'sprofound disregard for the rights of detainees.Effects of the 1995 Amnesty LawThe effects of President Fujimori's amnesty law, promulgated in June1995, fall like a shadow over the issues discussed in this report. Thislaw granted amnesty to all military or police personnel and civilians convictedor implicated in human rights violations during the fifteen-year counterinsurgencywar, which started in 1980. While it was defended by the government asa pacification measure, its real purpose was to prevent criminal investigationsinto the grave human rights violations committed by the armed forces andpolice. The law and a subsequent one intended to make it impossible tochallenge the amnesty in the courts, were universally lamented by inter-governmentalhuman rights bodies, including the United Nations Human Rights Committee,the U.N special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary and arbitrary executions,the U.N. special rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers,and the Chairman of the U.N.'s Working Group on Enforced or InvoluntaryDisappearances.(31)The deleterious effects of laws designed to sacrifice accountabilityfor political stability have been well illustrated in Peru. A week afterthe passage of the law, eight members of the Colina Group, an army intelligencedeath squad who had been convicted and imprisoned for the abduction andmurder of five students and a teacher from the Enrique Guzmán delValle University--known as the La Cantuta case--were released. Since thatdate, abductions, death threats, and harrassment directed against knownopposition leaders, lawyers, and independent journalists have escalated,and for many of these incidents the Colina group is believed to be responsible.Many of the journalists targeted had investigated the La Cantuta case,and the lawyers had assisted relatives of other Colina victims in theirsearch for justice. In addition, army intelligence officers have targetedand tortured intelligence agents suspected of leaking data to the pressabout this campaign of intimidation against journalists. Former army Maj.Martín Rivas, the commander of the Colina group and one of thosereleased under the amnesty law, has emerged as the major suspect in themurder of Mariela Barreto, a former intelligence agent whose dismemberedbody was found on a road outside Lima in March 1997, as described below.Military JusticeAnother factor contributing to impunity in torture cases is the abilityof the police and the military to exploit ambiguities in the current definitionof the spheres of civilian and military justice, and to insist on tryingtheir own members in military courts that lack the most elementary guaranteesof independence and autonomy. Article 173 of the Constitution establishesthe jurisdiction of military courts over some crimes committed by membersof the armed forces and the National Police:In case of a function-related crime, the members of the Armed Forcesand the National Police are subject to their respective jurisdiction andto the Code of Military Justice. The provisions of the latter are not applicableto civilians except in the case of the crimes of treason and terrorismas determined by the law.The National Police, as well as the armed forces, possess their ownstructure of tribunals that adjudicate breaches of police discipline andsanction offenders. However, these tribunals frequently also assert jurisdictionover common crimes when they are committed by police on active serviceor on police premises. Thus, in cases of torture or other abuses of civiliansby military or police personnel, the police or military justice authoritiesoften assert exclusive military jurisdiction, and the accused is placedunder the jurisdiction of the Supreme Military Justice authority. Fromthen on, military prosecutors and judges frequently ignore orders fromtheir civilian counterparts who seek access to detainees.The legal definition of the crucial concept of a function-related crime(delito de función) is set out in Article 14 of the 1991Code of Criminal Procedure, according to which:Military justice is limited to those crimes that are directly linkedto military or police functions, in that they affect juridical values thatare exclusively military and the disciplinary order of the Armed Forcesor National Police. In these cases the military and police personnel aresubjected to their respective jurisdiction and to the Code of MilitaryJustice.(32)The norm states clearly that the classification of a crime as function-relateddepends on whether the value affected is exclusively military or not. Torture,the deliberate infliction of physical and mental suffering, affects a juridicalvalue--the integrity of the person--which clearly transcends the purelymilitary sphere.(33) Unfortunately, theCode of Penal Procedure, although approved by Congress in 1991, has neverbeen put into practice.(34) A bill to reformthe code that has been presented to congress excludes any definition ofthe concept of a function-related crime.(35)Recent cases confirm that military thinking is miles apart from the definitionin the 1991 code. Military and police believe that torture, if practicedby an officer on duty and on army or police property is properly a function-relatedcrime, even though the offended party is a civilian. The courts have frequentlysupported this view. When civilian and military courts investigating atorture case both claim jurisdiction, either of them may appeal to a highercourt for a ruling to decide competence, and ultimately the Supreme Courtmust resolve the dispute. The Supreme Court has consistently passed humanrights cases to military courts,(36) includingthe best-known case of all, the La Cantuta disappearances. As Human RightsWatch/Americas noted in 1995,In a November 1994 statement before the U.N. Committee Against Torture,Justice Minister Vega claimed that between 1986 and 1993, 108 officersand 453 non-commissioned officers (suboficiales) had been punishedby military courts for having practiced torture. Of that number, he said,twenty-eight officers and 151 non-commissioned officers had been givenprison terms.Because of the secrecy of military court proceedings and decisions,it is virtually impossible to corroborate the minister's statement. Inthe few cases known to the Coordinadora, investigations concluded withmilitary courts asserting that the allegations were not proven and thereforeno punishment was merited.(37)Until the moment a jurisdictional dispute is definitively resolved,it is common for investigations of torture cases to be heard in parallelin both civilian and military courts, as occurred for example, in boththe Chamaya and La Rosa cases, analyzed in this report. The military judicialauthorities commonly hamper the civilian investigation, by ignoring ordelaying responses to court orders for access to defendants and witnesses.Since military and police tribunals use summary procedures and can speedup or slow down trials at their discretion, they may pre-empt a decisionby the civilian court by reaching a rapid verdict, as occurred in boththe Chamaya and La Rosa cases, detailed below. Despite the verdict, thecase continues in the civilian court until it reaches the Supreme Courtfor a ruling on the jurisdictional dispute, and in such cases the SupremeCourt has almost invariably ruled in favor of the military. One of themain arguments the court uses is that a verdict by the civilian court wouldcreate double jeopardy, violating a basic due process right not to be triedtwice for the same offense.Habeas corpus writs have been another source of conflict between theattorney general and individual judges on one side and military justiceauthorities on the other. Disturbingly, in some decisions in which thethe duty of the military to comply with habeas corpus rulings was at stake,the Supreme Court supported the military courts, and threatened to prosecutejudges who had defended individual guarantees.In December 1996, the Chamber of Public Law of the Higher Court of Limaordered military judges to allow drug-trafficker Demetrio ChávezPeñaherrera (alias El Vaticano), convicted by a military court tothirty years' imprisonment for treason, access to his defense lawyer. Militaryjustice authorities refused to comply, on grounds of national security.(38)In another case, the same civilian court granted a writ of habeas corpuson behalf of Capt. Gustavo Celsi Hurtado, formerly of the army, an insurancebroker accused of appropriating $1,050,000 from an army account, on thegrounds that Celsi was retired and his actions fell under civilian jurisdiction.The army refused to release Celsi, and a military court later sentencedhim to four years' imprisonment.(39) Inresponse, Aljovín ordered that army Gen. Guido Guevara Guerra, thepresident of the Supreme Council of Military Justice (Consejo Supremo deJusticia Militar, CSJM), be prosecuted for abuse of authority, violence,and resisting authority. In a crude retaliation, the CSJM announced thatit was opening impeachment proceedings against Aljovín for "obstructingthe judicial function" and "abuse of authority." Guevara announced thathenceforward no military judge would respond to any summons issued by acivilian court.(40) The CSJM's impeachmentinitiative foundered on lack of parliamentary support, even among legislatorsof proven loyalty to the government. Nevertheless, the episode was illustrativeof the military's view of their courts as being wholly autonomous of thecivilian judiciary, despite a constitutional principle that justice issingle and unified.(41)The CSJM also made a formal complaint to the judiciary's disciplinarybody against Sergio Salas Villalobos, Elizabeth Roxana MacRae Thays, andJuan Cancio Castillo Vásquez, three judges of the Public Law Chamberof the Lima Superior Court who granted habeas corpus petitions in the Robles(42)and Cesti cases, as well as others, accusing them of "dangerous interference"in the military's sphere of jurisdiction. On June 26, a Supreme Court panelremoved the three judges from their posts on the court, after having receivedauthorization to make appointments to the court from the Executive Commissionof the Judiciary only two days previously.(43)The legal action pursued by the attorney general against the CSJM was heardby a temporary panel of the Supreme Court, staffed by provisional judges,who ruled that there was no basis on which to charge the military justiceauthorities and instead called for the three judges responsible for thehabeas corpus rulings to be charged themselves with breach of public duty(prevaricato). The panel also ruled that the military courts couldnot be obliged to comply with an illegal habeas corpus ruling and thatthe case against the members of the CSJM must be heard by a military court.(44)The Supreme Court's call for the prosecution of the judges was rejectedby the Executive Commision of the Public Ministry on September 4. However,the episode clearly revealed the precariousness of the situation of judgeswho upheld constitutional guarantees against the executive branch.(45)Curtailment of Powers of Constitutional MonitoringBodiesPeru's constitution provides for autonomous public bodies to ensurethat legislation complies with constitutional principles and that justiceis administered fairly and in accordance with the law and human rightsprinciples. These are, respectively, the main functions of the ConstitutionalCourt and the Office of the Attorney General.(46)Following his April 6, 1992 "autogolpe," Fujimori dissolved the ConstitutionalCourt (then known as the Court of Constitutional Guarantees (Tribunal deGarantias Constitucionales) and fired scores of prosecutors and judges,replacing them with temporary government appointees. Since the promulgationof the new constitution in October 1993, the Fujimori government has takena series of measures to restructure the Public Ministry. After protracteddelays, a Constitutional Court was finally appointed in June 1996.Essential to the watchdog function of both these bodies is their capacityto make decisions without interference from the other branches of governmentand based on principled legal argument rather than political allegiance.As guarantors of the rule of law and redress against arbitrary acts bythe executive branch, their efficiency and independence has a strong, ifindirect, impact on violations of basic human rights, such as torture.Yet so far, neither body has exercised effectively the functions prescribedfor it in the Constitution. The Constitutional Court, hamstrung from themoment of its appointment by a law that required the votes of six out ofits seven members to declare a law unconstitutional, was further incapacitatedin June by the controversial impeachment and dismissal of three of itsmembers for issuing a ruling against the government. The powers of theOffice of the Attorney General, who is elected by his peers, were diminishedby a law passed in January 1997, which passed many of the post's key functionsto a government appointee.The Attorney General of the NationIn any aggressive policy to combat torture, the Office of the AttorneyGeneral would play a key role in his capacity as titular head of the PublicMinistry. Apart from its responsibility for leading police investigationsand formulating indictments, the Public Ministry is required to ensurethat the procedures used during criminal investigations comply with thelaw. The autonomy of the Public Ministry is essential to its ability toexercise the dual role of prosecutor and guarantor, as when it it is calledon to protect the rights of those detained arbitrarily or mistreated whilein police detention. Public ministry officials, known as fiscales,must be present when suspects are interrogated or sign declarations, andmust witness searches and post-mortem examinations. After arrest by thearmy, a detainee's first contact with a civilian is with a provincial prosecutor(fiscal provincial), who is expected to take over the investigationas soon as the detainee has been transferred to the custody of the NationalPolice. If police violate the law, the prosecutor must initiate legal proceedings.To be effective, therefore, prosecutors are required to act autonomously,on no account simply as an arm of the police.During 1996 and 1997, the Fujimori administration created new bodiesto supervise the reorganization of the administration of justice duringthe transitional period in which new permanent personnel were to be appointedto the judiciary and public ministry. These bodies included the EjecutiveCommission of the Public Ministry (Comisión Ejecutivo del MinisterioPúblico, CEMP) headed by the then-attorney general, Dr. Blanca NélidaColán and composed of senior prosecutors.The CEMP was charged withadministering the Public Ministry until December 31,1988, designated asthe end of the transitional period. Dr. Colán, known to be closeto President Fujimori, was appointed provisional attorney general afterthe April 6 coup.(47)A December 1996 law(48) prolonged theperiod of office of the members of the CEMP, until its functions terminatedin December 1988, including that of its president, Dr. Colán, regardlessof who was elected as new attorney general at the end of Dr. Colán'sterm in January 1997. The law shifted important powers formerly exercisedby the attorney general to Dr. Colán as president of the CEMP. Theyincluded the power to prosecute Public Ministry officials for misconduct,disciplinary powers, and control over the public ministry budget. In January1997, another law gave the CEMP's president the power to appoint temporaryprosecutors.(49) They had been previouslyappointed by a plural body, the National Council of the Judiciary, as theconstitution stipulates. These temporary prosecutors were eligible forappointment to the commission and could therefore influence Public Ministrypolicies directly.In January 1997, Dr. Miguel Aljvín Swayne, a jurist noted forhis independent stance, was elected attorney general.(50)In an interview after his appointment, Dr. Swayne announced that he woulddevote himself to restoring the dignity and autonomy of his office despitethe truncation of his powers.(51)The Constitutional CourtUnder Article 201 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court, anautonomous seven-member body, may declare legislation to be unconstitutionaland annul it; it also decides appeals for habeas corpus petitions and protectionof constitutional rights (amparo) when these have been deniedby a lower court.Like the Public Ministry, the Constitutional Court has been kept undertight reins by the pro-Fujimori majority in Congress. The seven membersof the court are elected by a two-thirds majority of Congress. Under thecourt's regulatory law, no legislation can be overturned as unconsitutionalif two or more of the seven members of the court oppose it or abstain fromvoting on the legislation. This voting requirement provides an enormousadvantage to the government in power if that government commands a significantmajority in Congress, as does the Fujimori administration. The court itselfdivided on the voting-requirement issue, which opposition congress membersswiftly impugned as unconstitutional.(52)Furthermore, the time period within which a law must be challenged as unconstitutionalwas drastically reduced from six years to six months, thereby making itimpossible to challenge controversial decrees enacted in previous years,including the Amnesty Law of 1995.The moment of truth for the court occurred when it was called to ruleon the constitutionality of Fujimori's bid to stand for election in theyear 2000 for a third successive term. Article 112 of the Constitutionallows a president to stand for re-election for an additional term, butdoes not permit a second successive re-election. On August 23, 1996, Congresspassed the so-called "Law of the Authentic Interpretation of Article 112of the Constitution," according to which periods of office before the constitutioncame into force in 1993 were not to be counted when tallying the numberof terms served by a president.(53)On January 17, 1997, the court ruled, in an unopposed vote but withfour abstentions, that the law was "inapplicable."(54)Following the legal reasoning that a decision on the "inapplicability"of a law required only a simple majority vote,(55)rather than the six-out-of-seven majority required for a ruling of unconstitutionality,the judges approved the ruling. C90-NM congress members angrily accusedthose who had voted for the ruling of exceeding their constitutional mandate.In response to a series of apparent acts of intimidation against thecourt members who voted for the ruling, opposition members of congresssucceeded in pressing for the establishment of a congressional commissionto investigate.(56) The commission reportedon May 6, but instead of addressing the illegal pressures that it was mandatedto investigate, it recommended the impeachment of the court's president,Ricardo Nugent, and judges Manuel Aguirre Roca, Guillermo Rey Terry, andDelia Revoredo, who had voted for the ruling. The impeachment prosperedin the government-controlled congress and the three judges were dismissedfrom the court. Although the impeachment of Nugent was not approved, heresigned in sympathy with his colleagues.Although the legality of on legal grounds, it was defended by juristsof standing across the political spectrum. The mechanism of impeachmentis limited in the constitution to "breaches of the constitution and forany crime (they) may commit in exercise of their functions or up to fiveyears after ceasing in their functions." Since the regulatory law of theConstitutional court does not have constitutional status and the judgescommitted no crime, the impeachment appeared to be unjustified an possiblyunconstitutional.Protests and demonstrations of support for the judges spread rapidlyacross the country and there were strongly worded expressions of dismayfrom the judiciary, the attorney general, the People's Defender, the CatholicChurch, the universities, and the great majority of Peru's newspapers.Announced a few days before the inauguration in Lima of the 17th AnnualGeneral Assembly of the Organization of American States, it also provokedconcern by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights in a June 5 pressstatement.(57)IV. TORTURE IN ALTO YURINAKIA stark and well-publicized example of the government's willingnessto use torture as a counterinsurgency tactic occurred in early 1997, asauthorities were engaged in confrontation with members of the MRTA whohad taken over the Japanese ambassador's residence in Lima. Far from thescene of the showdown, soldiers detained, tortured, and abused men, women,and children they believed linked to the MRTA in Peru's central jungleregion. Human Rights Watch/Americas participated in a delegation of nongovernmentalhuman rights organizations that visited Villa Rica and Alto Yurinaki inearly April. During this visit and in Lima we interviewed most of the releaseddetainees, members of their families, provincial government authorities,and village leaders. From these interviews it was possible to reconstructa clear picture of their detention and torture.Between February 24 and March 12, 1997, more than forty coffee growers,including eight minors, were detained by members of the 31st Infantry Divisionof the Peruvian army in and around Alto Yurinaki, province of Chanchamayo,in the Department of Junín. In a communique published in the nationalpress on March 18, the army claimed to have uncovered a plan by the MRTAto attack and overrun the Alto Comaina No. 79 Counterinsurgency Battalionbase in Villa Rica, which the group was said to have infiltrated.(58)The detainees, whose names, mugshots, and supposed aliases were also published,were accused of belonging to the MRTA's "Juan Santos Atahualpa Brigade."The communique also listed weapons and ammunition the army claimed to havediscovered buried in a ravine in Chancarmaz, close to Alto Yurinaki.(59)Gen. José Huerta Torres, commander of the 31st Infantry Division,produced the weapons for the first time on March 19 at the army base atPichanaki, where the press photographed them. Neither the provincial prosecutornor any of the accused were present at the place of their discovery, asthe law requires. The "search" appears to have been pre-arranged at a siteclose to Alto Chancarmaz, where some villagers claimed to have been askedby soldiers for tools, apparently to dig the hole where the weapons were"discovered." Over the following three weeks, all but one of the detaineeswere released by DINCOTE for lack of credible evidence on which to basecharges.Many of the detainees had been pointed out by masked informers accompanyingthe soldiers, held incommunicado for several days, and tortured repeatedlybefore being handed over to the police in Pichanaki.(60)As a result of persistent beatings and torture, they were forced to incriminatethemselves and others. Several of the minors alleged that they had beenforced to accompany the troops for several days to identify fellow villagersas terrorists, after being threatened with further torture if they failedto do so; others stated that they were interrogated by the police in thepresence of the military officers who arrested them, and that the officerstried to make them stick to the statements they had made under torturein the military base. Some alleged that the provincial prosecutor who waspresent when they gave their statements to the police, as the law requires,was dressed in military uniform. His appearance in uniform alongside themilitary interrogators is likely to have deterred the victims from denouncingtheir torture. Others insisted that the district attorney was not presentwhen they were interrogated.(61)The cases of torture and abuse that occurred in Alto Yurinaki includethe following:Paulino Solis Taype told Human Rights Watch/Americas that he was repeatedlybeaten by the army until he agreed to sign a statement "recognizing" thestockpile of weapons:I was so badly beaten and they said they would go on beating me if Idid not sign the statement. I was so scared, and there was a man therein military uniform who told me to sign, and as he was in military uniform,I signed. Only later when I had signed the paper they told me he was theprosecutor.(62)Inés Marilu Avila Gálvez, an agricultural student, wasdetained on March 9, 1997 in Alto Yurinaki by a patrol of the 31st InfantryDivision from Pichanaki. Avila, together with other youths from her village,was arrested after being made to walk in line past a masked man who pointedher out by nodding his head. According to Avila and several other detainees,the masked man was one of three men who had been accused of infiltratingthe army base for the MRTA to prepare for the attack and had been torturedto force them to act as "informers." Often, the men, when challenged bydetainees, were unable to name the person they pointed out to the army.On the night after Avila's arrest, the chief of the patrol, whom sheheard addressed as "Ronald," forced her to undress and tried to grope hergenitals. For four days she and the other detainees were made to accompanythe troops to various hamlets in the area, where more detainees were pickedup. Avila and two other young girls, Loida Soline Dionicio Antazu (17)and her younger sister were pulled by the hair, dunked in water, and forcedto undress and wash naked in front of a group of male soldiers.(63)Avila was accused of participating in an attack on the base at Villa Ricaon February 24, but was later able to prove from a bus ticket stub anda passenger list that she had been in Lima on that date and had returnedto Alto Yurinaki afterward.(64)Seventeen-year-old Emerson Wistrecher Cánepa was arrested withInés Marilu Avila Gálvez on March 9. He was tortured by beingdunked repeatedly in water for three hours, hung from the feet, and kickedin the stomach. He was taken by helicopter to Eneñas, where thedunking continued for another hour, and then forced to walk looking forsupposed weapons caches. He denied any knowledge of the weapons. He wasreturned to Alto Yurinaki at about 6 p.m. on March 10, and tortured againall night, including being subjected to water torture by the officer knownas "Ronald." Shots were fired close to his head. He was tied upside downwith an electrical cable and thrown into a tank filled with water, wherehe was forced to spend the night.(65)According to Avila:We were on the second floor and we could hear how they were half-drowninghim. Afterwards, we saw that his whole neck was covered in blood becausethey had hung him with a light cable, and he had gashes on his wrists becausethey tied his hands with a rope. They pulled him by the hair and threwhim into the water. His face was all swollen, and they had deprived himof consciousness about three times.(66)Wistrecher was transferred to the military base at Pichanaki and releasedwithout charge on March 14.A Channel 15 television interview with Wistrecher, recorded after hisrelease, was shown on March 21. It included footage of the backroom ofa small grocery store in Eneñas where Wistrecher was tortured, showinga car battery and a receptacle still containing water mixed with detergent.(67)It also showed gaping wounds on his wrists, caused by the electric cables,and on his shoulder, caused by a blow from a rifle butt. These wounds werelisted in a medical certificate issued by the hospital of La Merced.Soldiers arrested fifteen-year-old John Izurraga Soto on March 10 inEneñas, together with his brother and sister-in-law, after fourmasked informers had pointed him out. He was one of several youths detainedin Alto Yurinaki, held for several hours in the village school, and thentaken by helicopter to the military base in Pichanaki. During the helicopterjourney to Pichanaki, a colonel ordered him to throw himself onto the floorof the aircraft. Soldiers pushed his head through the open door and forcedhim to look down at the ground. When he said he knew nothing about MRTAweapons, they pushed his body half out of the helicopter and held him therein an effort to force him to talk. Soto was taken to the juvenile courtin La Merced and released without charge on March 14.Félix Jorge Romero, a municipal employee, was detained on February25 when on his way to make a bank deposit of money belonging to the municipality.He was taken to the army base in Pichanaki, where he was tied by the handsand feet, beaten around the head and body with sticks and rifle butts,and kicked in the stomach. He was also repeatedly dunked in a trough fullof water laced with detergent, where he lost consciousness. While he wasunconscious, a watch and the money he had been carrying were stolen. Hewas released later that day, after an interview with the commander of thebase, Col. Juan Loayza Miranda.On February 27, Romero returned to the base to reclaim his money, andhe was detained again. Soldiers tortured him from 5 p.m. until about 8p.m., and from midnight until 5 a.m. The soldiers tried to force him atadmit to collaborating with the terrorists and to incriminate MartínMorales, the owner of the local gas station. Jorge was made to lie in aditch, which was filled with earth that covered his mouth. Shots were firedclose to his head, his arms were cut with knives, and he was threatenedwith death. On March 2, he was taken to the DINCOTE headquarters in Oxapampasuffering from severe stomach pains and an infected wound in his left ear.After medical treatment in Oxapampa, on March 7 he was interned in the2 de Mayo Hospital in Lima, where he received treatment. Romero showedHuman Rights Watch/Americas scars on his wrist, knee, elbows, and stomach.He complained of numbness in his thumb and reduction of hearing in hisleft ear. He told Human Rights Watch/Americas he was convinced his secondround of torture was a reprisal by soldiers at the base for his havingreported the loss of the money.(68)Among the last prisoners to be released, on April 4, were Alfonso RojasColca and José Teofilo Huamán Navarro, members of the Yaneshaindigenous community in Alto Yurinaki. Detained on March 9, they were takento the military base in Pichanaki, where they spent the night. On the followingday, they were taken back to Alto Yurinaki and, for the next three days,were forced to accompany the troops around the area, visiting both SanJuan 71 and Eneñas. Both were also tortured. Huamán toldHuman Rights Watch/Americas that he was tied with a rope, hooded, and hungby the feet from the beam of a house belonging to his neighbor, PanchoDíaz. The soldiers used a cup of water to make him choke. Both Rojasand Huamán were later tortured together in a ravine in the hills,where they were repeatedly dunked head-first in a stream, with soldierssitting on them to prevent them from moving. The soldiers wanted to knowwhere the weapons were hidden, but neither had any idea. Huamánpassed out. During the three days Rojas and Huamán were accompanyingthe troops, neither was given any food. After returning to the base inPichanaki, both men were tortured again while being interrogated. Huamánsaid that the provincial prosecutor was not present when he was made tosign a declaration, although the prosecutor's signature appears on thedocument. He was not allowed to read the statement.(69)Martín Augusto Elguera, a Yanesha village official, was detainedon March 10 at about 6:30 p.m. by some twenty soldiers who were waitingfor him when he returned from work. He was taken to the village schoolthat the army was using as an interrogation and detention center. Arrivingat the school, he was immediately accused of being a terrorist by the commander,who hit him on the chest. He was put in the classroom, where fifteen otherswere being detained. Soldiers then took him to another room containinga receptacle full of water. When he said he knew nothing of the weapons,the commander said he was a tough nut, and pushed his head into the tankof water. He was kicked repeatedly in the stomach. After thirty minutesof this treatment, he gave in and pretended he was a member of the MRTA.The torture stopped. He was asked who he knew in the village. He said heknew two girls (Loida Dionisio and her sister, see above) and was forcedto show the soldiers where they lived. The girls were arrested, strippedto their underwear, and dunked in the water. Later, the group was takeninto the jungle to look for weapons. After a fruitless walk for severalhours, with Elguera leading the way, the party returned to Yurinaki, whereElguera was forced to identify more of his fellow villagers. He and twoother detainees, including Paulino Solís, were made to line up,together with a man in a ski-mask. He was told to nod or shake his headas the villagers filed past. On the following day, he and the detaineeswere transferred by helicopter to the military base in Pichanaki.(70)The Alto Yurinaki episode received considerable coverage both in thepress and on television. After its initial publicity on the dismantlingof the MRTA column, which caused great distress to those unfairly and publiclyaccused of terrorism, the army remained silent and did not comment on theallegations of torture or on the inexplicable scale of the mistakes made.In a March 30 television interview, President Fujimori stated:When situations like this occur, there may be detentions that are unjustified,which is regrettable, but unavoidable. Later investigations will determineif the detainees have committed an offence, and as this possibility isdiscarded, they will be released. Of course, the ideal would have beento have done a more careful follow-up, but given the urgency of the situationthese detentions took place. . . . If torture has taken place it will beinvestigated and sanctioned. We don't want ill-treatment or torture orviolations of human rights.(71)Despite Fujimori's assurances, to Human Rights Watch/Americas' knowledgeno officers or soldiers were detained or charged in relation to the abusescommitted in Alto Yurinaki, and, if an investigation was conducted by thearmy, its results were never made public.V. POLICE TORTURE: LEGAL CASESThe use of torture in Peru predates the outbreak of guerrilla violencein the 1980's and is not restricted purely to counterinsurgency operations.Police throughout Peru commonly abuse suspects and use torture, which mayvary considerably in its gravity and effects, to obtain confessions andinformation used to find and convict the culprits in common crimes. Everydaycases of physical abuse of detainees by the police attract little attentionfrom the press; it is rare for torture victims in criminal cases to makea formal complaint, and courts do not actively investigate such complaintswhen they are made, unless the ill-treatment is so severe that the victimdies. Peruvian law includes safeguards against police abuse, such as thelegal obligation of prosecutors to be present during interrogations andwhen suspects sign their declarations. Prosecutors must also be presentduring searches and post mortem medical examinations. According to theConstitution, it is the attorney general's office, not the police, thatis responsible for directing criminal investigations. However, in practice,prosecutors are frequently absent during interrogations or merely rubber-stampdeclarations without being present when they are drawn up. If prosecutorsdo not enforce strict standards in the treatment of detainees, it is unlikelythat the police will do so on their own. Police investigations still dependto a great extent on confessions to establish guilt; once a suspect hasbeen arrested, procedures center on gaining a confession rather then establishingthe truth. In the rare cases in which victims of torture, who are normallytoo afraid to denounce abuses, do come forward to file a complaint, prosecutorsmay open criminal investigations. Successful prosecutions, however, arefew. Two major factors contribute to impunity for torture. When policeare implicated in torture on police premises or in the course of duty,internal police tribunals, which are subject to the military penal code,often insist on jurisdiction. Further, police routinely fail to cooperatewith the civilian courts, and police tribunals are more likely than civiliancourts to acquit or give light sentences to those responsible for torture.Second, many prosecutors and judges still have temporary tenure, makingthem reluctant to energetically pursue cases that pit them against thepolice. Even when torturers are prosecuted, the weakness of Peru's torturelaws leads to sentences far shorter than those for other crimes, such asrobbery.An energetic and persistent prosecutor or judge, and victims or relativeswilling to fight the odds, can lead to convictions. The three cases discussedbelow illustrate both the use of torture by the police and the difficultiesfaced by civilians who try to prosecute those responsible.Jhoel Huamán GarcíaJhoel Huamán García, a nineteen-year-old electronics student,was detained by a police officer, Edson Cóndor Arredondo, at about1:00 p.m. on May 26, 1995, in the city of Cerro de Pasco, department ofPasco. He was arrested in a classroom of the institute of higher education,where he was a student, and taken to the headquarters of the DepartmentAgainst Terrorism (Departamento Contra el Terrorismo, DECOTE), a departmentalbranch of DINCOTE. Although Huamán had been accused by a robberyvictim a few days before, the police did not have a warrant for his arrest.At midnight on the day of his arrest, he was carried naked by a policemanto the local hospital, where he was pronounced dead on arrival. A doctorwho admitted Huamán and attended the initial autopsy later testifiedthat a police officer tried to dress the victim after he had arrived atthe hospital,(72) apparently in an attemptto mask the fact that police had stripped the victim during interrogation.The provincial prosecutor did not attend the initial autopsy, as requiredby law. The doctors who carried out the exam, performed the day after Huamán'sdeath, failed to collect needed medical evidence and concluded that thecause of death could not be determined.(73)At the insistence of the Huamán family's lawyer, a second autopsywas performed. On May 31, 1995, a forensic doctor from the Lima Morgue,local forensic doctors, and medical staff from the hospital carried outa detailed examination. Witnessed by the provincial prosecutor, they concludedthat Huamán had died from a cerebral hemorrhage caused by multipleblows from a heavy object and internal abdominal injuries.Rolando Huere Oré, a police officer who witnessed part of theinterrogation and was later released on bail, testified that he had seenHuamán "in a state of complete nakedness, shivering with cold, andwith staring eyes" while Edson Cóndor Arrendondo interrogated himin his office. Cóndor testified during the trial that Huamánhad torn off his own clothes to show that he had no scars and thereforewas not a criminal. According to Cóndor, Huamán ignored Cóndor'sorders for him to put his clothes back on, so the officer continued toquestion the naked suspect. Cóndor asserted that Huamán'sbruises resulted from an accident. He (Cóndor) "went on interrogatinghim, and when he asked him where the pistol was, he began to stumble andthen collapsed, falling onto his back. . . ."(74)After a one-year investigation conducted by a civilian prosecutor, inwhich the police did not seek jurisdiction, on July 17, 1996 the SecondChamber of the Huánuco Higher Court sentenced Edson Cóndorto six years in prison on a charge of battery resulting in death. AnotherDECOTE agent, Wilson Germán Toralva Dávila, received fiveyears in prison. Huere, who was detained on a lesser charge, abscondedafter being released on bail. On November 8, 1996, the Supreme Court increasedthe sentence on appeal to ten years in prison for both Cóndor andTorralva, the maximum sentence in the Peruvian penal code for the offenseof "battery resulting in death."(75) Asnoted above, the code does not contain a specific provision for torture,with penalties proportionate to the gravity of the offense.José Eugenio Chamaya PumacharisJosé Eugenio Chamaya Pumacharis, a forty-seven-year-old taxidriver, was detained at 8 p.m. on September 22, 1995, while driving hisvehicle in the La Molina residential district of Lima. The arresting policepatrolmen had become suspicious that he and his two teenage passengerswere about to commit a robbery. The police took the detainees to the policestation in Santa Felicia, where all three were beaten and tortured in thecourtyard of the precinct. The two teenagers, Katherine Keli and CarlosCasapaico, later testified to police investigators that police had blindfoldedthem and tied their hands behind their backs, made them lie on their backson a lawn, and forced them to inhale water by dunking their heads in abath filled with water. Medical examinations established that both hadbeen also beaten with a hard object. Chamaya, who was beaten on the chestand also half-drowned, suffered a seizure and collapsed. Police paramedicswho were called to the scene were unable to revive him.(76)The two officers responsible for the torture, José Zevallos Damacendand Aldo Sucno Luna, fled.(77) This wasnot the first complaint against Zevallos and Sucno. A previous complaintto the 30th provincial prosecutor by Arturo Valle Castillo that the officersbeat him to get him to confess to a robbery he had never committed, wasnever investigated. "Escándalo en delegación policial deSanta Felicia," El Popular, September 23, 1995.(78)but gave themselves up five days later and confessed.(79)From the outset, the police judicial authorities insisted on retainingjurisdiction in the case on the grounds that the crime occurred on policepremises and that the perpetrators were carrying out police functions atthe time.(80) The 40th provincial prosecutornonetheless opened a parallel investigation in the civilian courts on October11, 1995, in which the two suspects were charged with homicide. The prosecutorquickly found herself stymied by the police judicial authorities, who ignoredrepeated requests to allow the suspects, now said to be under arrest ina military prison, to give their statements. The civilian judge responsiblefor the case refused to contest the authority of the police tribunal totry the case.(81) By May 1996--eight monthsafter the crime--counsel representing Chamaya's widow was still urgingthe civilian court to order the police authorities to bring the suspectsto testify.(82)Eventually, one of the police suspects, José Zevallos, did presenthimself to the civilian court. The police insisted that Zevallos be returnedto the custody of police judicial authorities after testifying. Zevallos,however, tried to abscond at the court building, was detained in a corridor,and, instead of being returned to police judicial authorities, was confined,at the judge's orders, in Lurigancho, a public prison.The public prosecutor finished her investigation and asked for a sentenceof twenty years' imprisonment for homicide. However, before the date ofthe civilian court hearing, police justice authorities brought Zevallosto a police court hearing in Lima on September 17, 1996, where he was promptlysentenced to four years' imprisonment for "homicide" and "abuse of authority."(83)Since that time, the investigation in the civilian court has continued,but police judicial authorities have refused to respect at least five summonsesfrom the civilian judge to appear in court hearings. The other police suspecthas never attended a civilian court hearing or given evidence to the civilianprosecutor or judge.(84)Mario Jesús Palomino GarcíaFive officers of the National Police in the Breña district ofLima detained Mario Palomino, a thirty-seven-year-old skilled worker inplastics, at about 12:15 a.m. on March 23, 1996.(85)According to the testimony of his brother, José Enrique, Palominohad been attending a farewell party for his cousin, a major in the NationalPolice, and left his brother's house at about 11:35 p.m. Mario Jesústold his brother that he was going to walk back to his apartment on GeneralVidal street to see his children, a distance of some 200 yards. Palominonever arrived. He was intercepted by a police patrol that was on the look-outfor street drug dealers and taken off in a police vehicle, which continuedto pick up suspects for another two hours. When José Enrique discoveredin the morning that Palomino had not returned home, he went twice to theBreña police station, but he was told that the station's cells wereempty. Later, a friend told him that several neighbors had witnessed Palominobeing arrested by the patrol.Eventually, José Enrique found his brother at Lima's centralmorgue. According to a National Police document, Jose Enrique recalled,With profound pain I confirmed that it was my brother. As I came closeto his face to give him a kiss, I noted that there was blood mixed withsaliva on his right lip (sic) and that there were tears of blood in hiseyes, and that his wrists were a deep purple color. When I saw this I becamemore interested in inspecting my brother, and I noticed that his cheekswere swollen, that he had a bruise on the left side of his forehead. Infact, he had several signs of blows on his neck and face. I lifted hisstriped maroon-colored shirt, and he had bruises on his right arm. At thatmoment I was brusquely removed from the room by the guard, who had onlyjust become aware of my presence. . . .(86)The autopsy, performed on March 24, found multiple cuts and bruiseson Palomino's back, pelvis, wrists, arms, right thigh, left knee, and forehead.It concluded that these signs were compatible with having suffered trauma,but that they were not the cause of death. Death resulted from a cerebraland pulmonary oedema that could have been caused by a variety of otherfactors.(87) The testimonies of the fiveagents who detained Palomino and of other detainees picked up that nightestablish that Palomino was beaten after being put in the police vehicle.According to officer Luis Alberto Sánchez Vásquez, an officerwith the surname Revolledo hit Palomino repeatedly with a flashlight onvarious parts of his body.(88) Other suspectspicked up by the patrol car testified that they saw him in the police vehiclehandcuffed, still lying on his stomach on the floor of the vehicle, unconscious,and smelling of alcohol. The police continued to board suspects until thevehicle was filled with as many as fifteen detainees. Several sat on Palomino'sprostrate body, which smelled of excrement. One of the detainees testifiedthat Revolledo joked, saying: "Look at this coward, he's even shit himself."He warned the others, "anyone who behaves badly will end up like him."(89)At 4 a.m., several hours after bringing Palomino the station, the policerealized that he was dead. The officer in charge of the station, Maj. VíctorManuel Cabrejos Pastor, told one of his subordinates to dump Palermino'sbody in the street in another precinct. The subordinate refused(90)As in the Chamaya case, two parallel investigations were opened intoPalomino's death, one in the 14th criminal court of Lima, and the otherin a police court, the Sixth Permanent Court of the Second Police JudicialZone. Despite insistent petitions from the victim's lawyers requestingthat exclusive jurisdiction be established, if necessary by an appeal toSupreme Court, the civilian judge refused to contest the police court'sjurisdiction. According to a police report dated April 2, 1996, four ofthe officers who participated in Palomino's arrest were in detention, underthe authority of the 14th criminal Court of Lima.(91)In November 1996, the judge of the 44th criminal court in Lima, to whomthe case had been transferred, charged Luis Alberto Aliaga Trigoso, HumbertoEpifanio Revolledo Zevallos, Luis Alberto Sánchez Vásquez,and Carlos Burt Morales García with "aggravated homicide" and "exposureto danger or abandonment of persons in danger." Víctor Manuel CabrejosPastor and Aliaga were also accused of attempting to conceal the incident.The trial has continued in the 44th criminal court and, at this writing,is currently in its final public summing-up stage. It also continues, sofar without a verdict, in the police court. Since the military court canreach a final verdict more quickly than is possible in a civilian trial,which must go through several appeal stages before a final decision ismade, civilian proceedings in the Palomino case are at risk of being abortedby a preemptive military court ruling. In other such cases, the SupremeCourt has almost invariably supported the military court.VI. DETENTION AND TORTURE OF ARMY INTELLIGENCEAGENTSIn April 1997, Peru was stunned by reports of the torture and apparentsummary execution of members of the country's military intelligence services.The victims, Leonor La Rosa Bustamante and Mariela Barreto Riofano, wereboth agents with the Army Intelligence Service (Servicio de Inteligenciadel Ejército, SIE) who were suspected of leaking to the press informationabout illicit military intelligence activities, including serious humanrights abuses.Press reports based on the leaked information confirmed serious accusationsagainst the military: army intelligence had been engaged in secret operationsto carry out surveillance on and intimidation of opposition politiciansand journalists; the SIE maintained installations in the basement of thearmy headquarters in Lima, which were used for the interrogation of terroristsuspects and in which torture was regularly practiced; and members of thedeath squad known as the Colina Group continued to frequent army premisesalthough they were officially reported to have been discharged from thearmy.On April 6, 1997, "Contrapunto," a television program on FrecuenciaLatina (Channel 2), featured an interview with thirty-six year-old La Rosa,filmed secretly in Lima's military hospital. La Rosa, who could walk onlywith assistance, described how she had been detained and tortured on twoseparate occasions by other army intelligence officers. The televisioncamera clearly showed burns and scarring around the fingernails of herright hand, caused, she said, by electricity. She was initially detainedon January 16, 1997, and tortured for five days in SIE headquarters inLima, located in a basement of the General Command of the Peruvian Army(Comandancia General del Ejército Peruano), known as the LittlePentagon. She was then admitted to the military hospital with head injuries.She was discharged from the hospital on January 27 and given fifteen daysof convalescent leave.When La Rosa returned to work on February 11, she was re-arrested onthe orders of Gen. Juan Yanque Cervantes, head of the Directorate of ArmyIntelligence (Dirección de Inteligencia del Ejército, DINTE),and taken back to the cellar of the Little Pentagon. There, she was againbeaten and systematically tortured for a week. This time, the beatingsprovoked a vaginal hemorrhage. On February 19, she was again admitted tothe military hospital. Following an emergency operation to stop the bleeding,she suffered respiratory failure on three occasions.(92)From her hospital bed, La Rosa told reporters and visiting members ofcongress that her second interrogation had centered on the intelligenceservices's plans code-named Bermuda, Narval, and El Pino. The "Narval"plan involved an October 17, 1996 bomb attack on the local station of Channel13 television in Puno, in which an SIE operative and former Colina Groupmember participated. The "Bermuda" plan was an initiative to intimidatetelevision journalist César Hildebrandt, and the "El Pino" planwas designed to intimidate Heriberto Benítez, a lawyer defendingGen. Rodolfo Robles Espinoza.(93) La Rosanamed three SIE officers as directly responsible for her torture: Com.José Salinas Susanaga, Maj. Percy Salcedo Sandoval, and Maj. RicardoAnderson Kohatsu. She said that the interrogation and torture was supervisedby the head of the SIE, Col. Carlos Sánchez Noriega.(94)La Rosa's startling allegations coincided with the macabre discoveryof a corpse found in plastic bags on March 23 on a roadside fifteen milesnorth of Lima. Two days later, the parents of Mariela Lucy Barreto Riofanoidentified the body of their daughter,(95)an SIE agent and a friend and colleague of La Rosa. The body, found bya local teenager who saw two men dump the bags from a jeep with tintedwindows, had no head, hands, or feet; they had been severed with surgicalprecision.Barreto had entered the Army Intelligence School in 1989, where shewas a pupil and lover of Martín Santiago Rivas, then an instructorat the school. Rivas later became notorious as the head of the La ColinaGroup. By that time, Rivas had recruited Barreto to work in the group,and it is likely that she had intimate knowledge of the actions of thedeath squad. Rivas was detained and convicted for his role in the Cantutakillings and other abuses. In June 1995, a week after the passage of theamnesty law, Rivas walked free.(96)Apart from their friendship and association as SIE agents, La Rosa andBarreto were linked by the fact that both were suspected of leaking informationon secret intelligence operations to the press. In January 1997, both agentswere placed under investigation by the inspector general of the army.(97)In February, La Rosa was cited by the daily La República asone of three agents under investigation by the army Inspectorate General.According to the same article, Barreto was also being investigated andwas reportedly detained and tortured by the same officers who torturedLa Rosa.(98)The scandal provoked by the La Rosa and Barreto cases greased the normallyrusty wheels of Peruvian justice. Within forty-eight hours of the revelations,the four intelligence officers named by La Rosa had been suspended, detained,and charged with "abuse of authority" under the Military Penal Code.(99)Army commander Gen. Nicolás de Bari Hermoza Ríos virtuallyadmitted that the torture allegations were true.(100)In addition to this investigation, La Rosa was formally charged under militarypenal code with "disobedience" and "disloyalty."Civilian prosecutors also opened investigations in both the La Rosaand Barreto cases. The Attorney General of the Nation, Miguel AljovínSwayne, stated in both cases that ordinary crimes were involved and ordinarycriminal, not military, courts were entitled to try them.(101)The president of the Supreme Council of Military Justice, Gen. Guido Guevara,insisted that the La Rosa case fell under military jurisdiction becausethe events involved military personnel, took place in a military base,and were connected to the intelligence service. The army did not assertjurisdiction in the Barreto case.From the outset, the La Rosa case ran into obstacles in the civiliancourts. Judge Gaby Márquez of the Sixth Criminal Court rejectedthe indictment drawn up by the prosecutor on the grounds that no statementshad been taken from the accused. In fact, the prosecutor had been deniedaccess to the men by the military authorities and had not been allowedto interview La Rosa in the hospital, where the military was holding herincommunicado.(102) In June, Judge Márquezapplied to the Supreme Court to rule on the jurisdiction dispute by grantingthe civilian court sole competence. La Rosa's lawyer, Heriberto Benítez,who was also representing her in the case against her opened by the militaryjustice authorities, publicly complained that military justice officialswere preventing him from seeing his client, viewing the case file, andparticipating in the inquiries. The military officials claimed that Benítez'spresence could influence the witnesses and impede the investigation. OnApril 19, Benítez was banned for four months from litigating inmilitary courts for making comments in a national newspaper that were "insultingto the majesty of the military courts and offensive to the honor of thepersons who represent them." The military judge promptly appointed an armylawyer to defend La Rosa in his place.(103)La Rosa told Benítez in a letter from the military hospital thatan army colonel acting on behalf of the army commander-in-chief had visitedher in the military hospital and tried to persuade her to drop the accusationin return for a pension and a ticket to the United States for her and herfamily. She complained that she was being held in the hospital illegallywithout access to her lawyer, and that military officials were pressuringher into signing statements that she never made.(104)Harassment of La Rosa and her family did not stop there. In a case of policeabuse that few believed to be coincidental, on June 27, police from theNueva Esperanza precinct arrested La Rosa's half-brother Miguel CabezudoBustamante three blocks from the home he shared until recently with LaRosa and her family. Police asked him for his documents in the street andafter he showed them his voting credentials they threatened him, hit himand told him they were going to arrest him for a breach of public order.He was taken to the station where he was beaten again. He was releasedat 4:30 p.m the following day with cuts to the head and forehead and abruised back.(105)On May 9, ignoring a petition lodged by Judge Márquez for themilitary court to suspend the trial until the Supreme Court had ruled onthe jurisdiction issue, the Supreme Council of Military Justice convictedthe four officers to eight years' imprisonment after finding that theyhad tortured La Rosa with a blow-torch on her hands and ankles.(106)They also ordered them to pay La Rosa compensation of 5,000 soles (approx.US$ 1,900) apiece. The hearing was conducted in camera according to summarymilitary procedures, depriving the public of any possibility of knowingwho in the chain-of-command authorized or condoned the torture of La Rosa.La Rosa remained in incommunicado custody in the military hospital untilJune 5, when the military authorities finally acceded to a court orderfor her discharge and transfer to a private clinic. During this time, indefiance of a habeas corpus writ on her behalf, she had been denied visitsfrom her attorney, and allegedly intimidated and threatened by militaryofficials who included members of the Colina group.(107)During the second week of June, the minister for women's affairs, MiriamShenone, visited La Rosa in the clinic and offered on behalf of the governmentto pay for her rehabilitation in a hospital abroad. By October, La Rosawas still hospitalized in Lima, but was expected to travel to Mexico fortreatment paid for by the government. The case against her in the militarycourt, however, remained open.On August 6, a Supreme Court panel, four of five members of which weretemporary judges, ruled that the Supreme Council of Military Justice shouldenjoy exclusive jurisdiction in the La Rosa case, thus effectively frustratingany public accounting. According to press reports, an inspection of thebasement of the army headquarters in Lima, scheduled for August 8, whichhad been ordered by the civilian judge, was canceled.(108)VII. INTIMIDATION OF JOURNALISTS AND OPPOSITIONPERSONALITIESIn parallel with executive branch actions undermining the authorityand autonomy of the judiciary and legal bodies established to protect rightsand the rule of law, journalists and politicians who brought governmentabuses to public attention were subjected to a series of physical attacksduring 1997.In response to the public disquiet aroused by this violence, governmentspokespersons, including police authorities, the minister of the interior,and president Fujimori himself, claimed that ordinary criminals were responsible.Although all of the threats and attacks were made anonymously, and no group,government or otherwise, claimed responsibility, the explanation repeatedlyoffered by the government was unconvincing. If the attacks were the workof ordinary thieves, none of them were caught and brought to justice. Inmany cases, the authors left behind valuable items belonging to their victims,and in one case they burned a valuable car they had stolen. Some of thoseintimidated received specific threats warning them to stop meddling intopics known to be sensitive to the government. In addition, the attacksmirrored and accompanied open government harassment of key individualsin the media, including the owner of one of the country's most importanttelevision stations, and the management of its most vociferous oppositiondaily.Most, if not all, of the victims of this persecution were linked byhaving spoken out against the government or having published damaging informationlikely to affect its prestige and popularity. There was, indeed, a morespecific link, which reinforced the impression shared by the victims ofthese attacks that they were the work of military intelligence agents.Many of the targets had contributed--as journalists, congressmen, formermilitary officers, lawyers, and human rights activists--to exposing theactivities of the so-called Colina Group. Evidently these individuals wereperceived by the intelligence services as conduits to the public of thesecret intelligence information allegedly leaked by La Rosa and Barreto.Other individuals were apparently targeted because of their public defenseof negotiations between the government and the MRTA to solve the hostagecrisis, a solution known not to be favored by army hardliners.Peru has a vigorous opposition press, and reports of official misconductand sharp critiques of government policy are frequently aired. Indeed,the importance of the Peruvian media in revealing official malpracticeis all the greater for the lack of an effective and independent judiciary.The torture cases described in this report were publicized largely as aresult of valuable investigative work by a number of television stationsand newspapers, such as Frecuencia Latina (Channel 2), Channel 15, thedaily La República, and the weekly magazine Caretas.The media have also played a key role in exposing corruption and dirtytricks both in the private and public sectors. For instance, Channel 2published damaging information about the earnings of president Fujimori'sadvisor and de facto head of the national intelligence service, or SIN,Vladimiro Montesinos, as well as explosive revelations about wire-tappingby the SIN. In retaliation for its investigative reporting, the governmentcracked down on Channel 2, stripping its owner of Peruvian citizenshipand effectively eliminating the news program that had aired the reports.Caretas carried in August a special report questioning the authenticityof president Fujimori's claim to Peruvian birth. The attacks documentedbelow are troubling, not only because of the harm caused to the individualsaffected, but because, taken together with cases of overt harassment, theyrepresent a coordinated effort to silence public criticism.One of the most troubling recent incidents took place in April, whenChannel 2 Television, also known as Latin Frequency (Frecuencia Latina)began to broadcast news about the Leonor La Rosa case. Channel 2 was notnoted for reporting critical of the government until April 6, 1997, whenits program Counterpoint (Contrapunto) broadcast the explosive featureon the torture of Leonor La Rosa and the murder of her army colleague,Mariela Barreto, mentioned above. During the months that followed, thegovernment, with the evident and troubling support of the courts, resortedto one arbitrary measure after another to silence the station. FrecuenciaLatina broadcast further disclosures highly damaging to the government--inparticular to the intelligence services and the army--apparently basedon information obtained directly from intelligence sources. The most startlingwas a Contrapunto investigation, revealed in July, which showed that theSIN had tapped the phones of at least 197 businessmen, politicians, andpublic personalities, including Foreign Minister Francisco Tudela and formerUnited Nations Secretary General Javier Pérez de Cuellar, who hadrun against Fujimori in the presidential elections of 1994. In a follow-upreport on September 14, Contrapunto gave details of the equipment used,the main targets of the eavesdropping, and the location of some of thelistening stations. It gave viewers a glimpse of secret intelligence documentsdescribing the "Emilio Plan," a plan to monitor private telephone conversationsof opposition leaders, in particular of Javier Pérez de Cuellar.In February 1997, new espionage plans, known by the names of Halcónand Tucán targeted Javier Diez Canseco, Henry Pease, La RepúblicaEditor-in-Chief Gustavo Mohme, César Hildebrandt, and personalitiesof the political center. These journalists and congressman had all receiveddeath threats or been the victims of physical attacks.A naturalized Peruvian of Israeli origin, Baruch Ivcher Bronstein wasthe majority shareholder of Channel 2 television. On May 23, 1997, thecombined command of the armed forces issued a pronouncement denouncingIvcher for "using the medium of communication he owns to distort situations,twist facts, and broadcast comments from a clearly distorted viewpoint."Referring to the prestige won by the armed forces in defending thenation "on the internal as well as external front," the communiquéaccused Ivcher of "seeking to damage [this] prestige with negative intentionsthat affect not only the armed forces, but the Peruvian people in general."(109)In previous months, the station had denounced surveillance by helicopterand inquiries and pressure from the tax authorities seeking to recoveralleged tax debts.(110) When Channel 2journalists publicly denounced this as harassment, causing public concern,the government denied that any investigation had taken place. (111)Military justice authorities ordered Ivcher to appear to ratify hisallegations of harassment. When Ivcher failed to present himself, theyordered his arrest for resisting authority.(112)Ivcher, then in Miami, expressed fears of returning to Peru because ofdeath threats.(113) Meanwhile, articlespublished in the weeklies Sí and Gente accused Ivcherof associating with the commander-in-chief of the Ecuadorean armed forcesand of supplying weapons to the Ecuadoreans during and after the 1995 armedconflict between Peru and Ecuador. Ivcher strenuously denied the accusationsand alleged that they emanated from the SIN and from Vladimiro Montesinos.Almost simultaneously, the government announced a tightening of the lawsagainst naturalized Peruvians, who then risked losing their citizenshipif they committed offenses against the state, such as "terrorism" and "treason."The law was seen as aimed specifically at Ivcher.(114)During the second week of June, the C90-NM block in Congress passeda motion "deeply lamenting" a report, also broadcast on Channel 2's "Contrapunto"program, about the allegations published in Sí against Ivcher.Channel 2 had sent reporters to Ecuador to discuss the allegations withsenior military officers; the commander-in-chief of the Ecuadoran armedforces, Francisco Moncayo, stated in an interview that the documents publishedby Sí were false and that he did not know Ivcher.On July 13, a few hours after the broadcast of the first wiretappingexpose, the official gazette El Peruano published a resolution issuedby the Immigration Directorate (Dirección de Migraciones) revokingIvcher's citizenship. The grounds stated were that his application, filedthirteen years previously, had irregularities, and that Ivcher had failedto renounce his Israeli citizenship. Apart from the striking coincidencethat these alleged irregularities should come to light for the first timein the middle of a major campaign by the government against Channel 2,the decision was legally suspect; under Peruvian law an immigration officialdoes not have powers unilaterally to overrule a published government decree.It was also unconstitutional and violated a basic precept of internationalhuman rights treaties ratified by Peru regarding the right to nationality.(115)The final blow in the campaign against Ivcher came on September 15,1997, when the Chamber of Public Law of Lima's High Court handed over controlof Frecuencia Latina to its two largest minority shareholders, the brothersSamuel and Mendel Winter, depriving Ivcher of his right to remain at thehelm of the station. The three judges who ruled on the case were temporaryappointees nominated by a government official, after the Supreme Courthad removed the titular judges from the bench.(116)The ruling, which was in response to an appeal by Ivcher's lawyers againsta decision by judge Percy Escobar upholding the Winters' right to takeover the station, allowed the new managers of the station to call a shareholders'meeting to appoint a new board of directors and restructure its staff andpolicy. The court also failed to overturn a decision by Escobar declaringlegal the immigration decision stripping Ivcher of his Peruvian nationality,which his lawyers had challenged by filing a petition for protection ofhis constitutional rights (amparo). The High Court chamber refusedon procedural grounds to accept a final appeal by Ivcher's counsel to theSupreme Court. Instead of ruling on the complaint, the Supreme Court panel,composed of six judges, five of whom were temporary appointees, referredit to the Constitutional Court. Until the Constitutional Court ruled onthe issue, domestic remedies remained open and Ivcher was prevented fromtaking the case to an international forum such as the Inter-American Commissionon Human Rights. Following the dismissal in June of all but one of itsindependent members, the Constitutional Court offered Ivcher no possibilityof an impartial hearing.At 7:30 a.m. on September 19, before most of the staff had arrived,the Winter brothers, accompanied by Judge Escobar, judicial police, andprivate guards, took over the premises of Frecuencia Latina. The staffof Contrapunto and other Channel 2 employees instantly resigned.(117)Although many observers believed the army high command to be the mainforce behind the actions against Channel 2, President Fujimori was morethan a willing accomplice. He himself fired a personal broadside at thePeruvian press, and chose to do so during his inaugural address to theGeneral Assembly of the Organization of American States on June 1: "Justas the press denounces cases of government corruption or breaches of thelaw by private individuals, there is, in some cases a concealment of thetruth, a cover-up, bribery of certain journalists so that they attack thosewho are trying to eliminate corruption."(118)Fujimori named no names, but several journalists other than Ivcher feltthemselves to be under pressure. Ricardo Palma Michelsen, managing directorof Radio Miraflores, an opposition radio station, was arrested on May 23for tax evasion. On the following day, César Hildebrandt was suedby a C90-NM congressman for allegedly using false documents in a televisedinvestigation of an alleged network of local government officials who promotedFujimori's candidacy in the 1994 elections.(119)During the second week of June, two television stations aired advertisementspaid for by the president of the Council of Ministers and the Ministerof the Interior that attacked the version of events related to Javier DiezCanseco and Blanca Rosales that had been published in the newspaperLa República. The advertisement accused the paper of a campaignto damage the prestige of the armed forces.Other troubling cases include:At about 11 p.m. on March 16, 1997, Gustavo Saberbein, a former ministerof the economy, arrived home with his wife and son after a family get-togetherin Lima. Saberbein had been held hostage at the Japanese ambassador's residenceafter the building was overrun by MRTA guerrillas the previous December.He was among the hostages released soon after the crisis began. Since hisrelease, he had advocated publicly that the government negotiate an agreementwith the MRTA to facilitate a peaceful solution to the crisis. As he droveinto his driveway, his car was followed by a vehicle with five men inside,one of whom got out with a pistol drawn. Saberbein, who was already inthe house, heard his wife's desperate shouts and drew a weapon he carriedfor his own protection. Heading back to the garage, which was in darkness,he found himself facing the gunman, who fired at him while other shotswere fired from within the car. He returned the fire. The car then droveoff with all its occupants aboard. Bullets had penetrated the door of thehouse, the car, and the inner wall of the garage. For three months priorto the attack, Saberbein had received threatening telephone calls fromanonymous callers warning him not to make any more public declarationsabout the crisis at the residence of the Japanese ambassador and not tocontinue criticizing Fujimori's economic policy.(120)On March 19, three days after the attack on Saberbein, unidentifiedgunmen kidnaped and beat three occupants of a Nissan sport utility vehicleowned by Javier Diez Canseco, an opposition congressman of the United Left(Izquierda Unida, IU). Diez Canseco had also been among the hostages releasedby the MRTA in the early days of the embassy occupation and had advocatednegotiations with the MRTA. Diez Canseco was not in the car, but had madeit available to his friend Patricia Valdez, a distinguished Argentineanacademic and human rights advocate, to take her to Lima's Jorge ChávezAirport. Accompanying Valdez were Diez Canseco's chauffeur, Nilton Fernández,and his bodyguard, Edilberto Arévalo. While they were waiting atan intersection, they were attacked by a group of armed men who fired shotsinto the air and at the vehicle and beat on its windows, forcing them toopen the doors. Arévalo was hit by a bullet in the leg. Accordingto Valdez:Before lying down first on the seat and later on the floor of the jeep,I saw an individual on the right-hand side of the vehicle, very close tothe window where I was, who looked like he was putting on or taking offa dark ski-mask, and he had on a flak jacket with the inscription "police"on it."(121)The attackers entered the car, threatening and beating the three occupantsand forcing them into the back seat. The three assailants then transferredthe victims to another vehicle, which drove off. During the journey, themen took identity documents from Arévalo and Fernández, interrogatedthem, and continued to hit and threaten them. "We are going to take youto the beach and then you will see what's going to happen to you," saidone.(122) At one moment they operateda siren. Finally, they returned the documents to the driver and Arévaloand set all three victims down on the road opposite the army barracks ofSan Martín. The Nissan was found, a smoldering wreck, on March 22.Witnesses said that it had be burned by men with FAL rifles, accompaniedby other men in a vehicle with tinted windows.(123)On April 3, the minister of the interior told Congress that common criminalswere involved in the incident and that the police had arrested a gang ofcar thieves who specialized in off road vehicles. Fujimori reaffirmed theversion that common criminals were involved. However, Edilberto Arévalo,the wounded bodyguard, later told police that photographs of the criminalsuspects identified by authorities bore no resemblance to his attackers.(124)On May 26, the National Police presented another suspect. The man, MartínOré Yupanqui, claimed to have been hired as a driver by a gang ofthieves known as the Commandos. However, neither Arévalo nor Fernándezrecognized his appearance or voice. His confession contained five significantinaccuracies, raising suspicions that it may have been induced.(125)On April 1, four heavily armed men abducted Blanca Rosales, generaleditor of the daily La República, at about 12:30 a.m. whileshe was driving home accompanied by the head of the paper's political section,Juan de la Puente.La República, a left-of-center oppositionnewspaper, has campaigned for years against the illegal activities of theSIN and the Colina Group and was the first newspaper to reveal detailsof the Narval and Pino army intelligence plans. The paper also publisheddetails of the arrest of SIE agents accused of leaking information on theplans to the press.A blue Toyota car without license plates crossed the path of the journalists'vehicle, and its occupants forced Rosales to stop at gunpoint. There wasa brief struggle during which Juan de la Puente managed to escape. Oneof the gunmen tried to shoot at de la Puente, but his weapon jammed. Asin the Diez Canseco incident, the men split into two groups, one of whichdrove Rosales off in her own car, while the other followed in the othercar. De la Puente tried to follow his editor in a taxi but lost sight ofthem and went to the police.After a drive of about half an hour, during which the gunmen threatenedto kill her several times, Rosales was released and abandoned, still inher car, in the Lima district of Barranco. The car was intact and no documentsor credit cards were stolen.(126)On June 25, 1997, César Hildebrandt, presenter of the televisionprogram En Persona and a celebrated critic of the Fujimori government,demanded that the interior minister guarantee his and his family's personalsafety after his program broadcast revelations by La Rosa about a planconcocted by the SIE to kill him in December 1996. He also received a telephonecall threatening the safety of his son. Within days of the revelationsof the plans to kill him, three armed men broke into a house in Lima andbeat and threatened an En Persona film crew that was preparing tofilm an interview. One of those attacked, Edwin Montoya, was a staff memberof the People's Defender, or ombudsman.(127)At about 7:45 p.m on July 1, 1977, three unidentified men interceptedLuis Angeles Laynes, political editor of Ojo, a daily newspaper,in the street close to his home in the San Miguel district of Lima. Themen tried to force him into a waiting car but were unable to do so becausepassers-by went to his defense. The men got back in their car. Angeles,who was bleeding after being hit several times in the scuffle, tried totake the car's license number. One of the men got out and hit him overthe head with the grip of his revolver. The journalist was assisted andtaken to the hospital by local residents.According to press reports, Angeles had been receiving anonymous deaththreats by telephone at his home and office for six months prior to theattack. Other staff on the paper had also been threatened. His attackersshowed no interest in the money, credit cards, or personal items he wascarrying.(128) Ojo, a popular tabloid,had recently been publishing articles critical of the government, and Angeleshad been covering the La Rosa case, according to his senior editor.(129)Former Gen. Rodolfo Robles Espinoza has been a frequent target of deaththreats because of his key role in exposing the involvement of the ColinaGroup in the La Cantuta disappearances and other abuses committed by thegroup.(130) On November 26, 1996, SINagents violently abducted the general as he was leaving his home. Theybeat him and sprayed him with mace and took him to an army barracks wherehe was accused of slandering the armed forces, insulting a superior, anddisobedience. The abduction and charges were due to public allegationsmade by Robles that implicated members of the Colina Group in the bombingof the Puno station of Global Television the previous October. Due to theinternational outcry provoked by Robles's arbitrary arrest, Fujimori admittedthat an injustice had been done. Congress passed a law granting Roblesan amnesty, but, at the same time, it passed another law preventing prosecutionof the military tribunal that had ordered Robles's arrest that refusedto comply with a habeas corpus writ ordering his release.In an attack that appeared meant either for Robles or to send him amessage, four unidentified assailants attempted on March 26, 1997 to abductJaime Robles Montoya, the general's twenty-six-year-old son, who was drivingthe general's car. Robles Montoya was able to escape only by driving againstthe traffic up a one way street with his assailants in hot pursuit. Afterthe incident, an unidentified caller rang the Robles house and repeated"death, death, death!" and "this time he escaped, the next time he won't!"(131)Robles Espinoza received a new set of threatening phone calls the eveningof April 9, 1997, after he gave an interview on Channel 9 television.(132)VIII. ABUSES BY ARMED OPPOSITION GROUPSSince the beginning of the armed conflict, Peru's two armed oppositiongroups, Shining Path and the MRTA, have consistently violated principlesof international humanitarian law.(133)Such violations include the selective killing of non-combatants, indiscriminateattacks, forced recruitment, and, in the case of the MRTA, hostage-taking.(134)Shining Path, in particular, has gained a reputation for its glorificationof violence, making a revolutionary virtue out of the cold-blooded assassinationof noncombatants perceived to be its ideological enemies. Shining pathhas explicitly rejected respect for the principles of human rights, a stancethat is amply displayed in the group's disregard for the laws of war:We start from the position that we do not subscribe either to the UniversalDeclaration of Human Rights or the Costa Rica Declaration [the AmericanConvention on Human Rights]. . . [Shining Path's] position is quite clear.We reject and condemn human rights because they are reactionary, counter-revolutionary,bourgeois rights: they are presently the weapon of revisionists and imperialists,principally of yankee imperialism.(135)Rather than concentrate its attacks on the armed forces or police,Shining Path has predominantly singled out civilians. Attacks on localgovernment officials have been carried out systematically, with the evidentintent of undermining the presence of the state in the areas under theorganization's influence.(136) The organizationhas treated with special venom popular leaders such as community activists,trade union organizers, and leftist politicians, who are excoriated asreformists intent on diverting the masses from their revolutionary destiny.It has selectively murdered such civilians during its seventeen-year waragainst the Peruvian state. In recent years, the same ruthless logic hasbeen applied to members of the organization itself who have advocated renunciationof the armed struggle and have subsequently become targets of threats andassassination.(137)The Shining Path has pragmatically avoided taking captives unlessit intends to execute them. Executions frequently follow a mock trial heldin front of forcibly assembled villagers. Descriptions of brutal killingsof villagers committed with primitive weapons, such as sticks, stones,and machetes were common in press reports of political violence at theheight of the conflict.(138) Often, suchkillings took place in front of the victims' families and neighbors.Shining Path has been reported to torture captured civilians beforeexecuting them. Prior cases of torture by Sendero Luminoso remain vivid.On November 23, 1990, Javier Puiggrós Planas, an engineer and leaderof the conservative Popular Christian Party (PPC), was killed by a ShiningPath squad at his plantation in Vilcahuara, Huayra. As reported by HumanRights Watch/Americas:Having located Puiggrós, the senderistas brought him beforethe workers and berated him for mistreating them. The workers protestedthat Puiggrós was a decent man and asked the guerrillas not to killhim. While under interrogation, Puiggrós was tied hand and footand mistreated physically, but when workers attempted to help him theywere threatened with harm. According to a witness, the helpless captivewas executed with four shots to the chest.(139)In recent years, the armed activity of the MRTA has been concentratedin the jungle region to the northeast of Lima, particularly in the provincesof Chanchamayo and Satipo in the department of Junín and Oxapampain the department of Pasco. The organization has also carried out armedattacks and kidnappings in the capital. Decimated by arrests and internaldivisions, the MRTA has increasingly undertaken attention-grabbing actions.A central element has been the taking of civilian hostages for ransom orfor strategic objectives, in violation of international humanitarian law.(140)The most spectacular case was the occupation of the Japanese ambassador'sresidence on December 17, 1997, in which the MRTA held seventy-two hostagesfor 126 days. Although the embassy occupation took Peru and the rest ofthe world by surprise, the MRTA had carried out at least nineteen kidnappingssince December 1984, according to the Combined Command of the armed forces.(141)Two of the victims, David Ballón Vera and Fernando Manrique Acevedo,were killed in cold blood after being held in cells measuring six feetseven inches by six feet in the basement of a Lima hideout, chillinglyreferred to as a "people's prison"(142)Ballón was abducted on September 11, 1992, and found dead on February24, 1994. According to DINCOTE, the MRTA killed him when his family failedto pay $5 million in ransom. The body was covered with bruises and weighedseventy-seven pounds less than before his capture.(143)IX. UNITED STATES POLICYA reading of successive annual State Department human rights reportsshows that the Clinton administration is well aware of the extent and seriousnessof torture in Peru. According to the most recent report, covering eventsof 1996, "Although the Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman or humiliatingtreatment, security force torture and brutal treatment of detainees remainscommon. This is as true for common criminals as it is for alleged subversives."(144)It continued, "Eye-witnesses and human rights monitors credibly reportedthat government security forces still routinely torture suspects at militaryand detention centers in some emergency zones, where certain constitutionalrights are suspended due to high levels of terrorist activity."(145)The report also notes that the rape of female detainees continues to takeplace and, for the most part, goes unpunished.Apart from its annual country report, however, for most of the five-yearperiod since Fujimori's April 1992 coup, the United States has refrainedfrom strong public criticism of human rights abuses in Peru or forcefulinitiatives to address the problem. It has preferred to give the governmentthe benefit of the doubt in its professed intent to restore and revitalizedemocratic institutions, and to use the methods of "quiet diplomacy" tofurther this objective. One notable exception was the formation in 1993of a commission of international jurists to recommend reforms to Peruviananti-terrorist legislation.(146) Eventhough the Fujimori government had agreed to the commission's establishmentand composition, its report received a hostile and uncooperative responsefrom the government, which accused the United States of meddling imperialisticallyin Peruvian affairs. Official criticism notwithstanding, the publicationof the commission's report led to some significant, if limited, improvements.There is no indication that the United States' subsequent retreat to "quietdiplomacy" has had a comparable effect on human rights practices in Peru.In recent months, with escalating numbers of assaults on the pressand opposition and with revelations of cases of government torture, theUnited States ambassador in Lima, Dennis Jett, has begun to make forcefulstatements to the Peruvian media. On April 9, for example, Ambassador Jetttold reporters who questioned him on the Leonor La Rosa case that a promptinvestigation of the torture she suffered and the swift prosecution ofthose responsible were essential and would improve Peru's internationalimage.(147) The ambassador also describedthe destitution of three Constitutional Court judges following their impeachmentby the pro-Fujimori majority in Congress as "definitely a step backwardsin the process of consolidation of Peruvian democracy." He noted, "democracyis always weakened when one democratic institution attacks instead of heedingthe views of another."(148) On June 12,Ambassador Jett recommended that the Peruvian government cease to use militarytribunals and "faceless courts" to try civilians accused of serious terroristcrimes.Human Rights Watch/Americas commends Ambassador Jett for these interventions.Though they have been poorly received by the Peruvian government, theyset an important tone for Peru's relations with the United States, remindingPeruvian authorities that cooperation in other spheres, such as economicpolicy and anti-narcotics efforts, can never be traded for silence overhuman rights abuses.However, the United States' role in Peru has been marred by a continuingambiguity concerning its relationship with Vladimiro Montesinos, de factohead of the SIN. In almost all the incidents documented in this report,which include torture, physical attacks, threats, harassment, and illegalelectronic surveillance, the hand of Peru's intelligence services is discernible.Montesinos, who is reported to have worked for the Central IntelligenceAgency, has been linked with the Colina Group and its egregious human rightsabuses in previous years. He is widely seen in Peru as enjoying Washington'ssupport, a notion that the United States has done nothing to dispel.(149)Moreover, Washington reportedly maintains a covert assistance program withthe SIN to combat drug trafficking. This apparent liaison with a unit deeplyinvolved in human rights violations undermines the impact of public statementsmade by Jett and the State Department.Human Rights Watch/AmericasHuman Rights Watch is dedicated to protectingthe human rights of people around the world.We stand with victims and activiststo bring offenders to justice, to prevent discrimination, to uphold politicalfreedom and to protect people from inhumane conduct in wartime.We investigate and expose human rightsviolations and hold abusers accountable.We challenge governments and those holdingpower to end abusive practices and respect international human rights law.We enlist the public and the internationalcommunity to support the cause of human rights for all.The staff includes Kenneth Roth, executivedirector; Susan Osnos, associate director; Michele Alexander, developmentdirector; Cynthia Brown, program director; Barbara Guglielmo, finance andadministration director; Patrick Minges, publications director; Jeri Laber,special advisor; Lotte Leicht, Brussels office director; Susan Osnos, communicationsdirector; Jemera Rone, counsel; Wilder Tayler, general counsel; and JoannaWeschler, United Nations representative. Robert L. Bernstein is the chairof the board and Adrian W. DeWind is vice chair.Its Americas division was establishedin 1981 to monitor human rights in Latin America and the Caribbean. JoséMiguel Vivanco is executive director; Anne Manuel is deputy director; JamesCavallaro is Brazil office director; Joel Solomon is research director;Jennifer Bailey, Sebastian Brett, Sarah DeCosse, and Robin Kirk are researchassociates; Steve Hernández and Megan Himan are associates. StephenL. Kass is chair of the advisory committee; Marina Pinto Kaufman and DavidE. Nachman are vice chairs.Web Site Address: http://www.hrw.orgListserv address: To subscribe to thelist, send an e-mail message to majordomo@igc.apc.org with "subscribe hrw-news"in the body of the message (leave the subject line blank).1. Those who died during the assault included twomembers of the security forces and a respected Supreme Court judge, Dr.Carlos Giusti Acuña.2. Coordinadora Nacional de Derechos Humanos,Informe sobre la Situación de los Derechos Humanos en el Perúen 1996 (Lima: Coordinadora Nacional de Derechos Humanos, 1997), pp.18-19.3. Fourteen occurred between 1992 and 1994 andseventeen between 1995 and 1996.4. These statistics were compiled for Human RightsWatch/Americas by the Institute for Legal Defense, based on questionnairesapplied to 1,068 male and 170 female prisoners whose cases the organizationhas taken up between 1990 and April 1997.5. Centro de Estudios y Acción por la Paz,Perfil social y jurídico de los adolescentes infractores de la leypenal procesados por terrorismo" (Lima: Centro de Estudios y Acciónpor la Paz, 1996), p. 30.6. At the end of 1996, emergency regulations affected18.5 percent of the national territory and 23 percent of the population.Coordinadora Nacional de Derechos Humanos, "Informe sobre la Situaciónde la Tortura en el Perú," unpublished report submitted to the UnitedNations Committee against Torture, April 1997, pp. 3-4.7. According to the United States Department ofState's 1996 human rights report on Peru, for example, "In Tocache 17-year-oldJuan Gutiérrez Silva was tortured repeatedly on July 6, when herefused to sign a confession for allegedly shooting at the girlfriend ofa military officer. When hospitalized after ten hours of beatings, Gutiérrez'sskull was cracked, and he had been stabbed with a thin rod ten times inthe chest area, and suffered cuts in the neck and left arm. Near death,Gutiérrez was transported to Lima for medical treatment." UnitedStates Department of State, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for1996 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1997), p. 542.8. Coordinadora Nacional de Derechos Humanos,Informe sobre la Situación de los Derechos Humanos en el Perúen 1994 (Lima: Coordinadora Nacional de Derechos Humanos, 1994), pp. 21-22.9. Coodinadora Nacional de Derechos Humanos, CartaCircular, Vol. 40, July, 1997, p.9.10. Article 4.11. Article 5.12. "No one may be a victim of moral, psychologicalor physical violence, or subjected to torture or inhuman or humiliatingtreatment. Anyone may request immediately a medical examination of theaffected party or of anyone who is incapacitated to request it for themselves.Declarations obtained by the use of violence have no legal value. Whoeverresorts to it is criminally responsible."Constitution of 1993, Article2 (24,h), Translation by Human Rights Watch/Americas.13. "He who causes serious physical injury ordamage to the health of another shall be punished with a penalty of imprisonmentof no less than three years or more than eight. . . . When the victim diesas a result of the injury and if the agent could have foreseen this consequence,the penalty shall be no less than five years or more than ten." Penal Code(1991), Article 121. The wording of the article makes no distinction betweenviolence resulting in injury occurring between private parties and injuryinflicted by agents of the state acting in an official capacity.14. Article 376 states: "The public officialwho, abusing his powers, commits or orders any arbitrary action whatsoeveragainst any person shall be punished with a penalty of no more than twoyears' imprisonment." The article refers generically to "any arbitraryact" without specifying its nature, seriousness, or whether violence wasused.15. Peru ratified the United Nations ConventionAgainst Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishmentin July 1988.16. Committee against Torture, Considerationof Reports Submitted by States Parties under Article 19 of the Convention,Peru, U.N. Doc. A/50/44 (Fiftieth Session, 1995).17. Commission on Human Rights, Fifty-SecondSession, Report of the Special Rapporteur, Mr. Nigel S. Rodley, submittedpursuant to Commission on Human Rights resolution 1995/37, E/CN.4/1996/35,January 9,1996.18. Article 7 of the ICCPR states that "No oneshall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatmentor punishment". Peru ratified the covenant on April 28, 1978.19. Article 5(2) of the American Convention onHuman Rights contains the same wording on torture as the ICCPR. Peru ratifiedthe convention on July 28, 1978.20. Peru ratified the Inter-American Conventionto Prevent and Punish Torture on March 28, 1991.21. Article 55.22. ICCPR, Article 4.23. See comments by the U.N. Special Rapporteuron Torture in his 1996 report on Peru. Commission on Human Rights, E/CN.4/1996/35,January 9,1996.24. Decree Law 25475.25. Decree Law 25659.26. In August 1996, after a long and emotionalcampaign by human rights advocates, President Fujimori established a commissionto review cases of innocent prisoners and propose them for a presidentialpardon. By November 1997, the so-called Adhoc Commission, composed of theminister of justice, the ombudsman, and a former prison chaplain, had securedthe release of 227 wrongly convicted prisoners, but hundreds more applicationsremained in the pipeline.27. Human Rights Watch/Americas, "Peru: Presumptionof Guilt, Human Rights Violations and the Faceless Court," Vol 8, No.5(B),August 1996, pp. 6-9.28. "The inquiries undertaken in this respectby military personnel, like the taking of statements by detainees in militarybases or barracks, would be void of legal value. In addition, they wouldbe converted into a source of human rights violations." Ronald Gamarra,Terrorismo: Tratamiento Jurídico, Instituto de Defensa Legal, Lima,1994 (Translation by Human Rights Watch/Americas).29. Ibid., pp. 199-201.30. One exception is the case of Jorge CauracuriCoronado, who was abducted by army personnel in plainclothes on April 14,1992 and held in secret for ten tays before being handed over to DINCOTE.In his statement to the judge, Cauracuri said that he had been torturedby the army and DINCOTE, and he exhibited the marks. Cauracuri's allegationswere backed up by a medical certificate issued by the Institute of LegalMedicine. The prosecutor filed charges of "battery" and "abuse of authority"against police Capt. Jaime León Bohórquez, before Lima's32nd Criminal Court. Bohórquez, however, absconded, and the prosecutionwas suspended. Despite his substantiated claim of torture, Caurcari wasconvicted to ten years' imprisonment under the antiterrorism law. Memoto Human Rights Watch/Americas from the Comisión de Derechos Humanos(COMISEDH), April 8, 1997.31. In November 1996, the United Nations HumanRights Committee "deplored" the failure of the Peruvian government to complywith its recommendations on the amnesty law. The committee had called onthe government to "review or revoke" the law, ensure that victims of humanrights violations by state agents received compensation, and make surethat agents found guilty were removed from office. Committee of Human Rights,Examination of the Reports presented by States Party under Article 40 ofthe Covenant, UN Doc. CCPR/C/79/Add. 72, November 8, 1996.32. Código Procesal Penal, Decreto LegislativoNo. 638. Article 14. Translation by Human Rights Watch/Americas.33. Thus, a robbery committed while a policemancarries out an arrest would be a common crime, because the value affected,the right to enjoy one's property, pertains to civil society and is identicalregardless of whether the author of the crime is a policeman or a civilian.On the other hand, "disobedience" is a function-related offense, becausethe value affected, "discipline," is exclusively a military value. A disobedientworker in a civilian job could be fired, but not prosecuted.34. The Code of Penal Procedure currently inforce dates back to 1940. The 1991 code was suspended indefinitely by theFujimori government after the coup of April 1992. According to the Coordinadora,the main reasons for the suspension were the increased supervisory powersthe new code gave to public prosecutors over the police. Another factor,according to lawyers experienced in litigating torture cases in civiliancourts, was the clear delimitation of military justice in the code. Memofrom the Coordinadora to Human Rights Watch/Americas, August 4, 1997.35. According to the draft law, "Ordinary criminaljurisdiction is not competent to hear: 1) Function-related crimes committedby members of the Armed Forces and the National Police, typified in theMilitary Penal Code."36. Americas Watch, Peru Under Fire, p.28.37. Human Rights Watch/Americas, The Two Facesof Justice, p.16.38. Chávez Peñaherrera had testifiedthat he had paid bribes to presidential adviser Vladimiro Montesinos toallow him to conduct drug-trafficking operations without interference.The government would not allow the allegations to be investigated.39. In November 1996, the CSJM refused to respecta habeas corpus petition granted by a civilian judge on behalf of retiredGen. Rodolfo Robles Espinoza, who had been arbitrarily and violently arrestedby army intelligence agents.40. "Acuerdos inconvenientes del CJSM," El Comercio,May 11, 1997.41. Constitution of 1993, Article 139(1). Thisarticle states that "there may not exist or be established any independentjurisdiction, except for the military and arbitration (courts). Despitethis explicit mention of military jursidiction as independent, militarycourts may not intrude in cases under ordinary jurisdiction. Their competenceis restricted to purely military offenses."42. As described below, army intelligence expertsabducted former Gen. Rodolfo Robles in the street in November 1996 afterhe had denounced the participation of the Colina group in the bombing ofa television station in Puno in October of that year. The army refusedto heed a habeas corpus writ issued on his behalf and only released Roblesafter Fujimori intervened and granted him an amnesty.43. The Executive Commission of the Public Ministrywas set up in 1996 to oversee the restructuring of the Public Ministry.44. Article 34(4) of the Organic Law of the Judiciarystipulates that the criminal chambers of the Supreme Court are competentto hear cases against members of the CSJM.45. Elba Greta Minaya Calle, a respected judgewho has courageously defended human rights, was removed from the 37th CriminalCourt in Lima after she had granted a habeas corpus writ in December 1996on behalf of Robles. After public pressure, the president of the SuperiorCourt of Lima reinstated her. In July 1997, the Minister of the Interior,César Saucedo Sánchez, ordered Minaya prosecuted for terrorismand other crimes for granting a habeas corpus petition on behalf of a womanarbitraily detained by DINCOTE. Minaya had ordered the release of CarmenCáceres Hinostrozo after the criminal investigations departmentof the police detained her when she refused to sign a statement recognizingthat police had discovered ammunition in her kitchen. She was later transferredto DINCOTE, although there was no warrant for her arrest. The accusationof terrorism against Minaya was subsequently dropped, and instead a disciplinarycomplaint against her was lodged with the judiciary's internal controlbody.46. Constitution of 1993, Articles 201-204 and158-160, respectively.47. Colán has acquired a reputation asa fierce defender of Fujimori's authoritarian policies. In 1993, she refusedto allow foreign forensic experts permission to assist in the exhumationof the bodies of the La Cantuta victims; she helped instigate arbitrarylegal action against journalist Ricardo Uceda, editor-in-chief of Símagazine, after he had published evidence of the La Colina death squad'sinvolvement in the Los Barrios massacre; she threatened to prosecute judgeAntonia Saquicuray Sánchez for continuing to investigate the group'sinvolvement in the crime despite the recently promulgated amnesty law.See Americas Watch, Peru, Anatamy of a Cover-Up: the Disappearances atLa Cantuta, September, 1993, p.14, and Human Rights Watch/Americas, WorldReport (New York: Human Rights Watch, 1996), p. 118.48. Law No. 26695, of December 3, 1996.49. Law No.26738 of January 7, 1997, widely knownas the "third Colán Law." The "first Colán Law" helped Colánto remain in the post of attorney general, when her temporary appointmentexpired, by giving her the necessary seniority to do so. The "second ColánLaw" extended her period of office by discounting her time as a temporaryappointee. A recurrent feature of the current administration in Peru hasbeen its use of a comfortable parliamentary majority to pass laws couchedin general terms but designed to affect one individual in particular. Anotherexample was the "Susana Law" designed to prevent the presidential candidacyof Fujimori's estranged wife, Susana Higuchi.50. The original vote went against him due toa last-minute appointment by Dr. Colán of a new temporary seniorprosecutor to the board of senior prosecutors responsible for the election.However, following widespread protests, Dr. Colán stood down.51. "Fiscal de la Nación Habemos:entrevistaa Miguel Aljovín," Ideele, No. 94, March 1997.52. Three of its members voted in December 1996to support a motion of unconstitutionality against the voting requirement,presented by a group of thirty-six members of Congress. In its annual reportfor 1997, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights criticized therequirement as one that allows for "overarching state authority, abovethe highest-level judicial bodies, allowing for the blatant interferenceof the Executive in the administration of justice and judicial reform,"OEA/Ser.L/V/II.95, Doc 7 rev., March 14, 1997, p. 744.53. Since Fujimori's first re-election was in1995, this would make him eligible to stand again in 2000.54. Two members of the court who strongly disagreedwith the verdict published a minority view alongside it, despite havingabstained from the vote.55. Article 4 of the law stipulates that "thecourt resolves and adopts decisions by a simple majority of votes cast,except to resolve the inadmissability of an inconstitutionality complaintor to issue a sentence that declares unconstitutional a norm with the statusof law, in which case six votes in favor are needed." (Translation by HumanRights Watch/Americas.)56. One of judges who abstained, Judge JoséGarcía Marcelo, a former army chaplain, was suspected by Judge Revoredoof stealing a confidential draft of the ruling from her briefcase.Other members of the court who voted for the resolution also reportedconfidential documents missing. The draft in question appears to have foundits way into the hands of a group of C90-NM members of congress, who senta letter to the president of the court, Dr. Ricardo Nugent López-Chávez,urging him to vote against the ruling. Judge José GarcíaMarcelo received a vote of censure in the court for disclosing its confidentialdeliberations.During the week of the ruling, Judge Revoredo alleged that her homehad been under surveillance by naval intelligence agents posing as icecream sellers and gardeners. She also said that a case against her concerningthe importation of an automobile, which had been closed several years ago,was suddenly reopened by a judge in Callao, apparently in retaliation forher vote. On November 8, 1996, Nugent's police bodyguard was killed andtwo other police officers escorting his vehicle were seriously injuredwhen gunmen attacked his vehicle. The press reported that the gunmen, whowere attempting to kidnap a businessman when Nugent's car passed by, mistookit for a police vehicle and opened fire. These were not the only suspiciousincidents involving members of the court. The Minister of the Interior,Gen. Juan Briones Dávila, denied that the attack was politicallymotivated. However, the incident remained unclarified. See "Quedóal voto pedido para procesar a Delia Revoredo," La República,April9, 1997 and "Presidente del T.C. salva de balacera," La República,November 9, 1997.57. The statement read: "Given the institutionalimportance of the Constitutional Court, the IACHR hopes that it will berestored to regular functioning as soon as possible, guaranteeing due respectfor its independence, impartiality and autonomy of the other organs ofthe state, and consolidating its position as the most authoritative interpreterof the Constitution and human rights."58. Comunicado Oficial No. 003/SZSNC-7, Ministeriode Defensa, Lima, March 18, 1997.59. "Ejército Peruano presenta armamentodel frustrado ataque terrorista del MRTA," El Sol, March 20, 1997.60. "Militares los torturaron para que admitieranser del MRTA," La República, March 26, 1997.61. El Sol, March 20, 1997. The article in thepro-military El Sol appeared on the day after a television report denouncingthat the peasants had been tortured into confessing. The article claimedthat all of the detainees had been interrogated in the presence of theprovincial prosecutor and that none had denounced torture. Thus, it concluded,the army had "de-activated another plan by the terrorists to attack thearmed forces for committing abuses against peasants, in which they hopedto use the foreign press that is in our country for the hostage crisis."(Translation by Human Rights Watch/Americas.)62. Human Rights Watch/Americas interview withPaulino Solís Taype, Lima, April 4, 1997. Solís's allegationwas confirmed by journalist María Elena Cornejo, who later interviewedthe provincial prosecutor, Victoriano Núñez Valdivia. Hetold her: "The thing is I don't have a budget for clothes, and as I wasin civilian clothes and my shoes were dirty, the general lent me the uniform.Besides, it was 4 p.m. on a Friday and it was time for me to leave work,and I didn't have time to change. But I don't take pressure from anyonebecause I stand up to anyone like a man." María Elena Cornejo, "ElVoltaje del Miedo, Caretas, No.1460, April 10, 1997, p.37.63. The soldiers tried to force Loida Dionicioto admit that she had been recruited to the MRTA by another detainee, AurelioLeiva, and that he had raped her. A later medical examination in the DINCOTEshowed that Loida was, in fact, a virgin. Leiva had been singled out asthe "leader" of the MRTA column.64. Asociación Pro-Derechos Humanos, unpublishedtestimony of Inés Marilu Avila Gálvez, March 1996.65. Asociación Pro-Derechos Humanos, unpublishedtestimony of Emerson Wistrecher Cánepa, March 1996.66. Asociación Pro-Derechos Humanos, unpublishedtestimony of Inés Marilu Avila Gálvez, March 1996.67. Human Rights Watch/Americas saw and photographedthe torture equipment during our visit on April 2, 1997.68. Human Rights Watch/Americas interview withFélix Jorge Romero, Lima, April 9, 1997.69. Human Rights Watch/Americas interviews withAlfonso Rojas Colca and José Teofilo Huamán, Lima, April4,1997.70. Human Rights Watch/Americas interview withMartín Augusto Elguera, Lima, April 9, 1997.71. "Salud sicológica de rehenes estádeteriorada," Expreso, March 31, 1997.72. Judge Onésimo Julio Vela Velásquez,Informe No. 003-96-1JEPP, expediente No. 55-95, January 23,1996. Pagesnot numbered.73. The forensic doctors asserted that it wasimpossible to determine whether the victim's lesions were self-inflictedor had been caused by a third party, but they went on, contradictorily,to say that the lesions had not been self-inflicted. Diligencia de necropsiaen el cadáver de Jhoel Huamán García. Ministerio PúblicoFiscalía Mixta Pasco, date indistinct.74. Judge Onésimo Vela Velásquez,Expediente No. 55-95, page un-numbered.75. Penal Code, Book II, Title 1, Chapter 3,Article 121(3, ii).76. Letter from Francisco Soberón, generalcoordinator of the Asociación Pro-Derechos Humanos and FelicitaBuendía Oré, Chamaya's widow, to Luz Salgado Rubianes, presidentof the Congressional Human Rights Committee, November 9, 1995.77. "Policías enfrían taxista encómica," El Popular, September 23, 1995. According to the same source,their superiors were complicit in their escape.78. A police witnesses who was not identifiedtold reporters that the officers responsible, apparently backed by thestation chief, Carlos Sánchez Gutiérrez, hatched a plan toremove and "disappear" the body: "Lieutenant Zevallos tried to take thecorpse away in the trunk of a private car, but because others tried tostop him, he began to shout like a madman, threatening to 'talk' aboutother abuses committed in the station. Later, he disappeared." "Jefes decómica en Santa Feliciaimplicados en crimen de taxista," El Popular, September 25, 1995.79. "Asesinos de taxista se entregan a las autoridadesy admiten su crimen," La República, September 28, 1995.80. According to a legal advisor to the criminalinvestigations department of the national police, the National Directoratefor the Investigation of Crimes (Dirección Nacional de Investigacióndel Crímen, DININCRI): "On this point, since the events took placein the installations of a police establishment and as a consequence ofthe carrying out of professional functions, the criminal conduct fallswithin the terms of Article 173 of the Constitution; for this reason thepresent advisor is of the opinion that, in application of Article 319 and326 of the Code of Military Justice, it is of the exclusive competenceof the military jurisdiction." Asesoría Legal de la DININCRI-PNP,Dictámen no. 181-0AJ-DININCRI-PNP, September 25, 1995. (Translationby Human Rights Watch/Americas.)81. Human Rights Watch/Americas interview withlawyer Jorge Vega Fernández, Asociación Pro-Derechos Humanos,Lima, April 8, 1997.82. Letter to the judge of the 40th CriminalCourt, signed by Jorge Vega Fernández, May 14, 1996.83. The civilian and military judges also conflictedover the place where Zevallos would serve his sentence. After his convictionby the military court, police authorities refused to return him to Lurigancho,sending him to a military prison instead. According to a memo from thenational penitentiary authorities to the judge, "this decision has causedadministrative problems in this department in that the prisoner was internedin a public prison, Lurigancho, with a detention order issued by your worthycourt, and in his capacity as accused, and he should have been returnedto the same prison." Memo to the judge of the 40th Penal Court of Limafrom an official of the National Penitentiary Institute (INP), a departmentof the Ministry of Justice, September 17, 1996.84. Human Rights Watch/Americas interview withlawyer Jorge Vega Fernández, Asociación Pro-Derechos Humanos,Lima, April 8, 1997.85. "Policías de la delegaciónde Breña asesinan a comerciante de lápidas," Expreso, March25, 1996.86. Manifestación de José EnriquePalomino García, document bearing the National Police stamp, datedMarch 26, 1996.87. Protocol de autopsia, Ref. Ofc. 384-96-14FPPL-MP-FN, March 24, 1996.88. Ampliación de la Instructiva del InculpadoAlberto Sánchez Vásquez, July 18, 1996.89. Testimony of José Fiorentini Vergara,cited in summary of evidence by Judge Cecilia Bolack Baluarte of the 44thCriminal Court of Lima, November 6, 1996.90. Testimony of Capt. Jorge Manuel Cheng KongChu, March 29, 1996.91. Atestado No. 448 IC-H-DDCV, Delito Cometidopor Funcionarios Públicos- Abuso de Autoridad, April 2, 1996.92. "Descuartizan a mujer agente del SIN y aotra la torturan y la internan en Hospital Militar," La República,April 7, 1997; "El ejército investigaba por 'infidencia' a MariellaBarreto la agente descuartizada," La República, April 8, 1997; "Unaagente de inteligencia asegura haber sido torturada," El Comercio, April7, 1997; "Congreso pide informe a ministros por denuncias de torturas enel SIN," Expreso, April 8, 1997.93. "Los planes al desnudo," La República,April 7, 1997.94. "Descuartizan a mujer."95. Human Rights Watch/Americas interview withOrlando Barreto Peña, father of Mariella Barreto, April 7, 1997.96. "El ejército investigaba por "infidencia"a Mariela Barreto."97. Ibid.98. Ibid.99. "Enjuician a cuatro de SIE por caso de torturas,"El Sol, April 9, 1997; "Cuatro militares enjuiciados por torturas,"Expreso,April 9, 1997.100. De Bari was quoted as saying, "[The case]has occurred in a circumstantial fashion [and] remains an isolated eventthat we categorically condemn." "Ejército remueve y detiene a cuatrooficiales," El Sol, April 10, 1997. (Translation by Human Rights Watch/Americas.)101. "Fiscal de la Nación ordena investigar,"Expreso,April 9, 1997; "Casos deben verse en fuero civil; Fiscal de laNación habla claro," La República, April 9, 1997.102. DESCO, "Trabas al Fiscal?," ResúmenSemanal, April 9-15, 1997.103. On May 8, this lawyer was also fired bythe military justice authorities for giving an unauthorized interview tothe press. "Agente SIE se desmaye en juicio," Expreso, May 9, 1997.104. "Coronel EP por encargo del general Hermozame propuso retirar denuncia de tortura," La República, May 12, 1997.105. "Detienen y golpean a hermano de LeonorLa Rosa," La República, June 29, 1997.106. This was reported in the summing-up ofthe military prosecutor, Gen. Raúl Talledo Valdivieso. "Agente LenorLa Rosa sufre desmayo durante audiencia y tribunal militar la suspendepara hoy,"La República, May 9, 1997.107. Asociación Pro-Derechos Humanos,"Noticias," June 6, 1997.108. DESCO, "La frustración cronometrada,"Resumen Semanal, August 6-12, 1997.109. Asociación Pro-Derechos Humanos,"Noticias," May 24, 1997.110. "El SIN estaría investigando a directivosde Frecuencia Latina," El Comercio, April 7, 1997; "Denuncian presionescontra Canal 2 por informes periodísticos del SIN," La República,April 7, 1997; "Por difundir reportaje sobre torturas presionan a Canal2," La República, April 10, 1997.111. The government interfered with the policeto silence unwelcome criticism. In August 1997, police captain Julio SalasCáceres told Human Rights Watch/Americas that he had been orderedby his superiors to open an investigation--at the SIN's request, they toldhim--into alleged customs duty evasion by Channel 2. He said that his superiorshad visited Vladimiro Montesinos, the SIN's de facto head, and receivedhis personal congratulations for their work. However, when news of theinvestigation caused a public outcry, the government backtracked and promptlydenied its existence. Alone, Salas refused to go along with this pretense;for refusing to deny his role in the investigation, he was hauled up beforehis superiors, threatened, physically assaulted, and summarily dismissedfrom the force. Salas and his lawyer were subjected to death threats, andhis wife was attacked in the street by a man who told her she was goingto "die like a squashed rat." Salas left the country in fear for his safety.112. Asociación Pro-Derechos Humanos,"Noticias," May 24, 1997.113. DESCO, "Canal 2: Winter se cuadra," ResumenSemanal, May 28-June 3, 1997.114. Asociación Pro-Derechos Humanos,"Noticias," May 29, 1997.115. Article 2(21) of the Constitution stipulatesthat everyone has a right "to their nationality. No one may be strippedof it." Article 20(3) of the American Convention on Human Rights holds,"No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his nationality or of the rightto change it."116. The judges were transferred after beingaccused by the army of unlawfully granting habeas corpus petitions in favorof general Rodolfo Robles, after his detention by SIE agents in November1996.117. Contrapunto's director, Luis Ibérico,told reporters: "We hit the nail on the head, we touched the spot, andthe mask dropped. Something that before had been debatable has become obvious.That was the merit of Contapunto and the reason for its destruction." DESCO,"Ibérico: dimos en el clavo," Resumen Semanal, September 17-23,1997.118. DESCO, "Fujimori agresivo," Resumen Semanal,May 28-June 3, 1997.119. DESCO, "Detención de Ricardo Palma;Hildebrandt tambien denunciado," Resumen Semanal, May 21-27, 1997.120. This account is extracted from a letterfrom Gustavo Saberbein to Francisco Soberón, director of the AsociaciónPro-Derechos Humanos, a nongovernmental human rights group, March 24,1997.121. Testimony of Patricia Valdez, sent to HumanRights Watch/Americas, March 25, 1997.122. Lima's deserted beaches are a well-knownsite where the police torture victims, sometimes half-drowning them inthe ocean.123. DESCO, "Diez Canseco: Un Acto del SIN,"ResúmenSemanal, March 19-25, 1997; "Hermanos Huamaní no incendieron carrodel congresista Diez Canseco," La República, April 9, 1997.124. "Fujimori afirma que delincuentes comunesatentaron contra Diez Canseco," La República, April 7, 1997; "HermanosHuamaní no incendieron carro."125. Nota de prensa: Oficina Parlamentaria delCongresista Diez Canseco, Lima, 27 de mayo, 1997.126. Human Rights Watch/Americas interview withBlanca Rosales, Lima, April 7, 1997.127. Amnesty International, Urgent Action, UA201/97, AI Index: AMR 46/27/97, July 8, 1997.128. "Un nuevo atentado contra la prensa independiente,"La República, July 2, 1997. Received by internet.129. DESCO, "Golpean a periodistas," ResúmenSemanal, July 2-8, 1997.130. Robles' role in exposing the Colina groupis described in his book. Rodolfo Robles, "Crimen e Impunidad: El "GrupoColina" y el Poder (Lima: Asociación Pro-Derechos Humanos, 1996).131. Human Rights Watch/Americas interview withRodolfo Robles Espinoza, Lima, April 10, 1997.132. Ibid.133. The standards set forth in Common Article3 of the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 explicitly address conflicts thatare not of an international character. Human Rights Watch/Americas appliesthese standards where guerrilla forces do not exercise formal, consistentcontrol over population or territory, as is the case in Peru. Common Article3 prohibits the mistreatment of individuals taking no active part in hostilities,including combatants who have laid down their arms or have been placedhors de combat for any reason. The following are strictly prohibited: violenceto life and person, in particular murder, mutilation, torture; humiliatingor degrading treatment; the passing of sentences and carrying out of executionswithout previous judgment pronounced by a regularly constituted court affordingguarantees of due process. Common Article 3 states explicitly that itsapplication does not affect the legal status of the parties to a conflict,nor does it confer any special status on the armed opposition.134. Human Rights Watch/Americas has consistentlyreported on violations of the laws of war by the armed opposition as wellas government forces since our first report on Peru in 1984. See AmericasWatch, Abdicating Democratic Authority: Human Rights in Peru (New York:Human Rights Watch, 1984); A Certain Passivity: Failing to Curb Human RightsAbuses in Peru (New York: Human Rights Watch, 1987); Americas Watch, ANew Opportunity for Democratic Authority: Human Rights In Peru (New York:Human Rights Watch, 1985); Americas Watch, In Desperate Straits; HumanRights in Peru after a Decade of Democracy and Insurgency (New York: HumanRights Watch, 1990); Americas Watch,Tolerating Abuses: Violations of HumanRights in Peru (New York: Human Rights Watch, October 1988); Americas Watch,Peru Under Fire, Human Rights Since the Return to Democracy (New Haven:Yale University Press, 1992);Americas Watch, Human Rights in Peru One Yearafter Fujimori's Coup (New York: Human Right Watch, April 1993).135. Above the Two Hills: Counter-InsurgencyWar and its Allies, document attributed to the Shining Path's founder,Abimael Guzmán, written in 1991, cited in Amnesty International,"Peru: Human Rights in a Time of Impunity," May 1996, AMR 46/01/96.136. From January through October 1989, theShining Path assassinated forty-six mayors, and a further 263 resignedafter receiving death threats. See Americas Watch, Peru under Fire: HumanRights Since the Return of Democracy (New Haven: Yale University Press,1992), p. 65.137. For several years, Shining Path has beensplit after its imprisoned founder and leader Abimael Guzmán calledfor a "peace accord" with the government. A faction known as Red Path,led by Oscar Ramírez Durand, aka "Feliciano," has openly rejectedthese overtures and wasbelieved responsible for a number of assassinations of advocatesof the peace strategy in 1996.138. Americas Watch, Peru under Fire, p. 66.139. Ibid, p. 69.140. The taking of hostages is specificallyprohibited in Common Article 3 of the four Geneva Conventions of 1949.The MRTA has also violated Common Article 3 by resorting to assassinations,selective executions, and indiscriminate attacks.141. Comando Conjunto de Las Fuerzas Armadasdel Perú, "La Verdadera Historia del MRTA," Comando Conjunto's internetwebsite, http://ekeko.rcp.net.pe/CCFFAA, March 18, 1997.142. Ibid.143. Human Rights in Peru One Year after Fujimori'sCoup, p.17.144. United States Department of State, CountryReports on Human Rights Practices for 1996 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. GovernmentPrinting Office, 1997), pp. 541-542.145. Ibid., p. 542.146. The commission was known as the GoldmanCommission, after its chair, Robert Goldman.147. "Embajador EEUU: 'Sanción a Culpables,'"Expreso, April 10, 1997.148. DESCO, "Las opiniones del embajador," ResúmenSemanal, May 28-June 3, 1997.149. In October 1996, the Fujimori governmentused the visit to Lima of Gen. Barry McCaffrey, director of the White HouseOffice of National Drug Control Policy, to launder the image of Montesinos,who has repeatedly been involved in scandals, including allegedly acceptingpay-offs from a renowned drug-trafficker. U.S. officials took insufficientsteps to publicly distance themselves from Montesinos during McCaffrey'svisit, even while the press characterized his meetings with Montesinos,who is rarely seen in public, as a gesture of support. See Human RightsWatch, World Report 1997, p. 120. Since the date of McCaffrey's visit,evidence of the illegal activities of the Colina Group, said to have beendirected by Montesinos, has continued to mount.