"We Will Teach You a Lesson": Sexual Violence against Tamils by Sri Lankan Security Forces | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the full reportDonate NowDownloadsDownload the full reportFebruary 26, 2013"We Will Teach You a Lesson"Sexual Violence against Tamils by Sri Lankan Security ForcesA survivor of sexual abuse at the hands of Sri Lankan authorities while in detention.© 2012 Private"We Will Teach You a Lesson"Sexual Violence against Tamils by Sri Lankan SecurityForcesMap of Sri LankaSummaryKey RecommendationsMethodologyI. BackgroundThe Armed ConflictInternal Displacement and DetentionCampsAllegations of War CrimesDecades of Sexual Violence by theSecurity ForcesII. Legal FrameworkSri Lanka’s Obligations underInternational LawSri Lankan National LawIII. FindingsPerpetratorsPlaces of DetentionInterrogation PracticesVictimsPost-War DevelopmentsViolations: Denial of Basic DueProcessViolations: Torture, Rape, and SexualViolenceIV. Domestic ResponsePost-War Barriers to RedressContinuing Impunity and MilitaryAbusesV. RecommendationsTo the Government of Sri LankaTo the United Nations Human RightsCouncilTo Concerned GovernmentsAppendixCases of Rape and Other SexualViolence by Sri Lankan Security Forces, 2006-2012AcknowledgmentsMap of Sri LankaClick to expand ImageSummaryThe police officials accused me of being an LTTE[Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam] member and returning to Sri Lanka fromabroad to revive the LTTE. They blindfolded me and pushed me into a jeep. Theykept asking me the same questions, about which other LTTE members I workedwith, my activities abroad. I kept refusing to answer. I was beaten up withseveral objects, burned with cigarettes, suspended from the ceiling, sexuallyabused, and raped. I was raped by different people for three nights—itwas dark so I couldn’t tell their faces.—Tamil man, 29, arrested by Sri Lankan police inVavuniya, April 2012They asked all six of us if we had any links with the LTTE.I did not want to lie and get caught so I told them that I had worked for theLTTE. I was taken to Veppankulam camp in Vavuniya. I was questioned andtortured by Sri Lankan army personnel and some were in uniform. I was rapedmany times. I cannot recall how many times. I was kept in detention for 15days. Finally, I agreed to sign papers and admit that I was a full member ofthe LTTE. I just wanted the rapes and torture to stop.—Tamil woman, 34, detained by the Sri Lankan army inTrincomalee, February 2009There have long been reports that the Sri Lankan militaryand police forces rape and sexually abuse ethnic Tamils detained for allegedlinks to the secessionist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), among otherforms of torture and ill-treatment. During the 26-year-long conflict betweenthe Sri Lankan government and the LTTE, state security personnel wereresponsible for numerous acts of sexual violence against women, men, andchildren in official and secret detention centers seeking to coerceconfessions, degrade them, and discourage broader Tamil involvement with theLTTE. Although reports by United Nations expert bodies have documented some ofthese abuses, including details of specific cases, most have gone unreported.Available information indicates that rapes by Sri Lankansecurity forces, together with other violations of international human rightsand humanitarian law, sharply increased with the implementation of expandedEmergency Regulations, and the resumption of armed hostilities between thegovernment and the LTTE following the breakdown of the 2002 ceasefire in 2006.Since the government’s defeat of the LTTE in May 2009, new allegations ofsexual violence by members of Sri Lankan security forces against alleged LTTEmembers and supporters have been reported. In December 2012, the UN HighCommissioner for Refugees, in its eligibility guidelines for assessing the protectionneeds of Sri Lankan asylum seekers abroad, noted that “sexualviolence, including but not limited to rape, against Tamil men in detention hasalso been reported recently, including reports of cases perpetrated in thepost-conflict period.”[1]This report focuses on rape and other sexual violencecommitted by members of the Sri Lankan security forces from 2006-2012 againstwomen and men in state custody. It documents 75 cases of rape—31 of men,41 of women, and 3 of boys under age 18—which the evidence stronglysuggests were perpetrated by members of the state security forces. Theinformation is based on in-depth interviews conducted over a 12-month periodwith former detainees in Australia, the United Kingdom, Germany, India,Malaysia, and Indonesia. Supporting medical evidence, obtained with the consentof the victim, was examined in 67 of the cases. The names of all victims quotedin this report have been withheld (we have used two-letter abbreviationsunrelated to the victim’s actual name) to protect their privacy and avoidpotential retaliation by the authorities against them or their relatives.Because of government access restrictions, Human RightsWatch was not able to conduct research openly in Sri Lanka. As a result, wewere able to reach only a small fraction of detainees held by Sri Lankanauthorities in connection with the armed conflict since 2006. The relativelylarge number of sexual abuse cases we were able to document among a group offormer detainees using both similar methods and occurring in a number oflocations across the country strongly suggests that these abuses werewidespread and systematic during the final years of the conflict and in theyears since. Eight of the cases of rape that Human Rights Watch documentedoccurred in 2012, and new cases continue to be reported.In all of the cases documented in this report, the acts ofrape and sexual violence were accompanied by other forms of torture and cruel,inhuman, and degrading treatment by state security forces. The conditions inwhich the individuals were held—without access to judges, defenselawyers, relatives, or doctors—violated fundamental due process rights. Oftenthe perpetrators came from more than one branch of the security forces, andincluded members of the Sri Lankan army, police, and pro-government Tamilparamilitary groups. In the cases we investigated, most of the detainees wereinterrogated by Sinhala-speaking security officials with Tamil interpreters.Most were forced to sign a confession in Sinhala following their abuse, thoughthe torture often continued after they signed confessions. Detainees werenormally not released but rather allowed to “escape” after arelative paid a bribe. Human Rights Watch of necessity was only able tointerview those no longer in custody—the fate of detainees who remain incustody, while unknown to us, is of urgent concern.KP told Human Rights Watch he was picked up by securitypersonnel in a white van in the northern town of Vavuniya in August 2011, anddetained for 10 days in a “small, dirty room.” The 31-year-old saidthat he was beaten, burned with lit cigarettes, and sexually abused until heconfessed that he had supported the LTTE while studying abroad:During the first interrogation, the official in militaryfatigues forced me to undress. He tried to have oral sex with me. He forcedhimself on me and raped me. During questioning, the officials would squeeze mypenis. They would force me to masturbate them. One of them masturbated me. Iwas severely tortured when I resisted. The officials would furiously say somewords in Sinhala when they sexually abused me. I couldn’t understand whatthey were saying. They abused me in Tamil and used slang words. I was sexuallyabused many times during my detention. On some days, the army official who hadarrested me sexually abused me during interrogation. On two nights, I was rapedby prison guards. The sexual abuse by the officials stopped after I signed theconfession.Male and female former detainees told Human Rights Watchthat prior to being raped, they were forced to strip, their genitals or breastsgroped, and they were verbally abused and mocked. Many of the medical reportsexamined by Human Rights Watch show evidence of  sexual violence such asbites on the buttocks and breasts, and cigarette burns on sensitive areas likeinner thighs and breasts. Two men interviewed by Human Rights Watch said thatthey had a sharp needle inserted in their penis. In one case, this was used toinsert small metal balls into their urethra by army personnel; the metal ballswere later surgically removed by doctors abroad after the victim complained ofdiscomfort and pain.Human Rights Watch’s research does not show why rapeand other sexual violence were used against some detainees in governmentcustody and not others. However rape was one of the unlawful tools used by theSri Lankan military and police against alleged LTTE members or supporters togather intelligence on the LTTE network during the fighting and immediatelyafter the conflict ended in May 2009, as well as to obtain information aboutany remnants of the LTTE since then, whether in Sri Lanka or abroad. As notedabove, it was one of the methods used to force persons in custody to“confess” to membership in the LTTE and, as with other forms oftorture, it may have been part of a broader government effort to instill terrorin the Tamil community to discourage involvement with the LTTE.Several factors suggest that the use of sexual violence wasnot just a local occurrence or the action of rogue security force personnel,but a practice that was known or that should have been known by seniorofficials. In many cases documented by Human Rights Watch, the victims knew thesecurity establishment to which one or more of the perpetrators belonged, andalso identified camps and detention sites where the abuse occurred. Soldiers,police, and members of specialized units like the Criminal InvestigationDepartment (CID) and the Terrorist Investigation Department (TID) were allinvolved. Cases involving Tamils in custody were reported not just inbattleground areas of northern Sri Lanka, such as Vavuniya, the Vanni region,and the Jaffna peninsula, but in Boosa and Kaluthara prisons in western SriLanka, and in Trincomalee police station in the east. And former detainees toldHuman Rights Watch that they were abused at various official as well as secretdetention sites in and around the Sri Lankan capital, Colombo, includingWelikada prison, the fourth floor of the CID headquarters and the sixth floorof TID headquarters, and at Kotahena, Dehiwela, and Wellawatta police stations.In short, many branches of the security forces, operating throughout thecountry, often in official places of detention, were involved in the sexualabuse of detainees.However, not all the cases of rape we documented werenecessarily politically motivated: we have a few cases where it does seem tohave been the depravity of a rogue officer acting on his own, but, even inthose cases, the officers acted with complete impunity in a context in whichrape and sexual violence were also used for extracting confessions.A number of cases involved individuals who were returning toSri Lanka from abroad either because they had been deported or had voluntarilyreturned. For instance, SV was taken into custody upon arrival atColombo’s international airport on December 10, 2010, having exhaustedhis asylum claims in France. He told Human Rights Watch:The officials introduced themselves as CID and told me theyhad to take me for questioning. I was taken to the 4th floor of the CIDheadquarters in Colombo. I did not know where I was being taken at the time. Iwas photographed once we reached the CID headquarters and then pushed up thestairs to a small dark room. The officials kept hitting me on the head as theypushed me up the stairs.I was kept in detention for more than a month. During thistime, I was questioned and beaten up every day. They asked me about myactivities with the LTTE in France. They brought pictures of my participatingin anti-war protests in France and accused me of betraying the government. Theyasked me for the names of others who had organized the protests in France.I was locked in a dark room and my hands were tied in theposition of a crucifix. I then was burned all over my arms in this position. Iwas beaten with hot metal rods on my back and thighs. I was sometimes pokedwith the end of a hot poker and they kicked my head with metal-toed boots. Iwas raped many times. Two men would come to my room and one would hold me down.They would take turns raping me.In some cases,  information from an earlier detentionwas used during the second interrogation—for  those detainees whowere abducted and abused by unknown men in civilian clothes during the seconddetention, this use of old information was evidence of state complicity intheir mistreatment.Not all detainees subjected to sexual violence were ethnicTamil: Human Rights Watch interviewed one Sinhalese woman and threeTamil-speaking Muslim men, all with some links to the LTTE, who were raped indetention.Many cases documented here took place in the final months ofthe armed conflict in 2009 or shortly thereafter. Some involved LTTE membersand supporters who surrendered to the Sri Lankan army. Others were picked up bythe army for questioning from displacement camps.UM, 25, was detained at Arunachalam camp after she managedto flee Mullivaikal during the last weeks of the conflict in April 2009. Shetold Human Rights Watch that army personnel took her to another camp in October2009:They questioned me about my links with the LTTE and askedabout my activities. I said I was forced to work for LTTE and didn’t knowanything. They didn’t believe me. They beat me, pulled my hair, andbanged my head on a wall. They beat me with their hands and kicked me withtheir boots.One of the soldiers said, “We will teach you alesson.” I lost consciousness that day and when I came to, I realized Ihad been raped. Then more soldiers came and raped me. This went on for manydays. I can’t remember how many times and how many soldiers raped me.This report does not intend to offer a comprehensive accountof politically motivated sexual violence during the period covered (2006-2012).The cases investigated by Human Rights Watch present a picture of sexual violenceby state security forces against individuals in their custody, but the reportdoes not address sexual violence by state security forces in other contexts,such as in captured villages and towns or on the battlefield, or sexualviolence by LTTE personnel.Evidence of rape of captured women by government soldiers onthe battlefield has received public attention: photographs and video from theconflict’s final days show corpses of women, some in LTTE uniform, whowere stripped, suggesting that they may have been raped before being summarilyexecuted. In March 2011, the report of the UN Secretary-General’s Panelof Experts on Accountability in Sri Lanka noted “many indirect accountsreported by women of sexual violence and rape by members of government forcesand their Tamil surrogate forces, during and in the aftermath of the finalphases of the armed conflict.” The panel added: “rapes of suspectedLTTE cadre are also reported to have occurred, when they were in the custody ofthe Sri Lankan police (CID and TID) or SLA [Sri Lankan Army].”[2]Humanitarian workers present in northern Sri Lanka duringthe final months of the conflict described widespread rape of women by the SriLankan army. A former UN field officer told Human Rights Watch that “alarge number of women fleeing from the conflict areas during the peak offighting were sexually assaulted. The abuse was extensive, causing a largenumber of civilians to flee back to the theater of conflict to escape theabuse.”[3]Women and men who were raped told Human Rights Watch thatthey had generally kept silent about their abuse, fearing social stigmatizationand reprisals from perpetrators if they reported the crime. The reluctance toreport sexual abuse also stems from institutional barriers imposed by the SriLankan government to block effective reporting and investigation of rape cases.Many LTTE suspects have been held under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA)which provides effective immunity to officials implicated in abuses.Medical and psychological treatment for rape survivors hasalso been hindered by the government. Detainees held under the PTA do not havean independent right to a medical examination. Neither is such a rightavailable under the Code of Criminal Procedure or in terms of special lawsapplicable to deterring torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment,such as the Convention Against Torture Act. Under the Prevention of TerrorismAct (PTA), currently in effect, as well as under the State of Emergency ineffect during the war, confessions to the police and other authorities obtainedunder duress are admissible unless the accused can prove that they wereinvoluntary. And the Sri Lankan military, through the PresidentialTask Force on Resettlement, Reconstruction, and Security in the NorthernProvince (PTF), has effectively prohibited any local or internationalnongovernmental organizations from providing services for survivors of sexualviolence.Since the end of the armed conflict in 2009, the continuedlarge-scale deployment of the armed forces in former LTTE areas of northern SriLanka, coupled with increased surveillance of civil society groups, has stymiedcommunity responses to rights abuses including sexual violence.Torture, including rape and other sexual violence of personsin custody, violates Sri Lanka’s obligations under international humanrights law and international humanitarian law (“the laws of war”). TheSri Lankan government has an obligation not only to prevent such violations,but also to investigate credible allegations of abuse and prosecute thoseresponsible. Officials who knew or should have known of such abuses and failedto take action, are criminally liable as a matter of command responsibility.To date, only a handful of reported acts of rape committedby members of security forces have been prosecuted. No senior military officialhas been prosecuted for any serious crime related to the conflict, and crimesof sexual violence have been no exception.Access to justice for victims of rape in Sri Lanka remainsparticularly difficult. Victims are typically unaware of remedies to which theyare entitled under Sri Lankan law, and investigations are few.Responsibility for this situation rests with the Sri Lankangovernment. But the Rajapaksa administration has taken no serious action inresponse to domestic and international calls for investigations into allegedhuman rights violations by Sri Lankan security forces. The government’sresponses to allegations of sexual violence by its security forces in the finaldays of the conflict have been dismissive. Most have been deemed as“fake” or “pro-LTTE propaganda.”The Sri Lankan government should make serious efforts toprevent and punish sexual violence by the police and the military. As a matterof urgency, the Sri Lankan government needs to conduct credible and impartialinvestigations into cases of rape and other sexual violence that occurredduring the armed conflict and its aftermath, and prosecute those responsiblefor these crimes, including persons with command responsibility. Theinternational donor community should press Sri Lanka to ensure cases of sexualviolence by security forces are seriously investigated and prosecuted. Supportshould be provided for nongovernmental organizations in Sri Lanka that providepsycho-social and other support for victims of sexual violence as well as otherabuses.Key RecommendationsHuman Rights Watchurges the Sri Lankan Government to:Investigate all allegations ofrape and other sexual violence by Sri Lankan security forces, includingfrom the armed conflict period as well as the years since. Prosecute thoseresponsible for these crimes, including persons with command or othersuperior responsibility, in proceedings that meet international fair trialstandards. Publicize the outcome of such prosecutions, including byproviding information on the punishments meted out, and the redress andcompensation provided to victims;Repeal the Prevention ofTerrorism Act (PTA), and abolish the system of detention without charge ortrial;Immediately lift accessrestrictions imposed by the Presidential Task Force onResettlement, Reconstruction and Security in the Northern Province (PTF)so that medical personnel, counselors, and NGOs providing psycho-socialsupport and independent medical examination and treatment can reachvictims of human rights violations;Release all individuals whohave been arrested under emergency or anti-terrorism laws, unless they arecharged with recognized criminal offenses. Conduct prompt trials that meetinternational due process standards;MethodologyFrom November 2011 to October 2012, Human Rights Watchconducted extensive interviews in Sri Lanka, Australia, the United Kingdom,Germany, India, Malaysia, and Indonesia with victims of alleged sexual violenceby the Sri Lankan security forces. In total, we interviewed 120 people,including 68 victims, 10 relatives of victims, 11 witnesses to sexual violence,and 31 church and nongovernmental organization workers, international agency staff,doctors, and lawyers. We also obtained, with the victims’ permission,detailed medical and psychiatric records in 60 of these cases, which includehospital and general practitioner records and medico-legal records (MLRs),which are medical assessments, submitted to an immigration authority in supportof a torture survivor’s asylum claim. In three cases, the victim’saccount of rape was found credible by immigration courts in the UK and nomedical assessment was conducted.Research into sexual violence requires taking into accountthe consequences for victims of speaking about what they experienced, includingpossible threats to their physical security and their position within thecommunity should what they say become publicly known. Speaking about sexualviolence can also impact the victim’s emotional and psychiatric health.Human Rights Watch took great care to ensure that victims ofsexual violence were interviewed in safe conditions and were comfortablespeaking about their experiences. The interviews took place privately in thepresence of a trusted interpreter and, in some cases, other family members. Inall, we interviewed 68 people—27 men, 38 women, and 3 boys— whoalleged they suffered rape and other sexual violence by members of Sri Lankan securityforces between 2006 and 2012. We also interviewed individuals who said theywere present with victims immediately after the latter were raped in 2009. Mostvictims specifically told us they were concerned about possible reprisals bySri Lankan security forces against them should their identities become known. Thenames of all victims interviewed for this report have been withheld, replacedwith names and initials that do not reflect their real names to protect theirsecurity. Human Rights Watch has also withheld victims’ place ofresidence, as well as specific dates, locations, and other information thatcould potentially be used to identify them. All are ethnic Tamil unlessotherwise specified.  Ages are the age at time of arrest. The month andyear of detention and release, rather than specific dates, are provided. Theseomissions are out of concern about possible government reprisals against theindividuals and their relatives.In addition to the interviews and medical and psychiatricrecords described above, Human Rights Watch examined MLRs of 7individuals—4 men, 3 women—who were allegedly raped by members ofthe Sri Lankan security forces. The names of the medical personnel who preparedthe MLRs and the medical institutions for which they work have been withheld inall the cases in order to protect the victims.The scale of politically motivated rape and other sexualviolence in the context of the Sri Lankan armed conflict is difficult toestablish, but it is likely that the cases detailed in this report representonly a fraction of the total cases; for this report, we focused on casescorroborated by the reports of agencies outside Sri Lanka that provide servicesto victims, such as medical or legal assistance. We received reports of manyother cases of sexual violence from Sri Lanka which we were unable toinvestigate ourselves or in which victims were unable, afraid, or unwilling toseek assistance or speak of their abuse, and these cases have not been includedhere.The appendix to this report contains detailed descriptionsof 75 cases of rape and sexual abuse documented by Human Rights Watch. We havemedical documentation in 67 of the 75 cases, and obtained other independentcorroborating information in the remaining eight cases.This report uses the following internationally recognizeddefinition of rape, taken from the Rome Statute of the International CriminalCourt: rape is a form of sexual violence during which the body of a person isinvaded, resulting in penetration, however slight, of any part of the body ofthe victim, with a sexual organ, or of the anal or genital opening of thevictim with any object or other part of the body.[4]I. BackgroundThe 26-year-long armed conflict in Sri Lanka ended on May19, 2009, with the defeat of the secessionist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam(LTTE). During the last months of the fighting, the Sri Lankan armed forces andthe LTTE repeatedly violated the laws of war, causing unnecessary civiliancasualties and suffering.The Armed ConflictIn July 1983, members of the LTTE ambushed a Sri Lankanmilitary convoy in Jaffna, sparking anti-Tamil riots in Colombo during whichseveral hundred Tamils were killed. The incident referred to as “BlackJuly,” marked the beginning of the nearly three-decade armed conflictbetween the government and the LTTE, which sought to create an independentTamil state, Tamil Eelam.The first two decades of the conflict were interspersed withlarge-scale military operations and short-lived ceasefires. In February 2002, theSri Lankan government and the LTTE signed a ceasefire mediated by the Norwegiangovernment that brought a temporary lull in fighting, but human rights abusespersisted. The Nordic-led Sri Lanka Monitoring Mission, established to monitorcompliance with the Ceasefire Agreement,[5] reported over 4,000violations of the agreement from February 2002 until December 2006. The LTTEwas significantly weakened when its forces in the east under VinayagamoorthyMuralitharan, known as Colonel Karuna, defected in 1994 to the government side.The LTTE launched a series of attacks on the police and armyin the north and east, carried out suicide bombings on ethnic Sinhalesecivilians in the south, and stepped up forcible recruitment of children andadults and other abuses in areas under their control. Government securityforces quietly unleashed a counterinsurgency campaign against suspected LTTEmembers and supporters, and subjected hundreds of Tamils to arbitrary arrestand detention, torture, enforced disappearance, and extrajudicial execution.[6] Inthe east, the Karuna faction, renamed Tamil Makkal Viduthalai Puligal (TMVP),continued guerrilla attacks against the LTTE.The ceasefire formally continued until January 2008, butfull-fledged fighting between government forces and the LTTE resumed bymid-2006. Conventional battles were accompanied by continuing rights abuses byboth sides, including political assassinations, abductions, and targetedattacks on civilians. In late 2008, the Sri Lankan government ordered mosthumanitarian agencies out of the Vanni region, where most of the fighting wasoccurring, and denied access to the international media and human rightsorganizations. An estimated 20,000 to 30,000 deaths occurred during thefighting between 2006 and early 2009, with government forces and particularlythe LTTE suffering heavy losses in battle.[7]Government forces won back all but a small piece ofterritory held by the LTTE following its January 2, 2009, capture of the defacto LTTE capital of Kilinochchi. During the first four months of 2009, morethan 300,000 civilians were trapped in areas of fighting, effectively used as“human shields” by the LTTE, with limited access to food, water,and medical care. The LTTE forcibly conscripted civilians and prevented othersfrom fleeing LTTE-controlled areas by firing at them, killing many. Governmentforces repeatedly bombed and shelled the increasingly constricted populatedareas, including its own unilaterally declared “no fire zones.” OnMarch 13, 2009, Navanethem Pillay, the UN high commissioner for human rights,expressed grave concern over credible evidence of war crimes by both sides.[8]The UN and government leaders called on the LTTE to allow civilians to leavethe combat zone and for both sides to allow access for humanitarian relief.The Sri Lankan government declared victory over the LTTE onMay 18, 2009. Virtually all of the LTTE’s military leaders and many ofits political leaders were killed in the final days of the fighting, undercircumstances that remain unclear. The government’s refusal to allow anyindependent observers into the conflict zone or to talk to people who fled theconflict zone makes it impossible to establish conclusively the number ofcasualties.[9] ThePanel of Experts appointed by UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon later reportedthat up to 40,000 civilians died in the final months of the war.[10]Internal Displacement and Detention CampsDuring the final months of fighting, some 300,000 Tamilcivilians behind the narrowing LTTE lines sought to escape death fromstarvation, disease, and constant shelling by escaping to safety ingovernment-controlled areas. While most were blocked by LTTE forces that usedfirearms to prevent their escape, many managed to flee in small groups. Amassive exodus of tens of thousands occurred after the Sri Lankan forces brokethrough the LTTE defense fortifications in the eastern coastal town ofMullaithivu on April 20, 2009. Most of the rest did not escape the fightinguntil the final collapse of LTTE forces a month later. According to the UnitedNations, 290,000 people crossed over to government-controlled areas from theconflict zone between October 27, 2008, and June 1, 2009.[11]Government security forces screened and registered thosefleeing the war zone at several checkpoints before transporting them todetention camps in the north, which the government euphemistically called“welfare centers.” The largest was the multi-camp Menik Farm inVavuniya district.Both at checkpoints and in the camps, the authoritiesseparated certain individuals from their families—presumably because ofalleged ties to the LTTE—and sent them to “rehabilitationcenters” established for alleged LTEE suspects. Relatives were often notinformed of the whereabouts of these detainees, and domestic human rightsorganizations repeatedly have alleged that many suffered torture, includingsexual abuse, while in custody. After the end of the war, the military detainedan estimated 11,000 people, mostly men but including many women, suspected ofLTTE ties in extra-legal detention centers, where they had no access to legalcounsel or protection agencies.[12]Initially the thousands of people who fled the conflict zonewere denied the right to live with relatives or host families, and UN agenciesand humanitarian organizations had limited access to the camps, and wereprevented from delivering adequate supplies and services. Conditions in campsfailed to meet international standards, with poor sanitation, insufficientwater supplies, and inadequate food and medical care. Until October 2009,authorities had released fewer than 20,000 of the camps’ detainees.[13]Responding to growing international pressure and domesticdiscontent, the government sped up the resettlement process in the final monthsof 2009, with nearly 150,000 released from the camps and allowed to return totheir home districts by the end of the year. And by December 2011, thegovernment had released all but about 1,000 of the nearly 11,000 LTTE“surrenderees,”[14]alleged combatants and supporters that it was detaining without charge ortrial, and claimed that those remaining would be released by mid-2012. Of thesethe government claims, 636 individuals remain in four rehabilitation centers,[15]while the rest of the former combatants have been rehabilitated and trained toenter civilian life.Allegations of War CrimesThe Sri Lankan government has neither investigated norprosecuted alleged human rights abuses and war crimes committed by governmentforces and the LTTE during the conflict, and has resisted international callsfor an independent investigation.Senior government officialsinitially denied that government forces had committed any serious violations.Amid overwhelming evidence, a few senior officials later conceded that governmentforces caused some civilian casualties, but continue to downplay the scale ofcivilian loss of life, and the security forces’ repeated use of heavyweaponry in indiscriminate and possibly deliberate attacks on civilians.In response to President Rajapaksa’s failure toimplement his May 2009 promise for accountability, UN Secretary-General BanKi-moon in June 2010 established a Panel of Experts to advise him on next stepsfor accountability. The panel’s April 2011report found “credible allegations, which if proven, indicate that a widerange of serious violations of international humanitarian law and internationalhuman rights law was committed” by both sides to the conflict.[16]InDecember 2011, the government’sLessonsLearnt and Reconciliation Commission (LLRC) released its own findings. Createdin May 2010 to examine the circumstances that led to the breakdown of the 2002Ceasefire Agreement and recommend action to foster reconciliation, theLLRC was not set up as a vehicle for justice and accountability.However, under increasing pressure to act on these issues, the governmentextended the mandate of the LLRC to wartime abuses.The LLRC’s mandate,composition, and methodology were wholly inadequate to achieve any measure ofjustice and accountability.[17]The commission’s report, issued in December2011, largely ignored the Panel of Expert’s detailed findings ongovernment abuses. Although concluding that there had been civilian casualtiesattributable to “crossfire,” and calling for investigations into ahandful of minor incidents, the LLRC largely exonerated the military’swartime actions.[18]The LLRC, however, did make some recommendations toaddress accountability issues.[19]On March 22, 2012, the UN Human Rights Council passed aresolution calling upon the Sri Lankan government to fulfill its legalobligations toward justice and accountability, and to expeditiously provide acomprehensive action plan to implement the recommendations of the LLRC, and toaddress alleged violations of international law.The Sri Lankan government in July approved a national ActionPlan to implement recommendations made by the LLRC. The Action Plan ostensiblyaims to implement the Human Rights Council’s March 2012 resolution butset out unreasonable timelines and ceded authority for implementing therecommendations to agencies with a vested interest in thwarting investigations.In January 2013, a report of a committee of officers of the army appointed bySri Lanka’s army commander to look into recommendations of the LLRCrelevant to the army, and to formulate a viable action plan to address thespecific areas so identified, also failed to address the question ofaccountability. Notably, this report emphatically disagreed with theLLRC’s recommendation that the Ministry of Defence should be delinkedfrom supervisory authority over the Department of Police. An update on theaction plan, also published in January, provided little measurable informationas to what steps the government had taken towards implementing the LLRC recommendations.Decades of Sexual Violence by the Security ForcesRape as a form of torture of persons in custody has longbeen a serious problem in Sri Lanka. Sporadic reports of sexual violence bymembers of Sri Lankan security forces against detained men and women emergedover the course of Sri Lanka’s armed conflict. Specific cases of rape ofTamil women and girls by Sri Lankan military personnel were raised by the UNspecial rapporteur on violence against women and the special rapporteur on tortureand other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in reports theyissued between 1997 and the end of the war.[20]From 1990 to 2002, Sri Lankan civil society organizationsreported dozens of alleged rapes of Tamil women by the security forces primarilyin the north and east.[21]Although there has been no systematic survey to assess the prevalence of sexualviolence in Sri Lanka’s three decades of civil war, regular reports byvarious UN special mechanisms, human rights organizations, and the media indicatepersistent sexual violence against both men and women by state security forces.There is also some evidence to show that the LTTE used sexual torture againstsome male prisoners held in detention.[22]Sexual violence, as with other serious abuses committed bySri Lankan security forces, was committed against a backdrop of deeplyentrenched impunity. However, one emblematic case for a time galvanized publicopinion, and finally led to the arrest and prosecution of low-level Sri Lankanarmy soldiers and police officers. In September 1996, 18-year-old KrishanthiKumaraswamy was raped and murdered at a checkpoint near Jaffna.Kumaraswamy’s mother, brother, and neighbor, who went in search of her,were also killed. Six low-level personnel were convicted by the High Court andthe convictions were upheld on appeal to the Supreme Court. Their trialrevealed information about various mass graves in Jaffna from a clandestinesite near Chemmani.[23]Years later, no proper further investigations or prosecutions have ensued.In numerous other cases, perpetrators have managed to evadeall attempts at accountability. Constitutional remedies have proved to be asineffective as penal remedies. The Sri Lankan Supreme Court orderedcompensation and costs in a fundamental rights application to be paid toYogalingam Vijitha, a 27-year-old Tamil woman from Jaffna district, who wastortured and raped by police officers with a plantain tree flower[24]while detained from June 21-27, 2000, at Negombo police station near Colombo.However, there were no prosecutions.Numerous cases of rape reported in a letter by the UNspecial rapporteur on torture to the government in 1997 went similarlyunpunished.[25]The cases include the March 17, 1997, rape of Velan Rasamma and her sister,Velan Vasantha, at their home in Mayilampaveli Colony, Batticaloa district, byfour soldiers from a nearby army camp who were said to have forced their wayinto the victims’ home. Complaints were made to the local police atEravut and to the joint operations commander, but they declined to initiateprosecutions. In another case in Batticaloa, Murugesupillai Koneswary wasreportedly subjected to harassment by local police officers after shecomplained that officers had stolen timber from her house. On May 17, 1997, allegedpolice officers entered her home and raped her, then detonated a grenade at hergenitals that caused her death.[26]No one was convicted for the crime.Other such cases that were inadequately investigated andprosecuted included the gang rape and killing of Ida Carmelita in 1999 and therape of two women from Mannar, Vijikala Nanthakumar, and Sivamani Weerakoon, in2001.[27]Even in the few cases where prosecutions areunderway, progress has been slow. In the Viswamadhu case, in which members ofthe security forces allegedly raped a woman in her home in June 2010, eventhough the victim and a witness were able to identify the perpetrators, theprosecutor has been slow to move the case forward. Witness and victimintimidation by the police and army was a common feature of all these cases.Sri Lanka has not yet enacted a law to effectively protect victims andwitnesses even though a draft has been pending for several years.In March 2000, the UN special rapporteur on violence againstwomen expressed grave concern over the lack of credible investigations intoallegations of gang rape, and murder of women and girls. In its response, thegovernment provided details regarding the progress of investigations into twoof four specific cases raised by the special rapporteur, stating that“every case of alleged criminal conduct committed by the armed forces andpolice has been investigated and the perpetrators prosecuted, although theremay have been unavoidable legal delays.”[28] In a January 2002report, Amnesty International noted that not a single member of the securityforces had been brought to trial in connection with incidents of rape incustody, although one successful prosecution was brought in a case where thevictim of rape was also murdered.[29]As a general rule, cases of sexual violence and rape by thesecurity forces have been poorly investigated or not pursued at all. Complaintsof rape, like other complaints of torture, are often not effectively dealt withby the police, magistrates, or doctors. Weaknesses in the early stages of thecriminal investigation process have repeatedly contributed to the ultimatecollapse of investigations of alleged rapes and other acts of sexual violence.Rapes of male detainees by their security force captors wasfirst acknowledged as a serious concern in 2000 when doctors writing for theBritish medical journal Lancet reviewed records of all Sri Lankan menwho had been referred to the Medical Foundation for the Care of Victims ofTorture (now Freedom from Torture) in 1997 and 1998. That review revealed that20 percent of 184 male torture victims had been sexually abused in detention.[30]Since then various organizations, including Freedom from Torture, havedocumented endemic torture, including sexual abuse and rape of both men andwomen, in formal detention settings in Sri Lanka for over a decade.[31]A high number of rapes, including of men, in the context ofSri Lanka’s armed conflict was also reported to the UN special rapporteuron torture in 2002. These included the case of Subramaniam Kannan, a man fromVavuniya, who was taken into custody on June 20, 2000, and held for 42 days inthe 211 Brigade army camp in Vavuniya. During his detention he was beaten withbatons and subjected to electric shocks, before he was allegedly handed over tothe Counter Subversive Unit (CSU) of the police. At the CSU, his head wasreportedly covered with a petrol-infused plastic bag in an attempt toasphyxiate him, he was repeatedly beaten, and he had barbed wire inserted intohis rectum.[32]The victims of sexual violence in custody have not beenlimited to Tamil men and women. During the second JVP uprising in 1987-1990,there were a number of alleged cases of sexual violence by state securityforces against Sinhalese women.[33]Human rights organizations monitoring torture in Sri Lanka have documented overa thousand cases of torture of Sinhalese men and women in police custody overthe past dozen years, many of which involved sexual violence and rape.[34] Agovernment-appointed commission to inquire into enforced disappearances ofpersons during this period found disturbing instances of rapes and killings ofwomen and noted that “violence against women was used as a tool ofcontrol of a community (family, village, peers).”[35]Despite emerging reports of past and continuing sexualviolence, the issue has remained outside public discourse. High levels ofsocial stigmatization, fear of reprisal owing to ongoing military control overadministration in northeast Sri Lanka, lack of meaningful accountability forpast crimes of sexual violence and rape, and an overriding climate of impunityhave combined to discourage rape survivors from seeking redress for the abusesagainst them. The degrading nature of rape and the silence that surrounds itmakes women and men alike reluctant to discuss rape and other forms of sexualviolence. Victims rarely volunteer information about the violation they havesuffered and, when they do speak, often use indirect language or euphemisms; avictim might note, for example, that she was knocked unconscious and found shewas bleeding when she regained consciousness, and only later will acknowledgeexplicitly that she was raped.II. Legal FrameworkSri Lanka’s Obligations under International LawSri Lanka is bound by international human rights law andinternational humanitarian law (“the laws of war”). Both bodies oflaw prohibit acts of sexual violence. Sri Lanka is party to major internationalhuman rights treaties, including the International Covenant on Civil andPolitical Rights (ICCPR),[36]the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatmentor Punishment,[37]the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women(CEDAW),[38]the Convention on the Rights of the Child,[39]and other sources of human rights law.[40]International human rights law contains protections fromrape and other forms of sexual abuse through its prohibitions on torture andother ill-treatment, and discrimination based on sex.[41]International human rights law also enshrines the right to an effective remedy,which obligates the state to prevent, investigate, and punish serious humanrights violations.[42]States must also provide reparations to victims of human rights violations,such as compensation for damages.[43]The UN has reaffirmed these principles specifically in relation to eliminatingviolence against women.[44]Sri Lanka is also obliged under international human rights law to providereproductive, sexual and mental health services, and other redress to victimsof torture, sexual assault, and other forms of cruel, inhuman, and degradingtreatment.[45]International human rights law also provides protections toindividuals in custody during an internal armed conflict unless they aresuperseded by more specific provisions of humanitarian law. These include therights to be promptly notified of the reasons for arrest, to the presumption ofinnocence, to be brought promptly before a judicial authority and be informedof any criminal charges, to have access to counsel, and to communicate and meetwith family members. Those detained on criminal charges must be promptly triedbefore a court that meets international fair trial standards or be released.[46]The ICCPR permits the suspension or restriction (derogation)of certain due process rights during a state of emergency. States havefrequently misused states of emergency as an excuse to deny individuals theirfundamental rights. According to the UN Human Rights Committee, the expert bodythat monitors state compliance with the ICCPR, any measures of derogation mustbe “limited to the extent strictly required by the exigencies of thesituation.”[47]The fundamental requirements of a fair trial must always be respected. And inorder to protect against torture and other non-derogable rights, “theright to take proceedings before a court to enable the court to decide withoutdelay on the lawfulness of detention, must not be diminished by a Stateparty’s decision to derogate from the Covenant.”During the armed conflict with the LTTE, which ended in May2009, Sri Lanka was also obliged to abide by international humanitarian law,which regulates the conduct of hostilities and protects persons affected byarmed conflict, including civilians and captured combatants. The hostilitiesbetween the Sri Lankan government and the LTTE met the criteria of anon-international armed conflict under the 1949 Geneva Conventions. Sri Lankaand the LTTE were bound by Common Article 3 of the 1949 Geneva Conventions,which applies to internal armed conflicts, and customary internationalhumanitarian law.[48]International humanitarian law has long prohibited tortureand cruel or inhuman treatment.[49]Common article 3 to the 1949 Geneva Conventions prohibits “crueltreatment and torture” and “humiliating and degradingtreatment.”[50]Rape and other forms of sexual violence are prohibited.[51]When crimes of sexualviolence are committed as part of armed conflict, they can be prosecuted as warcrimes. States have an obligation to investigate alleged war crimes committedby their nationals, including members of the police and armed forces, andprosecute those responsible.[52]Acts of sexual violence committed as part of awidespread or systematic attack against civilians can be classified as crimesagainst humanity and prosecuted as such. The Rome Statute of the InternationalCriminal Court (ICC) specifies that acts of rape, sexual slavery, enforcedprostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form ofsexual violence of comparable gravity can constitute war crimes or crimesagainst humanity.[53]Aside from their directcriminal responsibility for crimes committed on the ground (for instance, byissuing orders that are executed by subordinates), commanders or othersuperiors may be guilty for failing to prevent or punish crimes committed bytheir subordinates. Command responsibility is an established principleof customary international humanitarian law and has been incorporated into theRome Statute.[54]Sri Lankan National LawSri Lanka’s constitution guarantees fundamental humanrights, including the right to life, liberty, and security of person, the rightto a fair trial, and the prohibition of torture.[55]However, national security legislation, including emergency provisions and thePrevention of Terrorism Act (PTA), has been in place intermittently since 1971.[56]Such emergency laws and regulations have been used to supersede constitutionalguarantees.The constitution makes the Public Security Ordinance (PSO),introduced by the British colonial authorities in 1947, part of Sri Lankan law.[57]Section 5 of the PSO empowers the executive to issue emergency regulations thatmay authorize detention of suspects without charge or trial; authorize entry,search, and seizure of property; amend any law (other than the Constitution) orsuspend its operation; and create special courts to prosecute offenders,including under the emergency regulations themselves.The PSO and emergency laws enacted by various Sri Lankangovernments have been widely criticized by national and international legalexperts for contradicting international human rights standards, and underminingthe rights enshrined in Sri Lanka’s constitution.[58]In August 2011, the Sri Lankan government finally lifted thestate of emergency but almost immediately the president introduced newregulations under the PTA. Under these new regulations, authorities may stilldetain suspects without charge for up to 30 days, pending issuance of detentionorders under the PTA or remand by a magistrate.[59]The government passed a  new law passed in January 2013 which allowspolice to hold suspects for up to 48 hours without a warrant.Persons mistreated under the Emergency Regulations or PTAare unlikely to come forward and make an official complaint because of immunityprovisions in these laws. The emergency regulations provide immunity fromprosecution for government officials who commit wrongful acts when theyimplement the regulations. Legal proceedings are prohibited if an officialacted “in good faith and in the discharge of his official duties,”and prosecutors and courts are likely to interpret this language broadly. [60]Presidential directives to the security forces initiallypublished in July 2006 and re-circulated in April 2007 instruct the securityforces to respect basic human rights. Those directives specify securityforces’ obligations, including providing suspects with the reasons forarrests, identifying themselves while carrying out the arrests, and allowingarrested persons to inform family members of their whereabouts. The directivesalso instruct the security forces to inform the National Human RightsCommission (NHRC) within 48 hours of any arrest, and allow the commissionunimpeded access to all detainees.[61]However, research conducted by Human Rights Watch and other organizations showsthat these directives remain largely declarations on paper—with no legalforce and no penalties for non-compliance.[62]The government has reformed Sri Lanka’s rape laws tobetter address the rape of detainees. Beginning in 1995, the government put inplace a legal framework which in principle should have allowed more effectiveprosecution of alleged rapists. Among the changes to the Penal Code was theinclusion of a new provision (section 364(2)) recognizing the phenomena of rapein custody and gang rape as acts constituting grave crimes. The minimum andmaximum punishment for rape in custody as a form of aggravated rape is 10years’ and 20 years’ imprisonment, respectively. [63]III. FindingsHuman Rights Watch’s research into rape and othersexual violence by Sri Lankan security forces during and since the armedconflict with the LTTE uncovered disturbing patterns, strongly suggesting thatit was a widespread and systematic practice. Rape appears to have been a keyelement of broader torture and ill-treatment of suspected LTTE members andothers believed linked to the LTTE. This torture was intended to obtainconfessions— whether accurate or false—of involvement in LTTEactivities, obtain information on others including spouses and relatives, and,it appears, to instill terror in individuals and the broader Tamil population.Our research suggests that rape as a form of torture in formal and informaldetention centers continues up to the present.The cases detailed in the appendix of this report likelyrepresent a small sample of total rapes in custody, as the detainee populationfrom which the cases come is only a subset of the larger detainee population.In all of these cases documented here, the victims or their families were ableto bribe the authorities to win their release, and then have sufficient fundsto flee the country. The treatment and fate of the overwhelming majority ofdetainees, those who could not purchase their way to safety outside thecountry, remains unexplored and of great concern. Available informationindicates that countless others may have experienced sexual violence in custodyand that many in detention may still be experiencing it today.[64]PerpetratorsThe 75 cases investigated by Human Rights Watch cannot besaid to represent a random sample of individuals subjected to sexual violencewhile in the custody of Sri Lankan security forces. However, the findings dopermit some broader conclusions to be drawn.  The perpetrators of rape andsexual violence covered a range of Sri Lankan security organizations—themilitary, military intelligence, and the police, the last including theCriminal Investigation Department (CID) and Terrorism Investigation Department(TID). Frequently members of more than one state agency would work together.The victims of sexual violence almost always knew which part of the securityestablishment the perpetrator belonged to and which camps or detention sitesthey were taken to: the security forces responsible for the mistreatment madeno attempt to hide their unit identities from the victims.There were exceptions. SA, for example, told Human RightsWatch that he was apprehended in Colombo in 2012 by men in civilian clothes.Even in such cases the evidence of security force involvement was strong. InSA’s case, the men who abducted him carried T56 military assault rifles,and displayed them openly at checkpoints manned by the army. During hisinterrogation, SA said, his abductors mentioned each other’s ranks, andwhile blindfolded he heard his interrogators stand up and address others as“Sir” when they entered the room.In some cases reported to Human Rights Watch, formerdetainees also pointed to the role played by members of pro-government Tamilparamilitary or armed groups, namely the Eeelam People’s Democratic Party(EPDP), People’s Liberation Organization of Tamil Eelam (PLOTE), and theKaruna group. These groups acted in conjunction with security forces byproviding information on alleged LTTE sympathizers and their families.Detainees frequently secured their release from detention by paying bribes tosecurity forces using members of these groups as interlocutors. Often Tamilparliamentarians would play this role.The perpetrators of sexual abuse were male, but uniformed femalepolice officers assisted in the torture and rape of both men and women. Forexample, women police officers tied up and shackled detainees to expose them,stripped them of their clothes, threw chili powder in their faces, andparticipated in their near asphyxiation with petrol-infused plastic bags.Places of DetentionSexual abuse as a form of torture or ill-treatment does notappear limited to particular areas or detention centers, but appears to haveoccurred in all the places that suspected LTTE members and supporters weresubject to custodial abuse. Many of those mistreated were held in unofficialplaces of detention or places they could not name, including in Puttulam andAnuradhapura cities north of Colombo. Some former detainees told Human RightsWatch about unofficial detention sites run by the EPDP. Two women interviewedwere raped during interrogations at their homes.But much of the mistreatment reported to Human Rights Watchoccurred in official detention centers, indicating that senior commanders knewor should have known of the abuses taking place. In the conflict areas in thenorth these included various sites in Vavuniya, on the Jaffna peninsula, and inVanni, and victims in most of these cases identified Sri Lankan army personnelas the perpetrators. Among the “known” sites in Vavuniya were:Vavuniya police station, Chettikulum police station, Arunachalam camp, anarmy-controlled detention site at Omanthai, and the Nelukulam, Joseph,Ramanathan, and Veppankulam military camps.Official detention centers were not just in the conflictareas in the north. Police stations in towns such as in Kotahena, Dehiwela, andWelawatta, and various official and unofficial detention sites in and aroundColombo also were used, including Welikada prison, the fourth floor of CIDheadquarters, and the sixth floor of TID headquarters. Abuses investigated byHuman Rights Watch also took place in Boosa prison in Sri Lanka’s south,Kaluthara prison in western Sri Lanka, and in Trincomallee police station in theeast.In addition to its regular military operations, the SriLankan government’s multi-pronged strategy to defeat the LTTE includedclandestine joint operations with the police to uncover LTTE safe houses,dismantle LTTE networks in the country, and kill persons believed to beassociated with the LTTE.[65]As noted above, the end of the armed conflict with the LTTE did not result inan end to the military’s emergency policing powers,[66]and Sri Lankan authorities have continued to arrest and detain individualssuspected of links to the LTTE, and to hold them without charge or trial.[67]For instance, GD, a 31-year-old woman, told us that four menin civilian clothes took her from her house in Dehiwala, Colombo, in lateNovember 2011. She says the men introduced themselves as CID officials and tookher to the fourth floor of CID headquarters for questioning. There herinterrogators, including a uniformed police officer, tortured and raped her.The Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA) allows Sri Lankanauthorities to hold detainees where they choose and to move them from place toplace while under investigation,[68]practices that increase the likelihood of torture and abuse. In only a handfulof the cases reported to Human Rights Watch was the victim provided an arrestwarrant or a legally valid reason for arrest; more typically they were forciblyput into vehicles and subjected to beatings. Some detainees told Human RightsWatch that rapes and sexual violence did not occur in the first and“known” places of detention, but rather after they were driven,often blindfolded, to a second, unofficial location.None of the former detainees interviewed for this reportwere told that they were being held under the Emergency Regulations or the Preventionof Terrorism Act (PTA). However, during interrogation, it became clear theywere detained due to their involvement or perceived association with the LTTE.For example, OP, 20, was arrested by the police during a random searchoperation at Colombo’s international airport in January 2009 because hisID card showed Puthukudiruppu—an LTTE stronghold then under attack—as his home address. OP was initially taken to the sixth floor of TIDheadquarters in Colombo and transferred to a TID detention center at Boosa campwhere he was interrogated and tortured. He reported being repeatedly sexuallyabused during the five months he spent in Boosa.Interrogation PracticesThe interviews conducted by Human Rights Watch also revealpatterns in how interrogations were conducted and abuses meted out.Interrogations typically were conducted by teams, rather than by individuals,and members of the any given team often came from different governmentagencies. Torture, including sexual abuse, took place in interrogation roomsthat appeared to be frequently used for torture, as they were oftenblood-stained and contained visible torture instruments. Interrogation wasconducted in Sinhala with a Tamil-speaker present as an interpreter. Mostvictims who spoke to Human Rights Watch said they were told they would bereleased if they agreed to sign a confession, were tortured until they agreedto do so, and, in many cases, were tortured afterwards as well. Frequently, therapes continued throughout their detention.Under Sri Lanka’s Evidence Ordinance, confessions madeto a policeman or other public officer, and confessions made while in thecustody of the police are not admissible as dispositive evidence in ordinarycriminal cases unless they are made in the presence of a magistrate. But suchconfessions are presumptively dispositive under the Prevention of Terrorism Act(PTA), which has remained in effect after the end of hostilities. Confessionsmade under “inducement, threat or promise” are legallyinadmissible. However, the PTA reverses the burden of proof, putting the onuson victims to prove that their confessions were made under duress and thereforethe evidence gathered under torture is inadmissible in court.[69]As noted above, all of the victims interviewed by HumanRights Watch were able to “escape” from detention only by paying abribe after they had signed a confession that was coerced under rape and otherforms of torture and ill-treatment. Detainees who did confess aftermistreatment were frequently taken to other sites, and told to identify andimplicate others. Fearing further abuse, these detainees often identified othermen and women as LTTE members or supporters even though they did not recognizethem or knew otherwise.The sexual abuse was frequently carried out by more than oneperson, often with multiple onlookers, including women members of the securityforces. This would indicate that the practice was not something secret, but waswell-known by the authorities, at least at a particular detention facility.Precise details like the names and ranks of those who interrogated and sexuallyabused the detainees was either not known or could not be recalled,unsurprising under the circumstances. The one exception was PR, 26, who toldHuman Rights Watch that he and other detainees were raped repeatedly at nightby KK, a police officer from the Colombo Crime Division at his room in theDehiwela police station in June 2008. “Everybody knew that when he [KK]takes someone out of the cell,” PR said. “He will rape them.”[70]Both men and women were raped. Rape often occurred in cellsat night or in interrogation rooms in which other acts of torture took place. Itwas carried out by prison guards and officers, often repeatedly and often bymore than one individual. Frequently the perpetrators had been involved ininterrogating the victims during the day, had used some form of sexual violenceduring questioning, and returned later for more serious violence. Sexualviolence included groping, kicking and squeezing genitals, biting buttocks andbreasts, and burning sensitive areas like inner thighs and breasts withcigarettes.The patterns across perpetrators, places of detention, andinterrogation practices noted above strongly suggest that rape and other sexualviolence was a systematic practice that was known or should have been known atthe highest levels of the state security apparatus.VictimsThe predominately ethnic Tamil detainees we spoke with whoalleged that they were raped and otherwise sexually abused while in the custodyof Sri Lankan security forces covered a broad spectrum. They included men andwomen, ranged in age from 16 to 50, and came both from Tamil areas of the northand east, and from Colombo and vicinity. Tamil-speaking Muslims were also amongthose so treated, and one case involving a Sinhalese woman suggests that themajority population has not been exempt from such mistreatment. While all wereaccused of being LTTE members or supporters, or were questioned about otherswho had such involvement, most of the individuals we spoke to denied directinvolvement in the LTTE but admitted links through spouses and relatives, orsaid they had been forced to join the LTTE. No doubt in many cases the securityforces realized the detainee was not responsible for any unlawful acts—yetcontinued their abusive treatment anyway. In any case, torture and otherill-treatment are prohibited under all circumstances, regardless of whether thevictim may have violated the law.Like many Tamils caught up in the armed conflict, theindividuals we spoke to had suffered from the war in various ways. Many hadbeen displaced by the fighting, often more than once. Some had been trapped inLTTE-controlled areas while others had escaped to government-controlled areaswhile the fighting continued. Others said they had been forcibly recruited intothe LTTE’s ranks. In one case, police and soldiers arrested BN, 17, fromhis home in Vavuniya in April 2008 during a search for his father, an allegedLTTE member. BN was taken to the Veppankulam camp where he was interrogated,tortured, and raped over a two-week period.In other cases, those mistreated appeared to have beenpeople who merely ran afoul of the government’s regulations on freedom ofmovement that were primarily applied against the Tamil population. For example,police and soldiers conducted a joint search operation at the house of34-year-old RN’s uncle in Trincomalee in November 2008. RN and herhusband were taken into custody because they did not possess a valid permit tostay in Trincomalee and had failed to register with the police on their arrivalfrom Mullaithivu. While detained, RN was tortured and raped.At war’s end, some detained Tamils we interviewed hadbeen taken into custody by the army out of displacement camps, while others hadsurrendered to government forces. Others were abducted from homes orguesthouses. Tamils in Colombo were arrested because they had IDs for the northor east. KN, 30, surrendered to the Sri Lankan army on April 19, 2009, atIranipilai and was taken first to Omanthai and then to Arunachalam camp inVavuniya. She shared a tent in the camp with six other young women, each ofwhom was ordered to come for an “inquiry” every evening. KN toldHuman Rights Watch that the officials asked her to provide details of herhusband’s whereabouts and when she failed, she was raped multiple timesby four or five officials. However, the questioning stopped after the first“inquiry” and from then on she was only raped. “I resistedeach time and they would beat me and rape me. This went on for a week.”Since the end of the armed conflict, other Tamils, livingabroad, returned to Sri Lanka only to be arrested immediately or soon afterarrival, and they too have been subjected to torture, including rape, while incustody. A number of these were questioned about alleged activities abroad,including peaceful criticism of the Sri Lankan government. For instance, YN,46, was deported to Sri Lanka in January 2010. He told Human Rights Watch hewas picked up by CID officials as soon as he cleared immigration at theColombo’s international airport, and taken to the fourth floor of CIDheadquarters where he was detained for two or three days before beingtransferred to Joseph camp in Vavuniya. He said he was repeatedly beaten,tortured, and raped at Joseph camp.In short, there appears to be no category of Tamil who, oncetaken into custody, is immune from rape and other sexual violence.Post-War DevelopmentsAs noted above, rape and other sexual violence of persons incustody continued during the final weeks of the fighting in 2009 and in theimmediate aftermath as LTTE members and civilians who had been under LTTEcontrol were processed at screening sites and camps for internally displacedpersons (IDPs). As people fled the conflict areas and surrendered to the SriLankan army, government authorities’ conducted strip-searches andscreened people for LTTE associations. Once identified, suspected LTTE wereremoved from the IDP camps to separate, often unknown, locations generallyreferred to as “rehabilitation centers.”According to the later government commission:At Omanthai, announcements had been made requesting thosewho were involved with the LTTE to declare themselves. IDPs had been sent tocamps and surrendees had been sent to Detention Centers. Due to the very largenumbers of civilians that had crossed over on 17th and 18th May 2009, everyonehad been sent to IDP centers at Vavuniya and registration had been done at thispoint.[71]As of August 2012, 636 adult detainees under the custody ofthe commissioner general of rehabilitation (CGR) remained in four locations atMaramadu, Welikanda, Kandakadu, and Poonthottam. Referred to alternately as“temporary accommodation centers” and “rehabilitationcenters” by the Bureau of the CGR, many of these camps were educationalinstitutions requisitioned in order to accommodate the detainees.Available evidence, including that obtained by the UN Panelof Experts, indicates that this “screening process” directlyresulted in summary executions, enforced disappearances, rapes, and otherabuses of LTTE suspects.[72] In amedical interview, PV said that she had been taken in 2009, she with herparents and her breast-feeding infant were taken to a very large camp inVavuniya where she was separated and taken away for questioning because she hadworked for the LTTE. She said she was repeatedly tortured and “taken tothe Brigadier’s room over a period of three months where her hands weretied to the bed and she was raped.” She said the brigadier told her ifshe told anyone, he would he would kill her family, her child, and her.Poor conditions in camps also facilitated sexual abuse.There was an absence of privacy, and soldiers and police would infringe on theprivacy of women by watching them when they bathed or used the toilet. Womenand girls were forced to bathe at dawn or after dusk which exposed them tofurther opportunistic abuse. In one example, VB, 28, from Mullaivaikal wasdetained at the Ramanathan camp in Menik Farm where she and other women from hertent bathed at the river every night. The river was guarded by the police soaccess from the other side was limited. She told Human Rights Watch, “Oneevening when I was returning after a bath with some others, suddenly a group ofsoldiers appeared. Some of the girls managed to scream and run away. I wasraped.”[73]The office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, in itsDecember 2012 eligibility guidelines for assessing protection needs of SriLankan asylum seekers, stated that “sexual violence,including but not limited to rape, against Tamil men in detention has also beenreported recently, including reports of cases perpetrated in the post-conflictperiod.”[74]The UNHCR citedreports documenting high levels of sexual and gender-based violence against womenand girls in the post-conflict phase as well as in the final phase of the armedconflict, including in parts of the country not directly affected by theconflict.Violations: Denial ofBasic Due ProcessAll but one of the individuals interviewed by Human RightsWatch were denied basic due process rights after being taken into custody. Theywere not brought before a judge or magistrate, did not have charges filedagainst them, and had no access to family members or legal counsel.They were effectively “disappeared” as none oftheir family members were informed about their locations. Being heldincommunicado facilitated their mistreatment, including rape. MT, 30, wasarrested and detained in Vavuniya police station in May 2010. She was taken toan unknown detention site where she was tortured and raped and then broughtback to the police station. She told Human Rights Watch, “My motherbrought my one-year-old daughter to the police station and one guard told methey were there, but I was not allowed to meet them.”[75]The Sri Lankan authorities denied detainees opportunities tochallenge their mistreatment. None of those we interviewed said they had accessto an independent medical representation or were examined by a Judicial MedicalOfficer (JMO).[76]In two instances the authorities took detainees who had been raped to ahospital for medical treatment. But many victims were too fearful to everreport the abuse to a magistrate and those who were hospitalized said policewere present with them throughout their hospitalization. Human rights activistssay that even if a JMO compiles a Medico-Legal Examination Form (MLEF), thereis no assurance that the document will get further than the hospital. Thepolice often force doctors and JMOs to file a false MLEF and in some casesdictate what gets written on the form.[77]According to local human rights groups, JMOs have been orally instructed not toexamine and report on cases of abuses by “those in uniform.”[78]Sri Lankan law does not provide adequate protections toensure detainees get necessary medical treatment. Suspects held under the PTAor Emergency Regulations, as well as other legislation, do not have anindependent right to a medical examination. The Code of Criminal Procedure Actin article 122(1) states that “where an officer in charge of a policestation considers it necessary for the investigation, he or she may order theexamination of any person by a medical practitioner.”[79]However, the decision to order a medical examination rests with the policeofficer.Violations: Torture, Rape, and Sexual ViolenceSexual abuse in detention in cases investigated by HumanRights Watch appeared to be part of a broader effort to break down and degradeindividuals in detention. Sexual violence frequently began with sexual humiliationand forced nakedness or semi-nakedness, either during the interrogationsessions or outside of them. Forced stripping was accompanied with verbalsexual threats and mocking, which added to the humiliation and degradation ofbeing tortured. This psychological sexual abuse was frequently followed byphysical torture and ill-treatment, including rape and various forms of sexualviolence.For victims, it is difficult to acknowledge being raped andsexually abused. Human Rights Watch stopped interviews when victims becamedistressed in talking about their experience. Doctors say that victims can bereluctant to speak even when signs of sexual abuse are present. “Telltalesigns of sexual violence in Sri Lankan cases are cigarette and other burnsaround genitals and breasts and bite marks, especially on buttocks,” saidDr. Allison Callaway, who has medically reviewed over a hundred Sri Lankanasylum seekers in the UK. “Women tend to clench particularly during aphysical examination and both men and women show marked signs of Post-TraumaticStress Disorder.”Whatever the circumstances of their abuse, the peopleinterviewed by Human Rights Watch expressed shame in admitting rape and othersexual abuse. Most were incapable of describing being raped in detail becausethey could not formulate the language to explain what had happened. Many feltthat they had been picked because of alleged links to the LTTE and felt thismade them vulnerable. A large number did not disclose their abuse in theirinitial screening interviews for asylum in various countries. Instead theydisclosed details of their abuse to psychiatrists and doctors only when theywere specifically probed on this aspect of torture. “Victims sometimesgive ‘hints’ in the substantive interviews, but these are moreoften than not, not picked up by the interviewing officer, unless some detailsare provided,” a senior immigration barrister in the UK told Human RightsWatch.[80]Cultural stigmatization and shame is a very real deterrentto seeking help for both men and women who have been raped in custody. One mantold Human Rights Watch that it was impossible for him to admit being raped toanybody, including his wife.Various forms of sexual abuse were reported to Human RightsWatch by former detainees. Men said that they were kicked in the genitals; hadtheir testicles repeatedly squeezed; were forcibly masturbated; were forced toperform or receive oral sex; and were orally and anally raped. CR, 45, said forinstance that a group of soldiers and paramilitaries raped him with a smallglass bottle.[81]Women told Human Rights Watch of being kicked or otherwisehaving their genitalia assaulted; being forced to perform oral sex; andsuffering biting, scratches, and other wounds to their breasts and other partsof their bodies. All the women interviewed by Human Rights Watch sufferedvaginal rape at least once, but some repeatedly. These rapes resulted inextremely heavy bleeding, miscarriages, pregnancy, and other outcomes.Sexual abuse can have long-lasting physical andpsychological effects. Some men who experienced anal rape and forcedpenetration with instruments said that they experienced ongoing pain in theiranus and bleeding.Many of those Human Rights Watch interviewed were receivingpsychiatric care in addition to continued medical treatment. They described arange of psychological symptoms that included difficulty getting to sleep;waking with nightmares; jumpiness and irritability; trying to avoid rememberingwhat happened in detention; and depression. A consultant psychiatrist in the UKtold Human Rights Watch: “The level of trauma among those who haveescaped from recent detention in Sri Lanka is extremely high. It will take themmany years of counseling before they are able to lead normal lives.”[82]Two men interviewed by Human Rights Watch had a sharp needleinserted in their penis. In one case, this was used to insert metal balls thatlater had to be surgically removed.In addition to sexual abuse, some of the common forms oftorture and cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment reported were forcefulslapping and punching; sustained kicking all over the body; stomping on limbswith hard boots; beatings with batons, rifle butts, electric cables or wires,and sand-filled plastic pipes; being thrown against a wall; hair pulling;partial suffocation by inhaling in a petrol-infused plastic bag; twistingfingers and limbs; and beating the soles of feet.Also common were burning with a heated metal rod on theback, thighs, and soles of feet; burning with glowing cigarettes; repeatedsuspension from a metal bar with both hands tied at the wrists; suspensionupside down; sleep deprivation including by flashing lights, loud noises, beingpoked with sticks, or having dry chili powder thrown into one’s eyes; andhaving one’s head pushed into dirty water.Psychological torture and ill-treatment included beingverbally abused in Tamil or Sinhala; being threatened with execution or theexecution of loved ones; and hearing screams of others being tortured. In onecase, an officer of the Colombo Crime Division in Dehiwela police stationforced 26-year-old PR to sit on his knees with his head under the bed and theofficer would sit on him, using him like a stool for hours at a stretch. WhenPR begged him to stop, the officer threatened to kill him.Former detainees who spoke to Human Rights Watch said theywere held in filthy, small detention rooms or cells with little or no access totoilet facilities, forcing them to defecate in a plastic bag. One bucket of waterwould be provided to drink and wash. The amount of food available to detaineesvaried, but many told Human Rights Watch that they were fed only once dailyduring their detention.IV. Domestic ResponsePost-War Barriers to RedressEthnic Tamils seeking basic assistance or redress formistreatment during the armed conflict, including rape and other sexualviolence while in custody, face enormous barriers. The Presidential Task Force Resettlement for Reconstruction and Security in the Northern Province(PTF),[83] established in 2009, and a heavy-handed military presence havelimited their access to civil society groups that could help them pursue claims.For the first two years after the war, the PTF and the military activelyprohibited any local or international nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) fromconducting programs designed to address war-related trauma and otherpsycho-social stresses. The PTF also indirectly controlled which NGOs canprovide services in the north. In practice, all NGO workers have faced seriousrestrictions on access and movement within the region; international NGOworkers also have had great difficulty obtaining visas.[84]Groups based in Colombo, which previously had freer rein toraise concerns in the north have themselves come under threat from thegovernment, limiting their ability to speak out.[85]On sexual abuse in particular, whether of persons in custody or by the securityforces in villages and towns, governmental restraints on investigations bydomestic organizations has meant a lack of reporting that has prevented anymeaningful national advocacy. Legal responses through habeas corpuspetitions on sexual violence and other human rights violations have had verylimited success.[86]In 2008, community outrage over one case involvingallegations of sexual harassment and abuse during a registration process in theEastern Province resulted in the removal of the police Special Task Force (STF)camp from Alayadivembu.[87]However, this was exceptional.During the armed conflict, the police forcein Sri Lanka became significantly militarized and emergency provisionsconferred police powers on the army, thus blurring the distinction between thetwo forces.[88] This overlap, which has continued up to the present, has made itmore difficult for people to file complaints or seek redress, particularlyagainst the military. “There is a sense in all five districts [inthe Northern Province] that there is no use complaining to the police, be itabout rape, murder, trafficking, disappearance as it only opens the victim tofurther abuse and gives the military access to people’s lives,” anactivist told Human Rights Watch.[89]Since mid-2011, a small number of NGOs have been givenpermission to provide psychological counseling and related support so long asthey work through local government health services. But the need is enormousand the available staff and programming less than adequate.[90]“The level of trauma among Tamils who survived the conflict andparticularly among those who have been detained is extremely high and the needfor concerted action and resources is acute,” a representative of aninternational peace-building organization said.[91]Continuing Impunity and Military AbusesThe Sri Lankan government’s response to allegations ofsexual violence by the security forces has been crude and disdainful.[92]The government has viewed these allegations as an LTTE conspiracy to defame anddemonize the armed forces for winning the war.[93]The government was quick to condemn US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's2009 mention of Sri Lanka in a statement at the UN regarding sexual violence inconflict.[94] Asenior defense official attacked the allegations, saying there was no basiswhatsoever to suggest Sri Lankan security forces were involved in such seriousabuses during the final years of fighting.[95]Three months after Sri Lanka declared victoryover the LTTE, the UK’s Channel 4 News broadcast footage apparentlyshowing government troops summarily executing Tamils during the final push ofthe war. In June 2011, Channel 4 broadcast “Sri Lanka’s KillingFields” which showed footage captured on mobile phones of theextra-judicial executions of prisoners; the aftermath of targeted shelling ofcivilian camps; and dead female Tamil fighters who appear to have been raped orsexually assaulted, abused, and murdered. In March 2012, Channel 4 broadcast afollow-up film, “Sri Lanka’s Killing Fields: War CrimesUnpunished” which examined four issues including the deliberate heavyshelling of civilians and a hospital in the No Fire Zone; the strategic denialof food and medicine to hundreds of thousands of trapped civilians; the killingof civilians during the “rescue mission”; and the systematicexecution of naked and bound LTTE prisoners.The government flatly rejected the Channel 4 findings as “fake”and in an August 8, 2011 interview with Indian television channel“Headlines Today,” the president’s brother, Defence SecretaryGotabaya Rajapaksa, dismissed all allegations of sexual abuse during the war.[96]Rajapaksa spoke disparagingly about a British Tamil woman who had worked in thegovernment camps and raised concerns about rape in an interview with Channel 4:[S]he says that there have been, you know, all theseallegations: rape and murder and all these things. Now she is one person whowill get attracted by the people (haha) soldiers that’s right, becauseshe’s different from others. So, I want to know whether she was raped.She was there for one year she came with the IDPs and she was in the IDP camps.Now she was talking about the rape. How can she talk about the rape when she aperson so attractive safely came into this area was in IDP camps and released?She was not raped, she was not killed. How can she comment like that?[97]The issue of male rape and sexual violence against men hasneither been raised nor addressed. Suppressed by victims and perpetratorsalike, male rape remains a taboo subject and strategies to combat it have beenglaringly absent. In an appearance before the UN Committee Against Torture, SriLanka publicly committed to a zero-tolerance policy on torture,[98]yet this has not been transformed into meaningful government action to combattorture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment.In fact, with the lapsing of the State of Emergency, thelimited safeguards contained in Emergency Regulation No. 1 of 2005, such asthat the armed forces must turn over suspects to police within 24 hours, areapparently no longer in effect. Relying on the more permissive PTA will haveserious implications given the continued policing functions exercised by themilitary in northeast Sri Lanka.Impunity for serious human rights violations, includingtorture and rape, by state security forces is endemic in Sri Lanka.It is possible to identify specific problems that contributeto deep-seated impunity for torture in Sri Lanka, including that prosecutorialand judicial staff responsible for collecting and processing evidence lackadequate training, resources, and gender sensitivity, that repeatedly transferringcases without informing petitioners denies witnesses a chance to attendjudicial hearings, and an absence of witness protection mechanism deterswitnesses from coming forward. Legal guarantees meant to protect due processand ensure a speedy trial have been eroded by more than three decades ofreliance on emergency regulations and provisions of the PTA. Even after theEmergency Regulations were withdrawn in September 2011, the PTA, with similarlybroad powers, remained in force. Directives issued by the president in July2006 to reduce the likelihood of torture and ill-treatment have largely beenignored.[99]However, these specific barriers to prosecutions and redresspale in comparison to the larger and more intractable issue: the Sri Lankangovernment’s clear unwillingness to seriously investigate or prosecuteserious violations of human rights by the military and police, particularlythose committed in connection with the armed conflict against the LTTE. Despite a backlog of cases of torture, enforced disappearance, andunlawful killings going back two decades, there have been only a small numberof prosecutions. Past efforts to address violations by creating ad hocmechanisms have produced few results, whether in providing information orprompting prosecutions.V. RecommendationsTo the Government of Sri LankaInvestigate all allegations ofrape and other sexual violence by Sri Lankan security forces, includingfrom the armed conflict period as well as the years since. Prosecute thoseresponsible for these crimes, including persons with command or othersuperior responsibility, in proceedings that meet international fair trialstandards. Publicize the outcome of such prosecutions, including byproviding information on the punishments meted out and the redress andcompensation provided to victims;Repeal the Prevention ofTerrorism Act (PTA), and abolish the system of detention without charge ortrial;Immediately lift accessrestrictions imposed by the Presidential Task Force onResettlement, Reconstruction and Security in the Northern Province (PTF)so that medical personnel, counselors, and NGOs providing psycho-socialsupport and independent medical examination and treatment can reachvictims of human rights violations;Release all individuals who havebeen arrested under emergency or anti-terrorism laws, unless they arecharged with recognized criminal offenses. Conduct prompt trials that meetinternational due process standards;Make available to familymembers the names and locations of all individuals detained for suspectedinvolvement in the LTTE, including those in rehabilitation centers andundisclosed detention sites, and facilitate family visits;Ensure detainees’ rightto legal representation and access to a lawyer of their choosing upon beingtaken into custody and thereafter. Amend current regulations to ensurethat all detainees may have legal counsel present during interrogations ifthey so choose,Permit all detainees to beexamined by an independent medical practitioner immediately after they aredetained and following each period of questioning, if they request suchexaminations;Establish, maintain, andpublicize a centralized database of all detainees, including thosedetained for “rehabilitation,” providing the dates of arrestand detention, the authority issuing such orders, and all transfer,release and revocation orders;Ensure all ranks of thesecurity forces, including the military, police, Criminal InvestigationDepartment, and Terrorist Investigation Division, receive regular andappropriate training on civilian protection;Institute a reparationsprogram in accordance with international standards for all victims ofserious human rights violations committed during the armed conflict,including victims of custodial torture;Provide reproductive andsexual health services, and psycho-social support for all victims ofalleged rape and other sexual violence. Permit appropriate domestic andinternational nongovernmental organizations to provide these services toindividuals in northern and eastern Sri Lanka;Ratify the followinginternational conventions: the Optional Protocol to the UN Conventionagainst Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment orPunishment; the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court; and theInternational Convention for the Protection of All Persons from EnforcedDisappearance;Invite and facilitate the visits of UN special proceduresincluding the UN special rapporteur on torture, the UN Working Group onArbitrary Detention, the UN Working Group on Enforced Disappearances, theUN special rapporteur on violence against women, and the UN specialrapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers.To the United Nations Human Rights CouncilCall for the establishment of an independent investigationin allegations of violations of international human rights andhumanitarian law by all parties during the final months of the armedconflict in Sri Lanka;To Concerned GovernmentsSupport the establishment ofan independent international mechanism under the UN secretary-general toestablish accountability for alleged violations of international humanrights and humanitarian law during the final months of the armed conflictin Sri Lanka;Press the Sri Lankangovernment to investigate allegations of rape and other sexual violence bythe security forces, prosecute those responsible for these crimes,including persons with command responsibility, and publicize the outcomeof such prosecutions;Press the Sri Lankangovernment to ensure that victims of rape and other sexual violence by thesecurity forces receive prompt and adequate compensation;Encourage the UN Working Groupon Arbitrary Detention to initiate its "urgent action" procedurefor victims of state-orchestrated sexual violence in Sri Lanka, and toundertake a field mission to Sri Lanka to engage with government officialsand victims of sexual violence by state security forces.Urge the government to allow local nongovernmentalorganizations and private hospitals in the north to provide reproductiveand sexual health services and psycho-social support to those affected bythe conflict.AppendixCases of Rape and Other Sexual Violence by Sri LankanSecurity Forces, 2006-2012(presented in reverse chronological order)Note on sources: in 60 of the 75 cases documented in thisappendix, we spoke directly with the victim and were able to obtain medicalrecords with the consent of the victim, corroborating the victim’s claimsof rape and other sexual violence. In another 8 cases, we spoke directly withthe victim and relied on sources other than medical records to corroborate hisor her claims. In 3 of these 8 cases, no medico legal reports were preparedsince the UK courts found the victims’ account of rape and torturecredible and granted them asylum. In the remaining 5 cases, we spoke towitnesses who were present with the victim after their rape. In 7 cases, wewere not able to speak directly with the victim but obtained medico-legalreports, prepared by doctors and submitted to the courts in support of theirasylum claim, that provided detailed evidence of sexual abuse. For ease ofpresentation below, we reference medical reports in citations only in the casesin which they were our main source for the case or in which we had no access tosuch records.Name: JH (all initials are pseudonymsand bear no relation to the person’s actual name)Gender: MaleAge: 23DateDetained: September2012DateReleased: October2012Circumstancesof detention: JHarrived in the UK to pursue higher studies in March 2011 and returned to SriLanka to attend to family matters on August 17, 2012. One evening inSeptember 2012, JH was walking home in Colombo when a white van pulled upnear him. Several men jumped out and told him to join them for aninvestigation. They blindfolded him and drove him for over an hour to anunknown site.Account:I wastaken up some stairs but when they removed my blindfold I found myself in aroom where four other men were present. I was tied to a chair and questionedabout my links to the LTTE and the reason for my recent travel abroad. Theystripped me and started beating me. I was beaten with electric wires andburned with cigarettes. My interrogators tried to asphyxiate me.[100] Later that night, I was left in asmaller room. I was raped on three consecutive days. The first night, one mancame alone and anally raped me. The second and third night, two men came tomy room. They anally raped me and also forced me to have oral sex with them.I signed a confession admitting my links with the LTTE after the rapes.[101]JH’smedico legal report, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes that the physicalevidence of scars on his body strongly support his account of torture. Thereport further adds: “the spots of dark pigmentation on his buttocksand around his anus are consistent with an infective rash which has nowhealed, support in my view, a situation in which he was repeatedly subjectedto anal intercourse in which his skin has become lacerated and easilyinfected.”JH escapeddetention after his family bribed CID officials. He has since receivedmedical care for severe anal pain.Name:KMGender:MaleAge:22Date Detained:September 2012Date Released:Cannot recallCircumstances ofdetention:KM went to study abroadin February 2011 but says he returned to Sri Lanka in August 2012 for familyreasons. One afternoon in September 2012, KM was going to the market inBatticaloa when he was stopped by a man in civilian clothes and asked to gofor further questioning. Despite protests, KM was pushed into a light coloredvan, blindfolded, and driven away to an unknown place.Account:I didn’t know where Iwas taken but as soon as we reached the destination, around five or six menin civilian clothes started questioning me. They asked me about my activitiesabroad and my links with the LTTE. They asked me for names of supporters andfundraisers of the LTTE abroad. I was at first slapped and kicked butgradually the tortured worsened. I was burned with cigarettes, hung upsidedown and my head was submerged in a barrel of water. I was stripped duringinterrogation.I refused to sign theconfession statement and the torture continued for three days. I was rapedfour times during my detention. The rapes occurred at night and I could notidentify my assailant. I could recognize their voices. They spoke in Sinhala.I signed the confession after the second time I was raped.[100]KM’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes that the considerable numberof scars on his body strongly supports his account of torture in Sri Lanka.The report says that KM shows symptoms of “significant anxiety, severedepression and post-traumatic stress disorder.”KM’s fatherapproached members of the group linked to Vinayagamoorthy Muralitharan, theLTTE defector formerly known as Colonel Karuna, who arranged his release fromdetention.Name: TJGender: MaleAge: 19Date Detained: August 2012Date Released: August 2012Circumstances of detention: TJ returned to Sri Lankaafter completing his studies in the UK in August 2012. One evening in August2012, TJ was returning home after visiting a friend in Vavuniya when a whitevan stopped near him. Around five or six men in civilian clothes jumped outof the van, forced TJ inside the van, and blindfolded him as they drove himto an unknown destination.Account:They removed my blindfoldand I found myself in a room. There were five men and one of them was in amilitary uniform. They started questioning me about my work with the LTTE inthe UK. They asked me about my connections with the LTTE abroad. I did notrespond and they started torturing me. First, I was slapped and punched. Thenthey began to torture me severely. I was beaten with batons, burned withcigarettes, and my head was submerged in a barrel of water. I was strippednaked during interrogation.The beatings and torture continuedthe next day. I was only given some water in the morning. The next night, Iwas given my clothes and left in a small, dark room. One person entered myroom that night. It was dark, I couldn’t see him. He banged my headagainst the wall, pushed my face against the wall and raped me. He said somewords in Sinhala.[101]TJ’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes the presence of scars alongthe length of his back, thighs, shoulders, arms, and legs. It states that“there is no doubt that the injuries were caused by being brutallytortured as described by the claimant.”TJ told Human Rights Watchhis release was secured after his maternal uncle managed to bribe a CIDofficial.Name: DKGender: MaleAge: 21Date Detained: August 2012Date Released: September 2012Circumstances ofdetention: One evening in August2012, DK was returning home in Vavuniya when he was stopped on the way by twomen who jumped out of a white van. They confirmed his name and asked him togo with them for an “inquiry.” DK was blindfolded and driven inthe van for approximately half an hour.Account:When they removed myblindfold, I found myself in a dirty room. The floor of the room was coveredwith dried blood. I could hear some screams coming from another room. Thatnight I was left alone in another small room. The next day, I was taken toanother room, photographed, and my fingerprints were taken. One of the men incivilian clothes accused me of being an LTTE member. He told me he knew aboutmy escape from Arunachalam camp[102][at Menik Farm near Vavuniya] and asked me why Ihad not registered as an LTTE member when the authorities came to the camp. Idenied all their allegations. Two other men came to the room. They startedbeating me with plastic pipes filled with sand, batons, and forced apetrol-infused plastic bag on my head and tried to asphyxiate me. They burnedme all over with cigarettes during the questioning. At night when I was in asmall room, a man in civilian clothes came and started touching meindecently. He told me to have oral sex with him. When I refused, he beat meand raped me. This happened every night for four or five nights. I signed theconfession when I could not bear this torture any more. But the rapescontinued after I signed the confession.[103]DK’s records from amedical general practitioner note obvious injury marks on his body and theneed to refer him for specialist counseling on post-traumatic stress disorderon account of being tortured in Sri Lanka.DK told Human Rights Watchhe managed to escape from detention after his uncle bribed CID officialsusing the services of a member of the Eelam People’s Democratic Party(EPDP), a pro-government Tamil group.Name: SAGender: MaleAge: 42Date Detained: April 2012Date Released: April 2012Circumstances ofdetention: SA, a Tamil politicalactivist, was abducted by a group of men in civilian clothes in April 2012.Account:They were all armed withpistols and T56 [military assault] rifles.[104]They all seemed drunk. They told me to kneel andremoved my clothes and used my shirt to blindfold me. I was threatened with apistol and beaten for around 15-20 minutes. They kicked my genitals. Theysexually assaulted me. It was clearly done to humiliate me. I was blindfoldedand taken to an unknown detention site. I was repeatedly beaten up andinterrogated. When I was not being questioned, my legs and hands were cuffedto a steel bed. That night I was taken to a third place, which was like anabandoned motel. I was kept blindfolded throughout but questioned moresystematically. After two days, I was dropped in front of a police station.My abductors did not appear to have any fear of the police and told me,“If you try to escape, go elsewhere, or contact colleagues,you’ll be shot.”[105]Before SA was released, hiscaptors told him that he was being dropped at a police station, saying:“You should go right in, don’t look back at our vehicle. We willuse different number plates so it won’t be useful.”At the police station, SAwas taken to see the senior superintendent of police and subsequentlyreleased from detention.Name:VVGender:MaleAge:29Date arrested:April 2012Date Released:Cannot recallCircumstances ofdetention:At about 7 p.m. sometimein April 2012, five uniformed policemen arrived at VV’s home inVavuniya. They announced that they were arresting VV and gave his uncle anarrest receipt. VV told Human Rights Watch he was blindfolded and draggedinto a jeep and taken to the Vavuniya police station where he was questionedand his responses recorded.Account:The police officialsaccused me of being an LTTE member and returning to Sri Lanka from abroad torevive the LTTE in the country. They blindfolded me and pushed me into ajeep. We drove for around 10 to 15 minutes and I was pushed into a smallroom. They kept asking me the same questions, about which other LTTE membersI worked with, my activities abroad and I kept refusing to answer them. Theytortured me in several ways. I was beaten up with several objects, burned withcigarettes, suspended from the ceiling, sexually abused, and raped. I think Iwas raped by different people for three nights—it was dark so Icouldn’t tell their faces. They used abusive language and spoke inSinhala although they knew a few Tamil words. They smelled of alcohol. I wasforced to strip down to my underwear during my interrogation. They kicked mygenitals with their boots during questioning. I broke down after the rape andagreed to sign anything they wanted me to sign. I admitted to everything theysaid.[106]VV’s scar report, onfile at Human Rights Watch, states that the injuries on his body areconsistent with the treatment he describes. The report notes that the scarsare “highly consistent with repeated beatings” and “thereis a high degree of likelihood that the scars were caused by being torturedin the way described.”VV told Human Rights Watchthat he managed to secure his release from detention after his uncle bribedthe authorities. He managed to flee from the country using the services of aformer parliamentarian who escorted him to the airport and organizedassistance through immigration.Name: SJGender: FemaleAge: 32Date Detained: April 2012Date Released: April 2012Circumstances ofdetention: SJ was on her way homefrom work in Kilinochchi when a white van pulled up beside her. Two men incivilian clothes got off and asked her to accompany them for questioning.Account:I was taken to a room in aderelict building. Around three men in civilian clothes started questioningme. I came to know one of the men was a senior official as the others weretalking respectfully to him. The men asked me to take my clothes off and tookphotographs of me naked. They told me they had all the information about meand my activities with the LTTE. They told me to confess about everything. Irefused to confess as I thought they would kill me. I was beaten up andtortured continuously. On the second day, a man came to my room and raped me.I was raped by different men on at least three days. I can’t rememberhow many times. They would always touch my private parts after they raped me.They spoke in Sinhala but also spoke some broken Tamil. I signed a confessionstatement as I wanted the rapes to stop. While I was in detention, my familytried to lodge a complaint with the NHRC [National Human Rights Commission]but they refused to register a complaint. My family also approached somemembers of parliament. Nobody helped us.[107]SJ told Human Rights Watchthat she managed to escape detention after her family bribed members of themilitary. At the time of the interview SJ was undergoing medical treatmentabroad.Name: BLGender: MaleAge: 28Date Detained: March 2012Date Released: Cannot recallCircumstances ofdetention: In March 2012, BL was onhis way back from Jaffna to Colombo when he was abducted by a group of armedmen in civilian clothes who blindfolded him and pushed him into a van. BLsaid he was driven for over an hour and taken to a room where he wasfingerprinted, photographed, and his details recorded.Account:I was stripped down to myunderwear and tied to a chair. My interrogators started slapping and punchingme. I continued to deny their charges that I was an LTTE member. They made melie flat on a bench and started beating me with a baton. The torture grewworse and I was subsequently burned with cigarettes. I was raped by those whowere interrogating me for three consecutive days. The rapes occurred at nightand they would come drunk to my detention cell. Finally, I could not bear thetorture anymore and signed a confession statement on the fourth day. Myinterrogators groped and pulled my genitals during the interrogation but therapes happened at night.[108]BL’s medical recordsfrom his general practitioner notes that he has several scars on his body andsuffers from anxiety and depression on account of his experience of torturein Sri Lanka.BL said he was releasedfrom detention after his father bribed authorities through an EPDPinterlocutor.Name:GDGender:FemaleAge:31Date Detained:November 2011Date Released:December 2011Circumstances ofdetention:At around 10 p.m. oneevening in late November 2011, GD was at her house in Dehiwala, a suburb ofColombo, when four men in civilian clothes arrived at her house. GD toldHuman Rights Watch that they introduced themselves as CID officials and askedto inspect ID cards of all family members present at her home. GD said thatthey confiscated the ID card of her husband who was abroad and asked her toaccompany them for questioning.Account:I was taken to the fourthfloor of the CID office in Colombo and kept in a room. I was not given anyfood or water. The next day, the officials, who included a uniformed armedofficial, photographed me, took my fingerprints, and made me sign on a blanksheet of paper. They told me that they had all my husband’s details andkept asking me to disclose his whereabouts. When I told them my husband wasabroad, they continued to accuse him of supporting the LTTE. I was beaten withmany objects. I was burned with a cigarette during questioning. I was slappedaround and beaten with a sand-filled pipe. Throughput the beatings, theyasked me for my husband’s details. I was raped one night. Two men cameto my room in civilian clothes. They ripped my clothes and both raped me.They spoke Sinhala so I could not understand anything. It was dark so Icouldn’t see their faces clearly.[109]GD’s medical legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, shows she was tortured several timesand raped, which led to a heavy vaginal bleed. The report notes she issuffering from “severe depression and PTSD.”GD was released fromdetention on in early December 2011 after her father bribed the authoritiesusing the services of a Tamil-speaking “agent” or middle-man withclose connections with the security forces.Name:KPGender:MaleAge:31Date Detained:August 2011Date Released:August 2011Circumstances ofdetention:One evening in August2011, KP was on his way to his parent’s home in Vavuniya when a whitevan pulled up close to him and five men, three military personnel and two incivilian clothes, got out of the van. KP told Human Rights Watch that two ofthe men overpowered him while another tied his hands behind with a rope andanother blindfolded him. He was pushed into the back of the white van.Account:The van stopped after 15 to20 minutes and I was pushed out of the van. When my blindfold was removed, Ifound myself in a small, dirty room. Over the next 10 days I was questionedand tortured. The officials asked me about my links with the LTTE. They toldme to admit that I was supporting the LTTE as a student abroad. They kickedme with their boots and punched me with fists. They beat me on my back with ahot, metal rod. They covered my head with a petrol-infused, plastic bag. Iwas hung upside down and beaten severely. They burned me with cigarettebutts. During the first interrogation, the official in the military fatiguesforced me to undress. He tried to have oral sex with me. He forced himself onme and raped me. During questioning, the officials would squeeze my penis.They would force me to masturbate them. One of them masturbated me. I wasseverely tortured when I resisted. The officials would furiously say somewords in Sinhala when they sexually abused me. I couldn’t understandwhat they were saying. They abused me in Tamil and used slang words. I wassexually abused many times during my detention. On some days, the armyofficial who had arrested me sexually abused me during interrogation. On twonights I was raped by prison guards. The sexual abuse by the officialsstopped after I signed the confession.[110]KP’s psychiatricrecords, on file with Human Rights Watch, note that he “suffers from Severe Depression secondaryto Post Traumatic Stress Disorder related to the physical, sexual andemotional trauma that occurred while he was in Sri Lanka.”KP said he escaped fromdetention after his family bribed the authorities. He used the services of apolitician to arrange his escape from Sri Lanka.Name:YJGender:FemaleAge:36Date Detained:July 2011Date Released:Cannot recallCircumstances ofdetention:In July 2011, YJ landedat Colombo’s international airport from the UK where she had beeninvited to a conference. YJ said that on clearing immigration, she wasapproached by a group of officials claiming to be CID who took her to anotherroom for questioning.Account:They asked me for detailedinformation about my travels, about whom I met in the UK. They warned me notto hide any information as the Sri Lankan government had full knowledge of myactivities of fundraising for the LTTE and anti-government propaganda in theUK. They took my fingerprints and allowed me to leave. I went to my house inColombo.[111]YJ told Human Rights Watch thatshe was frightened and asked her father to come and stay with her fromVavuniya. She said someone tried to break into her house in the early hoursof July 19, 2011. Later in July, on her way back from her office to the localtemple, in an area between Wellawatte and Kirulaphona in Colombo, she wasstopped by two men who got out of a white van. They dragged her inside thevan. Once in the van, they slapped her, confiscated her mobile phone, andblindfolded her. When her blindfold was removed, she found herself in a smallroom. She says she was tortured and raped in custody:Two army officials cameinto the room and asked me to stand up. They took me to another room that hada table and two men in civilian clothes seated across from each other. Theyasked me to sit down and remove my blouse. I refused but a woman policeofficial forcibly removed it. The two men in civilian clothes told me,“We have all the information on you.” They accused me of doingpropaganda against the government and security forces. They said they wouldmurder me. They forced me to sign on blank sheets of paper, took myfingerprints and photographs, and sent me back to the room. I was kept in theroom for two days. They gave me food once a day. A few days later, two men incivilian clothes came to my room. My hands were tied together and I could notfight them. Both men raped me. They behaved liked animals and bit me. Theywere smoking and burned me with cigarettes on my breasts and genitals. Theyused abusive and obscene language. They left me naked with my hands tied backthe whole night. The same men came back in the morning and untied me. Theymade obscene comments and said they would come back that night. However, theydid not come back.[112]YJ’s medical recordsfrom her general practitioner, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes thatshe was found suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder and depression.The report also notes marks on her breast, groin, wrist, and leg which wereconsistent with cigarette burns.YJ told Human Rights Watcha female police officer brought her clothes to her the next day andblindfolded her. She was blindfolded and released in Colombo after her fatherpaid a bribe to CID officials.Name:PNGender:FemaleAge:37Date Detained:May 2011Date Released:August 2011Circumstances ofdetention:In May 2011, PN wasreturning home in Vavuniya when a van pulled over next to her and two menjumped out, pushing her into the van. In the van, the men tied her hands,blindfolded her, and drove for about 45 minutes.Account:I was taken inside abuilding. When my blindfold was removed, I found myself in a dusty room. Fourmen and a woman were already present there; they wore civilian clothes. Theyspoke to me in Sinhala. They accused me of being an LTTE member. I said Iwasn’t. They started kicking me with their boots and beating me withexposed wires. They knew I was with the LTTE, they had this information. Theyjust wanted me to say it. The torture got worse. I was burned withcigarettes—my back is covered with marks. I was raped on three or fouroccasions. I cannot remember how many times. All I can remember is that thosewho raped me spoke in Sinhala. At some point during the torture, I signed aconfession in Sinhala.[113]PN’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes that “hyper-pigmented scars on her back werecaused after being beaten with batons during her detention in 2011. Theappearance of the scars is typical of injuries caused by being beaten with along narrow object/surface. The hyperpigmentation could be the result of postinflammatory changes after contusion in areas of thin skin overlying bones,which occurs more often in darker skins. These scars cannot be explained byskin infections or other inflammatory skin condition and cannot beself-inflicted.”PN told Human Rights Watchshe escaped from detention in early August 2011 after her uncle bribed theauthorities using the services of a Tamil Parliamentarian.Name:MBGender:MaleAge:27Date Detained:May 2011Date Released:June 2011Circumstances ofdetention:MB told Human RightsWatch that in May 2011, he was awaiting a decision on a visa application nearan embassy in Colombo when a light blue van stopped near him. Four men incivilian clothes got out and one of them asked MB for his ID. He was detainedimmediately.Account:I was pushed into a van andtaken to the fourth floor of the CID headquarters in Colombo. Once we gotthere, I was stripped and photographed. The men who stripped me saw the scarsfrom my torture. They told me I was with the LTTE and was trying to escapefrom the country. I told them I was arrested and tortured in Joseph Camp [inVavuniya]. One of the officials went out. After a while, he came back andsaid he had confirmed that I was arrested in Vavuniya. I was beaten withwires. I was hung upside down and beaten. One day, two officials came and puta pistol in my mouth. They said unless I confessed to the crime of activelysupporting the LTTE, I would be killed. I said what they wanted me to say.It was not the first timethat MB had been tortured by Sri Lankan government authorities. On November14, 2009, he was at his home in Vavuniya when a white van pulled up outsidehis home. A few men in civilian clothes got out of the van and introduced themselvesas CID officers from Chetti Kulam in the Vanni. MB told Human Rights Watchthat the men pushed him into the van saying they had to question him andwould take him to Chetti Kulam police station.I was taken to the JosephCamp in Vavuniya. I was stripped and photographed. After that, they took meto a dark room. The officials started asking me about a friend who they saidworked for the LTTE. They asked me where he was. I said, I did not know. Oneof them slapped me so hard, I fell down. They would question me again andthen beat me. I was hung upside down and beaten, I was burned withcigarettes. They forced a petrol-infused plastic bag on my head and tried toasphyxiate me. They forced my head into a bucket of ice water. They alsopushed my penis into a wooden pipe. For three weeks, at night times I wasleft alone in the small, dark room. At nighttime, two or three officialswould come to the room. They would be in civilian clothing. They would smellof alcohol. They forced me to have oral sex with them. In the beginning oneofficial would hold me down while the other raped me. Afterwards, it was onlyone person at a time. After three weeks, I was moved into a larger room,which I shared with six other Tamils. I was raped 15-20 times after I wasmoved. The officials would take me out for questioning at night. They wouldtake out the other detainees in my cell too. I started working with the[Tamil] paramilitary groups that openly visited the camp. They would take meoutside to identify others who had been involved with the LTTE. The people inthe paramilitary groups knew how the officials were treating us. It wascommon knowledge that we were raped. The paramilitary members helped meescape from the camp on in early July 2010. I arrived in Colombo in a van andstayed at my uncle’s house.[114]MB’s medical notesfrom his medical practitioner, on file with Human Rights Watch, show that heis currently under treatment for post-traumatic stress disorder.MB said he remained inColombo until he decided to apply for a UK visa and was detained again. Hewas released from detention following payment of a bribe in June 2011.Name:JVGender:MaleAge:28Date Detained:April 2011Date Released:Cannot recallCircumstances ofdetention:JV, a resident of Trincomalee,had a cousin who worked in the media wing of the LTTE. In 2007, JV’scousin asked him to carry some documents to Chennai when he was on apilgrimage to India. JV’s cousin asked him to carry papers again inJanuary 2008, January 2009, and September 2009. JV’s family sent him tothe UK to study in 2010. However, his mother fell ill and had to behospitalized in Colombo, forcing him to return to Sri Lanka in April 2011. Inhis medical interview, JV said the CID took him aside for questioning soon afterhis arrival in Colombo from the UK.Account:JV said the CID accused himof participating in anti-government demonstrations in London. He denied thecharge and was released. The following day CID officials came to the place hewas staying in Colombo and arrested him. They told him they had proof of hisinvolvement with the LTTE and photographs of him with Seeman [Indian Tamilactivist], founder of the Naam Tamilar Iyakkam in India. JV confessed totaking papers to India, but denied involvement in any activities with theLTTE.His medical records, madeavailable to Human Rights Watch with his permission, include transcripts inwhich JV describes various forms of torture. He told doctors he was hung byhis wrists with his feet above the floor while he was interrogated, andbeaten all over with batons. He said his interrogators deliberately beat himin areas where his skin broke because of the beating. He was returned to asmall and dark cell after hours of beating and rarely given food and drink.JV said he was anally rapedseveral times by interrogating officers during questioning.After about eight days hewas taken to a court where he could not understand the proceedings as theywere conducted in Sinhala. He was released at the end of the proceedings andtaken to hospital where the worst wounds were sutured and others dressed.During his medical interview he revealed that he later learned that hisfather and uncle bribed officials in the CID to secure his release.[115]Name:HGGender:MaleAge:29Date Detained:March 2011Date Released:March 2011Circumstances ofdetention:In March 2011, HGreturned to Sri Lanka from the UK to help his brother’s wife trace hismother and brother who went missing in the last months of the Sri Lankanconflict in 2009. HG told Human Rights Watch his brother was an LTTE memberwho had surrendered to the SLA in May 2009 and was forcibly disappeared.Account:On arriving in Colombo, Ilodged a complaint with the Sri Lankan Red Cross and the NHRC. One day inmid-March, I came out of St. Anthony’s Church in Kotahena [an area ofColombo] after my prayers. I was waiting to meet a friend. Suddenly, five orsix men in civilian clothes appeared around me. They told me they were CIDofficials. They got hold of me and took me to Kotahena police station anddetained me. The next day, I was blindfolded and taken to another place. Theofficials over there photographed me and took my fingerprints. I was kept ina small room. I was not given any food. From the second day, they startedbeating me. They asked me whether I was an LTTE member. They asked me why Icame back to Sri Lanka. They said, “We know you. You are helping LTTEfrom London.” When I refused their charges, they started beating me.They kicked me with their boots, they beat me with metal pipes and plasticpipes filled with sand. They forced a petrol-infused plastic bag on my headand tried to asphyxiate me. The officials harassed me sexually. They gropedmy penis during questioning. I was raped twice by two different officials inmy cell. They forced me to have oral sex with them too. They spoke littleTamil but it was mostly abusive. They said Tamils are dogs.”[116]HG’s medical records,including documents of his admission into a UK hospital for treatment forpost-traumatic stress disorder, are on file with Human RightsWatch.HG was released fromdetention in late March after a Tamil politician assisted with bribingrelevant authorities. HG has tried to take his life on one occasion and wasunder psychiatric care when Human Rights Watch interviewed him.Name:IRGender:FemaleAge:29Date Detained:February 2011Date Released:March 2011Circumstances ofdetention:IR arrived at Colombointernational airport in February 2011. She told Human Rights Watch that soonafter she collected her baggage, two officers from the TID approached her andasked her to show them her documents.Account:The officials picked up mybags and took me to a separate room at the airport. In a little while,another officer in civilian clothes came into the room and accused me ofsupporting the LTTE while abroad and spreading propaganda against thegovernment. I denied this and told them I was a student and had come back toSri Lanka as my mother was sick in hospital. They photographed me and took mydetails including my Vavuniya address. They told me they would check theinformation they had on me. In a while they returned and said that theirinformation had been confirmed by the Vavuniya Police station. They said Iwas a member of the LTTE. They took me in a white van. After travelling anhour, they took me into a building where a lady body-searched me. She tookoff my belt, shoes, and hair-clip, and pushed me into a room. After a fewminutes two men came into the room. They asked me whether I had been helpingthe LTTE abroad. They also wanted to know who else was helping the LTTE inthe foreign country. I told them that I knew nothing. They said I was lying.They grabbed my hair and smashed my head against the wall. I collapsed and fainted.The next day, they brought XX [name withheld], with whom I had worked in theLTTE, to my room. XX told me in front of them that they knew everything andasked me to confess to them. After XX left, they resumed beating me withwires and their boots. On the fourth or fifth day since I was detained, theinterrogators again came into my room. They forced me to sign on a blankpiece of paper and also took my fingerprints. Then one of the men said thatthey would kill me but before that they would use me. They tried to undressme. When I resisted, one kicked me to the ground, another tightly held myhands, while a third burned my body with a cigarette. When I regainedconsciousness, I was in terrible pain and also realized that I had beenraped.[117]IR’s medicaldocuments by her general practitioner, on file at Human Rights Watch, records“multiple cigarette burns and whip marks on her body.” Themedical report notes her being subject to serious physical assault includingrape.IR told Human Rights Watchshe was released from custody after her family managed to bribe theauthorities. She said that one night during her detention, an official askedher to sign a form written in Sinhala. The same official drove her out of theplace she was detained to a deserted building where he locked her up in aroom. IR was released the following day.Name:CKGender:FemaleAge:38Date Detained:Interrogated in her home in February 2011Circumstances ofdetention:In February 2011, sevenSri Lankan army soldiers arrived at CK’s house in the town ofMullaithivu in northeastern Sri Lanka. CK told Human Rights Watch thatsoldiers forced her four children into the backroom and locked the door fromoutside.Account:A few soldiers came forwardand pushed me. They started questioning me about my husband. They said,“We know your husband is LTTE. Tell us where he is now. Who does hework with now?” I said I didn’t know anything. My children werecrying in the other room. One of the soldiers took his belt off and said“You are not listening.” He started beating me. Then one of thempulled off my clothes. I lost consciousness but when I came round, I knew Ihad been raped because I was bleeding heavily. I don’t know, but Ithink I was raped many times. I put on my clothes and opened the door so mychildren could come in. I cannot leave the country as I don’t have themoney. If I complain, everybody will come to know. I will have no respect. Itwill be very dangerous for me and my family.[118]Name:KIGender:FemaleAge:29Date Detained:January 2011Date Released:March 2011Circumstances ofdetention:KI returned from the UKto Sri Lanka in January 2011. She told Human Rights Watch she was arrested byofficials from the TID soon after her arrival and taken to an unknowndetention facility for questioning.Account:KI worked as a teacher innorthern Sri Lanka when she entered into a relationship with a young man whopersuaded her to join the LTTE in 2002. KI underwent some training and joinedthe LTTE’s intelligence wing. KI’s boyfriend died during thefinal stages of the conflict in 2009 and her family persuaded her to leave tostudy in the UK in order to avoid arrest. In her medical interview, whichHuman Rights Watch obtained from her doctor with her consent, KI said she arrivedin the UK in October 2009 and enrolled at the East Thames College. In early2011, her mother suffered a heart attack and KI left the UK to visit hermother in Sri Lanka soon after. KI said she arrived at Colombo’sinternational airport on January 27, 2011, and was arrested by CID officialssoon after arrival.She said she was asked towait in a room and asked to hand them her jewelry, belongings and shoes. Shewas subsequently taken to an unknown detention facility where officials beganto question her about her involvement with the LTTE. She said she was beaten,punched, and kicked. Officials grabbed her hair and bashed her head againstthe wall. The following day, KI said an LTTE member whom she was familiarwith through previous contact was brought to her. The LTTE member asked herto confess everything. KI said she continued to deny her involvement in theLTTE. She was then burned with cigarettes on her back, breasts, and thighs.She was stripped and raped by three officials one after another. Throughoutthe torture, the officials demanded that she confess to being an LTTE member.They demanded to know the names of people she knew in the LTTE and thelocations of other LTTE members. KI said she was released from detention inMarch 2011 after her aunt managed to bribe the authorities.[119]Name:TTGender:FemaleAge:27Date Detained:January 2011Date Released:Cannot recallCircumstances ofdetention:During the early morningone day in early January 2011, a group of CID and uniformed military personnelcame to TT’s home in Kilinochchi. TT told Human Rights Watch she wasblindfolded, handcuffed, and taken to an unknown detention site.Account:The room where I wasdetained had blood stains and was very dirty. The military personnel startedquestioning me on the second day. They took all my details. I wasfingerprinted and photographed. The officials forced me to take all myclothes off. I was tortured severely. I was beaten up with severalinstruments and burned with cigarettes. The officials who questioned mebehaved indecently with me. They groped at my breasts during questioning. Iwas raped at night in my cell. Sometimes two and sometimes three men cameinto my room at night. Some of them were uniformed. They said abusive wordsto me in Tamil and Sinhala. I tried to defend myself but I think they rapedme at least six times. Each time when I resisted, they threatened to kill me.The officials and guards did not let me sleep. They threw water at me orshouted very loudly through the night. They constantly accused me of being anLTTE member during questioning.[120]TT’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch notes:“she is a young woman who describes a twentyday history of extreme sexual violence and torture in detention in Sri Lanka,with multiple physical scars and psychological sequelae.” The reportpoints to the various burn marks on her body as being “typical of burnsmade with a cigarette.”TT told Human Rights Watchshe was detained for around 22 days and made to sign a confession in Sinhala.She said she was unofficially released from detention after her uncle bribedofficials in the CID.Name:YSGender:FemaleAge:27Date Detained:December 2010Date Released:January 2011Circumstances ofdetention:In mid-December 2010, YSwas arrested by a joint team of the CID and police during a search andseizure operation at a motel in Walwatte, Colombo, where she was staying. YStold Human Rights Watch she was pushed into a police van and taken to a CIDcamp in Colombo.Account:I worked with the TamilRehabilitation Organization (TRO) [an LTTE-controlled humanitarianorganization] for four years and was forcibly recruited by the LTTE in 2009.I was scared that the security forces would arrest me, so I went to Colombofrom Vavuniya to apply for a student visa to the UK. I was detained in asmall cell in the CID camp for nearly 15 days. The CID officials whointerrogated me would take me out of the cell for questioning. They asked meabout my role with the LTTE. I told them that I wasn’t a member. Theythen started beating and torturing me. I was burned with cigarettes all overmy chest; I was beaten with hot metal wires on my thighs and my buttocks.During the interrogation, the officials would pull me by the hair and drag mearound the room. I was raped repeatedly by my interrogators. I cannot talkabout my rape. I want to forget about my rape. My life has been ruined. Theofficials forced me to sign confession sheets of paper written in Sinhala.They asked me to identify various people as being LTTE operatives. I did notknow these people, but said they were LTTE as I wanted them to stop thetorture.[121]YSs medico legal report, onfile at Human Rights Watch, notes that “the appearance of scarsindicates that the insult was caused by heated metal burning on theskin.” The report also notes her distress and despair on talking aboutthe rapes she suffered.YS told Human Rights Watchshe was released from detention after her father managed to bribe theauthorities. She fled Sri Lanka using the services of a human-smugglingagent. After her departure from Sri Lanka, YS’s father was arrested bythe army and detained in an army camp in Vavuniya before being released oncondition that he report to the camp on a weekly basis.Name:SVGender:MaleAge:29Date Detained:December 10, 2010Date Released:January 8, 2011Circumstances ofdetention:On December 10, 2010,SV, a poet and writer from Vavuniya, was deported from Dubai to Sri Lanka,having exhausted his asylum claims in France. SV told Human Rights Watch hewas detained on arrival at the airport.Account:The officials introducedthemselves as CID and told me they had to take me for questioning. I wastaken to the fourth floor of CID headquarters in Colombo. I did not knowwhere I was being taken at the time. I was photographed once we reached theCID headquarters and then pushed up the stairs to a small dark room. Theofficials kept hitting me on the head as they pushed me up the stairs. I waskept in detention for more than a month. During this time, I was questionedand beaten up every day. They asked me about my activities with the LTTE inFrance, they brought pictures of my participating in anti-war protests inFrance and accused me of betraying the government. They asked me for the namesof others who had organized the protests in France. I was locked in a darkroom and my hands were tied in the position of a crucifix. They then burnedme all over my arms. I was beaten with hot metal rods on my back and thighs.I was sometimes poked with the end of a hot poker and they kicked my headwith metal-toed boots. I was raped many times. Two men would come to my roomand one would hold me down. They would take turns.[122]SV’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes the scars on his back and theback of his thighs areconsidered“highly consistent with his account of torture.” The medico legalreport also notes that he meets the criteria for post-traumatic stressdisorder and major depressive disorder.SV told Human Rights Watchthat during his detention he was taken out to identify various people andinform the security forces about their involvement with the LTTE. He wasreleased from detention on January 8, 2011, after his aunt bribed CID andmilitary personnel using the services of a member of the Eelam People’sRevolutionary Liberation Front (EPRLF), a Tamil political party. SV arrivedin the UK on January 20, 2011, and sought asylum.Name:FJGender:MaleAge:20Date Detained:June 2010Date Released:September 2010Circumstances ofdetention:One day in late June2010 at about 2 o’clock in the afternoon, FJ was waiting for a decisionon his visa application to the United Kingdom at a tea stall near the UK HighCommission in Colombo. A light colored van stopped beside the tea stall whereFJ was having soda.Account:There were five or sixpeople in the van. They pushed me into the van, handcuffed me, and took me toan unknown destination. We drove for approximately 30 minutes. When the vanstopped, they pushed me out of the van and into a room in an abandonedbuilding. The room was very dark and smelled of dust. They locked me in theroom and left me overnight. The next morning the torture began. I was beatenand kicked with boots, hung upside down, and beaten. I was made to inhalefumes from chilies that were burned in a container under my face. I wasburned with cigarettes all over my pubic area. I was beaten with hot metalrods. The officials who interrogated me stamped on my private parts withtheir boots. They twisted and crushed my buttocks with pliers. I was kept inthis location for two weeks during which I was beaten and tortured every day.There was no toilet so I had to defecate in the room. They would beat me forthis but would not take me to a toilet. A piece of bread or a food packetwould be thrown into my room once and sometimes twice a day. I could not bearthe pain of my torture and signed some documents in Sinhala. The officialstook my fingerprints and photographs. After two weeks in this location, I wasblindfolded and transferred to another location. I was taken naked to thesecond location and my hands were tied. The second room was also dirty andsmelly. There were three other Tamil men detained in the same room. I wasraped 4 or 5 times during this detention. The rapes always happened at night.Sometimes it was the prison guards and at other times, they were officials incivilian clothes. During the rape, they beat me and also burned me withcigarettes. They used abusive, Tamil slang words. If I didn’t cooperatewith them [with oral sex], they would slap me across the face.[123]FJ’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes that the scars on his body“are consistent with the manner of injuries he describes havingsuffered.” In particular, the report states that the scars on hissacral area, said to be caused by being pinched with pliers are“consistent with this mechanism of injury.”FJ told Human Rights Watchhis uncle paid for his release from detention in September 2010.Name:NHGender:MaleAge:34Date Detained:June 2010Date Released:February 2011Circumstances ofdetention:One morning in June2010, NH was at the office of the Shipping Corporation in Colombo when agroup of 15 to 20 Sri Lankan army and police personnel arrived at the office.NH told Human Rights Watch they approached him and asked for his ID. Theythen arrested him.Account:The officials pushed meinto a military jeep parked outside and took me to Kalutura jail [south ofColombo]. They took me to a room where they recorded my details andphotographed and fingerprinted me. They asked me to sign on a sheet of paperthat had something written in Sinhala. They asked me about my connectionswith [name withheld] who worked for the LTTE. They asked me about my role inthe LTTE. I did not say anything, so they started beating me. I was beatenwith sand-filled plastic pipes and kicked with boots. They forced apetrol-infused plastic bag on my head and tried to asphyxiate me. They hungme upside down and beat me with metal rods. They burned me with cigarettesduring the questioning. At night, when I was alone in the room one of theinvestigating officers came and raped me. He wore a uniform and I recognizedhim as he had also questioned me. He raped me many times. He used to abuse mein Sinhala. He raped me whenever he was on duty.[124]NH’s psychiatricrecords, on file with Human Rights Watch, indicate “severe majordepressive disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder.” NH was grantedasylum on grounds of his psychiatric condition.NH told Human Rights Watchthat, fearing more torture, he signed a confession in Sinhala after which hewas transferred to another cell. NH was in detention for eight months andmanaged to escape detention in February 2011 after his uncle bribed theauthorities through someone in the EPDP.Name:DBGender:MaleAge:19Date Detained:May 2010Date Released:June 2010Circumstances ofdetention:On evening in May 2010,DB was arrested at his home in Kalutara by four men in civilian clothes whosaid they were members of the security forces but would not say which branch.DB told Human Rights Watch he was handcuffed, pushed into a van, and taken toa local police station.Account:The officials startedquestioning me about my links with the LTTE. They told me that I suppliedgoods to the LTTE. I told them, “I only help my father in hisbusiness.” They did not believe me and started beating me. They took meto another place. I was blindfolded and handcuffed. They pushed me into aroom. It was dark, dirty, and smelly.I was severely beaten andkicked and punched. The officials kicked me with military boots and beat mewith a belt. One official beat me with the butt of his rifle. All along theykept asking me questions.At night, I was left in asmall cell. One official in civilian clothes came to my room. He spoke inSinhala and forced me to remove my clothes. He took his trousers off andtried to have oral sex with me. He told me that if I didn’t cooperate,he would torture me. He abused me and called me a “dog.” He rapedme. I screamed in pain but nobody came to help me. He bit my buttock and mythigh. He took my clothes and left me naked in the room that night. I was indetention for a month. I was beaten and tortured every day. The interrogatorstied my hands and feet and hit the soles of my feet with batons, they forcedme to lie face down and stamped on my hands with their boots. My head waspushed under water and I was almost drowned. They forced a petrol-infusedplastic bag on my head and tried to asphyxiate me. I was burned on my legs,thighs, back, and chest with cigarettes. I was whipped with stripped electriccables and Palmyra sticks.[125]I was forced to sign a confession document inSinhala. I was photographed and fingerprinted.I was given a rusty bucketof water for drinking and washing up. There was no toilet. They asked me tourinate and defecate in a plastic bag in the room. I was given food once aday. The food was bad. They would push it in my room from under the door.[126]DB’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes that he had severe analbleeding on account of multiple rapes, pain in defecation and constipationfrom which he suffers till date. The report also confirms that the scars onhis body, attributed to cigarette burns, beatings and human bites,“strongly support his account of torture.”DB told Human Rights Watchhe was released from detention in late June 2010 after his father managed tobribe government officials who secured his release. He subsequently escapedfrom Sri Lanka with the help of an agent who belonged to the EPDP.Name:PPGender:FemaleAge:29Date Detained:April 2010Date Released:May 2010Circumstances ofdetention:PP arrived back at theinternational airport in Colombo in April 2010 after being deported from anAfrican country (prior to which she had spent over a year in a Europeancountry). She told Human Rights Watch that after clearing immigration she wasdetained by three officials who took her to the fourth floor of the CIDheadquarters in Colombo.Account:The officials beat me withmetal pipes and plastic rods filled with sand. They questioned mecontinuously about my links with the LTTE and my activities abroad. Theofficials dragged me up the stairs and took me to another room. I wassexually abused and raped five times by officials when I was there. Theofficials spoke Sinhala and wore civilian clothes. I could not understandmuch of what they were saying. They took turns raping me. This happened fouror five times. I remember that I fainted the first time. When I came to, Isaw that I was bleeding from my genitals and was in terrible pain.[127]PP’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes the presence of “17scars on her body which corroborate her account of torture.” A secondmedical report notes “her behavior reflects the continuing distresscaused by her related to her experiences, death in the family, rape, andtorture.”PP told Human Rights Watchthat she secured her release from detention in May 2010 after her familyarranged to bribe the authorities.Name:CRGender:MaleAge:45Date Detained:April 2010Date Released:June 2010Circumstances ofdetention:In April 2010, CR wentback to Mullaithivu town from Colombo to reclaim a piece of land to which hehad lost access during the armed conflict. He was staying in arelative’s house when an army truck drove up one evening and parkedoutside the house. CR told Human Rights Watch that six soldiers got out ofthe truck and dragged him into the truck. CR said he was taken to Kilinochchifor five days and then taken in the truck to Joseph Camp in Vavuniya.Account:I was taken by truck fromKilinochchi to Joseph Camp in Vavuniya where I was detained in a small, darkroom. I was repeatedly questioned by a mixed group of army officials inuniform and civilian clothes, and some members of the EPDP. They repeatedlyquestioned me about my travel abroad and my links with the LTTE. They forceda petrol-infused plastic bag on my head and tried to asphyxiate me while theybeat me. They hung me upside down and beat me with wires and sand-filledpipes. I was raped with small, glass Coke bottles. The officials would dothis as they were questioning me. The officials inserted an iron rod in mypenis. I screamed and said I would confess everything. After I signed theconfession paper in Sinhala, the officials only harassed me and beat me. Theydid not sexually abuse me after I signed the confession.[128]CR’s medico legalreports, on file with Human Rights Watch, note that theinjuries on his back and thighs“are typical of the events described by him of being intentionallyburnt with a hot long instrument.” CR’s psychiatric assessmentnotes that he is suffering from complex post-traumatic stress disorder alongwith features of major depressive disorder and an enduring personalitychange.”CR said he was releasedfrom detention after his uncle bribed the authorities in June 2010.Name:LPGender:MaleAge:20Date Detained:March 2010Date Released:March 2010Circumstances ofdetention:In early March 2010, LPwas walking back to his parents’ house in Vavuniya when he was stoppedby a group of four or five soldiers, including some in civilian clothes, whowere traveling in a white van. LP told Human Rights Watch that the officialsasked him to get into the van. LP said when he refused, he was dragged intothe van and pushed face-down at the back of the van.Account:I was taken to Joseph Camp.Once we got there, the officials took my ID away, photographed me, andrecorded my details. I was blindfolded and taken in the van to anotherlocation where I was kept in a dark room. An official came to my room andadvised me to admit my role with the LTTE. I refused. It was only after Irefused that they started first beating and then torturing me. I was notgiven any food or water the first day. The second day I was taken to adifferent room. The officials questioned me and severely tortured me. Theykicked my knees and hung me upside down and beat me. They forced a petrol-infusedplastic bag on my head and tried to asphyxiate me and burned me withcigarette butts. I was kept in my underwear during my entire detention.During interrogation, I was stripped naked. At one point, one of theinterrogators squeezed my penis very hard and I was in unbearable pain. I wasraped at night. Different people came to rape me either singly or in groupsof two. One of them held me down, while the other raped me. Those whoattacked me wore civilian clothes. They spoke Sinhala but swore at me inTamil. The guards threw some bread or a food packet into my cell once a day.At times the guards spat on my food before they gave it to me. I could noteat because of the torture. I had injuries on my hands and my lips werebattered and swollen.[129]LP was detained for 15 daysand made to sign a confession in Sinhala prior to his release. He wasreleased in March 2010 after his family managed to bribe Sri Lankan armyofficials.Name:ARGender:MaleAge:30Date Detained:February 2010Date Released:March 2010Circumstances ofdetention:Towards the end ofFebruary 2010, AR went to register his residency at the police station inWelawatte, in Colombo.AR told Human Rights Watch he had recentlyreturned from the UK and was moving in with his aunt and uncle in Colombo.Account:When I gave my details atthe police station, I was asked to wait. After some time, the policemen tookme out and pushed me into a van. I was blindfolded and my hands were tiedbehind my back. I was kicked and punched on the way. When the van stopped, Iwas taken to a room. I was stripped naked and questioned about my links withthe LTTE and my activities abroad. I was severely tortured during myinterrogation. I was burned on my back with cigarettes and was thrashed witha hot metal rod. I was raped and sexually abused many times. Theinterrogators kept asking me about my role within the LTTE and myrelationship with an individual named XX [name withheld]. Unable to take anymore torture, I agreed to their charges and told them I was a member of theLTTE. They forced me to sign a confession in Sinhala, and took myfingerprints. They forced me to agree to become an informer.[130]AR’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes that he is suffering fromcomplex post traumatic disorder and major depressive disorder compounded byhis rape.”AR told Human Rights Watchhe was released from detention in early March 2010 after his family managedto bribe the police.Name:RCGender:FemaleAge:30Date Detained:February 2010Date Released:May 2010Circumstances ofdetention:One day in mid-February2010, RC was at her home in Kondavil, Jaffna when, at about 11 p.m., a whitevan stopped outside. Five men in civilian clothes entered her house afterjumping over the boundary wall of the house. Two of the men grabbed her anddragged her out to the van.RC told Human Rights Watchshe was pushed into the van. She was then gagged, handcuffed, andblindfolded. The van drove for about 15 minutes and stopped; she was draggedout and taken into a room in a building.Account:I was kicked and beaten.They beat my legs with a rifle. They told me, “You dance with theselegs for LTTE. We will break your legs.” They knew that I worked forthe cultural wing of the LTTE. I told them I did not support the LTTE butthey kept beating me. When they left they opened my blindfold. The room wasdark and smelled dusty. The next day, one senior army official and some otherpeople came to see me. They fingerprinted me, took my photograph, and askedme to sign two blank sheets of paper. I refused to sign. They started beatingme with the back of a rifle. I was very scared and signed the paper. Theyleft after that. That night, the senior officer returned to my room. Hesmelled drunk. He locked the door from inside. He removed his clothes. Hecame close to me and started licking my face and my body. He spoke brokenTamil. He called me “cow” and said I must have good milk. I kepttrying to push him away. At one time I managed to push him away. He grabbedme again. He tried to kiss me. When I wouldn’t allow him that, he bitmy lips. He told me he would rape me. He was very angry with me. He pushed meon the ground, kicking and beating me. He was swearing at me in Sinhala. Idid not understand anything else. He tore my clothes off and raped me. I lostconsciousness. I did not see him leave the room.The following night twoother men came to my room. They blindfolded me and forced me into a van. Wedrove for a very long time. When we stopped they removed my blindfold and Isaw a derelict house surrounded by some trees and a compound. I was takeninto a room where a group of men in civilian clothes were present. Theystarted questioning me about my involvement with the LTTE. They took myphotograph and fingerprints. They beat me with a rifle.I stayed in a bloodstainedand dirty room in that house for nearly eight days. I was made to do menialwork in that house. I was not sexually abused or tortured in this seconddetention. I got talking to someone who used to bring food into that housetwice a day and learned that this was a People’s LiberationOrganization of Tamil Eelam [PLOTE, a pro-government Tamil paramilitarygroup] camp.[131]RC’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes 29 scars on her body includingnine near her genitals, provide “strong support to her account ofsexual abuse.” In addition, the report notes, that “herpronounced anxiety and fear match the criteria for post-traumatic stressdisorder.”RC told Human Rights Watchshe escaped from detention with the help of a man who delivered food to thePLOTE camp. She paid an “agent” to bribe authorities andfacilitate her departure from Sri Lanka in May 2010.Name:MTGender:FemaleAge:30Date Detained:May 2010Date Released:June 2010Circumstances ofdetention:In May 2010, MT’shusband left for India while she stayed behind with her mother and 1-year-olddaughter at their home in Vavuniya. She told Human Rights Watch that someonebanged at her door very loudly one day at about 3 p.m. She opened the door tofind 5 or 6 men in civilian clothes. They asked her to accompany them to thepolice station. MT said the men told her they were police and wanted torecord her statement. She left her daughter with her mother and accompaniedthe men to the police station.Account:As soon as we reached thepolice station, I was handcuffed and pushed into a cell. There were two younggirls in the cell. The girls told me they were brought in that morning. Lateat night, I was taken out for questioning to the duty room where two femaleofficials in uniform were already waiting for me. They started questioning meabout my husband and his links with the LTTE. I told them I did not knowanything. I begged them to spare me. I was repeatedly beaten with a stick anda wire across my leg and back. After a few hours, they sent me back to thecell. Later that night, another policewoman came to the cell and told me thatthey would take me away to identify someone. Four officials forced me into avan. We travelled for around half an hour and arrived at a house. They pushedme inside the house and in a room that was very dirty and had no furniture.The officials brought two blindfolded men in the room. They asked me whetherI had seen these men visit my husband. I did not know these men so said I didnot. They took me to another room and left me there. I could hear noisesoutside. There were men singing songs. They sounded drunk. One man incivilian clothes came to my room. He told me that he would help me if I toldhim everything. I was wearing a shalwar kameez[132]and had a shawl. The official started pulling at myshawl. I moved back a little and he came closer and said, “Don’tshout. I will kill you if you shout.”He chained my handcuffs toa chair so I couldn’t move. He tore my shirt and tried to remove my shalwar.I kept shouting and crying, but he was stronger than me. He raped me. When hefinished he went outside. A second official came to the room. He raped metoo. The second official smoked cigarettes and he burned my breast, my innerthighs and legs. Both men beat me. They bit my breast and my thighs. It wasstill dark when I was brought back to the police station the next day. Theofficial who raped me first warned me not to tell anybody about this. Theytold me they would kill my husband. I started bleeding very heavily. I thinkI was pregnant prior to the rape and miscarried. My mother brought mydaughter to the police station, but they didn’t let me meet them. Thethird day after I was arrested, my husband returned from India. He came tothe police station and surrendered. The police then released me but locked upmy husband. I cried and begged them to give me an arrest receipt [officialacknowledgement of arrest] for my husband. They gave me a receipt.[133]MT told Human Rights Watchshe secured her husband’s release from detention a month after hisarrest after she paid Rs 10 lakhs [US$7,800] as a bribe to an EPDP member.Name:YNGender:MaleAge:46Date Abducted:January 2010Date Released:February 2010Circumstances ofdetention:YN had been deportedfrom the UK to Sri Lanka in December 2005 after he exhausted his asylumclaims. He told Human Rights Watch he made another attempt at fleeing SriLanka after he was detained by the police in 2007. He was deported to SriLanka in January 2010 where he was taken into custody.Account:I was picked up by CIDofficials as soon as I cleared immigration at Colombo’s internationalairport. I was taken to the fourth floor of CID headquarters where I wasdetained for two or three days before being transferred to the Joseph Camp inVavuniya. I was kept handcuffed in a single cell in Colombo. I was torturedin Vavuniya in the room where I was questioned. During questioning, I wasbeaten with batons and metal rods. The officials poured kerosene on the floorand threatened to set it alight. In another instance, they held a gun to myhead and threatened to pull the trigger. I was hung upside down and beatenwith truncheons and hot metal rods. I was stripped naked in both detentionsites. I was sexually abused by being forced to have oral sex on two or threeoccasions when I was detained in Vavuniya.[134]YN’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes “at least 13 scars onhis body on account of cigarette burns in addition to scars due to beatingsby truncheon and a chain. The report notes that he has suffered “markedphysical damage which supports his account of torture.”YN told Human Rights Watchhe did not sign a confession statement, but managed to escape detention afterhis uncle bribed army personnel in Vavuniya.Name:TRGender:MaleAge:16Date Detained:December 2009Date Released:January 2010Circumstances ofdetention:In December 2009, TR wasat his home in Welawatte, Colombo, when a white van stopped outside hishouse. He told Human Rights Watch that five or six men in civilian clothesjumped out and grabbed him. He said he was handcuffed, blindfolded, andpushed face down in the back of the van. He says he later found himself inthe custody of government forces.Account:We drove in the van forabout 30 minutes. I was taken to a room where they removed my blindfold. Iwas stripped, fingerprinted, and photographed. They asked me to confess myinvolvement with the LTTE. I refused. The torture started soon after that. Iwas beaten with heated iron rods and sand-filled plastic pipes; I was hungupside down. The officials kicked me with their boots and burned me withcigarettes. They forced a petrol-infused plastic bag on my head and tried toasphyxiate me. They took my underpants off and groped my genitals. The guardsthrew one food packet every day into my room. The food was generally not fitfor consumption.I was raped about five orsix times by members of the security forces. They came to my room at nightafter the interrogation was over. Some of them wore civilian clothes, otherswere in military uniform. They spoke in Sinhala but could say some words inTamil. I could smell alcohol on them. They used bad language and called me aTamil dog.[135]TR’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes that “he has experiencedseveral traumatic events on account of his torture, sexual assault, sexualviolence, and rapes.”TR was released fromdetention following payment of bribe towards the end of December. He managedto flee from Sri Lanka, using the services of an agent in January 2010.Name:DSGender:MaleAge:17Date Detained:November 2009Date Released:December 2009Circumstances ofdetention:DS’s father owneda photocopy shop in Jaffna and helped the LTTE by printing propagandaleaflets and distributing them. In 2005 when he was 13 years old, DS wasforcibly taken away by the LTTE and provided compulsory military training for10 days. On completing his training, he returned to Jaffna and worked for theLTTE by distributing pamphlets in his school and participating in LTTEcultural festivals like Pongu Thamil. In 2008, DS’s father was arrestedand detained by the authorities for providing shelter to an LTTE member. Hewas released on payment of bribe and on the condition that he stop providingservices to the LTTE. DS told Human Rights Watch he was returning from hisschool in November 2009 when he was arrested by a joint team of police andarmy officials. He was blindfolded and taken to an unknown detention site.Account:They asked me to tell themall about my activities with the LTTE. They said that if I told themeverything about my work, they would let me go. I refused to admit toanything. Then they started beating me. I was stomped with boots and punched.They then forced me to undress completely. I was hung upside down and burnedwith cigarettes. I was beaten with sand-filled pipes and wires. The officialsbeat the soles of my feet with rubber and forced a petrol-infused plastic bagon my head and tried to asphyxiate me.One officer performedsexual acts in front of me. He then raped me. I lost consciousness. I wasbleeding heavily from my anus. There was no toilet and I had to use a plasticbag. The officials who were questioning me did not let me sleep. They did notgive me any food for the first two or three days. They fingerprinted andphotographed me. I finally signed a confession document in Sinhala andadmitted to everything they said.[136]DS’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes that he suffers frompost-traumatic stress disorder, and secondary depression, coupled with anongoing risk of suicide on account of his experiences of torture.DS said he was releasedfrom detention in December 2009 after his father secured his release bybribing the officials through the services of a Tamil parliamentarian.Name:UMGender:FemaleAge:25Date Detained:August 2009Date Released:April 2010Circumstances ofdetention:UM was detained atArunachalam camp (at Menik Farm near Vavuniya) after she managed to fleeMullivaikal in the northeast during the last stages of the conflict in April2009. She told Human Rights Watch that army personnel took her to anothercamp in October 2009.Account:I was sexually abusedand raped repeatedly by soldiers in the other camp. They questioned me aboutmy links with the LTTE and asked about my activities. I said I was forced towork for LTTE and didn’t know anything. They didn’t believe me.They beat me, pulled my hair and banged my head on a wall. They beat me withtheir hands and kicked me with their boots. One of the soldiers said,“We will teach you a lesson.” I lost consciousness that day andwhen I came to, I realized I had been raped. Then more soldiers came andraped me. This went on for many days. I can’t remember how many timesand how many soldiers raped me.[137]UM told Human Rights Watchshe was released from detention in April 2010 after her uncle paid for herrelease through an EPDP member. She made her way abroad through an agent andhas subsequently received asylum in the United Kingdom.Name:HBGender:MaleAge:22Date Detained:September 2009Date Released:September 2009Circumstances ofdetention:One afternoon inSeptember 2009, around seven or eight uniformed policemen forcibly enteredHB’s home near Colombo. HB told Human Rights Watch they handcuffed himand took him to the local police station.Account:They took me to a roomwhere they started questioning me. They asked me if I knew [name withheld]. Isaid I didn’t. One policeman slapped me and told me, “[namewithheld] is in our custody. We know everything you are doing here.” Iwas locked up in a small cell that night. The next morning I was taken toanother room where I was photographed. I was then handcuffed again,blindfolded, and taken to another place in a van. The officials took myclothes away and I was kept only in my underwear. I was questioned every dayabout my work with the LTTE. They repeatedly asked me who had worked with me.I was kicked and slapped. They kicked me on my stomach with boots. I wasbeaten on my back with heated metal bars. I was beaten with strippedelectrical wires. They burned me with cigarette butts. They forced me to liedown and beat the soles of my feet. They kicked my genitals. I was sexuallyabused and raped. I told the psychiatric counselor about my sexual abuse. Idid not tell anybody else. I am too ashamed of this. I cannot describe theshame.[138]HB’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes “the presence ofspecific and distinctive scars whose causation is consistent with his accountand no other plausible causation is likely.”HB was released fromdetention around September 2009 after his mother arranged for his release bybribing officials in the Sri Lankan military. While he has left Sri Lanka,his family continues to face harassment from the Sri Lankan security forces.Name:VPGender:FemaleAge:20Date Detained:September 2009Date Released:December 2009Circumstances ofdetention:In September 2009, VPwas arrested by a group of soldiers and men in civilian clothes from theRamanathan Camp in Vavuniya. VP told Human Rights Watch that while in custodyshe was identified by two masked informants as being involved with the LTTE.She said the LTTE had forcibly recruited her in February 2009.Account:My hands were tied and Iwas blindfolded and pushed into a van. I couldn’t see where they weretaking me. I was held in a small, dark room. The officials beat me andquestioned me. They asked me to identify places where the LTTE had hiddenweapons. They asked me about details of other LTTE members. They threatenedto kill me if I did not show them the location of the weapons. During theinterrogation, I was burned with cigarette butts; they tied me to a chair andslapped and punched me. They then pushed my head in a barrel of water andtried to suffocate me. They forced a petrol-infused plastic bag on my headand tried to asphyxiate me. They threatened to kill me. At night, two orthree different officials came to my room. They wore civilian clothes andspoke Sinhala. They raped me. They used bad language and Tamil slang words.They raped me because they wanted to put pressure on me to reveal informationabout the LTTE to them. I admitted I was an LTTE member and signed on blanksheet of paper and some documents in Sinhala.[139]VP’s medico-legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, confirms her account of torture andnotes that “scars and other injuries are highly consistent and typicalwith the history provided,”VP told Human Rights Watchshe was unofficially released in December 2009 after her relatives usedconnections with the EPDP to bribe authorities.Name:CNGender:FemaleAge:32Date Detained:August 2009Date Released:July 2010Circumstances ofdetention:In August 2009, CN wasat the Arunachchalam Camp, finally reunited with her children andparents-in-law after having been separated from them during the Sri Lankanarmy’s capture of Matalan in April that year. CN told Human RightsWatch that one evening in August, four officials in plainclothes, whointroduced themselves as belonging to the CID, came to her tent and asked herto go with them for questioning. She says she was taken to an office withinthe camp premises.Account:I was scared to go, but Ihad no alternative but to listen to them. They threatened me that if I didnot tell them my husband’s whereabouts, they would kill me. I was rapedby a number of officers. They would take turns raping me. I was only allowedto go back to my tent at dawn. Then again in the evening they would comeagain and take me and rape me. They said that I knew how my husband hadescaped and wanted me to reveal the names of the people who helped him toescape. When I said I didn’t know, they would rape me. I was raped bytwo or three people at a time. They also threatened that if I told anyonethey would kill me and my children.[140]In February 2010, CN wastaken to another CID camp, where she was photographed and fingerprinted. CNtold Human Rights Watch she was tortured and raped by CID officials in thesecond camp as well and had to be admitted to hospital because of torture.She said, “They kept saying to me ‘We know you know thewhereabouts of your husband.’ They would beat me and rape me when Isaid I did not know. I became a creature without feelings.”CN’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes that the scars on her body areconsistent with her history of torture in detention in Sri Lanka. The reportalso describes her “feelings of guilt, self-blame, and disgust onaccount of her experience of being raped.”CN told Human Rights Watchshe escaped from the detention camp in July 2010 after her family bribed aCID officer through a Muslim agent.Name:WPGender:MaleAge:31Date Detained:August 2009Date Released:January 2010Circumstances ofdetention:WP was fromPuthukkudiyiruppu in northeastern Sri Lanka near the coast. He worked withthe LTTE treating injured LTTE fighters in Poonakari until he surrendered tothe Sri Lankan army in May 2009. He was taken to an IDP camp in Vavuniyawhere he provided voluntary first aid to injured civilians. Fearing hisarrest by the CID for his previous association with the LTTE, WP’s auntmade arrangements to have him leave Sri Lanka for India. In August 2009, WPwas stopped by TID agents at Colombo’s international airport. He wastaken to a small room and questioned about his links with the LTTE.In his medical interview,WP said that the interrogators took hold of his hair and forcibly banged hischin several times on the table, splitting his chin open. They grabbed hisright thumb and pulled it back causing it to dislocate. WP said that thefollowing day he was taken to the fourth floor of the TID headquarters wherehe detained alone in a cell. He was told to strip naked and then he wasshackled at the wrists and ankles and a broomstick was placed behind hisknees. He was forced into a squatting position, his feet were lifted from thefloor and he was turned around as “if on a spit.” In thisposition, he was beaten with cricket wicket stumps, mainly on the soles ofhis feet.On the second day oftorture his interrogators pushed a piece of pipe into his anus. They theninserted a piece of barbed wire into the pipe and pulled out the pipe. Theinterrogators then ripped out the piece of barbed wire from his anus causinghim to pass out unconscious with pain. Afterwards, WP was detained naked in a5 foot by 3 foot cell.He was not provided any bedding.He told his medical specialist that he could hear the sounds of others beingtortured and that he was hidden by TID officers during a visit byrepresentatives from the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).WP was held in the TIDdetention center for eight days in August 2009. Following this, he was movedto Boosa Camp where he shared a hall with such a large group of people thatthey could not all lie down on the floor at night. After three months in thedetention center at Boosa, WP was transferred to a remand prison in Colombowhere he stayed until his aunt bribed authorities to secure his release inJanuary 2010.[141]Name:GWGender:FemaleAge:40Date Detained:July 2009Date Released:Cannot recallCircumstances ofdetention:In July 2009, GW wasoutside a camp in Vavuniya enquiring about six members of her family who hadbeen reported killed in the fighting. GW told Human Rights Watch that she hadbeen outside the country with relatives since April 2009 and returned to SriLanka only in early July 2009. She says she was captured by soldiers who tookher into custody.Account:It was midday and I wasstanding at the gate of the camp. Four or five army officers came towards me.They asked me my name and then pushed me into a military jeep and took me toNelukkulam camp [in Vavuniya] where I was taken into a small, dark room.I was detained for nearlyone-and-a-half months. The officials questioned me and tortured me almostevery day. The torture stopped only after I confessed. During the torture, Iwas beaten with metal pipes and burned with cigarettes. The officialsinserted pins under my toe nail and it came off. I was kept naked during thetorture. I was raped at night. Most of the female detainees were raped. In mycase, sometimes one, sometimes two people came to my room and raped me. Ihave lost consciousness of how many times I was raped. They bit me andscratched me on my breasts and thighs when they raped me. I have marks allover my body.[142]GW’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, confirms the scars on her body.GW told Human Rights Watchthat in order to avoid being raped further, she did not clean herself as shewanted to make herself as unattractive as possible. However, this was not adeterrent as the officials continued to rape her until she signed theconfession sheets. GW said she was released from detention after herrelatives bribed officials. At the time we spoke with her, she was underpsychiatric care.Name:EBGender:MaleAge:31Date Detained:June 2009Date Released:January 2010Circumstances ofdetention:In June 2009, EB wasdetained by personnel from the Sri Lankan military and CID after beingidentified by ex-LTTE cadres during an “identification parade” atthe Vavuniya Sivapragasam Welfare Centre. EB said the LTTE had forciblyconscripted him in June 2008 and following training for 45 days, he servedwith an LTTE field medical team. EB told Human Rights Watch that he was takento Velikkulam School detention camp in Vavuniya where he was photographed,fingerprinted, and his ID card was seized.Account:I was tortured severely byCID and Sri Lankan army personnel. I was kept alone in a dirty room at firstand then transferred to a larger room where there were around 100 to 150 peoplepresent. I was always taken to a separate room for interrogation and torture.We were all kept stripped in detention and only had our pants on. Duringinterrogation, the pants were removed. I was hung upside down and whipped byvarious types of wires. I was hung upside down and they forced apetrol-infused plastic bag on my head, and tried to asphyxiate me. Mytesticles were rubbed against a rough wall on numerous occasions and this hasled to permanent scars. I was sexually abused. I am so ashamed of this that Idid not mention this in my interviews. But after I was sexually abused andtortured, I confessed to everything and signed a blank piece of paper. TheCID and army officials kept asking me why I did not surrender. When I gavethe reply that I was scared, they would torture me further. They did this ona numerous occasions. On some of these occasions, I would collapse and loseconsciousness. They also forced me to identify other LTTE cadres within thecamp. If I failed to do so, I would be tortured.[143]EB’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes that he is suffering fromcomplex post traumatic disorder along with major depressive disorder.EB said he escaped fromdetention one evening in January 2010 after his family members managed tobribe army officials. He fled Sri Lanka in late January 2010.Name:VMGender:FemaleAge:26Date Detained:June 2009Date Released:January 2010Circumstances ofdetention:In June 2009, VM wasstaying at a lodge in Colombo when a group of army soldiers knocked on thedoor. VM told Human Rights Watch they were accompanied by some masked men incivilian clothes. She says she and another woman from the lodge were detainedand brought in a van to a police station (name of station withheld). Theiridentification cards were seized by the soldiers.Account:I was photographed and myfingerprints were taken. They took all my details. Then they startedquestioning me and beating me. I was kept in the police station for a fewdays and then moved to another site. The officials questioned me about mylinks with LTTE. They asked me for details of LTTE cadre. When I said I didnot know, they started torturing me. I was punched and kicked. I was beatenon my back and legs with wooden sticks and metal rods. I was stripped nakedduring questioning. The officials, who questioned me, groped me. I was rapedrepeatedly at night in detention. There were always two or more perpetrators.I could not see their faces. I had a lot of bleeding because of the rapes. Theytold me they would kill me if I told anybody about the rapes.”[144]VM’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, confirms that the injuries on herbody are consistent with her account.VM told Human Rights Watchher release from detention was secured in January 2010 after her uncle bribedpolice and army officials.Name:LBGender:MaleAge:20Date Detained:May 2009Date Released:June 2009Circumstances ofdetention:In May 2009, LB was athis home in Vavuniya when a group of four or five men, including some SriLankan army soldiers, arrived at his house in a military jeep. The men incivilian clothes introduced themselves as CID officials. LB told Human RightsWatch that the officials claimed to have information on his LTTE links from anLTTE member.Account:I was dragged to the jeepand driven to Joseph Camp. Once we reached the camp, the officials took me toa small room where they tied my hands behind my back to a gas cylinder. I wasbeaten up with hot metal rods. They forced a petrol-infused plastic bag on myhead and tried to asphyxiate me. The officials held a lighter close to thegas cylinder and told me they would blow me up. I was kept naked duringdetention. During the night, two women police officials who were on dutyraped me; they threatened to torture me if I didn’t cooperate. Theytook their clothes off and got on top off me. They grabbed my penis and tookpictures of it on their mobile phone. They would not let me sleep. Theysprayed my wounds with a chili powder that made them burn. The womendidn’t question me. They raped me when they were on duty. I wasfingerprinted and photographed and the officials took all my details. Theyproduced some photographs and asked me to identify the people in thephotograph.[145]LB’s medico legalreports, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes that “there is a veryhigh degree of likelihood that the scars was caused in the mannerdescribed.”LB told Human Rights Watchhe was kept in detention for a month during which he was sexually abused onsix occasions. He secured his release following payment of a bribe in June2009.Name:MHGender:FemaleAge:35Date Detained:May 2009Date Released:cannot recallCircumstances ofdetention:MH said he was forciblyconscripted into the media unit of the LTTE but managed to escape in 2009. MHtold Human Rights Watch she left Mullivaikal in the Vanni with a group ofpeople on May 17, 2009, and reached Omanthai the same day. On May 19, MH wasseparated from other members of her group at Omanthai and sent to an unknowndestination with 40 other female ex-LTTE cadres.Account:The soldiers startedharassing us on the bus. They particularly targeted the younger girls andasked them questions like: “Will you marry me? How many men have youslept with? Will you sleep with me?” We did not answer them. We knewwhat was going to happen. We were taken to Poonthottam Technical College inVavuniya. When we reached the camp, there were a lot of women and girls,perhaps nearly a thousand. Some of these women were previously with the LTTE.We were photographed and fingerprinted by the soldiers on arrival; they askedus for some basic information and kept us in the compound. The army drove ina lot of armored vehicles into the compound of the college. The soldiers ontop of these vehicles had their guns pointed at us. We were terrified.I was in the technicalcollege for a week. During this time, I was taken away on two occasions by agroup of soldiers. They questioned me about my links with the LTTE. Theyslapped me and beat me with their canes. I was raped after that. Idon’t want to remember how many soldiers raped me. I was bleeding andin a lot of pain.[146]Towards the end of May, MHand all the women were moved to the Pampaimadhu University building.According to MH, the living conditions were cramped and unhygienic, but shewas not tortured again. MH said she escaped detention after her familysuccessfully bribed officials in the army and arranged her departure from SriLanka through a human smuggler.Name:KDGender:FemaleAge:32Date Detained:May 2009Date Released:Cannot recallCircumstances ofdetention:KD was from Mullaithivuand worked for the cultural unit of the LTTE before she was forciblyconscripted by the LTTE for military service in 2008. KD told Human RightsWatch she crossed into government-held territory in mid-May 2009 and wasdetained at Omanthai in Vanni.Account:I was taken to thePampaimadu Technical College in Vavuniya after 10 days or so. We werephotographed when we got to the camp. The conditions were very bad, therewere so many of us cramped in a small room. We were lined up and questionedevery day; they wanted to check our stories. I noticed that some younger andbeautiful women and those who had scars on their bodies were taken aside.Quite a few women had shrapnel scars on their faces and arms. In some casesof women who had some visible scars, the soldiers asked the women to lifttheir clothes to check for more scars. They wanted to see if they were scarsfrom fighting with the LTTE. Sometimes these women came back to our group.Some of the women didn’t come back. One day, I was asked to step aside.I was very frightened. I was taken to another room where the officialsstarted questioning me. They asked me about my links with LTTE, what I didfor them, where other LTTE supporters were. I did not know, so I told them Iwas forcibly conscripted. As I had not said this before, they became veryangry and, they started beating me. They asked me to sign a confession. Irefused because I thought they would kill me if I signed the confession. Asenior official said he would make me sign. He started removing his belt andtrousers. I lost consciousness and don’t know how many times I wasraped. I signed the confession after that and was sent back to the room wherewe all stayed.[147]KD managed to escape fromdetention after her family bribed authorities.Name:VBGender:FemaleAge:28Date Detained:May 2009Date Released:Cannot recallCircumstances ofdetention:VB from Mullaivaikal wasdetained at the Pon Ramanathan camp at Menik Farm in Vavuniya after shesurrendered to the army in Omanthai. VB told Human Rights Watch she shared atent with eight others. She said that soldiers would often physically touchher and “misbehave” with her and others whenever she came intocontact with them.Account:We would go to bathe in theriver but only when it got a bit dark. The river was guarded by police.Nobody else could access that area without being checked by the police. Oneevening, I was returning to the camp from the river with five other women.Suddenly, a group of soldiers appeared. It was dark, so I couldn’t seehow many. Some girls managed to run away. The rest of us were overpowered.The soldiers tore my clothes off and raped me. When I got back to the tenteverybody knew what happened but nobody said anything.[148]VB told Human Rights Watchshe was released from the camp after military personnel concluded she had nolinks with the LTTE.Name:GFGender:MaleAge:25Date Detained:May 2009Date Released:January 2011Circumstances ofdetention:GF said he was forciblyconscripted by the LTTE in 2008, underwent brief training, and was employedas a food supplier in the LTTE’s medical wing. His identical twin, amember of the Black Tigers suicide unit, had been an LTTE member for manyyears. In May 2009, GF, his mother, and brother surrendered to the Sri Lankanarmy and were taken to a camp in Vavuniya. In his medical interview, GF saidhe was identified as an LTTE member and was taken to a detention camp inVavuniya.Account(via a UK based medical doctor who interviewed GF):GF said that at thedetention camp, army personnel mistook him for his twin brother, and began tointerrogate him. He said he was placed in solitary confinement with no lightor bedding. He was frequently deprived of food and drink and provided abucket as a toilet. GF said he was stripped naked, handcuffed, and beatenwith an electric wire. He said he was beaten all over, but mainly on his backand legs and also on his feet with batons. He was slapped, his hair wasgrabbed, and his head banged against the wall many times. GF said he was illtreated for over a year until August 2010, when he was released after hisuncle managed to bribe a guard to release him unofficially.GF said that he made hisway to Colombo where a human smuggling agent supplied him with a falseidentification card. Soon thereafter, however, he was rearrested for carryingthis false card and taken to the fourth floor of CID headquarters. GF saidthat the conditions here were worse than in the previous interrogation camp:the cell was smaller, the toilet bucket was full of feces, and he could hearscreams of other people being tortured. His hands were cuffed behind hisback.GF said he was severelytortured during questioning. He was stripped naked and hung upside down forseveral hours, until he started bleeding from his mouth. He was burned withcigarettes over his arms, chest, back, and legs. His interrogators pulled offhis toenails and hit him in the face with a rifle butt. The medical reportconfirms that severe trauma caused two of his front teeth to“die.” GF said he was raped with a piece of wood duringquestioning. His interrogators held a gun to his head and threatened him withdeath if he did not reveal the names of Black Tigers. GF said his mother anduncle secured his release in January 2011 with the help of an agent whobribed the guards once again.[149]Name:PVGender:FemaleAge:26Date Detained:Unclear date in 2009Date Released:Cannot recallCircumstances ofdetention:PV said she was forciblyrecruited into the LTTE in 2006 and trained as a medical assistant, learninghow to move and bandage injured persons, administer medications, and performother nursing tasks. She met a man there as he was distributing medicine forthe LTTE; they married in 2007 and had a daughter in June 2008. Soonthereafter PV’s husband was captured by the Sri Lankan army and she hasnot seen him since. After Sri Lankan forces defeated the LTTE in 2009, PV,along with her parents and breast-fed infant were taken to a large camp inVavuniya where she was separated and taken away for questioning since she hadworked for the LTTE.Account(via a UK-based medical doctor who interviewed PV):PV said she was taken forquestioning by military officials, she beaten with batons, her hair wasgrabbed, her head was smashed against the wall, and her lactating breastswere squeezed. She said she was taken to the brigadier’s room over aperiod of three months. Her hands were tied to the bed and she was rapedrepeatedly. She said he burned her with cigarettes on her breasts and innerthighs. She said the brigadier told her if she told anyone he would he wouldkill her family, her child, and her.After three months, PV saidshe had very heavy vaginal bleeding and was so ill that she had to be takento a hospital outside the camp. She thought in all likelihood she hadmiscarried. Her uncle arranged for her to be taken to his house from thehospital. Fearing her re-arrest, her uncle told her to go to the NationalHuman Rights Commission (NHRC). Before she did so, however, PV was picked upby the CID from the NHRC office in Vavuniya, and taken to a darkened cell andleft without food or water for several hours. She was then taken to anothercamp and put in a room with about 30 others crowded together.She says she was beatenwith pipes filled with sand, stripped, and humiliated. Her head was coveredwith a petrol-infused plastic bag in an attempt to asphyxiate her. She wasasked to identify other LTTE cadres in the camps. PV said she could notidentify anybody but, unable to bear the torture, went ahead and identifiedpeople she did not know. She said her release was facilitated by aTamil-speaking CID officer after her family arranged payment of a bribe.[150]Name:APGender:MaleAge:33Date Detained:May 2009Date Released:Cannot recallCircumstances ofdetention:In May 2009, APsurrendered to the army in Mullaivaikal and was taken to Omanthai CentralCollege. AP told Human Rights Watch he was identified by an informant asbeing involved with the LTTE and was subsequently taken by army personnel tothe Veppankulam Camp in Vavuniya.Account:I was questioned about mylinks with the LTTE and tortured severely. The officials who tortured me woremilitary trousers and camouflage T-shirts. They spoke Sinhala. One officialwho asked the questions spoke Tamil. They beat me mercilessly withsand-filled pipes and wires; they hung me upside down and forced a petrol-infusedplastic bag on my head and tried to asphyxiate me. I was kept in my underwearin detention. During the questioning, the officials removed my underwear. Onthe second day, two officials held my arms back. A third official held mypenis and inserted a metal rod inside my penis. They inserted small metalballs inside my penis. These had to be surgically removed after I escapedfrom the country. I was sexually abused in detention. I was in detention atVeppankulam for almost three weeks. There were seven detainees in my room. Iknow all of them had similar experiences. I know that they too had metalballs inserted in their penises. It was very painful for us to pass urine. Iheard the others cry as they passed urine. I was given some bread and waterbut I couldn’t eat because I was in severe pain. My lips were cut andbleeding because of the torture. The fear of death was always in front of us.[151]The medico legal report andhospital discharge papers, on file with Human Rights Watch, note“removal of foreign body inserted at the base of penis as a means ofidentification during the recent military conflict.”AP told Human Rights Watchhis captors forced him to sign documents written in Sinhala and transferredhim to an unknown detention site after he confessed. He said he was releasedfrom custody after his family bribed those in positions of authority at thedetention site.Name:ENGender:FemaleAge:28Date Detained:April 2009Date Released:May 2009Circumstances ofdetention:In April 2009, EN wasamong the thousands of civilians and LTTE cadre rounded up by the Sri Lankanarmy as they fled the “no fire zones” that had been under LTTEcontrol. EN told Human Rights Watch she was taken to an overcrowded camp inVavuniya. She was picked up from there by Sri Lankan army soldiers.Account:One day, five or six daysafter I arrived in the camp, I was standing in a food queue when soldierscame with a masked man. The masked man identified me and some others from thequeue. We were all taken away to a small center near the camp. The soldiersphotographed me, took my fingerprints, and details. My hands were tied behindmy back. I was taken into another small room. The officials startedquestioning me. They hung me from my wrists and beat me with batons. I wasburned with cigarettes on my chest, arms, and thighs. I was kicked andpunched. I was beaten and questioned repeatedly for 12 or 13 days. In theend, I signed a confession in Sinhala. Soon after I signed the confession, Iwas dragged into a room by two soldiers. One held me down, while the otherstripped off my clothes and raped me. Then the second man raped me. Idon’t know how many times I was raped.[152]EN’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, confirms the presence of widespreadscarring on her body which corroborates her account of ill treatment.EN told Human Rights Watchher relatives managed to secure her release from detention after bribingofficials through a member of People’s Liberation Organization of TamilEelam (PLOTE).Name:ZSGender:FemaleAge:22Date Detained:First detained in April 2009 and again in November2010Date Released:January 2011Circumstances ofdetention:In April 2009, ZS andher husband were in a bunker in Matalan when they were found by Sri Lankan armysoldiers. ZS told Human Rights Watch she was taken to Omanthai and then toArunachalam camp where she was questioned about her links with the LTTE. ZSsaid she and many others were rounded up and taken to another camp forquestioning.Account:I was kept with at least 20others in a very small space. It was hot and we were taken aside andquestioned every day. The soldiers would beat and punch me. They pulled myhair and banged my head against the wall. They hit me with wooden batons,thick wires, and belts. They made me sign documents in Sinhala. One of myfamily friends managed to get me released from this place after paying twolakh rupees [US$1,550] to the officials in the camp.ZS said she escaped hiddenin a truck used to transport rubbish and reached Vavuniya, but was capturedagain.I stayed with mymother-in-law. In November 2010, some soldiers came to my house. Theyhandcuffed me and took me to Jacob Camp in Vavuniya. I was tortured severelyin this detention. I was beaten with batons and hung upside down and beatenwith heated metal rods. The officials questioning me pushed me on the floorand stamped on me. I was stripped during questioning. I was raped. I cannotremember how many times this happened as I fell unconscious.[153]ZS’s medico-legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, corroborates that the“appearance of scars which are typical of injuries caused by beingbeaten in the manner described by her.”ZS’s family securedher release from detention in January 2011. ZS told Human Rights Watch shewas placed in a van with darkened windows and driven to Colombo. CIDofficials told her she was being sent for further questioning to Colombo, butshe was instead released.At the time we interviewedher she was being treated for post-traumatic stress disorder.Name:STGender:FemaleAge:50Date Detained:March 2009Date Released:November 2009Circumstances ofdetention:In late March 2009, STand her daughter surrendered to the Sri Lankan army in Matalan during theheight of the fighting. ST told Human Rights Watch that the army personneldivided those who surrendered into subgroups, and that she and her familywere in a group of 20.Account:The army made us stripcompletely in front of the children. All the women were made to walk aroundthe soldiers in a circle. The soldiers were laughing at us. All the womenwere then raped in front of everyone. My daughter and I were raped in frontof her children. I was raped in front of my grandchildren.After about two hours, thesoldiers asked a naked boy and girl, who didn’t know each other, to hugeach other at gunpoint. As they hugged due to fear, they were shot in frontof our eyes. I can still picture that moment. They then separated all youngboys and girls from us and took them away (they never came back). We heardscreams, wailings, and shootings continuously. During the time, we were inthe forest, we heard men and women crying and the sound of gunshotsconstantly. We were too scared to utter a word. We were not given any food orwater for the first two days. On the third day, we were given dhal curry andrice. We were all transferred to Mirusuvil camp [on the Jaffna peninsula]after five days. I was questioned about my husband’s links with theLTTE when I was in that detention. The official who questioned me alsotouched me indecently during the questioning.[154]ST managed to escape fromthe camp with another family in November 2009. Her children, who are settledabroad, arranged the services of a human smuggler, who helped her leave thecountry.Name:TFGender:FemaleAge:34Date Detained:February 2009Date Released:February 2009Circumstances ofdetention:TF and her 9-year-oldson managed to flee the shelling around Mullaivaikal in early 2009 andreached Trincomalee by boat. TF told Human Rights Watch she was accosted by ateam of Sri Lankan army soldiers and members of Karuna’s paramilitaryforce in February 2009 and taken aside for questioning.Account:They asked all of us if wehad any links with the LTTE. I did not want to lie and get caught, so I toldthem I had worked as an assistant in the LTTE judiciary. I was taken toVeppankulam camp in Vavuniya. The officials kept accusing me of being amember of the LTTE and of moving from the Vanni to Trincomalee to spy on the armyand set off bombs. I denied their charges and told them that I left with myson to save our lives. I was questioned by Sri Lankan army personnel, somewho were in uniform. They immersed my head in water and tried to drown me.They burned me on the back and legs with hot metal rods. They would beat thesoles of my feet with batons and force a petrol-infused plastic bag on myhead in an attempt to asphyxiate me. I was raped many times. I cannot recallhow many times. I was kept in detention for 15 days. Finally, I agreed tosign papers and admit that I was a full member of the LTTE. I was made toidentify various people as LTTE supporters and I did that even though I didnot know them. I just wanted the rapes and torture to stop.[155]TF’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes that the physical evidence ofscarring confirms her account of torture and abuse in Sri Lanka.TF told Human Rights Watchshe managed to secure her release from detention in February 2009 after herfamily members arranged for authorities to be bribed.Name:OPGender:MaleAge:20Date arrested:January 2009Date Released:June 2009Circumstances ofdetention:On January 31, 2009, OPwent to the Colombo’s international airport to receive hisfriend’s uncle arriving from Canada. OP told Human Rights Watch thatwhen he and his friend tried to enter the arrivals terminal, they werestopped by police officials in a random search operation.Account:We were asked to produceour ID cards, which the officials took away. Since my ID showed myPuthukudiruppu address [northeastern town where fighting was ongoing], theofficials took me aside and asked me to join the officials for furtherinterrogation. The officials handcuffed me and my friend and took me to ajeep waiting outside. We were taken to the sixth floor of the TID office inColombo. There we were put into a room and locked up. They took us one by oneand questioned us in another room. They asked me whether I was LTTE. Theykept insisting I was. They registered my details and took my fingerprints. Iwas also photographed. I was not given anything to eat on that day, and theydid not allow me to sleep. The next day, we were transferred to the Boosadetention camp [near Galle in the south]. I was detained in a small room withanother person. There was a lavatory in the room and a cement bed, but I hadto sleep on the floor. I was taken to a bigger room. The room was dirty and Inoticed many torture instruments lying around. There were bloodstains on thefloor and on the wall and cigarette butts on the floor. They stripped me tomy underwear and made me sit on a stool in front of them. They kept asking mewhether I was an LTTE member and whether we were sent to plan any attacks inColombo. They told me they would release me if I told them the truth. Idenied the charges and insisted that I had no involvement with the LTTE. Mydenials infuriated the officers. Two officials were now standing behind me.They hit me with batons and pipes, kicked me with boots, and hit me with ironrods. I was carried back into my room. I was taken out every day and beatenand questioned. They submerged my head in water in between the beatings; theyhung me upside down and beat me. They sexually abused me. As it was aterrible experience, I am ashamed to talk about this in detail to anyone. Thetorture continued for about five days. I was forced to sign a documentwritten in Sinhala. I agreed to sign the document in the hope that they wouldstop torturing me.OP told Human Rights Watchhe was handcuffed and produced before the Colombo chief magistrate’scourt in February 2009. He said that he could not understand any of theproceedings as they were conducted in Sinhala. OP was not released at thattime.I was sent back to thedetention camp in Boosa. My parents visited me in the camp a few days laterand instructed a family lawyer to represent me. ICRC officials also came tothe camp and gave me a card with a reference number and asked me to keep ittill I was released. I was produced before the court once again but was notreleased.[156]OP’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes that “the burntscars on his body are typical of theevents described by him.”OP said he was detained forfive months in the Boosa camp during which he was sexually abused by theinmates and guards. He said he was released from detention in June 2009 afterhis uncle managed to bribe the officials at Boosa prison.Name:YTGender:FemaleAge:22Date Detained:January 2009Date Released:February 2009Circumstances ofdetention:Late one evening inJanuary 2009, YT was at her home in Vavuniya when army personnel conducted asearch operation in her house and found a bag full of explosives. YT toldHuman Rights Watch she was asked to keep the bag safe by one of her friendsand told the soldiers that she did not know its contents.Account:The soldiers asked for myID card and found I was originally from Mullaithivu. They immediatelyhandcuffed me and asked me to get into a van. In the van they kept calling meLTTE and punching me and hitting me with a rifle butt. I was photographed andmy fingerprints were taken when we arrived at an army camp. I do not knowwhere this was. From that point, I was beaten and tortured severely. The armyofficials questioning me would bang my head against the wall. I was burnedwith cigarettes and beaten with wooden batons and metal pipes. One day onefemale interrogator threw a fistful of chili powder on my face. I was notgiven any water to wash. I was raped in detention. Two soldiers came to mycell at night. I screamed and they gagged me. They forced me down and rapedme in turn. They also burned me with cigarettes. They left me naked. I wasbleeding profusely after the rape and was in severe pain. I told the womanduty officer about this the next day. I wasn’t raped again, but thebeatings continued.[157]YT’s medico-legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, confirms that she attended anaccident and emergency clinic in a hospital abroad in March 2009, where herheavy bleeding was diagnosed as a miscarriage confirming sexual intercourseresulting in conception. Her medico-legal report states that “the scarson her body and her psychological state match her account of rape andtorture.”YT told Human Rights Watchshe was forced to sign a confession in Sinhala prior to her release inFebruary 2009. YT said she was released after her father arranged a bribe toofficials.Name:NJGender:FemaleAge:20Date Detained:January 2009Date Released:January 2009Circumstances ofdetention:In January 2009, NJ wasarrested by the Sri Lankan army at Nedunkeerni (equidistant betweenKilinochchi and Vavuniya), taken to the Gamini Mahavidyalayam camp, and thentaken to Joseph camp in Vavuniya.Account:The soldiers told me Iworked for the LTTE and must tell them about my activities. I was very scaredbut said that I did not. They started beating me. I was slapped and kickedwith boots. They burned me with cigarettes on my arm and back. Two men forceda petrol-infused plastic bag on my head in an attempt to asphyxiate me and Iwas unconscious.I was pushed around and myhead was smashed against the wall. Throughout the questioning, the men gropedmy genitals and breasts. They raped me during interrogation. I am too ashamedabout this. This has ruined my life.[158]NJ’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes that the scarring on her bodywas due to cigarette burns and blunt instrument trauma.NJ told Human Rights Watchshe was released from detention after her family bribed soldiers throughmembers of PLOTE.Name:RSGender:MaleAge:27Date Detained:Sometime in 2009Date Released:cannot recallCircumstances ofdetention:RS was friendly with R.,a known LTTE political member in his village near Vavuniya. R. moved awayfrom the village when fighting between the LTTE and the government forcesrenewed in 2006. In January 2007, the LTTE bombed a bridge while an armyvehicle was crossing it and R became a prime suspect. Looking for R., CIDofficials arrested RS in 2009. In his medical interview, RS said he wasblindfolded, dragged, pushed into a jeep, and told he was being taken to apolice station.Account(via a Europe-based medical worker/doctor whointerviewed RS):RS told his medicalinterviewer he was taken to a small room where he was photographed andfingerprinted. His hands were then tied behind his back and he was taken to asmaller room. The smaller room was dark except during interrogations, thefloor was bare, and there was no bedding. The toilet was a hole in the floor.For the first three weeks of his imprisonment, RS said he was interrogated inthis room and repeatedly questioned about R.’s whereabouts. After a fewmore weeks, he was moved to a cell that he shared with four other inmates. Hewas later informed that he was in Joseph camp.RS said he was stripped tohis underpants, kicked and beaten, hung upside down by his ankles, and beatenwith sticks, heavy PVC pipes, and wires. He said he was burned on his thighsand elbows with a heated wire plate and burned with cigarettes on his handsand feet. RS said his interrogators pushed his head in a bucket of water andforced a petrol-infused plastic bag on his head and tried to asphyxiate him.RS told his doctor he wasforced to perform oral sex and raped anally by one prison guard every night.He said he was interrogated by the guard during the rape, and was rapedcontinually for four months. RS said that the living conditions wereextremely hard during detention; he and his fellow inmates had to use onecorner of their room as a toilet and were provided food once a day.RS said he managed tosecure his release from detention in 2009 after his family bribed officialsin the CID. He said he was in Colombo later that year to apply for a visa tothe UK when he was stopped by the police for an identity check. He wasblindfolded, rearrested, and taken away in a van. He said he was thrown intoa room where he was fingerprinted and photographed. RS said he was once againquestioned about his relationship with R. and the latter’s whereabouts.He was burned with cigarettes, hung upside down, kicked and beaten, includingon the soles of his feet. He said his interrogator put a gun in his mouththreatened to kill him. His family once again secured his release afternearly 40 days by bribing officials.[159]Name:KNGender:FemaleAge:30Date Detained:April 2009Date Released:cannot recallCircumstances ofdetention:KN lived with herhusband and child in Kodikaman, Jaffna, when fighting between the Sri Lankanarmy and LTTE intensified. KN told Human Rights Watch that her husband, afarmer, was conscripted by the LTTE in March 2009 to dig trenches and provideother support. She said she joined her fleeing neighbors with her young childin April 2009, and reached Iranaippalai in the northeast where she“surrendered” to the Sri Lankan army.Account:We were taken to Omanthaion April 21, 2009. All of us were stripped naked. The soldiers asked all thewomen and men to bend over and laughed when we did. They groped us and feltour breasts. On April 22, a bus took us to Arunachalam camp at ChettikulamVavuniya. I was questioned on numerous occasions at the camp and before beingtaken to the camp. My husband has been missing since April 2009. The soldiersknew I was without my husband. They asked me in each inquiry. I shared thetent with six other young women. Each of us was invited for an inquiry. Theofficials who conducted the inquiry wore military uniforms. The inquiryhappened only at nighttime. The officials who interrogated me took turns torape me. They took my photographs and fingerprints. They asked about myhusband’s whereabouts and how he supported the LTTE. I told them Ididn’t know anything. They slapped me and then said they would fix me.They raped me by turn. There were four or five people. I went back to my tentafter they finished. They would call different girls from the tent and I wascalled at least six times. They did not ask me to sign a confession document.[160]KN managed to secure herrelease from the camp after bribing EPDP members and Sri Lankan securityforces. She made her way to Germany with her son in January 2011.Name:JSGender:FemaleAge:51Date Detained:May 2009Date Released:UnknownCircumstances ofDetention:JS, fromeastern Sri Lanka, was returned to Sri Lanka by the UK in May 2009. JS toldHuman Rights Watch that on arrival at Colombo’s international airport,she was detained for around nine hours and interrogated by CID officials.Account:I was returnedto Sri Lanka with an emergency travel document in May 2009. The CID officialskept me waiting in the arrival lounge and after a while they told me that Iwas going to be questioned. I was initially kept at the airport for around8-9 hours. The CID officials accused me of being a supporter and fundraiserof the LTTE in the UK. I denied their allegations but they showed me videoclips of demonstrations where I was holding a banner criticizing the SriLankan government and its inhumane attitude. The CID officials took me toanother place for questioning. They took my fingerprints, photographs, andfamily details. I was questioned about my husband and my son. I wastransferred to the Batticaloa army camp where I was treated like a slave. Iwas made to clean and do all the chores and treated very badly. I was kept inthis army detention for nearly five months during which I was frequentlyraped.[161]JS’smedico legal report, on file with Human Rights Watch, confirms her account oftorture in Sri Lanka. It notes in particular, “deep scars from scratchmarks on her breast which support her explanation.”JS managed toflee Sri Lanka with the help of a human smuggling agent in April 2010 andarrived in the UK where she was granted asylum.Name:JMGender:FemaleAge:31Date Detained:December 2008Date Released:December 2008Circumstances ofdetention:In December 2008, JM wasvisiting her parent’s home in Jaffna when a group of around 10 to 15Sri Lankan army soldiers surrounded the house. JM told Human Rights Watchthey banged loudly at the door and asked LTTE cadre to come out. JM was takeninto custody.Account:My parents opened the doorand the soldiers rushed in and grabbed me. They handcuffed me and pushed meinto the back of a big army vehicle. On the way they started beating me andcalling me an LTTE cadre. I could not understand Sinhala, but I couldunderstand they were calling me LTTE. I was pushed into a dimly lit room whenwe reached the camp. They made me sit on a chair, but my wrists were tied behindme. The officials started kicking and punching me. They said I was LTTE. Theytold me I came to Jaffna for LTTE work. The next day, they told me to signsome sheets of paper written in Sinhala. They had taken my ID card. I refusedto sign and they got very angry. They started punching me. One of them caughtmy hair and banged my head against a table, and then a wall. They burned mewith cigarettes and beat me with electric wires. One of the interrogators cutmy arm with a metal blade. I agreed to sign the documents. They asked me toidentify some LTTE cadre in an identification parade. I did not know them, soI refused. I was tortured again. They tried to force my head in a bucket ofdirty water to drown me. One night, four soldiers came to my room. Theypulled me and started abusing me. They were very rough, and grabbed at mybreasts and genitals. I was screaming, so one of them gagged me. I fainted atone point, but I know they raped me in turns. When I regained consciousness,I was lying naked waist down and my underwear had been torn. My thighs werecovered with blood. The soldiers came to my room again. I could not tellwhether they were the same ones. The only thing I knew was they woreuniforms. One night, I screamed for water and one of them poured boilingwater over my thigh.I identified some people inthe identification parade. I did not know them but I wanted the torture tostop.”[162]JM’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes that the scars on her bodyconfirm her account of torture in Sri Lanka.JM told Human Rights Watchshe was released from detention in early December 2008 when her uncle bribedarmy officials through an EPDP member.Name:MGGender:FemaleAge:28Date Detained:November 2008Date Released:December 2008Circumstances ofdetention:In November 2008, MG wastravelling by bus from Trincomalee to Vavuniya to meet her aunt who was inhospital. MG told Human Rights Watch that her bus was stopped at 11 checkpoints during which all passengers were required to get off the bus and havetheir ID cards checked by a team of Sri Lankan army and police officials. Atthe 12th checkpoint, which was at Irambakulam, MG said she wasquestioned by a team of five or six officials and taken into custody.Account:I explained to theofficials I was going to Vavuniya to look after my hospitalized aunt, [but]they did not believe me. They asked me to step aside. When they finishedchecking other passengers, they handcuffed me and took me to Vavuniya policestation in a jeep. At the police station, they accused me of being an LTTEmember and of penetrating into [an] army controlled area for planting bombs.The officials slapped me while questioning me. They took my photo,fingerprints, and all my family details.I was then taken to theVeppankulam CID camp and locked up in a small room. A team of officials, somein Sri Lankan army uniform and some in civilian clothes started interrogatingme and pressuring me to admit I was a member of the LTTE. I kept denyingthese charges and that is when they started torturing me.They tied my legs withnylon ropes, hung me upside down and submerged my head in water. They burnedme on my inner thighs with cigarette butts and beat the soles of my feet withbatons. They punched me on my back and hit me on the head with heavy plasticpipes. I was beaten on the back of my legs with thick nylon ropes and theytried to suffocate me by covering my face with a sack that was used to carrychili powder.I fainted frequently duringthe torture. When I came to, I realized I had been raped by the four men whowere questioning me. I was bleeding heavily from the vagina and my lowerabdomen was very sore. This happened continually for three or four days bythe same people in the same place.[163]MG’s medico-legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes her “psychologicalsymptoms are typical of torture and rape.” It also notes that“all her scars together strongly support her account of being torturedas she describes.”MG told Human Rights Watchshe admitted to all charges against her and signed documents in Sinhala thatshe was unable to read. On signing the documents, MG remained in custody fora month during which she was taken to other detention camps and compelled toidentify other LTTE supporters. They beat her when she refused or failed toidentify people. MG’s family managed to secure her release fromdetention by bribing security officials in December 2008.MG said she didn’ttell anyone about the rape even after she left the country. She said:“I felt so embarrassed and scared that society may outcast me if I wasa rape victim. However, I could talk to the female GP about this and am nowreceiving psychiatric treatment.”[164]Name:RNGender:FemaleAge:34Date Detained:November 2008Date Released:December 2008Circumstances ofdetention:One evening in November2008, Sri Lankan police and army personnel searched the house of RN’suncle in Linganagar, Trincomalee district. RN told Human Rights Watch thatduring the search it was discovered that she and her husband did not possessa valid permit to stay in Trincomalee and had failed to register with thelocal police on their arrival from Mullaithivu in September 2008. Theauthorities took RN and her husband into custody.Account:We were accused of beingLTTE collaborators and were immediately taken into custody by the Sri Lankanarmy. We were handcuffed, blindfolded, and pushed into a vehicle. We were notallowed to talk to each other. I was taken out of the vehicle in one placewhile my husband was still in the vehicle. When my blindfold was removed, Ifound myself in a dark and smelly room. From the sounds I heard, I thought Iwas in an army or police detention center.I was not given anything toeat or drink that day. I was taken for interrogation the next day when I wasquestioned about my role in the LTTE and why we came to Trincomalee. I kepttelling them that we came because we were scared for our lives, but they didnot believe me.I was kept handcuffed throughoutmy detention. I was always taken into another room for questioning and thatis where the torture started. The torture became worse every day. I waswhipped with metal wires and plastic rods, burning chilies were held in frontof my face, and my head was periodically submerged in a bucket of water. Iwas repeatedly burned with cigarettes during questioning and beaten withplastic pipes filled with sand.The officials would drag meback into my cell and continue to kick me with their boots when I fell on thefloor. At night, a group of four or five soldiers entered my room and rapedme. It was dark so I couldn’t see their faces, but they smelled ofalcohol. They gagged me to prevent me from screaming. I was gang-rapedrepeatedly for six days. I recognized that some of the perpetrators remainedthe same, on some days, some new people joined. The men all spoke Sinhala andabused me while they raped me. I lived in terror. I would dread the sound ofapproaching footsteps.I could not endure thetorture anymore, so I told them that I was employed by the LTTE, that myhusband was a home guard with the LTTE, and that my brother was an LTTEmember. I also signed a confession written in Sinhala that I did notunderstand.[165]RN secured her release fromdetention following payment of a bribe in December 2008. She was told toreport to the Trincomalee police station every week following her releasebut, fearful of being detained again, arranged to leave Sri Lanka using theservices of a human smuggling agent.RN’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, confirms her account of rape andnotes that she suffers from depression and post-traumatic stress disorder.Name:GLGender:FemaleAge:34Date Detained:October 2008Date Released:November 2008Circumstances ofdetention:GL was at heruncle’s house in Vavuniya in October 2008 when she was identified as anLTTE operative during a random search operation conducted by police andmilitary intelligence. GL told Human Rights Watch she was taken to the localpolice station with a group of other people.Account:I was detained in a cell inthe police station. There were always three or four officials who questionedme, some in police uniforms while others who spoke Tamil were mostly incivilian clothes. I was beaten up severely during questioning and burnedrepeatedly with cigarette butts on my inner thighs. I was kept undressedduring questioning, and the men in civilian clothes groped my breasts andgenitals. They did not rape me during questioning. Some of the officials whoquestioned me came to my cell at night with some other people. This happenedrepeatedly. Often one would watch while the other raped me. Sometimes, Ismelled alcohol on them. They would say things like “You are LTTE”in Sinhala. I did not understand the other things they said. I was rapedalmost every night for 18 days. The men would come to my cell after 10 p.m. Iwas given one food packet during the day. The interrogation and beatings tookplace in the evening. The officials forced me to admit that I was with theLTTE and sign documents in Sinhala.[166]In her medico-legal report,on file with Human Rights Watch, GL was diagnosed with complex post-traumaticstress disorder and major depressive disorder.GL told Human Rights Watchshe secured her release from detention in November 2008 after her unclebribed officials in the police and army.Name:THGender:FemaleAge:28Date Detained:September 2008Date Released:September 2008Circumstances ofdetention:In September 2008, TH, aSinhalese woman was asleep in her rented accommodation in Kelaniya, a Colombosuburb, when she was awakened by someone banging on the door of herlandlord’s house.Account:My “uncle”[landlord] opened the door and there was a group of people, some in armyuniform and others in civilian clothes. One man in civilian clothes cameforward and showed his ID. He said he was from the CID and asked if someoneby the name of Sundaram [a pseudonym] lived there. I overheard this and cameforward as Sundararm was the name of my boyfriend.The officials searched myroom and found Sundaram’s gym bag and a suitcase. They asked me to openthe suitcase, but I did not know how to. They broke the lock and found asuicide-bomber’s green jacket and bomb-making equipment. They startedkicking me and punching me. They grabbed my hair and kept banging my headagainst the wall. They kept saying, “Where is the Tamil you wanted tomarry? This is the man you wanted to marry.”They blindfolded andhandcuffed me and took me away. On the way, I was kicked and punched. At thedetention center, I was questioned and tortured. I was burned withcigarettes, beaten on the soles of my feet with batons, and beaten all overwith electric wires. The interrogators were both male and female. They forceda petrol-infused plastic bag on my head and tried to asphyxiate me. Theyalmost drowned me by forcing my head down in a barrel of dirty water. Theykept asking me about Sundaram and his friends and acquaintances. During theinterrogation, the officials kicked me and spat at me. They treated me worsethan an animal.I was taken to anotherplace after I signed a confession statement. I think it was the CID fourthfloor office. Over there, I was raped again and again. I am not sure how manytimes. I was forced to sign another statement in Sinhala that said that Iworked against the Sri Lankan government and supported the LTTE.[167]TH’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, confirms that the physical evidenceof scarring corroborates her account of torture.TH told Human Rights Watchshe was released from detention in September 2008 after her brother-in-laworganized payment of a bribe of two million rupees [US$1,555] to the CID.Name:DJGender:FemaleAge:23Date Detained:July 2008Date Released:July 2008Circumstances ofdetention:Around noon one day in July2008, DJ was walking to her sewing class on the outskirts of Vavuniya townwhen she was approached by a group of uniformed and armed army and policepersonnel and two or three men in civilian clothes. DJ told Human RightsWatch that army officials asked to see her ID card, which revealed heroriginal residence was Mullaithivu. DJ said that the army officer told herthat she would need to accompany them for questioning.Account:I was pushed into an armyvehicle and taken to Joseph Camp for interrogation. There were threeofficials in army uniform who told me I was with the LTTE and had come to spyin Vavuniya. I kept denying this, but they kept insisting. I was pushedaround, but not beaten. I was then sent to a small, dark cell that had asquatting latrine in the corner. There was no water. The room was filled withinsects and mosquitoes.On the second day, I wasagain questioned and beaten in the office. I lost consciousness due to thebeating and was dragged back into my cell. The soldiers pushed some dry breadand dirty water through a low hatch in the door.On the third day, auniformed soldier with a rifle came into the cell. He dragged me to adifferent room that had a table on the side and three chairs for theinterrogators. There were pipes, metal rods, and some other instruments onthe table. There were bloodstains and other stains on the floor and on thewalls of the room. Three men in uniform and one in civilian clothes startedquestioning me. I kept denying any involvement with the LTTE. The men calledtwo women in uniform and the women came and tied my arms to the bars of asmall window that was quite high. I was facing the interrogators and my armswere tied, stretched over my head. The two uniformed women left the room.The uniformed men startedquestioning me again. The man in civilian clothes kicked me on the knees withhis boots and I almost fainted with the pain. A military officer burned mewith a cigarette on my arms while the others questioned me. The armedmilitary officer then tore off the front of my dress and started to fondleand grasp my breasts, and grab between my legs and genitals. He also punchedme on the chest, and I could not breathe. It was terrifying and brutal.The men then untied me andpushed me on the floor. One of them kicked me in my back with heavy boots andI collapsed in pain. I remembered that one after another the men were on topof me. I was shouting and crying and screaming and someone stuffed some clothinto my mouth. I was raped by three men. I regained consciousness and feltsomeone splashing water on my face. I saw that my clothes were torn even moreand my pants were lying on the floor torn into two pieces. I was half carriedto the cell. I could feel that my legs and genitals were sticky and sore. Iwanted to wash myself, but there was no water in my cell.[168]In July 2008, DJ was givena white cloth to cover herself and was photographed and fingerprinted. Shetold Human Rights Watch her captors forced her to sign various documents, andreleased her only after her cousins paid a large bribe to Sri Lankan armyofficials.DJ’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, confirms that her injuries areconsistent with her account of torture in Sri Lanka.Name:PRGender:MaleAge:26Date Detained:June 2008Date Released:September 2008Circumstances ofdetention:In June 2008, PR was outshopping when he received a phone call asking him to get back homeimmediately as the police were waiting for him at his house. PR told HumanRights Watch he saw nearly 30 army and police officials waiting outside hishome in Wellawatte [in Colombo].Account:The officials immediatelyoverpowered me. They blindfolded me and pushed me into a police vehicle. Theyremoved my blindfold when we reached a small, dark room. I did not know whereI was. They started questioning me and taking down my details. Differentpeople came to speak to me. Some of my friends rang me on my phone. Theofficials put my phone on a loud speaker and made me take calls from myfriends. They told me not to say that I was in detention.On the second day, [namewithheld], an Officer in Charge from the Dehiwela crime branch, took me toDehiwela police station. At the police station, I was questioned by variouspeople, some of who said they were from CID. I was beaten with a baton when Irefused to admit involvement with the LTTE.At the Dehiwela policestation, I was handed over to a CID officer. He blindfolded me and took meout to various detention sites and asked me to identify people once we werethere. I did not know any of the people, so I refused to identify them asLTTE. They started torturing me as I wasn’t cooperating. They tied myhands behind my back, hung me upside down and beat me. They tied my hands andlegs separately with a rope and placed me inside a barrel made of metal bars;they rolled the barrel, constantly poking and beating me with a wooden pole.Since S. [name withheld]was an officer of the Colombo Crime Division, he had a room in the Dehiwelapolice station. He took me to his room at night and raped me many times. Hewould make me sit on my knees with my head under the bed and he would sit onme, using me like a stool. At times he would sit on me for hours. I used tobeg him to stop. He threatened me that he would kill me if I did not comply.There were other peopledetained with me. They knew what happened when S. called us out. Everybodyknew that when he takes someone out of the cell, he rapes them.[169]PR told Human Rights Watchhe was in detention for over a month. He said he was released after he beggedS. for help. According to PR, S. offered to organize his release fromdetention for a bribe. S. advised PR’s family to file a complaint abouthis arrest with the NHRC, which would prompt him to have PR moved to NewMagazine prison in Welikanda, a town in northern Sri Lanka, from which hecould be released through the courts. PR said he was released from prison inSeptember 2008 after his mother arranged to pay 11 lakhs Rs [US$8,500] toColombo Crime Division officials. PR said he was arrested for a second timein March 2009 at Colombo’s international airport when he was trying toleave the country. PR said his parents contacted S. again after his secondarrest, and they were told not to complain to any organization including theICRC and NHRC. PR was released from his second detention following anotherbribe payment in April 2009.PR’s psychiatricreport prepared in support of his asylum application, on file with HumanRights Watch, confirms that he is suffering from post-traumatic stressdisorder due to ill treatment suffered in Sri Lanka.Name:MJGender:FemaleAge:32Date Detained:May 2008Date Released:July 2008Circumstances ofdetention:One evening in May 2008,MJ was in her house in Vavuniya when CID officials and members of PLOTEarrived and asked for her by name. MJ told Human Rights Watch she hadrecently moved from Kilinochchi to Vavuniya and CID officials startingaccusing her of doing so in order to spy on the army. MJ said that the CIDofficials took her to Anuradhapura in a van.Account:I was kept in a detentionsite, but I don’t know where I was. They started interrogating me andtook all my details. They photographed me and took my fingerprints and askedme to sign a form written in Sinhala. They accused me of being an LTTE spy.They said I had come to plant a bomb in Vavuniya and spy on the army. Thenthey started torturing me. It was a group of about six people. They told methey were from the CID and PLOTE. They also said that they had all theinformation on me and my activities. They knew that my sister was with theLTTE.I could hear the screams ofother people who were being tortured in the same building. I was burned allover my body with cigarettes. At night, one of the persons who said he wasfrom PLOTE came to my room and raped me. I was raped on three occasions bythe same person. I became pregnant as a result of these rapes. My daughterwas born in March 2009.[170]MJ’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes the presence of 20 scars onher body that confirm her account of torture in Sri Lanka.MJ was detained in the campfor two months until July 2008. She told Human Rights Watch that an agentsecured her release from detention after arranging to pay 10 lakhs Rs [US$7,750] as a bribe to the CID.Name:BNGender:MaleAge:17Date Detained:April 2008Date Released:cannot recallCircumstances ofdetention:One evening in mid-April2008, BN was studying at his home in Vavuniya when there was a loud bangingat the door. BN told Human Rights Watch that his mother saw two uniformedpolicemen standing outside their front gate. He said that when she opened thedoor, four men in civilian clothes stormed into the house, followed by thepolicemen.Account:The authorities werelooking for my father because he had worked for the LTTE. The policeofficials asked my mother where my father was. He was in hiding, but mymother said she did not know where he was. They handcuffed me and dragged meto the van. My mother was crying and pleading with them not to take me away.They drove me to a camp in Veppankulam.Once we reached the campthey put me into a small dark room and locked the door that was made of ironbars. The room had no lights and was dirty. I was left all night inhandcuffs, and they did not allow me to sleep. I was crying all night. Icouldn’t sleep, as they would either throw a bucket of water throughthe door at me or shout loudly when they passed the room.For the next three days, Iwas taken to an office where officials in civilian clothes questioned meabout my father’s whereabouts. I refused to tell them anything. I wasprovided one meal a day. On the fourth day, they took me to large room with awooden table where three uniformed officers were seated. There were a lot ofthings on the table like sand-filled pipes, metal rods, pieces of thick wire,and batons. There were bloodstains on the walls and cigarette butts on thefloor.The officers forced me toremove all my clothes except my underwear. They made me sit on a metal chairto which they tied my hands with a nylon rope. Two officials stood behind me.They spoke Tamil but the officer in front spoke in Sinhala. They repeatedlyasked me, “Where is your father?” “How is your fatherconnected to the LTTE?” They told me that they had information on mylinks with the LTTE. They punched and beat me during the questioning.They took me to the roomevery day for two weeks. They would tie me to the chair, question merepeatedly, slap and punch me, kick me with their boots. They hung me upsidedown and beat me. They laid me on the table and beat the soles of my feet.They tied my hands behind my back and submerged my head in a bucket of dirtywater. They made me kneel naked in the hot sun for hours. They kicked me onmy genitals and repeatedly grabbed and squeezed my genitals. The torturewould continue till I fainted and then they would drag me back to my room.One night, two other officials in civilian clothes came to my room. One heldme down while the other raped me. The same people came every night. One ofthe men bit me repeatedly on my buttocks. This continued for two weeks.[171]BN told Human Rights Watchthat two officers approached him and promised to lessen the frequency andintensity of the torture if he agreed to help them identify LTTE supportersand members. The officials took him to his school, Vavuniya railway station,the market, the main bus stand, and various checkpoints. BN was handcuffedand asked to identify LTTE members from a distance. One night in May 2008, hewas taken to Puttalam to identify LTTE members during a roundup operation.The officials kept hittingme until I started identifying some people. I didn’t know whether theyhad any connection to the LTTE or not. I identified them so that the beatingswould stop.[172]A few days later, BNsaid, two uniformed police officers took him outside the detention centerthrough the backdoor. He told Human Rights Watch he was released on paymentof a bribe that evening and started making arrangements to leave the country.BN’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, confirms that theinjuries on his body  aretypical of the events described and could not be caused intentionally.Name:QFGender:MaleAge:25Date Detained:February 2008Date Released:March 2008Circumstances ofdetention:In February 2008, agroup of five military personnel came to QF’s home in Colombo. QF toldHuman Rights Watch that two of them forcibly entered his house and startedquestioning his father. QF said that he came out of his room and introducedhimself. He was immediately detained.Account:The officials grabbed andhandcuffed me. They told my father they were taking me for questioning andtook me to Wellawatte police station. In the police station, they startedquestioning and beating me. They pushed me into a cell. I was not given anyfood or drink that night. The next day, I was blindfolded, my hands weretied, and I was taken to another place in a van. I was pushed into a room andmy blindfold was taken off. The room was small, dark, and dirty.I was stripped and left inmy underwear. I was taken to another room where the officials in civilianclothes started questioning me. They accused me of helping the LTTE. Theyshowed photographs and asked me to identify people. They made me bend overthe table and then hit me with a hot, metal rod. They burned me withcigarettes and beat me with a sand-filled plastic pipe. They punched me andkicked me with their boots. They forced a petrol-infused plastic bag on myhead and tried to asphyxiate me till I fainted.They covered my penis withsomething like Vicks.[173]They would grope my genitals during questioning.One official tried to make me have oral sex with him. Other men sexuallyabused me around three times. They wore civilian clothes and did not speakTamil.[174]QF’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, confirms his account of illtreatment and Sri Lanka.QF told Human Rights Watchhe was fingerprinted and photographed and made to sign a confession statementin Sinhala. He was blindfolded and taken to different places in a van wherehe was asked to identify people involved with the LTTE. He was released inMarch 2008 after his family bribed the authorities.Name:DHGender:FemaleAge:32Date Detained:February 2008Date Released:Cannot recallCircumstances ofdetention:DH moved to Colombo fromthe Vanni on February 16, 2008, and soon after that went to register herselfand her son at a police station. She was immediately detained.Account:I was taken into custody assoon as I arrived at the police station but I was not formally arrested. Iwas detained in a cell. The police got some men from the Karuna group toidentify me. I was moved to another detention site after this.As soon as I was brought tothe second detention site, two policemen starting behaving indecently withme. They groped me, grabbed my genitals and breasts, and tore off my clothes.They raped me by turn. They kept shouting at me in Sinhala but I could notunderstand what they were saying.I was beaten up andtortured during the detention. The interrogators punched me and kicked withmetal-tipped boots, they hit me on my back and legs with rifle butts. Theykicked the soles of my feet with boots and also beat my soles with woodenbatons. The interrogators submerged my head in water and tried to drown me. Iwas burned with cigarettes and hot iron rods during my detention. I wasconstantly accused of being an LTTE member.Frequently, myinterrogators removed my clothes, stripped me naked, and taunted me duringthe interrogation. Even though I was not raped again, they threatened thatthey would kill me.[175]DH’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, confirms her account of illtreatment and torture, including rape, in Sri Lanka.DH told Human Rights Watchshe admitted to the allegations and signed a confession document as shebelieved it would stop the torture. She managed to secure her release fromdetention after her brother arranged for police officials to be bribed.Name:MKGender:FemaleAge:21Date Detained:January 2008Date Released:February 2008Circumstances ofdetention:In January 2008, MK wasstaying with her relatives in Vavuniya after attending a primaryteachers’ training organized by the Tamil Eelam Educational Society. MKtold Human Rights Watch that one evening, their house was surrounded by fouror five army vehicles and at least a dozen soldiers rushed into her house.Account:The soldiers banged on thedoor and asked for me. When I came out, I was instantly handcuffed and pushedat the back of an army jeep. The soldiers started hitting me with the buttsof their rifle and calling me an LTTE agent. They took me to Veppankulam campwhere I was pushed into a tiny room.I was beaten and torturedfor nearly a month. The interrogators kicked and punched me. They grabbed meby my hair and hit my head against the wall. I was beaten everyday with heavyboots, metal pipes, and wooden batons. I was burned with cigarettes and hotmetal rods. The interrogators threw chili powder in my eyes and covered mybody with a white powder that caused an unbearable itch. They nearly drownedme in a barrel of water and forced a petrol-infused plastic bag on my headand tried to asphyxiate me.The interrogators groped atmy breasts and genitals during interrogation. I was repeatedly raped during andafter the interrogation.[176]MK’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, confirms her account ofill-treatment and torture.MK told Human Rights Watchshe agreed to sign a confession as she could not bear the torture. She alsoassisted the army in identifying those who had worked with the LTTE. MK wasreleased from detention in February 2008 after her aunt bribed armypersonnel.Name:LVGender:FemaleAge:38Date Detained:Not applicableDate Released:Not applicableCircumstances ofdetention:In mid June 2007, fiveor six Sri Lankan army personnel, including some men in civilian clothes,arrived at FJ’s home in Vavuniya. LV told Human Rights Watch they askedher to surrender her husband or pay them 20 lakhs Rs. LV denied any knowledgeof her husband’s whereabouts.Account:Two of them stayed outsidemy house while one man in civilian clothes and two of the uniformed officerscame inside and shut the main door. The army officers spoke in Sinhala andone person in civilian clothes spoke Tamil. They said, “You are lyingabout your husband’s whereabouts. You are lying that you don’twork for the LTTE.” They beat me with their fists and boots and pushedme on the floor. I kept struggling.The army officers raped meby turns. I was very scared. They waited for my husband to return until about7 p.m. and then left. Before they left, they warned me to surrender myhusband, otherwise they would come back to rape me again.We paid them Rs. 10 lakhs(US$ 7,877) in August. We did not have any more money. The same officialscame back to my house in November 2007 and arrested my husband and son. Theywere the same officials who raped me. I lost all contact with my husband fromthat day.[177]LV’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, confirms her account of sufferingsexual abuse in Sri Lanka which contributed to her post traumatic stressdisorder.LV told Human Rights Watchthat the army officials worked closely with members of Tamil paramilitarygroups who were assisting them in providing information about those who hadworked with the LTTE. LV managed to flee from Sri Lanka using the help of ahuman smuggler.Name:JTGender:MaleAge:28Date Detained:September 2007Date Released:October 2007Circumstances of detention:In mid-September 2007, JT said, he had escaped fromthe LTTE after having been conscripted from his home in Puthukudiyiruppu inthe northeast four months earlier. JT told Human Rights Watch that he went toPuttalam on Sri Lanka’s west coast, where he stayed at hisuncle’s house.Account:Around 4 p.m. officials incivilian clothes arrived at my uncle’s house. They did not sayanything, but handcuffed me and threw me in the back of a van. I was keptface down in the back of the van but when I came out, I saw it was an armycamp.I was beaten and questionedevery day in the camp. After four or five days I was taken to Colombo forfurther investigation. The officials told me, “You are an importantperson so we have to take you to Colombo.”I don’t know wherethey took me in Colombo. I was questioned again in Colombo. They accused meof being an LTTE member and of having penetrated Puttalam to launch attacksagainst the army. I was forced to sign a paper which had something written inSinhala. I was also taken to identify LTTE suspects in other camps. Theyforced me to undress during the questioning and torture. They beat me withsand-filled pipes and burned me with cigarettes. I was hung me upside downand beaten. They forced a petrol-infused plastic bag on my head and tried toasphyxiate me. I was raped in detention. I was bleeding for two weeks andcould not go to the toilet for a long time.[178]JT’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes the severe anal pain hesuffers following his rapes in Sri Lanka and the incidence of scarring thatmatches his account of torture.JT told Human Rights Watchhe secured his release from detention in October 2007 after his family bribedthe authorities.Name:DVGender:FemaleAge:37Date arrested:February 2007Date Released:April 2007Circumstances ofdetention:In February 2007, agroup of soldiers and men in civilian clothes took DV’s husband fromtheir house in Mt. Lavinia. When DV lodged a complaint about the illegaldetention at the Mt. Lavinia police station, the police provided noinformation on her husband’s whereabouts. A few days later, a similargroup of officials— six or seven army personnel, including some men incivilian clothes—came to the house again, this time looking for DV.Account:The officials who came forme behaved indecently. They abused me and called me a “Tamilbitch” in Sinhala. They pushed me into a van. I was held face down inthe van. They drove me for an hour, then stopped and took me out. I was takento a small, dark room where they recorded my details. I later came to knowthat they took me to Panagoda army camp. They started questioning me. Theyasked me about my husband’s involvement with the LTTE. They beat mewith sticks and wires. Always, the questions were followed by beating. Theysexually harassed me during the questioning. They touched me indecently andtold me I was beautiful. There were always two or three people who questionedme and tortured me. They showed me some photographs and asked me to identifythe LTTE members. The officials who questioned me were in Sri Lankan armyuniform. At night, I was left alone in the room. On the first night, twoofficials came to my room and dragged me to another room that looked like theduty officers room. There was a bed in the room. The two officials raped meone after the other on the floor.[179]DV’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes that she suffers from severepost-traumatic stress disorder on account of her ill treatment and torture inSri Lanka.DV told Human Rights Watchthat her uncle managed to secure her release from detention after arrangingpayment of a bribe to a brigadier at the Panagoda army camp in April 2007. DVwas released in April 2007 on “reporting conditions.”[180]Name:VAGender:FemaleAge:24Date Detained:February 2007Date Released:February 2007Circumstances ofdetention:VA, from Jaffna, moved toColombo to work as an accounts clerk in 2006. She was asked by a cousin, anLTTE sympathizer, to use the accounts database to obtain details of membersof the army and police. In her medical interview with a UK-based medicalworker, VA said she was taking a walk with a friend on February 3, 2007, whenthey were stopped by the police and asked to produce identity cards. Herfriend did not have a card, hence both women were arrested and taken to thepolice station.Account(via a UK -based medical doctor who interviewed thevictim):At the police station, theywere kept in separate rooms. VA was interrogated by the police who accusedher of working for the LTTE.She said she was beatenwith wooden batons on the back of her head and shoulders, and burned withcigarettes on her breasts, arms, and thighs. VA said that on the second day,her interrogators poured boiling water over her right foot. On the third day,in addition to the beatings, her interrogators poked her burns with a plasticpipe till she lost consciousness.In her medical interview,VA said her interrogators tried to rape her on at least two occasions duringher four days in detention, but was not sure whether they succeeded as shewas semi-conscious.[181]She was released fromdetention in February 2007 and following her release, met with her friend anddiscovered that she had been similarly tortured in custody.Name:PTGender:MaleAge:23Date Detained:December 2006Date Released:December 2006Circumstances ofdetention:One evening in earlyDecember 2006, a large group of military personnel, including some men incivilian clothes, arrived at PT’s home in Vavuniya. PT told HumanRights Watch he was forcibly taken to the Joseph Camp in Vavuniya where hewas detained in a toilet for 28 days.Account:The military officials tookme to a larger room for torture every day. I was hung upside down and beatenrepeatedly with sand-filled pipes. I was burned with cigarettes while beingheld upside down.During the course of theinterrogation, I was sexually harassed by a male army officer who told me toget undressed. He crushed my penis with his hands. The next day, a male armyofficial showed me naked photos of Asian girls and started making fun of mewhen I was aroused. The following day, they beat me with wires and inserted abeer bottle in my anus.I was repeatedly sexuallyabused by officials in detention at night. This happened every night for 28days. Some perpetrators were the same while some different people came everynight. They wore civilian clothes and did not speak Tamil.The torture kept gettingworse. On one occasion, they hung me upside down with my head touching theused toilet bowl and threatened me that they would make me eat my feces.While I was in detention, I heard the screaming of others, so I knew that Iwas not the only one being tortured.[182]PT’s medico legalreport, on file with Human Rights Watch, notes that the scars and thephysical pain he currently experiences confirms his account of ill treatmentand torture.PT managed to escape fromdetention after his family arranged to bribe officials in December 2006.AcknowledgmentsThis report was researched and written by Charu Lata Hogg,Associate Fellow, Asia Program at Chatham House, in an independent consultancy.The report was edited Phelim Kine, deputy Asia director at Human Rights Watch;James Ross, legal and policy director; and Joseph Saunders, deputy programdirector.Layout and production assistance was provided by ShaivaliniParmar and Storm Tiv, Asiaassociates, as well as Kathy Mills, publications specialist.We would like to thank the many representatives ofnongovernmental organizations, activists, and lawyers who contributed deepinsights and generously shared their time, energy, and experiences with HumanRights Watch. In particular, we would like to thank Tharanipan, who providedvaluable research assistance and support for this report.Special gratitude is owed to the survivors of sexual abuseand rape who shared their most painful experiences with us in the hope thataction is taken to prevent others suffering similar abuse.[1] UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing theInternational Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from Sri Lanka,”December 21, 2012, HCR/EG/LKA/12/04, available at: http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/50d1a08e2.html (accessed December 25, 2012).[2]UN Secretary-General, Report of the UN Secretary General’sPanel of Experts on Accountability in Sri Lanka, March 31, 2011,http://www.un.org/News/dh/infocus/Sri_Lanka/POE_Report_Full.pdf[3] HumanRights Watch interview with Peter Mckay, field officer with the UN Office forProject Services in Sri Lanka from January-April 2009, Sydney, December 19,2011.[4]Official Records of the Review Conference of the Rome Statute of theInternational Criminal Court, Kampala, May 31-June 11 2010; InternationalCriminal Court, “Elements of Crime,” ICC-PIDS-LET-03-002/11_Eng,2011, http://www.icc-cpi.int/NR/rdonlyres/336923D8-A6AD-40EC-AD7B-45BF9DE73D56/0/ElementsOfCrimesEng.pdf(accessed January 2, 2013).[5]The Agreement on a Ceasefire between the Government of the DemocraticSocialist Republic of Sri Lanka and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam,signed on February 21, 2002, had the stated objective to “find anegotiated solution to the ongoing ethnic conflict in Sri Lanka.” Theagreement set up modalities of the ceasefire, measures to restore normalcy, andthe Sri Lanka Monitoring Mission.[6]See Human Rights Watch, Sri Lanka – Return to War, August 6, 2007,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2007/08/05/return-war;Human Rights Watch, Sri Lanka –Recurring Nightmare, March 6, 2008,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2008/03/05/recurring-nightmare-0.[7]Human Rights Watch, Sri Lanka – Trapped and Mistreated, December15, 2008, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2008/12/15/trapped-and-mistreated-0;Human Rights Watch, Sri Lanka –  Besieged, Displaced, andDetained, December 23, 2008, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2008/12/22/besieged-displaced-and-detained;and Human Rights Watch, Sri Lanka – War on the Displaced, February19, 2009, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2009/02/19/war-displaced.[8]“Sri Lanka: Actions by Government forces, rebels possible war crimes– UN rights chief,” UN News Centre, March 13, 2009, http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=30175&Cr=sri+lanka&Cr1(accessed January 2, 2013).[9] For adetailed account of the final months of the fighting and abuses by both sides,see University Teachers for Human Rights (Jaffna), “Let Them Speak: Truthabout Sri Lanka's Victims of War,” December 13, 2009, http://uthr.org/SpecialReports/Special%20rep34/Uthr-sp.rp34.htm(accessed January 2, 2012).[10] UNSecretary General, Report of the Secretary-General’s Panel of Experts onAccountability in Sri Lanka (UN Panel Report), March 31, 2011,http://www.un.org/News/dh/infocus/Sri_Lanka/POE_Report_Full.pdf (accessedJanuary 3, 2013).[11] Ibid.[12]Human Rights Watch, Sri Lanka – Legal Limbo, February 2010,http://www.hrw.org/node/88031/section/1.[13]International Crisis Group, “Sri Lanka conflict history,” updatedJanuary 2011,http://www.crisisgroup.org/en/publication-type/key-issues/research-resources/conflict-histories/sri-lanka.aspx(accessed January 2, 2013).[14] TheSri Lankan government refers to detainees held under Sri Lankan emergency lawsas “surrendees.”[15] Ministryof Defence and Urban Development, “Rehab and Rejoice Rehabilitation ofex-LTTE cadres- The Sri Lankan experience,” August 30, 2012,http://www.defence.lk/new.asp?fname=Rehab_and_rejoice_20120828_03 (accessedFebruary 17, 2013).[16]UN Secretary-General, Report of the Secretary-General’s Panel ofExperts on Accountability in Sri Lanka, March 31, 2011,http://www.un.org/News/dh/infocus/Sri_Lanka/POE_Report_Full.pdf (accessedJanuary 3, 2013).[17]“Sri Lanka: Report Fails to Advance Accountability GovernmentsShould Act on UN Panel Call for International Investigation,” HumanRights Watch news release, December 16, 2011,http://www.hrw.org/news/2011/12/16/sri-lanka-report-fails-advance-accountability.[18]Government of Sri Lanka, “Sri Lanka: Report of the Commission of Inquiryon Lessons Learned and Reconciliation,” November 2011,http://www.priu.gov.lk/news_update/Current_Affairs/ca201112/FINAL%20LLRC%20REPORT.pdf(accessed January 2, 2013). It concluded that it was “satisfied that themilitary strategy that was adopted to secure the LTTE held areas was one thatwas carefully conceived, in which the protection of the civilian population wasgiven the highest priority.”[19]Ibid.[20]See, e.g. UN Commission on Human Rights, Reports of the SpecialRapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences, RadhikaCoomaraswamy, UN Doc. E/CN.4/1997/47/Add.4, January 30, 1997; UN Doc.E/CN.4/1998/54, January 26, 1998; UN Doc. E/CN.4/1999/68/Add.1, January 11,1999; UN Doc. E/CN.4/2001/73/Add.1, February 13, 2001; UN Doc. E/CN.4/2002/83/Add.1, January 28, 2002; UN Doc. E/CN.4/2003/75/Add.2, January 14,2003; UN Commission on Human Rights, Report of the Special Rapporteur onviolence against women, its causes and consequences, Yakin Ertürk, UN Doc.E/CN.4/2004/66/Add.1, March 3, 2004; UN Doc. E/CN.4/2005/72/Add.1, March 18,2005; UN Doc. E/CN.4/2006/61/Add.1, March 27, 2006; UN Doc. A/HRC/4/34/Add.1,March 19, 2007; UN Commission on Human Rights, Report of the SpecialRapporteur, Sir Nigel Rodley, submitted pursuant to Commission on Human Rightsresolution 2001/62, UN.Doc; E/CN.4/2002/76/Add.1, March 14, 2002; UN Commissionon Human Rights, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the question of torture,Theo van Boven, submitted pursuant to Commission Resolution 2002/38, UN Doc.E/CN.4/2003/68/Add.1, February 27, 2003.[21]DBS Jeyaraj, “Sexual Violence against Tamil Women,” July 8, 2001,http://dbsjeyaraj.com/dbsj/archives/1149 (accessed January 2, 2013); AmnestyInternational, “Sri Lanka: Rape in Custody,” January 28, 2002,ASA/37/001/2002, http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/3c552e584.html (accessedJanuary 2, 2013).[22]Elisabeth Wood, “Armed Groups and Sexual Violence: When Is WartimeRape Rare?” Politics & Society, vol. 37, no. 1 (March 2009),p. 149.[23]International Commission of Jurists, “Still Seeking Justice in SriLanka: Rule of Law, the Criminal Justice System and Commissions of InquirySince 1977,” January 2010,http://www.nipsa.in/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/Sri-Lanka_final_3.pdf (accessedFebruary 13, 2013), p. 46.[24]Plantain flowers are hard and cone-shaped, approximately 8-inches long.[25]UN Commission on Human Rights, Report of the Special Rapporteur, Mr. Nigel S.Rodley, submitted pursuant to Commission on Human Rights resolution 1997/38, UNDoc, E/CN.4/1998/38/Add.1, December 24, 1997.[26]From UN Commission on Human Rights, Report of the Special Rapporteur,Nigel S. Rodley, submitted pursuant to Commission on Human Rights resolution1997/38, UN.Doc E/CN.4/1998/38/Add.1, December 24, 1997,http://www.unhchr.ch/Huridocda/Huridoca.nsf/0/67afc13d3e01da61c12566110055160b?Opendocument(accessed January 2, 2013): “On 17 May, persons believed to be policeofficers allegedly entered her home and raped her, after which they threw agrenade at her genitals, which resulted in her death.”[27]Kishali Pinto-Jayawardena, “Still Seeking Justice in Sri Lanka:Rule of Law, the Criminal Justice System and Commissions of Inquiry since1977,” International Commission of Jurists, January 2010,http://www.nipsa.in/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/Sri-Lanka_final_3.pdf (accessedFebruary 13, 2013), pp.  52-53.[28]United Nations Economic and Social Council, Integration of the HumanRights of Women and the Gender Perspective, UN Doc E/CN.4/2001/73/Add.1,January 23, 2001, http://daccess-ddsny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G01/104/44/PDF/G0110444.pdf?OpenElement (accessedJanuary 2, 2013) para. 51-57.[29]Amnesty International, “Sri Lanka: Rape in Custody,” January 28,2002, ASA/37/001/2002,”http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/3c552e584.html (accessed January 2, 2013).[30]M. Peel, A. Mahtani, G. Hinshelwood, D. Forrest, “The sexual abuseof men in detention in Sri Lanka,” The Lancet, vol. 355, issue9220 (June 10, 2000),http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736%2800%2902368-0/fulltext(accessed January 2, 2013).[31]See, e.g. Freedom from Torture, “Out of the Silence: New Evidenceof Ongoing Torture in Sri Lanka: 2009-2011,” November 7, 2011,http://www.freedomfromtorture.org/sites/default/files/documents/Sri%20Lanka%20Ongoing%20Torture_Freedom%20from%20Torture_Final%20Nov_07_2011.pdf(accessed January 3, 2013); “Victims of Sri Lankan conflict arriving withincreasingly severe scars,” Freedom from Torture media release, April 9,2009, http://www.freedomfromtorture.org/news-blogs/2434 (accessed January 3,2013); Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), “Sri Lanka: A Report on 323Cases of Police Torture,” June 24, 2011,http://www.humanrights.asia/news/ahrc-news/AHRC-STM-085-2011/ (accessed January2, 2013); and World Organisation Against Torture, “State Violence in SriLanka: Alternative Report to the United Nations Human Rights Committee,”January 2004, http://www.omct.org/files/2004/01/2444/stateviolence_srilanka_04_eng.pdf(accessed January 3, 2013).[32]UN Commission on Human Rights, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the questionof torture, Theo van Boven, submitted pursuant to Commission resolution2002/38, UN Doc, E/CN.4/2003/68/Add.1, February 27, 2003,http://unispal.un.org/UNISPAL.NSF/0/7B874EAB39CFFE5D85256E6F004B90D3 (accessedJanuary 2, 2013).[33]See, e.g., “How security forces committed war crimes on innocentSinhalese two decades ago?,” Sri Lanka Guardian, October 9, 2011,http://jdsrilanka.blogspot.com/2011_10_09_archive.html (accessed January 2,2013), which highlights an interview by Right to Life (www.right2lifelanka.org)with a woman allegedly raped by security forces in torture centers where JVP suspectswere held.[34]Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), “Sri Lanka: A Report on 323 Casesof Police Torture,” June 24 2011,http://www.humanrights.asia/news/ahrc-news/AHRC-STM-085-2011/ (accessed January2, 2013); provides summaries of 323 of the most serious of some 1,500 policetorture cases reported to the organization during that period.[35]Government of Sri Lanka, “Final report of the Commission  ofInquiry into Involuntary Removal or Disappearance of Persons in the Western,Southern and Sabaragamuwa Provinces, No. V,” 1997, p. 132.[36]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), G.A. res.2200A (XXI), U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), entered into force March 23, 1976. SriLanka acceded to the ICCPR on June 11, 1980.[37]Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment orPunishment (“Convention against Torture”), G.A. Res. 39/46, U.N.Doc. A/39/51, entered into force June 26, 1987. Sri Lanka ratified theConvention against Torture on February 2, 1994.[38]Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination againstWomen (CEDAW), adopted December 18, 1979, G.A. res. 34/180, 34 U.N. GAOR Supp.(No. 46) at 193, U.N. Doc.A/34/46, entered into force September 3, 1981,ratified by Sri Lanka on October 5, 1981.[39]Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), G.A. res. 44/25, annex, 44U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered into forceSept. 2, 1990. Sri Lanka ratified the CRC on July 12, 1991.[40]See, e.g. Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, adoptedAug. 30, 1955, by the First United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crimeand the Treatment of Offenders, U.N. Doc. A/CONF/611, annex I, E.S.C. res.663C, 24 U.N. ESCOR Supp. (No. 1) at 11, U.N. Doc. E/3048 (1957), amendedE.S.C. res. 2076, 62 U.N. ESCOR Supp. (No. 1) at 35, U.N. Doc. E/5988 (1977).[41]The ICCPR prohibits torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degradingtreatment (art. 7) and protects women’s right to be free fromdiscrimination based on sex (arts. 2(1) and 26).[42]See UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment 31, Nature of the GeneralLegal Obligation on States Parties to the Covenant, U.N. Doc.CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.13 (2004), para. 15. See also Updated Set of Principles forthe Protection and Promotion of Human Rights through Action to Combat Impunity(“Impunity Principles”), U.N. Doc. E/CN.4/2005/102/Add.1, February8, 2005, adopted by the UN Commission on Human Rights in ResolutionE/CN.4/2005/81, April 15, 2005, principle I; Basic Principles and Guidelines onthe Right to a Remedy and Reparation for Victims of Gross Violations ofInternational Human Rights Law and Serious Violations of InternationalHumanitarian Law (“Reparations Principles”), adopted December 16,2005, G.A. res. 60/147, U.N. Doc. A/RES/60/147 (2005), principle 11.[43]UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment 31, Nature of the GeneralLegal Obligation on States Parties to the Covenant, U.N. Doc.CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.13 (2004), para. 16.[44]UN Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against Women, December 20, 1993,G.A. res. 48/104, 48 U.N.GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 217, U.N. Doc. A/48/49 (1993).[45]In its December 2011 Concluding Observations to Sri Lanka, the CommitteeAgainst Torture stated: “As a matter of urgency, the Committee calls uponthe State party to take immediate and effective measures to investigate allacts of torture and ill-treatment and prosecute and punish those responsiblewith penalties that are consistent with the gravity of their acts. It callsupon the State party to ensure that torture is not used by law enforcementpersonnel and members of the military. In addition to these measures, the Stateparty should unambiguously reaffirm the absolute prohibition of torture andpublicly condemn practices of torture, accompanied by a clear warning thatanyone committing such acts or otherwise complicit or participating in torturewill be held personally responsible before the law for such acts and will besubject to criminal prosecution and appropriate penalties, ConcludingObservations of the Committee Against Torture, Sri Lanka, December 8, 2011, UNDoc CAT/C/LKA/CO/3-4.[46]ICCPR, arts. 9 & 14.[47]Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 29: States of Emergency(article 4), U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.11 (2001), reprinted in Compilationof General Comments and General Recommendations Adopted by Human Rights TreatyBodies, U.N. Doc. HRI/GEN/1/Rev.6 at 186 (2003), para. 16.[48]Sri Lanka ratified the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 in 1959. Customaryinternational humanitarian law has been set out in International Committee ofthe Red Cross (ICRC), Customary International Humanitarian Law, (Cambridge:Cambridge Univ. Press, 2005).[49]See, e.g. Third Geneva Convention, art. 17; Protocol Additional to theGeneva Conventions of August 12, 1949, and relating to the Protection ofVictims of Non-International Armed Conflicts (Protocol II), 1125 U.N.TS 609,adopted June 8, 1977, arts. 5(2) &  6 (Sri Lanka has not signedProtocol II, but many of its provisions are recognized as customary internationallaw); ICRC, Customary International Humanitarian Law, rule 90; Rome Statute ofthe International Criminal Court (Rome Statute), U.N. Doc. A/CONF.183/9, July17, 1998, entered into force July 1, 2002, art. 8(2)(c)(i) and (ii).[50]Common article 3 to the 1949 Geneva Conventions, (1)(a) and (c).[51]See Customary International Humanitarian Law, rule 93, citing CommonArticle 3, Protocol II, art. 4(2), etc.[52]The obligation of states to prosecute serious breaches of internationalhumanitarian law is outlined in each of the Geneva Conventions and in ICRC,Customary International Humanitarian Law, rule 158.[53]Rome Statute, art. 8(2)(b)(xxii) and (e)(vi); and 7(1)(g).[54]ICRC, Customary International Humanitarian Law, rule 153; Rome Statute,art. 28.[55]The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 1978prohibits torture under chapter 3, article 11, providing that: “No personshall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment orpunishment.” Article 11 is an entrenched safeguard and as such can onlybe amended with approval of a two-thirds majority of Members of Parliament orby a simple majority in a public referendum. The Constitution does notexpressly recognize the right to life and, until 2003, this had significant implicationsfor the prohibition of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatmentor punishment. In 2003, however, the Sri Lankan Supreme Court inferred theright to life as flowing from article 13(4) of the Constitution, which providesthat “no person shall be punished with death or imprisonment except byorder of a competent court made in accordance with procedure established bylaw.”[56]The Sri Lankan Constitution in article 155 authorizes the president toissue emergency regulations “amending or suspending the operation of theprovisions of any law, except the provisions of the Constitution.”[57]Ibid.[58]The emergency regulations have consistently deviated from internationalstandards, such as the ICCPR and the Convention against Torture. Specifically,on their face and in practice the emergency regulations are in conflict withICCPR article 6 on the freedom from arbitrary deprivation of life, article 7 onthe prohibition of torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment orpunishment, article 9(1) on the rights of liberty and security and theprohibition of arbitrary arrest and detention, article 9(2) on the right to beinformed of the reason for one’s arrest, article 9(3) on the right to bepromptly produced before a judge, article 9(4) on the right to take proceedingsbefore a court, article 9(5) on the entitling of a victim of a human rightsviolation to compensation and article 14 on the right to a fair trial. While,as mentioned above, Sri Lanka on several occasions submitted its derogations fromICCPR to the UN secretary-general under article 4, it often failed to indicatethe specific provisions from which it has derogated and the reasons for thederogation. See Asian Center for Human Rights, The State of Civil andPolitical Rights in Sri Lanka, (Michigan, US: The University of MichiganPress, 2003).[59]“Prevention of Terrorism (Detainees and Remandees) Regulations No. 4 of2011,” The Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary provisions) Act No. 48 of1979 Regulation, made by the President under section 27 of the Prevention ofTerrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act, No. 48 of 1979 read with paragraph (2) ofArticle 44 of the Constitution, Mahinda Rajapksa, President, Colombo, August29, 2011.[60]Emergency (Prevention and Prohibition of Terrorism and SpecifiedTerrorist Activities) Regulation No. 7 of 2006, art. 15; a similar provision isfound in PTA, art. 26.[61]“Secretary of Defense Re-circulates Presidential Directives on ProtectingFundamental Rights of Persons Arrested and/or Detained,” Statement by theMinistry of Defense, Public Security, Law and Order, April 25, 2007, http://www.defence.lk/new.asp?fname=20070425_02(accessed 6 May, 2012).[62]See, for example, International Crisis Group, “Sri Lanka's Human RightsCrisis,” Asia Report no 135, June 14, 2007,http://www.crisisgroup.org/~/media/Files/asia/south-asia/sri-lanka/135_sri_lanka_s_human_rights_crisis.ashx(accessed February 13, 2013).[63]See the Penal Code (Amendment) Act Nos. 22 of 1995 and 29 of 1998; the Code ofCriminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, No. 28 of 1998; the Judicature (Amendment)Act, No. 27 of 1998; and the Evidence (Special Provision) Act of 1999.[64]See, e.g., US Department of State, “2011 Country Reports on Human RightsPractices - Sri Lanka,” May 24, 2012, http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/4fc75a5eb4.html(accessed January 3, 2013); Freedom from Torture, “Sri Lankan Tamilstortured on return from the UK,” September 13, 2012,http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/505321402.html (accessed January 3,2013); Freedom from Torture submission to the Committee against Torture for itsexamination of Sri Lanka in November 2011, http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/sitecontent/documents/policyandlaw/coi/srilanka12/bulletin-december.pdf?view=Binary(accessed January 3, 2013).[65]UN Secretary-General, Report of the Secretary-General’s Panel ofExperts on Accountability in Sri Lanka, March 31, 2011, http://www.un.org/News/dh/infocus/Sri_Lanka/POE_Report_Full.pdf(accessed January 3, 2013).[66]President Rajapaksa continued to invoke section 12 of the Public SecurityOrdinance to allow the armed forces (army, air force and navy) to retainpolicing powers, including search and arrest, and proposed a new Bill to extendsome of the powers provided by emergency regulations.[67]JC Weliamuna, “Lifting of Emergency: Exposing the ShamExercise," Groundviews, September 16, 2011, http://groundviews.org/2011/09/16/lifting-of-emergency-exposing-the-sham-exercise/(accessed January 3, 2013).[68]Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act No. 48 of 1979,section 7(3): “A police officer conducting an investigation … shallhave the right of access to [persons arrested under the act] and to take suchperson during reasonable hours to any place for the purpose of interrogationand from place to place for the purposes of investigation.”[69]Prevention of Terrorism Act, No. 48 of 1979 (PTA), section 16(2): “Theburden of proving that any statement referred to in subsection (1) isirrelevant under section 24 of the Evidence Ordinance [which deems confessionsextracted “by inducement, threat or promise” to be irrelevant]shall be on the person asserting it to be irrelevant”; South AsiaTerrorism Portal (SATP), “Prevention of Terrorism Act, No. 48 of1979,” undated,http://www.satp.org/satporgtp/countries/shrilanka/document/actsandordinance/prevention_of_terrorism.htm(accessed January 3, 2013).[70]Human Rights Watch interview with PR, January 28, 2012.[71]Government of Sri Lanka, “Sri Lanka: Report of the Commission ofInquiry on Lessons Learned and Reconciliation,” November 2011,http://www.priu.gov.lk/news_update/Current_Affairs/ca201112/FINAL%20LLRC%20REPORT.pdf(accessed February 16, 2013), para: 4.222.[72]UN Secretary General, Report of the Secretary-General’s Panel ofExperts on Accountability in Sri Lanka, March 31, 2o11,http://www.un.org/News/dh/infocus/Sri_Lanka/POE_Report_Full.pdf (accessedFebruary 16, 2013) para: 148.[73]Human Rights Watch interview with VB, November 20, 2011.[74]UN High Commissioner for Refugees, UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines forAssessing the International Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from Sri Lanka,December 21, 2012, http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/50d1a08e2.html(accessed February 16, 2013), page: 27.[75]Human Rights Watch interview with MT, December 4, 2011.[76]A magistrate may also order that a medical examination be carried out by aJudicial Medical Officer if a suspect complains of torture or ill-treatment.[77]See Asian Human Rights Commission, “Sri Lanka: Police torture as anindicator of the constitutional degradation of the Rule of Law,” January12, 2011, http://www.humanrights.asia/news/ahrc-news/AHRC-ART-004-2011(accessed January 3, 2013).[78]Human Rights Watch interview with Sri Lankan human rights activist, June6, 2012.[79]See Sri Lanka Consolidated Acts, Code Of Criminal Procedure Act (No. 15of 1979) - Sect 122,http://www.commonlii.org/lk/legis/num_act/cocpa15o1979276/s122.html(accessed January 3, 2013).[80]Human Rights Watch interview with senior immigration barrister (namewithheld), London, January 8, 2012.[81]Human Rights Watch interview with CR, December 10, 2011.[82]Human Rights Watch interview with UK-based consultant psychiatristspecializing in trauma and depression (name withheld), January 12, 2012.[83]The Presidential Task Force for Resettlement, Development and Security inthe Northern Province (PTF) was established in May 2009 and has been chairedfrom the beginning by Basil Rajapaksa, one of the president’s brothersand now the minister of economic development. It is composed of senior centralgovernment officials and the heads of the police and all branches of themilitary. All its members are Sinhalese. The north’s provincial governor,G.A. Chandrasiri, is a Sinhalese retired major general.[84]Human Rights Watch interviews with Colombo-based human rights activist(name withheld), London,April 22, 2012.[85]Human Rights Watch interview with civil society activist (name withheld),Colombo, January 28, 2012.[86]See, e.g., K. Pinto-Jayawardena and J. De Almieda Guneratne, “HabeasCorpus in Sri Lanka; Theory &Practice of the Great Writ in ExtraordinaryTimes,” Law & Society Trust, January 2011,http://www.lawandsocietytrust.org/PDF/HABEAS%20CORPUS%20IN%20SRIL%20LANKA_%20THEORY%20AND%20PRACTICE%20OF%20THE%20GREAT%20WRIT%20IN%20EXTRAORDINARY%20TIMES.pdf(accessed January 3, 2013).[87] SeeThe Women and Media Collective, “Shadowing the State through CEDAW: Acompilation of the Sri Lanka NGO Shadow Report, CEDAW Concluding Observationsand other documents 2010/2011,” June 2010, pp. 41-42.[88]See Kishali Pinto-Jayawardena, The Rule of Law in Decline: Study onPrevalence, Determinants and Causes of Torture and Other Forms of Cruel,Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in Sri Lanka,(Copenhagen: The Rehabilitation and Research Center for TortureVictims, 2009).[89]Human Rights Watch interview with a civil society activist (namewithheld), December 18, 2012.[90]“There is an urgent need for psychological assistance in theNorth,” Groundviews, July 30, 2011,http://groundviews.org/2011/07/30/there-is-an-urgent-need-for-psychological-assistance-in-the-north/(accessed January 3, 2013).91Human Rights Watch interview with international NGO worker (namewithheld), February 26, 2012.92In a Sky news interview on May 21, 2009, Rajiva Wijesinha, then-secretaryto the disaster management and human rights ministry, responded to a questionon allegations of sexual violence by saying: “There are a few blue-eyedchildren in that camp. So you know that some of the NGOs have had a jolly goodtime when they were up in Vavuniya. So when you go up, just have a look and tryand identify the”; Sally Sara, “Sri Lanka Army asked to showrestraint,” ABC News, http://www.abc.net.au/am/content/2008/s2573085.htm(accessed January 3, 2013).93 AmandaHodge, “Tamil refugees forced into sex rackets,” The Australian,July 2, 2009,http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/tamil-refugees-forced-into-sex-rackets/story-e6frg6n6-1225744996639(accessed February 1, 2013); Quotes Palitha Kohona, then-secretary to theForeign Ministry and now Sri Lanka’s permanent representative to the UNin New York, describing allegations as “absolute rubbish” andclaiming “[t]hese [the military] are the guys who were winning the war– they could have raped every single woman on the way if they wanted to.Not one single woman was raped.”94 UnitedStates Mission to the UN, “Opening Remarks by Secretary of State HillaryRodham Clinton on the Adoption of a UNSC Resolution [1888] to Combat SexualViolence in Armed Conflict,” September 30, 2009,http://usun.state.gov/briefing/statements/2009/september/130054.htm (accessedJanuary 3, 2013).95 Ministryof Defence and Urban Development Sri Lanka,“‘Far-from-truth’- Sri Lanka refutes Clinton's baselessallegation,” December 30, 2010, http://www.defence.lk/new.asp?fname=20091002_04(accessed January 3, 2013).96See “Gotabaya Rajapaksa speaks to ‘HeadlinesToday’”, Transcurrents, August 11, 2011,http://transcurrents.com/news-views/archives/2921 (accessed January 3, 2013).97Ibid.98 UNGeneral Assembly, Report of the Committee against Torture, Forty-seventhsession (31 October-25 November 2011), Forty-eighth session (7 May-1 June2012), 12 November 2012, A/67/44 ,http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/50a0f9b12.html (accessed January 3, 2013).99On July 7, 2006, the president and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forcesand the Minister of Defense issued Directives to the Heads of the Armed Forcesand the Police Force stating that, “any officer who makes an arrest ororder of detention must, according to the above Directives, within 48 hoursfrom the time of arrest or detention, inform the HRC [Human Rights Commission]of such arrest or detention and the place of custody or detention.”[100]Human Rights Watch interview with KM, October 13, 2012.[101]Human Rights Watch interview with TJ, October 13, 2012.[102]In Sri Lanka, a military “camp” is the equivalent of a military“base.”[103]Human Rights Watch interview with DK, October 21, 2011. DK was receivingmedical care at the time of the interview.[104]The T56 or Type 56 is the Chinese version of the Russian Kalashnikovassault rifle.[105]Human Rights Watch interview with SA, April 26, 2012.[106]Human Rights Watch interview with VV, May 13, 2012.[107]Human Rights Watch interview with SJ, October 13, 2012.[108]Human Rights Watch interview with BL, May 13, 2012.[109]Human Rights Watch interview with GD, February 18, 2012.[110]Human Rights Watch interview with KP, January 8, 2012.[111]Human Rights Watch interview with YJ, December 30, 2011.[112]YJ was granted asylum by the UK Home Office under a fast track scheme.YJ’s legal representatives were informed of this decision. A copy of thisdecision is available with Human Rights Watch.[113]Human Rights Watch interview with PN, October 21, 2012.[114]Human Rights Watch interview with MB, December 30, 2011.[115]Medical personnel interview with JV, January 30, 2012, contained in amedico legal report prepared for the UK courts in support of an asylum claim.[116]Human Rights Watch interview with HG, January 8, 2012.[117]Human Rights Watch interview with IR, November 27, 2012.[118]Human Rights Watch interview with CK, November 16, 2011. Medical documentationwas not available in this case.[119]Medical personnel interview with KI, August 11, 2011; Contained in a medicolegal report prepared for the UK courts in support of an asylum claim.[120]Human Rights Watch interview with TT, January 8, 2012.[121]Human Rights Watch interview with YS, January 8, 2012.[122]Human Rights Watch interview with SV, London, February 4, 2012.[123]Human Rights Watch interview with FJ, December 28, 2011.[124]Human Rights Watch interview with NH, November 18, 2011.[125]Palmya sticks are made from the long sharp leaves of the Palmya tree, atall palm tree native to Sri Lanka.[126]Human Rights Watch interview with DB, December 28, 2011.[127]Human Rights Watch interview with PP, February 4, 2012.[128]Human Rights Watch interview with CR, December 10, 2011.[129]Human Rights Watch interview with LP, December 10, 2011.[130]Human Rights Watch interview with AR, December 10, 2011.[131]Human Rights Watch interview with RC, November 16, 2011.[132]Traditional dress worn by women in South Asia, comprising loose trousers anda long shirt.[133]Human Rights Watch interview with MT, December 4, 2011. Medical recordswere not available in this case.[134]Human Rights Watch interview with YN, Febuary 5, 2012.[135]Human Rights Watch interview with TR, November 12, 2011.[136]Human Rights Watch interview with DS, November 28, 2011.[137]Human Rights Watch interview with UM, London, January 10, 2011. UK asylumauthorities found UM’s claims credible. Medical records were notavailable to Human Rights Watch in this case.[138]Human Rights Watch interview with HB, December 10, 2011.[139]Human Rights Watch interview with VP, December 28, 2011.[140]Human Rights Watch interview with CN, December 10, 2011.[141]Medical personnel interview with WP, February 9, 2012, contained in a medicolegal report prepared for the UK courts in support of an asylum claim.[142]Human Rights Watch interview with GW, January 11, 2012.[143]Human Rights Watch interview with EB, November 26, 2011.[144]Human Rights Watch interview with VM, December 10, 2011.[145]Human Rights Watch interview with LB, December 23, 2011.[146]Human Rights Watch interview with MH, November 18, 2011. Medical records werenot available in this case.[147]Human Rights Watch interview with KD, November 20, 2011. Medical recordswere not available in this case.[148]Human Rights Watch interview with VB, November 20, 2011. Medical recordswere not available in this case.[149]Medical personnel interview with GF, January 20, 2012; Contained in amedico-legal report prepared for the UK courts in support of an asylum claim.[150]Medical personnel interview with PV, January 11, 2012, contained in amedico legal report prepared for the UK courts in support of an asylum claim.[151]Human Rights Watch interview with AP, November 20, 2011.[152]Human Rights Watch interview with EN, January 6, 2012.[153]Human Rights Watch interview with ZS, December 4, 2011.[154]Human Rights Watch interview with ST, December 18, 2011. Medical recordswere not available in this case.[155]Human Rights Watch interview with TF, December 14, 2011.[156]Human Rights Watch interview with OP, January 10, 2012.[157]Human Rights Watch interview with YT, December 28, 2011.[158]Human Rights Watch interview with NJ, January 10, 2012.[159]Medical personnel interview with RS, February 6, 2012; Contained in a medicolegal report prepared for the UK courts in support of an asylum claim.[160]Human Rights Watch interview with KN, November 18, 2011. Medical recordswere not available in this case.[161]Human Rights Watch interview with JS, February 4, 2012.[162]Human Rights Watch interview with JM, November 18, 2011.[163]Human Rights Watch interview with MG, November 18, 2011.[164]Ibid.[165]Human Rights Watch interview with RN, November 24, 2011.[166]Human Rights Watch interview with GL, November 22, 2011.[167]Human Rights Watch interview with TH, December 28, 2011.[168]Human Rights Watch interview with DJ, December 28, 2011.[169]Human Rights Watch interview with PR, January 28, 2012.[170]Human Rights Watch interview with MJ, December 28, 2011.[171]Human Rights Watch interview with BN, January 28, 2011.[172]Ibid.[173]A mentholated, topical cream used on nose and chest for providing reliefin a common cold.[174]Human Rights Watch interview with KF, January 10, 2011. Medical recordswere not available in this case.[175]Human Rights Watch interview with DH, February 4, 2012.[176]Human Rights Watch interview with MK, February 4, 2012.[177]Human Rights Watch interview with LV, February 4, 2012.[178]Human Rights Watch interview with JT, January 28, 2011.[179]Human Rights Watch interview with DV, January 10, 2012.[180]Conditions for release from custody involving regular visits to thepolice station.[181]Medical personnel interview with VA, June 16, 2011, contained in a medicolegal report prepared for the UK courts in support of an asylum claim.[182]Human Rights Watch interview with PT, February 8, 2012.Related ContentFebruary 26, 2013News ReleaseSri Lanka: Rape of Tamil DetaineesPolitically Motivated Sexual Assaults in Custody Continue Since ConflictFebruary 26, 2013News ReleaseSri Lanka: Rape of Tamil DetaineesRegion / CountryAsia Sri LankaProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch