Hamas Political Violence in Gaza | Under Cover of War | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload reportDownload report with coverDonate NowDownloadsDownload reportDownload report with coverApril 20, 2009Under Cover of WarHamas Political Violence in GazaAvailable InEnglishالعربيةעבריתHamas security forces on patrol in Gaza City, January 21, 2009.© 2009 Tyler Hicks/The New York Times/ReduxSummaryAfter Israel began its major military offensive in Gaza on December 27, 2008, Hamas authorities in the territory took extraordinary steps tocontrol, intimidate, punish, and at times eliminate their internal politicalrivals and those suspected of collaboration with Israel. The attacks continuedthroughout Israel’s campaign, and have slowed but not stopped since majorhostilities ceased on January 18, 2009.During the chaos of Israel’s offensive, which killedapproximately 1,350 Palestinian civilians and combatants and wounded about5,000, Hamas security forces or masked gunmen believed to be with Hamasextra-judicially executed 18 people, mainly those accused of collaborating withIsrael. Masked gunmen also beat and maimed by shooting dozens of Hamas’spolitical opponents, especially members and supporters of its main politicalrival, Fatah.The internal violence in Gaza has continued since Israel withdrew its forces. Palestinian human rights groups in Gaza have reported 14 morekillings between January 18 and March 31, 2009.So far, this violence has gone mostly unpunished.Despite promises to investigate unlawful killings and other abuses, Hamasauthorities, to Human Rights Watch’s knowledge, have only investigatedone alleged killing by members of their security forces or armed wing.The majority of Palestinians executed by other Palestiniansduring Israel’s military operations were men accused of collaborationwith Israel. Along with others, they had escaped from Gaza’s main prisoncompound after Israel bombed the facility on December 28. In addition to the 32killings mentioned above, the relatives of one suspected collaborator shot himto death “to restore the family’s honor” while Hamas forcesfailed to intervene.Hamas security forces have also used violence against knownFatah members, especially those who had worked in the Fatah-run securityservices of the Palestinian Authority (PA). Of particular concern is thewidespread practice of maiming people by shooting them in the legs, which Hamasfirst used in June 2007, when it seized control inside Gaza from Fatah.According to the Independent Commission for Human Rights (ICHR), the human rights ombudsman organization of the Palestinian Authority, unidentified gunmenin masks deliberately inflicted bullet wounds to the legs of at least 49 peoplebetween December 28, 2008 and January 31, 2009.In January and February 2009 Human Rights Watch interviewedthree men who had been shot in the legs, apparently by Hamas security forces, asdescribed below.  Two of them were Fatah supporters; one was a formermember of the Fatah-led Preventive Security force of the PA.  The thirdman had been overheard on the street criticizing Hamas.Abductions and severe beatings are another major concern.According to ICHR, unidentified perpetrators physically abused 73 Gazan menfrom December 28 to January 31, causing broken legs and arms. Human Rights Watch documented three such cases of Fatah supporters assaulted during and afterthe Israeli offensive, as well as one case of what appeared to be a politicallymotivated house arrest.The attacks by Hamas security forces against otherPalestinians during and since the recent major hostilities with Israel marked the worst outbreak of internal violence since Hamas took control inside Gaza in June 2007. But the types of violations are not new.  Human Rights Watch haspreviously documented similar abuses by Hamas police and the Internal SecurityForce, including arbitrary detentions accompanied by severe beatings andgunshots to the legs, and torture, sometimes leading to death.On the other side of the internal Palestinian divide, theFatah-run authorities in the West Bank have also increased repressive measuresagainst Hamas members and supporters there.  Between December 28, 2008,and February 28, 2009, Palestinian human rights groups recorded 31 complaintsof residents who said they had been tortured by Fatah-led securityforces.  They also recorded one known death in custody and the arbitrarydetention of two journalists from a private television station consideredpro-Hamas.  United States and European Union donors who fund and trainthese forces have expressed no public criticism of these serious human rightsviolations.In both Gaza and the West Bank, these abuses violatePalestinian law. The Palestinian Basic Law, considered the interimconstitution, guarantees the right to equal treatment before the law, freedomof expression and association, and fundamental due process rights.  Itprohibits torture and other mistreatment.An extensive body of international treaties,notably the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and theConvention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment orPunishment, also prohibit these abuses. Both the Hamas and Fatah authoritiesclaim to be the legitimate heads of the Palestinian Authority. Not being arecognized state, the PA cannot ratify these treaties, but PA officials haverepeatedly pledged to respect their standards. As a political party, Hamas haspublicly indicated on several occasions that it would respect internationalhuman rights norms.Hamas officials have said that they will investigateallegations of abuse by its security forces, and deny that there is any policyto target political opponents or critics.  Hamas Interior Ministryspokesman Ihab al-Ghusain told Reuters on January 29 that Hamas wasinvestigating Fatah accusations and would hold any guilty parties accountable.[1]In early February, Hamas spokesman Ghazi Hamad told Al-Jazeera: “I don'tignore that there were some mistakes made by members of Hamas, but I think thatis not a policy adopted by the leadership here.”[2]Hamas officials have statedthat on one occasion they disciplined police officers found to be involved in acustodial death.  On March 31, theministry of interior fired 11 police officers and placed them in custodypending a trial before a military court.  The police officers standaccused of involvement in the death of Zayed ‘Ayesh Mabrouk Jaradat, 40,who according to Palestinian human rights groups died under torture on March16.  The police in Rafah had reportedly detained Jaradat for drugpossession.It is difficult to determinewhether or not the abuses documented in this report resulted from a policydecision by Hamas leaders, but the extent and frequency of the violationsstrongly suggests such a policy.  At the very least, Hamas security forcesare not doing enough to prevent or punish these abuses.During periods of armed conflict, Hamas, as the effectiveauthority in Gaza, is entitled to take appropriate measures to ensure security,including by detaining individuals who pose a genuine security risk. Butdetentions cannot be arbitrary or target a group or category of persons forpolitical as opposed to security reasons.  Physical abuse againstdetainees, including torture and summary executions, is strictly forbiddenunder all circumstances.MethodologyAfter being denied entry into Gaza by Israel during major hostilities, Human Rights Watch researchers entered Gaza via the Rafah bordercrossing with Egypt on January 21, 2009, and over the following two weeksconducted 13 interviews with the victims of and witnesses to the abusesdocumented in this report. Human Rights Watch researchers also spoke with localhuman rights groups and journalists who had researched these issues, beforeleaving Gaza on February 4, when Egypt again closed the border.  Israel continues to deny Human Rights Watch access to Gaza.  An additional victim wasinterviewed in Egypt on February 10.On March 5, 2009 Human Rights Watch submitted a list ofdetailed questions to the government of Ismail Haniya regarding alleged abusesby Hamas security forces.  A follow-up letter was sent on March 13.Both letters are provided as an appendix to this report.  As of April 10, Human Rights Watch had received no reply.Unlawful Violence against Political Rivals in GazaDuring Israel’s major military offensive in the GazaStrip, which resulted in the deaths of approximately 1,350 Palestiniancivilians and combatants and wounded about 5,000[3], Hamas authoritiesthere took extraordinary steps to control, intimidate, punish, and at timeseliminate their internal political rivals as well as persons suspected ofcollaboration with Israel.  These attacks by Hamas-controlled securityforces and the group’s armed wing against other Palestinians during andsince the recent fighting marked the worst outbreak of internal violence sinceHamas took control inside Gaza in June 2007.[4]The Hamas internal security forces have two main pillars:the police and the Internal Security Force (al-Amn al-Dakhili),which deals with matters of territorial security and political crimes, similarto the Fatah-run Preventive Security Service in the West Bank. Hamas’sarmed wing, the 'Izz-al-Din al-Qassam Brigades, dealsprimarily with external security, and in particular the hostilities with Israel. In Gaza, Hamas also controls the National Security Force, a PA-wideforce with responsibility for border security.Both the police and Internal Security Force sustainedextensive damage during the Israeli offensive.  Israeli air strikes onDecember 27 killed scores of policemen, including police chief TawfiqJabber, and subsequently destroyed dozens of police stations andfacilities across Gaza.  On January 15, an Israeli air attack killedInterior Minister Said Siyam together with nine others.  Nonetheless, Human Rights Watch researchers in Gaza after major hostilities had stopped observed that theHamas government and security forces apparently still had the capacity tomaintain internal order.  Hamas security forces appeared organized, withvisible patrols and police functioning out of makeshift offices. In lightof that degree of control, it seems unlikely that other armed groups were ableto move freely and carry out many of the beatings, shootings and killingsdocumented in this report.The unlawful violence by Hamas forces in the Gaza Stripsince late December 2008 falls into several categories: killings and maimingsby masked gunmen known or suspected to be affiliated with Hamas; executions ofsuspected collaborators; extra-judicial killings, torture, and othermistreatment; and arbitrary detention.Killings and Maimingsby Masked GunmenLocal human rights organizations have documented a total of30 cases of killings and scores of shootings by masked gunmen. According to theICHR, the human rights ombudsman organization of the Palestinian Authority(PA), masked gunmen killed 28 Palestinians from December 27, 2008 to February27, 2009.[5]In addition to the 28 deaths that witnesses attributed to masked gunmen, theICHR reported the death of Hasan Mohamed Hasan Hirz, 39, whose body, showingbruises and signs of torture, was found in Gaza City’s al-Shifa hospitalon February 28, a day after he was last seen leaving his home.  Accordingto the Palestinian Centre for Human Rights (PCHR), an independent human rightsgroup based in Gaza, Hamas security forces or unidentified gunmen killed atleast 29 Gaza residents between the start of Israel’s military operationand February 27; 26 of these cases were also recorded by ICHR.[6]Human Rights Watch documented one incident in which maskedgunmen killed a Gaza resident and three incidents in which they shot and maimedGazans.In the case resulting in death, at around 6 p.m. on January4, 2009, members of the al-Najjar family were sitting outside their home in theSheikh Radwan neighborhood of Gaza City when four men wearing masks andcarrying AK-47 assault rifles approached the house.  Two family memberswho were present told Human Rights Watch that the gunmen wore unmarked blackuniforms and ammunition vests, but the family did not identify them as Hamas.When the gunmen ordered everyone to stand up and raise their hands, the head ofthe household, Hisham al-Najjar, age 55, protested, the two witnesses said. Anargument ensued and one of the gunmen fired a shot, hitting no one. At leastfive women inside the house came rushing out, and in the chaos the gunmenopened fire, killing Hisham al-Najjar and wounding ten members of the familyand a family friend. The victims ranged in age from a 12-year old girl, AhlamHisham al-Najjar, who was shot in the leg, to Zakkia al-Najjar, 70,Ahlam’s grandmother, who was shot in both legs.[7]Human Rights Watch observed the bandages on both her legs.Click to expand ImageOn January 4, 2009, masked gunmen in Gaza City shot and killed Hisham al-Najjar and wounded ten members of the family, plus a familyfriend.  Hisham’s mother, Zakkia al-Najjar, 70, was wounded inboth legs.© 2009 Fred Abrahams/Human Rights Watch“After the gunmen left, I saw a sea of blood,”said Amar Hisham al-Najjar, 25. He told Human Rights Watch that the gunmen shothis father Hisham in the chest, the abdomen, and the legs.[8]“There was no electricity and no ambulances because of the war, so wetried to stop the bleeding and got our friends to drive the wounded to al-Shifahospital, where my father died,” he said.  “The Hamas policeat the hospital questioned me about what happened, and they said they’dget back to me, but there’s been nothing.  I’m not accusinganyone, but we demand a real investigation.”Amar’s cousin, Saleh Sofian al-Najjar, 21, a tailorwho was shot in the leg during the attack, confirmed this version of events.[9]Human Rights Watch saw Saleh’s and Amar’s bandaged legs but didnot inspect the wounds.  Saleh and Amar al-Najjar showed Human Rights Watch seven spent bullets that they said they had collected at the scene. Human Rights Watch identified the cartridges as 5.62 mm rounds for the AK-47 rifle.Apart from Amar al-Najjar, a former member of the PAPresidential Guard, two others of those shot had worked in the PalestinianAuthority’s Preventive Security and National Security forces prior to theHamas takeover of Gaza in June 2007.In a second case, at around 7 p.m. on January 26, fourmasked men wearing dark brown military jackets and carrying automatic weaponsgrabbed a 38-year-old former member of Fatah’s Preventive Security as hewalked near his home in Gaza City.  According to the victim, who asked toremain anonymous, the men threw him into the covered back of an Isuzu pickuptruck, covered his face with his kaffiyeh (scarf), and drove him to alocation he later identified as a Hamas training base around 500 meters fromhis home.  “They took me out of the truck and said, ‘What doyou want to do before you die?’” he said.[10]The men uncovered his face and allowed him to recite theevening prayer, he said, and then covered his face again and drove him toanother location where they forced him to sit on the ground with his legsextended.  “As soon as I did that, two of them shot me in the leftleg,” he said. Human Rights Watch observed his bandaged left leg.Click to expand ImageOn January 26, 2009, four masked gunmen took this formermember of the Fatah-run Preventive Security from his home in Gaza City and shot him twice in the leg.  © 2009 Fred Abrahams/Human Rights WatchIn a third case, a man in his 20s who asked not to beidentified told Human Rights Watch that he had “made a mistake” inmid-January when he criticized a Hamas leader in a conversation on the streetwith friends.[11]He believes his remark was overheard by someone in the area. Later thatevening, more than a dozen armed men with black masks and red kaffiyehtook him from his home, he said, and brought him to a solitary area where theyshot him three times in the lower legs and ankles.He told Human Rights Watch: “About fourteen of themcame for me.  They forced me to go from my home to a dark place near amosque and four of them shot me in the legs, one shot each, but onemissed.  Hamas pays people to listen for them – we call them‘drones’[12]– and the drones overheard me.  The man added that he was notpolitically active and was not a member of Fatah.  Human Rights Watchobserved the man’s heavily bandaged legs.Click to expand ImageThis man said he “made a mistake” when hecriticized Hamas on a Gaza City street in mid-January 2009.  Later thatday masked gunmen took him from his home and shot him twice in the right legand once in the left.© 2009 Fred Abrahams/Human Rights WatchIn other cases, Hamas security forces reportedly shotindividuals opposed to Hamas rule in Gaza who had openly supported Israel’s attack. Human Rights Watch interviewed one such person, who was recoveringin Egypt from multiple gunshot wounds to the left leg. “I was so happythey bombed that I was giving out sweets,” the man said, his injured legstill requiring him to use a wheelchair.[13]  According tothe man, he was walking home from visiting a friend in Gaza City on January 1 when he saw two young men whom he did not know carrying AK-47 assaultrifles.  They pointed their weapons at his legs and one of them openedfire, he said.  An ambulance took him to al-Shifa Hospital, where he saidhe shared a room with two other men, whose names he did not know, who saidHamas forces had also shot them in the legs.Click to expand ImageAlleged Hamas gunmen shot this man inthe left leg on January 1, 2009, after he had welcomed the Israeli offensive bygiving out candy in Gaza City.  © 2009 Fred Abrahams/Human Rights WatchExecutions of Suspected CollaboratorsApproximately 800 convicted prisoners and persons were beingheld in pre-trial detention in the central prison in Gaza City when Israeli airstrikes began on December 27, 2008, according to the ICHR, which had visitedthe facility earlier that month.  Hamas authorities released about 580 ofthe prisoners after the bombings started, but kept in custody roughly 115alleged collaborators with Israel, about 70 Fatah supporters held on variouscharges, and some persons convicted of criminal offenses who had been sentencedto death.[14]Some of the remaining detainees escaped the following day when Israel bombed the prison, but were subsequently tracked down and killed by maskedgunmen.  The ICHR documented 20 cases of escaped prisoners being shot andkilled by masked gunmen from December 28 to January 31; at least 12 of thevictims had been detained in the prison for allegedly “collaborating withthe enemy.”[15]Seventeen of the 29 people killed by gunmen that the Palestinian Center for Human Rights (PCHR) reported from December 28 to February 27 were prisoners anddetainees who had fled the prison compound after Israel’s attack,including 13 men sentenced to death for collaboration with Israel, three convicted of common crimes, and one man awaiting trial.[16]Click to expand ImageAn inmate in Gaza central prison, October 2007.  Israel bombed parts of the facility on December 28, 2008.© 2007 Fred Abrahams/Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch interviewed a Fatah member who was stilldetained at the central prison when Israel bombed the facility on December28.  The prisoners had attempted to escape at around 6 p.m. on December27, he said, after prison guards left the facility, but detainees who reachedthe prison yard came under gunfire from buildings surrounding the prisoncompound. “Two people were shot immediately, one in his head and thesecond in the chest,” the witness said.  “The shooting wascoming from everywhere.”[17]An hour and a half later, he said, 30 armed men in police uniforms and civilianclothes entered the compound, firing pistols at inmates’ legs and beatingthem to force them back to their cells.  The witness recognized one of themen as a Hamas Internal Security Force officer.[18]The security forces quickly took control, and punished some prisoners byhitting them on the hands with a thin wooden stick.  The security forcesthen released most of the detainees, including persons detained for drugsoffenses, fraud, violating court rulings, and some alleged collaborators.Detainees who were sentenced to death, Fatah members, and most of the allegedcollaborators were not released.Israel bombed the facility at around 10:30 a.m. thefollowing day, December 28, the witness said. “I was coming out of thebathroom and suddenly I saw the wall of a room on the first floor flying away.Two or three bombs hit that place at nearly the same time. The energy of theblast threw us toward the main gate.  There was white smoke. I regainedconsciousness and saw many prisoners wounded due to the shelling and thecollapse of the walls.” When he attempted to escape, he came under firefrom security forces outside the prison. He said:I ran to the street, along with tens of prisoners, but wecame under fire from the security forces [who had entered the prison theprevious night]. I saw three of them chasing down a fleeing prisoner, shootinghim in the leg and taking him away in a car.  They grabbed anyone theycould catch and put him in a car. A friend of mine who is a policeman helpedget me out of the area.A reporter for the New York Times witnessed thekilling of one alleged collaborator (whose death was also documented by thePCHR). On December 29, the journalist watched as a group of men pretended totransfer Saleh Hajoj, 32, from one ward of al-Shifa hospital in Gaza City.[19]He and five other alleged collaborators had reportedly been transferred to thehospital from the central prison after Israel bombed the facility. A number ofpeople were watching as one of the men fatally shot Hajoj in thehead.   The International Crisis Group reported that the man waskilled by his own family to “restore its honor.”[20]According to the New York Times, unidentified gunmen executed the fiveother detainees within 24 hours of Hajoj’s death.Rather than arrest those responsible for extra-judicialexecutions, Hamas officials have made statements that appear to justify thekilling of alleged collaborators.  On February 2, for example, Hamasgovernment spokesman Taher al-Nunu said, “The government will show nomercy to collaborators who stab our people in the back, and they will be heldaccountable according to the law.”[21] Al-Nunu added,“The government differentiates between violations of the law and thoseacts undertaken by the resistance during a time of war to protect itself fromthe danger of collaborators.”Extra-JudicialKillings, Torture and Other MistreatmentIn addition to shooting deaths and maimings, Hamas securityforces and unidentified assailants possibly linked to Hamas were alsoimplicated in custodial killings and torture against perceived politicalopponents and others.Human Rights Watch interviewed a Fatah activist who said hewas badly beaten by Hamas security forces in the Beach refugee camp on December29, 2008. “I was sitting with others listening to the radio around thefire at 9 p.m. when three masked men broke in,” he said, recalling thatthe men wore brown camouflage uniforms. He explained:There were eight of us sitting there. We were all fromFatah.  Then three masked militants broke in. They were dressed in browncamouflage military uniforms; they all had guns.  They pointed their gunsat us and cursed us, then they began beating us with iron rods, including a10-year-old boy whom they hit in the face.  They said we were“collaborators” and “unfaithful.”  Then they tookme outside, where there were four more men in masks.  They dragged me to adark place in the vegetable market about 300 meters away.  They beat mewith iron sticks and gun butts for 15 minutes.  They were yelling:“You are happy that Israel is bombing us!” until people came out oftheir houses, and they withdrew.[22]In total, Palestinian human rights groups documented ninedeaths by torture or severe beating in Gaza in January, February and March2009. According to both the ICHR and the PCHR:A group of armed masked men forced Zahir Ahmad al-Za`anin,40, from his home in Beit Hanoun on January 14; his body was found thefollowing day at Kamal Adwan Hospital in Beit Lahiya.On January 18, gunmen who said they were members of theHamas-run Internal Security Force arrested Hani Ibrahim Abu Reidah, 25, ofKhuza`a. He was found injured in an area east of Khan Younis on January22, and died after being transferred to Nasser Hospital in KhanYunis.  His body bore marks of torture.Armed men wearing masks grabbed Yunis Muhammad Abu Amrah,36, from his home in Gaza City on January 24; his family found him laterthat day, severely beaten, in the Tel al-Hawa neighborhood. He died inal-Shifa hospital from his injuries on January 28.[23]On January 30, members of the Internal Security Forcesummoned and detained Jamil Shakura, 51, from Khan Yunis refugeecamp.  After torturing and beating him on the head and body, securityagents transferred Shakura to Nasser Hospital in Khan Yunis, where he diedof a stroke on February 6.On February 6, masked men whom ICHR identified as InternalSecurity Force officers abducted Nihad Sa’adi al-Dabbaka, 47, fromal-Maghazi refugee camp in central Gaza.  He died on February 9, withmarks from apparent torture on his body.On February 7, ‘Ata Yousef Abdul Wahhabal-Bur’i, 39, from the Beach refugee camp, died after men claimingto be police abducted and beat him severely on January 8.[24]On March 8,security forces took Jamil Nasser Assaf, 20, from his Gaza City home on charges of theft.  He was tortured at the al-Tufah police station anddied on March 24.[25]PCHR also reported that on the morning of March 15, Rafah police arrested40-year-old Zayed ‘Ayesh Mabrouq Jaradat, on charges of drug possession. Theydetained him in the al-Quds Girls’ Secondary School, which became the defacto police headquarters after Israel bombed the Rafah police station. Accordingto PCHR, members of the security services tortured Jaradat during his detention,and he was pronounced dead on arrival at Martyr Mohammed Yousif al-Najjar Hospital in Rafah on March 16. The body was transferred to the forensic department atal-Shifa Hospital in Gaza City, where PCHR examined the body and saw bruising,particularly on the neck and shoulders, and that Jaradat’s toenails hadbeen removed.[26]Two other Gaza men died in February at the hands of maskedgunmen, who in both cases were identified as members of Hamas security forces.The ICHR reported that, according to the victim’s family, InternalSecurity Force officers took Basheer 'Ilayyan al Zaytouneh, a 41-year-oldresident of Gaza City, from his home on January 29. Zaytouneh’s familyidentified his body in al-Shifa hospital on February 2.[27]On February 26 at roughly 10 p.m., masked gunmen abducted Hamza Mahmoudal-Shoubaki, 40, from the al-Daraj neighborhood in the east of Gaza City; al-Shoubaki’s body was brought to al-Shifa hospital the next morning, withtwo gunshot wounds to the head, according to the PCHR. His wife identified themen who abducted him as members of the Internal Security Force.[28]In a case reported in the media, the family of UsamaAtallah, a teacher and Fatah supporter, said that gunmen who identifiedthemselves as Hamas abducted Attalah from the family home in Gaza City on January 27.[29]According to the Al-Jazeera English television network, two days later thefamily retrieved his body from the morgue at al-Shifa Hospital with signs ofstrangulation, blunt-force trauma to the head, and a gunshot wound to theshoulder.[30]Human Rights Watch separately interviewed two men who saidthey had each witnessed unidentified men they believed to be from Hamas badlybeat a suspected criminal on a Gaza street.  In the first case, men incivilian clothes whom the witness identified as Hamas members badly beat asuspected drug dealer with sticks and metal bars in Gaza City.  People onthe street watched but did not intervene, the witness said: “What couldpeople do? They are afraid.”[31]In the second case, men whom the witness believed to be Hamas beat a suspectedcriminal in the Tel al-Hawa neighborhood of Gaza City with sticks and bars.[32]Both men believed the assailants came from Hamas because other armed groupscould not operate in such a way publicly.On March 10, the London-based pan-Arab daily Al-Sharqal-Awsat reported the alleged torture by Hamas police of ten members ofSaraya al-Quds, the armed wing of Islamic Jihad.[33]The paper reported that Hamas police detained the ten men, from Khan Yunis, andtortured them in order to coerce them to sign pledges that they would not firerockets at Israel.Since the end of December 2008, Fatah-run Palestiniansecurity services in the West Bank have stepped up arbitrary arrests andharassment of Hamas members and supporters there.  The ICHR said it received 25 complaints in January 2009, and six complaints in February from West Bank residents who said they had been subjected to torture.[34]  OnJanuary 24, Palestinian security forces in the West Bank detained twojournalists from a pro-Hamas television station, Al-Quds.[35]According to the PCHR, on February 8 West Bank security forces announced thedeath of Muhammad Abd al-Jamil al-Haj, 30, from Jalqamus, who had been arrestedtwo days earlier. According to the ICHR, the Palestinian Legislative Councilhas formed an independent committee to investigate his death.[36]United States and European Union donors who fund and trainthese forces have expressed no public criticism of these serious human rightsviolations.Arbitrary Detention byHouse ArrestsAccording to the ICHR, from December 27, 2008, to the end ofJanuary, 2009, Hamas police ordered the house arrest of more than 150 Fatahmembers or supporters.  The PCHR said it had documented “hundreds ofcases” in which Hamas authorities have imposed house arrest on Fatahactivists and persons suspected of having committed a criminal offense.[37]Human Rights Watch interviewed a student who said Hamasofficials placed him under house arrest in late January, after the Israelioffensive had stopped.  “I was summoned to the medical clinic nextdoor to the police station – the police use it now that the station wasbombed,” the student said.[38]“They told me I was confined to my house for one month. I asked for apaper, because this means I will miss my exams and I need to show something tomy university.  They refused to give me any paper.  They said I wasarrested because I was a dishonorable citizen and a member of a dishonorablemovement, and that if I leave my house they will not be responsible for mylife.”Legal StandardsThe abuses documented in this report, includingextrajudicial executions, torture and other cruel and inhuman treatment, andarbitrary detention, are prohibited under international human rights law andinternational humanitarian law (the laws of war), which were applicable in Gazaduring the Israeli military offensive. The human rights abuses documented inthis report also violate the Palestinian Basic Law, which states in article 10that “basic human rights and freedoms shall be binding and respected.”[39]Customary international human rights law, such as found inthe Universal Declaration of Human Rights,[40] and treaty law,including the International Covenant on Civil and PoliticalRights (ICCPR) and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman orDegrading Treatment or Punishment, prohibit extra-judicial executions and otherdeliberate killings, and torture and cruel or inhuman treatment, among otherabuses described in this report. These prohibitions apply at all times, evenduring recognized states of emergency.[41]Likewise, the Palestinian Penal Procedures Law, which elaborates on theconduct of arrests and treatment of persons in custody by the security forces,allows some restrictions of fundamental rights during an officially declaredstate of emergency, but only “to the level that is necessary to achievethe objective stated in the decree that announces the state ofemergency.”[42]The prohibition of torture is one of the most fundamental ininternational human rights law. As set out in the Convention against Torture,torture means “any act by which severe pain or suffering, whetherphysical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person… by or at theinstigation of or with the consent or acquiescence of a public official orother person acting in an official capacity.” The UN Committee AgainstTorture, which reviews the compliance of states with the convention, has madeit clear that “those exercising superior authority -- including public officials-- cannot avoid accountability or escape criminal responsibility for torture orill-treatment committed by subordinates where they knew or should have knownthat such impermissible conduct was occurring, or was likely to occur, and theyfailed to take reasonable and necessary preventive measures.”[43]No exceptional circumstances whatsoever can justify torture.  States areresponsible for having effective systems in place for addressing victims’complaints, and prosecuting those who torture, those who order them to, andthose in positions of authority who fail to prevent or punish torture.The laws of war also prohibit unlawful killings andill-treatment of persons by a party to the conflict. Article 3 common to thefour Geneva Conventions of 1949, applicable to states and non-state armedgroups, prohibits, “at any time and in any place whatsoever” withrespect to civilians and combatants no longer taking part in the hostilities,“violence to life and person, in particular murder of all kinds, mutilation,cruel treatment and torture” and “the passing of sentences and thecarrying out of executions without previous judgment pronounced by a regularlyconstituted court affording all the judicial guarantees which are recognized asindispensable by civilized peoples.”[44]International human rights law also prohibits the arbitrarydeprivation of liberty.  Article 9 of the ICCPR defines as arbitrary andprohibits detention “except on such grounds and in accordance with suchprocedure as are established by law,” grants detainees the right tojudicial review of their detention and compensation if it is found to beunlawful.[45]Even during recognized states of emergency, fundamental guarantees, such as theright to be brought before a judicial authority, still apply.[46]The laws of war also prohibit the arbitrary deprivation of liberty.[47]Security forces may limit the movement of individuals during militaryoperations for specific reasons, however, they may not prohibit persons fromleaving their homes solely on the grounds of their affiliation with a politicalmovement.Hamas, as a non-state armed group, is bound by the laws ofwar. As a de facto governing authority, Hamas cannot be party to internationalhuman rights treaties, but it has publicly indicated it would respectinternational standards. In a speech in Gaza on June 21, 2006, Prime MinisterIsmail Haniya said Hamas was determined “to promote the rule of law, therespect for the judiciary, the separation of powers, the respect for humanrights, the equality among citizens; to fight all forms of discrimination; toprotect public liberties, including the freedom of the press andopinion.”[48]In the program of the National Unity Government, presented on March 17, 2007,Hamas stated its “respect for international law and internationalhumanitarian law insofar as they conform with our character, customs andoriginal traditions.”[49]The Gaza authorities consider themselves to be the lawfulgovernment of the Palestinian Authority and therefore should be bound by thePA’s repeated commitments to respect international human rights law.[50]In any event, Hamas de facto governs a specific territory and therefore shouldgovern in accordance with international human rights standards.[51]RecommendationsThe Palestinian authorities in the Gaza Stripshould take concrete and measurable steps to investigate, prosecute, and appropriatelypunish members of the security forces or others under their jurisdiction whoare responsible for the serious human rights abuses documented in this report.Human Rights Watch callson the Palestinian authorities in Gaza to implement the followingrecommendations:Issue clear and public instructions to allmembers of the security forces prohibiting extrajudicial killings,torture, and other mistreatment, and make clear that violators will bepunished to the fullest extent of the law; Initiate prompt and impartial investigationsinto all credible reports of torture or deaths of persons in custody.Discipline or prosecute as appropriate all individuals found responsible,including those persons working for or affiliated with Hamas-run securityforces or militia; andProvide prompt and adequate compensation tovictims of such abuses.AcknowledgmentsThis report was researched and written by Human Rights Watch staff Bill van Esveld, researcher, and Fred Abrahams, senior emergenciesresearcher; and Darryl Li, consultant to Human Rights Watch.  It wasedited by Joe Stork, deputy director of the Middle East and North Africadivision, James Ross, legal and policy director, and Iain Levine, programdirector.Human Rights Watch thanks all the victims and witnesses whorelated their experiences.  Thanks also to the human rights organizationswho provided assistance, in particular the Independent Commission for HumanRights, the Palestinian Centre for Human Rights and the Al Dameer Associationfor Human Rights.AppendixMarch 5, 2009PrimeMinister Ismail HaniyaJerusalem Street, Tal al-HawaGazaVIA FACSIMILE: + 970 8282 2159, + 970 8284 5040, + 970 82868971Dear Prime Minister Haniya,Over the weeks since Israel launched large-scale military operations in Gaza on December 27, Human Rights Watch hasissued a number of statements regarding violations of internationalhumanitarian law during the conflict. Our most recent intervention, of March 1,called on the United States, the European Union, and other donors meeting inSharm al-Sheikh to call upon Israel to open its crossings with Gaza to all humanitarian aid as well as to ordinary imports and exports. That statement canbe found at http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2009/02/28/israelgaza-donors-should-press-israel-end-blockadeHuman Rights Watch is currentlypreparing a report on recent human rights violations apparently carried out byforces affiliated with Hamas.  We would very much appreciate if youroffice provided us some information.  We are committed to representing thematerial in a complete and impartial way.  Your answers will help ensurethat we are able to do so.Our deadline for finalizingthis report is approaching.  If you can provide answers to these questionsby March 13 we will seek to reflect them in our report.  Thank you foryour time and assistance, and we look forward to engaging with your further onmatters of mutual concern.Sincerely,Joe StorkDeputy DirectorMiddle East and North Africa divisionQuestions for the Government of Ismail HaniyaHas your government conducted anyinvestigations into allegations that persons affiliated with Hamassecurity forces were responsible for extrajudicial executions during therecent fighting, including persons suspected of collaboration with Israelwho had been held in the Gaza Central Prison but escaped when Israeliwarplanes bombed that facility on December 28, 2008? If so, could youinform us which killings have been investigated and the results of thoseinvestigations?  Has your government conductedany investigations into shootings by masked gunmen that killed or woundedpersons during or after the Israeli military offensive? Has the governmentinvestigated any of the numerous incidents of shootings apparentlyintended to maim, such as shootings at the legs of persons who are or aresuspected of being supporters of Fatah? If so, could you inform us whichshooting incidents have been investigated and the results of thoseinvestigations? Human Rights Watch hasinformation concerning the deaths of Zaher Ahmad al-Za’anin (40),Jamil Shakura (51), Nihad Sa’adi al Dabbaka (47), Ata Yusif Abdal-Wahhab al-Bur’I, all of whom died apparently as the result oftorture following their apprehension or abduction by persons claiming towork for Internal Security or other Hamas security forces. Has yourgovernment investigated the circumstances surrounding any of these deaths?If so, could you provide information about the results of theinvestigations? Have the authorities taken into custody anyone suspectedof responsibility for any of these deaths? Has anyone from the InternalSecurity Force been held accountable for violating any of the provisionsin the Prime Minister’s Order No. 128/2007, which directed thesecurity organs to respect human rights?  If so, could you pleaseinform us of the names of the individuals and the current status of thoseinvestigations, or prosecutions, or of any disciplinary measurestaken?  With the destruction of Gaza’s prison facilities and most police stations, where are security forces holdingthose apprehended for, charged with or convicted of a crime?March 13, 2009Prime MinisterIsmail HaniyaJerusalem Street, Tal al-HawaGazaVIA FACSIMILE: +970 8282 2159, + 970 8284 5040, + 970 8286 8971Dear PrimeMinister Haniya,We wrote to youroffice on March 5 to request information for a report Human Rights Watch ispreparing on recent human rights violations apparently carried out by forcesaffiliated with Hamas.Because of thedeadline for our report, we had asked for your reply by today, March 13.Our report has been finalized and is now being translated.However, we willstill be able to reflect your responses to our questions if we receive them byMarch 17. Your answers will help ensure that we are able to represent thematerial in a complete and impartial way.Thank you onceagain for your assistance.Sincerely,Joe StorkDeputy DirectorMiddle East and North Africa division[1]Reuters, “Hamas accused of torture death of Gaza critic,” January29, 2009, http://www.reuters.com/article/latestCrisis/idUSLT773276, accessedFebruary 27, 2009.[2]Mike Kirsch, “Hamas accused of killing Palestinian opponents - 08 Feb09,” Al Jazeera English, available at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tJCGqQrxCaA, accessed February27, 2009.[3]Al-Mezan, an independent human rights organization based in the Gaza Strip,published the names of 1,342 Gazans killed in Israeli attacks during majormilitary operations. “Al Mezan Publishes a List of Palestinians Killed bythe IOF during the Israeli "Cast Lead" Operation in Gaza,”March 5, 2009,http://www.mezan.ps/en/details.php?id=8552&ddname=gaza%20destruction&id2=6,accessed March 13, 2009.The Palestinian Center for Human Rights (PCHR), anotherGaza-based independent human rights organization, reported that the Israeliattacks had killed 1,434 people. PCHR, “Confirmed figures reveal the trueextent of the destruction inflicted upon the Gaza Strip,” March 12, 2009,http://www.pchrgaza.org/files/PressR/English/2008/36-2009.html, accessed March13, 2009.[4]Human Rights Watch, Internal Fight: Palestinian Abuses in Gaza and the WestBank, July 29, 2008. This report also documented arbitrary arrests and tortureby Fatah-run Palestinian security services in the West Bank.[5]ICHR, “Monthly Report on Human Rights and Freedoms in the PNA-ControlledTerritory, January 2009,” http://www.ichr.ps/pdfs/eMRV-1-09.pdf, accessedFebruary 27, 2009, and “Monthly Report on Human Rights and Freedoms inthe PNA-Controlled Territory, February 2009,” http://www.ichr.ps/pdfs/eMRV-2-09.pdf,accessed March 11, 2009.[6]PCHRSpecial Report, “Inter-Palestinian Human Rights Violations in the GazaStrip,” February 3, 2009, p.2,http://www.pchrgaza.org/files/Reports/English/pdf_spec/Increase_rep.pdf,accessed February 27, 2009; “PCHR Demands Investigations into ViolentDeaths of Two Civilians in Gaza,” February 10, 2009,http://www.pchrgaza.org/files/PressR/English/2008/26-2009.html, accessed March8, 2009; and “PCHR Calls for Investigation into Gaza City Murder,”March 1, 2009, http://www.pchrgaza.org/files/PressR/English/2008/32-2009.html,accessed March 9, 2009. The one death ICHR reported in January that was notalso documented by PCHR is that of Saleh Salem Jahjouh, 38, of Beit Hanoun;according to the ICHR monthly report, his dead body was found with bullets tothe head, chest and legs in al-Shifa hospital on January 21, 2009. PCHR alsodocumented the killing of Saleh Salem al-Hajoj by his own family on December 29at al-Shifa hospital.[7]In addition to Hisham,  Ahlam and Zakkia al-Najjar, gunshot victimsincluded:  Amar Hisham al-Najjar, 25, a former member of the PresidentialGuard; Adham Hisham al-Najjar, 20, a house painter who suffered a flesh woundto the leg; Amran Hisham al-Najjar, 21, a former Preventive Security member wholost feeling in his leg after being shot; Riham Hisham al-Najjar, 16; SalehSofian al-Najjar, 21, a tailor; Mohamed Sofian al-Najjar, 26, a universitystudent; Ramsi Tawfiq al-Najjar, 36, also a house painter, and his wife, Manalal-Najjar, 31; and a family friend, Khamis Abd el Aziz Abu Nahel, 25, a formerNational Security Forces member.[8]Human Rights Watch interview with Amar Hisham al-Najjar, Gaza City, January29, 2009.[9]Human Rights Watch interview with Saleh Sofian al-Najjar, Gaza City, January29, 2009.[10]Human Rights Watch interview with former Preventive Security member, Gaza City, January 29,2009.[11]Human Rights Watch interview with gunshot victim, Gaza City, January 29, 2009.[12]“Drone”is a reference to the unmanned aerial vehicles frequently used by the IsraelDefense Forces, most notably in the recent military operations, forsurveillance and attack.[13]Human Rights Watch interview with Gaza City resident, Cairo, Egypt, February 10, 2009.[14]Human Rights Watch interview with ICHR staff, Gaza City, January 28, 2009. The InternationalCrisis Group reported that “115 collaborators and 60 political prisoners,were incarcerated in the Saraya, Hamas’s central jail in Gaza City, whenIsrael bombed the facility.”  International Crisis Group,“Ending the War in Gaza,” Policy Briefing No 26, January 5, 2009,p. 9, footnote 62.[15]Afive-page table listing the names of 20 men allegedly killed after escapingfrom the Gaza Central Prison and the al-Saraya Prison on December 28, 2008,appears at the end of the ICHR report. ICHR, “Monthly Report on HumanRights and Freedoms,” January 2009.[16]PCHR, “Inter-Palestinian Human Rights Violations,” p.2; “PCHRDemands Investigations into Violent Deaths of Two Civilians”; and“PCHR Calls for Investigation into Gaza City Murder.”[17]Human Rights Watch interview with former detainee, Gaza City, March 8, 2009.[18]Hamascreated the Internal Security Force in September 2007. In October 2007, Hamasdissolved the Executive Force and absorbed its personnel into the police, andappointed a former Fatah security officer, Tawfiq Jabber, as police chief,reporting to the minister of interior. Said Siyam, the minister of interior,was widely believed to control the police and the Internal Security Force. Human Rights Watch, Internal Fight: Palestinian Abuses in Gaza and the West Bank, July 29, 2008,p. 17. As noted, Israeli airstrikes killed Jabber and Siyam on December 27,2008 and January 15, 2009, respectively[19]Ethan Bronner and Taghreed El-Khodary, “No Early End Seen to ‘All-Out War’ onHamas in Gaza,” December 29, 2008, New York Times,http://www.nytimes.com/2008/12/30/world/middleeast/30mideast.html, accessedFebruary 28, 2009. See also Mike Kirsch, “Hamas accused of killingPalestinian opponents,” Al Jazeera English, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tJCGqQrxCaA,accessed February 27, 2009.[20]CrisisGroup, “Ending the War in Gaza,” p. 9, footnote 62.[21]“Hamas OKs killing of collaborators during war,” Al Arabiya/AFP,February 3, 2009, http://www.alarabiya.net/articles/2009/02/03/65607.html,accessed February 27, 2009.[22]Human Rights Watch interview with Fatah activist, Gaza City, January 29, 2009.[23]ICHR, “Monthly Report on Human Rights,” January, p. 4. PCHR,“Inter-Palestinian Human Rights Violations,” pp. 3, 4.[24]ICHR,“Monthly Report on Human Rights,” February, p. 2; PCHR, “PCHRDemands Investigations into Violent Deaths of Two Civilians in Gaza,”February 10, 2009,http://www.pchrgaza.org/files/PressR/English/2008/26-2009.html, accessedFebruary 27, 2009.[25]ICHR,“Monthly Report on Human Rights,” February, p. 2; PCHR, “PCHRDemands Investigations into Violent Deaths of Two Civilians in Gaza,”February 10, 2009,http://www.pchrgaza.org/files/PressR/English/2008/26-2009.html, accessedFebruary 27, 2009; PCHR, “PCHR Demands Investigation into Death of aCivilian Tortured by Members of the Intelligence Services in Gaza,” 25March 2009, http://www.pchrgaza.org/files/PressR/English/2008/42-2009.html,accessed April 4, 2009; ICHR, “ICHR calls for an investigation into theconditions that led to the death of a Palestinian citizen while he was beingheld by the police of the Deposed Government,” March 24, 2009,http://www.ichr.ps/index.php/etemplate.php?id=139, accessed April 4, 2009.[26]PCHR,“PCHR Demands Investigation into the Death of a Civilian Detained andTortured by Security Services in Rafah,” March 18, 2009,http://www.pchrgaza.org/files/PressR/English/2008/37-2009.html, accessed onApril 3, 2009.[27]ICHR, “Monthly Report on Human Rights,” February, p. 2.[28]PCHR, “PCHR Calls for Investigation into Gaza City Murder,” March1, 2009, accessed March 3, 2009.[29]“Hamas accused of torture death of Gaza critic,” Reuters.PCHR also reported this case: “Inter-Palestinian Human RightsViolations,” p. 4.[30]Mike Kirsch, “Hamas accused of killing Palestinian opponents – 08Feb 09,” Al Jazeera English.[31]Human Rights Watch interviews with anonymous witness, Gaza City, January 24,2009.[32]Human Rights Watch interview with anonymous witness, Gaza City, February 3,2009.[33]Al Sharq al Awsat, “الجهادتتهمحماسباعتقالناشطيهافيغزةوإجبارهمعلىتوقيعتعهدبوقفالصواريخ[Jihad accuses Hamas: activists arrested in Gaza and forced to sign a pledge tostop rockets],” March 10, 2009,http://www.aawsat.com/details.asp?section=4&issueno=11060&article=510382&search=الجهاد%20تتهم%20حماس&state=true,accessed March 13, 2009.[34]ICHR, “Monthly Report on Human Rights,” January, p.5, and“Monthly Report on Violations of Human Rights,” February 2009, p.4.[35]PCHR, “PCHR Condemns Continued Detention of Journalists by PreventiveSecurity Service in the West Bank,” February 12, 2009,http://www.pchrgaza.org/files/PressR/English/2008/28-2009.html, accessedFebruary 24, 2009. The journalists are Samer Khuweireh and Ahmad Bekawi. The ICHR confirmed that both men remained in detention as of February 25. Human Rights Watchtelephone interview with ICHR staff, Ramallah, February 25, 2009.[36]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with ICHR staff, Ramallah, February 24, 2009.[37]PCHR, “Inter-Palestinian Human Rights Violations,” p. 5.[38]Human Rights Watch interview with student, Gaza City, January 30, 2009.[39]ThePalestinian Basic Law was intended as a temporary constitution until theestablishment of an independent Palestinian state with a permanentconstitution. The Palestinian Legislative Council passed the Basic Law in 1997and President Yasser Arafat ratified it in 2002. It was amended in 2003 tointroduce a prime minister and in 2005 it to conform to the new Election Law.(See http://www.palestinianbasiclaw.org/2002-basic-law, accessed June 9, 2008).[40]Universal Declaration of Human Rights, G.A. res. 217A (III),U.N. Doc A/810 at 71 (1948).[41]ICCPR,art. 4 (non-derogable rights and states of emergency).[42]Article102.[43]UN Committee Against Torture, General Comment no2, CAT/C/GC/2, January 24, 2008.[44]CommonArticle 3 to the Geneva Conventions of 1949.[45]ICCPR, Article 9.[46]SeeICCPR, article 9 (prohibition on arbitrary detention) and article 4 (states ofemergency); see also Human Rights Committee,  GeneralComment 29, States of Emergency (article 4), U.N.Doc. CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.11 (2001), reprinted in Compilation of GeneralComments and General Recommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies,U.N. Doc. HRI/GEN/1/Rev.6 at 186 (2003), para. 11 (the ICCPR provisions onstates of emergency may not be invokes “as justification foracting in violation of humanitarian law or peremptory norms of internationallaw, for instance by taking hostages, by imposing collective punishments,through arbitrary deprivations of liberty or by deviating from fundamentalprinciples of fair trial, including the presumption of innocence.”).[47]SeeInternational Committee of the Red Cross, “Customary InternationalHumanitarian Law” (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005), rule 99.[48]Speech of Prime Minister Ismail Haniya at theconference “The New Government and the Agenda for Human Rights,”Gaza City, June 21, 2006 (as cited by “Human Rights Situation inPalestine and other Occupied Arab Territories,” Human Rights Council, A/HRC/8/17,June 6, 2008,http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrcouncil/docs/8session/A.HRC.8.17.doc(accessed June 16, 2008).)[49]“National Unity Government Program,” presented by Prime MinisterHaniya to the Palestinian Legislative Council, March 17, 2007 (as cited by“Human Rights Situation in Palestine and other Occupied ArabTerritories,” Human Rights Council).[50]According to article 10 of the Basic Law, the Palestinian National Authority“shall work without delay to become a party to regional and internationaldeclarations and covenants that protect human rights.” The PA hasexplicit legal obligations from the Oslo Accords, an umbrella term for theseries of agreements negotiated between Israel and the Palestine LiberationOrganization from 1993 to 1996. Annex I of the Protocol Concerning Redeploymentof the Interim Agreement of September 28, 1995, states that the Palestinianpolice will exercise powers and responsibilities to implement the memorandum“with due regard to internationally accepted norms of human rights andthe rule of law.” Article XIV of the 1994 agreement on the Gaza Strip andthe Jericho Area stipulates that both Palestine and Israel should respect humanrights. The Government of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization,“The Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement on the West Bank and the GazaStrip,” Annex I, article XI (1), Washington D.C., September 28, 1995. See“The “Roadmap”: Repeating Oslo’s Human RightsMistakes,” Human Rights Watch, May 6, 2003,http://www.hrw.org/backgrounder/mena/israelpa050603.htm, and “An Analysisof the Wye River Memorandum,” Human Rights Watch, November 1998,http://www.hrw.org/press98/nov/israel1102.htm.[51]According to the joint report on Lebanon and Israel issued by four UN SpecialRapporteurs, “It is especially appropriate and feasible to call for anarmed group to respect human rights norms when it exercises significant controlover territory and population and has an identifiable politicalstructure.” (“Mission to Lebanon and Israel,” Report of theSpecial Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, PhilipAlston; the Special Rapporteur on the right of everyone to the enjoyment of thehighest attainable standard of physical and mental health, Paul Hunt; theRepresentative of the Secretary-General on human rights of internally displacedpersons, Walter Kälin; and the Special Rapporteur on adequate housing as acomponent of the right to an adequate standard of living, Miloon Kothari,UN docA/HRC/2/7, para. 19.)Region / CountryMiddle East/North Africa Israel/PalestineProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch