Not the Way Forward: The UK’s Dangerous Reliance on Diplomatic Assurances | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload the reportDonate NowDownloadsDownload the reportOctober 22, 2008Not the Way ForwardThe UK’s Dangerous Reliance on Diplomatic AssurancesNot the Way ForwardThe UK's Dangerous Reliance on Diplomatic AssurancesSummaryRecommendationsTo theGovernment of the United Kingdom..To theBritish ParliamentTo therelevant institutions of the European UnionBritishPolicy on Diplomatic Assurances"Enhanced"Assurances or More of the Same?PendingAppeals to the House of LordsThe AlgeriancasesThe case ofAbu QatadaDomesticCriticism of UK PolicyRegionalDevelopmentsEuropeanCourt of Human RightsEuropeanUnionConclusionAcknowledgementsSummaryIn recent years the British government has been trying todeport a number of terrorism and national security suspects to countries inwhich they face a real risk of torture and other ill-treatment. Because theinternational ban on torture is absolute and the transfer of any person to arisk of such abuse is therefore illegal, the British government has secureddiplomatic assurances from the states to which it is trying to deport the personsthat they will not be subjected to mistreatment once they are returned. Theseassurances, the government claims, are sufficient to reduce or even eliminatethe risk of abuse.Not only does the government of the United Kingdom promote the use of such assurances at home, it has also expended a greatdeal of time and energy at the regional and international levels attempting tolegitimize the use of diplomatic assurances against torture. In recent years,British officials have engaged in vigorous lobbying at the European Union, theCouncil of Europe, and the United Nations to promote acceptance of diplomaticassurances as a counterterrorism tool.But the fact is that these assurances do not work. Incountries where torture is a serious problem, mere diplomatic promises areinsufficient to prevent torture. No matter how detailed such agreements are,they cannot eliminate the very real risk faced by people returned to countriesthat practice such clandestine, brutal abuse.Because diplomatic assurances are unenforceable promises, acountry that breaches them is unlikely to experience any serious consequencesif the assurances are violated. In many instances, moreover, it is practicallyimpossible to ascertain whether a breach has occurred. Because torture iscarried out in secret, and victims often do not complain for fear of reprisalsagainst them or their families, the practice is hard to investigate, and easyto deny. Notably, neither the sending state nor the receiving state has anyincentive to carry out such investigations seriously. To do so might not onlyreveal human rights violations, but might complicate efforts to rely onassurances in the future.These issues are central to two important appeals facing theHouse of Lords this month. In RB and U v. Secretary of State for the HomeDepartment and Secretary of State for the Home Department v. OO (Othman)-cases that will be heard on October 22 and October 28, respectively-theHouse of Lords will be examining the value of diplomatic assurances againsttorture in assessing whether terrorism suspects should be deported to theirhome states. The British government concedes that, but for the assurances, thedeportees would be at risk of torture; it is thus the effectiveness of theassurances that lies at the heart of the appeals.The potential deportees in the RB and U case areAlgerian, and the diplomatic assurances at issue in the case were negotiatedindividually, for each person. Omar Othman (a.k.a. Abu Qatada), the respondentin the Othman case, is a Jordanian national and radical Muslim clericaccused of ties to al-Qaeda. The assurances in his case come in the form of abroad "memorandum of understanding" between the United Kingdom and Jordan that purports to cover any Jordanian national deported back to that country.Notably, both cases involve countries in which the tortureand other abuse of national security suspects have been well-documented.If the two Algerians are returned to Algeria, they will mostlikely be detained by the notorious Department for Information and Security (DRS), whose operatives have been accused of-but never held accountable for-abuses such asbeatings, electric shock torture, suspending prisoners from the ceiling, andforcing them to ingest chemicals. If sent to Jordan, Othman would likely behanded over to the General Intelligence Department (GID), which has colludedwith the US government in renditions to torture, obstructed access to prisonsby the International Committee of the Red Cross, and been accused of committingserious abuses-such as brutal beatings and threats of rape-with virtualimpunity.These two pending appeals represent the first time that theHouse of Lords has grappled with the issue of diplomatic assurances. In theCourt of Appeal, the lower court that previously heard the two cases, therecord has been mixed. The Court of Appeal ruled in favor of allowing theAlgerians to be deported, but it barred Othman's return, concluding thatevidence extracted under torture from others in GID custody would likely beused in Othman's trial in Jordan. In a related ruling, involving two allegedmembers of the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group, the Court of Appeal held in April2008 that the men would be at risk of torture and of being denied a fair trialif returned to Libya.The British courts are the last domestic bulwark against thegrave violations that are likely to occur if people are sent back to abusivecountries in reliance on assurances.At the regional level, the European Court of Human Rightshas stood firm against assurances as sought by the UK and other governments: ina string of 2008 rulings concluding that diplomatic assurances are unreliable,the European Court dealt a hard blow to the UK government's persistent effortsto enshrine these agreements in law and practice. The Court ruled in key casesthat the use of diplomatic assurances for returns to countries such as Tunisia, Uzbekistan, and Turkmenistan would signal a regression in rights protection.While continuing to press its position in the courts, the UK government has also embarked on aggressive political lobbying efforts. The UK has asserted in various EU fora, for example, that diplomatic assurances, negotiatedoutside the multilateral human rights treaty framework, can provide an"effective way forward" for states seeking to expel persons who pose a threatto national security. And it has called any criticism of its diplomaticassurances policy "simply wrong," arguing that the policy is designed to complywith its human rights obligations, not to avoid them.To date, the UK government's efforts have been relativelyunsuccessful. Its reliance on diplomatic assurances has been criticized by theUnited Nations, rebuffed at the Council of Europe, and denounced within theBritish parliament. Opposition by numerous international actors and majordefeats in the courts indicate that a critical mass of experts and authoritiesview the assurances negotiated by the UK government as an ineffective safeguardagainst torture.There are broader moral, political, and national securityreasons to be concerned about the UK's promotion of diplomatic assurancesagainst torture. The British government promotes itself as a leader in theglobal effort to eradicate torture, through actions such as its early ratificationof the Optional Protocol to the United Nations Convention against Torture andits advocacy that other governments do the same. But the government'srelentless campaign to see "deportation with assurances" accepted throughout Europe reflects a more ambivalent attitude toward torture. That ambivalence sends the wrongmessage at a time when torture protection has been under assault in many partsof the world.The British government's "deportation with assurances"policy is also counter-productive at home. Since the July 2005 attacks on London, preventing radicalization and recruitment has been at the heart of the UK's counterterrorism strategy.  Whatever the alleged benefit of counterterrorism measureslike diplomatic assurances, in violating human rights in principle and practiceit is clear they undermine the UK's moral legitimacy at home and abroad,damaging its ability to win the battle of ideas that is central to long-termsuccess in combating terrorism.RecommendationsTo the Government of the United KingdomReaffirm the absolute natureof the obligation under international law not to expel, return, extradite,or otherwise transfer any person to a country or placewhere thereare substantial grounds for believing that he or she would be in danger ofbeing subjected to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment orpunishment. Halt immediately all effortsto remove foreign terrorism and national security suspectsat risk oftorture and ill-treatment on return in reliance on"diplomatic assurances"from countries with established records of practicing suchabuse,regardless of whether these unenforceable pledges areformalized in "memoranda of understanding."Drop immediately the effortsto have the Algerians and Jordanian whose cases are pending in the Houseof Lords deported to their home countries in reliance on assurances fromtheir respective governments against torture and prohibited ill-treatmenton return.Acknowledge publicly thatcounterterrorism measures that violate fundamental rights-such as measuresthat violate the ban on torture and returns to risk of torture-canalienate affected communities and hinder government efforts to stemradicalization and terrorist recruitment.Stop seeking to enshrine ininternational and regional law and practice the use of diplomaticassurances against torture and prohibited ill-treatment to facilitate thetransfer of foreign terrorism suspects to places where they areatrisk of such abuse.Withdraw the intervention in the European Court of HumanRights case Ramzy v. Netherlands and halt all efforts to weaken theabsolute ban on returns to risk of torture and prohibited ill-treatment. To the British ParliamentContinue the close scrutinyand resultant criticism of the government's "deportation with assurances"policy as reflected in reports by the UK Parliamentary Joint Human RightsCommittee and the House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee.Request the government, inparticular the home secretary, foreign secretary, and the prime minister,to set out and explain British policy and efforts in international fora topromote diplomatic assurances against torture, including in the EuropeanUnion, and legal interventions in European Court of Human Rights casessuch as Ramzy v. Netherlands and Saadi v. Italy.Request the Foreign and Commonwealth Office to provideinformation on the cost of the United Kingdom's interventions in casesconcerning returns to risk of ill-treatment including Ramzy v.Netherlands and Saadi v. Italy.To the relevant institutions of the European UnionRefuse all efforts to adopt acommon position or other formal policy statement on the use of diplomaticassurances against torture and ill-treatment for the transfer of terrorismand national security suspects to countries where they are at risk of suchabuse.Affirm that the use of diplomatic assurances againsttorture and ill-treatment for transfers to countries where such abuse isroutine undermines the EU Guidelines on Torture.British Policy on Diplomatic AssurancesThe British government's use of diplomatic assurances datesback to the mid-1990s. But it was only after a landmark House of Lords rulingin December 2004-in which the court held that the indefinite detention offoreign terrorism suspects violated the UK's international human rightsobligations-that "deportation with assurances" became a central plank of thegovernment's counterterrorism strategy.[1]As part of this strategy, the government signed "memorandaof understanding" (MOUs) with Jordan, Libya, and Lebanon to permit thedeportation with assurances of terrorism suspects based on promises from thehome state of humane treatment upon return.[2] The government alsosought to negotiate similar agreements with Algeria and other North African andMiddle Eastern governments. All the governments in question have welldocumented records of torture and ill-treatment, particularly of personssuspected of involvement in terrorism or radical Islamism.Notably, the Algerian government rejected these overtures,in particular the British government's request for a post-return monitoringscheme of visits to Algerian returnees. The UK government explained Algeria's refusal as the "sensitivity" of a post-colonial state to the suggestion that itneeded outside surveillance of its behavior.[3] In light of thefailed effort to obtain an MOU, the British government then claimed that theAlgerian Charter for Peace and National Reconciliation-adopted by a nationalreferendum in 2005 and followed by an amnesty law in February 2006-would protectthe deportees, making assurances and monitoring redundant.[4]In the end, Algerian President Abdelaziz Bouteflika agreed,in a July 2006 "exchange of letters" and notes verbale with UK then-Prime Minister Tony Blair, to negotiations for diplomatic assurances of humanetreatment and fair trial on a case-by-case basis.[5]The Algerian government also agreed that the British Embassy could maintaincontact with returned persons who were not detained, and with the next of kinof detainees.[6]"Enhanced" Assurances or More of the Same?Aware of documented cases in which persons sent home fromother countries based on diplomatic assurances have been abused, UK officials emphasize that the assurances that the British government secures are"enhanced." In particular, they claim that the UK MOUs offer added protectionbecause they provide for post-return monitoring.[7]In making this claim, however, the government has ignoredsome fundamental problems with monitoring isolated detainees: the fact thattorture occurs in secret, often using techniques difficult to detect, includingpsychological abuse; the lack of confidentiality and the consequent risk ofreprisals when complaining of abuse; and various documented forms ofobstruction to access to individual detainees by monitors, despite agreementsto the contrary.[8]The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) requires universal accessto all places of detention in a country and all detainees held in those places,precisely to avoid such pitfalls.[9]In addition to monitoring arrangements, the Britishgovernment argues that the formal assurances it seeks can be distinguished fromsimilar agreements brokered by other governments, some of which have resultedin breaches leading to torture.[10]It claims to have learned a lesson, in particular, from the notorious case ofAhmed Agiza, an Egyptian national who was transferred from Sweden to Egypt inDecember 2001 in reliance on assurances of humane treatment, and who was thentortured in a Cairo prison.[11]According to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, theassurances obtained by the British government are different. Theirdistinguishing features include: negotiations that occur at the "highestlevel," between heads of state or government "to ensure buy-in" throughout thesystem; detailed discussions about why assurances are sought and what they meanin practice; placing the assurances "at the heart of the bilateralrelationship" indicating "serious bilateral consequences" if a breach were tooccur; and discussing in detail precisely what would happen to a person onreturn in terms of apprehension, detention, prosecution, and sentence toidentify any "blind spots" that should be avoided or alleviated.[12]Simply saying that these measures are distinct, however,does not make them so. Nearly every government that seeks assurances claimsthat it negotiates them at the highest levels, with state actors who aredirectly responsible for the operatives that might perpetrate acts of torture,taking into careful consideration what might happen on return.[13]The Swedish government sent an emissary to Cairo in advance of Agiza'sexpulsion who liaised with the embassy staff of other European and NorthAmerican missions and with the Egyptian government itself. The assurances inthat case were also in written form, guaranteeing humane treatment, no deathpenalty, and a fair retrial for Agiza, who had been previously tried inabsentia.Given that Swedish officials made numerous consular visitsto Agiza in prison, the Agiza case also highlights the weakness of post-returnmonitoring. Although Agiza told visiting Swedish officials in January 2002 thathe had been tortured, that information was blacked-out in an official Swedishmonitoring report. In the aftermath of revelations of Agiza's torture and Sweden's cover up, the Swedes requested a full investigation by the Egyptians, whichEgyptian officials in Cairo ignored completely. Requests by Sweden for a second retrial, after many violations of the right to fair trial had occurredduring the first, similarly fell on deaf ears.[14]Despite these serious problems, Swedish-Egyptian relations were apparentlyunaffected. Robert Hårdh, secretary of the Swedish Helsinki Committee, aStockholm-based human rights organization, told Human Rights Watch that to hisknowledge, "there have not been any negative diplomatic effects at all due tothe Agiza affair."[15]In short, what is said to be unique about the UK's "deportation with assurances" policy is in most key respects already common in termsof practice by other deporting states. It is consequently subject to many ofthe same deficiencies as assurances agreements that the British governmentrecognizes have been ineffective.The UK Court of Appeal ruled to that effect with respect tothe MOU the British government signed with Libya in October 2005. In April 2008the court blocked the deportation of two Libyans, known only as "DD" and "AS,"by upholding an April 2007 ruling by the Special Immigration Appeals Commission(SIAC)-the court that hears appeals against deportation on national securitygrounds-that the men would be at risk of torture and a "complete" denial of afair trial if returned to Libya.[16]The two were alleged to be members of the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group (LIFG),an armed opposition group whose aim is the overthrow of Libyan leader Muammaral-Qadhafi.The Court of Appeal ruled that the SIAC did not err bydetermining that Colonel Qadhafi could not be relied upon to abide by hisagreement with the British government to treat the men humanely. The SIAC hadconcluded that torture is "extensively used against political opponents amongwhom Islamist extremists and LIFG members are the most hated by the LibyanGovernment, the Security Organisations and above all by Colonel Qadhafi." Italso noted that the incommunicado detention of political opponents withouttrial, often for many years, "is a disfiguring feature of Libyan justice andpunishment."[17]The British government did not appeal the ruling to the House of Lords andabandoned its plans to deport Libyan national security suspects back to Libya.The government points to the Libyan cases as an example ofhow the courts provide a check on its diplomatic assurances policy, but theconcerns raised by SIAC in the Libyan appeal arguably obtain with respect to Algeria andJordan as well.Pending Appeals to the House of LordsIn the Algerian and Jordanian cases, the House of Lords willneed to determine whether the lower courts erred in evaluating whether the menwould be at real risk of torture and ill-treatment on return.[18]The international standard for making such an assessment iswhether, at the time of transfer, a state knew or should have known that aperson would be at real risk of such abuse. The European Court of Human Rightshas ruled that as far as an applicant's complaint under article 3 of theEuropean Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) is concerned, the crucial questionis whether there is a "real risk" that if expelled, a person would be subjectedto torture or ill-treatment.[19]If a person has not been deported or otherwise transferred, the material pointin time must be the moment at which a court considers the case; if extraditionhas already been effected, "the existence of the risk must be assessedprimarily with reference to those facts which were known or ought to have beenknown to the Contracting State at the time of the extradition."[20]By this standard, for a court considering whether a transfermay go ahead, it will be necessary to take account of evidence that has come tolight since any prior review. Thus, new evidence of continuingtorture with impunity would have to be considered before any decision to deportcould be made.The Algerian casesThe first set of cases to be heard on appeal to the House ofLords on October 22-23, 2008, involves a July 2007 judgment of the Court ofAppeal. In that case, the Court of Appeal upheld a previous ruling by the SIACthat two Algerians could be deported to Algeria in reliance on diplomaticassurances against torture and ill-treatment from the authorities in Algiers.[21]As noted above, the test for assessing a deportation'scompliance with article 3 of the European Convention requires an evaluation ofthe personal risk a person would face given conditions in the home country atthe time of transfer. Recent UN reports are unequivocal in their condemnationof Algeria for torture and ill-treatment of persons held in security detention,the lack of investigation of alleged abuses, and the general impunity enjoyedby those perpetrating the violations.In May 2008, in its review of Algeria, the UN CommitteeAgainst Torture listed several areas of concern. It referred to the extensionof the official state of emergency, first declared in 1992; reports of secretdetention centers, outside any judicial control, operated by the AlgerianDepartment for Information and Security (DRS) and not subject to investigationby the authorities; numerous cases of torture and ill-treatment reportedly atthe hands of the DRS; and the lack of prompt and impartial investigations intoallegations of such abuse.[22]The UN Human Rights Committee had issued a similar report in December 2007. Itexpressed concern that human rights abuses were committed by Algerian publicofficials with "complete impunity"; requested action on reports of secretdetention centers operated by the DRS; called on the Algerian authorities toinvestigate reports of torture by DRS operatives; and noted that, underAlgerian law, confessions extracted under torture are not explicitly prohibitedand excluded as evidence.[23]Such reports echo evidence that was available to the SIAC atthe time of its original ruling in April 2007. In a hearing before the SIAC,the British government acknowledged the existence of torture in Algeria, the lack of civilian control over the DRS, and the fact that it "had never seenany report of any prosecution of a DRS official for torture or ill-treatment."[24]The SIAC found the Algerian assurances to be reliable, however, based on thetrend in Algeria toward civilian control, the promised loosening of militarypower, and the fact that President Bouteflika's position is not subordinate tothe military.[25]The SIAC noted that the DRS reports directly to the president, apparently notconsidering that such an admission makes Bouteflika himself responsible for thetorture and ill-treatment documented as occurring within DRS custody and the absence of accountability for such abuses.[26]The Court of Appeal pointed out, "If a country isdisrespectful of international norms and obligations, it is likely to be noless disrespectful of its obligations under a lower-level instrument such as adiplomatic note."[27]Inexplicably, however, the court went on to uphold the SIAC's findings.Algeria's treatment of recent returnees raises additional concerns.Indeed, the Bouteflika government has already breached promises it maderegarding the treatment on return of two Algerian nationals deported from the United Kingdom in January 2007. These promises were made by Algerian officials directly tothe affected men, but the British government had facilitated contacts betweenthe officials and the men.[28]While not formal "diplomatic assurances" brokered between governments, thesepromises-which were breached to devastating effect for the men, Benaissa Taleband Rida Dendani-are a window on the Algerian government's absence of goodfaith and the abuses returnees suffer on return.Frustrated by the long process of appealing theirdeportations, national security suspects Taleb and Dendani decided to return"voluntarily" to Algeria last year. Their decision was reportedly based in parton promises from the Algerian authorities that the February 2006 amnesty (seeprevious section) would apply to them; that they would not be tried for anyoffense; that they would be detained for only a short period on return; andthat they would not be held in DRS custody.[29]On return, however, the men were detained in DRS custody for 12 days, interrogated, and reportedly threatened and beaten. Both were latercharged, tried, and convicted of involvement in a terrorist network operatingoutside of Algeria. Statements reportedly extracted using coerciveinterrogation techniques during their initial period of detention were used asevidence against them at trial. Taleb was sentenced to three years'imprisonment and Dendani to eight years.[30]There are also concerns about the treatment of four former Guantanamo Bay detainees who were recently repatriated to Algeria. Abderrahmane Houari(also known as Sofiane Hadarbache) and Mustafa Ahmed Hamlily were transferredfrom Guantanamo to Algiers on July 2, 2008. They were the first Algeriandetainees to be repatriated after years of negotiations between the US and Algerian governments. Upon arrival, both men were detained incommunicado for nearlytwo weeks without access to family members or their lawyers.[31]They have since been charged with membership in a terrorist organization abroadand using forged travel documents. Both men were granted bail pending courtappearances.In August 2008 two other Algerians were transferred from Guantanamo to Algerian custody. For the first two weeks on return, there was noinformation available regarding their whereabouts or status.[32]They are both out on bail now pending trial on charges for membership in a terroristorganization operating abroad and using forged travel documents.According to the US State Department and Department ofDefense, it is the policy of the United States not to send any Guantanamo Bay detainee to a place where it is more likely than not that the detainee wouldbe tortured upon return. In cases where there is a risk of torture, thegovernment seeks and secures diplomatic assurances against such treatment.[33]In September 2008 Human Rights Watch urged US Secretary of State CondoleezzaRice to press President Bouteflika on the fate of the returned Guantanamo detainees.[34]Rice acknowledged after a meeting with Bouteflika in Algiers on September 6that the issue of Guantanamo was discussed, but gave no indication that shesought specific information on the treatment, whereabouts, or status of thereturnees, or that she asked for or received access to meet the men or theirfamilies.[35]The case of Abu QatadaThe second case on appeal to the Lords, to be heard October 28-29, 2008, involves Omar Othman, a.k.a. Abu Qatada. A recognized refugee andradical Muslim cleric accused of ties with al-Qaeda, Othman is threatened withdeportation to Jordan in reliance on promises from Amman of humane treatmentand fair trial.The Court of Appeals, overturning the prior SIAC ruling inthis case,[36]barred Othman's removal based on its finding that if he were prosecuted inJordan-a likely outcome given Jordanian interest in him-evidence extracted bythe torture of suspects in GID custody would almost certainly be admitted intoevidence.[37]The court ruled that the admission of such testimony would be a "flagrantdenial of justice" in violation of the ban on the use of torture evidence incriminal proceedings.[38]The ruling was artfully crafted, essentially rejecting Jordanian promises of afair trial, due to the likely admission of torture evidence, but avoiding afull assessment of the reliability of the specific UK-Jordanian MOU inquestion.Human Rights Watch has documented the severe abuses suffered by persons held bythe GID, which has a long record of torture and of obstructing the access ofICRC representatives.[39]The GID, whose law enforcement powers are not explicitly set out in law,continues to operate outside the normal prison supervision mechanisms in Jordan. TheGID prison regime includes long periods of isolation, raising concerns aboutprisoners' health and treatment and due process rights. GID detainees do nothave the right to make telephone calls to inform relatives or their embassiesof their whereabouts and any charges against them. Detainees are often heldincommunicado for weeks, thus having no contact with lawyers or family members,before they are permitted to have weekly supervised visits. Furthermore, the GID keeps all detainees in solitary confinement, often lasting months, while interrogatorsconduct their investigation.[40]Such prolonged solitary confinement can often constitute prohibitedill-treatment.[41]In 2006, after carrying out a visit to Jordan, the UN special rapporteur on torture issued a report concluding, "The practice oftorture is widespread in Jordan, and in some places routine, [including] theGeneral Intelligence Directorate (GID)." Although the special rapporteur wasdenied access to interview prisoners held in GID detention in Amman, he citedcredible and consistent allegations that torture was used at GID headquarters "to extract confessions and obtain intelligence in pursuit of counter-terrorismand national security objectives."[42]The UK Court of Appeal thus was correct to express concernthat the practice of torture in GID custody could lead to the admission intoevidence of statements or confessions extracted under profoundly coercivecircumstances. However, it is unclear how the Court could fail to link thosefindings to an analysis of the broader deficiencies with the UK-Jordanian MOU. The SIAC had acknowledged that Othman would be taken into GID custody upon return and interrogated, possibly even under "indirect" questioning by the US government at some point.[43]The panel also accepted that the GID system was rife with physical abuse,procedural irregularities, and impunity for those who perpetrated abuses.[44]Relying on Othman's "high profile," however, the SIAC ruled that due to theintense scrutiny of his treatment by persons sympathetic to him in Jordan, and by the local and international media, the Jordanians would comply with theterms of the MOU.[45]According to the SIAC, any abuse of Othman would cause a considerable outcry inJordan, inflaming his sympathizers and possibly destabilizing the country.Thus, instructions that he be treated properly would be followed and any riskof ill-treatment avoided.[46]This simplistic reliance on Othman's high profile as anadded safeguard ignores the more sophisticated analysis of the deficiencies ofpost-return monitoring, the relative weakness of local monitoring groups (whichconduct the monitoring under the MOUs) vis-à-vis the State, the lack ofincentive on the part of either the sending or receiving government toacknowledge a breach of the assurances, and the possible fear of reprisal thatOthman himself might have in complaining about abuse.The SIAC reiterated these arguments in the body of thedecision, liberally referencing criticisms of diplomatic assurances made byinternational human rights experts and nongovernmental organizations, includingHuman Rights Watch. Yet the court utterly failed to address such criticisms ina meaningful way.[47]Moreover, the SIAC ignored the European Court of Human Rights finding in the Chahaldecision that Chahal's high profile left him more vulnerable to torture andill-treatment, not less so (see below).Domestic Criticism of UK PolicyA robust analysis of the government's policy that didrecognize and engage with a substantive critique of the problems withdiplomatic assurances against torture was issued by the Parliamentary JointCommittee on Human Rights in a May 2006 report. The Committee heard evidencefrom a number of actors regarding the policy, pending court challenges, and theimpact of UK action on other countries using or contemplating using assurances.The Committee stated that "[t]he evidence we have heard in this inquiry, andour scrutiny of the Memoranda of Understanding … have left us with graveconcerns that the Government's policy of reliance on diplomatic assurancescould place deported individuals at real risk of torture or inhuman anddegrading treatment, without any reliable means of redress."[48]The Committee went further, however, and opined that UK policy "could well undermine well-established international obligations not to deportanybody if there is a serious risk of torture or ill-treatment in the receivingcountry. We further consider that, if relied on in practice, diplomaticassurances such as those to be agreed under the Memoranda of Understanding withJordan, Libya and Lebanon present a substantial risk of individuals actuallybeing tortured, leaving the UK in breach of its obligations under Article 3UNCAT, as well as Article 3 ECHR."[49]Regional DevelopmentsThe UK has advocated in a number of intergovernmental forafor the broader acceptance of diplomatic assurances to effect transfers ofnational security suspects. It has been active, for example, in intervening incases at the European Court of Human Rights that involve diplomatic assurances.European Court of Human RightsIn a string of cases decided in the first half of 2008, theEuropean Court of Human Rights reaffirmed the absolute ban on sendingpersons-no matter what their status or suspected crimes-to places where theyare at risk of torture or cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, despitediplomatic assurances against such abuse from their home governments. In one ofthose cases, Saadi v. Italy, the British government took the unusualstep of intervening as a third party in an effort to persuade the court to rulein Italy's favor.The logic of the absolute prohibition on returns to risk oftorture was first articulated in the landmark European Court decision of Chahalv. UK. In that case, the court ruled that the UK could not return KaramjitSingh Chahal, an alleged Sikh militant, to India in reliance on diplomaticassurances against torture from New Delhi, no matter what crimes he wassuspected of or his status in the UK.[50]The British government had argued that Chahal had such a high profile in the UK and India that he would be guaranteed fair treatment. The European Court, however, ruledthat the UK's public branding of Chahal as a "terrorist," coupled with theIndian government's lack of control over brutal security forces in the Punjab,instead made him particularly vulnerable to torture and ill-treatment. Carefulnot to doubt the good faith of the Indian government in providing theassurances, the Court noted that human rights violations by certain members ofthe Indian security forces were a "recalcitrant and enduring problem. Againstthis background, the court is not persuaded that the above assurances wouldprovide Mr. Chahal with an adequate guarantee of safety."[51]The European Court decisively returned to the principles of Chahalin 2008. Without ruling that removals on the basis of diplomatic assurances perse violate article 3, the court fashioned an approach that rightly questionsthe reliability of promises of humane treatment from governments that routinelytorture and ill-treat detainees or members of specific minority, ethnic, orpolitical groups.The first such ruling came in the Saadi case. On February 28, 2008, the court ruled that Italy would violate article 3 if it deported NassimSaadi, a Tunisian national lawfully residing in Italy, to Tunisia.[52]Saadi had been convicted in absentia of terrorism-related offenses in Tunisia, and had been sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment. He claimed that he would be atrisk of torture and ill-treatment in Tunisia, where the mistreatment ofsuspected terrorists is routine and well documented.In an ill-fated attempt to encourage the court to revisitthe Chahal decision, the British government intervened in Saadi toargue that the right of a person to be protected from ill-treatment abroadshould be balanced against the risk he posed to the deporting state. Thegovernment had intervened in an earlier case, Ramzy v. Netherlands, withthe same arguments, and requested that the court include its intervention in Ramzyfor consideration in Saadi.[53]British officials also pressed other governments through theEU Justice and Home Affairs Council to intervene in Ramzy, but only Lithuania, Portugal, and Slovakia joined the UK government's intervention.[54]The main purpose of the UK's intervention was to ask, "[W]hy should it beirrelevant, in considering whether removal would amount to inhuman anddegrading treatment, that the person to be removed himself posed a real risk tothe lives of the citizens of the Contracting state?"[55]The intervention went on to request a reconsideration of the Chahaldecision and the establishment of a new test in removal cases that wouldbalance national security considerations against other relevant factors.[56]The Saadi court rejected this argument outright. Asthe court explained,[T]he argument based on the balancing of the risk of harmif the person is sent back against the dangerousness he or she represents tothe community if not sent back is misconceived. The concepts of "risk" and"dangerousness" in this context do not lend themselves to a balancing testbecause they are notions that can only be assessed independently of each other.Either the evidence adduced before the Court reveals that there is asubstantial risk if the person is sent back or it does not.[57]As for the assurances, Tunisia declined to provide theItalian authorities with the detailed set of guarantees they had requested.Instead, in a note verbale dated July 10, 2007 (the day before the European Court hearing), the Tunisian Ministry of Foreign Affairs observed thatTunisian laws guaranteed prisoners' rights and that Tunisia had acceded to "therelevant international treaties and conventions." The court, however, observedthat "the existence of domestic laws and accession to international treatiesguaranteeing respect for fundamental rights in principle are not in themselvessufficient to ensure adequate protection against the risk of ill-treatmentwhere, as in the present case, reliable sources have reported practicesresorted to or tolerated by the authorities which are manifestly contrary tothe principles of the Convention."[58]The court went on to note that even explicit and detailedassurances would not necessarily be sufficient. The court explained, "[T]hatwould not have absolved the Court from the obligation to examine whether suchassurances provided, in their practical application, a sufficient guaranteethat the applicant would be protected against the risk of treatment prohibitedby the Convention. The weight to be given to assurances from the receivingState depends, in each case, on the circumstances obtaining at the materialtime."[59]In response to the British government's intervention in Saadi,the House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee roundly upbraided thegovernment. The Committee pointed out that "in the case of Saadi v. Italy, the Government clearly attempted to water down its anti-torture commitments." TheCommittee noted that "it is disturbing and surprising that such arguments weremade in the name of the United Kingdom and we believe this gives cause forserious concern."[60]In two subsequent rulings, involving transfers from Russia to Central Asian republics, the European Court continued to uphold its commitment tothe Saadi standard. In Ismoilov v. Russia, decided in April 2008,the petitioners were a group of Uzbek refugees who were detained in the Russiancity of Ivanovo. The Tashkent authorities, known for the systematic practice oftorture, claimed that the men had been involved in fomenting the 2005 events inthe Uzbek city of Andijan, in which hundreds of unarmed protesters were killedby state security forces. The Russian courts ruled in favor of the men'sextradition, relying on promises of humane treatment and fair trial from theUzbek authorities. The European Court ruled that given Uzbekistan's well document record of torture, "the Court is not persuaded that theassurances from the Uzbek authorities offered a reliable guarantee against therisk of ill-treatment."[61]The Court's June 2008 ruling in Ryabikin v. Russiawas notable, among other things, because Aleksandr Ryabikin, threatened withextradition from Russia to Turkmenistan, was not a threat to national security,but an alleged white collar criminal. The European Court ruled that ifextradited he would "almost certainly be detained and runs a very real risk ofspending years in prison." Taking note of Turkmenistan's extremely poorconditions of detention, as well as problems of ill-treatment and torture, the Ryabikinpanel invoked Saadi, recalling "that diplomatic assurances are not inthemselves sufficient to ensure adequate protection against the risk ofill-treatment where reliable sources have reported practices resorted to ortolerated by the authorities which are manifestly contrary to the principles ofthe Convention."[62]With Saadi, Ismoilov,and Ryabikinthe Court has reaffirmed its strong commitment to the nonrefoulementobligation set out in Chahal and its displeasure with states' attemptsto circumvent the Convention by negotiating dubious bilateral "human rights"agreements under the table.European UnionIn recent years, the UK has extended its direct advocacyeffort on diplomatic assurances to the European Union. Although mostcounterterrorism policy is set at the national level, the EU has taken upselect issues for consideration and consensus, including the definition ofterrorism and the question of a regional arrest warrant. The UK is currently leading an effort, through the G6 group of interior ministers (France, Germany, Italy, Poland, Spain, and UK), for broader EU endorsement of its "deportation withassurances" policy.At the end of a May 2007 G6 meeting in Venice, the interiorministers issued a statement referring to the question. It said,The Ministers believe that, in some legallyregulated cases, expulsion related to terrorism has proven to be an effectivetool for States in order to protect their people from foreign nationals thatare believed to pose a threat to national security. The Ministers discussed thedifficulties faced by States in seeking to implement an effective expulsionpolicy: the need to protect national security and the human rights of those whopose a threat. To that aim, they decided to analyse better the different mechanismsthat exist, including a case by case approach, diplomatic contacts orassurances, that could be useful under certain circumstances for promoting, inrepatriation States, patterns of conduct compliant with the internationalobligations as to the safeguard of human rights. They agreed to promote a morein-depth common study about the different systems and best practices. The needfor further consideration by the European Union in this field has also beenunderlined.[63]The public conclusions of the October 2007 G6meeting were considerably more definitive. They said in no uncertain terms thatthe G6 governments "will initiate and support continued exploration of theexpulsion of terrorists and terrorist suspects, seeking assurances throughdiplomatic understandings and other policies. In relation to the EU, thegovernments will seek to build consensus on these issues."[64]In an attempt to start building such a consensus, theBritish government circulated a memorandum in advance of a November 2007meeting of EU interior ministers that asserted that the expulsion of terrorismsuspects is an effective tool to protect people from foreigners who threatennational security. It argued that "the mechanism of seeking assurances, on agovernment-to-government basis" could be a "way forward."[65]The working group setting the agenda for the Justice and Home Affairs Councilmeeting that November declined to put the issue of diplomatic assurances on theagenda, however, signaling unease among some member states that the use of suchassurances could be enshrined as a matter of EU policy.In February 2008, Baroness Sarah Ludford, MEP, a vocalopponent of the British government's "deportation with assurances" policy,raised the issue of diplomatic assurances with the European Commission andrequested a written opinion on the Commission's position on the use ofassurances in the European Union. The Directorate General for ExternalRelations (RELEX) responded in writing soon thereafter. It cited the Saadidecision as controlling in Europe, and referred to a 2006 opinion by theEuropean Commission for Democracy through Law (Venice Commission), the Councilof Europe's advisory body on constitutional matters. The Venice Commission hadconcluded that "when there is substantial evidence that a country practises orpermits torture in respect of certain categories of prisoners, Council ofEurope member states must refuse the assurances in cases of requests forextradition of prisoners belonging to those categories."[66]It went on to express strong concern that the use of such assurances underminesthe global ban on torture and efforts to eradicate such abuse, stating,[T]o negotiate for protection from torture on a case bycase basis implies that a state does use torture sufficiently regularly for theassurance to be necessary in an individual case. Seeking assurances thusimplies acceptance of that state of affairs, and an understanding that theuniversal international prohibition on torture is taken less seriously than theterms of an individual bilateral assurance. Assurances may thus encourageStates which routinely practise torture in the belief that such practices aretolerated in at least some cases.[67]ConclusionThe British government's efforts to forcibly removeterrorism suspects in reliance on assurances against torture and ill-treatmenthave not, to date, been successful. And its advocacy efforts at the EuropeanUnion to develop the use of diplomatic assurances as standard practice havefailed. In important ways, therefore, the government's plans to enshrine thesebilateral agreements in law and policy have been thwarted.Still, with two crucial rulings pending in the House ofLords, legal protections against abusive returns are not yet secure. There are,moreover, broader moral, political, and national security reasons to beconcerned about the UK's promotion of diplomatic assurances against torture.The British government promotes itself as a leader in theglobal effort to eradicate torture.[68]The government has funded international anti-torture projects, and paid forpublications like The Torture Reporting Handbook-a practical guide toidentifying, documenting, and reporting incidents of torture for doctors,lawyers, and human rights activists.[69]The UK was also one of the first states to ratify the Optional Protocol to theConvention against Torture, which creates parallel international and domesticmonitoring systems aimed at reducing torture and ill-treatment in detention,and has been active in pressing other governments to do the same.All this deserves praise. But the government's relentlesscampaign to see "deportations with assurances" accepted throughout Europe reflects a more ambivalent attitude toward torture. That ambivalence sends the wrongmessage at a time when torture protection has been under assault in many partsof the world.Tolerating torture undermines the moral legitimacy of theBritish government around the world. The abandonment by powerful governments ofinternational rules-as we have repeatedly seen in the past few years-givesencouragement to others who believe that they, too, need not be bound by theuniversal rules of humanity. It is no surprise that the British government hasattracted some unsavory allies in its attempts to legitimize diplomatic assurances.Taking a page from UK policy on assurances, the Russianauthorities have attempted to extradite refugees to Uzbekistan in reliance onassurances of humane treatment from Tashkent, a government that practicestorture systematically. The Ismoilov case, noted above, represents avictory at the European Court of Human Rights against Russian efforts.Similarly aligning themselves to the UK approach on assurances, the Kyrgyzauthorities, however, had already extradited four Uzbek refugees in August 2006in reliance on diplomatic assurances against torture by the time the men'scases got to the UN Human Rights Committee. Although the committee found that Kyrgyzstan had violated article 3 for putting the men at risk of torture, setting thatlegal precedent after the fact was of no material impact on the risk the menfaced due to their pre-emptive transfers.[70]Perhaps more surprising is a Danish initiative to explorethe possibility of employing diplomatic assurances for nationalsecurity-related transfers, and attempts in recent years by the Italian,Spanish, and Swiss governments to actually employ diplomatic assurances.[71]These governments have at various times unequivocally supported global effortsto eradicate torture. For them to employ unreliable diplomatic assurances tolegitimize deportations and extraditions gravely undermines those anti-tortureefforts.The British government's "deportation with assurances"policy is also counter-productive at home. Since the July 2005 attacks on London, preventing radicalization and recruitment (the "prevent" strand) has been at theheart of the UK's counterterrorism strategy.[72] The strategystates that one of the key elements of prevention is engaging in the battle ofideas-challenging the ideologies that extremists believe justify the use ofviolence, primarily by helping Muslims who wish to dispute these ideas to doso. Whatever the alleged benefit of counterterrorism measures that violatehuman rights,[73]it is clear they undermine the UK's moral legitimacy at home and abroad,damaging its ability to win the battle of ideas that is central to long-termsuccess in combating terrorism.The most recent criticism of UK policy and practice comesfrom the Council of Europe human rights commissioner, who visited the UK in early 2008. In a September 2008 report, the commissioner stated categorically that hestrongly opposes the forced return of aliens from the UK on the basis of diplomatic assurances. He emphasized that such assurances "are usuallysought from countries with long-standing, proven records of torture," and hestressed that "the weakness inherent in the practice of diplomatic assuranceslies in the fact that where there is a need for such assurances, there isclearly an acknowledged, real risk of torture and ill-treatment." Suchassurances, he concluded, "should never be relied on, where torture orill-treatment is condoned by the Governments and is widely practised."[74]Human Rights Watch calls on the British government to heedthat call. We urge the government to halt immediately the practice of seekingunreliable assurances against ill-treatment from governments prone toperpetrating such abuse, and to hold perpetrators accountable rather thanpartner with them.AcknowledgementsThis report was written by Julia Hall, senior counsel in Human Rights Watch's Terrorism and Counterterrorism Program. Itwas edited by Joanne Mariner, terrorism and counterterrorism director; BenjaminWard, associate director in the Europe and Central Asia Division; and Ian Gorvin, senior program officer. Tom Porteous, Human Rights Watch's London director, reviewedthe summary and recommendations. Clive Baldwin, senior legal adviser, providedlegal review.Katharine Wies, associate in the Terrorismand Counterterrorism Program, provided production assistance, as did Grace Choi, publications director; Jim Murphy, onlineeditor; Rafael Jiminez, graphic designer; and Fitzroy Hepkins, productionmanager.[1]A (FC) and others (FC) (Appellants) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department(Respondent), [2005] UKHL 71, December 8, 2005, http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld200506/ldjudgmt/jd051208/aand-1.htm(accessed September 30, 2008).  "Deportation with assurances" is known in the UK as "DWA."[2]Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the United Kingdom ofGreat Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government of the Hashemite Kingdomof Jordan Regulating the Provision of Undertakings in Respect of SpecifiedPersons Prior to Deportation, signed August 10, 2005, http://www.fco.gov.uk/resources/en/pdf/jordan-mou(accessed October 8, 2008); Memorandum of Understanding between the GeneralPeople's Committee for Foreign Liaison and International Cooperation of theGreat Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and the Foreign andCommonwealth Office of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern IrelandConcerning the Provision of Assurances in Respect of Persons Subject toDeportation, signed October 18, 2005, http://www.fco.gov.uk/resources/en/pdf/libya-mou(accessed October 8, 2008);Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the United Kingdom ofGreat Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government of the Lebanese RepublicConcerning the Provision of Assurances in Respect of Persons Subject to Deportation,signed December 23, 2005, http://www.fco.gov.uk/resources/en/pdf/lebanon-mou (accessedOctober 8, 2008).[3]MT, RB, and U v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, [2007] EWCACiv. 808, July 30, 2007,  http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2007/808.html(accessed September 30, 2008), para. 131.[4]Amnesty International, "United Kingdom: Deportations to Algeria at All Costs," AI Index: EUR 45/001/2007, February 26, 2007, p. 2. The amnesty law offered exemption from prosecution for some persons charged with or convicted ofterrorist activities during Algeria's civil war (1991-2002).[5]Letterfrom Prime Minister Tony Blair to President Abdelaziz Bouteflika, July 11, 2006,    http://www.fco.gov.uk/resources/en/pdf/pm-letter-to-algerianpres (accessedOctober 8, 2008);Letter from President Abdelaziz Bouteflika to Prime Minister Tony Blair, July 11, 2006, http://www.fco.gov.uk/resources/en/pdf/algerian-pm-letter(accessed October 8, 2008). See also Hansard's, vol. 696, part no. 18, column WA 181, "Terrorism: Repatriation of Suspects,"December 4, 2007,http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld200708/ldhansrd/text/71204w0002.htm#07120461000021(accessed September 30, 2008).[6]MT, RB, and U v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, para. 130.[7]For more information about the UK government's claims, see Julia Hall, "Mind the Gap: Diplomatic Assurances and the Erosion of the Global Ban on Torture," HumanRights Watch World Report 2008, http://hrw.org/wr2k8/diplomatic/index.htm.[8]Human Rights Watch, Still at Risk: Diplomatic Assurances No SafeguardAgainst Torture, vol. 17, no. 3(D), April 2005, http://hrw.org/reports/2005/eca0405/4.htm#_Toc100558825.[9]Ibid. See also Human Rights Watch, Empty Promises: Diplomatic Assurances NoSafeguard Against Torture, vol. 16, no. 4(D), April 2004, http://hrw.org/reports/2004/un0404/.[10]Kate Jones, "Deportations with Assurances: Addressing Key Criticisms," Internationaland Comparative Law Quarterly, vol. 57, January 2008, pp. 183-94. Jones isassistant legal advisor in the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office.[11]In May 2005 the UN Committee Against Torture (CAT) found Sweden in violation of article 3 of the UN Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel,Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.  Article 3 absolutely prohibitstransferring a person to a place where there are substantial grounds forbelieving that he or she would be in danger of being subjected to torture. The CAT stated that Sweden should have known Agiza would be at risk and, "The procurement ofdiplomatic assurances, which, moreover, provided no mechanism for theirenforcement, did not suffice to protect against this manifest risk." Agizav. Sweden, Communication No. 233/2003, U.N. Doc. CAT/C/34/D/233/2003, May 20, 2005, http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/cat/decisions/233-2003.html(accessed September 30, 2008), para. 13.4. Agiza was expelled with another man,Mohammed al-Zari, and they were held together and tortured in prison. Al-Zariwas released in October 2003. In November 2006 the UN Human RightsCommittee ruled that Sweden violated the ban on torture by expelling him torisk of such abuse based on unreliable diplomatic assurances. See Alzery v. Sweden, CCPR/C/88/D/1416/2005, November 10, 2006, http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/0ac7e03e4fe8f2bdc125698a0053bf66/13fac9ce4f35d66dc12572220049e394(accessed September 30, 2008), para. 11.5.[12]Kate Jones, "Deportations with Assurances: Addressing Key Criticisms," p. 187.[13]The United States, for example, makes these same claims, and goes even furtherby arguing that because its negotiations are conducted at such a high politicallevel and include the very sensitive issues of torture and ill-treatment,impunity for abuses, and monitoring of places of detention and its implicationsfor a country's sovereignty, the US cannot reveal anything at all about thenegotiations, the actors, or the substance of the assurances. To do so, itclaims, would hinder the conduct of foreign affairs. See United States District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania, Sameh Sami Khouzamv. Thomas Hogan, Civil No. 3:CV-07-0992-TIV, June 15, 2007.[14]"Sweden Implicated in Egypt's Abuse of Suspected Militant: Egypt ViolatedDiplomatic Promises of Fair Trial and No Torture for Terrorism Suspect," HumanRights Watch news release, May 5, 2004, http://hrw.org/english/docs/2004/05/05/egypt8530.htm.[15]Email communication from Robert Hårdh to Human Rights Watch, September 29, 2008. TheSwedish Helsinki Committee assisted Agiza inseeking redress from the Swedishgovernment. The government eventually retroactively revoked Agiza's expulsionorder and agreed to pay the equivalent of about $450,000 in compensation to hisfamily. See "Around the World:Sweden-Ex-terrorism Suspect to be Compensated," Washington Post,September 20, 2008. Agiza remains in prison in Egypt, and his family wasgranted asylum in Sweden.[16]AS andDD v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, [2008] EWCA Civ. 289,April 9, 2008,http://www.judiciary.gov.uk/docs/judgments_guidance/judgment_as_dd_libya_090408.pdf(accessed October 13, 2008).[17]DD and AS v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, [2007] UKSIAC42/2005, April 27, 2007, http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/SIAC/2007/42_2005.html(accessed September 30, 2008).[18]HumanRights Watch and Justice, the London-based affiliate of the InternationalCommission of Jurists, submitted an amicus brief for consideration in bothappeals.  See RB and U v. Secretary of State for the Home Department andSecretary of State for the Home Department v. OO (Othman), House ofLords, Submission on Behalf of Justice and Human Rights Watch, October 2, 2008, http://hrw.org/pub/2008/ct/UKdiplomatic_assurances101008.pdf.[19]The risk cannot be a "mere possibility," but certainty that ill-treatment willoccur is not required. See Soering v. UK, 1/1989/161/217, July 7, 1989, para. 98.  In assessing whether there is a risk of torture, the CommitteeAgainst Torture has stated that the risk must go "beyond mere theory andsuspicion" but does not have to meet the test of being "highly probable." See UN Committee Against Torture, General Comment No. 1:Implementation of Article 3 of the Convention in the Context of Article22,A/53/44, annex IX, November 21, 1997, http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/(Symbol)/13719f169a8a4ff78025672b0050eba1(accessed October 8, 2008).[20]SeeEuropean Court of Human Rights, Cruz Varas and Others v. Sweden,SeriesA, no. 201, March 20, 1991, pp. 29-30, §§ 75-76.  As the Courtexplains, "Since the nature of the Contracting States' responsibility underArticle 3 in cases of this kind lies in the act of exposing an individual tothe risk of ill-treatment, the existence of the risk must be assessed primarilywith reference to those facts which were known or ought to have been known tothe Contracting State at the time of the extradition." See also UN CommitteeAgainst Torture, Tebourski v. France, CAT/C/38/D/300/2006, May 1, 2007 http://www.bayefsky.com/doc/france_t5_cat_300_2006.doc(accessed September 30, 2008).[21]MT,RB, and U v. Secretary of State for the Home Department.  All informationon these cases is taken from the Court of Appeal judgment.[22]CommitteeAgainst Torture, Algeria: Concluding Observations, CAT/C/DZA/CO/3, May 26, 2008. Ironically, the committee noted "with satisfaction" that a "positiveaspect" of Algerian practice was that "it does not engage in the practice ofseeking diplomatic assurances against torture from a third State to which itplans to extradite, return, or expel an individual." Ibid., para. 3(e).[23]Human Rights Committee, Algeria: Concluding Observations, CCPR/C/DZA/CO/3, December 12, 2007, pp. 2-7.[24]MT, RB, and U v., Secretary of State for the Home Department, para. 122.[25]Ibid., para. 123.[26]Ibid.[27]Ibid., para. 126.[28]Statement by Rida Dendani from HMP Long Lartin, December 24, 2006, http://www.cageprisoners.com/articles.php?id=18090 (accessed October 8, 2008). See also Gareth Peirce, "Was It Like This for the Irish?" London Review of Books,April 10, 2008, p. 6.[29]Ibid.[30]Ibid.[31]"US/Algeria: Reveal Location of Guantanamo Detainees: Two Algerians MissingSince Their July 2 Return," Human Rights Watch news release, July 11, 2008, http://hrw.org/english/docs/2008/07/11/algeri19339.htm.[32]Mohammed Abd al-Qadir (also known as Mohamed Trari) and Abdulli Feghoul arrivedin Algiers on August 26, after more than six years in Guantanamo. "US: RiceShould Press Algeria on Fate of Returned Guantanamo Detainees," Human RightsWatch news release, September 5, 2008, http://hrw.org/english/docs/2008/09/05/usint19754.htm.[33]US Court of Appeals for District of Columbia, Ghanim-Abdulrahman al-Harbi,et al. v. Robert M.Gates, Secretary of Defense, et al., No.07-1095, Attachment A: Declaration of Clint Williamson, Ambassador-at-Large forWar Crimes, US Department of State.  See also Ben Fox, "Security, Human RightsSnarl Gitmo Exits," Associated Press, August 8, 2007.[34]"US: Rice Should Press Algeria on Fate of Returned Guantanamo Detainees," HumanRights Watch news release.[35]USSecretary of State Condoleezza Rice, Round Table with Travel Press, Algiers, September 6, 2008, http://www.state.gov/secretary/rm/2008/09/109231.htm(accessed September 30, 2008). See also, "Rice Meets with Terror FightingAllies in Africa," Associated Press, September 6, 2008, http://www.iht.com/articles/ap/2008/09/06/africa/AF-North-Africa-Rice.php(accessed September 30, 2008).[36]Omar Othman (aka Abu Qatada) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department,SC/15/2005, February 26, 2007, http://www.siac.tribunals.gov.uk/Documents/QATADA_FINAL_7FEB2007.pdf(accessed October 13, 2008).[37]Othman (Jordan) and Secretary of State for the Home Department, [2008]EWCA Civ 290, April 9, 2008, http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2008/290.html(accessed October 13, 2008).[38]Ibid., para. 45.[39]Human Rights Watch, Suspicious Sweeps: The General Intelligence Departmentand Jordan's Rule of Law Problem, vol. 18, no. 6(E), September 2006, http://hrw.org/reports/2006/jordan0906/;Double Jeopardy: CIA Renditions to Jordan, April 2008, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2008/jordan0408/.For the wider problem of torture in Jordan's prison system, see Torture andImpunity in Jordan's Prisons: Reforms Fail to Tackle Widespread Abuse, 1-56432-382-X,October 2008, http://hrw.org/reports/2008/jordan1008/.[40]Letter from Human Rights Watch to European Union Officials on the Occasion ofthe Association Council between the EU and Jordan, July 23, 2008, http://hrw.org/english/docs/2008/08/11/jordan19588.htm.[41]See Istanbul Statement on the Use and Effects of Solitary Confinement, adopted December 9, 2007, at the International Psychological Trauma Symposium, Istanbul,  http://www.irct.org/Admin/Public/DWSDownload.aspx?File=%2FFiles%2FFiler%2FTortureJournal%2F18_01_2008%2F63-66_Istanbul_statement.pdf(accessed October 8, 2008).[42]Report of the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman ordegrading treatment or punishment, Manfred Nowak, Addendum: Mission to Jordan,U.N. Doc. A/HRC/4/33/Add.3, January 5, 2007, http://daccessdds.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G07/101/07/PDF/G0710107.pdf(accessed October 13, 2008), p.11, para. 29.[43]Omar Othman (aka Abu Qatada) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department,SC/15/2005, February 26, 2007, para. 348.[44]Ibid., paras. 350-53.[45]Ibid., para. 355.[46]Ibid., para. 356.[47]See Human Rights Watch Statement in the Omar Othman Case, May 2006, http://www.hrw.org/backgrounder/eca/ecaqna1106/witnessstatementjuliahall.pdf.[48]Joint Committee on Human Rights, Nineteenth Report, Session 2005-06, May 18, 2006, http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/jt200506/jtselect/jtrights/185/18508.htm(accessed September 30, 2008), para. 129.[49]Ibid., para. 131.[50]Chahal v. United Kingdom, 70/1995/576/662, November 15, 1996, http://cmiskp.echr.coe.int/tkp197/view.asp?action=html&documentId=695881&portal=hbkm&source=externalbydocnumber&table=F69A27FD8FB86142BF01C1166DEA398649(accessed September 30, 2008).[51]Ibid., para. 105.[52]Saadi v. Italy, Application No. 37201/06, February 28, 2008, http://cmiskp.echr.coe.int/tkp197/view.asp?action=html&documentId=829510&portal=hbkm&source=externalbydocnumber&table=F69A27FD8FB86142BF01C1166DEA398649(accessed September 30, 2008).[53]Observations of the Governments of Lithuania, Portugal, Slovakia, and the United Kingdom Intervening in Application No. 25424/05, Ramzy v. Netherlands,December 2005, on file with Human Rights Watch.[54]European Union, Justice and Home Affairs Council, Meeting on October 12, 2005. Main results of Council: "Article 3 of the European Convention on HumanRights. The Presidency briefed the Council about the UK and the Netherlandspositions regarding the possibility for the European Court of Human Rights ofrevisiting an earlier Court decision in the 1996 Chahal case," (undated), http://www.fco.gov.uk/Files/kfile/JHA_12Oct_Results,0.pdf(accessed October 4, 2008), p. 19.[55]Observations of the Governments of Lithuania, Portugal, Slovakia, and the United Kingdom Intervening in Application No. 25424/05, Ramzy v. Netherlands,para. 27.1.[56]Ibid., para. 37.[57]Saadi v. Italy,  para. 139.[58]Ibid., para. 147.[59]Ibid., para. 148.[60]House of Commons Select Committee on Foreign Affairs, Ninth Report, Session2007-08, July 9, 2008,  http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200708/cmselect/cmfaff/533/53306.htm#a11(accessed September 30, 2008), para. 72.[61]Ismoilovv. Russia, Application No. 2947/06, April 24, 2008,   http://cmiskp.echr.coe.int////tkp197/viewhbkm.asp?action=open&table=F69A27FD8FB86142BF01C1166DEA398649&key=69746&sessionId=14266138&skin=hudoc-en&attachment=true(accessed September 30, 2008), para. 127. This case has been referred to theGrand Chamber of the European Court.[62]Ryabikin v. Russia, Application No. 8320/04, June 19, 2008, http://cmiskp.echr.coe.int////tkp197/viewhbkm.asp?action=open&table=F69A27FD8FB86142BF01C1166DEA398649&key=71139&sessionId=14266163&skin=hudoc-en&attachment=true(accessed September 30, 2008), paras. 116, 119.[63]Conclusionsof the May 2007 Meeting of the Interior Ministers of France, Germany, Italy, Poland, Spain and the United Kingdom, http://press.homeoffice.gov.uk/press-releases/g6-meeting-conclusion-0507?version=1(accessed September 30, 2008).[64]Joint Declaration by the Ministers of Interior of G6 States, Sopot, October 18, 2007, www.statewatch.org/news/2007/oct/g6-poland-oct-07.pdf(accessed September 30, 2008), para. 3.[65]General Secretariat of the Council, Directorate General H2 (Justice and HomeAffairs), Room Document: Article 36 Committee, Proposal from the UK Delegation:Expulsion of Terrorist Suspects: EU Council Conclusions, para. 5 (proposedlanguage), on file with Human Rights Watch.[66]European Commission for Democracy Through Law (Venice Commission), Opinion: Onthe International Legal Obligations of Council of Europe Member States inRespect of Secret Detention Facilities and Inter-State Transport of Prisoners,Opinion no. 363, 2005, CDL-AD(2006)009, March 17, 2006, http://www.venice.coe.int/docs/2006/CDL-AD(2006)009-e.asp#_Toc130704778 (accessed October 5, 2008), para. 142.[67]European Commission, Response to Question Tabled by Baroness Sarah Ludfordunder Agenda Item 7 of the Subcommittee on Human Rights of the EuropeanParliament, (PE402.663vo1-00), February 28, 2008, on file with Human RightsWatch.[68]See Human Rights Watch, Dangerous Ambivalence: UK Policy on Torture Since9/11, no. 1, November 2006, http://hrw.org/english/docs/2008/04/07/global18555.htm;and Hearts and Minds: Putting Human Rights at the Center of United KingdomCounterterrorism Policy, no. 3, June 2007, http://hrw.org/backgrounder/eca/uk0607/.[69]Camille Giffard, The Torture Reporting Handbook: How to Document and Respondto Allegations of Torture within the International System for the Protection ofHuman Rights, Human Rights Centre, University of Essex, February 2000, http://www.essex.ac.uk/torturehandbook/handbook/index.htm(accessed October 15, 2008).[70]UN Human Rights Committee, Maksudov v. Kyrgyzstan,CCPR/C/93/D/1461,1462,1476&1477/2006, July 16, 2008. The committee ruled, "The procurement of assurances from the Uzbek General Prosecutor's Office,which, moreover, contained no concrete mechanism for their enforcement, wasinsufficient to protect against … risk." Ibid., para. 12.5.[71]See Human Rights Watch et al., "Denmark and Diplomatic Assurances Against GraveViolations of Human Rights: Joint Letter to Lene Espersen," June 18, 2008, http://hrw.org/english/docs/2008/06/18/denmar19151.htm;Human Rights Watch, "Letter to the Italian Government Regarding Nassim Saadi'sDeportation and the Use of Diplomatic Assurances," September 20, 2007, http://hrw.org/eca/2007/italyletter0907/;Human Rights Watch, "Letter to the Spanish Government Regarding the Extraditionof Murat Ajmedovic Gasayev," March 8, 2008, http://www.hrw.org/backgrounder/2008/spainletter0508/;Human Rights Watch, "Universal Periodic Review of Switzerland: Human RightsWatch's Submission to the Human Rights Council," May 5, 2008, http://hrw.org/english/docs/2008/04/07/global18555.htm.[72]"Countering International Terrorism: The United Kingdom's Strategy," July 2006,http://security.homeoffice.gov.uk/news-publications/publication-search/general/Contest-Strategy(accessed October 4, 2008). The strategy, first developed in 2003, containsfour elements: Prevent (tackling the radicalization of individuals), Pursue(disrupting terrorists and their operations), Protect (reducing thevulnerability of the UK to a terrorist attack), and Prepare (preparedness forthe consequences of a terrorist attack).[73]Governmentauthorities have indicated publicly and privately that measures such as deportation,indefinite detention, and extended pre-charge detention have been useful indisrupting terrorist networks.  Home Secretary Jacqui Smith has argued thatenhanced powers such as the further extension of pre-charge detention arenecessary for that effort. See "Prevent Strategy: Background and Next Steps -Speech to the BCU Commanders Conference," April 16, 2008,http://press.homeoffice.gov.uk/Speeches/bcu-conference-speech(accessed October 4, 2008).  See also Human Rights Watch, Letter to UKGovernment on the Implementation of the UN Human Rights Recommendations onCounterterrorism Policies, October 8, 2008, http://hrw.org/english/docs/2008/10/08/uk19925.htm.[74]Memorandum by Thomas Hammarberg, Commissioner for Human Rights of the Councilof Europe, CommDH(2008)23, September 18, 2008, https://wcd.coe.int/ViewDoc.jsp?id=1351681&Site=CommDH&BackColorInternet=FEC65B&BackColorIntranet=FEC65B&BackColorLogged=FFC679(accessed October 13, 2008), paras. 92-93.Related ContentOctober 28, 2008News ReleaseUnited Kingdom: Stop Deportations to Risk of TorturePromises From Algeria and Jordan Unreliable in Preventing AbuseOctober 28, 2008News ReleaseUnited Kingdom: Stop Deportations to Risk of TortureRegion / CountryEurope/Central Asia United KingdomProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch