“Every Morning They Beat Me”: Police Abuses in Burundi | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload this ReportDownload this Report with CoverDownload the Summary and RecommendationsDownload this Report with Cover in FrenchDonate NowDownloadsDownload this ReportDownload this Report with CoverDownload the Summary and RecommendationsDownload this Report with Cover in FrenchApril 30, 2008“Every Morning They Beat Me”Police Abuses in BurundiAvailable InEnglishFrançais"Every Morning They Beat Me"Police Abuses in BurundiMapof BurundiI.SummaryMethodologyII.RecommendationsTothe Government of BurundiToDonor PartnersTothe UN Peacebuilding FundIII.Events in Rutegama CommuneInterrogation,Torture and Ill-TreatmentPayingfor freedom..PoliceBrutality and Intimidation of Local ResidentsIV.BackgroundTheBurundian National PoliceV.The Official Response to Reports of Human Rights ViolationsProfessionalismand ImpunityVI.International and Burundian National Law..VII.Response by International ActorsVIII.Annex: Documented Cases of Police Abuse in Rutegama CommuneMap of BurundiClick to expand ImageI. SummaryIn October 2007officers of the Burundian national police (PoliceNationale du Burundi, PNB) illegally detained at least 22 persons inMuramvya province, most for periods of a few days but some for up to threeweeks. Security police beat detainees with clubs and batons at a temporarypolice post established at a health center. At least two men were subjected tomock executions.Additionally, membersof the same police unit subjected residents to public beatings. In four casesreported to Human Rights Watch, this was in response to residents' questioningpolice conduct. In another case, that of a police officer, it came after hespoke out about torture.After Burundianhuman rights monitors reported the abuses, local officials intervened to limitpolice excesses, freeing some detainees immediately and transferring others toan official jail from where they were subsequently released. Not a singledetainee was charged with a criminal offence. Shortly afterwards the policeunit responsible was transferred back to the capital, Bujumbura.Subsequent action toidentify and investigate the perpetrators of human rights violations has beenslow and inadequate. A police inquiry into the police misconduct wasinitiated only several weeks after the events and was subsequently abandoned,with no disciplinary action taken against any officer. The officer in command of the unit has since been promoted. Threevictims submitted criminal complaints to the Muramvya Prosecutor in lateOctober, but for over a month, no action was taken to investigate thecomplaints. Judicial investigations against three police officers wereinitiated only after an international NGO offered legal support by preparingcollective complaints on behalf of 13 victims. Despite the gravity of thecharges against them, those officers have remained in service and in directcontact with the population while the investigations are carried out. Theauthorities' reluctance to take action against the perpetrators is consistentwith a wider failure of the authorities to hold the perpetrators of humanrights abuses accountable, and points to the continuing challenge of impunityin Burundi.The Burundian government must take immediate steps to endthe climate of impunity that allows police officers to act outside the law. Human Rights Watch is calling on theauthorities to bring police officers alleged to be responsible for human rightsabuses in Muramvya promptly to justice. In addition, the authorities shouldensure that effective procedures are put in place to combat ill-discipline andthat all officers are given adequate training, including in human rightsstandards.Formally established in 2004, the Burundian police force is madeup of officers from the former government police, former government soldiers,and combatants from the several armed groups that waged war against thegovernment for more than a decade. The integration of demobilized combatantshas caused the number of police to swell from 2,300 in 2000 to somewherebetween 15,000 and 20,000 officers in 2007. Many officers have received littleor no training and some fail to abide by, far less enforce, the law. Policemisconduct is an issue of significant concern to civil society.The current government was democratically elected in 2005,after the majority of rebel groups agreed to a peace deal that included theintegration of their members into the government, the army, and the police. InJuly 2007, the Forces LiberationNationale (FNL), the last remaining armed group in opposition, withdrewfromtalks with the government andstarted a new round of recruiting, while also mounting sporadic attacks ongovernment troops. Their withdrawal coincided with an increase in violentcrime, some of it attributed to FNL members. The widespread possession offirearms by civilians is apparently contributing to both the number and theviolence of crimes.The government has relied on the police, including threeRapid Mobile Intervention Groups (Groupementsmobiles d'intervention rapide, GMIR), to combat crime, to search forunregistered firearms, and to limit attempts by the FNL to recruit new membersand to collect funds and other kinds of support from sympathizers.While the national police is conducting training programsintended to improve the conduct of police officers and to increase theireffectiveness in enforcing the law, progress towards building a well-trained,professional force has been slow. Police training is necessary, but must becomplemented by simultaneous measures holding officers accountable for abuses.MethodologyThis report is based on over 65 interviews, including 5group interviews involving between two and five people, conducted by a HumanRights Watch researcher in Bujumbura and MuramvyaProvince between October 2007 and March2008. Most of the information on abuses was provided by victims themselves,some of them referred to Human Rights Watch by other non-governmentalorganizations, some of them identified by other victims, and some located bythe researcher in jails in Muramvya. Most of these interviews were conducted inKirundi with the help of an interpreter and most were done in small groups.The researcher also interviewed police officers, othergovernment officials, representatives of local and internationalnongovernmental organizations (NGOs), United Nations (UN) officials,representatives of international donors and Burundian jurists.[1]A number of interviews in Muramvya province were conducted jointly withrepresentatives of either the Association for the Protection of Human Rightsand Detaineed Persons (Association pour la Protection des Droits Humains etdes Personnes Detenus, APRODH), aBurundian non-governmental organization, or with representatives of the HumanRights and Justice Division of the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi(BINUB).For reasons of security, the names of some personsinterviewed are omitted from the citations.II. RecommendationsTo the Government of BurundiTakedisciplinary action against officers who breach their obligations andprosecute those alleged to have committed criminal offences, includingsuch human rights violations as torture, ill-treatment, and unlawfuldetention.Ensurethat prosecutions of police officers who have been charged with crimes in Muramvyaare carried out promptly, fairly, and in accordance with internationaltrial standards.Ensurethat all police officers comply with human rights standards relating topolice functions (including those set out in the International Covenant onCivil and Political Rights (ICCPR), the African Charter on Peoples andHuman Rights, and the Convention against Torture), and abide by Burundianlaws that reflect these standards (including Article 146 of the BurundianCriminal Code, and the 2004 law on the creation, organization, missions,composition, and operation of the National Police).Ensurethat all police officers receive appropriate and sufficient training tounderstand their responsibilities to respect human rights as defined bythe international conventions to which Burundi is a party and toprevent violations of these rights.Establishan official system to record and respond to complaints of abusive conductand to track disciplinary or criminal action taken against policeofficers.Ensureprompt passage of a new criminal code prohibiting and punishing tortureand inhuman and degrading treatment.Ensureprompt passage of a new criminal procedure code reforming the system ofpre-trial detention so that Burundian law complies with internationalhuman rights standards.To Donor PartnersPressthe Burundian government to fully investigate and sanction all abusescommitted by police officers.In allassistance programs directed at the Burundian police, include training onhuman rights with a particular focus on enforcement of the prohibitions oftorture and the excessive use of force. Follow through in theestablishment of a proposed police working group as part of the Partners'Coordination Group (Groupe deCoordination des Partenaires, GCP) to ensure that aid to the police isdirected toward initiatives that promote human rights.Providesupport for the Inspectorate of National Police in its efforts to gatherdata and track complaints against police officers.To the UN Peacebuilding FundCloselymonitor the use of funds disbursed to the police by the United NationsPeace Building Fund in order to ensure that they are used in a mannerconsistent with the protection and promotion of human rights.III.Events in Rutegama CommuneOn October 3, 2007, the Commissioner Generalof the Internal Security Police (Policede la Sécurité Interior, PSI) sent approximately 100 officers from the 3rdRapid Mobile Intervention Group (Groupementsmobiles d'intervention rapide, GMIR to Muramvya province in central Burundi.Ordinarily based in the capital Bujumbura,the GMIR is a specialized reserve that is supposed to provide rapid response toemergencies across the country. At the time of the human rights abuses describedin this report, GMIR groups operated under the authority of the PSI.[2]According to police, the deployment was a response to an alarmingly highincidence of crime, including the theft of livestock and crops, as well as torecruitment and propaganda by the opposition National Liberation Forces (Forces de liberation nationale, FNL),which in July 2007 withdrew from talks with the government on theimplementation of a ceasefire agreed in September 2006.[3]The GMIR were deployed in several communes, includingRutegama, where they set up a post in the Kaniga health center severalkilometers from the town center. Throughout October, with the cooperation of alocal PSI police chief, they engaged in a heavy-handed policing operation thatinvolved numerous breaches of Burundian law and the violation of internationalhuman rights standards. According to residents interviewed by a Human RightsWatch researcher, the police behavior was brutal and inspired fear. Accordingto one victim, "Everyone in Rutegama is afraid. When people see the truck fromKaniga coming, they flee."[4]An officer of the GMIR police told the Human Rights Watchresearcher that the policing strategy was deliberately intended to intimidatelocal people.[5]A Campaign of Raids andArrestsStarting on October 8, GMIR officers underCommander Désiré Uwamahoro began carrying out searches and making arrests inRutegama and neighboring communes. Although officers had appropriate warrantsfrom the Muramvya prosecutor for most of these searches, they carried out manyof them at night and without the presence of a judicial police officer, inviolation of the Burundian code of criminal procedure.[6] Inaddition, officers beat and otherwise ill-treated arrested persons, includingbusinessmen, teachers, farmers, a demobilized combatant and a chef de colline, a local officialresponsible for governing a small administrative unit. Many of the victims toldthe Human Rights Watch researcher that police officers accused them of FNLmembership, which is not a crime in Burundi,[7]while others said they were accused of illegally possessing arms.[8]One of the first men arrested by the GMIRdescribed how his family was awakened at about 2 a.m., when everyone wassleeping:I heard someone knocking on the door, saying,"Open the door." I was very scared. My family was asking, "Is it bandits?" Igot up and said, "Who is it?" They said, "We're the police." My wife asked whythey were there. They kept knocking and saying, "Open up." They broke down thedoor, came in, and said, "Put your hands up." I did so. There were about 50 ofthem, with guns and grenade launchers.When they approached me, they told me to getall the guns that I had in the house. I said I didn't have any weapons. Theystarted to slap me. They searched through the house, but didn't find anything.They approached my wife, who was naked in bed. They slapped her and told her tofind the weapons. She said she had never seen weapons in the house. Theyhandcuffed me and made me leave the house, saying I had to show where I hadhidden the weapons and that I would show them after I was given a good beating.[9]A police officer stationed at the Kanigahealth center, along with several victims, told a Human Rights Watch researcherthat detainees were designated for arrest "arbitrarily" by the local securitypolice chief, Nestor Niyokuri, and by the Rutegama communal administrator,Josias Ndikumagenge.[10]The GMIR unit took the detainees back to their post at the health center, abuilding consisting of one large room and several small rooms of about two bythree meters each. As many as ten detainees were held in each of these smallrooms.[11]Human Rights Watch identified 22 detainees, but according to one GMIRofficer who was present, as many as 50 persons may have been detained at thehealth center throughout the course of the month.[12]By detaining persons for periods of timeranging from several days to more than three weeks, GMIR officers violatedBurundian law which requires officers from all branches of the InternalSecurity Police to deliver detainees immediately after their arrest to theJudicial Police (Police Judiciaire,PJ).[13]GMIR officers also held the detainees at the health center, not atan official place of detention.[14]Therewas a jail at Rutegama center, to which any suspects should have beentransferred immediately after their arrest.GMIR officers interrogated the detainees, afurther violation of Burundian law.[15] Investigating crimes is a functionof the Judicial Police, who question suspects and provide evidence to theprosecutor (Ministère Public).[16]Many victims assumed a person taking notes during their interrogation was ajudicial police officer (Officier de laPolice Judiciaire, OPJ), but an officer present at Kaniga, as well as thecommissioner general of the PSI who ordered the deployment, told the HumanRights Watch researcher that no judicial police officers were present.[17]Interrogation, Torture and Ill-TreatmentDuring interrogations GMIR officerstortured, beat, and intimidated detainees to coerce them into givinginformation. All 11 former detainees interviewed by Human Rights Watch reportedthat they had been beaten by police officers. Four said they were also subjectto mock executions or death threats. When asked about the treatment of otherdetainees, one victim said, "Everyone at Kaniga was beaten… every time thepolice walked passed a detainee, they would hit them."[18]According to one man, an officer whom hepresumed to be a judicial police officer arrested him on October 8 and took himto the health center, where he was held overnight.He asked me if I was a member of the FNL. Isaid that I used to be, but that I haven't been a member for a long time. TheOPJ wrote a statement and made me sign it, saying I used to be a member of the FNLbut that I no longer was involved.The OPJ then beat me with a wood baton and aclub. I was beaten on my hands, face, buttocks, backs of my legs, and my back.I still have problems walking and I have scars on my legs. When I was freed,they told me to quit the FNL and not to help the FNL when they ask for help.[19]Another person arrested on October 13recounted:They put rocks in our mouths while beatingus… They have a system. Five or six police take you and lift you 50 centimetersoff the ground. They hold you by the arms, legs, and head, and others beat you.They did this to me. Everyone had trouble sitting because we were all beaten onthe buttocks. I received more than 50 baton blows in the buttocks… I eventuallylost count.[20]Two other victims showed a Human RightsWatch researcher scars on their backs and stomachs that they said had resultedfrom the beatings two weeks previously. Another man said that he had urinatedblood for days after being beaten.[21]One of the first men arrested on October 8,another who assumed that judicial police officers were involved, also describedtorture and ill-treatment, including being subjected to death threats:When we arrived at Kaniga, they made me laydown on my belly in a puddle in the corridor. A judicial police officer … cameand called over two other police. The three of them beat me seriously, withbatons, all over my body. I had serious injuries afterwards, and could not sitdown for two weeks. They turned me over and beat me on the stomach, saying I shouldadmit I had weapons.One of the police put a pistol to my head,and another started digging a hole in the field right outside. They were tryingto intimidate me, to terrorize me. I said, "Do what you want, I have nothing tosay to you other than what I've already said." Then they accused me of being amember of the FNL, and I denied it. They continued beating me to try to get meto admit it. When they got tired of beating me, I fell asleep there in thecorridor. Every morning for the next few days, they beat me.[22]Two men told the Human Rights Watchresearcher that in addition to being beaten, they were also subjected to mockexecution. One man said:After beating me, the police took a pistoland said they were going to kill me. I was lying on the ground. A policeofficer shot at the ground next to my ear.[23]Another recounted:They said I should confess to having aweapon and being a member of the FNL… They beat me with a club and abaton.  They threatened to shoot me. Iwas sitting in a chair and they shot so that the bullet went right past my headand into the ground.[24]Burundi is a party to theInternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,[25]the African Charter on Human and People's Rights[26]and the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or DegradingTreatment or Punishment (CAT), all of which prohibit torture. Under CAT,torture is defined as "any act by which severe pain or suffering, whetherphysical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person" with the consent oracquiescence of a public official in order to elicit a confession orinformation, or for purposes of punishment or intimidation.[27]Systematic beatings, sometimes on a daily basis for several days and mockexecutions fall within the scope of that definition.Payingfor freedomSome persons who had been detained forperiods ranging from hours to days were released if they were willing and ableto pay bribes to police officers. As one recounted:One day they asked me if I wanted to gohome. They suggested my wife send someone with a "message"–a code word formoney–so that I could leave. I agreed, and sent someone to my family, to askthem to sell a goat or a cow in order to have money. They targeted me becausethey knew I had resources. My wife came and brought 120,000 Burundian francs(Fbu),[28]and I was freed. I gave the money to (a police officer named) Apollinaire.[29]One former detainee reported that a policeofficer asked him for 20,000 Fbu.[30]When he could provide only 14,000 Fbu, he was not released. The police officertold him he would be freed if he produced another 6,000 Fbu.Unableto do so, the victim was transferred to a Muramvya jail and detained thereanother three weeks in violation of Burundian law, which requires detainees tobe charged and presented to a prosecutor within one week of having beenarrested.[31] Atleast three other detainees were also transferred to jails in Muramvya; onesaid that even though he had paid the bribe requested by GMIR officers, he wasstill transferred to a Muramvya jail and was freed only after paying a secondbribe to a judicial police officer there.[32]None of those arrested in October wascharged with any criminal offence. All were released after periods ofdetention–some after a few hours, most after a week or so, but a few afternearly a month.PoliceBrutality and Intimidationof Local ResidentsMeanwhile, residents, including a policeofficer, who complained about police conduct were themselves abused by thepolice. On October 25, for example, a judicial police officer spoke about theabuses at Kaniga during a workshop on police conduct that was organized by theBurundian human rights organization Association for the Protection of HumanRights and Detained Persons (Association pour la Protection des DroitsHumains et des Personnes Detenus, APRODH.)Upon returning to Rutegama that evening, he was confronted by GMIR officers whobeat him and detained him overnight at the health center.[33] Awoman who witnessed his arrest and challenged the police about their conduct,told the Human Rights Watch researcher that in response to her question she wasbeaten in Rutegama town center by the Rutegama chief of security police, NestorNiyokuri. She later filed charges against him.[34]Three other persons also told the HumanRights Watch researcher that GMIR officers and Nestor Niyokuri beat them in thetown center on or about October 26, after they questioned police conduct or, inone case, approached police officers while they were beating another person.[35]One victim recounted:I went to a bar [in Rutegama]… A policeofficer from Kaniga came and was talking to [a woman]. I saw that the policeofficer was harassing [the woman] and I intervened and said he shouldn't dothat. He said it was none of my business… I left, but the police officerfollowed me. Outside the bistro, the police officer hit me on the cheek, and Ifell on the ground.Just then, a vehicle arrived with the policefrom Kaniga and the Chef de Poste. They all started beating me. There wereabout 8 or 9 people who beat me. They kicked me on the neck, and used theirhands and feet. They were beating me just because I had stood up for [thewoman].[36]During the period when the GMIR officerswere active in Rutegama, other locally-based security police officers alsotried to intimidate residents. According to one resident, Provincial InternalSecurity Police Commissioner Viateur Muco "came to my house and asked me why Iwas an FNL sympathizer… Later, a neighbor told me that my name was on a list ofpeople who were to be arrested. I wasn't arrested, but I am still afraid."[37]Another resident said the same official warned him to stop doing things thatthe police did not like and "asked me if I had information on the FNL. I said Ididn't know anything abut them. He said 'If you try to join them, we'll arrestyou immediately.'"[38] Asmentioned above, according to the ceasefire agreement signed between theGovernment of Burundi and the FNL in September 2006, being a member of the FNLis not a crime.[39]IV. BackgroundThese events took place in the context of intensifiedpolitical tension in Burundi,the proliferation of illegal small arms in civilian hands and a growing problemof armed robbery.On September 7, 2006 the government of President PierreNkurunziza and the armed opposition FNL, led by Agathon Rwasa, signed aceasefire, to be implemented over a period of six months under the supervisionof a Joint Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.[40]Pierre Nkurunziza, and his party, the National Council for the Defense ofDemocracy-Forces for the Defense of Democracy (Conseil national pour la défense de la démocratie-Forces pour la défensede la démocratie, CNDD-FDD), itself a former armed opposition movement, hadcome to power in 2005, in Burundi's first elections under a new constitutionaccepted by a popular referendum earlier in the year. The FNL had remained inarmed opposition.The 5,600 United Nationspeacekeepers participating since May 2004 in the United Nations Operation in Burundi (Operationdes Nations Unies au Burundi,ONUB) left the country in December 2006. They were replaced by the civilianUnited Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB), whose primary mission isto support consolidation of the peace and to coordinate UN agencies working in Burundi,and by 1,100 South African peacekeeping troops working under the aegis of theAfrican Union.[41]Talks on implementing the 2006ceasefire started belatedly in February 2007. The FNL quit the discussions onJuly 21, 2007, alleging that the South African facilitator was partial to thegovernment.[42]In the meantime, in contravention of the ceasefire agreement, the FNL continuedto recruit new combatants, and by the time of its withdrawal from the talks,Burundian authorities and BINUB estimated the FNL to be as much as twice as strongas it had been at the time of the ceasefire.[43]Although the FNL has not formally withdrawn from the ceasefire deal, in late2007 and early 2008 FNL soldiers carried out several attacks on both governmenttroops and so-called "FNL dissidents"-combatants who had quit the movement andmoved into cantonment sites (camps where FNL combatants wishing to demobilizeare protected by government and African Union soldiers while questionsconcerning their disarmament and reintegration are resolved).The FNL's departure from the implementation talks coincidedwith an increase in crime throughout the country, most notably robbery. Thenumber of armed or aggravated robberies committed by civilians and recorded bythe Burundian police in 2007 was 4,004, up from 2,530 in 2006.[44]The increase in robberies reflects both an opportunistic resumption ofpredatory attacks as well as the growing desperation of many Burundians in theface of continuing poverty and the failure of long-promised economicimprovements to materialize.[45]Much of the crime has been perpetrated by current and former FNL combatants aswell as by other assailants who have often posed as FNL combatants.[46]The proliferation of illegal firearms in the hands ofcivilians (and the conduct of ill-disciplined police officers and soldiers) isoften said to contribute to both the number and seriousness of crimescommitted.[47]During the years of conflict, previous governments occasionally providedarms to civilians to form militias for local defense. In addition manyBurundians obtained arms to protect themselves, their families, and theirproperty. Gun possession is in most cases illegal, though a small number ofcivilians receive gun permits by applying to the Ministry of Defense.[48]The current government launcheda campaign in mid-2006 to collect illegal firearms, estimated as between100,000 and 300,000, and established a Technical Commission for CivilianDisarmament and the Fight Against the Proliferation of Small Arms (CommissionTechnique de désarmament de la population civile et lutte contre laprolifération des armes légères et de petit calibre, CTDC).[49]The commission started with few resources and has not yet made any significantimpact on the number of firearms present throughout the country.[50]Recent data released by BINUB suggests that civilian disarmament efforts maynot greatly reduce property crime: only about 1% of recorded thefts perpetratedby civilians in 2007 involved firearms.[51]Police sources suggested the majority of armed robberies in 2007 were committedby members of the FNL, a group that is not currently targeted by the forceddisarmament campaign.[52]The Burundian NationalPoliceOne of the significant challenges faced by the current government hasbeen the building of a competent, properly-trained, professional police force.Security sector reform has been an integral feature of each agreement aimed atending civil war between the Burundian government and rebel groups, beginningwith the Arusha Accord of 2000. A new national army and a national police forcehave been established, each including members of former government forces andformer rebel combatants.Formally established on December 31, 2004, the Burundiannational police is a civilian force operating under the newly created Ministryof Public Security, formerly an arm of the Ministry of the Interior.[53]It consists of four commissariats: the Internal Security Police (PSI), theJudicial Police (PJ), the Penitentiary Police, and the Police for Air, Bordersand Foreigners (PAFE). The Rapid Mobile Intervention Groups (GMIR), aspecialized reserve founded in 2006, was part of the PSI until December 2007,when under a police restructuring program it became a stand-alone forcedirectly accountable to the director of the national police.Judicial police officers andsecurity police officers share responsibility for the prevention and punishmentof ordinary crime and are most regularly and directly in contact with thepopulation. The judicial police investigate crimes, question suspects, and provideevidence to the prosecutor (MinistèrePublic).[54]The security police guard public places, apprehend perpetrators, and executesearch and arrest warrants issued by the prosecutor.[55]Securitypolice, including GMIR agents, are not authorized to conduct interrogations orto detain suspects.The integration of demobilized combatants has caused thenumber of national police to swell from 2,300 in 2000 to somewhere between15,000 and 20,000 officers in 2007.[56] Theactual current number of police officers appears to be unknown even to thoseheading the force, because not all have been registered and some do not haveadministrative files.[57]It is widely recognized, however, that the size of the police force far exceedsnational needs. In accord with conditions set by the International MonetaryFund for future aid, the police force plans to select and demobilize officersin order to reach a target number of 15,000, but as of late 2007 this hadbarely begun, in part because of delays in the implementation of a program toidentify and register officers, which is to be carried out with the assistanceof the International Center for Transitional Justice (ICTJ), an internationalNGO.The force established in 2004incorporates elements from the former Public Security Police (PSP) and JudicialPolice, the former government army and gendarmerie, and former armed oppositionmovements. The latter make up over a third of the new police force. Mergingthese diverse components into a single, impartial force to serve citizens ofall ethnic and political affiliations, and ensuring that all officers aretrained to the necessary standard, have proven to be major challenges. Officersfrom the former police force had been trained to do police work, but soldierstransferred from the army had military but no police training. In addition,according to one high-ranking police officer, some of the soldiers transferredfrom the army had performed poorly in military service and were sent to thepolice because the army did not wish to retain them.[58]  More than a third of the new police officerswere former rebel combatants with no formal police or military training. Someof these new officers are illiterate.[59]With the need for trainingobvious, several international governmental and nongovernmental actors havebeen providing assistance, detailed below. But despite their efforts, at theend of 2007 a substantial number of officers-certainly more than half-wereoperating with little or no training.[60]This is a problem of particular concern given that many officers had servedwith armed forces or factions known to have engaged in human rights violations.[61]Despite a provision in the 2000 Arusha Accord requiring the exclusionfrom the police force of former combatants found guilty of "genocide, the coup d'etat of October 21, 1993, humanrights violations or war crimes," Burundi has not established any mechanism toscreen police officers for crimes related to the armed conflict, nor have themajority of such crimes been prosecuted. Thus no violators have been excludedfrom the security forces.[62]Despite efforts to create a unified, impartial force, it iswidely accepted in Burundithat under the surface some officers have retained strong political loyalties,particularly those who were once part of the FDD, the military branch of theCNDD-FDD.[63]Under the terms of the 2003 Pretoria Protocol signed between the interimgovernment and the CNDD-FDD when it was still a rebel movement, FDD combatantswere to make up 35 per cent of the police force.[64] Atthe time of the events described in this report, the Minister of the Interiorand Public Security, the director general of the police, the CommissionerGeneral of the PSI, and the chief commander of the GMIR were all formerCNDD-FDD officers, creating a chain of command heavily weighted towards onepolitical party. However, Desiré Uwamahoro, commander of the unit responsiblefor events described in this report, was apparently from an armed faction thatsplit off from the CNDD-FDD in 2001.[65]Police officers are prohibitedfrom belonging to political parties so none is openly a CNDD-FDD member, butsome police officers as well as other observers claim that former FDDcombatants sometimes follow orders from CNDD-FDD members who are high-rankingofficials but not their hierarchical superiors or even police officers.[66]One high-ranking police official told a Human Rights Watch researcher that "Thepolice are politicized. At times we are obliged to work in the shadows."[67]This sentiment was echoed by a GMIR officer present at Rutegama, who told HumanRights Watch, "The party uses the national police to get people in line." Inhis estimation, the unit was sent to Muramvya "because the government thinksthat people are abandoning the party in power, and that people won't vote forthem in 2010… They sent us there to intimidate the population, to win back thepopulation by force."[68]V. The Official Response to Reports of HumanRights ViolationsOn receiving reports of illegaldetentions and beatings at Kaniga, a number of local officials stepped in totry and restore due process and put an end to abuses. These interventionsreduced the scale of the violations, but did not stop police abuses completely.A judicial police officer working in Rutegama contacted the Muramvya authoritiesabout the abuses. On October 16, eight days into the arrests, a Muramvya deputyprosecutor and the Muramvya commissioner of the judicial police accompaniedthat officer to Kaniga to investigate his complaints. They found more than adozen detainees, many bearing scars from torture.[69]The deputy prosecutor informed the GMIR police officers that Kaniga wasan illegal detention site and that torture was prohibited. He insisted thatthey free the detainees, but the police refused, saying he would have to speakwith Commander Uwamahoro, who was not present.[70]The same day, Provincial Internal Security PoliceCommissioner Viateur Muco arrived independently at the Kaniga health center,after GMIR officers had told him that a woman was detained there (they wereapparently concerned that a woman was detained with men). Commissioner Mucotransferred the woman and two other detainees to jails in Muramvya town andfreed one detainee. However, for reasons that remain unclear, the commissionerleft others in the illegal detention center.[71] Avictim told a Human Rights Watch that Muco was well aware of the presence ofothers.[72]  Another victim said that when detainees weretransferred or freed on October 16, the GMIR officer taking notes duringinterrogations, whom victims assumed to be a judicial police officer, told himhe should stay because his file was not yet finished.[73]Two days later, on October 18,the governor of Muramvya and another deputy prosecutor attempted to visit thecenter, but were refused access by Commander Uwamahoro.[74]On October 19, the Muramvya Prosecutor arrived at the health center withthe provincial judicial police commissioner. By this time, all remainingdetainees had been freed apart from the several who had been transferred toMuramvya.[75]One detainee said that upon his release he was threatened byCommander Uwamahoro, "If you talk about what happened, you will be abducted."[76]Despite receiving a similar injunction, another victim contacted APRODH afterhis release, spurring investigations by APRODH, BINUB and Human Rights Watch,beginning the following week.[77] Detentions reduced in number butdid not entirely end at this time. For example, the judicial police officer whospoke up against torture cited above was held overnight at Kaniga on October25.Following the intervention of human rights organizations andBINUB human rights officers, who contacted the police spokesperson and otherpolice authorities in late October to protest the abuses, Burundian policeofficials recalled the GMIR unit under Commander Uwamahoro to Bujumbura in early November and re-posted itto several city neighborhoods.[78]According to residents, a new GMIR unit sent to Rutegama in November continuedthe practice of illegal nighttime searches. Its officers are reported to haveillegally detained at least one person in the health center rather thantransferring him to the judicial police.[79]Additionally, local security police chief Nestor Niyokuri, who was alsoimplicated in human rights violations, remained on duty in Rutegama untilFebruary 2008.[80]According to one victim, the police chief threatened her after the initialabuse and arrested another person who had spoken with human rightsorganizations.[81]Beyond the immediateinterventions to halt abuses by the GMIR unit based at Kaniga in October 2007,the police and judicial authorities have been slow to address human rightsviolations, with the result that as of this writing not a single officerinvolved in these events has been disciplined or brought to justice. Indeed,Commander Uwamahoro has been promoted from head of a single GMIR unit tocommander of the 3rd GMIR group.[82]Three victims filed complaints with the Muramvyaprosecutor's office in late October, but the prosecutor initially took no stepstoward interviewing witnesses or calling in suspects for questioning. He told aHuman Rights Watch researcher that he had not received one of the complaintsfiled, although a BINUB human rights observer later found this complaint on hisdesk.[83]Two of the victims who initially filed complaints were among those whohad visible scars, but the prosecutor never ordered medical examinations oftheir healed wounds.[84]Other victims initiallyexpressed reluctance to press charges, fearing retaliation. In late November,however, a number of them agreed to provide testimony as part of a collectivecomplaint of 13 victims submitted by Avocats Sans Frontières, an internationalnongovernmental organization, to the Muramvya prosecutor on November 30, 2007.In mid-December the Muramvya prosecutor finally issued summonses for GMIRCommander Uwamahoro, GMIR Brigadier Apollinaire Sindihokubwayo, and Rutegamasecurity police chief Nestor Niyokuri. The three were interrogated bymagistrates in Muramvya on December 20. All three denied that prolongeddetention and beatings had occurred at Kaniga. However, a deputy prosecutortold the Human Rights Watch researcher that charges against them would bebrought before the Muramvya courts.[85]Police officials asked about the abuses by Human RightsWatch either denied they had taken place or sought to justify police misconductand violations of procedure at Rutegama. One official explained, "People wereslapped around a bit, but it was necessary to get information."[86]In another discussion, the same official responded to questions about tortureby stating that the GMIR unit had confiscated eight Kalashnikovs, 14 grenades,and a pair of night vision goggles from the residents in and around Rutegama,as if to suggest the recovery of these firearms justified whatever methodsmight have been used.[87]The head of GMIR insisted that no one had been held in an illegal detentionsite and that all persons arrested by the GMIR had been turned over immediatelyto the judicial police, while the Commissioner General of the security policesaid the GMIR had not conducted interrogations.[88]In early November, authoritiesfrom both the Internal Security Police Commissariat and the Judicial PoliceCommissariat began internal investigations of the events at Kaniga, but theyproduced no public report. The commissioners of both police branches werereplaced in December 2007 in a restructuring of the national police, and theirreplacements both told a Human Rights Watch researcher in February that theywere unaware of the status of these investigations.[89] Thecommissioner general of the Internal Security Police has the authority tosuspend officers suspected of wrongdoing.[90] Butwhen a Human Rights Watch researcher asked the then commissioner generalGabriel Nizigama why this had not been done in spite of testimony provided bymultiple victims, he said the evidence did not constitute sufficient grounds totake such steps against Uwamahoro, Sindihokubwayo and Niyokuri.[91]Commissioner General Gabriel Nizigama did ask GMIR CommanderUwamahoro to submit a report to his superiors about the events that took placeat Rutegama. According to David Nikiza, the commander of the three GMIR groupsin Bujumbura,the report consisted only of a description of searches carried out and weaponsconfiscated, and did not include information on any arrests made or thetreatment of persons held at the health center. [92]In at least two cases,authorities including the prosecutor and governor of Muramvya and CommanderUwamahoro attempted to facilitate "amiable resolutions" between victims and thepolice officers who beat them.[93]While "amiable resolution" facilitated by local authorities is a commonpractice in Burundi,it is generally used to resolve conflicts between family members or neighbors.Mediation is not an acceptable alternative to accountability in the case ofserious human rights violations.In December 2007, the newdirector general of the National Police, appointed in November 2007 after theincidents discussed in this report, told a Human Rights Watch researcher thatwithin the next few months he would begin collecting information on policeabuse from citizens and local officials, including in Rutegama. He said thatpolice officers responsible for abuses would be demoted or demobilized.[94]A number of police officers were in fact demobilized for disciplinary reasonsbetween November 2007 and March 2008, but none of the officers accused ofabuses in Muramvya were among that number.[95]Professionalism and ImpunityThe abuses in Rutegama in October 2007 areindicative of a set of inter-linked problems that bedevil the Burundianpolice-problems of ill-discipline, lack of professionalism, and failures ofaccountability. Equipped with little training in policing but much experienceof insurgency and counterinsurgency, many police officers do not enforce lawseffectively, and some are themselves responsible for crimes and human rightsabuses, which are rarely punished.According to BINUB and the Office of theHigh Commissioner of Human Rights in Burundi, between January and October 2007 policeofficers committed at least 15 killings, 125 cases of assault, and six cases ofrape.[96]  AvocatsSans Frontières has received 119 complaints of torture by policeofficers, committed mostly in prisons and jails, in the last two years.[97]There are good reasons for believing thatthese reported incidents are only a proportion of the abuses that have actuallytaken place. Many victims do not press charges against police or even reportabuses to human rights organizations because they fear retaliation.[98]Others believe that pressing charges will be futile. The sense of futility isreinforced by the failure of even members of the political elite to get theperpetrators of abuses against them brought to justice. Speaking of thewidely-known case of former Vice-President Alphonse Kadege detained in 2006(who has not managed to have the police officers who allegedly tortured himbrought to account), one Burundian political analyst remarked, "If formerPresidents and Vice-Presidents can't get justice after being tortured, how canordinary citizens?"[99]Since the formation of the National Police,several hundred police officers have been dismissed or jailed after allegationsof criminal activity, and one police officer was sentenced to 20 years inprison after being convicted of rape in Bubanza province in mid-2007.[100]But in cases of torture or ill-treatment of detainees, limited officialresponse is more usual. Of six cases of murder and 52 of ill-treatment ortorture recorded by the Burundian human rights organization Ligue Iteka betweenJanuary and October 2007, only one murder and six torture cases led to chargesbeing brought. The majority of these cases were dismissed, while others movedslowly through the judicial system. As of January 2008 not one of these caseshad led to the conviction of police.[101]Avocats Sans Frontières assisted victims in filing complaints against policeofficers in 59 of the 119 torture cases submitted to them from early 2006 toearly 2008, but only two police officers had been convicted as of March 2008;one received a two-year prison sentence, while the other paid a fine.[102]In at least three cases in the last year,popular frustration at police misconduct has spurred violence against policeofficers, including lynchings of those suspected of having committed crimes.[103] Arecent study of popular attitudes towards the police found that 14 percent ofBurundians ranked the police as a "group at the origin of violence" in Burundi,following only "armed bandits" and the FNL as primary sources of violence.[104]Human Rights Watch has made repeatedrequests to the police spokesperson and other police officials for a list ofpolice officers arrested in 2007, the allegations against them, and the outcomeof any investigations and prosecutions. It is indicative of serious weaknessesin capacity to enforce discipline and accountability that no police authoritycurrently collects such information, and as of this writing the data had notbeen made available. In November 2007 the inspector general of the nationalpolice, responsible for monitoring police misconduct, said that a law has beenproposed that would make the inspectorate, an agency of the Public SecurityMinistry, the central repository for all complaints against police officers andwould authorize it to follow the progress of such complaints, but discussionsof the bill and possible funding mechanisms are still at an early stage.[105]Burundian human rights monitors note thatthere is a general culture of mutual protection among police, prosecutors andjudges. In addition, former and current political loyalties may keep officersfrom accusing colleagues from movements with which they were formerlyaffiliated.[106]According to Burundian human rights monitors, superior officers often respondto allegations of abuse by an officer by simply transferring the allegedperpetrator to another province.[107]Given the absence of administrative files for many officers, repeatedviolations may go unnoticed, even if some disciplinary sanctions have beenimposed.VI. International and Burundian National LawThe conduct of police officersat Rutegama violates national legislation and international human rights law onseveral grounds, and should be subject to appropriate investigation and sanctions.Burundi is a party to theInternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the 1981African Charter on Human and People's Rights, both of which set outprohibitions on arbitrary detention and use of torture and inhuman or degradingtreatment. Burundiis also a party to the United Nations Convention against Torture, which obliges states to prohibit and take appropriateaction to prevent and sanction acts of torture, and also acts of inhuman anddegrading treatment. Torture under the Convention is defined as "any act bywhich severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionallyinflicted on a person for such purposes as obtaining from him or a third personinformation or a confession, punishing him for an act he or a third person hascommitted or is suspected of having committed, or intimidating or coercing himor a third person […] when such pain or suffering is inflicted by or at theinstigation of or with the consent or acquiescence of a public official orother person acting in an official capacity."[108]The Convention against Torturerequires that state parties undertake a prompt and impartial investigationwherever there is reasonable ground to believe that an act of torture has beencommitted.[109]Further, the UN Principles on the Effective Investigation and Documentation ofTorture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (2001)provides that "Even in the absence of an express complaint, an investigationshould be undertaken if there are other reasons to believe that torture orill-treatment might have occurred."[110]Burundian national law currentlyfails to prescribe penalties for torture, except if it results in death or iscarried out in the course of an abduction.[111] Aprohibition on torture, however, is part of a proposed new criminal code,currently before the National Assembly. The current criminal law prohibits"voluntary bodily injury" and prescribes a penalty of up to two years in prisonif the injury is premeditated.[112]Also prohibited is the extortion of funds carried out under threat of violence,punishable by five years in prison.[113]The 2004 law on the creation, organization, missions, composition, andoperation of the National Police prohibits the police from using force, exceptwhen in pursuit of a legitimate objective that cannot be achieved withoutforce.[114]In addition to violatinginternational and national law on torture, bodily injury, extortion, and theuse of force, the conduct of some GMIR officers at Kaniga violated provisionsof the Burundian code of criminal procedure, and the 2004 law on the NationalPolice relating to procedure. These laws specify that only judicial policeofficers may interrogate suspects. GMIR officers are not part of the judicialpolice.[115]  The commissioner general of the InternalSecurity Police told Human Rights Watch that security police officers have theauthority to hold suspects for 24 hours before turning them over to thejudicial police, but this assertion was contested by other police officials andan experienced jurist, who said suspects must be turned over to the judicialpolice "immediately" after their detention.[116]According to Burundian lawflagrant violations of criminal procedure are subject not only to internaldisciplinary proceedings but also to criminal sanctions. The conduct of illegalarrests and detentions, for example, is punishable by imprisonment for to up toa year.[117]VII. Response by International ActorsWell aware of the risks of an ill-trained police force,international donors have provided several training programs for the Burundianpolice.In September 2006, the Belgian Technical Cooperationinitiated a three-year program for Belgian police to train their Burundiancounterparts in community-oriented policing, but actual training began only inSeptember 2007. By the end of 2007 5,144 police officers had received aninitial one week of training under this program, as part of a more extensivecurriculum which they will follow in alternating groups of 1250 police officersat a time.[118]According to Director General of the National Police Fabien Ndayishimiye, thetraining included an emphasis on human rights and respect for rule of law.[119]Other international donors and NGOs have also provided training relevant tohuman rights, but these more limited programs have not reached the majority ofofficers.[120]In addition to the Belgian program, which focuses on therank-and-file, Francehas provided training to commanding officers. The Netherlands has committed fundingto the ICTJ-facilitated census of the police, and a Dutch police advisor isworking directly within the Burundian police to develop a strategic reformplan. As an element of this plan the Netherlands is consideringfinancing the office of the inspector general of the police in its efforts toserve as an internal monitor of police conduct. Such a step could be helpful incurbing police abuses.[121]No formal structure is currently in place to coordinatedonor assistance to the police.  In 2007 theBurundian government and donor partners launched the Partners' CoordinationGroup (Groupe de Coordination desPartenaires, GCP) to monitor international aid associated with the PovertyReduction Strategy Paper and the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding.[122]The GCP encompasses several working groups that coordinate aid todifferent sectors, but no working group on the police or on security sectorreform was in place as of March 2008.[123]A police working group could harmonize aid programs and ensure adequateattention to human rights.UN officials, both in the previous ONUB operation and in thecurrent BINUB, have played a significant role in police reform and training.The UN Peacebuilding Fund (PBF), a fund operated in conjunction with the UNPeacebuilding Commission (PBC) with the aim of strengthening institutions inpost-conflict states, granted $6,900,000 to the national police in July 2007,but the training to be financed by a portion of this funding had not yet beeninitiated as of March 2008.[124]UN Human Rights officers working under the combineddirection of BINUB's Human Rights and Justice Section and the Office of theHigh Commissioner of Human Rights (OHCHR) have effectively monitored violationsof human rights by the police. They, like Burundian human rights organizations,have been forthright in demanding accountability.VIII. Annex: Documented Cases ofPolice Abuse in Rutegama Commune[125]VictimDate of Incident/ Period of IllegalDetentionAccusations against Victim Made byPolice at Time of ArrestType of MistreatmentA. Victims Detained at KanigaHealthCenter1.BusinessmanOctober8-13, 2007FNLmembership, weapons possessionBeatenwith batons and clubs on hands, legs, buttocks, and back; slapped in the face2. FarmerOctober8-13, 2007Weaponspossession, FNL membershipBeatenwith batons on entire body; mock execution; paid 120,000 Fbu for release[126]3.Demobilized FDD combatantOctober8-16, 2007; continued detention in Muramvya through November 7FNLmembership, weapons possessionBeatenwith clubs and batons on the buttocks; mock execution4. WomanOctober9-16, 2007; continued detention in Muramvya through November 7FNLmembership, theft, weapons possessionBeaten onthe buttocks with a baton while handcuffed on the ground5.Demobilized FDD combatantOctober10-19, 2007Weaponspossession, FNL activityPicked upby arms and legs, beaten by eight police agents with batons and clubs onbuttocks; rocks placed in mouth; threatened with death with an iron bar;forced to watch torture of others ; 22,000 Fbu taken during beating6. LaborerOctober10-16, 2007; continued detention in Muramvya through November 7FNLmembership, weapons possessionBeaten onbuttocks, stomach, and hands with a club; mock execution; paid 14,000 Fbu forrelease, but detained further because he was unable to produce another 6,000Fbu7. Chef de colline (local official)October12-17, 2007Failure toarrest a thief40 blowswith batons and clubs on the buttocks and stomach; paid 35,000 Fbu forrelease8. WomanOctober13, detained for a period of hoursWeaponspossessionBeaten9. TeacherOctober13-16, 2007FNLmembershipPicked upby arms and legs, beaten on buttocks and stomach with batons about 50 times;death threats; cloth placed in mouth during beating10.TeacherOctober13-19, 2007FNLmembership, weapons possessionPicked upby arms and legs, beaten on buttocks and stomach; death threats; paid 40,000Fbu for release11. FarmerOctober16-19, 2007Sellingstolen cattle, weapons possessionPicked upby arms and legs, beaten on buttocks with clubs; rocks placed in mouth12. ManOctober16-19, 2007Sellingstolen cattle, weapons possessionPicked upby arms and legs, beaten on buttocks with clubs; rocks placed in mouth13. ManOctober16-19, 2007Sellingstolen cattle, weapons possessionBeaten14. ManOctober16-19, 2007Sellingstolen cattle, weapons possessionBeaten;paid unknown sum for release15. PoliceofficerOctober25-26, 2007InsultingGMIR CommanderBeaten16. ManOctober29, 2007MotorcycletheftBeaten atKanigaB. Victims Beaten in RutegamaTown17.TeacherOctober25, 2007Challengingarrest of previous victimBeaten intown of Rutegama;death threats18.Resident of Internally Displaced Persons' CampOctober25, 2007In companyof previous victimSlapped inface, kicked on legs and buttocks in town of Rutegama19. ManOctober26, 2007Observingbeating of another victimSlappedand threatened in town of Rutegama20. FarmerOctober26, 2007FNLmembershipBeatenwith a club on the buttocks in town of Rutegama21. PoliceofficerOctober26, 2007TellingGMIR agent not to harass a womanBeaten by8 or 9 police in town of Rutegama[1] Anumber of the police officers mentioned in this report were transferred to newpositions but remained in active service following a reshuffling of policeleadership on December 13, 2007. Unless otherwise noted, titles given refer topolice officers' positions in October 2007.Decret No. 100/360 du 13decembre 2007 portant nomination de certains cadres de la Direction Generale dela Police National du Burundi.[2]The GMIR groups are known respectively as the 1st, 2ndand 3rd GMIR.  Each oneconsists of approximately 300 police officers and is divided into severalfunctional "units."[3]Human Rights Watch interviews with police spokesperson Pierre ChanelNtarabaganyi, Bujumbura, November 16, 2007;Commissioner General of the Internal Security Police Gabriel Nizigama, Bujumbura, November 19, 2007; and Commissioner General ofthe Judicial Police Deo Suzuguye, Bujumbura,November 20, 2007.[4]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Bujumbura,November 1, 2007.[5]Human Rights Watch interview with GMIR police officer, Bujumbura, November 21, 2007.[6] Loi No. 1/015 du 20 juillet 1999 portantréforme du code de procedure penale, art. 52; Loi No. 1/020 du 31December 2004 portant creation, organization, missions, composition, etfonctionnement de la Police Nationale, art. 30.[7]Under the terms of the Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement Between the Governmentof Burundi and the PALIPEHUTU-FNL, Dares Salaam, September 7, 2006, membership in the FNL isnot a crime.[8]The spokesperson of the Burundian police claimed that no one was detained forFNL membership but that some persons were detained for prohibited activitieslinked to membership. Because police maintained no register of the detaineesand the charges on which they were held and because all detainees wereeventually released without charge, it is difficult to ascertain with certaintythe reason for arrest that was provided at the time. Human Rights Watchinterviews with victims, Bujumbura, November 1and November 20, 2007, and Rutegama, November 2, 2007, and police spokespersonPierre Chanel Ntarabaganyi, Bujumbura,November 16, 2007.[9]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Bujumbura,November 20, 2007.[10]Human Rights Watch interviews with victims, Bujumbura,November 20, 2007, and GMIR police officer, Bujumbura, November 21, 2007.[11]Human Rights Watch visit to Kaniga health center, October 23, 2007, andinterview with victim, Bujumbura,November 20, 2007.[12]Human Rights Watch interview with GMIR police officer, Bujumbura, November 21, 2007.[13]PSI officers are authorized to arrest suspects in only three instances: whenthey are caught « red-handed »; when they are pointed out by witnessesimmediately following a crime; and on the basis of a warrant. Loi No. 1/020 du 31 December 2004 portantcreation, organization, missions, composition, et fonctionnement de la PoliceNationale, art. 21.[14] Burundianlaw does not explicitly define what constitutes a legal detention site.However, Burundian judicial and police authorities explained that the Kanigasite was unknown to judicial authorities and thus in violation of acceptedstandards of detention. Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with Muramvyadeputy prosecutor, March 22, 2008, and with a judicial police officer, March24, 2008.[15]Human Rights Watch interview with police spokesperson Pierre ChanelNtarabaganyi, Bujumbura,November 16, 2007.[16] Loi No. 1/020 du 31 December 2004 portantcreation, organization, missions, composition, et fonctionnement de la PoliceNationale, art. 27.[17]Human Rights Watch interview with Commissioner General of the Internal SecurityPolice Gabriel Nizigama, Bujumbura, November 19,2007, and GMIR police officer, Bujumbura,November 21, 2007.[18]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Bujumbura,November 1, 2007.[19]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Rutegama, November 2, 2007.[20]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Bujumbura,November 1, 2007.[21]Human Rights Watch interviews with victims, Bujumbura, November 1, 2007, and Rutegama,November 2, 2007.[22]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Bujumbura,November 20, 2007.[23]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Rutegama, November 2, 2007.[24] HumanRights Watch interview with victim, Muramvya, November 2, 2007.[25]International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,G.A. res. 2200A (XXI), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force March 23, 1976,ratified by Burundion May 9, 1990.[26]African [Banjul] Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights,adopted June 27, 1981, OAU Doc. CAB/LEG/67/3 rev. 5, entered into force October21, 1986, ratified by Burundi on July 28, 1989.[27]Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman orDegrading Treatment or Punishment (Convention against Torture), adoptedDecember 10, 1984, G.A. Res. 39/46, annex, 39, U.N. Doc. A/39/51, entered intoforce June 26, 1987, ratified by Burundi on February 18, 1993, art.1 and 2.[28]Approximately $110. 1000 Burundian francs, Fbu, is equivalent to just under oneUSdollar.[29]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Bujumbura,November 20, 2007.[30]Approximately $18.[31]Human Rights Watch interviews with victim, Muramvya PSI jail, November 2, 2007,and Bujumbura, November 20, 2007; Loi No. 1/015 du 20 juillet 1999 portantréforme du code de procedure penale, art. 60-65.[32]Human Rights Watch interviews with victim, Rutegama, November 2, 2007.[33]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with victim, October 29, 2007.[34]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Bujumbura,November 1, 2007.[35]Human Rights Watch interviews with victims, Rutegama, November 2, 2007.[36]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Rutegama, November 7, 2007.[37]Human Rights Watch telephone interview, October 23, 2007.[38]Human Rights Watch/APRODH interview, Muramvya, October 23, 2007.[39]Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement Between the Government of Burundi and the PALIPEHUTU-FNL, Dar es Salaam, September7, 2006.[40]Theverification mechanism included seven representatives each from the Governmentof Burundi and the FNL as well as representatives from the nationaldemobilization commission, the African Union (AU), BINUB, South Africa, Tanzania,and Uganda."Joint truce verification mechanism launched," IRIN, October 11, 2006, http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/library/news/2006/10/mil-061011-irin05.htm (accessed December 7, 2007).[41]United Nations Security Council Resolution 1719 (2006), October 25, 2006[42]After months of deadlock, government and FNL representatives held talks in Dar es Salaam from January 21 to January 30, 2008 andagreed to resume talks on implementing the ceasefire, but their representativeshad not yet returned to Burundias of March 2008.[43] Human Rights Watch interview withNational Defense Forces (Forces de laDéfense Nationale, FDN) spokesperson Adolphe Manirakiza, Bujumbura,November 26, 2007; Bureau Integré des Nations Unis au Burundi/Office du HautCommissaire aux Droits de l"Homme aux Burundi, "Rapport sur la situation desdroits de l'homme au Burundi; Rapport Mensuel, April 2007"and "Rapportsur la situation des droits de l'homme au Burundi; Rapport Mensuel, May2007", unpublished documents.[44] BINUB, "Analysede la Criminalité", March 15, 2008.  Unpublished document submitted toHuman Rights Watch via email, March 25, 2008.[45]International Monetary Fund, "Burundi:Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper", IMF Country Report No. 07/46, February 2007,http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2007/cr0746.pdf(accessed March 24, 2008).[46]Human Rights Watch interview with Commissioner General of the Internal SecurityPolice Gabriel Nizigama, Bujumbura, November 19, 2007; "Insécurité : l'arméeburundaise restreint la circulation routière", PANA, November 17, 2007, reprintedin Arib News, November 18, 2007, www.arib.info/flash-info.html(accessed December 7, 2007).[47]Stephanie Pézard and Nicolas Florquin, SmallArms in Burundi: Disarmingthe Civilian Population in Peacetime (Geneva:Small Arms Survey, 2007), p. 3.[48]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with FDN spokesperson AdolpheManirakiza, March 24, 2008.[49]Human Rights Watch interviews with President of the Technical Commission onCivil Disarmament and the Fight against the Proliferation of Small Arms (CTDC)Sylvestre Kibeceri, Bujumbura, October 8, 2007, and a representative of DanishChurch Aid, Bujumbura, November 22, 2007; CTDC press release, November 29,2006, as cited in Centre d'Alerte et de Prevention des Conflits (Bujumbura),"Etude sur la réforme du secteur de sécurité pour la protection de lapopulation civile," undated, p. 38.[50]The police began a massive campaign of forced disarmament in January 2008 andhave successfully collected a number of firearms. In some cases they havefailed to respect procedure. For example, they have searched homes withoutpresenting a search warrant, and without the involvement of judicial policeofficers, who must be present at all searches. Human Rights Watch interviewwith representative of Ligue Iteka, Bujumbura,March 3, 2008, and representative of the Public Prosecutor's office, Bujumbura, March 3, 2008.[51] BINUB, «Analyse de laCriminalité», March 15, 2008.  Unpublisheddocument submitted to Human Rights Watch via email, March 25, 2008.[52]Human Rights Watch interview with Assistant Director General of the NationalPolice Gervais Ndirakobuca, Bujumbura,March 26, 2008.[53]The Ministry of Public Security was established as part of a reorganization ofgovernment on November 14, 2007. The Minister of Public Security is AlainGuillaume Bunyoni, former Director General of the national police; he was replacedas police Director General by Fabien Ndayishimiye.[54] Loi No. 1/020 du 31 December 2004 portantcreation, organization, missions, composition, et fonctionnement dela PoliceNationale, art. 27.[55] Loi No. 1/020 du 31 December 2004 portantcreation, organization, missions, composition, et fonctionnement dela PoliceNationale, art. 19-26.[56]BINUB estimates that the integrated forced in early 2005 included 2079 formerPublic Security and Judicial Police officers; 8257 ex-gendarmes; 3000 formersoldiers; and 6744 former members of armed political parties and movements. ByNovember 2005, 1,546 of those police who were past retirement age had beendemobilized, most of them from the former police and gendarmerie, leaving atotal of 18,534 police officers. Human Rights Watch interview with official ofBINUB Security Sector Reform and Small Arms Unit, Bujumbura, December 19, 2007.[57] Director General of the National PoliceFabien Ndayishimiye, press conference, Bujumbura, November 29, 2007;  Centre d'Alerte et de Prévention des Conflits(Bujumbura), "Etude sur la réforme dusecteur de sécurité pour la protection de la population civile," undated, p.20.[58]Human Rights Watch interview with police official, Bujumbura, November 30, 2007.[59]Human Rights Watch interview with official of BINUB Security Sector Reform andSmall Arms Unit, Bujumbura, November 20, 2007; Republic of Burundi andCooperation Belgo Burundaise, "Projet d'Appui à la Formation de la PoliceNationale du Burundi," unpublished document distributed at press conference,Bujumbura, November 29, 2007; Centre d'Alerte et de Prévention des Conflits, p.21.[60]Human Rights Watch interview with Director General of the National PoliceFabien Ndayishimiye, Bujumbura,November 30, 2007.[61]For background on wartime human rights violations committed by both rebelmovements and the former Burundian army, see Human Rights Watch, Everyday Victims: Civilians in the BurundianWar, vol. 15, no. 20(A), December 2003,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2003/burundi1203/burundi1203.pdf.[62]ArushaPeace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi, Protocol III, Chapter II,article 14, no.2 d., 2000.[63]A report on security sector reform that was well-received enough by the newPolice Director to be distributed en masse at a November 2007 press conferenceon police reform notes, "Since the CNDD-FDD came to power, the PNB has beenconspicuous in the repression of opposition political parties and some elementsof civil society… there have been cases in which elements of the police haveforbidden authorized meetings of political parties, searched opposition partyoffices without warrants, and put journalists under surveillance withoutofficial approval for such activities." Centre d'Alerte et de Prévention des Conflits  (Bujumbura), p. 25.[64]Pretoria Protocol on Political, Defense and Security Power Sharing, October 8,2003, paragraph 2.2.[65]Human Rights Watch interview with Assistant Director General of the NationalPolice Gervais Ndirakobuca, Bujumbura,March 26, 2008.[66]Human Rights Watch interviews with judicial police official, Bujumbura,December 21, 2007, Burundian analyst, Bujumbura,December 19, 2007, and Burundian jurist, March 26, 2008.[67]Human Rights Watch interview with judicial police official, Bujumbura, December 21, 2007.[68]Human Rights Watch interview with GMIR police officer, Bujumbura, November 21, 2007.[69]HumanRights Watch telephone interviews with Muramvya deputy prosecutor, November 28,2007 and March 22, 2008; Human Rights Watch/APRODH interview withjudicial police officer, Rutegama, October 23, 2007.[70]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Muramvya deputy prosecutor, March22, 2008.[71]Human Rights Watch interviews with victims, Bujumbura,November 1, 2007 and Muramvya, November 2, 2007, and GMIR police officer, Bujumbura, November 21,2007.[72]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with victim, March 19, 2007.[73]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Rutegama, November 2, 2007.[74]Human Rights Watch/APRODH interview with Muramvya deputy prosecutor, Muramvya,October 23, 2007.[75]Human Rights Watch/APRODH interview with Muramvya deputy prosecutor, Muramvya,October 23, 2007.[76]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Bujumbura,November 1, 2007.[77]Human Rights Watch interview with victim, Rutegama, November 2, 2007;«Province Muramvya : la Police de Sécurité Intérieure sème l'insécuritédans les communes Rutegama et Kiganda.», APRODH news release, October 30,2007, http://www.aprodh.org/article.php3?id_article=102(accessed March 24, 2008).[78]Human Rights Watch interview with GMIR police officer, Bujumbura, December 3, 2007.[79]Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with local authorities, Rutegamaresidents, and local human rights observer, November 16-18, 2007.[80]Human Rights Watch interview with new Commissioner General of the InteriorSecurity Police Onesphore Mbazumutima, Bujumbura,March 17, 2008.[81]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with victim, December 3, 2007.[82]Human Rights Watch interview with new Commissioner General of the InteriorSecurity Police Onesphore Mbazumutima, Bujumbura,March 17, 2008.[83]Human Rights Watch interview with BINUB official, Bujumbura, November 12, 2007.[84]Human Rights Watch interview with BINUB official, Bujumbura, January 28, 2008.[85]Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with Muramvya deputy prosecutor,December 7 and 20, 2007, and January 3, 2008.[86]Comment by police spokesperson Pierre Chanel Ntarabaganyi, Bujumbura, November 12, 2007.[87]Human Rights Watch interview with police spokesperson Pierre ChanelNtarabaganyi, Bujumbura,November 16, 2007.[88]Human Rights Watch interviews with Commissioner General of the InternalSecurity Police Gabriel Nizigama, Bujumbura,November 19, 2007, and GMIR Commander David Nikiza, Bujumbura, November 23, 2007.[89]Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with new Commissioner General of theInternal Security police Onesphone Mbazumitima and new Commissioner General ofthe Judicial Police Bernard Sekaganda, Bujumbura, February 18, 2008.[90]Human Rights Watch interviews with high-ranking police officials, Bujumbura, November 21,2007 and February 18, 2008.[91]Human Rights Watch interview with Commissioner General of the Interior SecurityPolice Gabriel Nizigama, December 4, 2007.[92]Human Rights Watch interview with GMIR Commander David Nikiza, Bujumbura, November 23,2007.[93]Human Rights interviews with victims, October 29, 2007 (by telephone), and in Bujumbura, November 21,2007.[94]Human Rights Watch interview with Director General of the National PoliceFabien Ndayishimiye, Bujumbura,December 18, 2007.[95]Human Rights Watch interview with Assistant Director General of the NationalPolice Gervais Ndirakobuca, Bujumbura,March 26, 2008.[96] BINUB/OHCHR, "Rapport sur la situationdes droits de l'homme au Burundi; RapportsMensuels, January-October 2007", unpublished documents. The October 2007 report is available athttp://www.reliefweb.int/rw/RWFiles2007.nsf/FilesByRWDocUnidFilename/EGUA-79CST3-rapport_complet.pdf/$File/rapport_complet.pdf.[97]Avocats Sans Frontières, "Dossiers tortures en phase pré-juridictionelle" and "Dossierstorture phase juridictionelle", unpublished documents transmitted to HumanRights Watch, March 25, 2008.[98]Human Rights Watch interviews with victims, Rutegama, November 2, 2007,representative of Action Chretien contre le Torture (ACAT), Bujumbura, November16, 2007, and representative of APRODH, Bujumbura, November 20, 2007.[99]Human Rights Watch interview with Burundian analyst, Bujumbura, December 19, 2007. For the casesof former President Domitien Ndayizeye and former Vice-President AlphonseKadege detained in 2006,  see HumanRights Watch, We flee when we see them:Abuses with impunity at the National Intelligence Service in Burundi, vol.18, no. 9(A), October 2006, http://hrw.org/reports/2006/burundi1006/index.htm.[100]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with representative of APRODH, February4, 2008.[101]Email communication from representative of Ligue Iteka to Human Rights Watch,November 23, 2007; Human Rights Watch telephone interview with representativeof Ligue Iteka, December 19, 2007.[102]Avocats Sans Frontières, "Dossiers tortures en phase pré-juridictionelle" and "Dossierstorture phase juridictionelle", unpublished documents transmitted to HumanRights Watch, March 25, 2008.[103]In one case in mid-2007, two police officers were released from prison inBururi shortly after being charged with theft. Just after their release, theywere again caught stealing by local residents, who proceeded to kill them. In anotherrecent case, a police officer was lynched in NgoziProvincein November 2007 following his alleged participation in an armed robbery andmurder. Human Rights Watch interviews with representative of APRODH, Bujumbura, December 18,2007, and February 4, 2008; email communication from representative of BINUB toHuman Rights Watch, November 28, 2007.[104] Centre d'Alerte et de Prévention desConflits  (Bujumbura), "Etude sur laréforme du secteur de sécurité pour la protection de la population civile,"undated, p. 18.[105]Human Rights Watch interviews with Inspector General Pierre Claver Gahungu, Bujumbura, November 26,2007 and March 11, 2008 (by telephone).[106]Human Rights Watch interview with Burundian analyst, Bujumbura, December 19, 2007. Suchconsiderations appear to have played a part in delaying justice for soldiersand intelligence agents implicated in the killings of some 30 civilians inMuyinga province in 2006. See Human Rights Watch, We flee when we see them: Abuses with impunity at the National IntelligenceService in Burundi, vol. 18, no. 9(A), October 2006,http://hrw.org/reports/2006/burundi1006/index.htm; and "Burundi: Bring Muyingamassacre suspects to trial," Human Rights Watch news release, September 27,2007, http://hrw.org/english/docs/2007/09/26/burund16957.htm.[107]Human Rights Watch interview with representative of APRODH, Bujumbura, November 20, 2007.[109]Convention against Torture, art. 12.[110]Manual on the Effective Investigation and Documentation of Torture and OtherCruel, Inhuman or Degrading Punishment («Istanbul Protocol»), August 9, 1999.The United Nations General Assembly in its resolution 55/89 of February 22,2001, drew the attention of governments to the Principles on the EffectiveInvestigation of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment ofPunishment (Istanbul Principles) emanating from the Istanbul Protocol.[111] Décret-loi no. 1/6 du 4 Avril 1981portant réforme du code penal, art. 145 and 171.[112] Décret-loi no. 1/6 du 4 Avril 1981portant réforme du code penal, art. 146.[113] Décret-loi no. 1/6 du 4 Avril 1981portant réforme du code penal, art. 189[114] Loi No. 1/020 du 31 December 2004 portantcreation, organization, missions, composition, et fonctionnement dela PoliceNationale, art. 47.[115] Loi No. 1/020 du 31 December 2004 portantcreation, organization, missions, composition, et fonctionnement dela PoliceNationale, art. 21; Loi No. 1/015 du 20 juillet 1999 portant réforme decode de procedure penale, art. 58. The "OPJ" referred to by a number ofvictims in this report was Apollinaire Sindihokubwayo a brigadier of thesecurity police who told Human Rights Watch and BINUB researchers that he wasauthorized to interrogate detainees because he had "completed a training";Human Rights Watch/BINUB interview, Kaniga, November 7, 2007.[116]Human Rights Watch interviews with Commissioner General of the InternalSecurity Police Gabriel Nizigama, Bujumbura, 19, 2007; Commissioner General ofthe Judicial Police Deo Suzuguye, Bujumbura, November 20, 2007; and a Burundianlawyer knowledgeable about police procedure, Bujumbura, November 23, 2007.[117] Loi No. 1/015 du 20 juillet 1999 portantréforme du code de procedure penale, art. 57; Décret-loi no. 1/6 du 4Avril 1981 portant réforme du code penal, art. 392. According to the former, "La rétention ne peut intervener que dansles cas, selon les modalités et pour les fins que la loi détermine. Larétention effectuée hors ce cas constitue un des faits visés aux articles 171ou 392 du Code Penal, selon le cas."[118] Republic of Burundi and Cooperation BelgoBurundaise, "Projet d'Appui à la Formation de la Police Nationale du Burundi."[119]Human Rights Watch interview with Director General of the National PoliceFabien Ndayishimiye, Bujumbura,December 19, 2007.[120]Organizations that have provided some police training include the BurundiLeadership Training Program, the International Committee of the Red Cross(ICRC), Réseau de Citoyens/Citizens' Network (RCN), and Avocats San Frontières(ASF).[121]Human Rights Watch interview with Major Luc Verhoef, Technical Assistant to theDirector General, Embassy of the Netherlands/National Police of Burundi,Bujumbura, December 20, 2007, and a representative of the Embassy of theNetherlands in Burundi, Bujumbura, March 28, 2008.[122]The Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper is an agreement between Burundi, the World Bank and the IMFthat is intended to promote growth and reduce poverty. The Strategic Frameworkfor Peacebuilding is a partnership between Burundi, the UN PeacebuildingCommission and other stakeholders, designed "to bring together all relevantactors to marshal resources and to advise on and propose integrated strategiesfor post-conflict peacebuilding and recovery, to focus attention on thereconstruction and institution-building efforts necessary for recovery fromconflict and to support the development of integrated strategies in order tolay the foundation for sustainable development". United Nations PeacebuildingCommission, "Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in Burundi," PBC/1/BDI/4*, July 30, 2007,p. 4.[123]Human Rights Watch interview with representative of the Embassy of the Netherlands in Burundi,Bujumbura,March 28, 2008.[124]The PBF financing, to be administered through the United Nations DevelopmentProgram, is to support a variety of activities, including some intended toimprove discipline and respect for the rule of law and human rights.The policeproject is to support finishing a census of officers, training in managementand logistics, the distribution of new uniforms, collection of "war arms", andthe establishment of a computer network to promote the sharing of informationand increase accountability.   UnitedNations Peacebuilding Fund, "Burundi Peacebuilding Fund Overview," http://www.unpbf.org/burundi.shtml(accessed March 28, 2008), and United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi(BINUB) Peace Building Fund Project Summary, "Support to Burundian NationalPolice of Operational Proximity", http://www.unpbf.org/burundi-projects.shtml(accessed March 28, 2008).[125]The table summarizes 21 cases of abuse committed by GMIR officers and localpolice officers working with them. The list is non-exhaustive but representsthe types of abuse suffered both by detainees at Kaniga and by non-detainedcivilians in Rutegama town. 16 of the victims listed here – 11 of the detaineesand all five people beaten in Rutegama town – were interviewed by Human RightsWatch.  Information about the other fivedetainees was obtained through BINUB, Muramvya judicial authorities, and othervictims.  Human Rights Watch obtained thenames of six additional detainees, but could not verify specific detailsconcerning their detention.  As notedabove, one police officer present estimated that about 50 detainees passedthrough the center.[126]1000 Fbu, or Burundian francs, is equivalent to just under one U.S.dollar.Region / CountryAfrica BurundiProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch