The “Anti-Nationals”: Arbitrary Detention and Torture of Terrorism Suspects in India | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload this reportDonate NowDownloadsDownload this reportFebruary 1, 2011The “Anti-Nationals”Arbitrary Detention and Torture of Terrorism Suspects in IndiaThe “Anti-Nationals”Arbitrary Detention and Torture ofTerrorism Suspects in IndiaMap of IndiaSummaryRecommendations for Immediate Action by the IndianGovernmentMethodologyI. Recent AttacksAttributed to Islamist and Hindu Militant GroupsIndian MujahideenStudents Islamic Movement of IndiaLashkar-e-TaibaAbhinav BharatMajor Attacks on Civilians in India Since 2001Past Responses: Abusive and Ineffective.Torture and Other Ill-Treatment of Terrorism SuspectsTorture in Police CustodyForced Confessions in Police LockupsBeatings in JailProtections against Torture and Other Ill-TreatmentSuspicious Killings: The Batla House EncounterIII.Arbitrary DetentionArrests of Relatives to Coerce Surrenders or ObtainInformationExtended Police CustodyMass Arrests for QuestioningDenial of Access to Lawyers and Family MembersProtections against Arbitrary DetentionIV.Religious and Ethnic DiscriminationV. The Malegaon Blast:Hindu Suspects Allege AbuseVI. Attacks on LawyersThreats against the Mumbai Gunman’s DefendersVII.Failure of AccountabilityIndifferent or Biased CourtsConduct in the Kasab TrialNational Human Rights CommissionVIII.Draconian Counterterrorism LawsMaharashtra Organized Crime LawLaws of 2008: Repeating Past AbusesAmendments to the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) ActNIAA: Potential for AbuseIX.Reforming the Response to AttacksInadequate ResponsesSteps toward ReformX. RecommendationsTo the Indian Central GovernmentTo the Indian State GovernmentsTo Concerned Governments and Multilateral OrganizationsAcknowledgementsMap of IndiaClick to expand ImageSummaryThe policeman said to me,“Please speak to your son. Tell him that he must give us a few names.Then we will let him go.” But my son told me, “I cannot give anynames wrongfully.” The police said to me, “Your son’s lifewill be ruined. Tell him to identify some people.”—A father whose son wasdetained after the 2008 Gujarat bombings, Ahmedabad, July 2009.“You give me a stick and nothingelse, no intelligence or forensic training, no education—and then youask, why are you beating people up?”—SecurityanalystAjai Sahni on why the police tortureterrorism suspects, New Delhi, May 2010.On three separate days in 2008, India was plunged into panicas synchronized bombs struck three major cities, killing 152 people andinjuring hundreds of others. An obscure Islamist militant group calling itselfthe Indian Mujahideen (IM) claimed responsibility. The bombings—first inJaipur in May, then Ahmedabad in July, and finally New Delhi inSeptember—were heinous crimes, targeting ordinary people in markets,hospitals, and other public places.The state response wasmassive. In sweeps across the country, state police brought in scores of Muslimmen for questioning and promptly labeled many “anti-national.” Thepolice arbitrarily detained, tortured, and ill-treated many bombing suspects toget them to confess. In several cases, the police themselves appear to havedrafted the confessions. Suspects suffered further mistreatment while in jailawaiting trial, and faced unfair proceedings in court.The spate of 2008 bombings was followed by the November 26,2008, attack on the entertainment and commercial hub of Mumbai, in which 10Pakistani gunmen went on a killing spree inside two luxury hotels, a hospital,the main railway station and a Jewish center. The 2½ day assault, laterlinked to the Pakistan-based group Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), killed 166 people andwounded 238 others. Nine of the gunmen died, and the tenth was captured. Incontrast to the previous incidents, the Mumbai attack did not result in themass arrests of Muslims.There were no attacks by Islamist groups for more than ayear. On February 13, 2010, however, 17 people were killed and dozens injuredin Pune by a bomb blast, at a restaurant frequented by foreigners and locatedclose to a Jewish center and an internationally known ashram. Indian policesuspected IM, acting in collaboration with LeT. In September 2010, IM allegedlywarned of further attacks, and the police were investigating the group’sclaims that it was behind a motorcycle drive-by shooting in New Delhi thatmonth that injured two Taiwanese tourists. An email claiming to be from IM alsoclaimed responsibility for a December 2010 bombing in Varanasi,Hinduism’s holiest city and a popular tourist site, which killed twopeople and injured more than 30 others. There also were no mass arrests ofMuslims following these attacks.Human Rights Watchunequivocally condemns all such attacks on the population and believes that theperpetrators should be appropriately prosecuted. We also understand the need toprevent further attacks, and the great public pressure on the Indianauthorities to do so.Nonetheless, as detailed in this report, the security forcesin India, the world’s largest democracy, have time and again responded tothese horrific attacks by committing numerous, serious human rights violationsin their quest to identify and prosecute suspected perpetrators. These abusesare both unlawful under Indian and international law and counterproductive inthe fight against terrorism.This report focuses primarily on torture and other abusescommitted by the police against alleged Muslim militants. But the Indiansecurity forces have long applied similar, unlawful methods against members ofother groups deemed a security threat. These include Maoist rebels known asNaxalites in much of the central and eastern areas of the country, parties tothe conflict in Jammu and Kashmir, and Hindu militants accused by the homeminister of “saffron terror” —some of whose cases aredocumented in this report.In this report, the term “terrorism suspects”refers to the Indian government’s designation of those accused ofcommitting the 2008 bombings and other recent major attacks on civilians. Thoseimplicated in these attacks are alleged members of Islamist and Hindu militantgroups; Human Rights Watch has documented attacks by and treatment of otherarmed groups in India in other publications.For our research, Human Rights Watch interviewed more than160 people in India, including the relatives and lawyers of more than 35 suspectsin the 2008 bombings, as well as five individuals who were subsequentlyreleased. We found that mistreatment of suspects detained in connection withthe 2008 bombings occurred at every stage of custody, from police lockups wheremany were tortured, to jails where they were beaten, to courthouses wheremagistrates often ignored their complaints. In a few cases, the relatives ofsuspects were even taken hostage by law enforcement agencies. Specializedpolice units were the worst offenders, particularly the Crime Branch of theGujarat state police; the Maharashtra state Anti-Terrorist Squad (ATS); theUttar Pradesh state ATS; the Rajasthan state police and the ATS it formed afterthe bombings; and the Special Cell police in Delhi.Together, these units rounded up scores of Muslim citizensfor questioning after the bombings in Jaipur on May 13, Ahmedabad on July 26,and Delhi on September 13, 2008, as well as smaller blasts in the technologycenter of Bangalore on July 25, 2008, and the recovery of several unexplodedbombs in the port city of Surat a few days later. The police ultimately chargedmore than 70 alleged IM members or associates from nine states in theseattacks. They also issued warrants for more than three dozen others, many ofthem suspected to be in Pakistan under the protection of LeT and theBangladesh- and Pakistan-based Harkat ul Jihadi Islami (HuJI)—groups thatthe Indian authorities described as the planners of the bombings.At this writing, trials had begun in Delhi and Jaipur. India’sSupreme Court stayed proceedings in Gujarat after dozens of suspects filed apetition seeking the transfer of the case to another state on allegations ofbias by the police and judiciary that included turning “a blind eye toallegations of torture.” Many of those initially arrested were former oralleged members of a banned student group, the Students Islamic Movement ofIndia (SIMI). Indian investigators believe that IM is a militant offshoot ofSIMI, but IM has denied this.Some of the worst abuses documented by Human Rights Watchoccurred in a lockup of the Ahmedabad Crime Branch of the Gujarat state police,where many detainees allege they were blindfolded and shackled with their armscrossed over their knees from morning to night. According to one formersuspect, who feared reprisals if his name wererevealed, the screams from detainees began shortly after midnight,alerting him that it was time for his next round of torture:We were madeto wear dark masks. They always used dark masks. I had to stand with my hands extended horizontallyand if they came down, the police would beat me. Whenever they interrogated me and they felt that the answerwas improper, they beat me with thewooden stick or the leather belt or whatever they liked…. I was told by the police department, “If youdo not cooperate, we will take custody of all of yourfamily….” I was so scared I did not know what would happen and what to do or not to do. I hadno hope of coming out.In some states, police held suspects for days, or evenweeks, with the police failing to register their arrest. Many suspects alsoallege that they were denied proper food and water. A few said they weretortured in secret interrogation centers or subjected to electric shocks.Mumbai attorney Amin Solkar said the signs of abuse wereevident when he first visited some of those suspects after their arrests.“I could see the marks on them—abrasions on the arms andback,” he said. “One of them told me he lost his hearing after hewas stripped naked, tied to a stick, and beaten.”The authorities’ main goal appeared to be to coercesuspects into confessing or naming other conspirators. Several suspects allegedthat police made them sign blank sheets of paper or woke them up at night tomake them repeat a fabricated version of events until they had memorized it.Nisar Ahmed of New Delhi said that his son Saqib Nisar was denied sleep untilhe memorized the police version of events: “When I asked my son if he wastortured, he said, ‘They are hardly going to treat me with love. Theywant to build the case. They would not let me sleep. They used to make usmemorize a story of the police version of the case. We were not allowed tosleep until we could recite the police version.’”When relatives and lawyers eventually were able to meetsuspects, police in some cases unlawfully remained within earshot, making itdifficult for the detainees to reveal abuse or seek counsel. “They dideverything they could to make the environment as hostile as possible,”Delhi attorney Jawahar Raja recalled, describing one visit. “A policeofficer would be sitting right next to us.”In at least three caseswhere the police could not find the suspects they were seeking, they took arelative hostage. “The policesaid that they would release Shakeel only when Raziq comes,” recountedone mother whose younger son was unlawfully detained for a month while policesought his brother. “But … he had left his wife with our relativesand disappeared.”Police in Gujarat and Delhi also manipulated criminalprocedures to allow them to hold suspects for interrogation well beyond theinitial 15-day legal limit after arrest. By filing additional charges againstthe same men for the same conspiracy every fortnight, the police extended theircustody of more than two dozen suspects for three to four months, prolongingthe risk of torture and other abuse.Only after suspects were transferred from police custody tojails did many of them dare to retract confessions or complain of mistreatment.Mohammad Arif, arrested in the Uttar Pradesh capital of Lucknow in September2008, said in a written submission retracting his confession that the UttarPradesh ATS tortured him into admitting to involvement in a set of 2007bombings in that state and in the bombings in Gujarat the following year:I was punched, kicked, beaten very badly.In order to humiliate me and to break me down the ATS made me stand for longhours and hung me upside down. During the police custody, I was denied allbasic amenities and was forced to drink water from toilet. Further on, I wassubjected to electric shocks by the police officials and made to repeat whatthey were saying. The interrogators repeatedly used … name calling,sexually profane abusive language, with me.Relatives and lawyers claim that many of the suspects didnot dare complain to magistrates because they feared retribution once returnedto their cell.Human Rights Watch also has concerns about the so-calledBatla House encounter, in which police killed two suspects during a raid on ahouse in a predominantly Muslim neighborhood six days after the September 2008Delhi bombings. While this was a violent incident—one or more of thesuspects fired at police and one officer was killed and another wounded—suspiciousmarks on the bodies of the slain suspects, the Delhi police’s refusal torelease the victims’ autopsy reports, which when ultimately made publicraised additional doubts, and the Delhi government’s failure to order amagisterial investigation into the cause of death have prompted allegationsthat the suspects were summarily executed.* * *Human Rights Watch is keenly aware that India’s statepolice forces, which have primary responsibility for maintaining law and orderin India, face a daunting task. Their counterterrorism units are undertrained,underfunded, and understaffed. While there have been fewer attacks attributedto Islamist groups since the November 2008 assault on Mumbai, the likelihood offuture attacks remains. India faces persistent threats from foreign militantorganizations, including IM and LeT, which India contends has the continuedsupport of elements within Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI).Yet the very real pressures to deter and prevent suchattacks do not justify violations of human rights, which undermine efforts tofight terrorism. By relying on forced and sometimes fabricated confessions, theIndian government risks punishing the wrong suspects while perpetrators remainfree. Moreover, allegations of abuse create resentment in Muslim communitiesacross India, depriving law enforcement officials of information sources thatcould prevent future attacks. Reports of torture may also serve as arecruitment tool among some Muslims in India and abroad to join extremistgroups.For genuine progress to be made, Indian police need to putan end to the ugly assumption, all too common after the 2008 bombings, thatvirtually any Muslim is a threat to national security. As a young, Muslimprofessional who was interrogated by the Delhi Special Cell police told HumanRights Watch:The very first question was: “Whyhave you people become anti-national? You people are bloody Pakistanis.” They kept on targeting my religion,actually my beliefs, my practices.In Rajasthan, the state police, suspecting that thePakistan-based militant Islamist group HuJI was behind the blasts there in May2008, rounded up hundreds of Bengali-speaking Muslims for questioning. Afterpolice released them, state officials nevertheless razed their homes, claimingthat their settlement was illegal. Many were forcibly put on trains or busesand expelled to West Bengal state, which borders Bangladesh. The policeinsisted that they were illegal Bangladeshi immigrants, although many of themsaid they had documents that proved their Indian citizenship. “Wheneverthere is trouble, the needle of suspicion points toward the minority,”Mohamed Shafi Qureshi, chairman of India’s National Commission forMinorities, told Human Rights Watch.Human Rights Watch documented abuses that had clearreligious overtones. In Jaipur Central Jail, guards and two senior jailofficials were accused of beating a dozen suspects in September 2009 as theywere praying to mark Eid al-Fitr, an important Muslim holiday. At SabarmatiJail in Ahmedabad, 22 detainees, most of them 2008 bombing suspects, said theywere praying in an enclosed courtyard when guards and police assaulted them inMarch 2009; citing an antiquated manual from India’s colonial era, thejail authorities said they used force against the prisoners because they wereon a hunger strike, which the manual defines as a form of mutiny.Lawyers defending Muslim terrorism suspects also came underattack for being unpatriotic. After the 2008 bombings, several such lawyerswere physically attacked or threatened by Hindu extremists, many of them fellowlawyers. In the high-profile case of Ajmal Kasab, the lone surviving gunmanfrom the 2008 Mumbai attack, one lawyer was threatened by mobs, another wasremoved from the board of a prestigious Muslim foundation, and a third receiveda death threat for representing the defendant. Two lawyers had to defy thelocal bar association to defend suspects in the 2010 Pune attack. In February2010, Shahid Azmi, who was representing a number of IM suspects as well as anIndian co-defendant in the Mumbai attack, was shot dead by gunmen. Police havecharged three alleged members of a Hindu criminal gang for the slaying.Hindus who represented Muslim suspects or protested theirabuse also were targeted. In Lucknow, police brutally beat a Hindu human rightsactivist in a secret detention center because he was demonstrating against themistreatment of Muslims after the bombings. “The police said …‘You should not be seen with these people, these Muslim people again, andif you don’t understand this, the future will be bleak foryou,’” recalled the activist, Vinod Kumar Yadav.Discrimination against minorities is not the only motivebehind the mistreatment of terrorism suspects. Human Rights Watch foundcredible evidence that Hindus arrested for a separate 2008 bombing incident inthe city of Malegaon, Maharashtra state, were also subjected to arbitrarydetention, torture, and religion-based ill-treatment. One Hindu suspect, aself-styled theologian, alleged that during one torture session, police forcedwhat they said was beef, which is forbidden to Hindus, down his throat.A key factor contributing to abuse of terrorism suspects hasbeen the failure of domestic mechanisms of accountability.India’s judiciary, widely esteemed for itsindependence, has the authority to curb mistreatment by investigatingcomplaints of abuses. In the 2008 bombing cases, however, magistrates in Delhiand Ahmedabad repeatedly extended police custody of bombing suspects, even asdefense lawyers warned that the defendants were being returned to the verylockups where they were being abused.The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC), the Indiangovernment body that is officially mandated to investigate allegations of humanrights violations, has been ineffectual in responding to abuses againstterrorism suspects. Most glaring was the NHRC investigation into the so-calledBatla House encounter case. Ordered by the Delhi High Court to probe the two IMsuspects’ deaths, after ignoring its own guidelines that require allpolice killings to be investigated, the NHRC produced a report that reliedalmost exclusively on the police version of events. A new and more seriousinquiry into the causes of death that includes collection and examination ofall relevant evidence is needed.Only rarely have the authorities credibly investigatedabuses. Notably, in 2008, the Andhra Pradesh state government admitted that itspolice force had unlawfully detained and brutally tortured 21 Muslim suspectswho were being questioned in connection with two bombings the previousyear—stripping them, hanging them upside down, beating them, andsubjecting them to electric shocks. Too often, such investigations are nevereven begun, let alone conducted in a rigorous, professional manner.India’s Parliament responded to the 2008 attacks byenacting draconian counterterrorism legislation. In December 2008, followingthe Mumbai attack, the Parliament passed amendments to the Unlawful Activities(Prevention) Act (UAPA) that contain sweeping, vaguely worded definitions ofterrorism, vastly increase police powers of search and arrest, and double themaximum period of pre-charge detention for terrorism suspects to 180 days, wellbeyond internationally accepted limits. The amendments mirror provisions of thenotorious Prevention of Terrorism Act (POTA), a law repealed in 2004 that encouragedabuses and was counterproductive in combating terrorism.Another law passed in 2008 created a National InvestigationAgency that can authorize the use of special courts with broad powers toprosecute national security crimes. Laws enacted at the state level have alsofacilitated abuse of terrorism suspects. The authorities in Maharashtra areprosecuting dozens of suspects in the 2008 bombings and other attacks under theMaharashtra Control of Organized Crime Act (MCOCA), which permits longpre-trial detention periods in often abusive police study. The Gujarat state isseeking to enact a MCOCA-style law as well.The Parliament—in preparation for ratifying theConvention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment orPunishment, which India signed in 1997–introduced a draft law in 2010prohibiting the use of torture and other ill-treatment.* * *Addressing and eliminating abuses in counterterrorismoperations in India demands strong political leadership at the national andstate levels. Such leadership has been in evidence following the most recentattacks. After the 2008 Mumbai attack, the authorities largely avoided sweepinggeneralizations about Muslims in their public rhetoric. Senior politiciansreached out to Muslims in an effort to address the feeling that the entirecommunity was being penalized. Religious leaders were encouraged to promoteinter-communal harmony. These and other actions reduced the suspicion amongdifferent religious communities that had spiraled after previous attacksattributed to IM, helping to prevent a backlash against the Muslim population.The Indian government also stressed that it would provide amodel trial for the surviving Pakistani gunman, Ajmal Kasab, even as some Hindugroups demanded that he be summarily hanged. Home Minister P. Chidambaram saidthat he was “proud of the fact that we are a country wedded to the ruleof law … regardless of the great pain it suffered.”Despite some allegations of questionable rulings,Kasab’s trial was not the summary proceeding that critics had feared. Theacquittal of two Indian co-defendants for lack of evidence, despiteconsiderable public pressure to find them guilty, was one of severalencouraging signs. In May 2010, Kasab was convicted of participation in theMumbai attack and was sentenced to death; he has appealed his verdict to theHigh Court.After the Pune bombing in February 2010, Maharashtra policeacted with relative restraint, refraining from mass roundups or abuses ofMuslims. Police in Delhi and Varanasi showed similar restraint following theSeptember and December 2010 attacks that were attributed to IM. Moreover, underpressure from civil society groups, Indian investigators stepped upinvestigations into the role of Hindu extremists in several high-profilebombing cases initially blamed on Muslim groups, and have made several arrests.The response of Indian authorities to the most recentattacks attributed to Islamist groups has been a positive development. But ifIndia is to achieve long-term success in countering terrorism, it will need totransform individual acts of restraint and respect for the law intoinstitutional changes. That means ensuring that the institutions meting outjustice according to law–the police, the courts, and thelegislatures–are fully committed to promoting and protecting basic humanrights and are held appropriately accountable when they do not. Without that commitment,India will undermine its own efforts to curb militancy and inadvertentlybolster the lure of violent groups such as IM.Recommendations for ImmediateAction by the Indian GovernmentThe Indian government should take immediate steps to endtorture and other abuses by repealing harsh provisions of the UnlawfulActivities Prevention Act (UAPA) including overly broad definitions ofterrorism, expanded police powers of search and seizure, the presumption ofguilt under certain circumstances, and draconian pre-charge detention periods.It should similarly repeal provisions of the National Investigation Agency Act(NIAA) that grant special courts wide power to conduct closed proceedings withundisclosed witnesses. The government also should enact the Prevention ofTorture Bill, but only if it conforms with the Convention against Torture andOther Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.India’s president should sign into law criminalprocedure amendments, already passed by Parliament, which will require thepolice to record a formal reason for making a warrantless arrest—therebyclosing a glaring legal loophole that fuels impunity. The government alsoshould also codify the full set of guidelines for police officers that arecontained in the landmark 1997 Supreme Court case D.K. Basu.These measures should not be seen as substitutes for fullyinvestigating and prosecuting allegations of wrongdoing by police and otherofficials, professionalizing India’s police forces, and updating thecountry’s outmoded police law and jail manuals. Such broader, longer-termreforms are critical to ending the culture of impunity for crimes againstterrorism suspects and others in India.MethodologyHuman Rights Watch conducted research for this report in fiveIndian states in November 2008, June-July 2009, and periodically throughDecember 2010. In all, we interviewed more than 160 people, including therelatives and lawyers of more than 35 suspects in the 2008 bombings as well asfive individuals who were subsequently released.We focused on the treatment of Muslim men detained orquestioned in connection with the bombings. We also examined police treatmentof other terrorism suspects, including 10 Hindu men and one woman arrested foranother 2008 bombing that was initially blamed on Islamist militants, and thesurviving Pakistani man charged with the Mumbai attacks of November 26, 2008.The majority of interviews were conducted in the capital NewDelhi; Ahmedabad and Baroda in Gujarat state; Mumbai and Pune in Maharashtrastate; Jaipur in Rajasthan state; and Lucknow and several towns in Azamgarhdistrict in Uttar Pradesh state.In addition, Human RightsWatch interviewed civil society activists, state police officials, formerjudges, current and former prosecutors, national human rights and minorityrights officials, United Nations counterterrorism officials, security andcounterterrorism analysts, political analysts, and legal experts. Theinterviews were conducted in English, Hindi, or local dialects, sometimes usingan interpreter. We conducted numerous follow-up interviews via telephone andemail through September 2010. No one we interviewed received compensation.Many individuals spoketo us on condition of anonymity out of fear of reprisals from the police orother authorities. We have referenced all instances in which we withheldidentities.  We identified individuals who were questioned or detainedthrough media reports, court documents, and interviews with journalists,lawyers, and members of nongovernmental organizations.Human Rights Watch made repeated interview requests byemail, telephone, and fax to India Home Ministry officials entrusted withsecurity and counterterrorism, as well as to top government officials andcounterterrorism police authorities in the states we researched. Regrettably,nearly all the officials in question either declined or did not respond tointerview requests, or said they were unavailable and did not arrange forsurrogates to meet us. The only three officials who responded to our writtenquestions—ranking members of the police departments of Delhi and thestates of Maharashtra and Gujarat—denied any abuse and said their forcesare well trained in human rights and counterterrorism techniques.I. Recent Attacks Attributed toIslamist and Hindu Militant GroupsEach year India suffers numerous bombings and other attackson civilians conducted by an array of militant groups with religious,separatist, nationalist or other agendas. These include Maoist insurgents knownas Naxalites, Punjabi Sikhs, Hindu extremists, and the warring parties in Jammuand Kashmir and in India’s northeast. Human Rights Watch has documentedabuses by these groups and the Indian security forces.[1]In recent years, attacks on civilians by militant Islamist groups have emergedas a major threat. This chapter provides background on some Islamist and Hindumilitant groups that have been implicated in recent attacks.The rise of Islamist militant groups can be traced totensions that have persisted since the 1947 partition of British colonial Indiainto the predominantly Muslim state of Pakistan and majority Hindu state ofIndia, and the two nations’ competing claims to the Kashmir region wedgedbetween them.Indian authorities have long blamed attacks within India onextremist organizations based in neighboring Pakistan and Bangladesh. Whilethere is basis for these allegations, it is only part of the story, as manyattacks in India are claimed by indigenous Islamist groups citing domesticgrievances, such as scarce economic and educational opportunities, rising Hindunationalism, and anti-Muslim violence. The destruction of the Babri Mosque inUttar Pradesh state in 1992 and communal riots in Gujarat state a decade laterthat killed more than 2,000 people, most of them Muslims, have fuelled theseresentments.[2]Over the past decade, Pakistan-based Islamist militantgroups have carried out a number of attacks targeting civilians. These includethe assault on the Indian Parliament building on December 13, 2001, which killedsix policemen and a worker, and nearly prompted a war between India andPakistan as both countries moved troops to their shared border.[3]Other attacks attributed to Pakistan-based groups were the three synchronizedbomb attacks in New Delhi on October 29, 2005, that killed over 60 people andinjured 200 others, and the detonation of seven bombs on local commuter trainsin Mumbai which killed over 200 people on July 11, 2006.In 2008, multiple, synchronized blasts in Jaipur in May, Ahmedabadin July, and Delhi in September killed at least 152 people. Those blasts wereclaimed by the then-obscure Indian Mujahideen (IM), which police describe as ahome-grown group fostered by Pakistani Islamist militants. Indian police alsoalleged that IM may have been involved in eight synchronized blasts that killedtwo people in Bangalore a day before the Ahmedabad blasts, and the planting ofseveral unexploded bombs that were found in the western port city of Surat afew days later.The IM blasts were quickly overshadowed by the devastatingattack on the commercial and economic hub of Mumbai that began on November 26,2008, and became known as India’s “9/11” in reference to theSeptember 11, 2001, attacks on the United States. Ten heavily armed Pakistanimilitants entered Mumbai via a hijacked boat by sea and attacked two luxuryhotels, a hospital, the main railway station, a Jewish cultural center, and acafe popular with foreigners. The attack, which only ended two-and-a-half dayslater with the death of nine of the gunmen, killed at least 166 people andwounded 238 others. India, Pakistan, and the United States attributed theattack to the Pakistan-based Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT; literally, “Army ofthe Pure”). LeT is fighting Indian control of Kashmir but also is aproponent of broader anti-western struggles.[4] Seven suspects areon trial in Pakistan in connection with the attack, but the case was stalled asof this writing and the defendants do not include Hafiz Saeed, the founder ofLashkar-e-Taiba and the man whom many Indian authorities consider themastermind of the strike.[5]The Mumbai attackprompted the Indian government to suspend its peace talks with Pakistan forseveral months and to renew its allegations that the Pakistani military’s Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) hassupported LeT and other groups, including IM, which it accuses of attacksinside India. Those accusations gained currency after David Coleman Headley, aPakistani-American who pleaded guilty in March 2010 to terrorism-related charges,including reconnaissance for the November 26 Mumbai attack, accused ISI membersof recruiting disaffected Muslims inside India. In a scheme that Indianintelligence officials call the Karachi Project, Headley reportedly saidmembers of the ISI were training Indian Muslims in Pakistan and sending themhome to stage attacks inside India as a new form of proxy war.[6]After a lull in 2009, India was hit by three more attacksthat federal and state authorities attributed to IM. The first was a powerful bombthat exploded on February 14, 2010, in Pune, Maharashtra state, inside a cafepopular with foreigners near a Jewish center and an ashram.[7]Two arrests had been made as of this writing.[8] Policealso suspect IM in the motorcycle drive-by shooting that wounded two Taiwanesetourists and a failed, nearby car bombing in New Delhi in September 2010.[9]An email in the name of IM claimed responsibility for a December 2010 bombingalong a historic embankment on the River Ganges in Varanasi, Hinduism’sholiest city and a popular tourist site, which killed two people, including aone-year-old girl, and injured more than 30 others.[10]While the 2010 attacks were not on the level of 2008 bombings attributed toIslamist militant groups, Indian authorities continued to warn of persistentthreats from IM and LeT throughout 2010.[11]In the past three years, the authorities also have arresteda number of alleged Hindu militants for attacks on civilians, focusing publicattention on what has been controversially termed “saffron terror.”[12]Hindu suspects were charged or questioned in late 2010 in connection withbombings at mosques in Hyderabad and Amjer in 2007, of a passenger trainlinking Pakistan to India in 2007, and of a Muslim cemetery in Malegaon in2006. Those three attacks, initially blamed on Islamist militants, togetherkilled at least 115 people and injured nearly 350 others.The Hindu suspects include members of groups such as AbhinavBharat, which authorities have also linked to a second bombing in Malegaon in2008 that killed six people. (See Chapter V, “The MalegaonBlasts.”) Abhinav Bharat is allegedly affiliated with RashtriyaSwayamsevak Sangh (RSS), which is widely considered the ideologicalfountainhead of Hindu nationalist movements. As of this writing, a rankingmember of RSS was being questioned in the 2007 bombings.[13]Indian MujahideenIndian federal and state authorities describe the IndianMujahideen (IM) as a militant splinter faction of the Students Islamic Movementof India (SIMI), an outlawed organization that promotes an Indian Islamic state.[14]Indian authorities depict IM as a mostly indigenous group but also allege thatit is under the control of Pakistan’s ISI and has ties to foreignIslamist militant groups, specifically Bangladesh’s Harkat-ul-Jihad-al-Islami(HuJI) and Pakistan’s LeT and Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM). Some India securityexperts assert that IM’s top operators received training at LeT camps.[15] In June 2010, the Indian government placed IM on itslist of terrorist organizations and said that since 2005, it hadconducted more than 10 bombings around the country that killed nearly 500 people.[16] However, the group’s origins, its ties to SIMI,and its strength remain unclear.[17]In emails sent to media outlets after attacks, IM claimedresponsibility for the 2008 bombings in Jaipur, Delhi, and Ahmedabad, in partas revenge for the deaths of Muslims in the 2002 riots in Gujarat.[18]An email believed to be from IM repeated that refrain in claimingresponsibility for the December 2010 bombing in Varanasi, which it described asretaliation for the failure of authorities to hold Gujarat’s chiefminister accountable for the Gujarat riots of 2002 and for the demolition of the Babri Mosque in 1992.[19]The email cast the September 2010 attack ontourists in New Delhi as retaliation for the killings of protesters by policein Indian-administered Jammu and Kashmir.[20]According to Indian authorities, IM was started by a groupof SIMI organizers who were frustrated by the group’s failure to turn itsideology into action.[21] Theyallege that IM leaders operate out of Karachi in Pakistan and use variousaliases. Investigators have yet to identify all the IM cells that wereestablished in India, but believe that in addition to alliances with groupssuch as LeT and HUJI, the IM receives support through criminal networks linkedto fugitive gang leader Dawood Ibrahim, believed to be residing in Pakistan.[22]Students Islamic Movement ofIndiaThe Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) was formed inAligarh, in Uttar Pradesh state, in 1977. Initially SIMI simply attempted topromote morality campaigns and a conservative Islamic lifestyle that did notemulate the West. As the Hindu revivalist movement led by the Bharatiya JanataParty (BJP) and its affiliate groups gained strength, SIMI attracted increasingsupport among Muslim youths and, according to Indian authorities, beganpreaching a more conservative interpretation of Islam and advocating violent“jihad” to protect the rights of Muslims.[23]India’s central government banned SIMI after September11, 2001, in its first response to the Bush administration’s call for a“Global War on Terror,” prompting numerous legal challenges.[24]Some Indian security analysts believe that the banning of SIMI promptedmilitant members of SIMI to form IM.Many former SIMI members insist that the group’s aimwas to promote social justice and equality for Muslims. Shahid Badar Falahi,SIMI’s national president who was arrested in September 2001, told HumanRights Watch: “Our basic aim was that Muslim youth should haveeducational awareness; that they be pious but achieve in newprofessions.”[25] Now outon bail, he continues the legal effort to challenge the ban on SIMI.Indian officials contend that SIMI has continued itsoperations despite the ban, often through front organizations, and receivesfunding primarily from sources in the Persian Gulf that support Islamistmilitancy. They also allege that some SIMI members have received training andinstructions from Pakistan-based groups such as LeT and JeM, and have providedsafe houses for militants from LeT, JeM, HUJI, and others.Lashkar-e-TaibaLashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) is widely considered to be the mostformidable foreign-based militant group targeting India and is viewed withincreasing concern by Western governments. It was formed in the early 1990s andinitially operated in Indian-administered Kashmir. Its later strikes insideIndia’s heartland include the November 2008 attack on Mumbai. After LeTwas banned by the Pakistani government in January 2002, largely as the resultof international pressure, it adopted a new identity as a charity,Jamaat-ud-Daawa (JuD), which was banned by the United Nations after the Mumbaiattacks. LeT allegedly has an intimate relationship with the Pakistani army andmilitary Inter Services Intelligence (ISI). While Pakistani authorities closedsome facilities linked to LeT and JuD following the Mumbai attack, theirefforts were limited and raised questions about the government’scommitment.[26]Indian authorities have long asserted that LeT had beenbehind a number of attacks across India. However, it was only after the arrestof Lashkar member Ajmal Kasab, a Pakistani national and the lone survivinggunman in the November 26 Mumbai attack, that they had clear evidence.Abhinav BharatAbhinav Bharat is a Hindu nationalist organization thatauthorities have blamed for the 2008 Malegaon bombing. It is believed to be afringe group that broke away from the Sangh Parivar, an umbrella group of theRSS.[27] HumanRights Watch and other organizations have concluded that the RSS and associatedmilitant groups,  such as the Vishwa Hindu Parishad and the Bajrang Dal,played a role in the mass attacks on Muslims in Gujarat in 2002 and the attackson Christians in Orissa in 2008. The Bharatiya Janata Party, the mainopposition political party in India, is also affiliated with the Sangh Parivar.The RSS publicly distanced itself from Abhinav Bharat afterpolice arrested several members for their suspected role in deadly attacks. Thereare allegations that Abhinav Bharat plotted attacks on RSS leaders for notbeing radical enough in supporting the Hindu cause.[28]Serving and retired armyofficers are also believed to be part of the group, with two men, retired Maj.Ramesh Upadhyay and Lt. Col. S.P. Purohit, implicated in the Malegaon blast of2008.[29] TheAbhinav Bharat has also been linked to the 2007 bombing in Ajmer, site of aSufi shrine. The Rajasthan police have filed charges against three allegedmembers and are investigating the role of several others.[30]Investigators suspect that some members of the RSS may havebeen involved in these attacks. According to the charges filed by the Rajasthanpolice in the Ajmer case, a secret meeting where the conspiracy was planned wasalso allegedly attended by several RSS leaders. A front-organization called JaiVande Mataram was started by one of the accused, Sunil Joshi, who was laterkilled.[31]The Central Bureau of Investigation has also arrestedNaba Kumar Sircar, a religious leader who usesthe name Swami Aseemanand, in connection with the bombings at the MeccaMasjid in Hyderabad and the Khwaja Moinuddin Chisti shrine in Amjer, and on theSamjhuata Express train, in 2007, as well as blasts in Malegaon and Modasa in2008, and possibly the mosque blast in Malegaon in 2006.[32]Aseemanand, who is also linked to AbhinavBharat, was apparently a member of theVanvasi Kalyan Ashram, anotherorganization inspired by the RSS.Major Attacks on Civilians inIndiaSince 2001New Delhi,December 13, 2001: Five gunmen, one wearing a suicide vest, openfire on India’s Parliament after infiltrating the building in a carwith government identification stickers. The attack results in the death of agardener, six security officers and the five attackers, and leads to the2001-02 India-Pakistan border standoff. Indian authorities blamePakistan-based LeT and JeM.Mumbai, July 11, 2006: Seven bombs explodewithin 11 minutes of each other on suburban railway trains in Mumbai, killing209 people and injuring more than 700. Police blame LeT, SIMI, and later alsoaccuse IM.Malegaon,September 8, 2006:Synchronized explosions at a cemetery outside a mosque on an Islamic holy dayin the town of Malegaon,Maharashtra state, kill at least 37 people and injure more than 270 others. Mostvictims are Muslim pilgrims. Maharashtra police charge nine alleged SIMImembers but in late 2010 the Central Bureau of Investigation charges allegedmembers of Hindu nationalist groups including Abhinav Bharat and question aranking official of RSS.Panipat,February 19, 2007: Two explosions on the Samjhauta Expressconnecting India and Pakistan kill 66 people, including Pakistani nationals.Investigators initially suspectLeT, JeM, and other Pakistan-based groups, but in 2010 begin questioningHindu extremists.Hyderabad, May18, 2007: A powerful explosionin the crowded area outside the Mecca Masjid (mosque) kills 9 people andinjures over 70. Five others allegedly die as police open fire in respondingto the attack. Investigators initially suspect groups including HuJI. In late 2010 the Central Bureau of Investigationnames six alleged members of Hindu nationalist groups including AbhinavBharat and questions a ranking RSS official.Hyderabad, August 25, 2007: Bombs at anamusement park and at a restaurant kill 44 people. Seven alleged IM membersare among those charged.Amjer, October11, 2007: An explosion at theKhwaja Moinuddin Chisti, a revered Sufi shrine in Amjer, Rajasthan state,kills three people and injures 15. Police initially suspect groups includingHuJI and SIMI, but in late 2010 authorities charge five alleged Hindunationalists, some of whom are also suspects in the 2007 Hyderabad mosqueblast, and question the same ranking RSS member suspected in other attacks aswell.Varanasi,Faizabad, and Lucknow, November 23, 2007: Near-simultaneous blaststargeting lawyers in court premises in three Uttar Pradesh towns kill 15people. Police later suspect IM.Jaipur, May 13, 2008: Eight bombings in thespace of eight minutes at crowded market areas and Hindu temples kill atleast 69 people and wound more than 150. Police charge four alleged IM members,hold a dozen alleged SIMI members as suspects, and issue warrants for fivefugitives.Bangalore, July 25, 2008: Eight coordinatedblasts in areas including a bus stop and a park kill one person and woundseven. Police suspect IM.Ahmedabad, July 26, 2008: Seventeen explosionskill 57 people and wound at least 156 in markets and buses, and at a hospitalwhere the first blast victims were treated. Five bombs fail to detonate.Several additional bombs fail to explode in the smaller Gujarati city of Surat.Police charge 54 IM suspects and issue warrants for more than three dozensuspects.Delhi, September13, 2008: Five synchronizedbombings in market places and other congested areas kill at least 26 peopleand wound more than 130. Police charge 16 suspects and issue warrants for 12others, two of whom are arrested in 2010. Two other suspects and a policeofficer are killed in a controversial police raid.Malegaon,September 29, 2008: A bomb in aMuslim section of Malegaon kills six people. Indian authorities initiallyblame Islamist extremists but subsequently charge 11 Hindus who are membersof the nationalist group Abhinav Bharat, including an army colonel and a nun.Mumbai, November26, 2008: A group of heavilyarmed LeT militants using bombs and small arms attack and seize targetsincluding two luxury hotels, Mumbai’s central train station, and aJewish center, killing at least 166 people and wounding more than 238 others.The dead include 22 foreigners, 20 security forces members, and 9 of 10 attackers.The surviving gunman, Ajmal Kasab of Pakistan, who is captured on videofootage aired worldwide during the two-and-a-half day gun-battle, isconvicted of charges including murder, conspiracy, and of waging war againstIndia in May 2010.Pune, February 13, 2010: A bomb rips throughPune’s German Bakery, near an ashram and a Jewish center, killing 17people, including 4 foreigners, and injuring 60 others. The blast takes placeon the eve of resumed Pakistan-India peace talks. Police name IM, along withLeT and Pakistan’s ISI, as being behind the attack.New Delhi, September 19, 2010: Two gunmen on amotorcycle open fire with an automatic weapon on a tourism bus outside JamaMasjid, a historic mosque, wounding two Taiwanese tourists. A car explosionnearby causes no injuries. IM claims responsibility.Varanasi, December 7, 2010: A bomb blows upalong an embankment on the River Ganges in Varanasi, Hinduism’s holiestsite and a popular tourist city, killing two people, one of them aone-year-old girl, and injuring more than 30 others. An email claiming to befrom IM takes responsibility.Past Responses: Abusive andIneffectiveIndia’s security forces have long sought to elicitinformation, evidence, and confessions for bombings and other militant attacksusing torture and other ill-treatment of suspects—which in some casesresulted in deaths. Many security experts believe these abuses stem in partfrom India’s longstanding failure to modernize, expand, and train itspolice units, which wield enormous authority and are responsible forinvestigating most terrorism-related incidents. “Much of these humanrights violations are caused by a deficit of capacity,” said Delhi-basedsecurity expert Ajai Sahni. “You give me a stick and nothing else, nointelligence or forensic training, no education—and then you ask, why areyou beating people up?”[33]Indian security forces are also responsible for grave humanrights abuses during counterinsurgency operations, such as in Jammu andKashmir, Assam, and Manipur.[34] Thosesubjected to torture and ill-treatment are not just members of militant groups,but include many people whom the security forces falsely claim are involved inmilitant attacks or are the relatives of suspected militants.Indian security forces have frequently been implicated infaked “encounter killings”—summary executions of persons incustody who the authorities later claim were killed in gun battles withinsurgents.[35]This issue was highlighted in a September 2009 report inwhich a magistrate concluded that members of the Gujarat Crime Branch inAhmedabad extrajudicially executed four people in 2004 and then falsely claimedthey were LeT members killed in a shootout to thwart a plot to killGujarat’s chief minister.[36]According to the inquiry report of Magistrate S.P. Tamang, members of thestate’s Crime Branch abducted a 19-year-old woman named Ishrat Jahan andthe other three suspects on June 12, 2004, and killed them in custody two dayslater. The police then claimed that there was an armed exchange outside Ahmedabadon June 15, in which they killed Muslim militants conspiring to murder GujaratChief Minister Narendra Modi, an account that Tamang described as “falseand concocted.” According to the magistrate, the police officers weremotivated by “personal interest which included to secure their promotion,to maintain their posting, so as to falsely show excellent performance.”[37]Despite strong objections from the Gujarat state government, the Gujarat HighCourt in September 2010 empaneled a special investigative team to further probethe killings.[38]The Gujarat Crime Branch in Ahmedabad, which our researchfound to be one of the worst abusers of suspects held for the 2008 bomb blasts,has been accused of an array of violations in other cases as well. In July 2010,the Central Bureau of Investigation arrested Amit Shah, a minister in theGujarat state government, for allegedly ordering the extrajudicial execution ofan alleged terrorism suspect called Sohrabuddin inNovember 2005, and for his role in the death of two witnesses, includingSohrabuddin’s wife.[39]Several senior police officers, including Abhay Chudasama, deputy commissionerof the Crime Branch, have also been arrested in this case.[40] In January 2010, the Supreme Court asked the CBI to takeover the investigation of the case, saying an independent agency wasneeded because “high police officials are involved in the saidcrime.”[41] TheGujarat police also claimed in this case that they killed Sohrabuddin to thwarta plot on Chief Minister Modi.In another case, theAndhra Pradesh government admitted in 2008 that its police had unlawfullydetained and tortured 21 of the 100 Muslims it questioned in connection withtwo blasts in 2007 in the state capital of Hyderabad. On the basis of findingsby the Andhra Pradesh Minorities Commission, the government orderedcompensation of 30,000 rupees (US$600) to each of 21 victims. The detaineestold the commission that they were subjected to “third-degree”methods that included being stripped, hung upside down, severely beaten,subjected to electric shocks, and threatened with the torture of theirrelatives, particularly females.[42]Courts have intervened in other cases as well. In 2004, atleast 14 police officers were found responsible for the custodial killing ofSyed Khwaja Yunus, a suspect in a 2002 Mumbai bombing. After the Maharashtragovernment failed to prosecute several police suspects, and filed chargesagainst only four junior police officers, the Bombay High Court questioned thegovernment’s failure to prosecute higher-ranking police suspects inYunus’ killing.[43]State police abuse has been facilitated by abusive andoverbroad counterterrorism laws that were repealed as unconstitutional in 2004,only to be largely reinstated after the November 26 Mumbai attacks. Under the Preventionof Terrorism Act (POTA) of 2002, hundreds of suspects were arrested andsubjected to lengthy detention, in which many were physically abused, on vagueand open-ended charges.[44]Many observers have described the shortcomings of state policeforces that have resulted in ineffectual investigations and widespread abusesin counterterrorism efforts. Even in routine law enforcement duties, the Indianpolice have gained a reputation for inefficiency, brutality, and corruption. AsHuman Rights Watch has detailed elsewhere, this is a consequence both of theimpunity with which police too often operate and severe shortcomings in theircapacity.[45] Thepolice continue to be governed by the Police Act of 1861, which was drafted byBritish colonial administrators with the aim of instilling fear rather thaninspiring trust and cooperation.[46] Juniorpolice officers are underequipped and overworked; the nation’spolice-to-population ratio is nearly half the UN-recommended level.[47]Senior police officers, in turn, complain of political interference from theirsupervisors.Police capacity tocollect and analyze forensic evidence is minimal. For instance, there is littletraining in evidence gathering so that by the time evidence arrives at one ofthe country’s few laboratories, it has often decomposed or beencontaminated. Police have almost no training in intelligence gathering andbuilding community support networks to identify suspects and prevent attacks.[48] As for human rights training, it “is takenas a token, something that has to be imparted,” said Mallika Joseph,deputy director of the New Delhi-based Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies.“There is no training on the issue of accountability.”[49]In recent years, many state police forces have created specialsquads to investigate and respond to terror attacks. Yet with only a fewexceptions—notably the Mumbai attack, in which LeT gunman AjmalKasab’s confession was backed by video evidence of hisparticipation—previous Indian counterterrorism investigations have failedto produce sufficient evidence to allow suspects to be prosecuted.[50]Many security analysts view even thesespecial counterterrorism units as poorly trained, lacking in resources andtechnology, and fraught with infighting among states and with centralgovernment intelligence agencies.[51] “TheAnti-Terrorism Squads are practically dysfunctional,” said securityexpert Sahni. “They are basically a few guys picked up from the regularforce and told, ‘All right now you just run afterterrorists.’”[52]In addition,counterterrorism units cannot cross state boundaries. According to Ajit Doval, a former director of India’sIntelligence Bureau, they “tend to focus their investigations on where theattack occurred and they stop their investigations where their jurisdictionends.”[53] Their lack of mobility can pose serious obstacles to carrying outsuccessful investigations. In many cases, the perpetrators of attacks come fromoutside states (or countries), plot attacks in one community, obtain financingin another, stage attacks in yet another, and hide in another still.The central government security apparatus is also outmoded.India still lacks a nationwide crime database, leaving state police stations as“virtually unconnected islands,” the country’s Home Minister,P. Chidambaram, has conceded.[54] In acountry of more than 1.1 billion people, fewer than 500 officials from theNational Intelligence Bureau specialize in terrorism, and fewer than 150 CoastGuard boats and aircraft guard 5,000 miles of shoreline.[55]More than one year after the Mumbai attack, India’s foreign intelligenceagency, called the Research and Analysis Wing (R&AW), reportedly had littlemore than a dozen officer-grade employees with Pakistani language and areaexpertise.[56]“Unless you have good intelligence you have nothing. You are just gropingin the dark,” said Vikram Sood, former secretary of the R&AW.“You are going to catch the wrong chaps, you are going to alienate thepublic, and you will create more Indian Mujahideen.”[57]II. Tortureand Other Ill-Treatment of Terrorism SuspectsThe bombings in Jaipur, Ahmedabad, and Delhi in 2008 killeda total of 152 people, and spread panic across India. Another two people werekilled in serial bombings on July 28, 2008, in Bangalore. During a three-dayperiod immediately after the Ahmedabad blasts in July, police defused 23 bombsin the Gujarati port city of Surat.In response, state police carried out massive sweeps ofMuslim communities in those cities, as well as in areas such as Uttar Pradeshstate that had suffered attacks in the recent past. Hundreds of Muslim men werebrought in for questioning, particularly those who were known or suspectedmembers of the banned student group Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI).Ultimately, police charged more than 70 suspects with involvement in theattacks and issued arrest warrants for more than three dozen others.Human Rights Watch has found credible evidence that statepolice units investigating the attacks engaged in widespread and serious abusesof suspects’ rights, such as arbitrary arrest and detention, torture, andother ill-treatment, including threats against suspects and their relatives.Police in Delhi may have deliberately killed two suspects in a staged shootout.These abuses are serious violations of both Indian and international law.In several cases, plainclothes police picked up suspects andyet, even with eyewitnesses present, did not register them as having beenarrested for days or even weeks, putting them at particular risk ofmistreatment. Former suspects, relatives of suspects, and lawyers told HumanRights Watch that police held and tortured some detainees in secretinterrogation centers. They alleged that detainees were blindfolded and held instress positions during all their waking hours, beaten, subjected to electricshock, or denied food and water. Many said police forced detainees to makefalse confessions, at times making them repeat a fabricated version of eventsuntil they had memorized it. In several instances reported to Human RightsWatch, the authorities threatened detainees into telling relatives they wereguilty, or would deny them access to counsel and relatives. According todefense lawyers, at least a dozen suspects have withdrawn confessions theyclaim were false and obtained by force.Abuses against terrorism suspects were carried out byspecialized units of state police forces, primarily the MaharashtraAnti-Terrorism Squad (ATS), headquartered in Mumbai; the Uttar Pradesh ATS,headquartered in Lucknow; the Rajasthan ATS, headquartered in Jaipur; and theAhmedabad Crime Branch of the Gujarat State Police. In Delhi, the abuses werecarried out by the Special Cell of the police force. While the worst abusesoccurred in police custody, in Jaipur and Ahmedabad, suspects were also beaten,denied access to relatives and lawyers, and suffered other ill-treatment afterthey had been transferred to jails, which are under judicial authority.However, Human RightsWatch did not hear similar allegations of abuse from suspects held by regularpolice following the Pune blast on February 13, 2010, even though Indianauthorities quickly named Indian Mujahideen (IM), assisted byPakistani-American David Headley and Lashkar-e-Taiba(LeT), as the most likely suspects.[58]Accordingto rights defenders who monitored the investigations, the police in thisinstance did not arbitrarily round up Muslims. “No young Muslims weredetained or ill treated,” said Kishore Jagtap, a Pune-based activist whohad previously met with authorities to warn against arbitrary round-ups.[59]Human Rights Watch sent repeated requests for comment on ourfindings to central Home Ministry officials, as well as to ranking governmentand police officials in the states we investigated.[60]Only three officials responded—a police director from Maharashtra state,the police commissioner from the city of Baroda in Gujarat, and a ranking Delhipolice official who spoke on condition of anonymity. All three police officialsdenied any abuse or illegal activity of any kind.“Whatever allegations are made were afterthought andtutored by their attornies with a view to frustrate the investigation,”K.P. Raghuvanshi, the additional director general of police for law and orderin Maharashtra, stated in a written response to Human Rights Watch. Raghuvanshiwas chief of the state’s Anti-Terrorism Squad when much of the abuseallegedly occurred. “Therefore all the charges of beating, unlawfuldetention, secret interrogation center etc. are false and baseless.”[61]According to the Baroda police commissioner, RakeshAsthaana, in a response to Human Rights Watch, Indian police generally abide bythe law and are subjected to “effective frameworks/checks andbalances.” He added that should supervisors learn of an alleged abuse,“immediate, appropriate action, as per the law, is taken against theguilty.”[62]Torturein Police CustodyHuman Rights Watch received numerous credible accounts ofpolice torture and other ill-treatment of suspects detained for the 2008bombings. Methods included both physical and mental abuses such as beatings,electric shocks, stress positions, denial of food and water, sensorydeprivation, and threats against suspects and their families. The level ofabuse varied by the police force involved and how swiftly investigators wereable to secure confessions or other incriminating information.In some cases, the police not only relied on torture toforce suspects into incriminating themselves and others, they also fabricatedconfessions that they made the suspects sign and memorize, to repeat later infront of a magistrate. They also used confessionsto persuade magistrates to extend police custody of suspects forcontinued questioning.[63]In all types of criminal cases in India, police routinelyuse torture to extract confessions. Many investigating officers admit theyconsider torture and other forceful methods essential tools of police work.[64]In the 2008 bombing cases, those tendencies appeared to have been exacerbatedby the tremendous public pressure to find and punish the perpetrators.“There is a good deal of torture, particularly in terrorist cases….The police are under terrible pressure to come up with quick fixes,” Kadayam S. Subramanian, a retired senior policeofficer, told Human Rights Watch. He also explained that, lacking adequatetraining on interrogation and evidence gathering, “a large percentage ofthe police feel they would totally fail if they were to strictly adhere to therule of law.”[65]Precisely because of the high risk of torture, confessions madeto the police are generally not admissible as proof of guilt in an Indian courtof law. For a confession to be used as evidence, a suspect must repeat theconfession before a magistrate.[66]However, a suspect’s statements to police are admissible as corroborationof other evidence, creating a “back door” for them to enter intocourt proceedings.[67]Much of the worst abuse in the 2008 bombing investigationswas committed by the Gujarat Crime Branch police at their Gaekwad Haveli lockupin Ahmedabad. Vikas Padora, a Delhi attorney, recounted the experience of asuspect who had alleged abuse in Delhi Special Police custody and wassubsequently transferred to Ahmedabad. The man pleaded with him, “Gujaratpolice are even worse, kindly keep me in Delhi.”[68]According to I.M. Munshi,a lawyer for many of the Gujarati accused, suspects at the Gaekwad Havelilockup were forced to sit facing a wall, their hands cuffed and their eyescovered, for 18 to 20 hours a day, and often were taken for interrogation lateat night. A former suspect held in Ahmedabad gave a similar account,emphasizing that suspects were made to wear dark masks and that beatings in thelockup usually began after midnight. “The screaming lasted allnight,” the former detainee said. His interrogators usually came for himat 1 or 2 a.m.:I was beatenwith a wooden stick and a leather belt. I had to stand with my hands extendedhorizontally and if they came down, the police would beat me. My physicalcondition was such that I could not stand it for more than ten minutes.Whenever they interrogated me and they felt that the answer was improper, theybeat me with the wooden stick or the leather belt or whatever they liked. I wastold by the police department, “If you do not cooperate, we will take custodyof all of your family. We will not allow your [relative] to study. We will notallow your [relative] to work.” I was so scared I did not know what wouldhappen and what to do or not to do. I had no hope of coming out.[69]Much of the torture involved techniques that did not leaveobvious marks. In Gujarat, according to some former suspects, relatives, andlawyers, police used a method called the “T,” which involvedpulling a suspect’s legs apart while beating the bottoms of his feet. Arelative of one detainee said:He told me, “I was beaten verybadly with the T. They tied ropes on both feet and they stretched them to 180degrees and in that situation I went totally unconscious. After 10 minutes, Iregained consciousness, and the pain I felt was unbearable by any man.”[70]Not all torture is carried out in a manner to cover up theabuse. As a mother of a detainee in Gujarat recounted:My son had a big beard. But we saw thatlarge tufts had been pulled out of his face. But when I asked him, thepoliceman said, “Tell your mother that the police are very nice.”Later, once he went to jail, he told me that they had pulled his beard andbeaten him. He said they even beat him with a belt.[71]In Mumbai, lawyer Shahid Azmi said that one of his clientswas tortured so badly by the Maharashtra ATS during a month of arbitrarydetention that when he saw him in October 2008, two months after he was firsttaken into custody, he still had trouble walking:He was still limping, almost unable towalk, in a deep depression and almost unable to say “yes” or“no”…. About six months after his arrest he told me that hewas kept naked for several days, that he was beaten badly with sticks on thesoles of his feet … and with belts.[72]Several relatives said police deprived suspects of food orwater. A father of a suspect told Human Rights Watch, “[My son] said,‘We were kept hungry for three days at a time, we were not allowed tosleep.’”[73]Mohammad Arif, arrested in the Uttar Pradesh capital ofLucknow in September 2008, retracted his statement of involvement in thebombings in that state and in Gujarat, saying that the Uttar Pradesh ATS usedtorture to make him confess:I was punched, kicked, beaten very badly.In order to humiliate me and to break me down the ATS made me stand for longhours and hung me upside down. During the police custody, I was denied allbasic amenities and was forced to drink water from toilet. Further on, I wassubjected to electric shocks by the police officials and made to repeat whatthey were saying. The interrogators repeatedly used … name calling,sexually profane abusive language, with me.”[74]Forced Confessions in PoliceLockupsRelatives and lawyers of suspects told Human Rights Watchthat detainees were made to sign blank papers or to memorize confessions handedto them by police. Twenty-two-year-old suspect Saqib Nisar, an alleged IMmember, was detained at the Delhi Special Cell lockup in October 2009.According to Nisar’s father, Nisar Ahmed, his son was denied sleep untilhe memorized a police-concocted narrative of the Delhi bombings. The fathersaid his son’s face was swathed in cloth when he was first allowed tovisit him in October 2009:I unwrapped my son's face and saw thewounds…. When I asked my son if he was tortured, he said, “They arehardly going to treat me with love. They want to build the case…. Theyused to make us memorize a story of the police version of the case. We were notallowed to sleep until we could recite the police version.”[75]In some cases reported to Human Rights Watch, formersuspects alleged that police tortured or threatened them with the aim of makingthem provide confessions that would implicate others. One man told us he wasreleased in return for agreeing to provide false testimony for the prosecution.[76]“Testimony was given by the [police] department to me to learn by heartand I had to recite the statement in front of all of them [in court],” hetold Human Rights Watch. “It was a totally false description. On thiscondition they released me.”[77]In cases where suspects have filed complaints of such abuse,the police units in question denied any ill-treatment, saying in court papersthat, for example, they “meticulously followed” laws regardingcustody and that suspects fabricated wrongdoing to dodge prosecution.[78]One ranking Delhi police official, speaking to Human Rights Watch on conditionof anonymity, contended that his unit did not have to torture:We did not have to use what we policecall “rough treatment” because they all admitted to their crimesimmediately. The words just flowed out of them. These are very young boys andthey were extremely frightened. Some of them were crying. We felt sorry forthem because they had been trapped.[79]Lawyers and relatives counter that the suspects were toofrightened to complain about torture because they were being returned toextended custody of the very police who were perpetrating the abuse.Human Rights Watch also received complaints of policeholding individuals in secret interrogation centers for one or more days. Threesuspects and one human rights activist said that they were beaten and held insecret police interrogation centers in Maharashtra, Gujarat, and Uttar Pradesh.Two of the suspects were Hindu.[80]In Baroda, a city in Gujarat that was one of the flashpointsof Hindu-Muslim riots in 2002, police from a unit called the Special OperationsGroup allegedly took a group of young Muslim men to a secret interrogationcenter at a farmhouse outside the city in August 2008 and beat them all nightwhile questioning them about the Ahmedabad bombings and the Surat bombingattempts, according to two relatives of a member of the group. One relativesaid the victim later told him the abuse included electric shocks:The torture continued from about midnightor one o'clock until morning…. They were grabbed by the collars and theirheads were bashed against the walls. They were given electric shocks andthreatened that “either you confess to your crimes or we will harass yourfamily members or ruin your business or kill you in an encounter—take yououtside and kill you.”[81]State police and other security forces deny the existence ofsecret interrogation centers, but there have been persistent allegations thatthey exist.[82]Beatingsin JailSuspects in India are generallyconsidered to be safe from abuse once they are transferred from police stationlockups to jails, which are under judicial custody. However, Human Rights Watchheard credible allegations from relatives and lawyers that suspects in the 2008blasts were abused in such facilities in Jaipur, Ahmedabad, and Delhi. Thealleged perpetrators include jail authorities, the police, and fellow inmates.In two jails, guards and police beat suspects while they knelt in prayer.[83]In August 2010, Mohammed Salman, a 17-year-old held inDelhi’s Tihar Jail in connection with bomb blasts in the capital,appeared in court with his head bandaged. Salman told the judge that twoinmates had repeatedly slashed his face with a razor blade earlier that month.He said jail authorities “did nothing” to prevent theincident—international law prohibits the incarceration of children under18 with adults[84]—althoughhe had twice requested transfer because he feared for his safety, and also tookno action against the attackers.[85]He also accused guards of laughing and saying: “He is a terrorist andthis is what should happen to him, anyway.”Salman received 22stitches three days after the attack and was moved to another cell. The judgeordered an internal investigation that had not been made public as of thiswriting. In Jaipur Central Jail, guards allegedly beat about a dozen prisonerson September 21, 2009, after they requested permission to leave their cells forextra hours and pray with other inmates to mark Eid al-Fitr, an importantIslamic holiday. A few hours after the request, while the prisoners werekneeling in afternoon prayer, a group of police officers, prisoners, and jailauthorities dragged them from their cells and struck them with batons andsticks, according to complaints lodged by two inmates and a Muslim delegationof activists, lawyers, and relatives.[86]“Some of them weredragged out exactly in the position of prayer,” said a report from theRajasthan Muslim Forum that was based on interviews with three beaten prisonersin the presence of the Jaipur Central Jail superintendent.[87] “We saw scars on their bodies from thebeatings,” said Salim Engineer, who led the group.[88] The inmates said they had been subjected tosimilar beatings on Eid al-Fitr in October 2008, the Rajasthan Muslim Forumreport said.[89]The state governmenthas ordered an inquiry and transferred the warden and his deputy.[90]A similar incident had occurred at Sabarmati Jail inAhmedabad, Gujarat, on March 27, 2009. There, 22 prisoners alleged they werekneeling in afternoon prayer when prison guards and police assaulted them withbatons and pieces of furniture. The prisoners, all of them terrorism suspects,the vast majority of whom were accused in the 2008 bombings, were among 300prisoners staging a hunger strike to protest conditions including the denial ofoutside medical treatment. The attack left three men unconscious, which wentunconfirmed “for so long as to start rumors in the city that they haddied,” according to a report from a coalition of national human rightsgroups.[91]Word of the assault on the detainees quickly spread viarelatives who had visited regular inmates.[92] A crowdof nearly 200 relatives and friends gathered outside the jail, demanding to seethe injured. But for three days, jail authorities denied both relatives andlawyers access to the beaten prisoners. They also refused to take the inmatesto a hospital, instead treating them with jail doctors.[93]Relatives and lawyers told Human Rights Watch that when they were finallyallowed in, they saw that the beating victims were injured. The brother of oneprisoner described the scene:You could see that most of the prisonerswere badly beaten and they were wounded and had bandages. My brother’seyes were swollen and there were black marks near the eyes. One prisoner waslifted and carried by four guards to see his female relatives because both ofhis legs were fractured.[94]Relatives said they obtained information in snippets asguards moved around the visiting room, trying to stop them from discussing thebeating. The wife of one Ahmedabad suspect told Human Rights Watch:My husband said he was beaten with a belton the back and had marks on his hands and feet. He tried to show them to usbut the guards did not allow us to see them. The guards were standing behind theprisoners. They would stand very close and if the prisoners talked about thetorture they would tap them on the shoulder and say, “Don’t talkabout that.”[95]The Sabarmati police precinct refused to registerrelatives’ complaints about the beatings, and instead submitted its ownversion of events, which acknowledged that guards had beaten the prisoners butadmitted no wrongdoing. In a lower court hearing in Ahmedabad on the incident,jail officials argued that the beatings were legal under the colonial-eraBombay Jail Manual of 1935, which remains in force in the state of Gujarat. Themanual states that hunger strikes—a form of protest used in the 1930s byMahatma Gandhi—constitute “mutiny” and can be quashed withwhippings.[96]Section 46 of the Colonial Prisons Act also allows corporalpunishment in cases where a prison offense has been committed.[97]On April 6, 2009, Special Magistrate G.M. Patel ruled thatthe jail authorities had acted lawfully under the Jail Manual guidelines. Heordered additional food and medical treatment for the detainees but conductedno further investigation into the beatings.[98] On May 6, 2009,the High Court dismissed a petition from an Indian human rights group totransfer the jail superintendent.[99]In another case, relatives said three terrorism suspects,Saif-ur-Rahman, Mohammad Sarwar, and Shahbaz Ahmed, were beaten in a Jaipurcourthouse holding area in June 2009 by some fellow inmates and a group ofHindu supporters while waiting to appear before a magistrate. “There areso many policemen in the court, but no one wanted to help,” said ShahbazAhmed’s father-in-law.[100]Mohammad Sarwar told relatives that therewere slogans on the door of the alleged IM members’ jail cells,identifying them as bombers. “He told me, ‘The guards and some ofthe Hindu inmates are calling us Pakistanis and terrorists,’” saidSarwar’s uncle, Mohammad Hasim. “He begged me to keep visiting himoften so the guards and other inmates would not consider him vulnerable.”[101]The beatings and other abuses in judicial custody violateIndian and international law and underscore the urgent need for jail reform.[102]Reformers have unsuccessfully sought tooverhaul India’s outmoded jail laws and manuals since the 1978 Supreme Court ruling of Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration, inwhich Justice V.R. Krisha Iyer, writing for the majority, observed that:Jail manuals are largely a hangover ofthe past, still retailing anachronistic provisions like whipping….Barbaric treatment of a prisoner from the point of view of his rehabilitationand acceptance and retention in the mainstream of social life, becomescounterproductive in the long run.[103]The All India Committee on Jail Reforms,which served from 1980-83, urged the creation of a national jail manual,observing that existing state laws contained punishments that were “notin conformity with standards of humanitarian treatment of offenders.” TheNational Human Rights Commission followed up in 1996 by circulating a draftbill to states that contained core recommendations for reform. But states havelargely ignored the recommendations, perceiving them to be an intrusionon their sovereignty over detention and other law-and-order matters.[104]In one positive development, the Bombay High Court sent astrong message to jail authorities in a case in which terrorism suspects werebeaten by jail staff in 2006. Describing the abusers as traitors, the courtruled in July 2009 that disciplinary action and, if need be, criminal actionshould be initiated against those responsible. As the court’s opinionpointed out:It has to be remembered that the convictsor the under-trials are human beings and they have to be treated like humanbeings. The jail authorities who have custody over them have [a] specialresponsibility to protect their rights and in fact they are their custodian,reformer and counselor.[105]Protections against Torture and Other Ill-TreatmentThe use of torture violates numerous international,constitutional, and statutory protections, and has been repeatedly condemned byIndia’s Supreme Court and the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC).[106]To protect persons in police custody from abuse, the Supreme Court has laiddown specific rules that police must follow while making arrests, such asinforming relatives of an arrest or detention, recording the arrest in a diary,and having the detainee medically examined every 48 hours.[107]These guidelines are regularly flouted.[108]In 1997, the UN Human Rights Committee expressed its concern“about the incidence of custodial deaths, rape and torture, and at thefailure of the Government of India to receive the United Nations SpecialRapporteur on the question of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degradingtreatment or punishment.”[109]Yet 14 years later, India continues to rebuff repeated requests from therapporteur’s office to visit.India’spractice of torture violates its international legal obligations, including theInternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), to which it is aparty. Article 7 of the ICCPR states that: “No one shall be subjected totorture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.”Article 10 provides that "all persons deprived of their liberty shall betreated with humanity and with respect for the inherent dignity of the human person.”[110]In 1997, India signed the Convention against Torture andOther Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“Conventionagainst Torture”).[111]Although the country is one of nine signatories that have yet to ratify thetreaty, international law binds India to respect the Convention againstTorture’s absolute prohibition on torture and other ill-treatment. In aneffort to ensure ratification, India has now drafted the Prevention of TortureBill.[112]Suspicious Killings: The BatlaHouse EncounterHuman Rights Watch isconcerned that authorities have failed to fully investigate whether the DelhiSpecial Cell police killed two bombing suspects on September 19, 2008, in a“fake encounter”—that is, an incident in which policedeliberately kill suspects but claim that they shot them in self-defense. Inthe incident, police raided Batla House, a housing complex in the Muslimneighborhood of Jamia Nagar, six days after the Delhi bombings. One policeofficial, Inspector M.C. Sharma, and two Muslim youths, Mohammad Atif Ameenand Mohammad Sajid, whom authorities subsequently described as IM leaders,were killed. Another police official, Head Constable Balwant Singh, wasinjured. Police seized a third suspect inside the apartment and said twoothers escaped.The police have given contradictory statements about theshootings. Initially, for example, they said Atif and Sajid opened fire,fatally wounding Sharma, and that they returned fire in self-defense, killingboth of them. However, after the arrest of two more persons related to theBatla House incident in early 2010, the police claimed that one of thosearrested, Shahzad Ahmed, had killed Inspector Sharma.[113]More significantly,suspicious markings were found on the bodies of the two IM suspectswhenthey were returned to their families for burial. Photographs of the corpsesshow four bullet wounds in the topof Sajid’s head, suggesting he may have been forced to kneel while he was shot, while the skin on Atif’sback appeared burned and peeled.[114] The autopsy reports of the two slain militants—which human rights activistsobtained in early 2010 only afterfiling a half-dozen requests through the Right to Information Act—noteinjuries fromblunt objects and other details that raisefurther questions about how they died.[115]The police refused toconduct a legally required magisterial inquiry into the deaths, and werebacked in that move by the Delhi lieutenant governor, who declared that aprobe “would weaken the resolve of the police officers to fight againstterrorists.”[116]Indian courts rebuffed human rightsgroups’ repeated demands that they order an independent investigation.[117]Human Rights Watchdoes not have sufficient information to determine whether the police’sfatal shootings inside Batla House were legitimate acts of self-defense.However, we believe such incidents should be thoroughly and independentlyinvestigated without exception, particularly given the broad pattern of fakeencounters that Human Rights Watch and Indian human rights organizations havedocumented in many areas of India.[118]Fake encounter killingsamount to extrajudicial executions in violation of the prohibitions againstarbitrary deprivations of life under both the Indian Constitution andinternational law.[119] Regrettably, India’s Code of Criminal Procedureauthorizes police to use all “necessary” force to effect arrest, without regard to whether asuspect is armed.[120]III. Arbitrary DetentionWhile the majority of individuals who were questioned inconnection with the 2008 bombings were released within a day or two, policewrongfully detained scores of others in violation of their due process rightsunder Indian and international law. Suspects were not brought before amagistrate within 24 hours of arrest as required by Indian law,[121]and held for up to a month before theauthorities either released them or formally acknowledged their arrest. Policein some cases delayed suspects’ access to relatives and lawyers, and heldthem incommunicado in undisclosed locations. The failure of the authorities todisclose the fate or whereabouts of someone in custody is considered anenforced disappearance in violation of international law.[122]Many of those questioned or detained were former orsuspected members of SIMI, some of whom had been picked up numerous times inprevious police raids but never charged. Several relatives said the former SIMImembers had become “the usual suspects” in Indian counterterrorismcases—rounded up, beaten in an attempt to make them name other suspects,and then discharged.“As soon as thereis an incident, promptly HuJI [the militant, Bangladeshi-based group] or SIMIare named,” said Mohammad Sajid, a former SIMI member who was detainedfor more than three weeks after the Jaipur bombings but never brought before amagistrate.[123] He continued:On the nightof May 17-18, the police came for me. I was expecting it because my name wasalready in the media after the blast. I simply asked them, “Why atnight?” They said that some officers wanted to question me…. For 23days, different styles, different methods, I was interrogated … I wasimmediately described as a mastermind…. There was no physical torture butthey kept saying, “Confess to these crimes.” I said, “I amagainst these crimes that I am being blamed for.” But they said,“Give us names of people who might be involved.”[124]Many of these wrongful detentions took place in Gujarat.Human Rights Watch met with relatives or lawyers of 16 suspects detained inthat state. Almost all said that the suspects were held secretly for a week ortwo after the July 26 bombings before their detentions were made public. Thepolice announced their formal arrests on August 15 and produced them before amagistrate the following day. By then, the police were already declaring thatthe suspects had confessed and that the bombings were linked to SIMI.[125]Among the first to be picked up was Mohammad ZahidKutubuddin Shaikh, who was brought on July 31 to a lockup at the police CrimeBranch office in Ahmedabad called the Gaekwad Haveli. Although Zahid managed tocall his wife and inform her of his detention, the family had no news of himfor five days, despite making repeated visits to the Crime Branch. According tohis mother, Badrunissa Kutubbidin Shaikh:On the sixth day, my husband and I wentto the Crime Branch and met Officer Tarun Barot. He called us to his room andsaid, “Your son is with us. We are checking a few things. I will bringhim home after that.” We asked, “When can we see our son?”Barot said, “Bring him lunch. We will sit and eat together.” We werehappy and we went away. When we came back, they brought my son. When he saw us,he sat down on the floor and wept. He said, “Mother, they are reallytreating me badly.”[126]Several relatives said that Crime Branch officials,particularly Barot, promised that the suspects would be released soon, andencouraged them not to seek legal aid to get them out. For this reason, fewmissing person complaints or petitions for the writ of habeas corpus were filedchallenging the detentions in Gujarat. Said one mother: “Tarun Barot gaveso much reassurance. We believed him. He is such a big officer. We thought thathe would not lie to us.”[127]Another relative of a suspect still incustody said, “We did not complain because we thought it might anger thepolice and make things bad for the boys. The police said to me:‘Don’t go to anyone. If people come offering help, or suggestingthat you need a lawyer, your money will be wasted. Don’t listen to them.We will let him go.’”[128]The mother of Ayaz Razzaqmiya Saiyed, 25, claimed that afterher son was picked up from his house, Barot held her at bay for three daysbefore formally acknowledging the arrest. She said that Barot reassured her bypromising, “Your son is your treasure which is in my keeping. I willreturn your treasure to you. Don’t worry about lawyers.”[129]Three or four Ahmedabad Crime Branch police arrestedGyasuddin Abdul Salim Ansari on August 9, 2008, as the family was sleeping,said his mother, Sanjeed Begum Abdul Alim. He was held for a week before hisarrest was formally acknowledged, the day that he was produced before amagistrate:The men said they were from Crime Branchand pushed my husband aside to enter the house. Two days later, we were allowedto meet my son. My son was crying and we were crying. We asked the police whatwas going on. The policeman said, “Don’t worry. We will release himsoon.” We waited and waited, but they did not let him go.[130]In cases where police decided to formally arrest suspectsafter detaining them unlawfully, they often falsified the dates and sometimesthe locations of their initial arrest.Mohammad Arif, anAzamgarh resident studying in Lucknow, was arrested by the Uttar Pradesh ATS onSeptember 24, 2008. He remained in unacknowledged detention, unable to informhis relatives of his arrest or seek legal counsel, until police announced hisarrest on September 29 and said he had confessed. Even then, he wrote in asubsequent complaint to a Lucknow magistrate, police only allowed him to speakwith his family after he promised to “say exactly what they asked me tosay on the phone.”[131] In his complaint, Arif retracted his confession,saying police tortured and coerced him to make false statements against otherindividuals and to sign blank papers or written documents that he was not allowedto read.[132]In the case of Mohammad Sarwar, another former Azamgarhresident accused in the Jaipur blasts, there is strong evidence that policepicked him up in one city but alleged that he was arrested two days later inanother city in another state. An engineer who had excelled in school, Sarwarwas recruited by a prominent firm and began work at its branch in Ujjain, acity in Madhya Pradesh state, on January 16, 2009. On the evening of January19, he called relatives to tell them that he had settled in. The next morning,the family found his mobile phone switched off. Several hours later, accordingto his brother Mohammad Qausar, Sarwar’s employers called to say he hadnot turned up for work. The employers sent someone to check Sarwar’shouse and were told that five people in plainclothes had taken him the previousevening:They had sent someone to check inSarwar’s house. There is a teashop nearby, and they told the companypeople that five people had arrived and pushed Sarwar into a car. He was shoutingfor help…. Our world had changed…. On January 21, we heard thatthey were flashing Sarwar’s arrest on television.[133]Sarwar’s employers lodged acomplaint with Madhya Pradesh police in reporting his abduction from Ujjain.The Uttar Pradesh police, however, insisted that Sarwar had been arrested inLucknow.[134]At a minimum, the circumstances of his arrest indicate the need for aninvestigation. If in fact Sarwar was first detained in Ujjain, registering himas having been arrested in Lucknow would have allowed police to hold himincommunicado for 48 hours and avoid having to request a legal transfer fromMadhya Pradesh to Uttar Pradesh.Arrestsof Relatives to Coerce Surrenders or Obtain InformationIn some cases, police detained suspects’ relatives as aform of collective punishment and at times used them as hostages in an effortto bring in fugitives.In August 2008, the Gujarat police were unable to locatesuspect Abdul Raziq, and instead picked up his young brother Shakeel and heldhim for about a month.[135]Noorjahan, their mother, told Human Rights Watch:The police said that they would releaseShakeel only when Raziq comes. We called Raziq at our relative’s house totell him about Shakeel. But he … had left his wife with our relatives anddisappeared. We went and told the police that Raziq had run away. They took myhusband and questioned all our relatives…. My son-in-law was kept at thepolice station all night…. My son Shakeel was released only after a monthor so.[136]In one case, police were seeking a man because he was thedistant cousin of a suspect. Not finding that man at home, plainclothes policegrabbed his 19-year-old brother, Mohammad Saquib, gagged him before he couldspeak with his mother, and dragged him, barefoot and in his pajamas, into awaiting car. Police handcuffed and held the younger brother for questioning,threatening to free him only if his brother surrendered, until lawyers arrivedand secured his release.[137]Abdul Rahman, the father of a suspect in the September 2008Delhi bombings and the caretaker of the Batla House apartment where policestaged a deadly raid, was held for 45 days in what he suspects was an effort topressure him or his son, who was also arrested, into confessing. When Rahmanheard the address of the apartment on television news, he immediately went tothe police to provide information about the student tenants, who he had foundthrough his son Zia-ur-Rahman. When he returned to the police stationvoluntarily a day later, he and the apartment’s landlord, his boss, werekept in police custody all night. “I began to suspect they were trying tobuild a case against me,” Rahman said.Rahman’s boss was released after filing a policecomplaint saying Rahman had forged the signature, changed the month on thelease and stole one month’s rent. “I think [my boss] was underpressure from the police,” Rahman said. “He told me later that,‘The circumstances were such that I couldn’t dootherwise.’”[138] Rahmanwas free on bail at the time of this writing; his son Zia ur-Rahman had beencharged in the bombings.Abu Bashar has been described by the police as one of the IM“masterminds” behind the 2008 bombings. In August 2008, officialsin plain clothes abducted him from his home in Azamgarh. They entered his houseclaiming to bring a marriage proposal for one of his brothers, tricked him intostepping outside, pushed him into a vehicle, and drove away. Abu Bashar wastransferred to the custody of Gujarat police, who held him for four months inAhmedabad before he was transferred to a local jail. Abu Bashar’sbrothers told Human Rights Watch that they had been worried that they, too,might be arrested. In January 2009, when Abu Bashar’s brother Abu Zafarvisited him in jail, their fears were realized:That evening, I was returning to Mumbaifrom Ahmedabad. It is an overnight train. At about 1 a.m., three men came to mein the train and asked for my documents. They asked, “Are you the brotherof Abu Bashar? We are from the crime branch. We want to ask you some questions.”When the train stopped in Surat, they asked me to step off.[139]For the next two days, Abu Zafar said, police held himincommunicado as they drove him to three different destinations in Gujaratstate, questioning and threatening him. The first stop was the town of Naroda.They asked every detail of my life....Then they asked me for email andpassword. And they took away my cell phone. At about 1 p.m., they brought me toAhmedabad. There I met with the ATS people. They asked, “What did yourbrother say to you?” They also asked many more questions, about ourfamily and our house…. Then some of the police began to threaten me. Theysaid, “If you don’t tell us everything you will end up where yourbrother is.” At about 3 p.m., I was taken to the ATS headquarters. They hadthe printout of all the phone calls I had made or received. They asked mequestions about the calls to UP [Uttar Pradesh] or Gujarat. Some numbers Irecognized and could explain. Others I could not. I am a journalist. There aremany phone conversations. I cannot remember everything…. Then they askedme to sign some blank papers. I refused to sign until I knew what had beenwritten. So then they wrote it out and gave them back to me to sign, but sinceit was all in Gujarati, I did not understand it.[140]When night fell, police drove Zafar to the isolated town ofGandhinagar, and the questioning resumed again.It was ajungle area, only one street and the police station and nothing, not anybuildings or housing…. They were much rougher in their language…. Theytold me all of the citizens of Azamgahr are terrorists. I was very afraid. Theyhad taken all of my documents. No one knew where I was…. Sometimes Ithought, “They will kill me and no one will know what happened. Or theywill plant my documents as evidence and say I am the new mastermind of thebombings.”[141]When police finally released him, Zafar said, they boughthim a return train ticket to Mumbai and returned most of his belongings, butkept his identity card.In one case in Delhi, Special Cell Police conceded in courtpapers that there were times that lawyers and “so-called human rightsactivists” could not immediately see the IM suspects held in the 2008bombings in the capital. They said the reason was that “the accusedpersons were not available,” without explaining how the detained mencould be unavailable for days at a time.[142]ExtendedPolice CustodyPolice counterterrorism investigators, particularly inAhmedabad and Delhi, routinely manipulated Indian law in order to detain 2008bombing suspects well beyond the 15-day legal limit for police custody providedunder Indian law—in some cases for three to four months.[143]This practice not only violated the right to liberty, it also vastly increasedthe risk of custodial torture and coerced confessions. “The mostworrisome, the most vulnerable period is when suspects are in policecustody,” said Mukul Sinha, a Gujarat High Court attorney who handleshigh-profile human rights cases. “When the law tells you 15 days youcan’t artificially prolong it to 150 days.”[144]In most cases, suspects subjected to prolonged policecustody were still presented to a magistrate every 15 days as required by law. That procedure wasemphasized by police officials who responded to our concerns about abuse inpolice custody. K.P. Raghuvanshi, additional director general of policefor law and order in Maharashtra, stated in a letter to Human Rights Watch: “Had there been any forced confession, thesuspect could have complained to the Judicial Magistrate. But the very factthat none of them complained to the Judicial Magistrate, shows that they werevoluntarily given and were not false.”[145]According to relativesand lawyers, however, many suspects were too frightened to tell magistrates ofpolice abuse because they knew they would almost certainly be returned topolice custody rather than be sent to jail or released on bail. One mother toldus that when she asked her son why he did not complain to the magistrate aboutbeing tortured by police, he replied, “We have to go back to the police.We have to live here.”[146] A lawyer explained that he did not file a directcomplaint in court of the torture his client had endured because there was nophysical evidence of the abuse and because his client had instructed himagainst it, warning him, “If you trouble them, they will troubleme.”[147] Another lawyer said that his client was undersevere police intimidation and had told him: “We have all been torturedand beaten. They have threatened us that if we reveal any of this we will neverget out.”[148]Indian law prior to the passage of amendments after theNovember 2008 Mumbai attack, permitted authorities in most states to detainsuspects for up to 90 days without charge, of which no more than 15 days couldbe in police custody.[149] Tocircumvent that limit, police investigators in Ahmedabad and Delhi treated eachof the coordinated bomb blasts that occurred on the same day in the same cityas a separate criminal incident. Instead of filing multiple complaintssimultaneously against each suspect for all the bombings, the police lodged anew complaint against each accused every 15 days in connection with a differentblast. Each new filing of a complaint—called a First Information Report(FIR)—allowed them to extend police custody of a suspect for an additional15 days.With rare exceptions, magistrates authorized the repeatedreturns to police custody over the objections of defense counsel, who notedthat the police had from the start described each city’s coordinated bombblasts as a single conspiracy rather than a series of separate offenses.Defense lawyers also argued that police applications for remand lackedsufficient details to justify continued custody. In some cases, magistratesgranted the remand applications even if the suspects or their lawyers complainedthat they had been abused in the very police lockups to which they were beingreturned.By filing additional FIRs every 15 days, the Special Cell ofthe Delhi police kept five suspects in their custody for nearly six weeks inlate 2008. During that time, according to court papers filed by one defenselawyer, they were “extensively interrogated by various state police… and were also taken to various [other] states for interrogation andinvestigation.”[150]A Delhi judge then transferred the five suspects to the custody of Gujarat,where a judge in Ahmedabad granted additional FIRs periodically to keep them inAhmedabad Crime Branch custody for another five weeks.[151]The Special Cell repeated the pattern in 2010, holding twosuspects it had arrested in February and March 2010 for more than one month.One of the suspects was a minor, whose name and photographs were released tothe media in violation of Indian law. The teenager was to turn 18 in October2010.[152]The Ahmedabad Crime Branch held severalother suspects for nearly four months in 2008-09 through multiple FIRs.[153]In Maharashtra state, 21 bombing suspects were charged undera special organized crime law that allows police custody for 30 days ratherthan 15. Even with that extraordinarily long period at their disposal, statecounterterrorism police contrived to keep at least a dozen suspects in theircustody for more than a month by charging them with additional offenses relatedto the bombings as soon as the first 30-day period expired.[154]India’s Supreme Court ruled in 1992 that separate FIRsmay not be lodged against the same suspect to prolong police custody beyond the15-day cap if the offenses of which he or she was accused were part of a singletransaction. Instead, the Supreme Court held, multiple FIRs allowing numerousremands can only be lodged for separate offenses.[155]In late 2008, human rights lawyers appealedthe multiple remands to the Delhi and Gujarat High Courts, arguing that theyviolated the Supreme Court ruling because state prosecutors had charged thesuspects with participating in a single conspiracy. As Nitya Ramakrishnan, oneof the Delhi-based attorneys, said: “If a criminal drops multiple bombsfrom an airplane during a single flyover, the act is a singleconspiracy.”[156]The High Court did not agree. In rejecting the appeal onDecember 17, 2008, the judge held: “Sometimes it is not known how manylayers exist in any conspiracy and up to which layer of conspiracy the culpritsapprehended had access.” His opinion took issue with anyone who wouldquestion police authority “when national security was at stake.”[157]Police questioning is not limited to the period suspects arein police custody. Indian law grants police the right to continue questioningsuspects while they are in judicial custody, provided they notify defensecounsel. The Delhi High Court ruled that this was not sufficient grounds toreject multiple remands to police custody, but in the context of widespread andcredible allegations of torture and other mistreatment in Indian policelockups, its decision could constitute an invitation to abuse.MassArrests for QuestioningDuring the initial roundups after the 2008 bombings, policedetained hundreds of Muslim men for questioning. In many cases they forciblyentered homes or work places, sometimes in civilian clothes, and picked upindividuals for custodial interrogation without identifying themselves properlyor providing arrest warrants. The Indian Code of Criminal Procedure allowspolice to summon individuals for questioning.[158]However, the police have no authority to involuntarily detain anyone forquestioning prior to placing them under arrest. Nor can police force persons toanswer questions that might be self-incriminating.[159]The law also requires that police issue summonses in writing, a formalityusually ignored by the police even in cases that do not involve nationalsecurity.[160]In the days following the Delhi bombings in September 2008,Delhi police took into custody many Muslims in and around the Batla Houseapartment complex, the site of the police raid described in Chapter II above.The police took five minors from Batla House and held them without theirparents for several hours, releasing them at 10 p.m. that evening.[161]Following the July 2008 bombings in Ahmedabad and theattempted bombings in Surat, Gujarat police questioned about 400 Muslimsstatewide, according to lawyers and human rights activists. “Hundreds ofMuslims were picked up for questioning. My sense is they were randomly pickingup people without a clue as to who did what,” said Ahmedabad human rightsactivist Hanif Lakadwala, whose organization interviewed many of the men whompolice questioned. Lakadwala said that of the 8 to 10 men he personallyinterviewed, “all of them said they had been beaten [duringquestioning].”[162]In the Gujarati city of Baroda, police summoned about 70Muslims. These included Yusuf Shaikh, a local human rights leader, who wasorganizing responses to the roundups and assisting residents seekinginformation on relatives in custody. The police detained Shaikh for questioningfor three consecutive days, releasing him only in the evenings and holding himone night until 2 a.m. Shaikh suspects the motive was to keep him from theoffice so that he could not assist the suspects’ relatives.[163]In some cases, policeleaked the names of those they brought in for questioning to the media,damaging their reputation, even though they were never charged. In Jaipur,police picked up Anwar Hussain, a physician at a local hospital, because hisname had come up during police investigations of a suspect. Hussain told HumanRights Watch: “They did not askme anything about the bomb blast, only how I knew this person. I explained andthey were satisfied. But the newspapers reported that there was there was aterrorist in the hospital.”[164]Another physician in Jaipur, Abrar Ali, said local medialabeled him “Dr. Terror” and “Dr. Death” and claimed hehad supplied ammonium nitrate for making the bombs after he was picked up forquestioning:[165]When I applied for a post-graduateprogram, my college refused to sign my application and instead set up adisciplinary committee. Even though there was nothing against me, and I had noteven been arrested, the principal said to me, “We don’t allow suchactivities.”[166]Rasheed Hussein believes he lost his job with an Indiansoftware company because Rajasthan police questioned him for nine days in June2008 in connection with the Jaipur blasts.[167]Hussein was a member of SIMI before it was banned and said the organization ashe knew it “was not associated with violence.”[168]After the Jaipur bombings, he organized relief operations and blood drives forsurvivors. During police questioning, he said, “I was not tortured. Theywere just asking for names of people who might be involved.”[169]Soon after his release, Rasheed wasdismissed by his company.Denialof Access to Lawyers and Family MembersThe likelihood of coerced confessions and other unlawfullyobtained statements is vastly increased during incommunicado detention.[170]Indian law grants arrested persons the rightto legal consultation. Among other requirements, police must allow a suspect tomeet with a lawyer and inform relatives of a suspect’s arrest.[171]Although the police can keep suspects inview, they must be out of earshot during consultations with lawyers.[172]The International Covenant on Civil andPolitical Rights requires that all those in criminal proceedings have the rightto communicate with legal counsel of their own choosing.[173]The UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners provides thatdetainees have the right to regular visits with legal counsel during which theycan exchange confidential information out of earshot of police or otherauthorities. They also have the right to “regular” contact withfamily and friends.[174]In several cases, police unlawfully denied suspects theright to meet with their legal counsel or family members for days or weeks. Thepolice also in many cases unlawfully monitored suspects’ conversationswith lawyers when their attorneys were finally allowed to visit. “Becausethe men are accused of terrorism-related offenses, access to lawyers …has been extremely minimal, in violation in of the Constitution,” saidAhmedabad defense attorney Somnath Vatsa.[175]One released suspect said he was tortured and intimidatedinto not requesting a lawyer.We were told by the police departmentthat if we got a lawyer, we would face many problems. And before our familiescame to visit, they [told] us to not say anything about what is going on inside[the police lockup ] or that the officers are bad.[176]Once they gained access, lawyers frequently were unable tospeak privately with clients. The lawyer of one suspect in Delhi complained toa magistrate that, “Throughout the meeting the officers of the SpecialCell remained in the same room in close proximity of the accused and hislawyers thereby denying them confidentiality.”[177]Another Delhi attorney, Jawahar Raja, had topetition the High Court to gain access to his client, but still was unable tospeak with him privately until he vigorously protested to Special Cell police.He said, “Since we had a court order they couldn’t refuse us, butthey did everything they could to make the environment as hostile as possible.A police officer would be sitting right next to us.”[178]Khalid Sheikh, legal counsel for Abu Bashar, said: “We insisted on aprivate meeting out of earshot but the guard stood very close…. For twoto three months we were not allowed to meet our client out of earshot.”[179]Many relatives also alleged that they were not allowed tomeet with suspects. Twice, Abdur Rahman Ansari of Azamgarh traveled 460miles—a 24-hour journey by bus and train—to meet his son,Saif-ur-Rahman, a suspect in the Jaipur bombings, and both times, the police turnedhim away. Mohammad Hasim, the uncle of Mohammad Sarwar, whose case is describedearlier in this chapter, was twice denied access in January 2009 after makingthe same journey, and only met him two weeks later after obtaining a courtorder. In Gujarat, a woman said that in refusing to let her meet with herhusband, the police “were angry and rude. They told me he is a terroristwho was part of the blasts.”[180]Some relatives suspectedthey were kept away while suspects were beaten. Nasim Bano Shahbuddin Sheikhsaid her son Shamshuddin Shahbuddin Sheikh was repeatedly summoned forquestioning after the July 26, 2008, bomb attacks in Ahmedabad. On August 8,her son was summoned once again, but this time he did not return. He was notallowed to meet with his family members for three days. “We wentrepeatedly to the Crime Branch, we took food and clothes, but they would notlet us meet. On August 11, they finally let us meet him. They were holding him,he could barely walk.… [An officer] said, ‘Tell your mother that weare not beating you.’ I asked my son to change his shirt. His back wasblue with wounds.”[181]In other cases, policefinally let relatives in hoping they would help persuade loved ones to provideevidence. Gujarat police picked up Mohammad Zaid Quttubuddin on July 31, 2008,but his family members were not allowed to meet him for six days. Eventually,after repeated appeals, his parents were allowed to meet him in the presence ofOfficer Barot who they said told them, “Your son is refusing to giveinformation. That is all we need. Why is he refusing?”[182]In Maharashtra, many relatives of 2008 bombing suspectscomplained that they were not allowed to meet detainees for weeks or monthsafter they were placed in judicial custody. Some lawyers made similarcomplaints, although they said access was generally better at jails than inpolice lockups.Shakira Mozam Ali Khanwas anxious to see her son, Mubin Kadar Sheikh, after she received a lettersaying that he was punished with solitary confinement for arguing with jailstaff. His jailers had also placed him in a cell for about three weeks withseveral inmates suffering acute psychiatric disorders.[183] Sheikh, 24, had written to his mother saying thathe was in trouble.Don’t panic please. It’snothing very serious. But I need your help. I have been shifted to another Yardin here. The Superintendent is harassing me and I don’t know why….I want you to come here as soon as you can along with the lawyer or at leastconsult a lawyer as to what I should do.[184]When Khan went to Amravati Central Jail, the authoritiesrefused to let her see her son for two months, insisting she obtain a clearancecertificate from police investigators—a tactic Sheikh’s lawyer calleda “cumbersome exercise and unwarranted by law.”[185]During her visits with Sheikh, “I am not able to talk to him alone,without the guards,” the mother said.[186]Protections against ArbitraryDetentionPolice in India have broad authority to arrest anyindividual without a warrant if they have a “reasonable suspicion”of the person’s connection to serious criminal offenses.[187]Police can also arrest without a warrant any individual they know is planningto commit certain types of offenses.[188]Amendments passed in 2010 to the Code of Criminal Procedure that would curbpolice authority to make warrantless arrests have not yet been signed into law.[189]Nevertheless, India’s Constitution and Supreme Courtjudgments set procedural obligations for police arrests. Arbitrary detentionsare also barred under international law.The Indian Constitution establishes the right to life andpersonal liberty.[190] TheSupreme Court has held that these rights inherently limit the police’sexpansive arrest authority: Police can make an arrest only if, based on aninvestigation, they have “reasonable belief” in “theperson’s complicity” and “the need to effect arrest.”[191]The Constitution also mandates that when police make anarrest without a warrant, they must inform the accused of the grounds for thearrest and the right to bail. Police must produce an arrested person before thenearest magistrate without delay and at most within 24 hours.[192]Moreover, in the landmark 1997 case of D.K. Basu v. West Bengal, theSupreme Court established additional mandatory procedures for police detention.[193]The ICCPR’s prohibition on arbitrary arrest anddetention prohibits arrests and detentions that are carried out unlawfully, orare manifestly disproportionate, unjust, discriminatory, random, or capricious.At the time of arrest, the ICCPR states, the accused has the right be informedof the reasons for the arrest and the charges.[194]Arbitrary detentions have been challenged, sometimessuccessfully, in Indian courts or at the national or state human rightscommissions.[195] TheNHRC has repeatedly ordered prosecutions and compensation in such cases andsaid: “It is important to understand that a person in custody is underthe care of the State and it is the responsibility of the State to ensureprotection of his or her basic human rights. It should not be confused as advocacyfor rights of criminals and terrorists.”[196]However, only in some cases have the courts pressed for accountability for suchviolations. And even if there is acknowledgement of violations, the governmentprefers to pay compensation only and not prosecute those responsible.[197]IV. Religious and EthnicDiscriminationIndia is a secular statethat at its highest levels has always emphasized that it does not associateterrorism with any single creed. Nevertheless, the country has sufferedfrequent episodes of communal violence, much of it involving clashes betweenMuslims and Hindus such as the riots in Gujarat state that killed up to 2,000people, most of them Muslims, in 2002.[198]Home Minister P. Chidambaram took an important step towardpreventing a backlash following the 2008 bombings by telling Parliament thatthe “government maintains zero tolerance forterrorism inspired by religion, may it be Islam or may it be Hindu,”prompting sharp objections from the opposition Hindu-nationalistBharatiya Janata Party.[199] HumanRights Watch nevertheless received numerous, credible allegations of religiousharassment and ethnic stereotyping in the aftermath of the 2008 attacks,particularly of Muslims, but also of some Hindus, by law enforcement officials,employers, landlords, and the media.A brother of Abu Bashar, named as a primary conspirator inthe 2008 bombings, was fired from both of his jobs in Mumbai once word spreadof his sibling’s alleged involvement.[200] Afather of a suspect in Gujarat said that his boss fired him the day after hisson’s arrest was announced: “When they saw my son’s name inthe paper, they gave me my dues and asked me to leave. They said, ‘Yourson is a terrorist. It is in the newspaper.’”[201]The government’s failure to address these practiceshas fueled a belief among Muslims that the authorities, despite their officialnondiscrimination policy, are all too quick to blame Muslims first.A number of Muslims described discrimination by theauthorities. One young Muslim professional whom Delhi police detained forquestioning in late 2008 because they were seeking one of his relatives saidinterrogators made repeated slights to his religion: “The very firstquestion was, ‘Why have you people become anti-national? You people arebloody Pakistanis.’”[202]Vinod Kumar Yadav, a Hindu human rights activist in UttarPradesh, said he was taken by state police to a secret detention center inLucknow in October 2008 and repeatedly beaten for two days for participating inrallies against abuse of Muslim suspects in the bombings:They were constantly saying … youare a Hindu and you are questioning the statements we make about Muslim boysand that is not good…. You should not be seen with these Muslim peopleagain, and if you don’t understand this, the future will be bleak foryou…. I was forced to lie flat, my hands and legs were wrapped many timeswith cable wire. They beat me with fists, with shoes, with bamboosticks…. At one point I lost consciousness and when I came to, they beatme again.[203]In some cases, authorities targeted entire communities. InJaipur, the government razed a migrant camp for thousands of Bengali speakersand deported many inhabitants to the border of Bangladesh after initiallyaccusing residents of involvement in the May 2008 bombing in the city.[204]Mohammad Mujib-ur-Rahman, who used to run a small teashop in Jaipur, hasseveral government-issued identity documents. Originally from West Bengal, hisfamily has lived in Jaipur for over 25 years. Yet the police demanded that heand his family go back to West Bengal state to secure evidence of their Indianorigin. “How are we expected to do this?” he said. “Ourparents are dead, and so are our immediate uncles or aunts. We haven’tseen our cousins or other relatives in decades.”[205]There were several reports of discrimination against Muslimresidents of Azamgarh, the Uttar Pradesh district where about two dozen bombingsuspects grew up. In one small but telling incident in November 2008, GovernmentRailway Police accused three Muslim teenagers who were members of a local fieldhockey team of being “terrorists.” The police seized their pocketmoney when the teenagers went to retrieve a bag they had left on a train enroute to a game and the police learned they came from Azamgarh.[206]Ehsan Ahmed, a college teacher in Azamgarh whose son,Zeeshan Ahmed, is charged in the Delhi blasts, is among many parents who areafraid to send other children out of town for further studies for fear theywould be picked up simply because of their home address.Sensationalist media labeled Azamgarh a “terroristnursery.” One prominent Indian weekly stated: “It is a place wheremartyrdom can be booked in advance—or victimhood is a constantanticipation. It is where those who hear the call of the Book buy their one-wayticket to paradise from the nearest travel agent.”[207]Discrimination on the basis of religion violates the rightsof Muslims and other minorities under India’s Constitution. The charterdeclares that all citizens have equal rights to freedom of expression, faith,worship, and opportunity. Part III of the Constitution spells out thefundamental rights to equal protection under the law, prohibition ofdiscrimination on the basis of religion or race, and the right to freelyexpress and practice religion.[208] PartIV of the Constitution also directs the state to “endeavor to eliminateinequalities in status, facilities and opportunities” of “theweaker sections of the people.”[209]Many Muslims in India view the abuses of suspects in the2008 bombings as part of a broader pattern of discrimination against the Muslimpopulation. While India is remarkably pluralistic and many Muslims have enjoyedsocial and economic success, the majority of Muslims are marginalized.According to the landmark 2006 “Sachar Committee Report” commissionedby the central government, Indian Muslims are poorer and have lower rates ofliteracy than the majority Hindu population.[210] TheSachar report recommended measures such as expanded access to education,credit, and public-sector jobs to improve socio-economic conditions for Muslimsin India, but to date, few have been implemented. “The feeling amongMuslims is that their concerns are not being heard,” said Mohamed ShafiQureshi, chairman of India’s National Commission for Minorities.[211]Reports of discrimination spread through mosques, theinternet, or religious meetings, and find currency among disaffected Muslims.This, in turn, risks increasing Muslim youths’ vulnerability torecruitment by violent militant groups. The ability of groups such as LeT torecruit in India “will be enormously linked to India’s perceivedlack of redress for Muslims,” said US-based security analyst C. ChristineFair.[212]In December 2010, Indian investigators took an importantstep towards reversing perceptions of anti-Muslim bias by charging three peopleallegedly affiliated with the Hindu extremist group Rashtiya Swayamsevak Sanghand identifying other Hindu suspects in deadly bombings at three Muslim holysites. Officials with the Central Bureau of Investigation said the suspects,including a religious leader, were behind the bombings of an important SufiMuslim shrine in Amjer, a town in Rajasthan, and of a mosque in Hyderabad, bothin 2007, as well as of a Muslim cemetery in Malegaon in 2006.[213]Investigators also charged alleged membersof Abhinav Bharat, another Hindu extremist group, in a 2008 bombing in Malegaonthat police had initially attributed to Muslims, a case detailed in the nextchapter.V. The Malegaon Blast: HinduSuspects Allege AbuseThe Maharashtra ATS initially blamed Islamist militants forthe bombing on September 29, 2008, in the predominantly Muslim city ofMalegaon, which killed seven people. However, they soon after arrested 11alleged members of the Hindu ultra-nationalist group Abhinav Bharat. Thesuspects included a decorated army colonel—the first serving officersince Indian independence to be accused in a terrorism case—as well as aretired army major, a Hindu nun and a self-styled Hindu seer.At least five of those arrested have alleged mistreatment bythe Maharashtra ATS, including unlawful detention, torture, religiousharassment, verbal abuse, and denial of access to family and lawyers.[214]Pragyan Singh Thakur, a sadhvi (Hindu nun), alleges that ATS policedetained her for nearly two weeks before announcing her arrest on October 10,2008. For at least two days of the unlawful custody, she said, she wasrepeatedly beaten and threatened to the point where she became ill, promptingthe ATS to admit her to two Mumbai hospitals for treatment—covering her facewith a black cloth to conceal her identity as they carried her in on astretcher. In a detailed affidavit filed with the criminal court in Nasik onNovember 17, 2008, Thakur alleged the police also beat her disciple until heagreed to beat her as well:Being my disciple, he exerted the very minimum of force onme. He was then pushed aside by a member of the ATS … who then himselfcommenced beating me severely with a belt on my hands, forearms, palms, feet,soles, causing me bruises, swelling and contusions in these areas…. Inaddition I was subject to vulgar abuse and obscene language by members of theATS team interrogating me…. My chastity was questioned. I was physicallyand verbally traumatized to the extent that I wanted to commit suicide.[215]Thakur said her interrogators also checked her into a hotelin Mumbai—she named the hotel and room numbers—and made her callacquaintances from two mobile phones and say that she was “hale andhearty and doing fine.” She also alleged she was denied any access to herfamily or a lawyer until she was presented to a magistrate on October 24.Thakur’s lawyer, Ganesh Sovani, said he was not allowed to meet herprivately for more than five minutes at a time until November 14.[216]According to his relatives and lawyer, Lt. Col. P.S.Purohit, a veteran of the conflict in Jammu and Kashmir, was tortured andunlawfully held for one week by members of the Maharashtra ATS before theyannounced his arrest on November 5, 2008. He alleges that his mistreatmentbegan in a safe-house in the central Maharashtra hill station of Khandala, andcontinued in Mumbai until November 18, when he was transferred to judicialcustody. Said his wife, Aparna Purohit:He was made to hang upside down, and hewas severely beaten with a thick stick on his palms and soles. He was alsobeaten with a thick stick on his back. And they had tied his hands and tied hislegs, and then they started pulling his legs apart … to more than 120degrees. He kept on telling those people that he has an implant in his knee,which was actually a battle casualty…. But they just did not, you know,they were just not ready to listen to him, and finally there was some kind ofsound in his right knee and it started swelling…. They were saying, justconfess that you have done this and we’ll stop all this.[217]After repeated requests from Purohit’s lawyer, a courtordered an independent medical examination, which found that Purohit hadsuffered damage to his right knee and ligament. Purohit did not tell a courtabout the torture until November 21 because his interrogators threatened to“do certain things” to his female relatives and kill him in a fake“encounter,” his wife said. If police were willing to torturesomeone of her husband’s rank, Aparna Purohit asked, “What moregrave things could they do with the commoner? They could just pick up anyone onthe street, torture them and get away with it.”[218]Ret. Army Maj. Ramesh Upadhyay also alleged he wasunlawfully detained for four days before the ATS announced his arrest onOctober 28, 2008. During that time, he said, he was extensively tortured.“The marks of ATS beating are still fresh on my body,” Upadhyaytold a magistrate in a Nasik court the day after his arrest.[219]The magistrate transferred Upadhyay and four other suspects to judicial custodybut did not order an independent investigation into the allegations.Upadhyay’s son, Vishay Upadhyay, said he saw marks of abuse when policefinally allowed him to visit in a Mumbai lockup one week later:He was looking very weak and had darkcircles around the eyes and was sweating quite a lot…. He had lost a lotof weight… You could see marks on his body that he had beentortured—black marks on his hands.[220]Another suspect, Dayanand Pandey, who is a self-styled shankaracharya—arevered Hindu theologian—alleged in an open letter to followers that ATSpolice both tortured him and subjected him to religious harassment after he wasarrested in the state of Uttar Pradesh and sent to Mumbai on November 13, 2008.My saffron robes were removed, I wasstripped naked and wet in an air-conditioned room for three days and givenelectric shocks…. [My] religious books ... were trampled upon and thrownin a gutter. Three men would stand upon my legs and hit me with belts on thesoles of my feet, until I fell unconscious. Meat was pushed into my mouth and Iwas told that it was cow-flesh [beef]. I was forced to read certain scripts,and then my voice dubbed, and audio-video tapes produced. I was threatened thatpornographic CDs would be made about me.[221]The ATS in November 2008 filed charges against the Malegaonsuspects under the Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act (MCOCA) and theircases were sent to a special court in Mumbai. Among other measures thatencourage abuse, MCOCA allows suspects to be temporarily returned to policecustody even after they have been moved to a judicially supervised jail.Suspect Ajay Rahirkar, whom the ATS unlawfully detained for eight days beforehe was produced in Nasik court on November 2, 2008, was returned to the ATS forthree days on December 17, 2008. During those three days, “the worstpressure was placed on him,” according to a relative. “Theythreatened Ajay that they would beat his brother and father in front ofhim.”[222]As of this writing, the 11 Malegaon bombing suspects werebeing held without bail pending appeal of the MCOCA charges before the SupremeCourt.[223]VI. Attacks on LawyersLawyers who represent Muslims suspected of terrorism-relatedcrimes operate in a climate of overt hostility. In the wake of the 2008attacks, at least seven bar associations in four states issued official orunofficial resolutions instructing members not to represent terrorism suspects.They include the state bar association of Rajasthan, the local bar associationsof Lucknow and Faizabad in the state of Uttar Pradesh, and Bhopal in the stateof Madhya Pradesh. They also include the associations of Nagpur and Pune, aswell as the prestigious Mumbai Metropolitan Magistrate Court Bar Association,all in Maharashtra state.[224]In December 2010, the Supreme Court criticized barassociations for passing resolutions forbidding the defense of certain persons,stating: “The action of any bar association in passing such a resolutionthat none of its members will appear for a particular accused, whether on theground that he is a policeman or that he is a suspected terrorist, rapist, massmurderer … is against all norms of the Constitution, the statute andprofessional ethics.”[225]Mumbai lawyer Shahid Azmi was among the few lawyers willingto defend terrorism suspects in Maharashtra. A witness to violent anti-Muslimriots as a teenager in 1992, Azmi was arrested after joining a Kashmirimilitant group and was sentenced to five years in prison. In June 2009 he toldHuman Rights Watch that his experience with the justice system and those ofmany others he met while in prison—all convicted under the abusive andnow-defunct Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act—inspiredhim to defend persons charged with acts of terrorism.[226]Azmi was defending several of the 2008 terrorism suspects,including an Indian national charged in connection with the Mumbai attack, whenhe was killed in February 2010.[227]Three gunmen posing as prospective clientsentered his office one evening and shot five rounds at him from point-blankrange. Azmi told Human Rights Watch that he had been receiving threateningphone calls.[228] Threemen were arrested and charged with Azmi’s murder.[229]Police subsequently said the gunmen were contract killers for a Hindu gangsuspected of links to the killings of other Muslims and that Azmi was targetedbecause he had been defending two members of a rival Muslim gang.[230]In other areas of the country, at least eight lawyers whodefied bans on defending Muslim terrorism suspects were physically attacked byother lawyers affiliated with nationalist Hindu parties, threatened, orpublicly insulted. In most cases, the authorities have taken little if anyaction against those responsible.[231]In September 2010, the Pune Bar Association banned membersfrom defending two Muslim men accused of involvement in the Pune attack sevenmonths earlier. Bar association members also chanted slogans at one courthearing to protest the suspects’ right to counsel.[232]One lawyer, Sushil Mancharkar, resigned from the case after two dozen activistsfrom the nationalist BJP demonstrated outside his home, demanding he step down.[233]Another lawyer, A. Rehman, said he was forced to resign as the state minorityleader for the Nationalist Congress Party, which positions itself as a secularparty, for refusing to remove himself from the case.[234]While most of the IM suspects eventually obtained counsel,Indian human rights groups and defense attorneys told Human Rights Watch thatthe intimidation tactics have greatly reduced the pool of lawyers willing todefend Muslim terrorism suspects more generally. “Lawyers are reluctantto represent terrorist suspects,” said retired Gujarat High Court JudgeRamesh Mehta. “There is a kind of peer pressure to not defend them.”[235]It is also clear that defending a terrorism suspect of anyethnicity is unpopular in India. Lawyers for the 11 Hindus charged in theMalegaon bombing of 2008 also alleged that they received death threats.[236]Many bar associations qualified the bans by saying they onlyapplied in cases with “incontrovertible evidence” ofguilt—when the legal process itself is the mechanism for determiningguilt, and where proceedings that violated a defendant’s right to counselcannot fairly determine guilt.[237] Totheir credit, the Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh state bar councils denouncedthe bans. Even in those two states, however, at least three lawyers wereassaulted in 2008 for defending terrorism suspects.In Uttar Pradesh, veteran defense attorney Mohammad Shuaibof Lucknow alleged that Hindu lawyers repeatedly beat and harassed him insidecourthouses in the cities of Faizabad, Barananki, and Lucknow—once soseverely that he was sent to a hospital emergency room.[238]Shuaib filed detailed complaints with local police andnumerous other authorities. He said the desk office at the police stationrefused to accept his complaint, an FIR. The refusal of police to registerlawyers’ complaints of mistreatment violates India’s Code ofCriminal Procedure.[239]The police may decline to investigate claimsmade in an FIR if they are “not of a serious nature” or lack“sufficient ground” for investigating, but they have a documentedrecord of abusing that right.[240]Numerous eyewitnesses, including law enforcement officials, could providegrounds for investigations into the refusal to issue FIRs.Police also refused to accept an FIR from Lucknow attorneyZamal Ahmed, who alleged that on June 6, 2008, two lawyers in Faizabad,including the secretary of the Faizabad Bar Association, pushed him and threatenedhim with “dire consequences” if he did not withdraw as counsel fora Muslim terrorism suspect.[241]In the state of Madhya Pradesh, lawyer Noor Mohammad said hewas attacked on April 11, 2008, for defying a Dhar Bar Association ban onmembers defending terrorism suspects.[242]Police allegedly whisked Mohammad away in avan, but refused to release him until he signed a written statement that he didnot wish to lodge an FIR and that he had not sustained any injuries.[243]On October 14, 2008, the Human Rights Law Network, aDelhi-based nongovernmental organization, filed a plea with the Supreme Courtof India calling on the court to initiate contempt proceedings againstadvocates who prevent terrorism suspects from receiving legal aid.[244]The court rejected the plea, stating that the lawyers were governed by the BarCouncil of India alone and that the court did not have jurisdiction over thematter.[245]Shuaib stopped pressing for action against his attackers.“Eventually the cases would have to go before the same courts thatalready have done nothing,” he told Human Rights Watch. “What wouldbe the point?”[246]Some lawyers under attack have said they did not even wantto take the cases but did so simply to show that India is capable of upholdingthe rule of law even in circumstances of remarkable duress.Threatsagainst the Mumbai Gunman’s DefendersAfter the attack on Mumbai in November 2008, theinfluential Mumbai Metropolitan Magistrate Court Bar Association issued anedict against any of its 1,000 members representing the sole suspectapprehended, Pakistani native Ajmal Kasab, or any Indians charged asaccomplices.Kasab is “not thesame as other criminals arrested,” said Bar Association presidentRohini Wagh. “His main aim was an attack on our city, ourcountry.” Wagh justified the ban by noting the two-and-a-half day siegewas among the most publicly documented attacks in history, with numerouseyewitnesses to Kasab’s actions. “There is no doubt about what hedid,” Wagh argued. “The whole world was watching it [live ontelevision] for 60 hours.”[247]Following the BarAssociation ban, only one of 17 eligible pro bono lawyers, Anjali Waghmare,volunteered to represent Kasab. On the night of Waghmare’s appointmenton March 30, 2009, more than 200 people descended on her Mumbai home,throwing stones and shouting obscenities until she agreed to sign a notewithdrawing from Kasab’s case. “What I am doing is following thecourt’s orders and the mandate of law. How can a mob decide whether itis right or wrong?” a visibly upset Waghmare said the next day.[248]The judge presiding over Kasab’s trial gave Waghmarespecial protection and ordered an investigation into the incident that led toseveral arrests for contempt of court. As of this writing, however, none ofthe attackers had been prosecuted. At the judge’s urging, Waghmare alsoagreed to stay on the case but had to step down two weeks later because of anunrelated conflict of interest. Many of the protesters outsideWaghmare’s house were members of the Hindu political party Shiv Sena.[249]Some Islamic organizations and leaders condemned attorneysfor representing Muslim terrorism suspects as well. Abbas Kazmi, a prominentMuslim attorney, was expelled as a trustee from a prominent Islamic athleticfoundation two weeks after he agreed on April 16, 2009, to replace Waghmareas Kasab’s counsel. The Mumbai-based foundation, Islam Gymkhana, saidit took the action because defending a terrorism suspect “is againstthe essence of Islam.”[250]Kazmi also said he received anonymous hatemail containing messages such as, “You should be hanged along withKasab.”[251]The judge removed Kazmi as Kasab’s lawyer inNovember 2009, several months into the trial, in a dispute over the witnesslist. The judge then appointed Kazmi’s junior to defend Kasab.After he was forced to step down, Kazmi said prosecutor UjjwalNikamhad publicly denigrated him during court proceedings, calling him“Abu Abbas”—the name of the Palestinian mastermind of thedeadly 1985 hijacking of the cruise ship Achille Lauro—and“the terrorist’s lawyer.”[252]Nikam said he made the comments “in a lighter vein.”[253]In July 2010, Kasab’s appellate lawyer, Amin Solkar,received a text message on his cellphone threatening “direconsequences” if he did not immediately withdraw from the case. Statepolice authorities, to their credit, provided Solkar with a security escort.[254]VII. Failure of AccountabilityIndia rightly takes great pride in its democraticinstitutions, particularly its courts and the special commissions that it hasestablished to protect human rights. Unfortunately, these institutions oftenfail in ensuring accountability for human rights abuses. In many instances,this pattern continued in the cases of the 2008 bombing suspects. All toooften, magistrates accept police denials of mistreatment rather than orderindependent investigations of suspects’ allegations. Moreover, Indiacontinues to provide effective immunity from prosecution to its security forcesand other public officials. The army and other special forces, in particular,remain almost completely above the law. Human Rights Watch has repeatedlycalled upon India to remove all immunity clauses in Indian law, so thatofficials and police responsible for abuses or failing to discharge theirduties to protect vulnerable persons can be appropriately prosecuted andpunished.The Indian government often refers to institutions such asthe national and state human rights commissions as ensuring the protection ofhuman rights. However, these institutions are weak, under-staffed, and oftenignored. The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) itself has complainedabout restrictions that prevent it from performing a meaningful role inaddressing impunity. The state human rights commissions are invariably poorlyfunded and stacked with political appointees, making them ineffective inaddressing ongoing human rights violations. Other constitutional bodies such asthe National Commission for Minorities or the commissions to protect Dalits(so-called “untouchables”), women, or other vulnerable groups havesometimes shown similar indifference or even negligence in fulfilling theirmandates to investigate credible accounts of torture, unlawful detention, anddeaths in police custody. And even when they find mistreatment, they are often reluctantto demand prosecution of police or other public officials who may havecommitted the abuses.Indifferent or Biased CourtsIndia’s strong and independent judiciary is theultimate authority in the protection of human rights. However, defendants andtheir lawyers in the 2008 cases have repeatedly accused magistrates of failingto investigate police torture and other abuse, or to reflect on whetherdetainees might be too scared to voice complaints of mistreatment because theywould be remanded to the very police committing the acts.In Gujarat, dozens of suspects filed a petition in February2010 in India’s Supreme Court seeking transfer of their trial to anotherstate, alleging “bias by the police as well as the judicialmachinery.” Their allegations against judges include turning “ablind eye to allegations of torture,” delaying appointment of pro bonodefense counsel, withholding documents filed by the prosecution from thedefense, and supplying out-of-state defendants with charge sheets written onlyin Gujarati though it is a language they could not read. The petition alsonotes that one judge refused to recuse herself from a case related to thebombings; a defense lawyer filed a recusal motion after he accidentally spottedone investigating officer in the case meeting privately with the judge.[255]The Supreme Court stayed the trial andordered a response from Gujarat state authorities but had not ruled on thepetition as of this writing.Judges, particularly at the lower-court, or magisterial, level,seem to be particularly prone to lenience with the police when dealing with theso-called “anti-national” elements. “The degree ofimpartiality in the higher courts is quite good but at the lower-level courtsit is quite low” in such cases, R.K. Shah, a retired state prosecutor whonow serves as a special prosecutor in Ahmedabad, told Human Rights Watch.[256]Magistrates have shown a striking willingness to extendpolice custody well beyond the 15-day limit that is strictly defined underIndian law.[257] In somecases, magistrates have granted remand applications even if the suspects ortheir lawyers complained that the defendants had been abused in the policelockups to which they were being returned. For example, a Delhi magistrate onOctober 16, 2009, granted remand for the first five suspects in the Delhiblasts even after he received a defense petition alleging police abuse of oneof the accused, Saqib Nisar. The petition said Nisar’s father had visitedhis son in the Delhi Police Special Cell lockup three days earlier and sawmarks showing he had been “beaten upon the face and other parts of thebody.”[258]Later that month, a Delhi magistrate approved the transferof the same five suspects to Gujarat police custody despite having received adefense petition alleging that one of the accused had been visited andthreatened by a Gujarati police investigator inside the Delhi Special Celllockup. If suspect Mohammad Shakeel did not confess, the Gujarat policeinvestigator warned, once he was sent to Gujarat: “We will crush yourbones.”[259] Amagistrate turned them over to the custody of the Gujarat Police Crime Branchanyway.[260]On two occasions, a Delhi magistrate granted remand based onpolice departments’ generalized, oral arguments while failing to recordin writing his reasons for doing so. Defense attorneys showed Human RightsWatch other successful written police applications for remand that containedonly general statements that the investigating officers hoped to obtain“further information.”[261]The Code of Criminal Procedure states that amagistrate must record his or her reasons for authorizing police detention.[262]The Delhi High Court rules state that amagistrate must provide the accused and his or her counsel the opportunity tooffer objections to a grant of police remand.[263]Meaningful objections cannot be offered if the accused and defense counsel arenot provided with the prosecution’s application stating the grounds onwhich remand is sought.Magistrates and higher-court judges also appeareduninterested in pursuing allegations of mistreatment even if they were nolonger handling requests for remands to police lockups. A lawyer who in January2009 was representing a client in a Gujarat court described the attitude of onemagistrate at a hearing in Ahmedabad for several bombing suspects:They were all tied together with a ropelike you tie a herd of buffalo. They complained of mistreatment includingbeatings and being denied medical care. The magistrate said, “I am nothere to receive these complaints. This is only a production hearing.”[264]In Mumbai, one defense lawyer said a judge had failed toprovide him with a copy of a court-ordered medical report on a suspect’sallegation in October 2008 that police damaged his hearing during a beating.[265]Another Mumbai lawyer complained of a judge meeting with police and a clientwho was a bombing suspect at his house in late 2008, without notifying defensecounsel.[266]Magistrates and judges in some states also refused pleas byout-of-state suspects for translations of charge sheets and other courtdocuments, even though the documents were in local languages such as Gujaratior Marathi that they did not understand. Instead, the judicial authoritiesinstructed defense counsel to explain the charges to their clients. In some cases,the charge sheets were 60,000 pages.“Just translating and printing those charge sheets isa cost most defendants cannot afford,” said Ahmedabad defense lawyer I.M.Munshi.[267] WhileIndian law does not specifically say that charge sheets must be in a languagethe suspect can read, it does say the suspect must understand the evidenceagainst him.[268]Conduct in the Kasab TrialThe Indian government vowed to make the trial of Pakistaninational Ajmal Kasab, the surviving gunman from the Mumbai attacks, a showcaseof due process. On the first anniversary of the attacks, as some Hinduextremist leaders continued to call for Kasab to be hanged without trial,Home Minister P. Chidambaram said he was “proud of the fact that we area country wedded to the rule of law, that we do not try Kasab in a kangaroocourt and hang him overnight, like they do it in some other countries.”[269]The trial surpassed the expectations of many critics, whoexpected summary proceedings that blatantly flouted due process. The triallasted just over a year. Previous Indian counterterrorism prosecutions, suchas those against suspects in a series of coordinated bombings in Mumbai in1993, for example, had lasted more than 15 years. Noteworthy actions includedJudge M. L. Tahaliyani’s acquittal of two Indian men charged asco-conspirators; the evidence against them was weak but there had beenconsiderable public pressure to convict them. Using unusually blunt language,the judge labeled the police evidence against the co-defendants “unreliable.”[270]The prosecution has appealed the two acquittals.However, there havebeen allegations of shortcomings in some rulings in the trial. In onetroubling example, Kasab claimed in April 2009 at the start of the trial thathe was tortured into making his initial confession while in police custody.(This was one of several contradictory statements that Kasab made during thetrial on the issue of his guilt. Three months after alleging he had beentortured into confessing, Kasab gave the court an apparently voluntaryconfession of guilt, then in December 2009 he retracted it again.) HumanRights Watch is not in a position to gauge the veracity of Kasab’sallegations of torture.[271] However, given India’s history ofcustodial abuse, we are concerned that Judge Tahaliyani does not appear tohave ordered an investigation of these claims.[272]Judge Tahaliyani alsodid not act on complaints from the two Indian co-defendants that they weresubjected to torture while in the custody of Maharashtra Crime Branch police.When co-defendant Sabauddin Ahmed alleged that he was repeatedly administeredelectric shocks to his ears and genitals, Judge Tahaliyani told the accusedhe should have complained to a Mumbai magistrate at the time the allegedabuse occurred, according to his defense lawyer.  Ahmed’s reply,the lawyer said, was: “How could I complain to the magistrate when Iwas being returned to the custody of the same police who tortured me?”[273]Kasab’s lead lawyer, Abbas Kazmi, complained thatthe judge did not permit him to speak with Kasab in a private setting andinstead allowed only 10- to 15-minute consultations in the courtroom, withguards out of earshot but standing close by.[274]In September 2010, the High Court also struck down a motion by Kasab’sappeals lawyer to speak privately with his client, saying that Kasab’ssecurity could not be placed at risk.Kazmi also complained that Judge Tahaliyani did not givehim sufficient time to prepare his client’s defense. Kazmi wasappointed the day before the trial began; the judge rejected his request fora four-week adjournment to read the 11,000-page charge sheet and instead gavehim eight days. International law stipulates that an accused must haveadequate time to prepare his or her defense and to communicate with counsel.[275]National Human Rights CommissionIndia’s National Human Rights Commission (NHRC)responded weakly to the mistreatment of 2008 bombing suspects. The commissionwas established in 1993 to investigate allegations of human rights violationsand recommend remedial action.[276] Itcannot, however, independently investigate allegations of abuse by federalforces including the army and paramilitary police. The NHRC is often the onlyrecourse to victims of abuse, given the pervasive and chronic failure of thestate authorities and the courts to provide redress.In its early days, the NHRC made significant interventionsin highly controversial cases. But Human Rights Watch found that the commissiondid little in response to the numerous complaints filed by victims of tortureand other ill-treatment stemming from investigations into the 2008 bombings. Aparticularly troubling example is the commission’s failure to conduct anindependent investigation of the suspicious killings of two bombing suspectsand one police inspector in a Delhi Special Cell police raid known as the BatlaHouse encounter (described in Chapter II, “Torture and OtherIll-Treatment of Terrorism Suspects”).Complainants in several other cases that did not involvefatalities received even less attention from the NHRC. For example, thecommission refused to investigate serious allegations by Abu Zafar, a brotherof one of the key bombing suspects, that he was abducted, unlawfully detained,and threatened by Gujarat state police in January 2009.[277]“The complaint is notentertainable,” the NHRC responded, without elaborating or interviewingZafar. “Hence, no action is called for and file closed.”[278]One prominent human rights activist and several relatives of suspects fromAzamgarh said that they were still awaiting responses to their complaints tothe NHRC.[279]In an interview with Human Rights Watch, Dr. Y.S.R. Murthy,who at the time was the NHRC’s policy research director, called thecriticism of its responses to the Batla House encounter and to other bombing-relatedcomplaints “unfair.” He said that instead of bending to politicalpressure, “we have taken positions which are not welcomed by thegovernment,” such as issuing reports on abusive conduct by police andpublic officials.[280] Murthysaid that all complaints to the commission were fed into a database thatautomatically generated acknowledgements, and that the postal system wasresponsible for any failure of delivery.[281]He added that the status of each complaintcould be checked on the NHRC website though only if the complaint has beenacknowledged and allotted a case number.Justice J.S. Verma, who chaired the NHRC in 2000-2003, notedthat the commission has significant investigatory powers at its disposal.“The problem is not the commission’s mandate but how it appliesit,” Verma told Human Rights Watch. As chairman, Verma issued scathingreports on controversial issues such as state complicity in communal riots inGujarat, abusive national counterterrorism laws and police encounters.[282]Critics say that the commissionshies from tackling sensitive issues because its members are politicalappointees who often are not known for their human rights activism.[283] In a 2009 meeting with Human Rights Watch, G.P.Mathur, a retired Supreme Court justice and then acting chairperson of theNHRC, steadfastly defended the government’s human rights record along thelines of a government spokesman instead of an impartial rights monitor. The government appointed a newchairperson, former chief justice of India’s Supreme Court, K.G.Balakrishnan, in June 2010. It is as yet unclear whether the new chairpersonwill take a more proactive role in investigating allegations of human rightsviolations in politically charged cases.By failing to exercising its powers—howeverlimited—to the fullest, the NHRC risks alienating marginalized citizenseven further. When the commission released its report on the Batla Houseencounter, protesters burned copies outside its headquarters in central Delhiand near Batla House.[284]The NHRC inaction is also of concern because othergovernment-appointed panels look to it to take the lead on human rightsprotections. Asked why the National Commission for Minorities (NCM) did notinvestigate the Muslim bombing suspects’ allegations of abuse, Zoya Hasan,a prominent intellectual who was at the time an NCM member, replied:“There is a general perception” that “the NHRC is theappropriate body for such complaints.”[285]The NCM is, however, also empowered toinvestigate both specific complaints and any issue of discrimination, and torecommend remedial action to state and central government.[286]VIII. Draconian CounterterrorismLawsSeveral federal and state laws facilitate abuses ofcounterterrorism suspects in India. Of particular concern are amendments to thefederal Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA), the federal NationalInvestigation Agency Act (NIAA), and the state of Maharashtra Control ofOrganized Crime Act (MCOCA).Conflicting resolutionsfrom the United Nations Security Council have provided political cover forIndia’s passage of such laws. Within weeks of the September 11 attacks inthe United States, the Security Council adopted Resolution 1373, which wassponsored by the United States and requires all UN memberstates—including India—to take tough action to prevent and counterterror attacks. The resolution does not require states to affirmatively heedhuman rights obligations.[287]Nor does it define terrorism or terrorist acts,leaving each state to create its own definition. Indian politicians and mediahave frequently cited Resolution 1373 to justify abusive counterterrorism laws,with some going as far as to say that failing to enact them would constitute a“breach” of their country’s international obligations.[288]Subsequent Security Council resolutions have directed statesto ensure that counterterrorism measures comply with international human rightslaw.[289] Amongthe most important of these, Resolution 1456 of January 20, 2003, calls onstates to “ensure that any measure taken to combat terrorism comply withall their obligations under international law... in particular internationalhuman rights, refugee, and humanitarian law.”[290]However, neither the Security Council northe Counter-Terrorism Committee it established to monitor compliance with Resolution1373 has made human rights concerns a sufficient priority.[291]In his final report of October 2010, Martin Scheinin, the UNSpecial Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights andfundamental freedoms while countering terrorism, said that the counterterrorismregime created by the UN Security Council exceeds the scope of its powers andin some cases “continues to pose risks to the protection of a number ofinternational human rights standards.” [292]India now has the potential to play an important role inreforming UN counterterrorism mandates to ensure their compliance with humanrights standards both at home and abroad. In January 2011, India became atwo-year member of the UN Security Council and was appointed to chair thecouncil’s Counter-Terrorism Committee for one year.[293]India should at the same time reform its counterterrorismlaws at home. Like all governments, India has a responsibility to protect itspopulation from terrorist attacks. But it has sought to do so by resuscitatingcounterterrorism laws that previously brought widespread condemnation forviolating or facilitating the violation of basic human rights, including theinternationally protected rights to be free from extrajudicial execution,torture, and arbitrary detention. Moreover, employing such abusive measuresalienates communities that feel they are being targeted, and can serve as arecruitment tool for militant groups.MaharashtraOrganized Crime LawAt least 21 Muslims accused in the 2008 bombings and the 11Hindus accused in the 2008 Malegaon bombing have been charged under theMaharashtra Control of Organized Crime Act (MCOCA) of 1999, India’s mostdraconian counterterrorism law.[294]MCOCA allows suspects to be detained without charge for 90days with a possible 90-day extension, for a total of 180 days. Up to 30 daysof that period can be in police custody.[295] Theseperiods double the excessive periods allowed under the India Code of CriminalProcedure, which permits pre-charge detention for up to 90 days, of which up to15 days may be in police custody. While international law provides only thatsuspects must be charged “promptly,” several of the 2008 bombingsuspects were held for 70 to 90 days. The detention periods in both MCOCA andthe Indian criminal code contravene the right of detained suspects under theInternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) to be“promptly” informed of the charges against them.[296]MCOCA also allows the admissibility in court of confessionsobtained in police custody without the presence of a lawyer[297]—apractice widely believed to encourage torture in order to obtain confessions.At least four IM suspects charged under MCOCA have publicly retracted theirconfessions to police, claiming their statements were obtained through tortureor other coercion. Amin Solkar, a Mumbai defense attorney, said the signs ofabuse were evident when he first visited some of those suspects several daysafter their arrests. “I could see the marks on them—abrasions onthe arms and back,” Solkar said. “One of them told me he lost hishearing after he was stripped naked, tied to a stick, and beaten.”[298]Sadiq Sheikh, another suspect held by the Maharashtra ATS,was allegedly tortured while being arbitrarily detained for one week before hisarrest was formally announced in September 2008, relatives said. Sheikh’sbrother said that when he finally visited the suspect two weeks after he waspicked up, “A chunk of his hair was missing and there was a scratch onhis chest. We asked the police what happened and they said, ‘Oh, he mustbe shedding.’”[299]One month later, his relatives noticed hewas limping. “We asked, ‘What is the problem with your leg? Hassomeone assaulted you?’” his sister-in-law recalled. “Hereplied, ‘What else can you expect?’”[300]As with all suspects charged under MCOCA, the defendantsheld in Maharashtra for the 2008 bombings will be tried in special courts,where judges have broad discretion to use secret witnesses, hold in camera (closed)proceedings, and create a presumption of guilt for terrorism offenses ifcertain kinds of inculpatory evidence are found. The judge is also allowed todeny bail in almost all circumstances. Any offense that results in aperson’s death can result in a death sentence.[301]Leading Indian humanrights lawyers have challenged MCOCA’s application in terrorism cases.They note that in India states have control over law and order, butIndia’s Constitution grants the central government power over securitymatters. They contend that because MCOCA authorizes the state to prosecute acts“promoting insurgency”[302] and is being used to try terrorism suspects, itis unconstitutional. Furthermore, the Indian government in 2004 added a similarprovision to prosecute insurgency in the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA) and became the national lawused to prosecute terror suspects. The Constitution provides that in anyconflict between a state law and a central law, the central law prevails.[303]Critics note that MCOCA was not even used in terrorismprosecutions until 2006, two years after the central government repealed thenational Prevention of Terrorism Act (POTA). MCOCA contains many of theprovisions of the repealed POTA, such as the admissibility of a confession madeto a police officer as evidence. “When POTA was repealed, Maharashtrafound it had no tough law to help investigate terrorists, so it turned toMCOCA,” said Mahesh Jethmalani, a prominent Mumbai attorney who unsuccessfully challenged the use of MCOCA toprosecute the Hindu suspects in the 2008 bombing in Malegaon.[304]Jethmalani, who ran for political office in 2009 on a tough law-and-orderplatform, said he opposes MCOCA not because it is harsh but because it givesstates unconstitutional authority. “My heart says ‘yes’ butthe lawyer in me says ‘it is inapplicable,’” he said. Even aveteran MCOCA special prosecutor who approves of tough counterterrorism lawstold us that the act was wrongly applied in terrorism cases. “This is astate organized crime law. It has no place in terrorism cases, which is the jurisdictionof the center [national government],” the prosecutor said.[305]Several other Indianstates, particularly Gujarat, sought to enact MCOCA-style laws after the 2008bombings and the November 26 attack in Mumbai. Their efforts to date have beenthwarted by the central government, which must approve these laws before theycan become active.Lawsof 2008: Repeating Past AbusesIn the month after the November 2008 attack on Mumbai, theIndian Parliament approved two new counterterrorism measures: amendments toUAPA and to the National Investigation Agency Act (NIAA), which creates afederal bureau to probe national security threats. The laws were passed afterless than two days of parliamentary debate, with no significant opportunity forinput from the public or civil society groups. The new measures reinstateprovisions from two previous counterterrorism laws that had been allowed tolapse or had been repealed following widespread criticism that they facilitatedarbitrary arrest, incommunicado detention and torture.Among other concerns, thenew laws contain a vague and overbroad definition of terrorism, authorizewarrantless search and seizure with few safeguards, and double periods ofpre-charge detention to 180 days, of which 30 days may be in police custody.They also contain measures identical to those of MCOCA, described above, suchas the creation of special courts with broad discretion to hold in camera(closed) hearings, use secret witnesses, and create a presumption of guilt ininstances where certain kinds of inculpatory evidence are found. The 2008federal laws cannot be fully applied to most of the 2008 bombing suspectsbecause they were enacted after those men were arrested, and would thus be expost facto legislation, prohibited under Indian and international law. However,the suspects still are subject to many of UAPA’s pre-existing provisionsthat run counter to international legal protections.[306]Amendmentsto the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) ActMany of the 2008 amendments to the Unlawful Activities(Prevention) Act of 1967 (UAPA) were culled from two previous laws thatresulted in widespread violations of international human rights standards: theTerrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act of 1985 (TADA), and thePrevention of Terrorism Act of 2002 (POTA).[307]TADA, which was passed against the backdrop of a Sikhseparatist movement, resulted in tens of thousands of politically motivateddetentions before it was repealed in 1995. It was used to target Sikhs,Muslims, Dalits, trade unionists, and political opponents.[308]The law allowed detention without formal charge for up to one year, the use ofsecret witnesses and closed trials, and confessions to a police officer to beadmissible in court.[309]Allegations were widespread that the law encouraged police to routinely usetorture to obtain confessions or plant evidence as a means of detainingtargeted groups or individuals.[310]Although the conviction rate under TADA was less than onepercent, cases initiated while it was in force continue to hold legal validity.The Indian government enacted POTA in the wake of theSeptember 11, 2001, attacks in the United States, and an attack onIndia’s Parliament three months later that is attributed to thePakistan-based LeT and Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeT). POTA contained the same abusiveprovisions as TADA but limited detention without charge to six months. Criticsallege that POTA was similarly used to harass political opponents and targettribal groups, religious and ethnic minorities, and Dalits. In the state ofGujarat, POTA disproportionately subjected hundreds of Muslims to lengthydetentions after a mob attack on a train led to Hindu-Muslim riots that killedabout 2,000 people—mostly Muslims—in 2002. Some Muslims alsoaccused police of threatening to charge them under POTA if they testified abouthaving witnessed attacks by Hindus or police at the time.[311]In southern Tamil Nadu state, Indian authorities used POTAto detain political leaders including MP V. Gopalswamy, popularly known asVaiko, for their alleged support of the armed separatist Liberation Tigers ofTamil Eelam in Sri Lanka. Vaiko remained in detention for over a year, until hewas released on bail. POTA charges against him were dropped in August 2004 whena review committee said that speeches supporting a banned group did not amountto terrorism.[312]The Indian Parliamentrepealed POTA following legal challenges in 2004, but it immediately tuckedsome of its controversial counterterrorism provisions into UAPA, and addedseveral others to UAPA in response to the 2008 bombings and the November 2008attack in Mumbai. “They brought back the unjust provisions of POTA andTADA through the back door,” said Ravi Nair, executive director of theDelhi-based South Asia Human Rights Documentation Centre. Even POTA and TADAincluded some safeguards such as a review committee or sunset provisions, Nairnoted, but under the 2008 amendments to UAPA, “all that is gone.”[313]In one important exception, the Indian governmentcommendably resisted political pressure to restore the repealed POTA clauseallowing confessions obtained in police custody, without the presence of alawyer, to be used as evidence.Among many causes forconcern, the amended UAPA includes a vague and overly broad definition ofterrorism, which does not meet the criteria of the UN special rapporteur onhuman rights.[314] The UAPA definition includes acts “likelyto threaten the unity, integrity, security or sovereignty of India or withintent to strike terror or likely to strike terror in the people … by anymeans of whatever nature to cause or likely to cause” death or injury topersons, damage to property, or “the disruption of any supplies orservices essential to the life of the community in or in any foreign country.”[315] This definition can encompass non-violent formsof political protest. It gives authorities the ability to classify politicalopponents and a broad range of oppositional movements arising from regional,ethnic, or religious grievances, as “terrorist.”The breadth of the definition is all the more troubling whenpaired with UAPA’s expanded powers to ban organizations or prosecutetheir members. UAPA had already empowered the government to outlaw a group as a“terrorist organization,” a “terrorist gang,” or an“unlawful association.” The 2008 amendments broadened those powersby increasing the number of criminal offenses linked to association with ormembership in a terrorist organization or gang.UAPA defines terrorist organizations or groups using thesame vaguely worded definition of “terrorism” discussed above.[316]Its definition of the “unlawfulactivity” that can trigger a ban on an association is similarly vague.[317]The law allows a ban on a group that the government declaresto be a “terrorist organization,” a “terrorist gang,”or an “unlawful association” to take immediate effect.[318]Bans on groups that the government designates as “terroristorganizations” are permanent and are not subject to judicial review.[319]Bans on “unlawful associations” are subject to judicial review and mustbe renewed every two years.[320]Defense lawyers for SIMI, which was banned as an “unlawfulassociation” immediately after the September 11 attacks in the US, havemade strong arguments that the government reissues the ban every two yearswithout credible evidence of new unlawful activity.[321]International law guarantees the right to form associations,and any restrictions placed on that right must be “necessary in ademocratic society for national security or public safety, public order…the protection of public health or morals or the protection of the rights andfreedoms of others,” and be the least restrictive possible.[322]Restrictions on the right to freedom ofassociation may not discriminate on the basis of religion, ethnicity, politicalopinion, or other prescribed status.[323]State police have used the UAPA bans on groups to round upthe same suspects after every terrorism incident simply because they had beenpreviously charged—but not convicted—of membership in an unlawfulorganization.[324] In thestate of Rajasthan, for example, police have been holding 13 Muslim men assuspects in the Jaipur bombings since August 2008 even though the primarycharge against them is membership in SIMI. The SIMI suspects are also chargedwith conspiracy against the nation for allegedly providing shelter to theprimary suspects in the bombings, but the alleged SIMI members claim they didnot know of any bombing plot and in some cases did not even know the suspects.One alleged SIMI member’s link to a primary bombing suspect was that hewas his landlord.[325]UAPA allows that landlord, if convicted, to be sentenced tolife in prison: membership in a banned group, gang, or organization can resultin life sentences if that group is “involved” in a terrorist act,even if the member had no involvement in the act in question.[326]Similarly, harboring a terrorist is punishable by prisonterms ranging from three years to life, and conspiracy in a planned or executedterrorist act—another offense with which many of the 2008 bomb blastsuspects are charged—is five years to life.[327]The sentences make almost no distinction between various levels of knowledge orcomplicity. “If a court finds that a fellow stays overnight at your houseand you had an inkling of what he is up to, you could get life, just like themastermind,” said Nitya Ramakrishnan, a prominent Indian defense attorneywho filed appeals to POTA. “It is totally up to judicial discretion andjudicial discretion is constantly getting hardened.”[328]The 2008 UAPA amendments also grant security forces sweepingpowers that are not authorized under the Indian criminal code, significantlyraising the risk of arbitrary detentions such as those that occurred under TADAand POTA. Police may conduct arrests, searches, and seizures based merely on their“personal knowledge” that an offense was committed under UAPA, anda superintendent of police can authorize an officer to compel information fromthird parties on the same grounds. Failure to comply is punishable by up tothree years of imprisonment.”[329]The UAPA amendments also increase the risk of arbitrarydetention, custodial abuse, and violation of basic due-process rights byallowing courts to double the maximum period of detention without charge forterrorism suspects.A judge can extend pre-charge detention from the 90 daysallowed under the Indian criminal code to 180 days upon a vaguely definedspecial request from a prosecutor. The law also doubles the maximum period ofpolice custody from the 15 days allowed under the Indian criminal code to 30days.[330]Detainees face the greatest risk of torture and other ill-treatment while inthe custody of police, who may seek to extract confessions and other evidence.[331]Investigating police may also request that a suspect bereturned to police custody for further questioning after he or she is releasedto judicial custody.[332] Thisraises the specter of police retaliation against suspects who, while injudicial custody, had complained of abuse at the hands of the police. Theselengthy detention periods—including those already allowed under theIndian criminal code—contravene article 9 of the ICCPR, which providesthat anyone arrested shall be promptly informed of any charges against them.[333]For individuals who are charged, the UAPA requires denial ofbail where the court determines “that there are reasonable grounds forbelieving that the accusation against such a person is prima facie true.”[334]This provision applies not only to personsaccused of direct involvement in violent acts, but also to anyone charged withthe offenses of membership in a terrorist organization, harboring a terrorist,fundraising for a terrorist organization, and conspiracy to commit a terroristact. A prima facie basis for the offense of membership may be relativelyeasy to establish, resulting in ineligibility for bail irrespective of factorssuch as any threat posed by the detainee or flight risk.The easy denial of bail under the UAPA facilitates policeand prosecutorial abuse of the law to allow prolonged pre-trial detentioncontrary to general Indian criminal law and international human rights law.India’s criminal procedure law maintains the court’s discretion toorder bail even where there is a presumption against bail.[335]The ICCPR provides that “it shall notbe a general rule that persons awaiting trial shall be detained in custody, butrelease may be subject to guarantees to appear for trial.”[336]Another 2008 amendment directs a court during trial topresume the guilt of an accused in two circumstances, without a showing ofcriminal intent. The first is if arms, explosives, or other specifiedsubstances were recovered from the accused and there is reason to believe theyor similar items were used to commit an offense under UAPA. The second is incases where fingerprints or other “definitive evidence” suggestinginvolvement were found at the site or on anything used in the commission of theoffense.[337] Insuch cases, the burden of proof is on the accused to prove their innocence.This measure undermines India’s constitutionallyguaranteed right to a fair trial and creates enormous risks of wrongfulprosecution, particularly given the record of the Indian police in fabricatingevidence.[338] TheICCPR provides that everyone charged with a criminal offense has the right tobe presumed innocent until proven guilty.[339]The UN Human Rights Committee has statedthat the presumption of innocence is “fundamental to the protection ofhuman rights” and “imposes on the prosecution the burden of provingthe charge” beyond reasonable doubt.[340] Itcannot be derogated from, even during a public emergency or other declaredstate of exception.[341]NIAA: Potential for AbuseAlongside the amendments to UAPA, India in December 2008passed the National Investigation Agency Act (NIAA). The law created aspecialized National Investigation Agency (NIA), with broad powers toinvestigate terrorism-related crimes and other national security offenses. Italso authorizes the creation of special courts to prosecute crimes itinvestigates.[342] Thesecourts are of particular concern because they reinstate abusive powerscontained in the lapsed TADA and POTA.Proponents describe the NIA as similar to the US FederalBureau of Investigation (FBI) because it can investigate terrorism cases in anypart of India without seeking permission from individual states, which haveauthority over policing.[343]As of this writing, the NIA’s investigative role wasuncertain. Government authorities have credited the NIA with averting severalattacks and with an investigation that led to charges against militant Hindunationalists in attacks on Muslim mosques and cemeteries in Amjer, Hyderabad,and Malegaon. The NIA is also probing the role of Pakistani-American DavidColeman Headley in the 2008 attack in Mumbai and other crimes in India.In December 2009 Indian Home Minister P. Chidambaramproposed merging the NIA into a broader National Counter-Terrorism Center.[344]While there are advantages to a streamlined and coordinated counterterrorismeffort, Human Rights Watch has several concerns about the NIA’s potentialto become politicized or abusive.The NIA cannotinvestigate an offense unless it is granted permission to do so from thecentral government, which has 15 days to decide whether to hand it to theagency.[345] In addition, the NIA’s enabling legislationstates that the agency answers to the central government but fails to clearlydefine the NIA’s and the government’s respective powers.[346] Security analysts say this puts the NIA at riskof being thwarted any time a probe might prove embarrassing to the ruling partyor its allies. Rather than being subject to the whims of political officials,the NIA’s decisions should be made by its director and its professionalstaff.[347]There are also serious questions as to whether the NIA canbe effective in thwarting potential attacks, an issue the central governmentsays it intends to address with the creation of the National Counter-TerrorismCenter. The government granted the NIA powers to investigate offenses alreadycommitted, but does not specify how information should be obtained, shared, ordisseminated to prevent future crimes. “The NIA does not place theemphasis on prevention that it ought to,” said Sanjay Patil, aDelhi-based expert on South Asian police reform. “This is a tremendousfailing.”[348]NIAA provisions authorizing the central and stategovernments to establish special courts to prosecute crimes that the NIAinvestigates are particularly worrying. Human Rights Watch opposes the creationand use of special courts to prosecute national security crimes. The record ofnational security courts in many countries over the years shows that suchcourts, while highly sensitive to the need to protect national security,typically lack the respect for the rights of defendants intrinsic to criminalcourts of broader practice. National security courts are frequently authorizedto conduct trials in a manner that restricts the rights of defendants beyondwhat is permissible under international human rights law.The courts authorized under the NIAA are no exception. Amongother concerns, the judges to these special courts are appointed by the centraland state governments on the recommendation of the chief justice of therelevant High Court.[349] Judgesappointed to special courts in India have shown a tendency to allow statesecurity concerns to overshadow due-process rights.[350]The NIAA also entitles the central government to determine the court’sjurisdiction if there is a dispute over its competence.[351]Cumulatively, these powers allow the government to intrude upon functions thatare fundamentally judicial in nature.[352]They call into question the specialcourts’ appearance of impartiality—an essential aspect of theinternationally guaranteed right to a fair trial before a competent,independent and impartial tribunal.[353]The NIAA also givesspecial courts unfettered discretion to hold in camera (closed)proceedings, “if it so desires.”[354]This is not compatible with a defendant’sright to a public hearing[355]—a basic fair trial safeguard that assumesparticular importance in highly charged and politicized terrorism-relatedcases. In the context of terrorism-related cases, there may be relevantconsiderations that necessitate closing portions of a hearing, such as thesecurity of witnesses, the confidentiality of certain evidence and evidence-gatheringmethods, and protecting the accused from harm. However, internationalfair-trial guarantees permit closed proceedings in national security cases onlyduring “exceptional circumstances,” weighing the reasons forclosure against the right of an accused to a public hearing.[356]Another problematic provision of the NIAA permits a specialcourt to conceal the identity of witnesses if it is satisfied that their livesare in danger.[357]Prosecutors and courts have an obligation to ensure the security of allwitnesses to a criminal case and take appropriate protection measures, such askeeping the identity of certain witnesses from the media and general public.However, the measures that these special courts can take to protectwitnesses’ identities are not subject to specified limits, raising thepossibility that the court could conceal witnesses’ identity even fromthe defendant and their counsel. If applied in such a manner, these provisionscould deny the defendant’s fair-trial right to examine prosecutionwitnesses.[358]The NIAA’s shortcomings might have been avoided hadthe government taken more time to design it. “No comprehensive analysisof the issues was done, no review of existing legislation and capabilities wasconducted,” concludes the nongovernmental Commonwealth Human RightsInitiative in its analysis of the law. “An invitation was never extendedto the states or civil society to suggest possible alternatives.”[359]IX. Reforming the Response to AttacksIndian government investigations into bombings and other attacks on civiliansare often slow, inefficient, and ineffectual. These shortcomings raiseadditional human rights concerns, such as the right of criminal suspects to aspeedy and fair trial.Since the 2008 attacks, India’s central and stategovernments have taken some steps to deter future attacks and respond quickly.The central government also has increased training and intelligence-sharinginitiatives with the United States and governments in the region. Nevertheless,greater efficiency will not address India’s shortcomings in confrontingterrorism unless the changes are coupled with concerted efforts to end tortureand other abuses. Moreover, proposals for serious reforms will need to overcomeformidable opposition from competing state and federal security forces, andfrom a public that often seeks quick solutions to complex problems.Inadequate ResponsesThe slow and inadequate response by India’s eliteforces to the Mumbai attack was widely criticized as a case study in delays andlack of coordination that may have cost lives. Less publicized were the ways inwhich the investigations into the 2008 bombings in Jaipur, New Delhi, andAhmedabad may have also been hampered by inter-state rivalry, sloppy evidencegathering, and conflicting information.In one example, police as of September 2010 had still failedto submit a key forensic report in the serial blasts that rocked Delhi twoyears earlier. “There seems to be total lack of discipline, coordinationand professionalism on the part of the investigating agency,” a judgesaid in summoning senior police officers to explain the delay.[360]In another example, although state and centrallaw-enforcement authorities describe the 2008 bombings as a single conspiracy,police investigators in different states initially made numerous contradictorystatements about who was responsible for the attacks.Gujarat state police in August 2008 declared the“mastermind” of the blasts in Ahmedabad to be SIMI member AbuBashar, who was in their custody. But on September 17, 2008, four days afterbombs exploded in Delhi, the Delhi police named fugitive SIMI member AbdulSuban Tauqeer to be the “main leader” of the serial blasts. Twodays later, Delhi police changed their position, announcing that Atif Ameen,one of two Muslim youths killed during the controversial police raid that dayin Batla House, was the mastermind.[361]A week later, members of the Mumbai Crime Branch inMaharashtra state announced that Ameen actually reported to a suspect they wereholding named Sadiq Sheikh, whom they pronounced the “architect” ofall the blasts.[362]In February 2009, the Mumbai Crime Branchannounced that Sheikh had also given a detailed confession about his role in a2006 train bombing in Mumbai that killed more than 180 people. But in May 2009,a Mumbai magistrate threw out the charge against Sheikh after the Maharashtrastate police ATS, which had repeatedly interviewed Sheikh, absolved him of anyrole in that bombing.[363]In Delhi in July 2009, police named yet another mastermind,the fugitive LeT operations chief, Abu Alkama. “Alkama is the mainmastermind behind the creation of Indian Mujahideen and is responsible for theSeptember 13 blasts [in Delhi]. He is also involved in serial blasts in Jaipur,Ahmedabad, and UP [Uttar Pradesh],” an unnamed Delhi police official toldreporters on the first anniversary of the Delhi bombings.[364]While contradictory interpretations of the events have abounded,no central authority has intervened to coordinate investigations into the stringof bombings. Given that nearly one-third of the 70-plus suspects are charged inmultiple states, to which they must be shuttled for one hearing after another,it is not clear how many years if not decades the trials could last. All of thedefendants are being held without bail.In February 2010, the lawyer for nine suspects in the Delhibombings petitioned the Supreme Court to consolidate the trials into one caseor at least one city, saying the slow pace violates their right to a speedytrial under article 21 of the Indian Constitution. Defense attorney M.S. Khantold Human Rights Watch: “If petitioners are to be tried in several casesat different places, it may not be possible for the prosecuting agencies ofdifferent States to complete various trials during the lifetime ofpetitioners.”[365]Investigations into the Pune blast of February 2010proceeded more smoothly. Even here, though, evidence may have been lost as thecity police, initially assuming the explosion was caused by leaking gas, calledin firefighters to wash the site clean.[366]Moreover, the site allegedly was not cordoned off for several hours.[367]Steps toward ReformIn the wake of the Mumbai attack, India’s centralgovernment took what it described as the first steps in sweeping reforms of itssecurity apparatus. It says those measures helped thwart more than a dozenterrorist plots in 2009. Among other measures, the central governmentestablished four National Security Guard counterterrorism hubs, staffed with250 guards apiece, in the cities of Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad, and Kolkata.Click to expand ImageThe Mumbai police added another 250 officers to a specialfirst-responder force. The Coast Guard expanded its fleet. For the first time,the elite Indian Police Service academy in the city of Hyderabad introduced atraining capsule on counterterrorism and counterinsurgency. The centralgovernment also created the National Investigation Agency (see precedingchapter).Additional plans includecreating 20 counterterrorism and counterinsurgency schools around the country.[368] Past training focused on counterinsurgencytactics in jungles, rather than on urban attacks.[369] In December 2009, Home Minister P. Chidambaramproposed a “radical restructuring” of the nation’s securityarchitecture, which would include a National Counter-Terrorism Center to serveas an umbrella group for India’s myriad federal and state intelligenceagencies, including the NIA.[370] In addition, Chidambaram called for theestablishment of a central crime data base, the creation of a separate securitydivision within the Home Ministry, and said states should train an additional400,000 state police officers.[371]Indian authorities, long reluctant to share information withforeign governments on cross-border crimes, have shown an unprecedented degreeof openness to international and regional cooperation since the Mumbai attack. TheIndian government expanded the limited US counterterrorism training programsfor India and sent senior officials to the FBI for tips on runningIndia’s new National Investigation Agency.[372]Delhi and Washington have been sharing information on the Mumbai attack andother cross-border networks and plots. India also resisted pressure fromcertain nationalist politicians to break off peace talks with Pakistanfollowing the Mumbai attack.Indian security officialsalso have participated in regional initiatives such as a counterterrorismworkshop in November 2009 that was sponsored by the United NationsCounter-Terrorism Committee. Other participants included Pakistan, Afghanistan,and Bangladesh.Indian security experts with whom Human Rights Watch spokepraised the authorities for taking initiative and called some new measures animportant step forward. But theysuggestedother proposals may do little to improve evidence or intelligence gathering andwere skeptical about political prospects for implementing others.[373]At the international level, for example, regional mistrustand political rivalries hamper efforts to address terrorism. For example,friction between India and Pakistan has slowed efforts by the eight-nationSouth Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) to forge regionalresponses such as creating a regional terrorism database that could serve as anevidence-sharing center and early-warning system for potential attacks.[374]“SAARC has excellent agreements but when it comes to actualimplementation, it isn’t effective because the level of suspicion amongthe members is so high,” said retired Maj. Gen. Dipankar Banerjee, anIndian security analyst.[375]Indian and foreign security analysts told Human Rights Watchthat India did not need a plethora of flashy new agencies and paramilitaryforces with tanks to combat terrorism, but should instead commit to alarge-scale campaign to train and recruit police officers who can serve asfirst responders and as the backbone of intelligence gathering. Without trainedlaw enforcement officers, the proposed hubs and data-collection centers will beof little use. They expect that the training process will take years andencounter stiff resistance from state and central government agencies who willview them as a threat to their own power bases.Domestic and international efforts to improve theprofessionalism and technical skills of law enforcement can be crucial incountering terrorism, provided that they do not jeopardize respect forfundamental human rights. For instance, police forces should be trained incrime-solving and prevention methods that do not involve torture or otherill-treatment. International cooperation should be used to ensure that personswho commit terrorist acts in one country do not obtain protection fromextradition in another. At the same time, training, assistance, andinternational cooperation should never use or facilitate methods, such ascoercive interrogations or renditions of terrorism suspects without dueprocess, which themselves violate the protections of international human rightslaw.X. RecommendationsTo the Indian Central GovernmentInvestigate all allegations of human rights violationsduring counterterrorism operations and appropriately discipline orprosecute those responsible.Ensure that police training in counterterrorism operationsincludes respecting due process, nondiscrimination, and humane treatment;monitor police during counterterrorism operations to ensure that humanrights are being respected.Sign into law criminal procedure amendments passed byParliament in 2010 that would require the police to record a formal reasonunder law for making a warrantless arrest.Codify the full set of guidelines for police officersmaking arrests that are contained in the landmark 1997 Supreme Court case D.K.Basu, and consider expanding them to apply to the police and otherdetaining authorities in circumstances outside a formal arrest to preventtorture and ill treatment.Amend the India Prisons Act and jail manuals used byvarious state governments to repeal anachronistic provisions suchasthose that classify hunger strikes as “mutiny,” punishable bywhipping, and otherwise allow corporal punishment of prisoners, andreplace them with directives that conform to international law.Enact the Prevention of Torture Bill, 2008 after removingprovisions that would grant officials effective immunity from prosecution,and ensuring the bill’s conformity with the Convention againstTorture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.Ratify the Convention against Torture and its Optional Protocol. Extend aninvitation to the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture.Initiate independent, impartial, and transparentinvestigations into allegations of faked “encounter killings,”including at Jamia Nagar in New Delhi.Amend section 46 of the Code of Criminal Procedure so thatpolice are no longer permitted to use all “necessary” force toeffect arrest or to use deadly force whenever a suspect “attempts toevade the arrest,” without regard to whether the suspect poses animminent threat to others. Assist prosecutors in various states bringingcases against 2008 bombing suspects to better coordinate proceedings toensure speedy trials.Revise the overly broad definition of terrorism under theUnlawful Activities Prevention Act (UAPA) to be consistent with therecommendations of the UN Special Rapporteur on the promotion andprotection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while counteringterrorism, notably that it cover only those acts that are committed withthe intention of causing death or serious injury; are committed for thepurpose of provoking terror or coercing the government to do or refrainfrom doing any act; and are in line with international conventionsrelating to terrorism. Repeal provisions of UAPA contrary to internationallaw, including expanded police powers of search and seizure, thepresumption of guilt under certain circumstances, and the doubling of themaximum pre-trial detention period for terror suspects to 180 days, ofwhich 30 days may be in police custody and the rest in judicial custody.Amend the National Investigation Agency Act (NIAA) toensure the independence of special courts from the executive, remove theblanket power of courts to hold in camera (closed) proceedings, andconstrain the courts’ power to conceal the identity of witnesses, inorder to ensure that defendants can adequately confront those testifyingagainst them.Amend the UAPA and NIAA to include sunset clauses, so thatthe laws will expire within several years unless reenacted.Use the UN review process for monitoring state compliancewith Security Council Resolutions 1373 and 1456 to draft counterterrorismlaws that do not violate international human rights law.Reduce politicization of the National Human RightsCommission (NHRC) by requiring a transparent appointments process thatincludes public hearings and participation from civil society groups. Requirestate human rights commissions to report back to the NHRC on actions theyintend to take on complaints the NHRC forwards to them for review. The aimshould be to improve mechanisms for citizens to seek redress and holdgovernment officials accountable for human rights abuses.Initiate a public campaign to end discrimination on thebasis of religion; prosecute government officials, political leaders, andothers who incite religious violence.Publicly denounce national and state bar association resolutionsbanning lawyers from defending terrorism suspects, which interferes withthe right to counsel. Call on bar councils to promptly take disciplinaryactions against members who threaten or harass lawyers defending terrorsuspects.Initiate regional cooperation with other South Asianstates to promote effective methods to protect human rights duringcounterterrorism investigations.To the Indian State GovernmentsInvestigate all allegations of human rights violationsduring counterterrorism operations, including for abuses in response tothe 2008 bombings, and appropriately discipline or prosecute thoseresponsible.Establish routine cooperation with other Indian statesthrough the NIA, the National Counter-Terrorism Center, and othermechanisms to handle the investigation of terror attacks and threats sothat there is prompt exchange of information to identify the perpetrators.Ensure that police training in counterterrorism operationsincludes training on respecting due process, nondiscrimination, and humanetreatment.Act promptly on NHRC guidelines to investigate“encounter killings;” prosecute security personnel foundresponsible for involvement in faked encounter killings and otherextrajudicial executions.The Maharashtra state government should immediately repealabusive provisions of the MCOCA, such as those providing extended periodsof detention without charge and allowing confessions made to police to beadmissible; other state governments should cease efforts to enact similarmeasures.The Rajasthan, Gujarat, and Delhi governments shouldlaunch an immediate inquiry to identify and prosecute jail authorities andpolice who were responsible for attacking terrorism suspects who were injudicial custody in Ahmedabad in March 2009, Jaipur in September 2009, andDelhi in August 2010.To Concerned Governments andMultilateral OrganizationsStrongly encourage Pakistan and other neighboringcountries to investigate and identify groups that conspire or commitattacks against Indian civilians, and prosecute or appropriately extraditethose responsible.Make counterterrorism assistance to countries such asIndia and Pakistan contingent on periodic appraisals of conformity withhuman rights standards.Enhance the UN’srole to expand human rights considerations in the process of monitoringmember states’ compliance with Security Council Resolutions 1373 and1456.AcknowledgementsThis report wasresearched and written by Letta Tayler, researcher in the Terrorism andCounterterrorism program, and Meenakshi Ganguly, South Asia director in theAsia division of Human Rights Watch. Nehal Bhuta, a professor of law andinternational affairs and a former Human Rights Watch fellow, contributedcritical analysis of India’s counterterrorism laws.The report was edited by Brad Adams, director of the Asiadivision, and Joanne Mariner, former director of the Terrorism andCounterterrorism program. It was reviewed by James Ross, legal and policydirector, and Joseph Saunders, deputy program director. Aruna Kashyap, researcherin the Women’s Rights division, assisted in the review of Indian domesticlaw. Katharine Wies, senior associate in theTerrorism and Counterterrorism program, and Pema Abrahams, coordinator in theAsia division, formatted and copy-edited the report. Production assistance wasprovided by Grace Choi, publications director; Kathy Mills, publicationscoordinator; and Fitzroy Hepkins, production manager. Former HumanRights Watch intern Kate Oja provided valuable research assistance.We are very grateful to Ashok Agrwaal, an independent DelhiHigh Court lawyer, for his external review.In India, we also received substantial assistance fromnongovernmental organizations including Act Now for Harmony and Democracy, thePeople’s Union for Civil Liberties, the Commonwealth Human RightsInitiative, the Jamia Teachers Solidarity Association, the Human Rights LawNetwork, and Aman Samudaay. We are very grateful tothe many activists, academics, political and security analysts, policeand government officials, judges, and lawyers who generously assisted us, includingShahnawaz Alam, the late Shahid Azmi, Prashant Bhushan, Colin Gonsalves,Shabnam Hashmi, Ravi Nair, Jawahar Raja, Nitya Ramakrishnan, Trideep Pais, AjaiSahni, Tarique Shafique, Yusuf Sheikh, Kavita Srivastav, Mayur Sureh, ArvindVerma, and Rajeev Yadav. We also thank all of the other individuals whoprovided us with information and personal accounts.[1]See Human Rights Watch, Sabotaged Schooling: Naxalite Attacksand Police Occupation of Schools in India’s Bihar and Jharkhand States, December2009, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2009/12/09/sabotaged-schooling-0; Human Rights Watch, Protecting the Killers: A Policy ofImpunity in Punjab, India, October 17, 2008, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2007/10/17/protecting-killers-0;Human Rights Watch, “Being Neutral is Our Biggest Crime”:Government, Vigilante, and Naxalite Abuses in India’s Chhattisgarh State,July 14, 2008, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2008/07/14/being-neutral-our-biggest-crime-0;Human Rights Watch, India - “Everyone Lives in Fear”: Patterns of Impunity in Jammuand Kashmir, September 11, 2006, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2006/09/11/everyone-lives-fear-0;Human Rights Watch, India – “We Have No Orders To Save You,” State Participation and Complicityin Communal Violence in Gujarat, vol. 14, no. 3(C), April 2002, http://www.hrw.org/legacy/reports/2002/india/.[2]Human Rights Watch concluded in a 2002 reportthat the Gujarat police and state officials were complicit in the killings ofMuslims during the riots and that state authorities subsequently engineered amassive cover-up. Many of the victims were in Ahmedabad, which was struck inthe 2008 blasts. See Human Rights Watch, India - “WeHave No Orders To Save You,”  April 2002, http://www.hrw.org/legacy/reports/2002/india/.For further information on incidentsthat have fuelled religious polarization, see Luv Puri, “Mitigating theFurther Radicalization of India’s Muslim Community,” CTCSentinel, vol. 3, iss. 10, October 2010, http://www.ctc.usma.edu/sentinel/CTCSentinel-Vol3Iss10.pdf (accessed November 20, 2010), pp. 9-11.[3] “Pakistan, India 'movemissiles' to border,”CNN.com, December 26, 2001, http://archives.cnn.com/2001/WORLD/asiapcf/south/12/25/india.pakistan.kashmir.missiles/ (accessed December 28, 2010).[4]Stephen Tankel, “Lashkar-e-Taiba inPerspective: An Evolving Threat,” New America Foundation CounterterrorismStrategy Initiative Policy Paper, February 2010, http://www.newamerica.net/sites/newamerica.net/files/policydocs/tankel.pdf(accessed August 1, 2010); Jayshree Bajoria,“Lashkar-e-Taiba (Army of the Pure),” Council on Foreign RelationsBackgrounder, December 2, 2008, http://www.cfr.org/publication/17882 (accessedSeptember 4, 2009).[5] See,for example, “Deadlock over Pakistan's Mumbaisuspects,” BBC News, May 3, 2010, http://news.bbc.co.uk/go/pr/fr/-/2/hi/south_asia/8658038.stm(accessed May 4, 2010).[6]See Aminesh Roul, “After Pune, DetailsEmerge on the Karachi Project and its Threat to India,” CombatingTerrorism Center Sentinel, vol. 3, iss. 4, April 10, 2010http://www.ctc.usma.edu/sentinel/CTCSentinel-Vol3Iss4.pdf; “The KarachiProject,” India Today, February 18, 2010,http://indiatoday.intoday.in/site/Story/84662/CoverStory/The+Karachi+project.html?page=0 (both accessed April 11, 2010).[7]“Culprits Behind Pune Blast Identified: ATS,” Deccan Herald,April 7, 2010, http://www.deccanherald.com/content/62570/culprits-behind-pune-blast-identified.html(accessed April 22, 2010).[8] “Pune blast conspiracy unravelled, twoarrested,” Indo-Asian News Service, September 8, 2010, http://sify.com/news/pune-blast-conspiracy-unravelled-two-arrested-news-national-kjirOcbhgje.html(accessed September 30, 2010).[9]“IM behind Delhi firing, reveal police,” Deccan Herald, September20, 2010, http://www.deccanherald.com/content/98103/im-behind-delhi-firing-reveal.html(accessed September 30, 2010).[10]“Varanasi blast: Death toll rises to two,” Asia NewsInternational, December 11, 2010, http://www.24dunia.com/english-news/shownews/0/Varanasi-blast-Death-toll-rises-to-two/8430484.html (accessed December 15, 2010).[11]See, for example, “Nationwide terror alert over LeTthreat,” The Times of India, August 20, 2010,http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Nationwide-terror-alert-over-LeT-threat/articleshow/6349351.cms(accessed August 26, 2010); “Terror threat to Taj Mahal, Palace onWheels: Intelligence Bureau,” Hindustan Times,December 12, 2010 (accessed December 16, 2010).[12] “Saffronterror a new phenomenon, says Chidambaram,” The Times of India,August 26, 2010, http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Saffron-terror-a-new-phenomenon-says-Chidambaram/articleshow/6434972.cms(accessed August 26, 2010).[13]SeeVinay Kumar, “CBI grills RSS leader Indresh Kumar,” The Hindu,December 24, 2010, http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/article972714.ece;“Aseemanand mastermind behind Mecca blast,” The Times of India,December 14, 2010, http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/hyderabad/Aseemanand-mastermind-behind-Mecca-blast/articleshow/7095551.cms(both accessed December 28, 2010).[14] “Students Islamic Movement ofIndia (SIMI),” South Asia Terrorism Portal, http://www.satp.org/satporgtp/countries/india/terroristoutfits/simi.htm(accessed June 5, 2009).[15]See“The Karachi Project,” India Today, February18, 2010, http://indiatoday.intoday.in/site/Story/84662/CoverStory/The+Karachi+project.html?page=0; “IM has‘hostels’ in Gulf, Nepal & Bangladesh too,” TheEconomic Times, March 11, 2010, http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/politics/nation/IM-has-hostels-in-Gulf-Nepal--Bangladesh-too/articleshow/5670127.cms(accessed August 30, 2010).[16] See“Indian Mujahideen declared terror outfit,” The Times of India,June 4, 2010, http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Indian-Mujahideen-declared-terror-outfit/articleshow/6011678.cms; “Indian Mujahideen Declared a TerroristOrganisation,” Indian Home Ministry press release, June 4, 2010, http://pib.nic.in/release/release.asp?relid=62324&kwd(both accessed August 17, 2010).[17] C.Christine Fair, “Students Islamic Movement of India and the IndianMujahideen: An Assessment,” Asia Policy, no. 9, January 2010, pp.101-19.[18] Formore on the Gujarat riots, see Human Rights Watch, “We Have No OrdersTo Save You,” http://www.hrw.org/reports/2002/india/.[19]“Indian Mujahideen takesresponsibility for Varanasi blast,” The Timesof India, December 7, 2010, http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Indian-Mujahideen-takes-responsibility-for-Varanasi-blast/articleshow/7061144.cms#ixzz18QXmlduz (accessed December 17, 2010).[20]Praveen Swami, “These Terrorists Aren’t Playing Games,” ForeignPolicy, September 22, 2010, http://www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2010/09/22/these_terrorists_arent_playing_games(accessed September 22, 2010).[21] Ibid.[22] See,for example, “Mumbai Arrests cast light on jihadist-mafia nexus,” TheHindu, March 16, 2010, http://beta.thehindu.com/news/national/article245973.ece;“Indian Mujahideen Behind Pune Bombing,” Reuters,March 15, 2010, http://in.reuters.com/article/topNews/idINIndia-46938320100315;“We are Better Prepared, says Chidambaram,” The Hindu,November 27, 2009, http://beta.thehindu.com/news/national/article56038.ece;“The Karachi Project,” India Today, http://indiatoday.intoday.in/site/Story/84662/Cover%20Story/The+Karachi+project.html(all accessedAugust 30,2010).[23] YoginderSikand, “The SIMI Story,” Countercurrents.org, July 15,2006, http://www.countercurrents.org/comm-sikand150706.htm (accessed June 1,2009).[24] On August5, 2008, an Indian special tribunal lifted the government’s ban on SIMI,but the Supreme Court has issued repeated stays on the ruling until it holds ahearing on the issue.[25]Human Rights Watch interview with Shahid BadarFalahi, Azamgarh, June 30, 2009. Badar now practices traditional medicine in Azamgarh, a district inthe northeast state of Uttar Pradesh that Indian authorities consider arecruiting ground for the IM.[26]See DanielMarkey, “Terrorism and Indo-Pakistani Escalation,” Council on ForeignRelations, CPA Contingency Planning Memorandum No. 6, January2010,http://www.cfr.org/publication/21042/terrorism_and_indopakistani_escalation.html;Ashley J. Tellis, “Bad Company—Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and the GrowingAmbition of Islamist Militancy in Pakistan,” testimony before the UnitedStates House of Representatives, Committee on Foreign Affairs, Subcommittee onthe Middle East and South Asia, March 11, 2010, http://www.internationalrelations.house.gov/111/55399.pdf; StephenTankel, “Lashkar-e-Taiba in Perspective: An Evolving Threat,” NewAmerica Foundation, February 2010, http://www.newamerica.net/sites/newamerica.net/files/policydocs/tankel.pdf(all accessed August 1, 2010).[27] The Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (National PatriotismOrganization, or RSS), was foundedin the city of Nagpur in 1925 by Keshav Baliram Hedgewar with the mission ofcreating a Hindu state. It propagates a militant form of Hindu nationalism thatit promotes as the sole basis for national identity in India. According to theRSS, the leaders of India’s nationalist movement and those ofpost-independence India failed to create a nation based on Hindu culture.Western thought and civilization areperceived as enemies of Hindu culture. Religions such as Islam and Christianityare depicted as alien to India, as they are seen as the religions of foreigninvaders—the  Mughals and the British. TheRSS wanted the entire gamut of social life to be designed on the rock bed ofHindu nationalism,”agoal that inspired the creation of RSS political, social, and educational wingsthat became the Sangh Parivar. HumanRights Watch named RSS as directly involved in the three-day killing spreeagainst Muslims during the Gujarat riots of 2002. RSS denies the allegations.RSS has been banned three times: in 1948 after a former member assassinatedMahatma Gandhi; in 1975 during a government-imposed state of emergency; and in1992 because of its perceived role in the demolition of the Babri Mosque inAyodhya. All bans were subsequently lifted. See Human Rights Watch, “WeHave No Orders to Save You”: State Participation and Complicity inCommunal Violence in Gujarat,http://www.hrw.org/legacy/reports/2002/india/ ; “RSS aims for a Hindu nation,” BBC News,March 10, 2003, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/south_asia/655722.stm (accessedDecember 27, 2010).[28] StavanDesi, “Blast Accused Wanted to Kill Saffron Leaders,” TheHindustan Times, November 21, 2008, http://www.hindustantimes.com/News-Feed/india/Blast-accused-wanted-to-kill-saffron-leaders/Article1-353074.aspx (accessed January 4, 2011).[29]Yogesh Pawarand Imtiaz Jaleel, “Hindu Group Abhinav Bharat Under Scanner,”NDTV, November 7, 2008, http://www.ndtv.com/convergence/ndtv/story.aspx?id=NEWEN20080071745&ch=11/7/2008%206:03:00%20PM (accessedJanuary 4, 2011).[30]See “Rajasthan ATS files806-page chargesheet in 2007 Ajmer blast case,” ANI, October 23, 2010,http://www.thaindian.com/newsportal/india-news/rajasthan-ats-files-806-page-chargesheet-in-2007-ajmer-blast-case_100448597.html(accessed January 4, 2011).[31]Ibid.[32]Radhika Nagrath and Rajesh Ahuja, “Key ideologue behind Ajmer blastheld,” November 19, 2010, http://www.hindustantimes.com/Key-ideologue-behind-Ajmer-blast-held/Article1-628486.aspx (accessed January 4, 2011); “Aseemanandmastermind behind Mecca blast,” The Times of India, December 14, 2010, http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/hyderabad/Aseemanand-mastermind-behind-Mecca-blast/articleshow/7095551.cms(accessed December 28, 2010).[33]Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Ajai Sahni, executivedirector of the Institute for Conflict Management, New Delhi, May 4, 2010.[34] SeeHuman Rights Watch, India – “Everyone Lives in Fear”:Patterns of Impunity in Jammu and Kashmir,September11, 2006, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2006/india0906/; Human RightsWatch, India – “These Fellows Must Be Eliminated”:Relentless Violence and Impunity in Manipur,September29, 2008, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2008/09/15/these-fellows-must-be-eliminated.[35] SeeHuman Rights Watch, Broken System: Dysfunction, Abuse, and Impunity in the Indian Police,August 2009, http://www.hrw.org/node/84628.[36]S.P. Tamang, Metropolitan Magistrate Inquiry No. 1/2009, September7, 2009. Copy on file with Human Rights Watch; ManasDasgupta, “Ishrat Jahan Killing Also a Fake Encounter: probereport,” The Hindu, September 8, 2009, http://www.thehindu.com/2009/09/08/stories/2009090856670100.htm(accessed December 1, 2009). Gujarat cabinet minister Jay Narayan Vyas describedthe inquiry report as “bad in law” and said the state wouldchallenge it. The Gujarat government also cited reports from federalintelligence agencies describing the four victims as terrorists. India’sHome Minister P. Chidambaram countered that intelligence inputs could not betreated as conclusive evidence and said that would not in any case justifyillegal executions.[37] S.P.Tamang, Metropolitan Magistrate Inquiry No. 1/2009, September 7, 2009. Thedebate continues over whether Jahan was involved with LeT. In a controversialstatement, American LeT operative David Headley alleged after his arrest thatIshrat was an LeT member. See “Ishrat, would-be Modi assassin, was an LeTfidayeen: Headley,” Indian Express,July 5, 2010, http://www.indianexpress.com/news/headley-ishrat/642435/(accessed July 5, 2010). Indian central government officials have declinedcomment.[38] “DelhiPolice officer to head probe team in Ishrat Jahan case,” Indo-Asian NewsService, September 24, 2010, http://sify.com/news/delhi-police-officer-to-head-probe-team-in-ishrat-jahan-case-news-national-kjyvkddbgfa.html(accessed September 27, 2010). For more information onstate efforts to block the probe, see “Gujarat opposes handing overIshrat case to CBI,”Hindustan Times, July 19, 2010, http://www.hindustantimes.com/rssfeed/gujarat/Gujarat-opposes-handing-over-Ishrat-case-to-CBI/Article1-574798.aspx;“Ishrat Jahan encounter probe goes to SIT,” The Times of India,August 12, 2010, http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Ishrat-Jahan-encounter-probe-goes-to-SIT/articleshow/6298170.cms(both accessed August 25, 2010).[39]“Sohrabuddin Fake Encounter Case: CBI Arrests Amit Shah,” The Timesof India, July 25, 2010, http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Sohrabuddin-fake-encounter-case-CBI-arrests-Amit-Shah/articleshow/6213768.cms (accessed August 25, 2010).[40]“CBI arrests Gujarat IPS officerin encounter case,” The Times of India, April 29, 2010, http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/CBI-arrests-Gujarat-IPS-officer-in-encounter-case/articleshow/5870506.cms#ixzz19X3DSR4A(accessed December 29, 2010).[41]J. Venkatesan, “CBI to probe fake encounter killing ofSohrabuddin,” The Hindu, January 12, 2010, http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/article79245.ece(accessed August 25, 2010).[42]“India: Hold Torturers Accountable,”Human Rights Watch news release, November 17, 2008, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2008/11/17/india-hold-torturers-accountable.[43] HetalVyas, “Justify Immunity to 10 cops in Khwaja Yunus case: HC togovt,” DNA, December 9, 2009, http://www.dnaindia.com/mumbai/report_justify-immunity-to-10-cops-in-khwaja-yunus-case-hc-to-govt_1321698(accessed May 14, 2009).[44] AnilKalhan, et al., “Colonial Continuities: Human Rights, Terrorism, andSecurity Laws in India,” Columbia Journal of Asian Law, vol. 20,no. 1, 2006, http://www.abcny.org/pdf/ABCNY_India_Report.pdf (accessed January 3, 2011), ch. 5.[45]See Human Rights Watch, Broken System, http://www.hrw.org/node/84628.[46]Ibid. Police officers are selectedthrough a national examination process then allotted to various state cadres.State governments also recruit to fill the junior ranks, particularly theprimary investigative force at the inspector and police station levels.[47] India had 130 police forevery 100,000 people in 2009, compared to an international average of 270. See Union Home Minister P. Chidambaram, Intelligence BureauCentenary Endowment lecture, official transcript, New Delhi, December 23, 2009, http://www.mha.nic.in/pdfs/HM-IB-Endowment231209.pdf(accessed May 8, 2010).The UnitedNations’ recommended standard is 222 police per 100,000.[48] HumanRights Watch telephone interviews with security analysts including C.Christine Fair, assistant professor at the Center forPeace and Security Studies at Georgetown University, May 6,2010; Praveen Swami, diplomatic editor, the DailyTelegraph, at the time associate editor, The Hindu, New Delhi, May7, 2010; and Sanjay Patil, consultant on policereforms with the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative, May 7-8, 2010.[49] HumanRights Watch interview with Mallika Joseph, deputy director of the Institute ofPeace and Conflict Studies, New Delhi, June 17, 2009.[50]“India’s Success Rate Lacks in Terrorist Prosecutions,” TheWall Street Journal, December 8, 2008, http://online.wsj.com/article/NA_WSJ_PUB:SB122868069511586131.html(accessed July 30, 2010).[51]Human Rights Watch interview with Ajai Sahni,executive director, Institute for Conflict Management, New Delhi, June 15,2009.[52] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Sahni, New Delhi, May 4, 2010.[53] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Ajit Doval, New Delhi, May 7, 2010.[54] P.Chidambaram, “A New Architecture for India’s Security,” http://www.mha.nic.in/pdfs/HM-IB-Endowment231209.pdf.[55] HumanRights Watch interview with Sahni, June 15, 2009.[56] PraveenSwami, “The alphabet soup of internalsecurity,” The Hindu, January 11, 2010,http://www.thehindu.com/2010/01/11/stories/2010011155220800.htm (accessed May8, 2010).[57] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Vikram Sood, New Delhi, May 7, 2010.[58]Headley pleaded guilty in the United States in March 2010 to terrorism-relatedacts including reconnaissance for LeT at the sites that were attacked in Mumbaion November 26, 2008. In his guilty plea, Headley said he had conductedsurveillance for LeT in various cities in India in 2008-09. Numerous mediareports quote Indian or US authorities as saying those cities included Pune.See, for example, “Pune blast, Headley's recce linked, says homesecretary,” Hindustan Times, February 15, 2010, http://www.hindustantimes.com/newdelhi/Pune-blast-Headley-s-recce-linked-says-home-secretary/509188/H1-Article1-509172.aspx(accessed March 1, 2010); Jane Perlez, “AmericanTerror Suspect Traveled Unimpeded,” The New York Times, March 26,2010, http://www.nytimes.com/2010/03/26/world/asia/26pstan.html(accessed March 26, 2010).[59]Human Rights Watch interview with Kishore Jagtap, Pune, April 28,2010.[60] Copiesof correspondence on file with Human Rights Watch.[61] Letterfrom K.P. Raghuvanshi, additional director general of police for law and orderin Maharashtra, to Human Rights Watch, August 2, 2010.[62] Letterfrom Rakesh Asthaana, police commissioner of Baroda, to Human Rights Watch,June 7, 2010.[63] For example, in seeking furthercustody of two suspects, Mohammad Saif and Zeeshan Ahmed, the police made asubmission that said, “During investigation accused Mohammad Saifconfessed that he belongs to terrorist outfit ‘Indian Mujahideen,’and their Delhi organization…. The arrested accused Zeeshan also corroboratedthe facts and confessed his involvement…. The investigation of the caseis at a very crucial stage and the custodial interrogation of the accused willlead to unearthing of the entire module of the Indian Mujahideen who have theirnetwork in various parts of the country.” Submission by AssistantCommissioner of Police Sanjeev Kr. Yadav in the Tiz Hazari Courts, Delhi,October 4, 2008. Copy on file with Human Rights Watch. This practice hasprompted widespread criticism, not least because it is said to have led toincreased pressures on police to extract confessions before seeking extendedcustody. “Some conventions and practices have developed in several statesfor the magistrates not to grant police custody unless the investigatingofficer pleads that the accused has already made a confession and his continuedcustody is necessary to recover the property, [evidence],” wrote D.P.Khanna, “Reform Areas in Criminal Law” in P. J. Alexander, ed., PolicingIndia in the New Millennium (New Delhi: Allied Publishers, 2002).[64]SeeHuman Rights Watch, Broken System: Dysfunction,Abuse, and Impunity in the Indian Police, August 2009,http://www.hrw.org/node/84628,pp. 81-86. In 2008, the nongovernmental organization People’sWatch extrapolated from its research in several Indian states that policetorture about 1.8 million people every year in India. The Supreme Court highlightedthe problem in its 1997 landmark D.K. Basu decision, noting: “Worstviolations of human rights take place during the course of investigation, whenthe police with a view to secure evidence or confession often resorts tothird-degree methods including torture.” D.K. Basu v. State of WestBengal, (1997) 1 SCC 416.[65] HumanRights Watch interview with K.S. Subramanian, former director general of policefor Tripura state, intelligence chief, and research and policy director ofIndia’s Home Ministry, New Delhi, July 6, 2009.[66]India’s Evidence Act of 1872, secs. 24-26. Section 24 states that:“A confession made by an accused person is irrelevant in a criminalproceeding if the making of the confession appears to the Court to have beencaused by any inducement, threat or promise.” Indian Evidence Act of1872, http://www.vakilno1.com/bareacts/indianevidenceact/indianevidenceact.htm.[67]Ibid., sec. 27. According to the Indian SupremeCourt, “The basic idea embedded in Section 27 of the Evidence Act is thedoctrine of confirmation by subsequent events. The doctrine is founded on theprinciple that if any fact is discovered as a search made on the strength ofany information obtained from a prisoner, such a discovery is a guarantee thatthe information supplied by the prisoner is true. The information might beconfessional or non-inculpatory in nature but if it results in discovery of afact, it becomes a reliable information.” Bodh Raj v. State ofJ&K, (2002) 8 SCC 45. See also Law Commission ofIndia, “185th Report on the Evidence Act,” 2003,http://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in/reports.htm (accessed September 9, 2010),pp. 152-156.For example, if a suspected thiefreveals the location of stolen property, the police can seize the property anduse it as evidence—including against the accused, should the stolenproperty implicate him or her. In addition, even in the case of a coercedconfession, the evidence recovered as a result is admissible, despite thepotential for abuse. That is contrary to the law in other common lawjurisdictions, such as the United States, where the courts’ exclusion ofsuch evidence (the “fruit of the poisonous tree” doctrine) in the20th century gradually reduced police use of torture and ill-treatment ininterrogations, although non-physical police coercion remains a significantproblem.[68] HumanRights Watch interview with Vikas Padora, New Delhi, July 4, 2009.[69]Human Rights Watch interview, 2009. Name, exactdate and location withheld to protect interviewee from possible retaliation.[70] HumanRights Watch interview, 2009. Name, exact date and location withheld to protectinterviewee and suspect from possible retaliation.[71] HumanRights Watch interview, 2009. Name, exact date and location withheld to protectinterviewee and suspect from possible retaliation.[72] HumanRights Watch interview with Shadid Azmi, Mumbai, June 25, 2009. Azmi was killedin February 2010; see chapter titled Attacks on Lawyers.[73] Human RightsWatch interview, 2009. Name, exact date and location withheld to protectinterviewee and suspect from possible retaliation.[74]“Retraction of Statements Made under Duress,” Court of JudicialMagistrate, Lucknow, February 13, 2009. Copy on file with Human Rights Watch.[75] HumanRights Watch interview with Nisar Ahmed, New Delhi, June 14, 2009.[76] Policeconsider such confessions valuable because the Indian Evidence Act allows theuse of a confession that affects the person and another jointly on trial forthe same offense. Sec. 30 states: “When more persons than one are beingtried jointly for the same offence, and a confession made by one of suchpersons affecting himself and some other of such persons is proved, the Courtmay take into consideration such confession as against such other person aswell as against the person who makes such confession.”Indian Evidence Act, http://www.vakilno1.com/bareacts/indianevidenceact/CHAPTER2/S30.html.[77] Human Rights Watch interview, 2009.Name, exact date and location withheld to protect interviewee from possibleretaliation.[78] See,for example, Peoples Union for Democratic Rights v. Union of India,Reply Affidavit of Respondent No. 3, Writ Petition No. 7272 (Civil) of 2008.Copy on file with Human Rights Watch.[79] HumanRights Watch interview with ranking Delhi police official, July 2009, NewDelhi. The interviewee’s identity and the exact date of interview arebeing withheld as the official was not authorized to speak on the record.[80] For moreinformation on the Hindu cases, see Chapter IV,“Religious and Ethnic Discrimination,” and Chapter V, “TheMalegaon Blast: Hindu Suspects Allege Abuse.”[81] HumanRights Watch interview, 2009. Name, exact date and location withheld to protectinterviewee and suspect from possible retaliation. In September 2009, Indianhuman rights groups including Anhad and a former deputy mayor of Baroda held anews conference to denounce a similar incident earlier that month in which fiveBaroda Muslim youths were taken to a farmhouse and tortured outside of Baroda.Immediately afterwards, unknown assailants attacked the former deputy mayor.See “Gujarat: Brutal attack on former mayor of Vadodara,” Anhadpress release, October 11, 2009, http://www.anhadin.net/article91.html(accessed November 18, 2009).[82] In oneof many such allegations, the Indian news magazine The Week reported theexistence of 15 secret interrogation centers. See “India's secret torturechambers,” The Week, July 12, 2009, http://indianvanguard.wordpress.com/2009/07/22/india%E2%80%99s-secret-torture-chambers-a-book-and-an-essay(accessed December 29, 2010). Indian security expertsand a former ranking police intelligence official, Kadayam S. Subramanian, also told Human Rights Watch that theybelieve the centers exist.[83]See International Covenant on Civil and PoliticalRights, art. 10(1), “All persons deprived of their liberty shall betreated with humanity and with respect for the inherent dignity of the humanperson,”discussed below.InternationalCovenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adopted December 16, 1966, G.A.Res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966),999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force March 23, 1976,http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/ccpr.htm (accessed December 29, 2010). The UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, secs. 6and 42, respectively, set out the prohibition against religious discriminationagainst prisoners and guarantee prisoners’ right to practice their faith.UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (Standard MinimumRules), adopted by the First United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crimeand the Treatment of Offenders, held at Geneva in 1955, and approved by theEconomic and Social Council by its resolution 663 C (XXIV) of July 31, 1957,and 2076 (LXII) of May 13, 1977, http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/treatmentprisoners.htm (accessed November 2, 2009). The beatings during prayer are part of abroader pattern against the 2008 bombing suspects that is described in Chapter IV, “Religious and Ethnic Discrimination.”[84] SeeICCPR, http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/ccpr.htm, art. 10(2)(b); Convention onthe Rights of the Child (CRC), adopted November20, 1989, G.A. res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49)at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered into force, September 2, 1990, http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/crc.htm(accessed December 29, 2010), art. 37(c).[85]The account of this incident is based on Human Rights Watchtelephone and email exchanges with Manisha Sethi of the Jamia Teachers'Solidarity Association at Jamia Millia Islamia University in New Delhi, who wasserving as a spokesperson for Salman’s lawyers, September 1-3, 2010, andon media clips including “Explanation sought from Tihar authorities aboutattack on Indian Muhahideen man,” Daily News and Analysis,September 6, 2010, http://www.dnaindia.com/india/report_explanation-sought-from-tihar-authorities-about-attack-on-indian-mujahideen-man_1434327;“Suspected terrorist attacked in Tihar Jail,” The Times of India,August 31, 2010, http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/delhi/Suspected-terrorist-attacked-in-Tihar-Jail/articleshow/6469316.cms (both accessed September 13, 2010).[86]Complaintsby Rajasthan Muslim Forum Report on Jaipur Central Jail Beatings, issued bythe Rajasthan Muslim Forum, September 26, 2009, and statements from JaipurCentral Jail prisoners Munawwar Hussain and Nazakat, September 24, 2009, copieson file with Human Rights Watch.[87] Complaintsby Rajasthan Muslim Forum Report on Jaipur Central Jail Beatings, September 26,2009.[88] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Salim Engineer, Rajasthan state presidentof Jamaat-e-Islami Hind, Jaipur, September 28, 2009.[89] Complaintsby Rajasthan Muslim Forum Report on Jaipur Central Jail Beatings, September 26,2009.[90] See “JaipurBlasts Accused Tortured on Eid,” Central Chronicle, September 27,2009. http://www.centralchronicle.com/viewnews.asp?articleID=15623 (accessedSeptember 28, 2009). Local activists and relatives called the measuresinsufficient and demanded an independent investigation.[91] PUCL,et al., Independent Committee on Incidents of 26-27th March inSabarmati Jail, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, April 16, 2009. Copy on file with HumanRights Watch.[92]Human Rights Watch interviews in Gujarat, UttarPradesh, and New Delhi with more than a half-dozen relatives of the beatingvictims, June-July, 2009. Identities and exact dates withheld to protectinterviewees and suspects from possible retaliation.[93] PUCL,et al., Independent Committee on Incidents of 26-27th March inSabarmati Jail, Ahmedabad, Gujarat.[94] HumanRights Watch interview with brother of a jailed suspect, Gujarat, June 2009.Name, exact date, and exact location withheld toprotect interviewee and suspect from possible retaliation.[95] HumanRights Watch interview with the wife of a jailed suspect, June 2009. Name,exact date, and location withheld to protectinterviewee and her husband from possible retaliation.[96] BombayJail Manual of 1935, Rule 703.[97] IndiaPrisons Act 1894, sec. 46, clause 12, http://www.mha.nic.in/pdfs/Prisons_act1894.pdf(accessed August 31, 2010).[98] “Archaiclaw comes in handy for jail officials,” The Times of India, April7, 2009, http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/NEWS/City/Ahmedabad/Archaic-law-comes-in-handy-for-jail-officials/articleshow/4367560.cms (accessed June 8, 2009).[99]“PIL in Sabarmati jail beating up case dismissed,” IndianExpress, May 6, 2009, http://www.indianexpress.com/news/pil-in-sabarmati-jail-beating-up-case-dismis/455133/ (accessed June 8, 2009).[100] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Abdul Moid, father-in-law of ShahbazAhmed, Jaipur, July 8, 2009.[101] HumanRights Watch interview with Mohammad Hasim, uncle of Mohammad Sarwar, Azamgarh,July 1, 2009. Mohammad Hasim said the beating occurred June 20, 2009.[102] See,for example, South Asia Human Rights Documentation Centre, “Corporal Punishment in Prison: The Indian Position,”HRF/142/06, May 24, 2006, http://www.hrdc.net/sahrdc/hrfeatures/HRF142.htm(accessed July 20, 2009).[103]SunilBatra v. Delhi Administration, (1978) 4 SCC 409 at 511, http://www.indiankanoon.org/doc/162242/ (accessed September 10,2010).[104] SouthAsia Human Rights Documentation Centre, “CorporalPunishment in Prison,” http://www.hrdc.net/sahrdc/hrfeatures/HRF142.htm.[105] AjitSahi, “Walls Not a Prison Make,” Tehelkamagazine, vol. 6, iss. 35, September5, 2009,http://www.tehelka.com/story_main42.asp?filename=Ne050909walls_not.asp#(accessed October 2, 2009).[106]In a 1981judgment, the SupremeCourt of India said"[n]othing is more cowardly and unconscionable than a person in policecustody being beaten up and nothing inflicts deeper wound on our constitutionalculture than a state official running berserk regardless of human rights."Kishore Singh v. State of Rajastan,AIR 1981 SC 625 at 999, http://www.indiankanoon.org/doc/1308143/(accessed January 4, 2011).[107]Supreme Court, D.K.Basu v. State of West Bengal, (1997) 1 SCC 416.[108] AsianCentre for Human Rights, Torture in India 2009, April 2010, http://www.achrweb.org/reports/india/torture2010.pdf(accessed April 22, 2010). From 2001 to 2009, the NHRC received informationabout 1,345 persons killed in police custody; human rights experts believe thereal number is much higher.[109]Human Rights Committee, “Consideration ofReports Submitted by State Parties Under Article 40 of the Covenant, ConcludingObservations of the Human Rights Committee, India,” CCPR/C/79/Add.81,August 4, 1997,http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/(Symbol)/CCPR.C.79.Add.81.En?OpenDocument(accessed September 21, 2009).The HumanRights Committee monitors state compliance with the International Covenant onCivil and Political Rights, to which India is a party.[110] ICCPR,http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/ccpr.htm, arts. 7, 10 (1). The Human RightsCommittee has found that acts of corporal punishment such as beatings amount toviolations under articles 7 and 10. In further guidelines, Principle 6 of theUN Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any Form ofDetention or Imprisonment prohibits the use of torture or cruel, inhuman ordegrading treatment or punishment on any person under detention or imprisonmentunder any circumstances. Principle 33 (1) states that a detained or imprisonedperson or his counsel shall have the right to make a request or complaintregarding his treatment, in particular in case of torture or other cruel,inhuman or degrading treatment, to the authorities responsible for theadministration of the place of detention and to higher authorities and, whennecessary, to appropriate authorities vested with reviewing or remedial powers.Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any Form ofDetention or Imprisonment, adopted December 9, 1988,G.A. Res. 43/173, annex, 43 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 298, U.N. Doc. A/43/49(1988), http://www.un.org/documents/ga/res/43/a43r173.htm (accessed October 7,2010).[111] Conventionagainst Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Conventionagainst Torture), adopted December 10, 1984, G.A. res. 39/46, annex, 39 U.N.GAOR Supp. (No. 51) at 197, U.N. Doc. A/39/51 (1984), entered into force June26, 1987, http://www.hrweb.org/legal/cat.html(accessed January 4, 2011).[112]Prevention of Torture Bill, 2010, Bill No. 58 of2010,http://www.prsindia.org/uploads/media/Torture/prevention%20of%20torture%20bill%202010.pdf(accessed August 25, 2010).[113]Neeraj Chauhan, “Chargesheet Ready in BatlaHouse Encounter,” Indian Express, April 12, 2010, http://www.indianexpress.com/news/chargesheet-ready-in-batla-house-encounter/604936/ (accessed April 27, 2010). See also JamiaTeachers’ Solidarity Association, “Shahzad’s Arrest andGoebbels’ Lies,” February 10, 2010. Copy on file with Human RightsWatch.[114] HumanRights Watch’s description of the Batla House encounter is based on thereport ‘Encounter’ at Batla House, Unanswered Questions, JamiaTeachers’ Solidarity Association, February 2009, copy on file with HumanRights Watch, as well as interviews in New Delhi with lawyers and human rightsactivists who investigated the incident including Delhi Supreme Court attorney Prashant Bhushan, and Jamia Teachers’ SolidarityAssociation coordinator Manisha Sethi, in June and July, 2009. Human RightsWatch also read numerous media accounts and court documents related to theincidents.[115] JamiaTeachers’ Solidarity Association, “Postmortem Reports of Atif andSajid Call the Bluff of NHRC and Delhi Police,” March 18, 2010. Copy onfile with Human Rights Watch.[116]National Human Rights Commission, Report on Batla House Encounter,2811/30/8/08-09-FE, July 20, 2009, p. 15. Copy on file with Human Rights Watch.[117] Formore on the Batla House deaths, see theNational Human Rights Commission section of Chapter VII, “Failure of Accountability.” Another suspect,believed to have escaped from the scene, was subsequently arrested and charged withInspector Sharma’s death.[118]Human Rights Watch has previously reported on fakeencounters by military forces in Jammu and Kashmir, as well as by armed reservepolice forces and special police officers in Chhattisgarh. See Human Rights Watch,India - Everyone Lives in Fear: Patterns of Impunity in Jammu and Kashmir,http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2006/09/11/everyone-lives-fear, pp. 64-86; HumanRights Watch, India - Being Neutral Is Our Biggest Crime, July 14, 2008,http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2008/07/14/being-neutral-our-biggest-crime-0,pp. 64-67. We have also reported on extrajudicial killings by police in Punjaband paramilitary forces in Manipur. See Human Rights Watch and Ensaaf, India- Protecting the Killers: A Policy of Impunity in Punjab, India, October17, 2007, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2007/10/17/protecting-killers-0, pp.52-91; Human Rights Watch, India - These Fellows Must Be Eliminated:Relentless Violence and Impunity in Manipur, September 2008,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2008/india0908/, pp. 25-47. See also Asian Centrefor Human Rights (ACHR), “India Human Rights Report 2009,”http://www.achrweb.org/reports/india/AR09/AR2009.pdf.[119] IndianConstitution, http://lawmin.nic.in/coi/coiason29july08.pdf, art. 21, and ICCPR, art. 6(1),http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/ccpr.htm.[120] IndianCode of Criminal Procedure, 1973, sec. 46, http://www.vakilno1.com/bareacts/CrPc/Criminal-Procedure-Code-1973.htm(accessed December 29, 2010).[121] IndianConstitution, art. 22; Code of Criminal Procedure, sec. 151(2), http://www.vakilno1.com/bareacts/CrPc/Criminal-Procedure-Code-1973.htm.[122]See International Convention for theProtection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, adopted December 20, 2006,G.A. Res. 61/177, U.N. Doc. A/RES/61/177 (2006), entered intoforce Dec. 23, 2010, http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/disappearance-convention.htm#1(accessed December 29, 2010), arts. 1, 2. India signedthe convention in 2007.[123] HumanRights Watch interview with Mohammad Sajid, Jaipur, November 7, 2008. See also“Suspected SIMI Activist Detained For Jaipur Bombings,” IndiaAbroad News Service, May 17, 2008, http://www.ndtv.com/convergence/ndtv/mumbaiterrorstrike/Story.aspx?ID=NEWEN20080050130&type=News(accessed September 10, 2009).[124] HumanRights Watch interview with Sajid, November 7, 2008.[125]“Ahmedabad Blasts Case Cracked, SIMIDid It,” The Indian Express, August 16, 2008http://www.indianexpress.com/news/ahmedabad-blasts-case-cracked-simi-did-it-cops/349758/0(accessed September 20, 2009).[126] HumanRights Watch interview with Badrunissa Kutubuddin Shaikh, Ahmedabad, June 19,2009.[127] HumanRights Watch interview, Ahmedabad, June 2009. Name and exact date withheld toprotect interviewee and suspect from possible retaliation.[128] HumanRights Watch interview, Ahmedabad, June 2009. Name and exact date withheld toprotect interviewee and suspect from possible retaliation.[129] HumanRights Watch interview with Ashrunnisha Razzaqmiya, Ahmedabad, June 19, 2009.[130] HumanRights Watch interview with Sanjeed Begum Abdul Alim, Ahmedabad, June 19, 2009.[131]“Retraction of Statements Made under Duress,” Court of JudicialMagistrate, Lucknow, February 13, 2009. Copy on file with Human Rights Watch.[132] Ibid.[133] HumanRights Watch interview with Mohammad Qausar, Azamgarh, July 1, 2009.[134]“Jaipur Blast Accused Arrested,” Indian Express, January 22,2009,http://www.expressindia.com/latest-news/jaipur-blast-accused-arrested/413780/(accessed August 31, 2010).[135] HumanRights Watch interview with Noorjahan, Ahmedabad, June 19, 2009.[136] Ibid.[137] HumanRights Watch interview with Methab Alam, professor at Jamia Millia IslamiaUniversity and member of the Jamia Teachers’ Solidarity Association, June16, 2009, and Jamia Teachers’ Solidarity Association, ‘Encounter’at Batla House, Unanswered Questions.[138] HumanRights Watch interview with Abdul Rahman, New Delhi, June 14, 2009.[139] HumanRights Watch interview with Abu Zafar, New Delhi, June 14, 2009.[140] Ibid.[141]Additional Human Rights Watch interview with Abu Zafar, Azamgarh, June 30, 2009.[142]Affidavit of Delhi Joint Commissioner of Police, Special Cell, filed in responseto People’s Union for Democratic Rights v. Union of India, October15, 2008, W.P. (C) 7272 of 2008. Copy on file with Human Rights Watch.[143] Codeof Criminal Procedure, 1973, sec. 167, provides that an arrested person can bekept in police custody for no more than 15 days. While pre-charge detention mayextend to 90 days for serious crimes, any additional time must be“otherwise than in the custody of the police,” http://www.vakilno1.com/bareacts/CrPc/Criminal-Procedure-Code-1973.htm.[144] HumanRights Watch interview with Mukul Sinha, Ahmedabad, June 17, 2009.[145]Letter from Raghuvanshi to Human Rights Watch, August 2, 2010.[146] HumanRights Watch interview with suspect’s mother,Gujarat, June 2009. Name, exact date, and location withheld to protect interviewee and suspect frompossible retaliation.[147] HumanRights Watch interview with a lawyer for a suspect in Gujarat, 2009. Name oflawyer, exact date, and location withheld to protectsuspect from possible retaliation.[148] HumanRights Watch interview with a lawyer for a suspect in Gujarat, 2009. Name oflawyer, exact date, and location withheld to protectsuspect from possible retaliation.[149]TheDecember 2008 amendments to the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, passed inresponse to the so-called IM bombings and the Mumbai attack of November 26,2008, increased the pre-trial detention period for terrorism suspects to amaximum of 180 days, of which 30 days may be in police custody. However, those late2008 provisions could not be applied retroactively to the IM suspects who werealready arrested. For more on the 2008 laws, see Chapter VIII, “DraconianCounterterrorism Laws.”[150]“Written Submission on Behalf of Saqib Nisar,” State v. SaquibNisar, Tiz Hazari Courts, New Delhi, December 10, 2008. Copy on file withHuman Rights Watch.[151] Ibid.This point was also made during interviews with Human Rights Watch by defenselawyers including Nitya Ramakrishnan, Ahmedabad, June 22, 2009; Somnath Vatsa,Ahmedabad, June 19, 2009;JawaharRaja and Mayur Sureh, New Delhi, July 4, 2009; and VikasPadora,New Delhi, July 4,2009. The five suspects were Mohammed Saif, Zeeshan Ahmad, Mohammed Shakeel,Zia-ur-Rehman, and Saquib Nissar.[152] See “Cops get time in Delhiblasts case,” The Times of India, April 18, 2010, http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/delhi/Cops-get-time-in-Delhi-blasts-case/articleshow/5826851.cms(accessed April 27, 2010). Indian human rights activists were as of thiswriting petitioning to have the minor, Mohammad Salman, transferred to juvenilecourt. A copy of Salman’s school certificate listing his birth date asOctober 3, 1992, is on file with Human Rights Watch. See also Deepu SebastianEdmund, “Delhi Blast’s Suspect a Minor, says Jamia Teacher’sFront,” Indian Express, March 14, 2010, http://www.indianexpress.com/news/delhi-blast-suspect-a-minor-says-jamia-teac/590537/(accessed April 22, 2010).[153] HumanRights Watch interviews with lawyers Somnath Vatsa, Ahmedabad, June 19, 2009, andI.M. Munshi, Ahmedabad, June 20, 2009. The remands to police custody were alsowidely reported in Gujarat media.[154] HumanRights Watch interviews with defense attorneys in Maharashtra including ShahidAzmi and I.M. Munshi, both on June 25, 2009, and review of court papers inMaharashtra cases.[155]C.B.I. v. Anupam J. Kulkarni, (1992) 3 SCC141, http://www.lawyersclubindia.com/sc/CENTRAL-BUREAU-OF-INVESTIGATION-SPECIALINVESTIGATION-CELL-Vs-ANUPAM-J-KULKARNI-674.asp(accessed August 31, 2010).[156] HumanRights Watch interview with Nitya Ramakrishnan, Ahmedabad, June 22, 2009.[157]MohammadShakeel v. State (NCT of Delhi), Crl. M.C. 3374-75, 2008.The Delhi HighCourt Rules, a set of binding regulations for the Delhi High Court and lowercourts, note that magistrates should be cautious in granting even the first 15days of remand after a suspect is presented to a court within 24 hours ofarrest: “Magistrate should discourage tendency ofpolice to take remand to extort confession. The police are too often desirousof retaining the accused in their custody for the longer period thantwenty-four hours merely in the hope of extracting some admission of guilt fromhim. This is contrary to ... [the] Code of Criminal Procedure.” Delhi High Court Rules Part 3, Chapter 11, Part B, Rules 3-6, http://delhihighcourt.nic.in/rules/Vol.3/Part3Chapter11.html(accessed August 31, 2010).[158] Codeof Criminal Procedure, 1973, sec. 175, http://www.vakilno1.com/bareacts/CrPc/s175.htm.[159] Codeof Criminal Procedure, sec. 175(1), states that a police officer, “byorder in writing, summon two or more persons as aforesaid for the purpose ofthe said investigation, and any other person who appears to be acquainted withthe facts of the case and very person so summoned shall be bound to attend andto answer truly all questions other than questions the answers to which have atendency to expose him to a criminal charge or to a forfeiture.”http://www.vakilno1.com/bareacts/CrPc/s175.htm.[160] AsianCentre for Human Rights, “Torture in India 2009,” June 2009, http://www.achrweb.org/reports/india/torture2009.pdf(accessed September 1, 2009), p. 4.[161] JamiaTeachers’ Solidarity Association, ‘Encounter’ at BatlaHouse, Unanswered Questions, February 2009,. Human Rights Watch alsointerviewed lawyers and activists in Delhi in June-July 2009 who had spokenwith the children’s families.[162] HumanRights Watch interview with Hanif Lakadwala, an activist with the human rightsorganization Sanchetna, Ahmedabad, June 20, 2009.[163]Human Rights Watch interview with Yusuf Shaikh,activist with human rights groups including PUCL, Baroda, June 21, 2009.[164] HumanRights Watch interview with Anwar Hussein, Jaipur, November 7, 2008.[165]“Ex-AIMS Doc Part of Jaipur Cell?” The Times of India, August19, 2008, http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/India/Ex-AIIMS-doc-part-of-Jaipur-terror-cell/articleshow/3375528.cms(accessedSeptember 21, 2009).[166] HumanRights Watch interview with Abrar Ali, Jaipur, November 7, 2008.[167] HumanRights Watch interview with Rasheed Hussein, Jaipur, November 7, 2008. See also“Jaipur Blasts: Cleared by PoliceInfosys Techie Now Wants Job Back,” Indian Express, August 19,2008, http://www.indianexpress.com/news/jaipur-blasts-cleared-by-police-infosys%5C-t/350483/(accessed September 21, 2009).[168] HumanRights Watch interview with Hussein, November 7, 2008.[169] Ibid.[170] TheUN Human Rights Committee has observed that “[p]rovisions should also bemade against incommunicado detention” as effective means of preventingcases of torture and ill-treatment. See Human Rights Committee, General Comment20, Article 7 (Forty-fourth session, 1992), Compilation of General Comments andGeneral Recommendations Adopted by Human Rights Treaty Bodies, U.N. Doc.HRI\GEN\1\Rev.1 at 30 (1994), http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/gencomm/hrcom20.htm(accessed October 7, 2010), para. 11.As the UN Commission on Human Rights observed, “Prolongedincommunicado detention may facilitate the perpetration of torture and can initself constitute a form of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or eventorture.” See UN Commission on Human Rights, “Torture and othercruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,” Resolution 2003/32,adopted in the 57th meeting on April 23, 2003, chap. XI. E/CN.4/2003/L.11/Add.4,http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/43f313310.html(accessed January 4, 2011). See also the UN Committee againstTorture, “Summary record of the 251st meeting:China,” CAT/C/SR.251, May 3, 1996, http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/(Symbol)/CAT.C.SR.251.En?Opendocument(accessed January 4, 2011), para.18.[171] See D.K.Basu v. State of West Bengal, (1997) 1 SCC 416.[172]India’s courts have issued numerousjudgments upholding a suspect’s right to confidential consultation withan attorney. In the landmark case of Joginder Kumar v. State Of UttarPradesh (1994) INSC 259, the Supreme Court held in para. 20 that “the right to have someone informed… and consult alawyer in private… is inherent” in Article 22(1) of the IndianConstitution. See http://www.indiankanoon.org/doc/768175/. Article 22(1) statesthat: “Noperson who is arrested shall be denied the right to consult, and to be defendedby, a legal practitioner of his choice.” See Indian Constitution,http://lawmin.nic.in/coi/coiason29july08.pdf. In FrancisCoralie Mullin v. The Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi (1981) 2 SCR516, the Supreme Court held that jail or other custodial officials “may,if thought necessary, watch the interview but not as to be within hearingdistance of the detenu and the legal adviser.” Seehttp://www.indiankanoon.org/doc/78536/.These rights are furtherstipulated for suspects during court proceedings. India’s Evidence Act of1972, sec. 129, refers specifically to a suspect’s right to“confidential communication with Legal Advisors.” Sec. 126 of theEvidence Act further emphasizes that an attorney must not disclose confidentialdocuments or communication from his client without the client’s consent.See Evidence Act,http://www.vakilno1.com/bareacts/indianevidenceact/indianevidenceact.htm (allaccessed December29, 2010).[173]ICCPR, art. 14(3)(b), http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/ccpr.htm#art14. See, for example, Human Rights Committee, Kelly v. Jamaica, Communication No.537/1993 (1993),CCPR/C/57/D/537/199, July 17, 2996, http://www.bayefsky.com/pdf/202_jamaica006.pdf (accessed January 4, 2011), sec. 9.2 (accused not able tocommunicate with lawyer for five days after arrest).[174]UNStandard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, sec. 37, authorizesaccess to family and friends at regular intervals. Sec. 93 grants prisonersaccess to a lawyer and says that: “Interviews between the prisoner andhis legal adviser may be within sight but not within the hearing of a police orinstitution official.” UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatmentof Prisoners (Standard Minimum Rules), adopted by the First United NationsCongress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, held atGeneva in 1955, and approved by the Economic and Social Council by itsresolution 663 C (XXIV) of July 31, 1957, and 2076 (LXII) of May 13, 1977.http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/treatmentprisoners.htm (accessedNovember 2, 2009).[175] HumanRights Watch interview with Somnath Vatsa, Ahmedabad, June 19, 2009.[176]Human Rights Watch interview, 2009. Name, exactdate, and location withheld to protectinterviewee from possible retaliation.[177] Courtof Chief Metropolita Magistrate, Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi, State v. SaqibNisar, “Application for Directions,” October 10, 2008. Copy onfile with Human Rights Watch.[178] HumanRights Watch interview with Jawahar Raja, New Delhi, July 4, 2009.[179] HumanRights Watch interview with Khalid Sheikh, Ahmedabad, June 21, 2009.[180] HumanRights Watch interview, details withheld.[181] HumanRights Watch interview with Nasim Bano Shahbuddin Sheikh, Ahmedabad, June 19,2009.[182] HumanRights Watch interview with Badriunissa Qutubuddin Sheikh, Ahmedabad, June 19,2009.[183] HumanRights Watch interview with Azmi, June 25, 2009.[184]Letter from Mubin Kadar Shaikh to his mother, Shakera Mozam Ali Khan, May 12,2009. A magistrate in Mumbai allowed Mubin, a graduate student, to temporarilyleave custody to take a university examination in the Maharashtra city of Pune,but only after requiring relatives t0 pay 25,000 Rupees ($534) for his armedescorts, an amount they could ill afford. See “Application SeekingTransfer of Under-trial Prisoner Mubin Kadar Shaikh Currently Lodged inAmravati Central Prison,” Letter to the Inspect General Police fromsuspect’s mother, Shakera Mozam Ali Khan, June 10, 2009. Copies of bothletters on file with Human Rights Watch.[185] MCOCASpecial Court for Greater Mumbai, Mubin Kader Sheikh v. The State ofMaharashtra, “Application on Behalf of the Accused,” May 19,2009. Copy on file with Human Rights Watch.[186] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Shakira Mozam Ali Khan, Mumbai, October23, 2009.[187] Code ofCriminal Procedure, 1973, sec. 41, http://www.vakilno1.com/bareacts/CrPc/Criminal-Procedure-Code-1973.htm.[188]Ibid., sec. 151.[189]The Indian Parliament passed amendments in 2010that aim to curtail abuses under section 41 of the Code of Criminal Procedureby requiring the police to specify in writing the reasons for making an arrestwithout warrant for serious offenses. However, as of this writing, theamendments had not been signed into law by the president. See the Code ofCriminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2010,http://www.prsindia.org/uploads/media/CRPC/The%20Code%20of%20Criminal%20Procedure%20Amendment%20Bill%202010.pdf,and the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act,2008, Sec. 5, http://www.voice4india.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/03/THE-CODE-OF-CRIMINAL-PROCEDURE-_AMENDMENT_-ACT-2008.pdf(both accessed September 13, 2010).[190] Constitutionof India, art. 21,http://lawmin.nic.in/coi/coiason29july08.pdf(accessed August December 29, 2010).[191] See JoginderKumar v. State of Uttar Pradhesh, 1994 AIR 1349, 1994 SCC (4) 260.[192] IndianConstitution art. 22; see also Code of Criminal Procedure, sec. 57, http://www.vakilno1.com/bareacts/CrPc/Criminal-Procedure-Code-1973.htm.The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) has also established guidelines forarrest and detention. See NHRC, “NHRC Guidelines for Arrest,”November 22, 1999, http://nhrc.nic.in/Documents/sec-3.pdf (accessed February17, 2009).[193]D.K. Basu v. State of West Bengal, (1997) 1 SCC 416. The ruling requires police tobear accurate, visible, and clear identification, prepare a memo of arrest thatis signed by a relative or other witnesses at the time and place that a personis taken into custody, inform a relative or friend as soon as possible of thearrest or detention, and make the arrested person aware of that right. Policealso must document an arrest in a diary entry and a memo that states the timeand place of arrest, which is attested by a witness, and is counter-signed bythe arrested person. Police stations must post arrest information and sendcopies of related documents to the area magistrate. Basu also gives arrestedpersons the right to legal consultation during interrogation. Amendmentsapproved by Parliament that as of this writing awaited the president’ssignature would add key Basu mandates to the criminal code. See Code ofCriminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2008, sec. 6,http://www.voice4india.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/03/THE-CODE-OF-CRIMINAL-PROCEDURE-_AMENDMENT_-ACT-2008.pdf.[194] TheICCPR in article 9statesthat "No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest or detention [or] bedeprived of his liberty except on such grounds and in accordance with suchprocedures as are established by law." Article 9(1) states: "Everyonehas the right to liberty and security of person. No one shall be subjected toarbitrary arrest or detention. No one shall be deprived of his liberty excepton such grounds and in accordance with such procedure as are established bylaw.” See also Manfred Nowak, U.N. Covenant on Civil and PoliticalRights: ICCPR Commentary, 2nd ed. (Kehl am Rhein: Engel, 2005),pp. 224-25.[195]Shibu Thomas, “HC Orders Cops to Pay forIllegal Detention,” The Times of India, April 18, 2009,http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/news/city/mumbai/HC-orders-cops-to-pay-for-illegal-detention/articleshow/4416360.cms(accessed September 21, 2009); “Cops Guilty of Illegal Detention,” TheDeccan Herald, September 10, 2009http://www.deccanherald.com/content/24520/cops-guilty-illegal-detention.html(accessed September 21, 2009).[196]National Human Rights Commission, “Recommendations of NHRC onDetention,” October 2008 http://nhrc.nic.in/disparchive.asp?fno=1682(accessed September 21, 2009).[197] SeeHuman Rights Watch and Ensaaf, “Protecting the Killers; A Policy ofImpunity in Punjab, India, vol. 19, no. 14(C), October 2007, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2007/10/17/protecting-killers-0;“India: Hold Torturers Accountable,” Human Rights Watch newsrelease, November 17, 2008, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2008/11/17/india-hold-torturers-accountable.[198] Formore on the treatment of Hindu suspects see Chapter V,“The Malegaon Blast: Hindu Suspects Allege Abuse.”[199]Nistula Hebbar, “Chidu’s Hindu Terror Remark Causes Uproar,” DailyNews and Analysis, December 3, 2009, http://www.dnaindia.com/india/report_chidu-s-hindu-terror-remark-causes-uproar_1319466(accessed December 4, 2009).[200] HumanRights Watch interview with Abu Zafar, brother of Abu Bashir, New Delhi, June14, 2009.[201]Human Rights Watch interview, Gujarat, June 2009. Name, exact date, and location withheld atinterviewee’s request.[202] HumanRights Watch interview, details withheld, June-July, 2009.[203] Human Rights Watch interview with Vinod Kumar Yadav, Azamgarh,July 1, 2009.[204] PUCL Rajasthan, “The Jaipur Terror Scapegoat; The PoorBengali Muslim Migrant,” May 23, 2008, www.pucl.org/Topics/Religion-communalism/2008/jaipur-blasts.pdf (accessed October 2, 2009).[205] HumanRights Watch interview with Mohammad Mujib-ur-Rahman, Jaipur, November 6, 2008.[206]Human Rights Watch interview with Azamgarh HockeyAssociation players and coach Abu Lais Khan, Azamgarh, July 1, 2009. Oneplayer, Samiullah Usmani, 17, recalled the November 2008 incident in aninterview with Human Rights Watch in Azamgarh on July 1, 2009: “We realizedwe had left a kit bag on the train and ran back to get it. A GRP [GovernmentRailway Police official] called after us and asked what we were doing and wherewe were from. When we told them, he said, “You are from Azamgarh? You areterrorists.” The police searched our pockets. I had 200 rupees. They tookthem away from me. The second boy had 700 rupees and they took them away fromhim. The third boy, he only had one rupee. They called him‘beggar.’”[207] S.Prasannarajan, “The Ancestry of Hate,” India Today, October2, 2008, http://indiatoday.intoday.in/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&issueid=73&id=16655&Itemid=1&sectionid=&completeview=1(accessed June 8, 2009).[208] Constitutionof India, Part III, arts. 14, 15 (1) and (2); arts. 16(1) &(2); arts. 25-28, http://indiacode.nic.in/coiweb/welcome.html (accessed August 1, 2009).[209] Constitutionof India, “Directive Principles of State Policy,” Part IV, arts. 38(2) and 46, http://indiacode.nic.in/coiweb/welcome.html.[210]Social,Economic and Educational Status of the Muslim Community of India, Prime Minister’s High Level Committee Cabinet Secretariatheaded by retired Chief Justice of Delhi High Court Rajindar Sachar, Governmentof India, November 2006, http://minorityaffairs.gov.in/newsite/sachar/sachar_comm.pdf(accessed June 1, 2009).AlthoughMuslims comprise nearly 14 percent of India's population, they hold fewer than5 percent of government posts and account for just 4 percent of students inIndia's elite universities.[211] HumanRights Watch interview with Mohamed Shafi Qureshi, chairman of India’sNational Commission for Minorities, June 15, 2009.[212] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Fair, assistant professor at the Centerfor Peace and Security Studies at Georgetown University, May 6, 2010.[213]“Third suspect in Ajmer blast arrested,” The Hindu,May 3, 2010, http://www.hindu.com/2010/05/03/stories/2010050360581200.htm(accessed May 3, 2010).[214] TheMaharashtra ATS chief and the joint commissioner of police for Mumbai did notrespond to repeated written and telephone requests for interviews with HumanRights Watch. In November 2008, then-Joint Commissioner of Police for the ATS,Hemant Karkare, denied any Hindu suspects had been tortured. Karkare was killed in the 2008 Mumbai attack.[215] Thefollowing account is based on the affidavitof Sadhvi Pragyan Singh Thakur, filed November 17, 2008, in criminal court inthe city of Nasik, which has jurisdictionover Malegaon [C.R. I - 130/08].[216] HumanRights Watch interview with Ganesh Sovani, June 23, 2009.[217] RightsWatch interview with Aparna Purohit, Mumbai, June 26, 2009. The details werereiterated in a Human Rights Watch interview with Purohit’s lawyer, ShrikantShivade, Pune, July 8, 2009.[218] Ibid.[219]“Ex-army officer Upadhyay alleges torture by ATS,” ThaindianNews, October 29, 2008, http://www.thaindian.com/newsportal/world-news/ex-army-officer-upadhyay-alleges-torture-by-ats_100112851.html(accessed September 1, 2010).[220] HumanRights Watch interview with Vishay Upadhyay, Pune, July 8, 2009.[221] Translationof Hindi written statement from Pandey to his followers on December 25, 2008,provided to Human Rights Watch by Shivade, Pune, July 8, 2009. Hinduismconsiders cows sacred and forbids their killing or eating.[222] HumanRights Watch interview with Rahirkar’s relative, details withheld, 2009.[223]“SC declines bail to Purohit in Malegaon blast case,” DeccanHerald, October 4, 2010, http://www.deccanherald.com/content/101924/sc-declines-bail-purohit-malegaon.html (accessed December 17, 2010).[224] Localbar associations can be formed by lawyers appearing in various district or citycourts and usually serve union functions.[225]Satya Prakash, “Don’t refuse cases,Supreme Court tells lawyers,” The Hindustan Times, December 8,2010, http://www.hindustantimes.com/Don-t-refuse-cases-Supreme-Court-tells-lawyers/Article1-635762.aspx (accessed December 22, 2010).[226] HumanRights Watch interview with Shahid Azmi, Mumbai, June 25, 2009.[227]“26/11 accused Faheem Ansari’s lawyer Shahid Azmi shot dead,”The Times of India, February 11, 2010 http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/26/11-accused-Fahim-Ansaris-lawyer-Shahid-Azmi-shot-dead/articleshow/5561910.cms(accessed April 26, 2010). Azmi’s vigorous defense of the defendant inthe Mumbai attacks was widely credited with resulting in that client’sacquittal in May 2010. See, for example, Mayura Janwalkar, “Terrorsuspect is free, thanks to Shahid Azmi,” DNAIndia.com, May 4,2010, http://www.dnaindia.com/dnaprint910.php?newsid=1378731 (accessed May 4,2010).[228] HumanRights Watch interview with Azmi, June 25, 2009.[229]“Nikam appointed special prosecutor in lawyer Azmi's murder case,” TheTimes of India,July 10,2010, http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/mumbai/Nikam-appointed-special-prosecutor-in-lawyer-Azmis-murder-case/articleshow/6148007.cms (accessed August 25, 2010).[230]“Ex-Chhota Rajan aide Bharat Nepali got lawyer Azmi killed,” MumbaiMirror, February 17, 2010, http://www.mumbaimirror.com/index.aspx?page=article&sectid=15&contentid=20100217201002170349287132ee5e8a(accessed May 4, 2010). Numerous Muslim activists, political observers, andlawyers, who spoke on condition of anonymity for fear of retaliation, toldHuman Rights Watch in email and telephone interviews that they suspected Azmiwas killed for his successful defense of Muslim suspects in high-profile cases.[231] HumanRights Watch compiled information on these attacks from interviews withattorneys who have represented Muslim terrorism suspects in India includingColin Gonsalves of the Human Rights Law Network, New Delhi, July 4, 2009, andMohammad Shuaib, Lucknow, June 28, 2009, as well as from Indian media reportsand from Mohd. Shuaib v. Bar Council of India, Writ Petition No. 494,filed October 14, 2008, before the Supreme Court of India, copy on filewith Human Rights Watch.[232] “Policeremand of German bakery blast accused Himayat Baig extended,” DNAIndia, September 20, 2010, http://www.dnaindia.com/mumbai/report_police-remand-of-german-bakery-blast-accused-himayat-baig-extended_1440625(accessed September 27, 2010).[233] “BJPprotests Pune lawyer’s move to defend terror accused,” Indo-AsianNews Service, September 19, 2010, http://www.thaindian.com/newsportal/politics/bjp-protests-pune-lawyers-move-to-defend-terror-accused_100431014.html(accessed September 27, 2010).[234]“German bakery blast advocate resigns from minority cell of MaharashtraNCP,” DNA India, September 23, 2010, http://www.dnaindia.com/mumbai/report_german-bakery-blast-advocate-resigns-from-minority-cell-of-maharashtra-ncp_1441830 (accessed September 27, 2010).[235] HumanRights Watch interview with retired High Court Justice Ramesh Mehta, Ahmedabad,June 19, 2009.[236] HumanRights Watch email exchange with defense attorney Ganesh Sovani, Mumbai, July15, 2009. See also “Plot to kill Sadhvi Pragnya’s lawyers foiled: police,”Thaindian News, July 10, 2009,http://www.thaindian.com/newsportal/uncategorized/plot-to-kill-sadhvi-pragnyas-lawyers-foiled-police_100216377.html#ixzz0WJrXbe79(accessed August 1, 2009).[237] “MadhyaPradesh lawyers pledge not to defend terrorists,” Indo-Asian NewsService, September 24, 2008, http://www.thaindian.com/newsportal/world-news/madhya-pradesh-lawyers-pledge-not-to-defend-terrorists_10099467.html(accessed September 11, 2009).[238] HumanRights Watch interview with Shuaib, Lucknow, June 28, 2009. Human Rights Watchalso obtained information in hiscase from Mohd. Shuaib v. Bar Council of India, and Indiannewspaper reports.[239] AFirst Information Report (FIR) is a criminal complaint that police either fileagainst a suspect as a result of their own investigation or on behalf of acomplainant. When filing an FIR on behalf of a complainant, police are requiredto register the FIR of the reported offense, read it to the informant and haveit signed, and to provide a copy to the informant at no cost under India’sCode of Criminal Procedure, secs. 154-156, http://www.vakilno1.com/bareacts/CrPc/Criminal-Procedure-Code-1973.htm.As recently as 2008, the Indian Supreme Court noted police unwillingness toregister FIRs without pressure from higher authorities: See Lalita Kumari v.Gov’t of UP and Orissa, Writ Pet. (CRL.) No. 68, decided July 14,2008.[240] Codeof Criminal Procedure, secs. 154, 157, 173, http://www.vakilno1.com/bareacts/CrPc/Criminal-Procedure-Code-1973.htm.As recently as 2008, the Indian Supreme Court noted police unwillingness toregister FIRs without pressure from higher authorities: See Lalita Kumari v.Gov’t of UP and Orissa, Writ Pet. (CRL.) No. 68, decided July 14,2008.[241] Mohd.Shuaib v. Bar Council of India.[242]Kashif-ul-Huda and Mumtaz Alam Falahi, “Bar association expels lawyersrepresenting terror suspects,” The Muslim News, August 19, 2008. http://www.muslimnews.co.uk/news/news.php?article=14719(accessed September 17, 2009).[243] Mohd.Shuaib v. Bar Council of India.[244] Ibid.[245]“Can't direct contempt proceedings against lawyers, says SC,” TheTimes of India, November 8, 2008, http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/Cant_direct_contempt_proceedings_against_lawyers_says_SC_/articleshow/3687607.cms(accessed September 17, 2009).[246] HumanRights Watch interview with Shuaib, June 28, 2008.[247]“Lawyers Group Refuses to Defend Mumbai Suspects,” BreakingNews.ie, December 10, 2008, http://breakingnews.ie/world/lawyers-group-refuses-to-defend-mumbai-suspects-389928.html(accessed July 23, 2010).[248]“Shaken Kasab lawyer seeks time for rethink,” The Times of India,April 1, 2009, http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/Mumbai/Shaken-Kasab-lawyer-seeks-time-for-rethink/articleshow/4341541.cms(accessed July 23, 2010).[249] Ibid.[250]“Qasab's lawyer removed as Gymkhana trustee,” Indian Express,May 1, 2009, http://www.indianexpress.com/news/kasabs-lawyer-removed-from-islam-gymkhana/453443/(accessed June 26, 2009); Human Rights Watch Interview withAbbas Kazmi, Mumbai, June 26, 2009.[251] HumanRights Watch interview with Kazmi, June 26, 2009.[252]“KazmiCries Foul,” Indian Express, December 1, 2009, http://www.indianexpress.com/news/kazmi-cries-foul-says-nikam-humiliated-him-during-26-11-trial/548541/ (accessedDecember 7, 2009).[253]“Kasab has realised the inevitability of his fate,” Rediffnews.com,April 9, 2010, http://news.rediff.com/interview/2010/apr/09/interview-with-26-11-prosecutor-ujjwal-nikam.htm(accessed April 10, 2010).[254] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Amin Solkar, Mumbai, July 15, 2010. Copyof the SMS on file with Human Rights Watch.[255]JahidShaikh v. State of Gujarat, Transfer Petition (Crl.) No. 55 of 2010,Supreme Court of India, February 15, 2010, copy on file with Human RightsWatch. In an interview on June 20, 2009, in Ahmedabad, the defense attorney,Hashim Qureshi, told Human Rights Watch that in January 2009, he saw the judgemeeting privately with the investigating officer.[256] HumanRights Watch interview with R.K. Shah, special prosecutor, Ahmedabad, June 22,2009.[257] Formore information on police manipulation of the law to evade the 15-day cap, seethe section on extended custody in Chapter III,“Arbitary Detention.”[258] HumanRights Watch interview with Vikas Padora, attorney for Saqib Nisar, New Delhi,July 4, 2009. The allegations are contained in an Application for Directions,Court of Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Tis Hazari Courts, New Delhi, October15, 2009. Copy on file with Human Rights Watch.[259] HumanRights Watch interview with Jawahar Raja, defense counsel for Mohammad Shakeel,New Delhi, July 4, 2009.The petition, filed in Mohammad Shakeel v. NCT ofDelhi, High Court of Delhi, CMA 3549 (2008), is on file with Human RightsWatch. In November 2008, Gujarat police denied making the threat but did notdeny having visited Shakeel in the Delhi Special Cell lockup. By that time,Shakeel had already been in Gujarat police custody for more than two weeks.[260] HumanRights Watch email exchange with human rights attorney Sachin Pandya,Ahmedabad, November 11, 2008.[261]Human Rights Watch interview with Jawahar Raja, July 4, 2009. Theapplications are contained in Mohammad Shakeel v. NCT of Delhi, HighCourt of Delhi, CMA 3549 (2008), Annex R6.[262] Code of Criminal Procedure, sec. 167(3), http://www.vakilno1.com/bareacts/CrPc/Criminal-Procedure-Code-1973.htm.[263] DelhiHigh Court Rules, Part 3, Chapter 11, Part B.[264] HumanRights Watch interview in India. Details withheld to protect the intervieweefrom possible retaliation.[265] HumanRights Watch interview with attorney Amin Solkar, Mumbai, June 25, 2009.[266] HumanRights Watch interview with Azmi, June 25, 2009.[267] HumanRights Watch interview with attorney I.M. Munshi, Ahmedabad, June 20, 2009.[268] Indian Code of Criminal Procedure1973, sec. 279, http://www.vakilno1.com/bareacts/CrPc/Criminal-Procedure-Code-1973.htm.[269]“ICan't Change Pakistan's Attitude: Chidambaram,” Outlookindia.com, November27, 2009, http://news.outlookindia.com/item.aspx?670139 (accessed December 7,2009).[270]The co-defendants, Fahim Ansari and SabauddinAhmed, were accused of supplying LeT with a Mumbai map that was used in theMumbai attacks. See “How Ansari, Ahmed were acquitted in 26/11 terrortrial,” Indo-Asian News Service, May 3, 2010,http://sify.com/news/how-ansari-ahmed-were-acquitted-in-terror-trial-news-national-kfdwkehacjd.html(accessed May 3, 2010).[271] Informationin this section was obtained through Human Rights Watch interviews with AbbasKazmi in June 27, 2009, in Mumbai, from more than a half-dozen email andtelephone exchanges with Kazmi in December 2009 and March and August 2010, frominterviews with other defense attorneys in the trial in May 2010, frominterviews with independent legal experts, and from media reports. On thetorture allegations, see, for example, Erika Kinetz, “Mumbai gunmanwithdraws his confession as trial opens,” The Independent, April18, 2009, http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/asia/mumbai-gunman-withdraws-his-confession-as-trial-opens-1670428.html(accessed April 19, 2009); “Mumbai attacks trialadjourned after lawyer's plea,”The Economic Times, April 22, 2009, http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/politics/nation/Mumbai-attacks-trial-adjourned-after-lawyers-plea/articleshow/4434727.cms;Vikas Bajaj and Lydia Polgreen, “In Reversal, Mumbai Attacker AdmitsGuilt,” The New York Times, July 21, 2009, http://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/21/world/asia/21india.html?scp=1&sq=In%20Reversal,%20Mumbai%20Attack%20Admits%20Guilt&st=cse(accessed July 22, 2009).[272]Kasab’s allegations of forced confessions also were used by Pakistanigovernment officials to downplay India’s allegations that violentIslamist extremists were using Pakistan as a launch pad for attacks on Indiansoil. See, for example, Lydia Polgreen and Squad Mekhennet, “Network ofMilitants Is Robust After Mumbai Siege,” The New York Times, September30, 2009, http://www.nytimes.com/2009/09/30/world/asia/30mumbai.html (accessed September 30, 2009).[273] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with defense attorney Ezaz Nakvi, Mumbai, May2, 2010. Maharashtra Crime Branch police held Ahmed for two months from December2008 to February 2009, using a legal maneuver to bypass India’s two-weeklegal limit on police custody.[274] HumanRights Watch interview with Kazmi, June 27, 2009. The UN Standard Minimum Rulesfor the Treatment of Prisoners, Part 1, sec. 93, grant prisoners access to alawyer and say that: “Interviews between the prisoner and his legaladviser may be within sight but not within the hearing of a police orinstitution official,” http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/treatmentprisoners.htm. The Indian Evidence Act of 1872 as wellas Supreme Court rulings require attorney-client consultations to beconfidential, as noted in Chapter II, “Tortureand Other Ill-Treatment of Terrorism Suspects.” Kazmi argued that the guards were standing so close in thecourtroom that they were intimidating even if they could not hear theconversations.[275]ICCPR, art. 14-3(b), http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/ccpr.htm#art14.[276] TheNHRC was established through the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993, ChapterII, Section 3 (1), http://nhrc.nic.in/hract.htm (accessedDecember 29, 2010).[277] For furtherdetails on Abu Zafar see the section on arrests of relatives in Chapter III, “Arbitrary Detention.”[278] NHRCresponse to complaint No. 2556/6/1, February 8, 2009.[279]Several relatives in Azamgarh showed copies of letters and petitions sent tothe NHRC detailing complaints of arbitrary arrests, torture and forcedconfession to Human Rights Watch in July 2009. John Dayal, a Delhi-based humanrights activist and member of the government-appointed National IntegrationCouncil, told Human Rights Watch that he did not receive a response when herequested NHRC intervention to investigate the beatings of nearly two-dozenMuslim terrorism suspects in March 2009 in Ahmedabad’s Sabarmati Jail.Human Rights Watch exchanged emails with Dayal, in New Delhi, on September 9,2009.[280] HumanRights Watch interview with Y.S.R. Murthy, policy research director, NationalHuman Rights Commission, New Delhi, July 6, 2009.[281] Ibid.[282] HumanRights Watch interview with retired Supreme Court Justice and former NHRCChairman J.S.Verma, New Delhi, June 14, 2009. Chapter III, sec. 12(a) of TheProtection of Human Rights Act, 1993, grants the NHRC suo moto investigatorypowers.[283] TheProtection of Human Rights Act, 1993, Chapter II, sec. 3.[284]Mumtaz Alam Falahi, “NHRC Batla House Report burnt: Protests againstHuman Right Commission in New Delhi, Azamgarh,” Ummid.com, July25, 2009, http://www.ummid.com/news/July/25.07.2009/anti_nhrc_protests_in_various_parts.htm(accessed September 2, 2010).[285] HumanRights Watch interview with Zoya Hasan and other members of the NationalCommission for Minorities, New Delhi, June 15, 2009.[286]National Commission for Minorities Act, Chapter III, sec. 9, http://ncm.nic.in/ncm_act.html(accessed October 1, 2009).[287] UNSecurity Council, Resolution 1373 (2001), S/RES/1373,September 28, 2010, http://www.un.org/Docs/scres/2001/sc2001.htm (accessed January 10, 2010). See also Human Rights Watch, HearNo Evil, See No Evil: The U.N. Security Council’s Approach to HumanRights Violations in the Global Counter-Terrorism Effort, August 10, 2004, http://www.hrw.org/legacy/backgrounder/un/2004/un0804/;Anil Kalhan, et al., “Colonial Continuities:Human Rights, Terrorism, and Security Laws in India,” Columbia Journalof Asian Law, vol. 20, no. 1,2006,www.abcny.org/pdf/ABCNY_India_Report.pdf, pp. 213-224.[288]Kalhan, et al., “Colonial Continuities: HumanRights, Terrorism, and Security Laws in India,” www.abcny.org/pdf/ABCNY_India_Report.pdf, pp. 213-224.[289] For afuller discussion of the controversies surrounding UN counterterrorism mandatesand human rights, see James Cockayne, Alistair Millar, and Jason Ipe, “UNCounterterrorism and Human Rights: Time for a Reset?” in AnOpportunity for Renewal: Revitalizating the United Nations CounterterrorismProgram, Center on Global Counterterrorism Cooperation, September 2010, http://www.globalct.org/images/content/pdf/reports/Opportunity_for_Renewal_Final.pdf (accessed January 5, 2010), pp. 35-42.[290]UN Security Council, Resolution 1456 (2003), S/RES/1456,January 20, 2003, http://www.unhchr.ch/Huridocda/Huridoca.nsf/(Symbol)/S.RES.1456+(2003).En?Opendocument(accessed January 4, 2011), para. 6.[291] Inone important step, the UN Counter-Terrorism Committee appointed a human rightsadvisor to its executive directorate. But it did not do so until 2005 and itwas not until 2006 that the human rights advisor was actually allowed todirectly advise the executive directorate. See Eric Rosand, Alistair Millar,and Jason Ipe, The UN Security Council's Counterterrorism Program: What LiesAhead?, International Peace Institute, October 13, 2007, http://www.ipinst.org/publication/policy-papers/detail/105-the-un-security-councils-counterterrorism-program-what-lies-ahead.html(accessed January 10, 2010).InDecember 2010, the Security Council encouraged the Counter-TerrorismCommittee’s executive directorate to develop further human rightsactivities. See UN Security Council, Resolution 1963, S/RES/1963, December 20, 2010, http://www.un.org/Docs/sc/unsc_resolutions10.htm(accessed January 5, 2011).The UNSecurity Council in December 2009 passed a resolution creating an ombudsman tomediate requests from individuals, organizations, and companies to be removedfrom a controversial al Qaeda and Taliban sanctions list that can result in thefreezing of financial assets and travel bans. The ombudsman position wascreated in response to numerous complaints that the sanctioning committeelacked a meaningful appeals process. However, the Ombudsman does not have thepower to overturn listing decisions or even to make recommendations to thelisting committee, a political body that reaches decisions confidentially. SeeUN Security Council,Resolution 1904 (2009),S/RES/1904, adopted December 19, 2009, http://www.un.org/Docs/sc/unsc_resolutions09.htm(accessed May 22, 2010),  and UN Commission on Human Rights, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotionand protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while counteringterrorism, A/65/258, August 6, 2010,http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/65/258(accessed January 5,2011), para. 56.[292]Scheinin also called on the Security Council to systematize itscounterterrorism measures under one framework rather than several resolutions.See UN Commission on Human Rights, Report of theSpecial Rapporteur, A/65/258, http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/65/258,para. 39.[293]“Ambassador of India to Chair Counter-Terrorism Committee,”Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee statement, January 7, 2011, http://www.un.org/en/sc/ctc/news/2011-01-07india.html. India’s representative to the UN has expressed hiscommitment to “making the council’s counterterrorism machinery morerobust and effective.” See “Terror to be India’s focus atUNSC,” Hindustan Times, December 24, 2010, http://www.hindustantimes.com/News-Feed/americas/Terror-to-be-India-s-focus-at-UNSC/Article1-642487.aspx# (both accessed January 7, 2011).[294] Orderof Hasan Gafoor, late commissioner of police, Mumbai, “Sanction U/Sec. 23(2) of Maharashtra Control of Organized Crime Act, 1999,” February 12,2009. Copy on file with Human Rights Watch.[295]Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act of 1999, sec. 21(2).[296] TheICCPR in article 9 prohibits arbitrary arrest or detention, and states thatpre-charge detention periods must be “reasonable.” See thefollowing section of this chapter.[297]Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act of 1999, sec. 18. India in 2004repealed a federal counterterrorism law called the Prevention of Terrorism Act(POTA) in part because of widespread abuse of a similar provision admittingpolice confessions as evidence in court. For more on POTA, see the followingsection of this chapter.[298] HumanRights Watch interview, Amin Solkar, Mumbai, June 25, 2009. See also “IMmember loses hearing, blames it on police ‘torture,’” DailyNews & Analysis, October 31, 2008 http://www.dnaindia.com/mumbai/report_im-member-loses-hearing-blames-it-on-police-torture_1202192(accessed September 24, 2009).[299] HumanRights Watch interview with Asad Sheikh, Mumbai, June 25, 2009.[300] HumanRights Watch interview with Mahjabeen Sheikh, Mumbai, June 25, 2009.[301]Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act of 1999, secs.3(1)(i), 21(4) and (5), and 22.[302] SeeMCOCA, sec. 2(1)(e).[303]Constitution, art. 254.[304] HumanRights Watch interview with attorney Mahesh Jethmalani, Mumbai, June 24, 2009.[305] HumanRights Watch interview with MCOCA special prosecutor,Mumbai, June 2009. Name and exact date withheld because the prosecutor didnot have authorization to be interviewed and spoke oncondition of anonymity.[306] For amore detailed legal description of these laws, see Human Rights Watch,“Back To the Future: India’s 2008 Counterterrorism Laws,” www.hrw.org/en/reports/2010/07/28/back-future-0.[307] For areview of TADA’s and POTA’s inconsistencies with internationalhuman rights law, see Kalhan et al., “Colonial Continuities: Human Rights,Terrorism, and Security Laws in India,” www.abcny.org/pdf/ABCNY_India_Report.pdf.See also Human Rights Watch, Punjab in Crisis: Human Rights in India,August 1991,http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/1991/08/01/punjab-crisis,pp.148-157, regarding abuses under TADA.[308] HumanRights Watch, India Human Rights: Anti-Terrorism Legislation,backgrounder, November 20, 2001, http://www.hrw.org/backgrounder/asia/india-bck1121.htm.[309] TheTerrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act of 1985, (as amended in1987), secs. 20(4), 16 and 15.[310] SeeHuman Rights Watch and Ensaaf, “Protecting the Killers; A Policy ofImpunity in Punjab, India,”October 17, 2007, http://www.hrw.org/en/node/10644/section/1.[311]Kalhan et al. “Colonial Continuities: Human Rights, Terrorism, andSecurity Laws in India,” www.abcny.org/pdf/ABCNY_India_Report.pdf , pp.173-81.[312] Ibid,pp. 182-83, 192-93.[313] HumanRights Watch interview with Ravi Nair, executive director, South Asia HumanRights Documentation Centre, New Delhi, June 17, 2009.[314] MartinScheinin, the UN special rapporteur on the promotion and protection of humanrights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism, has emphasized therisks of vague and overly broad definitions of terrorism, accompanied by harshpenalties and wide ancillary powers of detention and investigation, whichauthorities can easily use to persecute political opponents or unpopular ormarginal religious and ethnic populations. To safeguard against such abuse,Scheinin recommends that any definition of terrorism contain the followingthree cumulative characteristics:-the acts are committed with theintention of causing death or serious bodily injury;-the acts are committed for thepurpose of provoking terror in the general public or part of it, intimidating apopulation, or compelling a government or an international organization to door refrain from doing any act;-theacts constitute offences within the scope of and as defined in theinternational conventions and protocols relating to terrorism.Report of the Special Rapporteur onthe Promotion and Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms whilecountering terrorism, E/CN.4/2006/98, December 28, 2005.[315] UAPA,sec. 15.[316] UAPA,secs.35-40.[317] Undersec. 2(o) of UAPA, an unlawful activity is any action (including speech andcommunication) that supports or is intended to support any claim for secession,which broadly “disclaims, questions, disrupts or is intended to disruptthe sovereignty and territorial integrity of India,” or that “causes or is intended to cause disaffection againstIndia.”[318] UAPA,sec. 3.[319] Thebanned group can apply to a judicial review committee but has no right to introducenew evidence or present witnesses in support of its application. See UAPA,secs. 36(4), 37. The UAPAprovidesthat the review committee may annul the central government’s refusal torevoke a declaration if “it considers that the decision to reject[de-listing] was flawed when considered in light of the principles on anapplication for judicial review.”[320] UAPA,sec. 6.[321] HumanRights Watch interviews with SIMI defense lawyers Jawahar Raja and Mayur Sureh,July 4, 2009, and Trideep Pais, June 18, 2009, New Delhi. In an unprecedentedruling, a special tribunal in New Delhi on August 5, 2008, lifted thegovernment’s ban on SIMI and scolded prosecutors for a lack of solidevidence to justify its extension. The following day, however, India’sSupreme Court stayed the tribunal’s decision.[322]ICCPR, art. 22, http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/ccpr.htm#art22.See also Manfred Nowak, UN Covenant on Civil and Political Rights: CCPRCommentary, pp. 504-508.[323]ICCPR, art. 2, http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/ccpr.htm#part2.[324] HumanRights Watch email from Raja, New Delhi, September 20, 2009, and interview withPais, New Delhi, June 18, 2009.[325] Human RightsWatch telephone interview with Salim Engineer, Rajasthanstate president of Jamaat-e-Islami Hind, Jaipur, July 5,2009. See also “Chargesheets filed against 11 SIMI activists,” TheTimes of India, November 19, 2008, http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/Chargesheets-filed-against-11-SIMI-activists/articleshow/3730238.cms(accessed July 20, 2009).[326] UAPAsec. 10 imposes a penalty of up to two years imprisonment for membership in anunlawful association. Under sec. 20, the maximum sentence for membership in aterrorist organization involved in a terrorist act is life in prison.[327] UAPA,secs. 18-19.[328] HumanRights Watch interview with Nitya Ramakrishnan, New Delhi, July 7, 2009.[329] UAPAsecs. 43A, F, 43F. These provisions confer discretionfor search, seizure, and arrest that is much broaderthan under the Indian criminal procedure code, which as a general rule requiresa threshold of “reasonable suspicion” for arrest and“reasonable grounds” for searches by a police officer. See Code ofCriminal Procedure, secs. 41 and 165, http://www.vakilno1.com/bareacts/CrPc/Criminal-Procedure-Code-1973.htm.[330] UAPAsec. 43D.[331] HumanRights Watch documented numerous cases of abuse during pre-charge policedetention in its August 2009 report, Broken System: Dysfunction, Abuse andImpunity in the Indian Police, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2009/08/04/broken-system-0, pp. 67-73. The Law Commission ofIndia, in its 1994 report on custodial crimes, stated: “Members of theweaker or poorer sections of society, are arrested informally and kept inpolice custody for days together without any entry of such arrests in thepolice records. During the informal detention they are subjected to torture,which at times results in death.” Law Commission of India, “152ndReport on Custodial Crimes,” 1994, http://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in/101-169/Report152.pdf(accessed June 16, 2009), para. 1.5.[332] UAPA,sec. 43D(2)(b).[333]The ICCPR in article 9 also upholds the right toliberty and prohibits arbitrary arrest or detention. It is well established ininternational human rights law that any interference with the fundamental rightto liberty must be shown to be strictly necessary and proportionate. The UNHuman Rights Committee in 2008 concluded that it was “disturbed” bythe United Kingdom’s Counter-Terrorism Bill 2008, which permits a 28-daypre-charge detention in terrorism cases, and was “even moredisturbed” by the proposed extension of this maximum detention period to42 days. The Committee recommended, consistent with the ICCPR, that suspects be “promptly informed of anycharges and tried within a reasonable time or released.” See Human RightsCommittee, Final Conclusions and Recommendations on Reports of the UnitedKingdom, France, San Marino and Ireland, 93rd session, July 25,2008, para. 15, http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrc/hrcs93.htm(accessed June 8, 2010).[334] UAPA, sec. 43D(5).[335] Code of Criminal Procedure, sec. 439, http://www.vakilno1.com/bareacts/CrPc/Criminal-Procedure-Code-1973.htm.[336] ICCPR, art. 9(3), http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/ccpr.htm#art9.[337] UAPA,sec. 43E.[338] Whilethe Indian Constitution does not expressly guarantee the presumption ofinnocence, the Supreme Court of India has included such a presumption in itsholdings concerning the constitutional right to a fair trial. See SupremeCourt, State of Punjab v. Baldev Singh, AIR 1999 SC 2378.[339]ICCPR, art. 14(2), http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/ccpr.htm#art14.[340] UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 32, Article 14:Right to equality before courts and tribunals and to a fair trial, U.N. Doc.CCPR/C/GC/32 (2007), para. 30.[341] UNHuman Rights Committee, General Comment No. 29 on Article 4: States ofEmergency, U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.11 (2001), para. 11.[342]National Investigation Agency Act, 2008, No.75-C.[343] NIAAsec. 9 states that “a State Government shall extend all assistance andcooperation [to NIA] for investigation of [terror related offences].”[344]Chidambaram, Intelligence Bureau Centenary Endowment lecture, official transcript,December 23, 2009, New Delhi, http://www.mha.nic.in/pdfs/HM-IB-Endowment231209.pdf.[345] NIAA,sec. 6(3), states that “the Central Government shall determine... within15 days... whether the offence is a Scheduled Offence or not.” Section6(4) states that the government will then decide whether “saidoffence” is “fit” for NIA investigation.[346] NIAA,sec. 4(1), states that, “the superintendence of the Agency shall vest inthe Central Government” but does not define superintendence. “Inthe past, the failure to define superintendence in police acts at both thestate and central levels has demonstrably led to the politicisation of policingwith all its attendant ills,” according to a 2008 report from a NewDelhi-based nongovernmental organization detailing shortcomings in the NIA. SeeCommonwealth Human Rights Initiative, Feudal Forces: Reform Delayed - Movingfrom Force to Service in South Asian Policing, 2008, http://www.humanrightsinitiative.org/publications/police/feudal_forces_reform_delayed_moving_from_force_to_service_in_south_asian_policing.pdf(accessed December 29, 2010).[347] HumanRights Watch interviews with Indian security analysts including Sanjay Patil,consultant on police reforms with the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative(CHRI) and author of the CHRI report “Feudal Forces: Reform Delayed,”New Delhi, June 15, 2009.[348] Ibid.[349] NIAA,sec. 11(3).[350] Forprevious violations in this regard, see Kalhan, et al., “ColonialContinuities: Human Rights, Terrorism, and Security Laws in India,” www.abcny.org/pdf/ABCNY_India_Report.pdf,pp. 165-66.[351]NIAA, sec. 11(2).[352] See BasicPrinciples on the Independence of the Judiciary,adopted by the Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and theTreatment of Offenders, Milan, August 26 to September 6 1985, U.N. Doc.A/CONF.121/22/Rev.1 at 59 (1985), http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/instree/i5bpij.htm(accessed January 4, 2011), paras. 3 and 5.[353]ICCPR, art. 14; also see the Human Rights Committee, GeneralComment 32, para. 21. The Constitution of India, art. 50, upholds theseparation of the judiciary from the executive; http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/ccpr.htm#art14.[354]NIAA, sec. 17(1).[355]ICCPR, art. 14(1); Human Rights Committee, General Comment 32, UNDoc CCPR/C/GC/32, paras. 28-29.[356]ICCPR, art. 14(1), permits closed proceedings “for reasons ofmorals, public order… or national security in a democratic society, or tothe extent strictly necessary where publicity would prejudice the interests ofjustice.” However, the UN Human Rights Committee general comment 32,para. 29, has stressed that in camera proceedings should be held in“exceptional circumstances” in accordance with the exceptions setout in ICCPR, art. 14(1).[357]NIAA, secs. 17(2)-(3).[358]ICCPR, art. 14(3)(e). See also the European Court of Human Rights, VanMechelen v. Netherlands (App. 21363/93, 21364/93, 21427/93, 22056/93),Judgment of 23 April 1997; (1998) 25 EHRR 647; ECtHR, P.S. v. Germany(App. 33900/96), Judgment of December 20, 2001.[359] CHRI,Feudal Forces.[360] “Courtraps police for probe delay,” Asian Age, September 25, 2010, http://www.asianage.com/delhi/court-raps-police-probe-delay-464(accessed September 27, 2010).[361] HumanRights Watch interviews with defense attorneys in Delhi, Ahmedabad, and Mumbai, June-July, 2009. See also ‘Encounter’at Batla House: Unanswered Questions, Jamia teachers’ Solidarity Association,April 2009, p. 28.[362] ‘Encounter’at Batla House: Unanswered Questions, p. 29.[363]“IM’sSadiq Sheikh let off in 7/11 case,” Indian Express, May 12, 2009,http://www.indianexpress.com/news/ims-sadiq-sheikh-let-off-in-7-11-case/457699(retrieved August 25, 2009).[364]“Policeyet to nab 14 accused,” Press Trust of India, September 13, 2009.Police have also accused some alleged IM members for a series of blasts in thestate of Uttar Pradesh in 2006-07.[365] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with attorney M.S. Khan, June 29, 2010.[366] ShailendraMohan, “Pune cops goof-up: Got blast site washed,” HindustanTimes, February 20, 2010, www.hindustantimes.com/rssfeed/maharashtra/Pune-cops-goof-up-Got-blast-site-washed/Article1-510781.aspx(accessed March 1, 2010).[367] HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Indian intelligence expert close to theinvestigations who spoke on condition of anonymity, May 2010.[368]“The National Investigation Agency,” Hindustan Times, July2, 2009.[369]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with Ajai Sahni, executivedirector, Institute for Conflict Management, New Delhi, June 16, 2009.[370] P.Chidambaram, Intelligence Bureau Centenary Endowment lecture, officialtranscript, December 23, 2009, New Delhi, http://www.mha.nic.in/pdfs/HM-IB-Endowment231209.pdf(accessed April 1, 2010).[371] Ibid.[372]“US-Indian security ties boosted after Mumbai: official,” AgenceFrance-Presse, June 19, 2009.[373] HumanRights Watch telephone interviews with security experts in New Delhi includingSahni, May 4, 2010; Vikram Sood, former secretary of R&AW, New Delhi, May7, 2010; Ajit Doval, former Intelligence Bureau director, New Delhi, May 7,2010; Praveen Swami, then-associate editor, The Hindu, New Delhi, May 7, 2010;and with security analyst C. Christine Fair of Georgetown University, May 6,2010. Also see Avnish Patel, “After Mumbai - India's Response,”Royal United Services Institute, November 5, 2009, http://www.rusi.org/analysis/commentary/ref:C4B0D3DCA5D253(accessed January 5, 2010).[374] EricRosand, Naureen Chowdhury Fink, and Jason Ipe, Countering Terrorism in SouthAsia: Strengthening Multilateral Engagement, Center for GlobalCounterterrorism Cooperation, May 2009, pp. 8-9.[375] HumanRights Watch interview with Maj. Gen. DipankarBanerjee,director, Instituteof Peace & Conflict Studies, New Delhi, June 17, 2009.Related ContentFebruary 2, 2011News ReleaseIndia: Overhaul Abusive Counterterrorism TacticsTorture and Forced Confessions Alienate Populations, Bolster Militant GroupsFebruary 2, 2011News ReleaseIndia: Overhaul Abusive Counterterrorism TacticsRegion / CountryAsia IndiaProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch