 
 
 AAIA  
ASSOCIATION  ON AMERICAN  INDIAN  AFFAIRS  
2008 Annual Report 
Serving American Indian and Alaska Native Communities for 86 years 
AAIA - working to provide the critical elements that Native American Indian 
children and families need to live happy, healthy and productive lives.  
 
 A S AN ORGANIZATION  with a modest budget, we desi gn our programs and determine our 
priorities with great care.   We work both nationa lly and at the grass roots level.  We focus upon  
programs where a small amount of targeted re sources can make a huge difference.    
 
 
The mission of the AAIA is to promote the welfare of American  Indians and Alaska Natives by  supporting efforts to – 
  
♦ Sustain and perpetuate cultures and languages – This includes  sacred lands protection, repat riation and Native language preser-
vation. 
 
♦ Protect sovereignty, constitutional, legal and human rights and natural resources – This includes Native religious freedom, federal 
acknowledgment and Indian child welfa re work that protects Indian 
children and families and increases funding available to tribal  
governments for these purposes.   
 
♦ Improve health, education and economic and community develop-
ment – This includes scholarships, summer camps, Native language education and promoting Native youth health and wellness. 
 AAIA’s Mission     2 
www.indian-affairs.org ASSOCIATION  ON AMERICAN  INDIAN  AFFAIRS  
 
 AAIA  
DEAR FRIENDS : 
 
I am pleased to present our 2008 Annual Report. 
 
Programmatically, 2008 was another very successful year for the A ssociation.  In particular, I 
would like to note two successes that were the culmina tion of  many years of ef fort by AAIA.  The first 
is the enactment of the Fostering Connections for Success and Increasing Adoptions Act of 2008.   This 
law allows tribal child welfare programs to dir ectly access the Title IV-E Foster Care and Adoption 
Assistance Program – a law designed to help the need iest of our children, thos e at risk of abuse or  
neglect.  AAIA began working on this  issue 20 years ago when we testif ied before Congress.   At that 
time, we were virtually alone in our advocacy.   Finally, in 2008, as 
part of a Coalition that included tribes, national Indian organiza-
tions such as the National Indian Child Welfare Association and National Congress of American Indi ans, and child welfare organi-
zations, this legislation was enacted.   It is an example of our relent-
less approach to issues and problems.   As long as there is hope, we will not give up until we reach our goals. 
 Another example involves the protection of the Bighorn 
Medicine Wheel/Medicine Mountain in Wyoming.   Although over the years we have had great success in changing the management by the Forest Service to better prot ect this site, we had been unable 
to get agreement on the boundaries to be included in a proposed 
National Historic Landmark nomina tion for the site that would be 
based upon its traditional cultural valu e.  This nomination is vitally 
important to ensure that the protec tions at the site are permanent.   But we did not give up.   Working 
with the Medicine Wheel Coalition, we continued to  talk and negotia te with the local community and 
Forest Service to try to reach a consensus.   Finally, after a process that lasted several years, we reached 
agreement on the boundary in 2008.   A nomination will be prepared in 2009 and I am confident that it 
will be approved by the Secretary of the Interior. 
 
 As you read this report, you will see progress in many other areas as well.   Our language preservation  program has started to gain a national reputation for the quality and innovative nature of the materials that it has 
created.   We are greatly indebted to our Treasured Elders in the language program wit hout whom this would not 
have been possible.  Our scholarship and summer camp programs continue to provide  critical funding to support 
Indian students and youth and our efforts to improve the quality of services provided  by non-profits in Indian com-
munities took a big step forward with the incorporation of the Native Ways Federation.   Unfortunately, 2008 was not as good a year finan-cially for AAIA.  Although we raised more money in 2008 than we raised in 2007, the stock market crash in the 
last quarter of 2008 significan tly reduced our assets.    A Message from the President  3 
   As long as 
  there is hope, 
  we will not 
  give up until    we reach our    goals. 
    Alfred R. Ketzler,   
 President, Athabascan Although conservatively invested, our portfolio was re duced in value by more than 25%.   This will 
make the continuation of our programs at th e same level much more difficult in 2009. 
 We will be tightening our belts and will make every effort to be as effici ent as possible in 2009.  
Because we know that our programs ar e important to Indian country, they are the last place that we will 
look for cuts.  
We know that many of our members and suppor ters have also suffered from the economic 
downturn.   But I urge those of you who can to continue to support AAIA  as generously as possible.   
The needs in Indian country are still great and AAIA’s efforts to addre ss these needs depends upon 
your support. 
 To our members, I thank you again fo r your generosity over the years. 
      Sincerely,    
    Alfred R. Ketzler, Sr. 
    P r e s i d e n t  
    Athabascan  
 
 A Message from the President    
     4  
Mission Statement     
    
Message from the President     
      
Programs  
 
Sustain and Perpetuate Cultures and Languages  
 
Sacred Lands      
     
Repatriation      
     
Language Preservation   
   
Protect Sovereignty, Constitutional, Legal and 
Human Rights and Natural Resources 
 
Native Religious Freedom    
   
Federal Acknowledgement    
   
Indian Child Welfare     
   
Improve Health, Education and Economic and 
Community Development  
 
Empowering Non-Profit Organizations 
       
Scholarships     
   
Youth Summer Camps    
 
Public Education  
 
Training and Publications  
     
Film Festival      
   
Financial Information  
 
Statement of Financial Position   
  
Statement of Activities    
  
Leadership  
 
Board of Directors     
  
Staff 
 
Show Your Support      
 
Contact Information 
   
 
2 
 
3 
 
 
     
 
6 
 
8 
 
9 
 
  
 
 
 
11 
 
12 
 
13 
  
 
    
15 
 
16 
 
18 
    
21 
 
21 
     
22 
 
23 
   
 
25 
 
26 
 
27 
 
Back Cover 
 
 Table of Contents  5 
 
 Sacred Lands 
 
LAND AND NATURAL  FORMATIONS  are inex-
tricably intertwined with the practice of traditional Native American religions and cultures.  The rela-tionship between physical areas and traditional  
cultural and religious ceremonies is a basic and  essential component of thos e cultures and religions.  
Many ceremonies and rituals must be performed at specific places.  These sites may be places where spirits live or that othe rwise serve as bridges  
between the temporal worl d and the sacred.   Com-
monly, these places are referre d to as sacred sites. 
 
A large number of sites sacred to traditional 
Indian cultures and religions  are located on lands not 
owned by Indians.  Historic ally, the goals and needs 
of those who want to “develop” land are more read-ily incorporated into go vernment land management 
policies and decision-making than are the religious and cultural beliefs of Na tive Americans affected by 
that development. 
 For that reason, we have worked closely with 
tribes across the country for decades to help them fight development that will have an adverse impact 
upon their sacred sites and traditional cultural places.   These efforts continued during 2008.    We have persisted in our effort to protect 
Medicine Wheel/Medicine Mountain in Wyoming, a site that is very sacred to many Plains tribes.  AAIA has played an integral role  in regard to Medicine 
Wheel and Medicine M ountain for many years. 
AAIA helped create the Medicine Wheel Coalition, a coalition of Plains Trib es who have a traditional 
history of using the Medicine Wheel and Medicine Mountain for spiritual purpos es.  With the assistance 
of AAIA, the Coalition ne gotiated and signed in 
1996 a landmark Historic Preservation Plan (HPP) with the Forest Service, as well as state and local government agencies, designed to ensure that the entire area around Medicine Wheel and Medicine Mountain is managed in a manner that protects the integrity of the site as a sacred site.      
 When a local logging company filed a federal court lawsuit seeking to overturn the HPP, AAIA  
represented the Medicine Wheel Coalition when it  decided to intervene in the case.  The Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals ultimatel y dismissed the case in 
2004 and review was denied by the United States  
Supreme Court.  
Subsequently, in 2005, the Bighorn Forest  
Service adopted a new Forest Plan which fully incor-porated the HPP, something for which the Association 
and the Coalition actively advocated. 
 In 2008, the focus was to make sure that these 
management changes are permanent.  In order to achieve this end, AAIA and the Coaliti on advocated 
that Medicine Wheel/Medicine Mountain be desig-nated as a National Historic Landmark (NHL) for its traditional cultural value.  For a number of years, the Forest, Coalition, AAIA and interested state and local governments have been disc ussing what the boundary 
for the proposed NHL should be.   The perspectives of the local community and tribes were initially quite  different and we have enga ged in a long and difficult 
process trying to reach cons ensus.  Finally, in Decem-
ber 2008, all of the parties agreed to prepare a NHL 
nomination for an area that would consist of about 3,500 acres.  The area includes the entire mountain and a nearby creek that is used as a staging area for ceremonies.  A larger area of about 19,000 acres (the 
entire area covered by the HPP) would also be nomi-
nated as a National Register di strict.   It is expected 
that a nomination to achieve this goal will be prepared 
during 2009. Sustain and Perpetuate Cultures and Languages     6 
 
 Sacred Lands 
 
IN 2008, WE ALSO  CONTINUED  to represent 
the Hualapai Tribe and Nava jo and Hopi traditional 
practitioners in their lawsuit which is seeking to  protect the San Francisco Peak s in northern Arizona.  
The Peaks are very sacred to a number of tribes,  including the Navajo, Hopi , Hualapai, Havasupai, 
and Apache.  The United States Forest Service has approved an expansion of the Arizona Snowbowl Ski Area on the Peaks, the most objectionable part of which is a proposal to us e treated sewage effluent 
for snowmaking.   It is undi sputed that this develop-
ment will have a severely negative impact upon the ability of the tribes to conduct important religious 
ceremonies, including the Navajo Blessingway and Hualapai healing ceremonies.  
In 2007, a three judge pa nel of the Ninth  
Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the tribal claims, 
finding that the developmen t violated both the Reli-
gious Freedom Restoration Act and the National  Environmental Policy Act.  Unfortunately, in 2008,  
the Ninth Circuit agreed to review the case en banc .   
An eleven judge panel reve rsed the panel and upheld 
the government’s decision.  The tribes and practi-tioners plan to seek revi ew of this decision by the 
United States Supreme Court.  
As part of our sacred  lands work, AAIA also 
frequently receives requests from tribes and their attor-neys to provide technical as sistance, short of actual 
legal representation in a part icular case.  We respond 
to these requests whenever possible.  Thus, in addition to the sacred lands seminars that we offer and presen-tations that we make (see the public education  section), we also provide input in regard to specific sites; for example, in 2008, we provided technical  
assistance to the Pit River Tribe in its efforts to protect the sacred Medicine Lake in California. 
 We also participate in national and interna-
tional efforts to protect sacr ed places.   For example, 
in 2008, we provided input into draft guidelines for protecting sacred sites that  are being developed by 
UNESCO. Sustain and Perpetuate Cultures and Languages 7 
San Francisco Peaks—Photo:  Williams Travel  
 Repatriation 
 
 T HE ASSOCIATION  PLAYED  a key role in ef-
forts to obtain enactment of the Native American Graves Protection and Re patriation Act (NAGPRA) 
in 1990.  That law mandates repatriation of cultur-ally affiliated human remains, funerary objects,  sacred objects and cultural patrimony to Indian tribes.  We have worked since 1990 to promote the effective implementation of that Act and to encour-age repatriation.  In 2008, our activities included:  
♦ Serving as part of a National Congress of American Indians (NCAI) Task Force to review draft regulations on the disposi-tion of cultural unidentified human re-mains that were proposed by the Depart-ment of Interior.  We worked with the Task Force to help develop comments for NCAI and also submitted short com-ments of our own supporting the ability of tribes to obtain the repatriation of 
these remains and associated funerary 
objects.  We also participated in a panel discussion on the issue at a National Con-gress of American Indians (NCAI) con-ference.  
 
♦ Facilitating the return of a 19th Century 
headdress, believed to be of Cheyenne or Arapaho origin.   The headdress had been discovered wrapped in a World War I uniform in an attic in North Carolina.  
AAIA worked with a professional ap-praiser hired by the family to determine its origin and to facilitate its return to the appropriate tribe.  The Medicine Wheel 
Coalition on Sacred Sites of North Amer-ica, a coalition of Plains tribes whose Board consists of traditional cultural practitioners, agreed to assist in this proc-
ess and take temporary legal custody of   
 
 
 
the headdress.  The Senator John Heinz Pitts-burgh Regional History Center agreed to take physical custody of the headdress on a tempo-rary basis to ensure th at it would be protected 
pending final repatriation. 
 
 Sustain and Perpetuate Cultures and Languages     8 
 
 Language Preservation  
 
 I T IS WELL  RECOGNIZED  that most Native 
languages are in danger.  Of 155 Native languages spoken in North America today, 135 are endangered.  The majority of languages are spoken fluently only by grandparents.     Preserving and promoting the use of Native languages strengthens and preserves tribal communi-ties and cultures and, by  focusing upon the youth, 
strengthens the self-estee m of the most vulnerable 
individuals in the community.  It also increases the chances that the children involved will be high  academic achievers in general.     The initial focus of our  Native language pres-
ervation program has been on the Dakotah language.   
 During 2008, the Association on American 
Indian Affairs Native Language program continued working for and with schools to create learning ma-terials for use by their teach ers.  To paraphrase one 
teacher: “If I want to find math curriculum, I simply go on-line and can find whatever  I need.  If I want to 
find curriculum and materials to teach a  native language, there is no where else to go.”  This 
void is being filled as much as possible by the AAIA Native Language Program.  
In 2008, we also continued with our commu-
nity language awareness pr oject.  We created a  
series of motivational posters in the Dakotah  
language.  These now hang in many schools and in 
tribal offices.  In addi tion, we created teaching post-
ers in several subject areas.   Even though the continuing focus of the AAIA Native Language Program  is to revitalize  
native languages, we cannot  ignore the fact that 
preservation also needs to take place.  So during 2008, the AAIA Native Language Program also em-barked on a project to record elders speaking in their heritage language for the sole purpose of archiving the material.  
 
   
 Although our materials are created in Dakotah, 
they are designed to be easily translated into any lan-guage.  For example in 2008, the Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe began translating our K-2 curriculum created 
in 2007 into the Ojibwe language.  
 
 Sustain and Perpetuate Cultures and Languages 9 
Sustain and Perpetuate Cultures and Languages   10 
In 2008 we created and published the  
following titles:  
Going to a Name Giving – a book about 
having respect 
 
Fish Head Soup – a book based on a true 
story about a Sioux man who was a pris-oner of war during the Korean War  
 
Going to the Eye Doctor – a book about a 
girl’s first pair of glasses 
 
I am Dakotah – a book about children 
identifying with their tribe 
 
Table Manners – a book about having  
table manners 
 
Lake Traverse – a book about the history 
of one of the Sioux Tribes 
 
Zitkanna – a book about birds  
 
Grandma’s house – a book about visiting 
Grandma  
 
I like dogs – a book about sizes and 
shapes 
 
What Are They Hiding – a book about a 
traditional game (moccasin) which teaches colors 
 
Healthy Eating – a book about eating 
healthy [to prevent diabetes]  
The Rabbit and the Bear with the Flint 
Body – a traditional story  
 
Island of Stones – a traditional story 
about how an island in a lake got its name  
 Native Religious Freedom 
 
As mentioned on page 7 of this report, AAIA 
has been representing tribal and Indian plaintiffs in litigation involving the San Fr ancisco Peaks.   That 
case, Navajo Nation v. United States Forest Service , 
is important not only because of the importance of the Peaks, but also because  of the legal principles 
involved.   The case involves the interpretation of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993 (RFRA).   This Act was a statutory response to the 
Supreme Court case of Employment Division,  
Department of Human Resources of Oregon v. Smith 
(Smith)  where the U.S. Supreme Court severely  
limited the compelling test that had previously been applied in First Amendment cases as a matter of constitutional law.  Specifically, the Act provides that governmental activity may not substantially  burden a person’s free exercise of religion unless the activity is in furtherance of a compelling govern-mental interest and is the least restrictive means of furthering that interest.   At issue in the Navajo Nation  case is the 
meaning of the term of s ubstantial burden.   The  
Ninth Circuit en banc decision that ruled  
against the tribes defined th e term very narrowly – to 
include only those governme nt actions that coerce  
religious practitioners to act contrary to their beliefs or 
deprive individuals of speci fic government benefits.   
Other circuits have interpreted this test more broadly – for example, the Tenth Circuit test does not require that coercion be present.   It requires only that govern-
ment action “significantly i nhibit or constrain religious 
conduct or expression…[or] meaningfully curtail [an 
individual’s] ability to expr ess adherence to his or her 
faith.” Largely because of this different test, a Federal district court in the 10
th Circuit recently ruled in favor 
of the Comanche Nation in a sacred lands case.   Thus, the outcome of the Navajo Nation  case 
will have real world impacts upon not only sacred lands protection, but upon th e protection of religious 
practices by Indians and non-Indians alike in a variety of contexts.   Until AAIA became involved with the Navajo 
Nation  case, RFRA had not been used as a mechanism 
to protect sacred lands.   Although the ultimate inter-
pretation of RFRA is in doubt, AAIA advocacy has already had a positive impact on this issue. 
 
 Protect Sovereignty, Constitutional, Legal and Human Rights and Natural Resources 11 
San Francisco Peaks—Photo:  Webshots  
 Federal Acknowledgement 
 
AAIA has been working with non-
recognized tribes to gain  federal recognition for 
many years.  The issue of recognition is an issue of the rule of law, human rights and national responsi-
bility.  
♦ The tragic history of relations between American Indians and the United States has, in many cases, created the conditions by which many Tribes go unrecognized today.  
Withholding recognition punishes legitimate Tribes for that tragic history and ignores the many benefits that the United States has de-rived from it. 
 
♦ Federal recognition allows Tribes to control their own destiny thro ugh the exercise of 
governmental authority and ensures that the tribe will continue to exist for the benefit of tribal children yet unborn. 
 
♦ Acknowledgment by the federal government also makes tribal members eligible for basic Federal services such as health care and edu-cation.   In 2008, AAIA participated in a National 
Congress of American Indians (NCAI) Task Force on Federal Recognition, including the drafting of materials helping to explai n the importance of recog-
nition to the NCAI membersh ip and policymakers.   
In addition, we continued to provide financial assis-
tance and technical support to the Piro/Manso/Tiwa 
Tribe of Las Cruces, New Me xico.   They are in the 
process of updating and editing their petition for fed-eral recognition in anticipati on of the review of that 
petition in 2009-2010 by the Office of Federal Ac-knowledgment (OFA), which is  part of the Bureau 
of Indian Affairs.  In order for such a petition to suc-ceed, among other things, it must document that the tribe is a distinct community, has been recognized as an American Indian entity  since 1900, and that its  
members are descendant from historical tribes exercis-
ing political authority.   Voluminous documentation is 
required for each of the criteria.   It is a daunting task for tribes seeking recognition and the process has been criticized as unduly burdensome and extremely slow.    In recent years, Congress has been reluctant to recog-nize tribes legisla tively, however.   For that reason, the 
OFA process has been the primary focus for most un-recognized tribes. 
  Some unrecognized tribes have been working 
to maximize their exercise of sovereignty within the framework of state recogn ition, even while working 
toward federal recognition.   AAIA has supported that 
effort, including providing t echnical assistance to the 
Nanticoke-Lenni Lenape I ndians of New Jersey, a 
state recognized tribe. 
  Protect Sovereignty, Constitutional, Legal and Human Rights and Natural Resources   12 
 
 Indian Child Welfare 
 
AAIA has continued its efforts to promote 
the well-being of Indian children and families through the appropriate implementation of the  Indian Child Welfare Act and related laws and by seeking to generate resources for tribal child welfare programs so that they provi de the quality services 
that their children and families need.   AAIA studies completed in the 1970s  revealed that Indian childr en were placed in foster 
care and for adoption far more than non-Indian  children.  The results of these studies led Congress to invite AAIA to work with them to develop legis-lation to deal with this s ituation.  That legislation 
became the Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978 (ICWA).  ICWA has provide d vital protections to 
Indian children, families and tribes during the last 30 years and AAIA has worked to ensure that the Act is fully and effectively implemented.   These efforts to enhance the well-being of Indian children and families  have taken a variety of 
forms in 2008. 
 
Legislation :  Our efforts resulted in a major 
legislative accomplishment in 2008 that will 
strengthen protections for Indian children and families.   The 110
th 
Congress passed the most significant child welfare legislation in more than a decade – the Fostering Connec-tions to Success and Increasing Adoptions Act of 2008.  
Most significantly for Indi an children and families, 
the bill makes Indian tribes eligible for  direct funding under the Titl e IV-E Foster Care and 
Adoption Assistance program for the first time.   For almost 30 years, the Ti tle IV-E program has  
  
 
provided funding for childr en who have been  
subjected to abuse or neglect  and who must be placed 
in foster care or for adopti on -- the neediest children in 
the community.  Yet Indian tribal governments have never been able to apply to the federal government for direct funding under the program – until now. 
 
AAIA has been advocating for the inclusion of 
tribes in the program since 1990/91 when we testified 
before the House Ways and Means and Senate Finance 
Committees on this issue.  We explained that tribes have the primary, and in most cases, the exclusive  authority to serve these child ren, but have been forced 
to do so with a patchwork of funding because of their ineligibility for this program .  Over the last several 
years, we worked closely with Congress and a coali-tion on Indian and child welfare organizations, such as the National Indian Child Welfare Association,  National Congress of Amer ican Indians, Child  
Welfare League of America and Children’s Defense Fund, to finally make this law a reality. 
 
The Fostering Connections Act also expanded 
the Title IV-E program to a llow payments to be made 
to children in relative guardianships.  This change is important to  Indian communities since it is traditional 
for extended families to step forward when a child 
needs a good home. 
  Protect Sovereignty, Constitutional, Legal and Human Rights and Natural Resources 13 
  
 Indian Child Welfare 
 
After enactment of this bill, AAIA turned its 
energy to the implementation of the law, including making a presentation at th e National Congress of 
American Indians (NCAI) Annual Conference, preparation of fact sheets and meetings with federal 
officials charged with implementing the law.  
 Litigation:   We provided technical assis-
tance in an Indian Child Welfare Act case in Califor-
nia dealing with the issue of when the tribal notice requirement in the Act should be triggered. 
 
Other Activities:   We participated in a Task 
Force charged with reviewing standards that were  being developed by the Counc il on Accreditation in 
the areas of Child Protection, Family Preservation  Services, Adoption Services , Kinship Care and Fos-
ter Care to ensure those standards would be consis-tent with and adequately implement the Indian Child  Welfare Act.  Many state, local and private agencies seek accreditation from COA as a means of improv-ing the level of their serv ices and receiving recogni-
tion of the quality of their work.  Thus, strengthen-ing COA’s standards can ha ve a direct impact upon 
the quality of services provi ded to Indian children by 
these agencies.  
  
 Protect Sovereignty, Constitutional, Legal and Human Rights and Natural Resources   14 
 
 Empowering Non-Pr ofit Organizations 
 
In 2007, AAIA joined toge ther with six other 
national non-profit Indian organizations to form the Native Ways Federation.    One significant purpose of the Federation is to es tablish standards of opera-
tion for national American Indian/Alaska Native non-profit organizations.  The participation by any non-profit organization in this program would be 
entirely voluntary, but by meeting those standards an 
organization will be able to demonstrate that it is a bona fide  organization making meaningful contribu-
tions to the well-being of Native peoples.   Secondly, the Federation will also be developing a workplace 
giving campaign designed to provide additional sup-port to organizations that meet Federation standards 
and choose to become members of the Federation. 
 In 2008, significant progress was made in 
making the Federation a reality.  Articles of Incorpo-ration and By-laws were dr afted, the Federation was 
incorporated under Navajo tribal law and submitted an application to the Internal Revenue Service for 501(c)(3) non-profit st atus.   It received its first grant 
and hired an Executive Dir ector.    AAIA’s Execu-
tive Director serves on the Board of Directors of the Native Ways Foundation and AAIA provided sig-nificant legal assistance throughout the incorporation and 501(c)(3) processes. 
 We believe that the Federation will play a 
major role in enhancing the quality of services to Native communities.   Establishing the Foundation 
under tribal law will also cr eate a precedent for other 
organizations and tribes to empower their communi-ties by chartering and creating non-profit organiza-tions to meet the needs of those communities.   The Native Ways initiative dovetails with our advocacy in Congress for technical amendments to the Tribal Governmental Tax Status Act – a law originally drafted by AAIA attorneys.   Those amendments would make sure that non-profit or- 
ganizations that receive support from tribal govern-ments or are created by tribes would still be treated as public charities eligible to receive tax deductible con-tributions and foundation gran ts.   Unfortunately, this 
law was not passed in 2008, but  we are hopef ul that it 
will be re-introduced and enacted in the next Con-
gress.   Improve Health, Education and Economic and  Community Development 15 
 
 Scholarships 
 
 
AAIA HAS A LONG  HISTORY  of assisting college stu-
dents to reach their edu cational and life goals by 
providing scholarships.  For the 2008 school year, 
AAIA funded 126 students through our 8 scholar-
ship programs with some scholarships being dis-bursed both fall and spring a nd some only in the fall 
semester.
 
 E
MILIE  HESEMEYER  MEMORIAL  SCHOLARSHIP  -  
 Scholarships in the amount of $750 per semester are awarded to undergraduate students and can be re-
newed for up to 4 years.  A preference is given to students majoring in Education.  Forty-nine scholar-ships were awarded in 2008.  D
ISPLACED  HOMEMAKER  SCHOLARSHIP  -  
 Scholarships in the amount of $750 per semester are awarded to students who would not otherwise be 
able to complete their educational goals due to fam-ily responsibilities.  Stude nts who receive this award 
are generally older students  who have returned to 
school after raising a fam ily.  Nine scholarships 
were awarded in 2008.  A
DOLPH  VAN PELT SCHOLARSHIP  –  
 This scholarship was previously structured as a re-newable scholarship rang ing from $500-800 for up 
to 4 years.  The nine stud ents who had been awarded 
under this graduated funding structure continued to 
received funding as allocat ed.   In 2007-2008 this 
scholarship was re-structured as a one-year $1,500 scholarship with disbursements of $750 per semes-ter.  Eight one-year scholarships were awarded.  A
LLOGAN  SLAGLE  MEMORIAL  SCHOLARSHIP  -  
 
Scholarships in the amount of $750 per semester are 
awarded to students who are members of non-federally recognized tribes.  Eight scholarships were 
awarded in 2008.    Improve Health, Education and Economic and  Community Development   16 
Harley Miller, Pawnee 
Emilie Hesemeyer Recipient 
Fanaye Barney, Navajo Adolph Van Pelt Recipient 
  Cecelia Grant, Koyukuk Tribe,   Displaced Homemaker Recipient 
Erica Hunt, Lumbee Allogan Slagle Recipient   Rhea Allery (and family), 
  Turtle Mountain Chippewa 
  Elizabeth & Sherman Asche Recipient    
Gentri White, Oneida of Wisconsin 
Florence Young Recipient 
 
  Sasanehsaeh Pyawasay,  
  Menominee 
  Sequoyah Recipient  
  
 
 
 
 Improve Health, Education and Economic and  
Community Development 17 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
DAVID  RISLING  EMERGENCY  AID SCHOLARSHIPS  -  
 Scholarships in the amount  of $100-400 are awarded 
to students who have a s udden critical need that was 
not expected or that woul d prevent the student from 
attending school. Eight schol arships were awarded in 
2008.  F
LORENCE  YOUNG  MEMORIAL  SCHOLARSHIP  –  
 Scholarships in the amount of $750 per semester are awarded to graduate studen ts pursuing a master’s de-
gree in the arts, public health or law. Six scholarships were awarded in 2008.  S
EQUOYAH  GRADUATE  SCHOLARSHIP  -  
 Scholarships in the amount of $750 per semester are awarded to graduate students  in any curriculum. Eight-
een scholarships were awarded in 2008.  E
LIZABETH  AND SHERMAN  ASCHE  MEMORIAL   
SCHOLARSHIP  –  
 
Scholarships in the amount of $750 per semester are 
awarded to graduate or undergraduate students in pub-lic health or science. Eleven scholarships were 
awarded in 2008. 
Natane Runningfox,  
Santo Domingo Pueblo 
David Risling Emergency Aid  Recipient  
 Youth Summer Camps 
Language and Cultural Preservation  
 T
HE SUMMER  CAMP  PROGRAM  supports summer  
programming for Indian youth around the country.  In 2008, AAIA funded 10 summer camps that  focused primarily on diabet es prevention (see page 
20 of this report), language preservation and  culture.    
♦ CLOUD  HORSE  ARTS, INSTITUTE —Kyle, SD 
        This cultural camp emphasized traditional 
Lakota life skills and was aimed at young women completing their Isna Ti Ca Lowan Ceremony (First Moon Ceremony) - the  traditional coming of age ceremony. 
 ♦     K
IDS IN THE WOODS —Bighorn National 
       Forest, WY          This environmental camp emphasized inter-
tribal and intergenerational interaction which conveyed traditional knowledge while par-ticipating in natural resource management activities. 
 
♦ MENOMINEE  NATION  LANGUAGE  AND CULTURE   
      C AMP—   Keshena, WI  
  The camp was held at the traditional hunting 
and fishing grounds for the Menominee tribe. Elders and certified language teachers pro-
vided Menominee language activities.  
Campers also participated in activities aimed at preserving their heritage.  
 
♦ MIAMI NATION  OF INDIANS  OF INDIANA — 
      Peru, IN   This camp sought to introduce and 
strengthen the Miami language, cultural  beliefs and traditional values for the Miami youth through traditiona l and nature activi-
ties.  Activities stressed kinship connections, cooperation and community support. 
   
  Improve Health, Education and Economic and  Community Development   18 
  
  Improve Health, Education and Economic and  
Community Development 19 
 
 Summer Camps 
 Language and Cultural Preservation  
 
♦ CONFEDERATED  TRIBES  OF THE UMATILLA   
      I NDIAN  RESERVATION —Pendleton, OR 
  This camp focused on reinforcing Native  
language and culture. Campers had the choice of learning the Walla Walla, Umatilla or Nez Perce language in addition to participating in gender appropriate cultural activities.  Many community members participated, making for a vast amount of cultural knowledge from which to draw.  Fishin g skills and gun safety 
were also taught.   
 
♦ STOCKBRIDGE -MUNSEE —Bowler, WI 
  This camp was aimed at exposing the youth to 
both dialects of language used by the Stock-bridge Munsee tribe – Muh he Kaneew and the Munsee dialect of the of the Delaware lan-guage (Lunaape) in hopes that families would reintroduce the language(s ) into their homes 
and communities.  Cultural lessons and activi-ties were taught as well  as healthy foods and 
diabetes prevention.   
 
AAIA’s programs are made possible due to the 
generous contributions of our donors. 
 
 
Summer Camps Diabetes and Cultural Preservation  
 
♦ FORT DEFIANCE  INDIAN  HOSPITAL  WILDERNESS , 
CULTURAL  & C OMMUNITY  ENHANCEMENT   
      P ROGRAM —Fort Defiance, AZ 
  This camp provided nutritional education, 
and physical activities as well as adventure activities, environmental activities, cultural awareness, and primitive outdoor skills and taught teambuilding and service learning through hands on experiences.   
 
♦ NATIVE  AMERICAN  YOUTH  & F AMILY   
      C ENTER — Portland, OR 
  This camp was designed to better connect 
campers with their Native culture.  They  participated in physical  activities and learned 
about health and diabetes and focused on  academics (math and science). 
 
♦ NIMIIPUU  HEALTH -KAMIAH  CENTER — 
      Kamiah, ID   This camp consisted of healthy activities, 
workshops and games aimed at educating youth in culture, tradit ions and medicine use 
that lead to a healthie r life.  Instilling disci-
pline and respect for elders was also part of the camp. 
 
♦ SAINT  PAUL COUNCIL  OF CHURCHES   
      D EPARTMENT  OF INDIAN  WORKS — 
      Saint Paul, MN   This program included activities which  
enhanced cultural awareness and developed healthy lifestyles and diabetes prevention.   Activities included health and nutrition les-sons and physical activities as well as cul-tural activities, including practicing the  Lakota and Ojibwe languages. 
 Improve Health, Education and Economic and  Community Development   20 
 
 Training, Publications and  
 Special Projects  
 
 We continued our series of educational workshops on sacred lands by providing a 2 day seminar for the United South and Eastern Tribes.   These seminars provide comprehensive information about the laws and policies relevant to the protection 
of sacred places, particularly those located on federal lands.   AAIA 
ALSO  PRODUCED  TWO EDITIONS  of its 
Indian Affairs  newsletter which included articles 
about contemporary Indian issues and culture, as well as information about AAIA programs and  activities.  Our newsletter is provided free to our members or is available by subscription for a fee.  Recent archived copies can be accessed on our web-site as well.  
Film Festival 
 
 AAIA 
SPONSORED  AN INDIGENOUS  FILM   
FESTIVAL  in New York City in November 2008 in 
conjunction with our Annua l Meeting of the Mem-
bers.  This program consiste d of several short pieces 
by Native film makers that explored a variety of contemporary issues of concern to Native Ameri-cans.  The films were coordinated by Raquel Chapa (Lipan Apache/Yaqui/Cherokee). Raquel is the for-
mer Native American curator at the Hemispheric Institute, Tisch School of the Arts at New York Uni-
versity and has worked with such diverse institutions 
as the Museum of Indian Arts and Culture in Santa 
Fe and the National Museum of the American Indian in New York.   AAIA 
IS PROUD  TO HAVE  PRESENTED  THE 
FOLLOWING  SHORT  FILMS  SHOWCASING  NATIVE  
AMERICAN  FILMMAKERS  
 
SIKUMI  (O N THE ICE), written and directed by  
Andrew Okpeaha MacLean ( Inupiaq ).  Andrew 
won the 2008 Jury Prize in Short Filmmaking at the Sundance Film Festival.  Sikumi, which was 
shot in Barrow with an I nupiaq cast, tells the tale 
of a hunter who goes out  on the ice looking for 
seal and inadvertently witnesses a murder.  
 
 
 
CALEB ’S LEGACY , directed and produced by 
Raquel Chapa ( Lipan Apache/Yaqui/Cherokee ), 
through the American Expe rience Reel Indian pro-
ject.  In 1655 Caleb Cheeshahteaumuck, an Aquin-nah Wampanoag member, became the first gradu-ate of Harvard Indian College.  Over 300 years later, four Native women at Harvard from different departments and tribes rec ount their journey to the 
prestigious institution a nd draw inspiration from 
their remarkable forerunner.  A
NCESTOR  EYES, directorial debu t by award win-
ning screenwriter Kalani Queypo ( Blackfeet/
Hawaiian ). After getting sick, a young Native 
American woman, Willa, returns to her mother's home where they both must come to terms with her illness. Willa's mother, who had been a long time 'shut in', begins venturing outside with her camcorder, taping the sunrise and mountains, bringing the outside worl d in to the bed ridden 
Willa. 
 
I
N HORSE  YOU SEE ROSS, by Melissa A. Henry 
(Navajo ), explains the very  essence of being a 
horse.  A
MERICAN  C OWBOYS , written, produced and 
directed by Cedric ( Umatilla ) & Tania Wildbill.  
Narrated by Academy Award Winner William Hurt. This excerpt is about the first Native Ameri-can to win the saddle bronc finals world title and be inducted into the Pe ndleton Roundup, breaking 
color barriers in the rodeo arena.  American Cow-boys won the 1999 Great Plains Film Festival for Best Documentary Made fo r Public Television and 
also won the 2001 New York International Inde-pendent Film and Video Festival for Best Docu-mentary. 
 Public Education 21 
 
Current Assets     2008     2007 
 
Cash and Cash Equivalents 
 Interest Bearing       $   100,347        $      82,757 Investments in Marketable Securities        1,097,850           1,422,669 Other Receivables               70,016              207,646 Prepaid Expenses               15,699
                13,905  
 
Total Current Assets          1,283,912                  1,726,977 
 
 
Property and Equipment 
 
Furniture and Equipment            183,563              181,075 
Leasehold Improvements              14,901                 14,901  
               198,464              195,976 
Less Accumulated Depreciation  ____(183,717)              (178,058)  
 
                 14,747                 17,058  
 
       $   1,298,659       $   1,744,035  
 
 
Liabilities and Assets 
 
Current Liabilities 
 
Accounts Payable     $          2,956      $        35,796 
Accrued Wages      9,826       6,401 
Accrued Payroll Taxes     4,683              - Accrued Vacation               16,006
     12,735  
 
Total Current Liabilities              33,471     54,932 
 
 
Net Assets 
 
Unrestricted              211,801              561,629 
Temporarily Restricted            400,564              499,651 Permanently Restricted            652,823
              627,823  
 
Total Net Assets          1,265,188            1,689,103  
        $   1,298,659
     $    1,744,035  
 Financial Information   22 
 
Statement of Financial Position 
 
December 31, 2008 and 2007  
 
Assets  
           2008                    2007  
 Revenues, Gains  and Other Support 
 
Contributions and Dues   $272,973        $296,307 Legacies         405,712             312,921 Grants          185,134      164,925 Investment Income           41,472                45,350 Media Sales                2,844        12,495 Other Income             51,283        17,343 In-Kind Contributions               6,000        16,000 Realized (losses) Gains        (71,334)           201,661 
on Investments Unrealized Losses     (414,208)
             (58,692)  
on Investments 
 
 
Total Revenues, Gains            $  479,876                              $   1,008,310  
and Other Support   
 
 
 Financial Information 23 
 
Statement of Activities 
 
For the Year Ending December 31, 2008  
 
(With Comparative Totals for the Year Ending December 31, 2007)  
           2008                    2007  
 Expenses 
 
Program Services 
 
Youth, Education & Scholarships     $445,295           $436,944 Health             14,945        15,575 
Legal Affairs             91,898              124,475 
Public Education              74,987
        62,636  
 Total Program Services        $627,125   $ 639,630
 
  Supporting Services 
 
General and Administrative   $  83,851    $  86,199 Fundraising     $192,815
    $249,409  
 Total Support Expenses     276,666
      335,608  
 
Total Expenses     $903,791          $980,238  
 
Change in Net Assets                      $(423,915)        $  28,072  
 
Net Assets, Beginning of Year                   $1,689,103               $1,661,031 
 
Change in Net Assets               (423,915)          28,072  
 
Net Assets, End of Year                       $1,265,188                $1,689,103  
 Financial Information   24 
 
Statement of Activities 
 
For the Year Ending December 31, 2008  
 
(With Comparative Totals for the Year Ending December 31, 2007)  
 Board of Directors 
 
AAIA is governed by an all-Native Board of 
Directors representing all regions of the country.  
The collective wealth of knowledge and expertise in diverse areas makes AAIA’s Board well suited to develop policies that benefit all Native peoples.   
       
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 Leadership 25 
Alfred R. Ketzler, Sr. 
President 
Athabascan 
Fairbanks, AK 
DeeAnn DeRoin, MD 
VicePresident 
Ioway 
Lawrence, KS 
Bradford R. Keeler 
Treasurer 
Cherokee 
West Chester, PA 
Joy Hanley 
Secretary 
Navajo 
Tempe, AZ 
Owanah Anderson 
Choctaw 
Wichita Falls, TX Elke Chenevey 
Omaha 
Encinitas, CA 
Wathene Young 
Cherokee/Delaware 
Tahlequah, OK 
John Echohawk 
Pawnee 
Boulder, CO 
Jerry Flute 
Dakota 
Browns Valley, MN 
 
Advisory Board Members 
 
Francesca Kress, New York, NY 
Benita Potters, New York, NY Howard Teich, New York, NY 
 
 
 Staff 
 
AAIA’s executive office is located in Rock-
ville, MD.  Our field office is located in Sisseton, SD and our language preservation office is located in Agency Village, SD.    
         Leadership   26 
Jack F. Trope 
Executive Director  
  
Lisa Wyzlic 
Executive Assistant/ Director of Scholarship Programs 
Grand River Ottawa 
 
 
Loretta Eller Office Assistant 
Cherokee 
 
 
Helen Shao 
Bookkeeper  
  
Wendy Scheffer Flute 
Director of Dir ect Mail and  
Membership Services   
Tammy DeCoteau 
Director, Native Language  Program 
Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate 
 
 Delbert Pumpkinseed 
Treasured Elder 
Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate 
 
 
Jodi Eastman 
Technology Coordinator 
Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate 
 Wayne Eastman 
Treasured Elder 
Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate 
 
 
V. June Renville 
Treasured Elder 
Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate 
 Orsen Bernard 
Treasured Elder 
Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate 
 
 
 
AAIA RECEIVES  CONTRIBUTIONS  FROM  
grants, foundations, bequests, trusts, on-line 
contributions and membership dues.  Consistent  financial support helps AAIA continue to fund the programs described in this  report.  AAIA has the 
following avenues by which you can show your  support.  
• MEMBERSHIP  - By contributing $25 per year 
you can assist us in supporting programs that are vitally important to Indian communities.  You will receive program updates through our newsletter Indian Affairs, and be invited 
to attend our Annual Meeting of the Mem-
bers (which is open to the public) held in New York City, or to vote by proxy. 
 
• SPREAD  THE WORD  -  Invite family and 
friends to join AAIA. 
 
• ON-LINE GIVING  - Donate on-line through 
Network for Good on our website at www.indian-affairs.org. 
 
• MONTHLY  GIFTS -  Consider a monthly gift 
to AAIA, which can be easily paid by credit card or automatically deducted from your bank account. 
 
• MATCHING  GIFT PROGRAM  - Many compa-
nies offer Matching Gi ft Programs.  Visit 
your Human Resources Department and ask if donations to AAIA can be matched and use their Matching Gifts Contribution form.  
 
• BEQUESTS  AND TRUSTS  - Remember AAIA 
in your will.  Consider contributions  of a spe-
cific sum, a percentage of your estate or stocks and bonds.   
 
 
 
    
            
 
 
The Association on American Indian Affairs  
is a not-for-profit 501(c)(3)  
publicly supported  
organization. 
 
We meet all  
Better Business Bureau  
Wise Giving  
Standards 
 
We are a founding member of the  
Native Ways Federation 
 
Combined Federal Campaign #12307 
   
 Show Your Support 27 
 
 
 AAIA  
www.indian-affairs.org ASSOCIATION  ON AMERICAN  INDIAN  AFFAIRS  EXECUTIVE  OFFICE  
 966 Hungerford Drive 
Suite 12-B 
Rockville, MD  20850 
Phone:  240-314-7155 
Fax:  240-314-7159 
E-Mail:  general.aaia@verizon.net 
 
FIELD  OFFICE  
2009 SD Hwy. 10 
     Suite B  
Sisseton, SD  57262 
Phone:  605-698-3998 
Fax:  605-698-3316 
E-Mail:  member_services@venturecomm.net 
 
AAIA L ANGUAGE  PROGRAM  
P.O. Box 509 
Tiospa Zina Drive 
Agency Village, SD  57262 
Phone:  605-698-4400 x 367 
Fax:  605-698-7067 
E-Mail:  tdc. aaia@verizon.net  
 
 
The Association on American I ndian Affairs is a non-profit,  tax exempt corporation  
as described in Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.   
 
Combined Federal Campaign #12307  
 
Donations and contributions to AAIA are tax deductible 
to the extent provided by law. 
  