ASSOCIATION ON AMERICAN INDIAN AFFAIRS 
Amplifying Our Future for the Next 100 Years  
2020 Annual Report  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This artwork was created especially for the 6th Annual Repatriation Conference by  
George Curtis Levi , who is a citizen  of the Southern Cheyenne Tribe of Oklahoma  
and is also Southern Arapaho. This ledger art painting depicts how repatriation  
builds community and strengthens culture. It was painted on an antique  
mining document from  Montana that dates from the 1890s.  Association on American Indian Affairs 
Protecting Sovereignty  ●  Preserving Culture 
Educating Youth  ●  Building Capacity 
Since 1922  
 
AMPLIFYING OUR FUTURE FOR THE NEXT 100  YEARS  
 
The Association on American Indian Affairs is the oldest non- profit serving Indian Country , 
formed in 1922 to change the destructive path of federal policy from assimilation, termination and allotment, to sovereignty, self -determination and self- sufficiency. Throughout its 9 8-year 
history, the Association has provided national advocacy on watershed issues that strengthen  
sovereignty and diverse Native culture s, while working at a grassroots level with Tribes to 
implement programs that affect real lives on the ground.  
 The Association began 2020  with a bright future – working diligently to prepare the 
organization for its next 100 years  of advocacy . Unfortunately, the coronavirus pandemic  has 
stymied our efforts to build sustainable funding for the organization. Then, with the murder of Georg e Floyd, Brianna Taylor, and the reckoning  of the countless and nameless Indigenous 
Peoples who are murdered by law enforcement, and who go missing and are murdered 
through chains of human trafficking , we know we cannot let the pandemic weaken our voices. 
Instead – we must AMPLIFY OUR VOICES and run with joy towards our vision to create a “world 
where diverse Native American cultures and values are lived, protected and respected.” W e 
cannot allow anything to stop us!   
We cannot continue forward with the level of energy we need without you. We need your 
commitment, we need your time, we need your advocacy, and we need your investment  to 
build a new path forward for the next 100 years. Now is the time to commit to the next 100 
years of sovereignty, culture, education and capacity building. Now is the time we must amplify 
our vision for what we want for our future ! 
 
Any support you can provide will fund programs that protect sovereignty, preserve culture, 
educate youth and build capacity on the ground. In addition, the Association seeks members of its Legacy Council to build a sustainable endowment to fund the Association’s 100 Year 
Endowment  Campaign. Together we can affect the change necessary to  heal and  strengthen 
Indian Country for the next 100 years. As we look to our 100th year anniversary in 2022, we ask you to continue your journey with us to amplify our desire for a diverse and respectful world. 
Take action to help us amplify  our future ! 
 Thank you for your commitment to Indian Country .  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 
Frank Ettawageshik, Odawa  
President of the Board of Directors  
AMPLIFYING  OUR FUTURE  
THROUGH OUR PROGRAMS  
 
A YEAR IN SUMMAR Y 
Programs Supporting Cultural Sovereignty  
 
See our program highlights  for this year!  
 
SCHOLARSHIPS.   The Association began a partnership with the  
American Indian College Fund this year to adminis ter the 
Association’s scholarships. This saved the Association administrative costs while continuing to provide scholarship 
funding to  27undergraduate and graduate students  from federally 
recognized and non -recognized Tribes, representing the Navajo 
Nation, Choctaw Nation , Santo Domingo Pueblo, Sault Ste Marie 
Tribe of Chippewa Indians, Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe,, Turtle 
Mountain Band of Chi ppewa , Sisseton -Wahpeton Sioux Tribe, 
Laguna Pueb lo, Spirit Lake Tribe, Menominee Indian Tribe of 
Wisconsin,  Osage, Menominee, Oglala Sioux Tribe, Tsimshian, and 
Citizen Potawatomi Nation . Two of these students graduated and 
the remainder continue their educational path!  
 SUMMER CAMPS.   The Covid -19 pandemic changed how summer camps operated,  this year 
and many were still able to provide a safe, fun and educational 
experience for Native youth  by providing boxes to students’ homes 
with cultural kits and other opportunities . The Association granted  
funding to 4 Native Youth Summer Camps, serving 933 youth from 
Tribes across  Indian Country, including  Salt River Pima -Maricopa, 
White Mountain Apache, Sault St. Marie Chippewa, Hopi, Gila River, 
Hualapai,  Colorado River Indian Tribes, Fort McDowell Yavapai, 
Jemez Pueblo, Navajo, Pascua Yaqui, San Carlos Apache, Tohono O’odham, Yavapai Apache, Yavapai Prescott Indian Tribe, Port Gamble S’Klallam Tribe, and Village of Ruby  Nations . 
  
100 YEAR CELEBRATION.  Professor and renowned l egal scholar Matthew Fletcher is drafting 
the Association ’s 100 Year History  as an educational tool about federal Indian policy 
advancement and the work of the Association . We are hoping that it will be released in 2022 
during the Association’s 100 Year celebration s. However, the pandemic closed the Princeton 
Archives where are historic documents are kept. The publ isher will be  Michigan State 
University  Press.
  
 
REPATRIATION CONFERENCE.  The Association’s 6 th Annual 
Repatriation Conference  – Growing Community & Moving Forward after 
30 years of NAGPRA – was the Association’s first virtual conference  ever . 
The Association teamed up with University of Denver to deliver a 
successful conference with  730 registered participants  representing 
Tribes,  museums, foreign institutions,  and the federal government , as 
well as artists, auction houses and the public . Scholarships for registration were also available 
and provided to 345 attendees from Native Nations and small museums.   
REPATRIATION.  The Association advocated for new legislation, 
including the Safeguarding   Tribal Objects of Patrimony Act, and 
revisions to old legislation, such as the Native American Graves 
Protection and Repatriation Act, regarding the theft, looting and sale 
of Native American cultural heritage . We provided technical assistance 
and trainin g for Native Nations and museums that had questions about 
NAGPRA and other opportunities to return culture –  both tangible and 
intangible – back to their origin Nations. The Association responded 
to more than 200 telephone and email inquiries regarding Nat ive 
American cultural heritage items from Tribal and non -Tribal parties.  
 
INDIAN CHILD WELFARE . The Association  is part of a national Native organization coalition 
called #ProtectICWA. Together, we are working to protect the Indian Child Welfare Act from 
an onslaught o f litigation from conservative think tanks that are using ICWA to overturn the 
constitutionality of federal Indian law –  which would impose on all laws affecting the 
government -to-government  relationship between Native Nations and the Un ited States. A 
nationwide coalition of 495 Native Nations, more than 60 Native organizations, 26 states and 
the District  of Columbia, 77 members of Congress, 31 leading child welfare organizations, and 
Indian and  constitutional law professors agree ICWA is  vital to the well- being of Indian children 
and the stability and  integrity of Indian families today.  The Association continues to participate 
as an Amicus  member in the Fifth Circuit litigation, Brackeen v. Bernhardt  case.  
 
SACRED SITES. The Association participated in Amicus  briefs against  the Trump 
Administration regarding th e decrease in size of the Bears Ears 
National Monument . Our CEO provided testimony to the U.S. House 
of Representatives Natural Resources Committee, Subcommittee for 
Indigenous Peoples,  about Sacred Sites destroyed with the building of 
the border wall between the U.S. and Mexico. The Association further 
provided written comments on changes to the National Environmental 
Policy Act. The Association conti nues to research ways to protect 
known Sacred Sites, including the Big Medicine Wheel Site in 
Wyoming.  
 
JUVENILE JUSTICE. The Association worked with the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians and 
the Annie E. Casey Foundation regarding the Juvenile Detention Alternatives Initiative, and 
began research into  the scope of  Indian Country juvenile justice  programs and alternatives to 
detention . 
 COMMERCIAL SALE  OF SENSITIVE CULTURAL HERITAGE.  The Association issued 190  
Auction Alerts identifying 1,117 potentially sensitive cultural and sacred items belonging to  
Tribes  that were up for auction in foreign and domestic sales . 
 
98
th ANNUAL MEMBERSHIP MEETING  & CULTURAL EVENT. 
The Association held its 9 8th Annual Membership Meeting and 
Cultural Event virtually this year with the theme  “Envision the 
Future ” showcasing young and emerging Native artists.  Special 
guests were Author Tommy Orange (Cheyenne and Arapaho 
Tribes); actor, singer and writer Shaun Taylor- Corbett  
(Blackfeet); actor and professor  
Kimberly Guerrero (Colville/Salish -
Kootenai/Cherokee); writer and 
creator Azie Dungey (Pamunkey 
and African -American); writer, 
comedian and actress  Siena East 
(Choctaw); YouTube influencer, 
video producer and writer Raquel 
Quinones (Spirit Lake Dakota); hoop dancer Patrick Willie 
(Navajo); musician Raye Zaragoza  
(
Japanese -American, Mexican, Indigenous ); and photographer, printmaker and designing 
artist Ryan Young (Two Spirit- Ojibwe). The event can be seen on our YouTube channel 
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eicMsl78NZU&t=19s ).   
 PUBLIC EDUCATION.  The Association provided public education through webinars and its 
new  live and streaming Native news talk show called Red Hoop Talk. Since its creation in April 
2020, Red Hoop Talk has reached tens of thousands of viewers with 29,752 views on Facebook, 
YouTube and Twitter combined.  
 SOCIAL MEDIA.  The Association increased 
its social media presence this year on all social media platforms. The Association gained 3,584 followers on Facebook, 6,031 
followers on Twitter, 5,310 followers on Instagram, 838 followers on LinkedIn and 
increased website visits by 74% from last 
year. This year the Association started 
spreading Native awareness on the new platform TikTok. The Association has 827 
TikTok followers.  
 
Our social media handles are :  
Facebook  https://www.facebook.com/AssociationAmericanIndianAffairs
   
Instagram  https://www.instagram.com/associndianaffairs/   
Twitter  https://twitter.com/IndianAffairs   
LinkedIn  https://www.linkedin.com/company/association- on-american -indian -affairs/   
TikTok   https://www.ti ktok.com/@americanindianaffairsorg?lang=en   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
Amplifying Our Future 
THROUGH RESPONSIBLE FINANCIAL ACTIVITY  
 
The Association’s income was down just over 7% from 2019’s $522,270 revenue (not including 
investment income), and program expenditures were 80% of total expenses for 2020. The 
Association’s continued growth in programs has showed stronger commitment throu gh 
increases in foundation  funding sources. However, there is still a need to develop sustainable 
sources for operations capital that will grow the capacity of the Association’s important 
programs in Indian Country for our next 100 years.   
 
Public donor contributions were 49% of total revenue and the largest source of revenue for the 
Association. Legacy gifts provided 21% of revenue. The 6th Annual Repatriation Conference 
provided 26% of revenue . 
 
 
  
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
    
 
Total expenses in 2020 
were $476,834. The 
percentage of program 
costs were 80%, 
showing efficient and 
above ideal spending. 
General and 
administrative costs 
were 18%. Fundraising 
expenses were 2%. 
 
 
 
$236,470 
$15,495 
$127,250 
$6,139 
$98,558 Revenue Total $483,912
(not including investment income)
Contributions
Membership
Repatriation
Conference
Other
Legacy Gifts
80%
2%
 18%Allocation of Total Expenses
ProgramExpenses
Fundrtaising
Expenses
General &AdministrativeTotal program expenses in 2020 were $381,838. Funds dedicated to the Repatriati on and 
Sacred Sites Program s were $116,588; program costs for the Indian Children and Youth 
Program s were $250,850; and other program costs were $14,400.  
 
 
 
. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The majority of the Association’s assets are restricted funds that can only be used for program purposes, and not for capacity building of the organization. These restricted assets include 
$632,340 held in an endowment for our Native American graduate and undergraduate 
scholarships.  
 
  
$116,588 
$250,850 
$14,400 Program Expense Details
Repatriation &
Sacred Sites
Indian Children &Youth
Other Programs
$176,354 
15%
$1,027,423 
85%Total Net Assets -$1,203,777 
December 31, 2020
WithoutRestrictions
With RestrictionsAmplifying Our Future 
THROUGH THE COMMITMENT OF  
OUR PARTNERS AND DONORS  
 
THANK YOU TO OUR 2020  DONORS  
No matter what level of contribution you are able to make,  
we cannot continue our efforts without your commitment!  
 
SELF -DETERMINATION Level  
$25,001 - $50,000  
Poarch Band of Creek Indians  
 
FORTITUDE Level  
$10,001 - $25,000  
Nottawaseppi Huron Band of the Potawatomi  
 
ACCOUNTABILITY Level  
$5,001 - $10,000  
Ben Plucknett Charitable Trust  
 
RESPECT Level  
$1000 - $5,000  
Mendon F Schutt Family  
Cengage Learning  
Venture Communications  
Arising Fund of the Marin Community 
Foundation  
Dee Ann DeRoin  
Holly Vincent  
Native American Rights Fund  
Joshua Spear 
Bernstein & Associates NAGPRA 
Consultants  
Susan Gendron 
One Little Independent Records  
Ed Cohen  Laura Sieling  & Daniel Gaylord  
Judith M. Buechner  
Devon Jobes  
Patrick Hannon  
Lamia Mamoon  
Jane Martin  
Aubrey McKean  
Henry E. Neuman De Vegvar  
Kris Olmsted  
Leon Pinheiro  
Jane Safer  
Leon & Peggy Sharyon  
Oil & Forge Co.  
Holly Vincent  
 
CAPACITY Level  
$500 - $999  
Howard Bayne Fund  
James Barsoum  
Alfred & Betty Ketzler  
Barbara Joy Silverstein  
Julian Pace  
Derrick Nursey  
George Cloward  
Greater Goods  Andrew Bond  
Kristin Burke  
Jane Burr  
Angie Cross  
Kira Davis  
Andrea Devereux 
Sisters of Charity of 
Nazareth  Cameron Koubek  
Matthew MacMill an 
Liz Quinn  
Andrew Rayment  
Jake Seltzer  
Alexander Tait  
Michael Yester  
Sara Younkin  
 COMMUNITY Level  
$250 - $499  
American Bar Association  
Jo Anna Dale  
Jonathan J. Perry  
Ralph D. Samuelson  
Robert Halcomb  
John B. Lane  
William Roberts  
Richard F. Potthoff  
Roger Burnett  
Gary N. Gildersleeve  
First Nations Development Institute  
Erin Bartley  
Breton Fischetti 
Ken Gregory & Craig 
Litman  
Edward Fleming  
Code for America  
Ashley Larsen  
William Roberts  
Jim Mossbarger  
A. Cunninghame -Blank  Michael Defabrizio  
Frank Ettawageshik  
Abby Fenlason  
The Boston Foundation  
Ryan Lemay  
Nova Vita Massage 
Therapy Clinic  
Lea S. McChesney  
Margot Newcomer  
Rachel Strohm 
 
We give continued thanks to all of our donors, including the 796 Native and non -Native 
individuals who donated between $1 -$249 this year! Thank you!  
Every dollar supports and strengthens Cultural Sovereignty for the next 100 years!  
 
LIVING LEGACY DONORS  
Thank you to the amazing and committed individuals and families that have left their  
lifetime legacies to support Indian Country programs!  
 
Lillian Pearl McCoy, 2002 
John S. Hirschoff, 2002 
Ruth Marie Tearney, 2003  
Irene Burr, 2004  
Sita Paulickpulle, 2004  
Justin M. Wool, 2005  
Agnes Scholl, 2005  
Lili G. Sweat, 2005  
Elizabeth B. Losey, 2005  
Culbreth Sudler, Jr., 2006  
Joe and Lucy Elder, 2006  
Walter J. Zimmerman, 2006  
Dorothy E. Hons, 2006  
Gwendolin B. Keeny, 2006  
Hazel M. Johnson, 2007 Lillian Frances Johnson 200 8 
Muriel Williams, 2008  
Gerda Stiller, 2008  
Mary Wisner Taylor, 2009  
Frederick H. Test, 2010  
Louise Cook Holmes, 2010  
John Herman, 2010  
Raymond A. Beplat, 2010 
Harold Nelson, 2010  
Margaret Lindstrom, 2011  
Bernice H. Thiele, 2011  
Paul F. Luenow, Jr., 2011 
Muriel Terry Wilson, 2012  
George P. Condon, 2013  
Beverly B. Howell, 2013  Dorothy R. Sanford, 2013  
Akabe Gulbankian, 2013  
J. William Ingeman, 2014 
Ghislaine D. Godenne, 2014  
June M. Cogswell, 2015 
Susan J. Goode, 2016 
Elsa B. Motzer, 2016  
Gloria E. Staab, 2016  
Peggy Jo Diggins, 2016  
Helen Mattin, 2017  
Alan & Kim London, 2019  
William Burke, 2019  
H. Raymond Almy, 2019  
Arlene Ann Sharp, 2019  
Anne Stehle, 2020
What lifetime legacy would you like to leav e to Indian Country? Please consider leaving a gift 
in your will or estate so that your commitment to the Association on American Indian Affairs 
and Indian Country may live on. Estate gifts can reduce (and even eliminate) the amount of 
estate taxes your beneficiaries will owe. Let us share your life with Indian Country!  
 
  Amplifying Our Future 
THROUGH STRONG GOVERNANCE  
 
The Association on American Indian Affairs is governed by an all -Native Board of Directors 
from all over Indian Country. The Board of Directors provides oversight and direction for the 
programs and operations of the organization. The Board assesses the organization’s programs at least every two years and works to implement recommendations from the assessment to 
actively strengthen the health of the organization at every opportunity.  
 
The Board meets at least four times per year, with at least two of those meetings face- to-face. 
However, because of the pandemic, we were unable to meet in person. All Board meetings 
were held through video c onferencing . In 20 20, the Board held four meetings : January 16, 
May 28, July 30 and December 3.  
 
The Association’s Annual Membership Meeting  is where members of the Association can take 
an active part in the governance of the organization  by voting in new Board of Director 
members , adopt and revise bylaws and support other governance activities of the 
organization . This year , the Association’s 98
th Membership meeting was an all -virtual event: 
“Envisioning Our Future: 98th Annual Membership Meeting & Young and Emerging Artists 
Showcase ” held on November 21 . During the membership meeting, members re-elect ed three 
of our current directors whose terms end ed at the end of 2020. Those three were Frank 
Ettawageshik  (Odawa) , Alfre d Ketzler  (Athabascan)  and Jonathan Perry  (Wampanoag).  
Frank Ettawageshik       Jonathan Perry           Joseph Daniels, Sr.               Dee Ann DeRoin, M.D.  
(Odawa )       (Wampanoag )          (Potawatomi )    (Ioway ) 
President        Vice President           Treasurer                  Secretary  
John Echohawk        Alfred R. Ketzler, Sr.     Brad Keeler                 Sandy White Hawk    Rory Wheeler  
(Pawnee )          (Athabascan       (Cherokee )                (Lakota)           (Seneca ) 
 
 
 
STAFF  
          Shannon O’Loughlin , Choctaw , Executive Director & Attorney  
Colleen Medicine , Anishinaabe Kwe,  Program Director  
Timothy Devine , Odawa,  Cultural Sovereignty Fellow  
River Kerstetter , Oneida, Social Media 
Van Tran , Program Assistant  
Moss CPA,  Financial Manager 
Addie Rolnik , Juvenile Justice  
Erin Namovicz, Juvenile Justice  
Andrew Meyer , Repatriation  
Kansas Begaye , Navajo, Office Administration  
Kamryn Yanchick , Intern  
Emily K. Andrews, Intern  
Ivy Devadas, Quapaw, Intern  
 
VOLUNTEERS 
RaeLynn Butler  
Anne Amati  
Morgan Atkins  
Tim Begay  
Raelynn Butler  
Sheila Gabe  
Deanna Byrd  
Gail Dabaluz 
Megan Noble  
Shane Anton  
Colleen Medicine  
Bridget Ambler  
Cassandra Atencio 
Andrea Carmen  
Melinda Casey  
William Johnson  
Angela Neller  
Wendy Teeter  Lourdes Henebry-
DeLeon  
Nichol Shurack  
Susan Johnson  
Betsy Chapoose  
Melanie O’Brien  
Beverly Crier 
Allison Daniels 
Clay Dumont  
Marcella Ernest  
Kamakana Ferreira  
Andrew Garcia  
Suzan Harjo  
Larry Heady  
Lourdes DeLeon  
Veronica Pasfield  
Michelle Holiday  
Dr. Andrea Hunter  
Brooke Johnson  John F.C. Johnson  
William Johnson  
Sarah Jones  
Michelle Kahn -John  
Akilah Kinnison  
Katie Klass  
Lynda Knowles  
Jaime Lavallee  
Shannon Martin  
Lea McChesney  
Christine McCleave  
Kathy M'Closkey  
Andrew Meyer  
Darren Modzelewski 
Keone J. Nakoa 
Albert Nelson  
Lauren Norman -
Brown  
Kirk Perry  Lylliam Posadas  
Vernon Roote  
Martin Schultz  
Todd Scissons  
Brett Shelton  
Jodi Simkin  
Aaron Sims  
Jenny Slagle  
Greg Smith  
Wendy Teeter  
Rebecca Tsosie 
Kaden Walksnice  
David Weeden  
Jael Whitney  
Lisa Woodward  
Mervin Wright  
Peter Yucupicio  
 
COUNCIL OF ADVISORS 
The Council holds a wealth of knowledge and various interests,  prominent in their fields and 
are allies of Indian Country. The Council’s main initiatives consist of raising the profile of the 
Association’s  work, assisting in planning fundraising events, and supporting the programs and  
initiatives of the  Association.  
Nadema Agard , Cherokee/Lakota/Powhattan      Gail Bruce      Jane Safer      Gloria Steinem  
Kimberly Guerrero, Colville/Salish -Kootenai/Cherokee   John Haworth , Cherokee  
Dennis Hirschfelder      Alli Joseph , Shinnecock      Hattie Kauffman , Nez Perce      Josh Spear  
Kerry Kennedy      Dr. Francesca Kress      George Stonefish , Lenape      Jody Naranjo, Pueblo  
Tommy Orange, Cheyenne & Arapaho     Shaun Taylor -Corbett , Blackfeet       
Lynn Taylor -Corbett      DeLanna Studi , Cherokee      Kathleen Wall , Jemez Pueblo   
Martha Redbone, Cherokee/Choctaw      Howard B. Teich      Curtis Zunigha , Delaware  Association on American Indian Affairs  
Protecting Sovereignty • Preserving Culture  
Educating Youth • Building Capacity  
Since 1922 
 
Amplifying Our Future for the Next 100 Years 
Through our Vision, Mission and Goals  
 
 
 
VISION  
The vision  of the Association is to create a world  
where diverse Native American cultures and  
values are lived, protected and respected. 
 
MISSION  
The mission  of the Association is to lead 
the grassroots fight to protect 
Native American Cultural Sovereignty.  
 
GOALS  
The Association’s goals  are to  
protect sovereignty, preserve culture,  
educate youth and build capacity. 
 
  
 
  
 
(240) 314-7155 
general@Indian -Affairs.org  
Donate at  
www.Indian-Affairs.org  
501(c)(3) public non-profit organization 
Federal Tax ID #: 13-1623902 