    
PROTECTING  SOVEREIGNTY   *  PRESERVING  CULTURE   *  EDUCATING  YOUTH   
AAIA  
2013 A NNUAL  REPORT  Association on American Indian Affairs  
 
Impacting the lives 
of Native Americans 
and Alaska Natives  
 
1922 -2013  2  AAIA:  Impacting the lives of Native Americans 
and Alaska Natives —1922 -2013  
We Were There — As the oldest Native American service and advocacy organization in the United 
States the Association on American Indian Affairs (AAIA) has impacted the lives of Native 
American and Alaska Natives in many ways over the past 91 years.  From helping the Pueblo 
people keep their land and water rights in the 1920’s, to the scholarships provided to Native 
college students in the 1940’s, to the Field Nursing Program in the 1950’s which sent nurses to 
reservations, to helping Alaska Natives to protect their lands and hunting and fishing rights in the 
1960’s, to the studies that were done in the 1970’s which led to the Indian Child Welfare Act, AAIA 
was there.   
In the 1980’s we were still there working to establish the Tribal Governmental Tax Status Act, and 
in the 1990’s we were there to gain enactment of the Native American Graves Protection and 
Repatriation Act and ensure its implementation and helped to protect sacred lands.  In the 2000’s 
we were there too —making sure that tribes have access to funding for their child welfare 
programs, fighting for the right to use eagles and other birds for sacred ceremonies, providing 
funding so Native children can attend summer camps that focus on cultural preservation and 
health education, and helping to change the process by which tribes are federally recognized 
among other things.  As we move into our 9th decade of providing services to Native Americans 
and Alaska Natives, we will continue to be here to impact Indian Country for future generations.  
AAIA is governed by an all -Native Board of Directors from across the country representing a 
diversity of tribes, geography and areas of expertise.  We work in close cooperation with Native 
Americans and other organizations that have similar missions in determining which issues will be 
pursued and the amount of emphasis to be placed on each issue.  Our national advocacy work 
and grass roots initiatives fall into three main categories:  youth/education, cultural preservation 
and sovereignty.  .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To learn more about these and other efforts of AAIA, please see our website at  
3  A Letter From the President  
 
Dear Friends:  
 
I am proud to present this Annual Report of 2013.  As you will see, the Association on American 
Indian Affairs has continued to work closely with tribes and other Indian and non -Indian 
organizations to address vital issues facing Indian tribes, families, children and communities.  
 
AAIA is the oldest Native American advocacy and service organization, having been founded in 
1922.  Preserving Native cultures while promoting self -determination and the well -being of Indian 
and Alaska Native children and families is a priority for our organization and has been for most of 
our long history.   Our current priority programs focus on Preservation of Tribal Cultures 
(international repatriation and sacred sites protection), Promoting Sovereignty  (federal recognition 
reform) and Youth/Education (scholarships, summer camps, juvenile justice and Indian child 
welfare advocacy training, research and legal assistance).   This work is done in partnership with 
Native communities and other Native and non -Native NGOs, wherever possible.  
 
There are a number of ways in which we are unique.  We are an independent organization.  
Although our Board of Directors is made up of respected Indian people from Indian nations from 
all parts of the country, we are not a tribal membership organization.  Because we are 
independent, we have the flexibility to put our resources where they are most needed.  Thus, we 
are able to work on issues and problems that are vitally important to Indian people, communities 
and tribes, but which don’t get the attention that they need and deserve.  We work at both the 
community and national levels and our work takes many forms -- legal assistance, development of 
teaching materials, cash grants and scholarships.   
  
Despite our modest size, we continue to provide important assistance to Indian country that would 
not be available were it not for AAIA and our members and contributors.  Thank you for your 
support.  
 
       Sincerely,  
 
 
        
       Alfred R. Ketzler, Sr.  
       President  
       Athabascan  
4  
 
AAIA:  90 Years of Service and Advocacy                                                                                 
 
A Letter from the President                                                                                     
      
Table of Contents                                                                                                 
  
 
Programs  
 
  Sustain and Perpetuate Cultures and Languages  
    Sacred Sites/Religious Freedom                                                                            
    Repatriation                                                                                                  
    Language Preservation                                                                                                      
     
  Protect Sovereignty, Constitutional, Legal and Human Rights and Natural Resources  
    Federal Acknowledgement   
    Indian Child Welfare    
    Juvenile Justice  
    
  Improve Health, Education and Economic and Community Development  
Health  
    Scholarships     
    Youth Summer Camps      
   
Public Education  
 
 Newsletter and E -Newsletter  
 Annual Meeting of the Members and Native American Short Film Event   
       
Financial Information  
 
 Statement of Financial Position   
 Statement of Activities   
       
Leadership  
 
 Board of Directors  
 Council of Advisors           
 Staff  
 
How You Can Help    
 
Contact Information                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Table of Contents  
 
  2 
 
  3 
 
  4 
 
 
 
 
 
  5 
  6 
  7 
 
 
  8 
  9 
11 
 
 
12 
13 
15 
 
 
 
16 
17 
 
 
 
18 
20 
 
 
 
23 
24 
25 
 
26 
 
Back 
Cover  5  Sustain and Perpetuate Cultures and Languages  
Sacred Sites/Religious Freedom  
In 2013, we continued our education efforts, including a training session on cultural resources and 
sacred lands protection in conjunction with the conference of the Society of American Indian 
Government Employees.  We also took part in a training session for the Tribal Historic 
Preservation Officers charged with implementing the Medicine Wheel/Medicine Mountain Historic 
Preservation Plan (HPP).  AAIA worked for many years to protect this sacred site through its 
representation of the Medicine Wheel Coalition (an intertribal organization), including negotiation 
of the HPP and a successful effort to have the site designated as a National Historic Landmark for 
its traditional cultural value.  
 
In addition to our work on sacred lands, we have continued working as part of a coalition of tribes 
and Indian organizations seeking to protect the right of Native peoples to possess and utilize 
eagles and other sacred birds for traditional ceremonial and cultural purposes.  The efforts of the 
coalition resulted in a new Department of Justice law enforcement policy in 2012  protecting 
members of a federally recognized Indian tribes from prosecution based upon the mere 
possession of these birds.  In 2013, the Coalition continued to work on a variety of related issues, 
including new proposed regulations relating to the eagle repository maintained by the federal 
government and proposals regarding permits which would allow wind farms to “take” a certain 
number of eagles as part of their routine operations.  
 
Photo by Dee Ann DeRoin, 2013  6  Sustain and Perpetuate Cultures and Languages  
Repatriation  
The repatriation of ancestral remains, funerary objects, sacred objects, and objects of cultural 
patrimony to tribes redresses a long standing human rights violation and helps to heal the 
historical trauma suffered by tribal communities and peoples caused by the looting of their 
ancestors’ grave sites and the loss of many sacred objects and cultural patrimony.  AAIA played 
an integral role in obtaining the enactment of the Native American Graves Protection and 
Repatriation Act (NAGPRA) in 1990 mandating repatriation by federal agencies and federally -
funded museums.  
 
Promoting the full and effective implementation of NAGPRA continues to be one of AAIA’s goals.  
For example, in 2013, we provided training to federal government employees at the Society of 
American Indian Government Employees convention.  In addition, AAIA Executive Director Jack 
Trope wrote a chapter laying out “The Case for NAGPRA” that was published by the Oregon State 
University Press in 2013 as part of an anthology entitled:  Accomplishing NAGPRA:  Perspectives 
on the Intent, Impact, and Future of the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act . 
 
In addition, and perhaps more significantly, we continued to develop our International Repatriation 
Project.  More than 1 to 2 million Native human remains and cultural items are held by 
international museums.  The recently -approved United Nations Declaration on the Rights of 
Indigenous Peoples includes provisions protecting the rights of indigenous peoples to their sacred 
and cultural objects and to repatriation of their ancestors’ human remains.  Our work is designed 
to give meaning to these provisions.  
 
Our Project has begun to document these overseas collections and develop materials for tribes 
explaining the process for seeking the return of these remains and items.  We have also 
convened a Working Group which includes indigenous people from the United States, Canada 
and Australia, and begun collaborating with the Australian National University, National Center for 
Indigenous Studies.  The Chair of our Working Group, Honor Keeler, organized and moderated a 
panel at the United States Mission to the United Nations in New York on international repatriation 
in 2013.  The panel included the Australian ambassador and representatives of the Australian 
aboriginal community, American Indian tribes and a representative from the National Museum of 
the American Indian.   This is part of an effort to raise the visibility of this issue and gain 
international support for repatriation.  
 
In late 2013, we received a significant funding commitment for the program and anticipate that our 
International Repatriation program will expand significantly in 2014.  
 
 7  Sustain and Perpetuate Cultures and Languages  
Language Preservation  
During 2013, the Language Program worked to promote the use of the Dakotah -language 
Jeopardy game that it recently developed in schools located in Dakotah communities .  It also 
continued to create a variety of new Dakotah -language materials.  
 
The program also went through a transition.  Early in 2013, it was decided that the program would 
be transferred to the Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate and be operated by the tribe in the future.  This 
occurred in October 2013 when a ceremony was held memorializing the transfer.  With Language 
Program Director Tammy DeCoteau and the Treasured Elders moving over to the tribe with the 
program, we know it will be continue to be very successful.  
 
The language program has left an amazing legacy of materials, including K -2 curriculum, Dakotah 
language SCRABBLE and Jeopardy, hundreds of books, CDs and other teaching materials, 
online word games on a dedicated website, and videos on a You Tube site.  AAIA continues to 
maintain a website with all of the materials created by the program over the years, as well as the 
online games.    It can be found at aaialanguageprogram.org.  
 8  Protect Sovereignty, Constitutional, Legal and  
Human Rights and Natural Resources  
Federal Acknowledgement  
By obtaining Federal acknowledgment of their tribal status, Indian tribes are able to have their 
sovereign activities recognized by the federal government and they become eligible for a wide 
variety of federal programs that are available only to tribes recognized by the federal government.  
Because federal recognition strengthens the ability of Indian tribes and their members to survive 
and thrive in the 21st Century, we have long worked with federally unrecognized tribes seeking 
federal acknowledgement.  
 
Tragically, the process by which the federal government determines who should be recognized as 
“legitimate” tribes is broken.  The administrative process for federal acknowledgement of Indian 
tribes has become increasingly unreasonable, overwhelmingly expensive, and unjustifiably 
unpredictable and there have been massive delays (a decade or more) in processing petitions.  
Successful applications once included only a couple of hundred pages of material.  Now, tens of 
thousands of pages of evidence are required, costing millions of dollars, and taking up to thirty -
five years for final acknowledgment determinations. After pouring such resources into an 
intergenerational effort, many worthy tribes are still unreasonably denied.  
  
We have been advocating for reform of this system to make it reasonable, fair and prompt for a 
number of years and have worked closely with NCAI’s Federal Recognition Task Force and the 
Alliance of Colonial Era Tribes, among others, to achieve this goal.  
 
In 2013, the Department of the Interior took the first steps toward meaningful changes to the 
process.  The Department circulated draft changes to the regulations governing federal 
recognition.  The changes were designed to streamline the process, make it more consistent, and 
reduce the level of documentation needed by eliminating or modifying requirements that are 
unnecessary to determine the legitimacy of petitioning tribes and their existence over time.  
 
AAIA was integrally involved in the process of responding to the proposal, working closely with 
interested tribes and attorneys to develop an analysis for circulation to interested parties.  AAIA 
also filed formal comments on the proposed regulations.  
 
In addition to this broad policy effort, we continue to have an interest in the efforts of some 
specific tribes to have their status acknowledged.  For a number of years, we provided support to 
the Piro Manso Tiwa Tribe of New Mexico in their efforts to develop a federal recognition petition.  
The federal government began its active consideration of that petition in 2010, but consideration 
of the petition has been suspended until new regulations are adopted.      9  Protect Sovereignty, Constitutional, Legal and  
Human Rights and Natural Resources  
Indian Child Welfare  
AAIA has worked actively in the field of Indian child welfare for more than four decades.  AAIA 
studies and advocacy were the catalyst for the Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978, an Act designed 
to provide legal protections to Indian children and families and promote tribal involvement in 
decision -making involving their children and families who are at risk.  Since that time, we have 
worked to promote the full implementation of the ICWA and to assist tribes in obtaining adequate 
resources for their child welfare programs by successfully advocating for expanded tribal eligibility 
under Title IV -B of the Social Security Act which provides funding for child welfare services and 
Title IV -E (entitlement program for foster care and adoption assistance) in the Fostering 
Connections to Success Act of 2008.  
 
Most of our work in 2013 can be directly connected with the United States Supreme Court case of 
Adoptive Couple v. Baby Girl . The case involved the attempted adoption of a young Cherokee girl 
by a couple in South Carolina.  The child’s non -Indian mother placed the child with the couple at 
birth.  The father, a member of the Cherokee Nation and a soldier in the United States Army, was 
notified of the adoption when the child was four months old -- days before he was scheduled to 
deploy to Iraq.  The father immediately challenged the adoption proceeding.  Within days, the 
father left for Iraq where he served for one year, receiving a Bronze Star for his service.  During 
this period, the case was held in abeyance and the Cherokee Nation intervened in the case on 
behalf of the father.  When the father returned, the South Carolina Family Court held a hearing to 
resolve who should have custody of the child.  Utilizing the Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA), the 
Court ruled in favor of the father, finding that the father would be an excellent father for the child 
and that the girl should be returned to him.  The South Carolina Supreme Court affirmed this 
decision.  
 
The United States Supreme Court reversed the South Carolina Supreme Court and remanded the 
case for further hearings to determine who should have custody of Veronica. In short, the Court 
held that  
 
 the heightened standard of proof for termination of parental rights in ICWA does not apply when 
a parent has never had prior legal or physical custody (although Justice Breyer in his 
concurrence suggests that there may be exceptions to this rule),  
 
 active efforts are not required to prevent the breakup of an Indian family when a parent 
abandons a child before birth and has never had physical or legal custody of the child, although 
the section may apply to a non -custodial parent in other factual circumstances, and   
 
 adoption placement preferences are not triggered until a party within the placement preferences 
(relative, tribal member, or other Indian person) seeks to adopt the child.  
 
Tragically, on remand, the South Carolina Supreme Court subsequently ordered that Veronica be 
removed from her father and that the adoption be finalized without any hearing on Veronica’s best 
interests.  10  Protect Sovereignty, Constitutional, Legal and  
Human Rights and Natural Resources  
Indian Child Welfare  
One of two national tribal briefs in the case was authored by AAIA.  The brief was filed in support 
of the father and Cherokee Nation on behalf of AAIA, the National Congress of American Indians 
(NICWA), National Indian Child Welfare Association, 30 Indian tribes, and 5 other Native 
American organizations.  We also worked very closely with attorneys for the father and Nation as 
they prepared for the case.  
 
Following the adverse decision, the AAIA, in conjunction with NICWA, prepared a Guide to the 
decision which is available on AAIA’s website.  The Guide includes an analysis of the Supreme 
Court case -- what it means and what it doesn’t mean -- as well as ideas for how the impact of the 
decision might be mitigated. The Guide was designed to provide tribal advocates and birth 
parents and children’s attorneys with the information that they need to respond to the decision at 
state and tribal levels and to minimize its negative impacts on Indian children and families.  AAIA 
also made presentations about the case and the Guide at a number of different forums, ranging 
from the National Congress of American Indians annual convention to the Idaho Indian Child 
Welfare Conference.  Finally, AAIA began discussions with the Department of the Interior 
regarding changes to the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) ICWA Guidelines as a mechanism to 
address some of the problems caused by the Supreme Court decision and to improve ICWA 
compliance in general.  
 
The implementation of Title IV -E tribal provisions in the Fostering Connections to Success Act has 
also been a priority for our organization.  In 2013, we prepared a comprehensive analysis of all 
Title IV -E tribal -state agreements, including a template based upon promising practices found in 
those agreements.   This work was funded by Casey Family Programs.  It will be finalized and 
posted on our website and the website of the Native American Rights Fund early in 2014.  We 
also worked with the Casey Family Programs ICW Work Group to develop recommendations on 
improving the CFSR process.  This is the process that the federal government uses to review 
state agency compliance with federal child welfare laws.  
 
Finally, we have also continued policy work in this area, meeting with Congressional staff and 
nonNative child welfare and children’s organizations on a variety of issues, including legislation 
dealing with the reporting of sexual abuse, background checks for foster and adoptive homes, and 
Title IV -E financial reforms.  
 11  Protect Sovereignty, Constitutional, Legal and  
Human Rights and Natural Resources  
Juvenile Justice  
During the last few years, one of AAIA’s priorities has been to improve how juvenile justice systems 
operate in regard to Native youth that come into those systems.  The focus has been both on 
assisting efforts to develop alternatives to incarceration, particular in tribal communities, and to 
develop strategies to address the unequal and disproportionate treatment of Native youth in non -
Native systems.  To these ends, we focused on two specific projects in 2013.  
 
Our work with the Annie E. Casey Foundation to make the Juvenile Detention Alternative Initiative 
(JDAI) available to interested tribes took a big step forward during the year.  JDAI is a system that 
promotes a method of decision -making that promotes and emphasizes alternatives to incarceration 
for youth that have come into contact with the juvenile justice system.  In 2013, the Mississippi 
Band of Choctaw Indians became the first pilot site for what is being called “Tribal JDAI”.  The goal 
of Tribal JDAI is to utilize the principles of JDAI, but to modify them as needed to reflect the unique 
cultural and jurisdiction framework within which tribes operate.  The Choctaw have commenced the 
process of implementing Tribal JDAI, a process which will continue in 2014.  The Tribe has already 
achieved a substantial reduction in the number of youth in detention since beginning the project.  
AAIA has been involved in the implementation process and will be documenting the experience of 
the Choctaw for the benefit of future tribes that may want to get involved with Tribal JDAI.   In 
addition, presentations about this work were made at the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency 
Prevention Tribal Youth Conference and the JDAI Annual Conference.  
 
Late in 2013, we also commenced planning for a project that will evaluate the efficacy of a New 
Mexico law that requires notice to tribes whenever one of their youth may be placed by the state 
juvenile justice system into secure detention.  The purpose of the study is to determine how this law 
is working and whether it might be a model for other states that are seeking to reduce the 
disproportionate treatment of Native youth in their systems.  This project will be an 18 month project 
that is scheduled to be completed early in 2015.  
 
We are collaborating with the National Indian Child Welfare Association (NICWA) on both of these 
projects.   12  Improve Health, Education and Economic and  
Community Development  
Health  
Late in 2013, AAIA signed an Memorandum of Understanding to work with the ARC on the 
development of materials and training for health care providers pertaining to Fetal Alcohol Spectrum 
Disorder (FASD).  The ARC is a national organization that works with individuals who have physical 
and intellectual impairments.   FASD is caused when fetuses are impacted by alcohol consumption 
by their mothers during pregnancy.  Children born with these conditions are often significantly 
impaired physically, intellectually and emotionally.  The goal of the materials and training will be to 
assist health care providers in their efforts to prevent FASD through education targeted toward 
women of child -bearing age.  
 
Work on this project will commence early in 2014.  13  Improve Health, Education and Economic and  
Community Development  
Scholarships  
AAIA has a long history of assisting Native American college students reach their educational 
and life goals by providing graduate and undergraduate scholarships.  For the 2013 calendar 
year, AAIA awarded ninety -four scholarships through our eight scholarship programs.  
 
 
ADOLPH  VAN PELT SCHOLARSHIP  –  
Scholarships in the amount of $750 per semester are awarded to undergraduate students in 
any curriculum.  Thirty -four scholarships were awarded in 2013.  
 
EMILIE HESEMEYER  MEMORIAL  SCHOLARSHIP  -  
Scholarships in the amount of $750 per semester are awarded to undergraduate students with a 
preference given to students majoring in Education.  Scholarships can be renewed for up to 4 
years.  Five scholarships were awarded in 2013.  
 
DISPLACED  HOMEMAKER  SCHOLARSHIP  -  
Scholarships in the amount of $750 per semester are awarded to undergraduate students in 
any curriculum who would not otherwise be able to complete their educational goals due to 
family responsibilities.  Students who receive this award are generally older students who have 
returned to school after raising a family.  Five scholarships were awarded in 2013.  
 
ALLOGAN  SLAGLE  MEMORIAL  SCHOLARSHIP  -  
Scholarships in the amount of $750 per semester are awarded to graduate and undergraduate 
students in any curriculum who are citizens of tribes that are not recognized by the federal 
government.  Thirteen scholarships were awarded in 2013.  
 
ELIZABETH  AND SHERMAN  ASCHE  MEMORIAL  SCHOLARSHIP  –  
Scholarships in the amount of $750 per semester are awarded to graduate or undergraduate 
students pursuing a degree in public health or science. Ten scholarships were awarded in 2013.  
 
FLORENCE  YOUNG  MEMORIAL  SCHOLARSHIP — 
Scholarships in the amount of $750 per semester are awarded to graduate students pursuing a 
master’s degree in the arts, public health or law.  Seven scholarships were awarded in 2013.  
 
SEQUOYAH  GRADUATE  SCHOLARSHIP — 
Scholarships in the amount of $750 per semester are awarded to graduate students in any  
curriculum.  Sixteen scholarships were awarded in 2013.  
 
DAVID RISLING  EMERGENCY  AID SCHOLARSHIPS  -  
Scholarships in amounts between $100 -$400 are awarded to graduate and undergraduate 
students in any curriculum who have a sudden critical need that was not expected or that would 
prevent the student from attending school.  Four scholarships were awarded in 2013.  
 
 14  
AAIA receives approximately 550 applications per year from undergraduate and graduate 
students from federally recognized tribes as well as those from tribes that are not recognized by 
the federal government.  In an effort to streamline our review process, AAIA put together a 
scholarship review team to help review undergraduate scholarship applications in the spring of 
2012 and continues to use this process.  This team is made up of volunteers of mostly former 
AAIA graduate scholarship recipients, who want to give back and help other students attain their 
educational goals.  We are grateful to these dedicated volunteers who give of their time and 
talent to assist us in the large task of selecting those applicants who are to receive our 
scholarships for the upcoming school year.   
 
2013 -2014 Scholarship Review Team  
 
Brian Hoeffner, Former Sequoyah Graduate Recipient  
Stephanie Big Crow, Former Sequoyah Graduate Scholarship  
Lucas Tyree, Former Allogan Slagle Memorial Recipient  
Hillary Renick, Former Sequoyah Graduate Recipient  
Roy Brown, Former Florence Young Memorial Recipient  
Christine Nelson, Former Sequoyah Graduate Recipient  
Clayton Wauneka, Former Elizabeth & Sherman Asche & Former Sequoyah Gradate Recipient  
Emily Smith, Former Florence Young Memorial Recipient  
Jessica Harjo, Former Florence Young Memorial Recipient  
Noelle Garcia, Former Emilie Hesemeyer Recipient  
Georgiana Lee, Former Adolph Van Pelt Recipient  
Melanie McKay Cody, Former Allogan Slagle Memorial Recipient  
Melissa Colby, Former Sequoyah Graduate Recipient  
Nora Cata, Former Sequoyah Graduate Scholarship  
Heather Ales, Former Emilie Hesemeyer Recipient  
Natahnee Winder, Former Emergency Aid Recpient  
Carly Tex, Former Sequoyah Graduate Recipient  
Karen Malone, Former Sequoyah Graduate Recipient  
Paneen Peterson, Former Florence Young Memorial Recipient  
Marvin Jim, Former Sequoyah Graduate Recipient  
Tealese Orme, Former Sequoyah Graduate Recipient  
Darrow Peynetsa, Former Emilie Hesemeyer Recipient  
Ryan Regan, Former Allogan Slagle Memorial Recipient  
Kara Four Bears, Former Emilie Hesemeyer Recipient  
Gentri White, Former Florence Young Memorial Recipient  
Teresa Abrahamson -Richards,  Former Elizabeth & Sherman Asche Recipient  
Taurra Sun Eagle, Former Sequoyah Graduate Recipient  
Terrra Branson, Former Emilie Hesemeyer Recipient  
Corey Gardipee, Former Adolph Van Pelt Recipient  
Donna Yellowhair, Former Sequoyah Graduate Recipient  
Erisel Cruz, AAIA Americorp Vista Program Staff  
 
 
 Improve Health, Education and Economic and  
Community Development  
Scholarship Review Team  15  Improve Health, Education and Economic and  
Community Development  
Summer Camp Program  
The Association on American Indian Affairs (AAIA) has been providing seed money for youth 
summer camps in the areas of cultural preservation, language preservation and health and 
wellness/diabetes education since the 1970’s.  These camps are run by Native run organizations 
and tribes from across the country, and are designed to strengthen and preserve the uniqueness 
of the individual culture of the tribe by providing opportunities for their youth to learn traditional 
cultural practices from tribal elders and others with specific expertise, while preparing them to 
live in the 21st Century.  Without these opportunities, many of these youth would not learn the 
traditions of their culture, nor would they achieve academically or in the larger society.   
 
Many of the activities in which the youth participate, such as regalia making, archery, plant 
identification, and cooking, are meant to strengthen cultural ties.  Native language is used to 
instruct many of the activities, allowing students to strengthen or learn their Native language.  
Healthy lifestyles are stressed, allowing campers to develop a strong sense of self -esteem, build 
good relationship skills, develop team building skills, and engage in healthy eating habits and 
physical exercise, all of which have been shown to lower the use of drugs and alcohol, prevent 
juvenile delinquency, and lower suicide rates as well as increase the likelihood that students will 
complete high school and go on to college.  
 
Tribes and Native run organizations that have existing youth summer camps apply to AAIA for 
seed grants to fund specific needs that, without outside funding, would have to be eliminated or 
reduced.  In drastic cases, if no outside funding is received, the camp may be cancelled.  AAIA 
provides funding for critical portions of the camp such as transportation, supplies for activities, 
camp cooks, stipends for peer counselors and honorariums for elders whose wisdom and insight 
enables youth to learn the unique traditions of their cultures.  
 
AAIA provided funding to six Native youth summer camps for the 2013 summer camp season.  
 
Indian Child and Family Preservation Program  
Ukiah, California  
 
Kamiah Nimiipuu Health  
Kamiah, Idaho  
 
Pathkeepers for Indigenous Knowledge  
Culpeper, Virginia  
 
Sicangu Lakota Youth Center  
Mission, South Dakota  
 
Saint Paul Council of Churches Department of Indian Works  
Saint Paul, Minnesota  
 
Zuni Youth Enrichment Project  
Zuni, New Mexico  16     Public Education  
Newsletter and E -Newsletter  
AAIA continued to publish our bi -annual newsletter Indian Affairs , which highlights 
the work of the Association as well as articles about issues important to the Native 
community.  Hardcopies, which are distributed in June and November, are available 
to individual members who make a contribution of $25 or more per year or 
commercially by subscription.  Please contact our Executive Office in Rockville, 
Maryland for  subscriptions.  AAIA also publishes a monthly online newsletter which 
may be obtained by clicking the link on the home page of our website at www.indian -
affairs.org.  
 
 17     Public Education  
Annual Meeting of the Members and Native American Film Event  
AAIA sponsored its 9th Annual Native American Film Showcase  at the Walter Reade 
Theater in New York City in November 2013.  The event, which was held in 
conjunction with our Annual Meeting of the Members, consisted of two short pieces 
by Native film makers that explored contemporary issues of concern to Native 
Americans and the feature length film The Cherokee Word for Water, which relays 
the story of Cherokee Chief, Wilma Mankiller, who brought her people together to 
bring much needed water to the Cherokee reservation.  The film was introduced by 
actor Kimberly Guerrero (Colville, Salish -Kootenai and Cherokee), who sits on 
AAIA’s Council of Advisors.  Comments about Wilma were provided by her good 
friend Gloria Steinem.  
 
Program and financial updates were provided for the members during the meeting.  
A fundraising reception was held prior to the meeting at which AAIA proudly honored 
Dr. Elizabeth Sackler, Director of the American Indian Ritual Object Repatriation 
Foundation, for her significant contributions to the repatriation of human remains and 
items of cultural value to their rightful tribal communities.   
 
 
Charlie Soap, Jack Trope, Oren Lyons, Kimberly Guerrero, Rosario Dawson  18     Financial Information  
Statement of Financial Position —Assets  
December 2013 & December 2012  
           2013                  2012__     
Current Assets   
    
  Cash and cash equivalent    $  256,295         $     21,987  
   
  Investments in marketable securities      251,533             240, 348  
 
  Grants and contracts receivable                 3,198                47,351  
 
  Contributions receivable                        16,797                76,443  
 
  Prepaid expenses and other                 6,527                  6,596  
                                                                           _________                    _________  
 
Total Current Assets                                       534,350              392,725  
 
Property and Equipment    
   
  Furniture and equipment                        56,030               56,030  
 
  Less accumulated depreciation              (36,125)             (28,791)  
    
Net Property and Equipment                19,905                27,239  
 
Other Assets  
     
  Investments -endowment        652,853              652,853  
 
  Security deposits            1,150                  1,150  
 
Total Other Assets                             654,003              654,003  
 
Total Assets                      $             1,208,258      $      1,073,967  19     Financial Information  
Statement of Financial Position — Liabilities & Assets  
December 2013 & December 2012  
  2013   2012  
Current Liabilities      
  Accounts payable   $                          113  $                   11,536  
  Accrued wages   10,951   12,392  
  Accrued payroll taxes   947  1,142  
  Accrued Vacation   13,996   14,288  
     
Total Current Liabilities    
26,007    
39,358  
 
Net Assets      
  Unrestricted   445,003   365,092  
  Temporarily restricted   74,425   16,694  
   Permanently restricted   652,823   652,823  
 
 Total Net Assets    
1,182,251    
1,034,609  
 
 
 
 Total Liabilities and Net Assets    
 
 
$               1,208,258    
 
 
$             1,073,967  20     Financial Information  
Statement of Activities for the year ending December 2013  
(with comparative totals for the year ending December 2012)  
  2013   2012  
Revenues, gains, and other support     
  Contributions and dues  $                 179,903   $             135,826  
  Legacies  383,237   78,370  
  Grants  185,250   280,718  
  Consulting  105,077   85,300  
  Investment income  16,662   21,703  
  Media Sales and  9,706   5,911  
  Other income  1,475   2,105  
  In-kind contributions  18,075   5,599  
  Realized gains (losses) on investments  84,237   42,996  
  Unrealized gains (losses) on investments  62,931   53,106  
    
Total revenues, gains and other support  $             1,046,553   $             712,604  
    21     Financial Information  
Statement of Activities for the year ending December 2013  
(with comparative totals for the year ending December 2012)  
 
  2013   2012  
Expenses     
  Programs   $             605,665   $             574,423  
  General and administrative  86,377   90,423  
  Fundraising  206,869   134,898  
    
    Total Expenses  898,911   799,744  
    
Change in net assets  147,642   (87,140)  
Net assets, beginning of year  1,034,609   1,121,749  
    
Net assets, end of year  $          1,182,251   $          1,034,609  22     Financial Information  
Statement of Activities for the year ending December 2013  
(with comparative totals for the year ending December 2012)  
 
 
   2013   2012  
Program services      
  Scholarship, education & youth   $              438,787   $           443,273  
  Health   10,299   9,106  
  Legal affairs   112,974   82,290  
  Public education   43,605   39,754  
     
    Total program services   605,665   574,423  
     
Supporting services      
  General and administrative   86,377   90,423  
  Fundraising   206,869   134,898  
     
    Total supporting services   293,246   225,321  
    Total expenses   $              898,911   $           799,744  23     Leadership  
Board of Directors  
ROW 1 (Left to Right ): 
 
Alfred R. Ketzler, Sr.  
President, Athabascan  
Fairbanks, AK  
 
Dee Ann DeRoin  
Vice President, Ioway  
Lawrence, KS  
 
Megan Hill  
Secretary, Oneida  
Arlington, MA  
 
ROW 2 (Left to Right):  
 
Frank Ettawageshik  
Treasurer, Odawa  
Harbor Springs, MI  
 
Jerry Flute, Dakotah  
Browns Valley, MN  
 
John Echohawk, Pawnee  
Boulder, CO  
 
ROW 3 (Left to Right):  
 
Elke Chenevey, Omaha  
Encinitas, CA  
 
Sarah Kastelic, Alutiiq  
Portland, OR  
 
Joy  Hanley, Navajo  
Tempe, AZ  
 
Row 4:  
 
Bradford R. Keeler, Cherokee  
West Chester, PA  
 
Not Pictured:  
 
Faith Roessel, Navajo  
Bethesda, MD  
 AAIA is governed by an all -Native Board of Directors representing all regions of the 
country.  The collective wealth of knowledge and expertise in diverse areas makes 
AAIA’s Board well suited to develop policies that benefit all Native peoples.  
24     Leadership  
Council of Advisors  
Howard B. Teich, Chair  
 
Nadema Agard, Cherokee  
 
Gail Bruce  
 
Kimberly Guerrero,  
Colville/Salish -Kootenai/Cherokee  
 
John Haworth, Cherokee  
 
Dennis Hirschfelder  
 
Peter Johnson  
 
Alli Joseph, Shinnecock  
 
 
 In 2013 AAIA was pleased to expand its Advisory Board into a Council of Advisors.  
Based largely in New York where AAIA was started and is incorporated, the Council is 
comprised of individuals who are interested in furthering the work of the Association.  
They hold a wealth of knowledge and various interests and many of them are promi-
nent in their own fields.  The Council’s main initiatives consist of raising the profile of 
the Association’s work, assisting in planning our fundraising events, and helping to net-
work AAIA with individuals who can assist AAIA programmatically and financially.  
Hattie Kauffman, Nez Perce  
 
Kerry Kennedy  
 
Dr. Francesca Kress  
 
Cynthia Rudder  
 
 25     Leadership  
Staff 
Although AAIA received very little funding from federal grants in 2013, we have been 
able to obtain valuable staff members through federal programs such as the 
Americorps*Vista  Program and the Federal Work Study Program. We are also very 
fortunate to have  dedicated  volunteers to review applications for our scholarship 
program, help in our office and work on special projects.  
 
AAIA’s Executive Office is located in Rockville, Maryland.  Additionally, we have a Field 
Office in North Carolina and (until October 2013) we also had a  Native Language 
Program Office in South Dakota.  
  MARYLAND  STAFF 
 
    Jack F. Trope, Executive Director  
 
    Lisa Wyzlic, Executive Assistant/  
Director of Scholarship Programs, Ottawa  
 
    Erisel Cruz, Americorps Vista Member  
Social Media and Internet Development 
Coordinator  
 
Mike Jones, Bookkeeper  
 
    Foster Wabama, Federal Work Study,  
Office Assistant  
 
Alyssa Newswanger, Legal Intern  
 
Lizz Compos, International Repatriation  
Intern  
 
Katie Roberts, International  
    Repatriation Intern  
 
Patricia Miguel, Office Volunteer  
 
Karl Slater, Special Project Volunteer,  
Navajo  
 
See Page 14 for a list of Scholarship  
Program Volunteers  
 
 
NORTH  CAROLINA  STAFF 
 
Earl Evans, Development Director,  
Haliwa –Saponi  
 
 SOUTH  DAKOTA  STAFF 
 
Tammy DeCoteau, Director, Native  
Language Program, Dakotah  
 
Jodi Eastman, Technology Coordinator, 
Dakotah  
 
Orsen Bernard, Treasured Elder, Dakotah  
 
Wayne Eastman, Treasured Elder,  
Dakotah  
 
Delbert Pumpkinseed, Treasured Elder, 
Dakotah  
 
V. June Renville, Treasured Elder,  
Dakotah  
 
Caroline Black Thunder, Treasured Elder , 
Dakotah  
 
 26     How You Can Help  
Consistent financial support helps AAIA continue to fund the programs described in 
this report.  AAIA receives financial support through a number of avenues such as 
member contributions, on -line contributions, trusts, bequests, grants and foundations.   
 
Your support will help us to continue to work for the benefit of Native youth, families 
and communities through our policy and advocacy work and grass roots 
programming.  
 
 Membership  - Your donation of $25 or more per year will assist us in providing 
programs that are vitally important to Native youth, families and communities.  
You will have the opportunity to receive program updates through our newsletter 
Indian Affairs, which is accessible online or as a hardcopy by request.  You will 
also and be invited to attend our Annual Meeting of the Members (which is open 
to the public) held in New York City, or to vote by proxy.  
 
 Spread the Word  -  Follow us on Facebook and Twitter and ask your family and 
friends to do the same and to join in supporting us too.  You can also view our 
language program videos on YouTube and see our new language program 
website at www.aaialanguageprogram.org.  Sign up for our monthly e -
newsletter by visiting our website at www.indian -affairs.org and forward the 
information to family & friends.  
 
 On-Line Giving - Make a safe and secure donation on -line through Network for 
Good on our website at www.indian -affairs.org.  
 
 Monthly Gifts -  Consider making a monthly gift to AAIA, which can be easily 
paid by credit card or automatically deducted from your bank account.  
 
 Matching Gift Program - Many companies offer Matching Gift Programs.  Visit 
your Human Resources Department and ask if donations to AAIA can be 
matched and use their Matching Gifts Contribution form.  
 
 Join your workplace giving program and designate AAIA for your charitable 
contribution.  
 
 Bequests and Trusts - By remembering AAIA in your will, you can support 
Native youth, families and communities for years to come.  Please consider 
contributions of a specific sum, a percentage of your estate or stocks and bonds 
in a bequest or trust to AAIA.  
 
 
 
 27   28  
EXECUTIVE  OFFICE   
966 Hungerford Drive  
Suite 12 -B 
Rockville, MD  20850  
Phone:  240 -314-7155  
Fax:  240 -314-7159  
E-Mail:  general.aaia@verizon.net  
 
 
www.indian -affairs.org  
The Association on American Indian Affairs is a 501 ( c ) (3) non -profit, publicly supported,  
tax exempt corporation.  
 
Donations and contributions to AAIA are tax deductible to the extent provided by law.  
 AAIA E XECUTIVE  OFFICE   
966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 12 -B 
Rockville, MD  20850  
Phone:  240 -314-7155   *   Fax:  240 -314-7159  
E-Mail:  general.aaia@verizon.net  
AAIA L ANGUAGE  PROGRAM  OFFICE  
P.O. Box 509  
Agency Village, SD  57262  
Website:  aaialanguageprogram.org  
 
 
 
 
AAIA Is a Founding Member of 
the Native Ways Federation.   AAIA Field Office  
P.O. Box 8  
Hollister, NC  27844  
AAIA meets all 20 Better 
Business Bureau Wise 
Giving Standards  
