Torture and Impunity in Jordan’s Prisons: Reforms Fail to Tackle Widespread Abuse | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload this reportDonate NowDownloadsDownload this reportOctober 8, 2008Torture and Impunity in Jordan’s PrisonsReforms Fail to Tackle Widespread AbuseAvailable InEnglishالعربيةTorture and Impunity in Jordan's PrisonsReforms Fail to Tackle Widespread AbuseSummaryMethodologyTortureTypes of Torture and Ill-treatmentAbuses Against Islamist Tanzimat-StateSecurity PrisonersOther Prison AbusesHealth ServicesThe Castor Oil TreatmentFood, Water, HygieneContact with the Outside WorldImpunityDeficient Complaints Mechanism..Lackluster ProsecutionsPolice CourtOfficial Responses to Human RightsReportingPrison Reform..General ReformsNew PrisonsThe Super-maximum security prisonMuwaqqar IIClassificationHealth ServicesSocial ServicesTrainingAccountabilityInternational AssistanceRecommendationsAcknowledgmentsAppendix: Three Incidents of PrisonTortureCase 1: AqabaCase 2: SwaqaCase 3: MuwaqqarSummaryTorture remained widespread and routine in Jordan's prisons at the time of Human Rights Watch's research in 2007. Updates to our investigationin 2008 reveal that problems of torture and accountability persist. We receivedallegations of ill-treatment, often amounting to torture, from 66 out of 110prisoners interviewed. Prison guards torture inmates with near impunity becausepolice prosecutors and police judges at the Police Court do too little topursue cases against their fellow officers. Prison conditions remain poor,especially health, food, and visitation provisions, despite an ambitious butill-considered reform program excessively focused on building new prisons.This report is based on Human Rights Watch's visits to sevenout of ten of Jordan's prisons in August and October 2007, and in April 2008.We interviewed 110 prisoners at random, except for specifically identifiedadministrative detainees and Islamist prisoners to whom we asked to speak. Weinterviewed prison directors and medical staff, and held talks withhigh-ranking officials in the Ministry of Interior, the Public SecurityDirectorate, and the prison service.Jordan's Ministry of Interior, Public Security Directorate,prison service, prison reform program, human rights office and Police Courtalmost always facilitated our requests and were always open to discussions. Thewillingness of these representatives of the Jordanian government to grant usaccess to their prison facilities and to meet with us repeatedly to discuss ourconcerns as well as particular cases is commendable and reflects a positivecommitment to transparency and reform.Despite the PSD's openness to human rights organizations,high-ranking officials regularly dismiss independent human rights reporting asunreliable or politically motivated.King Abdullah has called on the government to present aprison reform plan "according to the latest specifications consistent withinternational standards. Public Security Directorate (PSD) chief Maj.Gen. Muhammad 'Aitan in November 2007 sent out directives to PSD officials stating thattorture was unacceptable. In April 2008, the Public Security Directorate's newdirector, Maj.Gen. Mazin al-Qadi, informed us at length about ongoingimprovements to the prison system, including more judicial oversight overprisons to investigate allegations of abuse.The public concern of Jordan's highest leadership abouttorture has not showed lasting effects on the ground. Prison guards under thejurisdiction of the Public Security Directorate routinely torture or ill-treatinmates for perceived infractions of prison rules or for requests, such asaccess to doctors, the telephone, or visitation, but also in retaliation forfiling complaints. In five prisons, detainees told us that prison directorsparticipated in torture. We found torture in each of the seven prisons wevisited between August 2007 and April 2008, speaking unsupervised to 110prisoners. We found several instances of recent torture only days before ourvisit in four prisons.Most common forms of torture include beatings with cablesand sticks and the suspension by the wrists of inmates from metal grates forhours at a time. Guards flog the defenseless prisoner with knotted electricalcables, beat him with hoses and truncheons, or kick him with fists and boots.Islamists accused or convicted of crimes against nationalsecurity (Tanzimat) face greater abuse than ordinary prisoners. Prisonauthorities currently house Tanzimat prisoners in separate facilities insmall-group isolation within two prisons, Juwaida and Swaqa; since July 2007,the government has only rarely allowed them to mix with fellow prisoners.Because they often act as a group pressing demands in prison, guardsoccasionally punish them collectively. Such punishment happened to the Tanzimatinmates in Swaqa prison in July 2007 and August 2007, and to the Tanzimatinmates in Juwaida prison in June 2007. (This report does not cover earliersuch incidents that took place in 2006.)Complaints of incidents of torture have decreased recently,the National Center for Human Rights reported, but remain a common occurrence,as Human Rights Watch's research shows. Torture and ill-treatment in prisons donot reflect a general policy, although individual prison directors,high-ranking guards, and special forces dealing with prison riots, have orderedand participated in large-scale beatings.Torture remains a tolerated practice in Jordan's prisons because mechanisms for individual accountability are lacking. The deterrent effectof a royal proclamation against torture is less than that of effectivelyprosecuting an individual guard. Yet, the esprit de corps of the PSD, itsreluctance to prosecute, name, and shame torturers within its ranks decidedlymilitates in favor of settling incidents of torture quietly and internally, ifat all, with only a few egregious cases making it to the courts.In Jordan, PSD prosecutors and PSD judges investigate,prosecute and try their fellow officers for neglect of duties, abuse of power,insults to prisoners, and torture. Deficient investigations, lacklusterprosecutions, and lenient sentences combine to preserve an uncomfortably widemargin in which prison guards torture with impunity.Jordan's mechanisms to remedy torture and hold perpetratorsaccountable are not effective. Prisoners can complain to prison officials, apolice prosecutor at the prison, officials from the PSD Grievances and HumanRights Office, or outside visitors, such as human rights groups, lawyers ortheir family members.Prison directors inspect wards housing 20 to 60 inmates inlarge rooms with bunk beds and personally receive complaints, but many inmatesremain fearful of repercussions of complaints made to prison personnel. Thepolice prosecutors began to work at seven prisons in 2008, but had investigatedonly one case of abuse by April 2008. That number rose to 24 cases by August2008, however.Grievances and Human Rights officials have the longestexperience in investigating prison abuses, but they do not protect complainantsand witnesses or remove guards accused of wrongdoing from contact with them.These officials wear the same uniform as prison guards, and inmates remainedfearful of submitting complaints of torture.We found that Grievances officials, who have full powers ofpolice prosecutors, referred cases for prosecutions only where incontrovertibleforensic reports attested to torture.Of 19 cases of alleged torture Grievances officialsinvestigated in 2007, they referred six to court for prosecution. However, thedirectors of three prisons, Muwaqqar, Qafqafa, and Swaqa, told Human RightsWatch that from January to August 2007, they had investigated 20 instances ofabuse altogether, and internally disciplined six guards for assaulting orabusing inmates and using excessive force.Even where the government has prosecuted some egregiouscases of torture, the Police Court's verdicts have been flawed. Policeprosecutors, not their civilian counterparts, prosecute all crimes andviolations of the law involving PSD officials. The PSD's director appointsqualified police officers as Police Court judges to try their fellow officers..Two incidents of torture that Human Rights Watch documentedremained entirely without consequence: Juwaida and Swaqa prison guards torturedseveral Islamist prisoners following a successful escape by two prisoners fromJuwaida in June 2007.The PSD also did not prosecute a guard who had torturedprisoners at Muwaqqar prison in early April 2008, despite an extensiveinvestigation into the deaths of three prisoners in a fire at that prison onApril 14, 2008. The PSD did not inform the public or the families and victimsabout the investigation's process and outcome, which concluded that no officialhad done anything wrong.The government has quietly taken some initial steps toprovide greater opportunities for redress, but has not vigorously pursued thosenew opportunities. In October 2007, torture for the first time became arecognized crime, though no prosecutions for the crime of torture had occurredby August 2008. In early 2008, the PSD assigned prosecutors to investigateabuses at all prisons and allowed the National Center for Human Rights to setup an office inside Swaqa prison, though critical reporting about a prison riotthere in April 2008 led the PSD to stop its cooperation with the center.Everyday living conditions were at the forefront ofprisoners' complaints to Human Rights Watch. Prison conditions remain poor,lacking adequate health care, in particular psychiatric care. Around onepercent of prisoners had been hospitalized for psychiatric care at the times ofour visits.Sanitary facilities are also poor, drinking water is oftennot available and stale, and food is meager. The larger prisons did not provideadequate facilities for visitation or a prisoner's access to telephones. Noneof the prisons had newspapers or journals available in adequate numbers soprisoners could remain informed about important news. These unnecessary limits ona prisoner's contact with the outside world drew frequent calls by prisonersfor more access to telephones, visitation time, and news.Jordan's two year-old prison reform program plans to remedythe situation of poor sanitary facilities, visiting space, and few telephonesby building nine new prisons to be completed next year.One of the new prisons will be a 240-cell super-maximumsecurity prison, Muwaqqar II. Such "supermax" prisons were designed to houseincorrigibly violent inmates in separate isolation cells. They have fallen outof favor in the United States twenty years after they were first built therebecause of the debilitating impact of solitary confinement on prisoners.By April 2008, the reform program had not delivered betterhealth services, food, or visiting facilities for prisoners. New prosecutorsassigned to the prisons and the opening of an office in Swaqa prison by the National Center for Human Rights have not tangibly improved accountability for torture. Thegovernment had not addressed key deficiencies in the impartiality of currentinvestigations, prosecutions, and trials of alleged perpetrators of torture.Human Rights Watch recommends that the government of Jordan redirect its efforts to reform its prisons toward increased accountability forabuses by security authorities. The PSD should devise a new, independentcomplaints mechanism for prisoners that safeguards their anonymity and protectsthem from prison officials. It should refer investigations into abuse byofficials from police to civilian prosecutors, to be tried in civilian courts,not the Police Court.The government should grant Jordanian and internationalhuman rights organizations continued access to prisoners as a means to verifyimprovements in preventing and addressing torture. In particular Jordan should sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention Against Torture, and whichwill ensure that the Sub-Committee of the Optional Protocol to the Conventionagainst Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishmentcan visit without giving notice and that Jordan creates an independentinspection mechanism.The Ministry of Health should step up the provision ofhealth care to prisoners by providing more doctors and psychiatrists who conductentry examinations and also routinely inspect the wards.Human Rights Watch further recommends that Jordan's donors, especially the European Union and the United States, make accountability fortorture and prison reform an essential pillar of their development aid toimprove the human rights record in the security sector in the kingdom. The EUand the US should make parts of their development assistance conditional on Jordan's setting up an effective civilian prison inspection mechanism and the referral ofprosecutions to civilian prosecutors and courts.MethodologyThe information in this report is based primarily on prisonvisits Human Rights Watch carried out in August and October 2007 and in April2008. The Ministry of Interior, which has authority over Jordanian prisons,quickly agreed to our request to visit five Jordanian prisons in August 2007.The Ministry invited us to visit another prison for three days in October basedon our request, and the director of the Public Security Directorate, whichreports to the Ministry of Interior, spontaneously agreed to a request to visitanother prison in April 2008.They also agreed to our conditions for such visits:inspection of the entire facility of each prison visited; unsupervised meetingswith any prisoner of our choice willing to speak to us; and no examination ofour notes. We specified that we wished to visit five of Jordan's 10 prisons: Juwaida, Muwaqqar, Swaqa, Qafqafa and Aqaba. To our regret, immediately beforethe start of the prison visits in August 2007, the Ministry of Interiorinformed us that we could not visit Juwaida because they had scheduled it forclosure, but allowed us to visit Salt (Balqa') prison instead. Subsequently, inOctober 2007, the Ministry of Interior agreed to allow us three days of accessto Juwaida, following a renewed written request by Human Rights Watch. In April2008, we also had the opportunity to visit Birain prison and the constructionsite of Muwaqqar II prison.Between one and three Human Rights Watch researchers carriedout these visits, usually lasting around six to eight hours each. Tworesearchers spoke in Arabic, and an interpreter assisted a third researcher. Ateach facility, we first spoke with the prison director, usually accompanied bythe chief of preventive security, another senior prison official, andoccasionally the prison doctor. We asked the officials standard questions aboutprison staffing, classification of prisoners, unusual incidents and prisonresponses. We inspected health, dining, exercise, and solitary confinementfacilities. We then chose random prison wards to meet prisoners, with theexception of Tanzimat (Islamist prisoners charged with "nationalsecurity" offenses) and administrative detainees, whom we had specificallyasked to see. We also asked to meet any prisoner in solitary confinement. Wemet prisoners accused or convicted of crimes involving traffic accidents;financial impropriety or fraud; murder and attempted murder; sexual assault;assault and theft. We interviewed both convicted and unconvicted inmates,Jordanian and foreign, between the ages of 18 and 69. Overall, we interviewed110 prisoners, over twenty prisoners each at Juwaida, Swaqa, Qafqafa, and Muwaqqar prisons.We took important precautions to verify the credibility ofdetainee testimony; attacks on the credibility of evidence obtained fromdetainees is a frequent government defense to allegations of abuse, and thus wefocused a great deal of effort to ascertain the veracity of testimonies wereceived. We discussed these steps with the head of the prison service, Sharifal-'Umari, on July 31, 2008 in Amman. Where possible, we spoke to a prisoneralone out of earshot of other prison officials . Because this was difficult, attimes we gathered two or three prisoners who were all involved in a particularincident. In larger group meetings, we did not ask about physical abuse, butabout food, health care, and complaint mechanisms. On at least three occasions,we spoke in a language other than Arabic to individual prisoners who recountedproblems with the administration as well as with other prisoners. Noconversations with prisoners took place within earshot of prison guards.However, in an apparent breach of the agreement, a Public Security Departmentofficial who accompanied Human Rights Watch to some prisons informed us in July2008 that they had been monitoring which detainees we spoke to and haddebriefed them.Where prisoners alleged physical abuse, we asked probingquestions to ascertain details of place, time, and identifying details of theabuse and the abuser. Wherever possible, we corroborated details from prisonersin different wards. In almost all cases of allegations of recent abuse, HumanRights Watch was able to witness physical signs of ill-treatment, especiallyraw skin at the wrists, long bruises and smaller cuts. These injuries, forexample bruises on the back, were distinct from the prevalent scars resultingfrom prisoners' common self-injury and in places difficult to inflict onthemselves.Human Rights Watch's methodology is designed to detect falsestatements. We also spoke to former and current prison officials about theirexperiences in Jordanian prisons; they often, corroborated in general terms thepicture of widespread torture gathered from inmates. Where police prosecutorslaunched investigations into torture, court documents in two instances showthat witnesses separately interviewed by prosecutors and by Human Rights Watchgave similar accounts of torture.Following meetings with prisoners, we debriefed the prisondirector and conveyed specific requests of prisoners to health care orvisitation where we did not fear retaliation against the prisoners. To protectthe prisoners to whom we spoke from retribution, we are not identifying them byname.In October 2007, we debriefed the Ministry of Interior'sSecretary-General, Mukhaimer Abu Jamous, and the Director, Y, and DeputyDirector, Mohammed Sarhan, of its human rights office, as well as Khaled al-Majali of the prison development unit of the Royal Police Academy on our findings in prisons. Atthe time, we submitted a letter to the Ministry of Interior requestingstatistics from the PSD prosecution and the Police Court regarding complaints,charges and verdicts against prison officials, but did not receive a response.In April 2008, Human Rights Watch met with the director, Mazin al-Qadi, and senior leadership of the Public Security Directorate to hear about Jordan's achievements and future plans for prison reform. We also met with the National Center for Human Rights and the European Commission's delegation to Jordan concerning their involvement in prison reform. In July 2008, we again met with the leadershipof the prison service, the Grievances and Human Rights Office, and the prison developmentprogram at the Royal Police Academy.Human Rights Watch sent the PSD two memoranda in September2007, one about the events at Swaqa prison on August 26, when prisoners injuredthemselves during our second visit there in protest at mass beatings they hadendured on August 22,[1]and a second memorandum about our findings based on prisoner accounts regardingthe beating to death of Firas Zaidan at Aqaba prison on May 9, 2007.[2] Weoriginally kept these communications private. However, nobody in the Jordaniangovernment responded to our memoranda, and since then, the Police Court issuedunsatisfactory verdicts in both cases. The memoranda, as well as a news releaseregarding our investigation into the deaths on April 14, 2008 of threeprisoners at Muwaqqar prison, are attached to this report.[3]HRW also provided PSD director Maj.Gen. Mazen al-Qadi with a summary of our findings and concerns on September 25, 2008.This report does not address the frequent allegations oftorture in police holding stations, especially by the criminal investigationdepartment and the counter-drugs department, or in ordinary police stations. Inthis report, we use the word "prison" for what Jordanians officially callCorrection and Rehabilitation Centers.TortureTypes of Torture and Ill-treatmentHuman Rights Watch's research in 2007 indicates that tortureand ill-treatment of prisoners by guards remained a widespread and regularoccurrence throughout Jordan's prisons. We found evidence of abuse in all sevenof Jordan's 10 prisons that we visited. Among the 110 prisoners we interviewed,66 told us that they had experienced some form of torture or ill-treatment atthe hands of guards. We saw physical evidence of such abuse in ten instances,in addition to bruises on 20 Tanzimat[4] prisoners following collectivebeatings on August 22, 2007.Jordan acceded to the Convention Against Torture (CAT) in1991, and, shortly before the visit of the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture to Jordan, published the convention in the Official Gazette on June 15, 2006, giving it theforce of law. The CAT defines torture asany act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physicalor mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person for such purposes asobtaining from him or a third person information or a confession, punishing himfor an act he or a third person has committed or is suspected of havingcommitted, or intimidating or coercing him or a third person, or for any reasonbased on discrimination of any kind, when such pain or suffering is inflictedby or at the instigation of or with the consent or acquiescence of a publicofficial or other person acting in an official capacity.[5]In October 2007, the government amended Article 208 of thePenal Code to incorporate the definition of torture, making it a crime underdomestic law for the first time. Officials convicted of torture face a prisonsentence of between six months and three years. If torture results in illnessor injury, the penalty increases to a possible life-sentence.[6] The law does notcriminalize ill-treatment.Whether or not torture occurs at a prison appears to bewithin the control of the prison director. New directors at Salt (Balqa'),Aqaba, and Juwaida prisons were apparently able to put an almost complete stopto torture following their arrival. Prison directors spend as little as a fewweeks, and rarely more than one year at a prison before reassignment to adifferent posting in the PSD, usually outside the prison service. In Saltprison, Ali said: "We have a new director now for one month, but two to threeweeks before he came, the [previous] director and the guards beat me on thehead with plastic sticks that had iron inside, after suspending me in theholding pen from both hands."[7]Torture chiefly takes the form of beatings and suspension bythe wrists. According to prisoners' accounts gathered by Human Rights Watch,guards administer beatings mostly in and around the cage-like holding pen madeof iron bars located in every prison near the control room between the administrationbuilding and the prison wings. This area is monitored by closed circuit videocameras. Occasionally, guards beat prisoners inside the wards, sometimes incorridors, especially around the solitary confinement cells, in rooms of theadministration building, as well as in open areas, inmates told us.[8]Prisoner Armand said, "The guards who take us to court beat us on the waythere."[9]Prisoners' hands are cuffed behind their backs for court or hospitaltransports. Prisoners often remain shackled for hours inside the back of atruck, awaiting their turn or until the last of the group finishes his courthearings before returning to prison.[10]Guards torture prisoners in an apparent attempt to punishthem for perceived infractions of prison rules or for inconveniencing theguard. Ghaith, a Qafqafa prisoner gave Human Rights Watch an account of abusehe had suffered:Five days ago, guards beat me with the padlock on the doorto our ward because I went to the toilet with the wrong clothes. Guard [name withheld]and two other guards beat me with the lock and their keys. Then they took me tothe gate, hung me by the wrists with two separate handcuffs, spreading my armsout between two window grilles, and punched me in my stomach and chest. Whenthe [International Committee of the Red] Cross came for a visit, they hid me inthe computer room for one hour.[11]Human Rights Watch interviewed seven inmates who told usthey had been abused by guards who perceived them to have broken a rule orannoyed them with a request. Three prisoners in Muwaqqar, Juwaida and Qafqafadescribed to Human Rights Watch the types of unprovoked reasons that led to abeating. Muwaqqar inmate Lu'ai said that "another prisoner told the guards Iwas going to bring back drugs from a court hearing. When I came back, theysuspended me in the holding cell by my left arm, high up. They slapped me."[12]Nu'man, a Juwaida inmate said that "August 13 was the last time they beat me.Because I have a beard and look religious, I sometimes get picked on andbeaten."[13]A Qafqafa inmate, Qais, said that "sometimes guards provoke inmates byinsulting them. They carry sticks and cables and hit them when they respond."[14] Weobserved the raw skin on the wrists of a prisoner, Rafiq, in Swaqa who said: "Iwas cuffed to the holding pen for two hours and beaten several weeks ago withtwo others for having an [illegal] cell phone."[15]Where two prisoners get into a fight, inmates we interviewedtold us that guards would torture both.[16] Human Rights Watch observed rawareas of skin on the wrists of another prisoner in Muwaqqar, Luqman, who saidthatThree days ago, two prisoners were fighting and the guardsseparated them. I was sitting behind the two prisoners, but the guards took allof us, me and four others, to the solitary [confinement] cells. The guardshandcuffed us and beat us. They hit me with cables, sticks and hoses. Theguards usually carry sticks, about half a meter long, but not when visitorscome. The cables are three cables wrapped together, big and thick. Afterbeating us, they handcuffed us to the iron bars, with our arms stretching wayup high. They left us there from 12 p.m. until 8 a.m. the next morning. Theguards would walk by and hit us. My hands became numb.[17]Even where a prisoner in Salt had admitted being responsiblefor injuring a fellow prisoner who had insulted him, guards chose to torturehim instead of initiating disciplinary or criminal proceedings against him. Inthis incident, four days before Human Rights Watch's visit, prisoner Ghalib said,The guards hung me from both wrists, cuffed to the irongate downstairs at the entrance to the prison, for two hours. All prisoners sawme as they were going to get breakfast. Around seven masked guards, I thinkfrom the perimeter guards, beat me with a half meter long stick, mostly on theback. I asked for a doctor, but was refused.[18]If a prisoner does not stand to attention quickly enoughduring roll call, guards may beat him.[19] Prisoner 'Amr at Swaqa prisongave us the following account of abuse he had witnessed of a fellow inmate:At 1.30 p.m. on July 26, eight guards entered the ward andasked a prisoner to shout his own name, he refused because of his [unwell]mental state. He told the guards that he already knows his name and that it iswritten on the door outside. He was taken outside his cell … and the eightguards started beating him up with a thick black stick and electric cables.Then he was dragged by the feet to the ground floor, with his head bangingacross the walls and on the stairs. We heard him screaming from there an hourlater.[20]Human Rights Watch visited the inmate who had been beatenone month later. Physical evidence of his abuse was still visible; we sawswellings above his eye and bruises on his head, but he was unable to communicatewith us.[21]A prisoner who speaks back to an officer also risks abeating. Guards have beaten prisoners who press demands and complaints, such asseeing a doctor or better food. For example, prisoner Humaidan at Aqaba toldHuman Rights Watch: "I said [to the guard that] I wanted to make a phone call.I haven't called in 17 days. The Preventive Security officer slapped me. Iwanted to cut myself in protest, and he slapped me again."[22] Anotherprisoner, Laith, said thatofficers beat me two months ago after I asked to go to thedoctor. It was 10 a.m. on a Wednesday. I said I'll complain if you don't let mego. After I said that, they took me to the holding pen. They put a handcuff oneach wrist and suspended me from the iron gate until sunset. Then they put mein the automobile repair room, which is under ground, for one hour, and 10officers beat me.[23]Eight prisoners told us that guards had cuffed their handsabove their heads to a high bar, sometimes with their feet not touching theground, and sometimes with their arms cuffed behind their back in the style ofthe so-called "Palestinian hanging" (strappado).Guards then beat thedefenseless prisoners whether or not fully suspended with one of threepreferred tools: several electrical cables twisted together and knotted at theend, a rubber hose, or sticks, clubs and truncheons.[24] Sometimes,guards punch prisoners with their fists or kick them with their boots.[25] Towake up prisoners who pass out, guards sometimes splash them with cold water.[26]Prisoner Lu'ai in Muwaqqar said thatOne month ago, the guards beat a prisoner terribly. Theyput him under the stairs, and three or four guards beat him mercilessly. Theytie knots in plastic electrical cables to make it hurt more when they beat you.[27]Although prisoners we interviewed usually identified oneguard as a lead torturer, they also identified more than one guard as havingbeen involved. In some prisons, prisoners told us that guards prepared a"welcome party" for new arrivals, beating each one in the holding pen wherethey spend the initial hours or days prior to their classification anddistribution to a particular wing. Prisoner Dawud at Muwaqqar told Human RightsWatch that "on Saturdays, new detainees are brought here. They receive awelcome party. Two weeks ago, 70 came, and the guards lined them up and beatthem all. I was one of those beaten."[28]Talib, a prisoner at Salt, who had been to Muwaqqar, confirmed the welcomeparties, saying that,'Amir al-Qutaish, is a prison wing chief in the controlroom of Muwaqqar. He is a bit fat. I arrived on a Saturday, and he put me and24 others in the reception cell. There, he beat us with cables and plasticsticks.[29]Three prisoners at Qafqafa separately told Human RightsWatch of mass beatings on June 21 or 24 of 2007. One prisoner, Khalid, saidthat "100 masked security officers from 'Team 14' came to search our ward. Thiswas not a search; it was designed to teach us a lesson. They came and beat usall. They were vicious."[30]In five prisons, Salt, Swaqa, Juwaida, Qafqafa, and Muwaqqar, inmates told us that the director participated in such abuse.[31] A prisoner,'Umar, at Muwaqqar said, "They beat [this prisoner] terribly because he didn'twant to shave his hair. He's a new inmate. The director himself stepped on himwhile guards held him down and cut his hair."[32] Another prisoner at Muwaqqar, Walid, said that "last Wednesday, I beat another inmate over a drugs dispute in thedining hall at lunch. They took me into the corridor and suspended me fromhandcuffs and beat me heavily. The director was there and watched. There wereabout three to four guards."[33]Abuses Against Islamist Tanzimat-StateSecurity PrisonersTorture by prison guards of common prisoners appeared tooccur in response to perceived infractions or in retaliation for complaints.Torture by prison guards of Islamist Tanzimat prisoners, however, attimes took the form of collective beatings. These prisoners, of whom there wereabout 120 in October 2007, in Juwaida and Swaqa prisons, recount that guards andsometimes the director frequently abuse them and occasionally torture them inresponse to protests or riots. On at least three occasions all or nearly all ofthe Tanzimat prisoners were tortured, twice in Swaqa, and once inJuwaida. Furthermore, prison authorities house Tanzimat prisoners insmall-group isolation, a psychologically stressful environment. They separatethese inmates from the general population supposedly to prevent theirindoctrination of the general population.[34]The Tanzimat prisoners have on a number of occasionsheld violent protests, and authorities regard them as a difficult, hostileprison population. Prison guards in Swaqa and Juwaida and two prison directorssaid that Islamist prisoners frequently protest and insult guards, including byspitting on them.[35]Some of the Tanzimat protests have indeed been violent. Riots broke outamong the Tanzimat of Juwaida, Swaqa and Qafqafa in March and April 2006, following which the government closed the Qafqafa Tanzimat section.In Juwaida, in March 2006, Tanzimat prisoners took hostage the directorof prisons, who had come to negotiate, and reportedly beat him.[36] In Qafqafa, inApril 2008 (?), special forces stormed the prison's Tanzimat wing, whereprisoners also reportedly held two officers hostage.[37]At other times, the Tanzimat prisoners have stagedmore peaceful protests. In Swaqa, in August 2006, Tanzimat prisonerswent on a two-day hunger strike to protest their ill-treatment.[38] In July 2007,Swaqa Tanzimat prisoners again went on hunger strike to protest thewithdrawal of visiting privileges and the confiscation of books and otherbelongings, including a mobile telephone not allowed by the prison, followingthe escape of two Tanzimat prisoners from Juwaida reportedly with thehelp of a guard in June of that year.[39]In response to the Juwaida escape and the Swaqa protests,guards carried out collective attacks on the Tanzimat prison population.Inmates told us that guards wearing face masks and carrying thick truncheonsentered the Swaqa Tanzimat cells on June 23, July 5, July 26, and July27 of 2007, carrying out intrusive, violent full-body searches, insultingprisoners, and shaving their hair as part of degrading treatment.[40] OnJuly 28, during another search, inmates said that masked guards accompanied byfour officers entered the cells, pushed the prisoners toward the wall, carriedout a full-body search and ordered the prisoners to shout "long live the king,"while flogging them with knotted electrical cables on the backs.[41] The Tanzimatprisoners, who ideologically oppose the king, refused, and guards poured coldwater over them, adding soap to the cement floor so that the prisoners slippedand fell when they tried to dodge the flogging.[42] One inmate,Thamir, said that "at the end, the [guards'] arms got so weary, they startedusing their feet to beat us on the floor."[43]A hunger strike by Swaqa Tanzimat prisoners demandingto see a doctor was successful that day. The next day, on July 29, however, theinmates said that guards forced them to sign a statement that they had attackedthe guards first the day before The director then prevented all family visitsto the Tanzimat prisoners for one month.[44] On July 30,inmates told us that the guards again slapped some of the Tanzimatprisoners and beat them with truncheons and cables.[45]On August 22, 2007, one day after the first Human RightsWatch visit to Swaqa, Majid al-Rawashda became the new director at Swaqaprison. That day, he entered the cells of the prison with a group of prisonguards and beat all or nearly all of the inmates, according to testimony HumanRights Watch obtained from inmates during a return trip to the prison on August26. Inmates said beatings started in the afternoon and did not stop until lateat night. Accounts from Tanzimat and ordinary prisoners concerning thatday's events indicate that Tanzimat prisoners received particularlyharsh treatment. Human Rights Watch was able to see the marks of beatings onthe backs of six Tanzimat prisoners and on the arms and legs of anotherfourteen Tanzimat prisoners.Prisoners' injuries consisted most commonly of bruises,between 20 and 40 centimeters long, and two to four centimeters wide. Almostall were diagonally across the back, covering the shoulder blades. The color ofthe bruising ranged from deep purple to light green and light yellow. Inaddition to these bruises, marks from injuries included long, thin red lines onthe backs, necks, arms and legs of prisoners, where they said they were beatenwith cables. The skin appeared superficially lacerated. Some prisoners also hadbright red spots on their skin, mostly around the thighs, where they saidguards had hit them with an improvised whip with a metal ball bearing as a tip.A physically disabled prisoner who could not stand well told Human Rights Watchhow guards stuffed paper into his mouth until he gagged because he could notstand up to face the wall.[46]The director, who wore a face mask but who some Tanzimatprisoners recognized from their time together in Juwaida prison, also carriedan electric shock instrument, a stick with a handle and a cylindrical device ontop, although he did not use it.[47]One prisoner said, "The director grabbed me by the beard and said, 'Don'tcomplain'."[48]Following the beatings, the prison director ordered their hair and beardsshaved. One guard told a prisoner, "We will shave even your eyebrows."[49] Ontheir way down the stairs to the barber, guards further beat the prisoners. Oneprisoner said he saw a guard there whose clothing was covered in blood.[50]In Juwaida prison, Human Rights Watch again documented asignificant episode of collective punishment of the Tanzimat prisonpopulation. On June 19, 2007, two Tanzimat prisoners successfullyescaped, apparently with the help of a guard.[51] Following the escape, prisonguards tortured the remaining Tanzimat prisoners, according to thetestimony of eleven inmates. They reserved particularly harsh treatment for twoother Tanzimat prisoners who attempted to escape, but were caught, andanother wanted Islamist caught on a bus with one of the escapees.[52] Oneof them described to Human Rights Watch how guards tortured him for days,forcing him to crawl along an internal corridor, licking the floor while beingrepeatedly beaten.[53]Another prisoner told Human Rights Watch how after theescapeSpecial forces put a black bag on my head and banged myhead into the walls, saying 'Watch where you're going!' Masked PreventiveSecurity guards slapped me for thirty minutes and said, 'Now here's a goodparty for you.' They took me to the corridor, made me roll down it like afootball, then stand up, then made me spin around on the ground on my face. Allthe while, they beat me with a stick. Later they beat me on the soles of myfeet [فلقة] and on my hands.[54]Another Juwaida prisoner said that after the escape, guards"put their shoes in my mouth and made me pretend to have sex with my mattress.[55] Athird Tanzimat prisoner said that guards beat him "for one month withevery meal."[56]A fourth prisoner said that guards made him fill up his water bottle in thecell by filling and refilling only the cap of his bottle by reaching through anarrow opening in the cell door to a large bottle placed outside.[57]The PSD replaced the director of Juwaida following theescape, but other officers involved in the torture of the inmates remained inplace, a prisoner, Yasir, told Human Rights Watch, including those heidentified as torturers.[58]Other Prison AbusesUnder international law, prisoners have most of the samerights as persons not deprived of their liberty, such as rights to an adequatestandard of life, including access to the highest available standards ofhealth,[59]and to adequate food and drink.[60]Due to their confinement, prisoners also have special rights to contact withthe outside world.[61]Courts may deprive persons of their liberty as punishment for criminal acts,but not of these other rights. In Jordanian prisons in 2007, however, inmatessuffered from untreated health conditions, ate poorly and often hadunnecessarily limited contact with the outside world.Health ServicesMedical doctors regularly serve all Jordanian prisons, butour research indicates that access to health care and its quality is deficient.The administration of services fails to meet even the requirements of Jordanianlaw for health care in prisons. The Ministry of Health administers health carein prison, but the prison director from the Ministry of Interior has immediateauthority over medical staff.In Aqaba prison, with a capacity of 192, doctors only visitedthree times a week, according to the prison director.[62] This made itimpossible to abide by Jordan's Law on Correction and Rehabilitation Centers requiring the prison authority to administer a medical examination upon an inmate'sadmission to a prison and before placing him in solitary confinement.[63] InJuwaida prison, the pharmacist told us that two prison doctors working onalternate days are responsible for both the men's and the separate, butadjoining, women's prison.[64]The prison doctor said he sees 150 patients each day.[65] If the doctor isat the men's prison, he is unavailable to see women patients, and vice versa.[66] In Swaqa, Jordan's biggest prison, five doctors try to care for over 2,000 inmates.[67] In Muwaqqar, two doctors cared for 896 inmates on the day of our visit.[68]The prison doctor in Birain, a smaller detention facility,told Human Rights Watch that he treats 70 or more cases every day.[69]Doctors usually have the assistance of a nurse, but no further help. In each ofBirain, Qafqafa, Muwaqqar, Juwaida and Swaqa, one or two prisoners asked HumanRights Watch during our visit to inform the prison doctor and the director thatthey had been unable to obtain health care.[70] In Juwaida, a new arrival said hewas afraid he would miss a long-scheduled operation due to his recentincarceration.[71]Another prisoner there showed us his visibly broken arm with part of his boneprotruding under the skin.[72]Hospital doctors first treating him, before his arrest, said his arm would needan operation before being set, but the prison director had not coordinated withthe hospital and he had not received the operation.[73] Prisonerscomplained that doctors treat any ailment with simple pain killers and do notprovide more specialized care.[74]A Juwaida prisoner complaining of disc problems in his back said "the doctor isonly here from 8 a.m. until 11 a.m. He is very bad and only gives you ibuprofen[pain killer]." Some saw the doctor as their enemy, saying "the doctor treatsyou like he wants to beat you."[75]Prisoners do not under Jordanian law have the right to seeka second medical opinion by a different doctor, although Muwaqqar prisondirector Rakat al-Hallalat said that he generally allows prisoners to continueto see their existing specialist doctors if they have pre-existing medicalconditions.[76]He does not allow them to bring in their own medicines, however.[77]International standards provide for the right of a prisoner to seek a secondmedical opinion.[78]Frequent health complaints involve respiratory problems,aggravated by incessant smoking inside dormitory wards with between 28 and 50beds per room. One prisoner told Human Rights Watch that he has "asthma and alung infection … and take[s] 12 pills a day… The air in here is bad, fetid. Isleep near the door because of the air that comes in under the door… I wantedto be moved to a different prison where I could breathe fresh air. Theyrefused."[79]The regulations accompanying the prison law guarantee eachprisoner "health service sufficient … for his medical needs."[80] Internationalnorms dictate that "The medical officer [of the prison] … should daily see allsick prisoners, all who complain of illness, and any prisoner to whom hisattention is specially directed."[81]In addition to general physicians, prisons provide the servicesof dentists, psychiatrists, and, occasionally, dermatologists. The Aqaba prisondoctor reported that he refers two to three cases per day to the psychiatrists.At the time of Human Rights Watch's visit, prison authorities had transferredfour persons at the 650 capacity Birain prison, seven inmates at the 500prisoner capacity Salt prison, and 17 of the 1140 prisoners at Juwaida toFuhais mental hospital, which accommodates mentally ill prisoners. In thelarger prisons, a psychiatrist visits once every week or two.[82]These services appear to be wholly inadequate for the mentalhealth needs of the prison population. The ICRC in February and March 2008 conducted an assessment of the health care provisions in Jordan's prisons. While itsfindings remain confidential, a participating ICRC doctor in August told themedia that "manpower has clearly been the most lacking resource… 13psychiatrists are currently serving the Kingdom, working in 30 clinics inaddition to the country's 10 correctional facilities."[83]Jalil, a prisoner at Qafqafa prison told Human Rights Watch,"I have asked to see a doctor to speak about my mental health but have not beenable to do so. I have asked for one month now. I am depressed and often getangry."[84]The mental state of this prisoner's neighbor, also in solitary confinement,made him apparently unable to respond to Human Rights Watch's questions. Aprisoner in Swaqa also appeared to be mentally disturbed, unable to follow anormal conversation, but had not received specialized psychiatric care.[85]Another prisoner in Juwaida who had been on psychiatric medication for 12 yearsand had recently spent one month as a patient in Fuhais mental hospital toldHuman Rights Watch that "the psychiatrist comes once a month. He was here twoweeks ago, but I didn't get to see him. My family tried to get me mymedication, but couldn't. In here, if you complain too much, they put you insolitary."[86]The confinement of inmates in solitary cells no doubt has asignificant negative impact on inmates' mental health. Qafqafa's solitaryconfinement cells are underground, without natural light, locked with heavysteel doors in a dank and fetid environment. All inmates on death row also arein solitary confinement, and prison directors used short-term solitaryconfinement as a frequent disciplinary measure.[87] Three prisonersin Juwaida separately told Human Rights Watch about a "black room," called "thepharmacy," where guards sent them for punishment, sometimes lasting up to onemonth. This room was bigger than a solitary cell, and accommodated three orfour prisoners at a time, but let in no light.[88]According to the medical professionals we interviewed,neither psychologists nor general physicians treat prison rapes. Rape in prisonis a common occurrence, one former prisoner and four current prisoners in threedifferent prisons told Human Rights Watch.[89] They spoke in German, English orFrench so that Arabic speaking fellow prisoners could not understand them.Doctors do not provide condoms.Human Rights Watch learned of two suicides in Qafqafaprison, one on April 14, the other on August 14, 2007, and spoke to fellowprisoners about the incidents. Both prisoners hung themselves, allegedlyfollowing heavy beatings. One fellow prisoner told Human Rights Watch that hiscellmate showed signs of depression the night after the beating and that hisbody showed many bruise marks.[90]The Castor OilTreatmentAll prison directors informed Human Rights Watch aboutrecent discoveries of smuggled drugs and weapons. Commonly, they said,prisoners ingest balloons filled with psychiatric pills or razor blades orother sharp objects.[91]When prison guards suspect a new inmate or a prisoner returned from a courthearing or hospital of bringing in illegal substances, they force him to eatthree to eight castor oil pills that rapidly cause diarrhea. One prisondirector openly told Human Rights Watch that the prison buys the pills on theopen market.[92]Prisoners told Human Rights Watch about the inhumane anddegrading procedures of the castor oil treatment. In Muwaqqar, a prisoner toldus that guards made over one dozen new arrivals sit naked in a row on bucketswaiting for the pills to start working, usually within 30 minutes. Oneprisoner, Lu'ai, told Human Rights Watch "I had to go to the toilet, but theguards refused. The pills make you defecate after one minute. They brought me abowl but I didn't want to do it there in front of them, so I said 'I am goingto soil myself, and it will stink.' They slapped me, but brought me to thetoilet."[93]In Birain prison, Human Rights Watch spoke to a prisoner who said that guardshad forced him to swallow eight pills when he arrived. Two days later, he wasstill lying in bed, too weak to get up because of the violent diarrhea causedby the pills.[94]In Juwaida, a prisoner had no complaints about his treatment except for havingbeen forced to swallow three castor oil pills upon arrival.[95]Prison officials admitted to forcing prisoners to swallowcastor oil pills, but insisted it was the lesser of two evils: "We do not havethe facilities to x-ray every prisoner to discover ingested balloons withdrugs. So we give them castor oil."[96]Such facilities exist in hospitals, but officials shun the expense and time torefer most prisoners there. The EU assistance program has put out a tender forequipment for the detection of illicit objects for use in prisons by June 2008.[97] InJuly 2008, the director of prison service, Sharif al-'Umari, informed HumanRights Watch that he had stopped the use of castor oil pills as a laxative inprisons.[98]Food, Water, HygienePrisoners in all prisons complained about the quantity andquality of their food. Human Rights Watch saw lunch being served in mostprisons we visited. Prisoners at Qafqafa prison told us that that day'sportions were bigger, and there was an added vegetable on account of our visit.[99]Lunch consisted of a bowl of rice with one or two cubes of meat or chicken anda vegetable sauce. One prisoner told Human Rights Watch that he frequently hasto buy a can of tuna from the prison shop in order not to go hungry.[100]Another prisoner said the food was generally sufficient, but badly cooked andtasteless. He complained that there were no special meals for persons withdiabetes like him.[101]Breakfast and dinner usually consisted of one egg and a piece of bread withhalf a cucumber or tomato. All prisoners complained about the water they had todrink, saying it smelled foul. In Qafqafa, prisoners filled huge plasticbarrels full of water in the showers, to serve them as drinking water, becausethe administration frequently turned off the water during the day. A Swaqaprisoner complained of "too little food and water that is not good to drink."[102]The prison regulations stipulate that the prison provide"food of a sufficient nutrional quality" and that it "must provide every inmatewith drinking water whenever he needs it."[103]The sanitary conditions were generally poor, especially atthe older prisons like Juwaida, Qafqafa and Swaqa. Prisoners at Swaqacomplained about toilets "covered with mould, and fungi … causing fungousdisease on the feet."[104]Solitary confinement cells in particular were filthy. The cells contained atoilet hole in the floor without running water, separated only by a low wallfrom the rest of the one meter by two meter cell. An Egyptian man inadministrative detention was in a solitary confinement cell in Swaqa that stankof feces. This 69-year old man had only one blanket to sit on while hecontinued his hunger strike to protest his detention.[105] Anotherprisoner in Salt did not even have a blanket.[106]Contact with theOutside WorldContact with the outside world is an essential right ofprisoners. International standards dictate that prisoners must be allowed"communicate with their family and reputable friends at regular intervals, bothby correspondence and by receiving visits," and that they must be informed ofimportant news by "reading of newspapers, periodicals or special institutionalpublications, [and] by … wireless transmissions."[107] A prosecutor orprison director cannot arbitrarily withdraw a prisoner's rights to suchcontact: International standards require that "communication of the detained orimprisoned person with the outside world, and in particular his family orcounsel, shall not be denied for more than a matter of days."[108]Jordan's prisons only afford prisoners limited contact withthe outside world, whether they are unconvicted detainees or sentencedprisoners. The number of telephone booths is insufficient for the number ofprisoners, the paucity of visiting booths cuts short visits with family to mereminutes. Prisoners may only receive relatives, although the prison service saidit wanted to approve friends as visitors in the near future.[109] Prisonersoccasionally have access to newspapers, and generally can watch Jordaniantelevision, but have difficulty accessing books and periodicals.The directors of Qafqafa and Swaqa prisons, Jordan's largest, said that they only had enough telephones to allow prisoners one call permonth.[110]'Aql, a prisoner sentenced to 20 years in Swaqa prison, complained that prisonauthorities allowed him to make only one telephone call to his family eachmonth. This non-Tanzimat prisoner said he requested more frequent calls,but that the Preventive Security and the prison director, who must both agree,had recently refused.[111]Another prisoner in Qafqafa, Murad, said that while the authorities had allowedhim to make one phone call upon admission three weeks earlier, they had deniedall further requests for calls.[112]However, prisoners in other facilities such as Birain said they faced fewproblems accessing the telephone.[113]A prisoner in Juwaida said he was able to send faxes to the governor of Amman protesting his detention.[114]Long queues of visitors for only around 20 – 40 visitingbooths at Swaqa and Qafqafa prisons meant that prisoners did not get more thanfive minutes to a maximum of 15 minutes visiting time with their relatives.Prisoner Ra'id told Human Rights Watch that these short visits had become toopainful for him, because he could barely spend time with his children, so hepreferred that they did not visit.[115]Another prisoner beseeched Human Rights Watch to call his wife to come becauseshe had not visited in 35 days. When we called, she said the trip to the prisonwas too expensive for just a few minutes.[116]Prisons allow only immediate family to visit inmates. Jalil,a death row inmate told Human Rights Watch he had not had visitors for over oneyear, because his father had repudiated him, and prison regulations did notallow his former colleagues to visit him, only first-degree relatives.[117]The head of the prison service, Sharif al-'Umari, told Human Rights Watch thatthe prisons are in the process of complying with prison regulations allowingfor approved friends to visit.[118]The prison libraries had a few hundred to a few thousandvolumes according to the prison directors we interviewed. Prison authoritiesgenerally do not allow prisoners to keep their own reading materials. 'Amr, aSwaqa prisoner told Human Rights Watch that "on June 23, [2007] theyconfiscated all items in the ward that were previously allowed by the warden,including books, clothes, and food bought by us from the prison. They tookcourse books Usama Abu Hazim needs because he is doing two Masters [degrees] in prison, one in political science and one in engineering. These books took along time of negotiation between us and the administration to obtain."[119]In Qafqafa, Jalil told Human Rights Watch that for unknown reasons, he hadrecently been unable to get the two daily newspapers available to prisoners, al-Ra'iand Addustour.[120]Nasir, a prisoner in Salt who had been in solitary confinement for three monthsafter being sentenced to death complained that he had no news of the outsideworld and could not watch television like other prisoners.[121]The directors did not take these measures out of a lack ofavailability or to ensure good order in the facilities. Indeed, both directorsand especially the senior leadership of the PSD appeared keen on expandinglibraries and access to news.[122]International standards require that prisoners have access to "reasonablequantities of educational, cultural and informational material"[123]and that "Every institution shall have a library for the use of all categoriesof prisoners [who] shall be encouraged to make full use of it."[124]ImpunityJordan's mechanisms to hold accountable those responsiblefor torture and ill-treatment or violations of prisoners' rights areinsufficient either to provide redress to victims of abuse or to deterperpetrators. The justice system does not effectively hold officialsaccountable for torture or ill-treatment, creating a climate of impunity. Thelack of transparency and responsiveness to prisoner complaints also shows thatthe mechanism to address grievances is equally broken. Indeed, officials haverepeatedly dismissed allegations by individuals or human rights organizationsregarding violations of prisoner rights without starting a serious andtransparent investigation.The Convention Against Torture stipulates that states havean obligation to "proceed to a prompt and impartial investigation, whereverthere is reasonable ground to believe that an act of torture has beencommitted."[125]Reasonable allegations of torture not just incontrovertible material evidence,are thus sufficient to launch an investigation. Furthermore, every personsubjected to torture has "the right to complain to, and to have his casepromptly and impartially examined by, [the] competent authorities. Steps shallbe taken to ensure that the complainant and witnesses are protected against allill-treatment or intimidation as a consequence of his complaint or any evidencegiven."[126]Human Rights Watch heard accounts of over 60 prisonersalleging torture or ill-treatment in 2007.[127] In the cases we investigated,guards appear to have abused prisoners with near total impunity. This is inpart because there is no independent body to hold them accountable. The PublicSecurity Directorate (PSD), which is the agency that employs all prison staff,including guards and prison directors, is also the authority that investigatesand prosecutes prison abuses by such staff. Police prosecutors under the PSD'sLegal Affairs department are responsible for bringing charges against theirfellow officers in the prison administration. The PSD also convenes a specialcourt, the Police Court, to which it appoints the judges; the Police Courttries all crimes involving PSD officials.[128] The PSD director can personallyadjudicate criminal cases of misdemeanors carrying a prison sentence of lessthan three years.[129]Ordinary courts do not have jurisdiction of crimes committed by PSD officials.As can be expected, this internal prosecution mechanism has failed adequatelyto investigate and prosecute its own staff.Deficient Complaints MechanismPrisoners have four ways to complain about mistreatment:formally to the director of the prison, often via the guards in their wards; tothe PSD Legal Affairs prosecutors now present full-time in seven prisons; tothe PSD's Grievances and Human Rights Office during its regular visits, or byposting a complaint to its complaints box; or informally to external visitors,such as the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), the NationalCenter for Human Rights (NCHR), or their lawyers or visiting family members.The lack of confidentiality in the formal complaintsprocess, the lack of independence of the prosecutors, who appear in the sameuniform as prison guards and report to the same authority, as well as fear ofretaliation from prison guards, appears to dissuade prisoners from filingcomplaints of torture. In addition, prosecutors do not vigorously investigatethe cases of abuse they are informed about by obtaining credible witnesstestimonies, but rely too heavily on incontrovertible forensic reports provingtorture to pursue cases. Furthermore, the ability of prison directors to decidewhich cases of abuse to refer to prosecution and to "settle" cases internallyby disciplining abusive guards also results in few cases of formal prosecutionwith criminal sanction for abusers.The Grievances and Human Rights Office in 2007 received 710complaints, of which "95 per cent were administrative complaints."[130]Officials investigated 19 complaints of a potentially criminal nature, referredsix to the Police Court for prosecution and decided not to refer five cases tocourt for prosecution for lack of evidence (see below for the outcome ofprosecutions). Unit commanders disciplined officials in eight cases ofmisdemeanors or administrative transgressions without recourse to the courts.Between January and April 13, 2008, prison-based police prosecutors andGrievances Office prosecutors investigated only one case of alleged abuse.[131]By August 2008, that number had risen to 24 cases.[132]The official 2008 PSD guide instructs prison directors, allof whom make regular visits to the wards, about the steps they must take whenpresented with a complaint. Formalizing the complaints procedure is a welcomestep, but the guide underscores the lack of independence of the formalcomplaints mechanism: while the officer receiving the complaint must recordeach prisoner complaint in a register and give prisoners a copy of the filedcomplaint without checking the content, prisoners are supposed to present theircomplaints to the officer in charge of the prison wing, who also supervises theregistry.[133]This officer, however, may well be the abuser.In January 2008 the PSD assigned police prosecutors underits Legal Affairs department to seven prisons to more effectively investigateclaims of crimes committed by prison personnel.[134] This is asignificant step toward providing more localized and timely monitoring ofprison abuses. Ideally, such a presence would send a strong deterrent signal tothe prison guards. However, it is not clear that these prosecutors are alwaysfulfilling their mandate to actively investigate any incidents of abuse.[135]For example, on a visit to Birain prison on April 15, 2008,the newly-assigned prosecutor there told Human Rights Watch that he had not hada single case of abuse against a prison employee.[136] Three detaineesin the same prison, however, separately recounted to Human Rights Watch anincident of torture in early March, in which several guards had taken them andtwo other prisoners at night to a courtyard out of sight of the prison wingsand beat them for about two hours, before suspending them cuffed to a metal barfor one hour because one prisoner caught trying to smuggle drugs into theprison had named them as co-conspirators.[137] The prison director was aware ofthe incident, but neither he nor the prosecutor had investigated the allegedabuse by the guards.[138]The number of investigations has increased since April. Thedirector of the prison service, Sharif al-'Umari, told Human Rights Watch inJuly 2008 that prison-based prosecutors had investigated 24 incidents of abusein 2008, at least one in each of the seven prisons.[139]The PSD's Grievances and Human Rights officials work closelywith prison-based police prosecutors. They conduct their own prison visitsevery two weeks and empty a sealed mailbox for complaints located in anaccessible area, like the dining hall.[140]Only Grievances officials are supposed to have the key tothe complaints box. However, prisoners in Muwaqqar and Swaqa told Human RightsWatch that the prison staff have emptied the boxes and read the complaints withtheir own key.[141]The PSD denied that this had occurred.[142]Informal complaints to outside visitors benefit from greaterconfidentiality, but do not generally lead to judicial investigations. The National Center for Human Rights (NCHR) can only refer cases it receives during visits orvia telephone to the Grievances officials for judicial investigation or candecide to report publicly, but anonymously, on incidents of abuse.[143]In the aftermath of the mass beatings of prisoners andriots in August 2007, the PSD on February 3, 2008 allowed the NCHR to open anoffice inside Swaqa prison, staffed every Monday, to receive complaints fromprisoners. This new NCHR presence complemented the new prison prosecutors atthe prison and visits from the Grievances Office.[144] However, PSDofficials denied the NCHR's request to visit Swaqa prison during disturbancesthere on April 15, 2008 and reneged on its promise to extend NCHR offices toother prisons, too.[145]One concern with the current complaints mechanism is itslack of confidentiality and the failure to protect complainants and witnesses.Prisoners told Human Rights Watch that they had not told police prosecutorsfrom the Grievances Office all of what they told us.[146] Prisoners saidthey feared retaliation for telling the truth because the investigatingprosecutors wear the same uniform and are administratively responsible to thesame body as the prison official accused of misbehaving.[147]Prisoner Hazim told Human Rights Watch during a visit that"there is a 90 per cent chance that the prison guards will come in here afteryou leave, interrogate us about your questions, and punish us for talking toyou."[148]In all prison wings Human Rights Watch visited, prisoners were frank aboutinformers among prisoners who relayed information to the administration inexchange for favors from the guards.[149] One prisoner in Juwaida said "Ican't tell everything that goes on here," in a whispered comment repeated inother prisons.[150]Another prisoner in Swaqa, Ra'id, said that "when the [guards] came in to beatus, they taunted us, saying, 'You think the ICRC is better than us, then, doyou?' While they were beating us, they said 'Spit on the ICRC'."[151]Another reason for few complaints and the low number ofinvestigations besides fear of retaliation may be the failure by the Grievancesofficials to protect complainants or witnesses. Prisoners told Human RightsWatch that prison guards emptied the complaints box and "punished the prisonerfor complaining."[152]In one incident of abusing witnesses instead of protectingthem, guards and special forces beat witnesses and failed to remove threateningguards from contact with them.Ziyad, a former detainee described the investigation intothe Muwaqqar prison fire in April 2008: "The prosecutor came and asked us onlywhy we cut ourselves up. Then they took us to the solitary confinement cells,and beat us on the way there. They put two of us to one cell."[153] Fawzi, anotherformer prisoner questioned in the same incident said "a civilian prosecutorcame the second day after the incident to take my statement, but the clerk whowrote it down was a prison guard who looked at me intimidatingly."[154]Fawzi also described beatings three days after the prison riot and fire:On Thursday morning at 4 a.m. Team 14, Team 17, and theRapid Intervention Forces came with a list of 120 prisoners. They handcuffed usin the back and took us to prisoner transport vans outside, with their facesmasked, and four officers in front of us, and four behind. We were five to sixprisoners per van, where they beat and insulted us and told us to say the rightthing in the investigation. On the way back to the cell, one of them said,"There is no more [parliamentary] public freedoms committee, no more nationalcenter for human rights. We sent them away."[155]International guidelines on investigating torture requirethat officials implicated in torture be removed from positions of control orpower over witnesses:Those potentially implicated in torture should be removedfrom any position of control or power, whether direct or indirect overcomplainants, witnesses and their families as well as those conductinginvestigations. Investigators must give constant consideration to the effect ofthe investigation on the safety of the person alleging torture and otherwitnesses. [156]Lackluster ProsecutionsProblems with the complaints mechanism have produced fewercomplaints than the incidence of torture and ill-treatment in Jordan's prisons would warrant. Additional problems occur at the stages of investigation andprosecution. Overall, the number of prosecutions for physical or mental painprison guards inflict on their charges is low compared to the widespread androutine use by guards of violence against inmates Human Rights Watch's researchin 2007 indicated.One reason for fewer prosecutions is the provision of thePublic Security Law allowing "unit commanders" such as prison directors of themilitarily organized PSD to discipline subordinates for misdemeanors withouttrial.[157]Our research indicates that police prosecutors proceed totrial only where incontrovertible forensic medical reports indicating injuriesconsistent with physical torture exists. The office's director told HumanRights Watch that in several cases of alleged abuse, he could not proceed withan investigation because the medical report did not specify that injuries weresustained as a result of ill-treatment.[158]Hospital doctors may not be specialized in detecting theeffects of torture, including psychological torture, and the prisoner remainscuffed and in the presence of a prison guard in hospital, making it difficultfor him to ask the doctor to examine signs of possible torture. All prisonshave video monitoring of public areas, corridors, open spaces, entry and exitareas, and the space around the solitary confinement cells, accessible onscreens from a separate control room and the prison director's office. However,no routine recordings are made and preserved for some time to serve aspotential evidence in cases of abuse, although the Ministry of Interior plannedto do so in the future.[159]Grievances officials appear to make little effort toindependently research conditions of abuse, for example by frequently andrepeatedly visiting the wards to interview inmates as victims and witnesses inprivate and individually, speaking to prison doctors, or operating an anonymouscomplaints mechanism that prisoners trust. In the cases known to Human RightsWatch, prosecutors from the Grievances Office relied on a formal complaintbefore opening an investigation, and did not routinely research prisonconditions.[160]Their biweekly prison visits are too infrequent to secure timely information tostop or document torture as it happens.In 2007, officials investigated 19 complaints potentiallyindicating a crime out of 710 received, but referred only six to trial whileinternally settling five cases. Prison directors appear to receive morecomplaints of abuse but, without objection from police prosecutors, mete outmild disciplinary rebukes to abusive guards under their authority as unitcommanders.The directors of Muwaqqar, Qafqafa, and Swaqa prisonstogether told Human Rights Watch of 20 complaints of abuse they had received inthe first seven and a half months of 2007 alone. They settled these casesinternally, although the prosecutors were informed.[161]Of the 24 cases the Grievances Office and prison-basedpolice prosecutors investigated until August 2008, information on the outcomewas only available for four cases that occurred in Salt prison. The GrievancesOffice had referred three cases to Legal Affairs prosecutors to pursue theprosecution at trial, and in one case had stopped the charges, the director ofthe Grievances Office told Human Rights Watch.[162]In some cases, Grievances officials failed to prosecutesuspected guards, despite ample evidence of abuse. For example, the Office didnot prosecute guards for the torture of all or nearly all Tanzimatprisoners in Swaqa and Juwaida of June and July 2007. These incidents did notfeature among the reported 19 cases the Grievances Office investigated in 2007.When the Grievances Office visited Swaqa on August 27 in the wake of a separateriot there on August 22, its staff could have recorded allegations of abuse,and what some prisoners said were marks on their bodies from the torture theyendured in June and July. Yet there appears to have been no investigation intothese earlier incidents. The PSD did investigate and prosecute the August 2007torture of Swaqa prisoners, but the results were disappointing (see below).In April 2008, the Grievances Office and other PSDprosecutors conducted a lengthy investigation into the riot and prison fireresulting in three inmate deaths at Muwaqqar prison, but quietly concluded thatno official had done anything wrong.[163] Human Rights Watch's researchinto the Muwaqqar riot and fire in April 2008 showed that beatings andill-treatment were the underlying reason for the riot on April 15, 2008 (SeeAppendix 3). The PSD in July 2008 strongly disagreed with our findings and wetherefore carried out further research with eyewitnesses, who largely confirmedour findings.The PSD disagreed that Firas al-'Utti and Hazim Abu Ziyadhad been tortured in the days prior to their deaths during the fire. Neweyewitnesses came forward to say that 'Amir al-Qutaish, the prison guardalleged to have abused them, took Firas out of his room on April 13 and cuffedhim to the holding pen for a few hours before sending him to the solitaryconfinement cells.[164]Mundhir, Wadi', and Jamal, all confirmed earlier accounts of guards beatinginmates as they exited their burned out room, and one guard shooting oneprisoner , Muhammad al-Tabbasha, with a rubber bullet. Wadi' said, "We wentinto a large area, outside the buildings, but inside the prison walls andstayed there for four hours. Al-Tabbasha lay there like dead without medicalassistance, surrounded by special forces in balaclavas with electric stundevices."[165]These former prisoners also shed further light on why three prisoners burned todeath in their room.[166]These former prisoners also reported problems with the PSDinvestigation. Mundhir said that "the prison director intimidated me before therelease, telling me to affirm that Firas al-'Utti [a prisoner who died in thefire], not the guards, beat me causing marks on my body. He told anotherprisoner in my presence to lie to investigators about which room he was in."[167]Guards beat prisoners who had cut themselves up and put them into solitaryconfinement cells, two prisoners to a cell. They isolated the rest in an unusedwing of the prison.[168]Police CourtThe Police Court is not independent and averse to public scrutiny.Its verdicts reveal lenient sentences for torturing prison officials.The PSD director appoints qualified police officers as itsjudges and prosecutors who try fellow officers. Jordan's constitution andPublic Security Law allows, but does not mandate, the establishment of thisspecial court with jurisdiction over members of the Public Security Directoratefor any crime, whether committed on or off duty.[169]The PSD points out that the Police Court adheres to thehighest standards of justice, and its former head told Human Rights Watch thatno one interfered in his work in the two years of his judgeship there.[170]Nevertheless, the leadership of the PSD could not convincingly answer why sucha special court was necessary in the first place. The current head of thepolice court, Col. Muhammad al-Zu'bi, replied that it existed because it wasprescribed by law.[171]The court, which generally holds its trials openly, does notinvite scrutiny. When Human Rights Watch visited the Police Court to obtain acopy of the verdict in the Zaidan case, court officers declined the request andtold us to speak to the PSD's information office.[172] In a subsequentvisit coordinated with the PSD, the chief of the Police Court, Muhammad al-Zu'bi, provided us with six verdicts of the six cases of alleged prison abuseconcluded in 2007. However, only three were related to prison abuse, one from2004, and the two 2007 cases of the mass beatings at Swaqa on August 22, 2007and the beating to death of Firas Zaidan at Aqaba prison on May 9, 2007, and al-Zu'bi requested Human Rights Watch not mention the names of the convictedofficers, which he had blanked out.[173]A court that is so ill-disposed to public disclosure of its work can hardlyserve the cause of public justice by acting as a deterrent against crime.The Jordanian media has not covered proceedings at the courtin contrast to more extensive coverage of the State Security Court, a militarydominated special court set up to try suspects accused of crimes againstnational security.[174]As described earlier, the August 2007 Swaqa case involvedthe prison director and a group of prison guards beating dozens of inmatesbefore subjecting inmates to the forced shaving of their heads and beards.[175]Following its investigation into the incident, the prosecution charged theprison director and 12 other prison guards, including one Preventive Securityofficer, with "exercising unlawful authority resulting in harm," according toArticle 37.8. of the Public Security Law for having treated inmates in a mannernot in accordance with instructions issued by the PSD.[176] The court didnot charge the director with a crime under Jordan's penal code, such asassault.The evidence in the case consisted of forensic medicalreports of injured inmates, statements of the accused and of prisoners who werewitnesses, as well as a report by the National Center for Human Rights. Theprison director personally participated in the beatings; he was found to haveused an electric stun device, which is not among the PSD's authorized weapons.[177]He confessed to having beaten prisoners, ordered their heads and beards shaved,and put some prisoners into solitary confinement. The remaining 12 officersconfessed to the same things, but claimed they acted on orders of the director.The court accepted the evidence that the director had, in the words of onewitness cited in the verdict, "gathered around 70 inmates and put them in thecorridors and, together with a group of prison officials, beat them because theywere the chiefs of the prison." However, it found that the director had issuedthese orders "with good intention and with the motive of controlling theinmates," and sentenced him to a fine of JOD120, or roughly US$180.[178]The court did not convict the other officials, acceptingthat they had followed orders and thus were not personally liable. While thecourt noted that Article 61.2. of Jordan's penal code does not absolve a personof criminal responsibility for following "an unlawful order," it argued that"the nature of the military system and the proper performance of one's workconstitutes an excuse for the guilty when considering the extent of thelegality of the order" by the prison director.[179]This verdict reveals a great deal about the prison system:first, that prison officials may not recognize that beating prisoners isillegal and followed the order believing it to be legal; second, that the PSD'sinstructions prohibiting beatings either had not reached their intended targetsor were being ignored; third, that for prison officials obedience to one'ssuperiors is clearly more important than any perceived risks in committing acrime by carrying out the orders; and fourth, that there is no appropriatemechanism to protect officials who refuse to carry out unlawful orders, whichthe court could have cited had it existed. In its ruling, the court legitimizedcrimes committed by prison officials when they were following orders.In another case, the prosecution and trial of five personsinvolved in the beating to death of inmate Firas Zaidan at 'Aqaba prison in May 2007 was more thorough, but exhibits different problems. The prosecution did not fullyinvestigate all guards involved, failed to protect witnesses, and the judgesissued lenient sentences.The court convicted two guards of beating Zaidan to death,but found a third guard innocent of these charges because of conflictingtestimony of witnesses with long criminal records and never charged a fourthguard with intimidating witnesses. In a September 17, 2007 memorandum, HumanRights Watch conveyed to the prosecution the results of our interviews witheyewitnesses to the events, who clearly implicated the third and fourth guardsas having participated in the deadly beatings and intimidating witnesses,respectively.[180]Thecourt sentenced two guards to two and a half years in prison with hard laborfor "beatings resulting in death," and the fourth guard to two months in prisonfor "neglect in carrying out duties."[181]The prosecution only upgraded charges of "neglect of duties,""acting against orders," and "abuse of power," to "beatings resulting indeath," following Human Rights Watch's consultation with leading psychiatristsin the United States, and interventions by the US embassy in Amman (Zaidan wasengaged to a US citizen and his immediate family members are US citizens)andthe Royal Palace.Prosecutors based their initial charges on an early autopsyreport that identified the cause of death as an extremely high dosage ofClomipramine, a chemical substance used in psychiatric medications, in Zaidan'sblood sample. Outside intervention resulted in a further autopsy findingClomipramine levels within the therapeutic norm, and thus only a contributingcause of death.[182]In contrast to the verdict in the Swaqa case, the court inthe Aqaba case found that the prison director had committed "neglect incarrying out duties," in violation Article 37.6. of the Public Security Law forordering Zaidan into solitary confinement without assessing his health. Thedirector, who did not participate in the beatings, received a JOD120 (US$180)fine.[183]PSD director Maj.Gen. Mazin al-Qadi told Human Rights Watch he had personallyappealed the sentence to the civilian Court of Appeals.[184]An earlier case from 2004 again shows the leniency of verdictshanded down to guards guilty of murder. In September 2005, the Police Courtfound 10 prison officials guilty of "beating resulting in death" of Abdullahal-Mashaqba, an inmate at Juwaida prison, in January 2004. The court sentencedthem to five years in prison with hard labor, but immediately reduced by halfthe sentence because the prison guards "are in the prime of their youth, and toprovide them with an opportunity to change their behavior in the future."[185]Official Responses toHuman Rights ReportingJordan's successive governments have been among the mostopen to local and international human rights investigations in the region, butquickly dismiss as unfounded human rights criticism.[186]  Jordanianofficials increasingly have also recognized the need for speedy media responsesto incidents such as prison riots.[187]For its transparency and willingness to engage on the issue of torture in Jordan's prisons, the government is to be commended.Since 2007, however, the government has allowed markedlyfewer prison visits by local human rights organizations. In 2006, the ArabOrganization for Human Rights and the Public Liberties Committee of theEngineers' Association had been able to carry out multiple visits to ordinaryprisons.[188]Jordan's openness toward independent human rights scrutinycontrasts with its reserved, even dismissive, attitude toward the findings ofsuch organizations. Officials disparage human rights organizations, dismisstheir findings, while their own investigations remain non-transparent internalaffairs with unsatisfactory results.The PSD's public announcements following prison unrest haveprovided essential facts to the public, but at the same time have sometimesmisrepresented the underlying reasons for the protests. The PSD publiclyresponded to prison riots in 2006 and 2007, announced the start of aninvestigation, but then did not inform the public about the proceedings or theresults of the investigation.[189]The families of prisoners at times turned to human rights organizations forinformation.[190]In April 2008, the PSD spokesperson described the Muwaqqar riots as protests against the new segregation of convicted prisoners from thoseawaiting trial, when in fact separate investigations by the National Center for Human Rights and Human Rights Watch found that the overriding reason forthe protests was ill-treatment. The head of the prison service, Sharifal-'Umari, in an interview with al-Ghadd newspaper, criticized the NCHRreport, saying organizationsspeak about one side of the human equation, and that ishuman rights, and they put aside the other side, which is the response to[crimes] … The purpose of these reports is to cause disturbance and alarm, andtheir purpose is not humanitarian despite being human rights reports.[191]Despite announcements in April and early May 2008 that the investigation into the Muwaqqar riots would conclude imminently, no resultshad been made public by late July.[192]One person familiar with the inquiries said they had concluded by absolving allofficials of wrongdoing and referring nine inmates to the regular courts onvarious charges related to the riots.[193]In another instance, the government ignored Human RightsWatch's private account to the government about a riot at Swaqa prison that ourresearchers witnessed, choosing instead to misrepresent the events to themedia. During our visit on August 26, 2007, we witnessed prisoners sufferingfrom apparently self-inflicted injuries. We also recorded the accounts of 22prisoners who described to us earlier mass beatings of prisoners on August 22,the day following our first visit. We immediately informed the PSD, the Ministry of Interior, and the National Center for Human Rights of both incidents-the massbeatings on August 21, and the self-inflicted injuries on August 26, clarifyingthat those injuries appeared to be a sign of protest against torture theprisoners had endured four days earlier but that prison officials had notinvestigated. Nevertheless, according to identical reporting in three majorJordanian daily newspapers, the government spokesperson the next day continuedto claim that the Swaqa prisoners had "beaten themselves up so that theyappeared to carry marks of being subjected to torture."[194]In addition to misrepresenting underlying reasons for prisonriots to the public, officials roundly dismiss as unreliable prisoner accountsof torture.[195]However, court documents in two instances show that witnesses separatelyinterviewed by prosecutors and by Human Rights Watch gave similar accounts oftorture.For example, on the occasion of Minister of Interior Eid al-Fayez'svisit to open Muwaqqar prison in April 2007, al-Ra'i newspaper quotedhim as "stressing the importance of striving for accuracy in the reports ofinternational organizations, which seek their information from untrustworthysources."[196]Almost one year later, during another prison visit, al-Fayez called oninternational organizations to "derive their information from trusted sourcesand not to rely on falsified sources."[197]While such dismissals may be expected from governmentofficials, Jordan's parliamentarians and media are equally defensive of thesecurity services. Aside from a few local human rights organizations, the PSDfaces little scrutiny of its treatment of detainees.[198]Prison ReformGeneral ReformsBeginning in April 2006, the Public Security Directorate(PSD) undertook a plan to reform Jordan's prison administration. Followingprison riots in March and April 2006, the PSD hired a US consulting firm, Kerik International group, headed by the former Police Commissioner for New York City, Bernard Kerik, to provide analysis, advice, and training for prisonmanagement. These reform efforts received renewed impetus following a criticalreport by the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture, who had visited Jordaniandetention sites in June 2006, finding "cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment …amounting to torture in some instances [to be] widespread,"[199] and "generalimpunity for torture and ill-treatment in Jordan."[200]King Abdullah called on the government to present a reformplan "according to the latest specifications consistent with internationalstandards.[201]Uponbeing appointed director of the Public Security Directorate in December 2007, Maj.Gen. Mazin al-Qadi made it a priority of his tenure to "maintain the process of upgradingthe performance of personnel working in the country's correctional andrehabilitation centres and developing the[se] centres' infrastructure, premisesand services."[202]Overall, it appears that the reform program has emphasizedphysical improvements over procedural reform and accountability for abuses. Themost tangible results have been the building of several new prisons, with al-Muwaqqar prison, southeast of Amman, opening in May 2007, and the closure in December 2006 ofJafr prison, a remote desert prison with a particularly bad reputation fortorture.[203]Furthermore, Jordan passed an amendment to Article 208 of the Penal Codecriminalizing torture for the first time in October 2007, following Jordan's ratification of the UN Convention against Torture on June 15, 2006.[204]There have so far not been any prosecutions under this article.[205]In November 2007, the PSD director circulated an advisory to all PSD membersstressing that torture is a crime and that they must not have recourse toviolence.[206]Less tangible but potentially more important areas of reformhave included a new system to classify prisoners, which separates convictedprisoners from detainees awaiting trial who must be presumed innocent; aninterest in reducing the growing number of inmates by imposing punishmentsother than imprisonment; and improvements to prison services, including medicalservices, visitor and telephone services, and court transportation. In additionto criminalizing torture in the Penal Code, the PSD assigned police prosecutorsto seven prisons to investigate potential abuses (see "Impunity," "Complaintsand Prosecutions"). The reform plans have also included a new training programfor an augmented prison staff and directors on principles of the use of forceand human rights, among other topics.New PrisonsThe PSD is in the process of building a string of newprisons to alleviate overcrowding and decrepit facilities in the existingprisons. The prison population stood at 7,665 on April 13, 2008, and around55,000 inmates enter and exit the prison system each year.[207] The plan tobuild new prisons is ambitious, aiming to add a large prison for convictedprisoners in northern Jordan, Umm Lu'lu', by early 2009, in addition to twosmaller detention centers in Zarqa and Marka, with capacity for 900 to 1000inmates each over the coming two years. Umm Lu'lu' and Marka would replaceJuwaida prison, and Zarqa would replace Birain. In September, the governmentplans to finish construction of the super-maximum security prison Muwaqqar II (see below). In 2009, the PSD aims to open three more prisons in Karak/Tafila,Balqa' and Irbid to replace existing prisons there.Human Rights Watch's visits to seven prisons showed thatmost prisons were at or above capacity, but that in general the buildingstructures in most prisons appeared adequate, with the exception of Juwaida andparts of Qafqafa, and sanitary facilities. It is therefore surprising that byfar the largest effort, financially and administratively, has been directedtoward the construction of new prisons. PSD Director Mazin al-Qadi did notreveal the budget for these new prisons.[208] Current expenses per prisonerper day excluding capital outlays run at around JOD20 (ca. US$30), an officialsaid.[209]Director of prison service, Sharif al-'Umari, told Human Rights Watch that thedesign of the existing prisons, large rooms for 20- 60 prisoners facing ashared exercise courtyard, was inappropriate for modern prison operations.[210]The Super-maximumsecurity prison Muwaqqar IIIn early 2006, King Abdullah hired the Kerik Internationalgroup to reform the kingdom's prisons.[211] Among projects to trainJordanian prison staff and modernize its prisons, the Kerik Group also advisedon the establishment and design of a super-maximum security prison (supermax).Such prisons are designed to isolate violent inmates from the generalpopulation. Jordan's new supermax adjoins a brand-new regular prison a fewkilometers east of the police training academy outside al-Muwaqqar. Still under construction, it is officially called Muwaqqar II. The head of the PSD, Maj.Gen. Mazin al-Qadi, told Human Rights Watch that he hopes to have construction completed inSeptember 2008.[212]Reports indicate that the government, at least in 2007, considered imprisoningIslamists charged with "national security" offenses there, among others.Human Rights Watch visited the supermax on April 15, 2008,met with the supervising engineer, and inspected the facility. It has 240 cellsdivided among three wings, two stories tall and at 90 degree angles to oneanother. In between wings are high walls to prevent prisoners on the secondfloor from seeing, and communicating with, prisoners on the first floor ofanother wing. The cells are no bigger than two by three meters, containing ashower above a French toilet, a sink, and a cot. An outdoor veranda with metalbars at the back of the cell is big enough to stand up, but not to lie down.This is the exercise area. According to the supervising engineer, each prisonerwill eat inside his cell and have no contact with fellow prisoners.[213]Visiting cubicles, however, are included in the design.The purpose of supermax prisons, which came into vogue inthe US in the 1980s, was to isolate incorrigibly violent or dangerous inmatesfor whom the normal panoply of prison regulations stipulating the piecemealwithdrawal of privileges was insufficient. Human Rights Watch has documentedthe danger of these facilities in the US. In a report issued in 2000, we foundthatInmates have described life in a supermax as akin to livingin a tomb. At best, prisoners' days are marked by idleness, tedium, andtension. But for many, the absence of normal social interaction, of reasonablemental stimulus, of exposure to the natural world, of almost everything thatmakes life human and bearable, is emotionally, physically, and psychologicallydestructive. Prisoners subjected to prolonged isolation may experiencedepression, despair, anxiety, rage, claustrophobia, hallucinations, problems withimpulse control, and/or an impaired ability to think, concentrate, or remember.As one federal judge noted, prolonged supermax confinement "may press theouter bounds of what most humans can psychologically tolerate."Some inmates subjected to supermax confinement developclinical symptoms usually associated with psychosis or severe affectivedisorders. For mentally ill prisoners, supermax confinement can be a livinghorror: the social isolation and restricted activities can aggravate theirillness and immeasurably increase their pain and suffering. Moreover, few supermax facilities offer mentally ill inmates the full range of mental healthservices and treatment that their psychiatric conditions require.[214]Bernard Kerik in July 2007 told a U.S. television programthat "we're building a supermaximum facility for Al-Qaeda types, for theseradical Islamics so that they all go into one centralized center and they'reheld there under supermaximum security so that they done [sic] go intodifferent institutions throughout the country and radicalize other people."[215]Officials did not invite broader discussion about the supermaximum prison andits appropriateness for Tanzimat inmates. In October 2007,Secretary-General of the Ministry of Interior Mukhaimer Abu Jammous expressedsurprise in a meeting with Human Rights Watch that we had learned of theplanned relocation of national security prisoners to the supermax.[216]The designation of a supermax for prisoners who have committed certain types ofcrimes, rather than based on their violent or dangerous behavior inside theprison, regardless of their charge or conviction, defies the original purposeof such facilities.A supermax is not appropriate for national securityprisoners, so-called Islamist Tanzimat, who are already housed inseparate facilities inside two Jordanian prisons. Prison authorities hold the Tanzimatprisoners in small group isolation, with three or four prisoners to a cell,where they exercise and eat alone. The desire by prison authorities to managethis population by imposing additional restrictions on their movement seems togo beyond legitimate security concerns of indoctrination and escape risks.Small group isolation has already caused psychological strain, which completeisolation in solitary confinement would likely heighten.The authorities in 2007 withdrew privileges, such as seeingprisoners from other cells or praying together, citing the desire to apply thesame regime on Tanzimat inmates as on ordinary inmates. In fact, otherprisoners enjoyed more interaction with fellow prisoners. In August 2007, someof the Tanzimat complained that "we are exposed to the sun for just fourhours, then we stay in small cells for 20 hours [which has led to]hypertension, shortsightedness, severe constipation, back pain, rheumatism andskin disease."[217]Human Rights Watch cannot verify the accuracy of these complaints, but hasdocumented similar abuses of state security prisoners in small-group isolationin Turkey.[218]The psychological effects of small group isolation have led a governmentalgroup of prison experts to recommend certain minimum measures for inmates insuch group isolation:Prisoners who present a particularly high security riskshould, within the confines of their special unit [be] able to mix freely withfellow prisoners in the unit; allowed to move without restriction within whatis likely to be a relatively small physical space; [and be] granted a good dealof choice about activities … by way of compensation for their severe custodialsituation.[219]Jordanian corrections officials in April and again in August2008 assured Human Rights Watch that Muwaqqar II was no longer intended fornational security prisoners, but for violent prisoners, who would enter for aninitial period of three months before being returned to the general population.[220]Each case would require a special determination by a PSD committee, but repeatoffenders could be transferred to the supermax for periods longer than threemonths. By August 2008, the PSD had not finished writing regulations for Muwaqqar II.[221]Operating this prison would necessitate a change in the law.Article 38.d. of Jordan's current prison law stipulates that a prisoner whoviolates prison regulations can be "put in solitary confinement for a periodnot exceeding seven days each time."[222] International law does not putan explicit limit on the time authorities may put a prisoner in solitaryconfinement, such as in a supermax, but requires regular and transparentreviews of confinement in isolation.[223]The EuropeanCommittee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment orPunishment has argued that prolonged, consecutive solitary confinement canconstitute ill-treatment.[224]ClassificationThe prison law states that inmates should be separatedaccording to gender, conviction status, type of crime, length of sentence andage.[225]The government had not implemented this law until February 2008, when theprison service designated Qafqafa, Swaqa and Muwaqqar as prisons for convictedinmates, with the remainder for pre-trial and administrative detainees. Thereason for using entire prisons, rather than wings within a prison, aspre-trial or post-conviction centers was the improved logistics of transportingprisoners from fewer locations to the courts, officials said.[226] Juwaida prison,now largely a pre-trial detention center, will be only a few hundred metersfrom the planned new criminal court. Another reason was the increasedefficiency of concentrating improved rehabilitation measures, such as work,training and study, in only a few centers for convicts. Within these centers,and within each wing, prisoners are now further segregated according tosub-categories of age, health, crime and general behavior, the director of theprison service said.[227]The regulations accompanying the prison law require a"psychiatrist, a general doctor, and a social worker" to be part of the teamclassifying prisoners.[228]Since psychiatrists visit prisons between twice a week and once every twoweeks, it seems unlikely that this aspect of the law is being followed. HumanRights Watch did not encounter a prisoner who said a doctor or socialresearcher was present during his classification.The prison service also blamed prisoners' opposition totransfers to another prison under the new classification system for the riotsthat lead to a fire in which three prisoners died in Muwaqqar on April 14,2008. Opposition to the classification system may have been a minorcontributing factor.[229]Health ServicesPrison reform plans include providing better medical carefor inmates at all of Jordan's prisons. In July 2008, the prison service heldthree days of workshops with the Ministry of Health concerning the health careneeds of prisoners. Current deficiencies, the director of the prison servicesaid, lay in the lack of doctors, especially psychiatrists.[230] In August 2008,Minister of Health Salah Mawajdeh told Human Rights Watch that his Ministry was eager to ease the caseloads of prison doctors.[231] The director of the prisonservice said that improvements in health services depended on other agencies,too. Recently, the PSD concluded a Memorandum of Understanding with the Ministry of Health to provide improved health care. Qafqafa and Birain have received new medicalequipment. Nevertheless, there are still too few psychiatrists, according tothe head of the prison service.[232]The PSD also was studying the possibility of distributingcondoms following the appearance of sexually transmitted diseases in Qafqafaprison earlier this year.[233]Human Rights Watch received conflicting information from prison doctorsregarding blood testing of inmates upon entry. In April 2008 the doctor ofBirain prison said they did not conduct such blood tests, whereas the Muwaqqar prison doctor in August 2007 said he routinely took blood samples to check for sexuallytransmitted diseases. It was unclear whether prisoners consented to thesetests.Social ServicesPSD director Mazin al-Qadi told Human Rights Watch thatother planned improvements include issuing a prisoners' magazine, lecturesfocusing on national and religious values, a theater, already in place inSwaqa, allowing prisoners access to university text books, and increasing thestaff of Ministry of Social Affairs' social workers, for example to run literacyand adult education programs.[234]Sharif al-'Umari, the director of prisons, clarified in July 2008 that plansfor a prisons website, a magazine, visiting foreign music and theater groups,artisanal workshops for 150 inmates and a school at Muwaqqar were welladvanced.[235]The main role of social workers in prison currently appearsto be reviewing applications for financial aid from families where the mainbreadwinner is in prison. One prison director told Human Rights Watch that"Social services are not working as they should, although they helped 30families financially."[236]Overall, very few prisoners work in Jordanian prisons. In Muwaqqar, no prisoners worked, whereas in Salt (Balqa), around six prisoners out of 433 workedin the kitchen, or as teachers and barbers; in Juwaida 15 prisoners out of apopulation of 1140 worked, mostly in the kitchen. In Qafqafa, prisoners couldwork in a bakery and a patisserie. In Swaqa, there is a farm at which prisonerscan work. Not more than 20 prisoners worked in each prison.One idea of the reform program would be to create prisonswith different security levels in which prisoners could work and even leave thefacility.[237]In late 2008, the PSD hoped to open a low security prison in Salhub, close to Amman, consisting of five villas.[238]Al-'Umari also said he planned to put in place an individualized system forprisoner assessments, determining the appropriate facility and wing, work andsocial opportunities, and eligibility for a reduction of sentences of seven anda half days per month of good behavior.[239]TrainingAnother component of the reform program is new training foran augmented prison staff and administration. Sharif al-'Umari told HumanRights Watch that the prison service had added 400 employees to its staff in2008, helping to establish closer contact between guards and prisoners.[240]The National Center for Human Rights (NCHR), in cooperation with the prisonreform unit at the Royal Police Academy, has instituted a series of trainingprograms: one for prison directors, who are now mostly law school graduates,and one for prison guard trainees, including officials from Preventive Securitywho are tasked with guarding national security suspects and providing a controlfunction over regular guards. The training focuses on prisoner rights and theprohibition against torture.[241]The Kerik Group also carried out training of trainer workshops with correctionsofficers, including on non-lethal use of force.[242] At the sametime the supervisor of the prisons unit at the NCHR told Human Rights Watchthat they were preparing a new brochure about prisoners' rights and duties,which each prisoner would receive upon entering a facility.[243]The government has also focused on emphasizing limitationson the use of force and the prohibition against torture in its trainingmanuals. In 2007, the PSD issued a Code of Police Honor, which in Article 1stresses the "protection of human principles and rights that the heavenly lawsand international agreements have guaranteed."[244] In 2008, itproduced a "Working Guide for Directors of Correction and Rehabilitation Centers," which combines Jordanian law and international norms into some practicalrecommendations, such as a prisoner's rights to legal counsel, to consulthislegal file, or to practice his religion. In his foreword, PSD director Mazin al-Qadi emphasizes the importance "not to have recourse to force … and the importance ofdocumenting" instances in which force was used.[245] In a separatechapter on torture, the booklet obliges directors to hold weekly lectures onhuman rights, and emphasizes that as a deterrent to torture, directors should"make the employees understand … the negative consequences resulting [fromtorture] on the national level."[246]The PSD's efforts to raise awareness about torture andabuse, by training, educational booklets, and high-level instructionsadmonishing officials to refrain from use of unnecessary force, are laudable.However, they appear to be relying almost exclusively on educational measures,and not on accountability, to combat torture. Alone, these measures are tooweak to be effective, especially given the historic nonchalance with which lawenforcement officials have treated Jordan's prison laws, including theprohibition against torture, and the lack of accountability for acts oftorture.AccountabilityThe PSD's Legal Affairs department since early 2008 hasassigned police prosecutors to work inside the prisons (see "Impunity"). Thisis a significant step and shows the willingness of the government to providethe resources necessary to detect and prosecute torture. However, the absenceof any prosecutions to date for torture despite this reform indicates that thepolice cannot credibly investigate itself.InternationalAssistanceThe European Union has analyzed the needs of Jordan's penitentiary system and in March 2008 began a €1 million program of assistance tolast 18 months aimed at improving prison management, especially the flow ofinformation about prisoners' behavior and the training of prison staff.[247]The Austrian Ministry of Justice as the lead counterpart to Jordan's prison service began work on July 9, 2008.[248]The United States currently does not fund assistance to theJordanian penitentiary system, including the work carried out by the KerikInternational group.[249]RecommendationsTo the Government of Jordan:Accede to and ratify theOptional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel,Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.Set up an independent domestic prison inspection mechanism,meeting the requirements set out in the Optional Protocol, and strengthenthe powers of the National Center for Human Rights to carry out suchinspections.To the Ministry of Justice:Assume jurisdiction overcrimes in prison and prosecute officials and prisoners in civilian courts.Set up within the Ministry of Justice a unit of trained prosecutors who regularly visit prisons, at least once aweek, inspect all wards, and receive prisoner complaints. Theseprosecutors must have the powers to enter at any time and request to speakto any prisoner.Set up an independent mechanism allowing prisoners tosubmit complaints without the knowledge of prison guards directlyresponsible for them.To the Public Security Directorate:Ensure civilian prosecutorsand courts assume jurisdiction over crimes of torture and ill-treatmentcommitted by PSD officers against civilians.Take measures to removeofficials suspected or accused of crimes involving prisoners from contactwith prisoners or from positions in which they can improperly influencethe investigation.Routinely keep videorecordings in prison for a specified period and keep copies of therecordings with an official body not linked to the prison service forsafekeeping.Take measures to protectprisoners who testify as witnesses against officers or fellow prisoners.Grant Jordanian andinternational human rights organizations open access to prisons, includingreturn visits, to safeguard against guards retaliating against prisonersfor speaking to human rights organizations.Enable prisoners to callunsupervised the hotline at the National Center for Human Rights at anytime.Conduct investigations intoprison abuse transparently. In a periodic, public report, provide detailsabout investigations into abuse in prisons, including the number, thecharges, the evidence, and the result.Build better sanitaryfacilities in the prisons, install a sufficient number of telephones sothat prisoners can make calls at any time to their lawyers, familymembers, or the National Center for Human Rights.Improve the food given inmatesand provide safe, running drinking water at all times.Do not use the super-maximum security facility underconstruction, Muwaqqar II, to keep Islamist, or any other prisoners, insolitary confinement for periods longer than the seven days currentlyallowed under Jordanian law, following individual assessments, and only ifthey are deemed to be violent and a danger to themselves or others.To the Ministry of Health:Increase the number of doctorsworking in prison and provide at least 24 hour coverage of nurses.Routinely check a prisoner'shealth when entering and exiting prison. Inspect the wards of the prisonto ensure patients do not have to submit a request to see the doctor via aguard.Provide information onHIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted diseases (STD), distribute condoms freeof charge, and conduct tests for HIV and STDs only with the informedconsent of the prisoner.Allow prisoners to seek asecond medical opinion.Increase the number of psychologists or psychiatristsworking in prisons and ensure they inspect the wards to allow prisonerseasier access to them.To the European Union and the United States:Include prison reform anderadication of torture in Jordan in the development assistance provided toJordan.Condition such funding on thetransfer of jurisdiction over torture to civilian prosecutors and courtsand the establishment of effective investigations independent of theprison administration into abuses committed by prison officials.Ensure no funding goes towardthe operation or administration of the super-maximum prison Muwaqqar II, should it be operated as a long-term solitary confinement facility.Ensure that US and EUgovernment officials and politicians visiting Jordan are briefed on thestate of Jordanian compliance with human rights and its efforts andtransparency in addressing human rights violations in prisons andinstructed to raise these concerns systematically.Speak out publicly when Jordan lags in taking steps tocome into compliance with international human rights norms, and impose thetargeted withholding of parts of the development aidto Jordan in response to specific failures to take rapid steps to address gaps in compliance.AcknowledgmentsThis report presents the findings of prison visits to sevenof Jordan's 10 prisons in August and October 2007 and April 2008 and ofmeetings with Jordanian security officials between August 2007 and July 2008. Christoph Wilcke of the Middle East and North Africa Division of Human Rights Watch is theprincipal researcher and author of this report. Joanne Mariner, director of theTerrorism / Counter-terrorism Program at Human Rights Watch and GasserAbdel-Razek, until May 2008 acting director of regional relations for the Middle East and North Africa, conducted research for this report in August 2007.We express our appreciation to the officials in the Ministry of Interior and the Public Security Department for agreeing to our prison visits andalways showing a readiness to meet and discuss current efforts to improve theprison system, in particular, Sharif al-'Umari, director of the prison service,Mahir Shishani, head of the Grievances and Human Rights office, and Khalid al-Majali, deputy head of the prison reform program at the Royal Police Academy.We are grateful to those detainees and convicted prisonerswho shared their concerns with us, often in spite of personal risk ofretribution. We have substituted pseudonyms for their real names. We also hopethat our work and this report justifies the trust placed in us by the familiesof prisoners affected in the incidents of torture in Aqaba prison in May 2007, in Swaqa prison in August 2007, and in Muwaqqar prison in April 2008.Sarah Leah Whitson, executive director of the Middle East and North Africa Division, and Iain Levine, director of the Program Office,edited the report. Clive Baldwin, senior legal advisor, provided legal review.Amr Khairy, Arabic language website and translation coordinator, providedassistance with translation into Arabic. Brent Giannotta and Nadia Barhoum, associates for the Middle East and North Africa Division, prepared this reportfor publication. Additional production assistance was provided by Grace Choi, director of publications, and Fitzroy Hepkins, mail manager.Appendix: ThreeIncidents of Prison TortureCase 1: AqabaNew York, September 17, 2007Col. Abd al-Karim al-RadaidaHeadLegal DepartmentPublic Security DirectorateAmmanHashemite Kingdom of JordanDear Colonel al-Radaida:Human Rights Watch has been closely following theinvestigation into and prosecution of those implicated in the beating of Firas(Sbaih) Zaidan in Aqaba prison, where he was found dead on the morning of May 10, 2007.We are pleased to note that the Jordanian National Institutefor Forensic Medicine has issued an amended autopsy report for Zaidan. We alsonote that the prosecution has consequently reportedly upgraded the charges to"excessive beating resulting in death" against some of the defendants from thePublic Security Directorate's 'Aqaba Correction and Rehabilitation Center.We nevertheless remain concerned that the efforts by theprosecution have not fully exhausted all means to establish the truth of theevents that led to Zaidan's death at Aqaba prison and of finding all thoseresponsible. Human Rights Watch's concern isbased primarily on information gathered during a visit toAqaba prison on August 27, but also on our observation of the investigation andthe prosecution's efforts to date.In Aqaba prison we spoke to six prisoners who related indetail the beatings sustained by Zaidan. Some of them said they thatinvestigators never asked them for a statement. Some also said that theprosecutor had only taken one or two trips to the prison to gather evidence.All of them reported ongoing intimidation by current prison staff not totestify, or, once called, not to testify to identify the staff responsible forthe beatings.Human Rights Watch further believes that more should havebeen done to save Zaidan's life. Other officers should have intervened, sincesome of the beatings took place in plain view. An officer in the videomonitoring room should have seen the beatings take place on his screen andintervened. The hospital staff treating Zaidan on May 9 would have found aseverely beaten person, but decided to forego an examination and send him backto prison. Lastly, the circumstances of how the chemical substance Clomipramilfound in Zaidan's blood entered his body have not been fully investigated.We also submit a list of questions to the prosecution (seeenclosure) to assist it in seeking answers to questions relating to the causeof death and those responsible.Human Rights Watch has obtained accounts from Aqaba prisonofficials and prisoners that shed light on some of these questions, which weshare with you below.We have kept the names of the individuals who spoke to usconfidential at their request. The names of potential witnesses are listedshould you consider their testimony potentially useful.Please do not hesitate to contact me with further questions.I look forward to hearing from you about the course of the prosecution andtrial.Sincerely,Christoph WilckeHuman Rights WatchEnclosure:1) List of questions to the prosecutorCc:1) H.E. Dr. Bassem Awadallah, Director, King's Office, Royal Court2) Maj.-Gen. Muhammad Majid al-'Aitan, Director, PublicSecurity Directorate3) H.E. Shaher Bak, Commissioner-General, National Center for Human Rights4) The family of Firas ZaidanMemorandum Concerning the Investigation Into the Treatment of Firas Zaidanat 'Aqaba Correction and Rehabilitation Center, May 6-10, 2007A prisoner at Aqaba prison found Firas Ism'ail Mahmud Zaidan dead in his solitary confinement cell on the early morning of May 10, 2007 after prison guards had severely beaten Zaidan over the previous three days. Zaidanwas treated for "erratic behavior" at Princess Haya Military hospital in 'Aqabaon May 9, the day before he died.Cause of death and Zaidan's healthAn initial autopsy performed in Aqaba, dated May 10, found contusions and abrasions on Zaidan's head, back, buttocks and flanks. A firstautopsy report at the Amman National Institute for Forensic Medicine, dated May 12, and erroneously listing May 11 as the date of death, found "multiple andnumerous contusions …covering nearly 15-20%" of the body, in addition to"severe oedema" of the lungs. A third, undated autopsy report by the NationalInstitute, which included laboratory testing, determined "severe respiratoryfailure" resulting from the "toxic effects of Clomipramine" in a "concentration[of 14.3 micrograms per milliliter of blood] that exceeds by one hundred timesthe acceptable therapeutic concentration" as the cause of death.Human Rights Watch submitted these autopsy reports forreview to a forensic pathologist who has worked extensively on the detection oftorture, and we have consulted with several renowned clinical psychiatrists inthe United States about dosages and counterindications of Clomipramine, as wellas symptoms of an overdose. These experts found the third autopsy report to bewell-conducted, but expressed doubt about the extremely high doses ofClomipramine found in the body.The National Institute for Forensic Medicine has completed afourth autopsy report, dated August 21, based on re-testing blood and gallsamples, which found the Clomipramine levels in the blood to be 0.45 microgramper milliliter of blood, and determined the cause of death to be the"compounding of combined factors … of injuries, increased by bleeding, and theeffect of inhibition of the sympathetic nerves, in addition to the toxiceffects of Clomipramine medication, and of an ailment of the heart muscle."The report's finding rules out the amount of Clomipramine inZaidan's body as the sole cause of death. Nevertheless, Human Rights Watchwants to bring your attention to the following issues:According to Article 24 of the Law of Correction andRehabilitation Centers (Law No. 9 of 2004), "the doctor of the [Correction andRehabilitation] Centre must conduct a medical exam of the inmate and present areport of his state of health in any of the following cases: a) at theadmission to the Center of [the inmate] and before his release from it and uponhis transfer from one Center to another; b) Before placing the inmate insolitary confinement and after releasing him from it."According to an official in the Aqaba prison administration,speaking to Human Rights Watch on August 27, Zaidan "never received medicalexamination or treatment while in prison." A doctor should have examined Zaidanupon admission on May 6. The prison administration official said a doctorusually sees a new prisoner "on the day of admission or the next day," since adoctor only comes to Aqaba prison from 9am to 1pm on Mondays, Wednesdays andThursdays. Zaidan could have thus seen the doctor on Monday morning, May 7, approximately 14 hours after being admitted.Dr. Muhammad XX (full name uknown), the doctor at Aqabaprison on duty on August 27, told us that he cannot prescribe psychiatric drugsfor patients, saying that a specialist at an 'Aqaba Ministry of Health clinicmust do so. There is no information to indicate that Zaidan had takenClomipramine prior to entering Aqaba prison or that he received it in prisonfrom the doctor. However, 'Amir Jamil, from Rusaifa, and Fahd al-Ka'ba, from Madaba, who are reportedly both in Swaqa prison now, were two of Zaidan's bed neighbors in Wing1, where he spent around 10 hours from 9 a.m. to 7 p.m. on Monday, May 7. Fellow prisoners in Wing 1 said that Jamil and Ka'ba received psychiatric drugsfrom the guards every day, and that the pills in questions were called "Roche2."Furthermore, the prison administration informed Human RightsWatch that it keeps drugs for prisoners in the safe storage facility (Amanat),where prisoners leave all their belongings upon admission, and that drugsrequiring refrigeration are kept in the refrigerator of the market, where aprisoner is also employed. The safe storage facility and the market appear tobe easily accessible to guards. Medical records should reveal which medicinescontaining Clomipramine, were present at 'Aqaba prison, who received them, andwho had access to them between May 6 and 10.On May 9, reportedly around 2.30pm (others said it may havebeen later in the day), prison officials took Zaidan to Princess Haya Military Hospital, where a doctor injected Zaidan with a dose of Haloperidol, based on theguards' description that he was "having mental problems." Apparently, thedoctors noticed bruising on Zaidan's exposed arms, but did not perform anexamination or ask further questions, releasing him back to prison.Article 29 of the prison law states that: "A) If an inmatedies, … B) The doctor of the Centre must present a report of the situation ofthe deceased inmate in the Centre and in particular the following: 1) the typeof illness that he was complaining about and the date he began to be affectedby it; 2) Last date of a [medical] examination that the doctor carried outbefore the death; 3) Date of death and the time it occurred." Only the firstautopsy report, prepared in 'Aqaba, mentions Zaidan's visit to Princess Haya Military hospital. There is no medical report on Zaidan at the time of death and none of thereports mentions the time of death.Repeated, severe beatingsThe autopsy reports refer to signs of extensive beatings,and the fourth autopsy report lists injuries as a result of beatings as onecontributing factor causing death. According to prison administration officialsand eyewitness prisoners Human Rights Watch spoke with, Zaidan entered Aqabaprison around 7pm on Sunday, May 6, and was processed normally (registered,hair cut). At that time, an eyewitness who spoke to Zaidan reported that he actednormally. After 8pm, guards placed Zaidan in the holding cell (shabaka), whichhas metal bars and is located outside the general prison wings. Any officerpassing from the prison wing to the administration building would pass theshabaka. Human Rights Watch has found that it is common for a newly admittedprisoner to be placed in the shabaka for a period lasting between a few hoursand a day.The prison administration and some of the eyewitnesses gaveconflicting accounts about whether guards beat Zaidan in the shabaka for thefirst time on Sunday night or on Monday night. Hani al-Taqarna is said to havebeen in the shabaka with Zaidanon the first night.On Monday, May 7, before 9 am, guards put Zaidan in Wing 1,where he occupied the first bed in the right row of beds, and / or the one bedin front of it that is parallel to the wall. There, fellow inmates said, heacted strangely, drinking water from a plastic cup with cigarette butts,cursing others and banging his head against the wall, but that he had quieteddown by the evening. The prison administration said he cursed prisoners and theauthorities and that guards removed him due to complaints from fellowprisoners.Prisoners said that in the late afternoon, possibly around 7p.m., guards Lafi al-'Amiri, Musa al-Huwaitat, and Qadr al-Tawra entered theroom. Zaidan was sitting in the lower bed belonging to Mahmud Jawwad, who wasabsent due to a court date. The guards told Zaidan to get dressed, and, when herefused, al-'Amiri and al-Huwaitat swung from the upper bunk bed and hitZaidan, in the face and chest with their boots, before taking him outside. Theprosecution's charge sheet lists slightly different names for these guards.After that, prisoners heard Zaidan's screams, apparentlyfrom being beaten, from the direction of the shabaka. That night, eyewitnessesreported that al-Tawra, al-'Amiri, and al-Huwaitat beat Zaidan with four whiteelectrical cables and sticks in the shabaka. A possible further witness tothese events is Cesar Ibrahim Haniya. At the time, there were four persons inthe shabaka with him, but the guards only beat Zaidan, who was reportedlycursing guards and prisoners alike. The eyewitnesses said that the guards didnot hit Zaidan's head. They beat him around 15-20 times, each time for aboutfive minutes. He remained in the shabaka until about 1 a.m., after which guardstook him into a solitary confinement cell. Zaidan was walking by himself atthat time, the eyewitnesses said.On the morning of Wednesday, May 9, a prisoner saw Zaidanlying naked in his solitary confinement cell. He was bleeding and drooling fromhis mouth. Zaidan was semi-unconscious. Prisoners Badr Yahya Baraka, Ali Salihal-Karaduna (?), Wajdi Salama Abu Qadhum, Ma'mun Harb and Muhammad Nayif al-Mu'mani reportedly dressed Zaidan and carried him to the shabaka. There,Hassan Tallaq, a guard, beat Zaidan very hard with a cable for about 15minutes.Other prisoners nearby said they heard screams coming fromthe shabaka around 9 a.m. that they identified as being Zaidan's. They said thesounds of the beating lasted for around 30 minutes. Eyewitnesses said guard Musa al-Huwaitat beat Zaidan with a one-meter-long cable, belonging to the air conditioning,that was knotted together. At that point, Zaidan had been chained to theshabaka, with his hands outside, in a crouching position, because the handcuffswere chained low to a metal bar. Zaidan was wearing only his pants. Oneeyewitness said that Huwaitat's beating lasted about 10 minutes.Prisoners said that at 10 am, Zaidan was taken back tosolitary confinement. When guards from the night shift arrived around 4pm,eyewitnesses saw guards beat Zaidan again, this time in the kitchen corridor,which is close to the solitary confinement cells. Guard Lafi al-'Amiri wasreportedly one of those who beat Zaidan, since he was working two consecutiveshifts that day. This time, eyewitnesses observed beatings to the head, andblood and "white stuff" coming from an area close to Zaidan's temple. Onefurther potential witness to these events is 'Asim Shishtawi, from Aqaba(possibly in Ma'n prison now).Before or just after that beating, guards reportedly tookZaidan to hospital. According to one eyewitness, guards beat Zaidan after hisreturn from hospital in the kitchen corridor on the evening of May 9. A prisoner found Zaidan dead in his cell while serving breakfast the next morning, May 10.Ongoing problems with the investigation and prosecutionAccording to the 'Aqaba prison administration, the publicprosecutor for 'Aqaba visited the prison soon after Zaidan's death. Accordingto the prisoners, the 'Aqaba prosecutor came twice, once after Zaidan's death,and another time in mid-July. According to some prisoners, several current andformer prisoners at 'Aqaba have given statements to the prosecutor. However,other eyewitnesses to the beating of Zaidan said they had not been asked toprovide statements. All prisoners with knowledge of the events said that thatthe prosecutor only asked to see named individuals and did not ask for otherpotential witnesses. Furthermore, several prisoners who met the prosecutor saidthat he was primarily interested not in the beatings of Zaidan, but in how hemay have ingested drugs.All witnesses complained of intimidation by guards, especiallyby guard Hassan Tallaq, but also by Nizar XX and Salah XX (full names unknown).They said guards had made threats against them and their families, while onother occasions giving them preferential treatment, suggesting that they nottestify or, if they had already given their statements, that they not identifythe guards or recount the beatings in court.Prisoners said that four of the five guards who participatedin the beatings have been charged with a crime and consequently left the prisonservice, but that one other guard [name withheld], had also participated. Theysaid intimidation of witnesses continued as of August 27.It is highly likely that other guards saw, or at least knewof, the repeated beatings, since the shabaka is a much frequented area. HumanRights Watch also inspected the monitoring room of Aqaba prison on August 27.The monitoring official, who said he had worked there for one year, said thatvideo monitoring takes place 24 hours a day. The monitoring is computer-based,with five large computer monitors displaying about eight different camera shotsper monitor, in addition to one larger camera in the monitor's center. Thecameras film the corridors and other common spaces, such as the dining hall.Clearly visible on August 27 was some of the area inside the shabaka and thespace surrounding it, as well as the area of the corridor outside the solitaryconfinement cells, though not the inside of the cells. The monitoring officialdescribed his job as observing, and, in the event of an irregular occurrence,of making a recording of it. He said that no routine recordings are made.Human Rights Watch also notes that previous charges of"neglect of duties," "acting against orders," and "abuse of power," asstipulated in the charge sheet dated June 3, have reportedly been amended to"excessive beating resulting in death," according to a person familiar with theinvestigation.We urge you to increase your efforts to gather all relevantevidence, including eyewitness accounts, medical records and treatment, to findall those responsible for the death of Firas Zaidan, including those who, inthe course of their duties as prison officials or medical personnel, should orcould have intervened to prevent Zaidan's death.We are also extremely troubled by accounts of witnessintimidation, reported statements from high officials in the Public SecurityDepartment trying to obfuscate the fact that guards had beaten Zaidan or thatthe beatings were related to his death, and the inconsistent findings in theautopsy reports relating to the presence of Clomipramine in Zaidan's body.We expect you to take immediate steps to stop suchinterference in the course of justice.*          *          *Questions to the Prosecutor:1)Was Firas examined by a physician upon his admission into prison asrequired by the article 24 of the Correction and Rehabilitation Centers law?2)If so, have you requested and obtained the medical reports/records?3)Did Firas seek medical attention in prison?4)Did Firas obtain medical care in the prison?5)Did you cause to have the blood on Firas' "disdasha," that hewore during his first night in prison, analyzed to determine the source ofblood found on it and/or whether the blood was contaminated with a toxicsubstance in order to better determine the time that Firas allegedly ingestedthat substance?6)Did the prison physician at the prison examine Firas prior to histransport to Princess Haya hospital? If so, have you requested and obtained theprison's medical reports for May 9, 2007?7)Have you obtained the medical reports for Firas stemming from histreatment at Princess Haya hospital on May 9, 2007?8)What was the exact date and time of death?9)Does the Ministry of Health monitor Clomipramine's entry into Jordan? Is its distribution, sale, or provision subject to any other regulations?10)How does thegovernment monitor the distribution of Clomipramine to Jordanian medicalfacilities?11)IsClomipramine kept in the Aqaba prison's medical facility? Have you conducted asearch of the prison to determine the source of this substance?12)HasClomipramine in whatever form been found/used in Jordanian prisons before? Didyou interview the prison's physician (a) concerning Firas' health condition atthe prison and (b) concerning the possible origins and manner of ingestation byFiras of Clomipramine in detention?13)IsClomipramine used at Princess Haya hospital? Did you order an inventory of thedrug to be performed at Princess Haya hospital?14)Did you askthe female emergency room physician whether she knowingly or unwittingly gaveFiras a dose of Clomipramine?15)Did youconduct a search of the homes, lockers, living quarters, etc. of any of theaccused defendants or other suspects in search of Clomipramine?16)Did you verifythat officials and prison superiors followed proper procedures as required bylaw in placing Firas in solitary confinement as required by article 24 of theCorrection and Rehabilitation Centers law?17)Have youdeveloped a theory of how the Clomipramine entered Firas' body? Have youresponded to the Chief of Public Security General 'Aitan's letter to you askingthe same question? What is your theory?18)In order toexclude voluntary ingestation of Clomipramine, have you consulted with atoxicologist regarding the length of time a person could live with Clomipraminein his system in excess of 100 times the therapeutic level or what systems ahealthy, muscular built male might exhibit having such high levels?19)Have youobtained the verdict and court transcripts of the court in Aqaba that sentencedFiras? Have you interviewed participants in the trial regarding Firas' healthand mental condition at the time?20)Have you carefullyanalyzed the photos taken by the forensic medicine institute to ensure that a)they are complete, and no photos are being kept from the prosecution; b) thatthe photos correspond with the finding of 15%-20% bruising on Firas' body?21)Have youconducted extensive interviews with detainees and prisoners at aqaba prison, inaddition to those released from the prison during the tenure there of theguards accused, to assess whether other instances of beatings or other physicalviolations have occurred and what the results, if any, of such instances were?22)Have you conductedbackground research into whether others in Jordanian prisons have sufferedserious adverse health effects due to drug intoxication, in general, andClomipramine, specifically, in the past five years?23)Have you interviewedPrincess Haya hospital emergency room personnel, or those working in anothermedical facility used to treat Aqaba prison inmates, to determine the frequencyof their medical services to Aqaba prison inmates, and the types of treatmentsthey provided?24)Since substantialand compelling material evidence and witness testimony  exists showing thatFiras was heavily beaten, and since serious doubts lingers over the manner ofingesting the allegedly lethal dose of Clomipramine, what is the reason for notbringing murder charges against the defendants or unknown others who may havecaused Firas to ingest the toxic substance?Case 2: SwaqaMemorandum, September 5, 2007To: Khalid al-Majali, Ministry of Interior, CorrectionsDepartmentcc: Muhammad al-Sarhan, Ministry of Interior, Human RightsDepartment; H.E. Shaher Bek,Commissioner, National Center for Human RightsFrom: Christoph WilckeDate: September 5, 2007Re: Events at Swaqa Correction and Rehabilitation Center on August 26, 2007Dear Mr. al-Majali,I wish to thank you for your efforts in facilitating HumanRights Watch's recent visit to a select number of Jordanian Correction andRehabilitation Center's, in particular the return visit to Swaqa on August 26.As you probably know, we saw a large number of injuredinmates on that day who had apparently injured themselves. We also documentedmass beatings and forced shaving of heads and beards that took place in Swaqaafter our first visit there on August 21. The injuries were apparently aprotest against earlier beatings and forced shavings.We have prepared a memorandum to assist you in your internalinvestigation, and in that of the prosecution, should there be any. We havefurthermore documented shape, color and location of bruises of over 10prisoners subjected to alleged beatings between August 21 and 26.Please do keep me updated on the scope and course of theinternal investigation as well as any prosecutions.Yours sincerely,Christoph WilckeResearcherMiddle East and North Africa DivisionHuman Rights Watch350 Fifth Avenue, 34th FloorNew York, NY 10118U.S.A.+1 212 216 1295 (office)+1 212 736 1300 (fax)wilckec@hrw.orgwww.hrw.org2Events at Swaqa Correction and Rehabilitation Center on August 26, 2007On August 21, three Human Rights Watch (HRW) staff membersand an interpreter visited Swaqa from 9am to 5:30 pm. We spoke for two hourswith director Hani al-Majali on his last day as director at the facility. Wethen interviewed prisoners in several wings and wards of the facility,including room 220 in Wing I, the solitary confinement cells, the Murder and Attempted Murder Ward, the Drugs Ward, and Wards 13 and 14, which hold Islamistprisoners whose cases fall within the jurisdiction of the State Security Court.During that visit, HRW documented numerous abuses, includingrepeated instances of intentional and severe beatings by security personnel,which were inflicted on prisoners as punishment for perceived infractions.At around 6 p.m. on August 25 HRW learned of allegationsthat prisoners at the facility had been subjected to abuse as a result of ourAugust 21 visit to Swaqa. We informed Khalid al-Majali, an official in theCorrections department, of the allegations and of our desire to return to Swaqathe next day. Khalid al-Majali said that he informed the assistant to thedirector of Public Security, and indicated that we should address a request inwriting to the minister of interior.At 9 a.m. on August 26 HRW sent the attached fax to theminister of interior seeking permission for a return visit to Swaqa. At 10a.m., two HRW staff members and an interpreter arrived at Swaqa, where thenewdirector, Majid al-Rawashda, invited the delegation to visit the facility ataround 10.30 am.The delegation first spoke to al-Rawashda for about 45minutes. He acknowledged that he had had the heads and beards of prisonersshaved, for reasons of "cleanliness" – in particular, because of the prevalenceof lice. He explained that "we took harsh measures to sort out the problemscaused by the troublemakers," whose number he put at 50, in order to "protectthe 90 percent of respectful, law abiding prisoners," who cannot complain ofprisoner-on-prisoner violence "because their relatives outside would be indanger." Asked about what caused him to take "harsh measures," al-Rawashdamentioned cleanliness and "prisoner-on-prisoner violence." During the last 10minutes of the conversation, 'Amid Fayiz XX, the new head of Jordan's prison services, was present. He did not speak.After the visit, HRW asked director al-Rawashda again aboutany specific serious incident since beginning his tenure at Swaqa that led himto take "harsh measures." Al-Rawashda said that there had been none.Shortly after 11 a.m., the director, a Preventive Securityofficer, and several guards accompanied the HRW delegation into the prison. Thesituation was quiet. In the main, downstairs corridor, the doors to a few wardswere open and prisoners were walking around freely, while the doors to othersections and wards were locked.Director al-Rawashda introduced the delegation to an olderprisoner who showed us scars he said he had inflicted upon himself. The membersof the HRW delegation had previously seen such scars on the chests, arms andlegs of prisoners in all Jordanian prisons they had visited (Muwaqqar, Swaqa, Salt,Qafqafa), and in particularly high numbers in Qafqafa and Swaqa.HRW staff then spoke briefly with several prisoners in the Murder and Attempted Murder Ward, as well as at greater length with prisoners in the Islamistwards 13 and 14. While in ward 13, researcher Christoph Wilcke heard screamingand loud noises coming from an area immediately to the left and below ward13(when facing the prison administration building). This was at around 12.30p.m. The screaming lasted only a very short time (less than a minute), but wasrepeated several times, sometimes sounding as if it came from a direction tothe right of ward 13. Joanne Mariner, who was in ward 14 at the time, did nothear any noises coming from outside.Between around 12 and 1 p.m. Wilcke and Mariner were conducting interviews with prisoners regarding allegations of beatings that hadoccurred since HRW's last visit on August 21.At around 1 p.m. Christoph Wilcke left ward 13 and descendedthe stairs, which lie behind the doctor's office. The guards informed Wilckethat there had been some problems and asked him to wait for a while in theexercise yard. At the time, Wilcke had intended to visit other wings and wardsof the facility. A few minutes later, he left the exercise yard and saw a largenumber of bloody footprints in the corridor leading to the doctor's office.While standing in the corridor for several minutes, Wilcke observed at least 10injured prisoners, most of them stripped to their underwear, and some bleedingheavily from wounds to the head and the extremities, walking into the doctor'soffice. They did not speak to Wilcke or the guards, and seemed slightly dazed.A guard then led Wilcke into the doctor's office, "to see for yourself." Thesmall room was crowded with injured inmates, possibly over 40 of them; bloodwas everywhere on the floor and the walls. The room was so crowded with theinjured that there was almost no room left to stand. A doctor was workingfrantically to apply bandages. At least three times, prisoners carried otherinjured prisoners into the doctor's office. Some had lost consciousness, andone prisoner's stomach was heaving rapidly. While exiting, one of the prisonersspoke to Wilcke, saying, in front of the guards, "the guards beat us." This wasan isolated utterance.The wounds of the injured prisoners looked like they werethe result of cutting by sharp objects. Although we did observe some headwounds, most of the wounds were long cuts on the chest, arms and thighs, deepenough to be bleeding profusely. We did not observe the infliction of theinjuries. Nor did we observe any of the guards making physical contact with anyof the prisoners, except for one instance in which a guard assisted an injuredprisoner in reaching the doctor's office.Wilcke waited for some time in the officers' Monitoring Room ( Muraqaba) behind the holding cell(Shabak) and, after consulting with theofficers, decided to go with some of them to inform Joanne Mariner and her interpreter of the events and lead them out of prison.In ward 14, Wilcke spoke again with some Islamist prisonersthere, while Mariner and the interpreter were led back to the Monitoring Room. As the two walked there, several dozen bleeding prisoners walked by them downthe corridor, wearing only their underwear. Mariner and the interpreter spokebriefly to a few prisoners, who said that the prison population was protestingagainst the beatings they had recently suffered. Mariner and the interpreterthen went to the Monitoring Room, where they waited for about 15 minutes.During the time they were waiting, a number of bleeding prisoners walked throughthe room. They also saw a guard walk in and out of the main corridor carrying amake-shift metal stick(about 75 cm long).At around 2 p.m., Wilcke joined Mariner and the interpreterin the Monitoring Room. As the members of the HRW delegation exited the mainarea of the correctional facility, they saw three prisoners who were passed outin a reception area immediately behind the entrance door. The three were notreceiving medical attention at that time, although medical assistance and astretcher were arriving as the delegation left.On each of the four times Wilcke walked through short spansof corridors connecting wings, he observed injured prisoners who were mostlycoming from, or going in the direction of, the ground floor to the right of theMonitoring Room (facing the administration building). The guards were few andmainly left the gates open. The injured prisoners and others did not usethreatening words or gestures to each other, the guards, or HRW. There was nomore screaming, and, apart from some rushing of injured prisoners to thedoctor's office, the situation, while not under control, seemed calm, despitethe large number of injured prisoners.On the way into the administration building, some prisonersshouted from their wards to HRW "Did you see? Did you see what they do here?"HRW also observed about 40 special forces personnel lined up in about four rowsof 10 persons, with black face masks, which some wore, and others took off uponseeing HRW. They were carrying police truncheons and other items on their beltsthat the HRW delegation could not identify.From 2-2:30 p.m. the members of the HRW delegation againspoke to Director al-Rawashda, informing him of serious concerns regardingretaliation against prisoners who spoke to HRW on the previous visit, and offears of retaliation for the current visit. We urged Director al-Rawashda notto use force unless necessary, and only to use such force as is appropriate.Al-Rawashda showed us a sharp iron stick wrapped with cloth at one end, ca. 75cm long, intimating that these kinds of weapons were being used by prisoners toinjure themselves. HRW told al-Rawashda that the bloody injuries they had seenappeared to be self-inflicted. Al-Rawashda said that some prisoners forcedothers to injure themselves.On leaving the prison, Human Rights Watch observed a looselygathered group of around 50 special forces personnel, some with masks, at leastone playing with white plastic handcuffs as if beating someone, another doingthe same with what appeared to be three electrical cables twisted and knottedtogether, another one with what resembled a wooden baseball bat, and one personwith a large, bulging, yellow cloth sack with sticks sticking out of it. Itappeared that the sack contained improvised weapons. As the delegation wasdriving up to the main gate, another vehicle transporting 20 or more specialforces personnel arrived.Outside the administration building, the civil defense corpswas loading three ambulances with injured prisoners. As the delegation wasexiting the facility, another ambulance arrived. Within an hour of leaving thefacility, Human Rights Watch informed the National Center for Human Rights andthe Human Rights Department of the Ministry of Interior of the facts asobserved and described in this memorandum.Further observations:The HRW delegation received numerous credible and convincingaccounts on the evening of August 25,which we confirmed during our visit onAugust 26, regarding a mass beating that occurred at Swaqa on Wednesday, August22. Starting at approximately 3:30 p.m. that day, the new director al-Rawashdamade the rounds of the facility. He reportedly said that on the order of thePublic Security Directorate, he was authorized to use force. Security forcesproceeded to enter each wing and ward, one after another, beating each detaineebefore leading him to have his head and beard shaven. The beatings occurred inthe cells and in the large courtyard between the administration building andthe prison wings. Prisoners consistently and separately described hearingscreams and the sounds of beatings, in addition to describing their ownbeatings. One prisoner observed a security guard with a bloodied uniform.Prisoners said that the beatings individually took around3-10 minutes. The entire set of beatings lasted at least six hours, with someprisoners saying that they lasted until midnight, or nine hours. Members of the HRW delegation observed a number of prisoners with deep bruises on their backs,upper arms, and legs, which were said to be the result of these beatings. Theshape of the bruises, especially on the backs of prisoners, was most commonlytwo to three cm thick and between 20 and 70 cm long, with coloring from lightyellow to dark violet. There were also some round bruises, more commonly onlegs and arms, and some long surface wounds to the skin. In addition, at leasttwo prisoners had bruises on the backs of their head.One prisoner, Ala' al-Tair, died that night, apparently frombeing beaten, according to three inmates who claimed to have seen al-Tair. The National Center for Human Rights confirmed that al-Tair's corpse showed signs of heavybeatings. Neither the government spokesperson, H.E. Nasser Judeh, nor thespokesperson of the Public Security Directorate, Major Basheer Da'ja or SwaqaPrison Director al-Rawashda mentioned the mass beatings or an alleged death incustody from beatings publicly or to the HRW delegation.Case 3: MuwaqqarJordan: Prison Burning Deaths Need IndependentInvestigationPolice Investigation Ignores Evidence, IntimidatesWitnesses(New York, May 8, 2008) – King Abdullah should order anindependent investigation into the events surrounding the deaths on April 14 ofthree prisoners at al-Muwaqqar prison east of Amman, Human Rights Watch saidtoday. Despite ample evidence of misconduct, and potentially criminal acts byprison officials, police authorities told Human Rights Watch that theirinvestigation into the incident will vindicate the prison officials, settingout that they acted correctly."The police investigation is an attempt to whitewash theevents leading up to the burning to death of three inmates in Jordan," said Sarah Leah Whitson, Middle East director at Human Rights Watch. "It has lost allcredibility."Since the deaths of the three prisoners, the police haveplaced in solitary  confinement many of those detainees in al-Muwaqqar who were eyewitnesses to the events. Security officials have prevented lawyers, familymembers and human rights investigators from visiting them. Witnesses reportthat police have intimidated them and have ignored accounts that at least twoof the men burned to death had been seriously tortured just prior to the fire,shedding doubt on whether the men had in fact died accidentally. Thegovernmental National Center for Human Rights (NCHR) issued a report on April16, based on its investigation at al-Muwaqqar on April 15, confirming beatingsand ill-treatment at the prison before the fire.It is not disputed that at around noon on April 14,approximately 28 prisoners in Cell 3 of Section A of the newly-built al-Muwaqqar prison set their foam mattresses alight as a protest to events at the prison. Prisonersoccupying neighboring cells joined in the protest, shouting and inflicting harmon themselves with sharp objects. In response, the prison perimeter guards(Darak) entered the prison building to secure the burning cell. What happenednext is contested, but ultimately, when the Civil Defense later extinguishedthe fire in the cell, they found the burned bodies of Firas al-'Utti, HazimZiyada, and Ibrahim al-'Ulayan.The police claim that the prisoners had barricaded the doorsof the burning cell with beds to prevent the guards from opening them. However,one eyewitness denies this; he described in detail how prisoners were shoutingfor the Darak and prison guards to open the door of the burning cell, but thatthey idly stood by for around 10 minutes before opening the doors. Two othereyewitnesses also said that before opening the door, the Darak fired a gascontainer into the cell. Guards reportedly shot one prisoner in the chest withone or more rubber bullets. When the Darak opened the doors, the eyewitnessesclaim that all 28 prisoners left the cell. The NCHR pointed out that the doorsof the cell open to the outside, allowing the guards to open the doorsregardless of any barricade inside the cells.Eyewitness accountsAccording to two eyewitnesses, the fire was almostextinguished by the time the doors were open to allow the prisoners to exit thecell. One eyewitness said that the Darak viciously beat those who exited,"splitting open their skulls." The NCHR recorded blood stains in the rooms,corridors, and the exercise yard.Then, eyewitnesses said, the Darak pushed 18 people backinto Cell 3. These 18 include the three whose bodies were found, as well as Majid Khatir, Abed al-Khaffash, Muhammad al-Tabbash, and Faisal al-'Udwan, whose whereabouts arenow unknown. After the cell door had been relocked with the 18 men inside, asecond, much bigger fire started and it was that fire which the Civil Defenseextinguished when they arrived about 15-20 minutes later, two eyewitnessessaid. The NCHR report notes that a fire hose belonging to the prison was inplace 4 meters from the burning cell.One day before the incident, Human Rights Watch met with thedirector of the Public Security Directorate (PSD), Brig.-Gen. Mazin al-Qadi, who promised that the PSD (which includes the police and the prison service)would be fully transparent in its dealing with Human Rights Watch. Human RightsWatch also spoke with police officials on April 15, April 20, and May 5. A Human Rights Watch researcher visited the outside of the prison on April 15 andwitnessed a large presence of security guards. The officials insisted thatthere was no wrongdoing by any security forces, including both Darak and prisonguards, in connection with the April 14 fire, and that the police investigationwould conclude soon.Families left in the darkThe families of the three dead prisoners and eyewitnessestold Human Rights Watch that all three who died had complained during visitsdays before the fire about ill-treatment, in particular by a Captain 'AmirQutaish, who they claim insulted and beat them. An eyewitness alleges that onApril 13 this officer suspended Firas al-'Utti and Hazim Ziyada, two of the menlater burned in the fire, for four to five hours from a wall with their handsshackled behind their back (the shabah torture position) while beating them.This was in response to the fact that some 100 prisoners had started a hungerstrike that day protesting ill-treatment. Families and eyewitnesses told HumanRights Watch that Qutaish had bad relations with al-'Utti and Ziyada datingback to a period that the men had spent in a different prison. Al-'Utti alsoreportedly tried to warn a visitor to the prison that Qutaish had allegedlymade threats against them just five days before the fire. One eyewitness saidthat Qutaish threatened al-'Utti, Ziyada and another two prisoners withill-treatment again only hours before the fire on April 14. Three eyewitnessesspoke of the frequent morning searches, beatings, and insults by prison guardsand the shabah-style torture of prisoners who resisted the searches.After the fire, the prison administration placed allsurviving prisoners from Cell 3, Section A and the roughly 100 other prisonerswho had witnessed the events either into solitary confinement or separate fromthe remaining prison population after they had briefly been treated for smokeinhalation, burns, or injuries from beatings. At dawn on April 15, theytransferred between 15 and 60 prisoners to other prisons. Their families andlawyers have been unable to visit the isolated prisoners, "by order of the Ministry of Interior," one family member told Human Rights Watch. Human Rights Watch knows of atleast five families unable to visit their loved ones in prison since theincident. The prison also prohibited the visiting NCHR representatives fromseeing these prisoners.Eyewitnesses also said that the police put pressure on thetransferred prisoners to exonerate the security forces of the deaths and warnedthem not to mention that complaints about torture had given rise to theprotest.On April 20, four days after issuing its critical findingson al-Muwaqqar, the executive director of the NCHR, Shaher Bak, resigned."King Abdullah has an obligation under human rights law toset up an independent commission with judicial powers to investigate thetorture, protests and response to the fire in al-Muwaqqar prison, as the policeauthorities have clearly shown themselves incapable of holding their ownmembers to account," said Whitson.Human Rights Watch is concerned that, even with evidence ofcriminal culpability on the part of the members of the Public SecurityDirectorate, there are significant obstacles in the way of prosecution. In Jordan, a police court has jurisdiction over all cases in which members of the PSD standaccused of crimes. The PSD director appoints police officers as judges of thepolice court as well as the police prosecutors, and he retains the right toreduce sentences. Such a tribunal fails to meet any standard of independentjudicial scrutiny.The police court has a poor record of holding police toaccount for abuses. In March 2008, the police court sentenced two officers whobeat an inmate to death in Aqaba prison to two-and-a-half years in prison, butonly after private efforts by the family of the deceased, the US embassy, and Human Rights Watch to bring the perpetrators to justice. Before these efforts, thepolice court merely charged the men with "abuse of authority" and "violatingorders and directives." In December 2007, the police court sentenced thedirector of Swaqa prison to two months in prison for "exercising unlawfulauthority resulting in harm," then commuted the sentence to a fine of JOD120,or about US$170. The prison director had beaten, and forcibly shaved the headsand beards, of almost all 2,100 inmates at Swaqa prison, Jordan's largest, on hisfirst day as director there (http://hrw.org/english/docs/2007/08/30/jordan16770.htm).[1]Letterfrom Human Rights Watch to Khaled al-Majali, "Events at Swaqa Correction and Rehabilitation Center on August 26, 2007," September 5, 2007.[2]Letter from Human Rights Watch to Abd al-Karim Radaida, "Memorandum Concerningthe Investigation Into the Treatment of Firas Zaidan at 'Aqaba Correction andRehabilitation Center, May 6-10, 2007," September 17, 2007, reproduced in anAppendix to this report. Zaidan was found lifeless on the morning of May 10. His last beating took place on May 9.[3]"Jordan: Prison Burning Deaths Need Independent Investigation," Human RightsWatch news release, May 8, 2008, http://hrw.org/english/docs/2008/05/08/jordan18759.htm.[4]Islamistsconvicted of crimes against state security are commonly called Tanzimat becausethey belong to "unlawful organizations." They are typically prosecuted in Jordan's State Security Court and their sentences range from a few years to the deathpenalty. Common charges are for conspiracy to commit crimes, possession ofweapons or explosives, and for belonging to an unlicensed group. The Tanzimatview themselves as political prisoners because of the alleged political natureof the charges against them, such as membership in illegal groups, and becauseof the military character of the State Security Court, which has relied in thepast on confessions defendants claim were extracted under torture.. Regardingconfessions extracted under torture, see: Amnesty International, Jordan:"Your confessions are ready for you to sign": Detention and tortureof political suspects, MDE 16/005/2006, July 24, 2006, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/MDE16/005/2006/en/dom-MDE160052006en.pdf(accessed May 22, 2008). Jordan's State Security Court is a special court withjurisdiction over crimes against the internal or external security of thestate, state secrets, narcotics, and some other crimes. It is not anindependent court-the king appoints its judges, two thirds of whom are militaryofficers. The prime minister can refer any matter directly to the court, whichfollows ordinary criminal law and whose decisions can be appealed to theregular Court of Cassation.[5]Conventionagainst Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment(Convention against Torture), adopted December 10, 1984, G.A. res. 39/46,annex, 39 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 51) at 197, U.N. Doc. A/39/51 (1984), enteredinto force June 26, 1987, art.1.[6]Law ofSanctions (Penal Code) No 16, Official Gazette No 1487, January 1 1960, art.208.[7]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Ali, Salt, August 23, 2007.[8]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner Ramzi, Birain, April 15, 2008,[9]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Armand, Muwaqqar, August 19, 2007.[10]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner Samir, Salt, August 23. Head ofPrison Service Sharif al-'Umari told Human Rights Watch that he had changed thepractice to handcuffing prisoners' hands in front of their bodies, although itsapplication had been uneven since a new law created a separate security entity,the Gendarmerie [Darak], responsible for prisoner transports. Tanzimate prisonersnow were given front cuffing, while ordinary prisoners were normally stillcuffed behind their backs. Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif al-'Umari,July 31, 2008.[11]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Ghaith, Qafqafa, August 25, 2007.[12]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner Lu'ai, Muwaqqar, August 19, 2007.[13]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Nu'man, Juwaida, October 22, 2007.[14]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner Qais, Qafqafa, August 25, 2007.[15]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Rafiq, Swaqa, August 22, 2007.[16]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner Armand, Muwaqqar, August 19, 2007.[17]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner Luqman, Muwaqqar, August 19, 2007.[18]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Ghalib, Salt, August 23, 2007.[19]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Fakhri, Juwaida, October 23, 2007.[20]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner 'Amr, Swaqa, August 21, 2007.[21]Human Rights Watch meeting with prisoner Qinan, Swaqa, August 21, 2007.[22]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Humaidan, 'Aqaba, August 27, 2007.[23]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Laith, Qafqafa, August 25, 2007.[24]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Lu'ai, Muwaqqar, August 19, 2007.[25]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Majid, Muwaqqar, August 19, 20007.[26]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Ja'far, Swaqa, August 21, 2007, and withprisoner 'Asim, Salt, August 23, 2007.[27]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Lu'ai, Muwaqqar, August 19, 2007.[28]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Dawud, Muwaqqar, August 19, 2007.[29]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Talib, Salt, August 23, 2007. Severalprisoners in 2007 and 2008 named 'Amir Qutaish as an abusive guard. Six prisonersidentified him as having tortured prisoners at Muwaqqar in April 2008 alone(see Appendix C).[30]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner Khalid, Qafqafa, August 25, 2007.[31]Thedirector was not necessarily the director present during Human Rights Watch'svisit.[32]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner 'Umar, Muwaqqar, August 19, 2007.[33]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Walid, Muwaqqar, August 19, 2007.[34]Human Rights Watch interview with Ali Burjaq, Counter-terrorism official,General Intelligence Department, Amman, June 25, 2007.[35]HumanRights Interview with Hani al-Majalli, director, Swaqa, August 21, 2007.[36]Theriots were caused by the attempt to takefrom their cells two prisonersscheduled for execution. The two, Yasir Furaihat and Salim Suwaid (al-Libi),were executed shortly thereafter. Theirs were the last executions in Jordan before an unofficial moratorium. Human Rights Watch interview with high officialsfrom the Public Security Directorate, Amman, April 13, 2008. See also: "14-hourJordan Prison Riot Ends," Monterey County Herald, March 2, 2006. Members of parliament helped negotiate a peaceful end to the crisis. Human Rights Watchinterview with Ali Abu Sukkar, Amman, May 18, 2006.[37]Khalidal-Bishtawi, a prisoner, died in clashes. "Jordan Prison Uprising Quelled,"Agence France Presse, April 13, 2006.[38]"IslamistInmates Stage Hunger Strike in Jordan," Reuters News, August 26, 2006.[39]Human Rights Watch telephone conversation with Jordanian relative of a Tanzimatprisoner, Amman, July 8, 2007, and Human Rights Watch interview with Tanzimatprisoners at Swaqa, August 21, 2007. The EU has put out a tender for a contractto detect mobile telephone activity within prisons. European NeighbourhoodPolicy Initiaitive, "Supply Procurement Notice. Supply of Security andSurveillance Equipment for the Correcitons and Rehabilitiation CentresDirectorate of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan," Delegation of theEuropean Commission in Jordan, EuropeAid/126697/D/SUP/JO. Jordan installed its own jammers of cell phone wireless communication in the prisons in 2008. HumanRights Watch interview with Sharif al-'Umari, July 31, 2008.[40]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner 'Amr and three other prisoners, Swaqa,August 21, 2007.[41]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner 'Amr and three other prisoners, Swaqa,August 21, 2007.[42]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner 'Amr and three other prisoners,Swaqa, August 21, 2007.[43]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Thamir, Swaqa, August 21, 2007.[44]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Nasir, Swaqa, August 21, 2007.[45]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoners 'Amr, Thamir, Nasir in Swaqa, August 21,2007.[46]HumanRights Watch interview with 20 prisoners in four different cells in Swaqa,August 26, 2007.[47]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoners Husam, Khalil, Shukri in Swaqa, August26, 2007. A prisoner in Juwaida said al-Rawashda had used the electric shockdevice on prisoners there. Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner Sami,Juwaida, October 22, 2007.[48]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Muhanna, Swaqa, August 26, 2007.[49]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Husam, Swaqa, August 26, 2007.[50]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner Sabri, Swaqa, August 26, 2007.[51]AhmadKaraishan, "Escape of Two Prisoners Sentenced for Planning a TerroristOperation," al-Ra'i Newspaper, June 20, 2007, and Human Rights Watchconversation with an adviser to Jordanian prisons, October 2007.[52]Human Rights Watch interview with one of the two who attempted to escape,Juwaidah, October 23, 2007.[53]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner Faruq, Juwaida, October 23, 2007.[54]Human Rights Watch interview with a prisoner Nidal, Juwaida, October 23, 2007.[55]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner Sufyan, Juwaida, October 23, 2007.[56]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Nidal, Juwaida, October 23, 2007.[57]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Hamza, Juwaida, October 23, 2007.[58]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Yasir, Juwaida, October 23, 2007.[59]"BasicPrinciples for the Treatment of Prisoners, adopted December 14, 1990, G.A. Res.45/111, annex, 45 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49A) at 200, U.N. Doc. A/45/49 (1990),Principles 5 and 9: "Except for those limitations that are demonstrablynecessitated by the fact of incarceration, all prisoners shall retain the humanrights and fundamental freedoms set out in … United Nations covenants"(Principle 5). "Prisoners shall have access to the health services available inthe country without discrimination on the grounds of their legal situation,"principle 9.[60]"(1) Every prisoner shall be provided by the administration at the usual hourswith food of nutritional value adequate for health and strength, of wholesomequality and well prepared and served. (2) Drinking water shall be available toevery prisoner whenever he needs it." United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (Standard Minimum Rules), adopted by the FirstUnited Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment ofOffenders, held at Geneva in 1955, and approved by the Economic and SocialCouncil by its resolution 663 C (XXIV) of July 31, 1957, and 2076 (LXII) of May 13, 1977, rule 20.[61]"Adetained or imprisoned person shall have the right to be visited by and tocorrespond with, in particular, members of his family and shall be givenadequate opportunity to communicate with the outside world, subject toreasonable conditions and restrictions as specified by law or lawfulregulations." Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under AnyForm of Detention or Imprisonment (Body of Principles), adopted December 9,1988, G.A. Res. 43/173, annex, 43 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 298, U.N. Doc.A/43/49 (1988), principle 19. Furthermore, "Prisoners shall be allowed undernecessary supervision to communicate with their family and reputable friends atregular intervals, both by correspondence and by receiving visits." Standard Minimum Rules, rule 37, and "Prisoners shall be kept informed regularly of the more importantitems of news by the reading of newspapers, periodicals or specialinstitutional publications, by hearing wireless transmissions, by lectures orby any similar means as authorized or controlled by the administration," rule 39.[62]HumanRights Watch interview with Husain Rawafja , director, Aqaba prison, August 27,2007.[63]"Thedoctor of the [Correction and Rehabilitation] Centre must conduct a medicalexam of the inmate and present a report of his state of health in any of the followingcases: a) at the admission to the Center of [the inmate] and before his releasefrom it and upon his transfer from one Center to another; b) Before placing theinmate in solitary confinement and after releasing him from it." Prisons Law,art.24. Human Rights Watch interview with prison doctor at Aqaba, August 27,2007.[64]HumanRights Watch interview with pharmacist, Juwaida, October 24, 2007.[65]Human Rights Watch interview with the prison doctor and pharmacist, Juwaida,October 24, 2007.[66]HumanRights Watch interview with prison doctor and nurse, Juwaida, October 24, 2007.[67]HumanRights Watch interview with Hani al-Majalli, director, Swaqa, August 21, 2007.[68]HumanRights Watch interview with Rakat al-Hallalat, director, Muwaqqar, August 19,2007.[69]HumanRights Watch interview with prison doctor, Birain, April 15, 2008.[70]Internationallaw requires medical examinations at the point of admission to a prison: "Aproper medical examination shall be offered to a detained or imprisoned personas promptly as possible after his admission to the place of detention orimprisonment, and thereafter medical care and treatment shall be providedwhenever necessary. This care and treatment shall be provided free of charge."Body of Principles, principle 24.[71]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Maisara, Juwaida, October 24, 2007.[72]HumanRights Watch observation in prison, Juwaida, August 24, 2007.[73]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner Zuhair, Juwaida, October 24, 2007.[74]HumanRights Watch interviews with over a dozen prisoners in Muwaqqar, Qafqafa, andJuwaida, August and October, 2007.[75]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Zhafir, Qafqafa, August 25, 2007.[76]HumanRights Watch interview with Rakat al-Hallalat, director, Muwaqqar, August 19,2007.[77]PublicSecurity Directorate, Correction and Rehabilitation Centers Administration,"Regulations of the Law of Correction and Rehabilitation Centers," 2007,art.12.[78]"Adetained or imprisoned person or his counsel shall, subject only to reasonableconditions to ensure security and good order in the place of detention orimprisonment, have the right to request or petition a judicial or otherauthority for a second medical examination or opinion." Body of Principles,Principle 25.[79]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Suhail, Muwaqqar, August 19, 2007.[80]PublicSecurity Directorate, Correction and Rehabilitation Centers Administration,"Regulations of the Law of Correction and Rehabilitation Centers," 2007,art.8.a.[81]StandardMinimum Rules, Rule 25.1.[82]Human Rights Watch interview with the directors at Muwaqqar, Swaqa, Qafqafa andJuwaida, August and October 2007.[83]TaylorLuck, "ICRC Issues Assessment of Healthcare in Kingdom's CorrectionalFacilities," Jordan Times, August 12, 2008.[84]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Jalil, Qafqafa, August 25, 2007.[85]Prisonsdoctors should be knowledgeable about psychiatry, international norms hold. Ateach prison, there should be "at least one qualified medical officer who shouldhave some knowledge of psychiatry." Standard Minimum Rules, Rule 22.1.[86]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner Ibrahim, Juwaida, October 22, 2007.[87]HumanRights Watch interviewed seven prisoners in solitary confinement and more thanten prisoners who had been in solitary confinement.[88]HumanRights Watch interviews with three prisoners, Kazhim; Qasim; Husain, Juwaida,October 22 and 24, 2007.[89]HumanRights Watch interviews with former prisoner Munir, Amman, April 12, 2008, andwith two prisoners, Basim and Ali, Salt, August 23, 2007, prisoner Hashim,Qafqafa, August 21, 2007, and prisoner Husain, Juwaida, October 22, 2007.[90]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Khalid, Qafqafa, August 25, 2007.[91]Whilesome prisoners admitted that fellow prisoners smuggle drugs, usuallypsychiatric pills, sold for seven dinars per pill (a 700 per cent profit overthe price at the pharmacy), many more put the blame on individual prison guardsrunning illegal drug distribution rings in prison.[92]Human Rights Watch interview with Muhammad Muhaimid, director, Juwaida prison,October 22, 2007.[93]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner Lu'ai, Muwaqqar, August 19, 2007.[94]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Raja'i, Birain, April 15, 2008.[95]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Shakir, Juwaida, October 22, 2008.[96]HumanRights Watch interview with the director, Birain, April 15, 2008.[97]European Neighbourhood Policy Initiaitive, "Supply Procurement Notice.Supply of Security and Surveillance Equipment for the Correcitons andREhabilitiation Centres Directorate of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan," Delegation of the European Commission in Jordan, EuropeAid/126697/D/SUP/JO.[98]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif al-'Umari, director, prison service, Amman, July 31, 2008.[99]Human Rights Watch observation of lunch at Qafqafa, August 25, 2007.[100]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner 'Aql, Swaqa, August 21, 2007.[101]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner Khalid, Qafqafa, August 25, 2007. Atleast one prison director said that the kitchen prepared special meals fordiabetic prisoners.[102]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Falih, Swaqa, August 21, 2007.[103]PublicSecurity Directorate, Correction and Rehabilitation Centers Administration,"Regulations of the Law of Correction and Rehabilitation Centers,"2007, art.10.[104]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Fadi, Swaqa, August 21, 2007.[105]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner Sa'ud, Swaqa, August 21, 2007.[106]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner Wajih, Salt, August 23, 2007.[107]United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (Standard Minimum Rules), adopted by the First United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and theTreatment of Offenders, held at Geneva in 1955, and approved by the Economicand Social Council by its resolution 663 C (XXIV) of July 31, 1957, and 2076(LXII) of May 13, 1977, rules 37 and 39.[108]Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any Form ofDetention or Imprisonment (Body of Principles), adopted December 9, 1988, G.A.Res. 43/173, annex, 43 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 298, U.N. Doc. A/43/49(1988), principle 15.[109]HumanRights Watch interview with Sharif al-'Umari, April 13, 2008.[110]HumanRights Watch interview with Mahmud 'Ashran, director, Qafqafa prison, August25, 2007.[111]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner 'Aql, Swaqa, August 21, 2007.[112]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner Murad, Qafqafa, August 25, 2007.[113]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner Mu'adh, Birain, April 15, 2008.[114]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Musa, Juwaida, October 22, 2007.[115]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Ra'id, Swaqa, August 21, 2007.[116]Human Rights Watch telephone call to wife of a prisoner 'Aql, Swaqa, August 22,2007.[117]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Jalil, Qafqafa, August 25, 2007.[118]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif al-'Umari, April 14, 2007. PrisonRegulations, art.11.d.1.[119]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner 'Amr, Swaqa, August 22, 2007.[120]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Jalil, Qafqafa, August 25, 2007.[121]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Nasir, Salt, August 23, 2007.[122]HumanRights Watch interview with directors at Swaqa and Qafqafa, August 21 and 25,2007, and with the PSD leadership, Amman, April 13, 2008.[123]Bodyof Principles, principle 28.[124]Standard Minimum Rules, rule 40.[125]CAT, art.12.[126]CAT, art.13.[127]Of the66 cases of allegations of abuse, three came from detainees in Birain in April2008.[128]PublicSecurity Law No 38 (1965), art. 85.[129]PublicSecurity Law No 38 (1965), art. 81.c.[130]HumanRights Watch interview with Mahir al-Shishani, director, Grievances and HumanRights Office, PSD, Amman, April 13, 2008.[131]HumanRights Watch interview with Hani al-Majali, director, Swaqa prison, August 21,2007. In 2006, the Grievances and Human Rights office received 56 complaints ofbeatings, nine of which concluded with a suspended investigation, three caseswere decided not to be referred to court, four cases were settled within thePSD, and one case was referred to the Police Court, while investigations in 39cases were ongoing. Luqman Iskandar, "Has the Prison Administration Benefitedfrom the Recommendations of the National Center for Human Rights?," Al-Arabal-Yawm, September 1, 2007, http://www.alarabalyawm.net/pages.php?news_id=41238&select=%C3%A1%C3%A3%C3%98%C3%87%C3%A1%C3%88(accessed May 28, 2008). A representative of a human rights organization in Jordan who provides individual legal services to prisoners said that numbers of complaintsof torture had declined in recent years. Human Rights Watch interview withhuman rights lawyer, Amman, July 31, 2008.[132]Human Rights Watch interview with Mahir Shishani, director, Grievances andHuman Rights Office, PSD, Amman, July 31, 2008.[133]Sa'dal-Limun and Khalid al-Majali, "Working Guide for Directors of Correction and Rehabilitation Centers," Public Security Directorate, 2008, p.29.[134]Theseven prisons are: Balqa' (Salt), Muwaqqar, Qafqafa, Juwaida, Swaqa, Birain,and Juwaida.[135]The UNCommittee Against Torture found that, to effectively prevent torture, Statesshould "establish impartial mechanisms for inspecting and visiting places ofdetention and confinement, and [make available] to detainees and persons atrisk of torture and ill-treatment … judicial and other remedies that will allowthem to have their complaints promptly and impartially examined." UN Committee AgainstTorture, General Comment No. 2, Implementation of Article 2 by States Parties,U.N. Doc. CAT/C/GC/2 (2008), para. 13.[136]Hesaid that he instead spent his time helping the detainees speed up their courtdates. Human Rights Watch interview with Zaid (last name was not given), PSD prosecutor,Birain Correction and Reform Center, April 15, 2008.[137]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoners at Birain, April 15, 2008.[138]HumanRights Watch interview with director of Birain prison, April 15, 2008.[139]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif al-'Umari, director, prison service, Amman, July 31, 2008.[140]In April 2008, an official said the boxes are emptied every two weeks. HumanRights Watch interview with Mahir al-Shishani, director, Grievances and HumanRights Office, April 13, 2008. In August 2007, prison officials at Muwaqqar said the box was emptied every week. Human Rights Watch interview with Rakat Mahmud al-Hallalat, director, Muwaqqar prison, August 19, 2007. Since Tanzimat prisonersdo not share the dining hall, however, it is unclear how they can presentcomplaints other than through their guards.[141]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner Dawud, Muwaqqar, August 19, 2007 andwith a prisoner Hasan, Swaqa, August 21, 2007.[142]Human Rights Watch interview with Major General Mazin al-Qadi director, PSD, April13, 2008.[143]Since a change in the law governing the center in 2006, the NCHR has "the rightto … visit Correction and Rehabilitation Centers … according to the establishedfoundations." Law No 51 of 2006 on the National Center for Human Rights, OfficialGazette (No. 4787), October 16, 2006, art.10.a.[144]AGrievances Office prosecutor would accompany NCHR staff when they visited theprison, but the center's rights monitors could meet prisoners in privatewithout the presence of officials. Human Rights Watch interview with Nisreen Zureikat, supervisor of the prisons unit, National Center for Human Rights, Amman, April 9, 2008.[145]Human Rights Watch interview with Maj.Gen. Mazin al-Qadi, April 13, 2008. TheNCHR reported on the denial of the visit. Report on the Events of Muwaqqar and Swaqa Prisons, National Center for Human Rights, Amman, April 20, 2008. The PSDmaintained this was to allow the situation to quiet down. Human Rights Watchtelephone interview with Mahir Shishani, head, Grievances and Human RightsOffice, Amman, April 22, 2008. NCHR officials had not publicized the PSDreneging on its promise. Human Rights Watch interview with Nisreen Zuraikat,supervisor of prisons unit, NCHR, Amman, July 31, 2008. The Human Rights Officeof the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was not informed about these developments.Human Rights Watch interview with Ibrahim Awawdeh, director, Human RightsOffice, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Amman, August 5, 2008.[146]Human Rights Watch telephone interviews with former Jordanian prisoners Bilal,'Amjad, 'Abduh, Amman area, May 2 – 5, 2008. The NCHR also described to HumanRights Watch the problem of prisoners withdrawing their accounts made to thecenter when formally questioned by police prosecutors. Human Rights Watchinterview with Nisreen Zuraikat, supervisor of prisons unit, NCHR, Amman, April 10, 2008.[147]HumanRights Watch telephone interview with former prisoner 'Abduh, Amman area, May 5, 2008.[148]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoners Hazim and Saddam, Muwaqqar, August 19, 2007.[149]The "informers" were generally different from the "bosses" of the prison wing.The "bosses" at times also discouraged frank recounting prisoner-on-prisoner orguard-on-prisoner violence.[150]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoner Nu'man, Juwaida, October 22, 2007.[151]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoner Ra'id, Swaqa, August 26, 2007.[152]Human Rights Watch interview with prisoners Hazim and Saddam in Muwaqqar, August 19, 2007 and with prisoner Dawud, Swaqa, August 21, 2007.[153]Human Rights Watch interview with former prisoner Ziyad at Muwaqqar, Rusaifa, August 4, 2008.[154]HumanRights Watch interview with former prisoner Fawzi at Muwaqqar, Rusaifa, August4, 2008.[155]Human Rights Watch interview with former prisoner Fawzi at Muwaqqar, Rusaifa, August 4, 2008.[156]Manual on the Effective Investigation and Documentation of Torture and OtherCruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment ("Istanbul Protocol"),August 9, 1999., p.19.[157]It isnot always clear how the PSD decides which incidents to refer for prosecutionat the Police Court and which to leave in the hands of prison directors. Onethe one hand, the Police Court has issued verdicts for misdemeanors, such asviolations of the Public Security Law, while on the other hand, GrievancesOffice prosecutors in 2007 were involved in investigations that led todisciplinary measures.[158]Human Rights Watch interview with Mahir Shishani, director, Grievances andHuman Rights Office, Amman, April 14, 2008.[159]One control room operator told Human Rights Watch "We monitor the prison 24hours. It is my job to observe, and, when there is an irregular occurrence, torecord it, but I don't make routine recordings."[159] Officials citedprivacy concerns prohibiting filming inside wards and cells, but could notexplain why they did not use the cameras for routine recordings, kept for aspecific amount of time before being destroyed. Human Rights Watch interviewwith control room supervisor, Swaqa, August 26, 2007 and with Jordanian prisondirector, Washington, D.C., May 8, 2008, and Human Rights Watch interview with Mukhaimer Abu Jammous, secretary-general, Ministry of Interior, Amman, October 25, 2007.[160]TheNational Center for Human Rights reported that it had "noticed a tangiblereduction and decline in the numbers of complaints and accusations ofsubjection to beating and ill-treatment during the last quarter of this year2007" following a trend since it began reporting on prison conditions in 2004.National Center for Human Rights, Fifth Periodic Report on Conditions ofRehabilitation and Reform Centers and Places of Temporary Detention in theKingdom for the Year 2007, Amman, December 2007, p.20.[161]Thedirector of one prison alone, Muwaqqar, reported that between January andAugust 2007, there had been six complaints of abuse reported to the publicprosecutor, resulting in two staff being suspended. Two of these cases involvedthe use of excessive force, prosecutors did not refer them to the police courtonly because the forensic report from the second case did not indicate signs oftorture. Human Rights Watch interview with Rakat Mahmud al-Hallalat, director, Muwaqqar prison, August 19, 2007.In Qafqafa prison, between January and August 2007,there had been four complaints against guards for abusing inmates. In twocases, the prison director's internal investigation found the guards notguilty; in the third case, he internally disciplined a guard he found guilty ofabusing a prisoner. The fourth case remained under investigation by the GrievancesOffice. Human Rights Watch interview with Mahmud 'Ashran, director, Qafqafaprison, August 25, 2007.In Swaqa, there had been 10 cases of alleged abuseagainst prisoners between January and August 2007. The director againinvestigated and settled most incidents internally. He said he fired oneofficer for "abusing a prisoner," detained another officer for one week forabuse caught on camera, and docked another guard's pay for two weeks forassaulting a prisoner, although the prisoner did not file a complaint and anearlier internal investigation had found the guard not guilty. Human RightsWatch interview with Hani al-Majali, director, Swaqa prison, August 21, 2007.[162]HumanRights Watch interview with Mahir Shishani, director, Grievances and HumanRights Office, Public Security Department, Amman, July 31, 2008.[163]Human Rights Watch interview with Mahir Shishani, director, Grievances andHuman Rights Office, Public Security Department, Amman, July 31, 2008.[164]WhenFiras returned the next morning, he did not speak about what happened, but wentto sleep in his room. Human Rights Watch interview with former prisoners Mundhir, Wadi', and Jamal, Rusaifa, August 4, 2008. Former prisoner Wadi' said that he did notsee or hear of Firas being beaten, while Jamal said he knew Firas had beenbeaten. Wadi' said that 'Amir Qutaish beat him severely in the weeks precedingthe fire, too. Human Rights Watch interview with former prisoner Wadi',Rusaifa, August 4, 2008. Jamal said Qutaish and others beat him, too, includingshortly before the fire. Human Rights Watch interview with former prisonerJamal, Rusaifa, August 4, 2008.[165]Human Rights Watch interview with former prisoner Wadi', Rusaifa, August 4,2008.[166]As theriot spread and prisoners were shouting and cutting themselves with sharpobjects, special forces entered the prison and went from room to room, beatingprisoners, they said. To prevent them entering, prisoners barricaded the doorof their room with steel beds and set a foam mattress alight. Guards then pushedthe burning mattress into the room with their truncheons, and stood by whilethe room started burning, with the civil defense department's fire fightersbehind them, unable to get to the room. Prisoners fled to a courtyard outsidethrough an open door except for three prisoners, who were trapped. One escapedprisoner, Firas, went back into the room to rescue a friend, but could not getout. Muhammad al-Tabbasha, one of the four now inside, managed to get out.Breaking the windows caused the fire to ignite even more, accounting for whatearlier witnesses had said were two fires. Human Rights Watch interview withformer prisoners Mundhir, Wadi', Jamal and Ghassan, Rusaifa, August 4, 2008.[167]HumanRights Watch interview with former prisoner Mundhir, Rusaifa, August 4, 2008.[168]HumanRights Watch interview with former prisoners Mundhir, Wadi', Jamal and Ghassan,Rusaifa, August 4, 2008. The PSD also queried whether prisoners had beentransported to other prisons. Four new eyewitnesses confirmed that prisonerswere taken to other prisons, but they placed these events at between four andseven days after the prison fire, not the following day. Human Rights Watchinterview with former prisoners Mundhir, Wadi', Jamal and Ghassan, Rusaifa,August 4, 2008.[169] The Constitution of The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, January1, 1952, arts 99, 102, and 110, and, Law of Public Security, art. 85.1. ThePolice Court also tries PSD officials for traffic violations committed offduty. PSD prosecutors do not have jurisdiction to investigate crimes committedby prisoners inside prison, such as rape or assault.[170]Human Rights Watch meeting with 'Isa al-Raba'ba, director, Juwaida prison, andformer head of the police court, Washington, D.C., May 8, 2008.[171]HumanRights Watch interview with Muhammad al-Zu'bi, head, Police Court, Amman, April 13, 2008. In fact, Article 85 of the PSD law allows the PSD director toestablish such a court, but it does not make its establishment mandatory.[172]Human Rights Watch visit to the Police Court, Amman, April 13, 2008.[173]Human Rights Watch interview with Muhammad al-Zu'bi, head, Police Court, Amman, April 14, 2008.[174]Asearch of the archives of four major Jordanian dailies, al-Ra'i, al-Dustur,al-Ghadd, al-Arab al-Yawm, revealed only occasional mention of thePolice Court, and no mention of the verdicts in the Zaidan and Aqaba cases.[175]Prisoners at Swaqa told Human Rights Watch that all or nearly all of the around2,000 prisoners were beaten on August 22, 2007. Human Rights Watch saw about100 prisoners, all of whom had their heads and beards shaved. The court verdictfound that the director and prison guards beat around 70 prisoners. HumanRights Watch interviews with prisoners at Swaqa, August 26, 2007.[176]Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, Public Security Directorate, Police Court, Decisionin the Criminal Case Number 760/2007, October 29, 2007, p.1.[177]Human Rights Watch interview Mazin al-Qadi, director, Public Security Directorate,Amman, April 13, 2008.[178]Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, Public Security Directorate, Police Court, Decisionin the Criminal Case Number 760/2007, October 29, 2007, pp.3-5.[179]Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, Public Security Directorate, Police Court, Decisionin the Criminal Case Number 760/2007, October 29, 2007, p.4. The PSDfollows military ranks and organization.[180]Letter from Human Rights Watch to Abd al-Karim Radaida, "Memorandum Concerningthe Investigation Into the Treatment of Firas Zaidan at 'Aqaba Correction andRehabilitation Center, May 6-10, 2007," September 17, 2007. Internationalstandards require the removal of a person implicated in torture from contactwith victims or witnesses. Manual on the Effective Investigation andDocumentation of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment orPunishment ("Istanbul Protocol"), August 9, 1999., p.19.[181]HashemiteKingdom of Jordan, Public Security Directorate, Police Court, Decision inthe Criminal Case Number 383/2007, April 3, 2008, p.16.[182]Clomipramine is used in anti-depressant medication and witnesses told HumanRights Watch that two prisoners, also prosecution witnesses sharing a ward withZaidan, were taking psychiatric drugs at the time, given to them by guards whoparticipated in the beating of Zaidan. The prosecution did not investigate howthe substance entered Zaidan's body, despite orders of the head of the PublicSecurity Directorate urging the Legal Affairs department's prosecutors to "findout how the [substance] entered Zaidan's body." Handwritten note by Maj.Gen Mahmud al-'Aitan, the previous PSD director, written on prosecution documents in thecase. Papers on file with Human Rights Watch.[183]Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, Public Security Directorate, Police Court, Decisionin the Criminal Case Number 383/2007, April 3, 2008, p.16.[184]Human Rights Watch interview with Maj.Gen. Mazin al-Qadi, director, PSD, Amman, April 13, 2008.[185]HashemiteKingdom of Jordan, Public Security Directorate, Police Court, Decisionissued by the Police Court / First Chamber, in the Criminal Case Number299/2004, March 9, 2004, p.14.[186]For example, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the bodyinternationally tasked with looking after the welfare of detainees around theworld, has visited Jordanian detention centers since 1979, and has notsuspended visits in protest at official obstruction since 2006. Jordan's National Center for Human Rights regularly visits places of detention, including thedetention center at the General Intelligence Department (although visits thereremain announced despite the GID's promises to allow for surprise inspections).Human Rights Watch interview with officials of the General IntelligenceDepartment, Amman, August 30, 2007, debriefing them on our findings followingtwo weeks of repeated surprise visits to the detention facility in which theyagreed on similar conditions for the NCHR. In 2006, Jordan became the firstcountry in the region to invite the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture, althoughofficials in two detention centers obstructed his visit. Jordan has not at present signed the Optional Protocol to the Convention Against Torture providingincreased methods of prevention and detection of torture.[187]"Relationshipwith the Press During Times of Emergency," in: Sa'd al-Limun and Khalid al-Majali, "Working Guide for Directors of Correction and Rehabilitation Centers," PublicSecurity Directorate, 2008, pp.33-34.[188]Arab Organization for Human Rights, Annual Report, Amman, 2007, and Report ofthe Freedoms Committee of the Jordan Engineers Association, Amman, April 12,2006.[189]This was the case in riots at Qafqafa prison in March 2006 in which oneprisoner died, and in riots in Swaqa prison in August 2007 at which HumanRights Watch was present.[190]Severalfamilies contacted Human Rights Watch for information about their loved onesfollowing riots at Swaqa prison in July and August 2007, and following riots atMuwaqqar prison in April 2008.[191]Muwaffaq Kamal, "Col. Al-'Umari: International Organizations Speak of HumanRights and Neglect the Duties," Al-Ghadd, March 8, 2008 http://www.alGhad.jo/index.php?news=312831(accessed August 25, 2008).[192]Hashalal-'Adayila and Ziyad al-Dakhil," Publication of Results of the Inquiry into 'Muwaqqar, Swaqa, and Qafqafa Riots' Within Days" Al-Ghadd, April 19, 2008.[193]Human Rights Watch interview with Mahir Shishani, Amman, July 31, 2008.[194]Zayidal-Dakhil, "Judeh: Some Prisoners Beat Themselves Before the Visit of aDelegation of 'Human Rights'," Al-Ghadd, August 27, 2008 http://www.alGhad.jo/index.php?news=196384(accessed August 25, 2008).[195]Following publication of the Human Rights Watch report, Suspicious Sweeps.The General Intelligence Department and Jordan's Rule of Law Problem, inAmman in September 2006, Al-Ra'i newspaper reported that the secretaryof the parliamentary Committee for Public Freedoms and Citizen Rights, DeputyJamal al-Dumur, said that "the sources of this [report's] information came fromsuspicious parts known to attach epithets to the Jordanian state and to distortits snow-white image in international circles." "'Parliamentary Freedoms'Rebuts False Accusations by 'Human Rights'," Al-Ra'i, September 21,2006.[196]"Al-Fayez:Necessity of Striving for Accuracy in the Reports of InternationalOrganizations," Al-Ra'i, April 26, 2007.[197]Muwaffaq Kamal, " Minister of Interior: International Criticisms of Kingdom's Prisons NotObjective" Al-Ghadd, January 6, 2008. Similarly, the head of the PSD'sGrievances and Human Rights Office, Mahir Shishani, whose job is to investigatepolice abuse, dismissed human rights reporting, saying that "some human rightsinstitutions and activists pretend to forget the human right to live insecurity far from terrorism or crime." Muwaffaq Kamal, "'Security' Tries 12Police for Abusing Citizens," Al-Ghadd, April 1, 2007. The previous headof the prison service, Husain al-Tarawna, also considered information humanrights organizations obtain from prisoners to be "mostly incorrect." Muwaffaq Kamal, "Director of Correction and Rehabilitation Centers Confirms to "Al-Ghadd" thatits Doors Are Open for Civil Society Institutions," Al-Ghadd, June 3,2006.[198]Muhammad al-Shahwan, the head of the Parties of the National Movement, a bloc of politicalparties, wrote to the United Nations Secretary-General following the UnitedNations Special Rapporteur on Torture's report on torture in Jordan. Al-Shahwan, who later told Human Rights Watch he had no expertise in conducting prisonvisits, insisted that he himself had visited the General IntelligenceDepartment's (GID) detention center and Juwaidah prison and found that theywere "completely in compliance" with the stipulations of the Convention againstTorture. "National Movement Parties Respond to 'Nowak' and Deny the Presence ofTransgressions in Rehabilitation Centres," al-Ra'i,. Human Rights Watchcommunication with Muhammad al-Shahwan, February 2007. When Human Rights Watchbriefed the president of the parliament, Abd al-Hadi al-Majali, about ourfindings concerning arbitrary arrest and torture by the GID in September 2006,he called the report "an insult to Jordan," while pointing out that tortureexisted not only in Jordan, but also in other countries like West Germany inthe 1970s. Human Rights Watch interview with Abd al-Hadi al-Majali, President, Lower House of Parliament, Amman, September 18, 2006.When King Abdullah ordered the closure of Jafr prison,which the National Center for Human Rights recommended in 2005, a columnist forthe government-prone al-Ra'i dismissed the "Royal Committee for HumanRights [sic], [which] does not have the attributes or law that would qualifyits recommendations to be mandatory. The closure of the Jafr prison was not atits recommendation or under obligation… but there had been for four years adesire [by the PSD] to close that prison." Abd al-Hadi Raji al-Majali, "About the Prisons," Al-Ra'i, November 15, 2007. Jafr prison only re-opened in2005.[199]UNHuman Rights Council, "Report of the Special Rapporteur on torture and othercruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, Manfred Nowak. Mission toJordan," A/HRC/4/33/Add.3, January 5, 2007. Jordan was the first Arab countryto allow a visit by the U.N. Special Rapporteur on Torture.[200]"UNExpert Visiting Jordan Finds 'General Impunity For Torture And Ill-Treatment',"UN News, New York, July 3, 2006.[201]Ghaith Tarawna, "King Orders 'Immediate' Closure of Jafr Prison and ItsConversion to a School and Training Center," al-Ra'i, December 18, 2006.[202]"QadiPledges to Continue Upgrading PSD Performance," Jordan Times,December 11, 2007.[203]Jafr prison had a long history of housing political dissidents and armedPalestinian opposition before closing in the 1970s. It only reopened in thelate 1990s to alleviate overcrowding, but quickly earned criticism for itsremote location in the southern desert and as a "punishment center," beforeagain closing, and reopening in 2005, before closing again in 2006. UN SpecialRapporteur on Torture. U.N. Human Rights Council, "Report of the SpecialRapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment orpunishment, Manfred Nowak. Mission to Jordan," A/HRC/4/33/Add.3, January 5,2007. Guards from Jafr prison now serving in different Jordanian prisons arestill especially feared today. Human Rights Watch interview with prisoners inAqaba, August 27, 2007, and Swaqa, August 21, 2007.[204]Theamended article took the Convention's definition of torture into Jordanian law.The article prohibits "any act by which severe pain or suffering, whetherphysical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person for such purposes asobtaining from him or a third person information or a confession, punishing himfor an act he or a third person has committed or is suspected of havingcommitted, or intimidating or coercing him or a third person, or for any reasonbased on discrimination of any kind, when such pain or suffering is inflictedby or at the instigation of or with the consent or acquiescence of a publicofficial or other person acting in an official capacity." Penal Code, art. 208.[205]Human Rights Watch interview with Mahir Shishani, director, Grievances andHuman Rights Office, PSD, Amman, April 14, 2008.[206]Hilmial-Asmar, "Legislation Criminalizes Torture in Jordan," Amman NewsCenter, January 2, 2008, http://www.amanjordan.org/a-news/wmview.php?ArtID=17594(accessed June 9, 2008).[207]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif al-'Umari, director, prison service, Amman, April 13, 2008.[208]Human Rights Watch interview with Mazin al-Qadi, director, Public SecurityDirectorate, Amman, April 13.[209]HumanRights Watch interview with prison official, Amman, October 24, 2007.[210]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif al-'Umari, director, prison service, Amman, July 31, 2008.[211]Kerikhad spent a brief spell in Iraq as Minister of Interior under the U.S.-ledoccupation in 2003, and was then involved in the training academy for Iraqipolice set up outside the Jordanian town of al-Muwaqqar.[212]Human Rights Watch interview with Maj.Gen. Mazin al-Qadi, director, PublicSecurity Directorate, Amman, April 13, 2008.[213]HumanRights Watch interview with the supervising engineer from the PSD, Muwaqqar II, April 15, 2008.[214]Human Rights Watch, Out of Sight: Super-Maximum Security Confinement in theUnited States, vol. 12, no 1 (G), February 2000, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2000/supermax/Sprmx002.htm.[215]"Bernard Kerik Building Nuke Proof Complex in Jordan," Transcript, Glenn BeckProgram, July 03, 2007, http://archive.glennbeck.com/news/07032007a.shtml(accessed May 19, 2008). In June 2007, the magazine Best Life, in itsprofile of Kerik wrote, "Based on his undisputed success as commissioner of New York City's prisons, Kerik has been entrusted to overhaul Jordan's prison system anddesign a "supermax" facility to incarcerate hard-core Al-Qaeda detainees."Joseph Braude, "Bernie Kerik Won't Fold," Best Life Magazine, http://www.bestlifeonline.com/cms/publish/finance/Bernie_Kerik_Wont_Fold.shtml(accessed May 19, 2008).[216]Human Rights Watch interview with Mukhaimer Abu Jammous, secretary-general, Ministry of Interior, Amman, October 25, 2007.[217]HumanRights Watch interview with prisoners Isma'il, Swaqa Tanzimat, August22, 2007.[218]HumanRights Watch, Turkey: Small Group Isolation in Turkish Prisons: An AvoidableDisaster, vol.12, no. 8(D), May 2000, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2000/turkey/ .[219]European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or DegradingTreatment or Punishment, "Report to the Swedish Government on the visit toSweden carried out by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture andInhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) from 5 to 14 May 1991," CPT/Inf (92) 4 [EN], March 12, 1992, http://www.cpt.coe.int/documents/swe/1992-04-inf-eng.htm(accessed May 20, 2008).[220]According to the current prisons director, this plan was largely developedunder the previous PSD director, Muhammad 'Aitan. Human Rights Watch interviewwith Sharif al-'Umari, director, prison service, Amman, July 31, 2008.[221]Human Rights Watch interviews with Khalid al-Majali, Prison Reform Unit in the Royal Police Academy, Muwaqqar II, April 15, 2008, and in Amman, July 31, 2008.[222]Prison Law, article 38.d.[223]European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or DegradingTreatment or Punishment (CPT), Report to the Icelandic Government on the Visitto Iceland, conducted between 6 and 12 July 1993, Strasbourg, France, 28 June1994, CPT/Inf (94) 8, p. 26, http://www.cpt.coe.int/documents/isl/1994-08-inf-eng.htm#II.B.3(accessed June 8, 2006).[224]The principle of proportionality calls for a balance to be struck between therequirement of the situation and the imposition of a solitary confinement-typeregime, which can have very harmful consequences for the person concerned.Solitary confinement can in certain circumstances amount to inhuman anddegrading treatment; in any event, all forms of solitary confinement shouldlast for as short a time as possible. European Committee for the Prevention ofTorture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 2nd General Report,CPT/Inf(92)3, p.20.In 2003, Human Rights Watch examined the conditions ofmentally ill prisoners in US prisons, including those placed in solitaryconfinement and concluded that"Perhaps nowhere in corrections is the contradictionbetween the paradigm of security and that of mental health more apparent thanin supermax settings. Whatever the correctional justification for suchfacilities, it is clear they were not designed with their mental health impactin mind. Indeed, mental health experts did not participate in the developmentof such regimes… Yet most independent psychiatric experts, and evencorrectional mental health staff, believe that prolonged confinement inconditions of social isolation, idleness, and reduced mental stimulation ispsychologically destructive." Human Rights Watch, Ill Equipped: U.S. Prisonsand Offenders with Mental Illness (New York: Human Rights Watch, 2003) http://www.hrw.org/reports/2003/usa1003/index.htm.The UN Committee against Torture, examining the recordof the US came to similar conclusions in 2006, when it expressed its"concern[..] about the extremely harsh regime imposed on detainees in"supermaximum prisons, " [which, if ] its purpose [was] retribution, … wouldconstitute cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (art. 16).United Nations Committee Against Torture, "Conclusions and Recommendations ofthe Committee against Torture. United States of America," Thirty-sixth Session May 1-19, 2006, CAT/C/USA/CO/2, July 25, 2006 http://daccessdds.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G06/432/25/PDF/G0643225.pdf?OpenElement(accessed June 10, 2008).[225]Law of the Correction and Rehabilitation Centers Number 9 of 2004 (Prison Law),Official Gazette No. 4656, April 29, 2004, arts 10 and 11.[226]Human Rights Watch interview with Mazin al-Qadi, April 13, 2008.[227]Human Rights Watch interview with al-'Umari, April 14, 2008.[228]PublicSecurity Directorate, Correction and Rehabilitation Centers Administration,"Regulations of the Law of Correction and Rehabilitation Centers," 2007,art.3.d.[229]HumanRights Watch interview with prison official, Muwaqqar, April 15, 2008. Theseclaims are unconvincing, however, because our research has found that prisonauthorities routinely transfer prisoners to different prisons in Jordan, often as punishment. Our investigation also concluded that the underlying reasonfor the riots was inmates' anger at torture by guards. See Appendix 3.[230]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif al-'Umari, director, prison services, Amman, July 2008.[231]HumanRights Watch interview with Salah Mawajdeh, minister of health, Amman, August 5, 2008.[232]Human Rights Watch interview with Sharif al-'Umari, April 14 and July 31.[233]HumanRights Watch interview with Mazin al-Qadi.[234]HumanRights Watch interview with Mazin al-Qadi.[235]HumanRights Watch interview with Sharif al-'Umari, July 31, 2008.[236]HumanRights Watch interview with Muhammad Muhaimid, director, Juwaida, October 22,2007.[237]Human Rights Watch interview with Khalid al-Majali, prison reform unit, Royal PoliceAcademy, October 24, 2007.[238]HumanRights Watch interview with 'Umari, July 31, 2008.[239]Human Rights Watch interview with 'Umari, July 31, 2008.[240]HumanRights Watch interview with 'Umari, July 31, 2008. In October 2007, Abu Jammousof the Ministry of Interior had promised that some of the additional 12,000 PSDofficers in 2008 would be assigned to the prison service. Human Rights Watchinterview with Mukhaimer Abu Jammous, secretary-general, Ministry of Interior, Amman, October 25, 2007.[241]Human Rights interview with Nisreen Zureikat, supervisor of the prisons unit, National Center for Human Rights, Amman, April 9, 2008 and Human Rights Watch interview with Mazin al-Qadi.[242]Human Rights Watch interview with Frank Ciaccio, Vice President, Kerik Group, New York, September, 2007 and with Khalid al-Majali, prison reform unit, Royal Police Academy, Amman, October 24, 2007.[243]Human Rights Watch interview with Nisreen Zureikat, supervisor of the prisonsunit, National Center for Human Rights, Amman, April 9, 2008.[244]Code of Police Honor, Public Security Directorate, 2007, art.1.[245]Sa'd al-Limun and Khalid al-Majali, "Working Guide for Directors of Correctionand Rehabilitation Centers," Public Security Directorate, 2008, p.iii.[246]Sa'dal-Limun and Khalid al-Majali, "Working Guide for Directors of Correction and Rehabilitation Centers," Public Security Directorate, 2008, p.11.[247]HumanRights Watch interview with Joaquin de Tasso-Vilallonga, First Secretary, andwith Alessandro Campo, judicial adviser, Delegation of the European Commissionin Jordan, Amman, April 9, 2008; Delegation of the European Commission inJordan, Twinning Project Fiche. Improving the Penitentiary System in Jordan, JO07/AA/JH08.[248]Human Rights Watch interview with Josef Schmoll, project leader of the AustrianMinistry of Justice, Amman, August 5, 2008.[249]See: United States Agency for International Development, 2007 Cash Transferand Local Currency Program, http://jordan.usaid.gov/sectors.cfm?inSector=23(accessed February 12, 2008), now defunct. Human Rights Watch interview with USEmbassy and USAID staff, Amman, December 16, 2007.Region / CountryMiddle East/North Africa JordanProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch