649 Dayton Avenue  St. Paul, MN  55104  612.436.4800  cvt@cvt.org   www.cvt.org  
 
  January 2016        
 
Position Statement : Hunger Strike s and Forced Feeding  
 
As a rehabilitation center that has extended healing care to more than 30,000  survivors of torture and 
severe war -related atrocities  in 30 years , the Center for Victims of Torture (CVT) supports a safe 
environment where detainees held in custody are treated humanely and in accordance with domestic 
and international laws and obligations under the Convention Against Torture, the Geneva Conventions 
and other international human rights and hu manitarian standards.  
 
Prison hunger strikes have occurred in democratic and totalitarian  regimes around the world for 
hundreds of years. Prisoners in indefinite detention, at risk of torture, or who are held in other extreme 
conditions have resorted to h unger strikes or fasts to death as a way to publicize and create conditions 
for negotiations of grievances. Prison hunger strikes are often organized or understood a s a form of 
political  protest . Notable strikes have occurred during the course of civil and human rights struggles. 
Currently, they are a focus of concern at the United States ’ detention center at Guantánamo  Bay. 
The World Medical Association , an international congress of 102 national medical associations , has 
adopted two documents that address the treatment of prisoners who are on hunger strikes.   
The International Committee of the Red Cross endorse s these World Medical Association statements.  
CVT endorses the World Medical Association standards on prison hunger strikes . 
Specifically, CVT endorses the World Medical Association’s  Guidelines for Physicians Concerning 
Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in Relation to Detention 
and Imprisonment ( Declaration of Tokyo ) stating in part:   
Where a prisoner refuses nourishment and is considered by the physician as capable of 
forming an unimpaired and rational judgment concerning the consequences of such a 
voluntary refusal of nourishment, he or she  shall not be fed artificially. The decision as 
to the capacity of the prisoner to form such a judgment should be confirmed by at least 
one other independent physician. The consequences of the refusal of nourishment shall 
be explained by the physician to t he prisoner.  
CVT also endorses the World Medical Association’s  Declaration of Malta  on Hunger Strikers and its 
accompanying  Guidelines for the Management of Hunger Strikers .  
CVT takes the position that force d feeding of hunger strikers in violation of these standards is a breach 
of various bans on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment .  
 
### 
