LEARN. PRAY. ACT.  
www.nrcat.org  
www.facebook.com/nrcat  
@nrcattweets  
@nrcatphotos  
www.pinterest.com/nrcat/  DRONE WARFARE : 
An Emerging Technology with Deep Moral Implications  
 
The question of whether to go to war and the question of how warfare is conducted are both profound 
moral and religious questions.  Though there are differences of opinion within the religious community 
about the morality of going to war, most religions ar e unified in believing that when and if war occurs, it 
should be limited.  
 
Current U.S. policies for lethal drone strikes are unnecessarily opaque, are implicitly biased against efforts 
to capture those individuals who are targeted, cause an unacceptable  number of civilian casualties, allow 
targeting of unidentified individuals, violate international human rights law, may ultimately risk removing 
human judgment from drone strike decisions, create long -term hostility in affected communities toward 
U.S. int erests, directly harm attempts to promote human rights and the rule of law, and dangerously reduce 
the political and psychological costs of using lethal force.  
 
What makes drones different than other weapons?  
Broadly speaking we can put lethal drones in th ree 
categories:  
 
1. Battlefield drones – sometimes as simple as 
modified commercial drones, these short range 
drones are operated by individuals  on or near the 
battlefield.   
2. Long range drones – sophisticated aircraft operated 
by pilots hundreds or thousands of miles away from 
their targets.  
3. Autonomous drones – drones that carry out missions 
and strike targets autonomously based on supplied 
criteria.  
 
The first category, battlefield drones, are functionally not 
that different from previous weapons technolog ies – the 
operators still face physical risk and the drones themselves can sometimes be disabled or destroyed by 
ordinary combatants with conventional weaponry.  
 
The second and third categories , though, pose two related but distinct risks.  First, drones (and other lethal 
semi -autonomous and fully autonomous weapons) reduce the political and psychological costs of using 
force (mostly by decreasing the direct physical risk to U.S. personnel).  As  such, drones make it easier for 
decision -makers to choose force – even when other alternatives might otherwise be chosen – and that 
decision -making will only become more biased toward the use of force as drone technology improves.   
 
Second, semi -autonomou s and fully autonomous weapons create moral distance from kill decisions.  It is 
one thing for society to send 18 year -old draftees to fight and die in a muddy trench in a distant land; it is 
another thing for a President to order a strike carried out by a  drone pilot sitting in an air -conditioned room 
3000 miles from any conflict; and it is yet a third thing for a future President to authorize a computer to  Mural by Murad Subay  in Sanaa, Yemen .  muradsubay.com  
     
For more i nformation  on lethal drones  
and action alerts  for Congress and the President  
go to www.nrcat.org/ drones  
 identify and strike targets meeting certain pre -programmed criteria with the President receiving a monthly 
printout of kill totals.  Increasing autonomy allows for increased “othering” of target populations.  
 
What other effects to drones have?  
Like any other weapon, drones cause significant civilian casualties.  Additionally, the use of drones outside 
of the traditional battlefield can create a climate of terror where communities – most or all of whom are 
civilians – constantly fear sudden death from above.  This can weaken the rule of law in affected 
communities, and, according to many national security  experts, can create significant blowback against the 
aggressor.  Attempting to deal with terrorism (or other national security issues) by killing those we believe 
to be terrorists in their homes and in their communities, can result in a perverse situation  where drone 
strikes turn innocent people against us and ultimately leave our adversaries stronger than they were prior to 
the strikes.   
 
Why does the U.S. government use lethal drones?  
From a practical standpoint  for the U.S. government , drones are seemingly very useful.  Most importantly, 
long range drones shield operators from direct physical threat (although they do suffer psychological 
impacts).  They also conveniently combine surveillance and attack capabilities.   
 
In the future, improving tech nology will probably result in increasingly autonomous drones or drone 
swarms that can react more quickly than a human, or human -operated drone.  In that situation, similarly 
autonomous drones may be the only means of combatting an adversary with autonomou s drones.   
 
Are there concerns about non -lethal drones?  
Yes.  The use of drones for surveillance (both by governments and private citizens) is of increasing concern 
for many people.  NRCAT, however, focuses on the use of lethal drones.  
 
What can I do?  
You can: 
 
1. Discuss drones and other autonomous weapons with your friends and family.  Ask if they are 
worried about what happens when we  are no longer in the same room, or even the same country, as 
the people we  are killing?  Ask if they think computers ought to be able to make the decision to kill 
someone?  
 
2. Write to the President and to Congress and tell them that you are concerned that drones make it too 
easy for policy -makers to choose force.  Tell Congress and the President that we need additional 
restricti ons on the use of drones, that humans should always be “in the loop” on kill decisions, that 
the CIA should not carry out lethal strikes, and that Congress should appropriate funds to 
compensate the innocent victims of drone strikes.   
 
3. Support affected communities.  Join with others in your c ongregation or community  to support 
development work in troubled parts of the world – particularly those affected by U.S. drone strikes.  
Write to your Members of Congress and tell them that the U.S. government shoul d provide pay to 
rebuild infrastructure damaged by drone strikes and should provide additional development funds to 
address the reasons for future drone strikes.   
 