	  	  	  	  	  	  The	  New	  York	  City	  Council	  Committee	  on	  Immigration	  	  Hearing	  RE:	  Int.	  No.	  982,	  A	  Local	  Law	  to	  amend	  the	  administrative	  code	  of	  the	  city	  of	  New	  York,	  in	  relation	  to	  persons	  not	  to	  be	  detained	  and	  Int.	  No.	  989,	  A	  Local	  Law	  to	  amend	  the	  administrative	  code	  of	  the	  city	  of	  New	  York,	  in	  relation	  to	  persons	  not	  to	  be	  detained	  by	  the	  Department	  of	  Correction.	  	  	  Testimony	  of	  Lynly	  Egyes,	  Esq.	  Staff	  Attorney	  Sex	  Workers	  Project	  Urban	  Justice	  Center	  	  123	  William	  Street,	  16th	  Floor	  New	  York,	  New	  York	  10038	  T:	  646/602-­‐5695	  sbaskin@urbanjustice.org	  	  Friday,	  January	  25,	  2013	  at	  10:00	  a.m.	  250	  Broadway,	  16th	  FL,	  New	  York,	  NY	  10007	  	  Good	  morning,	  Council	  Member	  Dromm	  and	  members	  of	  the	  Committee	  on	  Immigration.	  	  	  	  The	  Sex	  Workers	  Project	  at	  the	  Urban	  Justice	  Center	  very	  much	  appreciates	  the	  opportunity	  to	  offer	  comment	  on	  these	  proposed	  changes	  to	  administrative	  law.	  My	  name	  is	  Lynly	  Egyes	  and	  I	  am	  an	  attorney	  at	  the	  Sex	  Workers	  Project.	  	  	  I’d	  like	  to	  start	  with	  a	  personal	  story.	  My	  father	  always	  told	  me	  that	  the	  way	  a	  community	  treats	  its	  most	  vulnerable	  members	  illustrates	  the	  values	  and	  principles	  of	  the	  community	  as	  a	  whole.	  	  My	  father	  told	  me	  the	  story	  of	  how	  different	  European	  countries	  treated	  the	  Jews	  during	  the	  Holocaust.	  	  Belgium	  is	  considered	  a	  one	  of	  the	  few	  European	  countries	  that	  tried	  to	  protect	  Jews	  within	  its	  borders.	  Hungary,	  on	  the	  other	  hand,	  willingly	  handed	  over	  Jews	  to	  be	  sent	  to	  concentration	  camps.	  Most	  of	  my	  father’s	  family	  were	  Hungarian	  Jews,	  killed	  in	  these	  camps	  because	  their	  country	  failed	  to	  protect	  them.	  	  Knowing	  this	  history	  has	  led	  to	  a	  passion	  to	  
protect	  the	  most	  vulnerable	  in	  my	  society	  from	  danger,	  and	  to	  ask	  our	  government	  to	  do	  the	  same.	  	  As	  an	  attorney,	  I	  represent	  some	  of	  the	  most	  vulnerable	  populations	  in	  New	  York.	  I	  represent	  people	  who	  are	  involved	  in	  the	  sex	  industry,	  often	  out	  of	  a	  need	  to	  survive,	  and	  often	  because	  they	  are	  forced	  by	  violent	  traffickers	  to	  engage	  in	  prostitution.	  A	  large	  portion	  of	  my	  clients	  are	  lesbian,	  gay,	  bisexual,	  and	  transgender	  individuals.	  For	  many	  of	  my	  clients,	  deportation	  does	  not	  only	  mean	  removal	  from	  the	  home	  they	  know,	  it	  can	  mean	  being	  forced	  back	  into	  a	  situation	  of	  forced	  prostitution.	  It	  can	  mean	  persecution	  and	  death.	  Secure	  Communities,	  if	  fully	  implemented	  in	  New	  York	  City,	  would	  be	  sure	  to	  lead	  to	  danger	  and	  suffering	  for	  my	  clients.	  	  The	  legislation	  being	  discussed	  here	  today	  seeks	  to	  limit	  the	  impact	  of	  Secure	  Communities	  by	  asserting	  local	  authority	  over	  which	  immigrants	  will	  be	  turned	  over	  to	  the	  federal	  government	  for	  detention	  and	  possible	  deportation.	  I	  believe	  the	  intent	  of	  this	  legislation	  is	  to	  protect	  the	  most	  vulnerable	  members	  of	  our	  community,	  including	  sex	  workers,	  victims	  of	  human	  trafficking,	  and	  LGBT	  individuals.	  For	  example,	  the	  law	  exempts	  individuals	  with	  prior	  arrests	  or	  convictions	  for	  the	  crimes	  of	  Prostitution	  and	  for	  Loitering	  for	  the	  Purposes	  of	  Prostitution.	  Our	  research	  and	  experience	  has	  shown	  that	  victims	  of	  trafficking	  and	  LGBT	  individuals	  are	  routinely	  arrested	  on	  these	  charges.	  Unfortunately,	  under	  our	  current	  system,	  defendants	  often	  plead	  guilty	  even	  when	  they	  are	  not	  guilty	  or	  were	  forced	  to	  commit	  the	  crime.	  	  Traffickers	  often	  hire	  private	  defense	  attorneys	  to	  represent	  their	  victims	  when	  they	  are	  arrested,	  who	  coerce	  them	  into	  pleading	  guilty,	  in	  order	  to	  force	  them	  back	  into	  work	  more	  quickly.	  	  LGBT	  immigrants	  in	  particular,	  are	  often	  terrified	  to	  be	  sent	  to	  Riker’s	  Island,	  where	  until	  now,	  they	  faced	  certain	  immigration	  detention	  and	  possible	  removal,	  in	  addition	  to	  mistreatment.	  A	  transgender	  woman,	  knowing	  she	  will	  be	  housed	  in	  a	  male	  unit	  at	  Riker’s	  and	  fearful	  of	  rape	  and	  abuse,	  will	  likely	  plead	  guilty	  just	  to	  be	  set	  free.	  	  However,	  I	  have	  three	  suggestions	  for	  how	  this	  bill	  could	  be	  expanded	  to	  fully	  protect	  our	  community’s	  most	  vulnerable	  members.	  	  	  This	  bill	  as	  written	  would	  still	  have	  New	  York	  City	  honor	  ICE	  detainers	  when	  a	  person	  has	  any	  other	  prior	  misdemeanor	  conviction	  in	  the	  past	  ten	  years,	  or	  when	  a	  person	  has	  two	  or	  more	  pending	  misdemeanor	  arrests.	  This	  is	  allows	  unnecessary	  deference	  to	  ICE.	  	  In	  the	  past	  few	  weeks,	  ICE	  issued	  its	  own	  policy	  instructing	  its	  officers	  not	  to	  issue	  detainers	  if	  the	  defendant	  only	  has	  two	  prior	  misdemeanor	  convictions.	  	  Our	  City	  Council,	  attempting	  to	  protect	  city	  residents	  from	  Secure	  Communities,	  should	  at	  least	  reach	  the	  standard	  that	  has	  been	  acknowledged	  as	  reasonable	  by	  ICE.	  My	  first	  suggestion	  is	  that	  the	  bill	  be	  expanded	  to	  protect	  those	  who	  have	  two	  or	  less	  prior	  misdemeanor	  convictions.	  	  My	  second	  suggestion	  is	  to	  expand	  the	  bill	  to	  protect	  individuals	  who	  have	  pending	  misdemeanors	  charges.	  	  It	  is	  important	  to	  know	  that	  survivors	  of	  trafficking	  and	  vulnerable	  members	  of	  the	  LGBT	  community	  frequently	  have	  misdemeanor	  arrests	  and	  convictions	  for	  a	  variety	  of	  low-­‐level	  crimes,	  directly	  due	  to	  being	  exploited,	  profiled	  or	  falsely	  arrested.	  	  Our	  clients	  who	  are	  survivors	  of	  trafficking	  have	  prostitution	  crimes	  on	  their	  records,	  but	  also	  have	  convictions	  for	  trespass,	  low-­‐level	  drug	  possession,	  and	  petty	  larceny,	  just	  to	  name	  a	  few.	  	  For	  example,	  my	  client	  who	  I	  will	  call	  “Allison,”	  was	  trafficked	  into	  stealing.	  	  Every	  day,	  Allison	  was	  forced	  to	  go	  into	  stores	  and	  steal	  baby	  formula	  and	  powdered	  milk,	  she	  thinks	  so	  that	  her	  traffickers	  could	  mix	  these	  substances	  with	  drugs	  for	  sale.	  	  She	  was	  also	  forced	  into	  prostitution.	  A	  case	  like	  this	  could	  easily	  result	  in	  a	  trafficking	  victim	  having	  two	  pending	  misdemeanor	  charges	  for	  petty	  larceny.	  Another	  client	  of	  my	  project,	  Lucille,	  was	  forced	  by	  her	  trafficker	  to	  purchase	  drugs	  for	  his	  use,	  and	  sustained	  a	  low-­‐level	  drug	  conviction.	  The	  same	  pressures	  that	  lead	  my	  clients	  to	  plead	  guilty	  to	  prostitution,	  lead	  them	  to	  plead	  guilty	  to	  these	  other	  crimes.	  The	  Criminal	  Court,	  recognizing	  Lucille’s	  exploitation,	  vacated	  her	  criminal	  record.	  Allison	  and	  Lucille	  are	  both	  living	  safely	  in	  the	  US	  with	  T-­‐visas.	  But	  under	  the	  proposed	  law,	  victims	  like	  them	  would	  be	  placed	  into	  deportation	  proceedings	  before	  they	  are	  even	  convicted	  of	  these	  charges,	  or	  have	  a	  chance	  to	  be	  identified	  as	  a	  trafficking	  victim.	  	  I	  would	  also	  respectfully	  suggest	  to	  the	  Committee	  that	  the	  carve-­‐out	  currently	  applied	  to	  prostitution	  should	  at	  least	  expand	  to	  include	  trespass.	  Immigration	  attorneys	  and	  well-­‐trained	  criminal	  defense	  attorneys	  know	  that	  “trespass”	  is	  a	  safe	  plea	  bargain	  to	  take	  if	  you	  are	  an	  immigrant,	  because	  it	  has	  no	  immigration	  consequences.	  Often	  when	  faced	  with	  the	  possibility	  of	  being	  sent	  to	  Riker’s	  or	  pleading	  guilty	  to	  trespass,	  immigrant	  defendants	  will	  reasonably	  choose	  the	  guilty	  plea.	  District	  Attorneys	  will	  accept	  these	  pleas	  because	  they	  are	  misdemeanors.	  I	  have	  advised	  criminal	  defense	  attorneys	  that	  trespass	  is	  a	  “safe”	  plea	  for	  their	  immigrant	  clients,	  including	  victims	  of	  trafficking.	  Now	  all	  of	  these	  individuals	  will	  be	  subject	  to	  detainer	  should	  they	  be	  arrested	  again.	  Trespass	  is	  a	  low-­‐level,	  nonviolent	  crime	  and	  is	  a	  logical	  addition	  to	  offenses	  that	  do	  not	  trigger	  a	  detainer.	  	  	  My	  client	  “Allen”	  was	  young	  gay	  man	  who	  had	  suffered	  horrific	  child	  abuse	  after	  being	  brought	  to	  the	  US	  by	  a	  relative.	  At	  19	  he	  was	  living	  in	  a	  state-­‐run	  HIV	  housing	  program,	  where	  his	  roommate	  soon	  began	  physically	  and	  sexually	  abused	  him.	  This	  roommate	  had	  him	  arrested	  numerous	  times	  on	  false	  allegations,	  where	  untrained	  police	  officers	  did	  not	  see	  him	  as	  a	  victim	  of	  domestic	  violence.	  Although	  clearly	  eligible	  for	  a	  U	  visa	  and	  other	  immigration	  relief,	  he	  was	  sent	  to	  immigration	  detention.	  After	  learning	  his	  story,	  I	  was	  able	  to	  secure	  his	  release	  with	  a	  trespass	  plea,	  a	  safe	  option	  for	  immigration	  purposes	  at	  the	  time.	  While	  Allen	  now	  has	  his	  green	  card,	  domestic	  violence	  survivors	  like	  him	  are	  common.	  The	  undocumented	  individuals	  I	  am	  concerned	  about	  have	  many	  forms	  of	  immigration	  status	  available	  to	  them	  in	  theory,	  such	  as	  asylum,	  T-­‐visas,	  U-­‐visas,	  or	  Special	  Immigrant	  Juvenile	  Status.	  Unfortunately,	  Secure	  Communities	  operates	  to	  deprive	  vulnerable	  individuals	  of	  the	  opportunity	  to	  have	  legal	  status.	  There	  is	  no	  right	  to	  counsel	  in	  removal	  proceedings,	  and	  there	  are	  no	  detention	  facilities	  in	  New	  York.	  Once	  someone	  is	  placed	  in	  immigration	  detention,	  they	  are	  quickly	  transferred	  to	  Louisiana	  or	  Texas.	  	  There,	  they	  have	  no	  family,	  no	  friends,	  and	  no	  one	  to	  secure	  any	  limited	  pro	  bono	  legal	  counsel	  that	  might	  exist.	  The	  immigration	  court	  or	  prosecutors	  do	  not	  screen	  them	  for	  possible	  remedies,	  but	  quickly	  deport	  them.	  	  	  That	  is	  exactly	  what	  happened	  to	  my	  client	  “Shelia.”	  	  Shelia,	  a	  transgender	  woman,	  experienced	  extreme	  violence	  and	  persecution	  in	  her	  home	  country	  because	  of	  her	  gender	  identity	  and	  was	  forced	  into	  prostitution.	  	  She	  luckily	  escaped	  the	  trafficker	  and	  fled	  to	  New	  York.	  	  Here,	  she	  was	  arrested	  several	  times	  for	  prostitution	  and	  pled	  guilty	  each	  time	  to	  avoid	  being	  sent	  to	  Riker’s.	  	  After	  her	  third	  arrest,	  she	  was	  flagged	  for	  immigration	  detention,	  and	  rapidly	  transferred	  to	  Louisiana.	  	  In	  Louisiana,	  she	  was	  horribly	  mistreated	  in	  immigration	  detention,	  subjected	  to	  extreme	  isolation,	  and	  told	  she	  would	  be	  left	  there	  to	  die	  if	  she	  did	  not	  agree	  to	  voluntarily	  depart	  the	  United	  States.	  Shelia	  consented	  and	  within	  an	  hour	  inside	  her	  country,	  she	  was	  arrested	  for	  being	  transgender,	  beaten	  and	  threatened	  with	  death.	  	  Once	  again	  she	  found	  the	  strength	  to	  escape	  to	  the	  United	  States.	  Vulnerable	  and	  fearful,	  she	  fell	  victim	  to	  her	  smuggler	  who	  trafficked	  her	  into	  sex	  slavery	  for	  several	  days.	  Finally,	  she	  escaped	  and	  made	  her	  way	  home,	  to	  New	  York,	  where	  she	  finally	  connected	  with	  the	  Sex	  Workers	  Project.	  	  This	  story	  is	  not	  uncommon	  among	  my	  clients.	  	  Immigration	  law	  tries	  to	  protect	  victims	  of	  violence	  and	  persecution	  by	  offering	  remedies,	  but	  once	  people	  are	  placed	  in	  detention	  and	  taken	  so	  far	  away,	  they	  have	  no	  real	  access	  to	  help.	  I’d	  like	  to	  return	  to	  the	  story	  of	  Belgium	  and	  Hungary	  during	  the	  holocaust.	  Many	  do	  not	  know	  that	  of	  the	  Jews	  that	  Belgium	  protected	  only	  six	  percent	  were	  Belgian.	  The	  rest	  were	  stateless	  people,	  refugees	  seeking	  safety,	  protection	  and	  a	  home.	  	  I	  believe	  New	  York	  City	  and	  this	  City	  Council	  want	  to	  provide	  that	  same	  safety,	  even	  to	  those	  who	  are	  not	  US	  citizens.	  I	  commend	  the	  City	  Council	  for	  creating	  this	  legislation	  to	  protect	  my	  clients,	  and	  believe	  that	  my	  three	  suggestions	  will	  help	  the	  City	  Council	  to	  fully	  realize	  its	  intent.	  	  	  	  	  