 
 
 
 
 
 
February 23, 2011  
 
To:   
Michael Posner  
Assistant Secretary of State  
Bureau of Democracy  
Labor and Human Rights  
U.S. Department of State  
 
Harold Hongju Koh  
Legal Adviser  
Office of Legal Advis er 
U.S. Department of State  
 
 
 
 
 David Sullivan  
Attorney -Adviser  
Office of the Legal Adviser  
U.S. Department of State  
 
Scott Busby  
Director for Human Rights  
Office of Multila teral Affairs 
and Human Rights  
National Se curity Council  
The White House
Re: Responding to the United Nations Human Rights Council 
 
Dear  Mr Posner, Mr. Koh,  Mr. Sullivan  and Mr. Busby,  
 
We are writing from the Sex Workers Project at the Urban Justice 
Center (SWP), the only legal and social services organization in 
the U.S. that specifically serves sex workers, to encourage the U.S. 
State Depa rtment to ACCEPT Universal Periodic Review 
recommendation #92.86.  
 
SWP represents individuals who are involved in the sex industry, 
whether they became involved by choice, because of their limited 
circumstance, or because of force, fraud or coercion. We se e 
around 150 clients per year, and around half of our clients are 
survivors of human trafficking. Therefore, we have the opportunity 
to work on the myriad legal and policy issues that affect those 
involved in commercial sex, including violence, abuse and 
harassment; employment and housing discrimination; criminal 
arrest and conviction; and difficulty regularizing immigration 
status. We also provide trauma counseling, psychotherapy and case 
management to our clients, whose mental health needs would  otherwise  go unmet. Our clients include minors and adults, men, women and transgender 
people, immigrants and citizens. SWP has been recognized as an expert in best practices 
providing services to sex workers and survivors of trafficking in the ten years since its 
founding.   
 
In Universal Periodic Review recommendation #92.86, member state Uruguay called on 
WKH8QLWHG6WDWHVWR³HQVXUHDFFHVVWRSXEOLFVHUYLFHVSD\LQJDWWHQWLRQWRWKHVSHFLDO
vulnerability of sexual workers WRYLROHQFHDQGKXPDQULJKWVDEXVHV´:H write this 
letter to strongly urge the State Department to accept this recommendation. Sex workers  
are members of families and communities in all parts of the United States. The rights to 
life, safety, free speech, political action, health, and education,  guaranteed in the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Economic and 
Social Rights, are as  important to sex workers as to anyone else. Unfortunately, sex 
workers in the United States are subject to widespread abuses of ci vil and human rights.  
Accepting this recommendation would demonstrate that the United States is ready to lead 
in the arena of human rights, and would be meaningful as there are many reforms the 
Federal Government can undertake to pursue its implementation . Below we have outlined 
areas where the United States falls short of ensuring human rights to sex workers, based 
on 10 years of research and client testimony.  
 
1. Address the Harms of State Level Criminalization of Prostitution  
 
Sex work is almost universa lly criminalized in the United States, with those actually 
providing sexual services experiencing the majority of arrests. People of color from the 
lowest income communities are disproportionately targeted by the police. Transgender 
women are profiled, tar geted, and falsely arrested by the police as sex workers for simply 
walking outside. Arrest and subsequent conviction for prostitution and prostitution -
related offenses makes it more difficult for sex workers to obtain stable housing or 
employment. It is c lear that criminalization has failed to eliminate the sex industry or 
abuses and harms against sex workers; in fact, sex workers are more vulnerable to 
violence where they are forced to work underground. The United States government has 
not adequately stud ied or attempted to remedy the negative effects of criminalization on 
the human rights of vulnerable sex workers.  
 
2. Improve Police Response to Violence against Sex Workers, Eliminate Police 
Brutality Towards Sex Workers 
 
It is indisputable that sex workers , especially street -based sex workers, face 
extraordinarily high rates of violence, harassment and abuse. This abuse is magnified by 
the fact that many of sex workers fear arrest, further victimization and abuse by police if 
they come forward to report cri mes.  A qualitative study that we conducted of 30 street -
EDVHGVH[ZRUNHUVLQ1HZ<RUN&LW\LQHQWLWOHG³5HYROYLQJ'RRU´VXSSRUWVWKLV
conclusion.1 2QHZRPDQVDLGWKDWWKHSROLFHGLVPLVVHGKHUUDSHFRPSODLQWVWDWLQJ³¶\RX                                          1 Urban Justice Center, Sex Workers Project (2003), Revolving Door: An Analysis of Street -Based 
Prostitution in New York City, available at: www.sexworkersp roject. org/downloads/RevolvingDoor.pdf.  VKRXOGQ¶WKDYHEHHQRXWWK HUHLQWKHILUVWSODFH¶´2 Thirty percent of all interviewees had 
been threatened with violence by police, and twenty -seven percent had been subject to 
physical and/or sexual violence by police.3 Transgender workers reported police checking 
their genitals and making comments about their gender status.4 The United States has not 
adequately trained or monitored incidents of police misconduct towards sex workers, or 
ensured that sex workers can report crimes to law enforcement without fear.  
 
3. Address Impact of Anti-Trafficking Polices on Human Rights of Sex Workers 
 
At the Sex Workers Project we serve both survivors of trafficking and sex workers who 
engage in commercial sex for other reasons, including to meet survival needs. 
Unfortunately, some current polici es that seek to end human trafficking adversely impact 
WKHULJKWVRIDOORIRXUFOLHQWV2XUVWXG\³7KH8VHRI5DLGVWR)LJKW7UDIILFNLQJLQ
3HUVRQV´5 found that crackdowns on prostitution often result in arrests of unidentified 
trafficked individua ls, and violations of their human rights.6 Some anti -trafficking 
initiatives have resulted in large scale arrests and possible deportation of sex workers and 
unidentified trafficked persons as collateral damage. Finally, the law contains a 
requirement, inf DPRXVO\NQRZQDVWKH³DQWL -SURVWLWXWLRQSOHGJH´WKDWDOOIHGHUDOO\IXQGHG
anti-trafficking service providers pledge not to help sex workers, and not to speak about 
different legal approaches to prostitution. The United States must address the unintended 
negative effects of some current approaches to human trafficking.  
 
4. Increase Access to Healthcare, Especially HIV/AIDS Treatment and Prevention 
 
In our research and experience, one of the most pressing needs sex workers identify is 
access to appropriate heal thcare. S ex workers often have negative experiences with health 
care providers because of negative attitudes towards sex workers.  Our federal policies do 
not effectively address the fact that sex workers may be at increased vulnerability to HIV 
transmissi on and other health risks. In fact, the U.S. National HIV/AIDS Strategy does 
not include sex workers as an at risk population, resulting in a lack of prevention and 
harm reduction services for this community. Instead, several policies actually work 
against  VH[ZRUNHUV¶HIIRUWVWRSURWHFWWKHPVHOYHVDQGWKHSXEOLFKHDOWK7KHIRUPHUO\
PHQWLRQHG³DQWL -SURVWLWXWLRQSOHGJH´UHTXLUHPHQWDOVRDSSOLHVWR86*OREDO$,'6
recipients, blocking organizations that support sex workers from receiving aid. Some 
states di sproportionately punish sex workers who are HIV positive through increased 
criminalization, and state and local police regularly confiscate condoms for use as 
evidence in prostitution cases. Through these polices, the United States has been working 
against  best practices for providing healthcare and preventing HIV transmission.  
 
 
                                           
2 Id. At 47.  
3 Id. At 7.  
4 Id. 
5 Urban Justice Center, Sex Workers Project (2009), The Use of Raids to Fight Trafficking in Persons, 
available at: http://www.sexworkersproject.org/downloads/swp -2009 -raids -and-trafficking -exec-
summary.pdf .  
6 Id. at 2 -3. 5. Prevent Discrimination Against Sex Workers 
 
Because of criminalization, sex workers are often unable to access benefits that could 
help them have more opportunities. For example, persons with criminal records for 
prostitution may be barred from public housing, student loans, public benefits, or 
certification and employment in many different professions, including education, 
healthcare, financial services, or law. These policies fur ther punish sex workers who have 
already served their sentences, isolate them from the mainstream and make it more 
difficult to transition out of sex work.  
 
6. Protect Migrant Sex Workers  
 
Migrants come to this country for a variety of reasons: to flee pers ecution, to seek a better 
life for themselves and their families, or because they were forced or trafficked into the 
country. Migrants with no legal status to work may turn to sex work for survival. This 
population is especially vulnerable to abuse because  they are even less likely to report 
crimes against them, out of fear of deportation. U.S. law contains special provisions to 
bar persons with a history of sex work from entering the country or gaining immigration 
status or citizenship, even when they have  no criminal convictions. Green card holders 
can be deported only for prostitution convictions. These laws exclude sex workers from 
access to immigration status for which they would otherwise qualify, barring them from 
legal work authorization and making i t more likely that sex work is their only option. 
These laws also exclude sex workers from participating in dialogues where their rights 
are at stake: for example, persons with past involvement in sex work will be unable to 
attend the International AIDS Co nference in D.C. in 2012. Sex workers are critical allies 
in the fight against HIV/AIDS and the loss of their voices will be great disservice to the 
larger public health community.  
 
 
The U.S. Federal Government can show progress in addressing human rights  abuses 
against sex workers by 1) accepting recommendation #92.86, and 2) engaging in concrete 
steps that to minimize human rights abuses. Please do not hesitate to reach out to us for 
more information about these issues. The Sex Workers Project would be h onored to offer 
our expertise to the process of reform.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Sienna Baskin, Esq.  
Co-Director  
Sex Workers Project  
sbaskin@urbanjustice.org  
(646) 602 -5695  
 Crystal Deboise, LMSW  
Co-Director  
Sex Worke rs Project  
cdeboise@urbanjustice.org  
(646) 602 -5692
 