 
 
 
 
 
6/9/2008  
 
The Honorable Joseph Biden   The Honorable Sam Brownback  
Chairman     Ranking Member of the  
Foreign Relations Committee  Subcommittee on the Constitution  
United States Senate    Committee on the Judiciary  
Washington, D.C . 20510    Washington, D.C. 20510  
               
VIA FAX AND E -MAIL  
 
RE:  Senate Bill 3061 - William Wilberforce Trafficking Victims Protection 
Reauthorization Act of 2007 (TVPRA 2007)  
 
Dear Chairman Biden  and Ranking Member Brownback : 
 
The New York Anti -Trafficking Network  (Network)  has provided direct services to 
over 300 survivors  of trafficking and advocated on their behalf since 2002.  As the first 
coalition in New York State to engage in advocacy on issues relating to survivors of 
trafficking in New York , the Network aims to bring together the voices of those who have 
first-hand experience of the injustices of human trafficking, who work consistently to meet 
the needs of trafficked persons, and who advocate for a more humane and responsive policy 
towards trafficked persons. Our membership currently includes over 90 organizations and 
individuals working directly with survivors of trafficking and other forms of violence.  
 
On behalf of the Network,  we are writing to thank you for  introducing Senate Bill 
(S.B. ) 3061, the William Wilberforce Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization 
Act of 2007 . The provisions in S.B. 3061 greatly enhance protections for survivors of human 
trafficking and strengthens the government’s ability to prevent and prosecute these c ases. 
Indeed, provisions in S.B. 3061  provide critical and necessary improvements to protect the 
safety and dignity of survivors of human trafficking . They include : 
 
 Broadening continued presence protections to family members ;  
 Waiving the good moral chara cter bar ;  
 Exceptin g the cooperation requirements with law enforcement for a victim who 
experiences severe trauma but still wishes to seek immigration relief;  
 Providing resources and protection to those sponsored by diplomats ; and  
 Extending continued pre sence protection to victims who seek  civil remedies .  
 
We also thank you for  ensuring that the definition of human trafficking  is protected , 
and that it will continue  to focus on the horrific crime of human  trafficking , rather 
than on state -level pros titution. Specifically, t he Network would like to thank you for  
 excluding the  unnecessary and dangerous  provision s in House Bill (H.R.) 3887 that will have 
unintended negative consequences for survivors of trafficking.  
 
H.R. 3887 unnecessarily broadens the fed eral Mann Act, extending criminal penalties to 
“whoever knowingly, in or affecting interstate…commerce,  …persuades, induces, or entices 
any individual to engage in prostitution, for which any person can be charged with an 
offense, or attempts to do so .”1 It deceptively and inaccurately calls this prostitution -related 
crime “sex trafficking.”  
 
As written, H.R. 3887 equates every instance of adult prostitution to a form of modern -day 
slavery, whether these individ uals live under a climate of fear, which is t he heart of the 
trafficking crime. In fact, t he United Nations’ definition of human trafficking also requires 
that “threat ,” “force ,” or “other forms of coercion” be present.2  
 
Therefore , H.R. 3887  alters the definition of what constitutes human trafficki ng in a way that 
is drastically different than current federal and international laws and norms. The proposed 
changes in H.R. 3887 are dangerous in the following ways :  
 
 The bill would make prostitution -related activities, even within state borders, a fede ral 
crime. This confusion of prostitution and trafficking shifts  the focus from helping and 
protecting trafficked persons to using federal resources to prosecute state -level offenses 
involving consenting adults who may not see themselves as victims of a cr ime. 
 These provisions would force the Justice Department to investigate and prosecute 
crimes of prostitution that are already being prosecuted under the state laws, thus 
diverting much needed and already scarce resources from actual trafficking cases to 
prostitution crimes.   
 H.R. 3887 moves the real crime of sex trafficking from the list of 13th Amendment 
slavery crimes where it belongs to join the prostitution offenses in the Mann Act, 
thereby undermining the scope of 13th Amendment protections against mo dern-day 
slavery.  
 
Creating a new standard and definition for trafficking in persons  fails to protect victims.  
The Department of Justice has stated that the main difficulty is not proving these elements, 
but rather, securing witness testimony.  In our expe rience working on hundreds of cases, 
victims of a severe form of trafficking need critical protections, including social services 
advocates and attorneys, who accompany and support them through  the criminal justice 
process. When victims are ensured these s tabilizing services, they are willing and able to 
testify, and in fact many of our clients urgently want to testify against their traffickers.  
Changing the definition merely dilutes the strength of a powerful tool to protect human 
trafficking victims.    
 
As service providers and advocates  who witnesses the toll modern -day slavery takes on its 
victims and their families  each day and for years to come —even after they have escaped 
from the abuse —we urge you to ensure that the TVPRA of 2007 remains true to the  vision 
                                                 
1 Proposed Sec tion 221(f)(1) of H.R. 3887.  
2 Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children, Article 3, 
paragraph (a).   
 of the original law . We support S.B. 3061 and the efforts to prosecute perpetrators of all 
forms of forced labor and sexual exploitation ; prevent such acts from occurring ; and protect 
all victims of modern - day slavery.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
New York Anti -Trafficking Network Steering Committee:  
Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund  
Klasko, Rulon, Stock, and Seltzer, LLP  
New York Association for New Americans  
Safe Horizon  
Sex Workers Project at the  Urban Justice Center  
  
cc: Richard Lugar, Edward M.  Kennedy, Orrin G. Hatch, Herb Kohl, Charles E. Grassley, 
Dianne Feinstein, Jon Kyl, Russell D. Feingold, Jeff Sessions, Charles E. Schumer, Lindsey 
Graham, Richard J. Durbin, John Cornyn, Benjamin L. Cardin, Sheldon Whitehouse, Tom 
Coburn  
 
 