 
1 
  
 
 
 
 
 
The New York City Council  
 
WOMEN’S ISSUES COMMITTEE AND JUVENILE JUSTICE COMMITTEE  
PUBLIC HEARING  
 
June 11, 2008  
 
Testimony of Sapna Patel, Esq.  
 
Staff Attorney  
Sex Workers Project  
Urban Justice Center  
 
Steering Committee Member  
NY Anti -Traff icking Network  
 
Member  
Freedom Network  
 
123 William Street, 16th Floor  
New York, New York 10038  
T: 646/602.5626  
spatel@urbanjustice.org  
 
 
 
The Sex Workers Project at the Urban Justice Center thank s you for this opportunity to present our 
recommendatio ns for the New York City Council’s support of the William Wilberforce Trafficking Victims 
Protection Reauthorization Act of 2007.   
 
The Sex Workers Project (SWP) is the first program in New York City and in the country to focus on the 
provision of legal s ervices, legal training, documentation, and policy advocacy for sex workers. The SWP’s 
program on trafficking in persons advises and represents trafficking victims in legal cases; informs and 
educates immigrant communities about the issue of trafficking an d possible legal options; and trains 
attorneys on this issue. The SWP also coordinates with various law enforcement agencies to better identify 
victims of trafficking, and to ensure that trafficked persons who cooperate with law enforcement are 
protected t hrough the legal process. Finally, we collaborate with other non -governmental organizations to 
advocate for trafficking -related policies that focus on the human rights of trafficked persons and respect 
Urban Justice Center  
123 Williams Street, 16th Floor  
Tel:  (646) 602 -5626 • Fax:  (212) 533 -4598   
2 
 their dignity. The SWP is a member of the national Fre edom Network and the NYC Anti -Trafficking 
Network (Co -Chair, Policy & Advocacy Committee; Member, Steering and Legal Committees).  
The SWP applauds the efforts of the New York City Council to address the problem of human trafficking 
at the local level. Give n that New York City is a hub for this severe violation of human rights, it is critical 
that all trafficked persons here receive much needed services outlined and expanded in the Senate Bill 
3061, the William Wilberforce Trafficking Victims Protection Reau thorization Act of 2007.   
 
Based on experience working directly with over 100 trafficke d persons and through long -term relationships 
with them, SWP  encourages the New York City Council to SUPPORT Senate Bill 3061  and to OPPOSE 
House Bill  3887 .   
 
I. ENHANCED  PROTECTIONS UNDER SENATE BILL 3061  
 
We encourage the New York City Council to support Senate Bill 3061  as the included provisions greatly 
enhance protections for human trafficking victims and strengt hen the government’s ability to prevent and 
prosecute ca ses.  The enhanced provisions  include broadening continued presence protections for family 
members and those victims seeking civil actions, waiving the good moral character bar, providing resources 
and protection to those sponsored by diplomats, and except ing the requirement of cooperation for victims 
who experience severe trauma.  Most importantly, Senate  Bill 3061 ensures that the definition of 
human trafficking is protected and that it will continue to focus on the horrific crime of trafficking 
rather th an on state -level prostitution.   
 
II. PROBLEMATIC PROVISIONS IN HOUSE BILL 3887  
 
The Sex Workers Project strongly encourages the New York City Council to actively oppose House Bill 
3887 as it u nnecessarily broadens the federal Mann Act thus inaccurately equat ing every instance of adult 
prostitution to a form of modern -day slavery.  In moving “sex trafficking” into the Mann Act, H.R. 3887 
shifts the focus of the federal government from prosecution of 13th amendment related crimes, such as 
peonage, slavery, and trafficking in persons, to prostitution offenses where individuals can leave their 
situation and do not see t hemselves as victims of a crime.   
 
As written, H.R. 3887 alters the definition of what constitutes human trafficking in a way that is drastically 
different than current federal and international laws and norms by eliminating  force, fraud or coercion as 
elements of trafficking.  Creating a new definition of trafficking that eliminates force, fraud or coercion does 
not protect victims by minimizing th eir testimonial burdens.  In fact, the Department of Justice ( DOJ ), and 
service providers can attest to this, state that the main difficulty is not proving elements of force, fraud or 
coercion but rather securing witness testimony.  In workin g with victims , SWP  has found that many  
trafficked persons , once stabilized with housing, medical care, work authorization and the elimination of the 
threat of deportation, are willing to participate in the investigation and prosecution of the traffickers and do 
wish to  seek justice as part of the healing process.   
 
Furthermore, H.R. 3887 d rains already o vertaxed resources of the DOJ.  Currently, even though trafficked 
persons working with the Sex Workers Project  are willing to cooperate and seek justice, federal law 
enforcement has been unable to investigate and prosecute these cases due to the large volu me of  victim   
3 
 reports . Including consensual adult prostitution as a crime that DOJ must focus on while already covered by 
state law enforcement , dilutes already scarce p rosecutorial r esources and makes the current lack of 
opportunities  for trafficked persons  to seek justice even worse.   
 
Lastly, increased criminalization of the sex industry by the federal government will exacerbate the violation 
of human rights against U S citizens and migrants, including those persons in the sex industry due to 
circumstance for lack of livable economic options and  trafficked persons.  Mandating the federal 
government to enforce prostitution offenses will result in more arrests of people w ho are trafficked – the 
very people this law intended to protect.   Already, state law enforcement, in their efforts to “rescue” 
trafficked persons in the sex industry, raid brothels that culminate in detaining many trafficked persons who 
are terrified to s peak out against their abusers for fear of retribution and keep silent due to grave mistrust of 
U.S. law enforcement.  Requiring federal law enforcement to build -upon ineffective local raids will only lead 
to the exacerbation of victims being arrested as c riminals instead of being rescued and directed to social 
services.   
 
III.   ALLIES IN OPPOSITI ON TO HOUSE BILL 3887  
The Sex Workers Project stands firm in our opposition of H.R. 3887 with the following allies: Department 
of Justice, Fraternal Order of Police, National Association of Attorney s General , National District 
Attorney’s Association, New York Anti -Trafficking Network, Freedom Network and the N ational Asian 
Pacific American Women’s Forum.  
IV. CONCLUDING REMARKS  
In, conclusion, the Sex Workers Project of th e Urban Justice Center encourages members of the New York 
City Council to support Senate Bill 3061 and actively oppose House Bill 3887.   Policies and laws , such as 
H.R. 3887,  that are created based on misinformed ideologies that do not reflect the realitie s on the groun d 
must not be supported.  SWP urges the New York City Council to stand against  anti-prostitution measures 
that couch themselves as anti -trafficking.  This type of advocacy only serves to harm trafficked  persons in 
the sex industry and  in the general labor sectors where a majority of persons are trafficked.   
 
Your support of Senate Bill 3061 of the reauthorization of TVPRA will directly and positively affect 
trafficked persons in New York City and enable them to access much needed services wit hout scarce 
resources being re -directed to persons who are not victims of trafficking.   
Thank you for offering advocates such as the Sex Workers Project and other members of the NY Anti -
Trafficking Network an opportunity to share our expertise and our con cerns with you as you consider 
supporting the William Wilberforce Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2007.   
 