 
 
 
 
 
 
September 4, 2012  
 
To: National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Law  
 
Re: Comments on the Discussion Draft of “Prevention of and Remedies For 
Human Trafficking”  
 
Dear Commissioners:  
 
The Sex Workers Project at the Urban Justice Center, which was established in 
2001, provides client -centered legal and social services to individuals who 
engage in sex work, regardless of whether they do so by choice, circumstance, 
or coercion. One of the first programs in the nation to assist survivors of h uman 
trafficking, the Sex Workers Project has pioneered an approach to service  
provision  grounded in human rights, harm reduction and in the real life 
experiences of our clients. We have represented many victims of trafficking in 
their cooperation with law  enforcement investigations, and in their applications 
for immigration status and other forms of relie f.  In addition to providing direct 
services, we conduct  human rights research with victims  of trafficking and sex 
workers . We are recognized expert s on the experience of persons involved in 
commercial sex in the United States, and travel throughout the United States 
and internationally to consult, lecture and provide training on issues related to 
human trafficking and prostitution. Given our unique persp ective, we wanted to 
respectfully offer suggestions and feedback on the development of a 
comprehensive model law on human trafficking.  
We applaud the Uniform Law Commission for taking on the issue of human 
trafficking and for drafting this proposed uniform  law. Overall, we believe it 
balances many concerns and we support most of the provisions. As co -authors 
of the first law to allow survivors of trafficking to vacate prior convictions, we 
are especially supportive of the inclusion of such a provision in a uniform law.  
We offer the following comments:  
 In Section 2 .3, where forms of coercion are enumerated , we suggest adding “or 
threat of the abuse” to subsections B, C, D, and G. In our experience, coercion is 
often experienced as the threat of some form of harm, not the harm itself.  
 
 
 
  In Section 2 .11, sexual activity , as an element of commercial sexual activity,  is defined to include 
certain sexual acts, including the touching of breasts. We are concerned about this broad 
definition, because in states where prostitution is defined very vaguely, such as New York, 
courts often borrow the definition of “sex ual conduct” or “sexual activity” from other parts of 
the criminal code. This broad definition could lead to prosecution of a wider range of persons, 
such as people that work in strip clubs, for prostitution. Arrests and convictions for prostitution 
can le ad to devastating consequences for those arrested. We suggest adding a provision stating 
that this provision should not be read to expand the definition of prostitution.  
 
 We are unclea r as to the need for Section 3. We believe that d efining “trafficking” as involving 
the acts mentioned here dates back to an earlier understanding of trafficking as a crime about 
the transportation or movement of people. In our experience, the harm caused by human 
trafficking is due to the  forced or coerced labor, not due to the transportation or recruitment. 
Also, if a perpetrator is compelling another to do labor or sexual services, clearly they have 
“recruited ” or “obtained ” that person , making this definition co -extensive with the later 
provisions . We are also concerned th at a person who  merely  transported or maintained 
another, while  “recklessly disregard ing” the fact that they may be coerced into labor by another 
individual, would here be charg eable as a trafficker. We think that is not proportional to the acts 
that perso n would have done - the real crime is the forced labor or sexual servitude . Therefore, 
we think that this section, along with the acts of “recruits, transports, transfers, etc” should be 
omitted, and that the subsequent Sections 4, 5, and 6 should be renamed “Trafficking.”  
 
 In general, we do not support the use of a “reckless” standard to apply to human trafficking 
throughout the act. We believe that the use of a “reckless” standard is overly broad and vague 
as applied to such a serious crim e.  
 
 Section 4.a mention s “coercion, deception, or fraud .” Fraud is not defined in the act, and the 
definition of “deception” appears to be inclusive of fraud . We suggest omitting “fraud.”  
 
 Section 6 .g appears to be creating a strict liability standard as  to the age of the victim. However, 
Section 6 also requires at least a mens rea of recklessness. If a perpetrator needs to at least be 
reckless towards the fact that the individual they are offering for commercial sex is under 18, 
then the fact that they r easonably believed that individual was over 18 would  be a defense. We 
support at least a reckless standard being applied.  
 
 In Section 7, we think that the minimum mens rea that should be required for this offense is 
“knowledge. ” An individual who did not engage in any form of coercion towards the victim 
should at least be proved to have known that the i ndividual was being trafficked.  
 
 In Section 10, we support Alternative B, as imposing a surer liability on business entities.  
 
 In Section 10, we suggest cl arifying whether the cap of $1 million for the fine  is per 
victim or p er perpetrator.  
 
 In Section 11, we suggest removing the reference to the already existing state rape shield law. In 
New York, the state rape shield law excludes a victim’s prostitution convictions, meaning that he 
or she can be questioned about them in a rape trial. We are concerned that rape shield laws may be less protective than this propose d provision, and think that this proposal is better and 
should trump state rape shield laws.  
 
 In Section 12, we suggest that  the victim not be criminally liable for “illegal sexual activity ” but 
also for  any criminal activity that a perso n committed as a result of being  a victim.  
 
 In Section 12, we suggest that subsection b.2 be omitted, so that the affirmative defense is 
available to victims of trafficking by coercion, debt bondag e, deception, and other methods, not 
only threatened seriou s harm.  
 
 Section 12.c provides that minors found to be victims of human trafficking should be presumed 
to be a “child in need of supervision ” and subject to laws regarding juveniles. In our experience, 
children who are deemed persons in need of supervisio n are often subject to punitive 
placements that put them in danger, are removed from their families, or face other 
consequences. It is well known that in New York, minors arrested for prostitution often give an 
older age in order to avoid the harsher conse quences of family court in favor of cri minal court. 
In addition, minor  victims of trafficking into commercial sex  are often abused and traumatized in 
the course of arrests for prostitution. We suggest removing this subsection, and adding a new 
provision th at redefines the crime of prostitution to apply only to persons 18 and older, 
protecting minors not only from conviction, but from arrest.  
 
 As one of the only legal service providers who have  brought motions under a law to vacate 
convictions for trafficked persons, we would like to suggest a few additions to Section 13, to 
make  this remedy accessible and effective for victims of trafficking : 
1. Ensure  that if a survivor meets the requisites of th e law, the j udge MUST vacate the prior 
conviction(s), dismiss the accusatory instrument, and seal the record.  We would 
recommend changing the word “may” to “must” in the first sentence.  
2. Ensure the confidentiality  of survivors by allowing for initials or “Jane Doe”  designations to 
be use d in court filings . 
3. Ensure a degree of  judicial discretion to allow further appropriate actions by the Court to 
assist the survivor.  
4. Ensure  funding so that there are legal services available to survivors seeking to bring th ese 
motions . 
For a full discussion of a model vacating convictions law, please see our legislative memo here: 
http://www.sexworkersproject.org/downloads/2012/20120422 -memo -vacating -convictions.pdf  
 
 In Section 14.a.2,  the intention is clearly to include per sons trafficked into commercial sex as 
eligible for restitution , even if it is not possible to calculate the value of their labor to the 
defendant . However, this section includes only those whose labor was subject to the minimum 
wage and overtime provision s under FLSA, which excludes persons trafficked into illegal 
commercial sex. We suggest rewording to say “the equivalent of the value of the victim’s labor 
or services, using the  minimum wage and overtime provisions…”  
 
 We suggest omitting subsection  16.7,  as transporting someone over state lines should not be 
considered an aggravating factor on the level of the others listed here, which actually cause 
additional harm to victims . 
  In Section 18, we suggest applying confidentiality to court proceedings and court documents as 
well.  
 
 In Section 24 .b, we suggest adding a requirement to the services provision plan ; that it fund a 
sufficient array of service providers so that competent services are available for  victims of 
trafficking into forced l abor and victims of trafficking into sexual servitude, for both adults and 
minors, and for men, women and transgender people.  
 
 In Section 25, we prefer Alternative A.  
 
 In Section 27, we would like the same suggestions for Section 24.b above, ensuring ser vices are 
available to  all victims , to apply here .  
 
We thank you for taking our comments into consideration. If you  have any questions, please do not 
hesitate to contact us for further information.  
Sincerely,  
 
Sienna Baskin, Esq.  
Co-Director  
Sex Workers Project  
Urban Justice Center  
(646) 602 -5695  
sbaskin@urbanjustice.org  
