	  	  	  	  	  	  The	  New	  York	  City	  Council	  Committee	  on	  Immigration	  and	  Committee	  on	  Civil	  Rights	  	  Hearing RE:  Resolution calling on the New York State Legislature to pass and the Governor to sign A.2736/S.1379, which would prohibit possession of a condom from being used as evidence of prostitution and certain other offenses. 	  Testimony	  of	  Lynly	  Egyes,	  Esq.	  Staff	  Attorney	  Sex	  Workers	  Project	  Urban	  Justice	  Center	  	  123	  William	  Street,	  16th	  Floor	  New	  York,	  New	  York	  10038	  T:	  646/602-­‐5697	  legyes@urbanjustice.org	  	  Tuesday,	  June	  18,	  2013	  at	  10:00	  a.m.	  250	  Broadway,	  16th	  FL,	  New	  York,	  NY	  10007	  Good	  morning,	  members	  of	  the	  Committee	  on	  Immigration	  and	  Committee	  on	  Civil	  Rights.	  	  	  	  The	  Sex	  Workers	  Project	  at	  the	  Urban	  Justice	  Center	  very	  much	  appreciates	  the	  opportunity	  to	  offer	  comment	  on	  this	  proposed	  resolution.	  My	  name	  is	  Lynly	  Egyes	  and	  I	  am	  an	  attorney	  at	  the	  Sex	  Workers	  Project	  where	  I	  primarily	  represent	  victims	  of	  trafficking.	  	  I’m	  here	  today	  to	  illustrate	  to	  you	  why	  this	  resolution	  is	  so	  important	  in	  the	  fight	  against	  in	  human	  trafficking	  and	  more	  importantly	  why	  this	  resolution	  will	  protect	  victims	  of	  trafficking.	  	  The	  best	  way	  to	  explain	  how	  important	  this	  resolution	  is	  to	  victims	  of	  trafficking	  is	  to	  tell	  you	  about	  Allison.	  	  Allison	  was	  brought	  into	  the	  United	  States	  by	  a	  large	  trafficking	  ring.	  	  On	  daily	  a	  basis,	  she	  was	  beaten,	  starved	  and	  humiliated	  by	  traffickers.	  	  In	  my	  office,	  she	  told	  me	  her	  trafficker	  gave	  her	  only	  five	  condoms	  a	  day,	  but	  she	  was	  forced	  to	  have	  sex	  with	  up	  to	  twenty	  five	  people	  a	  day.	  	  After	  her	  five	  condoms	  were	  used,	  she	  was	  forced	  to	  have	  sex	  without	  a	  condom.	  	  One	  of	  Allison’s	  greatest	  fears	  was	  that	  she	  might	  have	  contracted	  a	  life-­‐threatening	  disease	  while	  being	  trafficked.	  	  Even	  after	  her	  escape,	  she	  tells	  me	  that	  she	  is	  so	  scared	  for	  the	  other	  girls	  that	  she	  left	  behind	  -­‐	  she	  knows	  they	  are	  being	  denied	  access	  to	  condoms	  just	  as	  she	  was.	  	  She	  asked	  me,	  “Do	  you	  think	  that	  I	  wasn’t	  allowed	  to	  have	  condoms	  because	  they	  are	  used	  as	  evidence?”	  	  I	  didn’t	  know	  what	  to	  tell	  her	  but	  to	  be	  honest,	  I	  was	  scared.	  	  I	  know	  the	  trafficking	  
ring	  that	  Allison	  was	  part	  of	  and	  I	  know	  they	  are	  still	  in	  existence.	  	  At	  that	  moment	  I	  thought	  to	  myself,	  these	  traffickers	  know	  that	  condoms	  are	  being	  used	  as	  evidence	  and	  that	  means	  more	  and	  more	  victims	  are	  going	  to	  be	  denied	  access	  to	  condoms.	  	  	  	  My	  client	  Sarah	  met	  her	  trafficker	  here	  in	  the	  United	  States	  when	  she	  was	  fifteen	  years	  old.	  	  For	  nine	  years	  he	  forced	  her	  through	  physical	  violence	  and	  threats	  to	  work	  in	  prostitution.	  	  She	  was	  arrested	  many	  times.	  	  Sarah	  told	  me	  that	  she	  plead	  guilty	  every	  time	  because	  her	  trafficker	  would	  beat	  her	  more	  if	  she	  had	  to	  go	  back	  to	  court	  or	  if	  she	  was	  sent	  to	  jail.	  	  Sarah	  was	  lucky	  in	  the	  sense	  that	  she	  escaped	  her	  trafficker	  over	  ten	  years	  ago	  and	  while	  she	  was	  be	  trafficked	  she	  had	  access	  to	  condoms.	  	  	  But	  I	  wonder	  what	  would	  have	  happened	  if	  Sarah’s	  trafficker	  knew	  that	  condoms	  could	  be	  used	  as	  evidence	  of	  prostitution	  and	  trafficking.	  	  Do	  you	  think	  fifteen	  year	  old	  Sarah	  would	  have	  been	  allowed	  to	  carry	  condoms?	  	  It	  is	  because	  of	  Allison,	  Sarah	  and	  so	  many	  other	  victims	  of	  trafficking	  that	  I	  consider	  this	  resolution	  calling	  on	  the	  New	  York	  State	  Legislature	  to	  pass	  the	  No	  Condoms	  As	  Evidence	  bill	  to	  be	  a	  revolutionary	  moment	  in	  the	  anti-­‐trafficking	  movement.	  This	  resolution	  is	  calling	  for	  passage	  of	  legislation	  that	  is	  about	  trying	  to	  protect	  victims	  while	  they	  are	  being	  trafficked.	  	  It	  is	  about	  saying	  to	  them	  while	  they	  are	  being	  forced	  into	  prostitution	  we	  might	  not	  be	  able	  to	  reach	  you	  now,	  but	  at	  least	  we	  are	  going	  arm	  you	  with	  condoms.	  	  We	  are	  not	  going	  to	  give	  a	  trafficker	  any	  excuse	  to	  deny	  you	  condoms	  because	  we	  believe	  you	  deserve	  to	  be	  safe	  and	  that	  you	  should	  have	  access	  to	  condoms.	  	  It	  is	  about	  reaching	  victims	  while	  they	  are	  being	  victimized	  and	  providing	  them	  with	  a	  little	  bit	  of	  safety	  while	  they	  are	  being	  forced	  into	  prostitution.	  	  It	  would	  also	  give	  them	  a	  fighting	  chance	  once	  they	  are	  able	  to	  escape.	  	  	  	  Now,	  I	  have	  heard	  some	  say	  that	  we	  need	  to	  be	  able	  to	  use	  condoms	  as	  evidence	  to	  prosecute	  traffickers	  but	  I	  challenge	  that	  notion.	  	  Condoms	  are	  not	  evidence	  of	  trafficking.	  	  Successful	  trafficking	  prosecutions	  need	  evidence	  that	  a	  person	  was	  subject	  to	  coercion	  and	  force	  –	  often	  through	  victim	  statements.	  	  I	  am	  often	  asked	  by	  federal	  law	  enforcement	  officers,	  how	  can	  we	  make	  a	  victim	  feel	  more	  safe,	  how	  can	  we	  make	  a	  victim	  trust	  us	  more	  so	  that	  we	  can	  help	  find	  the	  people	  who	  hurt	  them.	  	  A	  victim	  that	  was	  denied	  condoms	  by	  their	  trafficker,	  contracted	  an	  STI,	  or	  had	  a	  forced	  abortion	  because	  of	  the	  lack	  of	  access	  to	  condoms	  will	  be	  much	  more	  traumatized	  and	  probably	  less	  likely	  to	  be	  able	  to	  contribute	  to	  an	  investigation.	  	  Now	  imagine	  that	  victim	  finds	  out	  that	  it	  is	  the	  policy	  of	  New	  York	  that	  led	  to	  them	  being	  denied	  access	  to	  condoms.	  	  How	  cooperative	  do	  you	  think	  that	  victim	  will	  be?	  	  	  	  But	  if	  we	  pass	  this	  resolution	  and	  legislation,	  we	  can	  send	  a	  loud	  and	  clear	  message.	  The	  lawmakers	  and	  the	  law	  enforcers	  of	  New	  York	  care	  about	  the	  health	  and	  safety	  of	  sex	  workers	  and	  victims	  of	  trafficking.	  What	  a	  powerful	  statement	  that	  makes	  to	  victims,	  and	  to	  those	  who	  would	  exploit	  them.	  	  	  Allison	  was	  given	  only	  five	  condoms	  a	  day,	  and	  she	  is	  only	  one	  of	  many	  victims	  but	  there	  are	  still	  other	  victims	  out	  there	  being	  made	  to	  risk	  their	  lives	  every	  day	  because	  their	  traffickers	  won’t	  allow	  them	  access	  to	  condoms.	  	  I	  am	  only	  here	  today	  because	  I	  care	  about	  trafficking	  victims,	  those	  who	  are	  my	  clients	  and	  those	  who	  have	  not	  yet	  escaped.	  	  I	  care	  about	  victims’	  safety	  because	  I	  know	  what	  happens	  when	  they	  are	  denied	  access	  to	  condoms.	  	  I	  am	  asking	  you	  to	  care	  about	  them	  too.	  	  Please	  don’t	  leave	  victims	  of	  trafficking	  behind.	  	  	  