NARF’s reputation as a leading force in the
development of Indian law and its record inachieving justice on behalf of Native Americanpeople by providing excellent and highly ethicallegal representation to Indigenous peoples hasnot gone unnoticed in national and internationalforums.  The newly elected Obama Administrationcalled on the Native American Rights Fund tohelp them prepare to implement their policiesfor our tribal nations.  NARF Executive DirectorJohn Echohawk, and former NARF attorneysBob Anderson and Keith Harper were called uponby President Obama to serve on his TransitionTeam.  President Obama has already appointedJodi Archambault Gillette, a member of theStanding Rock Sioux Tribe and daughter of for-mer NARF Board member Dave Archambault, asone the three Deputy Associate Directors of theOffice of Intergovernmental Affairs.  This is thefirst time a Native has been appointed to thisposition. 
In April, President Obama announced the
nomination of Larry EchoHawk (brother of NARFExecutive Director John Echohawk) as AssistantSecretary for Indian Affairs and the full Senate
VOLUME 34, NO.1                                                            WINTER/SPRING 2009The New Obama Administration and Indian Country 
............................................................................ page 1
NARF Bids Farewell to True Modern Day Warrior:
Walter Echo-Hawk Jr. ........................................ page 7
CASE UPDATES
- Supreme Court continues to rule against tribes and
Indian country .......................................................... page 8- Nation’s Tribes Asking Congress for Swift Action on
Climate Legislation .......................................... page 10
- Yup’ik-Speaking Voters Ask Supreme Court To Uphold
Voting Rights Act ............................................ page 12
CALLING TRIBES TO ACTION! ...................... page 13
Indian Law Library .......................................... page 14NARF ................................................................ page 15The New Obama Administration 
and Indian Country
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
President Obama and Shahela Pourier/Eyre - photo by Lori Pourierconfirmed his nomination on May 19, 2009. Mr.
EchoHawk was officially sworn in on May 22.Larry Echohawk brings with him a wealth ofknowledge in Indian law, government and pub-lic policy.  Larry Echohawk is a former tribalattorney, a former Attorney General of Idaho,was most recently a law professor at BrighamYoung University, and serves as of counsel to theEchoHawk Law Firm in Idaho.   It is also expect-ed that President Obama will soon be filling thepositions of Office of the Special Trustee forAmerican Indians, the National Indian GamingCommission, and the Commissioner for theAdministration for Native American Indians,with Native Americans.
Three other Natives have been nominated and
are waiting for Senate confirmation or havebeen confirmed.  Mary L. Smith, a member ofthe Cherokee Nation, has been nominated forthe position of Assistant Attorney General forthe Tax Division at the Department of Justice.Hilary Tompkins, a member of the NavajoNation, has been nominated for Solicitor of theDepartment of the Interior.  Yvette Roubideaux,a member of the Rosebud Sioux Tribe, has beennominated and confirmed as the Director ofIndian Health Services. These Native womenwill bring with them outstanding expertise inIndian law, Indian health care needs, and innational Indian issues.  
On June 15, 2009, in taped remarks to the
2009 National Congress of American IndiansMid-Year Conference, President Barack Obamaannounced the appointment of KimberlyTeehee, a member of the Cherokee Nation, asSenior Policy Advisor for Native AmericanAffairs. As a member of the Domestic PolicyCouncil, Teehee will advise the President onissues impacting Indian Country.  Since Januaryof 1998, Teehee has served as a Senior Advisor tothe House of Representatives Native AmericanCaucus Co-Chair, Congressman Dale Kildee (D-MI).  President Obama also announced thatthe White House will hold a Tribal NationsConference later this fall.We have hope that President Obama and his
Cabinet, with those fresh Native faces and anabundance of expertise, can begin to help steerthis Nation into recognizing and embracing ourtribal nations, our tribal histories, and our tribalknowledge. 
During his campaign, President Obama stated
that “Perhaps more than anyone else, the NativeAmerican community faces huge challengesthat have been ignored by Washington for toolong. It is time to empower Native Americans inthe development of the national policy agenda.”...“We’ve got to make sure we are not just having a BIA that is dealing with the variousNative American tribes; we’ve got to have thePresident of the United States meeting on a regular basis with the Native American leadershipand ensuring relationships of dignity and respect.”
President Obama supports the principle of
tribal self-determination, with recognition thatthe federal government must honor its treatyobligations and fully enable tribal self-governance.In furtherance of the government-to-governmentrelationship, Barack Obama will include triballeadership in the important policy determina-tions that impact Indian Country. Obama willappoint an American Indian policy advisor onhis senior White House staff so that IndianCountry has a direct interface at the highestlevel of the Obama Administration. In addition,Obama will host a White House “Tribal G8” – anannual meeting with Native American leaders to
develop a national Indian policy agenda.
Barack Obama recognizes that honoring the
government-to-government relationship requiresfulfillment of the United States’ trust responsi-bility to tribes and individual Indians. Morespecifically, Obama is committed to meaningfulreform of the broken system that manages andadministers the trust lands and other trust assetsbelonging to tribes and individual Indians.Further, he is committed to resolving equitablywith both tribes and individual Indians litigationresulting from the past failures in the adminis-tration and accounting of their trust assets.
PAGE 2                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                          PAGE 3NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDWe do have hope.
BARACK OBAMA’S PRINCIPLES FOR
STRONGER TRIBAL COMMUNITIESHealth Care
The Indian Health Service estimates that it
receives only 55 percent of the federal funding itrequires. Federal per-capita funding for Indianhealth care amounts to about half of the federalper capita health funding for federal prisoners.Indians are the most at-risk minority group forhealth problems like diabetes, which they sufferfrom at a rate 249 percent higher than thenational average. Moreover, Indians have thenation's highest death rates for tuberculosis andsuicide. After Haiti, men on the Pine Ridge andRosebud Reservations in South Dakota have the lowest life expectancy in the WesternHemisphere.* Indian Health Services: Barack Obama voted
in the Senate to provide an additional $1 billionfor IHS to address these disparities.Additionally, he was an original cosponsor ofthe Indian Health Care Improvement Act of2007 which mandates modernization of theIndian health care system and strengthensurban Indian health facilities. Obama hasfought against the Bush Administration’sattempt to eliminate urban health care forIndians not living in reservation communities.Obama opposed a federal land acquisition pro-gram that would have diverted funds from theSpecial Diabetes Program for Indians and theAlcohol and Substance Abuse program.Obama supports sufficient funding for IHSand proper staffing and maintenance for IHS facilities.
Education
Education is the key to improving the lives of
Native Americans and empowering tribalnations to build a better future. Educationalpolicies in the 1970s attempted to reverse pastfederal policies aimed at eradicating NativeAmerican languages and cultures, but NativeAmericans still suffer from some of the lowest
high school graduation and college matricula-tion rates in the nation. We must continue tohonor our obligations to Native Americans byproviding tribes with the educational resourcespromised by treaty and federal law.* Indian Language Education: Tribes are strug-
gling to preserve their languages. It is estimated that by 2050 only 20 of the over 500Native languages once spoken will remain.Research shows that instruction in tribal language increases Native American academicperformance in other areas like math and science. Barack Obama supports funding forNative language immersion and preservationprograms.
* No Child Left Behind: The goal of the No Child
Left Behind Act is the right one – ensuringthat all children meet high education stan-dards – but the law has significant flaws thatneed to be addressed, including in IndianCountry. Unfulfilled promises, ineffectiveimplementation, and shortcomings in thedesign of the law itself have created countlessobstacles for tribal educators. Barack Obamawould fund No Child Left Behind and reformthe law to better incorporate Title VII, thelaw’s Indian, Hawaiian, and Alaskan educationprovision. Obama’s plan would provide greaterflexibility in integrating Native languages, cultures, and communities into school pro-grams in a manner consistent with principlesof tribal sovereignty.
* Early Childhood Education: Research shows
that half of low-income children start schoolup to two years behind their peers inpreschool skills and that these early achieve-ment gaps continue throughout elementaryschool. Barack Obama supports increasingfunding for the Head Start program, includingthe American Indian and Alaska Native HeadStart Programs, to provide American Indianpreschool children with critically importantlearning skills. He also appreciates the role ofparental involvement in the success of HeadStart and has called on states to replicate the
Illinois model of Preschool for All. Tribes shouldalso be given the opportunity to implementculturally appropriate versions of this program.
* Indian School Construction: Many govern-
ment-funded Indian schools are dilapidated,and many are simply too small to meet theneeds of growing Indian populations. A safe,comfortable place to learn is critical to receivinga proper education. Barack Obama is committedto repairing and building Indian schools.
* Tribal Colleges: Tribal colleges have played a
critical role in improving the lives of NativeAmericans. Obama supports increased fundingfor operations and facility construction, as wellas the removal of bureaucratic impedimentsso tribal colleges can thrive.
Religious Freedom and Cultural Protection
* Cultural Rights and Sacred Places Protection:
Native American sacred places and site-specificceremonies are under threat from develop-ment, pollution, and vandalism. BarackObama supports legal protections for sacredplaces and cultural traditions, includingNative ancestors' burial grounds and churches.
Economic & Infrastructure Protection
Native Americans experience some of the most
severe socioeconomic conditions in the UnitedStates. Poverty and its effects are pervasive, withmore than quarter of all Native Americans livingin poverty and unemployment rates reaching 80percent on some reservations. Obama’s experi-ence as a community organizer working in poorneighborhoods plagued by high unemploymenthas taught him that there is no single solutionto community poverty. Therefore, he supportsusing a comprehensive approach that includesinvestment in physical, human and institutionalinfrastructure, increased access to capital, theremoval of barriers to development, and above all,authentic government-togovernment relation-ships between the federal government and tribes.* Minimum Wage: Barack Obama believes that
people who work full time should not live inpoverty. In 2007, Obama supported legislation
that increased the Federal minimum wagefor the first time in 10 years. Even though theminimum wage will rise to $7.25 an hour by2009, the minimum wage’s real purchasingpower will still be below what it was in 1968.As president, Obama will further raise theminimum wage to $9.50 an hour by 2011,index it to inflation and increase the EarnedIncome Tax Credit to make sure that full-timeworkers can earn a living wage that allowsthem to raise their families and pay for basicneeds such as food, transportation, and hous-ing – things so many people take for granted.
* Housing: The federal government has a moral
and legal responsibility to assist tribes in providing housing. Yet, Native Americans sufferfrom some of the worst housing conditions inthe nation. Some 14 percent of all reservationhomes have no electricity, and on some reser-vations, as many as 20 individuals are forced tolive in a single-family home. Barack Obamasupports increased funding for the IndianHousing Block Grant and other Indian housingprograms as well as improving the effective-ness of these programs.
* Gaming: The Supreme Court has upheld the
right of tribes, as sovereign entities, to operategaming operations on Indian reservations. A total of 225 of the 558 federally recognizedIndian tribes operate gaming facilities, creating670,000 jobs nationwide and paying $11 billionto the federal and state governments throughtaxes and other revenue. The vast majority ofIndian gaming operations are small enterprisesproviding jobs to tribal members. Becausemost tribes continue to suffer from high ratesof poverty and unemployment, Barack Obamabelieves that gaming revenues are importanttribal resources for funding education, health-care, law enforcement, and other essentialgovernment functions.
* Energy: Tribal nations have joined in
America’s quest for alternative, renewableenergy. Because of their rural land bases andaccess to natural resources, many tribes have
PAGE 4                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 5NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDmade great strides in economic development
in the energy sector. Tribes have successfuloperations producing gas, solar, and windenergy. In addition to harnessing and producingenergy, tribes have an interest in energyrights-of-way. Barack Obama encourages energy companies and Indian tribes to negotiatein good faith to ensure tribes receive just compensation and in furtherance of carryingsustainable energy to all communities.
Women’s Health
Indians are often subject to unusually harsh
conditions when it comes to women’s health. Arecent study by Amnesty International detailsthe alarming rates at which Native women aresubject to violence. The report states that one inthree American Indian women will be raped intheir lifetime, and they are more than threetimes as likely to be raped or sexually assaultedthan other women in America.* Reproductive Health: In the past, IHS has
been criticized for performing forced steriliza-tions of Indian women. More recently, manyNative women have been pushed to receiveone type of contraception instead of more suit-able alternatives. Although these women oftenhave no alternative to IHS, the program oftendoes not provide them with adequate repro-ductive health care, and many women areoften denied equal access to birth control, andprenatal care. Barack Obama supports thereproductive health rights of American Indianwomen, and supports ensuring that theyreceive equal opportunities to make healthyreproductive choices.
* Violence against Women: Violence in Indian
country is committed at alarmingly high rates,and all too often Indian women are the victims.Medical facilities are few and far between, andare often not adequately prepared to deal withassault victims. Also, because of the uniquejurisdictional scheme on reservations, lawenforcement can be slow and difficult to comeby. If the perpetrator is non-Indian, then thetribe does not have jurisdiction over thecrime. This is alarming when more than 86
percent of assaults against Indian women arecommitted by non-Indians. State and federallaw enforcement officials are often farremoved from the situation, and the tribes areleft without the authority to protect their people. Barack Obama will reexamine the legalframework that allows such injustices, andsupports empowering tribes to combat violenceagainst Native women irrespective of whetherthe perpetrators are Indian or non-Indian.
* Law Enforcement: Barack Obama also sup-
ports fully funding the Community OrientedPolicing Services (COPS) program that manytribal law enforcement agencies have come torely upon. He also recognizes the importantrole tribal courts play on the reservation.Obama will continue to support additionalresources to strengthen tribal courts as well ascorrection by statute of the jurisdictional gapsthat currently inhibit tribes’ ability to protecttheir communities.
* Detention Centers: There is a demonstrable
need for facility improvements and expansionsof detention centers in Indian Country. BarackObama understands that federal funding ofsuch improvements is essential to enabletribe’s to effectively protect their communities.
Methamphetamines
In a 2006 survey, 74 percent of tribal law
enforcement officials reported methampheta-mines to be the leading threat to their tribes’livelihood. The same survey reported dramaticincreases in cases of domestic violence, childneglect, sex crimes, and weapons charges.* Combat Meth Act of 2005: Barack Obama 
supported the Combat Meth Act of 2005,major parts of which became law in 2006. Theact puts federal funds into the fight againstmethamphetamine, provides assistance tochildren affected by meth abuse, and placesrestrictions on the sale of the ingredients usedto make the drug.
* Tribal empowerment: Barack Obama believes
that funding tribal police programs and tribalcourts and resolving longstanding
jurisdiction issues will enabletribal authorities to deal moreeffectively with the causes andeffects of this and other crimeproblems on Indian land.
Veterans’ Affairs
Native Americans serve in the
armed forces at a higher rate thanany other group in America. NativeAmericans have served in everywar, and their special place inAmerican military history is widelyrecognized. The first woman to diein combat in the Iraq war was ayoung Native American woman.World War II’s Codetalkers are themost celebrated examples of howIndians have been critical to thesuccess of American efforts over-seas. As a member of the SenateVeterans’ Affairs Committee, Obamasupports several Veteran measures,including the sheltering and reha-bilitation of homeless veterans,securing veterans’ benefits, andeasing service members’ transitionback into society.
Hunting and Fishing
Hunting and fishing are impor-
tant to many tribes’ diet, culture,and spirituality. Protecting huntingand fishing rights ensures thattribes are able to carry on thoseaspects of their traditional way of life.* Fishing Rights: The fishing rights of Indian
tribes are guaranteed not only by 150 year-oldtreaties, but by the Supreme Court’s affirma-tion of the Boldt decision as well. It is ourshared duty to uphold these obligations andprotect fisheries in such a manner that allowstribal and non-tribal fishing to continue intothe future. The path to equitable fishery man-agement is paved with good science. Barack
Obama supports initiatives to improve the science and our understanding of our nation’sfish stocks. Through improved science, we canbetter guide decisions about how to protectthe health of fish stocks, and, in turn, ensure abetter, more secure and predictable future forour nation’s fishermen. ❂
PAGE 6                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Illustration by Walt Pourier - Nakota Designs.NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 7NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
It is with great sadness
and with well wishesthat NARF bids farewellto senior staff attorneyWalter “Bunky” Echo-Hawk. Walter retiredfrom NARF at the end ofMarch. He has served asan attorney for NARFsince 1973 and has beena true pioneer and iconof Indian law. His contri-butions to the field arefar too numerous toentirely mention. Walterhas tirelessly ser ved as a lawyer, tribal supreme court
judge, scholar, writer and activist for more than 36
years. His legal experience includes cases involvingNative American religious freedom, prisoner rights,water rights, treaty rights, and reburial/repatriationrights.
Among Walter’s most important contributions to
Native American rights was his involvement in thedevelopment and passage of The Native AmericanGraves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA), aFederal law passed in 1990. NAGPRA provides aprocess for museums and Federal agencies to returncertain Native American cultural items-- humanremains, funerary objects, sacred objects, or objectsof cultural patrimony – to lineal descendants, andculturally affiliated Indian tribes and NativeHawaiian organizations.
Through his important work with NARF regarding
NAGPRA and defending Native American religiousfreedom, Walter has literally helped to enable mil-lions of Indian people to practice their religion(s)without fear of reprisal; enabled tribes to repatriatetheir loved ones’ remains from countless museumsand private collections in order to give them the rest,peace and dignity they deserve, and has helped tribessecure their rights to use and protect their naturalresources.Other important contributions by Walter include
his representation of the Native American Church ofNorth America to secure passage of the AmericanIndian Religious Freedom Act Amendments of 1994to protect religious use of peyote by Indians.Presently he represents the Klamath Tribes ofOregon to quantify treaty-protected water rights inSouthern Oregon in a highly publicized and contro-versial set of federal and state litigation.
A prolific writer, his publications include an award-
winning book Battlefields and Burial Grounds(1994). He has received various awards, such as, theAmerican Bar Association “Spirit of ExcellenceAward” for legal work in the face of adversity and the“Civil Liberties Award” from the ACLU of Oregon forsignificant contributions in the cause of individualfreedom. Since 1995, Walter has served as a memberof the Carter Center’s International Human RightsCouncil. He is admitted to practice law before theUnited States Supreme Court, Colorado SupremeCourt, U.S. Courts of Appeals for the Eighth, Ninth,and Tenth Circuits, and a host of federal DistrictCourts.
Walter is a member of the Pawnee Nation, belonging
to the Kitkehaki Band, born on the Pawnee reserva-tion in Oklahoma. Upon his retirement, he and hisfamily will return to Oklahoma. Walter’s new book,In the Courts of the Conqueror: The Ten WorstIndian Law Cases Ever Decided , will be published 
in 2010.
Words cannot express our gratitude to Walter for
his many contributions to NARF and to all NativeAmericans. He is truly one of the greatest legalminds in the country and his work has impactedmany past, present and future generations of NativeAmericans. Walter’s sense of humor, guidance, wisdom and unique sense of style will be missed byall here at NARF . Thank you Walter for all you havedone. Your people are proud of you. Your relativesare proud of you, and the ones that have gone beforeus have looked down and I know they are proud ofyou. Thank you. 
❂NARF Bids Farewell to True Modern Day Warrior:
Walter Echo-Hawk Jr.
PAGE 8                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDOn February 24, 2009, the United States
Supreme Court issued an extraordinarily trou-bling decision, limiting the authority of theSecretary of the Interior under the provisions ofthe Indian Reorganization Act (“IRA”). Carcieri
v. Salazar involved a challenge by the State of
Rhode Island to the authority of the Secretary totake land in to trust for the Narragansett Tribeunder the IRA. The Court held that the term“now” in the phrase “now under Federal jurisdiction” in the definition of “Indian” isunambiguous and limits the authority of theSecretary to only take land in trust for Indiantribes that were under federal jurisdiction inJune 1934, the date the IRA was enacted.
Writing for the majority, Justice Thomas,
joined by Chief Justice Roberts, Justices Scalia,Kennedy, Breyer and Alito, reversed the decisionof the U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuitand held that “the record in this case establishesthat the Narragansett Tribe was not under federaljurisdiction when the IRA was enacted.” In concurrence, Justice Breyer wrote separately tomake the point that Indian tribes federally recognized after 1934 may still have been “under
federal jurisdiction” in 1934, particularly where
the Interior Department made a mistake abouttheir status or if there was a federal treaty inplace. Justice Souter, joined by Justice Ginsberg,concurred in part (holding that the term “now”is unambiguous), but dissented to the Court’sstraight reversal, finding instead that the caseshould be remanded to the lower courts to pro-vide an opportunity for the United States andthe Narragansett Tribe to pursue a claim thatthe Tribe was under federal jurisdiction in 1934.Justice Stevens dissented from the majority’sopinion finding “no temporal limitation on the
definition of ‘Indian tribe’” within the IRA.
The Supreme Court has invoked a strained and
circular reading of a few sentences in the IndianReorganization Act to create different “classes”of tribes. Given the fundamental purpose of theIRA was to organize tribal governments andrestore land bases for tribes that had been tornapart by prior federal policies, the Court’s rulingis an affront to the most basic policies underlyingthe IRA.
The Court’s decision threatens to be destabi-
lizing for a significant number of Indian tribes.For over 70 years the Department of the Interiorhas applied a contrary interpretation – that“now” means at the time of application – andhas formed entire Indian reservations andauthorized numerous tribal constitutions andbusiness organizations under the IRA. There areserious questions about the effect on long set-tled actions as well as on future decisions. If thedecision stands, the Interior Department willhave to determine the meaning of “under federaljurisdiction” in 1934, an uncertain legal questionand one that makes little sense from a policyperspective. By calling into question which fed-erally recognized tribes are or are not eligiblefor the IRA’s provisions, the Court’s ruling inCarcieri threatens the validity of tribal business
organizations, subsequent contracts and loans,tribal reservations and lands, and could affectjurisdiction, public safety and provision of services on reservations across the country.
The Supreme Court’s new interpretation of
the Indian Reorganization Act is squarely atodds with Congress’ relatively recent directionto the federal agencies that all tribes must be
CASE UPDATES
Supreme Court continues to rule against tribes 
and Indian countryNARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 9NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDtreated equally regardless of how or when they
received federal recognition. In 1994, Congressenacted the Federally Recognized Indian TribeList Act (“List Act”) in part to prohibit the Department of the Interior’s attempts toimpermissibly “differentiate between federallyrecognized tribes as being ‘created’ or ‘historic.’”That same year, Congress enacted an amend-ment to the IRA which prohibits the federalagencies from classifying, diminishing orenhancing the privileges and immunities avail-able to a recognized tribe relative to those privileges and immunities available to otherIndian tribes. Congress has also enacted 25U.S.C. § 2202 which authorizes the Secretary toacquire land in trust for “all tribes.” The Courtentirely ignored subsequent Congressionalaction which made clear Congress’ intent thatall tribes should be treated equally under the lawregardless of the manner in which the tribe wasrecognized or the date on which the tribe wasrecognized.
To reverse the Court’s damage to Congress’
overall policy and intent, an amendment to theIRA is necessary to make clear that the benefitsof the Indian Reorganization Act are available toall Indian tribes, regardless of how or when theyachieved federal recognition. One Congressionalhearing on the subject has already been held andmore are expected.
On April 6, 2009, the Court decided United
States v. Navajo Nation (Navajo II) , part of the
ongoing litigation between the Navajo Nation,Peabody Coal and the United States (as trustee)which reached the Supreme Court in 2003. InNavajo I , the Court had held that the Indian
Mineral Leasing Act of 1938 (IMLA) and its reg-ulations did not constitute the substantivesource of law necessary to establish specifictrust duties which mandate compensation forbreach of those duties by the Government, andremanded the case for further proceedings con-sistent with its opinion. On remand the FederalCircuit held that provisions of the Navajo-HopiRehabilitation Act of 1950 and the SurfaceMining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977(SMCRA) create specific trust duties which the
Government had violated, as well as their viola-tion of the “common law trust duties of care,candor, and loyalty” that arise from the compre-hensive control exercised by the Governmentover tribal coal. Justice Scalia, writing for theCourt, found that the IMLA governed the coallease at issue here and, as the Court held inNavajo I, the IMLA does not constitute the requisite substantive source of law. The Courtfound that the provisions of the Navajo-HopiRehabilitation Act and SMCRA relied upon bythe Tribe and the Federal Circuit on remand donot apply to the coal lease. Justice Souter, joinedby Justice Stevens, concurred in the judgment,but expressed their regret that their dissent(along with Justice O’Connor) in Navajo I “did
not carry the day” back in 2003.
NARF coordinated amicus support through
the Tribal Supreme Court Project for both theCarcieri v. Salazar case and the United States v.
Navajo Nation (Navajo II) case.
A week before, on March 31, 2009, the Court
issued a unanimous opinion in State of Hawaii
v. Office of Hawaiian Affairs and reversed the
decision by the Supreme Court of Hawaii whichhad held that the State of Hawaii should beenjoined from selling or transferring “cededlands” held in trust until the claims of the nativeHawaiians to the such lands have been resolvedbased on the Apology Resolution adopted byCongress in 1993. Justice Alito, writing for theCourt, found that the “State Supreme Courtincorrectly held that Congress, by adopting theApology Resolution, took away from the citizensof the Hawaii the authority to resolve an issuethat is of great importance to the people of thestate.” The Court did, however, remand the casefor further proceeding based on possible state-law based property rights in the land in ques-tion, as well as “broader moral and politicalclaims for compensation for the wrongs of thepast” as a matter of Hawaiian law.  On behalf ofits client, the National Congress of AmericanIndians, NARF filed an amicus brief in the State
of Hawaii v. Office of Hawiian Affairs case. PAGE 10                                                                          NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNation’s Tribes Asking Congress for Swift Action on
Climate Legislation
Tribal leaders from around the country have
come to Washington, D.C., to press theirSenators and Representatives for support of federal climate legislation in 2009. Historically,tribal communities have borne the brunt of negative environmental impacts generated primarily by non-tribal activities, and are recognized by the Intergovernmental Panel onClimate Change as disproportionately impactedby the effects of global warming.
To fight global warming and preserve their
ways of life, America’s tribal governments callfor national legislation that results in mandatoryreductions in climate change pollution, thedevelopment of renewable energy sources with-in a time frame that prevents irreversible harmto public health, the economy and the environ-ment, and includes dedicated funding for fishand wildlife conservation and restoration. The tribes also call for legislation that supportstribal efforts to lessen climate change impactson tribal communities, lands and naturalresources, and cultural traditions, and providestribes with equal access to economic develop-ment opportunities presented by renewableenergy development, energy efficiency, carbontrading mechanisms, and other mitigationstrategies.
“Every day, our people are impacted by global
warming and the changes to our environment,”said Jerry Pardilla, Executive Director of theNational Tribal Environmental Council (NTEC)and member of the Penobscot Nation. “It isimportant for tribes to participate in nationalefforts to mitigate the causes of global warmingand to develop adaptation strategies for theanticipated changes in our homelands.”
NTEC, the National Congress of American
Indians (NCAI), and the Native American RightsFund (NARF), supported by the national envi-ronmental organization National WildlifeFederation (NWF), are calling for federal climatelegislation that addresses the following:
• Indian tribes, as defined in the Indian Self-
Determination and Education Assistance Act,must be sovereign partners in assessing andaddressing the problem of climate change atthe national and international levels.Legislation must accord tribes, and otherindigenous peoples worldwide, at least the status and rights recognized in the U.N.Declaration on the Rights of IndigenousPeoples and other international law.
• Indian tribes shall be provided equitable
access to the same financial and technicalresources provided to states and local govern-ments, without having to obtain treatment-as-a-state (TAS) status or meet a similar burden,to access such resources.
• Indian tribes shall be provided adequate
resources by the federal government to enablethem to assess the adverse impacts of climatechange on their culture and resources, and inpartnership with others, where appropriate, toaddress those impacts through adaptation andmitigation measures that will ensure theintegrity of their cultures, homelands, infra-structures, services, natural resources, andoff-reservation resources. These resources shallspecifically include those necessary to gatherthe traditional tribal knowledge necessary tothis process, with this knowledge given properweight in assessing and addressing climatechange.
• A set-aside of direct monies or allowances,
amounting to five percent of the value of allallowances provided for under the legislation,shall be made available for distribution toIndian tribes. In accordance with a negotiatedrulemaking process, a federal-tribal advisoryNARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 11NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDcommittee shall design and manage a program
for the implementation of mitigation andadaptation strategies to address climatechange, which shall include criteria as to howtribes would qualify for a monetary orallowance distribution. Tribes shall have theirchoice of direct monies or allowances, andconsiderable discretion in how to use suchmonies or allowances. This set-aside is justifiedby the disproportionate impact of climatechange on tribes, the difficult economic situation of many tribes, the fact that theirsurvival as peoples depends on safeguardingtheir resources on and off tribal lands, and thefederal trust responsibility to tribes.
• Indian tribes shall have direct, open access to
the necessary resources to actively engage inrenewable energy development, enact andimplement energy efficiency building codes,and provide green job transition assistance fortribal members.
• The federal tax code shall allow Indian tribes
to take advantage of opportunities available toother entities.
• Indian tribes shall have direct open access to
the necessary resources to improve theirtransportation, health, housing, water, andother infrastructures.
• Alaska Native Villages shall have direct, open
access to funding and technical assistance torelocate those communities threatened by climate change, with their free prior andinformed consent.
• Indian tribes shall have direct, open access to
the resources provided for under any offsetsprogram.
NTEC, NCAI, NARF , and NWF hope that climate
legislation will help tribes address the manychallenges posed by a changing climate.(Contacts:  Bob Gruenig, National Tribal
Environmental Council, (505) 242-2175; JoseAguto, National Congress of American Indians,(202) 553-7202; Myra Wilensky, NationalWildlife Federation, (303) 725-3157; KimGottschalk, Native American Rights Fund, (303)775-1315.)
The National Tribal Environmental Council
(NTEC) is comprised of 184 member tribes witha mission to enhance eachtribe’s ability to protect, pre-serve and promote the wisemanagement of air, land, andwater for the benefit of cur-rent and future generations.
The National Congress of
American Indians (NCAI) isthe oldest and largest inter-tribal organization in thecountry with over 250 mem-ber tribes, serving as themajor national tribal govern-ment or ganization, monitoring
federal policy and coordinatingefforts to inform federal decisions that affect tribalgovernment interests.
The National Wildlife
Federation (NWF) is America’sconservation organizationinspiring Americans to protectwildlife for our children’sfuture. NWF partners withsovereign tribal nations to solvetoday’s conservation chal-lenges for future generations.
PAGE 12                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDYup’ik-Speaking Voters Ask Supreme Court 
To Uphold Voting Rights Act
Cite State’s Discrimination against 
Alaska Natives
On March 25, 2009, four Alaska Native voters
and four tribal governments represented by theNative American Rights Fund (NARF) filed anamicus curiae (friend of the court) brief with theUnited States Supreme Court asking that theCourt find that Section 5 of the Voting RightsAct (VRA) is constitutional.  That brief followsNARF’s congressional testimony before theHouse Judiciary Committee last week aboutAlaska’s continuing failure to provide AlaskaNative voters with equal access to registrationand voting opportunities.
Alaska is one of just three states that are covered
in their entirety under Section 5 for a languageminority group, and the only one covered forNative voters.  Because of its coverage, Alaskamust provide all election materials in the AlaskaNative languages.  State and local election officials also must obtain approval from theAttorney General of the United States beforethey implement any changes in registration orvoting procedures.  When Congress reautho-rized the VRA in 2006, it found that recent evidence from Alaska had proven that there hadbeen insufficient “time to eliminate the vestigesof discrimination” against Alaska Natives. Thecase before the Supreme Court, Northwest
Austin Municipal Utility District Number One v.Mukasey , involves a constitutional challenge to
Section 5 by a municipal utility district nearAustin, Texas. 
“Alaska’s coverage under Section 5 has proven
to be an unfulfilled promise to Alaska Natives tohelp them overcome the State’s discrimination.For three decades, Alaska has largely ignored the mandate of providing language assistance,”said NARF attorney Natalie Landreth, who is co-counsel on the amicus brief.  “State officials onlyrecently began taking steps to provide languageassistance after Yup’ik voters and tribes suedthem, and a federal court ordered them to comply
with the law,” according to Landreth.  Sheadded, “Alaska’s violations of the VRA show thatfar from an unnecessary relic of a bygone era,Section 5 remains essential to combat the pre-sent realities of voting discrimination and edu-cational discrimination against Alaska Natives.”
James Tucker, co-counsel on the amicus brief,
noted, “The barriers that Alaska’s election offi-cials have put into place contributed to AlaskaNative voter turnout that was about 20 pointslower than statewide voter turnout in the 2008Presidential Election.”  He further observed,“Alaska election officials have evaded therequirements of Section 5, routinely submittingdiscriminatory voting changes and then with-drawing them when the U.S. Department ofJustice makes additional inquiries.  They haveattempted to realign predominately Nativepolling places that are sometimes more than 70miles apart and inaccessible except by air orboat.  Absent Section 5, the fragile gains thatAlaska Natives have made are at risk.”
Landreth added, “A former State official
claimed that Alaska was ‘in compliance’ with theVRA and ‘[h]appily so.’  The federal court andJustice Department found otherwise, particularlyin view of admissions that Alaska’s election officials have treated compliance with the VRAas a low priority to be ‘put aside’ in favor of othertasks.”  Landreth concluded, “Section 5 remainsessential to ensure that Alaska provides all of itscitizens, including Alaska Natives, with equalaccess to registration and voting.” ❂NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
• Americans for Indian Opportunity
• Chugachmiut, Inc.• Drumbeat Indian Arts• Native Village of Eyak• Mashantucket Pequot 
Tribal Nation
• Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma• Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe 
of Michigan• San Manuel Band 
of Mission Indians
• Seminole Tribe of Florida• Siletz Tribe of Oregon• Sycuan Band of Kumeyaay Indians• Viejas Band of Kumeyaay IndiansIt has been made abundantly clear that non-
Indian philanthropy can no longer sustainNARF’s work.  Federal funds for specific projectsare also being reduced at drastic rates. Our abilityto provide legal advocacy in a wide variety ofareas such as religious freedom, the TribalSupreme Court Project, tribal recognition,human rights, trust responsibility, tribal waterrights, Indian Child Welfare Act, and on Alaskatribal sovereignty issues has been compromised.NARF is now turning to the tribes to provide thiscrucial funding to continue our legal advocacyon behalf of Indian Country. It is an honor to listthose Tribes and Native organizations who have
chosen to share their good fortunes with theNative American Rights Fund and the thousandsof Indian clients we have served.  The generosityof Tribes is crucial in NARF’s struggle to ensurethe future of all Native Americans. We encourageother Tribes to become contributors and partnerswith NARF in fighting for justice for our peopleand in keeping the vision of our ancestors alive.We thank the following tribes and Native orga-nizations for their generous support of NARFthus far for our 2009 fiscal year – October 1,2008 to September 30, 2009:
CALLING TRIBES TO ACTION!
NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 13PAGE 14                                                                          NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNational Indian Law Library
About the Library
The National Indian Law Library (NILL) located
at the Native American Rights Fund in Boulder,Colorado is a national public library serving peopleacross the United States.  Since 1972 NILL hascollected nearly 9,000 resource materials thatrelate to federal Indian and tribal law. TheLibrary’s holdings include the largest collectionof tribal codes, ordinances and constitutions inthe United States; legal pleadings from majorAmerican Indian cases; law review articles on Indian law topics; handbooks; conferencematerials; and government documents.    
Library Services
Infor
mation access and deliver y:Library users
can access the searchable catalog whichincludes bibliographic descriptions of the libraryholdings by going directly to: http://www.narf.org/nill/index.htm or by accessing the catalogthrough the National Indian Law Library/Catalog link on the Native American RightsFund website at www.narf.org. Once relevantmaterials are identified, library patrons can thenchoose to request copies or borrow materialsthrough interlibrary loan for a nominal fee.
Resear
ch assistance: In addition to making its
catalog and extensive collection available to thepublic, the National Indian Law Library providesreference and research assistance relating toIndian law and tribal law. The library offers freeassistance as well as customized research for anominal fee. 
Keep up with changes in Indian law with
NILL ’s Indian Law Bulletins: The Indian Law
Bulletins are published by NILL in an effort keepNARF and the public informed about Indian lawdevelopments. NILL publishes timely bulletinscovering new Indian law cases, U.S. regulatoryaction, law review articles, and news on its website. (See: http://www.narf.org/nill/bulletins/ilb.htm) New bulletins are published on a regularbasis, usually every week and older informationis moved to the bulletin archive pages. Whennew information is published, NILL sends outbrief announcements and a link to the newly
revised bulletin page via e-mail. Send an e-mailto David Selden at dselden@narf.org if youwould like to subscribe to the Indian LawBulletin service. The service is free of charge!
Suppor
t the Librar y:The National Indian Law
Library is unique in that it serves the public butis notsupported by local or federal tax revenue.
NILL is a project of the Native American RightsFund and relies on private contributions frompeople like you. For information on how you cansupport the library or become a sponsor of a special project, please contact David Selden,the Law Librarian at 303-447-8760 ordselden@narf.org For more information aboutNILL, visit: http://www.narf.org/nill/index.htmLocal patrons can visit the library at 1522Broadway, Boulder, Colorado. ❂
Your Information Partner!NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 15NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDTHE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF Annual Report. This is NARF's major report on
its programs and activities.  The Annual Report is distributed to foundations, major contributors, certainfederal and state agencies, tribal clients, NativeAmerican organizations, and to others upon request.Ray Ramirez Editor, ramirez@narf.org.
The NARF Legal Review is published biannually by the
Native American Rights Fund.  Third class postage paidat Boulder, Colorado.  Ray Ramirez, Editor,ramirez@narf.org.  There is no charge for subscriptions,however, contributions are appreciated.
Tax Status .  The Native American Rights Fund is a non-
profit, charitable organization incorporated in 1971under the laws of the District of Columbia.  NARF isexempt from federal income tax under the provisions ofSection 501 C (3) of the Internal Revenue Code, andcontributions to NARF are tax deductible.  The InternalRevenue Service has ruled that NARF is not a “private
foundation” as defined in Section 509(a) of the InternalRevenue Code.
Main Office:
Native American Rights Fund 1506 Broadway, Boulder, Colorado  80302 (303-447-8760) (FAX 303-443-7776)http://www.narf.org  
Washington, D.C. Office:
Native American Rights Fund1712 N Street, NW, Washington, D.C. 20036 (202-785-4166) (FAX 202-822-0068)
Alaska Office:
Native American Rights Fund801 B. Street, Suite 401, Anchorage, Alaska 99501 (907-276-0680) (FAX 907-276-2466)The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) was
founded in 1970 to address the need for legal assis-tance on the major issues facing Indian country.  Thecritical Indian issues of survival of the tribes andNative American people are not new, but are thesame issues of survival that have merely evolved overthe centuries.  As NARF is in its thirty-ninth year ofexistence, it can be acknowledged that many of thegains achieved in Indian country over those years aredirectly attributable to the efforts and commitmentof the present and past clients and members ofNARF’s Board and staff.  However, no matter howmany gains have been achieved, NARF is stilladdressing the same basic issues that caused NARFto be founded originally.  Since the inception of thisNation, there has been a systematic attack on tribalrights that continues to this day.  For every victory, anew challenge to tribal sovereignty arises from stateand local governments, Congress, or the courts.  Thecontinuing lack of understanding, and in some caseslack of respect, for the sovereign attributes of Indiannations has made it necessary for NARF to continuefighting.NARF strives to protect the most important rights
of Indian people within the limit of availableresources.  To achieve this goal, NARF’s Board ofDirectors defined five priority areas for NARF’s work:(1) the preservation of tribal existence; (2) the pro-tection of tribal natural resources; (3) the promotionof human rights; (4) the accountability of govern-ments to Native Americans; and (5) the developmentof Indian law and educating the public about Indianrights, laws, and issues.
Requests for legal assistance should be addressed
to the Litigation Management Committee at NARF’smain office, 1506 Broadway, Boulder, Colorado80302.  NARF’s clients are expected to pay whateverthey can toward the costs of legal representation.
NARF’s success could not have been achieved with-
out the financial support that we have received fromthroughout the nation.  Your participation makes abig difference in our ability to continue to meet ever-increasing needs of impoverished Indian tribes,groups and individuals.  The support needed to sus-tain our nationwide program requires your contin-ued assistance.NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Delia Carlyle, Chairman.......................................................................... Ak Chin Indian Community
Kunani Nihipali, Vice-Chairman .............................................................................. Native HawaiianAlfred L. Berryhill........................................................................................ Muscogee (Creek) Na tion
Fred Cantu, Jr. ...................................................................................................... Saginaw Chippewa
Gerald Danforth....................................................................................................... Wisconsi n Oneida
Beasley Denson........................................................................................ Mississippi Choctaw Nati on
Billy Frank ................................................................................................................... ......... Nisqually
Richard Luarkie ....................................................................................................... Pueblo of Laguna
Lydia Olympic ................................................................................................................. . Yupik/Aleut
Anthony Pico .................................................................................. Viejas Band of Kumeyaay IndiansBarbara A. Smith.................................................................................................... Chickasaw Nation
Ron His Horse Is Thunder ................................................................................ Standing Rock SiouxWoody Widmark ............................................................................................................... S itka Tribe
Executive Director: John E. Echohawk .................................................................................... Pawne e
NARF LEGAL REVIEW • VOLUME 34, NO.1 • WINTER/SPRING 2009Native American Rights Fund
1506 Broadway
Boulder, CO 80302Non-Profit Org.
U.S. Postage
PAID
Boulder, Colorado
Permit No. 589
PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER
