“Sometimes I wonder if my votes count.
Poll workers speak to me in English, but Idon’t understand.  I didn’t understand any ofthe ballots but I still voted.  We go to vote andvote, but we don’t know what to do and how tovote.”  (Fred Augustine, Village of Alakanuk)
With the passage of the Indian Citizenship Act
(ICA) in 1924, American Indians and AlaskaNatives could vote.  Technically, this was true, butin practice it was not.  Because as soon as the ICApassed, jurisdictions started looking for ways torestrict the right to vote.  One way to do this ofcourse was through literacy tests.  Alaska had avery famous one that required the Native appli-cant to read aloud and then write sections of theU.S. Constitution.  Alaska’s literacy test lasteduntil 1970 when it was repealed – just barely – bya ballot pr oposition.  
The Voting Rights Act (VRA) had been passed in
1965 to protect racial and ethnic minorities fromdiscrimination at the polls, and in 1975 Congressamended the VRA to protect language minorities.To do so, Congress outlawed literacy tests andmandated that voting materials made available inEnglish also be made available in the minoritylanguages spoken in a given jurisdiction.  The lawcovers jurisdictions where more than 10,000 ormore than 5 percent of the voting-age persons inthat jurisdiction (usually a county, borough, orcity) speak the same minority language, have lit-eracy rates lower than the national average andhave limited proficiency in English (which isdefined as having less than a fifth grade educa-tion).  In this way, Congress does not require bal-lots and materials in every language spoken, agroup has to meet a minimum threshold, and itdoes not require them for groups that are also flu-ent in English.  To determine which jurisdictionsmust provide language assistance under Section
203, the Census Bureau relies upon returned cen-sus forms that indicate (1) location, (2) languagespoken and (3) proficiency in English.  
Jurisdictions throughout rural Alaska had been
covered by Section 203 since the law first passedin 1975.  Moreover, the Department of Justice hadregularly notified the State of Alaska, Division ofElections (DOE) which jurisdictions within theState were covered and for which language.Since Native languages are, and have been, aliveand well in rural Alaska , the DOE was routine-
VOLUME 39, NO. 2 SUMMER/FALL 2014NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
The right to vote for Alaska Natives
The Right To Vote For Alaska Natives .... page 1
Meet Hunter Cox – Siletz Grant Recipient from
the Native American Rights Fund.......... page 5
Case Updates .......................................... page 6
- Tribal Supreme Court Project update 
New NARF Board Member .................... page 8National Indian Law Library .................. page 9Calling Tribes to Action! ...................... page 10NARF .................................................... page 11NARF Board .......................................... page 12
LegalReview 11-14  11/14/14  3:20 PM  Page 1ly notified that it had to translate all election
materials into Yup'ik, Cup'ik, Siberian Yup'ik,Inupiag, and Gwich'in among others.  Despitethis very clear mandate and very clear direction,the DOE had conducted elections in English onlysince 1975 – exactly as it had done when the liter-
acy test was law.
One critical feature of Section 203, and the one
that would feature most prominently in theDOE’s policies for the next 40 years, was the so-called Stevens Proviso.  In 1975, when the VRAAmendments and Section 203 in particular werebeing debated, Senator Stevens (R-AK) arguedagainst its blind application to Alaska because heargued the very low literacy rates at the timemeant that simply providing materials in Nativelanguages would not necessarily help votersunderstand the ballot.  Instead, he argued thatAlaska Native languages were “historicallyunwritten” (a term Congress invented) and there-fore their language assistance should be providedorally, translator to voter.  Senator Stevens did
not intend, however, that Alaska Native votersreceive no materials written in their languages.On the contrary, he inserted letters and com-ments into the legislative history indicating that
the intent was to provide oral language assistanceand to provide written sample materials such asballots and candidate statements that could be
posted in public places and read by literate per-
sons to those who were not.  In other words, theStevens Proviso created supplementary languageassistance for Native languages to account for thefact that literacy levels were so low.  But theintent was clearly not to deprive Alaska Nativelanguage speakers of any information in writing– it just wasn’t supposed to be the only means ofcompliance with 203 as it was for other laguages.  
The Alaska DOE relied on the Stevens
Provision, or rather their peculiar interpretationof it, to provide no language assistance at all inthe covered communities since 1975.  Their view
PAGE 2                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Group photo:  second from left is Mike Toyukak
(lead Plaintiff), third from the left is FrankLogusak (tribal representative for Plaintiff TogiakTraditional Council), on the far right is MosesKritz (president of Plaintiff Togiak TraditionalCouncil). Mike and Frank testified in the case.LegalReview 11-14  11/14/14  3:20 PM  Page 2NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 3NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDseems to have been that since they were required
to provide only oral language assistance, bilin-gual people in the villages were all the languageassistance that was required.  The entire burdenfor providing language assistance had been shift-ed from the DOE to individual poll workers in thevillages.  However, the State never told this to theactual poll workers.  So, unbeknownst to them,they were supposed to be translating all electionmaterials for every voter in every election.  Notonly did the poll workers not know this, even ifthey had, they could not possibly translate all thecomplex election materials themselves and do socompletely and accurately.  Being bilingual ineveryday language such as traveling and orderingin a restaurant is one thing, but being able totranslate ballots written with legal terms and incollege level English is entirely different.Needless to say, election materials including bal-lots simply were not being translated.  The endresult is that a lot of people did not know whatthey were voting for.  
NARF brought a lawsuit to enforce Section 203
in 2007 called Nick v. Bethel. The plaintiffs were
four tribal councils and four individual elders inthe Bethel Census Area.  A huge swath of Alaskais not organized into any boroughs or counties sothe census had made its coverage determinationsbased on federal census areas.  In the BethelCensus Area, the first language spoken in 75 per-cent of homes was Yup'ik and the illiteracy ratewas 17 times the national average.  NARF won apreliminary injunction in July 2008 mandatingrelief for the 2008 election cycle, including sam-ple ballots written in Yup'ik.  The case was settledin January 2010 when the DOE agreed to providesome election materials in Yup'ik as well as pro-vide increased training for poll workers, amongother relief.  Because the census areas above andbelow Bethel, the Wade Hampton and DillinghamCensus Areas respectively, spoke the same lan-guage and had nearly identical statistics andneeds, the Nick Plaintiffs assumed that the samerelief would be afforded to them even thoughthey were not in the actual lawsuit. 
Beginning with the 2012 election cycle, NARF
began to receive complaints from the adjacentWade Hampton and Dillingham Census Areasthat they were receiving none of the benefits
from the Nick case and indeed almost no lan-guage assistance at all.  In fact, the DOE appearsto have been distributing sample ballots in Yup'ikin all three census areas, but restricting all otherYup'ik election materials to the Bethel CensusArea.  NARF sued the DOE again in July 2013.This time the Plaintiffs from the adjacent census areas added Fourteenth and FifteenthAmendment claims under the U.S. Constitutionbecause if you know there are language problemsand you have materials you use elsewhere butrefuse to provide, you are discriminating.  
This second case, called Toyukak v. Treadwell ,
did something very unusual for a Section 203case: it went all the way through trial.  This is notvery common for cases brought under this lawbecause jurisdictions usually do not fight theirvoters on something so simple all the way to thebitter end.  It is also generally easy to proveSection 203 cases in that the evidence consists ofthe materials made available in English and thematerials made available in the relevant lan-guage.  If they do not match one to one, there isliability.  However, what made this case drag onthrough trial was not just the DOE’s recalci-trance to change – they wanted a rule of lawestablished that, because of the Stevens Proviso,they just did not have to translate everything.  Inother words, Native language speaking voters get
less voting information than other voters. 
“This case boils down to one issue.  English
speakers receive a 100-page Official ElectionPamphlet before every election and theYup'ik speaking voters have been receivingthree things: the date of the election, thetime of the election, and a notice that lan-guage assistance will be available at the poll.That’s it.  That is a very clear violation of thelaw, and it has to change now.”  (NatalieLandreth, NARF attorney and counsel for thePlaintiffs)
During the two-week trial from June 23rd –
July 3rd, 2014, it became very clear what the elec-toral system looked like if you are a Yup'ik speaking voter. Almost no pre-election informa-tion was translated.  The “outreach workers”
LegalReview 11-14  11/14/14  3:20 PM  Page 3in the villages were supposed to be bilingual and
they were asked to translate a brief set of facts ona sheet of paper called a “certificate of outreach”:the date and time of the election, the location ofthe polling place, and the fact that languageassistance was available.  That’s it.  In contrast,English-speaking voters receive in the mail anOfficial Election Pamphlet (called the OEP) thatconsists of more than 100 pages of informationabout the candidates and all ballot measures.  Sothis case boiled down one comparison: the cer-tificate of outreach versus the OEP , and the resultwas that Native language speakers were receivingless than one percent of the information English
speaking voters were receiving. 
On September 3, 2014 the federal district court
in Anchorage found that the Plaintiffs had estab-lished violations of Section 203.  The Court thenasked for a schedule for the parties to file briefssetting forth what remedies they wanted theCourt to order.  The Defendant DOE actually rosein Court and suggested there be no changesordered for this election because there simplywasn’t time to do anything.  The Court set a brief-ing schedule anyway and issued a list of remediesto be implemented in the 2014 cycle.  It contains21 items and is eight pages long.  Although lim-ited by what could reasonably be completedbefore the election, it nonetheless orders somehighly significant changes: (1) all translatedmaterials must account for dialect variations andunderstandable to people in the different censusareas; (2) translated public service announce-ments must be made available on a variety of top-ics including the deadline to register to vote, thedeadline to request absentee ballots, the avail-ability of early voting, and specifically listing thename of the person in each village assigned toprovide voters with translated materials; (3)posters in the Native language have to be postedboth in public places like schools and stores butalso in the polling place telling voters they canreceive language assistance either from a pollworker or someone of their own choice; (5) theentire OEP had to be translated into the Nativelanguages, and (6) the Court required post-elec-tion reporting on how the DOE did in its effortsto meet the terms of the order.  The entire orderis posted on NARF’s website.  “Juk drin Diiginjik K'yaa geereekhyaa
geenjit gaayii gwiriltsaii.  Shoo tr'aaadlitts'a' hai' tr'oonyaa.  Today we have won a victory for speaking our language.  We arehappy and thankful.” (Allan Hayton,Representative of the Arctic Village Council)
The goal of this case (and the one before it), and
the goal of the Court’s interim order is equality.A level playing field.  Native voters should not bereceiving less than their English-speaking counterparts. The whole point of the 1975Amendments – and the whole point of the 14thand 15th Amendments to the Constitution – isequality. This is especially critical when the subject is voting, because voting is the core rightin a democracy and preservative of all otherrights.  These changes are way overdue. ❂
PAGE 4                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Eddie Frank,  Tribal Administrator (of Plaintiff
Venetie Village) and Tribal Council member(Venetie Tribal Government). Eddie also testifiedin the case.  With him in the picture is thefamous “blonde wolverine of Venetie”LegalReview 11-14  11/14/14  3:20 PM  Page 4NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 5NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Each summer NARF hosts the
Summer Law Clerk Program, a ten totwelve week program for second yearlaw students.  Unlike most law clerkprojects that consist mainly of legalresearch and writing, NARF’s projectsare extremely challenging becauseNARF practices before federal, state,and tribal forums, and because most ofits cases – whether administrative,trial, or appellate level – are complexand involve novel legal issues.
This summer the Law Clerk Program
was supported by a grant from theConfederated Tribes of Siletz Indiansthrough the Siletz Tribal CharitableContribution Fund.  NARF had six law clerks –two in the Alaska office, one in the Washington,D.C. office, and three in the Boulder office.  LawClerk Hunter Cox, Prairie Band of Potawatomi
Nation, was chosen to be the recipient of thisgrant due to his recent and impactful work col-laborating with NARF attorney Steve Moore toprotect the rights of Native high school studentsto wear their eagle feathers during their gradua-tion ceremony.
NARF , California Indian Legal Services (CILS),
and the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) ofNorthern California advocated on behalf of Nativestudents in Lemoore, California, who wanted towear eagle feathers at their graduation ceremony.The gift of an eagle feather is a great honor and is typically given to recognize an important tran-sition in a young person’s life.  Many graduatesare given eagle feathers in recognition of theireducational journey and the honor the graduatebrings to his or her family, community, and tribe.
Hunter Cox, along with Steve Moore, CILS , and
ACLU sent a letter on the students’ behalfrequesting the school district to allow the students to wear eagle feathers during gradua-tion.  After initially denying the students request,the school district relented once receiving the letter and allowed the students to wear theirfeathers despite originally denying the student’srequest.
NARF thanks the Confederated Tribes of Siletz
Indians and the Siletz Tribal CharitableContribution Fund for its grant to further theNARF Law Clerk Program, which allows Nativelaw students to make an impact on Indian law andto Native people during their term at NARF .
For questions regarding eagle feathers contact
Steve Moore, Native American Rights Fund at303-447-8760.  For questions about NARF’s LawClerk Program contact Matthew Campbell, NativeAmerican Rights Fund at 303-447-8760. 
❂Meet Hunter Cox – Siletz Grant Recipient 
from the Native American Rights Fund
Matt Campbell, Hunter Cox and John Echohawk.LegalReview 11-14  11/14/14  3:20 PM  Page 5PAGE 6                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDCASE UPDATES
The U.S. Supreme Court’s October Term 2014
began on Monday, October 6, 2014.  At present,the Court has accepted 40 cases for review,roughly half of the cases that will be decided dur-ing the upcoming term.  The Court has notgranted review in any Indian law cases, but hasnow requested the views of the United States inresponse to the petition filed in Dollar General
Corporation v. Mississippi Band of ChoctawIndians . In Dollar General , a non-Indian corpo-
ration is seeking review of a decision by the U.S.Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit whichupheld Tribal Court jurisdiction over tort claimsbrought by a tribal member based on a consensualrelationship between the store owned by DollarGeneral and the Tribe.  The store is located ontribal trust land leased to the non-Indian corpo-ration and the store agreed to participate in ayouth job training program operated by theTribe.  A tribal member who participated in theprogram brought an action in Tribal Court alleg-ing that he was assaulted by the store manager.
In its petition, Dollar General frames the ques-tion presented as follows:  “The case accordinglypresents the issue left open in Hicks and theQuestion the Court granted certiorari to decidein Plains Commerce :  Whether Indian tribal
courts have jurisdiction to adjudicate civil tortclaims against nonmembers, including as ameans of regulating the conduct of nonmemberswho enter into consensual relationships with atribe or its members.”  The U.S. Solicitor Generalwill likely file a brief on behalf of the UnitedStates before the end of the year.
The Court has held-over the petition filed in
Knight v. Thompson as it considers the petition
filed in Holt v. Hobbs . On October 7, 2014, the
Court heard oral argument in Holt. Both HoltTribal Supreme Court Project update 
A Choctaw family in traditional clothing, 1908
LegalReview 11-14  11/14/14  3:20 PM  Page 6NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 7NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
and Knight involve challenges by inmates to
prison grooming policies under the ReligiousLand Use and Institutionalized Persons Act of2000 (RLUIPA). In Knight , the Alabama
Department of Corrections requires all maleprison inmates to wear a “regular haircut,”defined as “off neck and ears,” with no exemp-tions, including Native American male inmateswho seek a religious exemption based on wearinglong hair as a central tenet of their religious faith.In Holt, the Court is considering a RLUIPA chal-lenge by a Muslim prisoner to the grooming pol-icy of the Arkansas Department of Correctionsprohibiting beards of any length. Overall, theargument seemed to go well for Mr. Holt, but thequestion is whether the Court will be able to setforth a legal principle that can be broadly appliedthrough its opinion in this case.  The Justicesappeared to be struggling to find the right for-mula to balance the due deference afforded toprison officials under RLUIPA against its leastrestrictive means requirement in relation to cer-tain grooming policies which on their face (nopun intended) do not raise security or safetyissues.
Currently, several petitions for a writ of certio-
rari have been filed in Indian law and Indian law-related cases and are pending before the Court:  
In MM&A Productions, LLC v. Yavapai Apache
Nation , on October 9, 2014, an entertainment
production consultant which produces and mar-kets entertainment programs for Indian casinosfiled a petition seeking review of a decision by theArizona Court of Appeals which affirmed the trialcourt’s dismissal of a contract action for lack ofsubject matter jurisdiction based on the doctrineof tribal sovereign immunity. Specifically, thequestion presented is “whether the authority of atribal official who signs a waiver of sovereignimmunity may be established under the doctrineof apparent authority.”  
In Seminole Tribe of Florida v. State of Florida ,
on September 25, 2014, the Seminole Tribe ofFlorida filed a petition seeking review of a deci-sion by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the EleventhCircuit which held that state sovereign immunitybars the tribe’s suit for declaratory relief and its
effort to enjoin state officials from unlawfully col-lecting motor fuel excise taxes from the tribe.The State of Florida has established a pre-collec-tion tax regime whereby exempt entities mustpetition for a refund of motor fuel taxes.According to the Eleventh Circuit, since anyrelief would necessarily come out of the statetreasury, the tribe’s suit falls outside the Ex Parte
Young doctrine which permits suit against state
officials for prospective relief only.  
In Friends of Amador County v. Jewell , on
September 18, 2014, Friends of Amador County(FOAC), a community organization opposed tothe development of additional casinos in thecounty, filed a petition seeking review of a deci-sion by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the NinthCircuit which affirmed the district court’s deci-sion that the Buena Vista Rancheria is a requiredand indispensable party under Rule 19 who can-not be joined under the doctrine of tribal sover-eign immunity. In the underlying action, FOACfiled several claims challenging the Tribe’s gam-ing compact with California, including: (1)whether certain lands qualify as “Indian lands”under IGRA; and (2) whether the federal govern-ment erred in granting the tribe federal recogni-tion. Specifically, the Question Presented in thepetition is: “Whether in an action by a third partyagainst the Secretary of the Interior under theAdministrative Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C. 551 et seq. ,
a putative Indian tribe may invoke its sovereignimmunity to prevent a court from reviewing thelawfulness of the Secretary’s decision to recog-nize it as a tribe.” 
❂
LegalReview 11-14  11/14/14  3:20 PM  Page 7PAGE 8                                                                           NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNARF’s newest Board member Robert McGhee ,
an enrolled member of the Poarch Band of CreekIndians, has been involved in and an advocate forNative American issues at all levels of govern-ment.  Mr. McGhee is currently serving his thirdterm on the Poarch Band of Creek Indians TribalCouncil, in which he holds the position ofTreasurer.  In this capacity Mr. McGhee is hon-ored to represent his people “government-to-gov-ernment” at the local, state, and federal levelsregarding issues of education, health care, eco-nomic development and sovereign immunity.  
Prior to moving back to Atmore, Alabama,
Robert McGhee worked in Washington, D.C. forapproximately five years at the Department ofInterior-Bureau of Indian Affairs, the UnitedStates Senate Committee on Indian Affairs, andTroutman Sanders LLP-Indian Law PracticeGroup.
Before accepting the position of Governmental
Relations Advisor for the Poarch Band of CreekIndians, Mr. McGhee served in several capacitiesfor the Tribe.  He was employed by the Tribe as theTribal Administrator, the governmental entity ofthe Tribe, and President of Creek IndianEnterprises (CIE), the Economic Developmententity of the Poarch Band of Creek Indians. 
Mr. McGhee received a bachelor’s degree from
the University of South Alabama and a BSW fromthe University of Alabama.  He also holds a MSWfrom Washington University in St. Louis, MO.  Mr.McGhee has also completed the GeorgetownExecutive Leadership Program in Washington,D.C. and a course at American University PublicPolicy Institute regarding Congress and EffectiveLobbying Practices.  He recently received hisExecutive Masters in Business Administrationfrom the University of Tennessee Knoxville.During his tenure in DC and at the Poarch BandNEW NARF BOARD MEMBER
of Creek Indians, Mr. McGhee has had the oppor-
tunity to serve on numerous White HouseInitiatives and boards.  Currently he serves on theTribe’s Governmental Affairs/Rules LegislativeCommittee, the Budget/Finance Committee, theBoard of Directors for United South and EasternTribes, is a member of Secretary Sebelius’ Healthand Human Services Tribal Advisory Committeeand was recently appointed to the Board ofAdvisors for the Center for Native AmericanYouth.  Civically, he has served as the VicePresident of the Atmore Chamber of Commerceand the Vice Chairman of the Episcopal Councilof Indigenous Ministries. 
The NARF Board of Directors and staff welcome
Robert McGhee and look forward to serving withhim. 
❂LegalReview 11-14  11/14/14  3:20 PM  Page 8NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 9NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNational Indian Law Library
Advance Justice through Knowledge! Support
the National Indian Law Library!
You probably are familiar with the great work
NARF does in court rooms and the halls ofCongress relating to tribal recognition, treatyenforcement, trust fund settlements, repatriation,and more.  Did you know that NARF also is thego-to resource for legal research in Indian law?
Historically, Indian people and advocates
fighting for indigenous rights have found them-selves limited by their ability to access relevantfederal, state, and tribal Indian law resources. Indirect response to this challenge, the NationalIndian Law Library (NILL) was established overforty years ago as a core part of the NativeAmerican Rights Fund (NARF). Today the librarycontinues to serve as an essential resource forthose working to advance Native American justice.  As the only public library devoted toIndian law, we supply much-needed access toIndian law research, news updates, and triballaw documents.  To extend the tradition of freepublic access to these services we ask for yourfinancial support. 
Each year, NILL responds to more than 2,000
individual research requests and receives sever-al hundred thousand visits to its onlineresources. Whether it’s through updates to the
ICW
A Info Blog or additions to the extensive
tribal law collection , NILL is committed to pro-
viding visitors with resources that are not avail-able anywhere else!  Additionally, our Indian
Law Bulletins and news blog deliver timely
updates about developments in Indian law andensure that you have the information you needto fight for indigenous rights.  However, we arenot resting on our laurels; we are constantlyimproving our online resources and access totribal law materials.  With your support, in the
coming year, we plan to publish more tribal lawand an innovative and a valuable audio directoryproviding the correct pronunciation for all 566federally recognized tribal nations.   
The bulletins, research resources, extensive
catalog, and personal one-on-one librarianassistance can only exist with your help. The
National Indian Law Library operates on anannual budget of $240,000—primarily from thedonations of concerned and motivated individu-als, firms, businesses, and tribes who recognizeNARF and NILL as indispensable resources forNative American justice.  
By donating, you stand with the National
Indian Law Library in its effort to fight injus-tice through access to knowledge. You help
ensure that the library continues to supply freeaccess to Indian law resources and that it hasthe financial means necessary to pursue innova-tive and groundbreaking projects to serve youbetter.  Please visit www
.narf.org/nill/donate now
for more information on how you can supportthis mission. ❂Research Support for the Public!
LegalReview 11-14  11/14/14  3:20 PM  Page 9PAGE 10                                                                          NARF LEGAL REVIEWNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
• Amerind Risk Management 
• Bay Bank (Oneida)• Chickasaw Nation• Comanche Nation of Oklahoma• Confederated Salish 
& Kootenai Tribes
• Confederated Tribes 
of Siletz Indians
• Cow Creek Band of Umpqua
Tribe of Indians
• Fort Mojave Indian Tribe• Lummi Nation• Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma• Muckleshoot Tribe
• Native Village of Fort Yukon• Native Village of Port Lions• Nome Eskimo Community• Nottawaseppi Huron Band 
of Potawatomi
• Oneida Tribe of Indians 
of Wisconsin
• Organized Village of Saxman• Pechanga Band 
of Luiseno Indians
• Poarch Band of Creek Indians• San Manuel Band 
of Mission Indians• Seminole Tribe of Florida
• Seven Cedars Casino/
Jamestown S’Klallam
• Shakopee Mdewakanton Sioux
Community
• Spirit Lake Dakotah Nation• Sycuan Band of Kumeyaay• Tonkawa Tribe• Tulalip Tribes• Twenty-Nine Palms Band 
of Mission Indians
• Yoche Dehe Wintun NationIt has been made abundantly clear that non-
Indian philanthropy can no longer sustainNARF’s work.  Federal funds for specific projectshave also been reduced.  Our ability to providelegal advocacy in a wide variety of areas such asreligious freedom, the Tribal Supreme CourtProject, tribal recognition, human rights, trustresponsibility, tribal water rights, Indian ChildWelfare Act, and on Alaska tribal sovereigntyissues has been compromised.  NARF is nowturning to the tribes to provide this crucialfunding to continue our legal advocacy onbehalf of Indian Country.  It is an honor to listthose Tribes and Native organizations who havechosen to share their good fortunes with theNative American Rights Fund and the thousands
of Indian clients we have served.  
The generosity of tribes is crucial in NARF’s
struggle to ensure the freedoms and rights of allNative Americans. Contributions from thesetribes should be an example for every NativeAmerican Tribe and organization. We encourageother Tribes to become contributors and partners with NARF in fighting for justice forour people and in keeping the vision of ourancestors alive.  We thank the following tribesand Native organizations for their generous support of NARF for our 2014 fiscal year –October 1, 2013 to September 30, 2014:
CALLING TRIBES TO ACTIONLegalReview 11-14  11/14/14  3:20 PM  Page 10NARF LEGAL REVIEW                                                                           PAGE 11NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDTHE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
NARF Annual Report: This is NARF's major report on its programs and
activities.  The Annual Report is distributed to foundations, major con-tributors, certain federal and state agencies, tribal clients, NativeAmerican organizations, and to others upon request.  Ray RamirezEditor, ramirez@narf.org.  
The NARF Legal Review is published biannually by the Native American
Rights Fund.  Third class postage paid at Boulder, Colorado.  RayRamirez, Editor, ramirez@narf.org.  There is no charge for subscrip-tions, however, contributions are appreciated.
Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund is a nonprofit, charitable
organization incorporated in 1971 under the laws of the District ofColumbia.  NARF is exempt from federal income tax under the provi-sions of Section 501 C (3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and contribu-tions to NARF are tax deductible.  The Internal Revenue Service hasruled that NARF is not a “private foundation” as defined in Section 509(a)
of the Internal Revenue Code.
Main Office: Native American Rights Fund, 1506 Broadway, Boulder,
Colorado  80302 (303-447-8760) (FAX 303-443-7776).  http://www.narf.org
Washington, D.C. Office: Native American Rights Fund, 1514 P Street,
NW (Rear) Suite D, Washington, D.C. 20005 (202-785-4166) (FAX 202-822-0068).
Alaska Office: Native American Rights Fund, 745 W. 4th Avenue, Suite
502, Anchorage, Alaska 99501 (907-276-0680) (FAX 907-276-2466).
Workplace Campaigns: NARF is a member of America’s Charities, a
national workplace giving federation. Giving through your workplace isas easy as checking off NARF’s box, #10350 on the Combined FederalCampaign (CFC) pledge form authorizing automatic payroll deduction.  The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is the oldest and
largest nonprofit national Indian rights organization in the countrydevoting all its efforts to defending and promoting the legalrights of Indian people on issues essential to their tribal sover-eignty, their natural resources and their human rights. NARFbelieves in empowering individuals and communities whoserights, economic self-sufficiency, and political participation havebeen systematically or systemically eroded or undermined. 
Native Americans have been subjugated and dominated.
Having been stripped of their land, resources and dignity, tribestoday are controlled by a myriad of federal treaties, statutes, andcase law. Yet it is within these laws that Native Americans placetheir hope and faith for justice and the protection of their way oflife. With NARF’s help, Native people can go on to provide leader-ship in their communities and serve as catalysts for just policiesand practices towards Native peoples nationwide. From a histori-cal standpoint Native Americans have, for numerous reasons,been targets of discriminatory practices.
Since its inception in 1970, NARF has represented over 250
Tribes in 31 states in such areas as tribal jurisdiction and recog-nition, land claims, hunting and fishing rights, the protection ofIndian religious freedom, and many others. In addition to thegreat strides NARF has made in achieving justice on behalf ofNative American people, perhaps NARF’s greatest distinguishingattribute has been its ability to bring excellent, highly ethicallegal representation to dispossessed tribes. NARF has been suc-cessful in representing Indian tribes and individuals in cases thathave encompassed every area and issue in the field of Indian law.The accomplishments and growth of NARF over the years con-firmed the great need for Indian legal representation on a nation-al basis. This legal advocacy on behalf of Native Americans con-tinues to play a vital role in the survival of tribes and their way oflife. NARF strives to protect the most important rights of Indianpeople within the limit of available resources. 
One of the initial responsibilities of NARF’s first Board of
Directors was to develop priorities that would guide the NativeAmerican Rights Fund in its mission to preserve and enforce thelegal rights of Native Americans.  The Committee developed fivepriorities that continue to lead NARF today:
• Preservation of tribal existence
• Protection of tribal natural resources• Promotion of Native American human rights• Accountability of governments to Native Americans• Development of Indian law and educating the public about
Indian rights, laws, and issuesUnder the priority of the preservation of tribal existence, NARF
works to construct the foundations that are necessary to empowertribes so that they can continue to live according to their Nativetraditions, to enforce their treaty rights, to insure their indepen-dence on reservations and to protect their sovereignty.
Throughout the process of European conquest and coloniza-
tion of North America, Indian tribes experienced a steady dimin-ishment of their land base to a mere 2.3 percent of its originalsize.  Currently, there are approximately 55 million acres ofIndian-controlled land in the continental United States and about44 million acres of Native-owned land in Alaska.  An adequateland base and control over natural resources are central compo-nents of economic self-sufficiency and self-determination, and assuch, are vital to the very existence of tribes.  Thus, much ofNARF’s work involves the protection of tribal natural resources.
Although basic human rights are considered a universal and
inalienable entitlement, Native Americans face an ongoing threatof having their rights undermined by the United States govern-ment, states, and others who seek to limit these rights. Under thepriority of the promotion of human rights, NARF strives toenforce and strengthen laws which are designed to protect therights of Native Americans to practice their traditional religion,to use their own language, and to enjoy their culture.  Containedwithin the unique trust relationship between the United Statesand Indian nations is the inherent duty for all levels of govern-ment to recognize and responsibly enforce the many laws andregulations applicable to Indian peoples.  Because such lawsimpact virtually every aspect of tribal life, NARF maintains itsinvolvement in the legal matters pertaining to accountability of
governments to Native Americans.
The coordinated development of Indian law and educating the
public about Indian rights, laws, and issues is essential for the
continued protection of Indian rights.  This primarily involvesestablishing favorable court precedents, distributing informationand law materials, encouraging and fostering Indian legal educa-tion, and forming alliances with Indian law practitioners andother Indian organizations. 
Requests for legal assistance should be addressed to the
Litigation Management Committee at NARF’s main office, 1506 Broadway, Boulder, Colorado 80302.  NARF’s clients areexpected to pay whatever they can toward the costs of legal representation. 
❂LegalReview 11-14  11/14/14  3:20 PM  Page 11NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Moses Haia, Chairman .............................................................................................. Native Hawai ian
Mark Macarro, Vice-Chairman .................................................. Pechanga Band of Luiseño IndiansKurt BlueDog ...................................... Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate of the Lake Traverse ReservationVirginia Cross ........................................................................................................ Mucklesh oot Tribe
Tex G. Hall ........................................................................................................ Three Affil iated Tribes
Gary Hayes ………………………………………………………………. Ute Mountain Ute TribeJulie Roberts-Hyslop …………………………………………………… Native Village of TananaStephen Lewis ……………………………………………………... Gila River Indian Community Robert McGhee .................................................................................... Poarch Band of Creek IndiansLarry N. Olinger .................................................................. Aqua Caliente Band of Cahuilla IndiansRichard Peterson .................................................................................. Tlingit & Haida Indian TribesPeter Pino ……………………………………………………………………………….Zia PuebloBarbara Anne Smith .............................................................................................. Chickasaw Nati on
Executive Director: John E. Echohawk .................................................................................. Pawnee
NARF LEGAL REVIEW • VOLUME 39, NO. 2 • SUMMER/FALL 2014Native American Rights Fund
1506 Broadway
Boulder, CO 80302Non-Profit Org.
U.S. Postage
PPAAIIDD
Boulder, Colorado
Permit No. 589
PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER
LegalReview 11-14  11/14/14  3:20 PM  Page 12