1 
 36th session of the Human Rights Council  
 
Annual half -day discussion on the rights of indigenous peoples  
Theme: Tenth anniversary of the adoption of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of 
Indigenous Peoples  
September 20, 2017 [9 am-12p] 
Statement of Karla E. Kawenniiostha General*  
 
Mr. Chair, Excellenc ies, Delegates, Representatives : 
 She:kon sewakwekon. Kaweniiostha ionkiats. My name is Karla General and 
my Mohawk name is Kawenniiostha, which means “she brings good words.”  I 
want to star t this morning  by asking a question:  “Do you really believe that all 
peoples are entitled to equal protection of international law? Do you really 
believe that treaty pledges should be kept?” My great -grandfather asked the 
same question of nation -states in 1923. Indigenous peoples around the world 
deserve an answer, an affirmative answer , and one that is met with action.  
It is such an honor to have the opportunity to address you today. It is 
actually quite remarkable. My great -grandfather was here in Gen eva almost 100 
years ago and attempted to do the same , but he was not allowed to address the 
League of Nations directly . My great -grandfather’s name was Levi General, Chief 
Deskaheh, he represented one of the oldest peoples and governments in the 
world – the Cayuga Nation of the Six Nations or Haudenosaunee – and his 
objective was to win support from the international community to stop the 
human rights violations his people were suffer ing.  
We have come a long way since those dark times.  In 2007, after 30 years of 
debate, the United Nations adopted its Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous 
Peoples.  Adoption of the Declaration was a historic achievement and the most 
significant develop ment in international human rights law in decades. And yet, we 
have many challenges ahead. Because it is also remarkable that, in 2017, almost a 
century after Deskaheh first attempted to address the world community, that 
authentic and representative indige nous voices are still denied access to the UN. 2 
 The Council and other UN bodies recognize that their existing rules do not 
generally permit the participation of indigenous peoples’ governments at the UN 
as such , unless they are able to acquire consultative status as non -governmental 
organizations. But, indigenous governments are not NGOs.  
To address this implementation gap, in 2014, member states committed at 
the Wor ld Conference on Indigenous Peoples to consider ways to enable the 
participation of indigenous peoples’ representative institutions  at the UN . After 
almost two years of consultations among indigenous peoples, member states, and 
UN bodies, and months of intergovernmental negotiations  this summer , member 
states failed to reach consensus  on a substantive resolution. On September 8 , the 
General Assembly adopted a  compromise  resolution  that simply encourages other 
UN bodies to enhance participation , delays a potential substantive decision in the 
General Assembly until its 75th session , and once  again, deliberately denies the 
opportunity for indigenous governments to participate in matters affecting their 
interests at the international level.  
This is t he most pressing issue of our time. Without authentic indigenous 
voices, decisions made in international forums will not be responsive to the lived 
realities  of indigenous peoples at home . If indigenous voices continue to be left 
out of decision -making, the most horrific rights violations of our times will 
continue – the killings of land defenders a nd human rights activists, the land grabs 
and rush for natural resources, the epidemic levels of violence against and 
trafficking of women and children, the movement of extractive industry to 
indigenous lands , and continued destruction of  our cultural ways of living . And 
even when a domestic legal victory is achieved, its impact can be limited, because 
our rights are not always guaranteed when the rule of law does not exist for 
indigenous peoples. It is morally reprehensible that killings of indigenous peoples 
like those in the Amazon recently , continue to occur and continue to go on 
unprosecuted. Last year , as reported by the Special Rapporteur on the rights of 
indigenous peoples, 281 human rights defenders were murdered in 25 countries – 
more than double the number who died in 2014. Half of them were working to 
defend their land  rights , indigenous and environmental rights.  If indigenous 
peoples had a voice at the UN, they could tell you themselves that their situation 3 
 has improved very lit tle in the ten years since adoption of the Declaration, 
because decisions continue to be made without the benefit of their views and 
experience. This has to change, and we, collectively, are in a position to help 
make that change. When indigenous voices ar e heard, debate and dialogue are 
strengthened, and proposed solutions are more responsive and effective.  
Our indigenous youth have a significant role to play in this work. They are 
citizens of the world and citizens of our tribal nations, and they have much to 
contribute to the international dialogue on human rights. In the United States, 
youth under the age of 24 represent 40 percent  of self-identified Amer ican 
Indians and Alask a Natives today, numbers that continue to grow as tribal 
communities become stronger, more self -determined, and provide more 
opportunities for their youth to contribute to the development of their nations. 
Yet, historical trauma, chronically underfunded pr ograms, ineffective policies, and 
failure to meet trust responsibilities to tribes have all contributed to negative 
health, education, and economic disparities for American Indians and Alaska 
Natives. The Declaration provides the tools to change this narra tive. Tribal nations 
have been working to incorporate the Declaration into their own tribal 
constitutions, statutes, and legal systems to better protect the human rights of 
their own citizens. And we see more and more indigenous youth stepping forward 
to b etter understand the international frameworks to strengthen their advocacy 
efforts and fight for the survival of their tribal nations , like efforts to oppose 
construction of the Dakota Access Pipeline at Standing Rock . We should be 
supporting and respectin g these young leaders, including  by providing the 
necessary seat at the table for their tribal governments at the UN.  
The 2014 World Conference on Indi genous Peoples presented a rare  
opportunity to implement the Declaration; to make decisions t hat would effect 
positive change in the lives of indigenous peoples and curtail rights violations. 
Together with over 150 tribal nations and indigenous organizations, the Indian 
Law Resource Center advocated for concrete steps the UN could take to achieve 
the objecti ves of the Declaration. The Outcome Document reflected these 
proposals and achieved two important things: it recommitted member states to 4 
 the rights of indigenous peoples and it resulted in new  commitments to establish 
international mechanisms to further implement the Declaration.  
One such mechanism is the Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous 
Peoples, which the Council decided to strengthen last year , providing it with new 
authority to address human rights violations. A Declaration will not go very far 
unless it has a serious implementing and monitoring body. The Mechanism can 
become the  credible independent body that can monitor and report  on states’ 
compliance with  the Declaration and that can engage with local actors to ensure 
recommendations  by international bodies and mechanisms are respected and 
fulfilled. The Mechanism can issue status reports and studies on indigenous 
peoples’ rights globally and on good practices regarding efforts to achieve the 
goals identified in the Declaration based on information and recommendations 
received from member states, indigenous peoples, and others. The body can 
report to the Council the necessary facts and information to respond seriously 
and effectively to rights violations and implementation failures. Be yond reporting, 
the body can seek, gather, and disseminate information about implementation 
and violations of indigenous rights by participating in regional or national 
gatherings of indigenous leaders and by actively seeking information from 
indigenous co mmunities.  The Mechanism can provide advice to member states 
and indigenous peoples about technical matters , like how states can develop new 
laws to protect indigenous rights or to eliminate harmful elements already in 
domestic law – elements like those that leave indigenous land and resources 
without protection or indigenous women and girls without justice when they are 
targeted f or sexual assault, violence , or trafficking.  
The Mechanism is also able to assist states with implementation of existing 
recom mendations of treaty bodies and the Universal Periodic Review , and to 
coordinate its work with other UN bodies and special procedures.  Such 
collaboration is critical. The Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous 
peoples is just one person. The Mechan ism is now seven and can provide the 
necessary support to work across UN agencies and bodies to bring indigenous 
rights to full fruition , and to translate its mandate into institutional practices and 
procedures that will improve the lives of indigenous peo ples and advance the 5 
 objectives of the Declaration at the international level . To be successful, the 
Mechanism will need adequate technical and financial capacity, and it will need 
the support of member states, the Human Rights Council, and of indigenous 
peoples, nations, and communities. The grave and urgent situation indigenous 
peoples are facing demand UN attention to redouble efforts to increase 
awareness of the Declaration and to encourage the Mechanism to utilize its new 
mandate to respond aggressivel y to rights violations.  
Implementation of the Declaration and the Outcome Document  are an 
ongoing challenge that will take time. It is the work of generations, and it  is 
essential the information and tools to continue the work are passed on  to our 
youth. Indigenous youth, along with their leaders, must be aware of their rights, 
educated about the international human rights system, and trained to utilize 
opportunities like those provided by the World Conference to implement their 
rights. Indigenous youth mu st be ready to stand alongside their elders  and 
continue the work of their ancestors who worked tirelessly to exercise their rights 
and to win recognition of those rights by the international community.  The best 
path forward in the implementation work is to open the door of the UN to 
responsible genuine indigenous leaders accountable to their people and 
communities. Behind credible indigenous leaders, there are more indigenous 
youth, more advocates, more indigenous voices, ready and eager to  participate  
and contribute to the work of the United Nations.  
The Declaration has empowered indigenous peoples to speak out and to 
stand up, and it has provided a platform for indigenous peoples to come together 
to call for much -needed changes in the laws and polic ies, and institutional 
practices and behaviors, that have hindered and discriminated against indigenous 
peoples for far too long. Now, we have the tools to determine when our rights are 
violated  and to pursue remed ies and reparations – we ha ve a measuring s tick and 
a guiding compass . Yet, for the  Declaration to become more than  a set of guiding 
principles and aspiration , it will need mechanisms for implementation at the local, 
region al, and internat ional levels;  most importantly, it will need the respect and  
recognition of your governments.  Let us work together to ensure the principles 6 
 and purposes of the  Declaration and the UN Charter are met and that all peoples 
are entitled to the equal protection of international law. Niawenkowa .  
 
 
  
*Karla E. General (M ohawk) is a Staff Attorney  at the Indian Law Resource Center  (Center)  in Washington, D.C.  Founded in 
1978, the Center is  a nonprofit law and advocacy organization established and  directed by American Indians . The Center 
provides legal assistance to  indigenous peoples in the Americas  who are working to protect their lands, resources, human 
rights, environment, and cultural heritage.  Karla  serves as the project director for the Center’s  World Conference on Indigenous 
Peoples  and the  American Declaratio n on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples  projects, which work to assist indigenous peoples to 
realize their human rights and to implement  international  law and  human rights  instruments such as the United Nations 
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples  and the American Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. Karla also 
contributes to the Center’s domestic litigation and law reform projects, including the  Safe Women, Strong 
Nations  project  which works to end violence against American Indian and Alaska Native women and its devastating impacts on 
Native communities.  Mrs. General is Deer Clan and was raised on  the Akwesasne  Mohawk Territory.  She earned 
her Juris  Doctor with a Certificate in Global Law and Practice from Syracuse University College of  Law and Master's degree in 
Sociology from the Maxwell School  in 2010.  She received her Bachelor of Arts in Government and Sociology  cum laude  from 
Saint  Lawrence University in Canton, New York,  in 2007. Karla is licensed to practice law  in New  York, is a member of the Native 
American Bar Association of DC,  and serves as an Associate Justice on the St. Regis Mohawk Tribal Appellate Court.  
 
 