		New	Information	from	ICE	ERO’s	July	Facility	List		ICE	ERO’s	Facility	List	from	July	10,	20171	was	recently	obtained	by	Detention	Watch	Network	and	the	Center	for	Constitutional	Rights	as	part	of	a	Freedom	of	Information	Act	(FOIA)	lawsuit,2	and	is	an	updated	version	of	a	similar	spreadsheet	from	2015.3			The	spreadsheet	contains	a	snapshot	of	the	immigration	detention	system,	including	all	the	facilities	in	use	on	July	10th,	their	capacity,	population	count,	average	daily	population	over	the	course	of	several	years,	facility	operator,	some	limited	details	about	the	contract	that	governs	that	facility	and	recent	inspection	results.4	The	fact	that	this	update,	which	should	be	routinely	provided	to	the	public,	is	only	available	through	litigation	is	further	evidence	of	ongoing	and	systemic	problems	with	transparency	by	ICE	concerning	immigration	detention.				Detention	Statistics		• 201	detention	facilities	• 35,929	people	detained	on	average	in	FY17	through	July	10	(not	including	family	detention	or	women	detained	at	Hutto)	• 26,249	or	73%	of	people	held	in	privatized	facilities5		Additionally,	information	contained	within	this	spreadsheet:		1. Suggests	that	ICE	is	unconcerned	with	Congressional	oversight	a. In	the	FY17	Omnibus	Appropriations	bill,	Congress	inserted	language	requiring	that	any	new	detention	contracts	needed	to	comply	with	the	most	recent	version	of	the	detention	standards	(Performance-based	National	Detention	Standards	of	2011),	or	that	ICE	needed	to	submit	a	report	explaining	why	they	were	unable	to	do	so.6	This	spreadsheet	shows	three	new	IGSA	detention	contracts	that	were	not	included	in	the	May	2017	list	(Beaver																																																									1	Spreadsheet	of	information	about	detention	facilities	from	Immigration	and	Custom	Enforcement’s	(ICE)	Enforcement	and	Removal	Operations	(ERO)	division,	available	at:	https://www.detentionwatchnetwork.org/sites/default/files/Confidential%20ICE%20ERO%20Facility%20List%2007-10-2017-1-1.xlsx		2	Detention	Watch	Network	(DWN)	and	Center	for	Constitutional	Rights	(CCR)	v.	Immigration	and	Customs	Enforcement	(ICE)	and	Department	of	Homeland	Security	(DHS),	all	case	documents	available		at	https://ccrjustice.org/home/what-we-do/our-cases/detention-watch-network-dwn-v-immigration-customs-and-enforcement-ice-and		3	Available	at	https://www.immigrantjustice.org/ice-detention-facility-list-december-2015		4	Note	that	this	spreadsheet	does	not	include	the	four	facilities	governed	by	the	family	residential	standards:	Dilley,	Karnes,	and	Hutto	in	TX	and	Berks	in	PA.	5	Note	that	this	percentage	would	be	higher	if	the	four	missing	facilities	were	included	since	Hutto,	Karnes	and	Dilley	are	all	privately	run	(Berks	is	publicly	run,	but	much	smaller	than	the	other	three).		6	See	page	70,	Division	F	of	the	DHS	Appropriations	Act	of	2017	here:	http://docs.house.gov/billsthisweek/20170501/DIVISION%20F-%20HOMELAND%20SOM%20OCR%20FY17.pdf		
County,	PA;	Tom	Green	County,	TX	and	Taylor	County,	TX).7	All	are	contracted	at	the	lowest	level	of	detention	standards	from	2000.	It	appears	that	ICE	did	not	submit	the	required	report	to	Congress.	b. In	FY09,	Congress	added	report	language	to	the	DHS	Appropriations	bill	requiring	that	ICE	terminate	contracts	for	any	facility	that	failed	two	consecutive	inspections.8	For	the	last	three	years,	organizations	have	raised	concerns	that	ICE	was	holding	final	inspection	results	pending	for	long	periods	of	time—both	undermining	the	integrity	of	the	inspections	regime,	and	preventing	the	failed	inspections	from	triggering	the	Congressionally-mandated	consequence.	This	spreadsheet	shows	that	ICE	has	continued	to	exploit	this	loophole.			2. Casts	doubt	on	ICE’s	claims	that	its	cost	per	detention	bed	are	increasing	a. ICE’s	funding	for	immigration	detention	is	based	on	a	simple	calculation:	the	average	cost	per	detention	bed	multiplied	by	the	average	number	of	people	per	day	to	be	detained.	In	FY18,	ICE	is	attempting	to	increase	its	overall	funding	by	not	only	arguing	for	an	expansion	in	the	number	of	detention	beds,	but	also	by	saying	that	the	average	cost	per	detention	bed	is	increasing.9		b. Given	that	ICE	has	announced	plans	to	significantly	decrease	detention	standards	in	the	majority	of	detention	facilities,10	this	is	confusing.	Furthermore,	this	spreadsheet	shows	a	large	number	of	inter-governmental	service	agreement	(IGSA)	detention	contracts11	that	have	been	created	or	reactivated	this	calendar	year	(Column	B,	green	highlight).	On	average,	they	have	significantly	lower	per	diem	payments	than	average,	including	some	as	low	as	$30	per	day,	significantly	below	the	average	rate	of	$114.22.12			3. Points	to	a	worrying	increase	in	the	combination	of	287(g)	agreements13	and	IGSA	detention	contracts	a. While	both	of	these	programs	have	existed	for	a	long	time,	this	spreadsheet	shows	a	significant	increase	in	the	number	of	localities	participating	in	both.	In	total,	32	detention	facilities	are	in	localities	that	also	have	signed	a	287(g)	agreement	with	ICE	(Column	E,	red	highlight),	and	four	detention	facilities	are	in	localities	with	currently	pending	applications	(Column	E,	orange	highlight).	Of	the	54	IGSAs	that	are	new	or	reactivated	this	calendar	year,	13	have	a	287(g)	agreement,	and	two	more	have	a	pending	application.																																																										7	Before	receiving	this	spreadsheet,	the	most	up-to-date	list	of	detention	facilities	was	from	May	2017,	though	that	list	does	not	include	most	other	accompanying	information.		8	See	page	36,	Division	F	of	the	DHS	Appropriations	Act	of	2017	here:	http://docs.house.gov/billsthisweek/20170501/DIVISION%20F-%20HOMELAND%20SOM%20OCR%20FY17.pdf	9	This	was	communicated	to	the	author	by	multiple	Congressional	appropriations	staffers,	and	then	further	confirmed	by	Phil	Miller,	head	of	Enforcement	and	Removal	Operations,	during	an	on	the	record	conference,	see	at	the	53	minute	mark:	https://vimeo.com/237433196.	Note	that	while	Mr.	Miller	indicates	that	healthcare	is	a	significant	part	of	the	cost	increase,	his	agency’s	own	Congressional	Budget	Justification	for	FY2018	predicts	steady	costs	for	healthcare	from	FY17	to	FY18,	see	page	160:	https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/DHS	FY18	CJ	VOL	II.PDF				10	Congressional	Budget	Justification	for	FY2018,	see	page	171	for	details	on	setting	a	new,	lowered	set	of	“minimum	requirements”	for	facilities	slated	to	hold	people	for	less	than	a	week,	and	an	also-lowered	set	of	lowered	“targeted	requirements”	for	non-dedicated	(hold	other	people	in	addition	to	those	detained	by	ICE)	long-term	facilities:					11	IGSAs	are	detention	contacts	between	ICE	and	a	local	government,	some	of	which	may	then	be	sub-contracted	to	a	private	prison	company.	You	can	see	a	full	list	of	them	via	Column	H	in	the	spreadsheet.		12	Congressional	Budget	Justification	for	FY2018,	see	page	161:	https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/DHS	FY18	CJ	VOL	II.PDF				13	The	287(g)	program	deputizes	local	law	enforcement	officers	to	act	as	immigration	enforcement	agents.	See	the	American	Immigration	Council	backgrounder	here:	https://www.americanimmigrationcouncil.org/research/287g-program-immigration		b. We	are	particularly	concerned	about	localities	participating	in	both	programs	because	of	the	perverse	financial	incentives	presented	by	their	combination.	Since	287(g)	agreements	give	local	law	enforcement	control	over	who	enters	the	immigration	enforcement	pipeline,	and	since	that	same	law	enforcement	entity	stands	to	make	money	per	person	per	day	through	the	detention	contract,	the	combination	of	these	two	programs	essentially	incentivizes	large	scale	racial	profiling,	in	order	to	make	the	detention	contract	as	profitable	as	possible.14		4. Affirms	continued	concerns	about	ICE	contracting	practices.	a. Two	of	the	listed	detention	facilities	do	not	have	a	contract	initiation	date	(Column	X).	It	is	unclear	if	this	is	the	result	of	poor	record-keeping,	or	of	something	non-standard	about	the	agreement	between	ICE	and	these	two	facilities.	b. More	alarming	because	it	is	clearly	a	systemic	problem,	a	whopping	159	detention	facilities	do	not	have	contract	expiration	dates	(Column	Y).	Since	the	process	of	renewing	a	contract	often	offers	the	best	window	for	addressing	chronic	problems	at	a	facility,	the	fact	that	79%	of	the	facilities	never	go	through	this	process	raises	questions	about	the	degree	to	which	ICE	is	actually	controlling,	or	even	seeking	to	control,	its	contractors.		c. These	are	just	two	examples	of	a	broader	problem	with	sloppy	contracting	noted	by	Congress	in	the	FY17	Omnibus,	criticizing	ICE	for	not	having	a	“standard	template	for	contracts	not	a	consistent	method…to	validate	invoices”	despite	having	over	400	active	contracts.15		Each	of	these	trends	is	more	worrying	in	light	of	signs	that	the	limited	oversight	and	accountability	that	does	exist	for	ICE	is	being	systematically	gutted.	Earlier	this	year,	ICE	disbanded	its	own	Office	of	Detention	Policy	and	Planning,	which	oversaw	the	implementation	of	many	Obama-era	reforms.16	The	Senate	DHS	funding	bill17	released	last	week	proposes	cutting	funding	for	the	DHS	Office	of	Inspector	General	by	27%,	despite	increased	funding	for	the	rest	of	DHS.	This	comes	just	days	after	IG	Roth	testified	to	Congress18	about	the	danger	of	decreased	oversight	in	the	face	of	increased	risk,	especially	from	“growth	in	high-risk	areas.”																																																											14	Cody	Stark,	Sheriff	McRae	responds	to	ACLU	regarding	ICE	training:	Critics	of	287(g)	program	worry	it	will	hurt	relations	between	law	enforcement	and	immigrants,	The	Huntsville	Item,	April	16,	2017,	available	at:	http://www.itemonline.com/news/local_news/sheriff-mcrae-responds-to-aclu-regarding-ice-training/article_cbf72b79-d75d-5b90-8e99-061c5f305b77.html;	Sean	Collins	Walsh,	How	two	ICE	programs	let	sheriffs	cash	in	on	immigration	crackdown,	Austin	Statesman,	July	15,	2017,	available	at:	http://www.mystatesman.com/news/national-govt--politics/how-two-ice-programs-let-sheriffs-cash-immigration-crackdown/9nhjHsUOZpzf8LKditPKbL/		15	See	page	21	of	Division	F	of	the	DHS	Appropriations	Act	of	2017	here:	http://docs.house.gov/billsthisweek/20170501/DIVISION%20F%20HOMELAND%20SOM%20OCR%20FY17.pdf		16	Caitlin	Dickerson,	Trump	Plan	Would	Curtail	Protections	for	Detained	Immigrants,	April	13	,	2017,	available	at:	https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/13/us/detained-immigrants-may-face-harsher-conditions-under-trump.html		17	Senate	FY2018	Homeland	Security	Appropriations	Chairman’s	Mark,	available	at:	https://www.appropriations.senate.gov/download/fy2018-homeland-security-chairmans-mark	18	Testimony	of	Inspector	General	John	Roth	Before	the	Committee	on	Oversight	and	Government	Reform	U.S.	House	of	Representatives,	“Recommendations	and	Reforms	from	the	Inspectors	General,”	November	15,	2017,	available	at:	https://www.oig.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/assets/TM/2017/oigtm-jr-111517.pdf			