 
 
 
Introductory Guide: Immigration Detention Visitation  
 
Each year, over 400,000 people are detained in a network of over 200 detention facilities across the country. 
These are mothers and fathers, brothers and sisters and sons and daughters that need your  support through 
visitation. The following is a brief visitation guide to help prepare you for your visit and point you in the 
direction for more resources.  
 
I. Planning your Visit to a Detention Center  
 
Connect with a DWN Member  to plan your visit throug h an established visitation program or local 
organization that has a relationship with a detention center. Visitation programs can arrange your visit and 
guide you through the entire process, providing in -depth manuals on visitation. They will also address  specific 
questions or concerns pertaining to your local facility.  
  
● Contact Community Initiatives for Visiting Immigrants in Confinement (CIVIC), who will 
recommend and facilitate an introduction to a local visitation program near you.  
○ Email CIVIC at info@endisolation.org  to be connected or learn more through their 
website: http://www.endisolation.org/    
 
II. Recognize your Role as a Visitor  
 
Your only agenda is friendship. Don’t assume anything about their stories or their needs, but go with a 
willingness to listen and learn and respond. You are not visiting as an attorney, social worker, or mental health 
professional. Your role is to be a compassionate presence in the lives of individuals who have been depr ived of 
freedom and cut off from the outside world. Their need for emotional support is real and deep.  
(Excerpt from the LIRS Bring the Sky manual)  
 
It might feel awkward at the beginning to engage in conversation but start off with basic questions. Introd uce 
yourself, what group you are with, how you got their name, and that you are there as a friend – not to sell 
anything, teach anything, or promise anything for them legally. Conversation may begin with you speaking 
about yourself and talking about the we ather or current events, allow plenty of time for the people you are 
visiting to talk. Let what they say direct the conversation, and as they do, their particular needs will become 
apparent in time.  Let them speak as much as possible.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III. What to bring  and What not to Bring  
 
It’s important to note that all facilities have different rules that visitors must follow.  
 
Do Bring  
 
● A form of identification  
● The “Alien Number” also known as  “A Number” 
of the person you will be visiting  
● Full name of the person you're visiting  
● Change -quarters  
○ Many facilities offer coin operated 
lockers to store your items  Don’t Bring  
 
Beyond the waiting room, you will not be allowed 
to bring anything inside the detention facility. 
Leave all non -essential items in your car 
(sungl asses, phone, camera) and expect to store 
the rest of your essential items in a locker (keys, 
ID). 
 
 
IV. What to Expect Upon Arrival of the Facility  
 
● You will need to check -in with the front desk and fill out a visitation form with your personal 
information, name and “alien number” of the person you are visiting and the make and model of your 
car if you arrived by personal vehicle.  
● When asked about the relation to the person you’re visiting, you should say you are a “friend.”  
● Be prepared to wait. Visiting hours depend on a variety of factors, therefore expect the possibility of a 
lengthy waiting period.  
 
V.  Help Share Their Story   
 
● Voices From Detention  ( http://www.deten tionwatchnetwork.org/voicesfromdetention )  
For people interested in sharing their personal story publicly please inform them of Detention Watch 
Network’s Voices from Detention project. Voices from Detention brings forward the voices of directly 
impacted in dividuals currently in detention via audio phone recordings.  
 
Contact DWN organizer Aurea Martinez at amartinez@detentionwatchnetwork.org  or 202 -803-6690 
for more details.  
 
VI. Learn More - Member Resources on Visitation  
● LIRS - Bring the Sky  
http://lirs.org/wp -content/uploads/2012/05/BRING -THE-SKY-4-BEING -A-VISITOR.pdf  
● CIVIC Visitation Page  
http://www.endisolation.org/resources/for -visitors/  
● DWN Visitation Guide  
https://www.prisonlegalnews.org/news/publications/detention -watch -network -visiting -us-detainees -
manual/  
 
VII.  Learn More - Immigration Detention System  
● Our website provides numerous resources and general information on the immigration detention 
system as well as the work we are currently focusing on: http://www.detentionwatchnetwork.org/  