T. Don Hutto Residential Center
IMMIGRANT DETENTION INSPECTION SERIES
FACILITY PROFILE
Location: Taylor, Texas
Contract type:  Intergovernmental Service Agreement (IGSA)
Population: About 500 women in Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement (ICE) custody
Standards: Family Residential Standards
Contractors:  Corrections Corporation of America (CCA),  
re-branded as CoreCivic as of 2016
METHODOLOGY      
Date of inspection: October 19, 2016
Number of inspectors: 13
Number of detained people interviewed: 20
ABOUT DETENTION INSPECTIONS
The United States has the largest immigration detention 
infrastructure in the world, currently detaining 41,000  
people in immigration custody. This recent expansion in detention goes far beyond the national detention bed 
quota of 34,000 and poses increasingly serious human 
rights concerns, especially given an official’s concession 
that ICE is “scraping the bottom looking for beds.”  ICE is 
lowering its already inadequate standards to search for 
bed space, making inspections of detention facilities – and 
particularly inspections done by independent stakeholders 
– even more necessary.Austin, T exasT. Don Hutto  
Residential CenterDetention facilities, rife with inhumane conditions and 
abuses, elude accountability through ineffective official 
inspections that lack independence, fail to check for 
policy implementation, and often exclude interviews 
with detained people. In response to inadequate official 
inspections, Detention Watch Network (DWN) is 
conducting NGO-led inspections alongside other 
stakeholder organizations to uncover the reality of 
immigration detention facilities.
OVERVIEW
The T. Don Hutto Residential Facility (Hutto) began 
detaining immigrants in ICE custody in 2006, when 
it operated as a family detention facility through an 
intergovernmental service agreement (IGSA) with ICE, 
using Williamson County as a contracting middleman. In 
2009, Hutto entered a new IGSA to become an adult 
detention facility and has been exclusively detaining adult 
women ever since. The vast majority of women detained 
at Hutto are asylum seekers, with a 2016 report  by 
Human Rights First finding that in fiscal year 2014, Hutto 
detained 4,142 asylum seekers--10 percent of all detained 
asylum seekers and the highest number of any detention 
facility. Despite ICE and CCA presenting Hutto as a 
model of “civil detention,” inspectors found serious issues 
regarding medical care, quality of life, legal access, discipline, 
and transparency.
MEDICAL CARE
Medical care at Hutto is provided by the 
ICE Health Service Corps (IHSC) with 
medical staff from the U.S. Public Health Service. There 
are reportedly 40 medical staff, 20 of whom are nurses 
and four of whom are full-time medical providers. The 
three IHSC mental health providers at Hutto include a 
psychiatrist, a social worker, and a second social worker 
who we were told is also a psychologist. There is a newly 
contracted trauma response coordinator on staff, who 
provides individual and group counseling sessions and may 
refer women to medical or mental health providers.
Women are reportedly screened for pregnancy within 24 hours of their arrival at Hutto, to be followed by a 
medical and mental health consultation for women who 
are found to be pregnant. Inspectors were informed that 
abortion is not presented as an option, but that women 
who request one will be referred to a medical provider 
in the community. Women who are found to be pregnant 
reportedly have their cases reviewed by ICE, who will 
decide if they should be released. According to the facility’s 
IHSC commander, pregnant women who ICE decides to 
release are generally released within two to three days.
Interviews with detained women revealed inadequate 
medical care. In one alarming instance, a woman reported 
severe pain in her head which she believes may be caused 
by a tumor previously diagnosed in her country of origin, 
and that no action has been taken at Hutto despite her 
attempts to seek care. Another woman reported that 
medical staff usually provide only ibuprofen and water. 
Through community visitation, some inspectors reported 
prior knowledge of similar complaints--namely, that 
medical staff at the facility often address symptoms rather 
than the underlying condition.
More systemic concerns regarding medical care at Hutto 
involve language access issues and inappropriate use of the 
medical isolation room. The IHSC commander stated that 
medical staff at Hutto rely heavily on the Language Line, a 
phone interpretation service, because the majority of the 
medical staff are not fluent in Spanish, and none of the 
mental health providers are. The only staff who we were 
informed speaks Spanish is the new trauma response 
coordinator. The low percentage of bilingual medical staff is 
highly troubling for a facility that detains women who are 
largely Spanish-speaking asylum seekers and poses barriers 
to language access as well as the provision of adequate 
medical care.
The facility’s medical isolation room is a small, single-
person cell with one observation window and was much 
colder than other areas of the facility during the inspection. 
It has a bed with a foam mattress, a metal sink and toilet, 
2and a small bench by the foot of the bed for a guard 
to sit on. Inspectors were informed that women who 
are placed in medical isolation for non-communicable 
reasons will be monitored by a guard stationed inside the 
isolation room 24 hours a day, raising concerns about lack 
of privacy in such close quarters. The IHSC commander 
stated that women may be placed inside the medical 
isolation room for tuberculosis, mental health observation, 
suicide watch, post-surgery observation, and health 
complications resulting from hunger striking. The use of the 
medical isolation room for women with potential mental 
health issues is particularly troubling given the harmful 
psychological effects of isolation.
QUALITY OF LIFE
Hutto offers poor quality of life for women 
who are detained there. During this visit, 
inspectors observed issues regarding food, freedom of 
movement, work, and the overall environment of the 
facility.
Seven women raised complaints about the quality of 
food provided at Hutto, with three women voicing 
complaints about insufficient food, meaning that women 
must purchase more food through the commissary or go 
hungry. Furthermore, inspectors were informed that Hutto 
maintains a strict meal schedule of breakfast at 6 am, lunch 
at 11 am, and dinner at 4 pm, with an hour allotted for 
each meal. The long gap between dinner and breakfast the 
next morning means that many women must supplement 
their diet through commissary purchases, and that those 
who cannot afford food from the commissary often go 
hungry.
Instead of counts, Hutto reportedly conducts “census” four 
times a day, during which detained women must check in 
with facility staff within an hour window from wherever 
they are within the facility, without being confined to 
their housing units. However, one inspector who regularly 
provides legal orientation services at Hutto has observed 
that in reality, the census at Hutto is so restrictive that women are unable to attend legal orientation on time, 
belying claims that the census allows for freedom of 
movement.
Inspectors were told that women detained at Hutto can 
work in the kitchen, library, commissary, laundry room, and 
warehouse. Workers reportedly earn $2 an hour working 
four-hour shifts. Inspectors were informed that some 
workers also earn extra computer time, and some can 
make their own meal with available ingredients. According 
to facility staff, about 40 percent of women detained at 
Hutto work. The low-cost labor provided by detained 
women supports core facility functions, and is a significant 
cost-cutting strategy for CCA.
Finally, Hutto does not provide a safe and welcoming 
environment for women detained there. Inspectors 
observed that IHSC medical staff wore military uniforms, 
which may reinforce the climate of fear among detained 
women at the facility, many of whom are seeking asylum 
from countries where the military are feared for their 
intimidation and violence.
LEGAL ACCESS
No federally funded legal orientation program 
is offered at Hutto. The nonprofit American 
Gateways offers general legal orientation and know your 
rights workshops that are open to all women detained at 
Hutto one day per week. However, census times and meal 
schedules have reduced the legal service provider’s time 
with the women by half an hour to only two hours. Even 
with this reduced time women still often miss the first 20 
minutes of the presentation due to logistical problems at 
the facility.
Many women seeking protection at Hutto remain 
detained for weeks or months after passing a credible 
fear or reasonable fear interview, and some remain 
detained throughout their entire legal proceedings. Three 
women we spoke with had passed their reasonable fear 
interviews, but remained in detention. All three women, 
3who have spent between two and five months at Hutto, 
have been told that they are not eligible for a bond and 
must remain detained until they complete their legal 
proceedings. Although the Asylum Office is required to 
schedule screening interviews within eight days of being 
notified by ICE, we also spoke with two women who had 
been detained for at least a month at Hutto and had not 
yet received an interview. An additional three women had 
been detained for 24 days, 27 days, and 41 days, including 
their time at other detention centers, and had not yet 
received interviews. This suggests that ICE may be failing to 
promptly notify the asylum office when women express 
fear of return to their country of origin. Such extended 
detention has serious negative impacts on women’s 
ability to obtain counsel, build their cases, and participate 
effectively in their Immigration Court proceedings.
Four women we spoke with reported having to sign 
documents without reading them--either because they 
were not given the time to read the documents or the 
documents were in a language they could not understand, 
and they were not provided proper translation. One 
woman reported that rather than translate the forms, ICE 
officials have told her that it’s “nothing bad, just something 
with [her] case that has to be signed at three months.” 
This raises serious concerns that women are signing 
documents that they do not understand or accept, which 
may have serious implications for their immigration cases 
or continued detention.
Inspectors also noticed that women are not provided 
clear instructions on how to make free phone calls to 
local pro bono legal service providers. The fact that 
women often must pay for these calls, if they can make 
them at all, creates an additional cost barrier to securing 
representation, despite clear standards protecting this 
right. In the binders by the phones in the housing unit, 
inspectors observed that the instructions regarding how 
to make free calls were placed several pages away from 
the legal services list, which contain the codes required to 
make the free calls. DISCIPLINE
ICE officials initially told inspectors that there 
were few disciplinary issues at Hutto, and that 
detained individuals will be transferred to another facility 
if they are found to be “criminally acting.” Using transfers 
for punitive purposes raises concerns that women may 
be transferred away from their legal representation and 
community support for minor incidents or as a form of 
retaliation for peaceful protest. For instance, a week and 
a half after the beginning of the hunger strike organized 
by women detained at Hutto in October 2015, those 
who were perceived to be leaders of the strike were 
transferred suddenly to Laredo Detention Center, a facility 
near the border that many women pass through when 
entering the country. This move was perceived by both the 
women and community volunteers who had been visiting 
them as punishment for engaging in the hunger strike.
When pressed for more information about what actions 
warrant disciplinary action, ICE officials stated that women 
at Hutto can be disciplined for “fighting, food, and violating 
another inmate,” though no further clarification was 
provided. One woman informed inspectors that she had 
been given a disciplinary report for playing hand games 
with another woman, and that they are not allowed to hug 
and are given disciplinary reports for doing so.
The IHSC commander stated that women may be placed 
in the medical isolation room for “health complications 
due to hunger striking,” raising concern that the room may 
potentially be used as discipline for engaging in peaceful 
protest. Inspectors have previous knowledge of a case 
in which Insis Bernardez, a participant in the October 
2015 hunger strike at Hutto, reported being placed in 
the medical isolation room for more than 36 hours as a 
punishment for engaging in the strike. She said that she 
was followed everywhere by a guard and did not receive 
any privacy, even while using the toilet. While there, she did 
not receive any attention from medical staff, and says that 
she was not given a blanket even though her sickle cell 
disease made her sensitive to the cold room.
4Finally, though inspectors were informed that Hutto’s 
Sexual Assault Response Team (SART) had not been 
mobilized within the past year, we have previous 
knowledge of a case in which a sexual assault investigation 
was conducted recently in a punitive manner. In this case, 
a detained woman had been working in the kitchen for 
several months when a co-worker began teasing her 
that one of the CCA employees “liked” her. Another 
CCA employee overheard the comment and reported 
it, leading to an investigation in which the woman 
was questioned and lost her “privileges” to work and 
participate in programs at the facility, even though she was 
the alleged victim.
TRANSPARENCY
Inspectors faced several obstacles in 
scheduling the visit to Hutto, and then 
continued to encounter problems with transparency 
from both ICE and facility staff throughout the inspection. 
Although inspectors originally submitted a request in April 
to visit the facility and interview detained women in May, 
ICE did not grant inspectors access to the facility until mid-
October, six months after the original request was made. 
The day before the inspection, ICE informed inspectors 
that it would only allow inspectors access to the facility 
for two and a half hours, an inadequate amount of time to 
conduct a walkthrough of the facility and speak with every 
detained woman who had signed up for interviews. 
Inspectors had to negotiate with ICE at multiple points. 
First, throughout the process of scheduling the visit, 
ICE was resistant towards allowing thirteen inspectors 
inside the facility. After much negotiation, all inspectors 
were able to gain access to the facility, but only as two 
separate groups. On the evening before the visit, ICE 
informed inspectors that only one group could tour the 
facility at a time while the other group would have to 
wait which, combined with the time limitations, made it 
seem as though only one group of inspectors would be 
able to conduct interviews with detained women for a 
majority of the time. Although inspectors were eventually able to negotiate with ICE to have one group tour the 
facility while the other group simultaneously interviewed 
detained women, the constant need to negotiate basic 
access demonstrates a clear reluctance by ICE to follow its 
own access directive and be accountable to independent 
stakeholders.
On the morning of the visit, inspectors were informed 
that Hutto was undergoing an official inspection at the 
same time, though we were unable to obtain details about 
which unit within ICE was conducting the inspection. 
Given the length of time it took for ICE to grant us access 
to Hutto, we suspect that ICE and CCA may have used 
the six months that elapsed to make cosmetic adjustments 
to conceal even more troubling conditions at Hutto in 
preparation for not only our stakeholder visit, but the 
official ICE inspection as well. Finally, when an inspector 
requested to see previous ICE inspections of Hutto, ICE 
staff claimed that they do not have inspections on file 
locally.
5Additional Information
For more information, please contact  
policy@detentionwatchnetwork.org .