An Advocacy & Organizing Toolkit
ICE
DEATH
WATCH:
ICE Death Watch:   An Advocacy & Organizing Toolkit 1ABOUT DETENTION WATCH 
NETWORK
Detention Watch Network (DWN) is a national 
coalition of organizations and individuals working 
to expose and challenge the injustices of the United 
States’ immigration detention and deportation 
system and advocate for profound change that 
promotes the rights and dignity of all persons. 
Founded in 1997 by immigrant rights groups, DWN 
brings together advocates to unify strategy and build 
partnerships on a local and national level to end 
immigration detention. 
Visit detentionwatchnetwork.org
ABOUT NATIONAL 
IMMIGRANT JUSTICE 
CENTER
With offices in Chicago, Indiana, and Washington, 
D.C., Heartland Alliance’s National Immigrant Justice 
Center (NIJC) is a nongovernmental organization 
dedicated to ensuring human rights protections and 
access to justice for all immigrants, refugees, and 
asylum seekers through a unique combination of 
direct services, policy reform, impact litigation, and 
public education.
Visit immigrantjustice.org
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This toolkit was a collaborative effort of DWN and 
NIJC. Primary contributors were Danny Cendejas and 
Mary Small of DWN; and Jennifer Chan of NIJC.
Other staff also contributed, including Carly Perez 
and Silky Shah of DWN; and Heidi Altman and Tara 
Tidwell Cullen of NIJC.FOR MORE INFORMATION 
CONTACT:
■■Organizing local campaigns  
Gaby Benitez, Detention Watch Network, 
gbenitez@detentionwatchnetwork.org   
Danny Cendejas, Detention Watch Network, 
dcendejas@detentionwatchnetwork.org  
■■Policy recommendations and advocacy  
Jennifer Chan, National Immigrant Justice Center, 
jchan@heartlandalliance.org  
Mary Small, Detention Watch Network,  
msmall@detentionwatchnetwork.org
■■Communications and working with  
the media  
Carly Perez, Detention Watch Network,  
cperez@detentionwatchnetwork.org   
Tara Tidwell Cullen, National Immigrant Justice 
Center, ttidwellcullen@heartlandalliance.org  
Design by: Nelton E. Castro  
Cover image by: Steve Pavey
© November 2016 Detention Watch Network and Heartland Alliance’s 
National Immigrant Justice Center
ICE Death Watch:   An Advocacy & Organizing Toolkit 2OVERVIEW
One hundred and sixty-five men and women have died 
in immigration detention since October 2003. Prior 
to 2008, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
(ICE) did not publicly provide information about people 
who had died in their custody. Following advocacy 
by non-governmental organizations and investigative 
reporting by The New York Times  and The Washington 
Post,  ICE began publicly reporting on in-custody 
deaths. Yet problems persist about transparency and 
accountability over these deaths.
Today ICE provides the names of those who die in custody; however, few details 
are provided regarding the circumstances of these deaths and whether detention 
facility conditions played a role. Each death in ICE custody is accompanied by an 
internal investigation, but these investigations are very rarely released publicly. Of 
the 35 deaths for which reviews have been released via Freedom of Information 
Act (FOIA) requests, substandard medical care contributed to at least 15 deaths. 
Even when ICE death investigations indicate violations of ICE detention standards, 
ICE fails to hold facilities accountable and ensure changes are made to address 
deficiencies that contributed to deaths. For example, there have been 14 deaths at 
the Eloy Detention Center in Arizona since 2003. Five death investigations at Eloy 
indicate persistent problems with medical care—ICE concluded that at least one of 
these deaths could have been prevented—yet the facility remains open.
Detention Watch Network (DWN) and the National Immigrant Justice Center 
(NIJC) have created this toolkit to provide community organizers, advocates, and 
other stakeholders with the tools to hold ICE and its contractors responsible for 
the deaths that happen on their watch.
ICE Death Watch:   An Advocacy & Organizing Toolkit 3RESOURCES:
■■US: Deaths in Immigration Detention   
Authored by: Human Rights Watch
■■ICE’s Systemic Lack of Accountability in 
Immigration Detention Contracting  
Authored by: NIJC
■■ICE Deaths Watch:  http://icedeathswatch.tumblr.
com/  
■■ICE Deaths List:  goo.gl/c9A1bK  
■■Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores 
Deaths in Detention  
Co-authored by: ACLU, DWN 
and NIJC  
  
 
■■Lives in Peril:  
How Ineffective Inspections 
Make ICE Complicit in 
Detention Center Abuse   
Co-authored by: DWN  
and NIJC  
 
■■Using ICE Contracts & 
Inspections to End Abusive 
Detention: An Advocacy  
& Organizing Toolkit   
Co-authored by:  
DWN and NIJC  
 
  TALKING POINTS
■■Recent investigations into deaths in detention 
have found that inadequate medical care at 
detention centers has contributed to numerous 
deaths.
■■In no uncertain terms, ICE has proven it is not 
capable of guaranteeing the safety and health of 
people in its custody.
■■Contrary to ICE’s claims, its inspections process 
is woefully inadequate. It allows rampant abuses, 
substandard medical care, and other violations 
to continue undetected—sometimes with fatal 
consequences.
●■Several facilities implicated in medically 
negligent deaths received passing ratings 
from ICE inspections, both before and after 
the deaths occurred, showing that inspections 
don’t identify and address the failings in 
medical care at these facilities. 
●■In one of many examples of medical 
negligence, Manuel Cota-Domingo died while 
in ICE custody at Eloy Detention Center after 
an eight-hour delay in transferring him to the 
emergency room.
●■Inspections are announced ahead of time and 
issues raised during interviews with detained 
individuals are frequently not meaningfully 
addressed. 
●■Inspections are not independent. ICE’s 
inspections are done internally or by 
contractors paid by ICE, raising concerns 
about impartiality. Even worse, smaller 
facilities are only subject to self-inspections.
●■ICE is not transparent or accountable to the 
public. ICE does not proactively disclose many 
of its inspections to the public, ensuring that 
failing facilities avoid public scrutiny. 
●■We cannot rely on contractors who make 
money detaining immigrants to provide 
sufficient health care for them. Instead, the 
current contracting process incentivizes 
cutting corners to save money. 
ICE Death Watch:   An Advocacy & Organizing Toolkit 4DEMANDS
1. Immediately reduce immigration detention as  
a first step toward ending the practice entirely.
a. Release people with serious medical and 
mental health needs, particularly when 
individuals require higher-level care.
b. Immediately terminate contracts for facilities 
with repeated preventable deaths, such as the 
Eloy Detention Center in Arizona.
c. Shift current funding for detention to 
community-based alternatives, which will 
allow people to seek medical attention and 
receive support from family, legal counsel, and 
community.
d. Apply current ICE detention standards to all 
facilities used by ICE and terminate contracts 
where current standards are not being met.
2. Improve delivery of medical care in detention.
a.  Revise PBNDS 2011 to require that medical 
care providers be held responsible for meeting 
the health care needs of individuals in ICE 
custody as opposed to simply providing 
“access” to health care.
b.  End the use of private for-profit detention 
facilities and for-profit medical care 
subcontractors. Historically, the involvement 
of contractors and subcontractors has been 
an obstacle to accountability as each entity, 
including ICE, shifts the blame to another. 
c. Ensure all detention facilities have fully staffed  
medical units, as required by their contracts. 
Terminate contracts if vacant positions aren’t 
promptly filled by qualified staff. 3. Increase transparency and accountability
a. Create an independent medical advisory 
committee to investigate deaths that occur in 
detention. These should be completed within 
two months of the death and immediately 
made publicly available. 
b. Improve the inspections process to ensure 
inspections catch deficiencies, and result 
in real consequences (for more in-depth 
recommendations see our Lives in Peril  report).
ICE Death Watch:   An Advocacy & Organizing Toolkit 5WHAT YOU CAN DO
The following are recommended tactics after a 
death in detention. Tactics can vary depending 
on resources and capacity, but do your best to do 
as much as possible and don’t hesitate to ask for 
support.
Responses to deaths ideally would be as immediate 
as possible. We encourage advocates to make 
concerted efforts to contact family members 
to obtain their permission and participation, if 
appropriate, and provide them with support and  
to include their voice in the response process.
Families can sometimes be contacted through 
outreach to local organizations working at the 
detention center or contact with other persons  
in detention. The person’s consulate may pass  
on information to their family as well. It’s 
recommended to make your phone number  
public on your website and/or social media,  
so the family can reach out to you.
TIMELINE OF RESPONSE:
 
Social Media
Hashtags:
Use the following hashtags on Facebook and Twitter 
when alerting your online community of a death. If 
you have a photo of the deceased and consent from 
the family, post on Instagram as well.
■■Specific to the death:  #Name (i.e. 
#ManuelCotaDomingo), #Facility (i.e. #Eloy) 
#DetentionDeaths■■Connecting to the broader conversation on 
detention:  #EndDetention #Not1More #StopICE
Sample tweets:
■■Today #Name died in ICE custody at #Facility in 
X. We demand @ICEgov be held responsible! 
#DetentionDeaths #EndDetention #Not1More
■■With the untimely death of #Name, @ICEgov 
continues to prove they are incapable of caring 
for people in their custody #DetentionDeaths 
#Not1More
■■Yesterday at #Facility, another life was lost due 
to the unjust and inhumane immigrant detention 
system #DetentionDeaths #EndDetention
■■As of today, X deaths in ICE custody since 2003. 
Rest in Power #Name #DetentionDeaths #Facility 
#EndDetention #Not1More
*Contact DWN for the total number of deaths to date*
Alternative Obituaries
ICE releases a “detainee death announcement” each 
time an individual dies in custody. While obituaries 
you read in the newspaper strive to honor the 
individual’s memory and highlight the best of who 
they were, ICE death announcements are written in 
a manner that dehumanizes people by emphasizing 
their violations of immigration law and any criminal 
history. We encourage supporters to write about 
these individuals’ family relationships and community 
contributions. It is important to change the narrative 
that these individual’s immigration status or personal 
histories somehow justifies their deaths in custody.
Violence against communities of color and 
immigrants is pervasive. Although this toolkit is 
focused on the treatment of detained immigrants, we 
are aware of the connections between this struggle 
and that of other communities. To push back against 
the narrative that immigrant deaths don’t matter, we 
encourage advocates to lift up narratives that honor 
people who die in detention while being aware that 
this work is part of a broader effort to hold state and 
local actors accountable. This includes local officials 
responsible for operating facilities and those elected 
officials who are accountable for respecting our 
community members.
1. Collect information.  Interview individuals who 
were detained with the deceased person. Try 
to locate any family members, legal counsel, or 
social service providers who can help provide 
more information on the individual’s life.WEEK 1 – 4: AMPLIFY
■■Alert social media
■■Send a press release about the death
■■Write an alternative obituary
■■Encourage local reporters to investigate 
the death
■■Make “in-memory” posters
WEEK 2: ACT
■■Coordinate a vigil or funeral-themed 
action
WEEK 3: ADVOCATE
■■Reach out to decision makers
WEEK 4: ESCALATE 
■■Host a rally or protest
ICE Death Watch:   An Advocacy & Organizing Toolkit 62. Write an obituary  highlighting the person’s 
contribution to their community, their family, etc.
3. Promote your alternative obituary  using the 
media.
Make “In Memory” Posters
Ask local businesses to put up an “in memory” 
poster, and/or post in public spaces. If the facility 
where the death occurred is operated by the city or 
county government, highlight that in the poster.
Vigil or Funeral-Themed ActionPoster courtesy of:  
Shut Down EtowahPoster courtesy of: Puente
Coordinate a vigil or funeral themed action within 
two weeks of the death, using the following 
guidelines:
■■Research  the detention center where the death 
occurred and understand what type of contract it 
is under to identify targets and opportunities (For 
more information visit http://immigrantjustice.
org/TransparencyandHumanRights )
■■Engage allies,  faith leaders and ally elected 
officials with a goal of at least 25 participants
■■Choose a strategic location  to host your action, 
such as in front of the facility, ICE field office or 
local government if the detention contract is an 
Intergovernmental Service Agreement ( IGSA)
■■Send a media advisory  and press release for your 
action to local reporters
■■Coordinate echo vigils or funeral-themed actions 
in other cities
Action example at Stewart Detention Center:  
http://bit.ly/2e4OLUp  
Advocate with Decision-Makers
Identify a member of Congress—either senator, the 
representative in whose district the facility is located, 
or a nearby representative—to recruit to join you in 
demanding accountability from ICE and the facility. 
Request a meeting ( sample request on page 27 of 
the Using ICE Contracts and Inspections Toolkit ), 
share your concerns about the facility, share what you 
know about the recent death and about the lack of 
accountability for deaths throughout the detention 
system, and ask them to support your demands 
through a letter to ICE, press release, etc. Remember 
to follow-up ( sample letter on page 28 of the  Using 
ICE Contracts and Inspections Toolkit )!
Alternately, you may want to send a letter to one or 
more members of Congress. After you send your 
Cuentame YouTube video: Death For Profit
Support Actions Inside 
Detention Facilities
It’s helpful to maintain communication with 
those inside the facility to respond to any 
support they may need, including legal 
support, or parallel outside actions to get 
their perspective out to the media. 
ICE Death Watch:   An Advocacy & Organizing Toolkit 7
letter, follow-up. Call the office to confirm that the letter was received. Call again a couple of days later to 
say that you’re following up on the letter, looking forward to the member’s response, and ask if there is any 
additional information you can provide.
SAMPLE LETTER:
Dear Senator/Representative X,
We are writing to express our concern about a recent death at the [name] detention facility, located in 
[location; specify it is in their district if relevant]. As you may know, [name] died while in ICE custody on 
[date]. [Two more sentences about the individual—what you know about them, their family, their medical 
condition, and/or any difficulty they had accessing medical care. It’s ok if you don’t know any of this—you 
can still write the letter!]
Unfortunately, ICE detention facilities have a track record of being unsafe, unaccountable and secretive. 
Recent reports have shown that inadequate medical care at detention centers has contributed to numerous 
deaths. This year alone, there have been nine deaths in Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) 
detention facilities.
ICE claims that it has a robust inspections process intended to prevent deaths but in reality, its inspections 
process is woefully inadequate. It allows rampant abuses, substandard medical care, and other violations 
to continue undetected—sometimes with fatal consequences. Several facilities implicated in medically 
negligent deaths received passing ratings from ICE inspections, both before and after the deaths occurred, 
proving that inspections don’t identify and address the failings in medical care at these facilities. 
Inspections are announced ahead of time, often don’t include interviews with detained people, and are not 
independent. Even worse, smaller facilities are only subject to self-inspections.
 In one of many examples of medical negligence, Manuel Cota-Domingo died while in ICE custody at Eloy 
Detention Center after an eight-hour delay in transferring him to the emergency room.  
14 people have died at Eloy since 2003, and yet the facility continues to hold hundreds of people each day. 
[Add an example from your own state/facility, if possible]
Finally, ICE is not transparent or accountable to the public. ICE does not proactively disclose many of its 
inspections to the public, ensuring that failing facilities avoid public scrutiny. While ICE does conduct 
death reviews after each death in detention, these often take years to complete, are published publicly, and 
often don’t carry any consequences—even when problems at the facility are found to have contributed  
to the death.
This is unacceptable. Please join us in demanding accountability and transparency for [name] and his/her 
family. Specifically, please publicly call on ICE to:
■■Release people with serious medical and mental health needs;
■■Create a truly independent medical advisory committee to investigate deaths that occur in detention. 
These investigations should be completed within two months of the death and immediately made 
publicly available. 
■■In the meantime, and regarding [name’s] death, please join us in demanding that ICE conduct its own 
review within two months and immediately release the full report to the public.
■■[Feel free to include other recommendations/demands from people detained in the facility and/or from 
the list on page XX]
Please don’t hesitate to be in touch with any questions. [Include contact information for one person.]
Sincerely,
[organization or individual names]
ICE Death Watch:   An Advocacy & Organizing Toolkit 8If your local government is part of the contract for 
the detention facility (your facility is contracted 
through an intergovernmental service agreement) 
you should also request to meet with members of the 
City Council or County Commissioners, whichever is 
relevant. 
Other ideas to consider:
■■If IGSA, take-over of next public meeting
■■If IGSA, occupation of target elected official’s 
office
■■Op-ed
●■Lindsay Marshall, “It’s surprising that more 
immigrants don’t commit suicide in jail,”  
The Arizona Republic,  May 16, 2013,  
bit.ly/2fCWyww.
Escalate Action
If no response or commitment is made to investigate 
the death, escalate your action by hosting a rally or 
protest ideally within one month since the death, 
using the following guidelines:
■■Engage allies,  faith leaders and ally elected 
officials with a goal of at least 50 participants
■■Choose a strategic location  to host your action, 
such as in front of the facility, ICE filed office or 
local government if IGSA
■■Send a media advisory  and press release for 
reporter turnout 
■■Use social media  to engage your online 
community about the actionSHADOW INSPECTIONS
In order to conduct a shadow inspection of a 
detention facility through  ICE’s stakeholder access 
policy , participants must be associated with an 
organization and submit the following information:
■■Written request to the Enforcement and Removal 
Operations (ERO)  Field Office Director  at least 
two weeks in advance of the requested visit. 
Clearly state in your request that you want both 
“a detention facility tour” and “visitation with 
detainees” in order to speak with immigrants who 
are currently detained. You can find a sample 
request letter on page 14 of the  Using ICE 
Contracts and Inspections Toolkit .
■■Code of Conduct .
■■Stakeholder Tour/ Visit Notification Flyer .  
ICE posts this sheet inside the facility so that 
interested individuals can sign up to speak  
with you.
If possible, try to recruit a medical professional to join 
your inspection team! In addition, try to research the 
medical care provider by searching for news stories 
or legal cases, if you have access to legal databases 
like Westlaw or Lexis Nexis. If you know the names 
of any medical staff, you may be able to use online 
databases to confirm staff are licensed.
■■List of State Medical Boards
■■List of State Boards of Nursing
During the “tour” portion of the day, you should  
have a chance to see the medical unit at the facility.  
You can also ask to speak to a medical provider,  
if it isn’t already arranged. 
If you are going to interview detained people,  
it is best practice to use a consent form to ensure 
that you are always certain whether you can share 
something publicly and/or use the person’s name.
Information gathered through the inspection, 
and especially through interviews with detained 
people, can provide new avenues for demanding 
accountability from the facility and from ICE.   
ICE Death Watch:   An Advocacy & Organizing Toolkit 9GET MORE INFORMATION
To obtain documents and reports about in-custody 
deaths, you will need to file a Freedom of Information 
Act (FOIA) request with any of the following parties:
1. ICE’s Office of Detention Oversight (ODO) 
conducts death investigations following  
in-custody deaths, which can take anywhere 
from a few months to more than a year to 
conclude. Since ICE very rarely releases death 
reviews voluntarily, the best way to obtain these 
documents is through FOIA.
2. Local law enforcement agencies  may conduct  
an investigation depending on the circumstances 
of the death. Documents obtained may include 
interviews with staff and even video of the 
incident.
3. Local detention facilities should conduct  
an after-incident review to evaluate and correct 
any flaws that contributed to the death. If the 
facility is publicly operated, it will likely be easier 
to obtain the information via FOIA.
FOIA requests to federal agencies typically take 
much longer than requests to local agencies. 
How to file an ICE FOIA request :  
https://www.ice.gov/foia/request  
How to file State FOIAs:  
http://www.nfoic.org/state-foi-resources
