Courting Catastrophe:
How ICE is Gambling
with Immigrant Lives
Amid a Global Pandemic
Informe disponible en españolA c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s  
Primary authors of this report were Setareh Ghandehari and Gabriela Viera with edits and suggestions
from Silky Shah and Aimee Nichols.
Design by: Carly Pérez Fernández
Translation by: Gabriela Viera and Gabriela Marquez-Benitez
© March 2020  Detention Watch Network
About Detention Watch Network
Detention Watch Network (DWN) is a national coalition of organizations and individuals building
power through collective advocacy, grassroots organizing, and strategic communications to abolish
immigration detention in the United States. Founded in 1997 by immigrant rights groups, DWN
brings together advocates to unify strategy and build partnerships on a local and national level.
Visit www.detentionwatchnetwork.org0 1S u m m a r y
Under ordinary circumstances, Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) custody has proven to be deadly for the people
detained at the agency’s network of over 200 jails and detention centers across the country. Now facing a global health crisis,
ICE’s shameful record of medical negligence, limited and rotten food provisions, poor sanitation, and demonstrated inability
to properly respond to past infectious disease outbreaks means that there is a serious risk of COVID-19 outbreaks at
immigration detention centers. These facilities threaten the lives of the people deprived of their liberty inside and the
surrounding communities outside.
It is imperative that ICE take the following actions immediately to protect our collective health:
Immediately release all detained immigrants to mitigate the spread of COVID-19
Cease all enforcement operations to prevent new people from being detained and ensure that immigrants are not afraid
to seek medical attention
Eliminate all check-ins and mandatory court appearances to comply with social distancing recommendations
Ensure all facilities where people are detained in ICE custody, be it county jails or dedicated facilities, are prioritizing the
health and wellbeing of people detained, including a waiver of all costs associated with soap, sanitizer, and other hygiene
products and a commitment to making these supplies widely available.R e c o m m e n d a t i o n s
0 2Introduction
Amid an ongoing global pandemic caused by the novel coronavirus,
COVID-19, ICE can and should immediately release all people from
its custody. Public health experts agree that the best way to prevent
the spread of COVID-19 is to promote good hygiene with proper and
frequent hand washing, and to practice social distancing. People
locked up in immigration detention are extremely vulnerable to the
spread of infectious disease because they are unable to take these
necessary and basic precautions to protect themselves.    This fact is
compounded by ICE’s horrific record of medical negligence and
inability to provide basic necessities imperative to maintaining
healthy immune function and sanitation.
Lack of Sanitation and
Basic Necessities
People in immigration detention face an egregious lack of basic necessities to maintain their physical and mental health
under normal circumstances. According to countless reports from advocates as well as the Department of Homeland
Security’s Office of Inspector General (OIG), ICE fails to provide adequate hygienic products critical to halting the spread
of illness.   OIG inspectors have reported that bathrooms at the Stewart Detention Center in Georgia lacked hot water,
and individuals at both Stewart and the Hudson County Jail in New Jersey were not provided with adequate supplies of
toilet paper, soap, shampoo, and toothpaste.
Despite guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and a broad range of medical professionals
recommending that people practice extra care in washing their hands, using hand sanitizer and disinfecting surfaces,
there have been numerous reports of ICE failing to take these basic precautions inside detention centers.    Hand
sanitizer is not available and access to soap continues to be limited. One of the primary recommendations to slow the
spread of COVID-19 is the practice of social distancing, keeping at least six to ten feet away from others. This is
impossible to comply with in ICE facilities where immigrants are housed together in shared living quarters. Denying
immigrants the ability to take even the most basic precautions to protect themselves is of grave concern.
In addition to the lack of access to basic hygiene, conditions inside ICE detention centers put immigrants at heightened
risk to contract illnesses. ICE serves food that is often moldy or expired, creating conditions for deteriorating health and
immune function.    At the Essex County Correctional Facility in New Jersey, inspectors found slimy and foul-smelling
lunch meat and moldy bread in kitchen refrigerators. Similarly, at the Adelanto ICE Processing Center in California,
inspectors found spoiled chicken and other expired food. Further, the well-documented verbal and physical abuse,
extensive use of isolation,    and lack of access to the outdoors in facilities contribute to mental and physical stress that
lowers immune function.    Coupled with a callous disregard for the health of detained immigrants when they seek
medical attention, these conditions exacerbate the potential for the rapid spread of COVID-19 in ICE facilities.
"Despite guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) and a broad range of medical professionals recommending that people
practice extra care in washing their hands, using hand sanitizer and
disinfecting surfaces, there have been numerous reports of ICE failing to take
these basic precautions inside detention centers."1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9Photo: Alonso Yañez0 3Troubling Record of Medical
Negligence and Deaths
ICE has repeatedly shown to be incapable of adequately responding to
outbreaks of contagious diseases and providing the proper care for people in
custody.     Outbreaks of mumps,     scabies,     and other highly contagious
diseases have been documented to spread aggressively in detention
facilities.     In October 2018, the Texas Department of State Health Services
reported five confirmed cases of mumps among immigrants transferred
between two ICE detention centers. By August 2019, there were 898
reports of mumps cases in 57 facilities. According to the CDC report, 84
percent of patients were exposed while in custody. This rapid spread of
mumps foretells what could happen when people inside ICE custody are
exposed to COVID-19.“This rapid spread of
mumps foretells what
could happen when
people inside ICE
custody are exposed to
COVID-19.”
ICE has proven time and again that it is unable and unwilling to adequately care for people in need of medical
attention. Recent investigations into deaths in immigration detention, Code Red: The Fatal Consequences of
Dangerously Substandard Medical Care in Immigration Detention,      Fatal Neglect: How ICE Ignores Deaths in
Detention     and Systemic Indifference: Dangerous and Substandard Medical Care in US Immigration Detention,
have found that inadequate medical care has contributed to nearly half of all deaths in ICE custody and that the
agency lacks urgency and transparency when reporting deaths. Since 2003 there have been 207 deaths in ICE
detention. In the last few months we have seen a troubling spike in the number of reported deaths of immigrants in
ICE custody. As of March 23, 2020, 10 people have died in ICE custody in fiscal year 2020, more than the number of
lives lost the entire previous fiscal year. In April 2019, a 54-year-old man died in his ICE cell in Arizona due to
complications from the flu.     Another man died from symptoms of liver cirrhosis after repeatedly informing ICE of
his conditions and pleading for medical care.
10 11 12
13
14
15 16
17
18
Photo: Steve Pavey0 4Public Health Risk
Grouping people inside jails, prisons and detention centers puts our collective health at risk. Facility staff and people
newly detained or recently transferred can spark outbreaks by bringing the virus into facilities, while staff can also take
it back into their communities when they go home.     Over 3,000 medical professionals have warned that it is only a
matter of time before the virus spreads throughout jails, detention centers and surrounding communities.      As long as
ICE keeps people locked up and continues to engage in enforcement operations that bring new people into detention
centers, the risk of spreading the virus grows exponentially.
Relying on ICE to manage a COVID-19 outbreak would not only risk the lives of the people in custody, but also increase
the threat of spread to the general public. Despite extremely high levels of funding, the agency has proven incapable of
providing proper medical care for people in its custody. ICE insists that it is instituting and following appropriate
procedures to address the pandemic and is seeking supplemental funding for continued operations and additional
quarantine facilities.     But ICE is not a medical provider, nor should it serve as one under any circumstances. ICE has
long perfected a pattern of deceptively requesting funding increases to improve conditions in its facilities. As a result,
the agency's budget has grown by the billions and ICE's network of jails has rapidly expanded along with it,      while OIG
reports continue to condemn their conditions. An agency whose explicit mission is to terrorize immigrant communities
will not prioritize nor understand how to address a public health crisis. Healthcare is best provided by medical
professionals in appropriate clinical settings.
"Over 3,000 medical professionals have warned that it is only a matter of
time before the virus spreads throughout jails, detention centers
and surrounding communities."19
20
21
22
Photo: Steve Pavey0 5R e c o m m e n d a t i o n s
It is imperative that ICE take the following actions immediately to
protect our collective health:
Immediately release all detained immigrants to mitigate the
spread of COVID-19
Cease all enforcement operations to prevent new people from
being detained and ensure that immigrants are not afraid to seek
medical attention
Eliminate all check-ins and mandatory court appearances to
comply with social distancing recommendations
Ensure all facilities where people are detained in ICE custody, be
it county jails or dedicated facilities, are prioritizing the health
and wellbeing of people detained, including a waiver of all costs
associated with soap, sanitizer, and other hygiene products and a
commitment to making these supplies widely available.
C o n c l u s i o n
Communities across the country have already witnessed the devastating impacts of immigration detention. We’ve seen
the deterioration of the mental and physical health of those held in ICE facilities. Now, facing a global pandemic, the lives
of everyone in its custody are in even more jeopardy. It’s clear that more resources for or dependence on ICE, an agency
that is not intended to provide medical care or respond to health needs, is not the solution. Doctors, advocates,
government officials, and even a former ICE Director      have been sounding the alarm. ICE should immediately use its
authority to release all people in detention – for their sake and for ours.
23
Photo: Fernando Lopez0 6E n d n o t e s
Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, World Health Organization, “WHO’s Director-General’s opening remarks at the media
briefing on COVID-19 – 11 March 2020,” Mar. 11, 2020, https://www.who.int/dg/speeches/detail/who-director-
general-s-opening-remarks-at-the-media-briefing-on-covid-19---11-march-2020.
Carla K. Johnson, Associated Press, “Hundreds of migrants are getting mumps at US detention centers,” Aug. 30, 2019,
https://www.businessinsider.com/mumps-sickens-hundreds-of-detained-migrants-in-19-states-2019-8.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security Office of the Inspector General, “Concerns about ICE Detainee Treatment and
Care at Four Detention Facilities,” Jun. 3, 2019, https://www.oig.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/assets/2019-06/OIG-19-
47-Jun19.pdf.
See “How to Protect Yourself,” Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19),”
Mar. 18, 2020, https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prepare/prevention.html.
Cat Cardenas, Texas Monthly, “’There’s been absolutely no change in procedure’: ICE Detention Facilities Are Not
Prepared for the Coronavirus,” Mar. 21, 2020, https://www.texasmonthly.com/news/ice-detention-facilities-not-
prepared-coronavirus/.
Colleen Long, Associated Press, “Rotten food, mouldy bathrooms found at ICE detention facilities: Watchdog,” Jun. 6,
2019, https://globalnews.ca/news/5361546/rotten-mouldy-ice-detention-facilities/.
Katherine Hawkins, Andrea Peterson, Nick Schwellenbach, and Mia Steinle, Project on Government Oversight,
“ISOLATED: ICE Confines Some Detainees with Mental Illness in Solitary for Months,” Aug. 14, 2019,
https://www.pogo.org/investigation/2019/08/isolated-ice-confines-some-detainees-with-mental-illness-in-solitary-
for-months/.
American Psychological Association, “Stress Weakens the Immune System,” Feb. 23, 2006,
https://www.apa.org/research/action/immune.
Amanda Holpuch, The Guardian, “Coronavirus inevitable in prison-like US immigration centers, doctors say,” Mar. 11,
2020, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/mar/11/coronavirus-outbreak-us-immigration-centers.
Human Rights Watch, “Code Red: The Fatal Consequences of Dangerously Substandard Medical Care in Immigration
Detention,” Jun. 20, 2018, https://www.hrw.org/report/2018/06/20/code-red/fatal-consequences-dangerously-
substandard-medical-care-immigration.
See Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report: Notes from the Field (Vol. 68, No. 34), Jessica Leung, Diana Elson, Kelsey
Sanders, et al, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Mumps in Detention Facilities that House Detained
Migrants — United States, September 2018–August 2019,” Aug. 30, 2019,
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/68/wr/pdfs/mm6834a4-H.pdf.
Saja Hindi, The Denver Post, “25 people quarantines at Aurora ICE detention facility due to scabies outbreak,” Dec. 10,
2019, https://www.thedenverchannel.com/news/local-news/25-people-quarantined-at-aurora-ice-detention-facility-
due-to-scabies-outbreak.
Priscilla Alvarez, CNN, “5,200 people in ICE custody quarantined for exposure to mumps or chicken pox,” Jun. 14, 2019,
https://www.cnn.com/2019/06/14/politics/mumps-chicken-pox-quarantine-ice/index.html
Human Rights Watch, “Code Red: The Fatal Consequences of Dangerously Substandard Medical Care in Immigration
Detention,” Jun. 20, 2018, https://www.hrw.org/report/2018/06/20/code-red/fatal-consequences-dangerously-
substandard-medical-care-immigration.1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
140 7E n d n o t e s
American Civil Liberties Union, Detention Watch Network, and National Immigrant Justice Center, “Fatal Neglect:
How ICE Ignores Deaths in Detention,” Feb. 2016,
https://www.detentionwatchnetwork.org/sites/default/files/reports/Fatal%20Neglect%20ACLU-DWN-NIJC.pdf.
Mitch Blunt, Human Rights Watch, “Systemic Indifference: Dangerous and Substandard Medical Care in US
Immigration Detention,” May 8, 2017, https://www.hrw.org/report/2017/05/08/systemic-indifference/dangerous-
substandard-medical-care-us-immigration-detention.
Hannah Rappleye, Lisa Riordan Seville, NBC News, “24 Immigrants Have Died in ICE Custody During the Trump
Administration,” June 9, 2019, https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/immigration/24-immigrants-have-died-ice-custody-
during-trump-administration-n1015291
Id.
Alejandra Lazo, The Wall Street Journal, “Fear of Coronavirus in Immigrant Detention Leads to Preparation, Calls for
Release,” Mar. 21, 2020, https://www.wsj.com/articles/fear-of-coronavirus-in-immigrant-detention-leads-to-
preparation-calls-for-release-11584810004.
See Open Letter to ICE from Medical Professionals Regarding COVID-19, New York Lawyers for the Public Interest
Medical Providers Network and Doctors for Camp Closure, Mar. 2020,
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1eNyNmy-622OjVILFSwgypITPK0eAt5yLgSkS_7_0vv8/mobilebasic.
See Letter from Russel T. Vought to Vice President Michael R. Pence, US Executive Office of the President, Office of
Management and Budget, Mar. 17, 2020, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/Letter-
regarding-additional-funding-to-support-the-United-States-response-to-COVID-19-3.17.2020.pdf.
Emily Kassie, The Guardian, “DETAINED: How the US built the world’s largest immigrant detention system,” Sep. 24,
2019, https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2019/sep/24/detained-us-largest-immigrant-detention-trump.
Camilo Montoya-Galvez, CBS News, "’Powder kegs’: Calls grow for ICE to release immigrants to avoid coronavirus
outbreak,” Mar. 19, 2020, https://www.cbsnews.com/news/coronavirus-ice-release-immigrants-detention-outbreak/.15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23