HUDSON COUNTY CORRECTIONAL FACILITY
IMMIGRANT DETENTION INSPECTION SERIES
FACILITY PROFILE
Location: Kearny, New Jersey
Contract Type:  U.S. Marshals Service Intergovernmental 
Service Agreement  (USMS IGA)
Population: Approximately 500 men and women in  
ICE custody
Standards:  Performance Based National Detention 
Standards (PBNDS) 2008
Contractors: CFG Health Systems (medical); GTL (phones); 
Keefe Group (commissary); Aramark (food)Jersey CityNew  
Y ork
Hudson County
Correctional Facility
METHODOLOGY      
Date of inspection: March 22, 2016
Number of inspectors: 7
Number of detained people interviewed: 22  
ABOUT DETENTION INSPECTIONS
The United States has the largest immigration detention 
infrastructure in the world, with the ability to detain 
approximately 34,000 people at any given time. Despite being rife with inhumane conditions and abuses, detention 
facilities elude accountability through ineffective official 
inspections that lack independence, fail to check for 
policy implementation, and often exclude interviews 
with detained people. In response to inadequate official 
inspections, Detention Watch Network (DWN) is 
conducting NGO-led inspections alongside stakeholder 
organizations to uncover the reality of immigration 
detention facilities.Photo: Rosa SantanaOVERVIEW
Hudson County Correctional Facility (Hudson) is a county 
jail that houses people in both the immigration system and 
the criminal system; Hudson has been in operation since 
1990 but entered an intergovernmental service agreement 
(IGSA) with Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
(ICE) to begin housing immigrants in 1996. The NGO-led 
inspection of Hudson revealed serious problems with 
medical care, an unaccountable complaints process, and 
overall poor quality of life for detained people. These 
findings should prompt ICE to implement more stringent 
third-party inspections, make all inspections available to 
the public in a timely manner, and enact consequences for 
violations, such as termination of contracts.
MEDICAL CARE
Hudson contracts with CFG Health Systems 
to provide health services such as physical 
exams, x-rays, and basic dental care. Though this contract 
is up for renewal, the Hudson County Board of Chosen 
Freeholders postponed voting on the contract renewal 
in response to a complaint filed  by Community Initiatives 
for Visiting Immigrants in Confinement (CIVIC) and First 
Friends of New Jersey and New Y ork regarding poor 
medical care at Hudson. In addition to the renewal, facility 
staff indicated that a $5.6 million county medical expansion 
is underway.
Facility staff said at different points during the inspection 
that people are always seen within 24 hours of submitting 
a medical request (“sick call”), but conceded that 
sometimes less urgent requests are pushed to the next 
day. Moreover, facility staff stated that Hudson does not 
have the capacity to hold individuals with serious mental 
health issues and asks ICE to transfer them elsewhere. 
According to facility staff, requests for offsite care 
usually receive a response within 24 hours. However, 
scheduling offsite care depends on the availability of 
the clinics providing the care, and facility staff indicated 
that if an offsite procedure cannot be scheduled within the timeframe ordered by a doctor, they do not pursue 
alternatives.
Interviews with people detained under ICE custody at 
Hudson revealed delays in medical care, inconsistencies 
with medical records and subsequent treatment, and 
inappropriate responses to health needs:
•  One person with a family history of breast cancer 
reported a delay in receiving medical care: she had 
gone to the medical unit for breast pain and was told 
that she would see a gynecologist the same day, but at 
the time of the inspection, it had been two weeks and 
she had yet to be seen for a follow-up appointment.
 It had been two weeks and she had yet 
to be seen for a follow-up appointment.
•  Two people reported problems with their medical 
records when they were transferred out of and then 
back to Hudson. One of them reported that when he 
returned to Hudson, the facility no longer provided 
the medication he was on prior to his release, and 
the current doctor will not administer the tests 
recommended by the previous doctor.
• Several people reported seemingly inappropriate 
responses from medical staff. Two people reported 
being told only to drink water for serious pain. One 
person reported that she went to the medical unit 
for an ear infection and was given eye drops instead. 
Another person reported that her glasses were 
confiscated upon arrival at Hudson because they had 
metal frames (which Hudson considers a security issue), 
but that she wasn’t provided with a replacement pair.
Reinforcing the medical failings uncovered during this 
inspection, in May 2016, CIVIC and First Friends submitted 
a complaint related to poor medical care on behalf of 
61 people detained at Hudson.  The complaint cited 12 
2concerns with medical care at Hudson, including extended 
delays in responding to people’s requests for medical care, 
delayed or denied care for serious conditions, unlawful 
medical charges for people in ICE custody, and poor 
sanitation leading to multiple people getting toenail fungus 
or bacterial infections.
LEGAL ACCESS
Because the vast majority of people  
detained at Hudson have their case assigned 
to the New Y ork court, they benefit from the New Y ork 
Immigrant Family Unity Project, which provides universal 
legal representation to immigrants facing deportation.   
As a result, there is a much smaller proportion of people 
at Hudson representing themselves in their immigration 
cases than usual. According to facility staff, individuals 
in ICE custody are allowed one hour a day in the law 
library, which is reportedly equipped with LexisNexis. A 
staff person stated that all phone calls, including calls to 
attorneys, consulates, and complaint hotlines, are recorded 
and stored, though not actively listened to without a court 
order.
During interviews with detained people, one person 
reported regular two week delays in receiving their mail. 
Another two people reported having trouble contacting 
their deportation officers, one of whom had been waiting 
at least eight weeks for a decision on their parole request.
SOLITARY CONFINEMENT
Though people can be placed in solitary 
confinement for a variety of reasons, the 
traumatic effects of isolation occur regardless. Solitary 
confinement is divided into two categories: disciplinary 
segregation, in which a person is segregated for punitive 
reasons, and administrative segregation, in which a person 
is segregated for non-punitive reasons, such as their 
own safety. At the time of the inspection, four people 
in ICE custody were in disciplinary segregation, three of 
whom were slated to be there for more than ten days, 
according to numbers provided by staff. At Hudson, people can be punished with a maximum of 15 days in 
disciplinary segregation per charge, and charges can run 
concurrently, not to exceed a total of 30 days. However, 
a local stakeholder informed DWN that Hudson has 
inappropriately held a detained person in disciplinary 
segregation for 20 days for a very minor infraction. While 
in disciplinary segregation, detained people reportedly 
have access to one hour of “recreation” each day in what 
can best be described as a large cage.
Facility staff report that individuals undergo medical and 
psychological screening before being placed in disciplinary 
segregation, and that nurses check in on people three 
times per day. Staff reported that no one has ever been 
taken out of solitary confinement early because of 
concerns about their medical or mental health.
There were no people detained by ICE in protective 
custody (a subcategory of administrative segregation in 
which people are segregated for their own protection), 
but according to facility staff, if someone requests or is 
identified for protective custody, they will be transferred to 
another facility within 24 hours. 
GRIEVANCES
The complaints process at Hudson is 
unaccountable, as facility staff have discretion 
in determining which complaints will ultimately receive 
a response, and whether there will be a record of how 
a particular complaint is handled. At Hudson, there 
are procedural differences between “grievances” and 
“complaints”: grievances are standards violations, while 
complaints are comparatively minor and typically addressed 
through an informal process, for which there seems to be 
no recordkeeping. Although facility staff stated that both 
grievances and complaints should receive a response, they 
conceded that certain issues, such as a lack of hot water, 
would not receive a response and would instead “just be 
fixed.” 
3In interviews, two people indicated that they had filed 
complaints and never received a response. One person 
reported that complaints regarding one sergeant are 
ignored because that sergeant is good friends with the 
lieutenant in charge. Another two people reported that 
electronic kiosks used for submitting complaints and sick 
calls were often broken.
QUALITY OF LIFE
Quality of life at Hudson is abysmal, with no 
access to real outdoor recreation, inadequate 
visitation times, and poor quality in food and housing. 
“Outdoor recreation” areas are triangular concrete rooms 
with relatively low ceilings; they are attached to housing 
units and their one external wall is covered entirely by 
bars. Facility staff twice claimed that people in ICE custody 
receive one hour for general visitation. However, two 
individuals indicated during interviews that they were only 
allowed half-hour visits.
During interviews, seven people complained about the 
quality and nutritional value of food served. One person 
said that the food was almost all carbohydrates; another 
said that the food was sometimes undercooked or not 
cooked properly; and another said that they only receive 
milk and fruit once a week. Of the people who raised 
complaints about food, two mentioned that they often 
had to buy food from commissary to supplement food 
prepared by the facility.
Other quality of life complaints related to issues in the 
housing units. One person expressed discomfort under 
the watch of only male officers at night in the women’s 
housing unit, stating that there are “no female officers at 
night and we feel exposed.” Three people said that the 
water in their showers was scalding, and that it had been a 
problem for about a month. One person said that guards 
did not provide toilet paper or feminine hygiene products 
when requested, and another said that her mattress has 
been ripped since her arrival at the facility (two months 
prior to the inspection) and that she still had not received 
a new mattress.Finally, facility staff stated that they prioritize detention 
space for people with active court cases, and people 
who have received a final order of removal are often 
transferred elsewhere, which can disrupt attorney, family, 
and community ties.
TRANSPARENCY
The most recent publicly available inspection of 
Hudson is a 2012 Enforcement and Removal 
Operations (ERO) inspection, for which the facility received 
a rating of “Meets Standards” despite the Lead Compliance 
Inspector recommending a rating of “Does Not Meet 
Standards” due to Hudson’s failure to comply with the 
Sexual Abuse and Assault Prevention and Intervention, Food 
Service, and Environmental Health and Safety standards. 
Facility staff informed us that Hudson passed its most recent 
inspection in January 2016. Because this inspection is not 
publicly available, it is unclear what, if any, changes the facility 
may have made to correct its deficiencies between 2012 
and 2016.
There were a number of obstacles in accessing information 
during the inspection. In addition to receiving vague or 
incomplete answers from facility staff, inspectors had to 
negotiate in order to speak with a member of the medical 
staff. After requesting to see the Hudson handbook for 
people detained by ICE, inspectors were told that a 
separate request and clearance would be required. Finally, 
inspectors were allowed only one hour to interview people 
in ICE custody, which was not sufficient.
4Additional Information
For more information, please contact  
policy@detentionwatchnetwork.org .