 
  1  
Ending the Use of Immigration Detention to 
Deter Migration   
Detention Watch Network  
April 2015  
 
 
Since its inception in 2002 , the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has managed an 
immigration enforcement system that has been fundamentally characterized by the inappropriate 
and arbitrary detention of migrants. The use of detention is and has been  based on deeply flawed 
justifications, including deterring future  migrati on, a rationale which  not only lacks  moral 
authority  and the support of empirical evidence , but also goes  well beyond the scope of 
longstanding principles underlying the use of civil detention.   
Deterrence is deeply embedded in many aspects of the immigration enforcement system, 
perhaps most obviously within the Consequence Delivery System , a set of enforcement policies 
intended to punish, incarcerate , and criminalize unauthorized migrants  apprehended at the 
border .1 Deterrence has also been cited b y some members of Congress to support the  increased 
use of and funding for immigration detention. However, the system has largely refrained from 
using deterrence as a justification during individual custody determinations. Unfortunately, 
beginning in June 2014, that restraint was all but abandoned in the  administration’s policy 
toward Central American asylum -seekers and other migrants. Instead, under an explicit policy of 
sending a message of deterrence back to Central America, DHS reset detention prioritie s, built 
enormous family detention facilities, established “fast track” removal procedures, and refused to 
release families who were detained.  
This administration’s recent reliance on the deterrence justification to rationalize the 
long-term detention of asylum -seeking families marks a new level of aggressive and 
inappropriate use. Beyond ending this practice for asylum -seeking families, we must remove the 
deterrence justification  once and for all,  from our detention system, and  from our broader 
enforcement regime .   
 
Civil Detention  as Deterrence : Illegal,  Punitive , & Ineffective  
  
The use of immigration detention as a deterrent , in which one person is punished in order 
to send a message to another person  or people to discourage future migration , is illegal under 
international and domestic law. Detaining immigrants under a general deterrence justification 
violates their Fifth Amendment rights ,2 which include  access to  fair and equitable legal 
procedures  and protections , rights which anyone present in the United States, regardless of legal 
                                                           
1 Slack, Jeremy, and Daniel E. Martínez, Scott Whiteford, Emily Peiffer. Journal on Migration and Human Security  
3.2 (2015): 109 -128. 
2 “[G]overnment detention violates [the Due Process] clause unless the detention is ordered in a criminal proceeding 
with adequate procedural protections…or, in certain special and ‘narrow’ non -punitive ‘circumstances.’” Zadvydas 
at 690 -91.  
  2 status, is afforded.3 In Kansas v. Crane , the Supreme Court wrote that civil commitment  may not 
“become a ‘mechanism for ret ribution or general deterrence .’”4 The United States is also a 
signatory to  treaties5 that create government obligations to  protect  asylum seekers and  children .6 
By arbitrarily locking up immigrants  in the hopes that it will deter other irregular migrants (many 
of whom are seeking protection) , the U.S. government is violating its constitutional  and 
international obligations  to protect and treat migrants fairly . 
 Under judicial precedent,  civil detention is intended to ensure compliance with 
immigration proceedings  and is not meant to be punitive . In Zadvydas v. Davis , the Supreme 
Court observe d that immigration detention could  be justifiably used for migrants who pose a 
flight risk or are a d anger to society , and then only  if there is an individualized determination .7 
Deterrence, however, falls outside of even these overly  broad parameters and operates as  an 
unwarranted punishment  for those  who are  targeted .  
 Moreover, this deterrence does not work .8 Many countries, despite having  increasingly 
severe detention systems, experience  similar —and even greater —rates of unauthorized 
migra tion.9 DHS has historically backed the deterrence justification with anecdotal evidence,10 
but even  when DHS has turned to more robust analyses, research findings have failed to support 
this claim. An immigration specialist from  the Congressional Research Service testified before 
Congress that, “[it] is especially difficult to measure ‘remote deterrence’: the decision by 
potential migrants, who may be thousands of miles from the border, to choose not to  embark on a 
trip to the United States.”11 When DHS tried to inappropriately use a Vanderbilt study  on 
violence and migration in Central America  to support a “no bond” or “high bond” policy  to 
disrupt “active migration networks” (or friends and family of mi grants already in the United 
                                                           
3 The Fourteenth  Amendment states that “ No state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges 
or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any state deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, 
without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws .”; In 
Zadvydas v. Davis , 533 U.S. 678 (2001), the Supreme Court wrote that “the Due Process Clause applies to all 
‘persons’ within the United States, including aliens, whether their presen ce here in lawful, unlawful, temporary, or 
permanent.” Zadvydas  at 693.  
4 Kansas v. Crane , 534 U.S. 407, 412 (2002)  
5 Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees, Convention Against Torture, International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights, and the Convention on the Rights of the Child  
6 The UN Special Rapporteur on Torture Juan E. Mendez recommends that all States “ ensure that immigration 
detention is never used as a penalty or punishment of migrant children, including for irregular entry or 
presence…[and] [t]o prohibit the use of immigration detention as a method of control or deterrence for migrant 
children.” Repor t of the Special Rapporteur on Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment of 
Punishmen t (2015); Also under UNHCR Detention Guideline 4.1.4 (Purposes not justifying detention): “detention 
as a penalty for illegal entry and/or as a deterrent to seeking asylum.” (2012)  
7 Zadvydas , 533 U.S. at 690 -91. Since then, courts have continued to further  restrict the use of immigration 
detention, as in Chavez -Alvarez v. Warden York County Prison , No. 14 -1402 (3d Cir. 2015).  
8 International Detention Coalition. There are Alternatives  (2011). Retrieved from 
http://idcoalition.org/publications/there -are-alternatives -2/   
9 Edwards, Alice. “Back to Basics: The Right to Liberty and Security of Person and ‘Alternatives to Detention’ of 
Refugees, Asylum -Seekers, Stateless Persons and Ot her Migrants.” UNHCR Legal and Protection Policy Research 
Series  (2011).  
10 “The Coast Guard states that ‘[a]necdotal reporting and operational experience strongly suggests that detaining 
and swiftly repatriating those who illegally and unsafely attempt to enter the United States by sea is a significant 
deterrent to surges in ill egal immigration and mass migration.” Matter of D -J-, 23 I&N Dec. 572, 578 (A.G. 2003).  
11 Rosenblum, Marc R. “Measuring Border Security: U.S. Border Patrol’s New Strategic Plan and the Path 
Forward .” Committee on Homeland Security, Subcommittee on Border a nd Maritime Security  (2012).   
  3 States) ,12 the study’s co -author publicly reject ed the Department ’s reliance on  the research 
findings  to rationalize deterrence .13  
 Despite lacking empirical evidence, the U.S. continues to justify the mass incarceration 
of immigrants on the basis of deterrence  without regard to  the Constitution  and international 
human rights standards.  
 
Congress Encourages the Deterrence Justification  
   
The administration’s use of deterrence as a justification for individual detention decisions 
has only recently gone into widespread effect. But the deterrence justification has a history of 
support from Congress. Despite the absence of compelling evidence, m any members of Congress 
continue to reaffirm their belief in the effectiveness of detention as a  deterren t to mass migration . 
For example, i n a congressional hearing entitled “Moving Toward More Effective Immigration 
Detention Management,” then Rep resentativ e Mark Souder (R -IN) and Ranking Member of the 
Subcommittee on Border Maritime, and Global Cou nterterrorism stated, “I think the most 
effective immigration reform is to truly enforce the laws on the books. Detention is important for 
homeland security, public safety, and is a deterrent for illegal border crossers and false claims of 
asylum.”14  
In apparent response to congressional recognition of the deterrence rationale , DHS has 
continuously stressed the deterrence value of detention in status reports to  the House Committee 
on Appropriations and Subcommittee on Homeland Security between 2006 and 2009.15 In a 2006 
Secure Border Strategic Plan Report, DHS stated that the “deterrent value of the increased 
detention rate is evident in the significant and almos t immediate decrease in apprehensions of 
nationalities as the implementation of this policy was phased in.”16  
DHS has an  obvious  interest in catering to Congress , which ultimately controls DHS’s 
budget. By conflating higher detention numbers with lower bor der apprehension numbers, DHS 
supports the deterrence justification in order to placate a Congress lobbied by powerful financial 
interests.17 However, it is important to note that while this rhetoric has been regularly , if 
inappropriately,  employed when discussing southern border policies and strategies, its 
widespread use by Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE)  for individual custody 
determinations is a more recent development.  
 
Family Detention: RILR v. Johnson  Preliminary Injunctio n 
  
In Matter of D -J-, decided in 2003, then-Attorney General John Ashcroft wrote a 
decision that would create the shaky foundation for the deterrence justification in the 
                                                           
12 Hiskey, Jonathan, and Mary Malone, Diana Orcés. “Violence and Migration in Central America.” Americas 
Barometer Insights: 2014 . Retrieved from http://www.va nderbilt.edu/lapop/insights/IO901en.pdf   
13 Declaration of Jonathan Hiskey (2014). Retrieved from 
https://www.aclu.org/sites/default/files/assets/hiskey_affid avit_9.22.14_final.pdf   
14 Moving Toward More Effective Immigration Detention Management  Before the Subcommittee on Border 
Maritime, and Global Counterterrorism . 111th Cong. 2 (2009).  
15 DWN v. ICE , No. 14 -cv-583 LGS (2013), DHS Bates No. 1825, 2047, 3477 -3479, 8812  
16 Id. at 2013   
17 Carson, Bethany, and Eleana Diaz. Grassroots Leadership  (2015, April). “Payoff: How Congress Ensures Private 
Prison Profit with an Immigrant Detention Quota.”  Retrieved  from http://grassrootsleadership.org/reports/payoff -
how-congress -ensures -private -prison -profit -immigrant -detention -quota#1    
  4 immigration detention context. He made it appropriate “to consider national security interests 
implicated by the encouragement of further unlawful mass migrations” in custody determinations  
by referencing anecdotal evidence that detention deters .18 Although  ICE has not historically 
considered  deterrence in individual custody determinations, this decision created the unfortunate 
foundation for such a pivot.   
 In 2009, the new Obama administration  stopped detaining families at the 512 -bed T. Don 
Hutto Detentio n Center in Taylor, Texas, following public opposition and a lawsuit highlighting 
the inappropriate use of the facility to detain children and families. The resurgence  over the last 
year of family detention (including the establishment of a 2,400 -bed facility in Dilley, Texas) is a 
stunning reversal, and a low point in the history of immigration in the United States.19 The 
administration’s open justification for its family detention policy has been deterrence , stating in 
an ICE  press release that  “these [family detention] facilities will help ensure more timely and 
effective removals that comply with our legal and international obligations, while deterring 
others from taking the dangerous journey and illegally crossing into the United States.”20 In June 
2014, Secretary of Homeland Security Jeh Johnson testified before the Senate Committee on 
Appropriations asking for increased support on, “an aggressive deterrence strategy focused on 
the removal and repatriation of recent border crossers.”21 
 This message was soon picked up by ICE prosecutors  fighting  against the release of  
women and children who had passed the first stage of the asylum process22 in the belief that the 
release of these families  would weaken the dete rrence message. Assistant Director of Field 
Operations for Enforcement and Removal Operations Philip T. Miller and Assistant Director 
over Investigative Programs for Homeland Security Investigations Traci A. Lembke have gone 
on the record supporting a “no bond” or “high bond” policy , with Lembke specifically stating the 
belief that this will deter “further mass migration .”23 Both DHS officials  based  their arguments  
on a misinterpretation of a report so incorrect  that the author was forced to publicly declare  that 
their “contentions…are not supported by [this] Report and its underlying research.”24 
In response to this egregious use of deterrence as a justification for long -term detention, 
the American Civil Liberties Union  (ACLU) , Immigration Clinic of the University of Texas Law 
School, and pro bono counsel  filed a nationwide class -action lawsuit  in the U.S. District Court 
for the District of Columbia  on December 16, 2014 . RILR v.  Johnson  was filed on behalf of 
                                                           
18 Matter of D -J- at 572.  
19 Detention Watch Network. Family Detention Background  (2015). Retrieved from 
http://www.detentionwatchnetwork .org/sites/detentionwatchnetwork.org/files/dwn_family_detention_backgrounder
_and_talking_points.pdf   
20 Immigration and Customs Enforcement. (2014). ICE to open additional facility in South Texas to house adults 
with children [Press Release]. Retrieved from  http://www.ice.gov/news/releases/ice -open -additional -facility -south -
texas -house -adults -children  
21 Johnson, Jeh. Statement to Senate Committee A ppropriations (2014). Retrieved from 
http://www.dhs.gov/news/2014/07/10/statement -secretary -homeland -security -jeh-johnson -senate -committee -
appropriations   
22 As of January 27, 2015, 2,625 credible fear interviews have been conducted at family detention facilities and 
69.2% of them have established a credible fear. Retrieved from 
http://www.uscis.gov/sites/default/files/USCIS/Outreach/PED -CF-RF-family -facilities -Jul2014 -Jan2015.pdf   
23 Declarations of Philip T. Miller and Traci A. Lembke (2014). Retrieved from 
https://immigrantjustice.org/sites/immigrantjustice.org/files/Government%20No%20Bond%20Declarations.pdf     
24 See supra  13  
  5 asylum -seeking mothers and children who were detained pursuant to the administration’s  “no 
bond” or “high bond” policy of deterring  other  migrants  and sought a preliminary injunction.25  
On February 20, 2014, a federal judge granted the preliminary injuncti on (based on the 
likelihood of success of the case on its merits)  which should have immediately halted the 
detention of class members  under  this justification.26 District Judge  James E. Boasberg describe d 
the government’s argument in using  detention as deterrence for mass migration as novel and 
mentions that  “[d]efendants have presented littl e empirical evidence… that their detention policy 
even achieves its only desired effect. ”27 The district judge further reasoned  that the 
“[i]ncancation o f the magic words ‘national security’  without  further substantiation is simply not 
enough to justify significant deprivations of liberty ”28 and “[u]nlike economic harm, the harm 
from detention pursuant to an unlawful policy cannot be remediated after the fa ct.”29 
Nevertheless , exactly a week following the injunction, government attorneys again used 
the deterrence a rgument in parallel litigation to justify  the detention of migrant children , 
acknowledging that , “DHS strongly believes that the appropriate use of  family detention is a key 
element of the U.S. Government’s efforts to deter aliens from Central America…”30 Equally 
disappointing, the U.S. Government has asked the district court to reconsider  the preliminary 
injunction, rather than acknowledge that its m ost recent experiment with deterrence as a 
justification for detention was ill -advised and outside the law.     
 
Conclusion  
 
The use of immigration detention as a deterrent for future migration is an absurd  
justification for detention, lacking both legal and moral authority. Constantly lingering at the 
periphery of our immigration enforcement system, it remains available for use whenever it is 
politically convenient.  
By indiscriminately locking up individuals in a misguided attempt to deter other 
migrants, the U.S. is acting punitively and extraneously to its Constitution and international 
obligations. It is time for the United States to fully reject, once and for all,  that some immigrants 
can be punished on the unproven hypothesis that it will affect the behavior of other potential 
immigrants hundreds, maybe thousands, of miles away.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
25 RILR v. Johnson , No. 1:15 -cv-00011 JEB , Amended Preliminary Injunction Motion  (2015).  
26 RILR v. Johnson , No. 1:15 -cv-00011 JEB, Memorandum Opinion (2015).  
27 Id. at 36  
28 Id. at 37  
29 Id. at 39  
30 Flores v. Holder , No. CV 85 -4544 -DMG, 12 (2015).  The government makes the distinction that the RILR v. 
Johnson  preliminary injunction pertains to the initial custody determination and, therefore, it is not prohibitive to the 
government’s argument that family detention can be a deterrent, so long as dete rrence was not a criterion considered 
during the determination.  Thank you to Ghita Schwarz and Ian Head from the Center for Constitutional Rights and to Jenny -Brooke 
Condon and her students, Christina Le and Thomas Lehman, at Seton Hall Law School's Equal Justice Clinic 
for their contributions.  