YORK COUNTY PRISON FACILITY
IMMIGRANT DETENTION INSPECTION SERIES
FACILITY PROFILE
Location: Y ork, Pennsylvania
Contract type:  Intergovernmental Service Agreement (IGSA)
Population: About 600 men and women in ICE custody
Standards: Performance Based National Detention Standards 
(PBNDS) 2008, PBNDS 2011 Significant Self-harm and Suicide 
Prevention and Intervention
Contractors:  PrimeCare (medical); GTL (phones)Jersey CityNew  
Y ork
Hudson County
Correctional Facility
METHODOLOGY      
Date of inspection: April 14, 2016
Number of inspectors: 8
Number of detained people interviewed: 44
ABOUT DETENTION INSPECTIONS
The United States has the largest immigration detention 
infrastructure in the world, with the ability to detain 
approximately 34,000 people at any given time. Despite being rife with inhumane conditions and abuses, detention 
facilities elude accountability through ineffective official 
inspections that lack independence, fail to check for 
policy implementation, and often exclude interviews 
with detained people. In response to inadequate official 
inspections, Detention Watch Network (DWN) is 
conducting NGO-led inspections alongside stakeholder 
organizations to uncover the reality of immigration 
detention facilities.Photo: Y ork County Government
Y ork County
Prison FacilityPhiladelphiaOVERVIEW
Y ork County Prison (Y ork) is a county prison that houses 
both people in the immigration system and people in 
the criminal system. Y ork opened in 1979 but has held 
immigrants through an agreement with Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement (ICE) since 1992. The NGO-led 
inspection revealed serious problems in medical care, 
abuse, and use of solitary confinement. These findings 
should prompt ICE to implement more stringent third-
party inspections, make all inspections available to the 
public in a timely manner, and enact consequences for 
violations, such as termination of contracts.
MEDICAL CARE
Interviews with people detained at Y ork 
revealed delays in responding to medical 
requests and providing medical care, and either 
inappropriate or inadequate responses to health issues. 
Y ork staff informed DWN that they check for medical slips 
(“sick calls”) every day, and that everyone is seen within 
24 to 48 hours. Despite this, seventeen people indicated 
delays in being seen and/or receiving care. 
Seven people said they submitted multiple sick calls before 
receiving a response. One person reported submitting sick 
calls for four months before receiving treatment, by which 
time she had sustained nerve damage and a 75 percent 
hearing loss in one ear from an untreated ear infection. 
One person reported a seven hour delay in being 
transferred to the hospital after she began to bleed from a 
dental surgery three days earlier. Another person reported 
that he was unable to chew due to broken dentures. He 
had to continually file sick calls and complaints for three 
months before seeing a dentist. 
Eleven people reported inappropriate or inadequate 
responses to their health concerns. One person who has 
epilepsy reported that facility staff do not warn her about 
fire alarm tests in advance, even though the flashing lights 
can induce a seizure. One person showed inspectors a forehead growth that he believed was causing worsening 
headaches. When he sought medical attention, he was 
given a brief touch exam, told that the concern was 
merely cosmetic, and given Tylenol for the headaches. 
Another person reported pain and shaking all over his 
body. When he goes to the medical unit, there is no 
attempt to address the underlying problem; instead, he is 
only given pain medication.  
Finally, although people in ICE custody are not supposed 
to be charged for medical care, one person showed an 
inspector a copy of his $260 medical bill for an x-ray from 
an outside provider (copy on file with DWN). The medical 
bill also showed that the individual’s x-ray appointment 
was one week later than the sick call response slip claimed.
LEGAL ACCESS
Inspectors found that the process for accessing 
the Officer of Inspector General (OIG) 
Complaint Hotline (which is the same process used to 
access consulates and pro bono attorneys in the area) 
was extremely convoluted and likely inaccessible to many 
detained people. In fact, the directions provide through the 
phone were wrong and would not result in a connected call. 
The process of obtaining a confidential legal call is also 
difficult, resulting in many detained people communicating 
with their attorneys through monitored calls. Though ICE 
staff said that people can obtain a confidential legal call 
through a written request, interviews revealed that people 
were much more familiar and had more experience 
with an alternate process, which does not grant them a 
confidential call but rather a call in a counselor’s office 
where they are monitored. Even then, at least one person 
reported delays in being able to make these calls. 
About ten people reported that phone calls were 
extremely expensive, with significant connect fees as 
well as per-minute charges (though costs vary widely 
depending on the state or country being called). In 
2addition to the prohibitive cost, phone accounts must be 
set up and paid for from outside the facility, meaning that 
friends and family must create accounts before people 
at Y ork can access the phones. This delays and impedes 
access to phones, especially for people without community 
ties in the U.S.
Language access is a particularly troubling concern at 
Y ork. At least nine people reported that translation is 
done by detained people, not by facility staff or phone 
interpretation. Of the nine, one reported that she herself 
had translated for others, and two reported relying on 
other detained people to translate for them. Another 
person reported that during a medical visit, the doctor 
communicated with her using a computer software, in 
which he typed in English and had her read the Spanish 
translation provided by the software. Given the quality 
of such automatically-generated translations, this is 
an extremely inappropriate method for any use, but 
particularly so for a medical visit. 
SOLITARY CONFINEMENT
Though people can be placed in solitary 
confinement for a variety of reasons, the 
traumatic effects of isolation occur regardless. Solitary 
confinement is divided into two categories: disciplinary 
segregation, which is punitive, and administrative 
segregation, in which a person is isolated for non-
punitive reasons, such as their own safety. Interviews with 
detained people indicate a concerning use of disciplinary 
segregation for minor offenses, asking questions or raising 
complaints. One person reported being placed in solitary 
confinement for seven days because she had an extra 
laundry bag, and later for five days because she spoke to a 
correctional officer while the officer was busy. One person 
reported being placed in solitary confinement for six days 
after being physically assaulted by another person in their 
housing unit in the presence of a correctional officer, who 
reportedly did not intervene and actually left during the 
attack. Another person reported being placed in solitary 
confinement for five days for cutting in line, which he said was an accident. One person reported being threatened 
with solitary confinement for asking a captain why he had 
to be strip searched.
In addition to the overly punitive and retaliatory nature of 
disciplinary segregation, Y ork blurs the usage of disciplinary 
and administrative segregation as well. Facility staff told 
DWN that people with mental health issues are regularly 
held in disciplinary segregation, raising urgent concerns 
about the treatment of people with mental health issues 
at Y ork. While there is a 60 day maximum on disciplinary 
segregation at Y ork, staff said there is no limit to how long 
someone with a mental health issue can be placed in 
solitary confinement.
GRIEVANCES AND ABUSE
Interviews with people detained at Y ork 
revealed four concerning incidents of abuse. 
Two people reported an excessive use of force incident 
resulting from a disagreement over the number of blankets 
they were allowed to have. They reported that during 
the incident, they were sprayed with mace by a captain 
and physically assaulted by the Certified Emergency 
Response Team (CERT Team). One person reported 
that his dentures broke when he was thrown onto a 
table, that he sustained knee and elbow injuries, and that 
there was a four day delay before being seen for these 
injuries. The other person reported ongoing thumb and 
knee problems.  Both individuals were sentenced to 
solitary confinement for 60 days, though one successfully 
petitioned for release after 32 days and subsequently filed 
a grievance about the incident. In a response months later, 
he reported that the warden defended the CERT Team 
for utilizing a “new technique” on the individual, who the 
warden deemed an “instigator.”
Three people reported witnessing other incidents of 
abuse. Of the three, two separately reported a sexual 
relationship between a guard and a detained person in ICE 
custody; one of the two people reported the abuse to a 
counselor and was subsequently moved to another dorm, 
3possibly as punishment. One person reported witnessing 
a physical assault in his housing unit, during which two 
correctional officers stood outside and did not intervene 
as a detained person was assaulted by someone else in 
the housing unit.
In addition to physical and sexual abuse, people detained 
at Y ork reported a hostile environment. One person 
reported having received threats of violence from a guard, 
and two people reported that one guard comes into their 
housing unit at night and makes a lot of noise by yelling, 
throwing chairs, and slamming drawers.
QUALITY OF LIFE
In addition to problems with medical care, 
legal access, and abuse, Y ork diminishes 
people’s quality of life even further through limited 
visitation access, poor food quality, and an absence of a 
real outdoor recreation area.  Y ork permits in-person 
and video visitation, though in-person visitation at Y ork 
is only non-contact. Video visitation is scheduled online 
and excessive in cost, with the following prices listed 
on the Y ork website: personal visits cost $15 for 0-30 
minutes, while legal visits cost $25.20 for 0-30 minutes. 
An ICE official stated that there is no intention to phase 
out in-person visitation as a result of having added video 
visitation.
Three people raised complaints that the food provided at 
Y ork is not enough, and three people indicated that the 
food quality is so poor that it leads to constipation. One 
person reported having to wait eight days to receive 
vegetarian meals after making the request. Nine people 
raised complaints about commissary being overpriced, and 
nine people raised complaints about a lack of hot water or 
microwave in their housing units to cook soups and instant 
noodles purchased through commissary. 
People who use the main “outdoor recreation” area 
reportedly receive two hours of outdoor recreation 
each day. The main “outdoor recreation” area at Y ork is a room completely surrounded by high walls and a ceiling 
made up of bars, belying claims that it is indeed “outside.” 
Although we were not able to confirm, we were told that 
low-level security housing units have outdoor recreation 
areas attached, and that people in these housing units have 
access to outdoor recreation all day.
Finally, Y ork has the dubious distinction of being one of 
the only facilities in which people being detained by ICE in 
supposed “civil detention” and people serving sentences 
within the criminal system are placed in the same housing 
units. This is perhaps one of the clearest indications that 
the difference between civil and criminal detention is pure 
fiction. In practice, people are held under the same harsh 
circumstances which often deny their humanity, dignity, and 
basic rights.
TRANSPARENCY
ICE denied two stakeholders access to the 
tour and visitation, citing “security concerns” 
but failing to provide any details. It appears, however, 
that the denial was based on their arrests for the 
misdemeanor offenses of trespassing and obstruction of 
a public thoroughfare during peaceful civil disobedience, a 
universally practiced form of peaceful protest recognized 
under international and domestic law. Allowing broad 
access to detention centers is an essential element of a 
transparent and accountable detention system, and was 
clearly not granted in this case. DWN and two other 
organizations raised the issue with ICE in April 2016, but 
did not receive a response until nearly four months later 
in August 2016. In its response, ICE stated that it does 
not have a policy of denying stakeholder access based 
on arrests for nonviolent protests, but failed to provide 
specific details on why the two stakeholders in this case 
were not allowed to participate in the Y ork visit.
4Additional Information
For more information, please contact  
policy@detentionwatchnetwork.org .