The history of abuse and negligence inside Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) detention is
long and well-documented. A growing consensus has emerged among advocates that the system is
irreparable, unnecessary, cruel, and racist by design. The only solution is to abolish it. As we work
together to achieve a future without immigration detention, Detention Watch Network believes that
efforts to end detention must be rooted in abolitionist values to ensure that we do not inadvertently
replicate or create new harmful systems. To that end, we created this document to help guide our
work.
 
 
 
We recognize that organizations and individuals play different roles in the fight for detention abolition.
Accordingly, different actors may pursue different strategies. This chart seeks to demonstrate which
strategies are reformist in nature, maintaining or expanding the reach of the system through social
control or violence, and which are abolitionist or transformative, moving us closer to liberation by
chipping away at ICE enforcement and incarceration. We also note potential pitfalls as we see them in
the hopes that such considerations will encourage advocates to make decisions based on the long-
term goal of ending detention altogether.
 
As with everything we do, this chart is grounded in our solidarity with people targeted for deportation
and detention and our belief that everyone, regardless of who they are or where they come from,
should be able to live and move freely. We thus challenge a frame that focuses on forcing compliance
with immigration laws that are flawed and racist by nature. Instead, we choose a frame that uplifts
human dignity and provides support for people as they navigate an unjust immigration system
designed to exclude them. Here, we focus on immigration detention, while recognizing that there are
broader immigration laws and enforcement policies that must be dismantled to achieve liberation.
 
 
 
This guide is modeled after Critical Resistance’s Reformist reforms vs. abolitionist steps to end
imprisonment chart. We extend our gratitude to the authors of that chart.
 
This resource was developed by Setareh Ghandehari. Silky Shah and Stacy Suh were thought partners
throughout the process. We would like to thank the following individuals who reviewed and provided
thoughtful feedback: Heidi Altman, Angélica Cházaro, Sophia Gurulé, Elizabeth Nguyen, Ana María
Rivera-Forastieri, Sandy Valenciano, Nathan Yaffe. Finally, we express our deepest gratitude for the
contributions of DWN staff and members throughout the years in developing our strategy and vision
for abolishing immigration detention. Design by Carly Pérez Fernández.Abolitionist Steps vs. Reformist Reforms
A few notes on this resourceEnding Immigration Detention:
Acknowledgments
Does
This:Reduce the scale of
detention and surveillance?Chip away at the current
system without creating
new harms or helping some
people at the expense of
others?Provide relief to people
who could be or are
currently detained or
under surveillance?
Reducing
funding to ICE
and CBP
Yes, by reducing funds
available for apprehension and
detention.Yes, by reducing the number of
people that can be detained.Yes, by reducing the space
available to detain people and
reducing apprehensions.
Yes, in the immediate.
Whenever a detention center is
shut down, it will be important
to mitigate potential harm by
working to ensure people are
released instead of transferred.Yes, chips away at the system and
builds narrative, power, and
momentum needed to sustain
the long-term work. Shut down
fights provide opportunities to
work in solidarity with
decarceration efforts in the
criminal punishment context (to
ensure empty beds are not used
in the criminal punishment
system).Yes, by creating space for
potential releases. Shutting
down individual detention
centers can also lead to a
reduction in arrests and
detention in surrounding
communities.Shutting down
individual
detention centers
and ending ICE
contracts without
replacing them
Federal legislation
aiming to shrink the
pipeline to
detention or limit or
end ICE detentionYes, legislative change not
focused solely on oversight has
the potential for the greatest
impact in reducing the scale of
detention and ultimately ending
detention completely. However,
legislation must be evaluated
individually to ensure it does not
expand surveillance, require
mandatory case management, or
include carveouts that expand
criminalization.Yes, legislative reform is a crucial
and necessary step to completely
end the use of immigration
detention permanently. However,
legislation must be evaluated
individually to ensure it does not
expand surveillance, require
mandatory case management, or
include carveouts that expand
criminalization.Yes, depending on specific
provision, can significantly
reduce the number of people
in detention. However,
legislation must be evaluated
individually to ensure it does
not expand surveillance,
require mandatory case
management, or include
carveouts that expand
criminalization.
Shrinking the
pipeline to
detention (ICE
collaboration with
local police)
through executive,
legislative, state, or
local actionYes, by reducing the number
of people who are targeted for
detention and deportation.Yes, chips away at the current
system to reduce the number of
people who end up in detention.
However, any efforts must be
evaluated individually to ensure
that there are no categorical
carveouts based on criminal
convictions or harmful new
surveillance policies that will need
to be dismantled.Yes, by reducing the number
of people who are targeted for
detention and deportation.
Ending contracts
with private prison
corporations
through executive,
legislative, state, or
local actionYes, 80% of people in ICE
detention are in facilities owned
or operated by private prison
companies, as long as capacity is
not replaced by federally or
locally operated facilities.Yes, 80% of people in ICE
detention are in facilities owned
or operated by private prison
companies, as long as capacity is
not replaced by federally or
locally operated facilities.Yes, 80% of people in ICE
detention are in facilities
owned or operated by private
prison companies, but
advocacy must include calling
for releases and not transfers.Abolitionist StepsAbolitionist Steps
vs Reformist ReformsP2Does
This:
Ending
agreements with
local jails through
executive,
legislative, state,
or local action
Yes, as long as capacity isn’t
replaced by privately or
federally owned and operated
facilities.Yes, as long as capacity isn’t
replaced by privately or federally
owned and operated facilities.Yes, as long as capacity isn’t
replaced by privately or
federally owned and operated
facilities and must be
accompanied by calls for
releases and not transfers.
Yes, if coupled with concrete
efforts to reduce funding and
scale of detention.Yes, but only if participation is not
compelled.Yes, but only if participation is
not compelled.Opt-in community-
based support
services
Maintaining or
shifting capacity for
detention to areas
with more access to
counselNo, while it may lead to relief for
some people, access to counsel
does not reduce the scale of
detention.No, while it may provide relief to
some people, it does not chip
away at the system but rather
legitimizes it.No, while it could lead to
release for some people, it is
not without harm to others and
the existence of detention in
the community could lead to
additional apprehensions.
Universal
representation or
increased access
to counsel for
people in ICE
detentionNo, while it may lead to releases
for some people, tying
representation to detention
legitimizes the detention system
and does not reduce its scale.No, while it may provide relief to
some people, it does not chip away
at the system but rather
legitimizes it.No, while it could lead to
release for some people, it is
not without harm to others.
Alternatives to
Detention: Case
ManagementNo, these programs often
increase the scope of who is
detained and surveilled and have
not led to a reduction in
detention thus far.No, given the history of case
management in the welfare context
and parole in the criminal
punishment context, compulsory
case management is often punitive
in nature.No, these programs have been
shown to increase the scope of
surveillance and do not
provide relief to those
currently detained.
Alternatives to
Detention: Custody
models that curtail
freedom (for
example, halfway
houses, hotels, and
reception facilities
where freedom is
limited to any
degree)No, these types of facilities
change the physical nature of
detention and are likely to
expand the scope and scale.No, creates a new system that is still
carceral in nature and will have to
be dismantled.No, simply another form of
detention that is still coercive
and punitive.Reformist ReformsChip away at the current
system without creating
new harms or helping some
people at the expense of
others?Provide relief to people
who could be or are
currently detained or
under surveillance?Reduce the scale of
detention and surveillance?Abolitionist Steps
vs Reformist ReformsP3
Abolitionist StepsDoes
This:
Alternatives to
Detention:
Electronic
monitoring such as
ankle bracelets,
and smart phone
appsNo, electronic monitoring has
not reduced detention
capacity and instead increases
the number of people
surveilled as an alternative
form of detention.No, further cements surveillance
and funding for detention,
surveillance and deportation.No, inherently coercive and
punitive.
No, we have seen that more
oversight does not lead to
reductions in capacity though it
has played an important role in
exposing the failings and
immorality of the system.No, but it can further expose the
abuses and support arguments
for closure, though the risk of
creating “nicer” cages to address
abuses is always there.No, has no immediate impact
on the punitive nature of
detention and deportation
proceedings. But it could help
bolster arguments for closure
of certain facilities.More oversight and
inspections or
transparency at
federal, state, or
local level
Codifying common
detention standards
at federal, state, or
local levelNo, has no impact on scale of
detention, but can provide a legal
basis for shutdown of individual
detention centers.No, does not actually chip away at
the system and can be seen as an
endorsement of the system and
shift focus to conditions while
impeding efforts to reduce scale.No, better standards do not
make the system overall less
punitive and do little to
alleviate harms.Reformist Reforms
Chip away at the current
system without creating
new harms or helping some
people at the expense of
others?Provide relief to people
who could be or are
currently detained or
under surveillance?Reduce the scale of
detention and surveillance?Abolitionist Steps
vs Reformist ReformsP4
