About the Detention Watch Network
The Detention Watch Network works through the collective strength and diversity of its members to 
expose and challenge injustices of the U.S. immigration detention and deportation system and advocate for profound change that promotes the rights and dignity of all persons.
Visit 
detentionwatchnetwork.org
About the National Immigrant Justice Center
With of ﬁ ces in Chicago, Indiana, and Washington, D.C., Heartland Alliance’s National Immigrant 
Justice Center (NIJC) is a nongovernmental organization dedicated to ensuring human rights protections and access to justice for all immigrants, refugees, and asylum seekers through a unique combination of direct services, policy reform, impact litigation and public education. 
Visit 
immigrantjustice.org
Acknowledgements
This toolkit was a collaborative effort of NIJC and DWN. Primary contributors were: Jennifer Chan of 
NIJC; and Aurea Martinez, Carly Perez, Silky Shah, and Mary Small of DWN. 
Other staff and interns also contributed crucial research, editing, and design support, including Tara 
Tidwell Cullen, Royce Bernstein Murray, Katherine Rivera, and Claudia Valenzuela of NIJC; and Ana Carrion of DWN. 
Sincere thanks to pro bono attorneys at Dentons US LLP, who represented NIJC through more than 
three years of Freedom of Information Act litigation to obtain the contract and inspections documents mentioned in this report.
For more information contact:
Inspections and contracts 
Claudia Valenzuela, National Immigrant Justice Center, cvalenzuela@heartlandalliance.org 
Organizing local campaigns
Aurea Martinez, Detention Watch Network, amartinez@detentionwatchnetwork.org 
Policy recommendations and advocacy
Jennifer Chan, National Immigrant Justice Center, jchan@heartlandalliance.org Mary Small, Detention Watch Network, msmall@detentionwatchnetwork.org 
Communications and working with the media
Carly Perez, Detention Watch Network, cperez@detentionwatchnetwork.org Tara Tidwell Cullen, National Immigrant Justice Center, ttidwellcullen@heartlandalliance.org 
Cover Image: Steve Pavey
© November 2015 Detention Watch Network and Heartland Alliance’s National Immigrant Justice 
Center1Table of Contents
Introduction ............................................................................. 2
Immigration Detention 
Contracts and Inspections ..................................................... 3
Policy Recommendations and Talking Points...................... 9What You Can Do .................................................................. 13
Launch or Support a Local Campaign
Against a Detention Center .................................. 13
Advocate with Decision-Makers ........................... 23Use the Media to Support Your Work .................. 29
Case Studies .......................................................................... 35
Appendix ................................................................................ 38Endnotes ................................................................................ 40
Look for these icons throughout the toolkit:
Links to important documents
Additional resources
2Using ICE Contracts & Inspections to End Abusive Detention: An Advocacy Toolkit
INTRODUCTION
The United States manages the largest immigration detention system in the world. American tax-
payers spend over $2 billion each year  to detain  an average of 34,000 individuals daily—nearly half 
a million people annually—under a bed quota established in congressional appropriations.1  Individ-
uals are held in a network of more than 200 detention facilities across the country. Roughly half of detained immigrants are held in state prisons and county jails, which contract with U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), the interior enforcement agency of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), to detain immigrants.
2 The rest are held in dedicated immigration detention facilities 
run by ICE or contracted to for-pro ﬁ t, private prison corporations, such as Corrections Corporation of 
America (CCA) or the GEO Group (GEO). Facilities often are punitive and remote, cutting immigrants off from their families, access to counsel and the opportunity for fair hearings. Despite  the Obama 
administration’s 2009 promise to overhaul the immigration detention system,
3 little progress has been 
made to increase transparency and oversight, improve conditions, or reduce the detention of individu-als who face deportation from the United States.
ICE provides minimal transparency to the public on how it operates its immigration detention system. 
Consequently, Heartland Alliance’s National Immigrant Justice Center (NIJC) ﬁ led a Freedom of Infor-
mation Act (FOIA) request to obtain the contracts and inspections for the 100 largest immigration de-tention facilities in the country in 2009.  Ultimately, NIJC entered into a three-year litigation battle and obtained the documents it requested in 2015, resulting in the most comprehensive public release to date of ICE immigration detention center contracts and inspections. The thousands of pages of docu-ments provide an unprecedented look into a failed detention system that lacks accountability, shields ICE from public scrutiny, and allows local governments and private prison companies to brazenly maximize their bottom line at the expense of basic human rights.
The contracts and inspections are available at http://immigrantjustice.org/TransparencyandHumanRights
NIJC and Detention Watch Network (DWN) have created this toolkit in order to provide community organizers, advocates, academics, and other stakeholders with the basics of how to read and under-stand immigration detention contracts and inspections and how to use these documents to advocate around various detention issues, such as shutting down detention centers, improving detention center conditions, and increasing accountability and transparency for ICE and other detention center oper-ators. While the documents obtained by NIJC include valuable insight into the level of oversight and transparency over immigration detention, the documents—especially the inspections—should be read with a questioning eye. NIJC and DWN encourage advocates to compare the content of ICE docu-ments to their experiences at certain facilities, the experiences of detained people, media reports, and public testimonials from service providers, including legal service providers and visitation groups.
3The Immigration Detention Transparency & Human Rights Project - November 2015
IMMIGRATION DETENTION 
CONTRACTS & INSPECTIONS
Immigration Detention Contracting
The immigration detention contracting system is shrouded in secrecy. ICE’s online map of immigra-tion detention facilities is updated infrequently and does not include many detention facilities. For instance, as of November 2015, the 10-month-old Mesa Verde Detention Facility, with space to detain 400 people, is not listed on ICE’s website. However, GEO Group, the detention facility operator, lists the facility on its website.
4 In addition, ICE does not share important information such as who oper-
ates the facility, the size of the facility, and which detention standards apply. In fact, NIJC’s release of 90 detention contracts after a three-year legal battle is the ﬁ rst time such a large number of detention 
contracts have been publicly released. The full explanation of NIJC’s review of the contracts can be found in its August 2015 report. In general, the review found that: 
1. The immigration detention contracting process is convoluted and obscure, suffering from a 
signi ﬁ cant lack of uniformity in how contracts are created, executed, and maintained.
2. There is a lack of consistency and clarity as to which detention standards govern which facili-
ties.
3. Forty- ﬁ ve facilities operate with inde ﬁ nite contracts, mostly under outdated standards.
4. Tracking the taxpayer dollars ICE pays to local and private contractors to detain immigrants is 
daunting, and for some facilities, nearly impossible.
5. The practice of contracting and subcontracting with private entities shields many ICE detention 
facilities from public (taxpayer) scrutiny.
6. At least 12 contracts will expire before the end of 2017, providing an opportunity for advocates 
to raise questions about the rationale for keeping these facilities open, and/or ensure any mod-iﬁ cations or extensions of the contract contain robust standards, and address other concerns.
Read the ICE contracts report at http://immigrantjustice.org/ICEcontractsreport
What to Look for in the Contracts
The following information that can be found in the contracts may be used to identify advocacy targets 
and opportunities (e.g. when the contract will be up for renegotiation). For examples of what this infor-mation might look like within the documents, see the annotations in the contracts posted online. More guidance on how to use this information is in the “What You Can Do”  section on page 13.
1. Type of contract . There are four contract types (see below). Note that because of the preva-
lence of sub-contracting, the type of contract will not necessarily indicate what entity is running that facility, but it will help you identify advocacy targets for your local detention center.
Contract Detention Facilities (CDFs) are owned and operated by private corporations 
that contract directly with ICE.
4Using ICE Contracts & Inspections to End Abusive Detention: An Advocacy Toolkit
Service Processing Centers (SPCs) are owned and operated by ICE. However, ICE 
hires contractors to handle many services within the facilities, such as transportation and guard services. 
Intergovernmental Service Agreements (IGSAs) are owned and operated by local 
governmental entities, typically county or city governments. Many local governments subcontract to private corporations to fully administer the facilities and/or to provide other services.
U.S. Marshals Service (USMS) Intergovernmental Agreements (IGAs) are under 
contract with the Department of Justice’s U.S. Marshals Service. In general, these contracts pre-date the 2003 creation of DHS and frequently do not reference clear applicable standards for detaining immigrants. Further, the majority of the USMS IGA contract terms are inde ﬁ nite, meaning that there is no clear opportunity to renegotiate 
facility contracts, upgrade them to the most recent detention standards, or contractually address other concerns.
2. Expiration date . This date will help you identify detention centers that have contracts expiring 
soon. Some contracts do not have expiration dates, which means that these detention cen-ters may continue to operate without ever being required to undergo contract modi ﬁ cations to 
incorporate newer detention standards or contractually address other concerns.
3. Per diem rates show the amount of money ICE pays per person per day. This does not neces-
sarily re ﬂ ect the total amount of money that the contractor is receiving; there may be additional 
per-person payments for other services, such as transportation or security. Additionally, the per person payment may ﬂ uctuate with population. 
4. Guaranteed bed minimums  are a contractual requirement that obligate ICE to pay private 
contractors or subcontractors for a minimum number of detention beds regardless of whether they are ﬁ lled. These often are found alongside a tiered pricing scheme in which the daily cost 
of each person detained above the guaranteed number is discounted. These are concerning because they can incentivize ICE to detain more people in order to access the discounted rate. DWN and the Center for Constitutional Rights investigated the local lockup quotas in its 2015 report Banking on Detention.
Read the Banking on Detention  report at http://www.detentionwatchnetwork.org/
sites/default/ ﬁ les/Banking_on_Detention_DWN.pdf
5. Governing ICE detention standards and other applicable standards (see below for more 
information about the different standards).
6. Average daily population : Number of people detained at the facility on an average day, 
though this can vary signi ﬁ cantly over the course of the year.
7. Subcontractors : Detention facilities subcontract many services, such as food services and 
transportation, to private companies. Contracts may include information on subcontractors; whether they are held to applicable detention standards; and rates of pay for subcontractors.
8. Financial penalties : Some facility contracts include provisions on ﬁ nancial penalties for failure 
to maintain adequate quality control. It is unclear how these penalties are implemented, but they can offer a helpful advocacy and organizing hook. 
5The Immigration Detention Transparency & Human Rights Project - November 2015
Immigration Detention Center Inspections
ICE’s lack of transparency continues in the immigration detention inspections process. The process 
fails to identify pervasive and troubling conditions of detention. Instead, the inspections process func-tions as a “checklist culture,” in which inspectors employed by ICE directly or via subcontracts engage in pre-planned, perfunctory reviews of detention facilities that are designed to produce passing ratings and ensure local counties and private corporations continue to receive government funds. NIJC and DWN’s analysis of inspections obtained through NIJC’s litigation can be found in the October 2015 report Lives in Peril ,but in general, the review revealed that: 
1. ICE’s culture of secrecy persists.
2. ICE inspections fail to adequately assess the conditions detained immigrants experience.3. Inspections are designed to facilitate passing ratings for facilities, not identify or address viola-
tions.
4. When violations are uncovered, facilities face no real accountability. 
Read the Lives in Peril  report at http://immigrantjustice.org/LivesinPeril
How does the inspections process work?
Facilities are inspected for compliance to ICE detention standards. Currently, ICE has three sets of 
standards that it uses nationwide. At an absolute minimum, NIJC and DWN believe that every facility should be contractually required to meet the 2011 standards, which contain the strongest protections for immigrants in detention:
1. National Detention Standards (NDS):  Promulgated in 2000, the NDS consist of 38 detention 
standards and are the least robust set of standards.
5 
Read the NDS: http://www.ice.gov/detention-standards/2000
2. 2008 Performance-Based National Detention Standards (PBNDS 2008) :9 PBNDS 2008 
include 41 standards, including standards added to monitor facilities’ preparedness to prevent and address sexual assault and abuse, and more detailed requirements for SPCs and CDFs.
Read the PBNDS 2008: http://www.ice.gov/detention-standards/2008
3. 2011 Performance-Based National Detention Standards (PBNDS 2011) : ICE revised the 
PBNDS in 2011 to improve medical and mental health services, access to legal services and religious opportunities, communication with detained immigrants with no or limited English proﬁ ciency, the process for reporting and responding to complaints, as well as guidelines for 
recreation and visitation. PBNDS 2011 has 42 standards.
Read the PBNDS 2011: http://www.ice.gov/detention-standards/2011
6Using ICE Contracts & Inspections to End Abusive Detention: An Advocacy Toolkit
The amount of ICE oversight at each facility is typically driven by a combination of the number 
of people detained at the facility. ICE uses three types of inspections:
Type of InspectionWhere is it 
used?Who is the 
Inspector?Inspection 
FrequencyCriteria Used
Enforcement 
and Removal Operations (ERO)Facilities 
which hold 50 or more people for more than 72 hoursICE ERO’s Deten-
tion Management Division employs private contractors, currently The Na-kamoto Group, and previously MGT of America and Cre-ative Corrections.Annually
ICE Form G-324A: Provides a 
checklist of applicable national detention standards and com-ponents under that standard.Rating System: Facilities receive a rating for the over-all facility. The overall rating is based on the rating for each standard, which in turn is based on ratings assigned to components categorized under each standard. 
Ofﬁ ce of 
Detention Oversight (ODO)Facilities 
which hold 50 or more people for more than 72 hoursMay include ICE 
ODO employees and/or private con-tractors.Varies
iODO inspectors focus on key 
standards which have been identi ﬁ ed as areas where a 
facility may not be in compli-ance. Thus, the standards dis-cussed may vary from facility to facility. Inspectors collect and analyze “relevant allega-tions, complaints, and detain-ee information from multiple databases”
ii and gather “facility 
facts and inspection-related information from ERO [head-quarters] staff to prepare for the site visit.”
iii
Organizational Review Self Assessment (ORSA)Facilities that 
hold fewer than 50 people  
or any number 
of people for less than 72 hours.  Facility staff Varies Unknown; not included in the 
inspections documents received through NIJC’s FOIA. 
i. The ODO selects facilities for inspection using a risk-based model that uses de ﬁ ciencies identi ﬁ ed in ERO’s annual inspections, 
number and type of allegations, de ﬁ ciencies identi ﬁ ed in prior ODO inspections, ADP, and the date of the facility’s last ODO inspection. 
U.S. Government Accountability Of ﬁ ce (GAO) Report to Congressional Requestors, Immigration Detention: Additional Actions Needed 
to Strengthen Management and Oversight of Facility Costs and Standards GAO-15-153, Oct. 2014, at footnote 71. Available at: 
http://www.gao.gov/assets/670/666467.pdf . 
ii. These include the Joint Integration Case Management System (JICMS) and the ENFORCE Alien Booking Module (EABM) and Alien 
Removal Module (EARM).
iii. 2011 Stewart ODO Inspection, p. 4. Available at: 
https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2065395-stewart-deten Ɵ on-center-ga-2011-odo-inspec Ɵ on.html . 7The Immigration Detention Transparency & Human Rights Project - November 2015
What to Look for in the Inspections
The inspections contain information on detention facility operations, facility capacity, subcontractors, 
and conditions. NIJC and DWN encourage advocates to compare the content of ICE documents to their experiences at certain facilities, the experiences of detained people, media reports, and public testimonials from service providers, including legal service providers and visitation groups.
1. Deaths of detained immigrants  are reported in ERO’s “Signi ﬁ cant Incident Summary Work-
sheet,” including information on whether the death was violent, a suicide, due to illness, or an-other reason. If further details on any deaths are provided, it is typically found in the comments section of the “LCI Review Assurance Statement” or in the sections on “Suicide Prevention and Intervention” or “Terminal Illness, Advanced Directives, and Death.” 
2. Suicides and suicide attempts  are reported in ERO’s “Signi ﬁ cant Incident Summary Work-
sheet.” More detailed information may be provided in the comments section of the “LCI Review Assurance Statement” or in the section on “Suicide Prevention and Intervention.”
3. Assaults  are reported in the ERO’s “Signi ﬁ cant Incident Summary Worksheet.” The worksheet 
requires disaggregated reporting on whether a weapon was involved and the type of assault (i.e. physical, sexual, etc.). However, the worksheet only requires reporting on assaults com-mitted by detained individuals against other detained individuals or staff members. Assaults committed by staff are buried in ERO inspections, and even then only for facilities inspected to the PBNDS. Component No. 10 of the Sexual Abuse and Assault Prevention and Intervention standard asks whether incidents or allegations of sexual assault or abuse by staff on detained individuals have been documented, but it is left to the discretion of inspectors whether to re-cord the actual number of incidents or allegations. 
4. Use of force incidents  are reported in the “Signi ﬁ cant Incident Summary Worksheet.” The 
worksheet mandates reporting on the number of uses of chemical agents; the Special Reac-tion Team; four/ ﬁ ve point restraints; and canine units. In addition, further comments on any use 
of force incidents may be found in the overall comments section in the “LCI Review Assurance Statement;” or standards on “Use of Force and Restraints” or “Staff Training.” If use of force incidents impact other areas of operation, related comments may be scattered throughout the inspection report.
5. Bed rates and guaranteed bed minimums  are documented in the ERO inspection “Deten-
tion Review Summary Form.” ODO inspections may include this information in the executive summary, but it is not provided consistently.
6. De ﬁ ciencies  (speci ﬁ c areas where a facility did not meet standards) are indicated in ERO in-
spections with a checkmark either for “De ﬁ cient” (for inspections based on the NDS) or “Does 
Not Meet Standards” (for inspections based on the PBNDS). ODO inspections highlight de ﬁ -
ciencies in bold throughout the report and typically summarize and describe de ﬁ ciencies in the 
executive summary and in the section on “ICE Performance Based National Detention Stan-dards.” De ﬁ ciencies in ERO inspections are more dif ﬁ cult to ﬁ nd. Whereas ODO inspections 
clearly delineate the de ﬁ ciencies found, ERO inspections do not provide a list of all de ﬁ ciencies 
found during an inspection. Further, even if several components within a standard are found 
deﬁ cient, the inspector may still ﬁ nd that the facility passes the overall standard and does not 
elaborate on the de ﬁ ciency in the comments section.8Using ICE Contracts & Inspections to End Abusive Detention: An Advocacy Toolkit
7. Detention standards to which the facility is inspected:  While the ODO inspections clearly 
state which detention standards were applied during the inspection in the “Inspection Process” section, the ERO inspections are less clear. One way to tell is that facilities inspected to the NDS will only have 38 standards listed in the table of contents whereas PBNDS 2008 include 41 standards and PBNDS 2011 include 42 standards. The revision dates for the inspection checklists, often noted at the bottom of the worksheets, provide another clue. Where possible, NIJC has annotated the set of standards on which each 2012 inspection posted online was based.
8. Operator of detention center:  The ODO inspections typically provide this information in the 
executive summary. This information may be provided in the comments of an ERO inspection, but there is not a standardized location for this information.
9. Population:  ERO inspections provide population information in the “Detention Review Sum-
mary Form,” including total facility population; detained immigrant’s security classi ﬁ cation level 
(only SPCs and CDFs); facility capacity (rated, operational, and emergency); and average daily population broken down by males and females. ODO inspections also provide this information in the executive summary, but since the information is in narrative form as opposed to ERO’s worksheet, the information may vary.
10. Private contractors: ERO inspections may include information on private companies to which 
ICE contracts services, including phone provider, food services, bio-hazardous waste disposal, commissary services, health services, pest control, pharmaceutical provider, transportation, etc. This information is not gathered in an organized manner, but may be found in the inspec-tor’s comments. ODO inspections may include this information in the executive summary.
11. Signi ﬁ cant redactions: Both ICE and the detention center operator may have made redac-
tions to the inspections, raising questions. For example, in ERO’s “Signi ﬁ cant Incident Summa-
ry Worksheet” the accompanying description for use of force incidents are routinely redacted.9The Immigration Detention Transparency & Human Rights Project - November 2015
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS 
& TALKING POINTS
In this section, you will ﬁ nd descriptions of some of the pressing problems within detention, as well 
as some recommended policy solutions to address them. In meetings with decision-makers who are looking for actionable recommendations, you may ﬁ nd these useful. However, depending on the 
context, you may instead want to say that the failure of the inspections process, or the convoluted nature of detention contracting, just offer further proof that there is simply no way to detain people hu-manely, and that the system must be dismantled. What you say and which recommendations you use will depend on your group, your target, and the goals of your campaign. For more information about selecting your targets and goals, see the “What You Can Do: Launch or Support a Campaign against a Local Detention Center” section on page 13.
1. Hold immigration detention centers accountable for deplorable conditions.
 Problems:
Individuals in detention report inhumane treatment, including inadequate or spoiled food, poor 
access to medical care, inappropriate use of solitary con ﬁ nement, and physical and sexual 
abuse.
Immigrants are isolated in remote detention facilities located far from cities. Exorbitant phone 
rates exacerbate detained individuals’ isolation, making it very dif ﬁ cult to report complaints, 
access legal service providers, and communicate with family members.
ICE’s inspection process fails to hold detention centers accountable. Facilities with well-docu-
mented problems continue to receive passing ratings.
In 2009, Congress said that ICE could not expend funding to any facility that failed two in-
spections in a row. After this consequence was established, the number of facilities failing inspections suddenly dropped, even as immigrants and advocates continued to experience and observe human rights and due process violations throughout the system. This is not what Congress intended and instead is facilitating abusive conditions. We need real oversight and real consequences. 
Solutions:
Require all detention facilities to, at a minimum, immediately adhere to the 2011 Perfor-
mance-Based National Detention Standards (2011 PBNDS), and terminate contracts for facili-ties that are unable or unwilling to meet these standards.10Using ICE Contracts & Inspections to End Abusive Detention: An Advocacy Toolkit
Place detention facilities on probation and subject them to more intensive inspections after the 
ﬁ rst ﬁ nding of substantial non-compliance within an inspection.
Terminate contracts within 60 days for those facilities with repeat ﬁ ndings of substantial 
non-compliance.
2. Eliminate arbitrary bed quotas that incentivize increased immigra-tion detention.
 Problems:
The immigration detention bed quota and contractual guaranteed bed minimums drive ICE to 
focus on detaining individuals to ﬁ ll arbitrary quotas.
Immigration detention is unnecessary for many individuals for whom detention in ﬂ icts tremen-
dous emotional and ﬁ nancial harm on their families. Further, detention severely hinders an 
individual’s ability to get legal help.
Solutions:
Eliminate the immigration detention bed quota.
Stop contracting with private corporations or other entities that require guaranteed payments 
for a minimum number of immigration detention beds, and modify existing contracts to remove guaranteed bed minimum payments. If the contractor is unwilling to make such a modi ﬁ cation, 
ICE should terminate the contract.
3. Improve transparency in the immigration detention contracting and inspection process.
 Problems:
ICE does not publicly provide detention center contracts or inspections, or even a comprehen-
sive list of the detention centers it uses and the standards that apply at each detention center.
The immigration detention contracting process is convoluted and obscure. Tracking the taxpay-
er dollars ICE pays to local and private contractors to detain immigrants is extremely dif ﬁ cult, 
and for some facilities, nearly impossible. 
At least forty- ﬁ ve facilities operate with inde ﬁ nite contracts, mostly under outdated standards. 
Since the contract renewal process typically triggers updates to applicable detention stan-dards, facilities with no end date can operate inde ﬁ nitely under old, inadequate standards.11The Immigration Detention Transparency & Human Rights Project - November 2015
Solutions:
Make detention center contracts and ERO and ODO inspections available to the public in a 
timely manner. To date, ICE has released its inspections to the public only as a result of FOIA requests. These are unnecessarily time-consuming and expensive obstacles to accessing information about how the federal government treats thousands of people in its custody and spends billions of taxpayer dollars. Instead, this information should be freely available.
Provide public reporting on suicide attempts, hunger strikes, work program stoppages, use of 
solitary con ﬁ nement, use of force, and other signi ﬁ cant events at detention centers.
Submit quarterly reports to Congress on inspection and oversight activities of detention facili-
ties, to be made available to the public.
Throughout the contracts negotiation process for individual detention facilities, engage with 
legal service providers, faith groups, and other local and national non-governmental organiza-tions that visit facilities, to address human rights and due process issues they observe.
4. Improve the quality of inspections.
 Problems: 
Inspections fail to adequately assess the conditions detained immigrants experience. ERO 
and ODO inspections are not designed to capture actual conditions of detention. They base ﬁ ndings on written policies, but do not check for implementation or take into account the expe-
riences of detained immigrants. Even where human rights violations and unexplained deaths have been publicly documented, facilities rarely fail ERO inspections. 
The inspections are designed to facilitate passing ratings for facilities, not identify or address 
violations. Both ERO and ODO inform facilities of inspections in advance, giving them time to improve conditions prior to the inspections. The entities which conduct the inspections are paid and vetted by ICE.
Inspections may be edited before they are ﬁ nalized by the inspections contractor and submit-
ted to ICE’s Detention Monitoring Unit.
Solutions:
Establish a DHS ombudsman outside of ICE to conduct unannounced inspections of immigra-
tion detention facilities not less than once per year, with complete ﬁ ndings made available to 
the public. These third-party inspections should examine compliance with all aspects of appli-cable detention standards and determine whether contracts will be renewed as stipulated in congressional appropriations.12Using ICE Contracts & Inspections to End Abusive Detention: An Advocacy Toolkit
Ensure that the inspection process involves more than a checklist and encompasses inter-
views with detained individuals and other stakeholders assessing the facility, including docu-mentation of the content of those interviews. Inspectors also must rely on more than assuranc-es by facility administrators of compliance with applicable policies and procedures and instead seek and document proof of their effective implementation.
Do not allow facilities to take an “à la carte” approach to compliance by only making a limited 
number of detention standards provisions “mandatory” during inspections and permitting some facilities to opt out of detention standards they have been contracted to apply. If a facility can-not abide by detention standards in their entirety then they should not be permitted to enter into or continue a contract with ICE.
5. End immigration detention pro ﬁ teering.
 
Problems:
Both local governments and private prison companies are making money from immigration 
detention contracts. Efforts to cut costs in order to maximize revenue often lead to inadequate medical care and other forms of abuse and neglect. 
Sixty-two percent of all immigration detention beds are operated by private for-pro ﬁ t prison 
companies.
6 Corrections Corporation of America (CCA) and GEO Group are the primary bene-
ﬁ ciaries, operating nearly three quarters of the privately-contracted beds.7 From 2007 to 2014, 
CCA’s pro ﬁ ts have increased from $133.3 million to more than $195 million while GEO Group’s 
proﬁ ts have increased from $41.8 million to more than $143.8 million.8 Often these contracts 
require guaranteed payments for a minimum number of immigration detention beds, regardless of whether they are full, in turn incentivizing ICE to detain more people.
Solutions:
ICE should cease using for-pro ﬁ t prison companies to provide the agency with immigration 
detention beds.  
So long as such contracts exist, ICE should refrain from contracting with private corporations 
or other entities that require guaranteed payments for a minimum number of immigration de-tention beds, and modify existing contracts to remove guaranteed bed minimum payments. If the contractor is unwilling to make such a modi ﬁ cation, ICE should terminate the contract.13The Immigration Detention Transparency & Human Rights Project - November 2015
WHAT YOU CAN DO
Launch or Support a Local Campaign 
Against a Detention Center
1. Request a Detention Cen ter Tour 
Start off by learning more about the detention facility in your area. Touring a detention facility through 
ICE’s stakeholder access policy is possible as long as participants are associated with an organiza-tion and submit the following information: 
A. Written request
Provide a written request to the Enforcement and Removal Operations (ERO) Field Of ﬁ ce Director at 
least two weeks in advance of the requested tour/visit.  
Download ICE’s stakeholder access policy for a list of information 
that must be included in the request: http://www.ice.gov/doclib/ero-outreach/pdf/access-directive-stakeholder.pdf 
The contact information for each Field Of ﬁ ce Director is listed on ICE’s 
website at http://www.ice.gov/contact/ero
CARLY PEREZ14Using ICE Contracts & Inspections to End Abusive Detention: An Advocacy Toolkit
B. Code of Conduct
These are rules stakeholders must follow when allowed on the premise to tour a facility. Read thor-
oughly and sign. Keep a copy for your records. Every person attending the tour must read, sign and submit a code of conduct. 
Download the code of conduct at 
http://www.ice.gov/doclib/ero-outreach/pdf/71-032.pdf
C. Stakeholder Tour/ Visit Noti ﬁ cation Flyer
You need to clearly state in your request if you want both “ a detention facility tour” and “visitation 
with detainees ” in order to speak with immigrants who are currently detained. 
If you do want to interview detained individuals, complete and submit the “Stakeholder Tour/Visit No-
tiﬁ cation Flyer” form. ICE uses this form to post a sign-up sheet inside the facility to notify individuals 
detained there of an upcoming visit and the opportunity to talk to visitors.  
Download the “Stakeholder Tour/Visit Noti ﬁ cation Flyer” 
form at http://www.ice.gov/doclib/ero-outreach/pdf/71-031.pdf
Sample Request Letter
This letter was submitted by the Detention Watch Network to arrange a visit 
to Adelanto Detention Facility.
Dear Mr. Jennings
My organization, Detention Watch Network, along with several southern California detention stakeholders, 
would like to request a detention facility tour and visitation with detained individuals at the Adelanto Detention Facility on either September 3, 2015 or September 4, 2015, under the Stakeholder Access Directive. On either day, we request that the tour begin in the morning in order to ensure that we have suffi   cient time to tour the large 
facility and speak to detained individuals who may sign up to speak with us. 
We are requesting the tour and opportunities to speak with detained individuals at Adelanto in order to learn 
more about the ways in which the recent expansion of the facility has aff  ected quality of life and access to re-
sources, programs and services for people detained at Adelanto. During the tour, we would like to see all areas of the facility, including the housing uni ts, special housing units, medical unit, library, dining areas, and recreation 
spaces. We also request the opportunity to speak with any detained person interested and willing to meet with us.
Enclosed, please fi  nd completed copies of the ICE Stakeholder Tour/Visit Notifi  cation Flyer and Sign Up Sheet 
and our interview consent form for your review. In addition, I have attached a separate fl  yer which explains who 
Detention Watch Network is and the purpose of our visit in both English and Spanish. Finally, I have included the signed ICE Stakeholder Code of Conduct form for the following group of stakeholders:
[Include chart with names, organizations, dates of birth and drivers license numbers for each tour participant]Please let me know at your earliest convenience which dates would work best for you and your staff  . If you need 
any additional information or  have questions about this request, plea se contact me at [em ail] or [phone number].
Sincerely,
[Signed by main point of contact]15The Immigration Detention Transparency & Human Rights Project - November 2015
2. Involve Directly Impacted Individuals
It is crucial to talk to individuals who are directly affected by detention, get their input when develop-
ing strategies, and have their voices at the forefront, leading campaigns. DWN members have used various methods to connect with immigrants impacted by detention:
Visitation Program
Plan a visit through an established visitation program or local organization that already has a rela-
tionship with a detention center. Visitation programs can arrange your visit and guide you through the entire process. Two organizations that run visitation programs are Community Initiatives for Visiting Immigrants in Con ﬁ nement (CIVIC) and Lutheran Immigration and Refugee Services (LIRS).
9
CIVIC can recommend and facilitate an introduction to a local visitation program 
near you. Email CIVIC at info@endisolation.org or go to http://www.endisolation.org.
LIRS can help people join or launch a visitation ministry. For more information email 
visitation@lirs.org or call 412-230-2775. 
Use the Media
Whether it’s a scheduled interview or you happen to ﬁ nd 
yourself being interviewed, use the media as a recruiting and awareness tool.  Being in front of a camera is a perfect moment to reach directly impacted individuals and their families and get them involved in your campaign to end detention. It is free publicity for the campaign, legitimizes the work, and will reach a large audience. Make sure to provide contact information so that people can get in touch with you or your organization. (See page 29 for more infor-
mation on how to use the media.)
Solidarity DayA more direct approach can involve standing outside the 
detention center during visitation hours to connect with family members who are visiting their loved ones that day. You can ﬁ nd information about visiting hours by calling the 
facility. This can help you learn and support individual cas-
es. Also, you can collect information about what’s happen-ing inside the facility regarding conditions or abuses. 
For example: Once a month on Saturdays, Northwest 
Detention Center Resistance in coordination with other 
groups has about 10-15 volunteers who stand outside the Northwest Detention Center in Tacoma, WA and talk to 
families visiting their loved ones.
Northwest Detention Center Resistance vigil. Photos courtesy Timothy Smith16Using ICE Contracts & Inspections to End Abusive Detention: An Advocacy Toolkit
3. Develop a Strategy for Your Campaign
Now you are ready to take action. You have learned about the appalling system of immigration de-
tention and have a clear understanding of the problem. You have connected with directly impacted individuals and will be working with them to develop a strategy targeting a speci ﬁ c detention facility. 
Below is an outline of the steps you can take to launch your group’s campaign. 
A. Determine Your Goals
Consider 1 to 2 long-term objectives for your campaign. Do you want to ultimately shut down 
the detention center, gain more access to support those on the inside, or something else? 
Examples: Shut down the detention center in my county or state; eliminate the local quota 
(guaranteed minimum) at the detention center. 
Determine 2 to 3 intermediate goals that will indicate movement toward your long-term objec-
tive. 
Examples: Local member of Congress calls for closure of the detention center; the county 
council passes a resolution against the facility. 
Determine 3 to 4 short-term goals that help you get to your long-term and intermediate goals
Examples: Get 2,000 signatures on a petition calling for closure of the facility; 20 people join 
the group to help ﬁ ght the facility; raise $3,000 for the campaign to support actions and out-
reach.
All your efforts should complement the long-term goals. 
B. Consider What Resources You Have, and What You Need
Assess the resources that you bring to this campaign:
Number of volunteers, staff
Space for meetings
Key relationships with decision-makers
Skill sets: media, organizing, writing, design, public-speaking
Budget
Consider what resources you need to win, and what gaps you may need to ﬁ ll or work around. 17The Immigration Detention Transparency & Human Rights Project - November 2015
C. Build and Sustain Your Base
Once you have a core group of people who are part of the campaign, set regular meeting times so 
that you are consistently checking in about progress towards your goals. Monthly or bi-weekly meet-ings will help you stay on track. You might also want to create a listserv for easy communication among the core group. 
Continue to build your vase of constituents
 »Who cares about the issue? 
 »Who can you mobilize on the issue?
 »How can you engage them to join your 
efforts? 
Determine who your allies are
 »Who are allies that you can move to join 
your effort?
 »What is their bottom line?
 »What power do they have?
 »Do you lose anything by engaging them in 
the ﬁ ght? (i.e. do you have shared prin-
ciples, objectives, or are they potentially “strange bedfellows”)
Who makes up the opposition? Who are your 
opponents?
 »What will your victory cost them? 
 »What will they do/spend to oppose you? 
 »What obstacles do you anticipate?
D. Choose Your Targets
Now that you have your goals in place and understand your capacity, it’s time to determine who your 
target is. It is rare to have access to the ﬁ nal decision-maker, so it’s important to consider both prima-
ry targets and secondary targets who can in ﬂ uence the primary target. 
Primary Target (the ﬁ nal decision-maker)
 »Who has the power to give you victory? 
 »What power do you have over your target?
 »What power can you obtain during the course of the campaign?
 »Chose a person or set of people, not an institution.
INDHIRA PREGO18Using ICE Contracts & Inspections to End Abusive Detention: An Advocacy Toolkit
Secondary Targets (those who can in ﬂ uence your primary target)
 »Who has power over your primary target?
 »Who do you know that has access to your target(s)? 
In order to determine your primary and secondary targets it is important to understand what type of 
facility you are focusing on. Below is a chart with the types of facilities you may encounter and possi-ble targets. To determine the type of facility you’re targeting, review your facility’s contract.
Type of Facility Description Possible Primary
TargetPossible Secondary Target
Contract Detention Facility (CDF)A facility operated by a 
private prison companyICE national and/or 
local ﬁ eld of ﬁ ceCounty or city 
ofﬁ cials, members 
of Congress
Intergovernmental Service Agreement (IGSA)When a local or state jail 
contracts with ICE to hold immigrants for civil detention (Note that the local government may in turn contract with a private company to run the facility)County commissioners, 
local sheriff, and/or ICE local ﬁ eld of ﬁ ce
City of ﬁ cials, 
members of Congress
Service Processing Center (SPC)A facility owned and 
operated by ICEICE national and/or 
local ﬁ eld of ﬁ ceMembers of Congress
Potential demands/requests for elected of ﬁ cials:
Demands for local of ﬁ cials (county commissioners, city council members, state legislature):
Visit the detention center in their district/county as a ﬁ rst step to increase engagement 
and their awareness of issues at the facility. 
 »Sponsor a city or county resolution against the facility.
 »Pressure a member of Congress to take a stand against the facility. 
Potential demands for representatives and senators who represent you in Congress:
 »Visit a detention center, in order to garner media coverage and/or as a ﬁ rst step to en-
gage them on problems within the facility.
 »Write a letter to DHS or ICE with concerns about a detention center.
 »Write an op-ed in their local newspaper calling attention to problems at the detention 
center.
 »Co-sponsor or vote for a good piece of legislation, or vote against a harmful piece of 
legislation.19The Immigration Detention Transparency & Human Rights Project - November 2015
E. Develop Tactics to Reach Your Goals
Tactics are the ﬁ nal part of strategy development and should not stand alone but complement the 
larger campaign. Tactics should:
Focus on the primary or secondary target of the campaign. 
Put power behind a speci ﬁ c demand.
Take your target by surprise – disrupt their schedule and force them to respond. 
Be supported by your members and involve actions they are comfortable carrying out. (As the 
campaign escalates consider pushing your own boundaries to advance your goals.)
Move the campaign forward in a logical progression. Whenever decision-makers don’t meet 
your demands, you can escalate to more disruptive tactics:
Tactics usually fall into one or more of the following categories:
Aimed at the target to show your power
Raising the morale and engagement of your members
Getting media coverage and raising public awareness
Below is a sample list of tactics. Don’t feel limited by these and be sure to think outside the box to 
catch your target off guard.
Teach-ins, workshops, presentations, and ﬁ lm screenings
 »Use every opportunity to raise awareness about the issue. These types of events are 
great places to recruit people to join your campaign and provide constituents ways to become active. 
20Using ICE Contracts & Inspections to End Abusive Detention: An Advocacy Toolkit
 »These types of events can be hosted in churches, public spaces or co-sponsored with 
other organizations to provide context and information about the immigration detention system or a speci ﬁ c component. 
 »Invite directly impacted individuals and individuals working on detention. 
Meet with your target/decision-maker or attend a public forum/town hall. 
(For more information on meeting with decision-makers, see the “What You Can Do: Advocate with Decision-makers” section on page 23.)
 »If your target is a public of ﬁ cial, schedule a meeting to directly talk about the conditions 
at the detention center, concerns or questions about its contract or inspections, guaran-teed bed minimums, the national bed quota and/or ending immigration detention. 
Hold a press conference.  (For more information on developing a media strategy, see the 
“What You Can Do: Use the Media to Support Your Work” section on page 29.)
 »A press conference is a good way to launch your campaign and get media attention.
INDHIRA PREGO21The Immigration Detention Transparency & Human Rights Project - November 2015
Do a petition drive
 »Gather signatures for a petition on one of your goals
 »Set a goal for the number of signatures
 »Develop a plan for where you will gather signatures: local events, farmers markets, etc.
 »From the beginning, plan how you will use the completed petition. Will you hand deliver 
it to your target? Call a press conference to announce it?
Organize a rally, march or vigil
 »Call attention to the issue and engage more members of the community. 
 »Consider location and necessary permits before moving forward. 
 »Identify compelling speakers and decide on spokespeople for the media. 
 »Develop chants and prepare materials and signs and creative tools such as puppets to 
call attention to the rally/march. 
Do a direct action involving civil disobedience, potentially including arrest.
 »Evaluate whether civil disobedience is the next logical step, taking into consideration 
efforts leading up to the civil disobedience event.
 »Determine goals of the action, how will it impact your decision-maker, how will it impact 
public perception of your cause, is the risk of arrest worth it?
 »Determine where, when, and what type of action it will be.
 »Identify who is willing to risk arrest and evaluate any potential negative consequences 
for them.
 »Identify legal support; reach out to your local National Lawyers Guild chapter to secure 
lawyers to support those who are arrested and to serve as legal observers during the action. 
 »Raise money for bail and potential legal fees. 
 »Conduct a training
24 for individuals who will participate in the event (both those getting 
arrested and those providing support), including de-escalation techniques and how to protect oneself during the action.
The Ruckus Society provides tools and training on nonviolent direct 
action at http://www.ruckus.org
 
 »Identify a point person to make contact and negotiate with the law enforcement agency 
that arrives on scene.
 »Recruit peacekeepers to monitor and prevent any con ﬂ icts at the action.
22Using ICE Contracts & Inspections to End Abusive Detention: An Advocacy Toolkit
Sample Strategy Charts 
This chart developed by the Midwest Academy is a useful tool for developing your strategy.
Download a template of this chart as a PDF at 
http://www.tcsg.org/sfelp/toolkit/Midweststrategy_01.pdf
Private Prison (Contract Detention Facility)
Goals Resour ces Base Building Targets Tactics
Long-term:
Shut down the 
detention center,
End ICE contracts 
with private prison companiesHave: 
10 volunteers1 part-time staffDesigner/ArtistMeeting space for 
50 people
Large van for 
transportation
Need: 20 volunteersFull-time staffMedia supportMoney for actionsConstituents:Immigrant community, 
Visitation Program, Legal Service Providers, Faith groups Primary: 
ICE National 
Ofﬁ cial Host a teach-in about the 
detention center and the private company
Hold a press conference an-
nouncing the campaign
Meet with member of Congress to 
gain their support
Expose the conditions of the 
facility via rallies, media, and actionsIntermediate: 
Member of 
congress pres-sures ICE to end contractAllies: 
Criminal justice organi-
zations, labor unions
Short-term:
20 signatures for 
a local sign-on letter from county and state of ﬁ cialsOpponents: 
Private prison compa-
ny, elected of ﬁ cials 
receiving private prison moneySecondary:
ICE Field Of ﬁ ce 
Director
Local elected 
ofﬁ cials (Mayor)
County Jail (Intergovernmental Service Agreement)
Goals Resources Base Building Targets Tactics
Long-term:
The contract 
between ICE and the county is terminatedHave: 
5 volunteersMeeting space for 
100 people
$2,000Free printingMedia supportNeed:StaffDesignerConstituents: 
Immigrant com-munity, Visitation Program, Faith groupsPrimary:
County 
Commissioners
ICE Field Of ﬁ ce 
DirectorHold regular (monthly or weekly) vigils 
outside the jail 
100 individuals attend City Council 
meeting to demand resolution
Be present at public events to get sig-
natures for the petition
Meet with decision-maker(s)Intermediate: City council 
resolution against the ICE contractAllies: 
NAACP, crimi-
nal justice orgs, civic engagement groups
Short-term:
Petition with 
5,000 signatures
Endorsement by 
local member of CongressOpponents:
Sheriff’s of ﬁ ce, lo-
cal anti-immigrant groups or elected ofﬁ cialsSecondary:
Member of 
Congress
Major faith leader
23The Immigration Detention Transparency & Human Rights Project - November 2015
Advocate with Decision-Makers
When politicians know that their constituents care about an issue, they are more likely to vote or take 
action in favorable ways. Establishing and nurturing relationships with your local, state, and/or national representatives is crucial to enacting policies that protect and af ﬁ rm the rights of immigrants, and also 
to stopping proposals that would negatively impact immigrant communities. 
Once you’ve chosen your target (see Step D in Section 3, “Develop a Strategy” on page 17)  you’re 
ready to start planning for a meeting. 
Setting up and preparing for a meeting
1. Get a team together: Before you meet with a decision-maker, g et a team together. Be strate-
gic in ﬁ nding team members who best represent your asks—including people who have been 
directly impacted by unjust policies—and who can commit to building an ongoing relationship with the of ﬁ ce. Think about including community leaders whom the decision-maker may al-WHAT YOU CAN DO
CARLY PEREZ24Using ICE Contracts & Inspections to End Abusive Detention: An Advocacy Toolkit
ready know or respect, or people who will be effective messengers with this particular deci-
sion-maker. Aim for 5-10 participants, though a larger group can be a powerful sign of support. Check with the scheduler to see how many people the of ﬁ ce can accommodate and be sure to 
plan well, so that you are focused on your message and everyone knows their speci ﬁ c roles.
2. Do background research on your decision-maker: This doesn’t have to be an extensive 
project, but some quick online searching will show you what past positions they’ve taken and comments they’ve made publicly as well as biographical sketches, campaign statements, past 
occupations, religion, political and social memberships, areas of interest and positions on other issues, all of which can inform your approach to the meeting. 
3. Have a plan: Before your visit, always  meet with the other participants to assign roles, includ-
ing the facilitator, the personal story, speci ﬁ c points, and the ‘ask’. Practice by role-playing be-
fore the meeting so that everyone feels comfortable and knows what to do . Review your talking 
points and prepare your materials. Think about any materials you want to bring to the meeting to share with the decision-maker. 
The Facilitator  will kick off the meeting by introducing the group, explaining the 
purpose for the meeting, and providing space for each person to brieﬂ y introduce 
themselves. The facilitator will also jump in if the meeting goes off-track and redirect the conversation.
The Personal Story  is key to every meeting. Someone should be present who has 
either been directly impacted by the unjust detention system, or has worked closely with individuals who have been separated from family members, detained, or de-ported. Telling these stories will show how peoples’ lives are impacted and how your community would bene ﬁ t from positive policies and legislation, as well as the nega-
tive consequences of proposed anti-immigrant bills.
Point People on Speci ﬁ c Issues:  There will be speci ﬁ c issues your group will want 
to discuss. It will be helpful to have one person take on each of these issues to show they are distinctly important. (For ideas of problems and recommendations you might 
want to discuss, see the “Policy Recommendations and Talking Points” Section on page 9.)
The Ask  is the critical part of the visit when you ask your decision-maker to take a 
speci ﬁ c action. It can be tempting to bury or qualify the ask because you’re afraid 
the decision-maker will say no. Whoever is in charge of the ask should practice and 
be comfortable making the ask directly, so that the decision-maker knows what you want. Listen carefully and ask for clari ﬁ cation if what they say is vague. 
1. Schedule a meeting.  Call your decision-maker’s local of ﬁ ce to request a meeting. Every sen-
ator and representative has an of ﬁ ce – often multiple of ﬁ ces – in their home state. They work 
from these local of ﬁ ces during “congressional recess,” making these recesses particularly good 
times to try to meet with your member of Congress. 25The Immigration Detention Transparency & Human Rights Project - November 2015
Look up when the next recess will be:
The U.S. House of Representatives calendar is at 
http://www.majorityleader.gov/ ﬂ oor/#annual 
(representatives will be in their local of ﬁ ces on the un-shaded weekdays)
The U.S. Senate calendar is at 
http://www.senate.gov/legislative/resources/pdf/2015_calendar.pdf (senators will be in their local of ﬁ ces on the weekdays in red)
When you call, make sure to state how many constituents would like to attend. If the deci-
sion-maker is unavailable, ask to meet with staff who work on immigration issues. You may have to send an email or ﬁ ll out a form. Don’t be discouraged if you need to follow up for a response. 
Following up on a meeting
1. Debrief your meeting
It’s important to make sure you and your group are on the same page immediately after leaving the 
meeting, while the conversation is fresh in your mind. Make sure to leave the of ﬁ ce building, so your 
debrief conversation cannot be overheard. As a group, review: What did we hear? Did we get what we wanted? What are the next steps? Choose one person to send a follow-up email attaching any documents mentioned, providing answers to questions that came up during the meeting, and continu-ing to engage the member and staff in your group’s work. 
Your email might say: 
Dear [Staff   Contact Name],
My name is [Primary Contact Name] and I represent [Organization or description of your group]. We are con-
stituents of [Decision-Maker’s Name], and would like to request a meeting with him/her to discuss our work on immigration detention. We have been [description of your work—visiting the detention facility, monitoring abuses at the detention facility, providing post-release services, etc] and as a result, have become deeply concerned about the [Name of Detention Center] and our immigration detention system in general. 
If possible, we would like to meet with [Decision-Maker] during the week of [date option 1] or [date option 2]. 
Could you please let us know what might work for [Decision-Maker]? 
We are very eager to meet with him/her.Appreciatively,[Signed by Primary Contact][phone number at which you can be reached]26Using ICE Contracts & Inspections to End Abusive Detention: An Advocacy Toolkit
2. Send a follow-up email or letter
Send an email or letter thanking the decision-maker for the meeting, and providing a clear point of 
contact for the of ﬁ ce moving forward. If you committed to providing additional information or electronic 
versions of any documents, make sure you include those items as well. In this letter, you may want to reiterate some of the points you made during your meeting. If the decision-maker committed to taking a speci ﬁ c action, you should include this in the letter or email, thanking them for the commitment and 
saying that you look forward to continuing to work with them on this issue. 
Writing to your elected representatives 
Sometimes you might want to send a letter to an elected representative in addition to or instead of requesting a meeting. You might want to encourage your representative to support good legislation, oppose harmful legislation, or speak out publicly about something happening at a detention center in their district. 
After you send your letter, follow-up. Call the of ﬁ ce to con ﬁ rm that the letter was received. Call again 
a couple of days later (or sooner or later, depending on the urgency of your ask) to say that you’re following up on the letter, and ask if there is any additional information you can provide.Your email might say:
Dear Representative [Last Name],
Th ank you again for taking the time to meet with those of us from [Organization or group name] earlier this 
week. We appreciated having the opportunity to share with you the abuses we’ve documented within the [Name of Detention Center], inclu ding severe medical neglect as shown by the consistent denial of medical care for [Person-
al Story spokesperson] and concerning due process violations such as the time that [Personal Story spokesperson]’s attorney wasn’t allowed to see him.
We welcome your commitment to write a letter to ICE expressing concern about these instances, requesting addi-
tional information about why they happened, and inquiring  about what steps ICE has taken to ensure that they 
don’t happen again. Please don’t hesitate to let us know if additional information or documentation would be helpful to you in writing the letter.
Th ank you again for your time, and we look forward to continuing to work with you on these important issues.
Appreciatively,[Signed by Primary Contact]27The Immigration Detention Transparency & Human Rights Project - November 2015
Sample letter to encourage legislative action
Earlier this year, several Washington based organizations sent this letter to 
Senators Murray and Cantwell, calling on them to take action on the national bed quota. 
Dear Senator Cantwell,
We are writing to encourage you to take initiative to end the immigrant detention bed 
quota in the current appropriations bill by introducing an amendment to that eff  ect in the 
upcoming continuing resolution.
As organizations working with immigrant communities, we know the disastrous eff  ects of 
immigrant detention for families and communities in WA State and across the country. Th ere are over 1,400 people detained right now at the privately run Northwest Detention 
Center in Tacoma, WA, the fourth biggest immigration detention center in the coun-try. We strongly believe that the practice of administrative detention of immigrants, legal permanent residents, and asylum seekers young and old, goes against basic conventions of human rights and the fundamental values of our country. Mandatory and indefi  nite 
detention is arguably against the constitution, and serves the interest of the for-profi  t 
corporations contracting with the U.S. government at the expense of immigrant’s health and human dignity. 
While administrative detention is ineff  ective and inhumane, it has been further en-
trenched and expanded as the result of a detention bed quota written into the Depart-ment of Homeland Security Appropriations bill for FY 2010, and wrongly renewed year aft er year. Th  e specifi  c language states that “funding made available under this heading 
shall maintain a level of not less than 34,000 detention beds. ” Because some members of Congress interpret the language to require ICE to maintain and fi  ll 34,000 beds daily, it 
has become known as the detention bed “quota. ” Th  e number itself is completely arbitrary, 
and the concept of a legislatively mandated detention quota is an aberration among law enforcement agencies. Furthermore, the detention bed quota wastes taxpayer dollars. Th  e 
annual budget for immigration detention has swelled since the introduction of the quota to over $2 billion dollars each year. 
While eff  orts to date in the House of Representatives have been unsuccessful at removing 
the bed quota from subsequent appropriations bills, momentum is building.  Members of Washington’s congressional delegation, including Representative Adam Smith, have actively advocated for an end to this quota.  In 2013, a simple amendment to strike the quota language received support from 190 members, inclu ding eight Republica ns, when it 
last received a fl  oor vote. Still, the quota remains intact, and continues to push our immi-
gration enforcement system into overdrive. 
As Washington-based organizations, we know that the Washington Congressional delega-
tion can be a leader in protecting the human rights of immigrants, rather than supporting arbitrary quotas for their detention. Given your extensive experience working toward immigration reform, including the most recent call to end family detention in June of this year, we believe your leadership on this issue would make a powerful diff  erence.
 As we are committed to ending the bed quota as soon as possible, we will support your 
initiative and recruit support from other Senators to the best of our ability.
While anti-immigrant sentiment continues to cloud legislation, we know that our Sena-
tors in Washington State are not afraid to take a stand against unconstitutional and in-humane policies.  Migrant detention not only drains tax-payer dollars, it also jeopardizes the well-being of communities in Washington State. We hope that you will join us in the important task of ending the bed quota and take part in bringing about justice to immi-grants and their families in Washington State and beyond.
Sincerely,
[Name and contact information]Ask is up front 
and clearly stated
Explain any policy or process details they need to know to task responsible actionExplain how the problem hurts real people
Explain why they speci ﬁ cally 
need to take action. If they’ve done something good recently, give credit!28Using ICE Contracts & Inspections to End Abusive Detention: An Advocacy Toolkit
Sample letter to oppose the renewal of a contract
This letter is ﬁ ctional, but something like it could be used to ask a politician 
you’ve already met with to oppose a contract renewal at your local detention facility. 
Dear Representative [Last Name],
Th ank you again for taking the time to meet with [Organization] last month, and also 
for visiting [Detention Center] earlier this year. As we mentioned last time we talked, the contract for [Detention Center] is expiring in three months, and we understand that ICE and [entity which runs the facility] have begun renewal negotiations. In light of the reports you’ve heard directly from people who were detained at [Detention Center] and what you observed during your tour, we encourage you to publicly oppose the renewal of this contract. 
As you know, over 900 people are detained at [Detention Facility] each day, many of 
them are family members of people in our community. Despite the concerns you raised earlier this year and the numerous complaints that we have sent to ICE, conditions inside the facility continue to be appalling. We remain concerned about severe medi-cal neglect, recently shown by the consistent denial of medical care for [Personal Story spokesperson], who was suff  ering from [describe condition]. We are also troubled that 
the facility continues to impede due process. Within the last three months, attorneys have reported having to wait over four hours to see their clients, and [Personal Story spokesperson]’s attorney was turned away entirely because she had previously partici-pated in a peaceful vigil outside the facility. 
We expected to see these issues raised within the offi   cial report from the inspection of 
the facility recently conducted by ICE. Instead, we were stunned and disappointed to see that inspectors ignored them all, and gave the facility a high rating. Among other rea-sons, this could be because it appears that they did not choose to interview any detained people. Both ICE and [Entity which runs the facility] have shown a complete unwil ling-
ness to be held accountable for the myriad of abuses within the facility, and are instead moving ahead to renew the contract by [date of contract expiration].
Furthermore, the contract for [Detention Center] includes a local quota, that is, a guar-
anteed minimum number of people who will be detained in the facility at all times. Th  e 
presence of this quota continues to drive reckless and aggressive immigration enforce-ment in our community, separating families and further eroding community trust.
Given [Entity which runs the facility]’s lack of regard for the treatment of detained indi-
viduals, due process, or the ways in which the facility is harming the broader communi-ty, we hope you will join us in opposing the renewal of this contract. 
Sincerely,
[Name and contact information]Ask is up front 
and clearly stated
Explain how the problem hurts real people
Your campaign may face retaliation.If it does, explain it in your own terms!
If several organizations are signing a letter, still include contact information for a single primary contact person29The Immigration Detention Transparency & Human Rights Project - November 2015
Use the Media to Support Your Work
Communications work is a crucial element to your overall advocacy efforts. It does not exist in a vacu-
um, but rather is woven throughout your organizing and advocacy objectives to complement strategy. Investing time and energy into your communications work is essential to achieving your goals.
Develop a Communications Plan
Developing a strategic communications plan that incorporates your goals and integrates campaign tactics will strengthen your overall work. Lay the foundation of your strategic communications plan-ning with the following overarching themes, while diving deeper into each component using the rec-ommended resources listed below.
1. Evaluate your communications resources
 »Consider your team’s writing strengths, social media capacity, reporter relationships, 
and support from national organizations (such as Detention Watch Network).
2. Reference your goals
 »Refer back to your campaign and organizational goals to drive your communications 
efforts.WHAT YOU CAN DO
NIJC30Using ICE Contracts & Inspections to End Abusive Detention: An Advocacy Toolkit
3. Understand your audience
 »Revisit your targets determined in the organizing section of the toolkit and consider who 
has in ﬂ uence over these decision makers.
4. Frame the issue
 »Describe your issue in a way that resonates with your audience. 
5. Craft your message (see below for more detail)
6. Disseminate your message (see below for more detail)
Strategic Communications Planning, The SPIN Academy :
http://www.detentionwatchnetwork.org/sites/detentionwatchnetwork.org/ ﬁ les/
strategiccommunicationsspin.pdf
Vision, Values, and Voice: A Communications Toolkit, Opportunity Agenda : 
http://toolkit.opportunityagenda.org/documents/oa_toolkit.pdf
Echoing Justice: Communications Strategies for Community Organizing 
in the 21st Century, Center for Media Justice: 
http://centerformediajustice.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/Echoing-Justice-7.pdf
Craft your Message
Crafting your message is a key component in supporting your overall advocacy efforts. Use the follow-
ing resources to support your message development process: 
“Media Polishing Worksheet,” Communicate Justice 101 , Center for Media Justice, 
 http://www.detentionwatchnetwork.org/sites/detentionwatchnetwork.org/ ﬁ les/
messaging_polishing_worksheet_communicate_justice_101.pdf
Try this messaging structure recommended by the Opportunity Agenda in the “Building a Message” section of its Vision, Values, and Voice toolkit 
(available at http://toolkit.opportunityagenda.org/building):
Lead with values and vision.  Starting with shared values helps audiences to “hear” our 
messages more effectively than dry facts or emotional rhetoric.
Then introduce the problem . Frame problems as a threat to your vision and values. This is 
the place to pull out stories and statistics that are likely to resonate with the target audience.
Pivot quickly to solutions.  Positive solutions leave people with choices, ideas, and motiva-
tion.
Assign an action.  What can this speci ﬁ c target audience do? Try to give them something 
concrete, that they can picture themselves doing.31The Immigration Detention Transparency & Human Rights Project - November 2015
Create Talking Points to Support your Message
Use the following sample talking points as a springboard to developing your own tailored message 
that aligns with your campaign goals. 
Immigration Detention
Immigration detention is a sprawling and unaccountable system of mass incarceration that 
unjustly and inhumanely targets immigrants.
The United States locks up survivors of torture, green card holders, undocumented individuals, 
visa holders, asylum seekers, individuals with serious mental and medical health conditions, and other vulnerable groups including pregnant women and families with children – including babies.  
At more than $2 billion per year, immigration detention comes at an exorbitant ﬁ nancial and 
moral cost to American taxpayers. 
The system has expanded rapidly over the past several years, in part due to an arbitrary quota 
set by Congress that virtually guarantees the incarceration of 34,000 immigrants at any given time. This policy, known as the detention bed quota, is unprecedented; no other law enforce-ment agency operates on a quota system for incarceration.
The Obama administration’s attempts at reforming the immigration detention system have 
failed.   Detention centers are not safe: abuses are widespread and detention facilities consis-
tently fail basic minimum standards.
Detention Contracts and Inspections
ICE’s broken inspections process fails to identify human rights violations against detained im-
migrants.
ICE’s inspection regime fails to provide an accurate assessment of detention conditions 
because the inspections are not independent, may be irregular, and are announced in ad-vance.  ICE’s continued refusal to make inspection ﬁ ndings public raises serious questions 
about the validity of those inspections. 
Congress must act to guarantee that the administration’s detention facility inspection process 
is effective and does not deliberately obscure a broken and abusive system that wreaks havoc 
on immigrants and their families.32Using ICE Contracts & Inspections to End Abusive Detention: An Advocacy Toolkit
Disseminate your Message
Press Materials
Media advisories and press releases assist the media to run accurate and timely news stories, and 
help to transmit your message to your audience. 
Media Advisories
A media advisory alerts reporters to an upcoming news event, typically several days in advance. Write a media advisory for upcoming actions, press calls, and events.
“Media Advisory Template,” Communicate Justice 101 , Center for Media Justice: 
http://www.detentionwatchnetwork.org/sites/detentionwatchnetwork.org/ ﬁ les/
media_advisory_template_communicate_justice_101.pdf
Press Releases Written like a news story, press releases are utilized for new information such as announcements and/or updates where you can offer analysis. Write a press release for report releases, actions, and policy updates that have an impact on your campaign(s).
“Press Release Template,” Communicate Justice 101 , Center for Media Justice:
http://centerformediajustice.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/PressReleaseTemplate.pdf
Develop Relationships with Reporters
Cultivating reporter relationships is key to getting your message out and in ﬂ uencing the news cycle. 
Here are some basic tips to help start building your reporter list:
Read local newspapers and watch local TV news to see who is covering immigration or incar-
ceration.
Reach out to outlets for contact information for reporters or send your press materials straight 
to the news desk if you’re not sure who to send them to. 
Make press calls once materials are sent out to ensure reporters are aware of your event and 
ask whether the outlet will be attending. 
Always have a media point person at events who can direct reporters to predetermined 
spokespeople. Make sure to have a sign-in sheet for reporters to record their contact informa-tion. 
Keep a spreadsheet of reporters, outlets, and contact info and notes you may have about the 
outlet or reporter. 
33The Immigration Detention Transparency & Human Rights Project - November 2015
Letters to the Editor
Letters to the editor allow you to offer a short rebuttal to an article or commentary already published in 
a speci ﬁ c paper, or add a crucial missing perspective. Most letters should be between 150-250 words, 
but be sure to research the requirements for your local news outlet before sending. 
“Writing a Letter to the Editor,” Fitzgibbon Media developed for Detention Watch Network: http://www.detentionwatchnetwork.org/sites/detentionwatchnetwork.org/ ﬁ les/dwn_effective_communications_-_ltes.pdf
Op-eds
Op-eds are an opportunity to communicate directly to the public, including decision-makers, and
shape or frame a debate in your own words. An op-ed is a short, usually 500-800 word, guest  es-
say published in the opinion section of a newspaper, Opposite the Editorial page.
“Writing an Op-Ed,” Fitzgibbon Media developed for Detention Watch Network: 
http://www.detentionwatchnetwork.org/sites/detentionwatchnetwork.org/ ﬁ les/
dwn_effective_communications_-_opeds.pdf 
Interviewing
Once you’ve gotten your message out through your press materials, op-ed, and letter to the editor, it’s 
time to build on your narrative by doing interviews. Interviewing is a great way to deliver your mes-Sample letter to the editorTailor this letter for your local campaign
Dear Editor,
A recent report by the Detention Watch Network and National Immigrant Justice Center exposed widespread 
abuse, corruption and cover-up at [local detention center] and is a clear reminder of how our nation’s immi-gration detention system is broken. Th  e report highlights how Immigrat ion and Customs E nforcement ’s (ICE) 
inspection process fails to identify even publicly reported human rights abuses, and is nothing more than a rubber stamp on a broken process that separates families and hurts local communities.
As a member of [local organization] here in [state] - we are committed to ending the horrifi  c practice of immigra-
tion detention and call for ICE and [local member of Congress] to take immediate action to close [local detention center].
NAME
CITYORGANIZERPHONE NUMBER AND EMAIL ADDRESS
34Using ICE Contracts & Inspections to End Abusive Detention: An Advocacy Toolkit
sage across multiple media platforms and amplify your reach. It is a skill that requires continual prac-
tice, however, when done successfully, interviews can draw in new audiences, build reporter relation-ships, and strengthen your message.
“Interviewing 101,” Fitzgibbon Media developed for Detention Watch Network: http://www.detentionwatchnetwork.org/sites/detentionwatchnetwork.org/ ﬁ les/
dwn_media101_-_interviewing.pdf
Social Media
Social media is a critical tool to engage your audience in timely and meaningful dialogue for com-munity building and education. It also acts as a megaphone to announce your events, activities, and share content that relates to your campaign goals.
Social Media Platforms that Maximize your Reach:
Facebook : Use for story-telling and adding context 
to news articles about your campaign. 
Twitter : Use for real-time conversations with short 
and punchy messages. 
Instagram : Create a personal connection through photos or 
short video posts of your direct action. 
YouTube : Videos are a great way to allow the audience to take 
part in your action or event.
Use Social Media to Develop Reporter Relationships: 
With social media, developing reporter relationships has never been more accessible. Learn how to build reporter relationships through social media with the following presentation:
“Building Relationships with Journalists via Social Media” by Will Coley: https://prezi.com/vxj2iabgivlr/building-relationships-with-journalists 
Use Hashtags to Categorize Content and Build Buzz on your Issue:Hashtags are a powerful social media tool used to centralize multiple posts on the same issue, giving you the power to draw in new audiences. Here are some suggested hashtags:
Create a hashtag for your local facility, i.e. #ShutDownEtowah
#ExposeandClose – any content related to speci ﬁ c facilities and conditions
#EndDetention
#EndtheQuota
#Not1More – can help link your message to the larger national immigrant 
rights movement
35The Immigration Detention Transparency & Human Rights Project - November 2015
Case Studies
T. Don Hutto Family Residential Center, Texas
Contributed by Bethany Carson, Grassroots Leadership
The campaign to end family detention at the T. Don Hutto Family 
Residential Center in Taylor, Texas between 2006 and 2009 pro-vides one example of how existing standards and detention facility contracts can be used, along with other advocacy and organizing strategies, to propel a campaign to victory. 
Lisa Graybill, one of the attorneys who worked on the legal set-
tlement, emphasized the role of organizing in the campaign’s success. “The public really hadn’t known what was going on; they didn’t realize that county of ﬁ cials had actually signed a contract with CCA [Corrections Corporation of 
America] to act as intermediary between ICE [Immigration and Customs Enforcement] and CCA, to disburse the federal funds,” she said. “It was the constant pressure at the facility, month after month, that ﬁ nally ended family detention at Hutto.”
Here’s a brief timeline of the campaign to end family detention at Hutto:
May 2006 CCA was awarded contract to detain mothers and children at Hutto
Summer 
2006Human rights advocates in Texas and across the U.S. ﬁ ercely criticized the move by 
ICE to detain families and denounced CCA’s de ﬁ ciencies.
2006-2007 Austin-based coalition Texans United for Families (TUFF) emerged, coordinated by 
Grassroots Leadership. Starting with a vigil in December 2006, near-monthly vigils were held at the facility by a broad spectrum of religious and civil rights organiza-tions. As grassroots opposition spread across the state, local media coverage blossomed into national media stories proﬁ ling individual cases of children that 
had been con ﬁ ned at the prison. Grass-
roots media helped to spawn a broader network of activists. A Hutto blog docu-mented the vigils. Email lists circulated ﬂ yers and announcements. Filmmakers 
produced a 17-minute video exposé, Hutto: America’s Family Prison . TUFF 
developed a DVD toolkit for broad distribu-tion, including at workshops to highlight the issue of family detention at national conferences. Throughout this time, advo-cates, visitors, and attorneys were also carefully documenting abuses and other con-cerns about treatement inside the facility. 
DWN36Using ICE Contracts & Inspections to End Abusive Detention: An Advocacy Toolkit
March 2007 Lawsuit ﬁ led based on violations of conditions guaranteed to children in ICE custody 
based on Flores v. Reno.
August 
2007DHS agreed to settlement of the lawsuit resulting in signi ﬁ cant improvements in con-
ditions at Hutto
2007-2009 Organizing continued through monthly vigils, ﬁ lm screenings, and media work
Late 2008 When the IGSA contract between Williamson County and ICE was up for renewal, 
organizers used the contract renegotiation as a hook to focus attention on the facil-ity. They urged residents who opposed family detention at Hutto to tell their county commissioners about their concerns.
2009 Organized 100 actions in the ﬁ rst 100 days of the Obama administration
August - 
September 2009DHS ended family detention at Hutto and the last family was released in September
Jefferson County Justice Center, Illinois
This case example highlights the role of litigation and the 
media to close a facility. Although grassroots organiz-ing was not a primary component of this effort, the case demonstrates the ef ﬁ cacy of litigation. We encourage ad-
vocates to consider how community organizing can work in conjunction with litigation to challenge detention cen-ters. For instance, individuals or organizations conducting visitation at detention centers may help gather evidence of abuses and/or organize actions to call media attention to problematic detention centers.
In 2008, ICE negotiated a contract with Jefferson County, Illinois, to detain immigrants at the Jefferson County Justice Center in Mt. Vernon. In anticipation of the contract, ICE had inspected the jail in 2007 and 2008. The facility failed inspections both times. Nevertheless, on January 19, 2009, ICE signed a contract to detain immigrants at the jail. Even after the contract was signed, ICE headquarters again found the jail de ﬁ cient in March 2009. The ICE 
director for detention management stressed: “This facility shall not house ICE detainees prior to the approval of the Plan of Action” (emphasis in original) to rectify the detention de ﬁ ciencies. ICE provid-
ed no record of whether a plan of action was ever implemented or the de ﬁ ciencies recti ﬁ ed. Despite 
federal appropriations requirements for ICE to suspend the use of detention facilities found to be “less than adequate” on consecutive inspections, ICE started detaining immigrants at Jefferson County the very next month.
 
As ICE steadily increased its detention population at Jefferson County, it conducted a new inspection of the facility in September 2009 and gave it an initial “acceptable” rating for the year. ICE provided no meaningful explanation for its change in rating from March to September. When the September report reached ICE headquarters, the rating was changed to “de ﬁ cient,” but ICE continued to increase the 
NIJC37The Immigration Detention Transparency & Human Rights Project - November 2015
number of immigrants detained there. In 2010 and 2011 inspections, ICE rated the Jefferson County 
facility “acceptable.”
Poor conditions at Jefferson County reached a peak in November 2012 following ICE’s evacuation 
of dozens of immigrants from the facility, after all but one member of the facility’s medical staff had resigned or tendered their resignation—including the jail’s only doctor. NIJC documented reports of MRSA, tuberculosis, respiratory infections, and skin funguses which occurred among the jail’s ICE population in the weeks leading up to the resignations and evacuation.  Requests for medical treat-ment were repeatedly ignored, showers and restrooms were crusted with mold, drinking water was brown and putrid, jail pods were poorly ventilated, jail uniforms were tattered and soiled, and immi-grants had no outdoor recreation or meaningful access to sunlight.  
In the face of a meaningless inspections 
process, NIJC ﬁ led a federal lawsuit in 
February 2013, Padron, et al., v. ICE, 
et al, against of ﬁ cials at ICE and Jef-
ferson County, Illinois, on behalf of seven immigrants who were held at the Jefferson County facility under these unsanitary conditions. The complaint challenged the validity of ICE’s contract with the county, as well as widespread constitutional violations at the jail, and sought to enjoin ICE from returning immi-grants to the facility after the evacu-ation. In addition, the lawsuit garnered media attention that heightened scrutiny of the facility. 
Following the evacuation, the lawsuit was dismissed for lack of standing given 
that ICE had evacuated all individuals in its custody from Jefferson County. In August 2013, NIJC followed up with a demand letter to inform then-ICE director John Morton and other ICE of ﬁ cials that it would renew litigation if ICE returned immigrants to Jefferson County Justice Cen-
ter without taking signi ﬁ cant steps to ensure the jail complied with the U.S. Constitution and federal 
detention standards.  Ultimately, NIJC’s complaint led Jefferson County’s liability insurance provider to review its policy. In October 2013, Jefferson County’s insurance provider sent the county a non-re-newal notice, effectively discontinuing the county’s insurance coverage to hold immigrant detainees.
The contracts and inspections documents cited in this case study are available at http://immigrantjustice.org/ICEinspections/Jefferson-TriCounty
38Using ICE Contracts & Inspections to End Abusive Detention: An Advocacy Toolkit
Appendix
Key Terms 
Corrections Corporation of America (CCA)  is the nation’s oldest and largest for-pro ﬁ t private 
prison corporation. CCA is the largest contractor of Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) detention beds.
Department of Homeland Security (DHS)  is responsible for ensuring the safety and security 
of the United States from terrorist attacks and other disasters. U.S. Citizenship and Immigra-tion Services (USCIS), Customs and Border Patrol (CBP), and ICE all fall under DHS.
Guaranteed minimums  are contractual provisions that require ICE to pay for a minimum num-
ber of immigration detention beds, regardless of whether the bed is ﬁ lled or not. 
GEO Group (GEO)  is the nation’s second-largest for-pro ﬁ t prison operator. GEO is the second 
largest ICE contractor.
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE)  is the federal agency responsible for 
immigration detention.
National Detention Standards (NDS)  are the policies and procedures of con ﬁ nement, pro-
gram operations and management expectations under which ICE operated its detention sys-tem. The NDS were issued in September 2000. 
Performance-Based National Detention Standards (PBNDS)  were crafted in 2008 in order 
to more clearly delineate the expected outcomes of each detention standard and the expected practices required to achieve them. ICE further revised its detention standards in 2011.
Contract Types
Contract Detention Facilities (CDFs)  are owned and operated by private corporations that 
contract directly with ICE.
Service Processing Centers (SPCs)  are owned and operated by ICE. However, ICE hires 
contractors to handle many services, such as administration of some facilities. 
Intergovernmental Service Agreements (IGSAs)  are owned and operated by local govern-
mental entities, typically county or city governments. Many local governments subcontract to private corporations to administer and provide services.
U.S. Marshals Service (USMS) Intergovernmental Agreements (IGAs) are formal agree-
ments between the USMS and a state or local government in which the state or local govern-ment agrees to house federal detainees at an agreed-upon daily rate.39The Immigration Detention Transparency & Human Rights Project - November 2015
Contracting Terms
Contract Line Item Numbers (CLIN)  are used by government agencies to report on the fund-
ing for contracts that utilize money from different accounts.
Federal Acquisition Regulation is the set of policies and procedures by which the United 
States federal government purchases goods and services.
Man-Days are one person’s working time for a day, used as a measure of how much work or 
labor is required or consumed to perform some task.
Inspections Terms
Enforcement and Removal Operations (ERO) is the primary enforcement arm within ICE 
responsible for the identi ﬁ cation, apprehension, and deportation of removable immigrants from 
the United States.
Man-Days : See “Contracting Terms”
Ofﬁ ce of Detention Oversight (ODO) is responsible for inspecting immigration detention facil-
ities and investigating the deaths of individuals in ICE custody.
Detention Monitoring Unit was created to conduct compliance monitoring within ICE deten-
tion facilities. The unit is comprised of Detention Servi ce Managers (DSMs) who are responsi-
ble for assessing potential problems and addressing these problems with the facility and re-spective ﬁ eld of ﬁ ces before they occur, or to ensure corrective action in a timely manner.40Using ICE Contracts & Inspections to End Abusive Detention: An Advocacy Toolkit
Endnotes
1. Mario Moreno, “Detention Costs Still Don’t Add up to Good Policy,” National Immigration Forum, 
Sept. 24, 2014, https://immigrationforum.org/blog/detention-costs-still-dont-add-up-to-good-policy .  
2. U.S. Government Accountability Of ﬁ ce (GAO), Report To Congressional Requestors: Immigration 
Detention – Additional Actions Needed to Strengthen Management and Oversight of Facility Costs and Standards  (GAO-15-153), Oct. 2014, p. 9.
3. Nina Bernstein, “U.S. to Reform Policy on Detention for Immigrants,” The New York Times , Aug. 5, 
2009, 
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/08/06/us/politics/06detain.html?_r=0 . 
4. See The GEO Group, Inc., “Mesa Verde Detention Facility,” accessed 10/12/2015, http://www.
geogroup.com/Maps/LocationDetails/123 . 
5. ICE revised NDS to move to a more performance-based format similar to the American Correction-
al Association’s Performance-Based Standards for Adult Local Detention Facilities.
6. Bethany Carson & Eleana Diaz, Payoff: How Congress Ensures Private Prison Pro ﬁ t with an Immi-
gration Detention Quota, Grassroots Leadership, Apr. 2015, http://grassrootsleadership.org/reports/
payoff-how-congress-ensures-private-prison-pro ﬁ t-immigrant-detention-quota .
7. Id.8. Amy Grenier, “Private Prison Industry Lobbies for Detention of Immigrants,” Immigration Impact, 
Apr. 2015, 
http://immigrationimpact.com/2015/04/22/private-prison-industry-lobbies-for-deten-
tion-of-immigrants/ .
9. For more information, see LIRS’s Bring the Sky  Resource at http://lirs.org/wp-content/up-
loads/2012/05/BRING-THE-SKY-4-BEING-A-VISITOR.pdf ; CIVIC’s  Visitation Page at http://www.
endisolation.org/resources/for-visitors/ ; and DWN’s Visitation Guide at https://www.prisonlegalnews.
org/news/publications/detention-watch-network-visiting-us-detainees-manual/ .