September 2014
ARTESIA FAMILY RESIDENTIAL CENTER, NEW MEXICO
CLOSE EXPOSEABOUT US
Detention Watch Network  (DWN) is a national coalition of organizations and individuals working to expose 
and challenge the injustices of the U.S. immigration detention and deportation system and advocate for 
profound change that promotes the rights and dignity of all persons. Founded in 1997 in response to the 
explosive growth of the immigration detention and deportation system in the United States, DWN is today 
the only national network that focuses exclusively on immigration detention and deportation issues and is 
known as a critical national advocate for just policies that promote an eventual end to immigration deten -
tion. As a member-led network, DWN unites diverse constituencies to advance the civil and human rights 
of those impacted by the immigration detention and deportation system through collective advocacy, public 
education, communications, and field-and-network-building.
DetentionWatchNetwork.org
HISTORY OF EXPOSE & CLOSE
Expose & Close  started in 2012, when DWN coordinated the release of ten reports that detail the acute 
and chronic human right violations occurring in immigration detention in the United States today. The 
reports were authored by DWN members and allies, including policy advocates, community organizers, 
legal service providers, faith groups and individuals personally impacted by detention, who together have 
deep experience and understanding of the immigration detention system. In 2013, DWN released Expose 
& Close: One Year Later, to review conditions in the original ten reports and shine the light on new facilities 
with egregious human rights violations. This year, in light of the alarming expansion of family detention, 
DWN has chosen to focus its report on the family detention center in Artesia, New Mexico.
REPORT METHODOLOGY & ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This report was developed through stories from women and children detained at the Artesia Family Resi -
dential Center, with the aid of their attorneys or advocates who visited the facility. We thank the countless 
pro bono  attorneys who have traveled to Artesia at their own expense and have shared these stories with 
us. Even as DWN staff finalized this report, we continued to receive new allegations of abuse and due 
process violations. We have done our best to cover the many problems at Artesia, but this report is by no 
means comprehensive. 
The primary researchers and writers of this report were Madhuri Grewal and Silky Shah. This report would 
not have been possible without the incredible support and feedback from many organizations and individu -
als. We would especially like to thank: Eunice Lee and Lindsay Nash (ACLU Immigrants’ Rights Project), 
Carl Takei (ACLU National Prison Project), Vicki Gaubeca and Maria Sanchez (ACLU of New Mexico), Anu 
Joshi and Karen Lucas (American Immigration Lawyers Association), Bob Libal (Grassroots Leadership), 
Tamara Lange (National Center for Youth Law), Jennifer Chan and Royce Murray (National Immigrant Jus -
tice Center), Barbara Hines (University of Texas School of Law,* Immigration Clinic), Danielle Rosché and 
Angela Williams ( pro bono  attorneys at Artesia), and Kathleen Sato (graphic design).
Finally, we express our deep gratitude and appreciation for the community organizations and individuals 
in New Mexico and Texas that are working hard to end family detention at Artesia and Karnes and to stop 
construction of a massive family detention facility in Dilley, Texas. Those groups include Somos Un Pueblo 
Unido, the ACLU of New Mexico, Grassroots Leadership, and Texans United for Families.
* For identification purposes only
©2014, Detention Watch Network
All Rights Reserved.September 2014ARTESIA 
FAMILY 
RESIDENTIAL 
CENTER
New Mexico
The new 
detention facility 
in Artesia is 
part of a radical 
increase in 
the detention 
of immigrant 
families, which 
grew by over 
1200 percent 
between June 
and August 
2014 alone. In the middle of the 
desert in Artesia, 
New Mexico, the 
United States government is locking up 
hundreds of migrant women and children 
in a makeshift detention facility. These 
families have braved the dangerous 
journey to the U.S. to seek safety and 
protection from violence in their home 
countries. In response, our government 
has incarcerated them in the Artesia 
Family Residential Center (Artesia), a 
remote facility, hours away from legal 
counsel and social services, under 
physically and psychologically harmful 
conditions that only further compound the 
traumas that they have already endured. Rather 
than providing sanctuary to these vulnerable 
women and children, Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement (ICE), a division of the Department 
of Homeland Security (DHS), has instituted a de 
facto policy of mandatory detention, meaning 
there is little possibility of release. The U.S. has 
the largest immigrant detention infrastructure 
in the world, and in fiscal year 2012 detained 478,000 immigrants, an all-time high. The new 
detention facility in Artesia is part of a radical 
increase in the detention of immigrant families, 
which grew by over 1200 percent between June 
and August 2014 alone. 
The Obama administration has argued that 
detaining women and children seeking asylum 
allegedly deters further migration from Central 
America, and that their release from detention 
would pose an indirect national security concern 
CLOSE EXPOSE
I. INTRODUCTION
05001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,000
1-June 1-July 1-August Expected by end of 2014Dilley, TX
Karnes, TX
Artesia, NM
Berks, PAExpansion of Family Detention Facilities in 2014NUMBER OF BEDS
TIMELINE
September 2014EXPOSE & CLOSE ARTESIA FAMILY RESIDENTIAL CENTER  2 
by encouraging more migration. This response 
is not only alarming and misguided,1 but runs 
contrary to upholding the fundamental right to 
due process and international human rights 
norms, including the preservation of family unity 
and child welfare2 and the prohibition on the 
use of detention solely as a deterrent to future 
asylum seekers.3 
ICE first began detaining women and children 
at the Artesia facility, a hastily converted former 
Border Patrol training center, on June 27, 2014. 
Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) were 
not allowed to enter the facility until almost a 
month later to assess and document conditions. 
By then, three planes of families had already 
been sent back to their home countries, the same 
ones they fled in fear for their lives. Detention 
Watch Network (DWN) was one of over 20 
NGOs that visited Artesia in the 
month after it opened. During the 
tour, it was quickly evident that 
the government was not meeting 
basic legal obligations to protect 
asylum-seekers. Moreover, the 
isolation of Artesia—which is 
approximately 200 miles from 
the nearest major city—seriously 
impairs access to legal counsel and 
makes oversight and accountability 
nearly impossible. Consequently, 
among attorneys and community 
groups Artesia has become known 
as a “deportation mill.”4
What is particularly disconcerting 
about Artesia is that it has resur -
rected the troubling practice of 
family detention, which the Obama 
administration largely ended in 
2009 after a sustained campaign of opposition against the T. Don Hutto Family 
Residential Facility (Hutto), a now infamous 
detention center in Texas. The administration 
has made it clear that it will continue to rapidly 
expand and construct family detention facili -
ties such as Artesia due to the recent influx of 
Central American women and children arriving 
at the border. These facilities—including one 
532-bed facility in Karnes City, Texas and another 
2,400-bed facility planned in Dilley, Texas—are 
intended to quickly deport Central American 
asylum-seekers. 
Since 2012, Detention Watch Network has 
released a series of reports entitled “Expose 
and Close” that documented pervasive abuse 
and inhumane conditions at some of the worst 
immigration detention facilities in the country 
and called for their closure.5 Since then, little 
has changed as ICE continues to assert that the 
facilities highlighted in the reports are in compli -
ance with applicable standards. Drawing upon 
interviews with attorneys and advocates who 
have visited the facility, this report demonstrates ...among attorneys and 
community groups Artesia 
has become known as a 
“deportation mill.”
There is clear 
evidence that 
warehousing 
families and 
raising children 
in prison-like 
conditions for 
even a limited 
period damages 
children’s 
psychological 
and educational 
development 
and overall 
health.
September 2014EXPOSE & CLOSE ARTESIA FAMILY RESIDENTIAL CENTER  3 
 uLocation:  1300 
W. Richey Ave., 
Artesia, New 
Mexico. The ICE 
family detention 
trailers are located on the 94,000 plus 
square foot Federal Law Enforcement 
Training Center (FLETC). The facility 
was built to train Customs and Border 
Protection officers and other federal law 
enforcement agents.  uDate opened:  June 27, 2014
 uAverage age of a child incarcerated at 
Artesia:  6 years old8
 uNearest ICE Field Office:  El Paso, TX 
 uCapacity:  672 detention beds
 uCost of family detention:  $266 per 
person, per day9that Artesia is, in important respects, just as bad, 
if not worse, than many of the jails highlighted 
in the previous “Expose and Close” reports. 
But even the best detention center is no place 
for children and families. There is clear evidence 
that warehousing families and raising children in 
prison-like conditions for even a limited period 
damages children’s psychological and educa -
tional development and overall health.6 Further -
more, the United Nations has condemned the practice of holding children in detention, stating 
that the “detention of children on the sole basis 
of their migration status or that of their parents 
is a violation of children’s rights, is never in their 
best interests and is not justifiable.”7 
DWN calls on the Obama administration to 
close Artesia, stop the sudden and reckless 
expansion of immigration detention, and halt 
the deportations of refugee families arriving from 
Central America.
II. ARTESIA AT A GLANCE
New 
Mexico
TexasThe isolation  
of Artesia,  
which is 
approximately 
200 miles 
from the 
nearest major 
city...makes 
oversight and 
accountability 
nearly 
impossible.September 2014EXPOSE & CLOSE ARTESIA FAMILY RESIDENTIAL CENTER  4 
 uStandards:  The detention of women 
and children is governed by ICE’s Family 
Residential Standards10 and the 1997 
settlement in Flores v. Reno (Flores 
settlement ).11 
The Flores  settlement  establishes nationwide 
policy for the treatment of children in federal 
immigration custody. It requires that all children 
be released from government custody “with -
out unnecessary delay.” The only exception is 
for safety or ensuring court appearances. The 
Flores settlement requires that if a child must 
be held in government custody, the detention 
must be in a state licensed facility that meets 
basic child welfare-based standards.12 The two family detention centers opened this summer, 
Karnes and Artesia, fail to meet the standards 
for licensed facilities, including education in 
a structured classroom setting from Monday 
through Friday; appropriate routine medical and 
dental care; group and individual counseling 
sessions each week; and recreation and social 
orientation programs.
ICE family detention standards, like all ICE immi -
gration detention standards, are not codified, 
meaning the standards do not have the force of 
law. Moreover, family detention facilities, like all 
ICE detention facilities, are subject to minimal 
independent oversight. 
BARRIERS  
TO LEGAL ACCESS  
AND SOCIAL  
ISOLATION
Artesia is extremely isolated from lawyers and 
community groups that could provide important 
oversight, accountability mechanisms, and 
critical legal counseling. Pro bono  attorneys 
at Artesia report that the government is failing 
in its obligation to provide asylum-seekers 
with the right to pursue relief and fair hearings. 
Nearly all of these attorneys have traveled long 
distances to provide support to those detained 
at Artesia, usually at their own expense and 
with few resources. 
While volunteer attorneys are currently repre -
senting some women and children at Artesia, 
many have expressed the view that this “fire 
brigade” of volunteer attorneys is a stopgap 
measure that is unsustainable given the remote 
location of the facility. Volunteer attorneys also 
report that they cannot fully meet the current 
demand or needs of individuals being detained 
at Artesia, whose asylum cases often require 
complex fact investigation and legal analysis. 
In addition, attorneys have also repeatedly 
expressed frustration at the lack of private space 
for in-person attorney-client meetings. There 
are only four private cubicles that were recently 
erected for attorneys to meet with their clients. 
These cubicles are not nearly enough to accom -modate the number of meetings happening. 
Attorneys have described sitting cross-legged 
on the floor with clients in a large room, just a 
few feet from other attorney-client meetings.
Although Artesia opened on June 27, a formal 
Legal Orientation Program (LOP)—which pro -
vides basic know-your-rights presentations to 
detained individuals but does not substitute for 
legal counsel—did not begin until July 18. Con -
sequently, for three weeks, countless women and 
children were deported without an understanding 
of why they were being detained or deported. 
When Artesia first opened, detained mothers 
reported that a video served as their “orienta -
tion.” Once LOP began, providers could not 
serve every family due to the lack of dedicated 
III. CONCERNS
Pro bono 
attorneys 
at Artesia 
report that the 
government 
is failing in 
its obligation 
to provide 
asylum-
seekers with 
the right to 
pursue relief 
and fair 
hearings. 
September 2014EXPOSE & CLOSE ARTESIA FAMILY RESIDENTIAL CENTER  5 
space for their presentations and have been 
forced to use the cafeteria space, which they 
share with other activities, including meal times 
and religious services. During presentations, 
women are distracted juggling their children in 
a crammed and chaotic room, making it very 
difficult to absorb the complicated legal infor -
mation presented.
Following guidance from the Obama adminis -
tration, ICE has effectively instituted a policy of 
mandatory detention for women and children 
asylum seekers at Artesia, even after they have 
passed a screening—known as a credible fear 
interview—that establishes they may qualify for 
asylum. At Artesia, ICE categorically denies bond 
to these women, as well as opposes release 
whenever mothers and children request bond 
from an immigration judge, despite the agency’s 
own assertion that “continued detention” after a 
favorable credible fear determination is generally 
not “in the public interest.”13 By denying bond, 
ICE forcibly incarcerates families and adds yet 
another major hurdle to legal access, making it 
easier for the agency to quickly deport women 
and children refugees.
INTERFERENCE WITH TELEPHONE 
COMMUNICATIONS
At Artesia, women and children are not only 
held in isolation, but are also severely restricted 
from communicating with the outside world. 
Policies regarding phone use are inconsistent 
and punitive. Women have consistently reported 
retaliation by ICE officers that involves the use of 
limiting or completely restricting phone access. With respect to cell phone use, policies have 
changed at least three times since Artesia 
opened. 
Landlines were not installed when the facility first 
opened. Instead, ICE officers carried 25 Black -
berry cell phones to be used by more than 640 
detained individuals. To make a call, a detained 
mother had to find an officer with a cell phone, 
learn how to use the device, and make the call 
in the presence of an ICE officer. After over six 
weeks of this convoluted system, ICE replaced 
the Blackberry devices with approximately 40 
flip phones, which could be checked out with 
identification. Calls were limited to one or two 
calls per day and cut off after arbitrary time 
limits, ranging from mere minutes to 20 minutes. 
Less than one week before the release of this 
report, DWN learned that ICE had changed 
the cell phone policy to emergency use only. It 
remains unclear how an emergency is defined; 
one attorney stated that it seems “subjective 
and at the discretion of the ICE official asked.” 
To have access to a cell phone, women are 
required to submit a written request—including 
one woman who needed to reach her consulate 
to obtain important documents—and often wait 
several days for the request to be processed. 
Once permitted to make an “emergency” call, 
individuals are limited to a few minutes. 
ICE has also recently installed landlines similar to 
those used at other facilities. However, families 
must prepay for minutes at exorbitant rates to 
make phone calls.14 One attorney stated that 
women who cannot afford the landlines are 
“at the mercy of the officials either granting or 
denying them access to the ‘emergency’ cell 
phones.” In addition, all calls made from land -
One attorney stated that 
women who cannot afford 
the landlines are “at the 
mercy of the officials either 
granting or denying them 
access to the ‘emergency’ 
cell phones.” September 2014EXPOSE & CLOSE ARTESIA FAMILY RESIDENTIAL CENTER  6 
lines are monitored and recorded. Confidential 
and unfettered access to phone calls is critical 
for those who wish to speak with an attorney or 
report concerns or abuse at the facility, making 
the lack of privacy particularly alarming.
A BROKEN ASYLUM PROCESS 
Women continue to be provided with little infor -
mation about their legal rights and the asylum 
process. A volunteer attorney reported that 
every woman she met with had a legitimate 
claim to asylum under U.S. law and a majority 
of the women had been sexually abused or 
physically assaulted in their home countries. 
Yet some of the determinations made by asylum 
officers clearly did not explore the nature of this 
violence and telephonic interpretation increased 
the women’s difficulty in communicating trauma 
and persecution. Many women did not disclose 
rape or other critical details to asylum officers or 
immigration judges because they were unaware 
that the proceedings were confidential. 
Lack of childcare continues to be a major prob -
lem at the facility and it often impairs immigrant 
mothers’ ability to clearly and fully describe 
the persecution they faced in their home coun -
tries. During attorney consultations, interviews 
with asylum officers, and in court hearings via 
video-teleconference, mothers were forced to 
recount sexual trauma and violence in front of 
their children. Women have also been forced to participate in 
credible fear interviews and immigration hearings 
with their children due to requirements by ICE 
and the Executive Office for Immigration Review 
(EOIR) that the family members be present and 
remain together. Consequently, many women 
feel hesitant or fail to disclose death threats 
against their children or fears of violence and 
persecution because they do not want to frighten 
them. Unfortunately, this hesitation can make 
or break an asylum case, in which credibility 
is critical. Recently, ICE has started to provide 
childcare staffed by ICE officers, but only for 
interviews with asylum officers; children are still 
required to attend immigration court proceedings 
with their mothers. 
T. DON HUTTO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL FACILITY
The Obama administration is all-too familiar with the serious consequences of 
family detention. In 2006, ICE began detaining families at the T. Don Hutto Family 
Residential Facility (Hutto), a former medium-security prison in Taylor, Texas built 
by the Corrections Corporation of America (CCA), a private prison corporation.  
Reports emerged that children as young as eight months wore prison uniforms 
and jumpsuits, lived and slept in locked prison cells with open-air toilets, and 
families were subject to highly restricted movement and threatened with family 
separation as a disciplinary tactic. Children experienced bed-wetting, significant 
weight loss, and nightmares as a result of the stress from incarceration. Children 
were reportedly only given one hour of education a day when the facility opened. 
In 2009, the administration stopped detaining families at Hutto after public 
opposition, widespread media reports, and a lawsuit challenging the deplorable 
conditions at the facility. 
September 2014EXPOSE & CLOSE ARTESIA FAMILY RESIDENTIAL CENTER  7 
On August 22, national immigration and civil 
liberties organizations and law firms, including 
the American Civil Liberties Union, American 
Immigration Council, National Immigration Law 
Center, and National Immigration Project of the 
National Lawyers Guild, filed a lawsuit to halt 
deportations at Artesia. The complaint includes 
incidents that have been highlighted in this 
report and repeatedly raised with ICE and the 
administration since Artesia opened. Concerns 
raised in the lawsuit include: virtually no notice 
to detained mothers and children of critical 
interviews related to their asylum requests; a 
policy driven by the administration of “detain 
and deport” that is systematically applied to 
every family held at Artesia; and intimidation 
and coercion of families by immigration officers, 
including being screamed at for wanting to see 
an attorney.
FAILURE TO MEET BASIC CHILD WELFARE 
GUIDELINES
Under the terms of the Flores  settlement, chil -
dren in government custody must be held in a 
state licensed facility that comports with basic 
principles of child welfare.15 The ICE officers that 
manage Artesia have little to no training in child 
welfare or social services. It appears that many 
officers are cycled in and out of the facility after 
a few weeks, and new officers who are unfamiliar 
with the facility must be trained each month. ICE has also failed to provide educational ser -
vices as set forth in its own guidelines. The ICE 
Family Residential Standards states, “All children 
residing in an ICE Residential Family Facility who 
reach the minimum age required by applicable 
state law shall be provided with educational 
services and programming appropriate to the 
minor’s level of development and communication 
skills in a structured classroom setting.” 16 The 
standards specify that children in ICE custody 
must receive an educational assessment within 
three days of their arrival at the facility, and then 
be placed in a grade or grade cluster based on 
this assessment. The Flores  settlement sets forth 
similar detailed requirements, even outlining 
basic academic areas that ICE must include in 
its education program.17 
The lack of education is one 
of the clearest violations 
of the Flores  settlement 
and ICE’s own standards, 
which require educational 
instruction Monday through 
Friday, on a year-round 
schedule in accordance 
with applicable state reg -
ulations and child welfare 
laws. Many schools in New 
Mexico, including the Arte -
sia Public School District,18 
started the school year by 
mid-August. As of the pub -
lication of this report—mid-
September 2014—ICE has 
not started education for 
the children incarcerated 
at Artesia. Because 
children are 
incarcerated 
in close 
quarters and 
under stressful 
conditions, their 
health is being 
compromised.
September 2014EXPOSE & CLOSE ARTESIA FAMILY RESIDENTIAL CENTER  8 
DEFICIENT MEDICAL AND MENTAL  
HEALTH CARE
Mothers have repeatedly expressed serious 
concerns regarding the health of their children; 
nearly every mother we spoke with stated that 
when their children were taken to the medical 
unit, instead of receiving medication, they are 
only told to drink more water. Because chil -
dren are incarcerated in close quarters and 
under stressful conditions, their health is being 
compromised. For example, in late July, cases 
of chicken pox resulted in a total quarantine 
of the facility. Although advocates reported 
to ICE headquarters in July that medical care 
was deficient, pro bono  attorneys continue to 
hear repeated concerns from clients detained 
at Artesia.
Many of the women and children detained at 
Artesia have experienced sexual violence and 
assault and other psychosocial trauma before 
even arriving at the facility. Advocates report 
that children at the facility exhibit suicidal ten -dencies. Yet, there are no onsite mental health 
providers and the mental health services that 
exist are only available via video-conferencing. 
Children at Artesia are able to speak with a 
female psychiatrist while their mothers can only 
request to speak with a male psychiatrist, who 
also serves as the psychiatrist for the Krome 
Detention Center in Miami, Florida. This appears 
to be a clear violation of the Flores  settlement, 
under which children must receive individual 
counseling at least once a week and group 
counseling sessions at least twice a week.20 At 
STORIES OF ABUSE AT ARTESIA 19
Even as this report was in its final stages, DWN continued to receive accounts of 
shocking abuse, unnecessary cruelty, and appalling conditions at Artesia. These 
are just some of those stories:
• A 16-month old baby boy entered Artesia able to walk. He got so sick that he 
developed pneumonia and had to be hospitalized. He stopped taking solid 
foods and returned to breastfeeding. He is now no longer able to walk.
• One woman arrived at the facility with her 6-year-old son, who had a sore on his arm 
that ICE believed was an infection. The mother and child were put in isolation for 
five days. On the fourth day, the mother began vomiting with an apparent stomach 
flu and diarrhea. She pleaded with ICE officers to be escorted to the bathroom.  
ICE officers repeatedly told her to wait until the woman was forced  to defecate 
on herself in front of her terrified child.  There was no shower in the room, 
leaving the mother to sit there in her soiled clothes for 20 minutes. When 
the ICE officers opened the door to the room, they laughed at her and tossed 
her a towel. The woman was then forced to walk across the facility covered 
in feces, accompanied by her crying child.
• A 5-year-old had diarrhea for more than two months and was told repeatedly 
to keep drinking water. He was not given antibiotics or other medication.
September 2014EXPOSE & CLOSE ARTESIA FAMILY RESIDENTIAL CENTER  9 
Artesia, however, women and children do not 
even know when the psychiatrist is available to 
meet with them, let alone prearranged counsel -
ing sessions. 
The institutionalized setting of immigration 
detention also breaks down family structures and 
parent-child relationships. Parents are stripped 
of their role as the head of household when ICE 
officers control everything from discipline to 
mealtimes. Disciplinary policies are not clearly 
outlined for both the officers running the facil -
ity and the families that are detained. Watching 
their parents’ authority undermined by a com -
plete stranger in uniform permanently impacts 
children. Moreover, women we met exhibited 
signs of depression and post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD), which is compounded by their 
detention and can have a severe impact on their 
children’s health and early development.21
MALNUTRITION AND SEVERE WEIGHT LOSS
Not only are children at Artesia failing to receive 
adequate healthcare services, they are rapidly 
losing weight due to the stress of incarceration. 
One attorney shared that her client’s child had 
lost nearly ten pounds in less than one month. 
Another attorney shared that her client’s child 
entered Artesia weighing 24 pounds and had 
dropped to approximately 14 pounds. He was slowly regaining the weight. Yet another stated 
that her client’s six-year-old son had lost up to 12 
pounds and now “has a face like a skeleton.”22
One attorney at Artesia reported serious concerns 
with the regimented nature of mealtimes and food 
service, they stated, “every mother we spoke 
with is forced to sneak food under her shirt or in 
her pants for her children to eat later. Because 
the only meal that the children enjoy and will eat 
in its entirety is breakfast, the mothers are forced 
to sneak breakfast food for the children to eat 
later. If they don’t, the children won’t eat. If food 
is found in their rooms it is thrown out. Rooms 
are subject to random searches that happen on 
a somewhat regular basis.”23
ICE itself provided conflicting reports regarding 
missed meals. When visiting Artesia, advocates “ ...every mother we spoke  
with is forced to sneak food 
under her shirt or in her 
pants for her children to  
eat later. ”An attorney at Artesia
Parents are 
stripped of their 
role as the head 
of household 
when ICE 
officers control 
everything from 
discipline to 
mealtimes.September 2014EXPOSE & CLOSE ARTESIA FAMILY RESIDENTIAL CENTER  10 
Family detention  is  
harmful and unnece-
ssary. Locking up 
mothers and their 
children in order to deter others  from migrating 
violates American principles of justice and 
international law. Indeed, the use of mass 
detention in order to “send a message” to others 
who might come later is one of the most noxious 
aspects of the Obama administration’s family 
detention policy. These problems are easy 
to fix: close Artesia and all family detention 
facilities, and instead divert funds toward 
providing refugee support to the families and 
children arriving at the border. 
In 2009, after years of pressure and lawsuits 
against human rights abuses, the Obama 
administration did the right thing and ended the inhumane practice of immigrant family detention 
at the Hutto facility. Later it also canceled plans 
for new family detention centers. We are alarmed 
to see the same administration ignore the painful 
lessons of Hutto and instead rapidly construct 
family detention beds at an unprecedented 
scale and at great cost to taxpayers. This year 
we have already seen a jump from under 100 
family detention beds to what is projected to 
reach 3,800 beds, and the administration has 
requested funding for even more. 
DWN urgently demands that the Obama admin -
istration reverse course: We call on the U.S. 
government to halt deportations, close Artesia 
and all family detention centers, cancel its plan 
for the 2,400-bed family detention facility in 
Dilley, Texas, and immediately release refugee 
families and children from immigrant detention.
IV. CONCLUSIONwere told by ICE officers that individuals who 
missed a meal could eat food from a refrigerator 
in each housing unit, which only contained 
fruit, milk, and juice. In addition, advocates 
were informed that families were not allowed 
to take meals out of the cafeteria to eat later to avoid insects and rodents in the housing units. 
Yet, in July, ICE assured advocates if families 
had to miss a meal, they are always provided 
with boxed meals to eat outside of meal times. 
However, an attorney at Artesia reported that 
ICE’s claim of boxed meals is simply “not true.”24 
Photo by Ed Williams[T]he use of 
mass detention 
in order to  
“send a 
message”  
to others who 
might come 
later is one 
of the most 
noxious aspects 
of the Obama 
administration’s 
family detention 
policy. September 2014EXPOSE & CLOSE ARTESIA FAMILY RESIDENTIAL CENTER  11 
ENDNOTES 
1  Research clearly indicates that detention is not an effective deterrent of migrants. International Detention Coalition There are alternatives: 
A handbook for preventing unnecessary immigration detention. Melbourne: The International Detention Coalition  (2011), p. 11, available 
at http://idcoalition.org/cap/handbook/capfindings/ .
2 Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights of Migrants, Mission to the United States of America, U.N. Doc. A/HRC/7/12/Add.2 (Mar. 5, 
2008) (“Families with children should not be held in prison-like facilities. All efforts should be made to release families with children from 
detention and place them in alternative accommodation suitable for families with children.”); Inter-Am. Comm. Hum. Rts., Report on 
Immigration in the United States: Detention and Due Process, para. 368 (“IACHR is concerned that the practice of detaining immigrant 
families continues with no extraordinary reasons to justify it.”).
3 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNCHR), Detention Guidelines, Guidelines 2, 4.1.4 (2012), available at unhcr.
org/505b10ee9.html (“[D]etention for the sole reason that the person is seeking asylum is not lawful under international law); Article 31, 
1951 Convention; Article 18(1), European Union Council Directive 2005/85/EC of 1 December 2005 on Minimum Standards on Procedures 
in Member States for Granting and Withdrawing Refugee Status, available at: http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/4394203c4.html ; 
Inter-Am. Comm. Hum. Rts., Report on Immigration in the United States: Detention and Due Process, para.104 (2010) (stating that the 
“generalized use of detention in the case of asylum-seekers does not comport with the right to personal liberty”).
4 M.S.P .C. v. Johnson , No. 1:14-cv-01437, Pls. Compl. (D.D.C. filed 22 Aug. 2014), available at https://www aclu.org/sites/default/
files/assets/filed_complaint_1.pdf .
5 All Expose and Close reports are available at http://www.detentionwatchnetwork.org/ExposeAndClose . ICE has a track record of abuse 
inside its detention facilities, which are documented in countless reports. A summary of reports on immigration detention published between 
July 2008 to October 2012 is available at http://www.immigrationforum.org/images/uploads/2010/detentionreportsummaries.pdf . 
6 Robjant K, Hassan R, Katona C. “Mental health implications of detaining asylum seekers: systematic review.” The British Journal of 
Psychiatry,194: 306-12 (Apr. 2009), available at: http://bjp.rcpsych.org/content/194/4/306 .full; Physicians for Human Rights and 
Bellevue/NYU Program for Survivors of Torture, From Persecution to Prison: The Health Consequences of Detention for Asylum Seekers  
(2003), available at https://s3.amazonaws.com/PHR_Reports/ persecution-to-prison-US-2003.pdf ; Allen S. Keller et al. “Mental 
Health of Detained Asylum Seekers.” Lancet  362: 1721-23 (2003) (explaining that “detaining asylum seekers exacerbates symptoms 
of depression, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder”).
7 Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC), Report of the 2012 Day of General Discussion on: The Rights of All Children in 
the Context of International Migration, available at http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/CRC/ Discussions/2012/
DGD2012ReportAndRecommendations.pdf .
8 M.S.P .C. v. Johnson, supra  n.3.
9  Summary of Draft Text of Senate Emergency Supplemental Bill, Senate Committee on Appropriations, 113th Congress, 2nd Session, 
July 2014, available at http://www.appropriations.senate.gov/news/chairwoman-mikulski-releases-summary-emergency-
supplemental-funding-bill .
10 ICE Family Residential Standards, available at https://www.ice.gov/detention-standards/family-residential/ .
11 Stipulated Settlement Agreement, Flores v. Reno , Case No CV85-4544-RJK (C.D. Cal. 1996), available at https://www.aclu.org/sites/
default/files/assets/flores_settlement_final_plus_extension_of_settlement011797.pdf , hereinafter Flores  settlement. 
12 Ibid., Exh. 1.
13 ICE, Parole of Arriving Aliens Found to Have a Credible Fear of Persecution or Torture, 6.2 (Dec. 8, 2009), available at http:// www.ice.
gov/doclib/dro/pdf/11002.1-hd-parole_of_arriving_aliens_found_credible_fear.pdf ; see also The Honorable Robert A. Katzmann, 
Bench, Bar and Immigrant Representation, 15 Legislation and Public Policy 585, 593 (2012) (reporting results of comprehensive study 
which showed that detention was one of the two most important variables determining success in Immigration Court, with representation 
being the other variable). 
14 Fees range from 10 to 20 cents per minute for domestic and international calls, respectively.
15 Flores settlement , Exh. 1, supra  n. 11.
16 ICE Family Residential Standards, Educational Policy, available at https://www.ice.gov/doclib/dro/family-residential/pdf/rs_
educational_policy.pdf
17 Flores  settlement, Exh. 1, A.4, supra  n. 11.
18 Artesia Public School District calendar, available at http://swmcdn.com/site_0552/ARTESIA_2014_15DistrictCalendar0801141.
pdf (starting school on August 11, 2014); see also Albuquerque Public Schools calendar, available at http://www.aps.edu/schools/
school-calendars/school-calendars#1415school  (starting school on August 13, 2014).
19  From interviews with Artesia volunteer attorneys (with attorney permission): Angela Williams, supra  n. 21, and Danielle Rosché, interview 
on file with the author (September 2014)
20  Flores  settlement, Exhibit 1, A.6-A.7, supra  n. 11.
21  National Center for Children and Poverty, Reducing Maternal Depression and Its Impact on Young Children  (Jan. 2008), available at 
http://www.nccp.org/publications/pdf/text_791.pdf .
22  American Immigration Lawyers Association (AILA), “Snapshots from Artesia: Interview with Angela Williams.” 0:00-2:46 (Aug. 18, 2014), 
available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l2ruGvQVvA&list=UUb5Kl7gHJ dchQVBJO9bqiPA
23  Interview with attorney on file with the author.
24  Ibid.