Human rights leader Dixon 
Osburn has been named the new 
Executive Director of CJA. Osburn 
served as the Director of Law & 
Security at Human Rights First 
from 2010 until this spring, where, 
among other accomplishments, he 
led efforts to end counterterrorism 
policies that violate the rule of law, 
including unlawful detention at 
Guantánamo, the lethal targeting 
by drone of suspected terrorists outside the laws of armed conflict, 
and the use of torture. He currently serves as an Adjunct Fellow 
at the American Security Project.  He will join the CJA team on 
December 1.
 
“It is a great honor to join one of the most talented teams of 
human rights advocates in the world, ” said Osburn in a statement 
made earlier in October. “Since 1998, CJA has been doing 
ground-breaking work on behalf of victims of torture, but there 
is more work that can be – and must be – done.  If we want to  
prevent human rights abuses from happening in the future, we 
must hold perpetrators accountable today. I look forward to  
leading that charge on behalf of CJA and its clients and partnering 
with the global human rights community. ”
Osburn has more than 20 years of experience in the field of 
social justice. In 1993, Osburn co-founded Servicemembers 
Legal Defense Network, a national security and human rights 
organization he led until 2007.  During that time, the organization 
spearheaded the effort to repeal “Don’t ask, don’t tell” and end 
sexual orientation discrimination in the armed forces. Rep. Barney 
Frank called Osburn “extremely effective and principled” in 
comments published in The Congressional Record .
As Executive Director, Osburn will lead efforts to raise CJA ’s profile 
and work with other human rights organizations and government 
officials to advance the organization’s work, which has an 
internationally recognized and sought after expertise in developing,  
investigating, and litigating human rights abuses.
“We are very excited to welcome Dixon, an experienced, visionary 
leader with a lifelong passion for, and commitment to human rights, ” 
said Wilma Wallace, CJA Board Chair. “CJA is at the forefront of 
the human rights community, and Dixon’s entrepreneurial spirit 
and collaborative approach will help the organization build on the 
great momentum we’ve created over the years for human rights 
advocates globally. ” CJA Welcomes New Executive Director  
Dixon Osburn  
Jesús Cabrera Jaramillo and his mother Alma Rosa in Colombia in 1997. 
Client Profile  
Jesús Cabrera Jaramillo: My Mother, the 
Tireless Fighter
Jesús Cabrera Jaramillo is the eldest son of Alma Rosa Jaramillo, 
an attorney who brought cases on behalf of communities displaced 
by the Bloque Central Bolívar (BCB), a violent paramilitary group  
under the command of Jiménez Naranjo (alias “Macaco”). Alma Rosa 
Jaramillo’s legal work drew her into confrontation with the BCB and 
in June 2001, she was killed by members of the BCB. Jesús Cabrera 
Jaramillo was 18 years old at the time of his mother’s death. In 2010, 
CJA and pro-bono counsel from Wilson, Sonsini, Goodrich & Rosati 
filed suit on behalf of of Jesús Cabrera Jaramillo as the representative 
of his mother’s estate. As CJA ’s client, Jesús Cabrera Jaramillo hopes 
to bring justice to his mother’s memory in our case against Macaco, 
who is accused of mass human rights abuses. In this interview, Jesús 
Cabrera Jaramillo talks about his childhood, his mother, and their 
struggle for justice. 
What was your childhood like?
I was born a little over 30 years ago in the coastal and historic city 
of Cartagena de Indias, in Bolívar, Colombia – a city with much  
history, fairy tales, and secret love affairs just as described in the  
story of Florentino Ariza and Fermina Daza, told in the book Love 
in the Time of Cholera by Gabriel García Márquez. Since I was  
little, I was raised in a matriarchy by my grandmother and my 
mother. My mother was always working for rural communities 
in several municipalities in the Colombian Caribbean coast and  
although we shared very little time at home, I learned that  
sometimes sacrifices are necessary and that the common good 
should be above personal interests.
What was your mother like?
My mom was an extraterrestrial.  She never saw the cup half 
empty even if there was only a sip left. (Continued on page 3)  
In This Issue:
2 Message from CJA ’s Board Chair
4 Program Updates5 Pro-bono Partner Profile: Staci Dresher
6 CJA Welcomes New Legal Fellows7 Patrick Ball Speaks at Y oung Professionals’ Event
8 Navi Pillay at CJA ’s Annual Dinner         THE CENTER FOR JUSTICE & ACCOUNTABILITY
Fall 2014 NewsletterBringing Human Rights Abusers to Justice.     
2Dear Friends of CJA,
We are pleased to bring you this fall newsletter 
— the first we have published since 2011.  This 
newsletter comes at an exciting time for CJA as we 
prepare to embark upon an era of new leadership.  
As we announced on October 6, we look forward 
to welcoming Dixon Osburn as our new Executive 
Director, effective December 1.  Dixon has more than 
20 years of experience as a champion of social justice 
and human rights, entrepreneur, leader, manager, 
political strategist, and fundraiser. The CJA board 
conducted a meticulous six-month search for the 
next leader of CJA, and received applications from 
an extremely gifted and diverse group of candidates.   
The level of experience and talent displayed by our 
candidate pool was telling of CJA ’s standing in the 
NGO and legal communities.  
This moment is also bittersweet, as we say goodbye to Pamela Merchant, CJA ’s long-
standing Executive Director who announced her decision to step down in April.  
Under Pamela’s leadership, CJA experienced unprecedented growth and transformed 
into a truly global organization, gaining recognition as an effective advocate for justice 
and human rights around the world. We are now working in six different legal systems 
– Cambodia, Guatemala, Haiti, Peru, Spain and the United States – and conducting 
human rights abuse investigations in 20 different countries.  We have more than 
tripled our operating budget and developed staff with deep subject-matter expertise 
who are recognized experts in the field.  As a result, we are stronger than ever as 
an organization.  The board is extremely grateful to Pamela for positioning CJA so 
favorably as we enter this new era and for the support she has provided throughout 
this transition process. The Board will miss working with Pamela and witnessing first-
hand her tireless passion for seeking justice on behalf of our clients.
We have many exciting things on the horizon for CJA.  On the litigation side, a damages 
hearing is scheduled for February 2015 in our case against one of the murderers of 
Chilean folksinger and activist Víctor Jara. In Cambodia, after a favorable judgment 
for survivors in Case 002/1 ( see page 4) , Case 002/2 began earlier in October 2014 and 
covers the remaining charges against the two former Khmer Rouge leaders. 
Finally, this spring will mark the return of CJA ’s Annual Dinner, on May 7, 2015.  I am 
delighted to announce that Navi Pillay, former United Nations High Commissioner 
for Human Rights, will be accepting CJA ’s Champion of Justice award for her career-
spanning commitment to the rule of law and advocating for victims.  In her time with 
the U.N., she bravely called out states where atrocities were taking place, organizing 
independent international investigations.  She also used her position to draw attention 
to gender-based violence and the rights of women.  She is truly an inspiration to all 
of us working in the field of human rights, and we are honored that she has agreed to 
spend this special evening with the CJA community.
From all of us at CJA, thank you for your continued support and for all you do to 
help make the world a just place. Please join me in wishing Pamela all the best and 
congratulating Dixon in his new role leading CJA forward. 
Wilma Wallace
Chair, Board of Directors
Wilma Wallace, Board ChairBOARD OF DIRECTORS
William Aceves, Vice Chair
California Western School of Law
Farah Brelvi, Secretary
Attorney
Lokelani Devone
Attorney
Tyler Giannini
Harvard Law School
Mina Titi Liu
Stanford Law School
James Mintz
The Mintz Group
Joey Neugart
Singularity University
Jane Rocamora
Harvard Immigration & Refugee Clinic at 
  Greater Boston Legal Services
Wilma Wallace, Chair
Gap Inc.
ADVISORY COUNCIL 
Chester Atkins
ADS Ventures, Inc., former Member 
  of Congress
Sandra Coliver
Open Society Justice Initiative
Benjamín Cuéllar
Independent Consultant, Former Director   
  of Instituto de Derechos Humanos de la    
  UCA
James Eisenbrandt
Berkowitz Oliver Williams Shaw & 
  Eisenbrandt LLP
Gerald Gray
CJA Founder, Institute for
  Redress & Recovery
Jennifer Green
University of Minnesota Law School
Paul Hoffman
Schonbrun DeSimone Seplow Harris
  & Hoffman LLP 
Naomi Roht-Arriaza
University of California, Hastings College                   
  of Law 
Steven M.  Schneebaum
Stephen M. Schneebaum, PC
Michael S. Sorgen
Law Offices of Michael S. Sorgen
Ralph G. Steinhardt
CJA Founding Board Member, George  
  Washington University Law School3Client Profile: Jes ús 
Cabrera Jaramillio (cont.)
My mother was a person who fearlessly told 
the truth in their face to anyone: mayor, 
judge,  police chief, priest, civic leader, 
shopkeeper or chalupero (canoe rider). She 
was a tireless fighter for just causes who 
put aside a successful career in the  judicial 
system to listen and solve the problems of 
disadvantaged communities.  She was a 
warrior who sacrificed many of her kids’ 
birthdays, Christmas, and Mother’s Day 
celebrations to stay with the farm workers 
of southern Bolívar and work with them 
under the guiding wing of the Program 
for Peace and Development in the Middle 
Magdalena.
What are some memories that you have of 
your mother?
I have many memories of my mother. 
On work-related memories, there is 
the story of a priest from the Program 
for Peace and Development, who was 
kidnapped (along with my mom) by ELN 
guerrillas in Morales, to send a message 
to the authorities. Although my mom got 
released, she decided to stay, like a mother 
with her cubs, to ensure the safety and 
integrity of the priest. 
I could spend an entire afternoon sharing 
stories, like the day she gave me my first 
guitar, my birthday party with the baseball 
theme, or the proud look in her eyes every 
time I achieved success ... so many things 
that stayed in my memory, but I long for 
the things that we were yet to experience. 
Why did you decide to bring this case 
against Macaco?   
On May 13, 2008, the Colombian 
government decided to extradite to the 
United States the Colombian paramilitary 
leaders (including Macaco) for the crime 
of drug trafficking. At that time the victims 
had reported 123,787 crimes committed by 
paramilitary members, but only 5,831 had 
been recognized officially and only 41% 
(2,391) of those were confessed by the 15 
extradited leaders. The government has 
partially repaired victims, but has denied 
them their right to know the truth. 
We are going after Macaco not just 
for Alma Rosa (my mom), but for the 
thousands of Alma Rosas lying in graves 
in Colombia or those whose limbs 
were food for fish in a Colombian river.  We are going after Macaco because he 
has to pay for the thousands of crimes he 
committed. We are going after Macaco 
to show the government of that time 
that it doesn’t matter if they sent the 
commanders of their parallel army out 
of the country to protect them because 
we’ve learned that justice has no borders.  
How has the experience with CJA been so 
far?      
It is very gratifying to see a whole group 
of renowned men and women lifting 
stones to find evidence, signs, or clues that 
can help in this case. Although we have 
overcome the barriers of communication 
and documentation, I could not answer 
this question as a client of CJA because I do 
not feel like one. CJA has been more than a 
legal support for me. 
Through this case I discovered that I have a 
couple of aunties outside of Colombia like 
Kathy Roberts and Almudena Bernabeu 
with whom — beyond the legal matters of 
the case — I’ve shared things about my life 
and fun moments. I know that they will 
always, always be there for me. 
 
I can feel CJA ’s desire to fight till the end 
regardless of the consequences to honor the 
life of a colleague they didn’t get to know. 
That’s why CJA has my infinite appreciation,  
and I will be grateful for the rest of my life. What are you hoping will happen in the 
case?      
A few close friends and family in Colombia 
see my case as a legal event that could 
bring interesting economic dividends 
because of the reparations side of it, but 
for me this case goes far beyond that. It is 
a pioneer case for many victims who seek 
justice and truth to hold accountable the 15 
individuals convicted in the United States 
for drug trafficking who are thinking they 
can get away with all the massacres they 
committed in Colombia. 
Alma Rosa is not dead. She lives not only 
in our family but also in the women and 
men of CJA who — with great tenacity 
and determination — sacrifice their time, 
effort, and money for this difficult and 
complicated case. I do not expect to just win 
a case, but I hope it serves to tell an entire 
country not to fall asleep, that a victory is 
possible, that we can demand truth, justice 
and reparation.
Is there anything else that you would like 
to add?    
Thank you! Thanks to all of those who in 
some way or another have contributed a bit 
for things to go on the right track. Special 
thanks to Almudena, Kathy, Yukyam Lam, 
Pedro Mahecha, the people at Wilson 
Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati and many 
others I haven’t met because I know they’re 
thinking of us, they’re thinking of Alma 
Rosa, her children and her family. Many, 
many thanks! 
Interview translated by Susana Solis.
“We are going after Macaco not 
just for Alma Rosa, but for the 
thousands of Alma Rosas lying in 
graves in Colombia... ”
Jesús Cabrera Jaramillo in Colombia in 2014. Photo by Jesús Cabrera Jaramillo.4
Former Khmer Rouge Officials Found 
Guilty by Tribunal, Face Second Trial
On August 7, 2014, two senior officials from the Khmer Rouge 
regime — Khieu Samphan and Nuon Chea — were found guilty 
of crimes against humanity.  In its first judgment issued against 
senior leaders of the Khmer Rouge, the Extraordinary Chambers 
in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC) sentenced both defendants 
to life imprisonment for crimes against humanity committed in 
Cambodia from 1975 to 1979. A second trial, which began on 
October 17, covers the remaining charges against the two leaders, 
including crimes related to genocide, crimes against humanity, war 
crimes, and forced marriage.
CJA represents 45 survivors from the U.S.-Cambodian diaspora 
before the ECCC. CJA client Sophany Bay was the first Cambodian 
American to testify before the ECCC in June 2013 about the loss of 
her young children at the hands of the Khmer Rouge. 
Upon hearing the verdict for the first trial, known as Case 002/1, 
Bay said, “The Court cannot give me my children back, but it can 
give me justice. I participated in the trial for the memory of my 
children and for all victims.  Today, the world will know who is 
responsible for our suffering. ”   
The decision read from the bench on August 7 specifically 
highlighted the harm suffered by Bay, and the written decision also 
cites evidence presented by CJA clients Marie Chea, Sowatha Chea, 
Nicholas Vesna Keo, Kelvin Leng So, and Sokhan Y ang.  All of 
these clients applied to the Court as civil parties with the assistance of U.S.-based victim’s association, the Applied Social Research 
Institute of Cambodia.  
 
“I have waited a long time to hear the Tribunal announce this 
powerful verdict condemning Khieu Samphan and Nuon Chea to 
life imprisonment for the destruction they brought to their own 
people, under their rule, ” said CJA client Kelvin Leng So. “The 
judgment tells the Khmer Rouge, and the world, that no matter 
how much time has passed, the victims will still demand justice. 
With this conviction, I am hopeful that the defendants will now 
formally apologize to the Khmer people and the world for their 
role in the devastation they committed. ” 
Death Cheats Justice: Notorious Haiti Dictator “Baby Doc” Duvalier Dead at 63
Jean-Claude “Baby Doc” Duvalier, Haiti’s former dictator and 
“President for Life, ” died at the age of 63 on October 4, 2014. His 
death cuts short a long overdue trial for crimes against humanity 
that held a glimmer of hope for his victims.
“We often say that one has cheated death, 
but now Baby Doc’s death has cheated 
justice, ” said CJA Staff Attorney, Scott 
Gilmore, who partnered with Haitian 
human rights lawyer Mario Joseph and the 
Bureau des Avocats Internationaux (BAI) 
in a case against Duvalier in Haiti.
In 2011, Duvalier returned to Haiti after 25 years in exile.  Within 
days, the Haitian government reopened a criminal investigation 
into financial crimes, while victims of persecution filed complaints 
for crimes against humanity.  After an investigating judge ruled 
that the charges of torture and murder were barred by the statute of 
limitations, Haitian and international human rights lawyers rallied 
around the victims to appeal the ruling.  
For several weeks in the spring of 2013, the Court of Appeals of 
Port-au-Prince heard a landmark hearing.  And for the first time 
ever, Duvalier was summoned to court and forced to face his vic -
tims.  CJA submitted an amicus brief to the court, laying out the 
international law basis for prosecuting Duvalier.  On February 20, 2014, the Court issued a historic ruling that Duvalier should face 
charges of crimes against humanity.  The court held that interna -
tional law puts no statute of limitations on such horrific crimes.
And Duvalier’s crimes were truly horrific.  From 
1971 to 1986, under Duvalier’s command, an 
estimated 300 to 4,000 political prisoners were 
held incommunicado in a network of prisons 
called the “Triangle of Death. ”  Many died from 
horrific conditions of confinement, torture, 
starvation, denial of medical care, and sum -
mary execution.  Others simply disappeared 
without their families ever learning their fate. 
“With Duvalier’s death, his prosecution in Haiti will no doubt be 
closed, but Haiti’s reckoning with its troubled past must not end, ” 
said Gilmore. “The testimony of Duvalier’s many victims were 
only beginning to come to light. The Martelly government should 
continue to investigate human rights abuses under Duvalier. Now 
is the time for Haiti to establish a truth commission to build a 
historical record of Duvalier-era crimes. ”
Currently, CJA and its partners in Haiti are reviewing the evidence 
to identify surviving members of the Duvalier dictatorship in Haiti 
and abroad. As Gilmore explains, “ As long as Duvalier’s accom -
plices and henchmen survive, they should be brought to justice. ” “With Duvalier’s death, his 
prosecution in Haiti will no 
doubt be closed, but Haiti’s 
reckoning with its troubled 
past must not end. ”
-CJA Attorney Scott GilmoreKhieu Samphan and Nuon Chea, former Khmer Rouge leaders. Photos 
courtesy of the Documentation Center of Cambodia.5Staci Dresher is Partner and Associate General Counsel at the 
professional investigative services firm The Mintz Group, which has 
helped CJA discover the whereabouts of human rights abusers, identify 
key witnesses, and uncover important leads. Dresher describes her 
work with CJA and how she became a private investigator.
When Staci Dresher explains the work of a private investigator, 
you can tell that this is a line of work that she truly enjoys. “What 
we do is we find the facts and connect the dots, ” Dresher said. She 
continues to describe how The Mintz Group was able to track 
down Colonel Abdi Aden Magan, the former investigations chief 
of a secret police force in Somalia that used torture and arbitrary 
detention to suppress dissidents. 
“So there is this rumor that Magan is in the U.S. and we were 
asked to pinpoint exactly where he was and his finances, ” she 
explained. “Y ou couldn’t just look for his whereabouts with the 
regular databases we use to locate people. ” Eventually, Dresher and 
her team found Magan living in Ohio, and CJA filed a case against 
him in 2010. In 2012, Magan was found liable for the torture 
and arbitrary detention of CJA ’s client, former constitutional law 
professor Abukar Hassan Ahmed.
Dresher has been the point-person for several cases that The Mintz 
Group takes on as part of their pro-bono partnership with CJA, 
from Ahmed v. Magan  to CJA ’s landmark Supreme Court case 
Yousuf v. Samantar .  She is also involved in several of our current 
investigations and has led a training at CJA on best practices for 
investigations. “Staci is one of my favorite people in the world 
to work with, ” said Kathy Roberts, CJA ’s Legal Director. “She is 
a brilliant investigator, generous with her expertise, and deeply 
committed to human rights. ”
 
 
 
 
Dresher has worked at The Mintz Group for eight years, but she 
did not always think that she would become a private investigator. 
Dresher studied international politics in college, worked in conflict 
resolution for a few years, lived in Latin America, and then decided 
to pursue law. After receiving her J.D. from the University of 
California, Hastings College of the Law, Dresher worked at two 
prestigious law firms, focusing on intellectual property, complex 
commercial matters, and insurance coverage. 
She stumbled into the world of private investigation when her firm, 
Sonnenschein Nath & Rosenthal LLP (now a part of Dentons), 
provided pro-bono counsel for CJA ’s case against Haitian 
paramilitary leader Emmanuel “Toto” Constant, who was later 
found liable for torture, crimes against humanity and the systematic use of violence against women, including rape. “I was one of the key 
associates in the case against Constant and the firm had hired The 
Mintz Group to do some investigative work, ” Dresher explained. 
Dresher was fascinated by the work and after several years as a civil 
litigator she decided to “try something completely new” and join 
The Mintz Group.
Dresher continued to do pro-bono work at her new job. “When I 
joined The Mintz Group, I made it clear that I wanted to continue 
my commitment to pro-bono because I think it’s really important 
that we give back, ” she explained. 
Because of her previous experience in the Constant  case, it was 
natural for Dresher to work on the CJA cases that The Mintz 
Group took on. And she finds her work with CJA to be undeniably 
rewarding. 
“It’s most rewarding to use the skills you have for a purpose 
that you strongly believe in, ” she said, touching on her previous 
experience in international politics and conflict resolution. “With 
my background, it’s heartening to know that I can make a difference 
and be a part of the justice system. Meeting [CJA ’s] clients, and 
seeing the look on their faces, it brings tears to your eyes. ”
She also noted that working with CJA is fulfilling because of the 
true impact of its cases. “Oftentimes, when it comes to human 
rights work, you’ll hear people say that you’re doing good work 
but nothing will happen, ” she explained. “CJA gives you the sense 
that this is not just lip service. Like in the Constant  case, where 
the plaintiffs were awarded $19 million in damages. The fact that 
this is in the books for other people in the field to look at is a big 
accomplishment. ”
CJA, in turn, is so grateful of the work that Dresher and her team 
provide. Their investigative work is often key to building CJA ’s 
cases. As Dresher describes, “Y ou don’t file a case until a year or 
two because half of it is getting the facts. The law is cut and dry, but 
you always need the facts. ” 
Pro-bono Partner Profile  
Staci Dresher from The Mintz Group: 
Digging for the Facts
“It’s most rewarding to use the skills you have for 
a purpose that you strongly believe in. With my 
background, it’s heartening to know that I can make 
a difference and be a part of the justice system. ” 
-Staci DresherStaci Dresher and CJA Legal Director Kathy Roberts at a CJA event held in 
early June. Photo by Hassan Elmi.65CJA Welcomes Legal Fellows from Yale Law School 
and UC Berkeley Law School
Amy Belsher  joins CJA as a Berkeley Law 
Public Interest Fellow. She is a recent graduate 
of the University of California, Berkeley, 
School of Law (Boalt Hall). During her last 
two years in law school, Belsher worked 
for the Human Rights Center, investigating 
accountability for sexual and gender-based 
violence in Uganda. 
Belsher spent a summer working for judges at 
the U.N. International Criminal Tribunal for 
Rwanda in The Hague. She has also worked 
for judges at the Immigration Court in San Francisco and for a number of immigration 
non-profit organizations, including the Iraqi Refugee Assistance Project. Belsher speaks 
proficient French and conversational Spanish.  She holds a bachelor of arts in Legal Studies 
and Global Poverty and Practice from the University of California, Berkeley. Mytili Bala joins CJA for a second year 
as a Robert L. Bernstein International 
Human Rights Fellow.  Prior to starting 
her fellowship at CJA in September 2013, 
Bala spent four years in private practice at 
Irell & Manella LLP and Kirkland & Ellis 
LLP , where she represented clients in civil 
litigation in federal and state court. 
Bala graduated from Y ale Law School in 
2009.  During law school, Bala participated 
in the Community Lawyering Clinic, 
where she worked with a community 
organization in New Haven to address local housing and employment concerns.  She also 
participated in the Temporary Restraining Order Project and served as Senior Editor of 
the Yale Human Rights and Development Law Journal .  Bala interned with an NGO in 
southern India as part of the EU-funded National Project on Preventing Torture in India.   
 
Bala received a bachelor of arts in Economics with Honors from the University of Chicago 
in 2005.  She is admitted to practice in California and Illinois and is fluent in Tamil and 
proficient in Spanish. CJA STAFF
Mytili Bala
Robert L. Bernstein International 
Human Rights Fellow
Amy Belsher
Berkeley Law Public Interest Fellow
Almudena Bernabeu
International Attorney/Transitional 
Justice Program Director
Carolyn Patty Blum
Senior Legal Advisor
Scott Gilmore
Staff Attorney
Rachel Hill
Individual Giving Manager
Marjon Momand
Development & Communications  
Associate
Dixon Osburn
Executive Director
Kathy Roberts
Legal Director
Nushin Sarkarati
Staff Attorney
Joninna Simpson
Finance & Operations Director 
Susana Solis
Office Manager
What CJA Does
The Center for Justice and Accountability is an international human rights organization dedicated to 
deterring torture and other severe human rights abuses around the world and advancing the rights 
of survivors to seek truth, justice, and redress. CJA uses litigation to hold perpetrators individually 
accountable for human rights abuses, develop human rights law, and advance the rule of law in countries 
transitioning from periods of abuse.
CJA uses two civil laws to hold perpetrators of international human rights abuses accountable in the 
United States: the Alien Tort Statute (ATS) and the Torture Victim Protection Act (TVPA). We also 
pursue criminal human rights cases before the Spanish National Court, which has initiated investigations 
into abuses around the world. CJA leverages resources by partnering with pro-bono law firms and 
expert witnesses to help litigate our cases. For more information, visit www.cja.org.7
On September 16, over 100 guests gathered 
at the headquarters of Eventbrite to attend 
the latest event in CJA ’s Y oung Professionals’ 
Committee for Human Rights’ “Drink + 
Think” series.  
Speaker Patrick Ball, Executive Director of 
the Human Rights Data Analysis Group, 
gave a fascinating presentation, titled 
“Data Mining for Good: Prosecuting War 
Criminals Using Data and Statistics. ” 
He discussed how data analysis can be 
used as a tool to speak truth to power 
and bring justice to communities that 
have suffered human rights abuses.  
 
Ball drew from his experiences as an expert 
witness in the International Criminal 
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia trial 
against Slobodan Milošević, the former 
President of Serbia, and in Guatemala’s 
Supreme Court in the trial of General José 
Efraín Ríos Montt, the de-facto president of 
Guatemala from 1982 to 1983.
CJA ’s Y oung Professionals’ Committee for 
Human Rights (YPCHR) was established 
in 2013 and produces quarterly events featuring expert speakers working in the 
field of human rights and social justice.  
At YPCHR’s first event in July 2013, Eric 
Stover, Faculty Director of the Human 
Rights Center and Adjunct Professor of 
Law and Public Health at UC Berkeley, 
spoke at SOMArts.
Human rights activist Ahmed Salah 
discussed Egypt’s 2011 revolution at 
YPCHR’s second event in November 
2013. Salah was one of the leaders behind 
the demonstrations in Cairo that sparked 
the revolution and was the recipient of 
CJA ’s 2013 Champion of Justice  award.  
 
In April 2014, YPCHR organized an event 
at Google that attracted more than 100 
attendees. Cindy Cohn, Legal Director and 
General Counsel at the Electronic Frontier 
Foundation, led an engaging discussion 
about NSA surveillance and internet 
freedom.  
For more information about YPCHR, call 
Rachel Hill at 415-544-0444 or email her at 
rhill@cja.org.  Patrick Ball Speaks at Young Professionals’ Event Held 
Patrick Ball and members of YPCHR. Photos by Carter Brooks.at Eventbrite’s Headquarters in San Francisco
On September 19, CJA friends and 
supporters gathered at the San Francisco 
offices of Dentons US LLP to celebrate 
Pamela Merchant’s accomplishments 
since joining CJA in October 2005.
During Pamela’s tenure, CJA has grown 
its client base from 56 clients from 
eight countries to over 220 clients from 
20 countries, including 188 torture 
survivors and 32 relatives of people who 
were tortured or disappeared.  
The past nine years have seen many 
firsts for CJA, from the filing of CJA ’s 
first criminal human rights case in 
Spain for the Jesuits Massacre Case , to 
crossing the one million dollar mark 
for recovery for our clients in Jean v. 
Dorelien , to attaining a unanimous 
victory in CJA ’s first case to reach the U.S. 
Supreme Court in Yousuf v. Samantar .   
 
CJA also testified before Congress, 
organized the first client conference on 
the effects of participating in human 
rights litigation, and launched a 
Transitional Justice Program, which is 
now operating in six countries.
“Because of Pamela’s work, and the work 
we’ve done together at CJA, survivors 
from all over the world can offer their 
children, and ours, the chance for 
a more just future, ” said CJA Legal 
Director Kathy Roberts.  
CJA Celebrates Pamela 
Merchant’s TenurePamela Merchant and CJA Board Chair Wilma 
Wallace at Dentons. Photo by Hassan Elmi.CJA ’s Annual Dinner, Celebrating our Victories in the Movement for Global Justice , 
will return on May 7, 2015  to San Francisco.  The dinner brings together leading 
international human rights advocates, judges, survivors, and supporters to celebrate 
important victories secured by CJA in our efforts to hold high-ranking human rights 
abusers accountable.
CJA will be presenting Navi Pillay, the former U.N. High Commissioner for Human 
Rights, with the Champion of Justice  award. Pillay was the first woman to start a law 
practice in her home province in South Africa where she defended scores of anti-
Apartheid activists including Nelson Mandela, and was the first nonwhite woman to 
be appointed as a judge in the South African High Court.  She has also served as a judge 
with the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and the International Criminal 
Court in The Hague.  As High Commissioner for Human Rights, Pillay was a critical 
first responder in ongoing human rights crises around the world.  
CJA ’s Annual Dinner will be held on May 7, 2015 at the Julia Morgan Ballroom in San 
Francisco.  Sponsorships are now available; for more information about sponsorship or 
to receive a sponsorship packet, please contact Rachel Hill, Individual Giving Manager, 
at rhill@cja.org or 415-544-0444. Save the Date for CJA’s Annual Dinner with Navi Pillay
We are moving! CJA ’s new address is:
One Hallidie Plaza 
Suite 406
San Francisco, CA 94102870 Market Street, Suite 688
San Francisco, CA 94102PRSRT STANDARD
US POSTAGE PAID
SAN FRANCISCO CA
PERMIT 4118
www. cja.org