Your year of advocacy against inhumane 
practices at the U.S.-Mexico border reached 
new heights this summer, when more than 
60,000 of you signed on to PHR’s letter 
demanding justice for migrant children 
victimized by the dangerous rhetoric and 
human rights-violating policies of the 
Trump administration. A team of PHR 
doctors led by Asylum Network Member 
Ranit Mishori, MD carried your pledge 
of “No More Watching and Waiting!” to Washington, where we presented our 
concerns to the Department of Homeland 
Security and made sure the White House 
heard our message loud and clear. All 
across the country, health professionals in 
our Asylum Network and medical school 
chapters rallied their colleagues to join our 
call for justice for migrant children and 
their families. If you haven’t yet, help us  
hit 100,000 signatures by signing here:  
phr.org/border-actionFall 2019Physicians for Human Rights
PHRecord
We Took Your Message to Washington:
 “Enough Is Enough!”Doctors demonstrate in front of the White House in July as 
part of PHR’s “No More Watching and Waiting” campaign 
against U.S. immigration policies. 
 “As physicians, we swear to put patients’ 
well-being above any other consideration 
— to “first, do no harm.” The immigration 
policies the administration is carrying out 
now would make that extremely difficult.”
Ranit Mishori, MD
PHR Asylum Network MemberYou Raised Your Voice and They Listened
Your support is amplifying the powerful 
voices of health professionals to change 
cruel and unjust U.S. immigration laws. 
When Vermont Senator Patrick Leahy 
appealed to the Trump administration to 
end the harms of the so-called “remain 
in Mexico” policy, he relied on first-hand 
accounts from PHR Asylum Network 
doctors working with migrants at the  
U.S. border. 
Our Network doctors also provided 
revisions and recommendations to a bill 
that could mean life-saving changes for 
migrants. Senator Martin Heinrich’s 
(NM) REMOTE Act provides monetary 
incentives to Border Patrol officers who 
undergo EMT and paramedic training –  
a crucial measure advocated by PHR. 
We advised Congressman Raul Ruiz, MD 
(CA) on his Humanitarian Standards Act, 
which would establish basic standards of 
care for people in immigration custody. 
And in July, our hard work and determined 
advocacy paid off when PHR was invited 
to testify at a Congressional hearing on 
conditions at the U.S. border and their 
impact on children. Child psychiatrist 
and PHR Asylum Network Member Amy 
Cohen, MD told the Senate Democratic 
Policy and Communications Committee: 
“The atrocities we are seeing in places 
like [detention centers] Clint and Ursula 
are not – as some would have us believe 
– the consequence of a migrant ‘surge,’ 
but rather of U.S. policies and procedures 
which result in the unnecessary, 
protracted, and damaging detention  
of ch i ld ren.” Thanks to you, we’re equipping doctors 
with the resources they need to push back 
against policies that prevent them from 
caring for their patients and we’re giving 
them the tools to become human rights 
advocates. You’re keeping these critical 
medical voices front and center to end 
abusive practices at the border and ensure 
that the United States respects the rights of 
migrant children and their families. 
Above: Child psychiatrist and PHR Asylum 
Network Member Amy Cohen, MD testifies 
on the impact of U.S. border policies 
before the Senate Democratic Policy and 
Communications Committee. 
Photo: Senate Democratic Media Center
2 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org PHRecord Fall 2019“Lives Are in the Balance, and I Need to Speak Out”
PHR Asylum Network Member Joseph Shin, MD presents PHR’s findings on trauma  
among child asylum seekers at the Human Rights Council in Geneva in June.In the face of U.S. immigration 
policies that are traumatizing 
children and threatening the health 
of migrant families and communities, 
we published two critical reports that 
drew widespread, global attention. 
“Not in My Exam Room” showed 
how harsh and discriminatory 
immigration enforcement actions 
along the border are violating patient 
rights and obstructing migrants’ 
access to critical medical care. Our 
study of trauma among child asylum 
seekers from Central America 
found that the vast majority had 
experienced direct physical violence, 
and more than three quarters were 
likely or diagnosed to be suffering 
from major mental health disorders. 
Report author Joseph Shin, MD has 
been volunteering with PHR for  
more than 10 years, conducting 
forensic evaluations of asylum 
seekers, delivering trainings 
for hundreds of clinicians, and 
mentoring students at the Weill 
Cornell Center for Human Rights, 
where he is medical co-director.  
Dr. Shin’s deep expertise elevated 
our findings on Capitol Hill and at 
the United Nations – and made him a 
powerful national and international 
human rights advocate. He speaks 
here about those experiences.When PHR first approached me to join a 
team going to Geneva to advocate at the 
UN Human Rights Council, I hesitated. 
Being a hospitalist and an academic 
can put tough demands on personal 
and family life; I try to be wise about 
boundaries, while researching, teaching, 
and having a clinical practice at the 
hospital. International governance and 
UN mechanisms seemed unfamiliar and 
far away.
The breaking news about horrific 
conditions for children in detention at the 
U.S. border changed my mind. I realized: 
“This is not about me. The dangers for 
these kids are happening now. Lives are in 
the balance, and I need to speak out.”
Going to Geneva at first felt like a steep 
learning curve. The situation on the 
U.S. border is grave, but human rights 
are under attack all over the world and 
our issue is just one of many. But when 
I delivered my speech to a room full of 
representatives from permanent missions, I knew that we had taken one step in a 
larger process. We documented what 
is happening in the United States and 
brought our evidence to the global stage. 
Governments were listening. We were 
holding our own government accountable 
in the community of nations, in order to 
prevent these unjust U.S. policies from 
setting a precedent for other nations and to 
maintain a moral clarity and focus on the 
wellbeing of children first and foremost.
Justice and service are part of finding 
meaning in medicine, and they have 
brought an even deeper meaning to my life 
as my career advances. 
There is strength in solidarity. We cannot 
save everyone, whether through medicine 
or advocacy. But we can find strength in 
helping. You alone cannot fix everything, 
but the meaning is in the work, and the 
impact on each life is worth it. It has 
certainly impacted my life.
To read our reports, visit:  
phr.org/child-trauma and   
phr.org/sanctuary-hospitals .Justice and service are part of 
finding meaning in medicine,  
and they have brought an even 
deeper meaning to my life as my 
career advances. 
Joseph Shin, MD  
PHR Asylum Network Member
3 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org PHRecord Fall 2019Trauma Among Children Seeking Asylum in the United States
Suffered direct  
physical violenceSuffered threats of  
violence or deathSuffered  
sexual violenceWitnessed  
acts of violence78%71%18%59%Types of violence experiencedPHR’s report “There Is No One Here to Protect 
You” showed the extreme violence and trauma 
experienced by children arriving at the U.S.-Mexico 
border to seek asylum in the United States.  
The study, which garnered widespread domestic  
and international attention, drew on data from  
183 children evaluated by PHR Asylum Network 
experts between 2014 and 2018. We partnered  
with the advocacy group MoveOn to produce a 
video featuring PHR medical experts explaining  
the severe health harms of U.S. border policies,  
and more than 150,000 people saw or shared  
our message.
Perpetrators of violence
Suffered gang-related violence Faced forced conscription into gangs Faced violence within the home or 
perpetrated by family members60%24%47%You Are Championing the Rights of  
Traumatized Children at the U.S. Border
 “Children are being met  
at the U.S. border with 
harsh, punitive policies  
that both violate their  
rights and severely affect 
their wellbeing.”
Kathryn Hampton
PHR Network Program Officer
4 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org PHRecord Fall 2019Impact of Violence against Child Asylum-Seekers
Of these, the most common were: More than three quarters of children were  
suspected or diagnosed to have at least one  
major mental health disorder. 
Major depressive  
disorder Anxiety  
disorder40%19%
Post-traumatic 
stress disorder64%
76%
Source: Data from 183 children evaluated by Physicians for Human Rights  
Asylum Network experts between 2014 and 2018.Reaching New Audiences with MoveOn.org
5 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org PHRecord Fall 2019You’re Backing the Struggle for  
Freedom and Justice in Sudan 
After former Sudanese president Omar 
al-Bashir was ousted in April following 
months of protests, hopes were high that 
decades of human rights atrocities and 
bloody crackdowns on protesters would 
end. But on June 3, Sudanese paramilitary 
forces opened fire on a peaceful sit-in in 
Khartoum, killing dozens and wounding 
hundreds of demonstrators calling for the 
installation of a civilian government. 
PHR’s in-depth reporting on the violent 
response to the protests, based on our 
extensive contacts with Sudanese medical 
networks at the heart of the movement, have made us a go-to organization for 
information on the evolving Sudanese 
crisis. As our partners shared updates 
of the unfolding massacre in June, 
we immediately called for an urgent 
international investigation into the 
bloodshed, urged the U.S. government 
to press for an end to the violence, and 
brought a team of Sudanese doctors to 
Geneva to present our evidence of abuses  
to the UN Human Rights Council. 
Thanks to you, PHR is expanding our 
investigation into the killings and other 
abuses in Sudan. The recent agreement 
PHR’s decade of work to end the long-
entrenched practice of torture in Central 
Asia has delivered groundbreaking change. 
With your support, we and our partners 
have helped improve policies and trained 
more than 1,000 medical and legal experts 
in Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan 
to investigate and document torture and PHR’s Agents of Change Are Ending Torture in Central Asia 
ill-treatment according to international 
standards known as the Istanbul Protocol. 
Before we began our work in 2011, 
there were virtually no cases of criminal 
punishment of torturers; today, police 
officers in both Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan 
are behind bars for torture and ill-treatment 
of prisoners. A new study of our work shows that  
90 percent of our trainees feel empowered 
to train others and to sustain our work to 
put an end to torture in their countries. 
Thanks to you, these agents of change are 
transforming the landscape for torture, 
dismantling bad practices, and building up 
rights-respecting societies in Central Asia.“I can see the difference after  
[the publication of] your report, 
reflected in the media’s growing 
attention and interest in covering Sudan 
medics and revolts. You are giving hope 
not only to me, but to those simple and 
dedicated doctors who work in very 
remote areas in Sudan and are subject 
to all kind of humiliations.”
Shaza Elmahdi, MD
Sudanese American  
Physicians Associationbetween the military and opposition 
groups that clears the way for an interim 
government is a positive sign, but we are 
closely monitoring developments to ensure 
that those responsible for human rights 
violations are held accountable for their 
crimes. Shaza Elmahdi, MD, a partner at the 
Sudanese American Physicians Association 
who joined PHR’s delegation to the UN, told 
us that your support is critical to our brave 
medical colleagues leading the struggle for 
freedom and justice in Sudan.
Sudanese demonstrators protest outside the 
army complex in Khartoum in April 2019. 
Photo: Ebrahim Hamid/AFP/Getty Images
6 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org PHRecord Fall 2019Acquittal for Leading Turkish Human Rights Defender
We are happy to share that S ebnem 
Korur Fincancı, MD, one of Turkey’s most 
prominent and intrepid human rights 
defenders and a longtime PHR partner, 
was acquitted in July of spurious charges 
of disseminating “terrorist propaganda” 
that were lodged against her after she 
guest-edited a newspaper critical of the 
Turkish government. When Dr. Fincancı 
was arrested and briefly imprisoned 
in 2016, you and PHR stood by her side 
– quite literally at her court hearings – 
calling global attention to her case and 
demanding that the charges be dropped. 
But the struggle is far from over.  
Dr. Fincancı, whom we honored at our 2017 
gala for her courageous work to end torture 
and ill-treatment, still faces a 30-month 
prison sentence for signing a peace 
petition in 2016. The Turkish government 
continues to arrest and persecute But Turkey’s Doctors Are Still Under Assault 
thousands of health professionals, 
academics, and many others who speak 
out in favor of fairness, justice, and respect 
for human rights. Punishing them isn’t 
just a blow against them individually, it is 
an attack against human rights globally. 
With your help, we will continue to resist 
attempts to silence these brave advocates. 
We know it works. When a PHR team met 
with Dr. Fincancı and other persecuted 
activists this summer, she told them:
 “It is the solidarity from PHR that has 
helped us to have these results at the 
courts. If I have been released from jail 
after only 10 days, it was because of the 
support of PHR that [has made] … the 
government feel the solidarity from the 
world…. With international support and 
solidarity, we managed to be successful  
at the end.” 
 “It is a basic duty of our 
profession to provide care in  
a non-partisan way. The 
Turkish Government is sending 
a message to civil society to 
undermine the idea of free 
expression and the delivery of 
medical care to protestors.”
Vincent Iacopino, MD, PhD
PHR Senior Medical Advisor 
Turkish human rights activist and PHR partner S ebnem Korur Fincancı, MD after an Istanbul court acquitted her in July of making  
“terror propaganda” for Kurdish militants.
Photo: Ozan Kose/AFP/Getty Images
7 Physicians for Human Rights phr.org PHRecord Fall 2019Speaking Up for Syria on the Global Stage
PHR’s documentation of crimes in 
the Syrian conflict catapulted onto 
the world stage this summer when we 
presented our findings and analysis of 
attacks on health at the United Nations 
Security Council – a rare opportunity 
for a non-governmental organization. 
From her seat in the Council room, and in 
front of a global audience, PHR Director 
of Policy Susannah Sirkin delivered an 
impassioned condemnation of the Syrian 
government’s relentless strikes on medical 
facilities and personnel and demanded an 
immediate investigation into recent attacks 
on Syria’s embattled northwest. “The 
ongoing assault on health care facilities 
and personnel has been a … deliberate, 
inhumane, illegal strategy of war,” she told 
the gathering. “Each of the attacks on a 
functioning health facility is a war crime. 
Taken together, these assaults constitute 
crimes against humanity.”  When the representative of the Russian 
Federation, Syria’s ally, tried to discredit 
her report, Sirkin struck back, refuting his 
criticism with the hard facts of PHR’s rigorous 
research: 16 confirmed attacks on medical 
facilities since Syria and Russia escalated 
their campaign in the northwest in April –  
a flagrant violation of  international law. Since 
the start of the conflict, PHR has documented 
fully 578 attacks on at least 350 separate 
health facilities and the killing of 910 medical 
personnel – more than 90 percent of them 
assessed to have been committed by Syrian 
government and allied forces. 
Sirkin’s statement was repeatedly praised by 
Security Council members and  cited more 
than 200 times in the global media. Two days 
after PHR’s testimony, the UN Secretary- 
General established a Board of Inquiry to 
investigate attacks on health care facilities in 
Syria – resounding evidence of the power of 
advocacy, and proof that your outrage against 
these heinous war crimes is being heard.
For more than 30 years, Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) 
has used science and the uniquely credible voices of medical 
professionals to document and call attention to severe human 
rights violations around the world. PHR uses its investigations 
and expertise to advocate for persecuted health workers and 
facilities under attack, prevent torture, document mass atrocities, 
and hold those who violate human rights accountable.
phr.orgShared in the 1997 
Nobel Peace Prize
PHR received the highest Charity Navigator rating for the fifth 
consecutive year, a distinction held by only 17 percent of the  
1.1 million charities that are rated annually.
PHR’s Susannah Sirkin (lower 
right) presents PHR’s findings 
at the United Nations Security 
Council on July 30, 2019. 
Photo: UK Mission to the UN