  By John Jay Powers  
The word “Namaste ” is from the San-
skrit language and means “I recognize 
the great goodness in you. ” 
Yoga is not a religion. It can facilitate 
spiritual beliefs and practices, but in 
and of itself is nothing more than a dis-
cipline. Yoga is easy to learn, and its 
main purpose is to coordinate (and 
thereby improve) the functions of the 
body and mind. Yoga is a set of spe-
cialized exercises that strengthen a 
person ’s mental and physical capabili-
ties. There is nothing mysterious about 
it. 
Yoga is many things. It is a philosophy, 
a way of life, a discipline, a perspec-
tive, an exercise, and a set of values. 
Among the many components of yoga 
is the continuity of positions. This can 
be called a sequence of positions 
(vinyasa), and it lends a sense of indi-
viduality to each practitioner of yoga.  
Although the sequence of positions is a 
matter of individual choice, there are 
certain guidelines that should be fol-
lowed. For example, a position that 
involves a forward bend should be fol-
lowed by a position that involves a 
backward bend. The primary goal is to 
balance components.  The main goal is to achieve a higher 
state of consciousness, awareness and 
understanding so that the practitioner 
can enjoy a better life and become a 
better human being (Samadhi).  
Most people go about their daily lives 
under the spell of incomplete under-
standing (avidya). But there is the pos-
sibility of developing a clear and proper 
understanding (vidya), which is a more 
substantial understanding that leads to 
overall peace of mind.  
These lessons involve what is called 
“royal yoga ” (raja yoga). There are 
three primary parts of this yoga: dia-
phragmatic breathing with ujjayi and 
mula banda (pranayama), practice of 
positions (hatha), and meditation 
(dhyana).  
Diaphragmatic Breathing  
Proper diaphragmatic breathing is the 
cornerstone of yoga, and this is why it 
is the most important thing of all to 
learn.  
In the human anatomy, the diaphragm 
is a thin sheet of muscle that separates 
the abdominal cavity from the chest 
cavity. It is located at about the bottom 
of the sternum and runs horizontal 
across the torso.  When the abdomen (the belly) goes 
outward, the diaphragm is pulled down 
and the lungs fill with air. When the 
abdomen is contracted and pulled in-
ward, the diaphragm is pushed up and 
the lungs empty out the air.  
Use your belly to breathe, and breathe 
through your nose. When inhaling, let 
your belly relax and bow outward (You 
can even push it out a little bit). When 
you begin to exhale, tighten the mus-
cles in your belly and pull your belly 
inward to force the air out of your 
lungs.  
Over the next two or three days, stop 
whatever you are doing several times 
each day and practice this breathing. 
Take ten breaths each time and count 
them on the exhale.  
Practice of Positions  
When performing each pose in the fol-
lowing sequence, be sure to implement 
the diaphragmatic breathing method, 
aiming to achieve ten full breaths in 
each pose: not too fast and not too 
slow!  
The positions in yoga are called 
“asanas ” and they have purposes other 
than stretching. In fact, stretching is 
probably the least important part of  
John Jay Powers spent a total of 25 years in solitary confinement. Originally arrested and jailed for bank robbery in 
1989, Powers made a nonviolent escape attempt at a time when he feared that his life was in danger in prison. He was 
subsequently sent to the federal supermax facility known as ADX Florence in Colorado, where he spent 12 years in ex-
treme isolation and was driven to several desperate acts of self -harm. He was finally transferred, along with several oth-
er men, following a legal challenge to the practice of holding people with mental health issues at ADX. Powers is current-
ly incarcerated at USP Florence, the maximum security facility located in the same complex.  
In a recent telephone interview with Solitary Watch, Powers described the role that yoga has played in his life during his 
incarceration. He first learned about yoga while being held at USP Lewisburg in Pennsylvania. “It’s a really old prison, 
probably well over 100 years old now, ” he said, “and I was being held in the basement...in a single solitary cell. And an-
other guy had a book that he didn ’t want, so he gave it to me. ” It turned out to be a book on sports yoga, and it interested 
Powers enough that when he had the opportunity, he continued to read and learn as much as he could. Powers said that 
yoga would later save his life on numerous occasions. He remembers times at ADX when he was “wallowing in a type of 
despair that would have been hard to come out of ” if he didn ’t have yoga to help him survive. He still practices every 
day. What follows are excerpts from the guidebook written and illustrated by Powers, intended especially for people in 
prison, called Yoga in 7 Easy Lessons . —Valerie Kiebala  
2 yoga training. One of the most im-
portant  
purposes of yoga is to gradually re-
move whatever keeps the life force 
energy (prana) from flowing freely 
throughout the body and mind of the 
practitioner (“yogi” for men; “yogini ” for 
women).  
Remember: Each lesson should be 
practiced at least ten times before 
moving on to the next lesson. There 
are good reasons for this kind of self -
discipline.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Mountain Pose (Tadasana)  
This standing position is very easy to 
perform but it is essential to any yoga 
practice.  
Stand with your feet more than shoul-
der width apart, and be sure to bend 
your knees and lower yourself into a 
solid stance. Put your hands together 
over the center of your chest (mudra) 
and keep your back straight. Get a 
nice ten full breaths right here.  
One thing to begin now is a kind of 
breath control at your throat (ujjayi). 
When you exhale, tighten the throat 
and make it a little bit harder for the air 
to pass. It should make a slight sound 
like “AHHH. ” 
 
 2. Front Forward Bend (Uttanasana)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In this position you bend over, place 
your hands on the front of your legs 
and stretch the back and the ham-
strings. At first, this position will usual-
ly be a bit tight. Remember to go easy!  
Your backbone will be stretched out, 
and the back of your legs will become 
flexible. It is important to relax and 
breathe into the position - and not to 
try to go too far too fast! Get ten full 
breaths. Whatever you do, do not 
bounce up and down!  
3. Chair Pose (Ukatasana)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In this position you have your legs 
together and squat down as if you are 
going to sit in a chair. Your hands are 
either out in front of you, raised in the 
air slightly forward, or on your hips (if 
you cannot hold your arms out).  Once again, when you strike the cor-
rect position, do not move around. 
You must keep the body still in the 
position. And then get your ten full 
breaths from this position.  
This position does strengthen the hip 
and knee joints, the thigh muscles, 
and the ankles. It tends to gather and 
focus attention, concentration and bal-
ance. The weight is kept mostly on the 
heels and the leg muscles are con-
tracted. The feet should be pointing 
straight ahead.  
4. Downward Dog (Adho Muka 
Savsana)  
 
 
You can begin on your hands and 
knees and lift your tailbone into the air. 
Your arms are left straight out in front 
of you with the weight mostly on your 
palms.  
This position is commonly known as 
“downward -facing dog. ” (It and “up-
ward -facing dog ” are probably the best 
known of all yoga positions). If the 
weight on the hands and wrists is too 
much, you can begin the position on 
your elbows and keep your knees 
slightly bent. The main focus is keep-
ing your head below your waist.  
You will probably want to begin with 
five breaths on this position and work 
your way up to ten during you prelimi-
nary practices.  
Eventually you will be able to keep 
your arms and legs straight and mas-
ter this position. Like anything else, 
you will get better at it with practice.  
 
 
 
 
3  5. Upward Dog (Urdha Mukha 
Svanasana)  
Keep your hands and feet planted 
and lower your pelvis area to the 
floor. Your feet, legs and hips should 
all be in contact with the floor, mus-
cles contracted (particularly the but-
tocks). Your upper body should be 
held up by your arms and your back 
should be bent. Your head should be 
bent back, and you should be looking 
up at the ceiling.  
Again, you can tell that this is a con-
traction because a lot of your muscles 
are flexed or tightened. The intra -
abdominal pressure is increased, 
which squeezes internal organs and 
glands. Remember that once you get 
set in a position, do not move!  
Now get your five breaths, making the 
“AHHH ” or “HAAA ” sound in your 
throat and locking the perineum mus-
cles on the exhale. (Note: If you feel 
dizzy, it is usually a sign that you need 
to drink more water in the hours prior 
to practice.)  
6. Child’s Pose (Balasana)  
You will move directly from the previ-
ous position by moving your buttocks 
down toward your heels. Your arms 
are stretched out in front of you, and 
your forehead is resting on the floor. 
Your body weight is mostly on your 
knees.  
This is a peaceful and relaxing posi-
tion. It calms the central nervous sys-
tem and balances the life force energy 
throughout the body.  
Your sequence of positions may very 
well change over time as you develop your personal practice. You will need 
to experiment in order to see how cer-
tain positions feel to you and how they 
fit together in your sequence. (Note: 
You can begin a sequence with any 
position, really.)  
7. Bridge Pose (Setu Banda Sar-
vangasana)  
 
For this position, you begin by lying 
flat on your back with your knees bent 
and your feet flat to the floor beneath 
them, hands pressed against the floor 
at your side. And now you simply lift 
your waist up as high as you can and 
hold right there.  
The weight is on your feet and shoul-
ders. (Never put the weight on your 
neck or head in this position.) If you 
have trouble holding a firm position, 
you can use your hands to help sup-
port your weight by placing them on 
your waist.  
Again, you are likely going to perform 
better by beginning with five breath 
repetitions. It will be relatively easy, 
however, to work your way up to the 
full ten breath repetitions you want. 
Remember that yoga is not a race; it is 
all about using simple techniques in 
combination and getting these right by 
way of practice.  
So, once you have secured a stable 
position, go ahead and get your ten 
breaths in.  
8. Halasana (Plow Pose)  For this position, you begin by lying on 
your back with your hands pressing 
against the floor at your side. Then 
you sort of lift your legs and hips and 
swing them up and over your head. 
(Note: Your legs may hang in the air 
or your feet may touch the floor. In the 
beginning, your knees will be bent to 
relieve pressure.)  
You want to be careful with this posi-
tion that you do not place too much 
pressure on your head and neck or 
lower back. This position is a tough 
one, but it is not so tough that you 
cannot master it. Just go easy!  
Once you secure your position, try not 
to move. The idea is to relax into it 
and engage the diaphragmatic breath-
ing. Go ahead and get your ten 
breaths and then roll back out of the 
position nice and easy.  
Meditation  
Yoga is meditation (dhyana). The ba-
sics of meditation involve techniques 
for keeping the body still and the mind 
quiet. There are many forms of medi-
tation, but all of them seek to bring 
about an altered state of mind.  
The main idea is to focus your mental 
attention on the breath itself as it trav-
els in and out of your body. Keep the 
inhale about the same length as the 
exhale so that you get a good bal-
ance. (Note: Be sure to exhale fully so 
that you expel the air in the very bot-
tom of your lungs).  
You are not trying to think of anything 
at all. You want your mind to be blank 
because this is the action that is going 
to expand your consciousness. When 
you are able to maintain a relatively 
blank mind for more than ten breaths, 
you will be ready to add more. The 
goal is to slowly work your way up to 
50 or 100 breaths. You will be able to 
accomplish this by adding five or ten 
breaths at a time. (Warning: You will 
need to maintain proper breathing and 
clarity of mind for at least five consec-
utive practices before being eligible to 
increase the number.)  
The cleansing and purification of all 
physical systems and mental channels 
is the main goal of yoga: nothing 
more, and nothing less.  
4 By A bhajita Maitreya Prakashananda  
If you ’re looking for God, you ’re in luck! 
God is EVERYwhere and in EVERY-
thing; and EVERYwhere and in EVE-
RYthing that IS/NOT! Just keep look-
ing…However, if you ’re looking only in 
a temple, a monastery, a church, a 
mosque, an ashram, etc., you may find 
yourself disappointed at each and eve-
ry stop.  
The correct teaching you ’ll find will 
consist of looking for God wherever 
you are, regardless of where that might 
be, even in your own home, or in a 
tree!  God is there. Just keep looking. 
Don’t give up … Remember: sit up!  
Find a way to sit so that you can bal-
ance all your body weight on the base 
of your spine: the tailbone.  Breathe.  
Balance. Relax. Breathe.  Let all your 
thoughts come back to breathing.  Con-
centrate.  
A thought comes. See it. Let it go. Re-
turn the mind to the breath.  Balance. 
Relax. Breathe.  Stop the mind from 
thinking and read that which is be-
tween thoughts. There you will find 
God. Watch the breath. Witness the 
breath. Peacefully abide in the breath.  
Your mind will drift. There may be 
times you feel you simply cannot sit 
still. It ’s okay. Be patient. Do not fret.  
Get up. Stretch.  Slowly walk around.  
Stay mindful of the breath. Step. 
Breathe. Step. Breathe. With each 
step, focus the mind on one thing: 
breathing.  
When you feel like sitting back down, 
remember: balance the whole body on 
the tailbone: relax and breathe. Focus. Breathe. Focus. Breathe. Always re-
turn to the breath.  No use in trying to 
breathe a particular way. Simply watch 
the breath come and go as it pleases.  
Be the seer and not the seen. Quiet 
the chattering thoughts that disturb 
your focus and bring the mind back to 
witnessing the breath enter the body of 
its own accord, then exit the body all 
on its own. Follow the breath. Allow the 
body to relax and balance itself as you 
sit quietly upon the tailbone. Breathe.  
At some point, you may get agitated 
and/or fidgety. Stay calm and relax. 
This will pass with patience.  You may 
come to a stage where you ’re totally 
relaxed and feeling fine and start get-
ting very bored. Good!  When you 
reach the boredom stage, you will find 
that breaking through it will take all the 
focus and concentration you can mus-
ter to get past it. Stay with the breath.  
If you persevere, you shall discover a 
state of being we call “shamatha ” or 
“peaceful abiding. ” There, you will find 
God. As if God could get “lost,” eh?
And it gets even better! The more you 
maintain in this state of being, the 
more you ’ll want to because the expe-
rience of shamatha is only the begin-
ning. There ’s more.  
However, with such knowledge comes 
great responsibility. You must PRAC-
TICE diligently if you wish to experi-
ence the joy and contentment of which 
I explain here. Be patient with yourself 
and cease expectations. Do not antici-
pate what you think might happen 
next; simply stay focused on the 
breath, relax, and balance, and every-
thing will fall in place just as it ’s meant to. No amount of effort is ever wasted. 
Practice unfolds differently for every-
one. We all have our own paths to find 
and follow – even if we are all on the 
same map. The Way is originally per-
fect and all pervading.  
“If you want to respect yourself, if you 
want to improve yourself, if you want to 
experience the joy of your own inner 
Self, you can do that anywhere, even 
in prison. ” —Swami Muktananda  
Reading about meditative techniques 
will help you analyze and understand 
the purpose for such knowledge. How-
ever, all the intellectualizing in the 
world can only give you someone 
ELSE ’S version of their experience in 
how that method or technique worked 
for them. You may find similarities in 
these explanations, which is good, but 
until you ’ve had your own experience, 
nothing anyone can say will truly de-
fine the extent and degree of the exact 
experience you ’ll undergo as you work 
through the stages these teachers tell 
you about.  
As for my own personal experience 
with meditation, I must say, it saved 
my sanity as I dealt with years of harsh 
and inhumane conditions in solitary 
confinement.  
Having witnessed the results of solitary 
firsthand, I can honestly say that the 
effort one puts into meditation may not 
only save your sanity, it could very well 
save your life … 
For information on mindfulness medita-
tion while in solitary confinement, write 
to: Mindfulness Peace Project, 6800 
79th Street, Suite 200, Niwot, CO 
80503  
 
Jeremy Ahba Guidry is  incarcerated in the Louisiana State Penitentiary at  Angola. He reports having spent more 
than seven years in solitary confinement, in stretches ranging from 90 days to three years, mostly for nonviolent rule 
violations such as  “having clothes out on my bed, ‘stealing ’ food out of the kitchen, [and] having cigarettes in unauthor-
ized areas of the prison. ”  
Guidry has received 12 years of Siddha Yoga guidance from the  Prison Project of the  SYDA Foundation (PO Box 
99140, Emeryville, CA 94662) and received the Buddhist name used below. At LSP,  he organized a volunteer Buddhist 
meditation program that grew from nine incarcerated participants to 60.  According to Guidry, prison officials terminated 
the program in 2018 without providing him a clear reason.  Guidry continues to practice Buddhist meditation and has 
written a meditation guide for our readers. In  a letter, he  compared the practice of meditation to the practice needed to 
become a professional boxer. “We have a saying in the boxing world: Never back down. Never give up. Never quit. If 
you apply this to your meditation practice, you shall find whatever it is you ’re seeking. ”  —Valerie Kiebala  