Every  year , JDI supporters share 
holiday greetings with prisoner 
rape survivors — gifts of hope that 
mean the world to those who re -
ceive them. This holiday season, thanks to 
many of you, JDI sent more than 11,000 
messages to survivors who are still behind 
bars, an unprecedented outpouring of 
compassion.
Participating in the Words of Hope  holiday 
card campaign is a powerful act of solidar -
ity with the countless men and women 
who have been sexually abused in the 
government’s custody. Boa Smith, who was released from prison in November, ex -
plained, “Getting a card might not seem like 
a big deal, but to people who are locked up, it 
means everything.”
More than a few survivors credit these simple 
messages with saving their lives. One such 
survivor is Dwight, a gay man who was raped 
repeatedly by other inmates at a Texas facil -
ity. Dwight has struggled with severe depres -
sion; at his lowest point, he contemplated 
suicide. But today, drawing hope and cour -
age from holiday messages, he has resolved 
to keep fighting for his rights. He wrote: Your Words, Their Hope
The Kindness of JDI Supporters — Included in 11,000 
Messages of Hope — Inspires Prisoner Rape Survivorsaction update                                                                                       april 2013
just detention international  april 2013 | action  updateJDI Survivor Council member Boa Smith, who served 29 years in prison before her release in 
late 2012, knows first-hand how messages from JDI supporters can change an inmate’s life.See Messages of Hope, continued on page 3Thank  you, jdi supporters , for show -
ing your extraordinary compassion 
for survivors of prisoner rape. Your 
holiday greetings — more than 
11,000 overall — changed people’s lives. So 
many survivors wrote us to say how your words 
restored their feelings of self-worth and dig -
nity, and gave them 
the strength to keep 
living. 
The need for all of 
us to keep fighting 
for the basic rights 
of inmates was made 
painfully clear in 
February, when the 
National Sheriffs’ 
Association (NSA) 
named Los Angeles County Sheriff Lee 
Baca “Sheriff of the Year.” Yes, that’s right; 
NSA has chosen to give its highest honor to 
a sheriff who is infamous for turning a blind 
eye to rampant physical and sexual violence 
in his jails, and for refusing to take responsi -
bility for atrocious abuses committed by his 
own staff. 
Worse still, Sheriff Baca serves on NSA’s 
Board of Directors — the governing body 
of the very organization that has proclaimed 
him the best in the country! For all the sheriffs 
across the country who are principled, and 
who are working hard to uphold inmates’ 
right to dignity, this is a slap in the face. 
I hope you will join the petition launched 
by JDI Survivor Council member Frank 
Mendoza (see page 2), who was raped by 
one of Sheriff Baca’s deputies, asking NSA 
to rescind this award. 
Lovisa Stannow 
Executive Director
EJDI survivor  Coun Cil M eMber Nicole 
Garza is one of the country’s top experts 
on inmate peer education. Nicole is also an 
inmate herself, serving time at the California 
Institution for Women (CIW). Amazingly, 
serving time didn’t stop her from appearing 
action update                     
Survivors Show Leadership at Trainings   
just detention international  as a guest speaker at a recent national train -
ing for corrections staff. The training was 
part of a groundbreaking series led by JDI 
and sponsored by the National PREA Re -
source Center.   
“Nicole earned the respect of everyone who 
heard her speak — not just for her courage, but 
for her expertise and leadership,” said Lt. Frank 
Esqueda, the PREA Coordinator at CIW.  
“During the webinar, I didn’t feel like I was 
in prison — I felt like I was part of a panel,” 
said Nicole. “It was incredibly important for 
me to share what I know about sexual abuse 
prevention — and even more important that 
everyone listened.” 
 Nicole Garza, a JDI Survivor Council memberJDI has laun Ched a petition urging the 
National Sheriffs’ Association to rescind 
its decision to name Los Angeles Coun -
ty Sheriff Lee Baca as its “Sheriff of the 
Year.” Under Sheriff Baca’s watch, abusive 
conditions, such as sexual assault, have been 
allowed to thrive in the county’s detention fa -
cilities. Giving him this honor shows an utter 
disregard for the human rights of inmates — 
and denigrates the countless sheriffs nation -
wide who work hard to uphold these rights. 
Advocates, journalists, and prisoners them -
selves have documented hundreds of cases 
of abuse committed by Los Angeles Sheriff ’s 
Department officials against inmates. Some 
of the worst crimes were carried out by gangs 
of sheriff ’s deputies, which used rape and 
excessive force against inmates to instill a 
climate of terror. 
JDI Survivor Council member Frank Men -
doza has direct knowledge of the brutal treat -
ment of detainees by jail officials; in 2006, 
Frank was raped by a deputy at the Twin 
Towers Jail. When he tried to get help, staff 
ignored him. “The Los Angeles County Lee Baca, “Sheriff of the Year”? 
Not on our Watch
Sherriff ’s Department 
obviously failed in its 
duty to protect me,” 
said Frank. 
Sheriff Baca has 
faced extensive criti -
cism for failing to 
keep inmates safe. In 
September 2012, the 
Citizens’ Commission 
on Jail Violence placed 
the blame firmly on 
his shoulders, citing a “failure of leadership.” 
What’s more, a federal grand jury is review -
ing whether department officials blocked 
an FBI investigation into the violence at the 
county’s jails. 
By any standard, Sheriff Baca does not deserve 
his profession’s most prestigious honor. 
Fortunately, the National Sheriffs’ Association 
has time to do the right thing — the award 
ceremony is not until June 2013. Please join 
survivors like Frank Mendoza in signing JDI’s 
petition demanding that it reverse its decision. 
Visit www .justdetention.org/not-on-our-watch .Los Angeles County 
Sheriff Lee Baca
Photo: AP/Reed SaxonThanks  to advo Cates and survivors, 
national awareness around sexual 
abuse in detention is growing. Yet 
the gulf between the reality of life 
behind bars and public perception of it 
remains vast. JDI believes that this lack 
of understanding is an obstacle to ending 
the crisis of sexual violence. Throughout 
April, in honor of Sexual Assault Aware -
ness Month, JDI will feature dynamic 
infographics that present the facts — and 
shatter the myths — about prisoner rape. 
THE FACTS:
HALF  of all sexual 
abuse is perpetrated 
by staff members.1
ONE IN EIGHT  
youth behind 
bars is sexually 
abused.2
Women are THREE 
TIMES  more likely 
than men to be 
sexually abused by 
another inmate.3
LGBT inmates 
and survivors of 
sexual abuse in 
the community 
are the MOST 
VULNERABLE.4
Sexual abuse 
behind bars is 
PREVENTABLE.5
For more information, visit www.justdetention.org.The Truth about  
Prisoner Rape3you for your love and support during the 
holiday season. It is very easy to get caught 
up in the loneliness and isolation of prison. 
I just want to thank everyone involved with 
JDI for your heartfelt reminders that it takes 
all of us to band together to make a difference 
in the fight against injustice and inequality!”
Harold, an inmate in a Pennsylvania facil -
ity who was sexually abused by staff, told us: 
“Thank you and all of the supporters at JDI, 
as well as supporters worldwide, for the great 
cards! I was simply floored when I received 
all those cards. Thank you all again, it really 
lifted my spirits.”
These men and women will continue to face 
obstacles as they heal from abuse. Thanks to 
you, however, they won’t have to overcome 
them alone. Messages of Hope   
continued from page 1action update                     
april 2013 | action  update“Honestly, my life is owed to you, JDI’s sup -
porters. Knowing that you’re thinking about 
my plight, about my welfare, inspires me to 
never give up.” 
Dwight was hardly alone in expressing his 
deep gratitude for JDI supporters. Rodney, 
an openly gay inmate who has been raped 
many times at two Louisiana prisons, wrote: 
“The holidays are extremely tough in prison. 
It is especially rough for those of us who 
have no one. It meant everything to me to 
receive the cards and well wishes. The abun -
dant value of a kind word was apparent in 
my tears. I appreciate the words and the 
hope. You are a reminder that there is still 
so much of it.” 
 
Cynthia, a survivor of repeated sexual assaults 
by staff at an Oregon facility, wrote: “Thank THE   FigHT To  
SToP PRiSoNER  RaPE  
WoRLdWidE
Prisoner rape is a global crisis. as such, it 
requires a global response. Jdi works with 
advocates and policymakers in Botswana, guyana, india, Jamaica, Mexico, the Philip
-
pines, and the United Kingdom — in addi -
tion to its major programs in the U.S. and South africa. 
in January, Jdi released an international 
summary that outlines why sexual abuse 
happens in detention facilities worldwide 
— and how it can be stopped. The summary 
is currently available in eight of the world’s 
major languages : arabic, Chinese, French, 
Hindi, indonesian, Portuguese, Russian, 
and Spanish. Visit  www.justdetention.
org/international_summary to down-
load this document in your language.  Messages from JDI supporters have touched the lives of many prisoner rape survivors, including  (clockwise from left): Rodney (raped by inmates at two 
facilities); Cynthia (sexually abused repeatedly by staff ); Ophelia (sexually assaulted repeatedly by inmates and staff );  Joe (raped by his cellmate); and 
Harold (sexually abused by staff ).
just detention international 
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los angeles, C a 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400
Fax: (213) 384-1411
East Coast office
1900 L Street NW,  Suite 601
Washington, dC 20036
Tel: (202) 506-3333
Fax: (202) 506-7971
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.org
4just detention international  april 2013 | action  updateone year  after  she arrived in the 
U.S. to seek asylum, Esmeralda 
Soto was raped in an immigration 
detention center. A transgender 
woman, Esmeralda had fled Mexico, where 
she was sexually assaulted many times, in -
cluding while in jail. 
At the U.S. facility, the man who raped Es -
meralda was also the man responsible for her 
safety — in this case, someone who worked 
for the Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS). Later, Esmeralda said, “It was dif -
ficult to comprehend how a federal employee 
could abuse his authority in such a flagrant 
and appalling manner.” 
Esmeralda’s ordeal happened at the end of 2003 
— nearly a decade ago. Since then, Esmeralda 
has remained committed to fighting for the 
human rights of immigration detainees. It has 
often been an uphill struggle. Yet Esmeralda 
pushed forward, sharing her story with policy -
makers and members of Congress, attempting 
to persuade them to change course. At last, Esmeralda’s calls are being heard.  
In December, in response to a landmark 
presidential directive — which was largely 
the result of significant pressure from JDI, 
Esmeralda, and other advocates — DHS 
released draft standards to eliminate rape in 
all of its immigration detention and holding 
facilities. After a public comment period, the 
standards are now back with DHS, which is 
under pressure from both the White House 
and Congress to issue final regulations 
quickly. 
The DHS draft standards are strong overall, 
including many of the basic provisions that 
JDI has insisted upon for years. They also 
have several weaknesses, however. Most no -
tably, the draft allows many contract facili -
ties — where most immigration detainees are 
held — to delay implementation for decades, 
or indefinitely. The draft also fails to give de -
tainees adequate protection from retaliatory 
deportation and from sexual abuse during 
transportation. 
JDI spelled out these concerns and others in 
its public comments, submitted with a group 
of allied organizations. Many JDI support -
ers sent their own comments to DHS, asking 
that it keep intact the parts of the draft that 
are strong — and fix the parts that are weak. 
“By issuing strong draft regulations, DHS 
has shown that it is serious about preventing 
sexual violence in its facilities,” said Lovisa 
Stannow, JDI’s Executive Director. “But the 
final standards must address the concerns 
raised by JDI and its allies. If DHS does not 
make the necessary changes, hundreds of 
thousands of people will remain at grave risk 
for sexual abuse.”
“When I was in a DHS facility, it wasn’t the 
case that immigration detainees were safe 
from sexual abuse — and, sadly, it’s still not 
the case today,” said Esmeralda. “Right now, 
DHS has a chance to do the right thing and 
commit to protecting the people in its 
custody.” Now is the Time to Protect  
immigration detainees  
Esmeralda Soto, a JDI Survivor Council 
member, survived sexual abuse while in an 
immigration detention facility. Jdi Welcomes New 
Survivor Council  
Members
Photo: Tamela KempJDI’s Courageous  Survivor Council mem -
bers help lead the fight against prisoner 
rape by working with JDI to share their 
experiences publicly, train corrections of -
ficials, and advocate for meaningful policy 
reforms. With the addition of three new 
members — Joe Booth, Michelle Norswor -
thy, and Boa Smith — the Council is poised 
to become an even stronger force for pro -
tecting the safety of people behind bars.   
Joe Booth, a survivor of repeated sexual 
assaults by his cellmate, is an outspoken 
champion for the human rights of inmates. 
An openly gay man who lives with HIV, 
Joe has written about his experience be -
hind bars for national media outlets and 
helped train corrections staff. 
Michelle Norsworthy  is a transsexual 
woman who was assaulted while incarcer -
ated at a men’s prison. She was one of the 
first PREA inmate peer educators at her 
prison and, after being transferred, helped 
launch a peer education program at her 
current facility.  
Boa Smith, who served 29 years in prison 
before her release in late 2012, survived 
sexual abuse and harassment prior to and 
during her incarceration. While behind 
bars, Boa was a PREA and HIV/AIDS 
peer educator, teaching inmates about 
their right to be free from sexual violence.