
Frank  Mendoza  is one of my heroes.
Sitting next to Mendoza at JDI’s Con-
gressional briefing, I watched his hands 
shake, pearls of sweat forming on his 
brow. Although nervous about testifying before 
such an audience, he was determined to do it. 
When his turn came, Mendoza spoke clearly 
and powerfully. In that moment, I admired 
him so very much — for his courage, his 
dignity, and his insistence that no one else 
should ever have to go through what he did. 
“I lost my job at a law firm and was arrested 
for public drunkenness,” Mendoza explained. 
“I had never been arrested before. I was 
scared of other inmates — I did not know at 
the time that I had more reason to fear the 
Los Angeles jail staff.” 
“The abusive officer entered my cell, beat me, 
and raped me. When the officer on the next 
shift saw me naked and bloodied in my cell, 
he asked what happened. I told him I was 
raped and he just told me to get dressed. Even 
though I was never convicted of a crime, I re -
ceived a life sentence of pain and hurt.”
Nobody who heard Mendoza speak will ever 
forget him. And he will never forget those 
still behind bars, struggling to keep safe. 
Thank you everyone, for continuing to support 
our work!
Lovisa Stannow  
Executive Director On June 23, 2011, JDI’s Survi -
vor Council members showed 
again that they will not stand by 
idly in the face of government 
dithering. Highlighting the one-year an -
niversary of Attorney General Eric Hold -
er’s failure to finalize national standards 
mandated by the Prison Rape Elimination 
Act, eight courageous survivors of prisoner 
rape descended on Washington, DC. On 
the agenda: meetings with Congressional 
staffers and a Congressional briefing about 
sexual abuse in detention. 
Survivor Troy Isaac’s message for Julia Mas -
simino, Chief of Staff for Rep. Howard 
Berman (D-CA), was clear and concise. “I’m here because I need your help to stop rape 
in detention.” Afterward, Isaac reflected: “She 
listened, she really listened, and she knew so 
much about the Prison Rape Elimination Act. 
I think I made a difference today.” Isaac was 
abused repeatedly while in juvenile detention 
and adult prisons in California; his first assault 
took place when he was 12. 
Another Survivor Council member, Jan Las -
tocy, met with staff in Reps. Dan Benishek’s 
(R-MI) and Nancy Pelosi’s (D-CA) offices 
and spoke at JDI’s Congressional briefing. 
She described her two days in Washington, 
DC as “something I’ll always remember. I 
was proud to be able to share my experiences. Survivors to Eric Holder:  
End Rape in Detention Now
Members of JDI’s Survivor Council in Washington, DC
for Congressional Meetings and Briefingaction update                                                                                       october 2011
Left: Jan Lastocy, who was raped repeatedly by an officer in a Michigan prison, getting ready for 
her presentation at JDI’s Congressional briefing in Washington, DC. Right: Survivor Cecilia 
Chung, who was raped in a San Francisco jail, embraces Frank Mendoza, who was raped in a 
Los Angeles jail, after Mendoza’s presentation. Photos: Tamela KempSee Survivor Council, continued on page 3Lovisa Stannow and Frank Mendoza.
just detention international  october 2011  | action  updateDenial : a psychological defense mecha -
nism in which confrontation with a per -
sonal problem or with reality is avoided 
by denying the existence of the problem 
or reality. (Merriam-Webster )
The septe Mber 15, 2011 hearings  of 
the Department of Justice’s Review 
Panel on Prison Rape were a stark 
reminder that official denial, which 
has allowed rampant sexual abuse in many 
prisons and jails to continue for decades, 
still exists despite powerful government data 
proving the magnitude of the problem.
The Review Panel on Prison Rape was cre -
ated by the Prison Rape Elimination Act, 
with the goal of publicizing best practices 
and systemic problems in U.S. corrections 
systems. Officials from Orleans Parish Pris -
on in Louisiana and Clallam County Jail in 
Washington had been called to Washington, 
DC to testify after surveys by the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics (BJS) found that their jails 
had shockingly high rates of sexual abuse.
These officials tried to call the BJS statistics 
into question, denying that their facilities 
had serious problems. Orleans Parish Prison 
officials claimed that inmates falsely reported 
abuse in return for “bags of cookies” offered 
by the survey administrators. This assertion action update                      
Review Panel on Prison Rape:
Jailers Call Prisoner Rape  
Cultural Delusion, like UFOs
AdaM was 30 years  old when he 
was arrested in New Orleans for 
nonviolent offenses. When placed     
in general population at Orleans 
Parish Prison, he was scared. As a gay man, 
he knew that he was likely to become a target 
for abuse by other inmates. He asked staff to 
keep him away from general population for 
his safety. But they said no.Adam’s worst fears were realized his first 
night in an overcrowded cell. He remembers 
his cellmates attacking him: “I called for help, 
but there were no guards around and no one 
responded to my screams. I refused to do what 
the inmate was telling me to do, but then he 
kicked me while another inmate held a knife 
to my back. I decided that I had better do 
what he wanted in order to save my life.”Testimony from Orleans Parish Prisonprompted lead BJS researcher Allen Beck 
to point out that there was no difference in 
average rates of sexual victimization between 
cookie and non-cookie facilities.
Clallam County Sheriff, Bill Benedict, went 
even further and equated inmates’ reports 
of sexual abuse to other “cultural delusions,” 
such as UFO sightings.  (Despite this, Sheriff 
Benedict later acknowledged that sexual 
assault does happen, and detailed steps his 
department is taking to fulfill the Panel’s 
recommendations.)
In stark contrast to those from Orleans Parish 
and Clallam County, officials from Miami-
Dade County Pre-Trial Detention Center in 
Florida — which also was found to have very 
high levels of sexual abuse — did not dispute 
the BJS numbers. Instead, they emphasized 
the many changes they have made at their 
facility since the survey results came out. 
Rather than denying their problems, they 
told the Justice Department that they had 
begun working with JDI to solve them. 
“The widely diverging testimony at the 
Review Panel hearings was a reminder of 
how far we’ve come, and how far we still have 
to go in ending sexual abuse in U.S. jails,” 
noted Chris Daley, JDI’s Deputy Executive 
Director. Miami-Dade and JDI 
Work Together to End 
Rape in Detention
JDI is pleased to announce the launch 
of a new project at the Miami-Dade 
County Pre-Trial Detention Center in 
Florida — a jail plagued by sexual abuse (see 
article to the left).
Large city jails tend to be noisy, crowded, 
and chaotic, with people cycling through for 
as little as a couple of hours. Straight off the 
streets, some detainees arrive under the in -
fluence of alcohol or other drugs, some still 
bleeding from a fight, and some having been 
homeless for weeks or months. 
Jails hold many inmates who are among the 
most vulnerable to sexual abuse: nonviolent, 
first-time detainees lacking even basic pris -
on savvy, often picked up for disorderly con -
duct, or failure to make bail — many never 
even charged with a crime.
For many of these detainees, a couple of days 
in a local jail results in a lifetime of trauma. 
But sexual abuse, even in crowded jails, is not 
inevitable. On the contrary, such violence 
can be prevented through strong manage -
ment, sound policies, and proper training. 
Officials from Miami-Dade County have 
committed to working with JDI to imple -
ment such policies and training at their fa -
cilities, aiming to make the Miami-Dade 
County Pre-Trial Detention Center a mod -
el for large jails nationwide. 
Over the next two months, Adam was choked, 
set on fire, and repeatedly raped and beaten 
by other inmates. He filed six grievances, and 
turned in some 25 requests for medical help.
“Not only did the guards sit by and do 
nothing while I was being raped on a regular 
basis, they made it even worse by not helping 
me when I complained.”
just detention international  3My ability to prevent others from getting 
raped is the one positive consequence of my 
own nightmare.” Lastocy was raped several 
times a week for seven months by an officer 
in a Michigan state prison. 
In each Congressional meeting, JDI’s Survi -
vor Council members shared data about the 
prevalence of sexual violence in detention, of -
fered suggestions for how to end this abuse, 
informed staffers about the Attorney Gen -
eral’s missed deadline for adopting national 
standards, and asked that each Representa -
tive tell Attorney General Holder to bring a 
greater sense of urgency to his department’s 
protracted review process of the standards.
“These amazing advocates did much more 
than put a face on sexual abuse in detention,” 
said JDI’s Executive Director, Lovisa Stannow. Survivor Council   continued from page 1action update                      
216,600 and Counting  
June 23, 2011 marked the one-year 
anniversary of Attorney General 
Holder’s failure to meet the statu -
tory deadline for adopting national 
standards to end prisoner rape. 
That day, JDI launched a campaign 
— “216,600 and Counting” — high -
lighting the number of people who 
are sexually abused behind bars 
in the U.S. every year. This number 
comes from the Department of Jus -
tice’s own inmate surveys. 
Every day, JDI gets letters from sur -
vivors of rape behind bars. Every 
day, until the standards are ad -
opted, JDI will send the Attorney 
General a quote from one of those 
letters. Please help by sending your 
own e-mails to the Attorney Gener -
al, at www.justdetention.org . 
Clockwise from left: JDI’s Senior Program Officer Christine Kregg and Esmeralda Soto (raped in immigration detention), Garrett Cunningham (raped in 
a Texas state prison), Jan Lastocy and her husband John (Jan was raped repeatedly in a Michigan state prison), Hope Hernandez (raped in a Washington, 
DC jail), Kimberly Yates (raped in a federal prison) and Troy Isaac (raped in California youth and adult state facilities). Photos: Tamela Kemp 
“They provided facts, policy proposals, and 
first-hand wisdom. They reminded lawmak -
ers that, as members of Congress, they have 
a responsibility to do everything they can to 
protect inmates from abuse.”
While in Washington, DC, Survivor Council 
members also spent an afternoon developing 
policy recommendations for community rape 
crisis centers, with the aim of making their 
services more accessible to formerly incarcer -
ated survivors of sexual violence. 
And instead of taking a break between meet -
ings, they all sat down and wrote personal notes 
of hope to hundreds of survivors who remain 
incarcerated. “JDI helped save our lives. Now 
it’s our turn to help someone else go from de -
spair to hope,” explained Kimberly Yates, who 
was raped by a guard in a federal prison.
october 2011  | action  updatejust detention international  
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400
Fax: (213) 384-1411
East Coast Office
1900 L Street NW,  Suite 601
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: (202) 506-3333
Fax: (202) 506-7971
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.orgLetters from Survivors Daily Reminder of Horror – and Hope  
Can a letter  save a life? Just ask 
Martin, who was considering com -
mitting suicide after being raped re -
peatedly and sold from one gang to 
another in a Texas prison.
  
You want to know what the turning point was 
for me? It was the book JDI sent, Hope for 
Healing . Believe it or not, your book saved my 
life. Your caring saved my life. So thank you 
from the bottom of my heart.
  
JDI gets letters from people like Martin 
every day. Incarcerated survivors cannot call 
hotlines, cannot reach out to a trusted friend 
or family member, and cannot go online to 
find out about their rights or how they can 
heal. Most are forced to suffer in silence. 
JDI’s staff respond to each survivor letter by 
sending a packet with self-help information 
and a letter of encouragement from another 
survivor of rape behind bars. 
These packets from JDI are a lifeline for 
prisoner rape survivors who are scared, alone, 
trapped with their abusers, and desperate for 
help. Through a new campaign — “One Letter, One Life” — JDI is aiming to raise $216,600: 
$1 for each person who, like Martin, is sexually 
abused every year while in U.S. detention. 
The funds raised through “One Letter, One 
Life” will be used to: 
•  Provide information to survivors of rape 
behind bars, so that they know how to  
get help; 
•  Build peer education programs inside 
prisons, so that inmates can learn about 
their rights and become leaders in sexual 
abuse prevention; 
•  Help local rape crisis centers work with 
prisons to provide counseling to survivors, 
before and after their release; and 
•  Help survivors become powerful voices 
for change, so that no one else has to go 
through what Martin did, ever again.
Help JDI save a life today. For more infor -
mation about “One Letter, One Life,” visit 
www.justdetention.org.Campaign: One Letter, One Life
In September 2011, just like every 
month, JDI received scores of letters 
from prisoner rape survivors. Here 
are a few excerpts, illustrating the 
horror of sexual abuse in detention, but 
also the enormous impact of JDI’s work.
“Thank you, thank you, thank you for 
standing with us, caring about us, and 
helping us fight for justice.” Anonymous 
woman, abused by an officer in Indiana
“I was scared. Humiliated. So I didn’t come 
forward right away. Since I did come for -
ward it’s been hell. I’ve been treated badly 
by everyone from the warden to investi -
gators. I have received no mental health 
counseling at all. I’m mentally drained, 
paranoid, and scared for my life. No one seems to care.” Anonymous man, raped by 
an officer in Oklahoma
“Tears are building up in my eyes from the 
pain and humiliation. I’m shocked, angry, 
enraged, I don’t know what to do.” Alex -
ander, raped repeatedly by staff and inmates 
in California
“Every day, I take time out of my day to 
go over the packet you sent me. It’s my 
daily meditation to help me heal. I have 
no outside support, so I depend on orga -
nizations to give me hope. If it weren’t 
for the packet, I probably would have 
given up and gone on to hurt people, 
but the JDI packet gave me a change of 
heart.” Cornelius, gang raped by inmates in 
FloridaLetters from InsideJDI Top-Rated by
Charity Navigator and
GreatNonProfits.org
JDI is a top-rated nonprofit organization, 
both in terms of financial management 
and transparency. Once again, JDI has 
been awarded four stars by Charity Navi -
gator – the highest possible score. JDI has 
also earned a spot on GreatNonProfits.
org’s list of Top-Rated Social Justice Non -
profits, based on positive reviews by JDI 
supporters. 
As a small organization seeking to end an 
enormous human rights crisis, JDI takes 
pride in spending every dollar it raises 
with the utmost care. With 87 percent of 
funds going straight to program work, fi -
nancial statements posted on its website, 
and a strict policy of never selling or trad -
ing our donors’ personal information to 
anyone, ever, JDI lives up to its core values 
of accountability and transparency.
Follow JDI on Twitter: 
www.twitter.com/JustDetention
“Like” JDI on Facebook:
www.facebook.com/JDIonFB
4just detention international  october 2011  | action  update