Since it became law in 2003,  
PREA has been a powerful tool 
for making our prisons and jails 
safer, more transparent, and more 
accountable. But the law’s passage was also 
significant because it showed that JDI — 
backed by a movement of supporters, like 
you — could make real and lasting change 
happen through legislation. 
Today, JDI and our allies are spearheading 
another effort in Congress to protect pris -
oners’ human rights. Working with elected 
officials in both the House and the Sen -
ate, JDI helped craft a proposal to improve S 
We’re Back on Capitol Hill
See We’re Back on Capitol Hill, continued on page 2
The Justice For All Act will set a firm deadline for states to comply fully with PREA. If the Act 
passes, states like Wisconsin, where the person above is being held, will have to adopt all of PREA’s 
groundbreaking provisions within three years.Jdi has never shied away from a 
challenge. It was once unthinkable 
that Congress would pass a law to 
stop prisoner rape, but we fought for 
one anyway. Nor did it seem likely that 
we would be able to get into and help turn 
around troubled prisons and jails. But our 
fearlessness has paid off: Congress passed 
the Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA), 
and today  we are working side-by-side with 
corrections officials at dozens of facilities 
across the country. 
Georgia is a good 
example. We have 
just launched a proj -
ect there, with the 
state prison system. 
There is much work 
to be done in Geor -
gia’s prisons; the state 
is currently dealing 
with a federal investigation into conditions 
in its facilities. 
Yet, after a recent visit, I left Georgia feeling 
optimistic. The state’s PREA Coordinator 
recognizes that JDI’s expertise can help make 
their prisons safer. During a visit to one of 
the prisons, the warden stopped to say a kind 
word to every prisoner we passed. It’s a small 
thing, but it reveals a deeper commitment to 
seeing prisoners as people deserving of rights, 
not just as inmates with a number. 
We still have plenty of work left to do, in 
Georgia and in prisons everywhere. With 
your support, we will keep fighting until we 
end prisoner rape, once and for all. 
 
1action  update                                                                                       may 2016
just detention international  may 2016  | action  updatePREA through a new bill, the Justice For All 
Act ( JFAA) reauthorization. As of this writ -
ing, the bill is awaiting votes in each Cham -
ber’s Judiciary Committee; our goal is to get 
it on the President’s desk by October 2016.  
JFAA calls for a few basic yet vital improve -
ments to PREA. Most notably, the bill sets a 
firm deadline for states seeking to fully im -
plement the law. “Until now, governors have 
not been subjected to a final deadline for 
implementing all of PREA,” explained Lo -
visa Stannow, JDI’s Executive Director. “In -
stead, governors have been able to kick the 
can down the road by assuring the Attorney More than a decade after the Prison Rape Elimination Act 
passed, JDI is again working with Congress to end sexual abuse J
Lovisa Stannow  
Executive Director
@ Richard Ross, www.juvenile-in-justice.com2 just detention international  may 2016  | action  updateF ive years ago,  members of the Re -
view Panel on Prison Rape toured 
Fluvanna, a women’s facility in Vir -
ginia. A federal government report 
had recently ranked Fluvanna among the 
nation’s worst prisons; the Panel’s task was 
to find out what had gone wrong. During 
the visit, they heard first-hand from pris -
oners who had been sexually abused by an 
officer. A number of women told the Panel 
that they would not dare make an official 
report, lest they get sent to “the hole.” As 
one prisoner put it, “If you dial the PREA 
number, it’s a ticket to SEG,” referring to  
solitary confinement.
But thanks to the state’s partnership with 
JDI, Virginia’s prisons are safer today. With 
funding from a federal grant, JDI and the 
Virginia Department of Corrections (VA 
DOC) have trained key corrections staff on 
sexual abuse prevention and put in place bet -
ter, stronger practices.  
The impact of this work is being felt 
throughout the state’s prison system. Staff  
increasingly treat inmates with more respect 
and care. “We’ve made a real effort to gain 
action  update                     
Taking PREA to the Next Level
the trust of offenders, and it’s paying off,” ex -
plained Statewide PREA Coordinator Rose 
Durbin. “Offenders are more comfortable 
telling staff if they have a problem or don’t 
feel safe, because they know that speaking out 
won’t get them put in restricted housing.”    
These pivotal reforms show that Virginia is 
serious about PREA. But Durbin and other 
leaders at the agency have set their sights even 
higher, aiming to go beyond what is required 
of them. Staff regularly check in with inmates 
to make sure that they know how to report, 
and to remind them that they have an abso -
lute right to be free of sexual abuse. And VA 
DOC will soon launch a peer inmate educa -
tion program — JDI’s tried and tested model 
for teaching prisoners about staying safe — in 
all of its prisons.  
“The state’s corrections leaders are not do -
ing this work just because it’s law, or because 
it will help them check all the boxes on an 
audit,” said Cynthia Totten, Senior Program 
Director at JDI. “Instead, they are looking 
to use PREA as a springboard for deeper 
and more meaningful culture change — and  
it’s working.”FWe’re Back on  
Capitol Hill  
continued from page 1 Virginia and JDI team up to make the state’s prisons  
a standard-bearer for prisoner safety
If the bill passes,  
governors will have to 
show that their efforts  
to make their prisons 
free of sexual violence 
are working, and, if they 
aren’t, explain why.
JDI is working inside detention facilities nationwide to put in place practices that keep prisoners 
safe from sexual violence.General that they are working to come into 
full compliance with the law. This bill will 
fix that fundamental flaw.”
JFAA also calls for states to share informa -
tion publicly about what they are doing to 
make their prisons safe. If the bill passes, 
governors will have to show that their ef -
forts to prevent and address sexual violence 
are working, and, if they aren’t, explain why. 
The bill also creates a federal online clear -
inghouse of all PREA audits. Current -
ly, audit results are published only on an 
agency’s website — or sometimes not 
published at all — making it hard to get a 
big-picture view of PREA’s impact. “Once 
the Department of Justice posts all PREA 
audits in one place, it will become possible 
to track and compare the progress of pris -
ons and jails, and to recognize those states 
that are doing the work, and to hold those 
that aren’t accountable. This clearinghouse 
will be a hugely important tool for advo -
cates, journalists, prisoners — anyone who 
wants to know what’s happening inside,”   
said Stannow.
Like PREA, JFAA enjoys strong bipartisan 
support — proving yet again that ending 
prisoner rape is the rare issue that unites 
Democrats and Republicans. JDI salutes 
the elected leaders who championed JFAA’s 
proposed changes to PREA: John Cornyn, 
Patrick Leahy, Dick Durbin, and Kelly 
Ayotte in the Senate, and Representatives 
Ted Poe and Jim Costa in the House.3 just detention international  may 2016  | action  updateAfter Darryl was raped by a 
group of staff and other boys 
at a California youth facility, 
he knew it would be difficult, 
even dangerous, to report the assault. Af -
ter all, one of the boys had warned him 
not to speak out. But Darryl was desper -
ate to make sure he wouldn’t be abused 
again, so he gathered the strength to tell a  
senior official. 
Appallingly, the official did nothing to 
help him. As Darryl explained in a letter 
to JDI, the officer laughed in his face, be -
fore telling him, “So what? Who is going 
to believe you?”
The depressing truth is that the officer was 
right: youth in custody who report sexual 
abuse are rarely believed. According to a 
recent Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) 
report, the vast majority of sexual miscon -
duct allegations in youth detention facili -
ties are not deemed credible by the facil -
ities’ investigators. A facility is especially 
likely to dismiss a report against staff, as 
opposed to another youth.
The BJS report also reveals the juvenile 
justice system’s utter failure to deal ap -
propriately with known staff perpetrators. 
Barely half of all abusive staff face legal 
action; even worse, 1 in 12 were allowed 
to remain on the job, giving them ongoing 
access to more potential victims.
These findings are even more grim when 
you consider that official allegations are 
just a drop in the bucket. In a 2013 BJS 
survey of youth in custody, a staggering 
one in ten youth said that they were sexu -
ally abused in the prior 12 months of their 
detention. Most of these youth choose to 
keep quiet and, with little chance at get -
ting justice, it is easy to understand why.
Darryl, and all youth in custody, have the 
absolute right to be safe from sexual as -
sault. And if they are assaulted, their per -
petrators should be brought to justice, so 
that no one else has to suffer the same fate.action  update                     
Abusive Staff Rarely 
Held to Account in 
Juvenile  DetentionJDI’s Words of Hope  Sends Light 
to Incarcerated Survivors
J di supporters did something tru -
ly heroic over the holidays. Through 
JDI’s Words of Hope campaign, you 
wrote more than 10,000 heartfelt 
greetings to prisoner rape survivors across 
the country.  
Your compassion did more than briefly lift 
the spirits of a survivor. You restored that 
person’s connection to the outside world, 
reminding them that they are cared for and 
that they matter. 
The power of your messages is apparent in 
the responses we have received from survi -
vors, like Samuel. Held in a Massachusetts 
prison, Samuel has been sexually abused 
by other inmates and by staff. Last year, he 
mustered up the courage to report the abuse. 
But instead of helping Samuel, staff spread 
rumors about him on the yard, as punish -
ment for “snitching.”    
By the time the holidays came, Samuel had 
hit rock bottom. The ongoing harassment 
crushed his self-esteem and left him feel -
ing isolated. Then, one day in December, 
he received a package with your cards. “Just 
going through each card slowly gave me a 
warmth I had not felt in many years,” he 
wrote to JDI. “I cannot even start to de -
scribe what it makes me feel to see that there are so many people who are kind 
enough to take a moment to brighten my 
normally dark and lonely holiday. I am truly 
happy that you and supporters throughout 
the world are there for me.”
Samuel is just one of hundreds of survivors 
who were uplifted by your compassion. Rob -
ert in South Carolina wrote us to say, “I was 
almost in tears while reading the short notes 
from everyone. The holidays are always a hard 
time for me, not just as a sexual assault survi -
vor, but being in prison so far from my family 
makes the holidays that much more difficult. 
The energy I felt coming off those cards left 
me speechless for a bit (not to mention giv -
ing me goose pimples). I thank you from the 
bottom of my heart.”
 
William, a survivor in Missouri, was also 
deeply moved by your compassion. He told 
us, “The cards you sent were the only thoughts 
from others that I received for Christmas. 
I had my fingers crossed that I’d hear from 
at least one of the 7.5 billion people in the 
world. Had it not been for those cards, I’d 
have felt counted among the living dead.”
Your Words of Hope  changed the lives of so 
many survivors behind bars. Thank you, once 
again, for your outpouring of kindness this 
holiday season! J
Every holiday season, JDI supporters — including Survivor Council members, like Joe Booth (left) — 
gather to write Words of Hope  messages to incarcerated survivors. A4 just detention international  may 2016  | action  update38 days in isolation, under conditions that 
no person should ever have to endure. Here’s 
how he described his isolation cell in a re -
cent letter to JDI:
The officer put me in a cell without any 
lights. The sink was clogged, with nas -
ty water that had soap scum in it. The 
walls of the cell were smeared with feces. 
The ventilation system blew dust into the 
cell because it had not been cleaned in 
years. Whenever the toilet flushed in the 
neighboring cell, raw sewage would flow 
into mine. 
Gregory was sent to solitary as punishment 
for reporting an officer who sexually abused 
him. Sadly, this is a common form of retalia -
tion behind bars and, understandably, many 
survivors stay quiet to avoid facing weeks — 
or longer — in isolation.JDI Highlights the Horrors of 
Solitary Confinement
Imagine going to the police  to re -
port having your wallet stolen, your 
car vandalized, or worse. Now imagine 
that, instead of helping you, the police 
send you to live alone for a month in a small, 
filthy room.
The idea of being punished in this way, after 
you’ve been victimized, is horrifying. But 
this is exactly what happens to many peo -
ple in prison when they dare to report sexual 
abuse. At precisely the moment that survi -
vors need the most support, prison officials 
regularly place them in solitary confine -
ment, which is well known to be harmful to 
their mental health. 
We believe — and we think you agree — 
that survivors deserve better. In April, JDI 
honored Sexual Assault Awareness Month 
by sharing testimonies on our website from 
prisoner rape survivors who have spent time 
in solitary confinement. 
Gregory, a prisoner in Illinois, knows all too 
well the horrors of solitary. Gregory spent I
An Emerging Leader in the Effort 
to Protect Detained LGBT Youth
the PREA Resource Center. “County officials 
wanted to gain the expertise to build a healthy 
environment for these young people. And, 
showing true leadership, they asked for help.”  
With management setting the right tone, 
staff have embraced new approaches for 
working with LGBT youth, and especially 
kids who are transgender. Officers are more 
attuned to respectful communications, mak -
ing sure to learn the preferred pronouns for 
transgender young people. “There really isn’t 
a great mystery to making LGBT youth in 
detention feel safe,” explained Woronoff. “It 
just takes commitment, a bit of compassion, 
and strong leaders. Thankfully, the youth de -
tention officials we worked with in Mobile 
and Baldwin counties seemed to have these 
qualities in spades.”  Iin 2016,  a local judge in Mobile Coun -
ty, Alabama, defied the Supreme Court 
by refusing to issue wedding licenses 
to same-sex couples. The judge’s ruling 
made national news, and the county’s rep -
utation took a hit. But officials at the local 
youth detention facility are showing that, in 
some ways, Mobile County is well ahead of 
the curve on LGBT rights.
With JDI’s help, Mobile and neighboring 
Baldwin County are taking crucial steps to 
protect LGBT youth in their care. “LGBT 
youth in detention are very vulnerable to 
abuse, but it is possible for staff to build a 
culture that values everyone’s safety,” said 
JDI Program Director Rob Woronoff, who 
recently co-facilitated a training in Mobile 
with JDI’s partners at The Moss Group and Iaction  update                     
just detention international
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400
Fax: (213) 384-1411
East Coast Office
1900 L Street NW,  Suite 601
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: (202) 506-3333
Fax: (202) 506-7971
JDI-South Africa
2nd Floor, Norwood Place
66 Grant Ave, Norwood
Johannesburg, South Africa
Tel: +27 (11) 483-0989
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.org
A Pivotal Step for 
Transgender Rights
Thanks to jdi’s advocacy — 
which our supporters helped 
make possible — the Depart -
ment of Justice has issued sorely 
needed instructions on how to help pro -
tect transgender prisoners.
The Department’s new guidance clarifies 
that, in order to comply with standards 
to prevent and respond to sexual abuse in 
detention, facilities cannot house trans -
gender prisoners based on their anatomy 
alone. Instead, a facility must factor in a 
transgender person’s gender identity and 
their own view of where they will be safest.
Virtually all U.S. prisons and jails currently 
base their housing decisions on a person’s 
anatomy and nothing else. This practice 
has left almost all transgender women ex -
tremely vulnerable to sexual abuse, as they 
have automatically been housed in men’s 
facilities. JDI has long advocated for pris -
ons and jails to take seriously a transgen -
der person’s own views on their housing 
and to respect a person’s identity regard -
less of their anatomy. The Department of 
Justice’s new guidance brings us closer to 
achieving this goal.  T
You can read Gregory’s story, and others like his, 
at www.justdetention.org/surviving-solitary