ver the past year , I’ve been 
asked many times whether 
there’s a connection between 
Covid-19’s devastating spread 
behind bars and prisoner rape. People are 
often surprised to learn that sexual abuse 
thrives in prisons and jails for many of the 
same reasons that Covid-19 does. The pri -
mary cause of both crises is government 
indifference to the 
safety and dignity 
of people who are 
locked up. 
Back in December, 
when Jared Polis, 
the Governor of 
Colorado, in com -
ments about the 
vaccine, stated that, “There's no way it's 
going to prisoners before it goes to people 
who haven't committed any crimes,” we at 
JDI were outraged — but not surprised. 
We’ve heard similar sentiments before 
when it comes to keeping prisoners safe. 
Shamefully, in times of crisis, incarcerated 
people have always come last.    
Governor Polis ought to take a lesson 
from the South African government. Last 
month, the country announced a plan to 
prioritize the vaccination of incarcerated 
people against Covid-19. The plan recog -
nizes that prisoners are no less deserving 
of a shot than anyone else — and that pro -
tecting them from the disease makes sense 
for the country as a whole. 
At the time of this writing, there’s still 
plenty of uncertainty about when prisoners 
will get their vaccines. But we know that 
we’ll keep fighting for prisoners’ right to 
be safe — and we’re grateful that we can 
always count on your support. Our Commitment to Survivors
During the pandemic, JDI has pivoted to virtual programs for incarcerated people. As soon as prison 
doors re-open and it’s safe — for our staff and the survivors we work with — we will be back running 
in-person programs, like the art workshop above at CIW , from 2017.See Our Commitment to Survivors , continued on page 2action  update                                                                                       MARCH  2021
O
ince 2016 , JDI has been a fixture 
at the California Institution for 
Women (CIW), a state prison 
just outside Los Angeles. JDI’s 
Mental Health Program Director, 
Vanessa Sapien, along with a team of 
other JDI staff and interns, has provided 
support to hundreds of people at CIW. We 
offer individual and group counseling to 
survivors of sexual abuse, provide support 
and training to sexual abuse prevention 
peer educators, and run on-site wellness 
programs — a series of workshops that 
help survivors heal from trauma.
All of JDI’s work inside CIW is guided by 
the people living there, and Vanessa meets 
regularly with the prisoner-led Council on 
Wellness, which ensures the programs we Soffer are based on their needs and interests. 
Just about everyone at CIW knows Vanessa’s 
name, and when she’s on the grounds both 
the staff and the people in custody make it a 
point to stop and say hello.  
Trauma-informed support can be trans-
formative — sparking a dramatic shift 
inside prison and changing the lives of the 
people who live inside its walls. “Counseling 
was essential to my healing, ” said Johanna 
Hudnall, a JDI Survivor Council member 
who met with Vanessa prior to her release 
in 2019. “Vanessa was like part of the family 
here at CIW. ”
Then last year, the pandemic hit. All in-person 
programs were abruptly cancelled. “We knew 
we had to find a way to keep supporting the During the pandemic, we are continuing 
to help survivors at a time of need
Linda McFarlane
Executive Director
just detention international  MARCH 2021 | action  update1people at CIW, ” explained Vanessa. “We 
can’t allow incarcerated people to be cut 
off from the help they need and deserve. ”
Over the past year, as prisons nationwide 
shut down vital programming left and 
right, we adapted our in-person services 
so they could be provided remotely. In 
a monthly written update to the people 
at CIW, we offer guidance on ways to 
cope with difficult feelings; Vanessa has 
also been providing individual support 
by letter. In addition, JDI is creating 
virtual programming to reach people 
in custody. We developed pre-recorded 
art workshops for people at the Central 
California Women's Facility, which will 
soon be launched at CIW. During the 
workshops, JDI staff guide people in 
custody in creating art to express and 
release painful feelings, an approach we 
pioneered based on a model developed by 
nonprofit arts organization A Window 
Between Worlds.
Our work during the pandemic extends 
well beyond California. In New York 
state prisons, we are running virtual 
workshops that are live, allowing direct 
interaction with JDI staff. The art that 
the participants have made depicts 
their healing journey — and shows 
the importance of a connection to the 
outside world, especially during this 
time of intense isolation. At the same 
time, our groundbreaking crisis hotline 
has remained open, serving people 
incarcerated in Michigan and Vermont. 
And we continue to respond to letters 
from survivors nationwide.
The hotline, letters to survivors, and vir-
tual programming are making a profound 
difference. But remote sessions can never 
fully replace the in-person interaction 
that JDI staff provide. As soon as their 
doors re-open and it’s safe — for our staff 
and the survivors we work with — we 
will be back inside prisons and jails. Until 
then, we will keep finding ways to bring 
services to people locked up in California, 
and in detention facilities nationwide.action  update                     
s any sexual abuse survivor 
knows , talking about the experi -
ence can be scary. When people 
come forward about such abuse, 
they are often blamed or made to feel as if they 
deserved it. 
In December, Just Detention International-
South Africa's ( JDI-SA) Prince Nare and 
Unathi Mahlati traveled to the rural town of 
Thohoyandou to spend time with a group of 
women who understand all too well how hard 
it is to share painful experiences. Each of the 
women had been held in police custody or 
served time in prison. They are also survivors of 
trauma, either in custody or in the community 
— or both. The purpose of the visit was to give 
women a safe space to talk about what they 
had been through, free from any judgment and 
far from the people who caused them harm. 
The JDI-SA staff had met with the women a 
few weeks earlier, via a video conference, to talk 
about the horrific conditions in detention fa -
cilities, including the lack of medical and men -
tal health care. This second meet-up was differ -
ent, not only because it was held in person, but 
because the JDI-SA team came equipped with 
a set of powerful tools: colored pencils, mark -
ers, and a thick stack of construction paper. 
Using the same model we use in U.S. prisons, 
Prince and Unathi ran an art workshop for the 
women, inviting them to use creative expres -
sion to reflect their process of healing. 
Each woman’s artwork tells a powerful story 
of perseverance and hope. Thami,* a survivor 
of rape by a police officer, created a colorful, 
flowering tree, which represents her love for A Safe Place to Heal, and Grow Our Commitment to 
Survivors
continued from page 1
A group exhibition of the drawings made during the Thohoyandou art workshopA
Thami’s drawing, “The Bright Tree of Life”
her children. Rori,* a rape survivor who strug -
gles to breathe when she thinks of her assault, 
drew three elephants in the wild. The picture, 
named “Elephant’s family,” transports Rori to 
the countryside, where the air is fresh and she 
can take deep, easy breaths. 
The art workshops are an important step 
along the women’s healing journey. JDI-SA 
will continue to provide them with support, 
including through referrals to local counsel -
ors. “These are women who have been failed 
again and again by the people who were sup -
posed to help them,” explained Unathi. “The 
purpose of the art workshops isn’t to give sur -
vivors the strength to pull through difficult 
times. Rather, the purpose is to help them 
find the strength that they already have.”
*The women’s names have been changed to protect 
their privacy 
just detention international  
2eentering society after serv-
ing time in prison is fraught 
with challenges. Housing and 
steady employment can be 
nearly impossible to come by; worse still, 
strict parole requirements mean that 
many people live on a knife’s edge, aware 
that even the smallest mistake can land 
them back in prison. These obstacles can 
be even greater for sexual abuse survivors, 
who must figure out ways to cope with 
the effects of trauma on top of meeting 
basic needs. 
Rodney Roussell, a JDI Survivor Council 
member who was released from prison 
in 2017, was fortunate in having crucial 
support from his family and in being 
able to get counseling. But he still had 
difficulty finding a sense of stability. 
“There’s so much I wanted to do but 
couldn’t," he explained. “I found myself 
back in a familiar place of helplessness. ”
With survivors like Rodney in mind, JDI 
is exploring how to help recently released 
people get back on their feet. Formerly 
incarcerated survivors themselves are 
playing a leadership role in this work. In 
February, Rodney was part of a virtual 
JDI Survivor Council meeting to discuss 
the challenges to reentry that survivors 
often face. Joining Rodney were Johanna 
Hudnall, Troy Isaac, Stephanie Walker, 
and Joe Booth, before he passed away 
later in the month (see JDI Remembers 
Joe Booth , on this page). Working with 
JDI, the group will develop guidance to 
share with other survivors who have just 
been released.
“Each of our struggles with reentry was 
different, and we want our advice to reflect 
that no one’s journey is the same, ” said 
Johanna after the meeting with her peers 
on the Council. “The Survivor Council 
has so much expertise to share, and I’m 
excited that we’re working together on a 
project that will change lives. ”
Rodney agreed. “Many people are set up 
to fail when they get out. We hope our 
work will help put survivors in a position 
where they can heal — and thrive. ”action  update                     
Survivor Council 
Lends Its Expertise 
RSending Words of Hope Behind Bars
wrote to say, “You cannot imagine how it feels 
to be so alone in the system, and then to have 
someone remind me that we are real people, 
and someone cares!”hen we asked people who care 
about incarcerated sexual abuse 
survivors to send them holiday 
messages this year, the stakes felt 
a bit higher than usual. Prison life has always 
been isolating, but during the pandemic, sur -
vivors have been cut off from their families 
and friends more than ever before. 
Not surprisingly, you came through in a huge 
way. Over the holidays, many of you gave sur -
vivors a reason to smile — more than 20,000 
reasons, in fact. That’s the total number of 
holiday greetings that JDI delivered to people 
locked up nationwide. Your outpouring of 
compassion gave hope and comfort to survi -
vors, like Vernon.
 
For Vernon, like so many people on the in -
side, 2020 was a tough year. But your holiday 
messages gave him a powerful emotional lift. 
“Thank you for always remembering me dur -
ing my worst times,” he told us in a letter. 
Vernon was far from alone in expressing his 
appreciation for your heartfelt Words of Hope  
messages. Our office has been flooded with 
letters since the New Year. Another survivor W
JDI Remembers Joe Booth
ur movement  to end prisoner rape lost one of its most powerful advocates on Feb -
ruary 22, 2021, when Michael Joseph Booth passed away. Joe, as he was known to 
friends, was one of the movement’s most 
recognizable faces — a fearless spokesper -
son who shared his story of being raped in prison to 
raise awareness of this violence and champion the 
humanity of survivors.
“It’s amazing to know that because I shared my 
story, people in our government are more likely to 
listen the next time a survivor reaches out to them,” 
Joe said after speaking at an advocacy meeting at the 
White House in 2016. 
“Joe Booth was a true hero in the fight for safety and 
dignity for incarcerated people,” said Linda McFar -
lane, JDI’s Executive Director. “He inspired count -
less advocates to provide incarcerated survivors with 
the help they deserve. Joe was part of the JDI family, 
and we will miss him.”O
Joe Booth outside JDI’s Los Angeles office 
in 2012
JDI supporters sent heartfelt holiday greetings to 
incarcerated survivors
  MARCH 2021 | action  update3action  update                      
With services behind bars severely limited 
due to the pandemic, we are working closely 
with our partners in rape crisis centers so they 
can continue to advocate for incarcerated sur -
vivors. At our virtual “Office Hours,” our staff 
gives information and support to advocates, 
and some corrections officials, to help them 
meet the challenges of delivering services 
during ongoing facility lockdowns.
“It’s exciting to see the energy and dedication 
that rape crisis counselors put toward helping 
survivors who are incarcerated,” said Cynthia 
Totten, a JDI Deputy Executive Director. 
“We know that counselors face obstacles to 
working behind bars that won’t vanish once 
the pandemic is over. But together, we are 
learning how to overcome those obstacles and 
get services to survivors who need them.”
Advocates and corrections officials interested in 
joining JDI’s virtual Office Hours can find out 
more information at www.justdetention.org/
officehours.Join JDI’s Office Hours
just detention international
3325 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 340
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel:  (213) 384-1400
East Coast Office
1900 L Street NW,  Suite 601
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: (202) 506-3333
JDI-South Africa
Norwood Place, 2nd Floor 
66 Grant Avenue
Norwood, Johannesburg 2192
South Africa
Tel: +27 (11) 483 0989
info@justdetention.org      
www.justdetention.org
Our Victory in the Fight to Keep Kids Safe
By securing the release of BJS data, our movement to end prisoner rape is helping to shine a light on the 
conditions inside the juvenile justice system. (Photo Credit: Richard Ross)We did it!  Thanks to many of you, 
the Department of Justice finally 
published its latest research on 
the sexual abuse of kids in youth 
detention facilities — research it had been 
withholding for more than a year. 
Last August, we asked you to join us in de -
manding the Department of Justice share 
what it knows about sexual violence in youth 
detention facilities. We knew that getting this 
data would be an uphill battle. After all, the 
Department had twice released only some of 
its findings, while holding back crucial infor -
mation about kids who are most at risk for 
abuse and the staff who perpetrate it.
 
But we couldn’t let the government continue 
to suppress its own studies. Hundreds of you 
joined us by writing the Justice Department, 
calling for transparency. Dozens of incarcerat -
ed survivors — people who know better than 
anyone that secrecy allows sexual violence to 
flourish — submitted their own letters. As 
Barry, one of the survivors who took action, 
explained to us, “I hope and pray it helps. I 
won’t stop fighting until all detention facilities 
are safe.” The government took notice and, in 
December, disclosed its full findings. 
To be sure, the newly released data paints a 
grim picture of our system of juvenile deten -tion. Staff are preying upon children in cus -
tody, grooming them for abuse by behaving 
in blatantly inappropriate ways that ought to 
be obvious to their colleagues, not to men -
tion leadership. Abusive staff target kids in 
their care who are most likely to be marginal -
ized and overlooked — kids who are LGBT, 
kids who have disabilities, and kids who have 
endured prior sexual abuse. Clearly, we have 
our work cut out for us. 
 
But there’s also reason to feel optimistic. We 
now have much more information about who 
is committing abuse, and how. It's more ap -
parent than ever that the problem lies with 
shoddy leadership and a toxic staff culture 
that places little value on the rights of chil -
dren. Thanks to this government research, we 
can focus our work where it will stimulate 
the changes that are badly needed in youth 
detention facilities.
Barry was elated to hear that the government 
had at last allowed its findings to see the light 
of day. “I’m so glad I could help,” he wrote to 
us. “I went through a lot, and I’m still going 
through a lot, but I’m thankful that I could 
help others.”
It won't be easy to fix our broken youth de -
tention system. But we can, and we must, in 
order to keep all children safe.
The government finally released vital data on sexual abuse in youth 
detention — a huge step forward in the fight to end this violence
just detention international  MARCH 2021 | action  update4