 
Submitted via Federal eRulemaking Portal  
 
January 13, 2020  
 
Samantha Deshommes , Chief, Regulatory Coordination Division ,  
Office of Policy and Strategy  
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) , Department of Homeland Security (DHS)  
 
Re: A gency DHS, Docket No. USCIS -2019 -0011 Public  Comment Opposing the Changes to 
the Asylum Application, Interview, and Employment Authorization of Applicants . In the 
Federal Register at  84 F.R. 62374  
 
Dear Ms. Des hommes:  
 
The eight  (8) national torture treatment programs below respectfully submit  this comment to 
oppose the Department of Homeland Security’s Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on the changes 
to Asylum Application, Interview, and Employment Authorization of Applicants. We are 
particularly concerned  by the  exponential increase  in the waiting period to obtain work  permits 
for asylum seekers,  the bar s disqualifying some from obtaining  work permit s, and the discretion 
in decreasing the validity period for work permit s, DHS Docket N o. USCIS -2019 -0011, issued 
November 14 , 2019.  
 
The proposed rule  is yet another step by the administration to punish asylum seekers for seeking 
refuge in the United States.  It will be especially  detrimental to survivors of torture, who comprise 
a shocking percentage of the refugee and asylum seeking populations.  Their  ability to  work is 
key to their mental health and wellbeing , and so  this rule will  hinder survivors’  healing and 
further expose them to re -traumatization and re -victimization.      
 
For the reasons detailed in the comments that follow, DHS and USCIS should immediately 
withdraw their current proposal and dedicate their efforts to advancing policies that safeguard 
individuals fleeing per secution, including torture .  
 
Thank you for the o pportunity to submi t comments on this proposed  rule.  Please do not hesitate 
to contact us with any questions or for further information.  
 
 
Andrea Carcamo /s/        
Andrea Carcamo                                                              
Senior Policy Counsel                                                      
acarcamo@cvt.org                                             
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
                                                                                              
 
                                     
                                  
 
DETAILED COMMENTS in opposition to DHS, Docket No. USCIS -2019 -0011.  Asylum 
Application, Interview, and Employment Authorization for Applicants.    
 
The eight  undersigned torture t reatment programs welcome the opportunity to comment on the 
proposed changes to the asylum application  requirements  and accompanying work authorization  
bars, and the doubling of the period an asylum seeker will have to wait before receiving a work 
authorization , DHS Docket No. USCIS -2019 -0011  (“the proposed rule,” or “the rule”).  
 
The signatory organizations seek to advance the knowledge, technical capacities and resources 
devoted to the care of torture survivors living in the United States and act collectively to prevent 
torture worldwide.  
  
As experts in providing mental health and other rehabilitation services to survivors of torture and 
other trauma , we are intimately familiar with the profound  effects  that this proposed rule will 
have on our clients , including  making  the U.S.  asylum process  effectively insurmountable  for 
many of them .     
 
I. Background  
 
Currently, asylum seekers whose asylum cases have been pending without a decision for at  least 
150 days from the date the asylum application was filed can submit an application to receive an 
Employment Authorization Document ( EAD )—they qualify for a work authorization at 180 
days, b ut they are allowed to submit the application  for processing 30 days earlier. Once granted, 
an EAD is  generally  valid for a period of two years . 
 
On November 14, 2019, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) published a notice of 
Proposed Rulemaking. The proposed r ule seeks to, among other things:  
 
- increase the waiting period for asylum seekers to obtain a work permit fro m 180 to 
360 days;  
- bar asylum seekers who cross or attempt to cross between ports of entry from 
obtaining a work permit;  and 
- bar from obtaining work permits  those who submit the asylum application beyond the 
one-year deadline . 
- Decreases the time for which the permit is  valid by giving discretion to USCIS 
officers and  allowing a m aximum of one year.  
 
II. This rule is part of a larger scheme  by the administration  to punish asylum  
seekers who come to  the United States , and to deter others from trying  
 
Through the establishment of policies, agreements, and dubious unilateral changes to well-settled 
asylum law, it is clear that the Trump administration seeks  to prevent  individuals —especially, 
but not only, those arriving at our south ern border —from  access ing the U.S. asylum process at 
all, much less actually obtaining asylum . These actions for m the ba ckdrop to the proposed  rule 
and include the following:    
 
Changing asylum  immigration  law: The attorney general certified to himself several  
immigration court cases and decided them in a way that upends longstanding  law. In overruling  
Matter  of A-B- and Matter of L -E-A-, the attorney general made it significantly more difficult 
for individuals from Central Americ a to win their asylum cases, si nce they  largely rely on these 
two cases.  
 
Zero Tolerance leading to Family Separation:  The administration adopted a policy of 
pursuing  criminal charges against  every individual who crossed the border  outside of a port of 
entry , then forcibly separated  children from the parents who were subjected to criminal 
proceedings. Family separation was a cruel practice that traumatiz ed both  children and parents . It 
will have long lasting consequences  for asylum seekers and for the United States .1 
 
Asylu m Ban 1.0:  In November 2018 , the president issued a proclamation banning individuals 
who enter the United States between ports of entry from asylum.2 
 
Migrant Protection Protocols:  Established in January 2019, this policy forces asylum seekers 
to wait in dangerous Mexican border cities during the pendency of their cases. Besides placing 
 
1 Center for Victims of Torture.  Asylum Fact 4. Available at  https://www.cvt.org/AsylumFact4  (last accessed on 
12/30/2019) . 
2 https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2018/11/09/2018 -24594/aliens -subject -to-a-bar-on-entry -under -
certain -presidential -proclamations -procedures -for-protection . asylum seekers in danger, it undermines their ability to obtain assistance of counsel, greatly 
diminishing their ability to win their case.3   
 
Asylum Ban 2.0:  In July 2019 , the administration disqualified from asylum any individual who 
transits  through a third country before arriving at the United States  southern border . This 
disqualifies all but Me xican asylum seekers arriving at our southern border from asylum.4 
 
Agreements  with other countries : The Trump administratio n continues to attempt to enter into  
“safe third country” agreements with countries that simply are not safe —from which people are 
fleeing violence and persecution that these countries’ governments cannot, or will not, 
effectively address —including El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras.  These agreements  would 
essentially trap asylum seekers in the countries where they are being persecuted or are otherwise 
at significant risk of harm .     
 
Work Authorization Restrictions: In addition to the restrictions imposed by the proposed 
rule—discussed be low—in a separate rule the administration proposed a prohibitive fee for work 
authorizations of $490  and $50 for asylum applications. Yet a  third  proposed rule eliminates 
entirely  the time limit  previously imposed on  USCIS to adjudicate  work authorization  
applications , which implicitly authorizes the agency  to delay any such adjudication  indefinitely.     
 
III. The proposed rule violates the 1951 Refugee Convention, which was adopted and 
codified by the United States through the Refugee Act o f 1980  
 
Article 31 of the 1951 Refugee Convention states that “ [t]he Contracting States shall not impose 
penalties, on account of their illegal entry or presence, on refugees who, coming directly from a 
territory where their life or freedom was threatened in  the sense of article 1, enter or are present 
in their territory without authorization, provided they present themselves without delay to the 
authorities and show good cause for their illegal entry or presence.”5 The Department o f 
Homeland Se curity (DHS) specifies  that the purpose of the rule is to “reduce incentives for 
[asylum -seekers] to file frivolous, fraudulent, or otherwise non -meritorious asylum 
applications…and to discourage illegal entry into the United States .”  In taking away the 
ability of asylum seekers to obtain a livelihood —by barring them from obtaining a work  
permit —specifically because they cross the border other than through ports of entry , the 
administration is  effectively violating Article 31 of the 1951 Refugee Convention  and Protocol .  
 
 
  
 
 
3 Human Rights First. Delivered to Danger: Illegal Remain in Mexico Policy Imperils Asylum Seekers’ Lives and 
Denies Due Process.  Available at  https://www.humanrightsfirst.org/sites/default/files/Delivered -to-Danger -August -
2019%20.pdf  (last accessed on 12/30/2019).  
4 https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2019/07/16/2019 -15246/asylum -eligibility -and-procedural -
modifications  
5 https://www.unhcr.org/en -us/3b66c2aa10  IV. The proposed rule will have profound health consequences for asylum -seeking 
survivors of  torture and trauma, and it will subject them to height ened risk of 
exploitation.   
 
In justifying this rule, the administration  claims  it will “reduce incentives for [asylum seekers] to 
intentionally delay asylum proceedings in order to extend the period of employment 
authorization based on the pending application.”  However, there are already rules in place to 
prevent purposeful delays . For example, the Executive Office for Immigration Review and the 
Asylum Office keep a “clock”  tracking  the number of days since the filing of an asylum 
application to determine when applicants qualif y for work permits . Once the “clock”  gets to 180 
days, in dividuals can obtain work authorization  (at 150 days they can submit the EAD 
application) . However, there are several reasons for which the “clock ” will be stopped, including 
“ any delays requested or caused by an applicant while his or he r asylum applicat ion is 
pending.. .”6  
 
The decrease in the period for which work permits are valid —which will require more work 
permit holders to re -apply with more frequency —will also exacerbate the detrimental effects of 
another proposed rule published the same day as this one , which  imposes a fee of $490 for the 
initial and subsequent  EADs . In addition, legal service providers will have to spend more time 
filing these applications.  
 
This rule will have  devastating  human consequences , both for those whom it deters from 
applying for asylum at all , and for those who pursue the process notwithstanding  the needless 
and punitive conditions the rule imposes . The overwhelming majority of asylum seekers arrive to 
the United States having suffered traumatic experiences, whether in the country from which they 
fled or on the often -perilous journey in search of safe haven, with no more than the possessions 
they can  carry.  According to the Department of Health and Human Services , research “suggests  
that 44% of refugees, asylees, and asylum seekers living in the U.S. have experienced torture. ”  
 
Clinicians and their colleagues from torture treatment programs across the United States engage 
with this population every day. The y know from first -hand experience how important 
employment  is for effective rehabil itation, and  the consequences for  refugee and asylum -seeking 
trauma survivors who do not receive timely wo rk authorization —from obstructing their recovery 
to forcing them into an underground economy where they risk being re -victimized. They also 
recognize that the bars imposed by the proposed rule will prevent many from even a chance at 
obtaining work authoriz ation, and thereby healing from trauma .  
 
The following clinicians offer their views directly on the proposed rule:  
 
Andrea Northwood,  Director of Client Services (Center for Victims of Torture)  
 
For torture survivors who have fled for their lives into exile, the period of time 
between arriving in a country of refuge and obtaining asylum is one of extreme 
 
6 
https://www.uscis.gov/sites/default/files/USCIS/Humanitarian/Refugees%20%26%20Asylum/Asylum/Asylum_Cloc
k_Joint_Notice_ -_revised_05 -10-2017.pdf  psychological vulnerability and fragility.  This is when survivors are most at risk, 
most distraught by recent trauma and losses, and least supported: t hey lack 
adequate food, clothing, shelter, health care, social support, employment 
authori zation, legal support and legal assistance.  They usually have medical and 
psychological wounds from their torture that ha ve not received any 
treatment.  This often put s their lives literally at risk: they can present at our doors 
with life -threatening physical conditions and life -threatening psychological 
symptoms, including suicidality and torture -related flashbacks that result in 
dangerous activities such as walking i nto traffic or leaving shelter at night in a 
semi -conscious state.  
 
Just a delay in the grant of a work authorization will deliberately increase this 
period of extreme risk, which  is both immoral and inhumane.  This will have a 
direct and immediate harmful effect on the lives of our asylum -seeking clients . . 
.  We believe such an inhumane measure is also a fundamental violation of human 
rights, which include the right to seek asylum and the right to be free from  
torture.  It punishes those who have come forward with honesty and presented 
their cases lawfully, making no distinction between cases with merit (in our case, 
this can include forensic evidence such as medical documentation of scars from 
torture) and the so-called frivolous claims the policy purports to address.  
 
In addition to the basic necessity of income in order to survive and support a 
family in danger back home, sitting around all day with nothing to do is described 
as a major stressor (at best) and even a cause of insanity (“going crazy”) by our 
asylum -seeking trauma survivors, as they use “keeping busy” and meaningful 
activity to distract themselves from involuntary, disturbing traumatic memories as 
well as profound sadness and loss.   One of the fir st priorities of rehabilitation at 
CVT is to rebuild meaningful activity into the lives of asylum seekers by helping 
them with employment -readiness activities until their work permit arrives and, as 
soon as it does, employment itself.  This is because this change alone produces a 
reduction in emotional distress and calms people down.    
    
Anne Eichmeyer, MSW, LICSW an d Vivienne Namujuzi, MSW, LGSW ( Center for Victims of 
Torture)   
 
A client from a country in Southeast Asia has struggled with severe PTSD and 
Depression from his torture, including nightmares, flashbacks, inability to sleep, 
and significant suicidal ideation. His identity is strongly connected to his 
profession, and pri or to receiving his work permit in the US he faced very high 
levels of stress and shame because he was unable to work. He faced multiple 
delays in receiving his work permit from the government. Once he received his 
work permit he received a job offer withi n a couple of weeks. Since receiving this 
offer his symptoms have improved significantly. He is able to sleep better because 
of the reduction in stress; this in turn has increased his capacity to address his 
PTSD, and he had learned coping skills to deal w ith flashbacks and anxiety.  
When he first came to the US he was forced to work illegally in order to provide for his basic needs.  Since finding a legal job he expresses pride in being able to 
give back to the country that does not persecute and torture him  for being who he 
is.” 
 
Alison Beckman, M.S.W., L.I.C.S.W, Senior Clinician for External Relations (Center for Victims 
of Torture)  
 
His face dropped when I told him he would have to wait 180 days after the 
submission of his asylum application to apply for a work permit.   He owned two 
businesses in his country, lived a good life with his family.   He had to flee 
because he was targeted and tortured on multiple occasions for assumed 
affiliation with an opposition party.   He had been in the US for many months, 
finding an attorney and meeting with him when the attorney was available to fill 
in the details for his asylum application.   This is common among our clients: they 
often wait months before the application is complete.   Then they wait another 180 
days to ap ply for a work permit, and then they wait another month or more to 
receive it by mail from the US government. Any money he might have fled with 
is likely long gone.   He is ineligible for public benefits, living with extended 
family and depending on their g enerosity, which will likely wane as the months 
go by and the strain of adding additional dependents weighs on families already 
living on the edge of poverty. These are the kinds of scenarios we work with on a 
daily basis at CVT.    
 . . . 
Most of our clien ts have Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Major Depressive 
Disorder.   The symptoms related to these diagnoses are maintained and worsened 
when clients have nothing to do all day long. Many of our clients sit alone during 
the day at whatever temporary place  they are staying doing nothing.   And doing 
nothing brings back reminders of their torture experiences, increased guilt for not 
being able to help family members back home, increased hopelessness about a 
future.   Work helps counterbalance all of this.   We see a return to a sense of self, 
meaning, purpose for our clients who can work.   They are actively contributing to 
US society both in their needed labor and in paying taxes .  Why would we want 
these talented individuals to be idle and potentially pull on s ystems as their health 
worsens?  
 
Ariel Zarate, MA, MSW, Survivors of Torture Clinical Case Manager (International Rescue 
Committee, Denver )  
 
Many of the torture survivors that the Survivor Wellness Center at IRC Denver 
supports are asylum seekers who want nothing more than to recreate safe, 
meaningful lives. They want to contribute to their community and to care for their 
families. They want to  rebuild themselves, separate from the abuses they and their 
families have endured. Key to this is the ability to work. Work is more than a 
means to financial stability but an element of human dignity and a Universal 
Human Right.7 For torture survivors, w ork is a path to reassert their humanity, to 
 
7 UN General Assembly,  Universal Declaration of Human Rights , 10 December 1948, Article 24.  take back agency that was lost as they were tortured . When meeting with clients, 
the primary, consistent stressor is work. Second only to housing and food, work is 
what keeps clients up at night, and what trigge rs anxiety, depression and traumatic 
withdrawal.  
 
  “I am just sitting here like nothing; I don’t want to just sit; I want to do.”  
   
This sentiment is universal; as is the aversion to “hand – outs.”  
 
“If I were not desperate, if I had another choice, I would never beg.”  
 
Beyond this, work is a way for survivors to buffer themselves against the 
intrusive, disruptive and dysregulating m emories of their torture. Images of the 
ways that their bodies, minds and lives were damaged can be persistent and very 
distressing. Work gives survivors a goal and a focal point outside of these 
experiences. Work gives survivors hope.  
 
Jordan N. Enger, MA , LPC Psychosocial Support and Survivors of Torture Clinical Care 
Coordinator (International Rescue Committee , Denver )  
 
My clients are survivors of torture as defined on the 18 U.S. Code §2340 which 
we use to determine eligibility and admission into our p rogram at the International 
Rescue Committee in Denver, CO. Since starting the program in October 2018, 
there are approximately 42 survivors to whom we are providing biopsychosocial 
and legal support, most with pending asylum applications. Asylum seekers d o not 
meet the criteria to receive temporary assistance through the government with 
medical issues, food, childcare or money for housing.  The time our clients spend 
without a work permit causes significant stress for them. They are unable to find 
safe and  sanitary housing, unable to cover their medical bills, unable to pay for 
groceries to support themselves and family members —and these compounding 
effects fill the days they cannot work with anxiety.  Having a work authorization 
not only bridges asylum seekers with basic needs, but it also engages their minds, 
allowing them to feel as if they can regain control over their lives. A work 
authorization offers a sense of hope to asylum seekers, something t hat they may 
not have experienced since they were tortured and had to flee their home country.  
Clinically we have seen many clients become more isolated while awaiting work 
authorization, which is counter -productive when working toward wellness and 
holisti c well -being. Having the ability to be productive and financially 
independent initiates hopefulness, which matches with determination to build a 
safe opportunity to live for themselves and their family, and can lead to a stronger 
mental outlook and dedicat ion to their community. I strongly encourage these 
benefits to be prioritized as they affect asylum seekers significantly as well as our 
community.  
 Caitlin Tromiczak LICSW -C, LCSWC, Health and Psychological Wellness Program Manager, 
Creator & Facilitator of Torture Abolition and Survivors Support Coalition (TASSC) Training  
Program (TASSC)  
 
At TASSC, we provide  holistic  services to support survivors of torture; many of 
whom are seeking asylum and struggling to create stability during the extensi ve 
process of waiting for interviews and  court dates.   While we offer support in the 
form of  therapeutic  services, cultural orientation, legal support, and career 
development, what we cannot do is provide  financially for them. More 
importantly, we cannot r estore in our clients the sense of dignity and self -worth 
that comes from being able to work for oneself . Although a great deal of our 
survivors bring  impressive resumes with high levels of education and professional 
accomplishments,  without a work permit they are unable to support themselves or 
contribute to society as they so  desperately  desire. Many basic necessities such as 
housing and food are provided by generous members of the community 
including  religious and diaspora groups, however  generosity has its limits and 
without the ability to work, our survivors are at extreme risk of homelessness, 
illness, and hopelessness. Some of our survivors have been waiting several years 
for their asylum interview or  court date and if they were unable to obtain a wor k 
permit the cost to their mental, emotional, and  physical wellbeing would be 
severe. There is no psychological support we can offer to offset these detrimental 
effects of abject poverty. Access to a work permit is essential for survival.   
 
Laura Rambikur, LCSW & MDiv, Clinical Therapist  (International Rescue Committee , Arizona )  
 
For our clients a job is more than just a way to earn money, it represents the 
restoration of human dignity and healing. It symbolizes the essence of American 
values: to be able to work, contribute to society, and participate as a member of 
the community. The proposed changes that were announced earlier in September 
that eliminate the requirement that USCIS process work permit applications for 
asylum seekers within 30 days  of filing will have a detrimental impact on our 
asylum seeking communities. At best, this policy will paralyze asylum seekers. At 
worst, it has the potential to create a market for labor exploitation that will force 
asylum seekers to engage in harmful, un lawful, and risky forms of employment, 
which could endanger their legal claims. This policy hurts immigrants who are 
within the boundaries of the legal structures that exist in our current immigration 
system. Exploitation and abuse will be a direct result of this policy. Healing 
happens in stable environments when one is able to provide for oneself and when 
people are recognized not by their past trauma and suffering, but by their 
resiliency and ability to contribute, find meaning, and create a new identity . 
 
Maria Childress, MSW, LCSW - Director, St. Louis Partnership for Survivors of Torture 
(Bilingual International Assistant Services ) 
 
Bilingual International’s St. Louis Partnership for Survivors of Torture and War 
Trauma provides integrated services to torture survivors in an effort to assist survivors with healing from the past and creating meaningful lives in the present.  
While the a gency supports asylum seekers who have fled torture with support 
through therapy, case management, legal assistance and psychiatry, it cannot 
provide survivors with the financial support required to meet their basic needs.   
 
The proposed rule will signifi cantly harm survivors of torture.  Earning money 
through work is an essential element in the ability of torture survivors to heal 
from past victimization and build safer lives.   Survivors are especially vulnerable 
while waiting to obtain asylum.  During th is time, they struggle with the physical 
and psychological consequences of torture, as they try to meet the basic needs of 
housing and food for themselves and their families.  In the agency’s experience, 
asylum seekers are willing and eager to work.  The l egitimate ability to work 
provides an initial sense of safety, f urthering the healing process.  
 
Jennifer Scofield, MSW, LGSW and Amy Kamel, MA, MSW, LICSW (Center for Victims of 
Torture)   
 
In exchange for shelter and the limited food from her host, one of  our clients is 
expected to provide child care at all times to the host’s young child. Often the 
client will wake up in the morning and find that she is alone with the child, and 
she is therefore unable to leave in order to attend scheduled medical or ment al 
health appointments. The client has stated that this is expected of her because she 
does not pay rent.  
 
This client is Christian and has a strong connection to her faith, but she cannot 
access her faith community in the US because of exploitation and control from 
her host.  
 
This client received her work permit 8 months after applying for asylum. She was 
a successful professional in her home country, but has not been able to continue in 
her field in the US. Her ability to leave home is extremely limited, but she is 
connected w ith a vocational rehabilitation counselor, and is working with a social 
worker to apply for jobs. Her HIV is worsening, and she is in constant pain. She 
suffers from a lack of independence because of the exploitation and control in her 
living situation, an d PTSD symptoms have shown little to no improvement.  She 
has ongoing nightmares of her torture, made worse by the stress of her living 
situation. Had she been able to access a work permit sooner, this client could 
potentially have found employment while sh e was physically well; this would 
have increased her access to basic needs, medical care, mental health care, and 
shelter, and therefore she may have avoided exploitation, isolation, and the 
decline in her physical and mental health.   
 
Clients who are forc ed to wait longer for work permits, or who cannot access money to 
apply for work permits, are susceptible to exploitation in return for basic needs being 
met. In addition, a lack of independence and lack of access to medical and mental health 
care may resu lt in significant declines in functioning.   
Conclusion  
 
The administration must abstain from implementing the proposed rule, which will continue to 
harm the asylum system, asylum seekers generally, and survivors of torture specifically.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
Bilingual International Assistant Services  
Center for Survivors of Torture   
Center for Victims of Torture  
IRC, AZ  
IRC Denver   
Mount Sinai  Human Rights Program  
Partnership for Trauma Recovery  
TASSC   
 
 