2007
The American Bar Association (ABA) found that Ohio failed to meet 93% of ABA recommended 
guidelines to ensure a “fair and accurate” death penalty system.
2011
 In response, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Ohio and the President of the Ohio State Bar Association formed a Task Force of experts to examine the death penalty. The Task Force was barred from any discussion about whether or not the death penalty should be repealed. 
2014
 The Task Force released a report with 56 recommendations that attempt to address Ohio’s failure to meet the ABA guidelines. 
Ohioans to Stop Executions is firmly committed to repealing the death penalty.
Mistakes will happen. That’s human nature. If 
mistakes are a certainty, the death penalty must be 
repealed to ensure innocent people aren’t executed.
Unfairness will happen. That’s human nature. If 
unfairness is a certainty, the death penalty must be 
repealed to ensure people aren’t sentenced to death 
based on their race or where they live.
Until the death penalty is ultimately repealed, 
Ohioans to Stop Executions will make sure that key 
recommendations are legislated in the coming years. 
These measures are crucial to reduce unfairness, end the possibility of executing an innocent person and 
address the needs of victim’s family members.
Key Recommendations
1. Enact legislation to exclude from eligibility from the 
death penalty defendants who suffer from “serious 
mental illness,” at the time of execution and at the time 
of the crime.
2. Enact legislation to narrow the number of factors that 
qualify a crime as felony murder.
3. Enact legislation to create a Death Penalty Charging Committee at the Attorney General’s Office.
4. Enact legislation to adopt a Racial Justice Act allowing 
for free-standing racial disparity claims in Ohio courts.
5. The legislature should study how to best support 
families of murder/homicide victims in the short and long 
term.
TAKE ACTION!
Tell your legislator about this report and how 
important these recommendations are to our criminal justice system. Want tips on how writing to your legislator? Head to otse.org/tips.Volunteers help complete important OTSE work. Visit otse.org/volunteer or send an e-mail to info@otse.org.The next couple of years will be critical to set the stage for repeal. Make sure that you can say you were a part of this historic moment. Visit otse.org/give or send an e-mail to info@otse.org. WRITE VOLUNTEER GIVEOhio Death Penalty Factsheet: 
The Study, The Taskforce, The Reforms
215 E. 14th St. Cincinnati, OH 45202
Learn more at www.otse.org