NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDNATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
Annual Report 2021
The Native American Rights Fund Statement on 
Environmental Sustainability
“It is clear that our natural world is undergoing severe, un-
sustainable and catastrophic climate change that adverse-
ly impacts the lives of  people and ecosystems worldwide. 
Native Americans are especially vulnerable and are experi-encing disproportionate negative impacts on their cultures, 
health and food systems. In response, the Native Ameri -
can Rights Fund (NARF) is committed to environmental 
sustainability through its mission, work and organization -
al values. Native Americans and other indigenous peoples have a long tradition of  living sustainably with the natu -
ral world by understanding the importance of  preserving 
natural resources and respecting the interdependence of  
all living things. NARF embraces this tradition through its work and by instituting sustainable office practices that re-
duce our negative impact on our climate and environment. 
NARF is engaged in environmental work and has estab -
lished a Green Office Committee whose responsibility is to 
lead and coordinate staff  participation in establishing and 
implementing policies and procedures to minimize waste, reduce energy consumption and pollution and create a 
healthful work environment.”
Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is a nonprofit, charitable organization incorporat -
ed in 1971 under the laws of  the District of  Columbia. NARF is exempt from federal income tax under the 
provisions of  Section 501(c)(3) of  the Internal Revenue code. Contributions to NARF are tax deductible. 
The Internal Revenue Service has ruled that NARF is not a “private foundation” as defined in Section 509(a) 
of  the Internal Revenue Code. NARF was founded in 1970 and incorporated in 1971 in Washington, D.C.
Boulder Office (main)
1506 Broadway
Boulder, CO 80302-6296
303-447-8760
www.narf.orgAnchorage Office745 West 4th Avenue, Suite 502Anchorage, Alaska 99501-1736
907-276-0680Washington DC Office
1514 P Street, NW (Rear) Suite D 
Washington, DC 20005-1910
202-785-4166
Cover and Photography: Sean Sherman, Oglala Lakota, born in 
Pine Ridge, SD, has been cooking across the US and international -
ly. His main culinary focus is revitalizing Indigenous food systems in a modern culinary context. Sean’s determination to understand the foundations of  these food systems include understanding the 
knowledge of  Native American farming techniques, wild food usage 
and harvesting, land stewardship, salt and sugar making, hunting and fishing, food preservation, Native American migrational histories, 
fundamental cooking techniques, and Native culture and history.
In 2014, he founded The Sioux Chef, a food education and catering 
operation in the Minneapolis/Saint Paul area. The following year, 
he debuted Tatanka Truck, a food truck featuring pre-colonized foods of  the Dakota and Minnesota territories in partnership with 
the Little Earth Community of  United Tribes in Minneapolis. Sean 
also founded the nonprofit North American Traditional Indigenous Food Systems (NATIFS) and its public-facing training center, In-
digenous Food Labs, at the Midtown Global Market in Minneapolis. 
Most recently, in June 2021, Owamni by The Sioux Chef  opened its doors in Minneapolis, showcasing a decolonized dining experience 
and menu of  Indigenous North American foods. In its first year, Owamni has been recognized by The New York Times, The Chicago Tribune, Esquire, Food & Wine, and Vanity Fair.
Chef  Sean and his vision of  modern Indigenous foods are featured in numerous articles, radio segments, and educa -
tional dinners at esteemed associations like the James Beard House in Manhattan. He has also shared his knowledge 
with audiences at Yale, the Culinary Institute of  America, the United Nations, and many more. Sean has received 
accolades for his work, such as the 2015 First Peoples Fund Fellowship, 2018 Bush Foundation Fellowship, Nation-
al Center’s 2018 First American Entrepreneurship Award, 2018 James Beard Award for Best American Cookbook, 2019 James Beard Leadership Award, and 2021 Esquire Chef  of  the Year. COVER PHOTO: Walleye Three Ways
ANNUAL REPORT 2021Table of Contents
Executive Director’s Report............................................................................................................4
Board Chair’s Message....................................................................................................................6Board of Directors..........................................................................................................................7Introduction..................................................................................................................................8Preserve Tribal Existence................................................................................................................8Protect T ribal Natural Resources...................................................................................................11
Promote Human Rights ................................................................................................................19
Hold Governments Accountable...................................................................................................29Develop Indian Law
......................................................................................................................30
FY 2021 Financial Report...............................................................................................................31Contributions..............................................................................................................................32NARF Staff..................................................................................................................................39
32021 was the fifty-first year that the Native American 
Rights Fund has been serving as the national Indian le -
gal defense fund providing legal advice and assistance to tribes, Native organizations, and individual Indians in cases of  major importance across the country.  Once 
again, we were proud that we were able to help our Na -
tive American clients achieve several significant legal 
victories and accomplishments during the year.
In Big Horn Electrical Cooperative v. Alden Big Man, the 
Montana federal district court upheld Crow tribal court 
jurisdiction over a non-member utility company for 
failure to follow a Crow tribal statute limiting heat and electricity service disconnections during winter months 
for homes where elderly and disabled individuals reside.  
The court held that the Crow Tribe, represented by NARF, has legislative jurisdiction over the non-mem -
ber utility company on the tribal trust land where Mr. Big Man, an elderly tribal member resides.
The new Biden Administration took action to reverse 
several actions taken by the Trump Administration that adversely affected NARF’s clients. The incoming Biden 
Administration revoked the illegally issued permit for 
the Keystone XL Pipeline which was opposed by the Rosebud Sioux Tribe and the Fort Belknap Indian Com -
munity. President Biden issued a proclamation restoring the Bears Ears National Monument to its original size plus some additional acreage. President Trump had pre-
viously issued an Executive Order greatly diminishing 
the National Monument over the objections of  tribes including the Hopi Nation, Ute Mountain Ute Tribe, 
and the Pueblo of  Zuni, NARF’s clients. The Biden 
Administration also stopped the National Park Service from adopting regulations implementing the National 
Register of  Historic Places that would have prevented 
traditional cultural properties, cultural landscapes, and places of  traditional religious and cultural significance 
from being listed. NARF represented the Native Village 
of  Tyonek, the Blue Lake Rancheria, and the National Association of  Tribal Historic Preservation Officers in 
this process.
In Alaska Department of  Fish and Game v. Federal Sub -
sistence Board, the Alaska federal district court upheld 
the Federal Subsistence Board’s authority to authorize emergency subsistence hunts for rural residents. NARF 
represented the Organized Villageof  Kake who inter -
vened in the case to support the Federal Subsistence 
Board’s authority.
The Biden Administration also took several actions 
which benefitted NARF’s tribal clients in Alaska by re-
versing previous Trump Administration actions. Presi -
dent Biden signed an Executive Order reinstating the Northern Bering Sea Climate Resilience Area which will protect the sensitive ecosystem and the subsistence 
lifestyle of  the Alaska tribes in the area. The Biden Ad-ministration denied a permit for the proposed Pebble 
Mine which NARF’s tribal clients in the Bristol Bay 
area oppose. President Biden also placed a full mora -
torium on all further oil and gas activities in the Arctic 
National Wildlife Refuge which NARF’s tribal clients 
in that area want to protect from development. After the Trump Administration had denied NARF’s Alaska 
tribal clients participation in the Bering Sea-Western In-
terior Proposed Resource Management Plan, President Biden signed an Executive Order that now has the Alas-
ka tribes participating.
In Brackeen v. Haaland , the Fifth Circuit Court of  Ap-
peals en banc  generally upheld the authority of  Congress 
to enact the 1978 Indian Child Welfare Act, held that 
the Act’s definition of  “Indian Child” did not operate 
on the basis of  race, but found certain sections of  the 
Act to be unconstitutional. All the parties in the case 
executive director’s report
John E. Echohawk
Executive Director
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 4are asking the U.S. Supreme Court to review the Fifth 
Circuit’s decision. NARF has filed a tribal amicus brief  
supporting review on behalf  of  180 tribal nations and 
35 tribal organizations.
NARF continues its Voting Rights Project and its work 
with the Native American Voting Rights Coalition. In addition to litigation and the work associated with 
leading the Coalition, we are currently engaged in se-
curing polling places on the reservations, securing ad -
dress reform for Native voters so they can register and 
receive ballots in the mail, and a redistricting project to 
undo much of  the damage to Native American repre-sentation across the country.
The U.S. District Court for the District of  Columbia 
has granted final approval of  the $59 million settlement 
in Pembina Chippewa v. United States. NARF represents the Turtle Mountain Chippewa, Chippewa Cree, White 
Earth Band of  Minnesota Chippewa, and the Little 
Shell Chippewa Tribe in this case against the federal 
government for misaccounting and mismanagement of  their tribal trust fund, the Pembina Judgment Fund.
These legal victories and accomplishments would not 
have been possible without the contributions and grants 
from the many supporters of  our nonprofit organiza -
tion. We thank you for your support and hope that your 
support will continue in 2022 and beyond so we can 
continue to pursue justice for Native Americans.    
John E. EchohawkExecutive Director
ANNUAL REPORT 2021 5WILD RICE STUFFED QUAILWILD RICE STUFFED QUAILOsiyo,
This past year has been another cycle of  challenges and 
hardship across Indian Country and the United States. So many have struggled in the face of  this pandemic. It 
can feel overwhelming and unending. For the staff  of  
the Native American Rights Fund, the work to serve Indian Country and assert Native American rights has 
multiplied exponentially.
In fact, it was exactly these perpetual challenges that led 
Native leaders and allies to envision a nonprofit legal 
organization to work on behalf  of  tribes. NARF was created in the face of  generation upon generation of  
adversity. NARF began at a time when so many chal-
lenges stood in our way as Native peoples, govern-ments, and cultures. Over the past fifty-one years, like 
Native cultures, NARF has proven to have the stamina, 
the strength, and the fortitude to not only continue, but to succeed in the face of  these hardships. 
In many ways, this year was no different than the fifty 
before. When states passed discriminatory legislation, 
NARF was there to fight for Native people. When cor -
porations prioritized profits over the rights of  Native 
peoples and the sovereignty of  Native nations, NARF 
provided the legal support and resources to protect 
tribal sovereignty, natural resources, and sacred plac-es. When states tried to divide and dilute the power of  
Native communities through gerrymandered districts, 
NARF supported and amplified tribal voices demand-ing justice and equal representation. In the face of  In -
dian Country’s challenges, NARF rose to the call with big wins.
As the chair of  NARF’s Board of  Directors,
I am happy to report that NARF also managed to cre -
ate these successes while maintaining fiscal soundness 
and conservation. Despite the economic chaos brought 
on by the pandemic, the organization has continued to develop a financial foundation that will ensure that we 
are able to continue these important fights on behalf  of  
Indian Country into the years to come. Of  course, that financial security would not be possible 
without the generous support of  the individuals, tribes, 
foundations, and other organizations that prioritize the fight for Native rights and the need for justice after hun-
dreds of  years of  inequity and systemic racism. Even as 
each of  us have faced “year two” of  the pandemic, we have stood together to ensure justice for this land’s first 
peoples. We thank you for that and looking forward to 
moving forward with you by our side.
To end on a joyful note, I am happy to share with you 
that plans to celebrate the first fifty years of  NARF are underway. I hope that you can join us on April 16, 2022. 
Find the details at https://www.narf.org/50thgala/. It 
will be a celebration of  much accomplished, and much to look forward to, indeed. Looking forward to seeing 
you there!
Wado,
Lacey A. Horn
Chair, NARF Board of  Directors
Board Chair’s Message
Lacey A. Horn
Chair, NARF Board of  Directors
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 6The Native American Rights Fund has 
a governing board composed of  Native 
American leaders from across the country. 
Board members are chosen based on their involvement and knowledge of  
Indian issues and affairs, as well as tribal 
affiliation, to ensure comprehensive geographical representation. The vision of  
the Board members is essential to NARF’s 
effectiveness in representing its Native American clients.
NARF’s Board of  Directors: Lacey 
Horn, Chair (Cherokee Nation); Kenneth 
Kahn, Vice-Chair (Santa Ynez Band 
of  Chumash Indians); Derek Valdo, 
Treasurer (Pueblo of  Acoma); Anita 
Mitchell (Muckleshoot Indian Tribe); 
Rhonda Pitka (Athabascan/Inupiaq); Robert Miguel (Ak-Chin Indian 
Community); Rebecca Miles  (Nez Perce 
Tribe); Gayla Hoseth (Curyung Tribal 
Council); Stephanie Bryan (Poarch Band 
of  Creek Indians); Rebecca Crooks-
Stratton  (Sisseton-Wahpeton Sioux); 
Jamie Azure (Turtle Mountain Band of  
Chippewa); Michael Petoskey  (Grand 
Traverse Band of  Ottawa and Chippewa 
Indians)
Not pictured: Camille Kalama (Native 
Hawai’ian) 
Randy Bardwell
, Pechanga Band  
of  Luiseño Mission Indians
Deborah Bardwell
Jaime Barrientoz , Grande Traverse 
Band of  Ottawa and 
Chippewa IndiansJohn Bevan 
Wallace Coffey, ComancheAda Deer, Menominee
Harvey A. Dennenberg
Lucille A. Echohawk , Pawnee
Jane Fonda
Eric Ginsburg
Jeff  GinsburgRodney Grant , Omaha
Dr. Marion McCollom Hampton
Chris E. McNeil, Jr., 
Tlingit-Nisga’a
Billy Mills, Oglala LakotaAmado Peña, Jr., Yaqui/Chicano
Wayne Ross
Nancy Starling-RossMark Rudick
Pam Rudick
Michael G. SawayaErnie Stevens, Jr., 
Wisconsin Oneida
Andrew Teller, Isleta Pueblo Verna Teller, Isleta Pueblo Richard Trudell,  Santee Sioux
Rebecca Tsosie,  Pascua Yaqui
Tzo-Nah, Shoshone BannockAine UngarRt. Rev. William C. Wantland, 
Seminole
W. Richard West , 
Southern Cheyenne
Randy Willis, Oglala Lakota
Teresa Willis , Umatilla 
Mary Wynne, Rosebud Sioux
 Board  OF DIRECTORS
The National Support Council assists NARF with fundraising and public relations efforts. Some members are 
prominent in the fields of  business, entertainment, and the arts. Others are known advocates for the rights of  the underserved. All are committed to upholding the rights of  Native Americans.National support council
ANNUAL REPORT 2021 7Introduction  
The Native American Rights Fund holds governments accountable. W e fight to protect Native American rights, resources, 
and lifeways through litigation, legal advocacy, and expertise. NARF’s first Board of Directors developed five priorities that still lead us today. In this annual report, you will find NARF’s recent work within each of these priority areas.
• Preserve tribal existence• Protect tribal natural resources• Promote Native American human rights• Hold governments accountable to Native Americans
• Develop Indian law and educate the public about Indian rights, laws, and issues
Tribal governments possess the power to regulate the 
internal affairs of  their members and activities within 
their reservations. In treaties, Indian tribes ceded mil -
lions of  acres of  land in exchange for the guarantee that the federal government would protect the tribes’ right to self-government. Under the priority to preserve tribal 
existence, NARF supports tribes’ rights to live according 
to traditions, enforce treaty rights, ensure independence on reservations, and protect their right to self-govern 
(sovereignty). 
TRIBAL SOVEREIGNTY AND JURISDICTION
Tribal Sovereignty Protection Initiative
NARF partners with the National Congress of  Amer -
ican Indians (NCAI) on the Tribal Sovereignty Protec -
tion Initiative to monitor legislation, judicial appoint -
ments, and cases related to tribal interests. 
~ Tribal Supreme Court Project (sct.narf.org)
The Tribal Supreme Court Project is a major component 
of  the Initiative through which the NARF and NCAI 
staff  monitor cases at or headed to the U.S. Supreme Court. The Project is based on  the idea that a strong 
and coordinated approach can reduce, and even reverse, 
the erosion of  tribal sovereignty by Justices who appear to lack an understanding of  federal Indian law and are 
unfamiliar with the practical challenges facing tribal 
governments. On June 1, the Court issued its opinion in Cooley v. United States  (19-1414) and held that a tribal 
police officer may detain a non-Indian on a public high-way running through the reservation           or suspected violations of  federal or state law and may perform a 
search while the suspect is held for transport to the state or federal authorities. On June 25, the Court issued it 
opinion in Alaska Native Vill. Corp. Assoc. v. Confederated Tribes of  the Chehalis Reservation (20-544) and Mnuchin v. 
Confederated Tribes of  the Chehalis Reservation (20-543). The 
Court held that Alaska Native regional and village cor -
porations are “tribal governments” for purposes of  the 
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act. 
For October Term 2021, the Project is closely watching 
Brackeen v. Haaland (21-380), and related petitions, which 
raise issues about the Indian Child Welfare Act. In ad-dition, the State of  Oklahoma filed a series of  petitions 
encouraging the Court to reverse its holding in McGirt 
v. Oklahoma.  
At this writing, Denezpi v. United States (20-7622) (double 
jeopardy) and Ysleta del Sur Pueblo v. Texas  (20-493) (In-
dian gaming) also were granted review.
 ~ Judicial Selection Project
Another component of  the Tribal Sovereignty Protec -
tion Initiative is the Judicial Selection Project. The Proj-ect’s focus is research and education: to educate the fed -
eral judiciary about tribal issues, to educate tribal leaders 
about the federal judiciary, and to raise awareness about 
the need for federal judges who understand the unique legal status of  Indian tribes. 
On October 5, the Senate confirmed Lauren King, a 
Muscogee Nation citizen, for a seat on the United 
States District Court for the Western District of  Wash-
ington. She is the first Native American federal judge in the Western District of  Washington. PRESERVE TRIBAL EXISTENCE
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 8Big Horn Electric Cooperative v. Alden Big Man, et al.
In 2012, Alden Big Man, an elderly member of  the 
Apsaalooke (Crow) Tribe sued the Big Horn Elec -
tric Cooperative in the Crow Civil Court pursuant to 
an Apsaalooke tribal statute limiting heat and electric-
ity service disconnections during winter months for 
homes where elderly and disabled individuals reside. In 2013, the tribal court dismissed the case, holding that 
it lacked jurisdiction over the case against a non-mem-
ber utility company. Mr. Big Man appealed the ruling to the Apsaalooke Appeals Court. In April 2017, the 
Apsaalooke Appeals Court held that the trial court did 
have jurisdiction and remanded the case to the Crow Civil Court. Big Horn Electric then filed a complaint in 
federal district court, asking the court to find that tribal 
court remedies had been exhausted and that the tribal court lacked jurisdiction over the suit. 
NARF, representing the Apsaalooke Appeals Court 
judges and Crow Tribal Health Board members, filed 
motions to dismiss. Those motions were denied, and 
the court found that exhaustion had occurred. Motions for summary judgment on the issue of  tribal jurisdic-
tion were filed in November 2019. In July 2020, the 
Magistrate concluded that the Crow Tribe has legisla -
tive jurisdiction over Big Horn on the tribal trust land 
where Big Man resides and the Crow Tribal Court has 
jurisdiction to hear Big Man’s claims. In February 2021, the court adopted the magistrate’s recommendations in 
their entirety. The order upholds the Tribe’s legislative 
and adjudicative jurisdiction. Big Horn appealed to the U.S. Court of  Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. Briefing 
of  the appeal was completed in late 2021 and oral argu-
ment is set for February 2022.
Cheyenne River Sioux et al. v. Mnuchin
In March 2020, Congress passed the Coronavirus Aid, Relief  and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) to re-
spond to the devastating impacts of  the pandemic. Ti -
tle V of  the CARES Act appropriates $150 billion for “payments to States, Tribal governments and units of  
local government.” with $8 billion reserved for tribal governments. In April 2020, Treasury announced its in-
tention to include Alaska Native Corporations (ANC) in 
disbursement. Three separate groups of  plaintiffs sued on the grounds that ANC are not tribal governments. 
NARF represents the Rosebud Sioux, Nondalton, Arc-
tic Village, and Venetie Tribes. In June 2020, the court reversed its earlier stance and granted summary judg -
ment to the government. The court held that ANC are “Indian tribes” and that their boards of  directors are “tribal governments” for purposes of  the CARES Act. 
The court’s decision rested on interpretation of  those 
terms in the Indian Self-Determination Education As-sistance Act (ISDEAA). Tribal plaintiffs appealed and 
the District of  Columbia Court of  Appeals reversed, 
holding that Alaska Native Corporations are not tribes for the purposes of  the CARES Act. The corporations 
and the federal government petitioned for certiorari, 
which the U.S. Supreme Court granted January 2021. Oral argument was heard in the case in April 2021. In 
June, the Court held that ANC were eligible for fund-
ing under the CARES Act. We continue to monitor the spend-out of  CARES Act funds.
Cheyenne and Arapaho Tribes T ax Dispute
In April 2021, Continental Resources, Inc., contest -
ed mineral severance taxes levied by the Cheyenne & Arapaho Tribes Tax Commission dating back several years. Twenty-five years ago, the U.S. Circuit Court of  
Appeals for the Tenth Circuit affirmed the Commis-
sion’s authority to tax mineral extraction by non-Indi-ans in Mustang Production Co. v. Harrison,  a case argued by 
NARF’s Melody McCoy. Continental now argues that Mustang Production  is no longer good law. In December 
2021, the Commission produced an updated tax bill and 
a record, which Continental is reviewing. If  Continental 
continues to object to the updated bill, then the matter will be briefed in the first half  of  2022.
 
ANNUAL REPORT 2021 9DUCK PATEDUCK PATEDuring colonization, tribes’ lands diminished to a mere 
2.3 percent of  their original size. An adequate land base 
and control over natural resources are necessary for economic self-sufficiency and self-determination. They are vital to tribal existence. Thus, much of  NARF’s work is to protect tribal natural resources. 
INDIAN LANDSKeystone XL Pipeline
The TransCanada (TC Energy) Keystone XL Pipeline is a massive oil pipeline intended to link the oil pro -
ducers in Canada with the refiners and export terminals on the Gulf  Coast. It would cross, or comes very close to, the boundaries of  many reservations and tribal land holdings, including the Oceti Sacowin (Great Sioux Nation) lands from before the Fort Laramie Treaty of  1868. Moreover, the proposed route crosses sacred Sioux land, cultural sites, and burials. However, no con -
sultation occurred between the federal government and the tribes affected. For these and other reasons, Presi-dent Obama rejected the permit required for the Cana -
da-U.S. boundary crossing in 2015.
In March 2018, the Trump administration reversed 
course and granted a Presidential permit. In response, NARF filed a complaint on behalf  of  the Rosebud Sioux Tribe and the Fort Belknap Indian Community in August 2018. The President issued a second permit to circumvent injunctions preventing construction. As a result, the Tribes amended their complaint to reflect new claims.The government and TC Energy filed mo-tions to dismiss and a hearing was held in September 2019. In December 2019, the court denied the govern-ment’s and TC Energy’s motions to dismiss. All of  the Tribes’ claims relating to the new permit were allowed to proceed, including the treaty claims, constitutional claims, trespass claims against TC Energy, and claims that TC Energy and the Keystone XL Pipeline are sub-ject to tribal regulatory jurisdiction. The order allow-ing the case to continue was a major victory. In January 2020, TC Energy filed a notice with the court that it would begin “pre-construction” activities in February. Given construction and the rise of  the pandemic, the Tribes were forced to move for a preliminary injunction and temporary restraining order. The court did not rule on those motions before an April hearing; however, the court did issue an injunction in another case that pre-vented TC Energy from crossing any rivers. In Octo-ber, the judge ruled against the Tribes on many claims finding that the permit only applied to the border cross-ing, but he requested supplemental briefing and noted that the tribes could file a new suit against the Bureau of  Land Management. In November 2020, the Tribes, represented by NARF, filed a lawsuit against the U.S. Department of  Interior and the Bureau of  Land Man -
agement over the KXL permit. The lawsuit was filed because the United States failed to honor the treaties and take a hard look at the impact the pipeline will have on tribal communities. In January 2021, the incoming administration revoked the illegally issued presidential permit for the KXL pipeline. The litigation against the president has been dismissed as moot. The litigation against the agencies, however, is stayed pending the ad -
ministration’s decision on the permits it has issued to TransCanada. TransCanada has since abandoned the project, relinquished its permits and most of  the right of  way, removed the installed pipeline, and reclaimed the disturbed land. Once the Bureau of  Land Manage -
ment determines that the land has been successfully reclaimed, they will approve TransCanada’s relinquish-ment of  the remaining right of  way.
Shoalwater Bay Indian Tribe
NARF is assisting the Shoalwater Bay Indian Tribe with a litigation request to the United States. The Tribe oc-cupies a small, coastal reservation southwest of  Seattle, WA. A state highway crosses through the reservation, and its surface water drainage inundates a portion of  the reservation. On behalf  of  the Tribe, NARF submit-ted a litigation request requesting that the United States, as the Tribe’s trustee, sue the Washington Department of  Transportation.
Hualapai Tribe Fee to Trust Applications
NARF represents the Hualapai Indian Tribe of  Arizo -
na in applying for the transfer into trust status of  eight parcels of  land owned in fee by the Tribe. The Tribe is located on the south rim of  the Grand Canyon in Arizona, and claims a boundary that runs to the center of  the Colorado River. Applications were submitted to the BIA. Two new parcels were taken into trust in Sep -
tember 2018, and after a long delay (in 2017 the Acting Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs withdrew authority from BIA Regional Directors to approve off-reserva -
tion fee-to-trust applications and placed that authority with the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs) the Cholla Canyon Ranch parcel was approved to be taken into trust in October 2021. In December, the BIA issued a Notice of  Decision approving the Tribe’s application for Hunt Ranch Parcels 1-4 to be taken into trust. Only Hunt Ranch Parcel 5, which requires an additional site visit, remains outstanding. Recent progress on this mat-ter, which was slowed significantly by the COVID-19 pandemic, makes us hopeful that work might be com-pleted in 2022.
protect tribal natural resources
ANNUAL REPORT 2021 11Akiachak Native Community, et al. v. 
Department of Interior, et al.
In 2006, the Akiachak Native Community, the Chilkoot 
Indian Association, the Chalkyitsik Village Council, and the Tuluksak Native Community IRA, represented by 
NARF, sought judicial review of  25 CFR Part 151. This 
federal regulation governs the procedures used by Indi-an tribes and individuals requesting the Secretary of  the 
Interior to acquire title to land in trust on their behalf. At 
the time, the regulation barred putting Alaskan land in trust other than for the Metlakatla Indian Community.
In March 2013, the court granted plaintiffs complete 
relief  on all of  their claims—a major victory for Alaska 
tribes. In December 2014, DOI published its final rule 
rescinding the “Alaska Exception.” 
DOI completed one Alaskan trust land acquisition in 
2017. However, in 2018, the Trump Administration officially withdrew the Solicitor’s opinion supporting 
land-into-trust for Alaska tribes and announced the De-
partment would review whether to reinstate the “Alaska Exception.” NARF represented clients at tribal consul -
tations, making clear Alaska tribes will tolerate noth -
ing more than full reinstatement of  the Alaskan trust lands program. On January 19, 2021, the Department 
decided that lands cannot be taken in trust for Alaska 
tribes. The Biden Administration withdrew the January decision in April 2021. The Department will again be 
accepting trust applications from Alaska tribes. 
WATER RIGHTS
Under federal law, Indian tribes are entitled to sufficient 
water for present and future needs. These water rights 
are superior to all water rights created after the tribes’ 
priority dates, at least as early as the establishment of  their reservations. In most cases, this gives tribes se -
nior water rights in the water-short West. Unfortunate -
ly, many tribes have not used their reserved water rights and the rights are unquantified. The current need is to 
define and quantify the amount of  water to which each 
tribe is entitled. 
Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians
NARF, with co-counsel, represents the Agua Caliente Band of  Cahuilla Indians in a lawsuit filed in 2013 in 
the U.S. District Court for the Central District of  Cal-
ifornia. The Agua Caliente asked the court to declare their water rights senior in the Coachella Valley, quan-
tify those rights, and prevent Coachella Valley Water 
District and Desert Water Agency from further impair -
ing the quantity and quality of  aquifer water. In March 2015, the court ruled largely in the Tribe’s favor, hold-ing that the Tribe has a reserved right to water and that groundwater is a water source available to fulfill that 
right. Upon appeal, the decision was upheld. 
With “phase one” done, the parties addressed “phase 
two” legal issues. Phase two dealt with the method for 
quantifying the Tribe’s water share, the right to water of  a certain quality, and whether the Tribe owns the 
groundwater storage space under its reservation. In 
April 2019, the court dismissed the claims holding that, since the Tribe could not show that it presently 
had a shortage of  water, it was not sufficiently injured 
to prove standing. This decision was made despite un -
refuted evidence that the aquifer depth underlying the 
reservation had lowered substantially and the water had 
been degraded by the water districts’ activities.
In July 2020, the Tribe filed an amended complaint, 
adding allegations relating to the Tribe’s injuries and the Tribe’s pumping of  groundwater, and to more accurate -
ly frame the issue of  the ownership of  the pore space under the reservation. In the meantime, the parties en-tered into mediation and the case has been stayed until 
January 2022.
Palouse River Basin Adjudication – 
Nez Perce Tribe W ater Rights
NARF represents the Nez Perce Tribe in its water rights claims in the Palouse River Basin Adjudication. In Oc-
tober 2016, the Idaho Water Court issued a commence -
ment order, and an initial hearing was held in January 
2017. The Tribe is working with the United States to ex-
amine the nature and scope of  the Tribe’s water rights 
claims.In late 2019, the U.S. and the Tribe filed claims for instream flows in 24 reaches of  the Palouse River 
and its tributaries, for nearly 200 springs claims on pri-
vate and federal lands, and for water for consumptive uses on two allotments in the Palouse watershed. The 
Idaho Department of  Water Resources released its Di-
rector’s Report on all federal/tribal and private Palouse Basin water claims in late July 2021. Those claims are 
under review.
Klamath Basin W ater Rights
Represented by NARF, the Klamath Tribes’ water 
rights were recognized in 1983 in United States v. Adair, but the courts left quantification of  the water rights to 
Oregon’s Klamath Basin Adjudication (KBA). After 
finishing the KBA’s 38-year administrative phase, the Tribes were able to enforce their water rights for the 
first time in 2013. The Klamath County Circuit Court 
is now reviewing the Oregon Water Resources Depart-PROTECT tribal NATURAL RESOURCES
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 12ment’s (OWRD’s) Findings of  Fact and Order of  De -
termination (FFOD) issued in the KBA. In 2017 and 
2018, the Klamath County Circuit Court resolved juris-
dictional and other legal issues as well as general proce -
dural issues. Importantly, the court issued rulings lim -
iting discovery and the introduction of  new evidence, preventing a complete do-over of  the administrative proceedings. However, the court ruled that a de novo 
standard of  review would apply, in which the court will “look anew” at the determinations of  OWRD in the FFOD and may give deference to OWRD’s determi-
nations. Now the KBA is in Phase 3, which addresses 
the substantive exceptions filed to the individual wa-ter right claim determinations in the FFOD. Part 1 of  
Phase 3 addresses crosscutting legal issues applicable to 
three claim groups: Group A – pre-1909 and non-tribal federal reserved water right claims; Group B – Walton 
right and Klamath Termination Act claims; and Group 
C – Tribal claims. Phase 3, Part 1 has been completed for all three groups.KBA Phase 3 Part 2 began in De -
cember 2020 to determine exceptions to legal issues or disputed factual issues. The KBA judge retired on April 30, 2021. A new judge was appointed on December 20, 
2021. The new judge will schedule motions to intro-
duce non-record evidence in the tribal Group C claims. 
Tule River Tribe
After almost 30 years of  advocacy, the Tule River Indian Tribe, represented by NARF, successfully settled its wa-
ter rights in November 2007. The settlement agreement 
secured a domestic, municipal, industrial, and commer -
cial water supply for the Tribe. The Tribe now seeks 
federal legislation to ratify the agreement and authorize 
appropriations to develop the water rights through the creation of  water infrastructure and reservoirs on the 
Tule River Reservation. The Tribe’s team assisted the 
federal team in developing an appraisal of  several al-ternatives. The federal team promised to be done with the study by November 2015 so that the Tribe could proceed to negotiate an appropriate settlement to pres-
ent to Congress. In December 2016 the federal team 
delivered its report to the Tribe. The Tribe and its team performed a detailed analysis and critique of  the report 
and met with Interior Department officials in March 
2018 to bring them up to speed. In spring of  2019, the Interior Department committed to some funding, but 
not enough to construct a meaningfully sized water 
storage project. Legislative efforts continued through-out 2020 and 2021. 
Kickapoo Tribe in Kansas
At times in recent decades, the water supply for the 
Kickapoo Reservation has violated the Safe Drink -
ing Water Act of  1974. Consequently, the Kickapoo 
people fear they are unable to safely drink, bathe, or 
cook with tap water. There also is not enough water 
on the reservation to provide basic municipal services to the community—the Tribe is not able to provide lo -
cal schools with reliable, safe running water, and the fire department cannot provide adequate protection. In June 2006, the Kickapoo Tribe in Kansas, represented 
by NARF, filed a federal court lawsuit to enforce ex-
press promises made to the Tribe to build a reservoir project, the most cost-effective way to improve the wa-
ter supply. Despite promises made to the Tribe, Nema -
ha Brown Watershed Joint Board #7, the Natural Re-
sources Conservation Service of  the U.S. Department 
of  Agriculture, and the State of  Kansas continued to 
develop the region’s water resources. The result was the near depletion of  the Tribe’s senior federal water rights.
The federal government, the state, and the local water -
shed district all concede the existence of   the Tribe’s 
senior Indian reserved water rights; the real issue is the 
amount of  water needed to satisfy the Tribe’s rights and 
the source of  that water. In September 2016, the Tribe and the state executed a settlement agreement that in-
ANNUAL REPORT 2021 13cludes a negotiated water right for the Tribe, as well as 
all of  the details for the administration of  the Tribe’s right in the Delaware River watershed. The Tribe devel -
oped legislation in consultation with the Kansas con-gressional delegation to approve the negotiated water right. Over the years, several bills were introduced, but not enacted into law. Finally, late in 2020, the Kicka-poo Tribe water project study was passed as part of  the final omnibus appropriations act. The legislation kicks off  a new study and re-evaluation of  the Plum Creek Project that the Tribe has been pursuing for years. The Tribe’s team, led by NARF, has retained water engineer -
ing and agricultural economic consultants. Given the Tribe’s successful negotiation in 2016 of  its water rights with the State of  Kansas, the final settlement approving legislation can move forward once the study provides the appropriations numbers necessary for water storage and usage in the Plum Creek Project.
Pauma Band of Luiseno Indians
The Pauma Band of  Luiseno Indians is one of  the five tribes party to the San Luis Rey Water Rights Settle -
ment. The San Luis Rey tribes’ water rights were initial-ly addressed by a Congressionally-approved settlement act in 1988. However, for a wide variety of  reasons, the settlement was unenforceable and did not address the needs of  the tribes. In 2016, a bill amending the original settlement act was passed by Congress, and the San Luis Rey Water Rights Settlement is now in its implemen-tation stage. NARF represents the Pauma Band in the implementation, which includes allocating water and funding as well as examining groundwater management strategies.
HUNTING AND FISHING RIGHTS  
Tribal hunting and fishing rights are grounded in sover -
eignty and affirmed in treaties and agreements. Because of  their remoteness, no other group of  people in the United States continues to be as intimately connected to the land and water and as dependent upon its vast natural resources as Alaska’s Indigenous peoples.
Alaska Department of Fish and Game 
v. Federal Subsistence BoardIn August 2020, the State of  Alaska filed a complaintin the Alaska federal district court challenging threedecisions made by the Federal Subsistence Board(FSB) related to subsistence hunting in the state.(The FSB is the body responsible for setting all rulesand regulations related to the taking of  wild fish andgame by qualified subsistence users within Alaska’sfederal lands.) Alaska alleged that the FSB actedoutside of  the authority granted to it by the AlaskaNational Interest Lands Conservation Act of  1980.NARF filed a motion to intervene on behalf  of  the Organized Village of  Kake to defend the FSB’s authority to authorize emergency hunts. In September 2020, the court heard oral argument. Shortly thereafter, the court denied the state’s effort to enjoin the Game Unit 13 closure. The court also concluded that the state’s arguments of  harm were overstated based on the evidence before the court. In December 2021, the court issued its final order on summary judgment upholding the FSB’s authority in all respects of  the case—marking a significant victory for the Organized Village of  Kake and subsistence hunters in GMU 13.
Bering Sea Elders Group
The Bering Sea Elders Group (BSEG) is an alliance of  39 Yup’ik and Inupiaq villages that seeks to protect the sensitive ecosystem of  the Bering Sea, as well as the subsistence lifestyle and the communities that depend on it. NARF has represented BSED since 2010 and has designed a comprehensive plan to help their efforts to protect the area and become more engaged in its man -
agement. 
In December 2016, NARF’s work with BSEG resulted 
in President Barack Obama signing an historic Execu -
tive Order creating the Northern Bering Sea Climate Resilience Area. This was an incredible victory for our clients and the first of  its kind for tribes anywhere in the United States. However, in April 2017, President Trump signed an executive order called “Implementing an America-First Offshore Energy Strategy.” While the order was aimed at re-opening Arctic and Atlantic areas for offshore drilling, it also entirely revoked Executive Order 13754. BSEG responded immediately, deter -
mined to restore the important conservation, econom-ic, and cultural provisions. President Biden signed an Executive Order that reinstated Executive Order 13754 and the Northern Bering Sea Climate Resilience Area. BSEG is now working on the implementation of  the reinstated order. In addition to work implementing the order, NARF assists BSEG with other work, including salmon bycatch, the reauthorization of  the Magnuson Stevens Act, engaging with federal funding agencies about the need to restructure their grants process to more equitably include tribes, and other subsistence ad-vocacy efforts.
Pebble Mine
Alaska’s Bristol Bay region is home to the largest wild salmon runs in the world. It is also home to the Yup’ik, Dena’ina, and Alutiiq peoples who depend on sustain-able salmon runs. In 2013, NARF helped create the United Tribes of  Bristol Bay (UTBB), a consortium formed to address mining proposals threatening salm-on-rearing streams. The proposed Pebble Limited Part-PROTECT tribal NATURAL RESOURCES
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 14nership (PLP) mine would sit on the headwaters of  the 
largest salmon-producing river in Bristol Bay. In Feb-
ruary 2014, EPA gave notice that it would 
initiate a Clean Water Act 404(c) process 
for the proposed mine. Section 404(c) authorizes EPA 
to prohibit or restrict the discharge of  material in wa -
ters when such disposal would have adverse impacts. In September 2014, PLP filed a complaint against EPA. The court granted PLP’s request for a preliminary in-
junction to halt the 404(c) process. As the case con-
tinued, the judge issued a broad order quashing PLP’s subpoenas, finding that they pushed the limits of  fed -
eral rules. PLP withdrew its remaining subpoenas, but began serving narrower subpoenas, which also were quashed. In the last days of  2016, the parties requested 
a stay in order to negotiate settlement. 
In May 2017, the parties reached a settlement of  the 
litigation. Settlement terms included: (1) dismissing all 
PLP lawsuits against the EPA; (2) EPA withdrawing the proposed Section 404(c) determination; (3) EPA 
agreeing to not finalize any Section 404(c) action for 
four years or until the U.S. Army Corps of  Engineers issued its final environmental impact statement. PLP 
filed its federal permit application in December 2017, 
beginning the NEPA review. UTBB continued to work to protect Bristol Bay throughout the federal and state 
permitting process surrounding the mine.
In June 2019, Gov. Dunleavy briefly met with Presi -
dent Trump on Air Force One; subsequently, he told 
reporters that he was convinced that the president was “doing everything he can to work with us on our min -
ing concerns.” In July 2019, the Trump Administration 
announced it would formally withdraw the proposed 
404(c) determination from the Bristol Bay watershed. The action was undertaken with no public input, no 
tribal consultation, and no prior notice to Bristol Bay’s 
tribes. 
In response to this illegal act, local interests formed 
the Bristol Bay Defense Alliance, consisting of  UTBB, Bristol Bay Native Association, Bristol Bay Regional 
Seafood Development Association, Bristol Bay Reserve 
Association and Bristol Bay Economic Development Corporation. Throughout 2020, the Alliance took legal 
action on behalf  of  the local people who rely on the 
Bristol Bay fishery and all it sustains. The Army Corps ultimately denied Pebble’s permit application for its de-
ficient compensatory mitigation plan―marking the first 
permit denial for an Alaska hard rock mine in modern memory. NARF and the Tribes continue to work on 
securing lasting, permanent protections for the Bristol 
Bay watershed. A major milestone came in September 2021, when the EPA announced the initiation of  a new 
Section 404(c) process in Bristol Bay. 
Arctic National Wildlife Refuge
The Arctic National Wildlife Refuge’s Coastal Plain is 
home to the calving grounds of  the Porcupine Caribou Herd—one of  the largest wild herds in the world—and 
of  great cultural importance to the Gwich’in Tribes of  
Alaska, who refer to the area as Iizhik Gwats’an Gwandaii 
Goodlit (the sacred place where life begins). Since 1980, 
when the Coastal Plain was first considered for devel -
opment, the Gwich’in Tribes have worked tirelessly to 
protect the Refuge and the caribou. NARF represents 
the Native Village of  Venetie Tribal Government, Ve-
netie Village Council, and Artic Village Council, three federally recognized Gwich’in tribes, and advises them 
on their rights and strategic options surrounding pro -
posed development of  the Coastal Plain.
In 2017, Congress enacted tax reform legislation that 
contained a provision opening the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge’s Coastal Plain to oil and gas develop-
ment. The Bureau of  Land Management (BLM) began 
the environmental review process to open the Coastal Plain to oil and gas leasing. In December 2018, the BLM 
published its draft environmental impact statement 
(EIS). Despite months of  government-to-government meetings, the draft EIS was based on pre-existing data 
and research from other regions in Alaska that brushed 
aside the effects on subsistence and cultural resources. The final EIS, released in September 2019, identified 
the most development-intensive alternative as the pre-
ferred option.
ANNUAL REPORT 2021 15OWAMNI BISON ENTREEOWAMNI BISON ENTREEIn August 2020, the BLM’s authorized oil development 
in the entirety of  the Coastal Plain, with few restric -
tions. In September 2020, NARF filed a lawsuit chal-lenging the final EIS as well as the decision. Unfortu -
nately, the Trump Administration held a leasing sale on 
January 6, 2021, after the court denied NARF’s motion 
for preliminary injunction. Fortunately, the lease sale was a failure: less than half  of  the land even received 
a bid. On his first day in office, President Biden placed 
a full moratorium on all further oil and gas activities in the refuge. With the immediate threat removed, the 
Tribes continue to work towards protective measures 
for the refuge.
Bering Sea-Interior Tribal Commission
The Bering Sea-Interior Tribal Commission is a tribal consortium of  27 Tribes working in unity to protect tra-
ditional ways of  life by advocating for land use planning 
processes and sustainable natural resource management decisions that meaningfully reflect member Tribes’ val-
ues. Currently, the Tribal Commission is participating 
in the resource management planning processes for the Bering Sea-Western Interior and Central Yukon plan -
ning areas. These vast areas of  land encompass Tribal Commission member-tribes’ traditional lands and con-tain vital resources, which sustain member Tribes’ tra -
ditional subsistence-based ways of  life. As BLM’s land use planning processes move forward, NARF is provid-ing legal and technical support to the Tribal Commis-
sion and member Tribes. 
In December 2020, the BLM released the Bering 
Sea-Western Interior Proposed Resource Management 
Plan and Final Environmental Impact Statement. The Tribal Commission submitted a protest letter, rais-
ing the BLM’s exclusion of  tribes from the planning 
process and failure to adopt adequate protections for cultural and subsistence resources. Eleven days after 
the protest period closed, the BLM dismissed or de -
nied every protest they received. Inexplicably, the BLM 
concluded that the Tribal Commission did not have 
standing and dismissed the protest without addressing 
any of  the issues raised. A few days later, on the day before the inauguration, the BLM released its record 
of  decision approving the proposed plan. On his first 
day in office, President Biden specifically identified the Bering Sea-Western Interior Resource Management 
Plan as an action to be reviewed. Since Executive Or -
der 13990 went into effect, NARF and the Tribes have 
met with BLM multiple times to identify next steps. In 
October 2021, the BLM agreed to prioritize the Ber -
ing Sea-Western Interior Plan in its continuing resource 
management planning work.Bay Mills Indian Community Challenge to Enbridge’s 
Line 5 Pipeline Tunneling Project
NARF and Earthjustice have teamed up with the Bay Mills Indian Community to fight a proposed oil pipe-
line tunnel that threatens the Community’s treaty rights, 
tribal fisheries, and the environment. In August 2020, a judge granted Bay Mills Indian Community the right 
to intervene in an ongoing process pending before the 
Michigan Public Service Commission. The decision al -
lows Bay Mills to be a party to the Enbridge’s permit ap -
plication to build a tunnel beneath the Straits of  Mack-inac, and relocate a new segment of  its Line 5 pipeline. The contested case process was extended in May 2021. 
Direct testimony was filed in September, with rebut -
tal testimony in December. Cross-examination hearings 
are expected in January 2022, and post-hearing briefing 
is to conclude in March 2022.
Wyoming v. Herrera
Clayvin Herrera, a member of  the Crow Tribe of  In-
dians, is charged with taking elk out of  season, and Wyoming state courts have barred him from asserting 
his treaty rights in defense. In 2019, the U.S. Supreme 
Court affirmed the continued existence of  the Crow Tribe’s right to hunt on unoccupied lands and remand -
ed the case to the Wyoming courts; NARF represented the Crow Tribe as amicus curiae in that case. Now, Wy -
oming argues that Mr. Herrera is precluded from assert-
ing his treaty rights because the U.S. Court of  Appeals 
for the Tenth Circuit, in Crow Tribe of  Indians v. Repsis , 
made alternative holdings that Wyoming’s prosecution 
of  Crow Tribe treaty hunters is warranted by conser -
vation necessity, and the Bighorn National Forest is no 
longer “unoccupied” land. 
The trial court sided with Wyoming; on appeal, howev -
er, the Wyoming District Court, 4th Judicial District, re -
versed the lower court in December 2021, holding that 
issue preclusion did not apply. The State petitioned for review in the Wyoming Supreme Court, but on Janu-
ary 4, 2022, the Wyoming Supreme Court refused to 
hear the case. The State is now considering whether to seek review in the U.S. Supreme Court. NARF again 
represents the Crow Tribe as amicus curiae, this time 
working with the Tribal Justice Clinic at the University 
of  Arizona James E. Rogers College of  Law and local 
counsel Bailey Lazzari of  Lazzari Legal in Lander, WY, 
and filed an amicus brief  on behalf  of  the Crow Tribe in the Wyoming District Court.
Crow Tribe of Indians v. Repsis
This matter is related to Herrera, above, in which the 
State of  Wyoming argues that the judgment in 
Crow 
Tribe of  Indians v. Repsis , a declaratory judgment action 
filed by the Tribe and decided in Wyoming’s favor in the PROTECT tribal NATURAL RESOURCES
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 161990s, precludes the Tribe from making certain argu -
ments today. As a result of  the U.S. Supreme Court’s de-
cision in Herrera v. Wyoming, the Tribe seeks relief  from the Repsis  judgment pursuant to Rule 60(b) of  the Fed-
eral Rules of  Civil Procedure. If  the court grants relief, then the Repsis judgment would have no further force or 
effect, and the State could no longer argue preclusion in the remanded Herrera case. On July 1, 2021, the Dis-trict Court denied the motion—not on the merits, but instead concluding that the District Court lacked au-thority to disturb holdings reached by the U.S. Court of  Appeals for the Tenth Circuit. The Tribe has appealed to the Tenth Circuit, and filed its opening brief  on Sep-tember 27. Briefing is complete, and we are waiting for the Tenth Circuit to schedule oral argument.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION NCAI Climate Change Matters
The effects of  climate change on Indigenous peoples throughout the world are acute and will only get worse. NARF represents the National Congress of  American Indians (NCAI) at the international level through the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). The goal is ensuring indigenous rights are protected in any international agreement gov-erning greenhouse gas emissions reductions.
In December 2015, the Paris Agreement was adopt-
ed under the UNFCCC. The International Indigenous Peoples Forum on Climate Change (indigenous caucus), in which NARF participates, did not achieve all that it sought, but it achieved significant references that can be built on going forward. The Agreement states that, when taking climate change action, indigenous peoples’ rights must be acknowledged. Also, traditional, indig-enous knowledge shall help guide the climate change science. It also recognizes the need to strengthen that knowledge and establishes a platform for sharing infor -
mation and best practices. Since the Paris Agreement, the Indigenous caucus has made efforts to make the traditional knowledge platform a reality. In December 2018, a Facilitative Working Group (FWG) for the plat-form was established. The working group met in June 2019 with seven country representatives and seven in-digenous representatives. For the first time, indigenous representatives (chosen by indigenous peoples) par -
ticipated on an equal basis with states within a United Nations body. At the June meeting, the working group prepared a two-year work plan that was approved at Conference of  the Parties 25 (COP 25) in December 2019. Because of  COVID-19, COP 26 was delayed. 
In November, 2021, COP 26 convened in Scotland. It 
was preceded by the fifth meeting of  the FWG. Despite shortcomings in climate and other negotiations, Indige-nous representation saw positive growth. There was an historic gathering of  Indigenous traditional knowledge holders from around the world, per the FWG work plan. The meeting represents growing recognition of  the importance of  traditional knowledge to addressing climate change. Similarly positive, was the announce-ment of  an historic $1.7 billion commitment for Indig -
enous-led solutions for forests and lands protections. In addition, an additional three-year FWG work plan was approved.
ANNUAL REPORT 2021 17CHAGA CAKECHAGA CAKECORN CRAB DUMPLINGSCORN CRAB DUMPLINGSproMOTE HUMAN RIGHTS
To promote Native American human rights, NARF focuses 
on equal protection and freedom from discrimination 
in areas such as voting, education, incarceration, and religion. NARF also helps develop laws that provide unique protections for Native collective rights, tradi-tions, culture, and property such as sacred places, pey -
ote, eagle feathers, burial remains, and funerary objects.
RELIGIOUS FREEDOM AND 
SACRED PLACES
Bears Ears
For years, the Bears Ears Inter Tribal Coalition, a con-sortium of  five sovereign Indian nations (Hopi Tribe, Navajo Nation, Ute Indian Tribe, Ute Mountain Ute Tribe, and Pueblo of  Zuni) worked to protect the Bears Ears region, America’s most significant unprotected cultural landscape. Located in Utah, the Bears Ears re-gion contains at least 100,000 archaeological sites, some dated back to 12,000 BCE, and remains critical to many tribes today for spiritual as well as hunting and gather -
ing purposes. In response to tribal efforts, in December 2016, President Obama designated the Bears Ears Na-tional Monument and established the Bears Ears Com-mission “to provide guidance and recommendations on the development and implementation of  management plans and on management of  the monument.” The Commission included one elected officer each from the Hopi Nation, Navajo Nation, Ute Mountain Ute Tribe, Ute Indian Tribe, and Pueblo of  Zuni. 
In April 2017, President Trump directed the Depart-
ment of  the Interior to review the Bears Ears National Monument to determine if  it was created without “pub-lic outreach and proper coordination.” The suggestion that the monument’s designation lacked outreach and coordination is disingenuous. The Bears Ears Nation-al Monument was created after years of  advocacy and many public meetings in the Bears Ears region and in Washington, DC. The effort to protect Bears Ears was very long, very public, and very robust.
Despite an outpouring of  public support for Bears 
Ears, in December 2017, President Trump issued an Executive Order revoking and replacing the nation -
al monument. Representing the Hopi, Zuni, and Ute Mountain Ute Tribes, NARF sued the Administration for violations of  the Antiquities Act, the Separation of  Powers, the Property Clause and the Administrative Procedures Act. The Tribes filed their First Amended Complaint on November 7, 2019 followed by a Mo -tion for Summary Judgment in January 2020. Briefing was completed in 2020; however, the incoming Biden administration requested a stay pending a 60-day mon-uments review. Secretary of  Interior Deb Haaland com-pleted the review and submitted recommendations to the president. On October 8, President Biden issued a proclamation restoring the Bears Ears National Monu-ment to its original size, plus some additional acreage. Tribal leaders from the Bears Ears Coalition hailed the decision and were in attendance at the White House for the signing. We have recently filed a status report with the court requesting additional time to consider the im-pact the proclamation has on the litigation.
Standing Rock Sioux Tribe v. Army Corp of Engineers - 
Amicus Brief StrategyNARF and the National Congress of  American Indi-ans (NCAI) are assisting the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe and their attorneys to develop and coordinate an effec -
tive amicus brief  strategy in their lawsuit against the U.S. 
Army Corps of  Engineers in relation to the Dakota Access Pipeline (DAPL). In December 2016, the Army Corps of  Engineers issued a statement that it would not grant an easement to allow the Dakota Access Pipeline to cross under Lake Oahe. The Corps determined that further environmental review was warranted. 
However, in January 2017, President Trump directed 
the Corps to take “any and all actions appropriate” to review and approve the easement, rescind or modify the December memo, and consider any prior determi -
nations in the matter. In February, the Corps provided notice of  its intention to grant an easement to Dakota Access, LLC, to construct a pipeline under Lake Oahe. Both Standing Rock Sioux Tribe and Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe filed amended complaints and motions for summary judgment. NARF, in conjunction with NCAI, coordinated an amicus brief  strategy to support the 
Tribes. 
In June 2017, the court issued a favorable ruling for 
the Tribes, finding that the Corps “did not adequately consider the impacts of  an oil spill on fishing rights, hunting rights, or environmental justice, or the degree to which the pipeline’s effects are likely to be highly controversial.” In April 2018, Dakota Access filed its oil spill response plan. Then, in August 2018, the Corps affirmed its decision to issue a permit for DAPL. The Corps concluded that the “. . . review on remand did not reveal ‘significant new circumstance[s] or informa-tion relevant to environmental concerns.” The Tribes 
ANNUAL REPORT 2021 19filed motions for summary judgment in August 2019. 
NARF filed an amicus brief  supporting the Tribes’ mo-
tions for summary judgment on behalf  of  14 tribes and eight tribal organizations. In March 2020, the court granted summary judgment in favor of  the Tribes and 
remanded the matter to the Corps for preparation of  an 
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS). Much as it had done when remanded to the Corps in June 2017, the 
Court ordered an additional briefing on whether the it 
should vacate the easement pending completion of  the EIS. NARF filed an amicus brief  supporting vacatur. 
In July 2020, the judge ordered that the pipeline be emp -
tied of  oil by August 5. Dakota Access filed a notice of  
appeal and the DC Circuit Court of  Appeals issued an 
administrative stay of  the shut-down until further no -
tice. NARF submitted an amicus brief  on the emergency motion to stay on behalf  of  NCAI, the Great Plains Tribal Chairmen’s Association, and several other tribal 
organizations and tribes. NARF and NCAI continue to 
work with the Tribes’ attorneys and coordinate amicus strategy as requested.
National Register of Historic Places Rulemaking
In early 2019, the National Park Service (NPS) an -
nounced proposed rulemaking that would change the regulations that implement the National Register of  Historic Places (NRHP). Among some minor house -
keeping and administrative changes, the NPS proposed substantive changes that are targeted specifically at tribes and Native Hawaiian organizations. The chang -
es are intended to prevent traditional cultural proper -
ties, cultural landscapes, and places of  traditional re -
ligious and cultural significance from being listed on promote human rights
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 20the NRHP and considered in the Section 106 review 
process. The proposed changes discredit the value of  
protecting these types of  cultural resources and sideline 
tribes and Native Hawaiian organizations.
Initially, the NPS refused to consult with tribes (and 
Native Hawaiian organizations), but relented under sig-nificant pressure. The NPS held a single “consultation” 
meeting in Nevada in June 2019, and a single telecon -
ference in July 2019. Along with over seventy tribes 
and Native organizations, NARF submitted extensive 
comments on the proposed rulemaking on behalf  of  
the Native Village of  Tyonek and attended the “consul -
tations.” Of  the more than 3,000 comments the NPS 
received, only five were in support of  the rulemaking. 
In October 2020, the NPS submitted its final rule for 
review. NARF represents the Native Village of  Tyonek, 
the Blue Lake Rancheria, and the National Association of  Tribal Historic Preservation Officers (NATHPO) 
in the final rulemaking process. The final rule was not 
published before inauguration, the Biden Administra-tion stopped the NPS from moving forward with the 
rulemaking. On July 28, 2021, the NPS formally with -
drew the rulemaking. There still remains a need to up -
date the NRHP regulations; to bring the regulations in line with 2016 amendments to the National Historic 
Preservation Act, and to provide Tribes, tribal histor -
ic preservation officers, and Native Hawaiian organi -
zations a more meaningful role in the nomination of  historic properties.
Indigenous Peyote Conservation Initiative
NARF has represented the National Council of  Native American Churches and the Native American Church 
of  North America (NACNA) for four decades. For the 
past five years, NARF has been working with the Na-tional Council and NACNA on a project to research the 
impact of  peyote decline on Native American Church 
(NAC) organizations and to develop and support ac-cess to and the use of  peyote for religious and ceremo -
nial purposes.
Importing from Mexico, where most naturally occurring 
peyote grows, is presently not legal. Artificial cultivation 
is difficult and extraordinarily expensive. The only do-mestic supply of  peyote (in Texas) is becoming less sus -
tainable due to growing NAC demand; exploitation and commercialization by non-Indian people; damage from land use practices including cattle ranching; and dam-
age from incorrect harvesting practices and over-har -
vesting. NARF, National Council, and NACNA repre -
sentatives developed a plan in 2015 and in 2016-7 held many meetings with Texas landowners, peyoteros, and 
botanists to develop relationships and raise awareness of  the need to protect the sacrament. In 2017, NARF closed on the purchase of  605 acres of  Texas land, made possible by a grant from the RiverStyx 
Foundation of  California. A nonprofit organization—
the Indigenous Peyote Conservation Initaitive—was created to hold the land’s title and put a peyote conser -
vation project on the land. Meetings on the land took place throughout 2018-2019 and early 2020. Work coor -
dinating with the local ranching community continues, 
and an adobe duplex and two bathhouses have been 
built on the land. Due to the pandemic, it is not possible to hold business or ceremonial activities on-site at this 
time. Work on the project continues remotely.
Graduation Eagle Feather and Regalia Project
Every spring, NARF is contacted by Native American 
students from across the country who are being pro-hibited from wearing eagle feathers at graduation cere -
monies. By and large, once schools come to understand the religious and cultural significance of  eagle feathers, they make accommodations and exceptions for Native 
American students. Unfortunately, there are a hand-
ful of  school districts that persist in restricting Native American religious liberty and speech. This insistence 
on uniformity puts Native American students in the 
position of  having to choose between celebrating with their classmates or following their Native religious and 
cultural traditions. When appropriate and as resources 
permit, NARF may send a letter to the school explain-ing the religious significance of  eagle feathers, and how 
both federal and state law protects their use. Addition -
ally, we are exploring the viability of  targeted legislative 
campaigns that could lead to a “fix” on a state-by-state 
basis.
On occasion, NARF pursues litigation on behalf  of  
affected students. For example, NARF partnered with 
Connor & Winters to file suit in Texas alleging a viola-tion of  a Native student’s right to adorn his high school 
graduation cap. The parties resolved this litigation 
through a negotiated agreement. NARF also co-coun -
seled with Rothstein Donatelli LLC to bring suit against 
an Arizona school district for a violation of  a Native 
student’s religious freedom rights to wear an eagle feather at graduation in 2019. The case is Waln v. Dysart 
School District, et al.  On March 1, 2021, the Court ruled 
against the Walns and dismissed the case. The Walns 
have appealed the decision to the U.S. Court of  Appeals 
for the Ninth Circuit and briefing is underway.
INDIAN EDUCATION
Tribal Education Departments National Assembly
NARF founded the Tribal Education Departments Na-
tional Assembly (TEDNA) in 2003 with funding from 
the U.S. Department of  Education to start a national membership organization for Tribal Education Depart -
ANNUAL REPORT 2021 21ments (or Agencies). TEDNA has become a leading In-
dian education organization that focuses on tribal gov-
ernance over K-12 education provided by state, federal, 
and tribal schools. NARF continues to represent TED-NA on national legislative and administrative matters 
and provides training and technical assistance regarding 
TEDs to TEDNA and its partner organizations. For example, NARF helped TEDNA prepare for an April 
2021 tribal consultation with the U.S. Department of  
Education. 
TEDNA and five tribes in Virginia were awarded 
State-Tribal Education Partnership grants to assist es -
tablish education departments, develop education 
codes, and work with the state to improve education 
for tribal students. NARF will assist with this work.
In October 2020, TEDNA was awarded a grant from 
the U.S. Department of  Education to work with five tribes and two schools in Oklahoma and research the 
effectiveness of  expanding choices of  education ser -
vices to support over 1,000 tribal secondary school stu -
dents. NARF provides training and technical assistance on this project.
Stephen C. v. Bureau of Indian Education 
In the appeal of  this case from the federal district court 
in Arizona to the U.S. Court of  Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, NARF represents the National Indian Educa-
tion Association, the Tribal Education Departments 
National Assembly, the American Indian Higher Ed -
ucation Association, and the National Congress of  
American Indians as amici curiae in support of  the stu-dents (and guardians) at Havasupai Elementary School, 
which is a K-8 school operated by the Bureau of  Indian 
Education (BIE). Students allege that the BIE has failed 
its statutory duties to provide basic special and general education at the school. This is a case of  first impres-
sion – never before has the BIE been sued for failing 
to provide basic education at any of  the elementary and secondary schools that it operates. In the district court, 
the parties settled the special education claims. The 
district court dismissed the general education claims, finding that they rose to the level of  a “systemic chal-
lenge” not reviewable by courts under the Administra-
tive Procedures Act. Students appealed the dismissal of  the general education claims. Briefing of  the appeal 
has been completed and oral argument is scheduled for 
February 2022.
Y ellow Kidney, et al. v. Montana Office of Public 
Instruction, et al.In July 2021, NARF, along with the American Civil Lib-
erties Union, the American Civil Liberties Union-Mon -
tana, and the Robins Kaplan law firm, filed a new action 
in Montana district court alleging that state agencies and 
officials have failed to implement the Montana provi-
sions known as “Indian Education for All,” which state that all Montana public school students will be instruct-
ed in American Indian cultural heritage in cooperation 
with Montana tribes. Despite years of  funding for the 
provisions, the state is not implementing the provisions. This action will seek declaratory and injunctive re -
lief for future compliance with the. The plaintiffs are Montana public school students and their guardians, promote human rights
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 22both Indian and non-Indian, and six Montana tribes: 
the Fort Belknap Indian Community, the Confederat -
ed Salish and Kootenai Tribes of the Flathead Reser -
vation, the Northern Cheyenne Tribe, the Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes of the Fort Peck Indian Reservation, the Little Shell Tribe of Chippewa Indians of Montana, and the Crow Tribe. In October 2021, the defendants moved to dismiss this action. Plaintiffs filed an amend -
ed complaint in December 2021.
Rosebud Sioux Tribal Education Code
Revision ProjectIn 1987 NARF accepted the request of the Rosebud Sioux Tribe to develop a precedent-setting tribal ed -
ucation code to regulate all K-12 schools on it reser -
vation. The Rosebud Sioux Tribe adopted its Educa -
tion Code in 1991. In 2015, the Rosebud Sioux Tribe received a grant from the Department of the Interi -
or to revise its 25-year-old Education Code. In Oc -
tober 2020, the Tribal Education Committee ap -
proved a final draft of the proposed revised Code. The formal approval and enactment of the proposed revised Code continues under the Tribe’s process.
Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe Education Code
NARF represents the Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe in drafting a comprehensive education code. Develop -
ment continues with community meetings upcoming.
INDIAN CHILD WELFARE ACT DEFENSE The Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) was passed 
by the U.S. Congress in 1978 in response to the disproportionate numbers of American Indian and Alaska Native children being removed from their families by state agencies and state courts and placed in non-Native foster or adoptive homes or residential institutions. Congress found that many of these removals and placements were due to state officials’ inability or unwillingness to understand tribal cultures and societies. The removals were extremely detrimental to the children, their families, and tribes. In 2016, the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) issued regulations and guidelines for the implementation of ICWA. The past several years have seen a dramatic increase in the number of legal challenges brought by opponents of ICWA, all with the goal of undermining ICWA and tribal sovereignty. The ICWA Defense Project is a partnership formed to protect the rights of children, families, and tribes in ICWA proceedings nationwide. The most prominent case right now is Brackeen v. Haaland  
(formerly Brackeen v. Bernardt and  Brackeen v. Zinke ).In October 2018, Judge Reed O’Connor of the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Texas ruled that both ICWA and the 2016 ICWA regulations are unconstitutional. The arguments Judge O’Connor re -
lied on to hold ICWA and the regulations unconstitu -
tional are contrary to the Constitution, congressional intent, and decades of well-established federal Indian law. Tribe defendants asked the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit to stay the decision, which it did, and initiated the appeal. NARF worked close -
ly with partners to coordinate amicus briefs, including 
a tribal brief, which was signed by 325 Tribes and 57 Native organizations. The Fifth Circuit held oral argu -
ment in March 2019. 
We are delighted to report that in August 2019, the 
Fifth Circuit overturned the district court’s opinion and affirmed the constitutionality of ICWA. On Octo -
ber 1, the Individual Plaintiffs and the State Plaintiffs petitioned the Fifth Circuit to rehear the case en banc and, unfortunately, rehearing was granted. NARF co -
ordinated the amicus  briefing strategy for the rehearing. 
We had 486 tribes and 59 tribal organizations sign on to the amicus  brief. The Fifth Circuit heard oral argu -
ment in January 2020. 
The Fifth Circuit decision was issued April 2021. Al -
though the court generally upheld the authority of Con -
gress to enact ICWA, and held that ICWA’s definition 
of “Indian child” did not operate on the basis of race, it also found certain sections of ICWA to be uncon-stitutional. In September, the Department of Justice, intervening tribal nations, and Texas and individual plaintiffs all asked the U.S. Supreme Court to review the Fifth Circuit’s decision. NARF filed a tribal am -
icus brief, which was signed by 180 tribal nations and 35 tribal organizations. That brief was joined by two other briefs supporting ICWA: one filed by Casey Fam -
ily Programs and 10 other child welfare organizations, and one filed by 25 States and the District of Columbia. All four petitions are now fully briefed and we await their decision whether to grant cert.
Finally, NARF has been heavily involved in recent ef -
forts in Alaska to transfer more control over the state’s 
child welfare system to tribes through a compacting process. The Alaska Tribal Child Welfare Compact was signed in October 2017. It allows tribes to enter into an agreement with the state to provide services and func -
tions that currently are provided by the Alaska Office of Children’s Services. For fiscal year 2022, there are six scopes of work available to tribal co-signers.
ANNUAL REPORT 2021 23VOTING AND CIVIL RIGHTS
Brakebill v. Jaeger and Spirit Lake Tribe v. Jaeger
In January 2016, seven Native Americans from North Dakota filed a case in federal district court in North 
Dakota under the Voting Rights Act and the U.S. and 
North Dakota Constitutions challenging North Dako -
ta’s recently enacted voter ID law on the grounds that it 
disproportionately burdens Native Americans and de -
nies qualified voters the right to vote.
These are two companion cases challenging the North 
Dakota voter ID law. The lawsuit alleged that North Dakota’s voter ID requirements limited the right to 
vote and disproportionately burdened Native American 
voters. On October 30, 2018, the Spirit Lake Tribe and six individual plaintiffs filed suit the week before the 
election seeking a temporary restraining order against 
the law’s implementation. In February, 2020, the Parties held a mediation and came to an agreement in princi-
ple resolving the cases. They were settled to the Tribes’ 
benefit with a final ruling from U.S. Court of Appeals for the 8th Circuit in 2021.
Rosebud Sioux Tribe v. Barnett
On September 16, 2020, NARF filed suit on behalf 
of Rosebud Sioux and Oglala Sioux in federal district 
court in South Dakota alleging violations of the Na -
tional Voter Registration Act (NVRA), also known as 
the Motor-Voter law, which allows voters to register at 
motor vehicle departments and public assistance offic -
es. NARF is co-counseling with Demos, which initiat -
ed an investigation after it discovered an 84% decrease in the number of voter registration applications from public assistance offices despite an 80% increase in the 
number of those receiving benefits. The investigation 
unearthed violations of the NVRA in past and current practices, programs, and trainings. The parties are at -
tempting to settle the state’s NVRA compliance issues.
Western Native V oice v. Jacobsen
In May 2021, NARF filed this case on behalf of the 
Blackfeet Nation, Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes of the Flathead Reservation, Fort Belknap In -
dian Community, and the Northern Cheyenne Tribe. It challenges two discriminatory voting laws: HB 176 and HB 530. HB 176 ends same-day registration, which res -
ervation voters have relied upon to cast votes in Mon -
tana since 2005. HB 530 attempts to block organized ballot collection on rural reservations, in spite of a sim -
ilar law being ruled unconstitutional in Western Native V oice v. Stapleton  in 2020.Brnovich v. DNC 
NARF represented the National Congress of American 
Indians as  amicus curiae  to the U.S. Supreme Court in a 
case that considered whether Arizona’s ban on ballot 
collection and ban on out of precinct voting violated 
Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act. The brief provided a review of the barriers faced by Native Americans and 
the importance of Section 2 in defending the rights of 
Native Americans to vote.
Native American V oting Rights Project
(vote.narf.org)The Voting Rights Project refers to all the voting rights 
work that NARF does. We used to have just one or 
two cases at a time and one project, but this work has expanded dramatically in the past few years. The goals 
and objectives of this work fall under this priority be -
cause we view voting and representation as a human 
right in any democracy.
The goal of the Voting Rights Project is Indian politi -
cal power. When Indian people have enough power to 
determine their elected officials, or better yet to elect 
people from their own communities, their representa -
tives will be truly answerable to their needs. When a 
congressional representative knows the tribe in her dis-
trict is not big enough to un-elect her, she is unlikely to be responsive to their requests for legislation or appro -
priations. This is the lack of political power, and it is the situation of the vast majority of tribes. Political pow -
er means the ability to effect positive change for the 
benefit of your members. Political power can be gained 
through media, relationships, and—above all—voting. To reach its ultimate goal, this Project focuses on re -
moving barriers to voting from the large to the small.
In 2015, NARF created the Native American Voting 
Rights Coalition to organize everyone working on vot -
ing in Indian Country so we could share information, 
resources and strategize on a nationwide basis. Mem -
bers, led by NARF, have completed two major, orig -
inal reports. The first is the largest voter survey ever conducted in Indian Country (almost 5,000 voters in 
five states) to help ascertain barriers to political par -
ticipation. That report was published in 2018. We also 
completed a series of  nine field hearings across Indi-
an Country. A report on the hearings was published in 
2020 and is available at vote.narf.org. We released report 
addendums in 2021.promote human rights
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 24In addition to litigation and the work associated with 
leading the coalition, NARF currently is engaged in three projects: (1) polling places for the 2022 election and beyond; (2) securing address reform for Native vot-ers so that they can register and receive ballots in the mail; and (3) a new, first of  its kind, redistricting project to undo much of  the damage to Native American rep -
resentation across the country.
-- Polling Places 
NARF is working toward securing polling places for reservations and tribal communities. The vast majority of  Native voters have to leave their reservations to vote and voter services can be as much as 98 miles one way. This is one of  the most common ways to suppress the vote, just make the elections too far away. We are ana-lyzing where reservations-in-need are and reaching out to affected communities. -- AddressingA second project works on addressing is-sues in Indian Country. Post office boxes and other non-traditional addresses make it very difficult for reservation residents to register to vote if  their state requires a street address. The same problems carry over when voters need absentee ballots, such as during the pandemic. This proj-ect focuses on securing more post office boxes in locations and determining new criteria for home addresses.
-- Redistricting
NARF has created a comprehensive In-dian Country redistricting project. Cen-sus undercounts and gerrymandered vot-ing districts lead to diluted voting power. Once a tribe has been gerrymandered into an unfavorable district in which they are a minority, they cannot elect candi -
dates to represent their interests. This is often paired with or followed by restric-tions in voting itself. When the barriers are removed and participation increases, Native communities can elect represen-tatives that are responsive to their con-cerns. The project is helping tribes over -
come these structural barriers.
Smith v. State
For decades, the Alaska Court System has excluded the residents of  over 150 rural villages from being called for jury 
service. The courts claim that it’s too expensive to in-clude rural residents; however, the exclusion of  rural residents disenfranchises communities with lower in-comes and that are predominately Alaska Native. Not including those communities in the jury pool results in thirty percent of  Alaska Natives being excluded from participating in the justice system. It affects perceptions of  the justice system—when excluded from jury ser -
vice, then one only encounters the courts as a victim, witness, or defendant. And, it results in unrepresenta-tive juries and likely disproportionate sentences.
In February 2017, NARF filed an amicus brief  before 
the Alaska Court of  Appeals in support of  Appellant Smith’s arguments that costs savings alone are not a sufficient government interest, under an equal protec-tion and due process analysis, to exclude thirty percent of  the Alaska Native community from serving on ju-ries. In March 2019, the court held that it was an error to refuse Smith an evidentiary hearing on the issue of  
ANNUAL REPORT 2021 25whether the transportation and housing of  prospective 
jurors from two Native villages would pose an unrea-
sonable expense. After another round of  technical find-
ings from the superior court, Appellant Smith submit-ted a petition to the Alaska Supreme Court to take his 
case. NARF filed an amicus brief  in July 2021 on be-
half  of  a coalition of  tribal organizations that support Smith’s petition. The Alaska Supreme Court declined to 
hear the case in January 2022.
INTERNATIONAL RECOGNITION 
OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
United Nations Declaration on the 
Rights of Indigenous Peoples
Since 1999, NARF has represented the National Con -
gress of  American Indians (NCAI) in the international 
arena to protect indigenous rights. In September 2007, 
the United Nations General Assembly overwhelmingly adopted the Declaration on the Rights of  Indigenous 
Peoples (Declaration). The Declaration recognizes that 
Indigenous Peoples have important collective human rights in a multitude of  areas, including self-determi -
nation, spirituality, cultural and linguistic heritage, and lands, territories and natural resources. It sets minimum standards for the treatment of  Indigenous Peoples and 
can serve as the basis for the development of  custom -
ary international law. NARF’s most recent actions on 
behalf  of  the NCAI have focused on the participation 
of  indigenous institutions at the United Nations (UN). 
Until now, Indigenous Peoples have had to appear in most UN bodies as non-governmental organizations, which is precisely what they are not. Indigenous peo -
ples’ representatives from around the world, including 
one from NCAI, met in November 2016 to discuss ar -
eas of  consensus. Informal consultations with member 
states began in December 2016 and continued through 
July 2017. This series of  consultations concluded with -
out any real movement, but the UN General Assembly 
committed, in September 2017, to continue to consider 
the issue for the next five sessions.
In 2018, the Human Rights Council began to estab -
lish an appropriate status for Indigenous Peoples rep -
resentatives and institutions to participate. Discussions 
continued through 2019 and was taken up at a meeting 
held in Ecuador in January 2020. An April 2020 meet -
ing was canceled in light of  the global pandemic. The 
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues met virtually 
in 2021, but with no meetings on the participation issue. 
A roundtable on participation was held virtually on July 16, 2021, in connection with meetings of  the Human 
Rights Council.
The Implementation Project 
(un-declaration.narf.org) 
NARF and the University of  Colorado Law School (CU Law) have initiated the Implementation Project to guide 
the implementation of  the United Nations Declaration 
on the Rights of  Indigenous Peoples (Declaration) in the United States. Guided by traditional values, contem -
porary challenges in Indian Country, and the needs of  future generations, the goal of  the project is to realize the promises of  the Declaration in the U.S.
promote human rights
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 26OWAMNI STAFF PHOTOOWAMNI STAFF PHOTOThe project held a conference in March 2019, which 
generated valuable discussion. A Project website was 
launched in May 2020. In April 2021, working with 
UCLA’s Native Nations Law and Policy Center’s Trib -
al Legal Development Clinic, the project developed a 
UN Declaration Implementation Toolkit. In October 
2021, the Project collaborated on a resolution adopt-ed at NCAI’s Annual Convention calling on President 
Biden to take specific actions related to implementation 
of  the Declaration.With the support of  generous fund-ing from the Henry Luce Foundation, in 2021-2023, the 
Project will offer a series of  workshops in different re-
gions of  the United States. Workshops were held in No -
vember 2021 at the Cherokee Nation and the Pawnee 
NationThe Project is developing an “Indigenous Peo -
ples Guide to the United Nations” and will be planning 
one or more side events for the next meeting of  the UN 
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues.
Organization of American States Draft 
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
The Organization of  American States (OAS) has been working on an American Declaration on the Rights of  
Indigenous Peoples for over twenty-five years. NARF 
has been representing NCAI on this matter. The Gen-eral Assembly of  the OAS approved the American 
Declaration on the Rights of  Indigenous Peoples in 
June 2016. The American Declaration goes beyond the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of  Indige -
nous Peoples in several respects including addressing treaties, the rights of  children, and the rights of  peoples in voluntary isolation. The United States commented it 
had been a persistent objector to the text and could not 
be bound by it. In 2019, NARF joined a coalition of  indigenous representatives calling for the OAS to fully 
carry out its plan to implement the American Declara -
tion. After in-person meetings were cancelled, a virtual 
dialogue was held in October 2020. NARF and NCAI, 
its client on these matters, was once again part of  the 
Indigenous Nations and Organizations Coalition mak-ing a virtual statement at the 51st session of  the Gen -
eral Assembly.
W orld Intellectual Property Organization
NARF represents NCAI in the ongoing negotiations 
for an international instrument to protect intellectu -
al property, including Traditional Knowledge, Genet -
ic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge (GRAATK), and Traditional Cultural Expressions (TCE). The United States has been participating in 
these negotiations at the World Intellectual Property 
Organization (WIPO) since 2000. Since 2009, the ne-gotiations have centered on the draft text of  the three potential instruments concerning TK, GRAATK, and 
TCE. 
In May 2017, NARF and CU Law hosted a drafting ses -
sion on the TCE instrument. Some of  that text was 
introduced into the WIPO draft. In October 2017, the new WIPO Intergovernmental Committee on In-
tellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional 
Knowledge and Folklore (IGC) mandate and work plan were approved by the WIPO General Assembly. 
NARF and CU Law hosted another drafting session in 
May 2018 focusing on the GRAATK instrument. In 
June 2018, NARF spoke on the IGC Indigenous Panel 
on “Practical Measures Relating to Intellectual Proper -
ty and Genetic Resources: Databases and Contracts – 
Indigenous Peoples’ and Local Communities’ Perspec -
tives.” A NARF article summarizing the 2018 WIPO 
IGC negotiations was published in The Indigenous World 
2019.
IGC 40 took place in June 2019. The text focus was the 
TK and TCE texts. NARF published an article about 
the 2019 WIPO negotiations in The Indigenous World 
2020.
In February 2020, at the NCAI Winter Session, fed -
eral agencies participating in the WIPO negotiations, 
attended a listening session that NARF organized. Also 
in 2020, the Indigenous Caucus held virtual meetings to discuss interim activities that could be pursued while 
waiting for negotiation sessions to resume. NARF 
wrote about 2020 negotiations in The Indigenous World 
2021 (www.iwgia.org/en/news/4335-launch-of-the-in -
digenousworld-2021.html).
IGC 41 took place in August 2021 in a hybrid format, 
with no in-person participation by Indigenous repre -
sentatives. Meanwhile, the Indigenous Caucus held vir -
tual meetings. Due to limitations on in-person partici -
pation, no substantive negotiations took place and the 
IGC merely approved the work program for 2022-2023, which the General Assembly subsequently approved in 
October. The work program includes four negotiation 
sessions in 2022. 
ANNUAL REPORT 2021 27CACAO DESSERT WITH ARONIA SORBETCACAO DESSERT WITH ARONIA SORBETWithin the unique trust relationship between the Unit -
ed States and Native nations is the inherent duty for all 
levels of government to recognize and enforce the laws and regulations applicable to Native peoples. NARF is committed to continuing to hold governments accountable to 
Native Americans. 
TRUST FUND MATTERSPembina Chippewa v. United States
NARF represents the Turtle Mountain Chippewa, Chip -
pewa Cree, White Earth Band of Minnesota Chippewa, and Little Shell Chippewa Tribe in this case against the federal government for misaccounting and mismanage-ment of their tribal trust fund, the Pembina Judgment Fund. Starting in August 2007, the parties engaged in al-ternative dispute resolution proceedings in the Court of Federal Claims. In July 2015, the parties reached agree-ment on a monetary amount for a potential settlement of the Plaintiffs’ claims in this case. In March 2018, the parties reached agreement on the non-monetary com-ponents of a potential settlement. In December 2020, the parties began the process of seeking court approval of the settlement. In June 2021, the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia granted final approval of the $59 million settlement. The parties are now focus-ing on the settlement proceeds distribution. The Sum-mer 2021 issue of the NARF Legal Review features the Pembina settlement.
Intertribal Council of Arizona v. United States 
In April 2015, NARF filed on behalf of the Intertrib-al Council of Arizona (ITCA) a breach of trust case against the United States seeking damages for misman-agement of the Arizona Intertribal Trust Fund (AITF). The AITF was established by Congress in 1988 to com-pensate Arizona tribes for the closure of the Phoenix Indian School. The school’s closure allowed the Depart-ment of the Interior to exchange the school’s land for privately owned lands of the Barron Collier Company in Florida. The Phoenix lands were more valuable than the Florida lands, and Congress approved the land ex -change only if the difference in value of the properties went to the AITF and a trust fund for the Navajo Na-tion. Collier partially paid the property value, but then gave notice that they would no longer make payments. The lawsuit seeks to hold the United States liable for the remaining payments into the AITF. After failed ne-gotiations, ITCA filed an amended complaint in April 2018, which the United States moved to dismiss. The court granted virtually the entire motion, dismissing all but a portion of one of ITCA’s claims. In early-2019, ITCA appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit. In February 2020, the Court of Appeals heard oral argument. In April 2020, they issued a deci -
sion. It stated that two ITCA claims were properly dis-missed, but a third claim, that the United States failed to hold sufficient security for the trust fund payments, should not have been dismissed and should go forward. Following the decision, the parties are exploring settle -
ment of the remaining claims.
Repeal of the Klamath Tribe 
Distribution of Judgment ActThe Klamath Tribe retained NARF to seek repeal of the Distribution of Judgment Fund Act, which was adopt-ed as part of the legislation that terminated the Tribes’ government-to-government relationship in 1954. The relationship was restored in 1986, but the remnant leg-islation was not repealed. Senators Merkley and Wyden introduced S.46 to repeal the act. S.46 was adopted by the Senate and forwarded to the House. The House Sub-committee on Indigenous Peoples of the United States held a hearing; NARF provided testimony in support of adoption. However, no action was taken, and the bill died at the expiration of the 116th Congress. In Feb-ruary 2021, Senator Merkley introduced S.314, which passed the Senate by unanimous consent in May 2021. It has not yet been assigned to a House committee.
hold governments accountable
ANNUAL REPORT 2021 29NARF is firmly committed to sharing its legal expertise 
in support of  Indian rights. NARF maintains several projects to develop Indian law and educate the public about 
Indian rights , laws, and issues . NARF staff  also participates 
in numerous conferences and events to share their knowledge and expertise in Indian law. 
INDIGENOUS PEACEMAKING INITIATIVE 
(peacemaking.narf.org)Indigenous peacemaking is a community-directed con-flict resolution process that addresses the concerns of  all interested parties. The peacemaking process uses tra-ditional rituals such as the group circle and Clan struc-tures to involve the parties to a conflict, their support-ers, elder and interested community members. Within the circle, people can speak from the heart in a shared search for understanding of  the conflict, and together identify the steps necessary to assist in healing all affect -
ed parties and to prevent future occurrences and con -
flicts. The mission of  NARF’s Indigenous Peacemaking Initiative (IPI) is to promote and support Native peo-ples in restoring sustainable traditional dispute resolu -
tion practices. Based on surveys of  tribal justice system professionals, our priorities are: (1) making available materials from tribal peacemaking efforts and peace-making in general; (2) providing technical assistance to tribes; (3) providing trainings in tribal peacemaking; and (4) providing advocacy supporting tribal peacemaking.The project is guided by an advisory committee of  tra -
ditional peacemaking experts and practitioners.
The IPI team continues to be very busy. Trainings and 
technical assistance are a primary focal point for the project. Several trainings were held in 2021, including at Nez Perce and Tulalip Tribes and for the National American Indian Court Judges Association. Technical assistance was provided to tribes including Oglala La-kota Children’s Justice Center, Native Village of  Kake, Cow Creek Tribe, and Ho-Chunk Nation. IPI also ca -pacitated a gathering of  Native peacemakers in March and a peacemaking-focused colloquium in September.
NATIVE AMERICAN JOURNALISTS 
ASSOCIATION MEDIA GUIDESThe Native American Journalists Association (NAJA) produces media guides—typically, a one-page infor -
mation sheet—with the goal of  improving the quality of  news coverage of  complex Native American issues. Beginning in 2020, NAJA and NARF formed a part-nership for media guides addressing legal issues. NAJA identifies the subject for each guide and produces an initial draft; NARF provides legal review, to ensure any legal claims or representations are accurate. The first NAJA-NARF guide was completed in July 2020, after the U.S. Supreme decided McGirt v. Oklahoma. The guide 
was cited by several news outlets in their coverage of  the case.
THE NATIONAL INDIAN LAW LIBRARY 
(nill.narf.org)The National Indian Law Library (NILL) is the only publicly available law library in the United States devot-ed to Indian law. In addition to the service that it pro -
vides to NARF’s attorneys, the library is an invaluable resource supporting Indian Law and educating the pub -
lic on Indian Law issues. The library’s website recorded 245,000 users and 322,000 sessions in 2021. Each week, NILL provides free updates through the Indian Law Bulletins, which more than 9,000 subscribers receive. Throughout 2020, NILL has worked with the Univer -
sity of  Wisconsin, the Open Law Library, the Stock-bridge Munsee Community, and the Pueblo of  San Il-defonso to develop a new platform for publishing tribal laws. The project reached a milestone in April 2021 when NILL was able to publish Stockbridge Munsee’s official laws on its website.
Develop indian law
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 30Based on our audited financial statements for the fiscal 
year ending September 30, 2021, NARF reports total 
revenue and net assets of  $35,860,017 and $71,273,133, 
respectively. Due to presentation requirements of  the audited financial statements in terms of  recognizing the 
timing of  certain revenues and expenses, they do not 
reflect the fact that based on NARF’s internal report -
ing, revenue exceeded expenses and other cash outlays 
resulting in an increase of  $5,634,058 to NARF’s re-
serve fund.
When compared to fiscal year 2020: The increase in 
public contributions is mostly due to escalated cam-paigns in areas such as direct mail, internet and cor -
porations. The increase in tribal contributions is most -
ly due to a generous $1 million donation from a tribe that we’ve had a long-standing relationship with. The 
increase in foundation grants is due to additional new grants restricted to our important projects and cases 
(many of  these grants are multi-year and support our 
work beyond fiscal year 2021). The increase in legal fees 
is mostly related to a large case settlement awarded in fiscal year 2021. The $10,000 for federal awards in fiscal 
year 2020 relates to the SBA’s Economic Injury Disas-
ter payment. Along with the overall markets, NARF’s investments continue to perform well. The gain on the 
sale of  property reflects our move to another location 
for our headquarters. 
Note:
 T his summary of  financial information has 
been extracted from NARF’s audited financial state -
ments which received an unmodified opinion by the ac-
counting firm of  BKD, LLP . Complete audited finan-
cials are available, upon request, through our Boulder office, or at www.narf.org.FY 2021 FINANCIAL REPORT
2021 2020
$ % $ %
Public Contributions $7,485,926 20.9% $4,581,770 28.5%
Tribal Contributions 1,740,800 4.8% 1,340,800 8.3%
Foundation Grants 8,087,601 22.6% 6,968,463 43.4%
Legal Fees 6,901,657 19.2% 583,904 3.6%
Federal Awards - 0.0% 10,000 .1%
Return on Investments 7,543,952 21.0% 2,552,705 15.9%
Gain on Sale of Property 3,791,063 10.6% - 0.0%
Other 309,018 0.9% 33,706 0.2%
TOTALS $35,860,017 100.0% $16,071,348 100.0%
2021 2020
$ % $ %
Litigation and Client Services $9,369,090 67.7% $7,359,178 65.5%
National Indian Law Library 254,924 1.8% 206,046 1.8%
TOTAL PROGRAM SERVICES 9,624,014 69.5% 7,565,224 67.3%
Management and General 1,255,864 9.1% 1,033,813 9.2%
Fundraising 2,957,912 21.4% 2,647,657 23.5%
TOTAL SUPPORT SERVICES 4,213,776 30.5% 3,681,470 32.7%
TOTALS $13,837,790 100.0% $11,246,694 100.0%
ANNUAL REPORT 2021 31SUPPORT AND REVENUE COMPARISON
EXPENSE COMPARISONNARF’s success relies on the generosity of  our donors 
throughout the nation. We invite you to learn more about the benefits associated with each program listed below, please contact our Development Department at 303-447-8760 . We gratefully acknowledge these 
donors for fiscal year 2021 (October 1, 2020 through September 30, 2021). 
TRIBES AND NATIVE ORGANIZATIONS
AMERIND, Chickasaw Nation, Confederated Tribes of  Siletz Indians, Cow Creek Band of  Umpqua Tribe of  Indians, Jamestown S’Klallam Tribe, Mohegan Sun, Muckleshoot Indian Tribe, National Indian Gaming Association, Poarch Band of  Creek Indians, San Manuel Band of  Mission Indians, Santa Ynez Band of  Chumash Indians, Seminole Tribe of  Florida, Shoalwater Bay Indian Tribe, Tulalip Tribes, United Tribes of  Bristol Bay, Yavapai-Prescott Indian Tribe, Yocha Dehe Wintun Nation 
FOUNDATIONS, CORPORATIONS, 
AND LAW FIRMS444S Foundation, Agua Fund, Alaska Conservation Foundation, Alaska Venture Fund, Annenberg Foundation, Arches Foundation, Arizona State University, Bay & Paul Foundation, Charles P . & Mary E. Belgarde Foundation, Berkeley Law Foundation,Bia-Echo Foundation, Morton K. & Jane BlausteinFoundation, Boston Foundation, Trudy Bronner - Dr.Bronner’s All-One, Case Family Programs, ChorusFoundation, Christensen Fund, Cisco Systems Inc.,Colorado River Sustainability Campaign, ComcastNBCUniversal Foundation, Common Cause, CommonCounsel Foundation, Darby Foundation, DemocracyFund, Edgerton Foundation, Facebook, Ford Foundation, Foundation to Promote Open Society,Genesis Prize Foundation NA LLC, Group HealthFoundation, Grove Foundation, Hanuman Foundation,Hearthland Foundation, Heartspring Foundation, Henry Luce Foundation, William & Flora HewlettFoundation, Honor the Earth, Ladybug Foundation,Lannan Foundation, Laughlin-Beers Foundation, LifeComes From It, Laughlin-Beers Foundation, Macy’sInc., MALDEF, Mennen Environmental Foundation,Mericos Foundation, Mexican American Legal Defense,Molson Coors Beverage Company, Moore CharitableFoundation, NEO Philanthropy, New Venture Fund,Northrup Gruman Corporation, NoVo Foundation, OakFoundation, Open Society Institute, Park FoundationInc., Pew Charitable Trust, Pollan-Belzer CharitableFund, Reis Foundation, RiverPsykhe Inc., RiverStyxFoundation, Rockefeller Brothers Fund, Roy & Patricia Disney Family Foundation, Sawaya Law Firm, Solidarity Giving, Sprout Social, Threshold Foundation, Tides Foundation, Trillium Asset Management, LLC, True North Foundation, Turnbull Family Foundation Inc., Tzo’-Nah Fund, Udall for Us All, Usona Institute Inc., Wallace Coulter Foundation, Walton Family Foundation, Warner Media, The Washkewicz Family Foundation, Inc., The Whitehead Foundation, The Wilderness Society, W .K. Kellogg Foundation
LIVING  WATERS ENDOWMENT  – The Living 
Waters Endowment allows donors to honor friends and loved 
ones by making an endowment gift of  $10,000 or more, where the principal is invested and interest income is used for NARF’s programs. By designating a gift to endowment, contributions generate annual funds and provide legal representation to our tribal clients in perpetuity.Elwood H. Brotzman Memorial Fund, Jerome Davis Living Waters Endowment Fund, Kathleen & Ruth Dooley Family Fund, John Echohawk, Kim Gottschalk, Susan K. Griffiths Memorial Fund, The Robert & Joy Hanson Leland Endowment, Frank J. McCormick Family Fund, Melody McCoy, Marvin W . Pourier Jr. & Donna M. Deans Memorial Fund, Mary Lou Mosca-Ragona Memorial Fund, Ernest l., Schusky Endowment, The Snoqualmie Indian Tribe, Helen & Sidney Ungar Memorial Endowment Fund, Dan & Beth Whittemore, Joel Williams, Anonymous
BEQUESTS AND TRUSTS
Diane D. Delp, Carolyn Ferriday, William Guimond Trust, R. Marital Hansl, John Milton Heller, Suzanne Johnson, Barbara R. Kjelgaard, Emily Lane Memorial Charitable, Margaret L Manella, McEldowney Family Trust, Edith McGuire, Phyllis McNeill, Harriet S. MullerDean Peerman, Edith S. Quevedo, Janice M. Richardson, Rothman - Choy Family Trust, Joan M. Seiger, John L. Vaupel
PETA UHA – Peta Uha in the Lakota (Sioux) language 
means firekeeper, an individual who makes a solemn commitment 
to ensure that the sacred flame—source of  light, heat, and energy for the people—will be kept burning. Peta Uha is a membership program for donors making substantial annual commitments to NARF. Like the firekeepers of  old, members of  the Peta Uha Council demonstrate constancy and vigilance to ensure the protection of  justice for Native Americans.
NARF Acknowledgement of contributions:
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 32FISCAL YEAR 2021PETA UHA PIPESTONE
Acorn Hill Foundation, Adam & Rachel Albright, Charles P Belgarde, Yvonne F. Bushyhead, Art L. Davidson, Margaret Dulany, Steven & Gloria J. Foster, Peter Gerbic, Mitchell H. Lasky & Cecilia M. Barajas, Persis Levy, Jason Macatangay, Priscilla McDougal, Matthew McLaughlin, R Eric Reuss, Arthur & Maria Richmond, Ellen Rifkin, The Darby Foundation, The Washkewicz Family Foundation, Inc., Richard Weaver
PETA UHA TURQUOISE
Charlotte Aitchison, Beane Family Foundation, Mark & Deborah Blackman, Judith Buechner, Scott Canute, Keith W . Cowan, Paige Gillies, Al & Charal Hatfield, Lloyd Miller & Heather Kendall Miller, Bill & Ildiko Knott, Lacy Family Foundatioin, Laughlin-Beers Foundation, Mr. & Mrs. Paul LeFort, Paul, Jul & Max Murphy, Jenny Nichols, Randall & Pamela Penn, Robert J. Quinn, Claudia Rebaza, Reimer Family Foundation,Michael G. Sawaya, Danell S. Scarborough, Srinivasan Seshadri, Jack & Bonnie Smailes, Susan Stathoplos, Dennise Templeton, Peter & Laura Terpenning, The Albany Foundation, The Vermont Community Foundation, Sen. Tom Udall, Wearne Family, Dan S. & Beth Whittemore, Katrina Wickersham, Naomi W . Wolf
PETA UHA GRANITE
Liam Ahern, Barbara Altman, Paul Anders, Richard Baltimore, Susan Okie Bush, Karen J. Crook, Eric Dahlstrom, Edward Giles, Zachary Grandi, David H. Gundy, Steve & Sheila Hoppenrath, Karen Kehoe, Carolyn Kipper, Angela Klatik, Ben Lewis, Samuel Marquis, Jr., James Mason, John Montgomery & Joan Reid, Anthony & Susan Morris, Helene Presskreischer, Emile Rhys, John Richard Ringoen Family Fund, Rosse Family Charitable Foundation, George Rozanski, Merrill Schneider, Richard Spitz, Jennifer Stanley,
ANNUAL REPORT 2021 33Livia Stone, Daniel J. Taaffe, Samuel Taylor, Beverly 
Terry, The Kay Fund, Thanh Tran, Alexander Weiss, Peter B. Wile, David Wilkinson, Emma Wohlgemuth, Mary Lee Zerby
PETA UHA FLINT
Nicholas Ah-Loe, Martha L Albrecht, Dennis & Diane Allen, Justine Altsher, Joy Alwan, Sal Amendola, Mr. Robert Anderson & Ms. Marilyn Heiman, Cynthia Argani, Johnny Armstrong, Joe Arthur, Linda Barnett, Laura Barrett, Peggy Barrett, Margaret Barton, Judith Barton, Jon Basalone, Anthony Stewart Bates, Daniel E. Baumann, Laura Berman, Glenn Bigonet, LawrenceBilstein, James August Biondi, Allan Bonney, Elise B.Bornstein, Colin Bosio-Cady, Boston Foundation, Mr.David L. Boyd & Ms. Misae Nishikura, Anna Bradberry,William Briggs Family Foundation, Alice L. Broner,M.S.W ., Jane A. Brown, Doreen L. Brown FamilyCharitable Fnd, Gary L. Brune, Sean Buffington,Braeden Butler, James Cameron, Janet Campbell,Kassidy Caruso, Warren Chang, Barbara Chapman,Michael & Beth Chardack Charitable Fund, MargaretChoenchom, Anees Chowdhery, Mary Chowdhury,Joseph Cieplinski, Henry Clayton, Richard W . Cobb, John Cohn, Catherine Colandro, Marilyn Valeri Colton, Patrick Conner, Daniel Cooley, Lammot D. Copeland, Jr., Lara Core, Mr. David Crand & Mrs. Elizabeth Dang, Barry Crisman, Phillip & Julie Croll, James P . Cuny, Larry C. Davis, Timothy Deane, Dana Dedrick, Anne DeMuth, Brad Denning, Juliane Diamond, Allyson Dias, Autumn Doss, Neville & Doreen D’Souza, Craig J. Du Prey, Daren & Amy Eilert, J Bruce Embury, MaryR. Fabri, Mb Fafunwa, Bill & Vicki Falk, Fino FamilyFoundation, Andrew & Audrey Franklin, ElizabethFray, Daniel French & Rosann Tung, Mike FrysingerLarry & Mary Galligan, SlugFest Games, CorrineGarza, Gaudio/Housley, Eric & Jeff  Ginsburg, RobertGips & Karen Harris, S. Fay Givens, GombroonBenevolent Fund, James M.L. Grace, Laura Grossman,Laurie Grossman, Collier Hands, Kevin Hannon, LydiaHantsche, Martha Harris, Judy Hartling, CharlotteT. Hathaway, Eileen Heaser, David Heinsler, RobertHenry, Jeanne Heyerick, Brian Highland, MatthewHighland, Shirley Hirschel, H.P . Lovecraft HistoricalSociety, Opal Holley, Ken D. Holm, Alison Holman,Sari Ruth Hornstein, Joan L. Howison, Thomas Hoyt,
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 34FRESH NIXTAMALIZED CORNFRESH NIXTAMALIZED CORNMylinh Huang, Hudson River Greenland Festival 
Inc, Hugh McKenna Lynch Memorial Fund, Donald Huisingh, Kurt Hull & Terri Hudler-Hull, Anne Humes, Jessica Hutcheson, Wayne Hyatt, Ada Jimenez, Olivier Jolliet, Rhianon Jones, Richard Joynes, Tiffany Ju, Kenneth Kahn, William Kelly, Jim & D’Arcy Kirkland, Frederick K. Kleene, Samuel Koenig, Dathan Konya, Ron & Barbara Kreher, Jonathon Kreinbrink, Scott & Ricki Kresan, Roxann Kuhns, T. G. Labrecque, Tom LaGatta, Dena Lapez, Drew Larson, Robert E. Law, Ingrid LeBlanc, Lester Poretsky Family Foundation, Joshua & Rebecca Levinson, Alan Levitt, Michael Levy, Evan & Joan Lewis, Alexandra List, Erika Long, Charles Long, Liz Lucke, Alexandrine Lyons-Boyle, Melody MacKenzie, Luisa M. Magarian, Florence Maher, Heather Malcolm, Austin Maples, James Marienthal, Martin Family Charitable Foundation Inc, Victor Martino, Larry Mastin, Patricia E. Mautner, Peyton Mays, Courtney McIntosh, Vicky McLane, Barbara J. Meislin, Mendenhall Family Fund, Amanda Michaels, James Miller, Mr. & Mrs. Stephen T. Millham, Gerrish & Gail Milliken, Clark & Jane Moeller, Yvette Molin, Louis Monti, Melvin Moore, Cheek Family Foundation, Lynette T. Morris, David Mortmanm, Sara Jane Moss, Hillary Mull, Roberta Mundie, Vejay Nair, Cassandra S. Naylor, Karen Ness, The McKee Foundation, Vincent Noto, Frannie Oates, Andy OBrien, Trinidad Ortega, Barbara Ortiz Howard, David Owens, Tom Pack, Joe Paduda, Mr. & Mrs. Paul Paese, Joaquim Panozzo, Dorothy Parris, Beth Peisner, Victor R. Pereira, Laurie Petronis, Anthony Pires, Nick Poeppelman, Samuel B. Pokross, Pollan-Belzer Charitable Fund,, Noelle Poncelet, Ean Price Murphy, Franklin Raines, Amelie Ratliff, Siva Raven, Raymond James Charitable Endowment, Danielle Redmond, Ashley Rexford, Ashley Rhodes, Callie Richards, Mark Richardson, Melissa Ricks, Olive Robinson, Mrs. Faith Roessel & Mr. Matthew Slater, Philip D. Ross, Caitlin C. Ross, Andrew Rowen, Paul F. Ryan, Robert Ryan, Mr. & Mrs. Robert A. Sanden, Nancy Scheer, Kristi Schermerhorn, Erin Schifeling, Jon Selkirk, Elaine Semancik, Bennett Silbert, Nathanael & Hoang LA My Silverman, Steven Slomka, Isadora Snyder, Brian B & Kathleen Kelly Spear, James Spurlock, Tom & Diane St John, Stanley Shalom Zielony Foundation, Wayne Ross & Nancy Starling Ross, Ryan` Stelly, Kerry & Bill Stevenson, Clayton Stevenson, Frances Stevenson, Sherna StewartWill Stoddard, Savithri Subramanyam, Succulent Studios Sucstu, Inc., Stephen Tait, Cole H Taylor, Melanie Taylor, Tom Tremaine, Daniel Tresemer, Alice D. Turak, United Jewish Foundation, Derek Valdo, BrianVan Buren, Amanda Van Hoesen, Margaret S. Verble,Charles Vetzner, Stephen Waldman, Janice Warner,Charles & Jacqueli Warren, Linda & Chris Warren, Kevin & Libby Washburn, Mike Watkins, Suzanne Way, Jerry Wayne, Carol L. Weale, Francine Weaver, Diann L. Weinman, Anthony Weiss, Aaron Wernham, MarilynW . West, Frederick Wiesinger, Patricia Williams, LeslieWilliams, Gayle R. Wilson, Donald & Myrna Wolfgang,Ann & Alan Woods, Harry & Belle Yaffe Family Fund,Madison Young, Linda Young, William Youngblood,Jeanne Zasadil
PETA UHA OBSIDIAN
Joe Adler, Signal Ai, Alexander Family Fund, Allen Foundation, Paul Alvarado, Alisa Freeman Alvarez, Caffe Amouri, Clarissa Angeroth Franks, Bryan Arledge, Bill Bajari, Neil Baldwin, Randall F. Barbis, Maureen Barckley, Stephen Barrett, Maia Barrow, Carlin Barton, Abraham Bauer, Brian Becker, Tria Belcourt, Logan Bell, Karen Benjamin, Cassandra Benjamin, Wallace Benkowski, James Bennett, Anne Bensard, Samantha Bergen, Robert & Ellie Bernstein, Robert Snyder & Mary BerryHill, Bryan Bigelow, Esther Billings, George Bingley, Margaret A. Bjerklie, Robert Blaha, Tyler Blevins, Caroline Blicq, Mr. & Mrs. David Boerner, Nancy L. Bonvillain, Andrea D Boone, Cathryn Booth-Laforce, B. Jay Bortz, David Boswell, Sandwich Bowl, Olen Bradburn, Mark Bregman & Susan Keller, Scott Breudecheck, Kristin Briggs, Jennifer Bright, Katherine K. Brobeck, Samantha Brown, David D. Brown, PatriciaBruggere, Breanna Brunswick, Mary Bucholtz, JamesBullard. Marianne Campbell, Cheryl Capps, DouglasCarnahan, Rose Carr, Ruth O. Carroll, Alex Carther,Robert Cathcart, Jessica Cattelino, Catalina Chacon,Coreina Chan, Andrew Chow, Elizabeth Christensen,Terry Christopherson, Christina Clayton, Mary Cline,Kiersten Clingersmith, George & Rachel L. ClowardBruce Cobern, Joyce T. Cogar, Cynthia Colangelo,Charles Cole, Mary Collier, Sarah Collins, SamuelT. Cook, George Corbett, James Paul Corrie, RogerCoupal, Ruth B. Cowan, Martha C. Crothers, PhD, ToniM. Crowley, John Cunningham, Jo Anna Dale, CarolD. Daley, Charles Davis, Olugbenga Dawodu, JudithA. DeJong, George Desmond, Andrea Devereux,Katie Dickson, Alexandra Dillard, Michael Dively,Kathryn Dunham, Kalyna Durbak, Lucille Echohawk,Bert & Jo Ann Eder, Susan Eichhorn Jordan, BonnieEisenman, Gail Elliott, David and Sonja V . Ellis, AnneT. Else, Peter Ember, Robert Endres, Daniela Endres,Englander Underberg Charitable Fund, Joseph Ennis,Olga Estrada, Marie Fabian, Arthur Fairley, LenoreFeigenbaum, Lor Feig-Sandoval, Benedict & MaryFeinberg, Stephanie T. Fenwick, Briana Feola, NathalieFernandez, Cherry Fielder, Herbert D. Floyd, PatriciaFosch, Robert L. Fox, Ann M. Francis,
ANNUAL REPORT 2021 35Max Friedman, John Fueller, Nat Furman, Ellen Ettlinger 
Furnari, Maria Gavin, Daniel Gelbaum, Ann Getches, Kathryn Gleason, Jayashree Gokhale, Bruce Golden, Thomas A. Goldsmith, Jimmy K. Goodma, Meredith Goodnight, Pamela Gordon, Melissa Gordon, Edward Gordon, Belinda Gore, Mary Gore, Judith P . Gould, Sadja Greenwood, Olivia Grieder, Martin Griffith, John Grim, Michelle Groleau, Heide Gulgowski, Adam Haber, Anna Hadar, Angeline Hadiwidjaja, Lyra Hall, Taylor Hamilton, Nur-ul- Haq, Sara Harkavy SenatoreWilliam Y . Harley, Regina Harrison, Karen Hart, Melissa Haskell, Joanna Hawley, Beverly J. Haynes, Emily Hebbron, Nellie Hedegar, Anthony Heilbut, Heimbinder Family Foundation, Grant Hendrix, Dawson Her Many Horses, Daniel Hermann, Bernhardt Hertlein, Mr. & Mrs. Arnold L. Higginbotham, Mr. & Mrs. John Hobson, Leela Hoehn, Hoffman Family Donor Fund, Lawrence J. Hogan, Nathaniel Holden, Raymond Honeywell, Lisa Honig, Lacey Horn, Susan Hornfeld, Kaye Howe, Amy Hubbard, Raymond HubbeEileen L. Hufana, Elizabeth Hunt, Liz Hurkes, Ann Ingersoll, John Ingraham, Larry Jack, Annette Jackson, Christy & Abe Jacob, Elizabeth James, Chris Jendrisak, Kristina Jensen, Melissa Jensen, Melissa John, Roberta Johnson, Colleen Johnson, Allison Jones, Bernadine Jones, Dani Kahn, Roberta M. Kamin-Lewis, Dean Kaplan, Kates Foundation, Inc, Mr. Ewert & Ms. Rulka, Scott & Michelle Kegler, Collin Kelly & Zahava Blumenthal, Jennifer Kemp, Kristina Kemp, Barbara Keppel, Jean Keskulla, KyungMann Kim, Thomas King James & Linda Kitchens, Duane Kline, Herr Georg J. Kochjar, Andrew J. Kocur, Joan Komatsoulis, Lavanya Kraus, Shelley Krause & Terri Riendeau, Diane Krueger, Nickola Kuhn, Lamson Lam, Farrah Lamoreaux, Robert L. LaRoque, Bonnie Laudenschlager, Walter Laughon, Adam Lawthers, Bennett Leifer, LaToya Lemons, Caroline Lengyel, James and Cynthia Leonard, Robert Leverett, Stephen & Margaret Libera, Virginia Lincoln, Chad Lindner, Jon Lindy, Jason Linzer, Suzanne Litke, Oleg Litvak, Peter Llerena, Jennifer Lucero, Carol J. Ludwig, Carolyn Swan Mack, Annie Maduzia, Nancy Main, Michael Makley, Sheila Ann Maloney, Molly Mangel, John & Susanne Manley, Mr. Roger Marble & Ms. Nancy Shaw, Otwin Marenin, Mr. & Mrs. Gilbert H. Martinez, Sr., Michael Mason, Penny Mason, Ellen Mattesen, Skye McCarty, Susan McClary, Susan McCullough, Kevin McDonald, Douglas R McFarlan, Mr. Colin McGurk & Ms. Orli Nativ, Dixie McIntyre-Mittmann, Molly McKaughan, Milton McKeen, Jr., Susan McKim, Helen F. McRoberts, Virginia Meade, Meek Foundation, AnnMerchant, Amy Messer, Margaret Meyerhofer, HarryMiller, Carol Miller, Claire Mills, Ted Minter, RoxanneMintz, Kaizad Mistry, Gwen Moffat, Edith Morris,Dan Morrow, Greg Moss, Dorothy Mott, Ryan Munsey,Barbara Musicus, Sarah Neely, Russ Nekorchuk, JudithR. Nelson, Susan R. Nelson, S. Nelson-Benway, LarryNesper, Marianne E. Nick, Heath Nivens, MeganO’Brien, Jean M. O’Brienkehoe, Frederic Oder, JosephOstoyich, Donna Owens, Calvin Pagel, Dylan Palme,
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 36Hemaxi Patel, Prashant Patel, Maureen F. Patrick, 
Ryan Patterson, Kathleen Paul, Heather Peck, Emily Percy, Johnny A. Perna, Paul J. & Diane Elaine Perry, Jeffrey & Joan Petertil, Michael & Barbara Petoskey, Fred and Linda S. Phaby, Dennis Phelan, Anna Ploegh, Jennifer Plombon, Anne Powell, Michael V . Priebe, Jr., Mark Priven, Lawrence Procell, Rory Pulvino, Bryce Purdy, Mr. & Mrs. Denis J. Quinlan, G. Craig Ramsay, Nancy C. Ramsey, Mary L. Rapczynski, Catherine Ravinski, Asha Reddy, Roy Regozin, Barbara Reilly, Kari Reiquam & Bryan Austill, Mr. & Mrs. James S. Rettig, David Rhoades, Parker Rider-Longmaid,Michael Ridgewell, Jeffrey & Teme Ring, BarbaraRisius, MD, Frank and Gladys Ritter, Gabriela Rivera,Jean Roberts, Jimmy Roberts-Miller, John A. Rodger,Jr. Foundation, Ashley Rodriguez, Allison Rogers,James Rogers, Barbara Rogoff, David Rohr, CarmenRoldan, Mary Rose, Robert C. Rothhouse, Anthony E.& Jane Rothschild, Sonia Roubini, Mark Rowell, ReneeRuchotzke, Paulo Ruffino, Nancy Ruhling, Ed Rumann,Russell-Dempsey Fund, David H. & Adrienne Ruud,Charlotte R. Sammon, Constance Sancetta, MichaelSanderson, Jeffrey & Carol Savery, Lisa Schachner,Jason Schechtman, Irl Schiley, Gerald & Karen Schuler,Karl Schults, Maryann Schultz, Anne Senning, Debbieand Vikram Shah, Jonathan & Catherine Shapiro,Elvera Shappirio, Rajiv Sharma, Betty Shea, NoelSheer, William T. Sherman, Susan Shiler, Saurin SunnyShine, Nan Silkunas, Saree Silverman, Susan Slaughter,Jeanette Sliter, Terri Slivka, Kaighn Smith, Jr. & AudreyMaynard, Bill D. Smith, Christina Sonas, Mary Sooter,David A. Souers, Tycho Speaker, Kelley Stanley, GeorgeStarzmann, Benjamin Steel, Lyle Steinfeldt, DeniseSterchi, Patrick Stollenwerk, Linda Stork, SamanthaStremmel, Michael Stutz, Scott Suchyta, Lynne Sullivan,Pavur Sundaresan, Ingrid Swenson, T. Rowe PriceCharitable, Christine Taffe, Florence Taitel, SoniaTamez & Kenneth Whistler, Collin Thormoto, WilliamThorne, Marian Tieh, Timberwolf  Welding, Inc., XavierTissier, Adam Torrey, Demian Trask, Rodney Troyer,Laura Twichell, Malcolm Ulbrick, Clo Ann Ulric, RonUrban, Paul van Trotsenburg, Michael Vanderbilt,Carmen P . Velasquez-Bales, Matthew Wallace, AnyaRader Wallack, Lish Walsh, Leota Walters, Chris Ware,Elizabeth Warriner, Susan Wayne, Charles & Sarah,Weems, Mary Wegehaupt, Jay Weiner, Caleb Weiss,Margaret N. Weitzmann, Elaina Welch, Karen Welmas,Liesl WestHolmes, Michael Weston, Leslie Wheelock,Michael White, Rachel Whitehurst, Christopher Whitney& Cheryl Warner, Arda Wigs, Williard & KatharineWilcox, Paul Wilhite, Brooke Williams, KatherineWilliams, Katharine Wilson, Kathleen Winder, DavidWinston, Debra Wollesen, William Wood, DonaldWoodworth, Tatianna Woydak,Morgan Wright, Olivia Wright, Gary Wright, Philip & Carolyn Wyatt, Alisa Yaffa & Ken McElvain, Karen Yust, Amy J. Zuckerman, Edward Zukoski
CIRCLE OF LIFE – The circle is an importrant symbol 
throughout Native American cultures, representing unity, 
strength, and the eternal community of  life. NARF’s Circle of  Life Donors provide lasting legacy to the Native American Rights Fund by including NARF in estate planning or deferred gifts.Mr. & Mrs. Catches Bear & Judy Adams, Mr. Rodney J. Addison, Theodora Barychewsky, Ms. Diane BenAri,Mrs. Nanette M. Bohren, Ms. Nina R. Brilli, SamuelB. Broaddus & Sandra Jensen, Mr. Larry A. Cooper,Katherine Curtis, Mr. Gary Dickerhoof, Mrs. SusanEichhorn Jordan, Ms. Allison B. Emerson, Mr. James K.Fee, Mr. Pete Floros, Ph.D., Paul Finley & Lisa Foxwell,Ms. Jan Freeman, Louise Gomer Bangel, Lydia GrimmMerrill Hakim, Mr. Michael S. Hall, Ms. MargaretHartnett, Ms. Karin Holser, Ms. Barbara A. Humes, Ms.Harriett Jones, Mr. Vusama Kariba, Mr. & Mrs. PhillipKatzen, Ms. Betty Kleczy, Mr. Edward Kriege, Ms.Sharon Laughlin, Ingrid LeBlanc, Mr. James Lehnerer,Ms. Jane G. Libby, Ms. Rima Lurie, Ms. Helen G.McCahill, Mr. & Mrs. William & Eileen B. McCarron,Ms. Marion McCollom Hampton, Mr. William G.Milligan, Mr. Gary Montgomery, Ms. Leila V . Moore,Jeanne Moska, Nancy O’Neal, Mr. Anthony Pampena,Mr. Moses Peter, Mr. Randall Petersen, Ms. DenisePfalzer, Casey Portnoy, Mrs. Andrea Robinsong, JuneRosenthal, Mr. William Rozier, Mrs. B. W . Sampson,Mr. & Mrs. LaRoy & Mary Seaver, Mr. Michael Seeley,Ms. Charlotte Selver, Mr. Kirk Sperry, William Steib,Mr. & Mrs. James & Patricia Straus, Mr. & Mrs. Michael& Carol Sullivan, Louis Tabois, Valeria Tenyak, Ms.Charlotte Thompson, Mr. Rene Vivo, Dr. & Dr. Robert& Mary Wellman, Mr. Roger L. Welsch, Tim Wernette,Mr. & Mrs. Dan S. & Beth Whittemore, Mrs. KarenWilliams-Fast Horse
MATCHING GIFTS
AbbVie Employee Engagement Fund, Bank of  America, BMS Matching Gift Program, Cairncross & Hempelmann, CBT Nuggets, LLC, Charityvest, Chevron Human Energy, Christy Furlan, Colorado Health Foundation, Compton Foundation, Inc., Consolidated Investment Group, LLC, Deckers Outdoor Corporation, DELL, Dessert Demora, Fidelity Brokerage Services NM, Financial Engines Association Matching Gift Program, GAP Inc., Goldman, Sachs & Company, Henry Luce Foundation, HSBC, HULU Employee Match, JP Morgan Chase & Co., Kauffman Foundation Matching Gifts, MASCO Support Service, MasterCard Impact Fund, Millennium Pharmaceuticals, Penguin Random House, PEW , 
ANNUAL REPORT 2021 37Pfizer Foundation Matching Gifts Program, Qualcomm, 
Rasmuson  Foundation,  Robert  Wood Johnson 
Foundation, Salesforce.org, TEL, Texas Instruments, 
Vanguard, Verizon Foundation,  W.K. Kellogg 
Foundation, Welch Mechanical Designs, LLC
NARF Employee giving - NARF employees commit 
thousands o f hours to protecting the rights o f  tribes. They also 
commit their own funds to help NAR F. We appreciate their 
steadfast dedication. 
IN-KIND DONATIONS
Dr. Nora Antoine, Hon. Kevin Briscoe, Richard de Bodo 
–Munck Wilson Mandala, Matt Collins -  Squire Patton
Boggs,  Hon. Tim Connors, Ann Estin - University of
Iowa College 
of Law , Hon. Cheryl Fairbanks, Natasha
Gourd, Dr. Polly Hyslop, Hon. Michael Jackson,  Rolf
Kjolseth, Stacy  Krumin – Squire Patton Boggs, Dr. 
Manulani Aluli Meyer, Hon. Michael Petoskey , Hon.
David Raasch, 
Heirloom  Films & Photography , Bryan
Sells, Carson Smith, Jim Tucker, Hon. Laurie Vilas,
Hon. Robert Yazzie
Boulder-Denver Advisory Committee
Lucille A. Echohawk, Thomas W
. Fredericks, 
Ava Hamilton, Jeanne Whiteing, Charles Wilkinson
OTHER WAYS TO SHOW YOUR SUPPORT FOR 
THE RIGHTS OF NATIVE PEOPLES
Tsanáhwit Circle – Tsanáhwit is a Nez perce word 
meaning equal justice. Tsanáhwit Circle members 
recognize the constant need to stand firm for justice 
by making monthly contributions. With cases that can 
span years, monthly ongoing contributions make a real 
difference for protecting the rights of  the tribes we 
serve. Visit our online donation page at www.narf.org to 
pledge your monthly support.
Otu’han – Otu’han is the Lakota (Sioux) word translated 
as giveaway. Otu’han gifts are memorial and honoring 
gifts modeled after the tradition of  the Indian giveaway in 
which items of  value are gathered over a long period of 
time to be given away in honor of  birthdays, marriages, 
anniversaries and in memory of a departed loved one. 
Visit our online donation page at www.narf.org to make a 
tribute gift.
Follow us – Sign up at www.narf.org for our e-news or 
like and follow us on social media. These are both great 
way to get case updates, calls-to-action, special events in-
formation, and invitations. Your e-mail address is confi -
dential and we will not share it with any outside sources.
NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND 38CORPORATE OFFICERS
John E. Echohawk (Pawnee)
Executive Director/Attorney
Matthew Campbell (Native 
Village of  Gambell) Litigation Management Committee Member/Attorney
David Gover (Pawnee/Choctaw)
Litigation Management Committee Member/Attorney
Erin Dougherty Lynch
Litigation Management Committee Member/Attorney
Michael Kennedy
Chief  Financial Officer
Donald M. Ragona (Matinecock)
Director of  Development/House Counsel
Sarah Palacios (Pueblo of  
Pojoaque) Corporate Secretary/Office-HR Administrator
BOULDER STAFFMichael Carter (Citizen Potawatomi 
Nation) - Attorney 
Kacey Chopito (Zuni) - FellowJacqueline D. De León (Isleta 
Pueblo) - Attorney 
K. Jerome Gottschalk - AttorneyMelody McCoy (Cherokee)
- Attorney
Steven C. Moore - AttorneySue Noe - AttorneyBrett Lee Shelton (Oglala Lakota) - 
AttorneyAda Montague Stepleton - Attorney
Joe M. Tenorio (Santo Domingo 
Pueblo) - Attorney
Nate Ahrens - Systems 
Administrator
Kevin Cheng - Paralegal
Amy M. Echo-Hawk (Yakama/
Pawnee) - Communications Manager
Cita Gover (Diné) - Development 
Donor Accounting Analyst
Patrick Hampton - Online 
Fundraising Manager
Patrice Kunesh (Standing Rock 
Lakota descent) - Major Gift Officer
Mireille Martinez - Annual Giving 
Director
Dallin Maybee (Northern 
Arapaho/Seneca) - Assistant Director Development
Mauda Moran - Director of  
Communications
Sarah Ortegon (Eastern Shoshone/
Northern Arapaho) - Executive Legal Assistang
Jennifer Redbone (Apache/
Comanche/ Kiowa) - Donor Information/Gift Processing Manager
Nova Rodriguez - Office Services 
Assistant/Receptionist
Jeff  Schmidt - ParalegalLilia Shahbandeh (Chickasaw/
Choctaw) - Communications Specialist
Laurie Stirling - ParalegalDebbie Raymond-Thomas (Navajo) 
- Controller
Jennie Tsikewa (Zuni) - AccountantNATIONAL INDIAN LAW 
LIBRARY
Anne Lucke - Director, National 
Indian Law Library
Nora Hickens - Library Assistant
ANCHORAGE STAFF
Heather Kendall-Miller 
(Athabascan) - Attorney
Megan Condon - Attorney Wesley J. Furlong - Attorney Matthew Newman - AttorneyChloe Cotton - Berkley Law 
Foundation Fellow
Gaylen Edmo (Shoshone Bannock/ 
Potawatomi and Ottawa) - Alaska Fellow
Maggie Massey - Alaska FellowJill Rush - Office Manager/Legal 
Assistant
WASHINGTON D.C. STAFFJoel Williams (Cherokee) - AttorneyEmily deLisle - FellowSamantha Kelty - AttorneyDan Lewerenz (Iowa Tribe of  
Kansas and Nebraska) - Attorney
S. Denver Jacket (Ute Mountain
Ute/Navajo) - Office Manager/Paralegal
ANNUAL REPORT 2021NARF STAFF
391506 Broadway, Boulder, CO 80302
303-447-8760
www.narf.org