IN MEMORIUM
DAVID HARDING GETCHES
AUGUST 17, 1942 – JULY 5, 2011
“We have an unknown distance yet to run, an unknown river to explore.”  
John Wesley Powell
The Board of Directors and the staff members of the Native American Rights
Fund wish to dedicate this 2011 Annual Report to the memory of David H.Getches, founding Executive Director of the Native American Rights Fund.  
Getches was born in Abington, Pennsylvania, received his bachelor’s degree
from Occidental College and his J.D. from the University of Southern CaliforniaLaw School.  He began his legal career in 1967 with the law firm of Luce,Forward, Hamilton and Scripps in San Diego, California.  By 1968, he was co-directing attorney for California Indian Legal Services Escondido office. In1970, he became the founding Executive Director for the Native AmericanRights Fund in Berkeley, California and later relocated to Boulder, Colorado in1971.  He served as Executive Director until 1973 when he turned the position over to John Echohawk and became Deputy Director for one year. He served as staff attorney until 1976 when he went into private practice.  In 1978, he joined the University of Colorado Law School faculty and taughtIndian law, environmental law, water law, and public land law.  In 2003, hebecame the Dean of the Law School.
As a staunch advocate for American Indian rights, David Getches left an indeli-
ble imprint on modern Indian law.  While at NARF, David Getches litigatedmajor cases on behalf of Native American clients that included water rights,land claims, environmental issues, education, and civil rights. He served aslead counsel in the 1974 U.S. District Court decision in U.S. v. Washington, a
landmark Northwest Indian fishing rights case – known as the Boldt decision– which still stands as the leading case on the enforcement of tribal treatyrights.  This litigation involved the extent of off-reservation treaty fishing rightsof 14 tribes in Washington.  Getches advanced the bold and creative legal theory that the treaty’s promise of the right to take fish at “usual and accus-tomed places” and “in common with” territorial citizens entitled Indians toshare equally and take up to half of the harvestable fish.  His advocacy was notappreciated by all, as he was verbally taunted each day that he walked up thecourthouse steps.  Despite difficult odds and public sentiment, he prevailed onhis theory and vindicated Indian treaty rights in the now famous Boldt decision.
David Getches’ visionary life has inspired each and every one of us. 
We commit to continue his legacy and devotion to our people, our nations,our causes and our environment.  In this way, we honor his life, his family and the many people that he taught. We will always remember David’s spirit with abiding affection and respect. This NARF Annual Report is dedicated to the life of David Getches, founding Executive Director of theNative American Rights Fund.TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111TTaabbllee  ooff  CCoonntteennttss
Introduction ................................................................................................................ page 2
Executive Director’s Report ........................................................................................ page 4
Chairman’s Message .................................................................................................... page 6
The Board of Directors .............................................................................................. page 7
The National Support Committee ............................................................................ page 7 
The Preservation of Tribal Existence ...................................................................... page 8
The Protection of Tribal Natural Resources ........................................................ page 14
Major Activities 2011 - NARF Case Map ................................................................ page 22
The Promotion of Human Rights .......................................................................... page 24
The Accountability of Governments ...................................................................... page 32
The Development of Indian Law ............................................................................ page 34
Treasurer’s Report .................................................................................................... page 36
Contributors .............................................................................................................. page 37
NARF Staff .................................................................................................................. page 44
Main Office
Native American Rights Fund1506 BroadwayBoulder, CO 80302303-447-8760http://www.narf.org
Alaska Office
Native American Rights Fund801 B Street, Suite 401Anchorage, Alaska 99501907-276-0680
Washington, D.C. Office
Native American Rights Fund1514 P Street, NW, Suite D (Rear)Washington, D.C. 20005202-785-4166
Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is a nonprofit,
charitable organization incorporated in 1971 under the laws of theDistrict of Columbia. NARF is exempt from federal income tax under theprovisions of Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue code.Contributions to NARF are tax deductible. The Internal Revenue Servicehas ruled that NARF is not a "private foundation" as defined in Section 509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code. NARF was founded in 1970 and incorporated in 1971 in Washington, D.C.
1The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is
the national Indian legal defense fund whoseprimary work centers on the preservation andprotection of Indian rights and resources.NARF began its work in 1970 with a planninggrant from the Ford Foundation and throughthe years has grown into a reputable and well-respected advocate of Indian interests.
Since its beginnings, NARF has worked in
conjunction with many people to seek judicialand negotiated solutions to long-standingIndian grievances, uncertainties and problems.NARF’s partners have included tribal leaders,tribal attorneys, government attorneys andlegal services attorneys.  
Native advocates were almost invincible
during the 1970's and into the 1980's, espe-cially in the U.S. Supreme Court. Beginning inthe mid-1980's, Supreme Court decisionsstarted shifting against tribal interests. Thisnegative shift continues today as the majorityof the Justices on the Supreme Court seem
intent on limiting tribal sovereignty.
After the modern day tribal sovereignty
movement, the field of Indian law is no longerconsidered an esoteric subject about ancienthistory. Due in part to NARF’s existence – itstremendous successes in the courts as well ascontinued representation over the years inthousands of cases – the rights of America’sIndians are now judiciously and routinelybeing advocated before the courts, administra-tive hearings, state legislatures and Congress.Officials and bureaucrats who either chose toignore or had no information on the specificrights of America’s Indians in the past aretoday held accountable for decisions relatingto Native Americans, partly because of therights defined and upheld in NARF’s court-room and legislative victories.
The initial goal for NARF’s Indian law practi-
tioners was to represent Native Americans incases of major significance to a great number
of Indian people. For the first time,Indian people were assured that asustained, highly-trained Indianadvocacy group was available tothem to clarify treaty and constitu-tional rights guaranteed them –regardless of their ability to pay.NARF has been involved in somecapacity in practically all of theprecedent-setting cases in pastforty-one years. 
The Native American Rights Fund
has been at the forefront in advocat-ing for many of the major actsaffecting Native Americans includingthe American Indian ReligiousFreedom Act, the American IndianPolicy Review Commission, theNative American Graves Protectionand Repatriation Act, the MaineIndian Land Claims Settlement Act,the Religious Freedom RestorationIInnttrroodduuccttiioonn
John Echohawk and 
David Getches in 1972.
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 2Act and many others. NARF has also been
instrumental in assisting vital new Indianorganizations including the American IndianHigher Education Consortium, the TribalEducation Departments National Assembly,the Council on Energy Resource Tribes, theNational Tribal Environmental Council and theNative Hawaiian Legal Corporation. 
As an Indian-controlled organization, NARF’s
leadership has provided as many opportunitiesas possible to develop young Indian law grad-uates and students in the area of Indian law. An average of eight law interns and/or clerksare employed annually by NARF, most of thembeing Native American.
NARF’s existence would not be possible with-
out the efforts of the thousands of individualswho have offered their knowledge, courageand vision to help guide NARF on its quest.  Ofequal importance, NARF’s financial contributorshave graciously provided the resources to giveour efforts life.  Contributors such as the FordFoundation have been with NARF since itsinception.  The Open Society Institute, the Bayand Paul Foundations and the UngerFoundation have also made long term fundingcommitments.  Also, the positive effects ofNARF’s work are reflected in the financial con-tributions by a growing number of tribal gov-ernments like the Yocha Dehe Wintun Nation,the Seminole Tribe of Florida, the ChickasawNation, the San Manuel Band of MissionIndians, the Muckleshoot Tribe, the MississippiBand of Choctaw Indians and the Poarch Bandof Creek Indians.  United, these financial,moral, and intellectual gifts provide the frame-work for NARF to fulfill its goal of securing theright to self-determination to which all NativeAmerican peoples are entitled.  Finally, NARF’slegal work was greatly enhanced by the gener-ous pro bono contributions by the law firms ofDLA Piper and Patton Boggs LLP.  Their manyhours of work made it possible for NARF topresent the best positions possible and to moveforward in insuring NARF’s success.
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111NARF’s Priorities
One of the initial responsibilities of NARF’s
first Board of Directors was to develop prioritiesthat would guide the Native American RightsFund in its mission to preserve and enforce thelegal rights of Native Americans.  That Boarddeveloped five priorities that continue to leadNARF today:
• Preservation of tribal existence• Protection of tribal natural resources• Promotion of Native American human rights• Accountability of governments 
to Native Americans
• Development of Indian law and educating
the public about Indian rights, laws, and issues“The man who sat on the ground in his tipi 
meditating on life and its meaning, acceptingthe kinship of all creatures and acknowledgingunity with the universe of things was infusinginto his being the true essence of civilization.” — Chief Luther Standing Bear
3In 2011, the Native American Rights Fund
continued providing legal advice and repre-sentation to Indian tribes, organizations andindividuals in cases of major significance forthe 41st year.  Once again, our efforts resultedin several important victories and accomplish-ments for Native Americans.
In McCrary v. Ivanof Bay Village , the Alaska
Supreme Court affirmed the federal tribalrecognition of Ivanof Bay Village and the corol-lary right of the Village to claim sovereignimmunity from suit over a contractual dispute.The Court rejected arguments that Congresshas not approved the Department of theInterior’s authority to acknowledge preexistingtribal status in Alaska and relied on a previous
case addressing the issue.
After many years of hearings, an Oregon
Administrative Law Judge in the Klamath BasinAdjudication issued Proposed Orders in sixcases quantifying the Klamath Tribes’ waterrights claims in flow amounts or water levels ineach case sought by the Tribes and confirmedonce again that the Tribal water rights are themost senior in the Klamath Basin.  NARF haslong represented the Klamath Tribes in theirefforts to protect their reserved water rights tosupport their treaty hunting, fishing and gath-ering rights with a time immemorial prioritydate as well as water rights needed to satisfythe Tribes’ agricultural needs.  The ProposedOrders now move forward for review by the Oregon Water Resources Department’sAdjudicator.
The Native Culture, Language, Access to
Success in Schools (CLASS) Act, an Indian edu-cation bill that dramatically increases tribalsovereignty over elementary and secondaryeducation, was approved by the United StatesSenate Committee on Indian Affairs and wasintroduced in the House of Representatives.The Act includes several provisions that theTribal Education Departments NationalAssembly (TEDNA) represented by NARF hasadvocated for including an authorization for atribal education agency pilot project, coopera-tive education agreements between tribes andstates, increased roles for tribal governments inpublic schools, increased funding for tribaleducation agencies and other Indian educa-tion programs.
In addition, after over 20 years of work,
NARF and TEDNA secured federal funding fortribal education departments in 2012.  Thefunding will be distributed to tribal educationdepartments by the Department of Educationso they can participate in a pilot project thatallows tribal education departments to operatefederal education programs in public andEExxeeccuuttiivvee  DDiirreeccttoorr’’ss  RReeppoorrtt
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 4
Bureau of Indian Education schools located on
Indian reservations.
NARF and several other groups convened a
Boarding School Healing Symposium at theUniversity of Colorado Law School.  TheSymposium brought together individuals fromacross the U.S. and Canada that have beenworking on various aspects of the issue to dis-cuss the priorities and strategies to achieveboth national recognition of and apology forthe wrongs visited on individuals and commu-nities of U.S. tribes and reparations to providethe framework for healing of these historic andenduring wrongs.  A coalition was formed tocontinue this work.
In State of Alaska v. Tanana, the Alaska
Supreme Court issued a broad affirmation oftribal authority by holding that tribal courts inAlaska have authority to initiate and adjudicateNative children’s cases without going throughstate courts.  State recognition of those tribalcourt proceedings is critical to assure that thetribal court proceedings are respected by otherstate agencies. NARF represented several AlaskaNative villages and a tribal couple in the case.
NARF represents 41 tribes in Nez Perce Tribe
v. Salazar , a case filed in 2006 seeking account-
ings of tribal trust funds managed by the federalgovernment.  In 2011, the government providedthe tribes with never-before provided trustaccount data and began settlement negotia-tions with the tribes to settle their cases. 
In Cobell v. Salazar , a case that NARF helped
to file in 1996 but is no longer active in, thefederal district court for the District ofColumbia approved a settlement of $3.4 billionfor the claims of over 300,000 individualIndian money account holders who are seekingan accounting of their trust funds held by thefederal government.  The federal districtcourt’s approval of the settlement has beenappealed to the Court of Appeals for theDistrict of Columbia.NARF’s Indian Law Support Center, which
works with the 32 basic Indian legal servicesprograms around the country, once againhelped to secure funding under the IndianTribal Justice and Legal Assistance Act to sup-plement funding for Indian legal services programs for their representation of Indianpeople and Tribes which fall below federalpoverty guidelines.  Congress appropriated$2.49 million for civil and criminal assistance intribal courts.
These positive results in 2011 would 
not have been possible without the financialsupport of our many contributors and supporters.  We thank you and hope that yourassistance will continue as we continue ourservice to Indian country on these priority legal issues.
John E. Echohawk
Executive Director
David Getches and 
John Echohawk in 1973.
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111 5About the time that the Native American Rights Fund was getting started, a 1969 US Senate
report was describing some ideals that were believed to be fundamental principles about societyin America.  The Senate report stated in part “The American vision of itself is of a nation of citizensdetermining their own destiny; of cultural differences flourishing in an atmosphere of mutualrespect; of diverse peoples shaping their lives and the lives of their children.”  While the conceptsounds ideal, in reality, the outcome of this vision has not held true for too many Native Americancommunities.
Yet today, more than forty years after that Senate report we still witness states such as South
Dakota and Alaska, to be in violation of the Voting Rights Act.  Voting is a right, fundamental toU.S. citizenship, and many jurisdictions go to great lengths to enable citizens to vote - yet thesestates choose efforts to limit voting rights to Native Americans.
States such as Wisconsin and Oklahoma have made great strides in educating citizens about
state, federal and tribal court systems and have achieved milestones in judicial reciprocity.  SouthDakota and Alaska, however, continue to not recognize the self-governing rights of Indian tribesto assert their authority and responsibility, even over the welfare of their children.
On other matters, and far too often, federal and state governments appear blind to the
destructive impact that certain regulations have on the sacred sites and burial places of NativeAmericans.  Our highest court in the land, the U.S. Supreme Court, continues to deny justice toIndian tribes year after year. It is unbelievable to conceive how or why matters brought beforethe Roberts Court have lost in all seven cases, even when the lower courts have ruled in favor ofthe Indian tribes.
There are many examples from around the world that reflect the fight for protecting sacred
land, preserving cultural values, defending ways of life.  That type of determination and unwa-vering sense of responsibility is no less among Native American leaders, whether on the battlefields of war or in the halls of Congress or in state, federal, or tribal courts.  Today these fightscontinue – they continue because the threat to the core values and the very fabric of what makesus who we are – Native Americans – is ever present.
For the past forty-one years, the Native American Rights Fund has been by the side of Native
American tribes in their fight to protect and preserve these rights.  For example, “The FirstThirteen” Native American attorneys who argued before the U.S. Supreme Court will be dis-cussing their experiences in a symposium in March 2012 at the University of New Mexico SchoolOf Law in Albuquerque.  NARF senior attorneys Melody McCoy and Heather Kendall-Miller aretwo of the thirteen.  Two others, Arlinda Locklear and Jeanne Whiting, were NARF attorneys atthe time of their arguments.  Terry Pechota and Ray Cross had been NARF attorneys prior to makingtheir arguments, and Rod Lewis was a former NARF Board member.  That seven of the thirteenbefore the Court had direct ties with NARF is a matter of pride and underscores the determina-tion and dedication that embodies NARF and those who serve.
The fight of Native Americans and tribal governments trying to protect their rights is far from
over.  The ability for NARF to serve those who are unable to afford legal counsel also continuesto grow.  Unfortunately, challenging economic circumstances are threatening the ability of NARFto provide counsel for the many cases that arise each day.  The members of the Board and thestaff at NARF earnestly solicit all the financial assistance possible in order to sustain the fight forsurvival in the courts and in Congress.  
On behalf of the NARF Board of Directors, I thank all who have contributed to NARF in the past
and encourage you to continue giving in the future.  If you have not contributed in the past,please consider giving this year.
Yaw^Ko,     
Jerry DanforthChairman, Board of DirectorsCChhaaiirrmmaann’’ss  MMeessssaaggee
Jerry Danforth 
Chairman, 
Board of Directors
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 6The Native American Rights Fund has a gov-
erning board composed of Native Americanleaders from across the country – wise and distinguished people who are respected byNative Americans nationwide. Individual Boardmembers are chosen based on their involve-ment and knowledge of Indian issues andaffairs, as well as their tribal affiliation, toensure a comprehensive geographical repre-
sentation. The NARF Board of Directors, whosemembers serve a maximum of six years, provide NARF with leadership and credibility,and the vision of its members is essential to
NARF's effectiveness in representing its Native
American clients.NARF’s Board of
Directors: (Left to Right)
Gerald Danforth, BoardChairman (Oneida IndianNation of Wisconsin);Buford L. Rolin (PoarchBand of Creek Indians);Barbara Smith(Chickasaw Nation); Ron His Horse Is Thunder,Board ExecutiveCommittee (StandingRock Sioux Tribe); MarkMacarro (Pechanga Bandof Luiseño Indians);Kunani Nihipali, BoardVice-Chairman (NativeHawaiian); Natasha V.Singh (Native Village ofStevens).  (Not Pictured)Marshall McKay, BoardTreasurer (Yocha DeheWintun Nation); RichardLuarkie, Board ExecutiveCommittee (Pueblo ofLaguna); Virginia Cross(Muckleshoot IndianTribe); Beasley Denson(Mississippi Band ofChoctaw Indians).
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111 7BBooaarrdd  ooff  DDiirreeccttoorrss
NNaattiioonnaall  SSuuppppoorrtt  CCoommmmiitttteeee
The National Support Committee assists NARF
with its fund raising and public relations effortsnationwide.  Some of the individuals on theCommittee are prominent in the field of business, entertainment and the arts. Othersare known advocates for the rights of the
underserved.  All of the 31 volunteers on theCommittee are committed to upholding the rights of Native Americans.
Randy Bardwell, Pechanga
Band of Luiseño Mission
Indians 
Jaime Barrientoz, Grande
Traverse Band of Ottawa
and Chippewa Indians
John Bevan
Wallace Coffey, Comanche
Ada Deer, Menominee
Harvey A. Dennenberg Lucille A. Echohawk,
Pawnee
Jane FondaJames Garner
Eric GinsburgJeff GinsburgRodney Grant, 
Omaha
Chris E. McNeil, Jr., 
Tlingit-Nisga’a
Billy Mills, Oglala Lakota
Amado Peña, Jr.,
Yaqui/Chicano
Wayne RossNancy Starling-Ross  Mark Rudick
Pam RudickErnie Stevens, Jr.,
Wisconsin Oneida
Andrew Teller, Isleta
Pueblo 
Verna Teller, Isleta Pueblo
Richard Trudell, 
Santee Sioux
Rebecca Tsosie, 
Pasqua Yaqui
Tzo-Nah, 
Shoshone BannockAine UngarRt. Rev. William C.
Wantland, Seminole
W. Richard West, 
Southern Cheyenn
Randy Willis, 
Oglala Lakota
Teresa Willis, Umatilla
Mary Wynne, 
Rosebud SiouxUnder the priority of the preservation of tribal
existence , NARF works to construct the founda-
tions that are necessary to empower tribes sothat they can continue to live according totheir Native traditions, to enforce their treatyrights, to insure their independence on reser-vations and to protect their sovereignty. 
Specifically, NARF’s legal representation 
centers on sovereignty and jurisdiction issuesand also on federal recognition and restorationof tribal status.  Thus, the focus of NARF's workinvolves issues relating to the preservation and
enforcement of the status of tribes as sovereign
governments.  Tribal governments possess thepower to regulate the internal affairs of theirmembers as well as other activities within theirreservations.  Jurisdictional conflicts often arisewith states, the federal government and othersover tribal sovereignty.
Tribal Sovereignty
The focus of NARF’s work under this priority
is the protection of the status of tribes as sov-ereign, self-governing entities.  The UnitedStates Constitution recognizes that Indiantribes are independent governmental entities
with inherent authority over their membersand territory.  In treaties with the UnitedStates, Indian tribes ceded millions of acres ofland in exchange for the guarantee that thefederal government would protect the tribes'right to self-government. From the early 1800son, the Supreme Court has repeatedlyaffirmed the fundamental principle that tribesretain inherent sovereignty over their membersand their territory. 
In McCrary v. Ivanof Bay Village , Appellant
McCrary challenged the federal recognition ofIvanof Bay Village and the corollary right of thetribe to claim sovereign immunity from suit inthe context of a contractual dispute. Appellantwas represented by Don Mitchell, an Alaskaattorney who has spent much of his careerarguing that Congress has not approved theDepartment of Interior’s authority to acknowl-edge preexisting tribal status.
The superior court dismissed McCrary’s
complaint for lack of subject matter jurisdic-tion and oral argument before the AlaskaSupreme Court was held in May 2011. InDecember 2011, the Alaska Supreme Courtagreed with NARF’s legal arguments andupheld Alaska tribal government sovereignty.Tribal government legal status has now beenclearly upheld by the Alaska Supreme Court intwo successive decisions and McCrary has noother recourse in the state court system.McCrary recently filed a cert petition in theUnited States Supreme Court but it is unlikelythat it will be granted.
Beginning with the decision in Oliphant v.
Suquamish Indian Tribe in 1978 and with
increasing frequency in recent years, theSupreme Court has steadily chipped away atthis fundamental principle, both by restrictingtribal jurisdiction and by extending state juris-diction.  These decisions by the Supreme Courthave made this priority more relevant thanever and have led to a Tribal SovereigntyTThhee  PPrreesseerrvvaattiioonn  ooff  TTrriibbaall  EExxiisstteennccee
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 8“David Getches, Founder of the Native American
Rights Fund. Defender and Advocate for TribalSovereignty, Treaty Rights and the Federal TrustResponsibility. Your piercing intelligence, diligent work and compassion for the Nativecause fostered a legal revolution and brought
hope and justice to Indian communities nation-
wide. We thank you and lift you up in ourhearts.” (National Congress of AmericanIndians Lifetime Achievement Award)Protection Initiative in partnership with the
National Congress of American Indians (NCAI)and tribes nationwide to restore the traditionalprinciples of inherent tribal sovereignty wherethose have been undermined and to safeguardthe core of sovereignty that remains.
This Initiative consists of three components.
The first component is the Tribal SupremeCourt Project, the focus of which is to monitorcases potentially headed to the Supreme Courtand those which actually are accepted forreview.  When cases are accepted, the TribalSupreme Court Project helps to ensure that theattorneys representing the Indian interestshave all the support they need and to coordi-nate the filing of a limited number of strategicamicus briefs.  A second component of theInitiative is to weigh in on judicial nominationsat the lower court and the Supreme Court levels.  Finally, there is a legislative componentto fight bills that are against tribal interests andto affirmatively push legislation to overturnadverse Supreme Court decisions.
The Tribal Supreme Court Project is a joint
project staffed by the Native American RightsFund and the National Congress of AmericanIndians. The Tribal Supreme Court Project isbased on the principle that a coordinated andstructured approach to Supreme Court advo-cacy is necessary to protect tribal sovereignty— the ability of Indian tribes to function assovereign governments — to make their ownlaws and be ruled by them.  Early on, the TribalSupreme Court Project recognized the U.S.Supreme Court as a highly specialized institu-tion, with a unique set of procedures thatinclude complete discretion on whether it willhear a case or not, with a much keener focuson policy considerations than other federalcourts.  The Tribal Supreme Court Projectestablished a large network of attorneys whospecialize in practice before the SupremeCourt along with attorneys and law professorswho specialize in federal Indian law.  The TribalSupreme Court Project operates under the theory that if Indian tribes take a strong, con-
sistent, coordinated approach before theSupreme Court, they will be able to reverse, orat least reduce, the on-going erosion of tribalsovereignty by Justices who appear to lack anunderstanding of the foundational principlesunderlying federal Indian law and who areunfamiliar with the practical challenges facingtribal governments.
Now in existence for ten years, the Tribal
Supreme Court Project can look back to reviewwhether its work has been effective.  From yearone through year ten, several developmentsare notable.  First and foremost is the win-lossrecord for Indian tribes before the Court.Overall, the win-loss percentage has remainedthe same with the Tribes winning only about25% of their cases. However, under theRehnquist Court (year one to year four), Indiantribes increased their winning percentage togreater than 50%, – winning 4, losing 3, and2 draws in 9 Indian law cases heard on themerits.  This winning percentage was a vastimprovement from a deplorable winning 
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111 910
percentage of 20% in that court.  The work of
the Tribal Supreme Court Project appeared tobe paying major dividends.  But in the past sixterms of the Roberts Court (year five to yearten), Indian tribes have witnessed their win-ning percentage plummet to 0% — losing all7 cases argued on the merits.
The end of the October 2010 Term (which
ended on June 30, 2011) was anti-climatic,with the Court denying review in all of theremaining Indian law cases on its docket.  Withtwo prominent reservation disestablishmentcases – Osage Nation v. Irby and South Dakota
v. Yankton Sioux Tribe – up before the Court at
the same time, many Court-watchers expecteda grant of one, possibly both petitions forreview. Indian law practitioners were also veryconcerned at the end of the Term when theCourt invited the U.S. Solicitor General to file abrief expressing the views of the United Statesin Brown (formerly Schwarzenegger) v. Rincon
Band, a case involving interpretation of “rev-
enue” sharing under the Indian GamingRegulatory Act. Fortunately, the SolicitorGeneral recommended denial of the petitionfiled by the State of California and the Courtfollowed that recommendation.  The Court issued opinions in two Indian law
cases, both involving the ability of Indian tribesto sue the United States for mismanagementof tribal trust assets.  In United States v. Tohono
O’odham Nation
,the Court reversed (7-1) the
judgment of the U.S. Court of Appeals for theFederal Circuit and held that 28 U.S.C. § 1500deprives the Court of Federal Claims (“CFC”)of jurisdiction over a claim (breach of trustclaim for money damages) when a suit ispending in another court (breach of trust claimseeking trust accounting) that is based on sub-stantially the same operative facts, regardlessof relief sought in each suit.  As a result andwithout opinion, the Court granted the gov-ernment’s petition in United States v. Eastern
Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma
,vacated the judg-
ment, and remanded the case for considera-tion in light of its decision in TohonoO’odham.  Then, in United States v. Jicarilla
Apache Tribe, the Court once again reversed 
(7-1) the judgment of the U.S. Court ofAppeals for the Federal Circuit and held thatthe fiduciary exception to the attorney-clientprivilege does not apply to the general trustrelationship between the United States andIndian tribes.  Justice Kagan did not participatein either decision.
The Court did grant review in one other
Indian law case, Madison County v. Oneida
Indian Nation of New York, which involved the
question of whether the Tribe was entitled tothe defense of sovereign immunity in foreclo-sure proceedings brought by the County foralleged non-payment of property taxes.However, the Oneidas recognized the severechallenges awaiting the Tribe on the meritsand determined that the best strategy was towaive its sovereign immunity.  As a result of thewaiver, the Court vacated the judgment andremanded the case to the U.S. Court ofAppeals for the Second Circuit.  This remand istruly a victory for the Oneida Indian Nationand for all of Indian country.  The SupremeCourt had granted review based on a terseNARF Board 
Vice-Chairman 
Richard Luarkie 
(Pueblo of Laguna)
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDconcurring opinion written by Judge Cabranes
of the Second Circuit in which two of the threejudges – on a three-judge panel – made clearthat although they were bound by SupremeCourt precedent upholding tribal sovereignimmunity, the decision “defies commonsense” and “is so anomalous that it calls out forthe Supreme Court to revisit its decisions inKiowa and Potawatomi. ” 
Thus, in stark contrast to the previous term
during which the Court did not issue a singleIndian law decision, the Court had a veryactive Indian law docket.  In all, thirty-one peti-tions for writ of certiorari were filed in Indianlaw cases during the October 2010 term.  Onaverage, twenty-six petitions have been filed inIndian law cases each year since 2001.  Of thethirty-one petitions filed, four were grantedand twenty-seven were denied.  As always, theTribal Supreme Court Project monitored eachpetition at the time it was filed, and providedresources in the preparation of the briefswhere appropriate.  For example, the Projectworked directly on the development of strate-gy and the preparation of an amicus brief insupport of the petition in Osage Nation v. Irby
(reservation disestablishment). The Project alsoworked closely with attorneys representingtribal interests which prevailed in the lowercourts to prepare response briefs to successfullyoppose review.  These cases included: South Dakota v. Yankton Sioux Tribe (reservation
disestablishment); 
Brown (formerly Schwarzenegger)
v. Rincon Band (IGRA “revenue” sharing); Eagle
v. Yerington Paiute (tribal criminal jurisdiction
over non-member Indians); Glacier Electric
Coop v. Estate of Sherburne (tribal court civil
jurisdiction over non-Indians); and Hoffman v.
Sandia Resort and Casino (sovereign immunity).
If any one subject matter area dominated
the field of thirty-one petitions filed this pastterm, it was the question of whether reserva-tion boundaries had been diminished or disestablished.  This issue encompassed five ofthe six petitions filed related to the status of
tribal lands.  The next area to dominate theCourt’s docket was four petitions involving thetrust responsibility of the United States, of which, at the request of the United States,three petitions were granted review (Tohono
O’odham, Eastern Shawnee, and Jicarilla
Apache). There was also an uptick with three
petitions seeking review of state authority totax or regulate on-reservation activities (e.g.,unstamped cigarettes) with no indication fromthe Court that it is interested in the questionsraised by those cases.  The Project continues toclosely monitor cases challenging tribal sover-eign immunity, but only two petitions werefiled on that issue (with a near miss in relationto 
Madison County ). Nonetheless, we may see
a resurgence in this area given that two of thepending petitions for review next Term involvequestions regarding the scope of tribal sover-eign immunity.  The remainder of the petitionsencompassed a number of questions, includingquestions regarding tribal civil jurisdiction overnon-Indians (2); water rights (2); political status, civil rights, and religious freedoms (3);interpretation of various statutes or regulations(4); Indian gaming (1); and criminal jurisdic-tion (1).
In addition to its work before the U.S.
Supreme Court, the Project continues to monitor Indian law cases pending before thelower federal courts and in the state courts.  Incertain cases, the Project may becomeinvolved in the lower court litigation—coordi-nating resources, developing litigation strategyand/or filing briefs in support of tribal interests.The Project also continues to provide updatesof Indian law cases pending in the lowercourts, updating the cases by subject-matterarea:  Post-Carcieri Litigation; CriminalJurisdiction (Federal and State); CivilJurisdiction (Tribal and State); Diminishment/Disestablishment; Indian/Tribal Status;Sovereign Immunity; Taxation; Treaty Rights;Religious Freedoms; and Trust Relation-ship.
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111 1112
Hopefully, these efforts will help us identify
trends or currents within distinct areas ofIndian law that can be effectively addressedprior to reaching the Supreme Court. 
The Judicial Selection Project prioritized the
development of a process to identify, evaluateand promote qualified Native attorneys, tribaljudges and state court judges for nominationto the federal bench.  Currently, there are noactive judges on the federal bench who areNative American.  There are 866 federal judge-ships – nine on the Supreme Court, 179 on theCourts of Appeals and 678 for the districtcourts.  And there are zero American Indian,Alaska Native and Native Hawaiian federaljudges.  A primary objective of the JudicialSelection Project is to ensure that qualifiedNative candidates are considered and nomi-nated to fill current vacancies on the federalbench. To date, one Native American, ArvoMikkanen, a federal prosecutor in OklahomaCity, has been nominated to the U.S. DistrictCourt for the Northern District of Oklahoma.However, Oklahoma Senators have refused tosupport his nomination so his confirmation isvery unlikely.  NARF and NCAI continue towork with the White House General CounselOffice, the White House Office ofIntergovernmental Affairs and the U.S.Department of Justice Office of Legal Policy toensure that qualified Native candidates areconsidered and nominated to fill other currentvacancies on the federal bench.
Another part of NARF’s work under this 
priority is the environmental law and policy ini-tiative.  NARF has played a key role in theimplementation of federal environmental lawand policy that recognizes tribal governmentsas the primary regulators and enforcers of thefederal environmental laws on Indian lands.NARF has worked with the National TribalEnvironmental Council (NTEC) on comprehen-sive climate change legislation.  NTEC, NARF,NCAI and the National Wildlife Federationworked together and created detailed legisla-tive proposals recognizing the role of tribal
governments in proposed federal mitigationand adaptation programs to address climatechange.  Unfortunately, climate change legisla-tion stalled in the Congress.  
Internationally, NARF and NTEC attended
the United Nations Framework Convention onClimate Change (UNFCCC) Summit-COP 16 inCancun, Mexico, in December 2010.  ACancun Agreement was reached, likely savingthe UNFCCC process.  The agreement con-tains increased mentions of indigenous peo-ples and of the U.N. Declaration on the Rightsof Indigenous Peoples.  There are safeguardscalling for “The full and effective participation”of indigenous peoples in REDD+ (ReduceEmissions from Deforestation and Degradation)activities, and there are also a few references totaking into account traditional knowledge andtraditional indigenous knowledge.  In movingforward to COP 17 in Durban, South Africa,NARF, on behalf of NTEC, attended a negotia-tion session in June 2011 in Bonn, Germany.The two Subsidiary Bodies which give adviceto the Conference of the parties, that is, theSubsidiary Body for Scientific and TechnicalAdvice (SBSTA), each fought for more than 3 days of the first week just to agree on anagenda.  Much of the work of interest toindigenous peoples occurs in these bodies,especially in SBSTA, relating to modalities toensure reporting of information to allow anassessment of whether safeguards for indige-nous rights are being implemented.  SBSTA’swork product at the end in Bonn was a bare-bones outline of what needs to considered infuture meetings. The final  session beforeDurban was held in October 2011 in Panama.
In Durban, South Africa, November-
December 2011, the countries, after runningpast the scheduled time by a day and a half,established a new Ad Hoc Working Group onthe Durban Platform for Enhanced Action.  Thecountries committed to adopt a universal legalagreement on climate change as soon as 
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDpossible, but not later than 2015, to go in to
effect by 2020.  Based on their commitment, acore of countries, led by the European Union,agreed to a second commitment period to theKyoto Protocol (to which the U.S. is not aparty).  In addition, the Green Climate Fund,which is to be the major source of funding for international mitigation and adaptationactivities, was agreed to and can start receivingfunding.  Basically no progress was made inSBSTA concerning modalities to ensure report-ing of information to allow an assessment ofwhether safeguards for indigenous rights arebeing implemented.  
Federal Recognition of Tribal Status
The second category of NARF’s work under
this priority is federal recognition of tribal status.  NARF currently represents Indian com-munities who have survived intact as identifi-able Indian tribes but who are not federallyrecognized.  Tribal existence does not dependon federal recognition, but recognition is nec-essary for a government-to-government relation-ship and the receipt of many federal services.
After twenty-two years of preparing the nec-
essary historical, legal and anthropologicaldocumentation to support its petition for fed-eral acknowledgment, the Pamunkey IndianTribe, located on the Pamunkey Reservation inVirginia, filed its petition with the Office ofFederal Acknowledgement (OFA) in October2010. The Tribe received OFA’s Letter ofTechnical Assistance (TA) in April 2011, and aresponse to the TA letter is being prepared.The Pamunkey Indian Tribe is the only tribelocated in Virginia to have filed a fully docu-mented petition. Established no later than1646, the Tribe’s Reservation is located next tothe Pamunkey River, and adjacent to KingWilliam County. The Reservation comprisesapproximately 1,200 acres and is the oldestinhabited Indian reservation in America.  NARFhas represented the Tribe in this effort since 1988.In October 2009, the Acting Assistant
Secretary for Indian Affairs issued a FinalDetermination against recognition of the LittleShell Tribe of Chippewa Indians of Montana,overruling the decision in the PreliminaryDetermination.  The stated rationale for thedecision was the unwillingness to go alongwith the “departures from precedent” whichthe previous Assistant Secretary found to bejustified by historical circumstances.  InFebruary 2010, the Tribe filed a Request forReconsideration with the Interior Board ofIndian Appeals (IBIA).   The IBIA allowed inter-ested parties, if any, to file  opposition briefs byJuly 2010.  No one filed an opposition brief.  Itis unclear how long the IBIA will take to rule.The Senate Indian Affairs Committee held ahearing on the recognition process in April2011, at which the Tribe and NARF testifiedconcerning Little Shell’s experience with theprocess and defects of the process.  The Tribecontinues to pursue legislative recognition.
NARF Board member 
Ron His Horse Is Thunder(Standing Rock Sioux)
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111 13Throughout the process of European 
conquest and colonization of North America,Indian tribes experienced a steady diminish-ment of their land base to a mere 2.3 percentof its original size.  Currently, there are approx-imately 55 million acres of Indian-controlled land in the continental UnitedStates and about 44 million acres of Native-owned land in Alaska.  An adequate land baseand control over natural resources are centralcomponents of economic self-sufficiency andself-determination, and as such, are vital to the
very existence of tribes.  Thus, much of NARF’s
work involves the 
protection of tribal natural
resources. 
Protection of Indian Lands
Without a sufficient land base, tribal exis-
tence is difficult to maintain.  Thus NARF helpstribes establish ownership and control overlands which are rightfully theirs. NARF has been retained by the Eastern
Shoshone Tribe of the Wind River IndianReservation to analyze the legal implications ofthe Surplus Land Act of March 3, 1905, as itmay have affected the boundaries of thatReservation. NARF is working with the Tribe'sAttorney General and the Shoshone BusinessCouncil on a variety of fronts to secure the vin-dication of the boundary. The Shoshone Tribesand Arapaho Tribes, through their respectiveattorneys, are also cooperating in an applica-tion to the United States EnvironmentalProtection Agency (US-EPA) for delegation of"treatment in the same manner as a state”(TAS) in the administration of certain Clean AirAct programs. The determination supportingdelegation to the Tribes from US-EPA willrequire that US-EPA determine the location ofthe boundary of the Reservation. The TASApplication has been published by US-EPA andthey have received comments. The Tribes filedtheir Response to the comments in March2010. US-EPA also requested a written opinionfrom the Department of the Interior Solicitoron the boundary of the Wind River reservation.We are awaiting US-EPA’s decision about theapplication of delegation of certain Clean AirAct programs that are dependent on the deter-mination of the boundary.
NARF represents the Hualapai Indian Tribe of
Arizona in preparing and submitting fourapplications for the transfer of 8 parcels of landowned in fee by the Tribe into trust status.  TheTribe is located on the south rim of the GrandCanyon in Arizona and claims a boundary thatruns to the center of the Colorado River. Inaddition. NARF assisted the Tribe with thetransfer of lands gifted to the Tribe at ChollaCanyon Ranch. Because there were title concerns, NARF prepared a trust which theTribe adopted and into which the  lands weretransferred.  We also assist the Tribe with workas assigned from time to time, most recentlyrelated to the development of a local watersupply.TThhee  PPrrootteeccttiioonn  ooff  TTrriibbaall  NNaattuurraall  RReessoouurrcceess
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 14“The earth was created by the assistance of the sun,
and it should be left as it was...The country was made
without lines of demarcation, and it is no man’sbusiness to divide it....The earth and myself are of onemind. The measure of the land and the measure ofour bodies are the same. Do not misunderstand me,but understand me fully with reference to my affection for the land. I never said the land was mineto do with it as I chose. The one who has the right todispose of it is the one who has created it. I claim aright to live on my land, and accord you the privilegeto live on yours.” (Heinmot Tooyalaket – Chief Joseph –
Nez Perce)Since 1981, NARF has represented the
Alabama-Coushatta Tribe of Texas in theirquest to secure compensation for the loss ofuse of millions of acres of fertile forest landthey once occupied in southeast Texas. In 2002, the U.S. Court of Federal Claims ruledin favor of the Tribe in their breach-of-trustclaim against the United States, holding thegovernment liable for the Tribe's loss of use ofover 2.85 million acres of land between 1845and 1954.  The Court also ruled that 5.5 millionacres of aboriginal title has never been extin-guished.  Negotiators for the U.S. and Tribereached an agreement on the amount of dam-ages for the loss of land – $270.6 million – andthe Court recommended the agreement toCongress in 2002.  NARF is working with theTribe to have a bill introduced in Congress tosettle the Tribe’s claims, accompanied by theCourt’s favorable recommendation. 
In Chalkitsik, et al v. United States, the Tribe
brought suit seeking judicial review of 25C.F.R. Part 151 as it pertains to federally recog-nized tribes in Alaska. This regulation governsthe procedures used by Indian tribes and indi-viduals when requesting the Secretary of theInterior to acquire title to land in trust on theirbehalf. The regulation bars the acquisition ofland in trust in Alaska other than for theMetlakatla Indian Community or its members.The case has been fully briefed and is waitingfor decision.
Water Rights
The culture and way of life of many indige-
nous peoples are inextricably tied to their aboriginal habitat. For those tribes that stillmaintain traditional ties to the natural world,suitable habitat is required in order to exercisetheir treaty-protected hunting, fishing, gather-ing and trapping rights and to sustain theirrelationships with the animals, plants and fishthat comprise their aboriginal habitats. 
Establishing tribal rights to the use of water
in the arid west continues to be a major NARFpriority.  The goal of NARF's Indian water rights
work is to secure allocations of water for present and future needs for Indian tribes rep-resented by NARF and other western tribesgenerally.  Under the precedent established bythe Supreme Court in 1908 in Winters v. United
States and confirmed in 1963 in Arizona v.
California, Indian tribes are entitled under fed-
eral law to sufficient water for present andfuture needs, with a priority date at least asearly as the establishment of their reservations.These tribal reserved water rights are superiorto all state-recognized water rights createdafter the tribal priority date.  Such a date will inmost cases give tribes valuable senior waterrights in the water-short west.  Unfortunately,many tribes have not utilized their reservedwater rights, and most of these rights areunadjudicated or unquantified. The majorneed in each case is to define or quantify theamount of water to which each tribe is entitledthrough litigation or out-of-court negotiatedsettlements. Tribes are generally able to claimwater for any purpose which enables thetribe's reservation to serve as a permanenthomeland.
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111 1516
The Klamath Tribes of Oregon hold reserved
Indian water rights in the Klamath River Basinto support their treaty hunting, fishing andgathering rights with a time immemorial prioritydate, as well as water rights needed to satisfythe agricultural purposes of the KlamathReservation. Their reserved water rights forthese purposes are currently being quantifiedin a state-wide water adjudication, the KlamathBasin Adjudication. NARF represents the KlamathTribes in asserting and defending their treaty-based water rights in the adjudication and inprosecuting contests against many junior waterrights claims filed by non-Indian water users. 
On December 1, 2011, the Oregon Office of
Administrative Hearings issued ProposedOrders in the six cases quantifying the Tribalwater rights claims in the amounts claimed bythe Tribes and the United States Bureau ofIndian Affairs, as trustee for the Tribes.  The rul-ings were a resounding victory for the Tribaland federal claimants, as they adopted, across-the-board, the flow amounts or water levels ineach case sought by the Tribes and confirmed,once again, that the Tribal water rights are the
most senior in the Basin. Rulings in the remainingtwo subcases are expected in April 2012.
Under Oregon’s general stream adjudication
process, the Proposed Orders are not final rulings, but are the Administrative Law Judge’sproposals to the Oregon Water ResourcesDepartment’s Adjudicator. In late 2012 or early2013 the Adjudicator will issue a Findings ofFact and Order of Determination (FFOD) thatwill define not only the water rights of theTribes, but the rights of all water claimants inthe KBA.  Upon its issuance, the water rightsdecreed in the FFOD become enforceable.Next, the Klamath Tribes will face a sequenceof challenges in Klamath County Circuit Courtand possibly subsequent appeals courts.Nevertheless, Judge Allen’s rulings in theProposed Orders mark a very significant victoryfor the Claimants, one that puts the Tribes andthe BIA in the best position possible for thenext stages of the Adjudication.
NARF has represented the Nez Perce Tribe in
Idaho in its water rights claims in the SnakeRiver Basin Adjudication (SRBA) – both litiga-tion and settlement phases – for over 16 years.Congress enacted the Snake River SettlementAct of 2004 and President Bush signed it intolaw on December 8, 2004. We continue towork with the Tribe, on a very limited basis, tosecure final approval of the settlement by thestate water court, and on the federal appropri-ations process. We were successful in securingFY 2011 appropriations for the Tribe and areworking now on the FY 2012 appropriations.Additionally, we are representing the Tribe inthe drafting and negotiations with the UnitedStates, the State and private water interests inthe final unified decree that will be the capstone document closing the SRBA adjudi-cation.  It is anticipated that the final decreewill be signed by the judge in 2012.
After almost 30 years of advocacy, the Tule
River Indian Tribe, represented by NARF, 
NARF Board member 
Mark Macarro 
(Pechanga Band of
Luiseño Indians)
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDsuccessfully settled its water rights in
November of 2007 by signing a SettlementAgreement with water users on the South Fork Tule River of California. The SettlementAgreement secures a domestic, municipal,industrial and commercial water supply for theTribe. The Tribe now seeks federal legislation toratify the Settlement Agreement and authorizeappropriations to develop the water rightsthrough the creation of water infrastructureand reservoirs on the Tule Reservation. Billsintroduced in the House and Senate in 2007,2008 and 2009 did not pass. 
With the current Congress, we are engaged
in strategy meetings with the CaliforniaCongressional delegation regarding the possi-ble introduction of a water settlement bill, inthe 2012 legislative year.  Additionally, we arecontinuing work with the federal Bureau ofReclamation on necessary studies for the feasibility and design of the Tribe’s water storage project.
In June 2006, the Kickapoo Tribe in Kansas,
represented by NARF, filed a federal lawsuit inU.S. District Court in an effort to enforceexpress promises made to the Tribe to build aReservoir Project. The Nemaha-Brown WatershedJoint Board # 7, the Natural ResourcesConservation Service of the U.S. Departmentof Agriculture and the State of Kansas madethese promises to the Tribe over a decade ago.In the intervening years these parties havebeen actively developing the water resourcesof the watershed, resulting in the near deple-tion of the Tribe's senior federal water rights inthe drainage. 
According to the Environmental Protection
Agency, the water supply for the Reservation isin violation of the Safe Drinking Water Act of1974. The Kickapoo people are unable to safe-ly drink, bathe or cook with tap water.  Thereis not enough water on the reservation to pro-vide basic municipal services to the community,and the Tribe is not even able to provide localschools with reliable, safe running water. The
Fire department cannot provide adequate fireprotection due to the water shortage.  Theproposed Reservoir Project is the most cost-effective and reliable means by which the Tribecan improve the water supply.
By early August 2007 the parties expressed
an interest in taking a break from the litigationtrack to explore mutual benefits from settle-ment. The U.S., the State and the local water-shed district all concede the existence of theTribe's senior Indian reserved water rights; thereal issue ultimately will be the amount ofwater to satisfy the Tribe's needs, and thesource or sources of those rights. The Tribe andthe U.S. are also discussing funding to quanti-fy the Tribe’s water rights.  We continue withactive negotiations with the State and the localwater interests on an agreed quantity of waterfor the Tribe. 
In March of 2011, the watershed district
rejected a Condemnation Agreement that theState and Tribe had approved.  That agree-ment created the mechanism for condemningthe property for the water storage project.NARF succeeded in restructuring the litigationto place the immediate focus on discoveryagainst the watershed district and on getting
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111 17NARF celebrating 
"Earth Day."18
the condemnation dispute resolved by the fed-
eral court.  NARF also continues to investigatethe possibility of a comprehensive settlementof the water right’s issues in the case.
The Oglala Sioux Tribe (OST) has been
working on the delivery of a safe, reliable andadequate source of municipal, industrial andrural water through the federally authorizedand funded Mni Wiconi Project. A critical element of the delivery of safe drinking waterto the people of the Pine Ridge IndianReservation is to ensure the security of thepipeline that distributes the water to the users.NARF has assisted the OST Department ofWater Maintenance and Conservation in fulfill-ing its responsibility to secure the pipelinethrough the development and adoption of an OST Pipeline Security Ordinance. TheDepartment of Water Maintenance andConservation is now faced with enforcementof the Ordinance in a number of important situations, including individuals who do notaccept that they cannot waste the water provided through the Mni Wiconi Distributionsystem on the Reservation. NARF is assistingthe Department with the development andrefinement of the necessary forms, standards,and protocols to accomplish enforcement ofthe Ordinance and with the training ofDepartment personnel on the Ordinance’senforcement.
Protection of Hunting 
and Fishing Rights in Alaska
The subsistence way of life is essential for the
physical and cultural survival of Alaska Natives.As important as Native hunting and fishingrights are to Alaska Natives' physical, economic,traditional and cultural existence, the State ofAlaska has been and continues to be reluctantto recognize the importance of the subsistenceway of life. 
On January 5, 2005, the State of Alaska filed
a lawsuit in the U.S. District Court for theDistrict of Columbia challenging the final ruleimplementing the mandate in a prior Alaska
Native subsistence case, John v. United States
.
The prior case, in which NARF represented
Katie John, an Alaska Native, established thatthe United States must protect subsistenceuses of fisheries in navigable waters where theUnited States possesses a reserved water right.In this new lawsuit, the State challenges theFederal agencies’ implementation of the mandate by arguing that the reserved watersdoctrine requires a quantification of watersnecessary to fulfill specific purposes. Katie Johnimmediately filed a motion for limited inter-vention for purposes of filing a motion to dismiss for failure to join an indispensableparty. The United States filed a motion totransfer venue to the U.S. District Court for theDistrict of Alaska in February 2005. JudgeCollyer entered an Order in July 2005, trans-ferring the case to the federal court in Alaska.The case was then consolidated with John v.
Norton (below).The issues in the two cases
were bifurcated for briefing with the State’sclaims addressed first. In May 2007, the districtcourt entered an Order upholding the agenciesrule-making process identifying navigable watersin Alaska that fall within federal jurisdiction forpurposes of Title VIII’s subsistence priority.
In January 2005, Katie John, represented by
NARF, filed a lawsuit in the U.S. District Courtfor the District of Alaska challenging theFederal Agencies’ Secretaries’ final rule imple-menting the prior Katie John mandate as beingtoo restrictive in its scope. Katie John’s com-plaint alleges that the Federal agencies shouldhave included Alaska Native allotments as publiclands and further that the federal govern-ment’s interest in water extends upstream anddownstream from the Conservation Unitsestablished under the Alaska National InterestLands Conservation Act. The State of Alaskaintervened and challenged the regulations asillegally extending federal jurisdiction to statewaters. On September 9, 2009, the Courtentered an order upholding the agencies’ finalrule as reasonable. While rejecting Katie John’s
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD19
claim that the agency had a duty to identify all
of its federally reserved water rights inupstream and downstream waters, the courtstated that the agency could do so at somefuture time if necessary to fulfill the purposesof the reserve. The case was appealed to theU.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit andhas been fully briefed. Argument took place inJuly 2011 and we are now waiting decision by the Court.
In Native Villages of Eyak, Tatitlek, Chenega,
Nanwalek, and Port Graham v. Evans, NARF
represents five Chugach villages that sued theSecretary of Commerce to establish aboriginalrights to their traditional-use areas on theOuter Continental Shelf of Alaska, in Cook Inletand the Gulf of Alaska. In September 2002, thefederal district court ruled against theChugach. NARF appealed to the U.S. Court ofAppeals for the Ninth Circuit, and in July 2004,the Ninth Circuit en banc panel vacated thedecision of the district court and remanded for determination of whether the Tribes canestablish aboriginal rights to the areas. In September 2004, the district court deniedprevious summary judgment motions as mootand ordered that new motions for summaryjudgment be submitted by December 2004.The Chugach chose not to file a Motion forSummary Judgment given the remaining factdisputes, but the government did submit onein December 2004. After gathering updatedevidence, the Chugach filed their Oppositionin June 2005. Oral argument on the motion forsummary judgment was held in November2006, and summary judgment was deniedshortly thereafter in December 2006.
Trial on whether these Tribes hold aborigi-
nal rights to hunt and fish in federal waters washeld in the second half of August 2008. InAugust 2009, the federal court held thatalthough the five Chugach Tribes had estab-lished that they had a “territory” and hadproven they had used the waters in question,that the Tribes could not hold aboriginal rightsas a matter of law. The Chugach have
appealed to the Ninth Circuit en banc panelwhich has retained jurisdiction over this caseand briefing was completed in April 2010.Oral argument was held in front of the en bancpanel in San Francisco on September 21,2011, and we are awaiting a decision.
As ocean temperatures rise due to climate
change, marine mammals and fish are movingnorth.  Commercially valuable fish that havetraditionally been in the Gulf of Alaska areshifting toward the Northern Bering Sea, andthe large-scale fishing fleets are planning tofollow them and expand their operations intothis highly sensitive ecosystem.  This fleetemploys bottom trawling, a highly destructivepractice in which weighted nets are draggedinches above the sea floor, removing every-thing in their path. Nevertheless, the NorthPacific Fishery Management Council (NPFMC)currently allows bottom trawling in the CentralBering Sea, and it is having a profound effect on sensitive habitat and local Yup’ikcommunities.  In addition, the NPFMC has
Youth from the Oglala
Lakota Reservation visiting NARF
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111
begun a process to consider whether to allow
these fleets to expand into the NorthernBering Sea, home to threatened species likethe walrus, endangered species such as theSteller sea lion and the spectacled eider, andmany isolated Yup’ik and Inupiaq villages whohave been the stewards of this diverse ecosys-tem for centuries.  
The Bering Sea Elders Group is an alliance of
thirty-nine Yup’ik and Inupiaq villages thatseeks to protect the sensitive ecosystem of theBering Sea, the subsistence lifestyle and thesustainable communities that depend on it.NARF has designed a comprehensive plan tohelp this group of Alaska Native villages intheir efforts to protect the area and becomemore engaged in its management.  Over thelast year, NARF has been working with theElders Group on both issues, and we have: (1)researched potential aboriginal rights that theElders Group and its constituent tribes maypossess based on their long-term exclusive useand occupancy of the area, (2) prepared theElders Group for negotiations with the trawlfishermen, and (3) assisted the Elders Groupwith its participation in the NPFMC process.
Climate Change Project
Global warming is wreaking havoc in Alaska.
In recent years scientists have documentedmelting ocean ice, rising oceans, rising river
temperatures, thawing permafrost, increasedinsect infestations, animals at risk and dyingforests. Alaska Natives are the peoples who relymost on Alaska's ice, seas, marine mammals,fish and game for nutrition and customary andtraditional subsistence uses; they are thusexperiencing the adverse impacts of globalwarming most acutely. In 2006, during theAlaska Forum on the Environment, AlaskaNative participants described increased forestfires, more dangerous hunting, fishing and traveling conditions, visible changes in animals andplants, infrastructure damage from meltingpermafrost and coastal erosion, fiercer winterstorms, and pervasive unpredictability.Virtually every aspect of traditional AlaskaNative life is impacted. As noted in the ArcticClimate Impact Assessment of 2004, indige-nous peoples are reporting that sea ice isdeclining, and its quality and timing arechanging, with important negative repercus-sions for marine hunters. Others are reportingthat salmon are diseased and cannot be driedfor winter food. There is widespread concernabout caribou habitat diminishing as largervegetation moves northward. Because of theseand other dramatic changes, traditional knowl-edge is jeopardized, as are cultural structuresand the nutritional needs of Alaska's indige-
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 20
John Echohawk meeting
with a group of public
school teachers 
from Kansasnous peoples. Efforts are continuing to 
convene Congressional hearings on climatechange impacts on indigenous peoples.
In Native Village of Kivalina v. Exxon Mobil,
NARF represents the Native Village of Kivalina,which is a federally recognized Indian Tribe,and the City of Kivalina, which is an Alaskanmunicipality, in a suit filed on their own behalfand on behalf of all tribal members againstdefendants ExxonMobil Corp., PeabodyEnergy Corp., Southern Company, AmericanElectric Power Co., Duke Energy Co, ChevronCorp. and Shell Oil Co., among others. In totalthere are nine oil company defendants, four-teen electric power company defendants andone coal company defendant. The suit claimsdamages due to the defendant companies'contributions to global warming and invokesthe federal common law of public nuisance.The suit also alleges a conspiracy by somedefendants to mislead the public regarding thecauses and consequences of global warming.
In October 2009, the District Court granted
the Defendant's motion to dismiss on the basisthat Kivalina's federal claim for nuisance isbarred by the political question doctrine andfor lack of standing under Article III of theConstitution. Although this was a setback, itwas not a surprise. The case is now on appealto the U.S. Court of Appeals for the NinthCircuit where the appellate court may be morepersuaded by the reasoning of the U.S. Courtof Appeals for the Second Circuit in the recentdecision Connecticut v. American Electric Power
Company. That ruling held that plaintiffs,
including states and private entities, may bringsuits. In short, the court held that: (1) theplaintiffs' claims do not present political ques-tions that the courts cannot / should notaddress; (2) the plaintiffs have standing tobring their claims;(3) the complaint statesclaims under the federal common law of nuisance; and (4) the plaintiffs' claims are notdisplaced by any federal legislation. The U.S.Supreme Court recently reviewed theConnecticut decision.  In a four-four decision,
the Supreme Court in Connecticut tied on the
standing, political question and prudentialquestion issues which affirms that there is juris-diction in federal court over the case. The onlyissue lost on was whether the EnvironmentalProtection Agency’s authority to regulategreenhouse gases under the Clean Air Act pre-empts or displaces plaintiffs’ right to pursue afederal common law claim.  The SupremeCourt held that the authority of EPA to regulategreenhouse gas emissions preempts a federalcommon law case seeking GHG emissions limits, even if EPA does not exercise suchauthority.
The holding in Connecticut allows Kivalina’s
case to proceed in that we have stated a prop-er federal common law claim upon which reliefmay be granted and that the monetary dam-ages relief we seek distinguishes the case fromone that seeks to displace EPA’s authority toregulate. The stay was lifted and the case wasset for oral argument.  Argument before theNinth Circuit Court of Appeals took place inJuly 2011 and we are now waiting decision bythe Court.
NARF staff (L to R)
Jennifer Redbone, Melody McCoy, Ray Ramirez and Jennie Tsikewa
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111 21MMAAJJOORR  AACCTTIIVVIITTIIEESS  22001111  --  NNAARRFF  CCAASSEE  MMAAPP
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDDAANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111Rincon Luiseno Band of
Indians – Tribal Trust Funds
San Luis Rey Indian Water
Authority – Tribal Trust Funds
Tule River Tribe – Water,
Tribal Trust Funds 
Yurok Tribe – Tribal Trust
Funds
COLORADONARF HEADQUARTERSBOULDER, COLORADOUte Mountain Ute Tribe –
Tribal Trust Funds
Valmont Butte – Sacred Site
Issue
IDAHONez Perce Tribe - Water
Rights, Tribal Trust Funds 
KANSASKickapoo Tribe – Water Rights
and Tribal Trust Funds
MINNESOTABois Forte Band of Chippewa
– Tribal Trust Funds
Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe –
Tribal Trust Funds
Minnesota Chippewa Tribe –
Tribal Trust Funds
Prairie Island Indian
Community – Tribal TrustFunds
White Earth Band of Chippewa
Indians - Tribal Trust Funds 
MICHIGANGrand Traverse Band of
Ottawa and Chippewa Indians– Tribal Trust Funds
Sault Ste. Marie Tribe of
Chippewa – Tribal TrustFunds
MONTANAChippewa-Cree Tribe of the
Rocky Boys Reservation -Tribal Trust Funds
Confederated Salish and
Kootenai Tribes – Tribal TrustFunds
Little Shell Tribe - Recognition
& Tribal Trust Funds
NEBRASKASantee Sioux Tribe – Tribal
Trust Fund
NEW MEXICOMescalero Apache Tribe –
Tribal Trust Fund
Pueblo of Zia – Tribal Trust
Funds
NEVADASummit Lake Paiute Tribe –
Tribal Trust Funds
NORTH DAKOTASpirit Lake Dakotah Nation –
Tribal Trust FundsALASKA
NARF ANCHORAGE OFFICEAkiachak Native Community –
Land into Trust
Native Village of Atka – Tribal
Trust Funds
Aleut Community of St. Paul
Island – Tribal Trust Funds
Chilkoot Indian Association –
Land into Trust
Chalkyitsik – Land into TrustChistochina Tribe –
Subsistence
Churyung v. Alaska – Indian
Child Welfare 
Native Villages of Eyak,
Tatitlek, Chenega, Nanwalek,and Port Graham –Subsistence & Aboriginal Title
Ivanof Bay Village – Sovereign
Immunity
Kaltag Tribe – Indian Child
Welfare
Native Village of Kasigluk –
Voting Rights Act Suit
Katie John v. Norton –
Subsistence
Kenaitze Indian Tribe – Tribal
Trust Funds
Native Village of Kivalina -
Global Warming Project
Native Village of Kwigillingok
– Voting Rights Act Case
Gwich’in Steering Committee
– Environmental/Subsistence
Native Village of Nulato –
Indian Child Welfare
Ninilchick Tribe – SubsistenceNoocksack Indian Tribe –
Tribal Trust Funds
Qawalangin Tribe – Tribal
Trust Funds
Tanana – Tribal SovereigntyTlingit and Haida Indian
Tribes – Tribal Trust Funds
Native Village of Tuluksak –
Trust Lands & Voting RightsAct Case
Native Village of Tuntutuliak –
Voting Rights Case
Village of Tyonek Village –
Subsistence & NAGPRA
Native Village of Venetie –
Subsistence
Voting Rights Act SuitARIZONAHualapai Tribe – Boundary
Issue and Tribal Trust Funds
Kaibab Paiute Tribe – Tribal
Trust Funds
CALIFORNIACachil Dehe Band of Wintun
Indians of Colusa Rancheria –Tribal Trust FundsTurtle Mountain Reservation -
Tribal Trust Funds
OKLAHOMA
Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes –
Tribal Trust Funds
Pawnee Nation – Education,
NAGPRA & Tribal Trust Funds
Sac & Fox Nations – Tribal
Trust Funds
OREGONKlamath Tribes - Water Rights
& Tribal Trust Funds
Confederated Tribes of Siletz
Indians – Tribal Trust Funds
SOUTH DAKOTAOglala Sioux Tribe -
Environmental 
TEXASAlabama-Coushatta Tribe -
Land Claim 
VIRGINIAPamunkey Tribe – Tribal
Recognition
WASHINGTONSamish Indian Nation – Tribal
Trust Funds
Shoalwater Bay Tribe – Tribal
Trust Funds
Skokomish Tribe – Tribal
Trust Funds
Spokane Tribe – Tribal Trust
Funds
Tulalip Tribes – Tribal Trust
Funds
WASHINGTON, D.C.NARF WASHINGTON, D.C.
OFFICE
Tribal Supreme Court ProjectWISCONSINBad River Band of Lake
Superior Chippewa Indians –Tribal Trust Funds
Lac Courte Oreilles Band of
Ojibwe – Tribal Trust Funds
Lac Du Flambeau Band of
Lake Superior Chippewa –Tribal Trust Funds
WYOMINGEastern Shoshone Tribe -
Land Issue 
CANADANorthern Lakes Pottawatomi
Nation - Land Claim 
INTERNATIONALDeclaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples/ClimateChange Issues – Organizationof American States and UnitedNationsAlthough basic human rights are considered
a universal and inalienable entitlement, NativeAmericans face an ongoing threat of havingtheir rights undermined by the United Statesgovernment, states and others who seek tolimit these rights. Under the priority of the promotion of human rights, NARF strives toenforce and strengthen laws which are designedto protect the rights of Native Americans topractice their traditional religion, to use theirown language and to enjoy their culture. NARFalso works with Tribes to ensure the welfare of
their children.  In the international arena,
NARF is active in efforts to negotiate declara-tions on the rights of indigenous peoples.
Religious Freedom
Because religion is the foundation that holds
Native communities and cultures together, religious freedom is a NARF priority issue. 
Legal work continues on a number of Native
American Graves Protection and Repatriation(NAGPRA) implementation issues.  NARF con-
tinued a decade-long effort as a member ofthe Colorado Commission of Indian Affairs towork out agreements and protocols with theColorado State Historical Society for the repa-triation and reburial of hundreds of NativeAmerican human remains, both culturally affil-iated and unaffiliated. Part of the work alsoinvolved the development of a protocol for thefuture identification and disposition of NativeAmerican remains disturbed on state or privatelands, which specifies a process for consulta-tion with interested tribes and for the reburialon site of those remains whenever possible. 
The massive Chuitna Coal project threatens
to destroy a vital salmon habitat stream thatthe Tyonek Native Village utilizes for subsis-tence fisheries.  After agreeing to assist theTribe in protecting its subsistence fisheriesresources, legal research established that muchmore was at stake, as recent field surveys andexcavations found numerous house pits, cultural features, and religious remains in theproject area.  Under such circumstances theNational Historic Preservation Act (NHPA)requires that the federal agency tasked withjurisdiction immediately contact the impactedTribe to seek consultation regarding the protection of the historic resources. Underexisting law Tyonek should be granted theopportunity to identify its concerns about historic properties, advise on the identificationand evaluation of historic properties, includingthose of traditional religious and culturalimportance, articulate its views on the under-taking’s effects on such properties and partici-pate in the resolution of adverse effects.Neither the federal agency nor its state coun-terpart have contacted the Tribe, as requiredby law, to invite it to participate in assessingwhether these historic cultural features deserveprotection and listing under the NHPA.  NARF’srepresentation of the Tribe is now focused onensuring that its cultural resources are protectedaccordingly.TThhee  PPrroommoottiioonn  ooff  HHuummaann  RRiigghhttss
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 24“We sang songs that carried in their melodies all the sounds of
nature – the running of waters, the sighing of winds, and the callsof animals. Teach these to your children that they may come tolove nature as we love it. We had our statesmen and their oratoryhas never been equaled. Teach the children some of these speechesof our people…Why not teach the children more of the wholesomeproverbs and legends of our people? Tell them how we loved all thatis beautiful. That we killed game only for food, not for fun...Tell your children of the friendly acts of Indians to the white people who first settled here. Tell them of our leaders and heroesand their deeds... Put in your history books the Indians’ part in theWorld War. Tell them how the Indians fought for a country of whichhe was not a citizen, for a flag to which he had no claim, and fora people that have treated him unjustly. We ask this to keep sacredthe memory of our people.” (Grand Council Fire of AmericanIndians 1927)NARF has been assisting the Denver area
Native American community and interestedtribes for almost a decade to give voice to theneed to clean up and preserve a prominentgeologic feature just to the northeast ofBoulder, Colorado. Valmont Butte is an ancientvolcanic uplift that sits prominently on the out-skirts of town, just overlooking the north forkof Boulder Creek.  In pre-contact times it wasthe location of Ute and then Arapaho villagesites.  Use and occupation of the area is knownto go back at least 10,000 years in antiquity.The property, owned by the City of Bouldersince 2000, is known to contain substantialprehistoric materials, including burial areas.The Butte has also until recent years been thesite of an active sweat lodge.  There is an aban-doned mill on the property, and tailings fromthe fifty-plus years of milling activities are nowcontained on the eastern end of the propertyabout forty acres in size.  The City purchasedthe property to locate a composting facility orfire training center.  The tribes and the localNative community successfully opposed thesefacilities.  In recent years, the effort has been tomonitor the development of the City’s proposed cleanup plan and also to secure aCounty landmark designation for the Butteand surrounding acreage.
NARF has recently agreed to represent the
Kaibab Paiute Tribe in their dispute with theKing County Water District and the ArmyCorps of Engineers who are preparing to builda dam over a burial ground that is known tocontain the remains of almost 100 people.The Water District and the Corps have not fin-ished their study to determine exactly howmany people are still buried there, and theKaibab do not want the dam built or the reser-voir filled until the full extent of the burials areknown and steps can be taken to protect thesite and the people.
The Native American Rights Fund is part of a
working group of Indian organizations andtribal leaders to address government interven-tion in the lives of Native people who work
with or use eagle feathers in traditional ways.Since time-immemorial, the eagle and otherraptor birds have been an integral part andintrinsic to the traditions, culture and religionof many tribes, pre-dating U.S. colonization.The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) andother federal law enforcement agencies hadbeen conducting raids, confiscations and inter-rogations on many Indian reservations andpow-wow events, in at least 14 states of thewestern United States under what purportedlyis referred to as an “Eagle Feather StingOperation.”
The immediate purpose of these investiga-
tions by the FWS was to address the illicit saleof eagles and eagle parts and the poaching ofeagles.  However, the impact of these investi-gations has awakened fear that the U.S. government is once again encroaching upontribal culture and religious practices, to thepoint where the tribal culture and religion maybe forced underground once again. 
The working group met with the FWS and
the Department of Justice (DOJ) in 2009 toexpress tribal concerns about raids that wereconducted by the FWS, FBI and other lawenforcement officials who seized feathers and
Lessons for a sweat lodge
ceremony led by Wallace Black Elk (1970s)
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111 25demanded documentation.  Under federal law,
only Native people can possess eagle feathersthrough gifts or inheritance, or from a govern-ment-run repository near Denver which issuespermits specifically for individual birds or parts,generally after lengthy waits.
As a result of this meeting, FWS and DOJ
pledged to take action regarding their lack ofeffective outreach and education to tribes onpolicies regarding the possession, use, giftingand crafting of eagle feathers and otherendangered birds.  FWS proposed the devel-opment of a Tribal Advisory Group to work outlong-term solutions to the issues that tribesraised. 
The National Congress of American Indians
(NCAI) adopted a resolution supporting theestablishment of Tribal Advisory Group to theU.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in order to pro-vide consultation on the policies, regulationsand procedures for the acquisition, possession,gifting, crafting and use of eagles and othermigratory birds by tribal members.  It was alsoresolved that NARF shall serve as a centralclearinghouse for the cases appertaining to the“Eagle Feather Sting Operation” being con-ducted by the FSW and other federal lawenforcement agencies. 
NARF and NCAI have continued meetings
with the FSW and other federal law enforce-ment agencies to discuss and seek solutions asto the effects and impacts of eagle feather con-fiscations and to discuss the drafting of
an all-inclusive bill to "fix" the gap between
current law and administrative policies, regulations and procedures.
NARF has also continued its representation
of the Native American Church of NorthAmerica in addressing issues concerning the sacramental use of peyote in their ceremonies.Indian Education
Recent developments mark a historical shift
in Indian education law and policy by takingthe first step in accomplishing “educationaltribal sovereignty.”  NARF, other Indian organ-izations and tribes have been advocating forsystemic changes to American Indian/ AlaskaNative (AI/AN) education.  Changes thatwould increase involvement of tribal govern-ments, educators, parents, and elders in whatAI/AN students are taught, how they aretaught, who teaches them, and where theylearn.  Tribal control of these core issues canamount to educational tribal sovereignty.  
NARF represents the Tribal Education
Departments National Assembly (TEDNA).TEDNA is a national advocacy organization fortribal education departments and agencies(TEDs/TEAs) that works to strengthen the legalrights of tribes to control the formal educationof tribal members.  NARF started TEDNA in2003 with a group of tribal education depart-ment directors from Indian tribes across theCountry.  Since its inception, NARF has hostedNational meetings with TEDNA to 1) identifyobstacles impeding educational tribal sover-eignty, 2) develop policy initiatives to addresssuch obstacles, and 3) advocate and providetechnical assistance on such policy initiatives.  
After over 20 years of work, NARF and
TEDNA secured federal funding for TEDs/TEAsin the Labor, Health, and Human ServicesFiscal Year 2012 Appropriations Bill for the firsttime in history. The funding will go to theDepartment of Education to be distributed toTEDs/TEAs to participate in a pilot project thatallows TEDs/TEAs to operate federal educationprograms in schools (public and Bureau ofIndian education) located on Indian reservations.
Both Houses of Congress have introduced
the Native Culture, Language, and Access forSuccess in Schools Act (Native CLASS Act), apro-tribal sovereignty bill that amends theElementary and Secondary Education Act.  The
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 26Native CLASS Act’s key areas are language and
culture based education, tribal control of edu-cation, support for Native American teachers,juvenile justice, and many other key provisions.The Act amends the No Child Left Behind Actby making tribes eligible for and to operatefederal education grants and programs and by adding new programs to support AI/ANstudents.  
In July of 2011 the Senate Committee on
Indian Affairs held a hearing on the NativeCLASS Act and invited NARF to testify.  NARFtestified on the importance of the NativeCLASS Act stressing the importance of sup-porting educational tribal sovereignty in federal law as a means to increase graduationrates and test scores of AI/AN students. InOctober, the Senate Committee on IndianAffairs passed the Native CLASS Act out ofCommittee.  The Act waits for full considera-tion by the Senate and to be passed out of theHouse Committee on Education and theWorkforce.  
In December 2011, President Obama signed
the Executive Order, Improving AmericanIndian and Alaska Native EducationalOpportunities and Strengthening TribalColleges and Universities.  The Executive Orderstates it is the policy of the ObamaAdministration to support activities thatimprove educational outcomes for AI/AN stu-dents and to provide an opportunity to learnnative languages and histories, and improveeducational opportunities at tribal colleges anduniversities. 
NARF and TEDNA worked on the policies
supported in the Executive Order since theDepartment first contacted NARF in 2008.Indeed, the Executive Order’s support forcapacity building for TEDs/TEAs and increasedpartnerships with TEDs/TEAs is a direct resultof TEDNA and NARF’s persistent advocacy.  Inaddition, its support for culture and languagebased education is an answer to TEDNA’smemberships constant requests to the
Department. 
The Executive Order establishes a White
House Initiative (Initiative) on AI/AN educationthat will work to expand opportunities forAI/AN students to learn Native languages, cul-tures, and histories, and receive complete andcompetitive educations preparing them forcollege and careers.  The Initiative will be over-seen by an executive director who will serve asa senior-level, Department of Education official, who will also be the Secretary ofEducation’s senior policy advisor on federalpolicies affecting AI/AN education. 
During the 19th and into the 20th century,
pursuant to federal policy, Native Americanchildren were forcibly abducted from theirhomes to attend Christian and government-run boarding schools.  The purpose was to"civilize" the Indian and to stamp out nativeculture. It was a deliberate policy of ethnocideand cultural genocide.  Cut off from their fam-ilies and culture, the children were punishedfor speaking their native language, bannedfrom conducting traditional or cultural prac-tices, shorn of traditional clothing and identityof their native culture, taught that their cultureand traditions were evil and sinful and thatthey should be ashamed of being NativeAmerican.  Placed often far from home, theywere frequently neglected or abused physical-ly, sexually and psychologically.  Generationsof these children became the legacy of the fed-eral Boarding School Policy.  They werereturned to their communities, not as theChristianized farmers that the Boarding SchoolPolicy envisioned, but as deeply scarredhuman beings with none of the acculturatedskills – community, parenting, extended fami-ly, language, cultural practices – gained bythose who are raised in their cultural context. 
There has been scant recognition by the
U.S. federal government that initiated and car-ried out this policy, and no acceptance of
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111 27responsibility for the indisputable fact that its
purpose was cultural genocide.  There are noapparent realistic legal avenues to seek redressor healing from the deep and enduringwounds inflicted both on the individuals andcommunities of tribal nations.  Lawsuits byindividuals have been turned aside, and unlikeother countries that implemented similar policies – e.g., Canada and Australia – therehas been no official U.S. proposal for healingor reconciliation.
NARF, working with several other groups,
convened a Boarding School HealingSymposium in May 2011 at the University ofColorado Law School.  The Symposiumbrought together individuals from across theU.S. and Canada that have been working onvarious aspects of the issue to discuss the pri-orities and strategies to achieve both nationalrecognition of and apology for the wrongs visited on individuals and communities of U.S.tribes, and reparations to provide the frame-work for healing of these historic and enduringwrongs.  The symposium participants agreedthat it was necessary to continue the work onthe issue and formed a Coalition to formulatea specific strategy and framework to pursuebroader support and participation. TheCoalition has developed a plan to organize anon-profit corporation that will carry out thework identified at the Symposium.
Civil and Cultural Rights
From the embryonic days of our Nation,
Indian tribes have long struggled against theassimilationist policies instituted by the UnitedStates which sought to destroy tribal culturesby removing Native American children fromtheir tribes and families.  As an example, thefederal government failed to protect Indianchildren from misguided and insensitive childwelfare practices by state human service agen-cies, which resulted in the unwarrantedremoval of Indian children from their familiesand tribes and placement of those children innon-Indian homes. Statistical and anecdotal
information show that Indian children whogrow up in non-Indian settings become spiri-tual and cultural orphans. They do not entirelyfit into the culture in which they are raised andyearn throughout their life for the family andtribal culture denied them as children. ManyNative children raised in non-Native homesexperience identity problems, drug addiction,alcoholism, incarceration and, most disturbing,suicide.
In order to address these problems facing
tribes as a result of the loss of their children,the Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) was enacted by Congress in 1978. It establishedminimum federal jurisdictional, procedural andsubstantive standards aimed to achieve thedual purposes of protecting the right of anIndian child to live with an Indian family and tostabilize and foster continued tribal existence.Since that time, there have been misinterpre-tations and, in some cases, outright refusal tofollow the intent of the law by state agenciesand courts. 
In March 2011, the Alaska Supreme Court
issued a broad affirmation of inherent tribalauthority in State of Alaska v. Tanana . The
Court ruled that tribal courts have authority toinitiate and adjudicate children’s cases withoutgoing through state courts.  The case wasbrought in 2004 on behalf of the Villages ofTanana, Nulato, Akiak, Kalskag, Lower Kalskagand Kenaitze along with a tribal couple. Thecase was brought after Governor Murkowsi’sadministration, on the advice of formerAttorney General Greg Renkes, abruptlystopped recognizing tribal court decrees incases that did not originate in state court.Renkes argued that only state courts could initiate children’s cases and, if they chose,transfer those cases to tribal courts. He alsoinstructed state employees to stop recognizingor enforcing tribal court decrees. The case wasbrought to overturn Renkes’ opinion and toforce the State, its agencies and officials to 
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 28formally recognize valid tribal court decrees
without regard to any state court involvement. 
State services frequently do not reach village
Alaska. Tribal courts must therefore handlemost cases involving the welfare of village chil-dren. State recognition of those tribal courtproceedings is therefore critical to assure thatproceedings which occur in tribal court arethen respected by other state agencies.Otherwise, adoptive parents may not be ableto participate in state-funded assistance programs, to secure substitute birth certificatesnecessary to travel out of state, to enroll children in school, or to secure medical care.The tribal couple faced just such a dilemma.After adopting a special needs child in Tananatribal court, they had difficulty accessinghealth care. They were also frustrated in theirplans to travel out of state when they were toldthat they could not acquire a substitute birthcertificate for their adoptive child since thechild had been adopted in a tribal rather thanstate court proceeding. 
Following the Alaska Supreme Court’s
March 2011 decision upholding tribal authorityto initiate children’s proceedings, NARF hasbeen working with the Alaska State AttorneyGeneral’s office to formalize policy and proto-col to implement the 
Tanana v. State decision.
In addition to policy revisions that will beinserted into the State’s Office of Child Servicesmanual, a committee is developing a proposedRule that would provide a procedure for Tribesto petition state courts to have tribal courtdecrees registered and enforced by state lawofficers.
In another Alaska ICWA case, the Native
Village of Kotzebue requested NARF’s assis-tance  to ensure that the superior court abideby the Tribe’s pre-adoption placement prefer-ence under ICWA.  One of the primary legalquestions at issue is the proper burden of proofthat the Office of Child Services must establishin order to move a child from one placementto another.  The placement hearing has been
set for 2012.
NARF filed a lawsuit, Nick v. Bethel and State
of Alaska , in federal court in 2007 alleging that
Alaska (through its agents the LieutenantGovernor and the Division of Elections, amongothers) had violated the Voting Rights Act(VRA) by failing to provide language assistanceto the thousands of Yup`ik-speaking voters inthe Bethel Census Area. The first claim wasunder Section 203 of the VRA, which requiresthat jurisdictions covered by the Act provideoral and written assistance sufficient to enablethe voter to cast a meaningful ballot. While thelanguages covered (meaning those for whichthe State has to provide assistance) variesstatewide to correspond to the number of people who speak that language, in the BethelCensus Area, the covered language is Yup`ik.However, as the complaint alleged, there is little to no oral language assistance providedand absolutely no written assistance providedto the Yup`ik voter. The second claim wasFormer NARF staff 
Rick Williams preparingfor a sweat lodge ceremony (1970s)
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111 29under Section 208 of the VRA which provides
that a voter who needs help reading and writ-ing may bring anyone they like into the votingbooth to help them cast a ballot. 
In July 2008, the District Court  issued a
Preliminary Injunction ordering the State toprovide comprehensive language assistance intime for the 2008 August primary andNovember general elections. This relief includ-ed providing written ballots in the Yup’ik lan-guage, publicizing all election notices andinformation in Yup’ik and creation of a newstatewide position to oversee Native languageassistance. Additionally, the State must reportto the Court before and after each electionthat they have taken these steps. 
The Plaintiffs settled with the City of Bethel
in 2009 and settled with the State in January2010. The comprehensive agreement includestranslation and interpretation assistance for allYup’ik-speaking voters throughout the regis-tration and voting process. The court hasretained jurisdiction to oversee the State’scompliance with the settlement agreement.NARF monitored the State’s compliance withthe settlement agreement for the 2010 and2011 election cycles and will continue to do sothrough the 2012 election cycle.
International Recognition 
of Indigenous Rights
The development of international laws and
standards to protect the rights of indigenouspeoples greatly benefits Native American peoples.  NARF and the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI) entered into anattorney-client relationship several years agofor the purpose of working in the internationalarena to protect indigenous rights.  
In 2007, the United Nations General
Assembly overwhelmingly adopted theDeclaration on the Rights of IndigenousPeoples. The Declaration recognizes thatIndigenous peoples have important collectivehuman rights in a multitude of areas, including
self-determination, spirituality, and lands, terri-tories and natural resources. The Declarationsets out minimum standards for the treatmentof Indigenous peoples and can serve as thebasis for the development of customary inter-national law.  In December 2010, PresidentObama made the historic announcement thatthe United States has reversed its previous negative vote and now endorses the UnitedNations Declaration on the Rights ofIndigenous Peoples. 
The United States is the last of four countries
who voted against the Declaration inSeptember 2007 to reverse its vote and to jointhe international chorus of voices recognizingthe fundamental rights of indigenous peoples.Australia, Canada and New Zealand had previously reversed their opposition to theDeclaration. Indigenous peoples worldwidehave worked on the Declaration since the late1970s. NARF has worked on the Declarationwith its client NCAI since 1999. TheDeclaration affirms the collective human rightsof Indigenous peoples across a broad range ofareas including self-determination, spirituality,land rights and rights to intellectual property. 
The adoption of the U.N. Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples (U.N. DRIP) willhave an impact on the Organization ofAmerican States (OAS) process.  NARF alsorepresents NCAI in this process.  In recognitionof this, the OAS held a "reflection" session inWashington, D.C., in November, 2007, to discuss that import. It was agreed that theU.N. DRIP would be used as the foundation foran OAS document, in that all the terms of theOAS document would be consistent with, ormore favorable to, Indigenous rights than theU.N. DRIP.
The group further agreed that all the terms
would be met through a consensus-baseddecision making process which includes theIndigenous representatives. The United States
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 30and Canada expressed their opposition to a
document that would be consistent with theU.N. DRIP, against which they had voted, butagreed they would not oppose the processmoving forward. 
The 11th meeting of Negotiations in the
Quest for Points of Consensus was held inWashington, D.C., in April 2008.  A session ofreflection on the process was held inDecember 2008, to consider the issues whichspecifically need to be addressed in theWestern hemisphere in regards to indigenouspeoples.  In June 2009, the General Assemblymet and adopted a resolution which renewedthe mandate of the Working Group andinstructed the Working Group to hold,between August 2009 and March 2010, up totwo meetings of negotiations.  A negotiationsession was held in November-December2009, in Washington, D.C.  Modest progresswas made at that session, but disturbingly thesecond week of negotiations was canceled. 
Disappointingly, the U.S. and Canada are
not actively participating, even though theyboth now support the U.N. DRIP.  Two shortnegotiation sessions were authorized to beheld in 2011.  One was held in January 2011.In September 2011, the technical committeefor the indigenous caucus met in Kuna Yala,Panama, to prepare for the second authorizednegotiation session.  This session has not beenscheduled, and there are serious questionsabout the commitment in the OAS to get thisdone.
NARF represents the Pottawatomi Nation of
Canada, a band of descendants from theHistoric Pottawatomi Nation, which from 1795to 1873 signed a series of treaties with theUnited States. These treaties provided for thepayment of certain annuities. The ancestors ofthe present-day Canadian Pottawatomi fled toCanada following the signing of the final treatyand were never paid their annuities as promised.  The American Pottawatomi Bandsrecovered the payment of these annuities in
the Indian Claims Commission (ICC), but thePottawatomi members who now reside inCanada could not bring a claim in the ICC. In1993, NARF brought suit on behalf of thePottawatomi Nation in Canada in the Court ofFederal Claims, by way of a congressional ref-erence bill, to seek redress. The Nation and theU.S. Department of Justice reached a settle-ment in principle and the Court of FederalClaims accepted the settlement in September2000 and recommended the settlement toCongress in January 2001. 
Attempts to pass congressional legislation
approving the settlement agreement havestalled on several occasions.  In January 2011,Senator Inouye introduced Senate Bill 60 forconsideration during the 112th Congress.Senate Bill 60 has been referred to the SenateCommittee on the Judiciary.  In September2011, Congressman Kildee introduced HR2928 which was referred to the HouseSubcommittee on Indian and Alaska Affairs.NARF is working closely with the leadership forthe Pottawatomi Nation in Canada and isdeveloping a legislative strategy for approvalof the settlement by both the House andSenate this session. 
Indian inmates preparing
to enter a sweat lodge(Swift Bird Project 1970s)
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111 31Contained within the unique trust relation-
ship between the United States and Indiannations is the inherent duty for all levels ofgovernment to recognize and responsiblyenforce the many laws and regulations appli-cable to Indian peoples and the trust duties towhich those give rise.  Because such lawsimpact virtually every aspect of tribal life, NARFmaintains its involvement in the legal matterspertaining to accountability of governments to
Native Americans. 
In Nez Perce Tribe v. Salazar , NARF represents
forty-one plaintiffs – the Nez Perce Tribe; theMescalero Apache Tribe; the Tule River IndianTribe; the Hualapai Tribe; the Klamath Tribes;
the Yurok Tribe; the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribe;the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma; the Sac andFox Nation; the Santee Sioux Tribe ofNebraska; the Tlingit and Haida Indian Tribesof Alaska; Aleut Community of St. Paul Island;Bad River Band of Lake Superior ChippewaIndians; Bois Forte Band of Chippewa; CachilDehe Band of Wintun Indians of ColusaRancheria; Confederated Salish & KootenaiTribes; Confederated Tribes of Siletz Indians;Grand Traverse Band of Ottawa and ChippewaIndians; Kaibab Paiute Tribe; Kenaitze IndianTribe; Kickapoo Tribe in Kansas; Lac CourteOreilles Band of Ojibwe; Lac Du FlambeauBand of Lake Superior Chippewa; Leech LakeBand of Ojibwe; Minnesota Chippewa Tribe;Native Village of Atka; Noocksack Indian Tribe;Prairie Island Indian Community; Pueblo ofZia; Qawalangin Tribe; Rincon Luiseno Band ofIndians; Samish Indian Nation; San Luis ReyIndian Water Authority; Sault Ste. Marie Tribeof Chippewa; Shoalwater Bay Tribe; SkokomishTribe; Spirit Lake Dakotah Nation; SpokaneTribe; Summit Lake Paiute Tribe; Tulalip Tribes;and, Ute Mountain Ute Tribe – in an action inthe federal district court for the District ofColumbia seeking full and complete account-ings of their trust funds. Such accountingsnever have been provided by the federal gov-ernment which is the trustee for the funds.
Pending before the Court is the govern-
ment's motion to dismiss the action for lack ofjurisdiction, which the Tribes have opposed. Aruling on that is expected at any time.  In themeantime, NARF has begun settlement nego-tiations in this case and the other tribal trustfund mismanagement cases.  In 2011, thegovernment provided these Tribes with never-before provided trust account data that theTribes are now reviewing and analyzing.  InDecember 2011, claims settlement negotia-tions became very active.
In Cobell v. Salazar, NARF and private co-
counsel filed this class action case in federalTThhee  AAccccoouunnttaabbiilliittyy  ooff  GGoovveerrnnmmeennttss
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 32“It may be regarded as certain, that not a foot 
of land will ever be taken from the Indianswithout their own consent. The sacredness oftheir rights is felt by all thinking persons in America as much as in Europe.” (ThomasJefferson, 1786)district court in Washington, D.C., in 1996 to
force the federal government to provide anaccounting to approximately 300,000 individ-ual Indian money account holders who havetheir funds held in trust by the federal govern-ment.  Through years of litigation, decisions ofthe federal district court and the federal courtof appeals held that the government was inbreach of trust and must provide an account-ing.  NARF was active in the case until 2006when the case was fully staffed and NARF’sresources were shifted over to help 41 unrep-resented  Tribes who faced a deadline to filesuit against the federal government foraccountings of their tribal funds held in trustby the federal government under the same system.  That tribal trust fund litigation, Nez
Perce Tribe v. Salazar, is proceeding. 
On December 8, 2010, President Obama
signed into law a settlement in Cobell v. Salazar
of $1.5 billion to be paid to the 300,000 indi-vidual Indian money account holders withanother $1.9 billion made available to payindividual Indians who want to sell their smallfractionated interests in their trust lands to thefederal government to be turned over to theirTribes. The total $3.4 billion in settlementfunds will be paid out if the Court of Appealsfor the District of Columbia approves the set-tlement.  The federal district court approvedthe settlement on June 20, 2011, and the deci-sion was appealed.  In February and May of2012, the Court of Appeals will be hearing oralarguments about the appeals of the decisionto approve the settlement.
In Pembina Chippewa v. U.S., NARF repre-
sents the Turtle Mountain Chippewa,Chippewa Cree, White Earth Band ofMinnesota Chippewa, and Little ShellChippewa Tribes in this case against the federalgovernment for misaccounting and misman-agement of their tribal trust fund, the PembinaJudgment Fund (PJF), since the inception ofthe fund in 1964. In 2006 the Tribes defeatedthe United States' motion to have the case dismissed.  Since August 2007, the parties
have been trying to resolve the Tribes' claims,primarily through alternative dispute resolu-tion (ADR) proceedings before a SettlementJudge of the Court. In August 2009, the partiesreached agreement at least for settlementnegotiations on the population of "baseline"(non-investment) transactions in the PJF.  NARFis now proceeding to negotiate the claims ofthe government's investment mismanagementof the PJF.  Three in-person ADR settlementnegotiations sessions have been held: (1)March 2010 at the U.S. Court of FederalClaims in Washington, D.C; (2) April 2011 atthe U.S. District Court for the District of NorthDakota in Bismarck, ND; and (3) July 2011 atthe U.S. Court of Federal Claims inWashington, DC.  All in-person negotiationshave been attended by representatives of the clients.
Crazy Horse Singers 
at NARF
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111 33The coordinated development of Indian law
and educating the public about Indian rights,laws and issues is essential for the continuedprotection of Indian rights.  This primarilyinvolves establishing favorable court prece-dents, distributing information and law mate-rials, encouraging and fostering Indian legaleducation, and forming alliances with Indianlaw practitioners and other Indian organiza-tions. NARF has three ongoing projects whichare aimed at achieving this goal: the IndigenousPeacemaking Initiative; the National IndianLaw Library; and the Indian Law SupportCenter.
Indigenous Peacemaking Initiative 
The Indigenous Peacemaking Initiative’s (IPI)
mission is to promote and support Native peo-ples in restoring sustainable peacemakingpractices. This project provides NARF  with an
opportunity to support traditional peacemak-ing and community-building practices as anextension of Indian law and sovereign rights.Peacemaking is a community-directed processto develop consensus on a conflict resolutionplan that addresses the concerns of all inter-ested parties. The peacemaking process usestraditional rituals such as the group circle, andClan structures, to involve the parties to a con-flict, their supporters, elders and interestedcommunity members. Within the circle, people can speak from the heart in a sharedsearch for understanding of the conflict, andtogether identify the steps necessary to assistin healing all affected parties and preventfuture occurrences and conflicts.
NARF has focused its initial efforts on the
creation of the clearinghouse, conductingneeds assessment of peacemaker resourcesand developing a sustainable business modelfor the program.  Most recently, NARF is in theprocess of analyzing the results of a nationalsurvey of peacemaking needs in Indian com-munities. Approximately 230 survey formswere filled out and returned.  We will use thesurvey results to help shape a national confer-ence on peacemaking set for Spring 2012 inOklahoma City, hosted by the ChickasawNation.
The National Indian Law Library 
The National Indian Law Library (NILL) is the
only law library in the United States devoted toIndian law. The library serves both NARF andmembers of the public. Since it was started asa NARF project in 1972, NILL has collectednearly 9,000 resource materials that relate tofederal Indian and tribal law. The Library’sholdings include the largest collection of tribalcodes, ordinances and constitutions; legalpleadings from major Indian cases; and oftenhard to find reports and historical legal infor-mation. In addition to making its catalog andextensive collection available to the public,TThhee  DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  ooff  IInnddiiaann  LLaaww
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 34“If we fight for civil liberties for our side, we show that
we believe not in civil liberties, but in our side. Butwhen those of us who never were Indians and neverexpect to be Indians fight for the Indian cause of self-government, we are fighting for something that is notlimited by accidents of race and creed and birth; weare fighting for what Las Casas, Vitoria and Pope PaulIII called the integrity or salvation of our own souls.We are fighting for what Jefferson called the basicrights of man. We are fighting for the last best hope ofearth. And these are causes which should carry usthrough many defeats.” (Felix Cohen, U.S. Solicitor –Circa 1940)NILL provides reference and research assis-
tance relating to Indian law and tribal law andits professional staff answers over 2,000 ques-tions each year. In addition, the Library has created and maintains a huge web site that provides access to thousands of full-text sources to help the researcher. See www
.narf/org/nill/index.htm.
The National Indian Law Library is celebrating
its 40th anniversary. Please visit the library website for more information about the history ofthe library and to learn how you can help sustainthe unique and valuable services it provides tothe public.
Indian Law Support Center
Since 1972, NARF’s Indian Law Support
Center (ILSC) has served as a national supportcenter on Indian law and policy for the national Indian legal services community andthe 32 basic field programs serving NativeAmerican clients.  NARF continues to performIndian Law Support Center duties by sendingout regular mailouts to Indian Legal Services(ILS) programs, handling requests for assis-tance and working with Indian legal servicesprograms to secure a more stable funding basefrom Congress. 
The Indian Tribal Justice and Legal Assistance
Act of 2000 authorizes the Department ofJustice (DOJ) to provide supplemental fundingto Indian legal services programs for their rep-resentation of Indian people and Tribes whichfall below federal poverty guidelines. Congressappropriated $2 million in FY 2003 under theAct, and ILSC and ILS programs worked withthe DOJ to devise an allocation methodology.The DOJ awarded a grant of $1,987,000 toNARF on June 7, 2004, most of which was contracted out to ILS programs with a smallportion used to cover NARF administrativecosts. Funding in the amount of $1,726,626for calendar year 2005 was appropriated byCongress for the project. Funding via 2007,2008 and 2009 Congressional appropriationswas unsuccessful.  In 2010 NARF secured a line
item appropriation of $2.35 million fromCongress.  In FY 2011 Congress appropriated$2.49 million for civil and criminal assistance intribal courts.  NARF is now working on FY 2012funding.
Other Activities
In addition to its major projects, NARF con-
tinued its participation in numerous confer-ences and meetings of Indian and non-Indianorganizations in order to share its knowledgeand expertise in Indian law.  During the pastfiscal year, NARF attorneys and staff served informal or informal speaking and leadershipcapacities at numerous Indian and Indian-related conferences and meetings such as theNational Congress of American IndiansExecutive Council, Midyear and AnnualConventions and the Federal Bar Association’sIndian Law Conference.  NARF remains firmlycommitted to continuing its effort to share thelegal expertise which it possesses with thesegroups and individuals working in support ofIndian rights and to foster the recognition ofIndian rights in mainstream society.
NARF attorneys hosting
students from HarvardUniversity
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111 3522001111  FFiinnaanncciiaall  RReeppoorrtt
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 36Public Contributions
Tribal Contributions
Federal Awards 
Foundation Grants
Return on Investments
Other
TOTALS   $ 1,869,051
      1,614,621      1,359,848         750,429
  1,135,010
          (55,381)
           32,291
   $ 6,705,869     27.9%
    24.0%
 20.3% 11.2% 16.9%
 (0.8%)
 0.5%
    100%    $ 1, 604,342
     1, 321,750
          10,000        528,580
     2, 192,905
         351,278
           43,312
    $ 6,052,167   26.5%
   21.8%     0.2%
 8.7%
   36.3%
     5.8%
     0.7%
 100%dollars percents
2011
dollars percents2010
Legal Fees
dollars percents2011
dollars percents2010
Litigation and Client Services
National Indian Law Library     Total Program ServicesManagement and General
Fund Raising
     Total Support Services                         TOTALS      $4,871,455
 200,342
        5,071,797
           713,086
        1,315,682
        2,028,768
     $ 7,100,565 68.6%
   2.8%
 71.4%
 10.1%
 18.5%
  28.6%
 100%   68.4% 
     2.5% 
   70.9%
 10.8%
 18.3%
 29.1%
 100%      $4,889,392
          178,529
         5,067,921
            770,152
          1,311,551
          2,081,703
       $ 7,149,624
Note: This summary of financial information has been extracted from NARF’s audited financial statements which received an unqua lified opinion
by the accounting firm of BKD, LLP .  Complete audited financials are available, upon request, through our Boulder office or at www.narf.org.UUnnrreessttrriicctteedd  SSuuppppoorrtt  aanndd  RReevveennuuee  CCoommppaarriissoonn
EExxppeennssee  CCoommppaarriissoonnBased on our audited financial statements for the fis-
cal year ending September 30, 2011, the NativeAmerican Rights Fund reports unrestricted revenues
of $7,755,340 against total expenditures of$8,150,036.  Total revenue and net assets at the endof the year came to $7,119,917 and $4,267,834,respectively.  Due to presentation requirements of theaudited financial statements in terms of recognizingthe timing of certain revenues and expenses, they donot reflect the fact that, based on NARF’s internalreporting, expenses and other cash outlays exceededrevenue resulting in a decrease of $447,810 to NARF’sreserve fund.  When compared to fiscal year 2010: theincrease in Public Contributions is mostly due to theincrease in bequests (this area can vary widely fromone year to the next) and an anonymous donation ofalmost $130,000.  We received a number of new TribalContributions in fiscal year 2011, many of those sup-
porting our 40th Anniversary and other special events.The increase in Federal Award relates to our newBureau of Justice Assistance contract (the majority ofwhich is also included in expenses since it is paid-outto sub-recipients).  We received both new andincreased funding from Foundations to support specif-ic projects and also for general purposes. The decreasein Legal Fees represents the continued decline in activ-ity for fee paying clients and settlements.  Along withthe overall investment markets, NARF’s investmentstook a hit near the end of the fiscal year.
Unrestricted revenue and Expense comparisons
between fiscal year 2011 and fiscal year 2010 areshown below (not including contributed services).Tribes and Native
Organizations
Chickasaw NationCitizen Potawatomi
Nation
Confederated Tribes
of Siletz Indians
Cow Creek Band of
Umpqua Tribe ofIndians
First Nations
DevelopmentInstitute
Fond du Lac Band of
Lake SuperiorChippewa Indians
Fort McDowell
Yavapai Nation
Iowa Tribe of
Oklahoma
Keweenaw Bay
Indian Community
Lac Courte OreillesLummi Indian
Business Council
Menominee Indian
Tribe of Wisconsin
Mescalero Apache
Tribe
Mole Lake CasinoMiami Tribe of
Oklahoma Indians
Mississippi Band of
Choctaw Indians
Muckleshoot TribeNez Perce TribePauma Band of
Mission Indians
Poarch Band of
Creek Indians
Pokagon Band of
Potawatomi Indians
Potlatch FundSaginaw Chippewa
Indian Tribe ofMichigan
San Manuel Band of
Mission Indians
San Pasqual Band of
Mission Indians
Seminole Tribe of
Florida
Seventh Generation
Fund
Shakopee
Mdewakanton SiouxCommunity
Stillaguamish Tribe of
Indians
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111 37NNAARRFF  AAcckknnoowwlleeddggmmeenntt  ooff  CCoonnttrriibbuuttiioonnss::  FFiissccaall  YYeeaarr  22001111
We thank each and every one of our supporters for their commitment to the goals of NARF.
NARF’s success could not have been achieved without the generosity of our many donorsthroughout the nation. NARF receives contributions from foundations, corporations, religiousorganizations, tribes and Native organizations, bequests and trusts, benefactors, private donations,and in-kind contributions.  We gratefully acknowledge these gifts received for fiscal year 2011(October 1, 2010 through September 30, 2011).
Stockbridge Munsee
Community Band ofMohican Indians
Sycuan Band of
Kumeyaay Indians
Tulalip TribesWildhorse
Foundation
Yavapai-Prescott
Indian Tribe
Yocha Dehe Wintun
Nation
Foundations,
Corporations andLaw Firms
Ford FoundationOak FoundationOpen Society
Institute
Foundation to
Promote OpenSociety
Bay & Paul
Foundation
Aria FoundationBally GamingBiedenharn
Foundation
Boston FoundationBurke Law Offices
Bush FoundationCascino Vaughn Law
Offices, LTD
Chahta Holding
Group
Faegre & BensonEdward & Verna
Gerbic FamilyFoundation
Gori Julian &
Associates, P.C. 
Gramann Reporting,
LTD
Inge FoundationJacobson, Buffalo,
Magnuson, Anderson& Hogen, PC
Lutheran Community
Foundation
Maynes, Bradford,
Shipps & Sheftel, LLP
Robert McCoyNative American
Bank
Pohlman USA Court
Reporting
Rocket Gaming
Systems, LLCNNAARRFF  AAcckknnoowwlleeddggmmeenntt  ooff  CCoonnttrriibbuuttiioonnss::  FFiissccaall  YYeeaarr  22001111
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 38Smith, Shelton &
Ragona LLC
Tilden & McCoy, LLCUngar FoundationWinky FoundationCorporate
Matching Gifts –
Currently, more than20 foundations andcorporations nation-wide make matchinggifts to NARF on aregular basis.Employers matchtheir employees’contributions some-times doubling oreven tripling theirdonation. Pleasecheck with yourhuman resourcesoffice and request amatching gift form.
Adobe Systems Inc.AIG Matching Grants
Program
Bank of AmericaCaterpillar Matching
Gifts Program
DellEdison InternationalFannie Mae
FoundationMatching GiftsCenter
G.E. FoundationHewlett PackardIBM Matching
Grants Program
Illinois Tool Works
Foundation
JustGive.orgMerrill Lynch &
Company
Microsoft
Corporation
Morgan StanleyPepsico FoundationPew Charitable Trusts
Matching Gifts
P.S.E.G.Springleaf Financial
Services
Sun MicrosystemsThe David & Lucile
Packard Foundation
Verizon FoundationWell Point
Foundation
Wells Fargo
CommunityFoundation
Xcel Energy
Foundation
Living Waters
Endowment
Elwood H. Brotzman
Memorial Fund
Jerome Davis Living
Waters EndowmentFund
Kathleen and Ruth
Dooley Family Fund
Edward & Verna
Gerbic FamilyFoundation 
Susan K. Griffiths
Memorial Fund
The Robert & Joy
Hanson LelandEndowment
Frank J. McCormick
Family Fund
Marvin W. Pourier, Jr.
& Donna M. DeansMemorial Fund
Mary Lou Mosca-
Ragona MemorialFund
Ernest L. Schusky
Endowment
The Snoqualmie
Indian Tribe
Helen & Sidney
Ungar MemorialEndowment Fund
Bequests and
Trusts
Ainslie Alice Bricker-
Clark Estate
Alice ArbogastRodger AndrewsClayton BlissElla BrauchMinda Chevalier
Claudia ChicklasBarbra Cornwell
Revocable Trust
Hilda DailyCarolyn W. FerridayJospeh FrommeRuby GarrettIda GibsonRobert GibsonJames GrunbaumFrances Horvath Helen HoweZabelle HudoyanJeanne LockettRobert McCargarDaniel NidessLinda Sue PlumbRichard & Nathalie
Woodbury
Ernest ZiegfieldPeta Uha
Platinum
Robert FriedePeta Uha GraniteMarion HamptonCollier HandsEdith QuevedoAANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111 39Peta Uha Flint
Roger & Camille
Abelson
Jerald AndersonPeter BronerRichard CobbMark CookeLyle DethlefsonHarvey DennenbergLucille EchohawkBert & Jo Ann EderDaren & Amy EilertDuncan HaasGarnet HammondEsther Hayward
Rivinus
Karin HolserScott & Ricki KresanWilliam LymanJames MarienthalEllen McHughBrent & Marilyn
Minney
Jeanne Morrel-
Franklin
Cassandra NaylorFrannie OatesClaude & Noelle
PonceletPeter Sheldon
Mary SpragueWalter StockBridget StroudMargaret VerbleMary ZerbyPeta Uha ObsidianClaude AshcraftBarbara BastleDavid & Sharon
Bergmann
Robert & Patricia
Berry
John BevanNorval BhendraCharles BleskanWilliam & Elsa BoyceElizabeth CelioTomas & Jane
Dunphy
Brad EngdahlAnne EvansJudy Fair-SpauldingLyman FlinnHerbert FloydMeredith HartStephen HillardSherrill HogenRaymond Honeywell
Gerri KayYvonne LeMelleKathleen LentzJames & Cynthia
Leonard
Joan LesterHarry McAndrewD. Michael McBrideBarbra MusicusMargaret RatheauDonald RhodesaltGeorge & Jo Rainie
Rodgers
Alfred SchwendtnerMathew SlaterJennifer StanleyJay StonerGilbert TauckSzmuk TanenbaumMargaret TravisRebecca TsosieJanice WarmerMargaret WeitzmannCircle of LifeCatches Bear & Judy
Adams
Rodney AddisonGloria Adkinson
Dale ArmitageMaxwell BarnardBarbara BeasleyDiane Ben AriRoy BensonSandra BergerBobby BitnerBetty BlumenkampCharles BowersDale BrandWilliam BrownGloria BurgessPatricia BurnetThomas CampbellLawrence CandelArthur CarterRobert CarterMary CasmusCarter CastleEd ChasteenPaul CliftonCharles ColeJanet CongeroJudith DayGary DickerhoofStarr DormannNNAARRFF  AAcckknnoowwlleeddggmmeenntt  ooff  CCoonnttrriibbuuttiioonnss::  FFiissccaall  YYeeaarr  22001111
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 38Patricia Duval
Noelle EdwardsAllison EmersonJames FeeDebra FrazierJan FreemanLyle FunderburkSuzanne GartzLawrence GellerDeborah GhoreyebEstela GoldsmithLouise Gomer BangelArline GoodrichBernard GordonGene GrabauJean GundlachMerrill HakimMichael HallMargaret HartnettTheodora HaughtonPatricia HeidelbergerCharles HoltzerAlfred HooseJudith HortonVeronica IfillElizabeth JohnsonVusama KaribaEmily Kirk
Betty KleczyMargo KochrutheEllyne Krakower -
Rice
Edward KriegeJames LangharstSharon LaughlinIngrid LeblancJames LehnererFrank LovelandRichard LuersRima LurieSuzanne MacDonaldPatricia Marks-
Greenfield
Joseph McNamaraStanley MetzgerPeter & Betty MeyerGary MontgomeryLeila MooreJeanne MoskalShirley NortonMarc PearceMoses PeterRandall PetersenDenise PfalzerRose PilcarskyThelma Populus
Gordon
B. PowellHorace RainesRobert & Mary
Resnik
Maureen RipleyBarbara RobertsAndrea RobinsongRay RodgersJune RosenthalKeith RossWilliam RozierMary SacherB. SampsonPeter SchmidtLaRoy SeaverMichael SeeleyCharlotte SelverKatey SimetraCharles SmithKirk SperryCarolyn StabyHerbert StewartJames & Patricia
Straus
Michael & Carol
SullivanLouis Tabois
Valeria TenyakCharlotte ThompsonM. TurekJohn TylerRene' Vivo'William WadeTed WeitzRobert & Mary
Wellman
Roger WelschGary WhiteKaren Williams-Fast
Horse
Marcel WingateDavid YeomanWayne ZengelNARF Employee
EndowmentGiving
Jonathan BriggsRose CunyK. Jerome GottschalkDavid GoverRichard GuestHeather KendallMelody McCoySteven C. MooreAANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111 39Morgan O'Brien
Christine PereiraRay RamirezDonald WhartonIn-Kind DonationsThere are many ways
to support theNative AmericanRights Fund, in addi-tion to cash gifts.People who volun-teer their time andtalents, or donatevaluable goods andservices, provide cru-cial support for theNARF mission.  Wewould like toexpressly thank the
following individualsand organizations fortheir generosity:
DLA PiperPatton Boggs LLPJames R. Botsford,
Wisconsin Judicare
Sheila D. Corbine,
Lac Courte Oreilles
Gerald L. Danforth,
Oneida
Ada Deer,
Menominee
Ann EstinKris M. Goodwill,
Menominee
Julia Guarino
Mark Johnson, Esq.
Boulder, CO Attorney
Cher LynRobert McCoySamuel NewmanEugene White-Fish,
Forest County
Potawatomi
Kimberly M. Vale,
Mohican
Other Anonymous
IndividualsNative Ways Federation – The Native
Ways Federation (Native Ways) is the onlyworkplace giving program in the UnitedStates to exclusively fund Native nonprofitsthat serve people and communities inIndian Country.  Native Ways has beentested in the workplaces of the sevenfounding Native nonprofits, and hasreceived W.K. Kellogg Foundation fundingto expand the program more broadly. To learn more about Native Ways and theparticipating nonprofits, or to see howyour company can support Indian Countrythrough workplace giving, please visitwww.nativewaysfederation.org.  Yourbusiness can make a difference!
Boulder-Denver Advisory Committee
– Lucille A. Echohawk, Thomas W.Fredericks, Ava Hamilton, Jeanne Whiteing,Charles Wilkinson.
Federated Workplace Campaigns
Thank you to the thousands of federal,state, municipal and private sectoremployees throughout the country whothrough their payroll deduction plans contributed $77,370 in fiscal year 2011.
Show Your Support in NARF’s programs
–  NARF receives contributions from foun-
dations, corporations, religious organiza-tions, tribes and Native organizations,bequests and trusts, benefactors, privatedonations, and in-kind contributions.Below are descriptions of NARF’s donorprograms and additional ways you can getinvolved.
Peta Uha Membership – Peta Uha in the
Lakota (Sioux) language means firekeeper.One that honors tribal members whomade a solemn commitment to ensurethat the sacred flame, source of light, heatand energy for his people, always be keptburning. Like the firekeepers of old, members of the Peta Uha Council candemonstrate constancy and vigilance by
helping to ensure that the critical work ofthe Native American Rights Fund contin-ues to move ever forward.  For benefitsassociated with each level of Peta Uhamembership, please contact ourDevelopment Department, 303.447.8760. 
Tsanáhwit Circle – Tsanáhwit is a Nez
Perce word meaning equal justice.Tsanáhwit Circle members provide a regular source of income to NARF bypledging and making monthly contribu-tions at any level of your choice. You maysign up to receive monthly pledgereminders in the mail or your credit cardmay be billed automatically.
Otu’han Gift Membership – Otu’han 
is the Lakota Sioux word translated asgiveaway.  Otu’han is a memorial andhonoring gift program modeled after thetradition of the Indian giveaway in whichitems of value are gathered over a longperiod of time to be given away in honorof birthdays, marriages, anniversaries, andin memory of a departed loved one.
Circle of Life – NARF’s Circle of Life are
donors who provide a lasting legacy to theNative American Rights Fund by includingNARF in estate planning or deferred gifts.The circle is an important symbol toNative Americans representing unity,strength and the eternal continuity of life.These lasting gifts help ensure the futureof NARF and our Indian clients nationwide.
Endowments – NARF has two established
endowments, the 21st Century Endowmentand the Living Waters Endowment. The21st Century Endowment is a permanentfund in which the principal is invested andinterest income is used for NARF’s pro-grams. This endowment is designed toprovide a permanent, steady income thatcan support the ever-increasing costs of
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD 42NNAARRFF  AAcckknnoowwlleeddggmmeenntt  ooff  CCoonnttrriibbuuttiioonnss::  FFiissccaall  YYeeaarr  22000077providing legal representation to our tribal
clients.  The Living Waters Endowmentdirectly funds the 21st CenturyEndowment. It allows donors to honorfriends and loved ones by making anendowment gift of $10,000 or more.  Bydesignating a gift to either endowment,you can be sure that your contribution willcontinue to generate annual funds in perpetuity. Endowment supporters arerecognized on a special wall plaque dis-played at NARF. Supporters will alsoreceive a memorial piece for their homeand be acknowledged in NARF’s annualreport.
Workplace Campaigns – NARF is a 
member of America’s Charities, a nationalworkplace giving federation. Givingthrough your workplace is as easy aschecking off NARF’s box, #10350 on theCombined Federal Campaign (CFC)pledge form authorizing automatic payrolldeduction.  NARF is also a member ofCommunity Shares of Colorado (CSC),member #5037.
Matching Gifts – Currently, more than
20 foundations and corporations nation-wide make matching gifts to NARF on a regular basis.  Employers match theiremployees’ contributions sometimes doubling or even tripling their donation.Please check with your human resourcesoffice and request a matching gift form.
E-Action – Sign up for our e-action 
network by providing NARF with youremail address . This is a great way to getperiodic case updates, calls-to-action, spe-cial events information, invitations andother activities. Your e-mail address is con-fidential and we will not share it with anyoutside sources.  For further informa tion
about any of the programs or services,please contact NARF’s DevelopmentDepartment at 303-447-8760. Thank you.
AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111 43
CORPORATE OFFICERS
John E. Echohawk(Pawnee)Executive Director/Attorney
K. Jerome Gottschalk
Litigation ManagementCommitteeMember/Attorney
Natalie Landreth
(Chickasaw)Litigation ManagementCommittee/Attorney
Melody McCoy
(Cherokee)Litigation ManagementCommitteeMember/Attorney
Morgan O’Brien
Director of Development
Ray Ramirez
Secretary
Michael Kennedy
Chief Financial OfficerBOULDER MAIN OFFICE
STAFF
John E. Echohawk
(Pawnee)ExecutiveDirector/Attorney
Amy Bowers (Yurok)
Attorney
K. Jerome Gottschalk
Attorney
David Gover
(Pawnee/Choctaw)Attorney
Melody McCoy
(Cherokee)Attorney
Steven C. Moore
Attorney
Donald R. Wharton
Attorney
Eric Anderson
Legal Assistant
Rose Cuny (Oglala Lakota)
Office Manager
Chrissy Johnson
Paralegal
Michael Kennedy
Chief Financial OfficerNNAARRFF  SSTTAAFFFF
TTHHEE  NNAATTIIVVEE  AAMMEERRIICCAANN  RRIIGGHHTTSS  FFUUNNDD  --  AANNNNUUAALL  RREEPPOORRTT  22001111 44Mireille Martinez
Development ProjectsManager
Katrina Mora (Oglala
Lakota)Office Services Assistant
Morgan O'Brien
Director of Development
Christine Pereira
SystemsAdministrator/Webmaster
Ray Ramirez
Editor/Grant Writer
Jennifer Redbone
(Apache/Comanche/Kiowa)Development Assistant
Jeff Schmidt
Paralegal
Joanne Soklin
Legal Assistant
Debbie Raymond-Thomas
(Navajo)Controller
Jennie Tsikewa (Zuni)
AccountantNATIONAL INDIAN
LAW LIBRARY
David Selden
Librarian
Mauda Moran
Library & InformationTechnology Assistant
ANCHORAGE OFFICE
STAFF
Heather Kendall-Miller
(Athabascan)Attorney
Natalie Landreth
(Chickasaw)Attorney
Erin Dougherty
Skadden Fellow Attorney
Jonathan Briggs
Legal AdministrativeAssistant
WASHINGTON, D.C.
OFFICE STAFF
Richard Guest
Attorney
Colby Duren
Legal AssistantThe “Native American Rights Fund Statement
on Environmental Sustainability.”
“It is clear that our natural world is undergoing severe, unsustainable and 
catastrophic climate change that adversely impacts the lives of people andecosystems worldwide. Native Americans are especially vulnerable and areexperiencing disproportionate negative impacts on their cultures, health andfood systems. In response, the Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is committed to environmental sustainability through its mission, work andorganizational values. Native Americans and other indigenous peoples have along tradition of living sustainably with the natural world by understandingthe importance of preserving natural resources and respecting the interde-pendence of all living things. NARF embraces this tradition through its workand by instituting sustainable office practices that reduce our negative impacton our climate and environment. NARF is engaged in environmental work andhas established a Green Office Committee whose responsibility is to lead andcoordinate staff participation in establishing and implementing policies andprocedures to minimize waste, reduce energy consumption and pollution andcreate a healthful work environment.” 11550066  BBrrooaaddwwaayy
BBoouullddeerr,,  CCOO    8800330022
330033--444477--88776600  ••  wwwwww..NNAARRFF..oorrggNative American Rights Fund