1
Photo: Ray Ramirez
ANNUAL REPORT 2007Table of Contents
Introduction ................................................................................................................ page 2
Executive Director’s Report ........................................................................................ page 4
Chairman’s Message .................................................................................................... page 6
The Board of Directors .............................................................................................. page 7
The National Support Committee ............................................................................ page 7 
The Preservation of Tribal Existence ...................................................................... page 8
The Protection of Tribal Natural Resources ........................................................ page 14
Major Activities 2007 - NARF Case Map ................................................................ page 22
The Promotion of Human Rights .......................................................................... page 24
The Accountability of Governments ...................................................................... page 32
The Development of Indian Law ............................................................................ page 34
Treasurer’s Report .................................................................................................... page 36
Contributors .............................................................................................................. page 37
NARF Staff .................................................................................................................. page 44
Main Office
Native American Rights Fund
1506 Broadway
Boulder, CO 80302
303-447-8760
http://www.narf.org
Alaska Office
Native American Rights Fund
420 L Street, Suite 505
Anchorage, Alaska 99501
907-276-0680
Washington, D.C. Office
Native American Rights Fund
1712 N Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20036
202-785-4166
Tax Status: The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is a
nonprofit, charitable organization incorporated in 1971under the laws of the District of Columbia. NARF is exemptfrom federal income tax under the provisions of Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue code. Contributions to NARFare tax deductible. The Internal Revenue Service has ruledthat NARF is not a “private foundation” as defined in Section509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code. NARF was foundedin 1970 and incorporated in 1971 in Washington, D.C.The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) 
is the oldest and largest nonprofit nationalIndian rights organization in the countrydevoting all its efforts to defending and promoting the legal rights of Indian peopleon issues essential to their tribal sovereignty,their natural resources and their human rights.NARF believes in empowering individuals andcommunities whose rights, economic self-sufficiency and political participation havebeen systematically eroded or undermined. 
At its inception in 1970, NARF believed
that the best hope for Indian survival anddevelopment rests with the maintenance ofthe tribe as an institution.  The inherent sovereign powers of a tribe to hold land, togovern tribal members and to command therespect of other units of government areessential to an Indian nation concept.Throughout the past 37 years, NARF has heldfast to this hope and through its work hasinsured that this concept has become a reality. NARF has represented over 200 Tribes in
31 states in such areas as tribal jurisdictionand recognition, land claims,  hunting andfishing rights, the protection of Indian religiousfreedom and many others. In addition to thegreat strides NARF has made in achieving justice on behalf of Native American people,perhaps NARF’s greatest distinguishing attributehas been its ability to bring excellent, highlyethical legal representation to dispossessedtribes. NARF has been successful in representingIndian tribes and individuals in cases thathave encompassed every area and issue in thefield of Indian law. The accomplishments andgrowth of NARF over the years confirmed thegreat need for Indian legal representation ona national basis. This legal advocacy on behalfof Native Americans continues to play a vitalrole in the survival of tribes and their way oflife. NARF strives to protect the most impor-tant rights of Indian people within the limit ofavailable resources. 
NARF’s efforts would not be possible with-
out the contribution of the thousands of individuals who have offered their knowledge,courage, and vision to help guide NARF on itsquest.  Of equal importance, NARF’s financialcontributors have graciously provided theresources to make these efforts possible.Contributors such as the Ford Foundationhave been with NARF since its inception.  The Open Society Institute, the Bay and PaulFoundations, and the Unger Foundation havealso made contributions the past severalyears.  Federal funding from the Administrationfor Native Americans enables NARF to carryon its social development efforts in Indiancountry.  Finally, the positive effects of NARF’s work are reflected in the financial contributions by a growing number of tribalgovernments.  United, these financial, moral,and intellectual gifts provide the frameworkfor NARF to fulfill its goal of securing the rightto self-determination to which all NativeAmerican peoples are entitled. 
Introduction
Northern Arapaho dancer.
Photo: Ray Ramirez
THE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
23
NARF’s Priorities
One of the initial responsibilities of NARF’s
first Board of Directors was to develop prioritiesthat would guide the Native American RightsFund in its mission to preserve and enforcethe legal rights of Native Americans.  TheCommittee developed five priorities that continue to lead NARF today:
• Preservation of tribal existence• Protection of tribal natural resources• Promotion of Native American human rights• Accountability of governments to Native
Americans
• Development of Indian law and educating
the public about Indian rights, laws, and issues
Under the priority of the preservation of
tribal existence , NARF works to construct the
foundations that are necessary to empowertribes so that they can continue to liveaccording to their Native traditions, toenforce their treaty rights, to insure theirindependence on reservations and to protecttheir sovereignty. 
Throughout the process of European 
conquest and colonization of North America,Indian tribes experienced a steady diminish-ment of their land base to a mere 2.3 percentof its original size.  Currently, there areapproximately 55 million acres of Indian-controlled land in the continental UnitedStates and about 44 million acres of Native-owned land in Alaska.  An adequate land baseand control over natural resources are centralcomponents of economic self-sufficiency andself-determination, and as such, are vital tothe very existence of tribes.  Thus, much ofNARF’s work involves the protection of tribal
natural resources.
Although basic human rights are consid-
ered a universal and inalienable entitlement,NARF Executive Director
John Echohawk (left) andNARF Board member BillyFrank (center) receivingthe Wallace Stegner Awardfrom the Center of theAmerican West at theUniversity of Colorado.  At right is former NARFattorney and noted authorCharles Wilkinson.  Photo: Ray Ramirez
ANNUAL REPORT 2007Native Americans face an ongoing threat of
having their rights undermined by the UnitedStates government, states, and others whoseek to limit these rights. Under the priorityof the promotion of human rights , NARF strives
to enforce and strengthen laws which aredesigned to protect the rights of NativeAmericans to practice their traditional religion,to use their own language, and to enjoy their culture.
Contained within the unique trust relation-
ship between the United States and Indiannations is the inherent duty for all levels ofgovernment to recognize and responsiblyenforce the many laws and regulations appli-cable to Indian peoples.  Because such lawsimpact virtually every aspect of tribal life,NARF maintains its involvement in the legalmatters pertaining to accountability of 
governments to Native Americans.
The coordinated development of Indian law
and educating the public about Indian rights,laws, and issues is essential for the continued
protection of Indian rights.  This primarilyinvolves establishing favorable court precedents,distributing information and law materials,encouraging and fostering Indian legal educa-tion, and forming alliances with Indian lawpractitioners and other Indian organizations. 2007 marked the 37th year that the Native
American Rights Fund has provided legaladvocacy to Native Americans on major issuesthroughout Indian country.  Through thehard work of the Board and staff of theorganization, several important victories andachievements on behalf of Native Americansoccurred once again.
Several efforts to protect hunting and fishing
rights for Alaska Natives were successful.  InState v. Demientieff , an Alaska district court
upheld the Federal Subsistence Board’s customary and traditional use finding for subsistence uses of moose by members of theChistochina Tribe represented by the NativeAmerican Rights Fund.  Such a finding entitlesTribal members to the subsistence priorityunder the Alaska National Interest LandsConservation Act.
In Ahtna Tene Nene’ Subsistence Committee
v. Alaska Board of Game , we won a preliminary
injunction against state regulations thatseverely restrict or eliminate subsistence usesof moose and caribou by several AlaskaNative tribes and communities in the Ahtnaregion that we represent..
On behalf of several Alaska Native subsis-
tence users, we were victorious against theState of Alaska in upholding the final ruleimplementing the mandate in a major subsis-tence case that we had won earlier, John v.
United States .  The prior case had held that
the United States must protect subsistenceuses of fisheries in navigable waters where theUnited States possesses a reserved waterright. A federal district court in Alaska upheldthe federal government’s process of identifyingthose navigable waters and rejected theState’s argument that the reserved watersdoctrine requires a quantification of watersnecessary to fulfill specific purposes.
In other matters, the Native American
Rights Fund continued its work in implementingthe Native American Graves Protection andRepatriation Act on behalf of the Pawnee
Nation of Oklahoma. We assisted with thetransfer of private lands in Nebraska to thePawnee Nation for use as a reburial and culturalsite since those lands are within the PawneeNation’s aboriginal area.  We also assisted thePawnee Nation in obtaining a legal opinionfrom the Nebraska Attorney General clarifyingthe right of the Pawnee Nation to conductreburials of 800 human remains on that land.  
A federal district court in Nevada ruled in
favor of the Fallon Paiute-Shoshone Tribe’sefforts to repatriate the remains of theirancestor in Fallon Paiute-Shoshone Tribe v.United States Bureau of Land Management.  As part of a legal team, we had filed an amicuscuriae brief in the case on behalf of severalinterested Native American organizations insupport of the Tribe.  The court ruled that theBureau of Land Management had failed tofully and fairly review the Tribe’s scientific evidence or address the Native AmericanGraves Protection and Repatriation ActReview Committee’s findings that supported
the Tribe.
In order to foster compliance with letter
and spirit of the Indian Child Welfare Act(ICWA),  we created and published A PracticalGuide to the Indian Child Welfare Act.  TheGuide, available both in print format and on-line, is a new powerful tool for tribal, stateand federal entities involved in child custodyproceedings.  ICWA was enacted in 1978 inorder to address the problem of tribes losingtheir children from misguided and insensitivechild welfare practices by state human serviceagencies resulting in the unwarranted removalof Indian children from their families andtribes and the placement of those children innon-Indian homes. Since that time, there hasbeen misinterpretations and, in some cases,outright refusal to follow the intent of the lawby state agencies and courts.
In Curiung v. Alaska , the Alaska Supreme
Court upheld the right of Alaska tribes to
Executive Director’s Report
THE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
4bring suit under federal civil rights law in
state court on behalf of themselves and theirtribal members to vindicate important statu-tory rights under the Indian Child Welfare Actand other federal and state laws.  We hadfiled an amicus curiae brief in the case on
behalf of a number of Alaska tribes because ofthe importance of the issue of tribes beingable to act on behalf of their members.
In Tanana v. State , an Alaska superior court
held that Alaska tribes possess inherent sover-eign power to adjudicate child custody proceedings involving their member childrenin their tribal courts.  The Alaska AttorneyGeneral had asserted a policy that state courtshave exclusive jurisdiction over child custodyproceedings involving Alaska Native children.The Native American Rights Fund is repre-senting several Alaska Native villages and individuals in the case.   
Three decades of worldwide effort by
Indigenous Peoples resulted in an historic victory in the United Nations GeneralAssembly when that body adopted theDeclaration on the Rights of IndigenousPeoples by an overwhelming majority.  Thevote was 143 in favor, 4 opposed and 11abstaining.  The four countries who votedagainst the Declaration were the UnitedStates, Canada, New Zealand and Australia.The Declaration affirms the collective rights ofIndigenous Peoples across a broad range ofareas including self-determination, spirituality,land rights and rights to intellectual property.The Native American Rights Fund has workedwith its client, the National Congress ofAmerican Indians, and indigenous peoplesworldwide in the process of elaborating theDeclaration since 1999.
In Nez Perce v. Kempthorne , a federal 
district court in Washington, D.C. rejected the federal government’s argument that NezPerce and 36 other tribal trust fund casespending before it were not properly beforethe court and should be remanded to the
Interior Department to allow the agency toprepare a plan to complete the requiredaccountings of tribal funds held in trust bythe federal government.  The court held that nothing prevents the government fromdeveloping such a plan now and that thegovernment has known about these concernsfor at least twenty years.  We filed the NezPerce case in 2006 on behalf of twelve tribesand a potential class of 220 tribes who havetheir tribal funds held in trust by the federalgovernment but have never received therequired accounting of their funds.
These victories and achievements would
have never been accomplished without thefinancial support of our many generousdonors across the country who support ourcause of justice for all Native Americans.  Wethank all of you for providing access to justicefor all Native Americans and hope that youwill continue to support the work of theNative American Rights Fund.     
John E. Echohawk
Executive Director
ANNUAL REPORT 20075With All Due Respect,
This past November I attended the 64th
Annual National Congress of AmericanIndians Convention in Denver, Colorado.Ironically, 64 years ago our grandfathers andgrandmothers met in this very city to createthis important national organization to stopthe threat of the day back then – termination.A matter so critical to the survival of Indianpeople they reacted the only way they couldand they won!  Well come forward some 64years later and the 2nd largest tribe in theCountry is facing this same threat.  Congress-woman Watson – D, California introducedlegislation to terminate the federal trustresponsibility with the Cherokee Nation.  
A resolution of support for the Cherokee
Nation was introduced and debated on thefloor of the NCAI convention.   Some of theDelegates were tiptoeing around the issueand were more concerned about being“diplomatic” in reference to the Congress-woman as contained within the resolution.This important resolution essentially support-ed the Cherokee Nation’s right to exercisetheir sovereignty and opposed theCongresswoman’s effort. At my urging andwith the support of other tribal leaders theresolution was adopted with reference to the Congresswoman by name in tact.  Chairman’s Message
John Gonzales
Chairman
THE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
6The significance of this issue and debate
reflects the important work that NARF, NCAIand tribal leaders must be ever vigilant toprotect our rights to self government.
As I wind down my term as a NARF Board
member I can’t help but wonder how 6 yearswent by so fast.  I suppose grandfather timecreates certain illusions of how fast or slowtime goes by depending upon the situation.For those in the justice system, there probablycan never be enough time to finish volumi-nous materials required in important cases.  I remember visiting the NARF Washington,D.C. offices several years ago.  In my tour ofthe offices I was introduced to a room whereboatloads of paper were stacked everywhere.It was all Cobell stuff.  I couldn’t help butthink of Keith Harper and the amount of timeit took him to work on briefs and readingimportant laws, etc. relating to the case.
I enjoyed my entire six years serving this
great organization.  We had our heateddebates over partisan politics, and we havecome together to support important initia-tives to protect the rights of our People andour Environment.  The bottom line is wemust all come together to strengthen ourresolve to battle for our survival.  Our issuescut across party lines.  I leave NARF with theknowledge that if there is anyone we cancount on who will be doing battle on ourbehalf to the very end it is the staff and Boardof NARF – the true Modern Day Warriors.  Bestrong and never give up!  I urge the leadersof tomorrow to continue to support this vitalorganization with both financial contributionsand individual involvement by lending yourhelp to this great organization.  May theGreat Spirit bless you and your love ones withlong and healthy lives.
Your Friend Always,John GonzalesThe Native American Rights Fund has a gov-
erning board composed of Native Americanleaders from across the country – wise and distinguished people who are respected byNative Americans nationwide.  IndividualBoard members are chosen based on theirinvolvement and knowledge of Indian issuesand affairs, as well as their tribal affiliation, toensure a comprehensive geographical repre-
sentation. The NARF Board of Directors, whosemembers serve a maximum of six years, provide NARF with leadership and credibility,and the vision of its members is essential toNARF's effectiveness in representing its NativeAmerican clients.NARF’s Board of
Directors: (left to right)
– Fred Cantu, Jr .
(Saginaw Chippewa);
John Gonzales,Chairman (San Ildefonso
Pueblo - New Mexico);Paul Ninham, Vice-Chairman (Oneida
Nation of Wisconsin); Delia Carlyle (Ak Chin
Indian Community -Arizona); Andrew
Bowers (Seminole Tribe
of Florida); Lydia
Olympic (Yupik/Aleut -
Alaska);  Kunani
Nihipali (Native
Hawaiian - Hawaii); Billy Frank (Nisqually
Tribe - Washington); and,Anthony Pico (Viejas
Band of KumeyaayIndians - California).
(Not Pictured) – 
Keith Anderson(Shakopee Mdewakanton); Elbridge Coochise(Hopi - Arizona) Jim Gray (Osage Nation -
Oklahoma); Woody Widmark(Sitka Tribe - Alaska).  
ANNUAL REPORT 20077Board of Directors
National Support Committee
The National Support Committee (NSC) assists
NARF with its fund raising and public relationsefforts nationwide.  Some of the individuals onthe Committee are prominent in the field ofbusiness, entertainment and the arts.  Others areknown advocates for the rights of the under-
served. All of the 32 volunteers on the Committee
are committed to upholding the rights of NativeAmericans.
Randy Bardwell, Pechanga
Band of Luiseno Indians
Katrina McCormick Barnes Jaime Barrientoz, Grand
Traverse Band of Ottawaand Chippewa Indians
John Bevan Wallace Coffey, Comanche
Ada Deer, Menominee
Harvey A. DennenbergLucille A. Echohawk,
PawneeJane Fonda
James GarnerEric GinsburgJeff GinsburgRodney Grant, Omaha
Chris E. McNeil, Jr., 
Tlingit-Nisga’a
Billy Mills, Oglala Lakota
Amado Peña, Jr.,
Yaqui/Chicano
Nancy Starling RossWayne Ross
Marc RudickPam RudickErnie Stevens, Jr.,
Wisconsin Onieida
Andrew Teller, 
Isleta Pueblo
Verna Teller, Isleta Pueblo
Richard Trudell, 
Santee Sioux
Rebecca Tsosie, 
Pasqua YaquiTzo-Nah, 
Shoshone Bannock
Aine UngarRt. Rev. William C.
Wantland, Seminole
W. Richard West, 
Southern Cheyenne
Randy Willis, Oglala Lakota
Teresa Willis, Umatilla
Mary Wynne, 
Rosebud SiouxNARF works to construct the foundations
that are necessary to empower tribes so thatthey can continue to live according to theirNative traditions, to enforce their treatyrights, to insure their independence on reser-vations and to protect their sovereignty.Specifically, NARF‘s legal representation centers on sovereignty and jurisdiction issues,federal recognition and restoration of tribalstatus, and economic development.  Thus,the focus of NARF's work involves issues relating to the preservation and enforcementof the status of tribes as sovereign governments.Tribal governments possess the power to regulate the internal affairs of their membersas well as other activities within their reserva-tions.  Jurisdictional conflicts often arise withstates, the federal government, and othersover tribal sovereignty.Tribal Sovereignty
The focus of NARF’s work under this priority
is the protection of the status of tribes as sovereign, self-governing entities.  The UnitedStates Constitution recognizes that Indiantribes are independent governmental entitieswith inherent authority over their territory.  In treaties with the United States, Indian tribesceded millions of acres of land in exchangefor the guarantee that the federal governmentwould protect the tribes‘ right to self-govern-ment.  From the early 1800s on, the SupremeCourt has repeatedly affirmed the fundamentalprinciple that tribes retain inherent sovereigntyover their territory.  However, in the past twodecades, the Supreme Court has steadilychipped away at this fundamental principle,both by restricting tribal jurisdiction and byextending state jurisdiction.
These decisions by the Supreme Court have
made this priority more relevant than ever,and have led to a Tribal SovereigntyProtection Initiative in partnership with theNational Congress of American Indians(NCAI) and tribes nationwide to restore thetraditional principles of inherent tribal sover-eignty where those have been underminedand to safeguard the core of sovereignty that remains.
This Initiative consists of three components.
The first component is the Tribal SupremeCourt Project, the focus of which is to monitorcases potentially headed to the United StatesSupreme Court and those which actually areaccepted for review.  An effort is made to promote the cases with the most likely successbefore the Court.  When cases are accepted,the Project helps ensure that the attorneysrepresenting the Indian interests have all thesupport they need, and to coordinate the filing of a limited number of strategic amicusbriefs.  A second component of the Initiativeis to participate in the judicial nominationsand confirmations at the lower court and the
The Preservation of Tribal Existence
Kenai Peninsula, Southern
Alaska by David Hocs
THE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
8Supreme Court levels.  Finally, there is a
Congressional component to fight legislativemeasures that are against tribal interests andto affirmatively push legislation to correctanti-tribal Supreme Court precedent.
NARF launched the Tribal Supreme Court
Project in conjunction with NCAI in 2001.Since 2001, the Project has been involvedwith nine cases – four wins, four losses, andone draw.  This is an impressive track record,given that before the inception of the Projecttribes lost 80% or more of these cases beforethe Rehnquist Court.  In addition, the Projectworked to ensure that tribal victories inCourts of Appeals were denied review by theU.S. Supreme Court.The Tribal SupremeCourt Project is housed at NARF‘s office inWashington, D.C., and is staffed by one NARFattorney and by support staff.  In an effort tofoster greater coordination in advocacy beforethe Supreme Court, an Advisory Board of triballeaders, comprised of NCAI ExecutiveCommittee members and other tribal leaderswilling to volunteer their time, also assists theProject.  The Board‘s role is to provide neces-sary political and tribal perspective to thelegal and academic expertise.  The Project hasalso established a Working Group – a group ofmore than 200 noted attorneys and academicsfrom around the nation who participate inthe Project as their interest, time andresources allow.
To achieve the goals of the Project, NARF
monitors cases which appear to be headedfor the Supreme Court, and organizes, coordi-nates and contributes to a nation-wide Indianamicus brief writing network.  Amicus briefsallow those not directly involved in litigation,but potentially impacted by the outcome, toprovide information and arguments directlyto the Court.  By bringing together experi-enced Indian law practitioners and scholars todiscuss and agree upon a coordinated amicusbrief writing strategy in each case, and byassisting the parties, NARF ensures that themost effective and focused arguments are
made before the Court on behalf of IndianCountry.
In  May 2007,  in  a  surprising  develop-
ment,  the  petition  for review  in  Doe  v.
Kamehameha Schools was withdrawn by
agreement of the parties.   Although theterms of the settlement agreement will not be disclosed, the agreement does leave inplace the 8-to-7 decision of an en banc panelof the Ninth Circuit which held that theadmissions policy of the KamehamehaSchools (which gives preference to NativeHawaiians) does not constitute unlawful racediscrimination under 42 U.S.C. §1981.  InSeptember 2007, the Court conducted itsopening conference for the October Term2007 and denied review in all three Indianlaw cases considered. 
The Project remains very busy developing
strategy and coordinating resources in a number of Indian law cases recently decidedby, or currently pending in, the various U.S.Courts of Appeal where review by the U.S.
Native children in
Kivalina, Alaska. by Jenni Monet
ANNUAL REPORT 2007910
Supreme Court may be contemplated.  One
example is State of Texas v. U.S. in which the
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuitissued a fragmented opinion which held thatthe Secretarial procedures regulation isinvalid.  The Secretarial procedures regulation,promulgated pursuant to the Indian GamingRegulatory Act, provided an alternativeprocess for approval of a tribe’s Class III gaming compact by the Secretary of theInterior when a state refuses to negotiate witha tribe in good faith.  
Federal Recognition of Tribal Status
Achieving legal status as an Indian tribe is
very important to preserving tribal existenceand self-government.  Some tribal groups donot have this status because they have neverbeen formally recognized as tribes by the fed-eral government.  NARF provides representa-tion to those tribal groups who have a rightto become federally recognized tribes.
NARF currently represents Indian communities
who have survived intact as identifiable Indiantribes but who are not federally recognized.These Indian tribes, for differing reasons, do notcurrently have a government-to-governmentrelationship between themselves and the federal government.  Traditionally, federal
recognition was accorded to a tribe throughtreaty, land set aside administratively for a tribe,or by legislative means.  The majority of theseNARF clients are seeking an administrativedetermination by the Bureau of Indian Affairs(BIA) that they, in fact, have continued toexist as Indian tribes from the time of signifi-cant white contact to the present day andhave continued to govern themselves and theirmembers.  NARF, therefore, prepares the necessary historical, legal, and anthropologicaldocumentation to support a petition foracknowledgment.  For more than 100 years,these Indian communities have been deniedthe benefits of a formal relationship with thefederal government.  Through the process ofadministrative acknowledgment, NARF is nowtrying to bridge that gap.
Federal recognition is an arduous process
that takes many years to complete.Petitioning tribes must prove that they havebeen identified by reliable external sources ona substantially continuous basis as an Indianentity; they must prove that they have main-tained a continuous community from historicaltimes to the present day; they must showthat they have maintained political authorityKenai Peninsula, Southern
Alaska by Jenni Monet
THE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDor influence on a substantially continuous
basis from historical times until the presentday; they must prove that current tribal members, as a whole, descend from a historictribe or tribes which amalgamated; they mustprove that their members are not mostlymembers of an already recognized tribe; and,their members cannot be from groups whichwere terminated by legislation.  This processrequires the testimony of many experts andthorough documentation of each requirement.Tribal existence does not depend on federalrecognition, but recognition is necessary for agovernment-to-government relationship andthe receipt of many federal services.  
After many delays, the Assistant Secretary
of Interior for Indian Affairs in 2000, publisheda preliminary finding in favor of recognitionof the Little Shell Tribe of Chippewa Indiansof Montana.  Substantial work was done tostrengthen the Tribe’s petition and the finalsubmissions were made in 2005. In addition,Patton and Boggs, a large D.C. firm, is representing the Tribe pro bono in seeking
legislative recognition. In March 2007,Montana Congressman Danny Rehberg, andSenator Max Baucus and Senator Jon Testerintroduced legislation to grant the Little Shell Tribe the recognition they have longbeen denied.  The Office of FederalAcknowledgment (OFA) began active consid-eration of the Tribe’s new material in August2007, and started a three week site visit inOctober 2007. OFA previously indicated it willreach a final determination on the Tribe’spetition by the end of calendar 2007.  This deadline was not met.
The Shinnecock Indian Nation, located on
the Shinnecock Indian Reservation, adjacentto Southampton, New York, with NARF’sassistance, filed a petition for Federalacknowledgment in 1998. The BIA eventuallyplaced the Nation’s petition on the “Ready,Waiting for Active Consideration” list in 2003.The placement on the list is a milestone forthe Nation after years of hard work to fully
document the petition. The Nation is well onits way to federal recognition. NARF continuesto represent the Nation in its efforts to gainfederal recognition.  NARF has been workingwith the Pamunkey Tribe in Virginia to preparethe necessary historical, legal and anthropo-logical documentation to support a petitionfor federal acknowledgment. The petition is
nearing completion and is expected to befiled in 2008 with the Office of FederalAcknowledgment.
At the U.S. Congressional level, on behalf
of it is federal recognition clients, NARF monitors and responds when appropriate toproposed federal legislation affecting the federal acknowledgment regulatory process.
Economic Development
NARF continues to do economic develop-
ment work for the Hualapai Indian Tribe ofArizona. The Tribe is located on the south rimof the Grand Canyon in Arizona, and claims aboundary that runs to the center of theColorado River. The Tribe asked that NARFprovide an interpretation of key provisions oftheir Constitution concerning the manage-ment and development of the Tribe’s natural
Patty Limerick, Faculty
Director and Chair of theBoard of the Center of the American West at the University ofColorado, and notedHistorian, presenting theWallace Stegner Award to John Echohawk andBilly Frank.  Photo: Ray Ramirez
ANNUAL REPORT 20071112
resources. In addition, the Tribe owns the
Cholla Canyon Ranch near Wikiup, Arizona.The Ranch was gifted to the Tribe by its ownersand is presently being operated as a palmtree plantation. NARF reviewed the proposedagricultural lease on the Ranch lands and ispresently conducting negotiations with theattorney for the tree grower to reach anacceptable lease agreement. Tribe has alsorequested that we review and provide legalanalysis of other issues related to agreementswith Coconino County, mineral developmentof tribal land acquired from fee owners, and aproposed easement on a tribal road for thehauling of flagstone.
Environmental Law and Policy Initiative
NARF has played a key role in the imple-
mentation of federal environmental law andpolicy that recognizes tribal governments asthe primary regulators and enforcers of the
federal environmental laws on Indian lands.NARF continued to work with tribes, theNational Tribal Environmental Council andother Indian organizations to maintain theprogress that has been made with theEnvironmental Protection Agency (EPA) andother federal agencies.  Through involvementwith the Green Group, the National ResourcesDefense Council and the Wilderness Society,NARF continues to coordinate with and educate the environmental community on therole of tribal governments in environmentallaw and policy.
Global warming is wreaking havoc in
Alaska. In recent years scientists have docu-mented melting ocean ice, rising oceans, rising river temperatures, thawing permafrost,increased insect infestations, animals at riskand dying forests. Alaska Natives are the peoples who rely most on Alaska’s ice, seas,marine mammals, fish and game for nutritionand customary and traditional subsistenceuses; they are thus experiencing the adverseimpacts of global warming most acutely. 
In 2006, during the Alaska Forum on the
Environment, Alaska Native participantsdescribed increased forest fires, more dangeroushunting, fishing and traveling conditions, visiblechanges in animals and plants, infrastructuredamage from melting permafrost and coastalerosion, fiercer winter storms, and pervasiveunpredictability. Virtually every aspect of traditional Alaska Native life is impacted. As noted in the Arctic Climate ImpactAssessment 2004, indigenous peoples arereporting that sea ice is declining, and itsquality and timing are changing, with impor-tant negative repercussions for marinehunters. Others are reporting that salmon arediseased and cannot be dried for winter food.There is widespread concern about caribouhabitat diminishing as larger vegetationmoves northward. Because of these and otherdramatic changes, traditional knowledge is
Native elder in Kotzebue,
Alaska. by David Hocs
THE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDjeopardized, as are cultural structures and 
the nutritional needs of Alaska’s indigenouspeoples.
NARF successfully gathered 162 Alaska
Native Tribal and Corporate Resolutions callingon Congress and the Executive Office toadopt legislation reducing carbon emissions.The resolutions were carried to Washington,D.C. by tribal leaders and presented to theAlaska Delegation on Climate Change CrisisDay, March 2007. A successful meeting withCongressman Markey followed and resultedin interest to convene hearings on climatechange impacts on indigenous peoples. The Alaska Climate Impact AssessmentCommission, which is charged with assessingthe effects and costs of global warming onAlaskans, held its final hearing on climatechange impacts in Anchorage, Alaska inOctober 2007. NARF has facilitated the partic-ipation of Alaska Native witnesses in all of theCommission’s hearings.
NARF continues its work with the Oglala
Sioux Tribe (OST) Department of WaterMaintenance and Conservation on the revision of the Tribe’s Ordinance for the
Protection of the Oglala Sioux Rural WaterSupply System and Other Public WaterSystems Within the Pine Ridge IndianReservation [“Tap-in” ordinance].  NARF hasalso been working on the OST Solid WasteManagement Code, and development of atribal Safe Drinking Water Act. The “Tap-in”ordinance, which was adopted by the TribalCouncil in 2006, will provide for the protec-tion of the integrity of the pipeline whichdelivers drinking water to the public watersystems on the reservation. NARF assisted theTribe in the formulation and regulations forimplementation of the Code, and has devel-oped draft forms for application and permitfor connections “in-lieu” of the usual process,and for delegation of authority to provideconnections to the pipeline. NARF may conduct training for the staff of the WaterMaintenance and Conservation Departmentconcerning the implementation of theseimportant codes.NARF attorneys meeting
with tribal clients on theNez Perce v. Kempthornetribal trust funds case.Photo: Ray Ramirez
ANNUAL REPORT 200713Over time, Indian tribes have experienced a
steady diminishment of their land base to amere two percent of its original size.  An ade-quate land base and control over naturalresources are central components of economicself-sufficiency and self-determination, and assuch, are vital to the very existence of tribes.Therefore, protection of tribal naturalresources is a high priority at NARF.
Protection of Indian Lands
Without a sufficient land base, tribal exis-
tence is difficult to maintain.  Thus NARFhelps tribes establish ownership and controlover lands which are rightfully theirs.
NARF has been retained by the Eastern
Shoshone Tribe of the Wind River IndianReservation to analyze the legal implicationsof the Surplus Land Act of March 3, 1905 forthe Shoshone or Wind River Indian Reservationas they may have effected the boundaries ofthat reservation. We prepared a memoran-dum which was presented to the TribalBusiness Council and to the Tribal GeneralCouncil. NARF is also monitoring cases thatmay have an impact on the issue of whetherthe boundaries were diminished by the 1905Act. NARF recently provided a moot court for
an attorney arguing a case, State of Wyoming
v. Yellowbear , before the Supreme Court of
Wyoming which squarely presented theboundary issue. In addition, we continue tomonitor cases in the United States DistrictCourt for Wyoming and in the 10th CircuitCourt of Appeals – an appeal brought by Mr.Yellowbear on a petition for habeas corpus .
In the meantime the Eastern Shoshone
Tribe, along with the Northern Arapaho Tribe,have been invited by the Mayor of the City ofRiverton to sit down and discuss the impor-tant issues related to jurisdiction and bound-ary to see if an agreement can be reached.The Mayor’s invitation has been accepted theChairman of the Eastern Shoshone Tribe, andan invitation has been extended to theChairman of the Northern Arapaho Tribe tojoin the meeting. In September 2007, NARFprovided the General Council with a com-plete briefing on the issues related to dimin-ishment and talks with the City. 
NARF represents the Pottawatomi Nation of
Canada, a band of descendants from theHistoric Pottawatomi Nation, which from
The Protection of Tribal Natural Resources
Treeline near Kivalina,
Alaska. by Jenni Monet
THE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
141795 to 1833 signed a series of treaties with
the United States.  While the AmericanPottawatomi bands recovered the payment ofannuities in the Indian Claims Commission(ICC), the Canadian Pottawatomi memberscould not bring a claim in the ICC.  In 1993,NARF brought suit on behalf of the CanadianPottawatomi in the Court of Federal Claims,and the parties reached a $1.8 million agree-ment which was approved by the Court in2000 and recommended to Congress in2001.  NARF continues to work with theSenate Committee on Indian Affairs, theSenate Judiciary Committee and the HouseResources Committee to see this matterthrough to Congressional approval.
Since 1981, NARF has represented the
Alabama-Coushatta Tribe of Texas in theirquest to secure compensation for the loss ofuse of millions of acres of fertile forest landthey once occupied in southeast Texas.  In2002, the United States Court of FederalClaims ruled in favor of the Alabama-Coushatta Tribe of Eastern Texas in theirbreach-of-trust claim against the UnitedStates, holding the Government liable for theTribe's loss of use of over 2.85 million acres ofland between 1845 and 1954.  The Courtalso ruled that 5.5 million acres of aboriginaltitle has never been extinguished. Negotiatorsfor the U.S. and Tribe reached an agreementon the amount of damages for the loss of land- $270 million- and the Court recommendedthe agreement to Congress in 2002.  NARF,private counsel, and the Tribe are now workingto garner Congressional approval for the pay-ment of this amount under the Congressionalreference procedure.
Chalkitsik et al v. United States seeks judicial
review of the federal regulation which governsthe procedures used by Indian tribes and individuals when requesting the Secretary ofthe Interior to acquire title to land in trust ontheir behalf. The regulation bars the acquisi-tion of land in trust in Alaska other than forthe Metlakatla Indian Community or its 
members. The exclusion of all other Alaskatribes from the scope of the regulation,including plaintiffs Akiachak NativeCommunity, the Chalkyitsik Village, theChilkoot Indian Association and the TuluksakNative Community, bars the acquisition oftrust title to land in Alaska and is arbitrary,capricious, an abuse of discretion, unconstitu-tional and otherwise contrary to law. Plaintifftribes seek declaratory and injunctive reliefpreventing the Department of the Interior
from excluding federally recognized Alaska
tribes from land-into-trust petition process;further seek a declaration that the Secretaryof the Interior has the authority to acquirelands in trust in Alaska on behalf of AlaskaTribes and their members; that plaintiff tribesare entitled to petition the Secretary to haveland in Alaska taken into trust; and, that theSecretary must give the same consideration toland in trust petitions in Alaska as would begiven to other federally recognized tribes. Thefederal defendants have moved to transfervenue to the District of Alaska.  In August2007, the court denied the motion to transfervenue to Alaska.
NARF attorneys Don
Wharton (left) and DavidGover (right) presentingto tribal clients in thetribal trust funds case.Photo: Ray Ramirez
ANNUAL REPORT 20071516
Water Rights
Establishing tribal rights to the use of water
in the arid west continues to be a major NARFpriority.  The goal of NARF’s Indian waterrights work is to secure allocations of waterfor present and future needs for four Indiantribes represented by NARF and other westerntribes generally.  Under the precedent estab-lished by the United States Supreme Court in1908 in Winters v. United States and confirmed
in 1963 in Arizona v. California , Indian tribes
are entitled under federal law to sufficientwater for present and future needs, with apriority date at least as early as the establish-ment of their reservations.  These tribalreserved water rights are superior to all state-recognized water rights created after the tribalpriority date.  Such a date will in most casesgive tribes valuable senior water rights in thewater-short west.  Unfortunately, many tribeshave not utilized their reserved water rights
and most of these rights are unadjudicated orunquantified.  The major need in each case isto define or quantify the amount of water towhich each tribe is entitled through litigationor out-of-court settlement negotiations.Tribes are generally able to claim water forany purpose which enables the tribes’ reser-vations to serve as a permanent homeland.
NARF has represented the Nez Perce Tribe
in Idaho in the Snake River Basin Adjudication(SRBA)  – both litigation and settlement phases– since 1987. Congress enacted and PresidentBush signed into law  the Snake RiverSettlement Act of 2004. The Idaho Legislatureapproved the agreement and Idaho GovernorDirk Kempthorne signed the approval legisla-tion in 2005. The subsequent approval by theNez Perce Tribe represented the final sign-offby the three sovereigns.
In January 2007, the SRBA Court heard the
Joint Motion for Entry of Consent Decree filedby the Tribe, the United States, and the Stateof Idaho, and entered a written order approvingthe Consent Decree. No appeals were filed
with the Idaho Supreme Court challenging thefinal consent decree.  In April 2007, the Stateand the Nez Perce Tribe certified that all ofthe Term Sheet conditions had been met.Now that the three sovereigns have enteredtheir final findings, the settlement provisionsrelating to the transfer of the 11,000 acres offederal land, shared management of theDworshak National Fish Hatchery, and management of the Kooskia National FishHatchery will be finally carried out.
This is a major accomplishment for the Nez
Perce Tribe and its members. This settlementrepresents the merging of traditional Indianwater rights settlement elements with othermajor environmental issues confronting all ofthe people of Idaho. It could well be lookedat by other states and tribes and federal landmanagement agencies in the west seeking to
Indian law student 
presenting his case before
a NARF moot court.
Photo: Ray Ramirez
THE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUNDsort out Indian water claims and other chal-
lenges presented by the federal EndangeredSpecies Act and the Clean Water Act. 
The culture and way of life of many indige-
nous peoples are inextricably tied to theiraboriginal habitat. For those tribes that stillmaintain traditional ties to the natural world,suitable habitat is required in order to exercisetheir treaty-protected hunting, fishing, gath-ering, and trapping rights and to sustain theirrelationships with the animals, plants, and fishthat comprise their aboriginal habitats. TheOregon water rights adjudication brings thesefactors into play, factors which are critical tothe cultural survival of tribal peoples in theUnited States. In this struggle, NARF repre-sents the Klamath Tribes of Oregon. Theyhold reserved Indian water rights in theKlamath River Basin to support their treatyhunting, fishing and gathering rights with atime immemorial priority date, as well aswater rights needed to satisfy the agriculturalpurposes of the Klamath Reservation. Ashunters and fishers, the Klamath Tribes havecontinuously exercised their hunting, fishing,trapping and gathering rights within thetreaty-protected area for thousands of years.This traditional way of life depends upon sufficient water and habitat to support thenatural resources which have been suppliedto these Indians by Mother Earth since timeimmemorial. Their reserved water rights forthese purposes are currently being quantifiedin a state-wide water adjudication in Oregon.NARF represents the Klamath Tribes in assertingand defending their treaty-based water rightsin the adjudication and in prosecuting contests against many junior water rightsclaims filed by non-Indian water users.
In Case 003, one of the largest, most com-
plex contests in the adjudication, a four-weektrial was held in 2004 and followed by post-trial briefs over the ensuing year. In 2006, theAdministrative Law Judge (ALJ) entered a rul-ing on the merits upholding NARF’s position
that the United States, not private water usersor irrigation districts, owns the water rightsfor the enormous Klamath Irrigation Project.Accordingly, the ALJ denied the claims of thewater users and irrigation districts. The hold-ing ensures that the Klamath Project will con-tinue to be operated pursuant to the UnitedStates’ Endangered Species Act and tribaltrust obligations. Exceptions to this orderwere briefed in the summer 2007, with NARFfiling three briefs and related papers in July2007, on behalf of the Tribes.
In 2005 and 2006, adjudication of the
Tribes’ water rights claims began in earnest.Sixty-four briefs were filed in eight tribal casesby the parties on legal issues defining thenature of the tribal water right claims andvarious defenses against those water rights.Oral argument was held and the ALJ enteredOrders in all eight cases in 2006 that held theTribes’ legal position in a sweeping set of victories. The ALJ held that the Tribes are entitled to a sufficient amount of water for ahealthy habitat and productive fishery. Theparties recently agreed to a vigorous discov-ery and trial schedule to adjudicate remainingissues regarding the Tribes’ water right claimsin the eight tribal cases which will extend well
(left to right) NARF 
attorneys Don Wharton,Kim Gottschalk, and SteveMoore judging a mootcourt case for Indian law students.  Photo: Ray Ramirez
ANNUAL REPORT 20071718
into 2008. In the summer of 2007, the tribal
cases were stayed pending Basin water settle-ment discussions with all stake-holders.
NARF represents the Tule River Indian Tribe
of California in negotiations to settle theTribe’s claims to reserved water rights on itsreservation. The Tule River reservation is locatedin a mountainous region and is crossed bythe South Fork of the Tule River. Flow fromthe river is abundant in the early spring,dropping off precipitously in the summer.With no reservoir and delivery facilities on the reservation, water supply for the Tribe’sgrowing domestic needs is severely limitedand water supply for significant irrigation isnonexistent. Without legal confirmation of itsreserved water rights, the Tribe will not beable to provide for its future water needs.After legal and technical analyses of its waterrights claims, the Tribe decided to pursue anegotiated settlement of its water rights claims
before engaging in litigation. Competingdownstream users include a ditch company,riparians, and an association of irrigationcompanies. The Department of the Interiorappointed a federal negotiation team to assistthe Tribe in settling its water rights claims.The Tribe’s goal is to negotiate a settlementthat will provide the Tribe with sufficientwater to create a permanent sustainablehomeland for its people with no or minimaladverse impact on other water users. Settlementnegotiations among the Tribe, the UnitedStates, and non-tribal downstream users (the Settling Parties) have been in progressfor several years. In 2007, the Settling Partieshave made significant progress toward reachinga water rights settlement agreement. TheTribe is hopeful that a final settlement agree-ment can be submitted to Congress for ratification in 2008.
Local native child in
Kivalina, Alaska. by Jenni
Monet
THE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND19
In August 2007 the Tribe hosted a meeting
of the federal negotiating team and localwater stakeholders.  A near final text of thesettlement agreement was discussed and afew changes made.  The local Californiamember of Congress, Rep. Nunes, introducedlast spring HR 2535, a bill to authorize theBureau of Reclamation to conduct a feasibilitystudy to site the water storage project, whichis the cornerstone of the Tribe’s water agree-ment, and also to authorize appropriations inthe amount of $3 million for the study.  A veryfavorable hearing was held in September2007 before the Water and Power Subcommitteeof the House Natural Resources Committee.Plans are to attempt to move the bill throughthe House and Senate this Congress. 
In 2006, the Kickapoo Tribe in Kansas filed
a federal lawsuit in U.S. District Court in aneffort to enforce express promises made tothe Tribe to build the Plum Creek ReservoirProject in the Upper Delaware and tributarieswatershed. The Nemaha-Brown WatershedJoint Board # 7, the Natural ResourcesConservation Service of the United StatesDepartment of Agriculture, and the State ofKansas made these promises to the Tribe overa decade ago. In the intervening years theseparties have been actively developing thewater resources of the watershed, resulting inthe near depletion of the Tribe’s senior federalwater rights in the drainage. 
The water quality on the reservation is so
poor it is harmful to human health andunsuitable for human consumption accordingto the Environmental Protection Agency. Thewater supply is in violation of the SafeDrinking Water Act of 1974.  As a result theKickapoo people are unable to safely drink,bathe or cook with tap water. The Plum CreekReservoir Project is the most cost-effectiveand reliable means by which the Tribe canfree its members from the dire living condi-tions forced upon them by their unreliableand dangerous water supply.A thirty-year era of unreliable water supplies
on the Kickapoo Reservation located in BrownCounty, Kansas has disabled the KickapooTribe from providing basic municipal servicesnecessary to protect its residents from illness,fire, and unsanitary living conditions. There is not enough water on the reservation toprovide basic municipal services to the com-munity: The Tribe is unable to provide localschools with a reliable, safe running waterand the fire department cannot provide adequate fire protection due to the watershortage.
The Tribe and the defendants are engaged
in the litigation of the case and someexploratory settlement talks have taken place.In August 2007, the parties expressed aninterest in taking a break from the litigationtrack to explore mutual benefits from settle-ment.  The U.S., the State and the localwatershed district all concede the existence ofthe Tribe's senior Winters water rights.  Thereal issue ultimately will be the amount ofwater to satisfy the Tribe’s needs and thesource or sources of those rights.  Overall,progress has been slow but steady and it isanticipated that continued negotiations willextend into 2008. 
NARF Executive Director
John Echohawk meetingwith tribal clients.  Photo: Ray Ramirez
ANNUAL REPORT 2007
Protection of Hunting and Fishing
Rights in Alaska
The subsistence way of life is essential for
the physical and cultural survival of AlaskaNatives.  As important as Native hunting andfishing rights are to Alaska Natives' physical,economic, traditional, and cultural existence,the State of Alaska has been and continues tobe reluctant to recognize the importance ofthe subsistence way of life. 
In State v. Demientieff, the State of Alaska
brought suit challenging the FederalSubsistence Board’s customary and traditionaluse finding for subsistence uses of moose bymembers of the Chistochina Tribe. A positivecustomary and traditional finding entitles residents for a specific community to the subsistence priority under Title VIII of theAlaska National Interest Lands ConservationAct Chistochina was granted intervention inthis action to protect its customary and tradi-tional status for moose.  In June 2007 the district court entered an order in favor ofdefendant United States and Chistochinaagainst the State and upholding the FederalSubsistence Board’s customary and traditional
use finding for subsistence uses of moose bymembers of the Chistochina Tribe.  The Statehas appealed.
In Ahtna Tene Nene’ Subsistence Committee
v. Alaska Board of Game , suit was brought on
behalf of tribal organizations and communitieswho live a subsistence way of life to overturna series of regulations adopted by the AlaskaBoard of Game in March of 2007.  The regu-lations severely restrict, and in some cases,eliminate plaintiffs’ subsistence uses of mooseand caribou.  Plaintiffs sought a preliminaryinjunction in state court requesting that thecourt enjoin the State from implementingthese regulations for the fall hunt. The courtfound that plaintiffs had shown that they satisfied the “balance of hardships” standardfor granting preliminary injunction by raisingserious and substantial questions going to themerits of the case and by demonstrating thatthe balance of hardships tip sharply in theirfavor.  The State of Alaska has decided not to seek review of the court’s grant of prelimi-nary relief.  Briefing on the merits will now proceed.   
In Native Villages of Eyak, Tatitlek, Chenega,
Nanwalek, and Port Graham v. Evans, five
Chugach tribes are suing the Secretary ofCommerce seeking to establish aboriginalrights to their traditional-use areas on theOuter Continental Shelf of Alaska, in CookInlet and the Gulf of Alaska. A decision wasrendered by the federal district court in 2002against the Chugach tribes. NARF brought anappeal to the Ninth Circuit and oral argu-ment was heard in 2003.  The Ninth Circuiten banc panel vacated the decision of the 
district court and remanded for determinationof whether the tribes can establish aboriginalrights to the areas. Oral argument on thetribes’ motion for summary judgment washeld in 2006 and was denied shortly there-after. The tribes are continuing discovery andtrial has been scheduled for the second half
Street scene in Kotzebue,
Alaska. by Jenni Monet
THE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND20of August 2008.
NARF is representing the Native Village of
Venetie Tribal Government, the NinilchikTribal Government and individuals as proposedinterveners in a case that was initially broughtby the Safari Club, a sporting club, to chal-lenge regulations promulgated by theSecretaries of the Interior and Agricultureimplementing the subsistence preferenceestablished by the 1980 Alaska NationalInterest Lands Conservation Act (ANILCA).ANILCA establishes a preference for custom-ary and traditional uses of fish and wildlife byaccording a priority for the taking of fish andwildlife on federal public lands in Alaska fornon-wasteful subsistence uses by rural Alaskaresidents, most of whom are Alaska Natives.The Safari Club challenged the validity of all180 customary and traditional use determina-tions under ANILCA and challenged the composition of Regional Area Council (RAC)as not adequately representing sport, recre-ational and commercial interests.  NARF intervened in the case on behalf of its clientsin order to defend the Federal SubsistenceBoard’s (FSB) subsistence use-determinationsfor their respective Alaska Native communitiesand to protect their entitlement to take fishand wildlife on federal public lands in Alaska.The court issued a decision in 2006, holdingthat the FSB had not followed theAdministrative Procedures Act in promulgatingthe regulation allowing 30% of the RAC seatsto be held by non-subsistence users.  Theaction has again been remanded to theagency with instructions to initiate rule-making.
In 2005, the State of Alaska filed a lawsuit
in the District of Columbia challenging thefinal rule implementing the mandate in theprior subsistence case, John v. United States.
The prior case established that the UnitedStates must protect subsistence uses of fish-eries in navigable waters where the UnitedStates possesses a reserved water right. The State challenged the Secretaries’ imple-mentation of the mandate by arguing that
the reserved waters doctrine requires a quan-tification of waters necessary to fulfill specificpurposes.  In May 2007, the district courtentered an order upholding the agency’s rule-making process identifying navigablewaters in Alaska that fall within federal jurisdiction for purposes of ANILCA’s subsistence priority.  
In 2005, Katie John also filed a law suit in
the District of Alaska challenging theSecretaries’s final rule implementing the priorKatie John mandate as being too restrictive inits scope. Katie John’s complaint alleges thatthe Secretaries should have included AlaskaNative allotments as public lands and furtherthat the federal government’s interest inwater extends upstream and downstreamfrom the Conservation Units establishedunder ANILCA. The two cases have been consolidated.
Meeting at NARF regarding
Native American Churchissues.  (Clockwise) JamesBotsford - NAC attorney;Suzan Shown Harjo -President, The MorningStar Institute; WalterEcho-Hawk, NARF attorney;Steve Moore, NARF attorney.Photo: Ray Ramirez
ANNUAL REPORT 200721MAJOR ACTIVITIES 2007 - NARF CASE MAP
THE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND22ANNUAL REPORT 200723NEBRASKA
• Santee Sioux Tribe – Tribal Trust Fund
NEW MEXICO
• Mescalero Apache Tribe – Tribal Trust Fund
NEW YORK
• Shinnecock Indian Nation - Recognition 
NORTH DAKOTA
• Fort Berthold Reservation - 
Education & Water
• Turtle Mountain Reservation - 
Tribal Trust Fund
OKLAHOMA
• Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes – 
Tribal Trust Fund
• Pawnee Nation – Education, NAGPRA &
Tribal Trust Fund
• Sac & Fox Nations – Tribal Trust Fund
OREGON
• Klamath Tribes - Water Rights 
& Tribal Trust Fund
• Bonnichsen v. United States 
(“Kennewick Man case”) - Repatriation 
SOUTH DAKOTA
• Lower Brule Sioux Tribe - Trust Lands• Rosebud Sioux Tribe - Education & Tribal
Administration
• Oglala Sioux Tribe - Environmental 
TEXAS
• Alabama-Coushatta Tribe - Land Claim 
VIRGINIA
• Pamunkey Tribe – Recognition
WASHINGTON
• Yakama Nation – Tribal Trust Funds
WASHINGTON, D.C.
NARF WASHINGTON, D.C. OFFICE• Cobell v. Norton & 
Tribal Supreme Court Project
• Harjo et al v. Washington Redskin Football -
Cultural Rights 
WYOMING
• Eastern Shoshone Tribe - Land Issue 
CANADA
• Northern Lakes Pottawatomi Nation - 
Land Claim 
INTERNATIONAL
• Draft Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples – United Nations &Organization of American StatesALASKA
NARF ANCHORAGE OFFICE
• Chistochina Tribe – Subsistence• Curing v. Alaska - ICWA
• Kaltag Tribe – ICWA• Katie John v. Norton - Subsistence
• English Only Initiative• Global Warming Project• Native Villages of Eyak, Tatitlek,
Chenega, Nanwalek, and Port Graham -  Subsistence &Aboriginal Title
• Gwich’in Steering Committee -
Environmental/Subsistence
• Native Village of Kiana - Education• Native Village of Nulato - Education
and ICWA
• Ninilchick Tribe - Subsistence• Native Village of Tuluksak - 
Trust Lands
• Native Village of Venetie -
Subsistence
• Tlingit and Haida Indian Tribes -
Tribal Trust Funds
• Voting Rights Act Suit
ARIZONA
• Hualapai Tribe – Boundary Issue
CALIFORNIA
• Tule River Tribe – Water, 
Tribal Trust Funds 
• Yurok Tribe – Tribal Trust Funds
COLORADO
NARF HEADQUARTERS
BOULDER, COLORADO
• ICWA Site• TEDNA Headquarters• Valmont Butte – Sacred Site Issue
HAWAII
• Pele Defense Fund - 
Aboriginal Rights 
IDAHO
• Nez Perce Tribe - Water Rights,
Tribal Trust Funds 
KANSAS
• Kickapoo Tribe – Water Rights
MINNESOTA
• White Earth Band of Chippewa
Indians - Tribal Trust Fund 
MONTANA
• Chippewa-Cree Tribe of the Rocky
Boys Reservation - Tribal Trust Fund
• Little Shell Tribe - Recognition &
Tribal Trust FundAlthough basic human rights are consid-
ered a universal and inalienable entitlement,Native Americans face an ongoing threat ofhaving their rights undermined by the UnitedStates government, states, and others whoseek to limit these rights.  NARF strives toenforce and strengthen laws which aredesigned to protect the rights of NativeAmericans to practice their traditional religion,to use their own language, and to enjoy theirculture.  NARF also works with Tribes toimprove education for and ensure the welfareof their children.  In the international arena,NARF is active in efforts to negotiate declara-tions on the rights of indigenous peoples.
Religious Freedom
Because religion is the foundation that
holds Native communities and culturestogether, religious freedom is a NARF priorityissue. Legal work continues on the implemen-
tation of the Native American GravesProtection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA)which NARF helped secure in 1990. NARFoffered testimony in 2004 and 2005 beforethe Senate Committee on Indian Affairs atoversight hearings regarding NAGPRA issues.NARF supports legislation to amend NAGPRAto correct problems created by the NinthCircuit decision in the Bonnichsen case which
effectively reversed the presumption that allancient remains are Native. In addition, NARFprovided comments on various proposed reg-ulations and policies implementing NAGPRA.
In April 2007, over a 100 tribal members
from the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma andtheir Nasharo Band Chiefs gathered at thePawnee Nation to honor writer Roger Welschand his wife, Linda, for their gift of approxi-mately 60 acres of land in Nebraska.  Thedeed to the land, located near the Loup Riverand Dannebrog, Nebraska, was given to thePawnee Nation of Oklahoma in a ceremonyfollowed by a feast, an honor dance, and Mr.Welsch and his wife being made honorarymembers of the Pawnee Nation.  NARF currently represents the Pawnee Nation in the reburial efforts of 800 human remains inNebraska. NARF worked with the PawneeNation and its Repatriation Committee toassist in the facilitation of the transfer of Mr.Welsch’s land to the Pawnee Nation for use asa reburial and cultural site.  NARF also assistedthe tribe in attaining an opinion from theNebraska Attorney General last year that clari-fied the tribe’s right to conduct reburials onprivate land.  
In 2006, NARF as part of a legal team filed
an amici curiae brief in the Spirit Cave repatri-
ation litigation captioned Fallon Paiute-
Shoshone Tribe v. United States Bureau of LandManagement in the United States District
Court of Nevada. NARF is representing theNational Congress of American Indians,Morning Star Institute, Association ofThe Promotion of Human Rights
Local native children in
Kivalina, Alaska. 
by David Hocs
THE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
24American Indian Affairs and the Medicine
Wheel Coalition of Sacred Sites in NorthAmerica in this important NAGPRA repatriationlitigation. The brief supports the FallonPaiute-Shoshone Tribe’s efforts to repatriatethe remains of their ancestor from the UnitedStates Bureau of Land Management (BLM). 
In 2006, the Court granted the Tribe’s
motion for summary judgment and remandedthe matter to the BLM for reconsideration.The Court determined that the BLM failed tofully and fairly review the Tribe’s scientific evidence or address the NAGPRA ReviewCommittee’s findings that opposed the BLM’sinitial determination in violation of  NAGPRAand the Administrative Procedures Act. TheUnited States appealed the Judge’s decisionto the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals.  InApril 2007, the United States opted to dismisstheir appeal to the Ninth Circuit. In turn theTribe also dismissed their cross-appeal andintend on obtaining a positive resolution tothe matter through the remand process.
NARF and the Colorado Commission of
Indian Affairs (“CCIA”) were first asked in2003 to become involved in the City ofBoulder’s process to decide whether to sitetwo facilities – a biosolids composting facilityand a fire training center – at Valmont Butte,located just east of the City.  In the midst ofthese legal processes, curious phenomenabegan to unfold. Given a voice and means ofexpression by NARF and CCIA’s involvement,the Native American community came forwardwith powerful evidence that (1) the Butte is aplace of significant prehistoric connections toNative peoples who inhabited Boulder Valleylong before Euro American settlers came intothe area in the 19th Century; and (2) theButte is a place of contemporary religiousimportance to many Indian people in themetropolitan Denver area, as well as to Indianpeople of Ute, Arapaho and Cheyennedescent who reside on reservations inOklahoma, Wyoming and southwestColorado. Important spirit voices are believed
to reside in and around the Butte itself and itis the locus of an active sweat lodge beingutilized by several Indian religious leaders.  In2005, the City Council heard and respectedthe wishes of the Indian Community byrejecting the planning staff recommendationsto locate the composting and fire trainingfacilities on the Butte property. NARF is workingwith the CCIA, the local Indian community inthe Denver metropolitan area, the interestedtribes and the residents of the Valmont Buttearea to identify a means of acquiring theproperty from the City.
Cultural Rights
In Nick v. Bethel and the State of Alaska , in
partnership with the American Civil LibertiesUnion, NARF filed a lawsuit in federal courtalleging that Alaska (through its agents theLieutenant Governor and the Division ofElections, among others) have violated theVoting Rights Act by failing to provide language assistance to the thousands ofYup`ik speaking voters in the Bethel CensusArea. The first claim is under Section 203 ofthe VRA, which requires that jurisdictions covered by the Act provide oral and writtenassistance sufficient to enable the voter to
Tribal advocates meeting
at NARF on the developmentof a practical guide to theIndian Child Welfare Act.Photo: Ray Ramiez
ANNUAL REPORT 200725cast a meaningful ballot.  While the languages
covered (meaning those for which the Statehas to provide assistance) varies statewide tocorrespond to the number of people whospeak that language, in the Bethel CensusArea, the covered language is Yup`ik.However, as the complaint alleges, there is little to no oral language assistance providedand absolutely no written assistance providedto the Yup`ik voter. The second claim is underSection 208 of the VRA which provides that avoter who needs help reading and writingmay bring anyone they like into the votingbooth to help them cast a ballot. The com-plaint was filed in June 2007, but shortlythereafter the District Court denied a motionto convene a three-judge court. Currentlyboth sides are conducting discovery and dep-ositions have been scheduled. Plaintiffs planto file for a preliminary injunction in time toallow the Defendants ample time to makeelection changes for the November 2008
election, should the Plaintiffs win any relief. 
From the embryonic days of our Nation,
Indian tribes have long struggled against theassimilationist policies instituted by the UnitedStates which sought to destroy tribal culturesby removing Native American children fromtheir tribes and families.  As an example, thefederal government failed to protect Indianchildren from misguided and insensitive childwelfare practices by state human serviceagencies, which resulted in the unwarrantedremoval of Indian children from their familiesand tribes and placed those children in non-Indian homes. Statistical and anecdotalinformation show that Indian children whogrow up in non-Indian settings become spiritual and cultural orphans. They do notentirely fit into the culture in which they areraised and yearn throughout their life for thefamily and tribal culture denied them as children. Many Native children raised in non-Native homes experience identity problems,drug addiction, alcoholism, incarceration and,most disturbing, suicide.
In order to address these problems facing
tribes as a result of the loss of their children,the Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) wasenacted in 1978. It established minimum federal jurisdictional, procedural and substan-tive standards aimed to achieve the dual purposes of protecting the right of an Indianchild to live with an Indian family and to stabilize and foster continued tribal existence.Since that time, there has been misinterpreta-tions and in some cases, outright refusal tofollow the intent of the law by state agenciesand courts. To gain a basic understanding ofthe ICWA and to access information toexpand that understanding, NARF has createdA Practical Guide to the Indian Child WelfareAct.The Guide , available both in print format
and on-line, is a new powerful resource toolfor tribal, state, and federal entities involvedin Indian child custody proceedings.  The
NARF Board member and
Chairman of the Northwest
Indian Fisheries
Commission Billy Frank
lecturing on indigenous
environmental issues at
the University of
Colorado.  
Photo: Ray Ramirez
THE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND26Guide consists of an Introduction, Frequently
Asked Questions with responses categorizedunder 22 topics, with a wealth of ICWAresources. The on-line version contains morethan 1,000 full-text resources. A Practical
Guide to the Indian Child Welfare Act is intended
to foster compliance with the letter and spirit
of the ICWA.  Funding for this project was provided by the Administration for NativeAmericans, the Morongo Band of MissionIndians, and the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
NARF filed an amicus brief on behalf of a
number of Alaska tribes in the AlaskaSupreme Court in Curiung v. Alaska. The ques-
tion presented in Curiung is whether federally
recognized tribes can bring suit under federalcivil rights law in state court on behalf ofthemselves and their members to vindicateimportant statutory rights under the ICWAand other federal and state laws after theUnited States Supreme Court ruling in Inyo
County v. Paiute-Shoshone Indians (2003). Inyo County involved the core issue of
whether the Paiute-Shoshone IndianCommunity was immune from execution of astate search warrant of tribal employmentrecords issued in connection with the investi-gation of potential off-reservation welfarefraud by certain unnamed tribal employees.The Tribe sought declaratory and injunctiverelief against the County and its officers onthe ground that they had exceeded theirjurisdiction because the warrant interferedwith the Tribe’s sovereign immunity and itsright to self-government. The Tribe alsosought compensatory damages under federalcivil rights law for violation of the Tribe’srights. The Supreme Court held that Tribesare not persons for purposes of bringing federal civil rights claims against a state fordamages for infringement of sovereign inter-ests. In Curiung, however, the amici tribes
argue that Inyo County does not preclude
their federal civil rights claims because therights asserted are private rights that aregrounded in statute.  In December 2006 wereceived a unanimous decision in our favor by
the Alaska Supreme Court upholding a Tribesright to bring a federal civil rights action onbehalf of its members under a parens patriaetheory. The case was remanded to the superiorcourt for a trial on the merits. NARF in nowdiscussing potential settlement remedies.
In Tanana v. State , the Villages of Tanana,
Nulato, Akiak, Kalskag, Lower Kalskag andKenaitze along with Theresa and DanSchwietert filed a complaint against the Stateof Alaska, Attorney General and various stateagencies challenging the policy adopted bythe Attorney General of Alaska that statecourts have exclusive jurisdiction over childcustody proceedings involving Alaska Nativechildren and that tribes in Alaska do not haveconcurrent jurisdiction to hear children’s casesunless (1) the child’s tribe has successfullypetitioned the Department of Interior to reas-sume exclusive or concurrent jurisdictionunder the Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA),or (2) a state superior court has transferredjurisdiction of the child’s case to a tribal courtin accordance with ICWA.  In May 2007, thecourt issued an opinion in the tribe’s favorrejecting all of the State’s arguments.  Thecourt held that Alaska tribes possess inherentpower to adjudicate proceedings involving
Northern Arapaho Tribe
color guard.  Photo: Ray Ramirez
ANNUAL REPORT 200727member children. The plaintiff tribes have
now moved for injunctive relief to prohibitthe state and its agency’s from denying fullfaith and credit to tribal court decrees pending the State’s appeal to the AlaskaSupreme Court. 
In Kaltag v. State of Alaska , an action to
enforce the full faith and credit clause of theIndian Child Welfare Act, the Kaltag Tribe hadcompleted an adoption in tribal court andhad applied for a new birth certificate, butthe State refused to issue one on the groundsthat the Tribe had not petitioned for reas-sumption of jurisdiction under ICWA.Thisargument assumes that a Tribe does not haveinherent jurisdiction to adjudicate adoptionsof its own tribal members. The Tribe and theparents (two individual Kaltag tribal members)brought suit against the State of AlaskaDepartment of Health and Social Services andthe Alaska Bureau of Vital Statistics for denyingfull faith and credit to a tribal adoptiondecree in violation of the Indian Child WelfareAct. The parents also have raised a federalcivil rights claim. Cross motions for summaryjudgment were filed in May 2007.
NARF is participating in the birth and
founding of a new national Native arts andculture foundation that will establish andmanage a multi-million dollar permanentendowment from which monetary awardscan be made to Native American artists andthose local and regional organizations whichcurrently support Native art and culture. Withassistance and leadership from the FordFoundation, a feasibility study demonstratedthe need and interest in such a nationalendowment in 2006. Significant initial fundinghas been committed by the Ford Foundationand a founding board of directors wasformed to finalize the articles of incorporationand other corporate documents this summer.Fundraising and organizational developmentfor the new foundation are underway withhope that the new foundation will be opera-tional in twelve months.  The development ofthe new foundation holds enormous potentialfor assisting in the nation-wide tribal effort topreserve, sustain, and pass on our NativeAmerican art and cultures–including endan-
Local native children in
Kivalina, Alaska. 
by David Hocs
THE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND28gered traditional art forms (and associated
practices), as well as all forms of contempo-rary art such as painting, sculpture, theater,dance, literature, film, and music. It is hopedthat the foundation will become a powerfulfunding engine for the Native American cultural renaissance which is sweepingAmerica and help fund this historic movement.
Also in the area of cultural rights, NARF
filed an amicus brief in the case of Harjo et al
v. Washington Redskin Football in the U.S.
Court of Appeals for the District of Columbiaon behalf of the National Congress ofAmerican Indians, National Indian EducationalAssociation, National Indian Youth Council,and the Tulsa Indian Coalition Against Racismin Sports in support of the Indian appellants.The brief argued that the federal trademarkfor the football team should be cancelledbecause the use of the “Redskin” mark isracially disparaging in violation of federaltrademark law. A decision was rendered in2005 holding that the case may have beenprematurely dismissed as to the youngestIndian petitioner. The case was remanded tothe district court to consider whether theyoungest Indian plaintiff, who was a year oldwhen the Redskins trademarks were first registered, should be barred from bringinghis claim because of delay in bringing theclaim. NARF will continue to monitor thisimportant case on remand.
Education
From the founding of this country, federal
policy effectively stripped Indian tribes of control over the education of their children.The disempowerment of tribes over educationhas been devastating. In most tribal commu-nities, formal schooling is resented and rejected.
NARF helped to establish the Tribal
Education Departments National Assembly(TEDNA) under contracts from the U.S.Department of Education’s Office of Indian
Education three and one half years ago. Nowdozens of federally-recognized TribalEducation Departments (TEDS) have joinedTEDNA.  TEDNA’s current advocacy activitiesinclude: 1) seeking federal appropriations forTEDS; 2) seeking an amendment to theFederal Education Rights and Privacy Act of1974 to allow TEDS to receive data and infor-mation kept by state public schools on tribalstudents without advance parental or studentconsent; and  3) substantive amendments tothe reauthorization of the Elementary andSecondary Education Act of 1965 (also knownas the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001) toincrease tribal governance over education.TEDNA also co-sponsors four National TribalEducation Departments Forums per year, typically in conjunction with meetings of theNational Indian Education Association and the National Congress of American Indians.  
NARF is participating in the historic birth of
a tribal college.  A NARF representative isserving on the Board of Trustees of thePawnee Nation College. During its secondyear of operation, in which numerous courseswere offered to the student body, NARFassisted the College in developing a fund-raising strategy, securing pro bono
Ivan Posey, Chairman of
the Eastern ShoshoneTribe meeting with NARF attorneys.  Photo: Ray Ramirez
ANNUAL REPORT 200729counsel to obtain 501(c)(3) non-profit status
for the new college, and other policy guidancefrom the Board of Trustees. As the third yearcommences, the college is focusing on com-pleting work necessary to obtain accreditationand it continues fund-raising efforts for thatpurpose. In the Fall Semester of 2007, 44 students were enrolled in 15 classes beingtaught by a faculty of seven professors. Thecollege has completed 10 of 12 criteria neces-sary to receive accreditation. In September2007, the college was notified that it receiveda Department of Education grant of 2.5 milliondollars over the next five years. This criticalfunding will assure successful completion ofthe accreditation process. NARF is proud toassist in this historic Indian educationundertaking that is so vital to the humanresources of Indian tribes in rural north central Oklahoma. International Recognition of Indigenous
Rights
The development of international laws and
standards to protect the rights of indigenouspeoples can be beneficial to Native Americanpeople as well as other indigenous peoplesaround the world. Native American tribestherefore need to be involved in these effortsand enlist the support of the United Statessince it is so influential in international circles.
Three decades of worldwide effort by
Indigenous Peoples resulted in an historic victory in the United Nations GeneralAssembly in September 2007 when that bodyadopted the Declaration on the Rights ofIndigenous Peoples (Declaration) by an over-whelming majority.  The vote was 143 infavor, 4 opposed, and 11 abstaining.  Thefour countries who voted against theNorthern Arapaho 
mother and son.  
Photo: Ray Ramirez
THE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND30Declaration were the United States, Canada,
New Zealand, and Australia. The Declarationaffirms the collective human rights ofIndigenous Peoples across a broad range ofareas including self-determination, spirituality,land rights and rights to intellectual property,thereby providing some balance to an inter-national rights framework based largely onindividual rights.  The Native American RightsFund has worked with its client, the NationalCongress of American Indians (NCAI), andindigenous peoples worldwide, in the processof elaborating the Declaration since 1999.
The Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples is an historic milestone inthe long struggle by indigenous peoples fordue recognition in the world.  Being theproduct of a highly political process, theDeclaration is not a perfect document anddoes not include everything IndigenousPeoples had hoped and worked for over thepast thirty years.  The Declaration detailsimportant “minimum standards for the survival, dignity and well-being of the indige-nous peoples of the world.”  (Article 43) Italso makes clear that nothing in theDeclaration “may be construed as diminishingor extinguishing the rights indigenous peopleshave now or may acquire in the future.”(Article 45)  The vast majority of the world,including those countries with the vast majorityof indigenous peoples, recognizes that notonly can the world live with the Declaration,but it will be a better place for doing so.  TheUnited States, Canada, Australia, and NewZealand are out of step with the march of history.
In the Organization of American States, the
tenth meeting in the search for consensus onthe American Declaration on the Rights ofIndigenous Peoples took place in La Paz,Bolivia in April 2007.  Once again, the atmos-phere proved to be more positive than sessionsheld in Washington, D.C.  President EvoMorales, an indigenous person himself, invitedindigenous representatives to the Presidential
Palace on two occasions.  In the actual draftingsessions, agreement was reached on para-graphs concerning education, spirituality andindigenous health. At the beginning of thesession, the United States made a statementthat it would take a general reservation to alltext discussed at the session and would notbe bound by anything which was agreed to.They later explained that the reason for thisstatement was so the United. States wouldnot obstruct the flow of discussion withobjection.  They indicated that any agreedupon text would be taken back toWashington and a decision made within twoweeks on whether the United States wouldconcur. More than eight months later, we stillhave not heard from the Unites States.  TheUnited States also floated a statement ofPrinciple on the Rights of Indigenous Peopleswhich it hoped would be considered along-side the text of the declaration and presentedfor approval at the June 2008 GeneralAssembly in Panama. There was no discussionof those principles at the session.
Selena Chico and former
Mescalero Apache TribalChairman Mark Chinomeeting with NARF attorneys on the tribaltrust funds case.  Photo: Ray Ramirez
ANNUAL REPORT 200731Contained within the unique trust relation-
ship between the United States and Indiannations is the inherent duty for all levels ofgovernment to recognize and responsiblyenforce the many laws and regulations appli-cable to Indian peoples and the trust dutiesto which those give rise.  Because such lawsimpact virtually every aspect of tribal life,NARF maintains its involvement in the legalmatters pertaining to government accounta-bility to Native Americans. 
The Cobell v. Kempthorne case was filed in
1996. It is brought on behalf of approximately500,000 past and present individual Indiantrust beneficiaries.  The individual Indianmoney account holders (plaintiffs) seek a fullaccounting of their trust assets for the entireperiod that such assets have been held intrust – since 1887. Trustees, without exception,have a duty to provide accurate and completestatement of accounts to each beneficiary at
regular intervals and a complete and accurateaccounting upon demand. Yet, the UnitedStates has never provided an accounting toindividual Indian trust beneficiaries. It hasnever provided beneficiaries accurate andcomplete statement of accounts. In addition,plaintiffs ask that the account balances berestated in accordance with the accounting.Finally, plaintiffs seek reform of the trust management and accounting system.
NARF continued in its new role as Of
Counsel in this case working primarily on settlement issues with the private attorneysinvolved in this case.  NARF filed this casewith them in to force the federal governmentto provide accountings to the 500,000 pastand current individual Indian money accountholders who have their funds held in trust bythe federal government. A trial to review the
The Accountability of Governments
Native elder in Kivalina,
Alaska. by Jenni Monet
THE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
32methodology and results of the government’s
accounting thus far as ordered by the federalcourts in this case was held in October 2007and a decision is pending. 
NARF represents the Turtle Mountain
Chippewa, Chippewa Cree, White Earth Bandof Minnesota Chippewa, and Little ShellChippewa Tribes in this case against theFederal government for misaccounting andmismanagement of their tribal trust fund, thePembina Judgment Fund, since the inceptionof the fund in 1964. Since the Court deniedthe United States’ motion in 2006 to have thecase dismissed, and in December 2006ordered the case to be at least partially settledor brought to trial in calendar year 2007, theparties have resumed negotiated settlementdiscussions.  In August 2007, the Court, withthe agreement of the parties, ordered the firsttwo temporal phases of the investment claimsto be resolved through alternative dispute resolution proceedings.
In Nez Perce v. Kempthorne, NARF repre-
sents twelve named plaintiffs – the Nez PerceTribe; the Mescalero Apache Tribe; the TuleRiver Indian Tribe; the Hualapai Tribe; theYakama Nation; the Klamath Tribes; the YurokTribe; the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribe; thePawnee Nation of Oklahoma; the Sac and FoxNation; the Santee Sioux Tribe of Nebraska;and, the Tlingit and Haida Indian Tribes ofAlaska in a new action filed in December2006 in the federal district court for theDistrict of Columbia. The action seeks full andcomplete accountings of tribal trust funds,which never have been provided by the federal government which is the trustee forthe funds. The action also seeks a court orderdeclaring that the Arthur Andersen reportsprepared under a reconciliation project contract with the Bureau of Indian Affairs andprovided to tribes in the 1990s are not fulland complete trust fund accountings. Theaction was filed as a class action to protectthe rights of all tribes that do not file theirown such actions and that choose to remain
in the class. About seventy (70) tribes filedtheir own actions, but as many as two hun-dred and twenty (220) may be in the class ifcertification is granted. The action had to befiled by December 2006 under an act ofCongress that gave tribes that date as a dead-line by which to challenge the accountingadequacy of the Arthur Andersen reports. 
In July 2007, the Court stayed this action
and the thirty-six (36) other tribal trust casesbefore it pending resolution of an argumentby the government that these cases are notproperly before the Court because theyshould be remanded to the U.S. Departmentof the Interior under the AdministrativeProcedure Act (APA) to allow the agency anopportunity to prepare a plan to completethe required accountings. In December 2007,the Court denied the government’s requestfor remand saying that nothing prevents the government from developing such a plan now and that the government hasknown about these concerns for at leasttwenty years. 
NARF attorney David
Gover (far right) givingpointers to Indian lawstudents after their mootcourt presentation.Photo: Ray Ramirez
ANNUAL REPORT 200733The systematic development of Indian law
is essential for the continued protection ofIndian rights.  This process involves distributingIndian law materials to and communicatingwith those groups and individuals working onbehalf of Indian people.  NARF has two ongoingprojects which are aimed at achieving thisgoal, the National Indian Law Library and theIndian Law Support Center.
The National Indian Law Library 
The National Indian Law Library (NILL)
located at the Native American Rights Fund inBoulder, Colorado is a national public libraryserving people across the United States. Sinceit began in 1972, NILL has collected nearly9,000 resource materials that relate to federalIndian and tribal law. The Library’s holdingsinclude the largest collection of tribal codes,ordinances and constitutions in the UnitedStates; legal pleadings from major American
Indian cases; law review articles on Indian lawtopics; handbooks; conference materials; andgovernment documents. 
Library users can access the searchable cat-
alog which includes bibliographic descriptionsof the library holdings by going directly to:http://www.narf.org/nill/index.htm or byaccessing the catalog through the NationalIndian Law Library/Catalog link on the NativeAmerican Rights Fund website at www.narf.org.Once relevant materials are identified, librarypatrons can then choose to request copies orborrow materials through in terlibrary loan for
a nominal fee.  In  addition to making its catalog
and extensive collection available to the public,the National Indian Law Library provides reference and research assistance relating toIndian law and tribal law. The library offersfree assistance as well as customized researchfor a nominal fee. 
NARF’s Indian Law Bulletins are published
by NILL in an effort keep NARF and the publicinformed about Indian law developments.NILL publishes timely bulletins covering newIndian law cases, U.S. regulatory action, lawreview articles, and news on its web site.(See: http://www.narf.org/nill/bulletins/ilb.htm) New bulletins are published on aregular basis, usually every week and olderinformation is moved to the bulletin archivepages. When new information is published,NILL sends out brief announcements and alink to the newly revised bulletin page via e-mail.
Indian Law Support Center 
Since 1972, NARF’s Indian Law Support
Center (ILSC) has served as a national supportcenter on Indian law and policy for thenational Indian legal services community andthe 32 basic field programs serving NativeAmerican clients.  NARF continues to performILSC duties by sending out regular mailoutsto Indian Legal Services programs, handlingThe Development of Indian Law
Young Northern Arapaho
Tribe dancer.  
Photo: Ray Ramirez
THE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
34requests for assistance, and working with
Indian legal services programs to secure amore stable funding base from the Congress.Congress enacted the Indian Tribal Justice andLegal Assistance Act of 2000 which PresidentClinton signed into law. The Act authorizesthe Department of Justice to provide supple-mental funding to Indian legal services programsfor their representation of Indian people andtribes which fall below federal poverty guide-lines. Congress appropriated $2 million in FY2003 under the Act, and NARF and Indianlegal services programs worked with theDepartment of Justice to devise an allocationmethodology. The Department of Justiceawarded a grant of $1,987,000 to NARF in2004, with the majority of the grant fundsbeing contracted out to the Indian legal services programs with a small portion usedto cover NARF administrative costs. Fundingin the amount of $1,726,626 for calendaryear 2006 was appropriated by Congress forthe project. NARF continues to be activelyinvolved with local ILS programs in theadministration of the grant and in developingtraining events to meet local program needs.Funding via 2007 Congressional Appropriations
was unsuccessful but NARF is working onfunding within the FY 2008 budget.
Other Activities
In addition to its major projects, NARF 
continued its participation in numerous conferences and meetings of Indian and non-Indian organizations in order to share itsknowledge and expertise in Indian law.During the past fiscal year, NARF attorneysand staff served in formal or informal speakingand leadership capacities at numerous Indianand Indian-related conferences and meetingssuch as the National Congress of AmericanIndians Executive Council, Midyear andAnnual Conventions and the Federal BarAssociation’s Indian Law Conference.  NARFremains firmly committed to continuing itseffort to share the legal expertise which itpossesses with these groups and individualsworking in support of Indian rights and tofoster the recognition of Indian rights inmainstream society.NARF attorneys meeting
with representatives of theShoshone and NorthernArapaho Tribes of theWind River Reservation.Photo: Ray Ramirez
ANNUAL REPORT 200735Based on our audited financial statements
for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2007,the Native American Rights Fund reports totalunrestricted revenues of $7,377,721 againsttotal expenditures of $6,535,189. Total netassets at the end of the year came to$8,820,509. Due to presentation requirementsof the audited financial statements in terms ofrecognizing the timing of certain revenues,
they do not reflect the fact that, based onNARF’s internal reporting, revenue exceededoperating expenses and other cash outlays by$953,495, resulting in an increase to NARF’sreserve fund.  We had a significant increase inPublic Contributions due to a bequest that we
received for almost $2,000,000. Tribal contri-butions have increased in 2007 due toincreased fund raising efforts in this area. Thedecrease in Federal Awards is mostly due to amajor contract winding down.  Legal Fees hasdecreased because 2006 includes a substantialcourt award for attorney fees for the Cobell
case.
Revenue and Expense comparisons between
fiscal year 2007 and fiscal year 2006 are shownbelow.
2007 Financial Report
THE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
36Public Contributions
Tribal Contributions
Federal Awards 
Foundation Grants
Return on Investments
Other
TOTALS$ 3,723,064
           1,059,100
85,150
530,652
1,331,288
615,566
32,901
$ 7,377,721 50.5%
       14.4%
1.2%7.2%
 18.0%
8.3%0.4%
100%  $ 1,795,069
        796,167     2,001,980
   736,900
 2,811,484
 556,866
68,005
 $ 8,766,47120.5%
        9.1%
22.8%
8.4%
32.1%
6.3%0.8%
100%dollars percents
2007
dollars percents2006
Legal Fees
dollars percents2007
dollars percents2006
Litigation and Client Services
National Indian Law Library     Total Program ServicesManagement and GeneralFund Raising     Total Support Services                         TOTALS$ 4,049,693
271,543
 4,321,226
791,330
1,422,633
2,213,963
$ 6,535,18961.9%
  4.2%
66.1%
12.1%21.8%
33.9%
100%68.7%
2.9%
 71.6%
9.1%
19.3%
 28.4%
100%$ 5,374,689
228,709
5,603,398
714,505
1,506,185
2,220,690
    $ 7,824,088
Note: This summary of financial information has been extracted from NARF’s audited financial statements which received an unqualified  opinion by the
accounting firm of JDS Professional Group .  Complete audited financials are available, upon request, through our Boulder offic e or at www.narf.orgUnrestricted Support and Revenue Comparison
Expense ComparisonLiving Waters
Endowment
Elwood H. Brotzman
Memorial Fund
Jerome Davis Living
Waters EndowmentFund
Kathleen and Ruth
Dooley Family Fund
Edward & Verna
Gerbic FamilyFoundation
Susan K. Griffiths
Memorial Fund
The Robert and Joy
Hanson LelandEndowment
Frank J. McCormick
Family Fund
Marvin W. Pourier,
Sr./Donna M. DeansMemorial Fund
Mary Lou Mosca-
Ragona MemorialFund
Ernest L. Schusky
Endowment
Helen and Sidney
Ungar MemorialEndowment Fund
Foundations,
Corporations andOrganizations
Ford FoundationBay and Paul
Foundation
Everett Public Service
Internship ProgramOpen Society
Institute
Adironack
Community Trust-Evergreen Fund
Agape FoundationArches FoundationAria FoundationBassett FoundationBiendeham
Foundation
Boston FoundationBrickmill Marketing
Services
Charles P. & Mary E.
Belgarde Foundation
Cohen Family FundCombine Jewish
Philanthropies
Community
Foundation forSouthwestWashington
Edward & Verna
Gerbic FamilyFoundation
Eugene and Emily
Grant FamilyFoundation
Frances & Benjamin
Benson FoundationInc.
Gorlitz FoundationInge FoundationJames Travel PointsJerome and Betty
ANNUAL REPORT 200737
NARF Acknowledgment of Contributions: Fiscal Year 2007
We thank each and every one of our supporters for their commitment to the goals of NARF.
NARF’s success could not have been achieved without the generosity of our many donorsthroughout the nation.  We gratefully acknowledge these gifts received for fiscal year 2007(October 1, 2006 through September 30, 2007).
Stone Charitable
Trust
Jewish Federation of
Greater Philadelphia
Johnson Family
Foundation
Kogovsek &
Asscoiates
LP Brown
Foundation
Lutheran Community
Foundation
Merrill LynchMilberg Weiss &
Bershad
Monteau & Peebles
LLP
Mr. & Mrs. Paul
Lefort
North Star
Foundation
Panaphil FoundationPhogg PhoundationPrinceton Area
CommunityFoundation
Rita S. Gold
Foundation
RMF FoundationSisters Charity of
Nazareth 
Stanley Family
Foundation
Stapp-Longenecker
Family Foundation
StettenheimFoundation
Trinity DirectThe Tzo’-Nah FundThe Ungar
Foundation
Wells Fargo
Foundation
Winky FoundationW. Ford Schumann
Foundation
Corporate
Matching Gifts
4CharityAlliant Energy
Foundation
Bank of America
Foundation, Inc.
DellFord FoundationG.E. FoundationIllinois Tool Works
Foundation
Microsoft
Corporation
Morgan StanleyPfizer FoundationSynopsys Foundation
Matching GiftsProgram
The Amgen
Foundation
The David & Lucille
Packard FoundationNARF Acknowledgment of Contributions: Fiscal Year 2007
THE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
38Tribes and Native
Organizations
Ak- Chin Americans for Indian
Opportunity
Barona Band of
Mission Indians
Chitimacha Tribe of
Louisiana
Colusa Casino &
Resort
Cow Creek Band of
Umpqua Tribe OfIndians
Fort McDowell
Yavapai Nation
Little Traverse Bay
Band of OdawaIndians
Mashantucket
Pequot Tribe
Mescalero ApacheMille Lacs Band of
Ojibwe
Miccosukee Indian
Gaming
Mohegan Sun
Casino
Muckleshoot TribeNative Village of Port
Lions
Oneida Tribe of
Indians of Wisconsin
Osage NationPala Band of Mission
Indians
Pamunkey Indian
Reservation
Pauma Band of
Mission IndiansPoarch Band of
Creek Indians
Prarie Band of
Potawatomi Nation
Pueblo of TesuqueSaginaw Chippewa
Indian Tribe ofMichigan
San Manuel Band of
Mission Indians
San Pasqual Band of
Diegueno Indians
Seminole Tribe of
Florida
Shakopee
Midewakanton SiouxCommunity 
Siletz TribeSouthern Ute TribeSycuan Band of
Kumeyaay Indians
Twenty Nine Palms
Band of MissionIndians
Viejas Band of
Kumeyaay Indians
Bequests and
Trusts
Nina BarghoomMary BickleyAnne BowenCarolyn FerridayHelen Gates TrustHamill Revocable
Trust
Dorothy JacksonJohn KarvelisEvelyn Kelly
Harry LawsonChristine MullikinOtero Family TrustAnita PotockiVern ReckmeyerEmiel & Dolores
Belmans Sanchez
Maxine SilvermanSandra SpeidenMary ThelenJohn VaupelWilliam Wenzel
Benefactors
Byron T. BeasleyHarvey DennenbergSubhuti
Dharmananda
Garold FaberBettie FassettJan GriesingerNicholas JacksonRichard KnutsonAnn LarimoreJohn & Susanne
Manley
Sara NerkenOla RexroatElizabeth SteeleAmelia VernonClint WarmuthPeta Uha
Pipestone
John S. Bevan
Peta Uha
Turquoise
Robert FriedeKarin HolserPaulette LewisTina PetersonDonald & Linda
Seberger
Peta Uha Granite
Marion McCollom
Hampton
Carolyn ReyerJill VogtElisa Wilkinson
Peta Uha Flint
Jerald AndersonRobert & Patricia
Berry
Marjorie BlachlyDavid BlackJeffrey BoschWilliam & Elsa BoycePeter BronerMarry BrookJack CampisiRaymond &
Constance Carroll
Mark CookeANNUAL REPORT 200739Paul D'Errico
Lucille EchohawkBert & JoAnn EderDaren & Amy EilertRico GenhartDuncan HaasBob & Barbara
Humes
Albert & Skaye KirkRobert KleigerScott & Ricki KresanJoan LesterWilliam LymanJames MarienthalArthur & Hope MillerGene MillerJeanne D. Morrel-
Franklin
Frannie OatesClaude & Noelle
Poncelet
Edith QuevedoEsther RivinusFaith RoesselRuth SchusterAlfred SchwendtnerPeter SheldonMathew SlaterMary SpragueWalter StockBridget StroudGilbert TauckDavid WinstonPeta Uha Obsidian
James & Louise
Arnold
Mary BaneBarbara BastleNorval BhendraCatherine BrotzmanElizabeth CelioJean CraneyPatricia deKovenAnne DeMuthThomas & Jane
Dunphy
Anne EvansJudy Fair-SpauldingLyman FlinnHerbert FloydAndrew & Audrey
Franklin
Susan GrayGloria GreenhillJames Grunbaum
Carole HallRobert HallameckCollier HandsVirginia HaysGeorge HetrickSara HinckleyMark HodgeJudith HortonBrenda JonesRichard Jong Mok
Kim
Frederic KottkeHal LitoffJanet McAlpinHarry McAndrewD. Michael McBrideMichael MeredithShirley MiollaJosie Moyer
Barbara Musicus
Robert PhillpsMary PodmostkoMichael ReynoldsMartin RitterMargaret TravisJennifer VanicaMargaret VerbleJanice WarnerStephen WasbyMargaret WeitzmannLisa WersalCatherine WilliamsMary ZerbyLocal native children in
Kivalina, Alaska by Jenni Monet
Circle of Life – Catches Bear & Judy
Adams, Rodney J. Addison, Richard & GloriaAdkinson, Maxwell K. Barnard, BarbaraBeasley, Joyce P. Beaulieu, Diane Ben Ari, RoyBenson, Sandra Carroll Berger, Bobby Bitner,Betty E. Blumenkamp, Charles Bowers, Dale E.Brand, William Brown, Gloria Burgess, PatriciaBurnet, Thomas Campbell, Lawrence Candel,Arthur Carter, Robert Carter, Mary Casmus,Ed Chasteen, Paul D.Clifton, Charles Cole,Janet M..Congero, Judith A. Day, Harvey A.Dennenberg, Gary Dickerhoof, StarrDormann, Patricia R. Duval, Noelle Edwards,Allison B. Emerson, Judy H. Fair-Spaulding,James K. Fee, Debra K. Frazier, Jan Freeman,Lyle Funderburk, Suzanne M.Gartz, LawrenceH.Geller, Deborah Ghoreyeb, EstelaGoldsmith, Louise Gomer Bangel, ArlineM.Goodrich, Bernard Gordon, Gene Grabau,Jean Gundlach, Merrill Hakim, Michael S.Hall,Margaret Hartnett, Theodora C. Haughton,Patricia Heidelberger, Alfred Hoose, Judith S.Horton, Veronica Ifill, Elizabeth A. Johnson,Vusama Kariba, Rose Ann Keeney, Emily S.Kirk, Betty Kleczy, Margo M. Kochruthe,Ellyne Krakower-Rice, Edward Kriege, JamesLangharst, Sharon Laughlin, Ingrid Leblanc,James Lehnerer, Frank O. Loveland, Richard B.Luers, Rima Lurie, Suzanne MacDonald,Patricia Marks-Greenfield, Marion McCollomHampton, Joseph McNamara, Stanley D.Metzger, Peter & Betty Meyer, GaryMontgomery, Leila V. Moore, Jeanne D.Morrel-Franklin, Jeanne Moskal, ShirleyNorton, Sara Osborne, Marc Pearce, MosesPeter, Randall Petersen, Denise Pfalzer, RosePilcarsky, Thelma Populus Gordon, B. J.Powell, Horace Raines, Robert & Mary Resnik,Maureen Ripley, Barbara H. Roberts, AndreaRobinsong, June B. Rosenthal, Keith I. Ross,William Rozier, Mary Sacher, B. W. Sampson,Peter E. Schmidt, LaRoy Seaver, MichaelSeeley, Charlotte Selver, Katey Lynn Simetra,Charles Smith, Kirk Sperry, Carolyn Staby,Herbert Stewart, James & Patricia Straus,Rennard Strickland, Michael & Carol Sullivan,Louis Tabois, Valeria Tenyak, CharlotteThompson, M. D. Turek, John H.Tyler, Rene'Vivo', William Joseph Wade, Ted Weitz, Robert
& Mary Wellman, Roger L. Welsch, GaryWhite, Karen Williams-Fast Horse, Marcel E.Wingate, David Yeoman, Wayne W. Zengel.
NARF Employee Endowment Giving -
Rose Cuny, John Echohawk, Gayla Fills Pipe,Kim Gottschalk, Heather Kendall Miller,Yvonne Knight, Melody McCoy, StevenMoore, Chris Pereira, Donald Ragona, RayRamirez, David Selden, Don Wharton.
Tsanáhwit Circle Members -  Jay Adler,
Cheyanne Alberti, Ken & Carol Ampel, DennisM. Anderson, MaryLou Aniballi, DaleArmitage, Jurgen Arnold, Holly Arrow, BarbaraA. Babcock, Carla Bagley, Kathy Bagwell, D.Michael Bailey, Colleen T. Baker, Jesus B.Barbarin, Cecil Barley, Nancy Barnett, Ruth M.Barr, Susan Battle, Gordon Denny Bell, JoyceBenedict, James Michael Bergstrom, JudyBerti, Joan L. Beuttler, Jefferson Bishop, JanineL. Blackburn, Craig Blaylock, Nanette M.Bohren, Robbin Bond, Fern Booth, JuneBordeaux, Richard Boylan, Joseph A. Braun,Margaret Brenner, Herbert Brentlinger, ElaineSue Brewington, John & Pat Brigham, Nina R.Brilli, Mary Anibal Brook, Michael & GeriBrown, Shelley Buck-Yeager, Maureen Burke,Perri W. Burritt, Jay Byerley, Sarah JaneyCallahan-Chin, Carol Campau, ThomasCampbell, Priscilla Carden, Carolyn Carter,Nason & Lisa Chehreh, Jane M. Christian,Helen Cooper, G. Copeland, Patty Crews, W.Croft, Ruth M. Cuprak, Elizabeth E. Cuprak,Linda Cwiak, Gwen C. Daum, NormanDavies, Barbara Dejaynes, Patricia deKoven,Cathy DeNu, Paul & Elizabeth Dombrosky,Ian Douglas, Phillip Douville, Sioux DuBois,Cheri Edwards, Daren & Amy Eilert, Cathy D.Ellis, J. Bruce Embury, Jennifer M. Erdmann,Judy H. Fair-Spaulding, Dorothy Blake Fardan,Judith Fazio, James Feichtl, Michael & EllenFinazzi, Marlene Fischer, Winn Flannery,Martha O. Ford, Marianne G. Freidberg,Veronica H. Frost, David Frye, Shirley J. Fultz,James M. Gambino, Diann Gamble, SuzanneM. Gartz, Lawrence H. Geller, Tracy Gibson,Carole Giles, James W. Gilkeson, Clara Gillis,
THE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
40NARF Acknowledgment of Contributions: Fiscal Year 2007Judy L. Goebel, Jean Gore, Larry & Melissa
Graykin, Barry C. Greenberg, MarthaGrudzien, Thomas P. Halliday, MarciaHalligan, Barbara E. Hann, Susan Hanna,Barbara A. Hargrove, Ronald Hartling,Margaret Hartnett, Bartlett Harvey, CarolHatfield, August L. Haynes, Diana R.Heyneker, Michael Hines, John F. Hodgson,Judith Hodson, Charles Holtzer, NancyHomyak, Judith S. Horton, Nicholas Horvath,Carol Houghton, Ethel E. Huebner, ClaytonHugo, Gary M. Hults, Charley F. Ice, John K.Ivie, Maria M. Januzys, Louise Johnson, EarlJohnson, Leslie G. Jones, Judith Karpilow,Stephen Kellogg, Jeralyn Keltonic, SherriKendrick, Grace M. Kepler, Susan Kepler,Laura Koester, Fred Kraeuter, Frances Kranz,Rollins E. Lambert, Risa Lange-Navarro,Dorothy N. Lear, Kurt Lehmann, John Lewis,James K. Lichtenstein, Leo Lirette, Hal Litoff,Dorothy H. Lockman, Rima Lurie, Mary-LeeLutz, Kimberly MacLoud, Jil MacMenamin,Richard A. Magyar, Ron Mahoney, Brigitta B.Mann, Miroslav & Anna Marek, MarcelleMartin, James Martin, Murray R. Matzner,Christopher McAuliffe, Donald J. McCaffrey,Ann McCarthy, Debbi McCoy, JamesMcDaniel, Michael McGee, Linda L. McGrew,LeRoy R. McLaughlin, Phyllis McNeill,Dorothy M. Meisky, Michael Paul Melendez,William G. Milligan, Jean S. Moore, ImogeneL. Morgan, Janis Morrison, Josie L. Moyer,Kayla Mullins, Kathleen A. Munsell, Rick J.Myers, Wendy Nash, Miriam Nathenson, RobNorris, Lucas & Joan F. Olguin, Patricia A.Opaskar, James & Rachel Osborne, Doris B.Palmer, Joyce Pappas, David C. Parachini,Toddy Perryman, Anna Pfeifer, Margaret L.Phillips, Jacqueline Pine, Gerald & AntoinetteA. Pollack, Michael Porlides, Michael Price,Linda J. Proctor, Timothy S. Raab, NapoleonA. Rahim, John L. Reed, Robert & MaryResnik, Thursa A. Revenaugh, Patrice A. Riley,George Rine, Linda Robinson, Ydameh Roig,Jan Roome, Christine Rosen, Stephanie Rossi,Ralph Rossilli, Jay Rubenstein, Ronald Ruble,Ruth M. C. Ruby, David H. & Adrienne Ruud,Theodore Sahl, Marge Salo, Edmond &Brietta Savoie, Mary Schappell, Gerald &
Karen Schuler, David Schwien, Shirley C.Seagren, Joanne M. Seymour, Susan Sherer,Freda Silver, Marie Simirenko, Pat Simons,Joan Slebos, Walter J. Smith, Shirley Sneed,Marilyn Snider, Jerry D. & Rita Spalding,Esther Span, Paul Spicer, Mary Anne Stafford,Stephen & Karen Strom, William Stuart,Elizabeth Szawlowski, Patricia P. Taylor, LauraTeague, Paul Theodore, Douglas R.Thompson, Charlotte Thompson, DiannaTobler, Janice Tonietto, Rebecca Townsend,Richard C. VandenHeuvel, Montez Vaught,Chrissi Vergoglini, Kristy Visser, R. Wall, LynnM. Waugh, Cecelia M. Welenowski, DeborahWilker, Holly A. Williams, Arnold Wilson,Margaret Wilson, Mauri Wilson, Roger Wise,Geoffrey & Mary Wold, Lisabeth Leigh Wolf,Andrew Kerry Wolfe, Jean L. Woodman, Jim A.Yellow Horse, Pamela  Zawila.
Special Events
NARF gratefully honors our many friends and
partners who sponsored and supported our spe-cial events in 2007.  Thank you for your supportand for caring so deeply about Indian rights,laws and issues.  NARF would like to give specialacknowledgment and thanks to our major eventsponsors in the last fiscal year:
First Annual Visions for the Future
Boulder Art Show – Turquoise Sponsors:
Belgarde Enterprises, Inez C. Moss Family ofPechanga Band of Luiseño Mission Indians;Granite Sponsors: The Ungar Foundation, John
Bevan, Republic of Boulder; Flint Sponsors:
Eugene & Emily Grant Family Foundation,Brickmill Marketing Services.
Honoring Our Leaders & Building
Partnerships for the Future of IndianCountry Dinner, Santa Fe, NM – Merrill
Lynch, Barona Band of Mission Indians,Cabinet Secretary Benny Shendo, NewMexico Department of Indian Affairs.
ANNUAL REPORT 2007416th Annual Visions for the Future
Benefit Art Auction, Santa Fe, NM –Turquoise Sponsors: Cow Creek Band of
Umpqua Tribe of Indians, Barona Band ofMission Indians; Juniper Sponsors: Miccosukee
Resort & Gaming, Fort McDowell YavapaiTribe, Millberg Weiss LLP; Sage Sponsors:
Merrill Lynch, John Bevan, Quadriga Art, Inc.,Americans for Indian Opportunity; Saguaro
Sponsors: Gary Farmer Gallery, KUNM Radio;
Piñon Sponsors: Kogovsek & Associates,
Colusa Casino Resort, Jeff Bosch, Richard JongKim; Santa Fe Donating Artists (in-kind):
Fernando Benally, David Bischoff, VinceBomberry, Quanah Parker Burgess, SheenaCain, Martin Casillas, Gloria Cunningham,Kathy Daniels, Duane Dudley, Bunky Echo-Hawk,Sam English, Fabian Fontenelle, Jeana Francisof Taste Twist Media, Melanie Fredericks,Happy Frejo, Eric Ginsberg, John Gonzales,Natani Gourneau, Bernie Granados, SuenHaakenson Jr., Joy Harjo, Andrea Hill, RanceHood, Michael Horse, Jesse "Sonny" Howell,Jim Jackson, Stephanie Jerome, Daniel Jim,Janice Black Elk Jim, Brenda Kennedy, KimKnife Chief, Heidi Kummli, Alyssa Macy,Daniel McCoy, Cara McDonald, ShirleyMiolla, Shelley Morningsong, Nidichi, Na NaPing, Liz Nicholas, Eric Bacon Otter, JerryPardilla, Marilyn Paul, Quese Imc, Jaune Quick-To- See-Smith, Ryan Red Corn, J.D. Rines,Andrew Rodriguez, Eddie Running Wolf, HarrySandoval, Ely Secody and Estun-Bah, TrinaSecody, Neal Ambrose Smith, Abby Stewart,Richard Tsosie, Billy Soza Warsoldier, Zola.  
In-Kind Contributions – Drew Allen, Apple
Reese Hand Made Soaps (Autumn Pereira),American Indian College Fund, Americans forIndian Opportunity, Randy Bardwell, Barlow’sPremium Cigars & Pipes, BasementalismRadio 1190, Bernie's Route 66 Motorcycles,Patton Boggs of Washington, D.C., TheBoulder Outlook Hotel, Andrew Bowers,Donovan (Tex) & Lisa Brown, Buffalo NickelPress, Caddo Solutions, Pat Cantley, FredCantu, Elbridge Coochise, Joe Cooper, TheDaily Camera, DJ Lazy Eyes and DJ Thoughtof Basementalism Radio, Michael Chapman,
The Colorado Daily, Conor O’Neil’s, KennethSwift Eagle Custalow, DemockrateesDrummond Woodsum MacMahon ofPortland, ME, Bunky Echo-Hawk, LucilleEchohawk, Eight Northern Indian PueblosCouncil, Espanola’s Best Autos, Ann Estin,FRMF Choppers, Fine Earth, Doug Foote, FourWinds Trading Company, Billy Frank, CarlaFredericks, Brian Frejo/Culture Shock Camp,Gary Farmer Gallery, Connie Ge, MelissaGerson, Golden Bear Bikes, Rebecca Martinez-Grandbois, Great Harvest Bread Company,Jim Gray, Ha-pah-shu-tse/RedCorn NativeFoods, Carly Hare, Lisa Hertz, James Travel,Jicarilla Apache Tribe, Juanita’s Mexican Food,Leanin' Tree Gifts & Cards, Leatherworks inDeVargas Mall, Alyssa Macy, Monica Martens,Mazatzal Hotel & Casino, Daniel McCoy, CaraMcDonald, Peter & Betty Meyer, MillenniumHotel, Jenni Monet, Marcin Mroz, MudmavenDesigns (Christine Pereira), Paul Ninham,Ohkay Owingeh Casino Resort & Hotel,Anthony Pico, Joan Policastri, Pure Water,Quese Imc, Carmen Ramirez, Red HandMedia, Salon Blue 22, Santa Fe Arts, Santa FeHarley Davidson, Audra Schaefer, BrettShelton, Karla Partee-Shephard, CharmaineShue, Silverwave Records, Rebekah Steers,Jennifer Stevens, Sundance Photography, JohnTennant, Warren Miller Entertainment, EliseWilkinson, Jim Yellowhawk.
Boulder-Denver Advisory Committee –
Lucille A. Echohawk, Thomas W. Fredericks,David Getches, Ava Hamilton, JeanneWhiteing, Charles Wilkinson.
Federated Workplace Campaigns
Thank you to the thousands of federal, state,municipal and private sector employeesthroughout the country who through theirpayroll deduction plans contributed $40,331in fiscal year 2007.
Federal Programs – Administration for
Native Americans, Bureau of Indian Affairs,Department of Education, Department ofJustice.
THE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND
42NARF Acknowledgment of Contributions: Fiscal Year 2007NARF receives contributions from foundations,
corporations, religious organizations, tribesand Native organizations, bequests and trusts,benefactors, private donations, and in-kindcontributions. Below are descriptions ofNARF’s donor programs and additional waysyou can get involved.
Peta Uha Membership – Peta Uha in the
Lakota (Sioux) language means firekeeper.One that honors tribal members who made asolemn commitment to ensure that thesacred flame, source of light, heat and energyfor his people, always be kept burning. Likethe firekeepers of old, members of the PetaUha Council can demonstrate constancy andvigilance by helping to ensure that the criticalwork of the Native American Rights Fundcontinues to move ever forward.  For benefitsassociated with each level of Peta Uha mem-bership, please contact Donald Ragona,303.447.8760 or e-mail him atpetauha@narf.org.
Tsanáhwit Circle – Tsanáhwit is a Nez Perce
word meaning equal justice.  Tsanáhwit Circlemembers provide a regular source of incometo NARF by pledging and making monthlycontributions at any level of your choice. You may sign up to receive monthly pledgereminders in the mail or your credit card maybe billed automatically.
Otu’han Gift Membership – Otu’han is
the Lakota Sioux word translated as giveaway.Otu’han is a memorial and honoring gift program modeled after the tradition of theIndian giveaway in which items of value aregathered over a long period of time to begiven away in honor of birthdays, marriages,anniversaries, and in memory of a departedloved one.
Circle of Life – NARF’s Circle of Life are
donors who provide a lasting legacy to theNative American Rights Fund by includingNARF in estate planning or deferred gifts. The circle is an important symbol to NativeAmericans representing unity, strength andthe eternal continuity of life. These lastinggifts help ensure the future of NARF and ourIndian clients nationwide.Endowments – NARF has two established
endowments, the 21st Century Endowmentand the Living Waters Endowment. The 21stCentury Endowment is a permanent fund inwhich the principal is invested and interestincome is used for NARF’s programs. Thisendowment is designed to provide a perma-nent, steady income that can support theever-increasing costs of providing legal representation to our tribal clients.
The Living Waters Endowment directly funds
the 21st Century Endowment. It allowsdonors to honor friends and loved ones bymaking an endowment gift of $10,000 ormore.  By designating a gift to either endow-ment, you can be sure that your contributionwill continue to generate annual funds in perpetuity. Endowment supporters are recog-nized on a special wall plaque displayed atNARF. Supporters will also receive a memorialpiece for their home and be acknowledged inNARF’s annual report.
Workplace Campaigns – NARF is a member
of America’s Charities, a national workplacegiving federation. Giving through your work-place is as easy as checking off NARF’s box onthe Combined Federal Campaign (CFC)pledge form authorizing automatic payrolldeduction.  NARF is also a member ofCommunity Shares of Colorado (CSC), member #5037.
Matching Gifts – Currently, more than 25
foundations and corporations nationwidemake matching gifts to NARF on a regularbasis.  Employers match their employees’contributions sometimes doubling or eventripling their donation. Please check with your human resources office and request amatching gift form.
E-Action – Sign up for our e-action network
by providing NARF with your email address .This is a great way to get periodic caseupdates, calls-to-action, special events infor-mation, invitations and other activities. Youre-mail address is confidential and we will notshare it with any outside sources.  For furtherinformation about any of the programs orservices, please contact NARF’s DevelopmentDepartment at 303-447-8760.  Thank you.
ANNUAL REPORT 200743Show Your Support in NARF’s programs   
CORPORATE OFFICERS
John E. Echohawk(Pawnee) ExecutiveDirector/Attorney
K. Jerome Gottschalk
Litigation ManagementCommittee Member/Attorney
Yvonne T. Knight (Ponca-
Creek) LitigationManagement CommitteeMember/Attorney
Natalie Landreth
(Chickasaw) LitigationManagementCommittee/Attorney
Donald M. Ragona
(Mattinecock/OglalaLakota) Director ofDevelopment
Ray Ramirez 
Secretary/ Editor/TechnicalWriter
Clela Rorex 
Chief Financial Officer/LawOffice Administrator
BOULDER MAIN OFFICE
STAFF
John E. Echohawk
(Pawnee) ExecutiveDirector/Attorney
Amy Bowers (Yurok) AttorneyWalter R. Echo-Hawk
(Pawnee) Attorney
K. Jerome Gottschalk
Attorney
David Gover (Pawnee/
Choctaw) Attorney
Yvonne T. Knight (Ponca-
Creek) Attorney
Melody McCoy
(Cherokee) Attorney
Steven C. Moore
Attorney
Mark Tilden (Navajo)
Attorney
Donald R. Wharton
Attorney
Eric Anderson
Legal Assistant
David Bernie (Yankton
Sioux) Office ServicesAssistant
Rose Cuny (Oglala Lakota)
Office Manager
Crystal Echo Hawk
(Pawnee) AssistantDevelopment Director
Gayla Fills Pipe (Oglala
Lakota) ReceptionistNARF STAFF
THE NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND - ANNUAL REPORT 2007
44Michael Kennedy
Assistant Controller
Mireille Martinez
Development ProjectsCoordinator
Christine Pereira
Micro Computer Specialist
Donald M. Ragona
(Mattinecock/OglalaLakota) Director ofDevelopment
Ray Ramirez 
Editor/TechnicalWriter/Public Relations
Jennifer Redbone
(Apache/Comanche/Kiowa) Development StaffAssistant
Clela Rorex
Law Office Administrator
Joanne Soklin
Legal Assistant
Debbie Raymond-Thomas
(Navajo)Assistant Controller
Jennie Tsikewa (Zuni)
AccountantNATIONAL INDIAN
LAW LIBRARY
David Selden
Librarian
Monica Martens
Assistant Law Librarian
ANCHORAGE OFFICE
STAFF
Heather Kendall-Miller
(Athabascan)Attorney
Natalie Landreth
(Chickasaw)Attorney
Anne Thomas
Legal Assistant
WASHINGTON, D.C.
OFFICE STAFF
Richard Guest
Attorney
Dawn Baum (Mole Lake
Chippewa/Menominee)Attorney
Darian Balcom
Legal Assistant1506 Broadway, Boulder, CO 80302
303-447-8760 • http://www.narf.orgNNaattiivvee  AAmmeerriiccaann  RRiigghhttss  FFuunndd