15 FACTS ABOUT THE
In the aftermath of the September 11, 2001 attacks, the CIA built a torture program.
Between 2002 and 2008, it held at least 119 Muslim men captive in secret “black site” prisons around the world 
and subjected them to abuses that many Americans rightly associate with foreign dictators, tyrants and terrorists. 
The program was built largely by two contracts psychologists, James Mitchell and Bruce Jessen. Neither had any 
experience as an interrogator, any knowledge of al Qaeda, or any science to justify their methods. The torture tactics 
they developed included chaining men to the ceiling, naked except for a diaper, in the dark with music blaring, 
sometimes for days on end; stuffing them for hours into (at times insect-filled) boxes the size of small dog crates or 
in the shape of coffins; and drowning them, just not to the point of death. Mitchell, Jessen and the CIA called this 
torture “enhanced interrogation” and said it would produce unique, otherwise unobtainable intelligence that would 
save lives. It did not.
For five years, the Senate intelligence committee investigated the torture program by reviewing over six million 
pages of the CIA’s own records, including operational cables, reports, internal memos, emails, letters, briefing 
materials, intelligence products, classified testimony, summaries of more than 100 CIA inspector general interviews 
with CIA personnel, and other records. The investigation resulted in a 6,700-page oversight report, the longest in 
Senate history. It has become known as the Torture Report. In late December, 2014, the intelligence committee 
released a 525 page, redacted executive summary of the Torture Report. The rest remains classified.
The following are fifteen facts about the CIA torture program, the intelligence committee’s investigation, and related 
developments since, including some eye-opening excerpts from the Torture Report’s executive summary.
Note: Mitchell and Jessen are referred to in the Torture Report by the pseudonyms SWIGERT and DUNBAR.
The Torture Report tells the story of the CIA torture program essentially in the CIA’s own words. That is to say, 
the Report is derived from CIA records, including but not limited to operational cables, reports, internal memos, 
emails, letters, briefing materials, intelligence products, classified testimony and summaries of more than 100 CIA 
inspector general interviews with CIA personnel. Almost every fact in the Torture Report is sourced to a CIA record, 
which is why it contains nearly 38,000 footnotes. It is also why the Report can fairly be said to have provided an 
objective and unvarnished recounting of what the CIA did and the consequences that flowed. 
Here is just one example, related to torture’s efficacy and the way in which the CIA misrepresented—in this case, to 
the President of the United States—whether torture was working:
 
 
FACT  1The Torture Report is the story of the CIA torture 
program told through the CIA’s own records, 
which the public was never meant to see.
According to the CIA, these are some of the abuses to which Abu Jafar al-Iraqi was subjected:
 
Because the Torture Report was developed this way—on the basis of the CIA’s own records—it is not surprising 
that a still-secret internal CIA review evidently of those same records (known as the Panetta Review) reached 
many of the same findings as the Torture Report. What is surprising, and deeply troubling, is that the CIA’s formal 
written response to the Torture Report, prepared long after the Panetta Review, differs from the Panetta Review 
in fundamental ways that paint the agency and the program in a far better light. In late 2014, former Senator Mark 
Udall, then a member of the Senate intelligence committee, described the Panetta Review as “a smoking gun.” 
 
There have been four votes in the Senate directly related to the Torture Report and the oversight investigation 
that produced it. Every vote has had both Democrat and Republican support, and all but one have been 
overwhelmingly bipartisan:
• In March 2009, the Senate intelligence committee voted 14-1 to launch an investigation into the torture 
program.
• In December 2012, the committee voted 9-6 to adopt the Torture Report, with one Republican member 
voting yes.
• In April 2014, the committee voted 11-3 to approve the Torture Report’s executive summary for 
declassification and public release, with three Republicans voting with the majority.
• In June 2015, the full Senate voted 78-21 in favor of legislation, co-sponsored by the late Senator John 
McCain and Senator Dianne Feinstein, that was developed as a response to the horrors revealed by the 
Torture Report’s executive summary and designed to prevent a return to anything like the CIA torture 
program. Thirty three Republican senators supported the legislation, which has since become law.
FACT  2Every vote in Congress related to the 
investigation into the CIA torture program was 
bipartisan.The CIA has always referred, at least publicly, to the torture tactics it employed as “enhanced interrogation.” Each 
technique itself was given a similarly innocuous sounding name: for example, “sleep deprivation, ” “cramped 
confinement” and “waterboarding.” In practice, “sleep deprivation” often meant chaining men to the ceiling, naked 
except for a diaper, in the dark with music blaring, sometimes for days on end; “cramped confinement” meant 
stuffing men for hours into (at times insect-filled) boxes the size of small dog crates or in the shape of coffins; and 
“waterboarding” meant actually drowning them, just not to the point of death. 
CIA interrogators also subjected detainees to abuses beyond those formally labeled “enhanced interrogation.” 
Some examples include: “rectal rehydration” (a form of rape accomplished by pumping fluid, or sometimes food, 
into a detainee’s rectum through a tube forced into his anus against his will); threating a detainee with a power 
drill; and dousing detainees with freezing cold water, which led to one detainee’s death.
Conditions of confinement also served as forms of torture and cruel treatment. As the CIA’s chief of interrogations 
told the CIA’s inspector general: “[DETENTION SITE COBALT] is good for interrogations because it is the closest 
thing he has seen to a dungeon, facilitating the displacement of detainee expectations.”
Although the CIA may not have known from the outset that these were the specific methods it would employ, 
officials there clearly knew the CIA would engage in torture because, months before the CIA took custody of its 
first detainee, CIA lawyers were researching legal defenses to torture. As the Torture Report explains:
 
 
FACT  3“Enhanced interrogation” was torture
and the CIA knew it.
In interviews with the CIA’s office of inspector general after torture had begun, James Pavitt, the CIA’s deputy 
director of operations, described possible public revelation of what the CIA was doing as “the CIA’s worst 
nightmare.” According to records of an interview with CIA director George Tenet himself, “Tenet believes that if the 
general public were to find out about this program, many would believe we are torturers.”CIA torture program victims have suffered permanent psychological and physical damage, as it should have been 
clear from the outset they would if subjected to “enhanced interrogation.” To take just three examples:  
• According to Dr. Sondra Crosby, a physician with deep expertise in torture and trauma evaluation, Abd 
al-Rahim al-Nashiri—whom Dr. Crosby has evaluated repeatedly—“presents as one of the most severely 
traumatized individuals I have ever seen, ” and “is most likely irreversibly damaged by torture that was 
unusually cruel and designed to break him.” The CIA tortured al-Nashiri extensively through methods 
including waterboarding, rape (euphemized as “rectal rehydration” or “rectal feeding”), and mock execution 
with both a handgun and a power drill. In describing detainees at one of the black sites at which Mr. al-al-
Nashiri was held, a CIA interrogator said “[‘they] literally looked like [dogs] that had been kenneled.’ When 
the doors to their cells were opened, ‘they cowered.’”
• Abu Zubaydah suffers from permanent brain damage, seizures and loss of vision in his left eye. According 
to internal CIA communications, CIA officers were well aware that these types of consequences, and 
potentially more serious ones, were foreseeable if they subjected Zubaydah to the torture being proposed, 
and they sought to devise ways in advance to shield themselves from accountability:
 
 
FACT  4The CIA torture program caused profound, and 
in numerous cases permanent, psychological 
and physical harm to its victims.
 The CIA repeatedly slammed Zubaydah against a concrete wall, locked him in “confinement boxes” for 
more than 12 days over a 20-day period, and waterboarded him to the point that he “became completely 
unresponsive with bubbles rising through his open, full mouth.” Some of the sessions were so gruesome 
that the CIA reported officers being “profoundly affected, ” in some cases “to the point of tears and choking 
up, ” and that several personnel were “likely to elect transfer” if the torture continued. 
• Gul Rahman was killed. According to the CIA’s own review and autopsy, he likely died from hypothermia 
after being stripped naked from the waist down and shackled to the wall such that he was forced to sit on 
the bare, freezing cold concrete floor overnight. Nobody involved in Rahman’s death was reprimanded, and 
at least one CIA officer was given a performance bonus: 
 
To this day, both Zubaydah and al-Nashiri—like other torture program victims—remain captive at the Guantanamo 
prison with no current prospect of release. The prolonged, indefinite detention they continue to endure exacerbates 
the trauma they have experienced. None of them has access to rehabilitation services, or, in many cases, to 
adequate medical care more generally.
Once the CIA began taking custody of detainees, it turned immediately to torture on the uneducated assumption—
peddled by contract psychologists James Mitchell and Bruce Jessen—that torture was necessary to produce 
actionable intelligence that would save lives. It was not, and did not. 
Detainees fabricated information just to stop the pain. For example:
 
Similarly:
 
Detainees were tortured notwithstanding interrogators telling CIA headquarters that the detainees were 
cooperating and the interrogators did not believe they possessed the information headquarters wanted:
FACT  5 Torture did not work.
In the end, none of the significant intelligence gathering “successes” the CIA attributed to torture was, in fact, 
a result of torture. The Torture Report “reviews 20 of the most frequent or prominent examples of reported 
intelligence successes that the CIA has attributed to the use of its ‘enhanced interrogation techniques, ’” including 
“terrorist plots thwarted, terrorists captured, and the collection of other terrorism-related intelligence.”
In some cases, there was no relationship between the cited counterterrorism success and any information 
provided by detainees during or after the use of the EITs. In the remaining cases, the CIA inaccurately claimed 
that specific, otherwise unavailable information was acquired from a CIA detainee “as a result” of the EITs, 
when in fact the information was either (1) corroborative of information already available to the Intelligence 
Community from sources other than the CIA detainee (and was therefore not “otherwise unavailable”); or (2) 
acquired from the CIA detainee prior to the use of the EITs.
None of this is surprising. As a group of the world’s leading interrogation researchers and experts on interrogation 
has explained, “harsh interrogation methods (including both physical and psychological coercion) are ineffective, 
particularly when compared with alternative, evidence-based approaches that promote cooperation, enhance 
recall of relevant and reliable information, and facilitate assessments of credibility.” Indeed, a report from the U.S. 
government’s elite, inter-agency interrogation component—the High Value Detainee Interrogation Group—has 
determined the same:
Based on the comprehensive research and field validation studies detailed in this report, it is concluded that 
the most effective practices for eliciting accurate information and actionable intelligence are non-coercive, 
rapport-based, information-gathering interviewing and interrogation methods. 
The fact that lawyers in the Department of Justice signed off on “enhanced interrogation” does not mean that it 
was “legal.” Torture was just as unlawful then as it is now. Here’s why:
First, the idea that “enhanced interrogation” was anything other than torture is absurd (see Fact 3 and Fact 4). 
Second, both U.S. domestic law and international law—in particular, the Convention against Torture and Other 
Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment—categorically prohibit torture, everywhere and at all 
times, both in peace and in war. 
Third, the legal opinions that authorized “enhanced interrogation”–which have become known as the torture 
memos—were built on a foundation of lies. Specifically, the memos’ authors say over and over that their legal 
analysis is contingent upon the “facts” as described to them by the CIA. The two CIA-provided “facts” that the 
authors relied on most heavily, and that proved most consequential to their conclusions, were that torture was 
working and that it was medically safe. Both were untrue. (See Fact 5 and Fact 4).
 
Finally, the torture memos were so irresponsible and/or poorly reasoned that the Justice Department eventually 
withdrew most of them. Upon taking office, President Obama prohibited government lawyers from relying on any 
of them going forward, and his executive order remains in force today.
FACT  6The CIA torture program
was never legal.The torture program was built largely by two contracts psychologists, James Mitchell and Bruce Jessen, neither 
of whom had any experience as an interrogator, any knowledge of al Qaeda, any relevant regional or cultural 
experience, or any science to justify their methods. They were allowed both to conduct interrogations and to evaluate 
the efficacy of their own torture tactics. This obvious conflict of interest was raised repeatedly by CIA personnel:
 
 
According to senior operators of the torture program, the CIA’s own officers were similarly unqualified and 
unprepared for the mission with which they were tasked. For example:
 
FACT  7The CIA torture program
was unprofessional and inept.
The chief of the CIA’s Rendition Detention and Interrogation Group told the CIA’s office of the inspector general: 
 
A senior interrogator expressed similar concerns to the inspector general’s office:
  
With respect to personnel at one of the CIA’s black site prisons—“DETENTION SITE BLACK”—the chief of base 
there wrote:
Management and oversight of the torture program were so deficient that at one point, almost two years after 
the CIA took custody of its first detainee, a CIA officer overseeing a black site in one country informed CIA 
headquarters:
The torture program also caused strategic damage to the United States. Alberto Mora, former Navy General Counsel 
during the George W. Bush administration, worked with a team of researchers at the Carr Center for Human Rights 
Policy at the Harvard Kennedy School to identify and assess those strategic costs. He and his team concluded: 
“…Washington’s use of torture greatly damaged national security. It incited extremism in the Middle East, 
hindered cooperation with U.S. allies, exposed American officials to legal repercussions, undermined U.S. 
diplomacy, and offered a convenient justification for other governments to commit human rights abuses.”
Here are three (of many) specific examples of the authors’ evidence in support of that conclusion:
• “The torture revelations … made it harder for the United States’ to recruit potential Iraqi allies…. As General 
Stanley McChrystal, the former head of the U.S. Joint Special Operations Command, acknowledged in a 
2013 interview with this magazine, ‘The thing that hurt us more than anything else in the war in Iraq was 
Abu Ghraib.’ He continued: ‘The Iraqi people . . . felt it was proof positive that the Americans were doing 
exactly what Saddam Hussein had done—that it was proof [that] everything they thought bad about the 
Americans was true.’ Without much cooperation from local populations, coalition forces found it difficult to 
develop the kind of intelligence sources necessary to identify and target insurgents.”
• “In 2005, a U.S. military attorney told [Mr. Mora] that the British army had captured an enemy combatant in 
Basra, Iraq, but released him because it did not have adequate detention facilities and did not trust U.S. or 
Iraqi forces to treat him humanely (aiding and abetting torture is a crime under British law). Later, in 2005, 
Australian, British, Canadian, and New Zealand military lawyers approached Mora at a military conference 
sponsored by U.S. Pacific Command in Singapore and advised him that their countries’ cooperation with 
the United States ‘across the range of military, intelligence, and law enforcement activities in the war on 
terror would continue to decline’ so long as Washington persisted in using torture.”
• “According to State Department cables made public by WikiLeaks, in the spring of 2006, a group of 
senior U.S. officials gathered in Kuwait to discuss how to stem the flow of foreign fighters into Iraq. Their 
conclusion was startling: that the mistreatment of detainees at Abu Ghraib and Guantánamo Bay was ‘the 
single most important motivating factor’ in persuading foreign jihadists to join the war. U.S. Senator John 
McCain reached a similar conclusion in 2008, when he asked a captured senior al Qaeda leader what had 
allowed the group to establish a foothold in Iraq. ‘Two things, ’ the prisoner replied, according to a State 
Department cable. ‘The chaos after the success of the initial invasion, and the greatest recruiting tool: 
Abu Ghraib.’ Of course, the claims of a captured terrorist are easy to discount. But in 2009, a Saudi official 
echoed this sentiment, when, according to another cable, he concurred with the Obama administration’s 
decision not to release any more photos of Abu Ghraib, alleging that when the scandal first broke, Saudi 
authorities arrested 250 people attempting to leave the country to join extremist groups.”
FACT  8The CIA torture program caused strategic 
damage to the United States and jeopardized
U.S. national security.The CIA paid contract psychologists and torture program architects James Mitchell and Bruce Jessen over $80 
million. Torture program non-personnel costs exceeded $300 million. The CIA then spent nearly $40 million in 
an unprecedented effort to keep documents away from the Senate intelligence committee during its oversight 
investigation:
Rather than provide documents for the committee to review in its own secure Senate office—as is standard 
practice—the CIA insisted on establishing a separate leased facility and a “stand-alone” computer network for 
committee use. 
The CIA hired teams of contractors to review every document, multiple times, to ensure they were relevant and 
not potentially subject to a claim of executive privilege. Only after those costly reviews were the documents 
then provided to committee staff. 
Chairman Feinstein wrote several letters objecting to this unprecedented action, pointing out the wasted 
expense and unnecessary delays. Later, this arrangement at the off-site CIA facility allowed CIA personnel 
to remove documents it had provided for the committee’s use and to inappropriately gain access to the 
committee staff’s computer network.
FACT  9The CIA torture program was 
wasteful.The Senate intelligence committee’s investigation into the torture program began because the committee 
discovered that the CIA had videotapes of its interrogations, and that it had destroyed them. Why? According to 
Jose Rodriguez, chief of the CIA’s counterterrorism center at the time, what was on those tapes was so profoundly 
disturbing that Rodriguez feared that their public release represented “a threat” to the CIA. Michael Morell, who 
would eventually become deputy director of the CIA, echoed Rodriguez’s concern in his memoir: “There was 
no doubt that waterboarding did not make a pretty picture, and publication of those images would have had a 
devastating effect on CIA, damaged the reputation of the United States abroad, and undermined the security 
of US officials serving abroad.” Even contract psychologist and torture program architect James Mitchell—who 
personally waterboarded Abu Zubaydah—says he “had a visceral reaction to the tapes. I thought they were ugly.” 
He compared them to videos of “aborting babies on YouTube.”
Perhaps this is why the cable authorizing the tapes’ destruction, which was sent by Rodriguez and drafted by 
his then-chief of staff (and now CIA director) Gina Haspel, specified using an “industrial-strength shredder to do 
the deed” so as to leave “nothing to chance.” In terms of timing, the CIA’s records make clear that the tapes were 
destroyed to avoid Congress getting their hands on them: 
 
The tapes’ destruction was only the first of many steps the CIA would take to hide the truth about the torture 
program, both during and after. Below are just three examples.
 
The CIA concealed from the President that torture was not working: 
 
 
FACT  10The CIA went to extraordinary lengths to cover up 
the torture program’s futility and brutality, including 
repeated misrepresentations to senior executive 
branch officials, Congress, and the public.
The CIA told the White House, the Department of Justice, Congress and the American public that Abu Zubaydah’s 
torture produced critical intelligence that thwarted a terrorist plot. And yet, the chief of the Abu Zubaydah task 
force made clear to colleagues internally that was not the case:
 
 
In 2008, the Senate intelligence committee held a hearing on the legal memos relating to the torture program, 
to which committee members had been provided limited access. The committee sent the CIA written questions 
following the hearing, including on testimony the witnesses had given regarding torture’s efficacy. The CIA drafted 
a response that would have finally come clean on its misrepresentations about Abu Zubaydah, but never sent it:
 
The CIA’s misrepresentations were incorporated into what was essentially a public relations campaign for the 
media. As the Torture Report’s executive summary finds: “The CIA’s Office of Public Affairs and Senior CIA officials 
coordinated to share classified information on the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program to select members 
of the media to counter public criticism, shape public opinion, and avoid congressional action to restrict the CIA’s 
detention and interrogation authorities and budget.” In 2005, shortly before being interviewed by a media outlet, 
the deputy director of the CIA’s counterterrorism center wrote the following to a colleague:
In November 2001, President George W. Bush issued an order establishing military commissions to prosecute 
those captured in the “war on terror.” Eighteen years later, the commissions have obtained only one conviction 
that has survived review by the federal appellate courts. The defendants who are alleged to have borne the most 
significant responsibility for 9/11 have not yet even gone to trial. Just from 2012 to 2018, the defense department 
reports that it has spent $679.6 million on the commissions, and “plans to spend almost $1.0 billion more from fiscal 
year 2019 through at least fiscal year 2023.”
As legal expert Steve Vladeck has explained, a significant reason for the military commissions’ failure is that “they 
couldn’t escape the shadow of CIA torture of many of the defendants, which continues to play a role in so many 
of the evidentiary disputes in these cases.” Secrecy in particular—the government’s ongoing efforts to prevent 
any more information about CIA torture from seeing the light of day—has handcuffed the commissions. One 
interrogator foreshadowed exactly this problem during the torture program’s early days:    
 
For these and other reasons, September 11 Families for Peaceful Tomorrows—an organization founded by family 
members of those killed on September 11th—is seeking to end the military commissions.
FACT  11The CIA torture program has prevented justice 
for the families of those killed during the 
September 11, 2001 attacks.
Notwithstanding United States federal law making torture a crime, nobody has been charged in connection with 
the CIA torture program. What is worse, architects and operators of the program have risen to prestigious—and 
often powerful—positions in the government, the federal judiciary, the private sector, and academia. For example:
Gina Haspel, who ran a CIA black site where both Abu Zubaydah and Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri were tortured, and 
who was deeply complicit in destroying CIA videotapes of that torture, now runs the CIA. A majority of the same 
Senate intelligence committee that investigated the torture program, developed the Torture Report, and released 
the report’s executive summary supported her nomination and voted to confirm her.
James Pavitt, the CIA’s deputy director of operations during the torture program, is a Senior Advisor at the 
prestigious Scowcroft Group, a global business advisory firm. He also sits on the Board of Directors of CACI, a 
U.S.-based government contractor with $5 billion in 2019 annual revenue that is being sued for its participation in 
the torture of four Iraqi men at Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq.
John Yoo, Jay Bybee, and Steven Bradbury were all principal authors of the “torture memos”—the legal opinions 
authorizing CIA torture. In 2003, Bybee was appointed, and Senate confirmed, as a federal judge to the Ninth 
Circuit Court of Appeals, which is one of the 12 most powerful courts in the United States federal court system, 
sitting just below the Supreme Court. Yoo is the Emanuel Heller Professor of Law and director of the Korea Law 
Center, the California Constitution Center, and the Law Program in Public Law and Policy at the University of 
California at Berkley Law School. In 2017, Steven Bradbury was appointed, and Senate confirmed, as the general 
counsel for the Department of Transportation. 
 
FACT  12Architects and operators of the CIA torture program 
have risen to prestigious positions in government, the 
private sector, the federal judiciary and academia. On December 9, 2014, then-Senate intelligence committee chair Dianne Feinstein filed the final, nearly 6,700-page 
Torture Report with the Senate. She sent copies to the heads of relevant executive branch agencies the next day, 
making clear that she wanted as many government officials as possible to read it “to help make sure that this 
experience is never repeated.” 
And yet, when the Justice Department, State Department, Defense Department and CIA received their respective 
copies of the Torture Report, each immediately locked it away. According to a government court filing six weeks 
later, “[n]either DOJ nor DOS, moreover, has even opened the package with the [compact disc] containing the full 
Report. And CIA and DoD have carefully limited access to and made only very limited use of the report.” The State 
Department went so far as to mark the envelope containing the report “Congressional Record – Do Not Open, Do 
Not Access.” The FBI did not even retrieve its copy, which was sent to the Justice Department, much less review it. 
What is worse, with limited exception each of these agencies subsequently returned its copy to the Senate 
intelligence committee in response to a demand by Senator Richard Burr, who became committee chairman in 
January 2015. There is no evidence that anyone in the executive branch made a meaningful attempt (if any) to read 
the report prior to its return.  
How this episode played out in the office of the CIA inspector general is illustrative. In October 2017, the Senate 
intelligence committee held a hearing on Christopher Sharpley’s nomination to become the next CIA inspector 
general. Sharpley had been the CIA’s acting inspector general since early 2015 and was the official who decided to 
comply with Senator Burr’s demand on behalf of that office. When this fact arose during the hearing, Senator Ron 
Wyden was not impressed: 
“If your office and the committee are going to be erasing historical records because somebody down the road 
is unhappy with them,” he said, “our country is going to need a lot of erasers.” Wyden worried aloud about 
the precedent Sharpley’s decision set, and was so exasperated by the nominee’s refusal to acknowledge 
as much that he spontaneously announced his intention to vote “no” from the dais. Sen. Martin Heinrich 
(D-N.M.) followed up by pointing out that the report includes chapters dealing specifically with the IG’s office, 
then asked Sharpley if he at least “consider[ed] reading the report before returning [it]…so you could do your 
job more effectively?” “No, I did not,” Sharply replied. He conceded that he could have done so, but “chose 
not to.” Ranking Member Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.) took a moment to remind Sharply of the obvious: “The 
point of distributing [the report] to the departments was in the hope they would read it, not look at it as some 
poison document, and learn from it.” 
To this day, the Torture Report remains out of reach of almost anybody who could make productive use of it. This 
includes the detainees (and their lawyers) whose torture is detailed in the Report.
FACT  13Almost nobody in the executive branch has 
read a single word of the Torture Report, and 
the report’s fate remains uncertain.People from all walks of life and from across the political spectrum oppose torture. Here are just some of the 
stakeholders and communities that have publicly expressed their opposition to torture:
• Military leaders
• Interrogators
• Families of 9/11 victims
• Faith leaders
• Diplomats and foreign policy leaders
• Medical professionals
• Elected officials
FACT  14Retired military leaders, former interrogators, medical 
professionals, faith leaders, families of those who died 
on 9/11, and many others—from across the political 
spectrum—are opposed to torture.As a champion of and a State party to the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman 
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the United States has embraced and reinforced obligations to prevent 
acts of torture; to investigate, prosecute and punish its perpetrators; to exclude evidence obtained under torture; 
and to refuse to send a person to a place where he or she would be at risk of being tortured. It has also assumed 
responsibility for ensuring that torture victims obtain redress and have an enforceable right to fair and adequate 
compensation, including the means for as full rehabilitation as possible. 
After the grievous failures to live up to these commitments after 9/11 and continued support for such practices 
from some quarters, the next President must meaningfully commit to the United States’ anti-torture obligations, 
including truth and accountability measures that still can, and should, be taken with respect to those subjected to 
the CIA torture program. Principal among these measures are:
• Declassify and release the full Torture Report.
• Redistribute the Torture Report throughout the executive branch and require government officials to read it 
and develop lessons learned.
• Exclude from her or his administration anyone involved in managing, directly carrying out, or providing 
legal arguments for the CIA torture program, or for torture in U.S. military custody.
• Acknowledge and apologize to torture program victims.
• Ensure that torture program victims obtain redress and have access to rehabilitation services in a manner 
in which those services can be effective.
FACT  15The next president can do a lot to
further truth, justice, and 
accountability for CIA torture.15 Facts about the CIA Torture Program
is produced by the Center for Victims of Torture.
www.cvt.org | Copyright © 2019 The Center for Victims of TortureThe Center for Victims of Torture heals 
the wounds of torture on individuals, 
their families and their communities and 
works to stop torture worldwide.CVT HEADQUARTERS
2356 University Ave W, Suite 430
Saint Paul, MN 55114
D.C. OFFICE
1015 15th Street NW, Suite 600
Washington, DC 20005