Annual
ReportJuly 1, 2008 – June 30, 2009Our Mission
The Center for Justice and Accountability is 
an international human rights organization dedicated to deterring torture and other severe human rights abuses around the world and advancing the rights of survivors to seek truth, justice, and redress.
CJA uses litigation to hold perpetrators 
individually accountable for human rights abuses, develop human rights law, and advance the rule of law in countries  transitioning from periods of abuse.From the Chair and the exeCutive direCtor
From the Chair and the exeCutive direCtor
We are pleased to present you with this report of our July 2008 – June 2009 activities 
and to mark CJA’s tenth anniversary. 
A decade ago, four visionaries — Jerry Gray, Paul Hoffman, Bill Schulz and Ralph Steinhardt — set 
about to create a new organization to help survivors of torture and other human rights abuses hold their perpetrators accountable in the courts. They shared the concern that the U.S. should not be a safe haven for human rights violators. They also shared the then revolutionary idea that U.S. courts could be used to seek reparations for survivors of human rights abuses. Ten years later, we are proud to report that CJA is realizing their vision of using national courts to hold human rights abusers accountable.
Our tenth anniversary year was one of  significant growth from both a programmatic and infrastructure 
perspective. On the program side, CJA and our pro bono co-counsel worked on thirteen civil and criminal law suits against 41 human rights abusers from eight countries. Our investigations docket included twelve investigations: two from Africa, four from Asia, three from Latin America and the Caribbean, one from the U.S. and two from the Middle East. We worked with a total of 151 clients, including 133 torture survivors and eleven relatives of people who were tortured or disappeared from twenty-one countries.
We filed the historic Jesuits Massacre Case before the Spanish National Court against fourteen former 
Salvadoran military officers for their role in the 1989 massacre of six Jesuits priests, their housekeeper and her daughter. That massacre was a defining moment in the twelve year civil war in El Salvador which took the lives of over 12,000 civilians. In another case which addressed abuses in El Salvador, our $6 million jury verdict against former Colonel Nicolas Carranza was upheld by the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals despite \the fact that the Government of El Salvador intervened on the side of the defendant.
The case against former Somali Minister of Defense Ali Samantar saw significant activity. In a stunning 
victory, the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals reinstated the case which had been dismissed by the lower  court on foreign sovereign immunity grounds. As most of you know, Samantar appealed that decision and the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to hear his appeal. This represents the first CJA case to be heard by the Supreme Court. Ten amicus briefs were filed in support of our clients, among them briefs from former diplomats, military officers, survivors of the Holocaust and Senator Arlen Specter, one of the original sponsors of the Torture Victim Protection Act. We were fortunate to work with wonderful co-counsel from Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP and Cooley Godward Kronish LLP on the briefs and argument. Oral argument was heard on March 3, 2010 and we expect a decision by the end of June.
We have continued to grow the transitional justice side of our program. For example, we assisted in 
the successful national court prosecution and appeal of Alberto Fujimori, the former president of Peru. In the end, Fujimori was convicted of crimes against humanity and the sentence of twenty-five years in prison was confirmed. We were also invited to participate as an international legal advisor for the Truth Commission of Ecuador. 
On the infrastructure side, we completed our first strategic plan, launched a new website and now have a 
staff of twelve dedicated human rights defenders including six attorneys and one investigator. 
2  3  From the Chair and the exeCutive direCtor
We wish to thank all our donors, supporters, pro bono attorneys, volunteers,  partner organizations and 
especially our clients and their families, all of whom have helped to make this tenth year a success.
As we look ahead, we remain committed to the principles on which we were founded. Individual 
accountability for human rights crimes is necessary to deter future abuses, uphold the rule of law and provide healing and closure to survivor communities.
With your continued support, we look forward to serving current and new communities around the world 
that have been denied access to justice.
Sincerely,
     
 
Chester G. Atkins Pamela Merchant 
Chair, Board of Directors Executive DirectorintroduCtion
“Universal Jurisdiction” is the doctrine of international law that holds 
that certain crimes are so egregious that the perpetrators may be held accountable wherever they are found. These crimes include genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes, and torture. The doctrine provided the legal foundation for the Nuremberg trials against Nazi war criminals. More recent events – including the arrest of Chilean General Augusto Pinochet in London, the establishment of the International Criminal Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, the prosecution of Liberian dictator Charles Taylor in Sierra Leone and the establishment of the International Criminal Court  – all reflect the growing determination of the international commu-nity to carry forward the Nuremberg legacy of bringing individuals to justice for violations of international law that shock the conscience of humanity. 
CJA plays a leading role in this emerging area of international justice by pur -
suing universal jurisdiction cases. In the U.S., we hold perpetrators of inter -
national human rights abuses accountable through civil litigation. In Spain, 
we pursue criminal human rights cases before the Spanish National Court. CJA has pioneered a survivor-centered approach to the quest for justice that combines legal representation with medical and psycho-social services to both empower and heal torture survivors and their communities. 
“T ransitional Justice” refers to a range of judicial and non-judicial strate-
gies that are used to deal with a legacy of human rights abuses and armed conflict in a given country. These strategies have a variety of goals: to hold those who had “command responsibility” for systematic abuses legally accountable; to help repair social divisions caused by conflict; to provide survivors with a full accounting and acknowledgement of the abuses that occurred; to offer material and moral reparations to survivors; and to reform key state institutions, including the military, police and judiciary, to ensure that the pattern of human rights violations is not repeated.
From joining as co-counsel in the historic prosecution of Peruvian former 
President Alberto Fujimori for crimes against humanity, to managing the distribution of over $400,000 in damages awards to massacre survivors in one of Haiti’s poorest communities, CJA is advancing transitional justice goals in countries transitioning from periods of abuse. 
4  timeline
 1789  Congress enacts the Alien Tort Statute (ATS) to provide federal courts with 
jurisdiction over torts committed against aliens “in violation of the law of nations. ”
 1945  The United Nations (UN), the Nuremberg International Military Tribunal, and the Tribunal for the Far East are established. Crimes against humanity are defined.
 1948  The UN General Assembly adopts the Genocide Convention and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
 1980  In Filártiga v. Peña-Irala, a U.S. appellate court holds a Paraguayan police officer liable under the ATS for human rights abuses committed in Paraguay.
 1992  President Bush signs the Torture Victim Protection Act , permitting U.S. citizens and aliens to sue for torture and extrajudicial killing.
 1993  The UN establishes the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.
 1994  The UN establishes the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. The U.S. ratifies the UN Convention Against Torture and adopts a law making torture, wherever committed, a crime prosecutable in U.S. courts.
 1998  CJA is incorporated. General Pinochet is arrested in London pursuant to a Spanish warrant for human rights abuses committed in Chile. CJA files its first case against Bosnian war criminal Nikola Vuckovic.
 2002  The International Criminal Court is established. CJA wins a landmark jury trial against two Salvadoran former Ministers of Defense, confirming the doctrine of command responsibility in U.S. civil human rights cases.
 2003  CJA wins the first jury verdict in U.S. history for crimes against humanity in a case against Chilean death squad operative Armando Fernández Larios. 
 2004  The U.S. Supreme Court affirms in Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain that non-U.S. citizens may use the ATS to sue human rights violators for abuses committed overseas. 
 2006  The U.S. indicts Liberian warlord Charles “Chuckie” Taylor, Jr. for torture, marking the first prosecution under the 1994 torture law. CJA joins a Spanish criminal complaint against senior Guatemalan officials for genocide and torture.
 2008  CJA clients recover $580,000 from former Haitian Col. Carl Dorélien.
 2008  CJA and the Spanish Association for Human Rights file criminal charges with the Spanish National Court against senior Salvadoran government and military officials for the notorious 1989 “Jesuits Massacre. ”  
 2009  Former Peruvian president Alberto Fujimori is sentenced to 25 years in prison for crimes against humanity. 
5  CJa’s Cases at a glanCe
Bosnia and h erzegovina
War Crimes and Ethnic Cleansing  
(Mehinovic v. Vuckovic)
In 2002, an Atlanta judge found Bosnian Serb war criminal Nikola Vuckovic liable for torture, war crimes and other abuses committed 
against Bosnian Muslims.
Chile
Pinochet’s “Caravan of Death” (Cabello v. Fernandez Larios)  
In 2003, a Florida jury found Pinochet operative  Armando Fernández Larios responsible  for torture and murder. 
China
Torture and Religious Persecution  
(Doe v. Liu Qi)
In 2004, a San Francisco judge issued a default judg-ment against Liu Qi, the Mayor of Beijing, for his role in the torture of Falun Gong practitioners. 
el salvador
Command Responsibility for Atrocities  
(Romagoza Arce v. Garcia)
In 2006, the 11th Circuit upheld CJA ’s 2002 $54.6 million jury verdict 
against Generals García and Vides Casanova for the torture of three CJA clients. 
Assassination of Archbishop Romero  
(Doe v. Saravia)  
In 2004, CJA won a $10 million judgment against Alvaro Saravia, marking the 
first time anyone had been held responsible for the assassination. 
The Civil War’s Most Notorious War Criminal   
(Chavez v. Carranza)   
In 2005, a Memphis jury found Colonel Nicolás Carranza liable for crimes against humanity and ordered him to pay $6 million. In March 2009, the 6th Circuit upheld the verdict.
Justice for the 1989 Jesuit Martyrs (The Jesuits Massacre Case)
In 2008, CJA filed criminal charges in Spain against the ex-President of El Salvador and 14 former military officers for the 1989  
massacre of six Jesuit priests and two women. 
guatemala
Justice for the Mayan Genocide (The Guatemala Genocide Case)  
In 2006, CJA became lead counsel on a case filed by Nobel Laureate Rigoberta Menchú Tum and others in Spain against senior 
Guatemalan military officials. 
6  haiti
The High Command and the “Raboteau Massacre” (Jean v. Dorelien)  
In 2007 , a Miami federal jury found Colonel Carl Dorélien liable for abuses and ordered him to pay $4.3 million. In 2008, CJA recovered 
$580,000 of his assets for the survivors. 
Death Squads and Gender-Based Violence (Doe v. Constant)  
In 2006, Emmanuel “Toto” Constant was ordered to pay $19 million to survivors of state-sponsored rape. With CJA ’s help, Constant 
was convicted in 2008 for a mortgage fraud scheme. 
honduras
Forced Disappearances (Reyes v. Lopez Grijalba)  
In 2006, a Florida judge held Colonel Juan López Grijalba responsible 
for abuses and ordered him to pay $47 million to six survivors and 
relatives of the disappeared.
      Indonesia
Atrocities During the East Timor Independence 
Referendum (Doe v. Lumintang)
In 2001, a D.C. judge ordered General Johny Lumintang to pay $66 
million to survivors of abuses. The judgment was reversed on a 
technicality, but Lumintang no longer travels to the U.S.
  Peru
The Accomarca Massacre I (Ochoa Lizarbe v. Hurtado)
In 2008, a Miami judge ordered former Major Telmo Hurtado to pay 
$37 million to two survivors for his role in the Accomarca Massacre.
The Accomarca Massacre II  
(Ochoa Lizarbe v. Rivera Rondon)
In 2007 , CJA filed suit against Captain Juan Rivera Rondón  
on behalf of two survivors for his role in the torture and killings com-
mitted during the Accomarca Massacre. 
somalia
Civil War and Widespread Repression  
(Y ousuf v. Samantar)  
In 2004, CJA filed suit against General Mohamed Ali Samantar on 
behalf of Somali survivors for crimes against humanity. In 2009, the 4th Circuit reinstated the case, holding that  
 foreign officials did not have sovereign immunity for human rights violations.
Grebela Massacre (Doe v. Ali)  
In 2004, CJA filed suit on behalf of two Somali survivors against Colonel Yusuf Abdi Ali, aka “Tokeh”,  
for torture, extrajudicial killing and war crimes.
7  8  El Salvador
“Selected Accomplishments 2008-2009
8  “In 1989 I was chosen by Congressman Moakley to lead a congressional investigation into the murders of six Jesuit 
priests and two lay women in El Salvador. Words cannot express the sorrow and outrage I felt when we uncovered evi-dence that members of the Salvadoran High Command were involved in the murders and the cover-up. Nineteen years later, I applaud CJA for their pursuit of truth and accountability. The world awaits a transparent and open investigation into the killings of these peaceful men of God, their housekeeper and her daughter. ”  
—U.S. Representative Jim McGovern (D-MA)Historic Filing of the 
Jesuits Massacre Case  
before the Spanish  National Court
On November 13, 2008, CJA and 
our colleagues at the Spanish Association for Human Rights filed a criminal case in Madrid, under Spain’s universal jurisdiction laws, against former Salvadoran President Alfredo Cristiani Burkard and 14 former officers of the Salvadoran Army for their role in the notorious 1989 “Jesuits Massacre. ”On January 13, 2009, Judge Eloy Velasco of the Spanish National Court formally charged 14 former military officials, including General Ponce and General Rafael Humberto Larios, with crimes against humanity for their role in the 1989 massacre. Additionally, the Judge reserved  
the right during the course of the  investigation to indict former President Cristiani for his role in covering up the crime. 
  
BACkGRouND  
On November 16, 1989, members 
of the Atlacatl Battalion entered the University of Central America college campus and murdered six priests, their housekeeper, and her 16-year old daughter. The Salvadoran military committed the crime as part of its misguided de-fense against a guerilla offensive launched by the Farabundo Martí Liberation Front (FMLN). 
The victims’ families and the 
Salvadoran people have gone without justice for the massacre for nearly two decades. When the case went to trial in El Salvador in 1991, only two Army officers were convicted. Then, in 1993, an amnesty law freed these men. The architects of the assassination—including former President Cristiani—continue to live in El Salvador, exerting political influence and lobbying to ensure that the 1993 amnesty law stays in place. 
The Spanish case is now the only 
means to seek redress for the massacre which, along with the murders of Archbishop Oscar Romero and the four church-women, stands as a symbol of the persecution of those who served El Salvador’s poor during the 1980-1992 civil war. El SalvadorSelected Accomplishments 2008-2009El Salvador
U.S. V erdict against 
former Salvadoran  Vice-Minister of Defense upheld  on appeal
2009 also brought a victory in CJA ’s 
case against a notorious Salvadoran war criminal. On March 17 , 2009, the 6th Circuit upheld a jury verdict against Colonel Nicolas Carranza for crimes against humanity. Carranza, the former Vice-Minister of Defense of El Salvador, was held liable in 2005 for his role in overseeing torture and extrajudicial killings committed during the early 1980s. 
In its decision, the federal appeals 
court rejected Carranza’s argument that U.S. courts should defer to a Salvadoran amnesty law that would immunize him from suit in Salvadoran courts. The court held that “as a citizen and resident of the United States, ” Carranza is “subject to civil liability for his violations” of U.S. human rights laws. 
BACkGRouND  
Five courageous plaintiffs went to trial in federal court in Memphis in October, 2005. 
After two weeks of testimony, the jury found Carranza liable for overseeing the plaintiffs’ torture and the killing of their family members, and awarded a total of  $6 million in damages. 
CJA and pro bono co-counsel Bass, Berry & Sims PLC continue to pressure the U.S. 
Department of Justice to revoke Carranza’s citizenship based on his responsibility for gross human rights violations. Carranza came to the U.S. in 1985 and settled in Memphis, becoming a U.S. citizen in 1991. 
“We are very pleased with the court’s decision, ” said David Esquivel, counsel for the 
plaintiffs and attorney at Bass, Berry & Sims PLC. “It affirms our clients’ steadfast commitment, over the course of three decades, to make sure justice was done. ”Colonel Nicolas Carranza was Vice-Minister of Defense of El Salvador 
from late 1979 to early 1981. In that position, he exercised command and control over the three units of the Security Forces—the National Guard, National Police and Treasury Police—that were responsible for widespread attacks on civilians, including the killing of 10,000 civilians in 1980 alone. 
9  GuatemalaSelected Accomplishments 2008-2009
Experts testify in  
the Guatemala Genocide Case 
2008 and 2009 brought new 
developments that will shape the course of litigation in the Guatemala Genocide Case. As lead counsel, CJA organized two delegations of witnesses from Guatemala to testify before the Spanish Natinal Court in Madrid in January and May 2008. In October 2008, a third delega-tion, including six survivors and one expert, traveled to Madrid to present testimony, giving survivors a historic opportunity to testify on the campaign of torture, rape, and killing perpetrated against their communi-ties in the early 1980s.
In February of 2009, CJA sponsored 
a fourth round of testimony in Madrid, where former President of the U.N. Truth Commission Christian Tomuschat testified about the Guatemalan government’s failure to cooperate with the Truth Commission’s investigation.
CJA also presented expert testimony 
relating to thousands of declassified U.S. documents on the Guatemalan civil war. Experts testified on the activities of the Guatemalan Armed Forces, including its structure, strate-gic planning and general operations. 
BACkGRouND  
In 2006, CJA joined a criminal complaint, filed in 1999 by Nobel Laureate Rigoberta 
Menchú Tum and others, charging ex-president Efraín Ríos Montt and other senior Guatemalan officials with state terrorism, genocide and systematic torture. 
Over 200,000 people were killed or disappeared between 1960 and 1996 in 
Guatemala. During the worst years of violence in 1982-1983, the army and its squads of forced conscripts destroyed an estimated 440 Mayan villages in a systematic campaign of repression against the Mayan indigenous community, which later came to be known as the “Silent Holocaust. ” 
10  Haiti
“Today is a victory for justice, and Emmanuel Constant will no longer be a menace to society. Constant is going to jail 
for harming New Yorkers through an elaborate mortgage scheme. Until he was arrested for mortgage fraud, this life-long criminal and former leader of a notorious Haitian death squad was living freely in New York. ”  —NY Attorney General Andrew CuomoCJA ’s impact on the 
trial of former Haitian death squad leader Emmanuel “T oto” Constant
In 2006, Emmanuel “Toto” Constant 
was ordered to pay $19 million in damages to three CJA clients targeted by the Revolutionary Front for the Advancement and Progress of Haiti (FRAPH). The judgment holds Constant responsible for torture and crimes against humanity, specifically the use of state-sponsored rape. With the pro bono assistance of investigators from The Mintz Group and pro bono co-counsel Sonnenschein Nath & Rosenthal, CJA continues asset collec-tion efforts.
Two years later, Constant found 
himself once again in a U.S. court. On July 25, 2008, a New Y ork jury found Constant guilty of criminal mortgage fraud. Judge Gerges sentenced Constant to 12-37 years in prison, stat-ing that Constant “has a truly heinous record of violence, murder, torture, and intimidation in Haiti. ”
Constant’s conviction is the result 
of CJA ’s efforts to educate the U.S. government about his background as a human rights abuser. Constant first came to the U.S. in 1994 to avoid a Haitian arrest warrant for murder and torture. He escaped deportation after disclosing on 60 Minutes that he had been on the CIA payroll during the reign of Haiti’s brutal military regime. 
The New York Attorney General’s office 
ultimately embraced the importance of educating the court on the existence of human rights abusers seeking haven in the U.S. At the prosecutor’s request, CJA submitted evidence of human rights violations and letters asking the court to apply the maximum sentence. Constant’s conviction is a victory for the Haitian and American human rights communities.
 
11  12  Former President 
Alberto Fujimori convicted of crimes against humanity
On April 7 , 2009, former president 
Alberto Fujimori was sentenced to 25 years in prison for hu-man rights abuses. Peru—still recovering from a 20-year internal conflict that claimed some 70,000 lives—has accomplished a landmark in transitional justice. The verdict marks the first time that an elected head of state has been convicted of human rights abuses by a court in his own country.
After fleeing Peru in November 
of 2000, Fujimori returned from exile in 2005, hoping to regain the presidency. His return was a miscal-culation; he was arrested in Chile, extradited to Peru, and prosecuted for the murder of 25 innocent civilians at the hands of death squads. Fujimori justified the attacks on civilians as part of a war against terrorists. In the 711-page decision, the Peruvian Supreme Court exonerated those who had been falsely accused of terrorism by Fujimori’s government.CJA joined the Peruvian prosecutors as co-counsel and partnered with local NGOs representing the victims, including the Association for Human Rights in Peru (APRODEH). In 2008, CJA prepared expert witness testi-mony on state terrorism and declas-sified U.S. documents on Fujimori’s human rights record. CJA also briefed legal issues for the prosecution; the Supreme Court later extensively quoted the legal standards set forth in the brief.
CJA ’s role in the prosecution stems 
from our civil cases against Major Telmo Hurtado and Lieutenant Rivera Rondón, two former members of the Peruvian military. After participating in the Accomarca Massacre, where 69 civilians were tortured and killed, both former military officers sought safe haven in the U.S. In 2008, CJA and pro bono co-counsel Morgan Lewis & Bockius LLP obtained a $37 million judgment against Hurtado, and a sister case against Rondón is on appeal before the 4th Circuit.
PeruSelected Accomplishments 2008-2009Somalia
U.S. Court Denies 
Immunity to former official, defendant seeks Supreme  Court review:  
Y ousuf v. Samantar
On January 8, 2009, the 4th Circuit 
reversed a federal district court’s decision dismissing CJA ’s human rights lawsuit against former Somali Minister of Defense General Mohamed Ali Samantar. As a result, the 4th Circuit reinstated the case against General Samantar for his role in overseeing the widespread and systematic use of torture, rape, prolonged arbitrary detention and mass executions against the civilian population of Somalia in the 1980s.
The 4th Circuit held that the Foreign 
Sovereign Immunity Act (FSIA) does not apply to individuals and that Congress did not intend to immunize “individual foreign government agents like Samantar, ” or shield former government agents from suit. The 4th Circuit’s reversal is significant in that it affirms the right of survivors of human rights abuses committed in other countries to seek redress in U.S. courts. It is estimated that over 1,000 human rights violators like General Samantar have found safe haven in the United States, often in the same communities as the people they persecuted. 
In June 2009, Samantar filed a peti-
tion for writ of certiorari, asking the U.S. Supreme Court to review the 4th Circuit’s decision rejecting his claim of immunity under the FSIA. CJA mounted a vigorous legal attack on the notion that former officials who abuse, rape and kill civilians are above the law.
 BACkGRouND  
In 2004, CJA and pro bono co-
counsel Cooley Godward Kronish LLP filed suit against Mohamed Ali Samantar. Since 1997 , he has lived with impunity in an affluent suburb in Fairfax County, Virginia, just miles from the nation’s capital.
During the 1980s, armed 
forces under Samantar’s author -
ity unleashed the full force of the state’s war machine in a counterinsurgency campaign against civilian ethnic minorities in present-day Somaliland. The military subjected the region to a widespread campaign of killing, arbitrary detention, torture and the use of rape as a weapon of war. The violence culminated in the 1988 aerial bombardment of the regional capital Hargeisa, which killed an estimated 40,000 people and drove some 400,000 refugees into Ethiopia.
CJA represents five plaintiffs in the 
Yousuf case: Bashe Abdi Yousuf, a young business man detained, tortured, and kept in solitary confinement for over six years; Aziz Mohamed Deria, whose father and brother were abducted by officials and never seen again; John Doe I, whose two brothers were summar -
ily executed by soldiers; Jane Doe, a university student detained by officials, raped 15 times, and put in solitary confinement for over three years; and John Doe II, imprisoned for his clan affiliation, who was shot by a firing squad but miracu-lously survived by hiding under other dead bodies.
The lawsuit, along with its sister 
case Doe v. Ali, represents the first ever attempt at accountability for human rights abuses in Somalia.
Like so many other Somalis, my life in the 1980s was marked profoundly by the terrible human rights situation  
under the regime of Mohamed Siad Barre. I was one of the very lucky ones. I did not live in Somalia at the time, and no-one in my family was killed or maimed when the government unleashed a genocidal frenzy in Somaliland, then the Northwest region of Somalia. Being lucky implied a responsibility: to let the world know what was happening,  so it could exert pressure to halt the atrocities. ”  —Rakiya A. Omaar, Somali Human Rights Defender“13  Amicus Briefs
CJA authors or signs onto “friend of the court” briefs in human rights cases filed with 
appellate courts and the u.S. Supreme Court. Highlights from the July 2008 – June 2009 
period include the following:   
Iraq v. Simon and Iraq v. Beaty
On March 25, 2009, CJA  filed an amicus brief with the Supreme Court in the consolidated cases Iraq v. Simon and Iraq 
v. Beaty. The cases involve claims brought by U.S. citizens—including CBS news correspondent Bob Simon—who were detained and severely tortured during the 1991 Gulf War. Our brief argued that under international law, victims of torture have a right to seek redress in U.S. courts, and that perpetrators of torture are not shielded by sovereign immunity. On June 8, 2009, the Supreme Court held that Iraq is immune from suit, pointing to President Bush’s 2003 decision to repeal Iraq’s “state sponsor for terrorism” status and retroactively foreclose the possibility of torture survivors seeking redress.
Ashcroft v. Iqbal
On October 28, 2008, CJA signed onto an amicus brief filed with the Supreme Court in a case brought against New York prison officials, Attorney General Ashcroft and FBI Director Mueller for human rights abuses and discrimination against Muslims and others during the post-9/11 “round up. ” The brief, authored by then-Dean Harold Koh of Yale Law School and the National Campaign to Restore Civil Rights, argued that the Supreme Court should reject applying a heightened pleading standard when plaintiffs seek to hold senior officials accountable. CJA signed onto the brief because of our strong interest in ensuring the correct application of pleading standards for government officials. We also have an inter -
est in preserving broader civil pleading standards that permit victims to access evidence. On May 18, 2009, in a 5 to 4 decision, the Court held that Iqbal’s complaint failed to plead sufficient facts to state a claim for purposeful discrimination. 
14  CJA’s outreach and education program mobilizes torture survivors to speak publicly to personalize the way interna-
tional human rights are explained to the general public, to impact the international debate on the use of torture and to empower other survivors to seek justice. Our attorneys, clients and expert partners conduct extensive public education on human rights issues in the U.S. and around the world. 
In June 2009, CJA joined film-makers Pamela Yates and Paco de Onís to launch “Support the Court: The International 
Criminal Court Awareness Initiative. ” Aiming to educate the U.S. public on the growing role of international justice, the campaign uses the PBS screening of the film The Reckoning: The Epic Story of the Battle for International Criminal Court  
as a platform to call on President Obama to reverse the Bush administration’s policy of disengagement with the ICC. 
CJA has partnered with PBS/P .O.V., Human Rights Watch, Human Rights First, Amnesty International, the Center for 
Constitutional Rights, International Center for Transitional Justice, WITNESS, the ENOUGH Project, the Open Society Institute, the Save Darfur Coalition, and the American Society for International Law, among others.
  outrea Ch and eduCation
Pro bono co-counsel Tara Lee 
(Cooley Godward Kronish)  
interviews representatives  
of the War Crimes  
Investigation Committee,  
Hargeisa, Somaliland.
15  u.s. human rights PoliCy and legal reForm
CJA works on a variety of U.S. 
human rights legislative and policy efforts. We focus particular attention on supporting policy initiatives that advance the U.S. government’s commitment to criminally prosecute human rights abusers. On the legislative side, we support the expansion of the current human rights statutory framework to include abuses such as extrajudicial kill-ing and crimes against humanity. We also strongly push for the inclusion of the “command responsibility” doctrine into all human rights laws. 
Highlights of our legislative and policy work over the past 12 months include:
Child Soldiers Accountability Act of 2008
On October 3, 2008, the Child Soldiers Accountability Act of 2008 was signed into law. The law makes it a federal crime to knowingly recruit or use soldiers under the age of 15 and permits the U.S. to prosecute any individual found on its soil for the offense. The law also allows the U.S. to deport or deny entry to individuals who have knowingly recruited child soldiers. Military and paramilitary leaders have recruited and used child soldiers in at least 20 armed conflicts around the world. CJA testified in support of this legislation before the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Human Rights in the Law.
Charles “Chuckie” T aylor, Jr. conviction: First criminal prosecution for 
torture under the 1994 U.S. T orture Statute
On January 9, 2009, Charles “Chuckie” Taylor Jr., the son of former Liberian warlord and President Charles Taylor, was 
sentenced to 97 years in prison by a U.S. federal judge. This marks the first prosecution under the 1994 torture statute for abuses committed overseas. This victory is particularly poignant for CJA, as one of our Liberian clients was brutally tortured by Chuckie Taylor, the notorious leader of the ‘ Anti-Terrorist Unit’ in Liberia, also known as the Demon Forces. CJA devoted significant resources to facilitating the prosecution, providing the Department of Justice with access to witnesses and research. CJA will continue to work with government agencies to ensure that U.S. law is brought to bear on human rights abusers.
16  17  transitional JustiCe suPPort
CJA works with foreign governments and civil society organizations on a variety of transitional 
justice initiatives. We work alongside in-country prosecutors to hold human rights abusers criminally accountable in national courts—especially where defendants in CJA’s  cases have been deported or extradited to stand trial in their home countries. CJA attorneys provide expertise on all areas of human rights prosecution, including witness preparation and charging human rights crimes. We also organize trainings that bring together faculties of judges, prosecutors, investigators and forensic anthropologists. 
Ecuador: Building Accountability with the Truth Commission
In early 2009, the Truth Commission of Ecuador invited CJA to assist their efforts to prosecute crimes against humanity 
and other international crimes. CJA staff traveled to Ecuador and met with Truth Commission Secretary General Christian Barahona and other government officials, including President Rafael Correa. 
Part of the Truth Commission’s mandate is to recommend cases to the Attorney General’s office for prosecution. CJA will 
analyze evidence and identify the best cases for further investigation, as well as draft parts of the final report regarding international civil and criminal law. As a consequence of CJA ’s early involvement, the Truth Commission report will be the first in Latin America to include ATS/TVPA litigation in the U.S. as an alternative remedy for Ecuadorian victims.
Guatemala: The Guatemala Evidence Project 
In April 2009, the first phase of the Guatemala Evidence Project was completed. Conceived by CJA and Professor Naomi Roht-Arriaza, the project aims to develop evidence for use in the Guatemalan Genocide Case in Spain and in future human rights legal actions. The project consolidated and indexed documents on Guatemalan security forces into an authoritative computer database and narrative report. Our principal col-laborators were the National Security Archive, the Myrna Mack Foundation and Impunity Watch. A summary of the analysis and a formal report was presented to the Spanish National Court in February 2009. 
CJA client and survivor Jesus Tecù 
Osorio and Almudena Bernabeu at the 
Rio Negro Massacre site  
18  
the Judith lee strona Ch human rights aw ard
The Judith Lee Stronach Human Rights Award, presented at CJA ’s Annual Dinner, was created in 2007 to be given to an 
individual or organization that has made an outstanding contribution to the movement for global justice. 
The inspiration for this award is Judith Lee Stronach (1943-2002), a committed human rights activist who was instru-
mental in the founding of CJA as an independent organization through a generous gift from the Judith Stronach Fund for Non-Violent Social Change of the Vanguard Foundation. Judith’s insights on the therapeutic effect of seeking redress helped shape CJA ’s original mission. 
Judith supported a wide variety of human rights causes and wrote often of her opposition to torture and other human 
rights abuses. She was also prescient in recognizing the role that the arrest of General Augusto Pinochet in London would have in challenging the culture of impunity in Chile and healing a society. CJA continues to benefit from her vision, 
as well as from the support and friendship of her husband, Raymond Lifchez.
2009 Judith Lee Stronach Award Honoree:  
Bureau Des Avocats and Mario Joseph
Leading Haitian human rights attorney Mario Joseph accepted the 2009 Stronach Award on behalf of Bureau Des Avocats Internationaux (BAI), where he is Managing Director. Based in Port-au-Prince, BAI was founded in 1995 to assist the Haitian judiciary with human rights cases arising from that country’s 1991-94 military dictatorship. Its Raboteau Massacre Case was one of the most significant human rights cases ever in the Western Hemisphere. 
BAI’s work was a springboard for CJA and pro bono co-counsel Holland & Knight’s U.S. judg-
ment against Haitian human rights abuser Colonel Carl Dorélien. The judgment led to the distribution of over $400,000 of 
Dorélien’s assets to survivors of human rights abuses—one of the largest recoveries in the history of U.S. human rights litigation.
(l to r)
Raymond Lifchez,  
Pamela Merchant,  
Paul Farmer,  
Mario Joseph,  
Brian Concannon
Mario Joseph19  From the Chair and the exeCutive direCtor CJa’s 10th anniversary e vent
10th Anniversary Dinner Special Guests
2009 marked ten years of bringing human rights abusers to justice, and CJA was honoured to pres-
ent two inspiring speakers, both devoted to protecting the health and human rights of the world’s poorest communities.
Paul Farmer, M.D., Ph.D, physician, anthropologist and founder of Partners In 
Health (PIH), spoke about the role of human rights accountability in opposing the structural violence of poverty and political oppression that produces poor health. Dr. Farmer founded PIH in 1987 to prove that cost-effective, high-quality health care could be delivered to the world’s poorest communities. Partners in Health now operates in seven countries worldwide and serves over 1 .7 million patients. Dr. Farmer and PIH have been important allies in CJA ’s cases against Haitian human rights abusers.
Dr. Juan Romagoza Arce, CJA plaintiff, Romagoza Arce v. García.  
One of CJA ’s first clients, Dr. Juan Romagoza Arce, gave a powerful speech on the impact of bring-ing torturers to justice on a survivor’s healing process. Juan is a Salvadoran medical doctor who has dedicated his life to treating poor communities in El Salvador and the United States. In 1980, Juan was shot by soldiers and later imprisoned and tortured for 22 days. He was one of three Salvadoran plaintiffs in CJA ’s landmark human rights case against former Salvadoran Ministers of Defense Generals García and Vides Casanova. 
(l to r)  
Sonia Estival,  Juan Romagoza, Scott Gilmore,  Natasha Fain.
20  
Pro Bono  
Law Firms
Bass Berry & Sims PLC
David R. Esquivel  
Stephen J. Jasper  
Matthew J. Sinback  
Scott P . Tift
Beveridge & Diamond, PC
Nicholas van Aelstyn
Cooley Godward Kronish 
LLP
Maureen Alger  
Ryan Berry  
Zmarak Khan  
Tara Lee  
Bonnie Nelson  
Lori Ploeger  
Meghana RaoRane  
Joseph Samarias  
Robert Vieth  
Kyle Christopher Wong
Hogan & Hartson LLP
Amanda Bishop  
Audrey ReedHolland & Knight LLPSteven Hanlon  
Nicole Ramirez-Seijas
Kirkland & Ellis LLP
Alejandro M. Ruiz  
Kyra Sanin  
Robert R. Zitko
Mintz Levin Cohn Ferris 
Glovsky & Popeo PC
Ben Clark  
Erin Cornell  
Sue Finegan  
Mary Harrison  
Nate McConartyMorgan Lewis & Bockius 
LLP
D. Scott Bayer  
Mark N. Bravin  
Marisa Fortunati  
Kelli E. Hall  
Matthew R. Kalinowski  
Simon Law  
Sarah L. Montgomery  
Amrutha Nanjappa  
Margaret Fishkin Ruiz  
Amanda D. Smith  
Angela M. Stetler  
Donald P . Sullivan  
Wade B. Wilson  
Anne Marie Wohlgehagen
Ollé & Sesé LLP
Eva Gimbernat  
Piluca Hernández  
Manuel Ollé
Orrick Herrington & 
Sutcliffe LLP
Andrea Ball  
William D’Angelo III  
Steven Malvey  
Mark Seneca  
Jill Ann SullivanPatterson Belknap Webb & 
Tyler LLP
Kim J. Landsman  
Claude Platton
Patton Boggs LLP
Joseph Brand  
Marci Fulton  
Melanie Gerber  
Joanna Grigson  
Jennifer King  
Brett Merfish  
Lewis Rhodes  
Denise Vanison
Sidley Austin LLP
Sarah Adamczyk  
Ronie SchmelzSonnenschein Nath & 
Rosenthal LLP
Daniel Pancotti  
Ivor Samson  
Jessica WoelfelWilson Sonsini Goodrich & 
Rosati PC
Leo Cunningham  
Stacy Love  
Nema Milaninia  
Lee Anne V. MulhollandLaw School Clinic 
Partners
International Human Rights 
Clinic, UC Berkeley School of Law
Laurel Fletcher, Director  
Roxanna Altholz,  
Associate Director 
Refugee & Human Rights 
Clinic, UC Hastings College of the Law
Karen Musalo, Director  
Naomi Roht-Arriaza,  
Faculty Advisor  
Erin Cipolla  
Morgan WeibelInternational Human  
Rights Clinic, Human 
Rights Program,  Harvard Law School
James Cavallaro,  
Executive Director 
Tyler Giannini, Clinical Director  
Susan Farbstein,  
Clinical Instructor
International Human Rights 
Law Clinic, University of Virginia School of Law
Deena Hurwitz, Director  
Joelle Perry  
Alexandra Taylor  
John WhiteAllard K. Lowenstein 
International Human Rights Law Clinic, Yale Law School
James Silk, Director
Organizational 
Support
Juice Design  
Brett M. CritchlowMartin TannenbaumRadical Designs  
Ted Young
Private Investigators
The Mintz Group
Staci Dresher  
Lecia Kaslofsky  
James MintzLegal InternsJosh Friedman  
UC Hastings College of  
the Law
Lena Masri  
Indiana University School  
of Law
Elvira Prada  
Universidad Complutense  
de MadridLeah Chen Price  
UC Hastings College of  
the Law
Anna Sanders  
UC Berkeley School of LawNushin Sarkarati  
UC Davis School of LawAmanda Sherwood  
UC Davis School of LawJaclyn Shull-Gonzalez  
UC Berkeley School of LawEfrain Staino  
Santa Clara University  School of LawNina Sudholt  
Johannes Gutenberg Universität Mainz
Sahar Sultan  
UC Hastings College of the 
Law
Jessica Tipton  
Santa Clara University School 
of Law
Claret Vargas  
Harvard Law SchoolClient SupportAna Deutsch  
Program for Torture VictimsMary Fabri  
Heartland AllianceNon-Legal InternsAnjali Pai Albuquerque  
Selma Bajramovic  
Maria DeGaetano  
Molly Javerbaum  
Sarah Malin  
Justin Shilad  
Aaron Woeste  
Peggy WongPro Bono  
Professionals
Sarah Adamczyk  
Erin Callahan  
Pablo Chamorro  
Djovida  
Jane Drury  
Jeff Graham  
Piluca Hernandez  
Marion Oddon  
Michael Paulin  
Ali Qadeer  
Rachel Silverberg  
Paloma Soria  
Viviana Waisman  
Johanna Westeson  
Pamela Yatesannual rePort suPPorters21  Partners
Académie de Droit International 
Humanitaire et de Droits  Humains à Genève  
www.adh-geneve.ch
Advocates for Human Rights  
http://www.mnadvocates.org/American Friends Service Committee  
www.afsc.orgAmnesty International USA  
www.amnestyusa.orgAmnesty International UK  
www.amnesty.org.ukAsociación Bufete Jurídico Popular  
http://mujerachi.interconnection.org/
bufete.htm
Asociación Pro Búsqueda de Niñas y 
Niños Desaparecidos  
www.probusqueda.org.sv
Asociación Pro Derechos Humanos  
www.aprodeh.org.peAsociación Pro Derechos Humanos  
de España  
www.apdhe.orgAssociation for Justice and Reconciliation
Boston Center for Refugee Health  
and Human Rights  
www.bcrhhr.orgBureau des Avocats Internationaux  
www.ijdh.org/bureau.htmUniversidad Carlos III de Madrid 
(Spain)  
www.uc3m.es
Center for Constitutional Rights  
ccrjustice.orgCenter for Gender and Refugee 
Studies  
cgrs.uchastings.edu
Centro para Acción Legal en  
Derechos Humanos  
www.caldh.org
Centro Romero  
www.centroromero.orgComisión Colombiana de  
Juristas (Colombia)  
www.coljuristas.orgComité de Apoyo al Tibet (Spain)
Comité de Familiares de Detenidos 
Desaparecidos en Honduras  
www.cofadeh.org
Corporación de Promoción y  
Defensa de los Derechos (CODEPU)  
www.codepu.cl
Corporación Colectivo de Abogados 
(Colombia)  
www.colectivodeabogados.org
Cursos de Verano en El Escorial, 
Universidad Complutense de Madrid  
www.ucm.es
Dejusticia (Colombia)  
www.dejusticia.orgDolly FiláartigaEarthRights International  
www.earthrights.orgEast Bay Sanctuary Covenant  
www.eastbaysanctuary.orgEast Timor Action Network  
www.etan.org
El Rescate  
www.elrescate.orgEquipo de Estudios Comunitarios y 
Acción Psicosocial  
www.ecapguatemala.org
Escola de Cultura de Pau  
escolapau.uab.cat
Fédération Internationale des Ligues 
des Droits de l’Homme  www.fidh.org
Florida Center for Survivors of Torture  
www.gcjfs.org/fcstFondasyon Kole Zepol  
www.fonkoze.org
Fundación para el Debido  
Proceso Legal  
www.dplf.org
Freedom House  
www.freedomhouse.orgFundación Democracia sin Fronteras  
www.fdsf.hnFundación Nueva Esperanza  
www.fne.cosmosmaya.infoFundación Rigoberta Menchú Tum  
www.frmt.orgGeorgetown University  
www.georgetown.eduGlobal Lawyers and Physicians  
www.globallawyersandphysicians.orgHaiti Action Committee  
www.haitiaction.net
Horn of Africa Human Rights  
Watch Committee
Human Rights First  
www.humanrightsfirst.orgHuman Rights in China  
www.hrichina.org
Human Rights Watch  
www.hrw.orgImpunity Watch  
www.impunitywatch.netInstitute for Redress and Recovery, 
Santa Clara University School of Law  
law.scu.edu/redress
Institute for Justice and Democracy 
in Haiti  
www.ijdh.org
Instituto de Derechos Humanos de  
la Universidad Centroamericana  
“José Simeón Cañas” (El Salvador)  
www.uca.edu.sv/publica/idhuca
Interights (UK)  
www.interights.orgInternational Center for Transitional 
Justice  
www.ictj.org
International Forum for Truth  
and Justice in Africa of the  
Great Lakes Region  
www.veritasrwandaforum.org
Partners cont’d
International Rights Advocates  
www.iradvocates.org
International Rivers  
www.internationalrivers.orgLa Fundación Myrna Mack  
www.myrnamack.org.gtLa Peña Cultural Center  
www.lapena.orgLeo Valladares, Former Honduran 
National Commissioner for Human Rights
Maryknoll Office for Global Concerns  
www.maryknollogc.orgMemoria y Justicia  
www.memoriayjusticia.clMoakley Foundation  
www.moakleyfoundation.comMovimiento Nacional de Víctimas de 
Crímenes de Estado (Colombia)  
www.movimientodevictimas.org
Muslim Public Affairs Council  
www.mpac.orgNational Security Archive  
www.gwu.edu/~nsarchivOffice of the Attorney General, HondurasOpen Society Institute  
www.soros.orgPartners in Health  
www.pih.orgPinochet Watch: Institute for Policy 
Studies  www.tni.org
Program for Survivors of Torture and 
Trauma: Northern Virginia Family Service  
www.nvfs.org
Program for Torture Victims  
www.ptvla.orgRedress (UK)  
www.redress.orgSafetyNet Project for Trafficked  
and Enslaved Persons, Cambridge  Health Alliance
Sister Dianna OrtizSpanish Embassy, El SalvadorSpanish Embassy, Guatemala CityStanford University  
www.stanford.eduSurvivors International  
www.survivorsintl.orgSurvivors of Torture, International  
www.notorture.orgTainos (Haiti)The Central American Resource Center  
www.carecen-la.orgThe Marjorie Kovler Center for the 
Treatment of Survivors of Torture  
www.heartlandalliance.org/kovler
The Shalom Center  
www.theshalomcenter.orgTorture Abolition and Survivors Support 
Coalition International  
www.tassc.org
Tutela Legal del Arzobispado de  
San Salvador  
www.tutelalegal.org
Universidad de Salamanca  
www.usal.esUniversity of San Francisco  
www.usfca.eduWashington Office on Latin America  
www.wola.org
Women’s Link Worldwide  
www.womenslinkworldwide.org
22  Board, legal advisory & leadershiP  CounCils
Board of Directors
William Aceves, Secretary  
California Western School of LawChester Atkins, Chair  
ADS Ventures, Inc., Former Member 
of U.S. Congress
William Belding, Treasurer  
Association of Small FoundationsJoseph Brand  
Patton Boggs LLPMaryam Elahi  
Open Society InstituteGerald Gray, Founder  
Institute for Redress & RecoveryRichard Leigh  
Retired Credit Union CEOEileen O’Connor  
McDermott Will & Emery LLP Jane Rocamora  
Harvard Immigration & Refugee Clinic 
at GBLS
Ralph Steinhardt  
George Washington University 
School of Law
Beth Stephens  
Rutgers University School of Law, 
Camden
Denise Vanison  
Patton Boggs LLPBay Area Leadership CouncilLena Ayoub-Van Leeuwen  
Law Offices of Lena Ayoub-Van 
Leeuwen
Jeffrey Bleich  
Munger Tolles & Olson LLPRussell Cohen  
Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe LLPChimène Keitner  
UC Hastings College of the LawDavid Lowe  
Rudy, Exelrod, Lowe & Zieff LLPPaul Renne  
Cooley Godward Kronish LLPFrank Russo  
California Progress ReportAmitai Schwartz  
Law Offices of Amitai SchwartzMichael Traynor  
The American Law InstituteHon. Rebecca Westerfield (Ret.)  
JAMS
Legal Advisory Council
Carolyn Patty Blum, Senior Legal 
Advisor  
UC Berkeley School of Law
Carlos Castresana Fernández  
United Nations Office on Drugs and 
Crime
Sandra Coliver  
Open Society Institute Justice 
Initiative
Benjamin Cuellar  
University of Central America,  
El Salvador
James Eisenbrandt  
Berkowitz Oliver Williams Shaw & 
Eisenbrandt LLP
Jennifer Green  
Center for Constitutional RightsPaul Hoffman  
Schonbrun DeSimone Seplow Harris 
& Hoffman LLP
Naomi Roht-Arriaza  
UC Hastings College of the LawSteven Schneebaum  
Greenberg Traurig, LLPAmanda Smith  
Morgan Lewis & Bockius LLPBeth van Schaack  
Santa Clara University School of LawCJA StaffNeshemah Beanez-Blackwell (2008)  
Operations CoordinatorAlmudena Bernabeu  
International Attorney/Transitional  
Justice Program DirectorElizabeth Chertoff (2008-09)  
Development & Outreach AssociateNatasha Fain  
Staff AttorneyJamye Ford (2009)  
Operations & Finance ManagerScott Gilmore  
Researcher & WriterChris McKenna  
Development & Outreach DirectorPamela Merchant  
Executive DirectorKathy Roberts  
Staff AttorneyLindsay Robinson (2009)  
Development & Outreach Associate
23  27  FinanCial
oPERATING REVENuE AND EXPENSES*
JuLY 1, 2008 – JuNE 30, 2009
Operating Revenues
Foundation Grants $     589,215
UN Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture 65,000
Individual and Corporate Contributions  300, 085
In-Kind Legal Contributions** 2,449,019
Investment Income  29,457
Other 15,677
 T otal Operating Revenues:   $  3,451,182
Operating Expenses
Pro Bono Fees and Expenses** $   2,449,019
Program  687 ,676
Administration  88,499 
Fundraising 155,560
T otal Operating Expenses:  $   3,380,754
*Audited figures for July 1, 2008 - June 30, 2009.  
An audited financial statement is available upon request.
**CJA partners with outside law firms and investigation firms to  
investigate and litigate cases on behalf of its clients. Sixteen firms 
provided over 5,979 hours of pro bono services valued at $2,441,128.  
In addition, nine firms made contributions of $37 ,891 to cover out of pocket expenses. The total donated pro bono services was $2,449,019. PROGRAM EXPENSES  
Program 90%
Administration 3%Fundraising 5%28  
(left to right) Pamela Merchant, Sonia Estival, Elizabeth Chertoff, Neshemah Beanez-Blackwell, Denise Vanison, William Aceves, Chris McKenna, Beth Stephens, 
Almudena Bernabeu, Joseph Brand, Jane Rocamora, Scott Gilmore, Eileen O’Connor, Gerald Gray, Natasha Fain, Richard Leigh.
cover:  zoriah
page 1:  Joe McKay
page 3:  CJA
page 4:  Dana Shepard
page 8:  Marcelo Montecino
page 9:  CJA 
page 10:  CJApage 11:  Jocelyn Mathewes
page 12:  Asociación Pro  
 Derechos Humanos
page 13:  CJA 
page 14:  Rusty Stewart
page 15:  CJA 
page 16:  CJA
page 17:  CJApage 18:  Teresa Kennett
page 19:  Teresa Kennett
page 21:  Matson Collection 
page 22: Joe McKay
page 23:  Jean-Francois Gaspar
Page 25 is Patrick LemieuxPage 26 is Neil Liddle
inside back cover: CJAPhOTO CREDITS:CJa Board/staFFThe Center for Justice and Accountability  
870 Market Street, Suite 680  
San Francisco, CA 94102  
(415) 544-0444  
www.cja.org
Graphic Design: Windesheim Design