DONATE AT WWW .INDIAN -AFFAIRS .ORG 
966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 30 -A Rockville, MD 20850  (240) 314 -7155  General.AAIA@Indian -Affairs.org  
    ASSOCIATION ON AMERICAN INDIAN AFFAIRS  
    Protecting Sovereignty ◦ Preserving Cultur e 
           Educating Youth  ◦ Building Capacity  
                                      SINCE 1922  
 
Press contact: general.aaia@indian -affairs.org  
 
SACRED SITES  DESTROYED BY DHS VITAL TO NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURE S, 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR WILL  TESTIFY TO CONGRESS  
 
WASHINGTON, D.C. , February 25 , 2020, 2:00 p.m. (E.S.T.)  – Association on American Indian 
Affairs  Executive Director  and Attorney  Shannon Keller O’Loughlin will testify to Congress 
Wednesday that recent U.S. government destruction of Native American sacred sites  for the 
construction of a border wall violates  the government -to-government relationship with  Indian Tribes .  
 
The House Subcommittee on Indigenous Peoples of the United States  will hear Ms. O’Loughlin’s 
testimony as part of an oversight hearing entitled,  “Destroying Sacred Sites and Erasing Tribal 
Culture: The Trump Administration's Construction of the Border Wall.”  Ms. O’Loughlin will join 
Ned Norris, Jr. , Chairman, the Tohono O’odham Nation , in testifying against desecration of sacred 
sites on the southern border. The hearing is Wednesday, Feb. 26, at 2 p.m. in Room 1324 Longworth  
House Office Building.  
 
Ms. O’Loughlin will testify to the vital importance of sacred sites  to the continued pra ctice of 
diverse Native American culture s and religion s and how the Department of Homeland Security’s 
blasting of sites sacred for th e Tohono O’odham Nation reflects the current Administration’s attempt 
to more easily and recklessly desecrate sacred land by refusing to consult with Tribes.  
 
While  Tribal cultural and sacred sites serve the same purposes as those western institutions , Tribal 
sacred sites have ne ver enjoyed  the same protections as non -Indian cemeteries, war memorials, 
churches a nd other institutions. Historically, F ederal Indian policy incorporated Indian separation 
from religious and cultural  sites, thereby  destroying  diverse Indigenous  religious practice s. Under 
regulations like the Indian Religious Crimes Code and the Rules for Indian Courts , punishment for 
visiting a sacred site or practicing one’s traditional religion ranged from  imprisonment  to death . 
Moreover, the U.S. allowed its officials and others to enter Tribal lands to desecrate burial and 
ceremonial places, steal Ancestral remains and their burial belongings, and take important cultural 
patrimony and sacred objects.   
 
Despite a long history  of religious persecution, Tribal Nations  continue  ceremonial life at s acred sites 
today. Since 1978, t he federal government  has recognized  its legal responsibilit ies to protect sacred 
sites and Ame rican Indian religious freedoms . Recent desecrations fly  in the face of these important 
obligation s. Federal d esecration of Native American sacred sites must cease immediately.  
 
Formed in 1922 to change the destructive path of federal policy from assimilation, termination and 
allotment, to sovereignty, self -determination and self -sufficiency , the Association on American 
Indian Affairs has provided legal and other advocacy ass istance to protect sacred sites since its 
founding. The Association fully supports Congress in its effor t to investigate Indigenous  sacred site 
destruction and religious freedom violations with respect to the construction of the border wall , as 
well as the protection of other sites threatened by the lack of proper federal decision -making . 
 
 
