1
Reforming the Nation’s Largest Juvenile Justice System“When I grew up in Los Angeles, California was at the forefront of progressive reforms, including a juvenile justice 
system committed to helping troubled youths develop knowledge and life skills to raise the odds that, upon release, 
they would not end up behind bars again. But in the 1980s we shifted course…The mission of rehabilitation got re -
placed by a culture of punishment... It is only by charting a new future that we can return Los Angeles’ youth proba -
tion system to a position it has held in the past – that of a national leader and model of best practices.”
 —Mark Ridley-Thomas, Chairman of the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors1
The Camp Vernon Kilpatrick Replacement project, funded primarily by California State juvenile justice realign -
ment legislation, is poised to become a model for best practices in Los Angeles County, reversing decades of ne -
glect and outdated practices that have led to poor outcomes for incarcerated youth.
IntroductionReforming the Nation’s Largest 
Juvenile Justice System
by Michelle Newell, MPP and Jorja Leap, PhD
Research confirms that incarcerating young people is 
harmful – contributing to lower educational achieve -
ment, higher unemployment, higher alcohol and sub -
stance abuse and increased mental health problems.2 
Roughly three-quarters of youth leaving locked facili -
ties nationally are rearrested and – depending on local 
juvenile justice statutes – up to 70 percent are con -
victed of a new offense.3 These dismal outcomes, com -
bined with a high price tag, have largely made youth 
incarceration a failed public policy approach.The good news is that youth incarceration rates in the 
U.S. have declined by 41 percent over the last 15 years, 
reaching the lowest level since 1975.4 While this is due 
largely to decreasing crime rates and state budget cuts, it also reflects the increased use of cost-effective, com -
munity-based programs for youth who pose a minimal 
threat to public safety. 
Nevertheless, approximately 70,000 youth nationwide
5 
– 2,000 in Los Angeles County6 – are still confined in Policy Brief  •  November 2013
2
2013 Children’s Defense Fund - California and UCLA Luskin School of Public Affairs
The command center station in the middle of the room projects a long row of 
beds in Camp Scobee’s 100+ bed dormitory at Challenger Memorial Youth 
Center in Lancaster. Photo courtesy of Kevin Chang of the Long Beach Press-Telegram.
juvenile detention facilities on any given day. While 
the goal remains to reduce these numbers further and 
keep young people out of the system whenever possi -
ble, a small number of youth will remain in secure fa -
cilities. How these youth are treated while incarcerated 
has a marked impact on the rest of their life, their com -
munities, and on our society as a whole.
The Los Angeles County juvenile justice system is 
the largest system in the nation, with locked facilities 
that include three juvenile halls7 and fourteen proba -
tion camps.8 Yet many observers of the system, includ -
ing legal groups, advocates and organizers, the media, and elected and appointed officials, have concluded  
over the years the camps are not meeting the needs of youth, and not helping them become law-abiding and productive members of society.
9
In a critique to the Board of Supervisors, Jerry Pow -
ers, Los Angeles County Chief Probation Officer, has described the design of the probation camps as “creat[ing] an image of a jail-like environment.”
10 De-
spite recent improvements, most youth in the camps (as 
in the rest of the country) are still subjected to some 
discredited and outdated approaches based largely on control and coercion.
11 Research has shown that these 
types of correctional practices – which  are widely ad -
opted and can include promoting fear, instilling boot-camp-style discipline, relying on surveillance and delivering punishment (e.g. isolation) – are ineffective and frequently harmful.
12 These approaches have also 
led to widespread abuses that have resulted in lawsuits 
and federal investigations, nationally and in Los Ange -
les County (see page 5). 
In contrast, effective approaches to juvenile justice are 
treatment-oriented,13 helping youth to develop pro-so -
cial strengths and attributes, heal from past victim -
ization, build relationships, develop skills and address 
mental health and substance abuse problems. However, while studies have shown that these approaches reduce recidivism
14 and help youth transition successfully into 
adulthood,15 they are rarely practiced with full fidelity 
in locked facilities.16
Now, with the estimated $48 million allocated for the pilot Camp Vernon Kilpatrick Replacement Project, 
funded largely by California State juvenile justice re -
alignment legislation (Senate Bill 81), Los Angeles 
County has the financial resources and opportunity to more fully align its camps with best practices in the 
field, jump-starting meaningful juvenile justice reform.How these youth are treated while 
incarcerated has a marked impact on the rest of their life, their communities, and on our society as a whole.The Los Angeles County juvenile justice system is the largest system in the nation, with locked facilities that include three juvenile halls and fourteen probation camps. 3
Reforming the Nation’s Largest Juvenile Justice SystemLos Angeles County’s Probation Camp System:  
An Outdated Model
During the past decade, responsibility for managing 
most system-involved youth has shifted from the State 
of California to its 58 counties.17 With 6,5 00 emp lo y -
ees and an annual $813 million budget,18 the Los Ange -
les County Probation Department is responsible for the vast majority of youth who become system-involved in 
the county, including those who have committed seri -
ous crimes and have complex needs. On any one day, the department supervises nearly 17,000 youth, close 
to 2,000 of which are held in locked facilities.
19
Experts consider probation camps to be a more moder -
ate alternative to the adult criminal justice system and the state-run Division of Juvenile Justice. Each camp 
in LA County is a fully enclosed facility, with a ca-pacity to hold up to 120 youth. While the LA County Probation Department runs these facilities, other 
county departments provide education (300 minutes 
of daily instruction in classes with a maximum 17-to-1 student-to-teacher ratio)
20 and health and mental health 
services. 
Youth are sent to these facilities post-adjudication for 
three-, six- or nine-month sentences, with an average camp stay of 4.7 months.
21 The average daily cost to 
house a youth in a probation camp is $329.61; for a six-
month sentence, this equates to over $60,000 for one 
youth.22 Of the approximately 900 young people de -
tained in the probation camps, 89 percent are male 
and more than 95 percent are youth of color. African 
American youth are particularly over representated  in LA County’s camps, with an incarceration rate three times that of their prevalence in the general popula -
tion. Youth in the camps come largely from the First and Second supervisorial districts, encompassing South Los Angeles, East Los Angeles and the San Ga-briel Valley.
23
African American Latino  White  Other 70%
30%50%60%
40%
10%20%
0%Youth in Los Angeles County 
Youth in Probation CampsFigure 1: Racial Breakdown of Youth in Los Angeles County Probation Camps 
Ages 10-18
65%62%
30%
8%17%
3%13%
2%4
2013 Children’s Defense Fund - California and UCLA Luskin School of Public AffairsIneffective Design and Operations
Today, we know that youth involved with the 
juvenile justice system have low rates of educational 
attainment and high rates of learning disabilities, 
substance abuse and mental health issues. Moreover, these young people are often victims of violence themselves and suffer from high levels of trauma and 
post-traumatic stress disorder.
24 But until recently, 
juvenile justice remained rooted in century-old beliefs that youth, instead of having complex needs that must 
be addressed, needed only discipline and structure, and that housing them together in one large space was the most cost-effective solution. 
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, counties in 
California had just two options for system-involved youth: adult prisons or juvenile training schools. Over -
crowding at the training schools in 1931 led to the opening of the first juvenile probation camp in the U.S., Camp Glenn Rockey in LA County.
25 Group -
ing a large population of youth together in a rural set -
ting far from urban temptations, Camp Rockey served as the model for similar probation camp programs for youth throughout the state.
26 However, since little was  
known at the time of its construction over 80 years ago 
about effective juvenile justice facilities or programs, 
the camp was limited in its ability to positively impact youth.
27
Built mostly in the 1950s and 1960s, today’s LA County probation camps followed this model, which 
relied on penitentiary-like facilities and strictly en -
forced routines. Over the decades, changes consisted 
mainly of implementing a boot-camp structure. Even the newest Los Angeles County probation camp – 
Challenger Memorial Youth Center, which opened in 
1990 in a geographically remote area with a command-and-control program
28 – represents an outdated era of 
juvenile justice that does not meet the needs of today’s 
system-involved youth.
Camp design does not foster rehabilitation.  
In Los Angeles County, as in counties throughout the 
state, juvenile probation camps are located in sparsely 
populated, geographically isolated areas of the county and remain largely correctional in design, with ra -
zor wire-topped perimeter fences.
29 Barracks-like dormitories can typically house up to 100 youth in one large open area built around a monitoring center, 
where a large custodial staff enforce supervision and 
control. Bathrooms consist of open showers and toilets without privacy. 
The design of large, open dorms like this has been re -
peatedly cited as problematic, particularly given the 
population and its needs, including mental health prob -
lems, anger management issues, and gang affiliation. 
As noted by former LA County Assistant Chief Proba -
tion Officer (and former Interim Chief Probation Offi -
cer) Calvin Remington, this design, which places many youth in one room together, can foster competition, 
deepen factions and further gang problems.
30
Nearly half of the camps contain a special housing unit (SHU) with individual cells used in large part to iso -
late youth who misbehave or pose safety concerns; camps without a SHU utilize one at a neighboring fa -
cility. Despite research showing the detrimental effects of solitary confinement on youth, the SHU continues 
to be utilized.
Youths’ lives are regimented yet filled with 
aimless free time.  Youth wear LA County-issued 
clothing and are permitted few personal items. Roll call is taken throughout the day, and youth transi -
tion between activities by marching with their hands Youth at Camp Smith sit lined up on the field by deputy probation officers 
before walking to another building for classroom instruction in March 2008. Camp Smith is one of six camps at Challenger Memorial Youth Center, the largest facility in LA County built with a combined 660-bed capacity. Photo courtesy of Kevin Chang of the Long Beach Press-Telegram.
5
Reforming the Nation’s Largest Juvenile Justice Systembehind their backs in single-file lines. Youth spend 
much of the day, including at meal times, in the dorms 
and transitioning between activities “on quiet,” where 
talking is restricted and sometimes silence is even re -
quired. Youth spend most of the day in school. Late afternoons and evenings often include recreation, en -
richment programs or individual and group therapy, though programs vary by camp. At some facilities, program options are scarce, and youth have consider -
able amounts of aimless free time. 
Youth interaction with staff is inconsistent 
and often adversarial. While some probation po -
sitions are specifically geared toward counseling, the design of the camps, which requires supervision and control, perpetuates a more guard-like approach to -
ward youth from many line staff. Probation staff uni -
forms are similar to law enforcement attire, including badges and combat boots, which can reinforce a cor -
rectional feel. Most staff, particularly probation line staff, works a 2½-day (56-hour) schedule, which in -
cludes two consecutive 16-hour shifts (6 a.m. to 10 p.m.), one eight-hour shift, and two eight-hour sleep periods on-site, followed by several days off. As a re -
sult of these long shifts–designed to ensure adequate supervision and lessen commute times, given the re -
mote location of these facilities–youth interact with a constantly changing group of staff.
31
A Pattern of Misconduct and Abuse
Recent lawsuits and allegations of ongoing misconduct and abuse have revealed critical systemic problems in 
Los Angeles County’s probation camps and halls. Evi -
dence of shortfalls has been extensive, multi-faceted, 
and ongoing, including: 
• An LA County Civil Grand Jury report32 in 2000 
that gave a majority of the county’s probation 
camps a failing score, citing unsanitary condi -
tions and inadequate programming, among other 
problems;
• A Department of Justice (DOJ) investigation and federal oversight beginning in 2004 that examined 
unsafe and abusive conditions at the three juvenile 
halls; 
• A DOJ investigation and federal oversight into the probation camps that began in 2008 and resulted 
in a still ongoing 41-provision Memorandum of Agreement (MOA); 
• A federal class-action lawsuit in 2010 that charged 
LA County with failing to provide adequate edu-
cational and rehabilitative services for youth in the 
county’s largest probation camp, Challenger Me -
morial Youth Center, which led to a settlement agreement in 2011 that is still being monitored
33; 
• County of Los Angeles Office of Independent Re -
view annual reports of the Probation Department 
in 2012 and 2013, assessing things like employee 
misconduct that have plagued the department; 
• Internal documents, including Interim Chief Pro -
bation Officer Calvin Remington’s 2010 “Back to 
Basics” report, outlining policy and procedural 
challenges faced by the department; and
• News and feature stories reporting on scandals and abuses in the camps and halls. 
These findings have centered primarily on the follow -
ing problems in the camps:
Failure to protect youth from harm.  Several re -
ports repeatedly found that staff employed excessive 
use of force, inappropriate physical restraints, blatant mistreatment and assault, overuse of pepper spray and 
verbal abuse. Reports also found a high incidence of 
youth-on-youth assaults, particularly when large num -
bers of youth were together in the dorms and when 
youth moved from one activity to another. Solitary 
confinement was being used excessively and inappro -
priately, causing mental and emotional harm to young people. Additionally, camps failed to provide adequate 
suicide management. Investigations into abuse allega -
tions failed to examine grievance reporting and inves -
tigation processes. 
Several reports repeatedly found 
that staff employed excessive use of force, inappropriate physical restraints, blatant mistreatment and assault, overuse of pepper spray and verbal abuse. 6
2013 Children’s Defense Fund - California and UCLA Luskin School of Public AffairsStaffing changes.  The staff-to-youth ratio for both 
probation officers and teachers has decreased. Camps 
have hired important new positions for transition 
counselors and additional mental health staff. Staff has also undergone extensive training in new procedures and programs.
With changes like these, most of the provisions of the 
Memorandum of Agreement have been satisfied, and many of the most concerning abuses – inappropri -
ate use of pepper spray, for example – have been rem -
edied. Additionally, the operations, programming and atmosphere at Challenger Memorial Youth Center has 
seen a positive shift under the settlement agreement. 
Moreover, the significant reductions in juvenile hall and probation camp populations – down 41 percent be -
tween 2009 and 2012
36 – mean that fewer youth, like 
those with only a technical violation, are being unnec -
essarily detained. These are promising developments.
Still, progress has been slow and limited in other ways:
Compliance challenges with the MOA and 
Challenger lawsuit. LA County was not able to 
achieve and maintain substantial compliance with the Insufficient and problematic staffing.  Reports 
documented extensive problems related to staffing, in -
cluding an insufficient number of staff, untrained staff, 
staff engaging in unpermitted punitive behavior and staff drinking on the job. Other pervasive problems in -
clude poor staff communication and collaboration. 
Inadequate rehabilitative and educational ser -
vices. Reports repeatedly found inadequate men -
tal health services and rehabilitative programming. 
Camps often failed to provide mandatory educational services, including ensuring participation in the re -
quired minimum school day–for all youth, including 
those held in the special housing unit–and assistance 
for youth who asked for help with schoolwork. The re -
ports also frequently cited conditions incompatible 
with a rehabilitative environment, including unsani -
tary environments and dilapidated infrastructure.
The Limits to Current Reform
To address violations and abuses, the LA County Pro -
bation Department, County Office of Education, and Department of Mental Health, have undertaken con -
siderable policy, program and staffing changes. The 
following details these steps forward:
New programs.  The county has implemented an in -
tegrated behavioral treatment model
34 at five camps. 
It consists of a unified approach to screening, assess -
ment, case planning, treatment, transition and after -
care (reentry), with all staff members trained to work 
together with a common vocabulary and common treatment goals. The approach is promising, though 
the extent of fidelity to the model is unknown and 
the results have yet to be determined. The Los Ange -
les County Office of Education has improved its edu-cational programs to increase student engagement and 
curriculum relevancy, including the project-based and 
interdisciplinary educational program Road to Suc -
cess Academy that piloted at camps Scott and Scudder 
and is now being expanded, and the Children’s De -
fense Fund Freedom Schools® literacy and enrichment 
program. Evidence-based programs such as Aggres -
sion Replacement Training are now standard through -
out the camp system. To support these new programs, the probation department is working to create smaller groups in the dorms when possible.
35
A young man at Camp Afflerbaugh is participating in CDF’s Free -
dom School program, which piloted in two LA County probation 
camps in summer 2013. Photo courtesy of Hanif Houston.7
Reforming the Nation’s Largest Juvenile Justice SystemMemorandum of Agreement for the camps within the 
required four-year period. The county still has not 
complied in full with several significant provisions: 
• Providing sufficient staff supervision to keep resi -
dents safe and allow successful implementation of rehabilitative activities; 
• Providing adequate rehabilitative and gender-spe -
cific programming to deliver instruction that meets youths’ needs, as well as mental health services, 
enrichment activities and family involvement; 
• Providing a facility-wide behavior management system; 
• Addressing substance use disorders; and
• Collecting sufficient and reliable data to evaluate implementation of the MOA.
37
In addition, the county struggled to resolve quickly and consistently the educational violations happening 
at the Challenger Memorial Youth Center. Progress has 
at times stalled or reversed. For example, in November 2011, the settlement monitors found that certain pro -
gram gains had “evaporated” and that staff turnover 
and staff quality was quite concerning.
38 While things 
have certainly improved as of late due to dedicated ef -
forts by the county and expert monitors, things like 
staff stability, staff collaboration and data collection ar continuing concerns.
39 Moreover, as of early 2013, new 
violations have still emerged at Challenger such as the 
failure to provide nutritionally adequate food, despite 
the increased resources and scrutiny at the facility.40
Misconduct and Violence.  Youth-against-youth 
and staff-against-youth violence, while declining, re -
main problematic. Some staff misconduct has been persistent, including aggressive behavior toward youth and an excessive use of force.
41 Despite many improve -
ments in staff recruitment, training and oversight, 
alarming incidents still occur, including staff oversee -
ing fight clubs and staff physically abusing youth in 
their custody.42Inter-department Collaboration.  Collaboration 
among county agencies serving youth, while improv -
ing, remains fragmented. For example, a report cited the lack of a close relationship between probation of -
ficers and education staff at the Challenger Memorial Youth Center as “harmful to the education of the youth, 
as lack of cooperation is carried over from the class -
room to the living units.”
43 
The Price Youth Pay for an Outdated 
Approach
The design and operations of the current camps remain 
obstacles to comprehensive reform. While promising 
programs, such as the Road to Success Academy edu-
cation model, have seen success, and lawsuits and fed -
eral oversight are implementing needed change, there is a limit to this success within our current camp sys -
tem. Fully rehabilitative and therapeutic environments simply cannot be established in facilities with institu-tional designs and operations that combine to cause safety concerns and atmospheres not conducive to pos -
itive mental health or meaningful relationship building between youth and staff. 
Design obstacles.  The current juvenile facility 
design in LA County constrains effective treatment 
programs. A design that requires supervision from a control center limits staff-youth relationship build -
ing. In large open dorms, it is also difficult to create Forcing trauma-exposed youth 
into one large dormitory leads to increased violence, threats to youth safety and delayed acceptance of rehabilitation.
A view of a single bed and shelf in the open dorm at Camp Afflerbaugh in La 
Verne, taken July 24, 2013.  Youth are permitted few personal items and have 
little to no privacy.  Photo courtesy of Michelle Newell.8
2013 Children’s Defense Fund - California and UCLA Luskin School of Public Affairs
a therapeutic environment, form cohesive groups and 
conduct small-group treatment. For this reason, camps 
offer treatment programs and evidence-based pro -
grams one to two hours a day at most. Some sites provide the programs only a couple hours a week. Dur -
ing the remainder of the day or week, the facilities revert to their routine operations, which do not sup -
port–and potentially undermine–the gains youth make during small-group treatment. Moreover, research demonstrates that forcing trauma-exposed youth into one large dormitory leads to increased violence, 
threats to youth safety and delayed acceptance of reha -
bilitation.
44 When youth do not feel safe, rehabilitation An inside view of the dormitory at Camp Afflerbaugh in La Verne, taken July 
24, 2013. Opened in 1961, this juvenile probation camp houses younger boys 
in one 120-bed open-dormitory style living unit. Photo courtesy of Michelle 
Newell.cannot occur.45
Additionally, many aging facilities require costly 
maintenance because of ongoing water, sewer and in -
frastructure problems.46 When a facility unexpectedly 
closes for maintenance, its youth are shuffled to an -
other camp. The combination of displacement and dis -
ruption and a crumbling and poorly kept environment stymies attempts at rehabilitation.
Operational obstacles.  P u n i t i v e  p r a c t i c e s  a r e  o f -
ten an unavoidable part of a supervision-driven camp 
model, which adversely affects youth with mental health issues and trauma-exposed youth. Though de -
creasing, some facilities still regularly employ solitary confinement in a special housing unit, which can have a devastating effect on young people already exposed to high levels of trauma. In response to studies dem -
onstrating the harm of such prolonged isolation, the United Nations has called on all countries to prohibit solitary confinement in juvenile cases.
47 
Finally, staff-related policies, including the staffing schedule, hinder attempts at creating a rehabilitative model. The 56-hour staff shift, with its 16-hour days and extended time away from the facility when a shift 
ends, undermines the staff’s ability to perform effec -
tively, engage with youth and address critical pro -
grammatic responsibilities.
48
A New Model
Senate Bill 81 as a Vehicle for 
Reform
Senate Bill 81, a juvenile justice realignment bill49 
passed by the California State Legislature in August 
2007, created new juvenile justice funding streams 
for counties, including $200 million in lease revenue 
bonds for counties to construct or improve juvenile facilities.
50
In December 2010, LA County was notified that it re -
ceived a state grant to tear down and rebuild one of its probation camps based on best practices.51 The county 
selected Camp Kilpatrick, an all-boys camp, because 
it was physically in the worst shape – the county Chief 
Executive’s Office found that the camp needed $22.3 million worth of renovations beyond the $1.127 million the county needed to spend, on average, to maintain it 
annually.
52
Since the Board of Supervisors approved this grant in 
early 2012, the county, in a burgeoning partnership 
with researchers, advocates and funders, has taken a 9
Reforming the Nation’s Largest Juvenile Justice Systemnumber of steps to inform the design of this new camp 
program, including conducting research on best prac -
tices and performing site visits to model programs throughout the country. With demonstrated commit -
ment and leadership from the Board of Supervisors (who recently allocated more resources to this project 
to help ensure fidelity to the model), the probation de -
partment and the Los Angeles County Office of Edu -
cation, LA County now has the opportunity through 
this $48 million project to create an innovative model 
that can vastly improve services for youth in the juve -
nile justice system, and can stand as an example of in -
novation and system reform for the rest of the nation.
The Origination of a New Model:  
A Success Story
For the Camp Kilpatrick project, policymakers in the 
county have committed to a new approach known as 
the LA Model. It is informed by best practices cen -
tered on a rehabilitative small group treatment model, 
which began to emerge in Massachusetts in the 1960s. This approach was exemplified in Missouri, whose ju-
venile justice system has proved so successful over the 
last 30 years–reducing recidivism to one of the lowest rates in the nation–that it is known as the “Missouri Miracle.” A number of practices combine to make this 
approach unique: it is primarily made up of small, cot -
tage-like facilities located at sites throughout the state 
that keep young people close to their own homes and 
embody a rehabilitative approach. The effectiveness 
of these practices in Missouri on reducing recidivism, improving educational and employment outcomes, and improving safety are clear: 
• In 2011, only 6.9 percent of youth discharged from 
Missouri’s Division of Youth Services (DYS) were recommitted for new juvenile offenses within one 
year;53 84 percent of youth discharged from Mis -
souri’s DYS are law abiding and productive in 
school or work after one year.54
• Seventy percent of youth incarcerated in Missouri 
facilities accumulated educational credits in core 
academic subjects as fast as, if not faster than, 
their same-age peers;55 85.3 percent were enrolled 
in school or employed at the time of discharge in 
2008.56
• Compared to other state’s juvenile justice systems, 
assaults on youth in Missouri are 4.5 times less 
likely and assaults on staff members are 13 times 
less likely. The frequency of restrictive conditions, including isolation, is 200 times less than in other juvenile justice agencies.
57
The success of the Missouri Model led states and counties across the country to implement a similar ju-
venile justice model. 
After publicly acknowledging its failing juvenile justice 
system in 2006, Santa Clara County, California, under -
took an overhaul of the William F. James Boys Ranch, a co-ed, 96-bed residential camp for youth, based on the small-group approach used in Missouri. Before the new model (called the Enhanced Ranch Program) was 
adopted, 47 percent of youth failed the program while 
at the ranch
58 and 4 2 recidivated59 within one year af -
ter release.60 In 2011, only 17 percent of youth failed the 
program, and 21 percent recidivated.61
These statistics reveal a 63 percent reduction in Missouri’s juvenile justice 
system has proved so successful 
over the last 30 years—reducing 
recidivism to one of the lowest 
rates in the nation—that it is 
known as the “Missouri Miracle.”
10
2013 Children’s Defense Fund - California and UCLA Luskin School of Public Affairsprogram violations and a 50 percent reduction in new 
arrests and violations for youth who returned to their 
communities.62 Additionally, between 2007 and 2011, 
the average number of violent incidents per individ -
ual per year (including gang-related fights, possession 
of contraband and disruptive conduct in the classroom) dropped from 9.8 to 2.36.
63
In Washington, D.C., the Oak Hill Youth Center was dangerous, overcrowded and plagued by lawsuits and 
consent decrees. Fifty-one percent of the center’s youth 
were rearrested within a year of returning to the com -
munity. Administrators, looking for a new way, designed and built the New Beginnings Youth De -
velopment Center, a 60-bed facility based on the Missouri Model. 
By 2010, after the new model was adopted, the re -
cidivism rate dropped to 35 percent.
64 Youths’ aver -
age annualized grade improvement in reading was 
an impressive 1.73 in the 2011-2012 school year during 
their approximately nine-month stay.65
 
Sites in Louisiana, New Mexico and New York City have also shifted their focus from large, correctional 
facilities and instead embraced this small group treat -
ment model. These sites have experienced a drop in vi -
olent incidents and an improvement in youth-to-staff 
and youth-to-youth interactions.Core Principles and Practices of the 
New Model
Across the country, including in Missouri, Santa Clara, 
and Washington, D.C., this new model has seen suc -
cess from the following characteristics:
Rehabilitative and non-institutional environ -
ment.  The model emphasizes a continuum of care, 
encouraging community alternatives to incarceration 
whenever possible. Secure facilities are rehabilitative, small and cottage-like, non-institutional, and whenever possible close to the young people’s communities. Fa-
cilities are designed to create a physical and emotional 
space that enables both staff and youth to feel safe and be open to taking risks, an approach integral to behav -
ioral and cognitive change.
66 
Small-group treatment model.  Youth spend al -
most all day in small groups of 10 to 12,67 sleeping, 
eating, exercising and attending school and therapy 
sessions together, and interacting with the same highly 
trained staff (youth specialists or youth counselors). This approach
68 is based on positive youth develop -
ment principles, which emphasize cognitive changes, 
the importance of peer influence among teens, close 
relationships and positive peer accountability.69The Santa Clara County Probation Department redesigned its William F. 
James Boys Ranch with small dorms to create a home-like environment that 
supports rehabilitation. Photo courtesy of the Santa Clara County Probation 
Department.
At the Watkins Mill Park Camp in Missouri, as in all secure juvenile facilities 
run by the state, youth are housed in small, cottage-like dormitories of 12, rather than large locked facilities. Photo courtesy of Julio Marcial.
11
Reforming the Nation’s Largest Juvenile Justice SystemSafety fostered by positive relationships.  Posi-
tive relationships among peers and between youth and 
staff foster a rehabilitative climate while improving 
safety. Punitive responses such as restraints and isola -
tion are avoided; alternative approaches, such as “cir -
cling up” – youth coming together in a circle to talk 
through their problems – help facilitate positive social 
behavior. 
High-quality education.  Access to a range of aca-
demic services – an engaging curriculum, vocational 
and credit recovery programs and a focus on devel -
oping soft skills, such as team building, communica -
tion and leadership–helps youth become motivated to change, build skills for the future and adapt to the de -
mands of reentering their communities when released.Integrated program based on collaboration.  
This model requires integration at every stage. Depart -
ments and staff have a unified approach and remain in close communication. Staff attends joint trainings across departments, and job descriptions and duties support collaboration.
Focus on reentry planning and family involve -
ment.  Staff undertakes thorough aftercare (reentry) 
planning early in a youth’s stay.
70 This includes com -
pletion of school enrollment, even if a youth must 
leave the camp temporarily to enroll at a school site. 
Staff helps identify employment opportunities, match a youth with mentors and meaningfully involve the youth’s family.
71
Current Probation Camp 
ModelThe New Model
Facility 
DesignLarge, institutional, and geographically 
isolatedSmaller, rehabilitative, home-like environment rather than a correctional setting.
Sleeping & 
LivingLarge open dorms with 50-120 
beds in military barracks style; open bathrooms; no privacySmall dorms of 10-12 youth; living room area; private bathrooms.
Safety Safety largely through supervision  
(command centers), restraints, isolation roomsStaff provide services and supervision; no use of isolation rooms; safety through positive relationships
Staffing 
ScheduleStaff work 56-hour work schedule with 
long (16 hour) shifts, sleeping at facility, then gone for several daysStaff have regular work schedules to support working with youth, consistency, and relationship building
Family & 
CommunityLimited family engagement and 
community involvementInteractive approach between youth, families, treatment center staff and community staff
Collaboration Siloed working practices; different programs done by different county agenciesIntegrated treatment model; cross-agency collaboration at each stage, including seamless transition and post-release services
Programs & 
EducationPrograms varied, sometimes limited, 
and often inconsistent with rest of camp experienceProgram and education central; focus on skill-building, relevancy, and internal transformation12
2013 Children’s Defense Fund - California and UCLA Luskin School of Public AffairsLos Angeles County is at a critical stage in reforming 
its juvenile justice system. The following recommen -
dations will help ensure that the Camp Kilpatrick Re -
placement project supports true reform:
1. Ensure youth sent to Kilpatrick (and other 
camps) truly need to be there. The first step to 
a better juvenile justice system is a smaller one. Since 
research confirms that incarcerating young people who commit low-level offenses is particularly harmful,
72 
LA County should only send youth to Camp Kilpat -
rick, or any other camp, who present significant dan -
ger to the community.73 While LA County has taken 
decisive steps to improve intake screening and reduce 
the average daily detention population in its 14 pro -
bation camps, further ensuring that only those youth 
who seriously threaten public safety be sent to the pro -
bation camps will promote better outcomes and cost 
effectiveness. 
2. Maintain fidelity to the model while adapting 
to the unique circumstances of Los Angeles.  
Success at other sites has been the result of adherence to the therapeutic, integrated, small-group treatment model. While each site’s location and population 
has specific needs, faithfulness to the model’s core 
principles is critical. In LA County, adaptations will likely include a projects-based education program modeled after the Road to Success Academy as well 
as extended and integrated mental health and aftercare 
services developed in coordination with community-based reentry programs.
Even the most forward-thinking building design will 
fall short if the county does not maintain fidelity to the model’s programming, training, collaboration and 
staffing by:
• Consulting with experts on the model; 
• Committing to small groups of no larger than 12 
youth;
• Ensuring staff focus on counseling and relationship-building by adjusting recruitment for these positions, modifying job descriptions, im -
proving trainings, and changing staffing sched -
ules; and 
• Conducting cross-departmental trainings and re -
vising Memorandums of Understanding between 
departments to increase collaboration.
3. Ensure broad agency collaboration and 
community partnerships.  The historical frag -
mentation and insularity of the county’s juvenile jus -
tice system has resulted in limited resources, a lack of transparency and hurdles to reform. Because county agencies – including departments of health services, 
mental health, education and probation – all play criti -
cal roles, collaboration at every step is vital. 
Community partnerships are also essential to ensure 
that reform is based on solid research and reflective of community needs. LA County’s community-based and faith-based organizations, advocates, researchers, or -
ganizers, youth and parents all have an investment in improved systems and improved youth outcomes. For community input to be significant, it must be solic -
ited early and often and be taken seriously. It also must 
come from those that have directly experienced the 
system. An outside evaluation will further help foster a successful public-private partnership. 
4. Improve tracking and use of data. 
Juvenile justice policy decisions in LA County are, unfortunately, often based on minimal data. 
Without the necessary data, the county implements 
new programs and expands pilot programs more often because they “feel” right then because of their demonstrated effectiveness. To better understand 
the experiences and outcomes of probation-involved 
youth and the success of programs that serve them, the reform of Camp Kilpatrick must be thoroughly 
documented and evaluated, enabling necessary course 
correction and ensuring that the experiences and outcomes of youth are indeed improving. Moving Forward: Recommendations for LA’s Camp 
Kilpatrick Replacement Project
12 2013 Children’s Defense Fund - California and UCLA Luskin School of Public Affairs13
Reforming the Nation’s Largest Juvenile Justice System5. Use Kilpatrick as a pilot for important 
concepts.
By using resources wisely and documenting successes 
and challenges, Camp Kilpatrick can be a springboard 
for greater reform in LA County probation camps. All youth in LA County, especially those who have been detained and deprived of their liberty, deserve 
to be treated humanely and in ways that will support 
their development, which means in probation camps aligned with best practices. While there are several other promising programs to learn from and expand 
on – including the multifaceted educational overhaul 
at Challenger Memorial Youth Center, the Road to Success Academy educational model at Camps Scott and Scudder (which is in the early stages of roll out to other camps), and community-based partnerships at 
other camps–lessons learned from Kilpatrick should 
undoubtedly inform future reform. This includes les -
sons from the research and planning phase happening now, as well as lessons from implementation when the 
camp opens in a few years. 
To ensure that a small-group treatment approach can 
be successful at other facilities, physically reconfigur -
ing other camps to support smaller groups and a more 
rehabilitative environment (as Santa Clara County did with its reconfiguration of its William F. James Ranch 
facility) should also be a top priority. 
13 Reforming the Nation’s Largest Juvenile Justice SystemConclusion
The time is now for Los Angeles County to move even 
further beyond outdated and ineffective approaches to 
juvenile justice with a probation camp that puts the needs 
of youth first. The Camp Vernon Kilpatrick Replacement Project–scheduled to open in 2017–represents a unique opportunity to develop an innovative approach that 
will profoundly improve the treatment of incarcerated youth. With a facility design, program design, staffing, training, and evaluation based on rehabilitative best 
practices, the LA Model can ensure that youth in the LA County juvenile justice system are set on the path 
toward becoming responsible adults with achievable 
goals, a credit to their communities. 14
2013 Children’s Defense Fund - California and UCLA Luskin School of Public AffairsEndnotes
1. Mark Ridley Thomas, “Don’t Let Houston Put Us To Shame,” Zocalo Public Square Blog, April 25, 2012. http://www.zoca -
lopublicsquare.org/2012/04/25/dont-let-houston-put-us-to-shame/ideas/nexus
2. Joanne Savage, ed., The Development of Persistent Criminality (New York: Oxford University Press, 2009).
3. T.A. Loughran, E.P. Mulvey, C.A. Schubert, J. Fagan, A.R. Piquero, and S.H. Losoya, “Estimating a Dose-Response Re -
lationship Between Length of Stay and Future Recidivism in Serious Juvenile Offenders,” Criminology 47, no. 3 (2009).
4. Sarah Bryer & Marc Levin. The Comeback States: Reducing Youth Incarceration in the United States. (Washington, 
D.C., 2013)
5. Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, Statistical Briefing Book, released December 9, 2011, http://www.ojjdp.gov/ojstatbb/corrections/qa08201.asp?qaDate=2010. 
6. California Board of State and Community Corrections, Juvenile Detention Profile Survey: Third Quarter Calendar Year 2012. Sacramento, CA: California Board of State and Community Corrections, Facilities Standards and Operations Divi -
sion [Producer and Distributor], 2012. http://www.bscc.ca.gov/download.php?f=/3Q12_JuvDS_full_report.pdf
7. The juvenile halls in the county typically hold youth pre-adjudication for an average of 17 days; these facilities, which contain individual cells, are not designed for long-term stays and typically offer minimal programming.
8. Of these fourteen probation camps, eleven are for males, two for females, and one is a treatment center (Dorothy Kirby) for both genders.
9. Examples include but are not limited to: lawsuits filed by organizations such as Public Counsel and ACLU – Southern California; federal oversight from the Department of Justice; a decade worth of documented youth stories, policy analy -
sis and organizing campaigns around reform from the Youth Justice Coalition; op ed articles written by the Advancement Project; numerous media reports of troubling conditions and policies; internal audits by the county and probation depart -
ment; elected officials’ writings and public comments like LA County Board Supervisor Ridley-Thomas.
10. Letter to the LA County Board of Supervisors on the Camp Vernon Kilpatrick Replacement Project, from William T. Fu -
jioka, CEO, and Jerry E. Powers, Chief Probation Officer, January 17, 2012. http://file.lacounty.gov/bos/supdocs/65921.
pdf 
11. Richard Mendel, No Place for Kids: The Case for Reducing Juvenile Incarceration (Baltimore, MD: The Annie E. Casey 
Foundation, 2011).
12. Mark W. Lipsey, James C. Howell, Marion R. Kelly, Gabrielle Chapman, and Darin Carver, “Improving the Effectiveness of Juvenile Justice Programs: A New Perspective on Evidence-Based Practice,” (Washington, DC: Center for Juvenile 
Justice Reform, December 2010), 23-24.
13. A classic treatment-oriented program that has been shown to reduce recidivism in the juvenile justice system is Cogni -
tive Behavior Therapy (CBT). This form of behavioral therapy is designed to elicit changes in thinking and beliefs, and ultimately influence behavior. CBT is active and goal directed and requires a small-group format, a trusting environment 
and strong relationships. “Cognitive Behavioral Treatment,” Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, U.S. 
Department of Justice, http://www.ojjdp.gov/mpg/progTypesCognitivePrev.aspx (accessed April 11, 2013).
14. Mark W. Lipsey, “The Primary Factors that Characterize Effective Interventions with Juvenile Offenders: A Meta-Analytic 
Overview,” Victims & Offenders 4, no. 9 (2009).
15. Positive youth development (also called positive youth justice), a framework developed primarily by Jeffrey Butts, M.S.W., Ph.D., of the John Jay College of Criminal Justice, has emerged as a resilience-oriented, strength-based ap -
proach to adolescence. Positive youth development posits that with the right opportunities and relationships, even youth with the highest needs can successfully transition into adulthood. Jeffrey A. Butts, Gordon Bazemore, and Aundra Saa 
Meroe, “Positive Youth Justice—Framing Justice Interventions Using the Concepts of Positive Youth Development,” 
(Washington, DC: Coalition for Juvenile Justice, 2010).
16. Stephen Phillippi, Laquinta Below & Damien Cuffie, “Evidence Based Practice for Juvenile Justice Reform in Louisiana,” (Louisiana State University School of Public Health, January 2010). http://publichealth.lsuhsc.edu/lamc/pdf%20files/
EBP%20Whitepaper%20FINAL%20FEB%202010%20_3_.pdf.
17. At its peak, the California Division of Juvenile Justice (formerly known as the California Youth Authority) housed nearly 15
Reforming the Nation’s Largest Juvenile Justice System10,122 young adults in 1996 in its facilities. In 2013, there are fewer than 750 young people in a mere three facilities, 
http://www.law.berkeley.edu/files/bccj/New_Era.pdf (accessed July 9, 2013).
18. County of Los Angeles, 2012-2013 Final Budget. http://www.lacountyannualreport.com/2012/pdf/2012-13_Complete_Budget.pdf
19. LA County Probation Data, August 2012.
20. In October 2008, the LA County Board of Supervisors voted to increase the 240 minutes of instruction required by the 
state to 300 minutes. http://file.lacounty.gov/bos/supdocs/41381.pdf 
21. Laura S Abrams, Jessica Nolan Daugherty and Bridget Freisthler, “County of Los Angeles: Young Offender Reentry 
Blueprint” (Commissioned by the Los Angeles County Community and Senior Services, and Prepared by UCLA School 
of Public Affairs, Department of Social Welfare, December 2010), 33. This average length of stay of 4.7 months is incon -
sistent with the three-, six-, and nine-month sentences youth are given because early release form the camps is a com -
mon practice.
22. Letter to the Board of State and Community Corrections on the Average Daily Cost to House Youth in Juvenile Halls and 
Camps / Ranches, from Gary Wion, Deputy Director, California Corrections Standards Authority, September 14, 2012. 
http://www.bscc.ca.gov/download.php?f=/Avg_Cost_Juv_Fac.pdf 
23. LA County Probation Data, August 2012
24. Anna Gorman, “Addressing girls’ health needs at juvenile detention centers,” Los Angeles Times, March 16, 2013, http://
www.latimes.com/news/local/la-me-juvenile-girls-health-20130317,0,564591.story (accessed July 2, 2013).
25. Allen F. Breed, “California Youth Authority Forestry Camp Program,” 17 Federal Probation 37 (1953), http://heinonline.org/HOL/LandingPage?collection=journals&handle=hein.journals/fedpro17&div=26&id=&page - (accessed June 25, 
2013).
26. Annette Kondo, “Doing Time: Camp Glenn Rockey Gives Juvenile Offenders a Chance to Fight Back.” Los Angeles 
Times, April 23, 1989. The camp also served as the model for federal Civilian Conservation Corps camps.
27. Richard Mendel, No Place for Kids: The Case for Reducing Juvenile Incarceration, 2011 
28. Challenger Memorial Youth Center, which is located next to an adult prison in a geographically remote area 70 miles north of downtown Los Angeles, is composed of six camps housed in a barracks-like compound. Group sizes are large 
and organized with a command-and-control model.
29. Daniel Macallair, Mike Males, Dinky Manek and Natasha Vinakor. “Renewing Juvenile Justice.” A report to the Sierra 
Health Foundation by the Center on Juvenile and Criminal Justice (March 2011), 54
30. Assistant Chief Probation Officer Calvin Remington, quoted in “Game-changer for a probation camp,” Zev’s Blog (Zev Yaroslavsky, Los Angeles County Supervisor, Third District), February 14, 2012, http://zev.lacounty.gov/news/game-
changer-for-a-probation-camp (accessed July 3, 2013).
31. Calvin C. Remington, “Management and Administrative Assessment of the Los Angeles County Probation Department: 
Back to the Basics: The Steps Required While Moving Forward,” Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors, August 24, 
2010. http://zev.lacounty.gov/pdfs/MANAGEMENT-ADMINISTRATIVE-ASSESSMENT.pdf
32. California Penal Code §919(b) mandates that the Grand Jury inspect all county and municipal police departments, jails, 
and holding cells in superior and municipal courts, as well as juvenile camps and other institutions operated by the Los 
Angeles Probation Department. 
33. Counsel in the lawsuit included ACLU of Southern California, ACLU National Prison Project, Disability Rights Legal Cen -
ter and Public Counsel.
34. The characteristics of an integrated behavioral treatment model are described in: Clemens Bartollas and Stuart Miller, 
Juvenile Justice in America (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2008), 280. 
35. At Challenger Memorial Youth Complex, reopening three of the camps has allowed for group sizes of close to 30 in some of the dorms. However, youth do not spend all day with this group, like is typically done to promote group cohesion in 
other small group treatment models. 
36. LA County probation camp and hall numbers were compared from 2009 to 2012 using the: Juvenile Detention Profile: 
California Board of State and Community Corrections. Juvenile Detention Profile Survey: Third Quarter Calendar Year 
2012. http://www.bscc.ca.gov/download.php?f=/3Q12_JuvDS_full_report.pdf
37. “Second Amendment to Memorandum of Agreement Between the United States and the County of Los Angeles Regard -
ing the Los Angeles County Probation Camps Entered Into On October 31, 2008,” October 2012. www.justice.gov/crt/about/spl/documents/lacamps_secondMOA_10-12-12.pdf 16
2013 Children’s Defense Fund - California and UCLA Luskin School of Public Affairs38. “Second Quarterly Report of the Technical, Consulting and Advisory (TCA) Team at the Challenger Memorial Youth Cen -
ter,” Casey A v Gundry, November 25, 2011
39. “First Semi-Annual Report of the Technical, Consulting, and Advisory (TCA) Team at the Challenger Memorial Youth 
Center,” Casey A v Gundry, April 1, 2013. 
40. Jason Song, “Youths at L.A. County probation caps complain about food,” Los Angeles Times, March 26, 2013, http://ar -
ticles.latimes.com/2013/mar/26/local/la-me-probation-food-20130326
41. In “Second Annual Report, Los Angeles County Probation Department,” March 2013, Office of Independent Review at -
torneys and investigators examine cases that include staff condoning and even promoting youth fight clubs, staff using 
excessive levels of force and violence when restraining youth, and reporting and oversight problems related to falsified 
accounts of youth restraint.
42. “Second Annual Report, Los Angeles County Probation Department,” Office of Independent Review, Los Angeles County. March 2013, 43-46. http://www.laoir.com/reports/OIR%20Second%20Annual%20Report%202013%20Final.pdf
43. “First Semi-Annual Report of the Technical, Consulting, and Advisory (TCA) Team at the Challenger Memorial Youth Center: Casey A v Gundry (April 1, 2013), 3-4
44. Cited in Dan Macallair, “Reaffirming Rehabilitation in Juvenile Justice,” Center on Juvenile and Criminal Justice (lecture, Western Society of Criminology, Berkeley, CA, February 1991), Harvard researchers Ohlin, Miller and Coates’ analysis 
of population size in youth correctional environments demonstrated how violence is partly a function of population size. 
http://www.cjcj.org/uploads/cjcj/documents/reaffirming_rehabilitation_in_juvenile_justice.pdf
45. Daniel Macallair, Mike Males, Dinky Manek and Natasha Vinakor. “Renewing Juvenile Justice.” 55
46. For example, in summer 2013 Camp Gonzales closed for several months due to roof repair. Other camps, like Camp Kil -
patrick, incur average annual repair and maintenance costs of over $1 million. 
47. In United Nations Special Rapporteur on torture, Juan E. Méndez told the UN’s General Assembly’s third committee, which deals with social, humanitarian and cultural affairs, to ban the solitary confinement of prisoners except in very ex -
ceptional circumstances and for as short a time as possible, with an absolute prohibition in the case of juveniles and people with mental disabilities. https://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=40097&;Cr=torture&Cr1=%20For -
ceRecrawl:%200#.Ud0DU1eRfKc
48. C. Remington, “Management and Administrative Assessment of the Los Angeles County Probation Department.”
49. Senate Bill 81 was termed the juvenile justice realignment bill because it set strict eligibility requirements for which youth could be committed to the state juvenile justice authority, the Division of Juvenile Justice (DJJ), ensuring that California 
juvenile courts could only send youth that had committed the most serious or violent crimes to DJJ. The remaining youth 
who would no longer be eligible for commitment to DJJ would remain the responsibility of the counties. 
50. Juvenile Justice Realignment Law § SB 81, Chapter 175, and AB 191, Chapter 257 (2007), http://www.leginfo.ca.gov/pub/07-08/bill/sen/sb_0051-0100/sb_81_bill_20070824_chaptered.pdf
51. Los Angeles County applied for these funds in 2009, proposing a facility composed of 120 individual cells (or wet rooms). The application was not selected, likely because the proposed facility design was not based on best practices.
52. “Game-changer for a probation camp,” Zev’s Blog (Zev Yaroslavsky, Los Angeles County Supervisor, Third District). 
53. Missouri Division of Youth Services, “Missouri Division of Youth Services Annual Report Fiscal Year 2012,” http://dss.mo.gov/re/pdf/dys/youth-services-annual-report-fy12.pdf
54. Missouri Division of Youth Services, “Missouri Division of Youth Services Annual Report Fiscal Year 2011,” http://dss.mo.gov/re/pdf/dys/youth-services-annual-report-fy11.pdf
55. Richard Mendel, “The Missouri Model.” 
56. Missouri Department of Social Services, “Missouri Division of Youth Services Annual Report Fiscal Year 2008,” http://dss.mo.gov/re/pdf/dys/dysfy08.pdf
57. Richard Mendel, “The Missouri Model.” 
58. Santa Clara County defines program failure here as a violation or new arrest while at the ranch.
59. Santa Clara County defines recidivism here as a re-arrest or violation within one year of release. 
60. “County of Santa Clara Strategic Investment in Innovative Juvenile Support Paying Off,” County of Santa Clara press re -
lease, June 11, 2012, on the County of Santa Clara website, http://www.sccgov.org/sites/opa/nr/Pages/County-of-Santa-
Clara-Strategic-Investment-in-Innovative-Juvenile-Support-Paying-Off.aspx, accessed July 10, 2013.
61. Santa Clara County Enhanced Ranch Program presentation, Washington, D.C., September 2012
62. Ibid. 17
Reforming the Nation’s Largest Juvenile Justice System63. Ibid
64. District of Columbia Department of Youth Rehabilitation Services, 2012 Annual Performance Report. http://dyrs.dc.gov/
sites/default/files/dc/sites/dyrs/page_content/attachments/DYRS_AR-low-res_041713.pdf
65. Ibid. 
66. Richard A. Mendel, “The Missouri Model: Reinventing the Practice of Rehabilitating Youthful Offenders,” Annie E. Casey Foundation, 2010, http://www.aecf.org/~/media/Pubs/Initiatives/Juvenile%20Detention%20Alternatives%20Initiative/MO -
Model/MO_Fullreport_webfinal.pdf
67. Small group size is essential because groups of 12 or larger have been shown to reduce group cohesiveness and nega -
tively affect relationship building, both of which are essential to this model. Research has shown that personal discus -
sions and problem solving work most effectively in small settings. Increasing group size can reduce the attention each individual receives, thus reducing effectiveness. L.K. Bendtro and A.E. Ness, Re-Educating Troubled Youth: Environ -
ments for Teaching and Education (Piscataway, NJ: Aldine Transaction, 1983). See also K.A. Avinger and R.A. Jones, “Group Treatment of Sexually Abused Adolescent Girls: A Review of Outcome Studies,” The American Journal of Family 
Therapy 35, no. 4 (2007): 315-326. 
68. This small group treatment model is based on approaches like Cognitive Behavior Treatment (CBT), an evidenced-based 
therapy shown to be effective with high-risk youth. Research on treatments utilizing CBT or similar cognitive behavior 
theories supports the model of groups that do not exceed 12 members. “Cognitive Behavioral Treatment,” Office of Juve -
nile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, U.S. Department of Justice, http://www.ojjdp.gov/mpg/progTypesCognitivePrev.aspx (accessed April 11, 2013). See also K. Jahnke, “Anger management programs for children and teens: A review of 
eleven anger management programs” (paper, Annual Meeting of the National Association of School Psychologies, Or -
lando, FL, April 1998).
69. Urie Bronfenbrenner, “The Ecology of Human Development” (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1979).
70. In the Youth Justice Coalition’s report “Welcome Home LA: From the Cell Block to the Corner Block” (February 2011), which many organizations and individuals endorsed, it is stressed that reentry planning should start as early as the time 
of arrest. http://www.youth4justice.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/2012WelcomeHomeLA.pdf 
71. In “Families Unlocking Futures: Solutions to the Crisis in Juvenile Justice,” a report by Justice for Families, with research 
support by Data Center (September 2012), the crucial roles families play in the success of system-involved youth is de -
tailed. In a survey of over 1,000 families, nearly one-third of them from California, eighty-six percent of family members surveyed said they would like to be more involved in their children’s treatment while they are confined, yet a majority of 
families said there were serious impediments to reaching youth by phone or visiting (difficulties with transportation, dis -
tance, cost, insufficient visiting hours and restrictive visitation rules were cited). Additionally, only 32 percent of parents and families surveyed reported discussing release plans with juvenile justice system staff before their child was re -
leased. A family-centered approach is needed so families are engaged in meaningful ways. http://www.youth4justice.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/Families-Unlocking-Futures.pdf 
72. In “First-time violent juvenile offenders: probation, placement and recidivism,” Joseph P. Ryan, Laura Abrams and Hui 
Huang (in press, 2013) found that, for youth who had committed their first violent offense, being assigned to probation 
camps was equated with a higher likelihood of recidivism than being assigned to suitable placement or in-home proba -
tion. This supports the idea that less restrictive settings are a more appropriate and cost-effective approach for these youth.
73. Daniel Macallair, Mike Males, Dinky Manek and Natasha Vinakor. “Renewing Juvenile Justice.” A report to the Sierra 
Health Foundation by the Center on Juvenile and Criminal Justice (March 2011)18
2013 Children’s Defense Fund - California and UCLA Luskin School of Public AffairsAcknowledgements 
We want to express our gratitude to the individuals who generously provided support to this policy brief, includ -
ing: Jesse Reyes, Intern, CDF-CA; Laura Rivas, Research Associate, UCLA Luskin School of Public Affairs; 
Hanif Houston, Communications Associate, CDF-CA; Michele Stillwell-Parvensky, Policy and Communica-
tions Associate, CDF-CA; Angie Salazar, Policy Associate, CDF-CA; Carol Biondi, Commissioner, LA County Commission on Children and Families; Jacquelyn McCroskey, Professor, USC School of Social Work; and Dan Macalliar, Executive Director, Center on Juvenile and Criminal Justice.  Additionally, copy editing was completed 
by Cathy Curtis and graphic designing by Micah Bazant. 
In addition, our heartfelt thanks go to the staff, leadership and consultants who work at the model sites referenced 
in this brief – the Enhanced James Ranch in Santa Clara County, CA, the New Beginnings facility in Washington, 
DC, and Missouri’s Division of Youth Services and Missouri Youth Services Institute. These individuals opened 
their doors for site visits and answered our countless questions.
We also must acknowledge the advocates, organizers and individuals who have been tirelessly pushing for re -
form in Los Angeles County’s probation camps for years, including but not limited to the Youth Justice Coalition, 
the Office of Restorative Justice at the Archdiocese of L.A., the Everychild Foundation, Public Counsel, ACLU-Southern California, Loyola Law School’s Center on Juvenile Law and Policy, the Advancement Project, Inside 
Out Writers, New Roads, as well as Los Angeles County policymakers – specifically the Board of Supervisors, 
Chief Probation Officer Jerry Powers and Office of Education Superintendent Dr. Arturo Delgado – whose leader -
ship and dedication have carried this project forward.
Finally, this policy brief was made possible by the generous support of The California Wellness Foundation. Michelle Newell  is a Senior Policy Associate at the Children’s Defense Fund - California. 
Dr. Jorja Leap  is an Adjunct Professor of Social Welfare and Director of the Health and Social Justice 
Partnership at the UCLA Luskin School of Public Affairs.About the Authors
Children’s Defense Fund-California is the California office of the Children’s Defense Fund, a non-profit child advocacy or -
ganization that has worked relentlessly for nearly 40 years to ensure a level playing field for all children. The Children’s 
Defense Fund champions policies and programs that lift children out of poverty, protect them from abuse and neglect, and ensure their access to health care, a quality education, and a moral and spiritual foundation. www.cdfca.org  
Founded in 1994 and dedicated in 2011, the UCLA Luskin School of Public Affairs is a leading institution for research and scholarship in the areas of public policy, social welfare and urban planning. our global society. Based in the global metropolis of Los Ange- les, UCLA Luskin develops creative solutions and innovative leaders that confront challenges in immigration, drug policy, prison reform, transportation, the environment, and other areas vital to the continued health and well-being of our global society. www.luskin.ucla.edu
