   
WHAT IS SOLITARY CON FINEMENT?  
Solitary confinement is the practice of isolating people  in 
closed cells for 22 -24 hours a day, virtually free of human 
contact, for periods of time ranging from days to decades.  
As Craig Haney, professor of psychology at UC Santa Cruz, 
stated:1 “For perhaps obvious reasons, total and absolute 
solitary confinement —literally complete isolation from any 
form of human contact —does not exist in prison and never 
has. Instead, the term is generally used to refer to conditions 
of extreme (but not total) isolation from others. ” 
Few prison systems use the term “solitary confinement, ” in-
stead referring to prison “segregation ” or placement in 
“restrictive housing. ” Some systems make a distinction be-
tween various reasons for solitary confinement. “Disciplinary 
segregation ” or “punitive segregation ” is time spent in solitary 
as punishment for violating prison rules, and usually lasts 
from several weeks to several years. “Administrative segre-
gation ” relies on a system of classification rather than actual 
behavior, and often constitutes a permanent or indefinite 
placement, extending from years to decades. “Involuntary 
protective custody ” is especially common among children 
held in adult prisons, LGBTQ individuals, and other vulnera-
ble populations who purportedly are placed in isolation for 
their own safety. Whatever the terminology, the practice en-
tails a deliberate effort to limit social contact for a determi-
nate or indeterminate period of time.  
The places where people are held in isolation also go by var-
ious names. In California, long-term solitary confinement 
units are referred to as Security Housing Units (SHUs); 
in New York, the same acronym stands for Special Housing 
Units. In Oregon, long -term isolation units are called Inten-
sive Management Units (IMUs), while in Pennsylvania  they 
are Restricted Housing Units (RHUs). In the federal system, 
one type of solitary confinement takes place in Special Man-
agement Units (SMUs), and another in Communications 
Management Units (CMUs). What all share are conditions 
of extreme isolation and sensory deprivation within a small, 
confined space, alone or, in limited cases, with a cellmate.  
Most prisons in the United States contain a solitary confine-
ment unit, and most local jails include cells where people are 
held in solitary. In addition, some incarcerated people are 
held in isolation in special “supermax ” prisons, such as Cali-
fornia ’s Pelican Bay, Virginia ’s Red Onion, and the federal 
government ’s ADX in Florence, Colorado. At least 44 states 
and the federal system now have supermax prisons,2 which 
are generally composed solely of solitary confinement cells.  
HOW MANY PEOPLE ARE HELD IN SOLITARY?  
The number of people held in solitary confinement in the 
United States has been notoriously difficult to determine. The 
lack of reliable information is due to state -by-state variances 
and shortcomings in data gathering and ideas of what consti-
tutes solitary confinement. Currently available estimates sug-
gest that at least  80,000  incarcerated men, women, and chil-
dren are held in some form of isolated confinement on any 
given day.  A report from the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) found 
that in 2012, nearly 20 percent of people incarcerated in fed-
eral and state prisons and 18 percent of people held in local 
jails had spent time in solitary confinement. On an average 
day, 4.4 percent of those in prisons and 2.7 percent of those 
in jails were in restrictive housing, including disciplinary and 
administrative segregation.3 Based on 2012 population sta-
tistics for state and federal prisons4 and local jails,5 calcula-
tions show that on an average day in 2012, 89,199  people 
were held in solitary —69,097  in state and federal prisons 
and 20,102 in local jails. About 448,000 people had been 
held in solitary confinement at some point in the preceding 
twelve months. These figures, unlike many others, do include 
local jails. However,  they do not include any juvenile, immi-
gration, or military detention facilities.  
More recent  figures collected and published by Yale Univer-
sity’s Liman Center in partnership with the Association of 
State Correctional Administrators suggest some decline in 
the number of people held in  solitary, reflecting widespread 
advocacy efforts and the implementation of reforms in some 
states. A survey conducted in late 2015  found approximately 
68,000  individuals in restricted housing.6 By late 2017,  the 
number was  61,000 .7 However, these  figures do not include 
people held in solitary for less than fifteen days (nor those in 
local jails or other types of detention), so they offer no point 
of accurate comparison with numbers collected by the BJS.  
Earlier surveys conducted by the BJS show the trends in the 
use of solitary confinement over time. A census of federal 
and state prisons (not jails) conducted in 2005 found 81,622 
people held in restricted housing.8 The BJS ’s 2000 census of 
the same facilities found 80,870 people in restricted housing, 
including 36,499 in administrative segregation, 33,586 in dis-
ciplinary segregation, and 10,765 in protective custody. The 
2000 figures represented a 40 percent increase over 1995, 
when 57,591  people were held in restricted housing. (During 
the same period of time, the overall prison population grew 
by 28 percent.)9 Further, a widely accepted 2005 study f ound 
that some 25,000  of the people in restricted housing were 
being held in long -term solitary in supermax prisons around 
the country.10 
All of the numbers in these surveys and reports were self -
reported by federal, state, and local departments of correc-
tions, with no process for independent verification.  
WHO GETS PUT IN SOLI TARY CONFINEMENT?  
Far from being a last -resort measure reserved for the “worst 
of the worst, ” solitary confinement has become a control 
strategy of first resort in many prisons and jails.  
Today, incarcerated men and women  can be placed in com-
plete isolation not only for violent acts but for possessing 
contraband, testing positive for drug use, ignoring orders, or 
using profanity. Others have ended up in solitary because 
they have untreated mental illnesses, are children in need of 
“protection, ” are gay or transgender, are Muslim, have un-
popular political beliefs, have been identified by others as 
gang members, or report rape or abuse by prison officials. 
Recent studies have shown that people of color are even 
2  
more over -represented in solitary than they are in the prison 
population in general, and receive longer terms in solitary 
than white people for the same disciplinary infractions.11  
Individuals  are sent to solitary based on charges that are 
levied, adjudicated, and enforced by prison officials with little 
or no outside oversight.  Many prison systems have a hearing 
process, but these are  seldom more than perfunctory.  Prison 
staff serve as prosecutors, judges, and juries, and there are 
no defense attorneys. Unsurprisingly, the accused are nearly 
always found guilty.  
WHAT ARE CONDITIONS LIKE IN  SOLITARY?  
For those who endure it, life in solitary confinement means 
living 23 to 24 hours a day in a cell. People held in discipli-
nary segregation in federal prisons, for example, typically 
spend two days a week entirely in isolation, and 23 hours a 
day in their cells during the remaining five days, when they 
are allotted one hour for exercise. Exercise usually takes 
place alone in an exercise room or a fenced or walled “dog 
run.” Some individuals in solitary are escorted, usually in 
shackles, to the shower, while others have showers within 
their cells.  They may or may not be allowed to leave their 
cells for visits or to make telephone calls.  
Solitary confinement cells generally measure from 6x9 to 
8x10 feet. Some have bars, but most have solid  metal 
doors.  Meals generally come through slots in the doors, as 
do any communications with prison staff.  Within these cells, 
people live lives of enforced idleness, denied the opportunity 
to work or attend prison programming, and sometimes 
banned from having  televisions, radios, art supplies, and 
even reading materials  in their cells.  
People held at  Pelican Bay State Prison  in northern Califor-
nia have been  described as living in a “small, cement prison 
cell. Everything is gray concrete: the bed, the walls, the un-
movable stool. Everything except the combination stainless -
steel sink and toilet …You can ’t move more than eight feet in 
one direction. ”12 
Thomas Silverstein, who has been held in the federal system 
under a “no human contact ” order for 35 years, described his 
environment in one prison: “I was not only isolated, but also 
disoriented …This was exacerbated by the fact that I wasn ’t 
allowed to have a wristwatch or clock. In addition, the bright, 
artificial lights remained on in the cell constantly, increasing 
my disorientation and making it difficult to sleep. Not only 
were they constantly illuminated, but those lights buzzed in-
cessantly. The buzzing noise was maddening, as there often 
were no other sounds at all. This may sound like a small 
thing, but it was my entire world. ”13  
For more firsthand descriptions of life in solitary confinement, 
see Solitary Watch ’s Voices from Solitary  series.  
HOW LONG DO PEOPLE S PEND IN SOLITARY?  
Terms in solitary  range from a few days to several dec-
ades.  Precise figures are scarce. In response to a 2016 sur-
vey, federal and state prisons reported that 11 percent of the 
people they held in restricted housing had been there for 
three years or more, and 5.4 percent had been there for six 
years or more. Anecdotal evidence suggests that some juris-
dictions may have under -reported lengths of stays.  
In California in 2011 —prior to the series of mass hunger 
strikes and legal challenges that led to reforms —nearly all of 
the 1,100 men in the SHU at Pelican Bay State Prison had 
been in solitary for five years or more; about half for ten 
years or more ; over 200 for 15 years or more ; and 78 for 20 years  or more.14 The group of men incarcerated in Louisi-
ana known as the Angola 3 spent what are likely to longest 
spans of time in solitary —29, 42, and 44 years.15  
WHAT ARE THE PSYCHOL OGICAL EFFECTS OF   
SOLITARY CONFINEMENT ? 
Following extensive interviews with people held in the SHU 
at Pelican Bay in 1993, Dr. Stuart Grassian found  that soli-
tary confinement induces a psychiatric disorder, which he 
called “SHU Syndrome, ” characterized by hypersensitivity to 
external stimuli, hallucinations, panic attacks, cognitive defi-
cits, obsessive thinking, paranoia, and a litany of other physi-
cal and psychological problems.16 Psychological assess-
ments of men in solitary at Pelican Bay indicated high rates 
of anxiety, nervousness, obsessive ruminations, anger, vio-
lent fantasies, nightmares, trouble sleeping, as well as dizzi-
ness, perspiring hands, and heart palpitations.  
In testimony17 before the California Assembly ’s Public Safety 
Committee in August 2011, Dr. Craig Haney discussed the 
effects of solitary confinement: “In short, prisoners in these 
units complain of chronic and overwhelming feelings of sad-
ness, hopelessness, and depression. Rates of suicide in the 
California lockup units are by far the highest in any prison 
housing units anywhere in the country. Many people held in 
the SHUs become deeply and unshakably paranoid, and are 
profoundly anxious around and afraid of people (on those 
rare occasions when they are allowed contact with them). 
Some begin to lose their grasp on their sanity and badly de-
compensate. ” 
In 2013, forensic psychiatrist Dr. Raymond Patterson report-
ed that people held in California ’s Security Housing Units and 
Administrative Segregation Units had a 33 times greater 
chance of suicide than someone in the prison system ’s gen-
eral population.18 Studies in New York19 and Texas20 also 
found significantly higher suicide rates in solitary.  
A 2012 class -action lawsuit filed against the Federal Bureau 
of Prisons and officials at ADX Florence supermax prison  
described  how solitary psychologically affected individuals 
held there: “Prisoners interminably wail, scream and bang on 
the walls of their cells. Some mutilate their bodies with ra-
zors, shards of glass, writing utensils and whatever other 
objects they can obtain. Some swallow razor blades, nail 
clippers, parts of radios and televisions, broken glass and 
other dangerous objects. Others carry on delusional conver-
sations with voices they hear in their heads, oblivious to the 
reality and the danger that such behavior might pose to 
themselves and anyone who interacts with them. ”21 
ARE PEOPLE WITH MENT AL ILLNESSES PUT IN         
SOLTARY CONFINEMENT?  
Over the past 30 years, prisons and jails have become the 
nation ’s largest inpatient psychiatric facilities. A 2014 Treat-
ment Advocacy Center report  found that over 350,000 indi-
viduals with severe mental illnesses were being held in U.S. 
prisons and jails in 2012, while 35,000 were patients in state 
psychiatric hospitals.22 
Solitary confinement cells, in particular, are now used to 
warehouse thousands of individuals  with mental illness. In a 
2003 report , Human Rights Watch estimated, based on avail-
able data from state prisons,  that one -third to one -half of 
those held  in isolation had some form of mental illness.23 
Most prisons and jails have shortages of trained mental 
health staff, and existing staff often face restrictions to 
providing treatment. In some facilities, treatment for people in 3  
solitary consists of weekly or monthly mental health checks 
that are conducted through the feeding slots in cell doors. 
Although people with underlying mental illnesses are at sig-
nificantly greater risk of self -harm and suicide if placed in iso-
lation, people who self -harm are sometimes punished for 
their actions with terms in solitary, and individuals perceived 
to be suicidal are frequently placed in completely bare “strip 
cells. ” 
The American Psychiatric Association,24 National Commis-
sion on Correctional Health Care,25 National Alliance on Men-
tal Illness,26 and other professional organizations have taken 
positions opposing the use of solitary for individuals with seri-
ous mental illness. The United Nations and many advocacy 
organizations also support a complete ban on the use of soli-
tary confinement for people with mental illness.  
WHAT ARE THE NEUROLOGICAL AND PHYSICAL   
EFFECTS OF SOLITARY CONFINEMENT?  
At a 2016 conference on solitary confinement, Dr. Michael J. 
Zigmond, professor of neurology at University of Pittsburgh, 
said, “Isolation devastates the brain.  There is no question 
about that. Without air, we will live minutes. Without water, 
we will live days. Without nutrition, we will live weeks. Without 
physical activity, our lives are decreased by years. Social 
interaction is part of these basic elements of life. ”27 At another 
conference in 2014, Dr. Huda Akil, a neuroscientist at Univer-
sity of Michigan, explained the brain “literally shrivels ” under 
the extreme stress that people experience in solitary.28 
In a 2016 article, Dr . Brie Williams, Director of the Criminal 
Justice & Health Program at UC San Francisco, called the 
health effects of solitary “under -documented, ” but pointed to 
some known risks: “Such a prolonged lack of sunlight can 
cause Vitamin D deficiency, putting older adults at risk for 
fractures and falls, a leading cause of hospitalization and 
death. Moreover, exercise —even the little we get walking 
from sofa to kitchen to bedroom —is crucial for maintaining 
health among all ages. It is also an important preventative 
measure, and sometimes treatment, for many conditions —
hypertension, diabetes, arthritis, heart disease, among oth-
ers. These conditions are disproportionately common, at 
younger ages, among prisoners. ”29 
ARE CHILDREN HELD IN SOLITARY?  
Children are placed in solitary confinement in both the juve-
nile and adult criminal justice systems. Although there are no 
reliable numbers on the use of solitary on children, available 
data suggests that hundreds and probably thousands of chil-
dren are experiencing solitary each year —some for months 
or even years at a time.  
The Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention 
(OJJDP) found that 45,567 children under 18 were held in 
juvenile detention facilities in October of 2016.30 In 2014, 47 
percent of juvenile detention centers and 46 percent of train-
ing schools reported  using solitary confinement as a discipli-
nary control method.31  
OJJDP data from 2014 and 2016 found more than 5,000 chil-
dren held in adult prison and jails.32 Despite bans in a handful 
of states, most of these facilities continue to place children in 
solitary to punish behavior or isolate them from adults.  
The experience of  isolation is particularly damaging to young 
people, since they are still in the stages of adolescent devel-
opment. According to the Campaign for Youth Justice , data 
shows that children are 36 times more likely to commit sui-
cide in an adult jail than a juvenile detention facility and nine-teen times more likely to kill themselves in isolation than in 
general population.33 In the juvenile justice system, approxi-
mately half of all suicides  take place when a young person is 
held in “room confinement. ”34 
WHAT EFFECT DOES SOLITARY CONFINEMENT 
HAVE ON LIFE AFTER PRISON?  
Despite the tradition of harsh sentencing in the United States, 
most incarcerated people will eventually be released from 
prison and be returned to their communities.  Yet impact of 
solitary confinement on recidivism and public safety has re-
ceived little attention.35 
In 2015, the American Civil Liberties Union of Texas and Tex-
as Civil Rights Project reported that individuals released from 
solitary confinement cells were more likely to land back in 
prison than those released from the general population. Of 
people released from Texas prisons in 2006, 48.8 percent 
were rearrested within three years. For those released from 
isolation units, 60.84 percent were rearrested in the same 
time frame.36 The 2006 report  of the Commission on Safety 
and Abuse in America ’s Prisons also found that solitary con-
finement was related to higher than average recidivism rates, 
particularly if people  were released directly from solitary.37 
Stories told by survivors of solitary confinement and their 
families suggest that the lasting damage caused by solitary 
adds significantly to the already difficult challenges of re -
entry.  
HOW MUCH DOES SOLITA RY CONFINEMENT COST?  
Nationally, it has been estimated that keeping a person in 
solitary for one year costs taxpayers $75,000 —approximately 
three times as much as housing a person at a regular maxi-
mum security prison.38 
In addition, solitary confinement has been associated with 
significantly higher construction costs per cell. For example, 
the now closed Tamms Correctional Center in Illinois cost 
$73 million to build in  1998 and was designed to hold 500 
people,  giving it a  construction price tag of approximately 
$146,000 per bed.39 
WHAT DO INTERNATIONA L AGREEMENTS SAY 
ABOUT SOLITARY CONFINEMENT?  
In October 2011, Juan Méndez, the UN Special Rapporteur 
on Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment, 
called on UN member nations to ban nearly all uses of soli-
tary confinement in prisons, warning that it causes serious 
mental and physical harm and often amounts to torture. His 
report, which singled out for criticism the routine use of super-
max isolation in the United States, recommended an end to 
“prolonged or indefinite solitary confinement, ” which he de-
fined as anything beyond fifteen days, as well as a complete 
ban on any use of solitary on children or people with mental 
illness.40 
In December 2015, the United Nations codified most of Mén-
dez’s recommendations when it passed the Standard Mini-
mum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, generally known 
as “the Mandela Rules. ”41  Earlier, the governing body of the 
UN Convention Against Torture, which the United States rati-
fied in 1994, recommended that the practice of prison isola-
tion be abolished.42 In 1992, the UN Human Rights Commit-
tee43 suggested that prolonged isolation  could amount to a 
violation of international human rights law. The UN Commit-
tee on the Rights of the Child has also urged an end to the 
use of solitary confinement against minors.  4  
WHAT REFORMS HAVE TAKEN PLACE IN U.S.     
PRISONS AND JAIL?  
In the past decade, a movement has grown nationally and 
locally to abolish long -term solitary confinement. Through 
litigation, legislation, and grassroots pressure, advocates 
have begun to secure meaningful reforms in some prison 
systems, while also increasing public awareness of the harms 
caused by solitary and the existence of safe and humane 
alternatives.  
In 2016, President Barack Obama denounced the overuse of 
solitary confinement and set out a plan to reduce the use of 
isolation in the federal prison system.44 However, many of the 
reforms had yet to be implemented when Donald Trump took 
office.45 
Progress has nonetheless continued at the state and local 
levels. In fall 2017, Colorado became the first state to an-
nounce that it had virtually eliminated long -term solitary con-
finement and implemented the standards laid out by the Man-
dela Rules. Colorado has replaced prolonged solitary with 
alternatives that include step -down programs and mental 
health units.46 North Dakota  also instituted more humane al-ternatives to solitary after its director of corrections visited 
prisons in Norway.47 Washington State has used innovative 
programs to greatly reduce its use of solitary confinement.48 
Under pressure from lawsuits, California49 and New York50 
have also significantly reduced their populations in solitary, 
and several additional states have worked with the Vera Insti-
tute of Justice ’s Safe Alternatives to Segregation project to 
reduce their use of solitary.  
WHERE CAN I FIND OUT MORE ABOUT SOLITARY 
CONFINEMENT —AND EFFORTS TO END IT?  
Be sure to sign up to receive updates from Solitary Watch at 
solitarywatch.org . Also visit Unlock the Box, a national coa-
lition of organizations (including Solitary Watch, the ACLU 
National Prison Project, the National Religious Campaign 
Against Torture, and the Center for Children ’s Law and Poli-
cy) working to end long -term solitary across the country, at 
unlocktheboxcampaign.org . A searchable list of resources 
including reports, media articles, scholarly and law review 
articles, video, audio, court cases, policy documents, advoca-
cy organizations, advocacy tools, and first -hand accounts of 
life in solitary can be found in the Solitary Confinement Re-
source Center at scrc.solitarywatch.org .  
1Expert Report of Craig Haney, Ph.D, J.D. (2015). Ashker v. Brown.  U.S. 
District Court, Northern District of California.  
2Mears, D. P. (2006). Evaluating the Effectiveness of Supermax Prisons. 
Florida State University, Urban Institute, & Justice Policy Center.   
3Beck, A. J. (2015).  Use of Restrictive Housing in U.S. Prisons and Jails, 
2011 –12. Bureau of Justice Statistics.  
4Carson, E. A., & Golinelli, D. (2013).  Prisoners in 2012: Trends in Admis-
sions and Releases, 1991 –2012 . Bureau of Justice Statistics.  
5Minton, T. D. (2013, May).  Annual Survey of Jails: Jail -Level Data, 
2012.  Bureau of Justice Statistics.  
6Association of State Correctional Administrators & Arthur Liman Public 
Interest Program, Yale Law School (2016). Aiming to Reduce Time -In-Cell.  
Reports from Correctional Systems on the Numbers of Prisoners in Restrict-
ed Housing and on the Potential of Policy Changes to Bring About Reforms.   
7Association of State Correctional Administrators & Arthur Liman Public 
Interest Program, Yale Law School (2016).  
8Browne, A., Cambier, A., & Agha, S. (2011). Prisons Within Prisons: Use of 
Segregation in the United States.  Federal Sentencing Reporter , 24(1).  
9Commission on Safety and Abuse in America ’s Prisons (2006). Confronting 
Confinement . Vera Institute of Justice.  
10Mears, D. P. (2006).  
11Juleyka Lantigua -Williams (2016). The Link Between Race and Solitary 
Confinement. The Atlantic.  
12Laura Sullivan (2006). At Pelican Bay, a Life in Solitary. National Public 
Radio.  
13Casella, J. & Ridgeway, J. (2011). America ’s Most Isolated Federal Prison-
er Describes 10,220 Days in Solitary Confinement. Solitary Watch .  
14Plaintiffs ’ Second Amended Complaint (2011). Ashker v. Brown .  
15The Angola 3 Case: What You Need to Know (2018). International Coali-
tion to Free the Angola 3.  
16Grassian, S. (2006).  Psychiatric Effects of Solitary Confinement, W ashing-
ton U Journal of Law and Policy, 22(1).   
17Rodriguez, S. (2011). "Pawns in a Failed Experiment": Testimony of Dr. 
Craig Haney on Solitary Confinement. Solitary Watch . 
18Rodriguez, S. (2013). California Prison Conditions Driving Inmates to Sui-
cide. Solitary Watch .  
19Casella, J. & Ridgeway, J. (2010). Suicide and Solitary Confinement in 
New York State Prisons. Solitary Watch .  
20Johnson, K. (2006). Inmate Suicides Linked to Solitary.  USA Today . 
21Cohen, A. (2012). An American Gulag: Descending Into Madness at Su-
permax. The Atlantic .  
22Treatment Advocacy Center (2014). The Treatment of Persons with Mental 
Illness in Prisons and Jails: A State Survey.  
23Human Rights Watch (2003). Ill-Equipped: U.S. Prisons and Offenders 
with Mental Illness . 
24American Psychiatric Association (2012). Position Statement on Segrega-
tion of Prisoners with Mental Illness.  
25National Commission on Correctional Health Care (2016). New Position 
Statement Provides Guidance on Solitary Confinement .  
26National Alliance on Mental Illness (2018). Policy Platform: Legal Issues.  
27Schaeffer, C. (2016, May 11). “Isolation Devastates the Brain ”: The Neuro-
science of Solitary Confinement. Solitary Watch.   
28Ramlagan, N. (2014). Solitary Confinement Fundamentally Alters the Brain, Scientists Say. American Association for the Advancement of Sci-
ence.  
29Williams, BA (2016). Older Prisoners and the Physical Health Effects of 
Solitary Confinement.  American Journal of Public Health 106(12).  
30OJJDP (2018). One Day Count of Juveniles in Residential Placement Fa-
cilities, 1997 -2016 .   
31OJJDP (2015). Juveniles in Adult Jails and Prisons .  
32OJJDP (2016). Data Reflect Changing Nature of Facility Populations, 
Characteristics, and Practices .  
33Campaign for Youth Justice (2007). Jailing Juveniles: The Dangers of 
Incarcerating Youth in Adult Jails in America .  
34OJJDP (2009). Juvenile Suicide in Confinement: A National Survey. (2009, 
February).  
35Gordon, S. (2014). Solitary Confinement, Public Safety, and Recidivism. U 
of Michigan Journal of Law Reform  47(2).  
36Butler, B. & Simpson, M. (2015). A Solitary Failure: The Waste, Cost and 
Harm of Solitary Confinement in Texas . ACLU of Texas.  
37Commission on Safety and Abuse in America ’s Prisons  (2006).  
38Mears, D. P. (2006).  
39Ross, J. (2006, April 19). Is the End in Sight for Supermax? Forbes.  
40 Juan E. Méndez (2011). Special Rapporteur ’s Thematic Report and Follow
-Up on Solitary Confinement . 
41Shalev, S. (2018). Mandela Rules: UN Standard Minimum Rules on the 
Treatment of Prisoners   
42Lobel, J. (2009). Prolonged Solitary Confinement and the Constitution. 
Journal of Constitutional Law  11(1).  
43International Psychological Trauma Symposium (2007). The Istanbul 
Statement on the Use and Effects of Solitary Confinement .  
44Obama, B. (2016). Why We Must Rethink Solitary Confinement. Washing-
ton Post.  
45Casella, J. & Ridgeway, J. (2016). What Trump and Sessions Could Mean 
for Solitary Confinement in America ’s Prisons. Solitary Watch.  
46Raemisch, R. (2017). Why We Ended Long -Term Solitary Confinement in 
Colorado. New York Times.  
47Slater, D. (2017). North Dakota ’s Norway Experiment. Mother Jones.  
48Leon Neyfakh (2015). What Do You Do With the Worst of the Worst? 
Slate.  
49Lovett, I. (2015). California Agrees to Overhaul Use of Solitary Confine-
ment. New York Times.  
50Mann, B. (2017). New York State Prisons Slash Use of Solitary Confine-
ment. North Country Public Radio . 
 
FAQ by Valerie Kiebala and Sal Rodriguez.  © 2018 by Solitary 
Watch. Please cite Solitary Watch and the original sources when 
quoting from this document.  
Solitary Watch is a national watchdog group that investigates, re-
ports on, and disseminates information about the widespread use of 
solitary confinement in U.S. prisons and jails. Since 2009, Solitary 
Watch has helped to spur public awareness, mainstream media 
coverage, and advocacy and policy work around this once invisible 
domestic human rights issue. To support our work, please visit soli-
tarywatch.org and click on “Donate. ” 