STANLEY ADAMS     NAWAZ AHMED      WILFORD BERRY, JR.      DAVID ALLEN     ANTHONY APANOVITCH     JAY D. 
SCOTT     ABDUL AWKAL     TYRONE BALLEW     JOHN WILLIAM BYRD, JR.     RICHARD BAYS     RICHARD BEASLEY     
ALTON COLEMAN     ANTHONY BELTON     ROBERT BETHEL     MELVIN BONNELL     ROBERT ANTHONY BUELL     
DAVID BRADEN     GRADY BRINKLEY     RICHARD EDWIN FOX     GEORGE BRINKMAN     ROMELL BROOM     QUISI 
BRYAN     DAVID M. BREWER     CEDRIC CARTER     SEAN CARTER     ERNEST MARTIN     AUGUST CASSANO     
STEVEN CEPEC     LEWIS WILLIAMS, JR.     DAVEL CHINN     CURTIS CLINTON     JOHN GLENN ROE     TIMOTHY 
COLEMAN     DOUGLAS COLEY     WILLIAM DEAN WICKLINE     JAMES CONWAY III     DERRICK COOK     WILLIAM 
G. ZUERN, JR.     WARREN WADDY     JERONIQUE CUNNINGHAM     ROLAND DAVISVON DAVIS     STEPHEN ALLEN 
VRABEL     ARCHIE DIXON     JOEL DRAIN     WILLIAM G. ZUERN, JR.     JOHN DRUMMOND     PHILLIP ELMORE     
GREGORY ESPARZA     SCOTT ANDREW MINK     STANLEY FITZPATRICK     SHAWN FORD     ADREMY DENNIS     
ANTONIO FRANKLIN     TERRY FROMAN     WILLIAM SMITH     CLARENCE FRY JR.     LARRY GAPEN     HERMAN 
DALE ASHWORTH     KRISTOFER GARRETT     JOHN GILLARD     WILLIAM JAMES “FLIP” WILLIAMS, JR.     JAMES 
GOFF     DAMANTAE GRAHAM     JOHN R. HICKS     SHAWN GRATE     SCOTT GROUP     DELANO HALE     GLENN 
LEE BENNER II     GERALD HAND     JAMES HANNA      JEROME HENDERSON     JOSEPH LEWIS CLARK     WARREN 
HENNESS     DANNY HILL     TIMOTHY HOFFNER     ROCKY BARTON WILLIE WILKS JR.     ANDRE “KOKOMO” WILLIAMS         
DARRELL WAYNE FERGUSON     GARY HUGHBANKS     LANCE HUNDLEY     JEFFREY LUNDGREN     LAMONT  
HUNTER     PERCY HUTTON    JAMES J. FILIAGGI     ANDRE JACKSON     CLEVELAND JACKSON     CHRISTOPHER 
NEWTON     JEREMIAH JACKSON     KAREEM JACKSON     RICHARD COOEY     NATHANIEL JACKSON STANLEY 
JALOWIEC     GREGORY BRYANT-BEY     MARVIN JOHNSON     ELWOOD JONES     DANIEL E. WILSON     ODRAYE 
JONES/MALIK AKBAR     PHILLIP JONES     JOHN JOSEPH FAUTENBERRY     DONALD   KETTERER     JUAN 
KINLEY     MARVALLOUS KEENE     ANTHONY KIRKLAND     THOMAS KNUFF JR.     JASON GETSY     KEITH LAMAR/
BOMANI SHAKUR     LAWRENCE LANDRUM      KENNETH BIROS     EDWARD LANG     ARRON LAWSON    VERNON 
LAMONT SMITH     CARL LINDSEY  CHARLES LORRAINE     MARK AARON BROWN     GREGORY LOTT     JOSE LOZA     
LAWRENCE RAYMOND REYNOLDS     RALPH LYNCH     CLARENCE MACK     MICHAEL MADISON     DARRYL M. 
DURR        JAMES MAMMONE     DAVID MARTIN     CHARLES MAXWELL     MICHAEL FRANCIS BEUKE      JOSEPH 
MCALPIN     CALVIN MCKELTON         WILLIAM GARNER     GREGORY MCKNIGHT     FREDDIE MCNEILL        RODERICK 
DAVIE               JONATHAN MONROE     CARON MONTGOMERY      LEE MOORE     MICHAEL W. BENGE    SAMUEL 
MORELAND     FREDERICK MUNDT     FRANK G. SPISAK, JR.          AUSTIN MYERS    DAVID MYERS     JOHNNIE ROY 
BASTON          CALVIN NEYLAND JR.     MATTHEW NICHOLSON     CLARENCE CARTER     TYRONE NOLING     DENNY 
OBERMILLER     DANIEL LEE BEDFORD JAMES ONEAL     GREGORY OSIE     REGINALD BROOKS, SR.      JAMES 
TENCH      ASHFORD THOMPSON     JAMES 
TRIMBLE        MARK WAYNE WILES        KERRY 
PEREZ     MARK PICKENS     WAYNE POWELL     
DONALD PALMER      WALTER RAGLIN     
JASON ROBB     DONNA ROBERTS     BRETT 
XAVIER HARTMAN             MARTIN ROJAS     
CARLOS SANDERS/ SIDDIQUE ABDULLAH 
HASAN     WILLIAM SAPP     FREDERICK TREESH           
MICHAEL SCOTT     KEVIN SCUDDER     STEVEN 
T. SMITH     BOBBY SHEPPHARD     DUANE 
SHORT     HARRY D. MITTS, JR.     GEORGE 
SKATZES     KENNETH SMITH     DENNIS B. 
MCGUIRE     DAVID SNEED      ANTHONY SOWELL    DAWUD SPAULDING     JOHN STOJETZ             RONALD 
RAY PHILLIPS       JOHN STUMPF       MICHAEL TURNER     RAYMOND TWYFORD III     MICHAEL WEBB     JAMES 
WERE/ NAMIR ABDUL MATEEN     HERSIE WESSON   GARY WAYNE OTTE  CHRISTOPHER WHITAKER        CLIFFORD 
WILLIAMS     ROBERT J. VAN HOOK     ROBERT WILLIAMS JR.     JEFFREY WOGENSTAHL     JAMES WORLEY
Names above recognize the 138 people currently on Ohio’s death row (regular text) and the 56 people Ohio has executed (bold). 
2The  Intercommunity Justice and Peace Center (IJPC)  educates and advocates for peace, 
challenges unjust local, national, and global systems, and promotes the creation of a nonviolent society. 
IJPC is supported by faith-based organizations and individuals who work together to educate around justice 
issues, take collaborative action and engage in public witness. Through a framework of non-violence, IJPC 
works to end the death penalty in Ohio, educate about human trafficking, promote immigrant justice, and 
foster peace.Kendra Cashman Intern, IJPC 
Chloe Corkery Program Assistant, IJPC
Abe Bonowitz  Co-Director, Death Penalty ActionHannah Kubbins Executive Director, Ohioans to Stop Executions,  
Allison Reynolds-Berry Executive Director, IJPC
Staff Hamilton County Clerk of CourtsSpecial thanks to the following for their considerable contributions:
215 E. Fourteenth Street, Cincinnati, OH 45202
phone: 513.579.8547       website: IJPCcincinnati.org
IJPC Founding Sponsors: Congregation of St. Joseph, Sisters of Charity of Cincinnati, Sis-
ters of Mercy, Sisters of Notre Dame de Namur, Sisters of St. Francis, Oldenburg. IJPC 
Sponsors: Anawim Community, Bellarmine Chapel, Cincinnati Friends Meeting, Cincinnati 
Mennonite Fellowship, Comboni Missionaries, Congregation of Divine Providence, Domini-
can Sisters of Hope, Franciscan Sisters of the Poor, Franciscans - St. John the Baptist Prov -
ince, Glenmary Home Missioners, Institute of Secular Missionaries, Mount Auburn Presby -
terian Church, New Jerusalem Community, Sisters of Notre Dame of Covington, Ursulines 
of Brown County, 
IJPC hosts a witness and press conference outside the Governor’s Mansion in Bexley, OH weeks before Jerome 
Campbell was set to be executed in 2003. Then-Governor Bob Taft commuted his sentence days before his 
execution. 
THIS PROJECT HAS BEEN FUNDED (OR PARTIALLY FUNDED) BY THE CONGREGATION OF ST. 
JOSEPH GENEROUS PROMISE GRANT FUND.2Table of Contents
  2 Introduction   
  3 Capital Punishment at a Glance/ Executive Summary
 Part I: Funding Capital Punishment
  4 What We Already Know/ Report Limitations
  5  Death Penalty Expenses  
  6 Hamilton County Dollars Spent on Capital Punishment
  7 Real Justice Means Investing in Communities 
 Part II: Inevitable Disparities
  8 Capital Punishment in Context 
  9 The Path to Ohio’s Death Row 
10 Geographic Disparities  
13 Racial Disparities 
15 Unequal Representation, Unequal Outcomes  
16 Risk of Executing the Innocent
17 The Deterrence Myth/ Compassion for Murder Victims’ Families
19 Glossary/ Notes on Methodology
20 Endnotes 
Published December 2020Ever since the threat of resuming executions became a 
reality in 1999, the Intercommunity Justice and Peace 
Center (IJPC) has worked to end the death penalty 
in Ohio. Throughout the years, IJPC has worked 
for abolition by educating the Greater Cincinnati 
community about Ohio’s ineffective, unjust death 
penalty system, advocated on behalf of individual 
inmates when appropriate, advocated for the needs 
of murder victims’ families, and offered support to 
families with loved ones on death row. 
As I carry on in this work at a time when Ohio hasn’t 
seen an execution in almost two years, abolition looks 
like it’s coming into clearer focus every day. But I think 
often of the work of the activists who paved the way 
for this moment and particularly of the Catholic sisters 
who, against the official position of the church in the 
nineties, advocated that the death penalty was always 
wrong and antithetical to the Christian charge-- after 
all, Jesus was a victim of capital punishment. 
Today, many major religions oppose the death 
penalty. Like them, IJPC believes that the death 
penalty is morally wrong because each life has 
inherent dignity, that people have the capacity to 
change, and that we are more than the worst thing we 
have ever done. But religion and morality aren’t the 
only reasons the death penalty should be abolished: 
capital punishment serves no rational purpose today. 
We know that the death penalty does not make our 
communities safer by deterring crime. We also know 
that it is disproportionately applied to the poor and 
to Black defendants (especially those whose victims 
are white), and that from county to county and state 
to state,  the death penalty’s application is wildly 
uneven. We know that there are innocent people 
who have been freed from death row, and we know 
that means we have certainly executed innocent 
people, too. To add insult to injury, the death penalty is extremely 
expensive. As Part I of this report will show, it is nealry 
twice as expensive to prosecute a capital case versus 
a life without the possibility of parole (LWOP) case. 
Considering that Ohio has executed only 56 people 
among its thousands of capital indictments and 
hundreds of death sentences, we’re spending money 
pursuing executions that we know have very, very 
small chances of ever being carried out. 
How much money and resources have been wasted on 
the 98% of capital indictments that end in something 
other than death? Why are we spending millions of 
dollars prosecuting a capital case knowing that there 
is only a 2% chance that decades-long battle will end 
in an execution? 
Part II of this report explains the ways in which the 
death penalty is applied, and how its application 
leads to disparities that create injustice. Geographic 
and racial inequities, along with the lack of quality 
representation and the omnipresent possibility of 
innocence all pose significant barriers to justice.  
Considering these implications alongside the price 
tag for capital punishment makes the case for abilition 
even more convincing.
It’s time for  Ohio to stop performing its “tough-on-
crime” act  and abolish the vengeful, violent political 
weapon that is the death penalty. Especially during 
this time of  racial reckoning and economic crisis 
due to the COVID-19 pandemic, it is clear that we 
need an economy and a justice system that is driven 
by the community’s needs.  It is time that we show 
compassion to the most broken among us, promote 
real healing for the grieving, and use data based 
reasoning to retire an expensive system that is 
draining our much needed resources and chipping 
away at our humanity.
Jessica Frank
Anti-Death Penalty Program ManagerIntroduction
 IJPC and friends stand outside the Lucasville Prison, where executions are carried out, as a presence opposing the 
execution of Ronald Phillips in July 2017. 3Capital Punishment at a 
Glance
Soon after he was sworn into office early in 2019, 
Gov. Mike DeWine ordered the Ohio Department of 
Rehabilitation and Corrections to find a new lethal 
injection protocol that would pass constitutional 
challenges. In the year that followed,  he delayed 
each of the seven executions scheduled (and 
rescheduled) to occur.  In April 2020, DeWine 
commuted all three executions set for that year, and 
in September he delayed the first three executions 
set for 2021. Now, Ohio’s use of capital punishment is 
on hold while the state continues its search for lethal 
injection drugs that they can legally obtain and use.  
Several political leaders have publicly opposed or 
questioned the relevance of Ohio’s death penalty,  
including former Speaker of the House Larry 
Householder, former Ohio Supreme Court Justice 
and author of Ohio’s death penalty law Paul Pfeifer, 
and former Ohio Govs. Bob Taft and Ted Strickland.
Before July 2020, use of the federal death penalty 
had become mostly obsolete. Between 1988 (the 
year the federal death penalty was reinstated) 
and 2020, the federal government executed only 
three individuals, and there had not been a federal 
execution from 2003-2020. But during the last six 
months of 2020,  the Trump administration executed 
8 people. As this report goes to print, two more 
people are set to be executed in December and 
three others in January.  In a matter of months (and 
in the midst of a pandmic), the U.S. will likely double 
the amount of people it has ever executed in a single 
year, skyrocketing from the previous 1984 record 
high of 5 executions. 
Generally, support for the death penalty has 
trended downward since the mid-1990s. Ohioans’ 
feelings toward the death penalty haven’t been 
measured since 2014. At that time, even though 
70% supported the death penalty, those feelings 
changed significantly  when given the chance to 
consider the alternative of LWOP , with only 43% of 
respondents favoring execution and 40% favoring 
LWOP .  
More recent national studies echo these distinctions 
when LWOP is an option:  a  2019 Gallup poll found that for the first time, a majority of Americans (60%) 
favor life in prison over the death penalty. Another 
national 2020 Gallup survey found that  those who 
think the death penalty is morally acceptable has 
reached a record low at 54%.
Executive Summary
In Ohio as elsewhere, the death penalty can never be 
considered “fair” or “justified” because it is randomly 
applied based almost wholly on two factors: where 
a crime was committed and the race of the victim. 
As this report will show, capital defendants  living  in 
(usually urban) counties with prosecutors who use 
the death penalty often and those whose victims are 
white are much more likely to find themselves on 
death row than others, even if the facts of the crime 
are nearly identical. 
The arbitrary injustice of capital punishment is 
made increasingly senseless when considering its 
exorbitant cost to counties and state government. 
Through a simple analysis looking at eight cases 
that exhausted all appeals and eventually ended 
in an outome other than a death sentence, our 
research indicates that the average cost of a death 
penalty case in Hamilton County is over $1 million-- 
double the cost of trying a LWOP case. Notably,  that 
estimate is conservative, given our data constraints.  
The state of Ohio has yet to fund a study focusing 
on the cost of the death penalty. Thus, it is our hope 
that this report breaks open a larger conversation 
about the resource drain that is our capital 
punishment system. There are too many unserved 
needs in communities around the state to throw 
money at death sentences that will likely never be 
carried out. Furthermore, this report will show that 
sentencing people to death should not be pursued 
in the first place, considering that Ohio continues to 
impose them with bias to geography, race, and/or 
the defendant’s wealth.  
This report makes brief suggestions on how we 
could re-allocate capital punishment funds, though 
recommending detailed policy alternatives is 
beyond its scope. IJPC invites readers to imagine 
more productive ways our counties and state could 
spend millions of dollars. 4 5Death Penalty Expenses
Potential 
jurors must 
be thoroughly 
questioned 
about their views 
regarding the 
death penalty.
 The cost of the death penalty is much more than the price tag on execution drugs. There are five major 
factors that drive the cost of capital punishment:
Defense Costs
Trial Costs
PretrialCourt Costs
Jury Selection Trial CostsAppeals Costs Prison Costs
Experts who can 
testify about 
the defendant’s 
history, mental 
health, and 
forensic evidence 
must be 
sought out and 
compensated for 
their testimony.Charges for serving subpoenas and 
summons
Court reporter charges for depositions 
and court transcripts
Costs for reproduction of papers and 
exhibitsFiling fees
Those who 
strictly oppose 
the death 
penalty are 
often removed 
from the jury. 
The complexity 
of a capital case 
often makes jury 
selection longer.Ohio’s death row inmates are held in 
maximum security, which often costs 
more than housing other inmates, like 
those serving life sentences.Because death is irreversible, those 
on death row are afforded additional 
appeals. The entire appeals process can 
last decades.  
Death penalty trials can last more 
than 4 times longer than 
non-capital trials, requiring more 
compensation for...
Jurors
Attorneys
Court
Personnel
Other
Court 
Costs9This 
contributes to 
a longer wait 
time before 
trial.
Which means 
defendants are 
held longer in 
pretrial detention, 
incurring more 
costs. 
Where does the funding for defense attorneys come 
from?
Even in Hamilton County 
cases, the entire state of 
Ohio bears close to half of 
the legal costs arising out of 
indigent defense.Increased time in court brings with it additional fees like...
The 
County 
45%8The 
State 
55%
What We Already Know
Research consistently shows that the death 
penalty costs significantly more than alternative 
punishments, such as LWOP . While some assume 
that the death penalty would eliminate prison costs 
including housing, meals, and healthcare, thereby 
making it a comparatively inexpensive punishment, 
careful consideration of the increased time and 
complexity of a capital case clearly proves otherwise. 
While the total cost of a capital case varies 
among states, a 2008 report by the Death Penalty 
Information Center found that on average, a single 
death penalty trial costs at least $1 million more 
than a non-death penalty trial. It noted, “ only one 
in every three capital trials may result in a death 
sentence, so the true cost of that death sentence is 
$3 million. Further down the road, only one in ten of 
the death sentences handed down may result in an 
execution. Hence, the cost to the state to reach that 
one execution is $30 million. ”4
Similarly, a 2016 study conducted by a conservative 
think tank estimated that over a two year period, the 
average U.S. state with the death penalty would 
have saved $46,474,823 had that state eliminated 
the death penalty and replaced it with LWOP .5 That same year, a look at Pennsylvania’s death 
penalty revealed that the state spent over $350 
million on the death penalty over a period in which 
the state carried out just three executions.
The state of Ohio has yet to comprehensively 
evaluate the fiscal costs of the death penalty.  But a 
2014 partial investigation by the Dayton Daily News, 
which didn’t account for the large costs incurred by 
the prison system, courts, or county prosecutor’s 
office, found at least $17 million in annual costs 
related to Ohio’s death penalty.6  Similarly, in 2017, 
the Akron Beacon Journal compared the trial records 
and court expenses of a death penalty case to a non-
death penalty case and found that the death penalty 
case cost ten times the non-death penalty  case.7
Report Limitations
To estimate the average cost of a death penalty 
case in Hamilton County, IJPC examined the eight 
total cases that originally received a death penalty 
verdict after 1990 and were later reduced to a lesser 
sentence.
This report offers just a glimpse into what the 
entire county and  state might spend on capital 
punishment. Capturing a fuller picture would require 
significantly more sophisticated research methods, 
and even those analyses, at best, would likely be  
conservative estimates, since data surrounding the 
costs of capital cases is often incomplete and/or 
inconsistent.
Given the lack of research into the fiscal costs of 
Ohio’s capital punishment system, it is our hope 
that this analysis can provide a more complete 
look at what Ohio and its counties are spending 
on capital punishment so that we can intelligently 
discuss whether the exorbitant costs are an effective 
allocation of taxpayer dollars.“Only one in every three capital trials 
may result in a death sentence, so 
the true cost of that death sentence 
is $3 million. Further down the 
road, only one in ten of the death 
sentences handed down may result 
in an execution. Hence, the cost to 
the state to reach that one execution 
is $30 million.” 4Funding Capital PunishmentPart I:6 7Many who find themselves on death row have histories of abuse, mental illness, poverty, and other 
traumas. While IJPC believes in accountability, we also believe that justice does not include punishing 
those who are violent with more violence. Instead, our state should take a restorative justice approach 
and address violence in all its forms at the root. The following are just some ways that we could proactively 
reduce violence in our own communities rather than increasing it through executions: 
• Increase access to mental healthcare. Ohio’s prisons are the largest mental health provider in the 
state. As of 2015, over 1 in every 5 Ohio inmates was diagnosed with a mental illness,  and there 
are 10 times as many mentally-ill inmates as there are patients in Ohio’s six psychiatric hospitals. 
Notably, Black people, who are already over-represented in prisons, are likely to have even more 
barriers to mental healthcare, such as lack of insurance, misdiagnosis, mistrust of the healthcare 
system, and concerns about stigma.13
• Relieve the burden carried by social workers. Social workers provide care for people facing a 
multitude of challenges, including poverty, addiction, abuse, mental illness and more. As such they 
play a critical role in reducing violence in our communities. Ohio’s social workers, however, are often 
overworked and underpaid. Large caseloads in school social work, child welfare, and community 
mental health continue to contribute to workplace stress and burnout.14
• Rethink community safety. One of the major reasons that people turn to violence in the first place is 
a lack of resources. Investing in communities’ economies, environments, schools, and infrastructure 
all help uproot violence and create more peaceful neighborhoods. 
• Increase services for murder victims’ families. Some services are available to murder victims’ families, 
but these services are also often housed adjacent to the prosecutor’s office, which can be complicated 
depending on families’ relationship with that office. Families are often too overwhelmed to properly 
access the available services. More services, like financial support or court provided family advocates, 
that are easier to access would help provide healing for victims’ families. 
Real Justice Means 
Investing in Communities
Miami University and Xavier University students participate in IJPC’s “Critical Issues in Criminal Justice” presentation.Inmate Rough Cost Estimate
(in 2019 U.S. Dollars)
Shawn Hawkins $1,343,253.66
Richard Nields $948,690.79
Michael Bies $981,450.03
Jeffrey Hill $922,832.40
Raymond Tibbets $1,228,942.37
Angelo Fears $1,410,834.78
Darryl Gumm12$440,044.76
Rayshawn Johnson $1,353,852.67
Beyond the dollars spent, there is a high opportunity cost for trying each of these eight cases because the 
appeals process necessarily takes time. From the original indictment date to the time the death sentence 
was reduced , the average case in this report took 16.5 years to complete.  Each of these cases 
ate up precious time from judges, lawyers, and court personnel working in a court system that is already 
overwhelmed. Each case also cost the families of both the murder victims as well as the defendants emotional 
trauma as well as time and money.  
These costs are conclusively wasteful and negligent, considering that capital punishment fails to serve 
any purpose other than revenge. As the rest of this report will show, these millions of dollars support a 
system that is arbitrarily applied on the basis of geography and race, is relegated to those who cannot afford 
good representation,  has no effect on crime, and continuously risks executing innocent people. Hamilton County Dollars 
Spent on Capital Punishment
This report examines eight cases that originally received a 
death sentence and were later reduced to a lesser sentence. 
Each case originated in Hamilton County after 1990. The 
average case in this study cost $1,077,762.68.10 That’s 
about double the cost of trying a LWOP case, which usually 
costs around $562,000.11 By trying and failing to secure a 
death sentence for just these eight cases, Hamilton County 
wasted over $8 million. 
These estimates are conservative, however, since the certain 
costs, such as total cost to prosecutors and the courts are 
unknown. In totality, Ohio likely spends much more on the 
death penalty annually; as reported by the Dayton Daily News, 
that number is probably close to $17 million per year. 8 9Prosecutor charges defendant with aggravated 
murder and at least one statutorily defined 
aggravating circumstance.
Is the defendant over 18?
If the jury 
finds that the 
aggravating 
factors do 
not outweigh 
mitigating factors,  
the defendant 
is sentenced to 
LWOP or LWP . Penalty Phase of Capital Trial  
If the jury finds that the 
aggravating circumstance(s) 
outweighs any mitigating 
factors beyond a reasonable 
doubt, they must recommend a 
sentence of death. Guilt Phase of Capital Trial  
Jury unanimously votes that 
defendant is guilty beyond a 
reasonable doubt.
The Appeals Process
The following judicial and executive reviews allege different reasons as to why the conviction or 
sentence should be overturned. 
• Direct appeal in state court: alleges legal errors that appear within the trial record.
• Petition for post-conviction relief in state court: alleges legal errors that occurred outside the trial record.
• “Murnahan” appeal in state court: alleges they did not receive effective representation on direct appeal; 
this appeal is only available to death sentenced individuals.
• Petition for habeas corpus relief in federal court: requests the federal courts to release the prisoner 
because of a significant constitutional violation; cannot begin until one year after all state court appeals 
are finished.
• Clemency review by the Governor of the State of Ohio: governor can grant pardons, reprieves, and 
commutations to any state inmate. After state and federal appeals are exhausted, the Ohio Supreme Court 
sets an execution date. Then, clemency proceedings can begin.Juror is 
removed from 
capital trial 
jury. 
Juror can 
remain on 
capital trial 
jury.  The Path to Ohio’s Death 
Prosecutor 
cannot seek 
death penalty. County prosecutor 
decides, according 
to their own criteria 
or philosophy, 
whether to seek 
death penalty.Defendant will be 
sentenced to a lesser 
punishment, such as 
LWOP or LWP .
Pretrial phase, including 
jury selection 
Does juror have opinions 
that would prevent them 
from recommending a 
death sentence?
Trial court reviews death sentence. 
If they disagree with death 
sentence they will sentence 
defendant to LWOP or LWP .No, don’t 
pursue 
capital trial 
Yes, 
pursue 
capital trial Yes
NoYes No
What are Aggravating Circumstances? 
Aggravating factors are those that increase the 
severity or culpability of a criminal act, which 
usually leads to harsher punishments. Ohio 
defines 10 aggravating circumstances, which 
include: the victim was a law enforcement officer, 
crime was committed for hire, and the principal 
offender committed the crime during the 
course of a kidnapping, rape, aggravated arson, 
aggravated robbery, or aggravated burglary.
What are Mitigating Circumstances?  
Mitigating factors include any evidence 
presented to the court -- regarding either 
the crime or the defendant-- that might 
lead to a lesser sentence. Examples include: 
the defendant’s lack of a criminal history, a 
severe mental illness, childhood abuse,  or 
playing a minimal role in the given crime.Capital Punishment in Context
In 2019, Amnesty International recorded 657 
executions. The United States ranked 6th 
highest in number of executions,  preceded by 
China, Iran, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, and Egypt.
Inevitable DisparitiesPart II:
Of the 25 states with the death penalty, 
only half actively carry out executions. 
7 states have not had an execution 
in over 10 years6 states have not had an execution 
in over 5 years13 states have had executions in 
the last 5 years
3 states have a governor-imposed moratorium22 states do not have the death penalty25 states have the death penaltyNationally:Nationally:5656  executions
8th8th  highest executing in country  143143   active death sentences
140140  people on death row
7th7th   largest death row in countryOHIO:OHIO:
Globally:Globally:10 11OhioGeographic Disparities
From indictment to the execution chamber, 
Hamilton County is one of just a few counties 
that drive Ohio’s use of the death penalty.  
Twenty-one people currently on death row are 
from Hamilton County, the most of any other 
county. At 62 people, it has sent the second 
highest number of people to death row, 
surpassed only recently by Cuyahoga County at 
70. Both counties are  trailed by a wide margin 
by Lucas County, who at 23 capital convictions 
is the third highest death sentencing county in 
Ohio. In fact, only 12 of Ohio’s 88 counties have 
sentenced more than 5 people to die in the last 
39 years, and 38 counties have never produced 
a death sentence.16  Hamilton County has also 
executed more people than any county in Ohio, being  responsible for 11 of the 56 total executions. Death Sentences by County
“These death sentences are cruel 
and unusal in the same way that 
being struck by lightning is cruel and 
unusual.” 
-US Supreme Court Justice Potter Stewart in Furman 
v. Georgia [1972]Executions by County
5 counties are responsible for 
over half of all death sentences have NEVER produced a 
death sentencehave NEVER produced an 
execution
38 
counties
69 
counties
5 
countiesGeographic Disparities (cont.)
It is not alarming in and of itself that indictment, sentencing, and execution rates vary across counties. If 
the death penalty were applied evenly across the state, we’d expect to see those variances attributed to 
fluctuations in murder rates. But even among the three counties with the most  capital indictments, we see  
no such correlation: while each of these counties has a nearly identical murder rate, Cuyahoga County 
has indicted more than six times the 186 people Hamilton County has indicted and almost 2.5 times 
Franklin County’s 514 indictments since 1981.17 Similarly, at .60 executions per 100 homicides, Hamilton 
County’s  execution rate is more than double the execution rate in Cuyahoga and nearly nine times 
the rate in Franklin County.18  Together, these three counties are responsible for almost 60% of all Ohio’s 
capital indictments.19 
Capital Indictments 
(Top 3 Counties)The Role of the 
ProsecutorOhio
Why the discrepency between counties? In 
each county, the prosecutor has the sole 
discretion whether to seek the death penalty 
for a case that is death eligible. Because each 
prosecutor has their own philosophy that helps 
them decide whether to seek the death penalty, 
crimes with similar circumstances are pursued 
differently from county to county and even 
from case to case within the same county.20
In 2018, the Cincinnati Enquirer reported that 
Hamilton County prosecutor Joe Deters uses 
the following criteria to determine whether or 
not to seek a death sentence: “Is the accused eligible for the death penalty under Ohio law? Does he have 
the evidence to remove all doubt of innocence? Was the offense so terrible the defendant deserves to 
die?”21 But other prosecutors might answer those questions differently, or they might use a different criteria 
altogether. Because of this, whether or not a person is sent to death row depends heavily on the county 
prosecuting them rather than  the severity of their crime alone.
Prosecutors often defend the death penalty by arguing that they needit as a bargaining chip to encourage 
defendants to take some other plea deal. Indeed, with 3,319 capital indictments and  only 140 people on 
death row, just a fraction of those indicted with death penalty specifications are ever sentenced to die. An 
Associated Press report found that up until 2002, over half of all Ohio’s death penalty indictments ended in 
plea bargains. 22  More recently, a study conducted by Ohioans to Stop Executions found that of all completed 
cases between 2014 and 2017, 9 of 10 capital indictments ended in a punishment other than death (LWOP , 
LWP , another sentence). 23
But there are important ethical costs to using the death penalty in such a way, as threatening death risks 
convicting the innocent. Furthermore, prosecutors in states without the death penalty generally report no 
issues securing LWOP sentences.12 13Study after study from across the country has proven that 
the race of the victim is one of the most important predictors 
of whether a defendant will be sentenced to death.26   While
a given defendant’s race can have both implicit and overt 
effects on that person’s sentence,  capital defendants 
whose victims are white are far more likely to be 
penalized with death than those whose victims are 
Black. 
Most homicides in the U.S. are intraracial, meaning murderers 
and their victims are likely to be the same race.28 So, if execution data is proportional to homicide data, we 
would expect that the executed and their victims are of the same race, and that  there should be relatively 
few people executed for murdering one or more victims of the opposite race. But the data shows that while 
most white people are indeed executed for killing white people, most Black people are not executed 
for killing Black people but for killing white white people. “I’m not saying judges or 
prosecutors or anybody is 
overtly racist—I don’t think they 
are—but you see it happen... 
You see it in deals. You see it in 
negotiations. You see it in how 
things are reviewed.”
- David Doughten, veteran Cleveland 
defense lawyer27 Racial Disparities
The Executed and their Victims  (nationally, by race)
Nationally
Victims of those ExecutedVictims of those Executed
Black 
Victims
 17%Other 
13%of Black murderers 
have Black victims
 85%
of white murderers 
have white victims
 94%
of all murder total 
murder victims are 
Black, the other 50% 
are white30 
50%of those 
executed had 
white victims 
70%Hamilton County proescutor Joe Deters has said that he thinks using the death penalty as a bargaing chip is 
“unethical” , which might help explain why Hamilton county has much fewer indictments than Franklin and 
Cuyahoga counties.24 
Because of its comparatively lower capital indictment rate, more indictments in Hamilton County lead to 
death sentences than in other high-use counties, like Franklin and Cuyahoga. But that does not necessarily 
mean that Hamilton County’s death sentences are more secure or justified.   Of the 62 people sent to death 
row from Hamilton County since 1981, 25 of them were eventually removed (by commutation, judicial action, 
exoneration, etc.). This makes the  county’s capital conviction reversal rate 40%, the second highest in the 
state. Of the entire state’s 340 total death sentences handed down from 1981-2019, 32%  were eventually 
reversed. 25Geographic Disparities
21 people currently on 
death row
25 death sentences thrown 
out (commuted, exonerated, 
etc.)
5 other deaths in prison 
(illness, suicide, etc.)
11 executedHamilton County has sent 62 people to 
death row since 1981. But only 11 of 
those people have been executed.  
Ohio death sentences  overturned25
32%
 40%
Hamilton County death sentences 
overturnedHamilton County
Around 90% of all executed white people had white victims, and few of 
them were put to death for interracial murders. But less than 40% of
 executed  Black people had Black victims, despite the fact that 85% of 
all African American murderers have Black victims.   What’s more, despite 
both white and Black victims each accounting for around half of homicide 
victims, only 17% of the victims of the executed were black, while around 
70% of the victims of those executed were white. 
Too often, the murders of white people are perceived as particularly heinous and the “worst of the worst,” 
whilethe murders of Black people are perceived as expected or run-of-the-mill. As Frank Baumgartner explains,  
“the death penalty creates two categories of victims--those whose deaths demand the harshest pun -
ishment, and those whose deaths are ‘garden variety.’ To a grieving mother or family member, it is hard 
to square the concept of a ‘garden variety’ homicide with the grief that we can expect to be associated with 
any tragedy.”2914 15Racial Disparities (cont.)
In Ohio, it wasn’t until 2011 that a white person was executed for murdering a Black person ; only two 
other white people have been executed for murders involving at least one Black victim.34 Nationally, 308 Black 
defendants have been executed for murders involving at least one white victim since executions resumed in 
1977 . With only 34 white people executed having at least one Black victim, 9 times more Black people have 
been executed for killing at least one white person than white people for at least one Black person.35
Across the country and in Ohio, it is clear that the criminal legal system places less value on the lives of black 
victims. Black on white crime is seen as “the worst of the worst.” Black murderers are executed at rates higher 
than proportional to homicide data, and the killing of a black person is seen as less heinous than the murder of 
white counterparts.of Black people on Ohio’s death 
row are there for killing at least one 
white person, while onlyof white people are 
there for killing a Black 
person. 
 53%
 5%Ohio
In addition to being disproportionate to the population, the racial breakdown among those executed and 
currently on death row is not commensurable, either. While only 8% of white people executed had at least “[African Americans] are not only over-represented 
among the executed, but are also vastly under-
represented among victims of those executed.”31                             
Across the country and in Ohio, the poor account 
almost exclusively for all of the executed.  Without 
the means to secure their own legal counsel, indigent 
defendants are assigned attorneys who are often 
overworked, underpaid, and lack the specialized 
knowledge necessary to defend a capital case.  Many 
capital defense attorneys are also woefully unprepared 
for trial. Some never speak with their clients 
beforehand, fail to conduct basic investigations, or 
conduct themselves in court inappropriately. Others 
present a weak case for an alternative life sentence by 
failing to present adequate mitigating factors (such 
as a serious mental illness, childhood trauma/abuse, 
etc.),  calling  few or no witnesses to testify, or failing 
to challenge forensic evidence.36
Incompetent lawyers are also harmful to their client 
because they seldom build a trusting relationship 
with them. This lack of trust and communication 
causes some defendants to turn down plea deals 
offered to them. This directly counters the myth 
that those on death row are the worst of the worst: 
sometimes the only difference between those 
serving lengthy life sentences and those set for 
execution is whether they took a plea deal. 
 
And, as the  ACLU notes, “the problem of inadequate 
counsel is not isolated to a few bad attorneys; it is a 
widespread and systematic failure to ensure access 
to justice for defendants facing capital charges and 
those convicted of capital crimes.37
Some of this failure can be attributed to the  lack of 
competency standards for capital defense attorneys, 
an issue that was highlighted by the 2013  Joint Task 
Force to Review the Administration of Ohio’s Death 
Penalty. 38Another major reason for poor representation is the 
lack of  financial compensation for public defenders’ 
work on capital cases,  which is especially time 
consuming.   Unlike non-capital cases, publicity 
(especially during the pre-trial phase) increases the 
pressure felt by the legal team, and the bifurcated 
capital trial leads to an increased and more complex 
workload.39 Experts around the country report that 
an average capital defense at the trial level, done 
reasonably well, requires between 400 and 1,500 
hours of attorney time-- potentially double the 
time required of a non-capital case.40
Despite the amount of time and energy that a capital 
case requires, defense counsel typically lacks the 
resources and financial compensation to satisfactorily 
represent their client. For much of Ohio’s history, each 
county set a different hourly rate for capital attorney 
fees, contributing to the geographical disparities 
previously described. The Ohio State Bar Association’s 
review of Ohio’s death penalty in 1997 (when death 
penalty cases were peaking)  found most counties 
paid under $25,000 for two attorneys at the capital 
trial level, ten counties paid $10,000 or less, and some 
paid as little as $25 an hour. As recently as 2014, 
some counties hourly rates were as low as $30, with a 
statewide average of $61.41Unequal Representation, 
Unequal Outcomes
“The problem of inadequate counsel 
is not isolated to a few bad attorneys; 
it is a widespread and systematic 
failure to ensure access to justice for 
defendants facing capital charges 
and those convicted of capital crimes.”“People who are well represented at trial do not get the death penalty... I have yet to see 
a death case among the dozens coming to the Supreme Court on eve-of-execution stay 
applications in which the defendant was well represented at trial.”
— Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, University of the District of Columbia, April 2001. According to the most readily available census data, 82% of Ohio’s population is white and only 12% is black.32 
Though they make up a fraction of the population, African-Americans make up over a third of those who 
have been executed and account for over half of all people currently on death row.33 On the other hand, 
white people make up just over 60% of the executed and and only 39% of those on death row. 
16 17Unequal Representation, 
Unequal Outcomes (cont.)
In the fall of 2017, a uniform, hourly rate of $125 for 
capital attorneys became law. Additionally, that same 
year Ohio eliminated the ability to cap counsel fees, 
since such caps often forced counsel to essentially 
choose between working for free after reaching 
the cap or failing to provide their client adequate 
representation.
Though Ohio’s current compensation structure is a 
significant improvement from the past, only 12 of 
the 140 people on death row have been sentenced 
under it. This means that for the majority of people 
on death row-- nearly all of whom are indigent--
there is at least a reasonable possibility that their 
representation at trial was lacking in some way.  
In fact, by the time death sentences across the 
country had reached their highest point during the 
mid 90s, two-thirds of all death penalty convictions in 
the U.S. were overturned, many due to “serious errors 
by incompetent court-appointed defense attorneys with little experience in trying capital cases. ”42 As 
recently as  2007, the Cincinnati Enquirer found that 
inadequate defense was the main reason most death 
sentences since 2000 were overturned.43
Having a competent, qualified lawyer can quite 
literally be the difference between life and death 
for someone convicted of a capital crime. The Equal 
Justice Institute explains, “the failure to provide 
adequate counsel to capital defendants and people 
sentenced to death is a defining feature of the 
American death penalty. Whether a defendant will be 
sentenced to death typically depends on the quality 
of his legal team more than any other factor. ”44
Notably, the problem of inadequate representation 
occurs throughout the criminal legal system. But this 
problem is especially insidious in terms of capital 
punishment, since an execution takes away the 
possibility of ever correcting errors or shortcomings 
made by the legal system. 
“The failure to provide adequate counsel to capital defendants and people sentenced to death is a 
defining feature of the American death penalty. Whether a defendant will be sentenced to death 
typically depends on the quality of his legal team more than any other factor.”Despite everything we know to be true about the 
death penalty’s cost and its unjust application, 
prosecutors continuously tout it as a tool they 
need at their disposal in order to deliver justice to 
victims’ family members. 
But what some victims’ families know even before 
the judicial proceedings begin, and what some 
later discover, is executions often don’t bring the 
satisfying “justice” prosecutors promise. Death 
sentences often cause victims’ family members to 
endure repeated trauma during the trial process, 
and after a person is sent to death row, the years of 
appeals rightfully afforded the defendant delays 
the healing process for many grieving families.  
Even after an execution, few family members 
report feeling a sense of closure.  
Research bears out these claims. A 2007 University 
of Minnesota study found that just 2.5% of murder 
victims’ friends and families reported feeling 
closure as a result of capital punishment, and 
20.1% said the execution did not help them heal.  
Similarly, a 2012 Marquette Law Review study found 
that, “family members in homicide proceedings 
in which the death penalty was unavailable were 
physically, psychologically, and behaviorally more healthy and expressed greater satisfaction with 
the legal system than family members in death 
penalty cases ” 51
We certainly don’t claim to represent the opinions 
and feelings of all murder victim families, but 
neither can prosecutors. If they argue that they 
need the death penalty to deliver justice, what 
would they say to the 90% of families whose loved 
ones’ murder trials don’t end in a death sentence?52 
What would they say to the families who explicitly 
asked that they not pursue the death penalty, but 
sought it out anyway? 
When a loved one is murdered, many families 
must navigate a confusing legal system on 
their own while they are in the throes of grief.  
The Ohio Attorney General’s office does offer 
some crime victim services, but most existing 
homicide survivor’s services are provided through 
county prosecutors offices, and these are often 
not continued once criminal proceedings are 
complete. And, it’s likely that there is a gap between 
the government provided services available to 
families and knowledge that they can access those 
services. Compassion for Murder 
Victims’ FamiliesThe Deterrence Myth
Since the Furman v. Georgia decision, studies have sought to understand the relationship between capital 
punishment and murder rates, and after decades of research, it is clear that the two have no relevant 
correlation.48 
A recent University of Colorado-Boulder study surveyed leading criminologists on their convictions about 
whether there was a link between the death penalty and murder rates. They found that 88% of criminologists 
do not believe the death penalty is a deterrent, and 91% believe that politicians support the death 
penalty to appear tough on crime.49
In Ohio, a 2014 Ohioans to Stop Executions report shows no clear correlation between capital indictments and 
homicides across Ohio.50 Refer to the “Geography” section of this publication to see how Ohio counties that 
frequently use the death penalty see no real reduction in their murder rates. 
1 exoneration 
for every
6 executions
in OhioThe Risk of Executing the 
Innocent
There are too many instances where  individuals  have been executed or sentenced to death despite serious 
doubts about their guilt. Since 1972, 1,518 people in the U.S. have been executed and 170 have been 
exonerated.45 That means for every nine of those people executed nationwide, one person on death 
row has been exonerated. Ohio sentenced nine of those exonerees to die, making our exoneration rate 
even higher than the national average, with one exoneration for every six executions.46 Estimating just 
how many executed people were innocent is difficult, since the quest to prove innocence usually ends once 
But a 2014 report from Michigan Law School predicts that at least 
4.1% of those sentenced to death are innocent.47 In effect, the 
researchers conculed that the number of innocent people sentenced 
to die is actually double the number of those actually exonerated. 18 19
Much is left to be provided by non-traditional victim 
service providers, such as faith communities or other 
local nonprofit organizations. This means crime 
victims who don’t live in a community with a strong 
network of resources (usually those in rural areas) 
often can’t access the resources and support they 
need. 
Not all victim’s family members are eligible for 
services, either: those who have a preexisting felony 
(even one that is totally unrelated to the case) are 
not able to receive services from certain federally 
funded programs. And because in all but two of 
Ohio’s 88 counties, victims’ services are adjunct to the 
prosecutor’s office, some victims have also reported 
that they didn’t receive available services because 
they were either unwilling to assist the prosecutor’s 
office or they disagreed with the prosecutor’s 
approach in seeking a death sentence in their case. 53
In 2014, the Joint  Task  Force on the Administration of 
Ohio’s Death Penalty unanimously recommended the Ohio Legislature study how to best support victim’s 
families. The Joint Legislative Study Committee 
on Victims’ Rights was mandated by HB 663 in 
December, 2014, and while a few hearings were held, 
the committee never completed its task, even failing 
to accept the offer to a very affordable study by the 
Kirwan Institute on Race and Ethnic Studies at The 
Ohio State University.54
Instead of draining our state’s resources on executions 
that might well never happen, Ohio should divert that 
money toward funding services for the families of 
murder victims. These services could include trained 
grief counselors, court-provided family advocates, or 
assistance to understand and apply for crime victim 
compensation. We should serve the families of murder 
victims with compassion, support, and resources that 
will help them heal rather than responding with more 
violence. Ohio murder victim’s families deserve better. 
In 1991, while under the severe influence of drugs, Jeffrey Hill tragically killed his mother, Emma Hill. 
The moment he realized the events of his mother’s death, Jeff expressed and continues to express 
deep remorse. Jeff and Emma’s family made it clear that they did not want 
the death penalty for Jeff, explaining “another death in our family will only 
add more suffering and grief to the burdens we have already borne. ” Despite 
their wishes, Hamilton County prosecutors pursued the death penalty and 
succeeded in sending Jeff to death row. Almost two decades later, after the 
family continued to advocate against Jeff’s sentence, he was finally commuted 
to life in prison and eventually freed. Situations like this, where victims’ families 
explicitly say that the death penalty is not part of their vision for justice or 
healing, suggest that prosecutors don’t always pursue the death penalty just 
to bring victims’ families justice.We don’t really believe in the death penalty. I came up in a time when it was ‘Live 
and let live.’ Now it’s ‘Live and let die.’ But I’m still on the old school. That’s what I 
believe in. As you go from year to year, you start to appreciate life a little bit more. 
You don’t wanna just see someone die because they made a mistake.         
-Eddie Sanders Sr., Emma Hill’s brother, about his family’s petition for Jeff’s clemencyJeffrey Hill
Compassion for Murder 
Victims’ Families (cont.) Aggravating factor: Those that increase the severity or culpability of a criminal act
Commutation: The reduction of a penalty to one less severe
Exoneration: Generally, clearing a person of a convicted crime based on new evidence of innocence
Clemency: An act of mercy or leniency exercised by the Governor after receipt of a recommendation from the 
Parole Board; can be in the form of a pardon, commutation, or reprieve
Indictment: Formal charge made by prosecutor’s office
LWP: The sentence of life with the possibility of parole
LWOP: The sentence of life without the possibility of parole 
Pardon: Relieves the person pardoned from some or all of the ramifications of lawful punishment; does not erase 
or seal a conviction; a pardon forgives guilt.
Mitigating factor: Evidence regarding either the crime or the defendant that might lead to a lesser sentence
Reprieve/Stay of execution: The temporary postponement of the execution of a sentence.
Overturn: Disagree with a prior court’s opinion (for the purposes of this report, a sentence that is commuted, 
removed by judicial action or exonerated). Glossary
The cost of the eight death penalty cases were found respectively through individualized research. In order to arrive at 
rough cost estimates,  each cost was recorded and the year that it was acquired was noted. All costs were applied and 
inflation was taken into account to arrive at what the costs would be in 2019 U.S. dollars. Due to the lengthy nature 
of the capital punishment cases, related court costs went back as far as 1985. Once each of the individual costs were 
identified, they were added together in the appropriate categories and then once again added to determine a rough 
total cost estimate for the costs of each case. 
Counsel fees were identified by making records requests for all files existing on each case, and then each case was 
examined in order to find the related counsel fees. Interviews with Jack Herbert, financial director from the Hamilton 
County Public Defender, also provided a base for the expected costs of defense fees. Case file costs with cost descriptions 
were available online through the Hamilton County Clerk of Courts. Case cost fees were also found when looking for 
the related court cost fees, which were identified through public records requests, reviewing all files associated with the 
cases, and recording the appropriate corresponding costs. Housing costs were extracted by analyzing the appropriate 
data and benchmarking research done on death row housing costs.
This report highlighted similar cost categories compared to those used by the noted Dayton Daily News study. The 
highest categorical cost identified in that study was the cost of housing death row inmates at $8.3 million dollars, and 
this report found housing to also be the most expensive category. The cost of legal compensation for defense counsel 
was also high, as indicated in the Dayton Daily News study. However, this report was able to identify the exact legal 
compensation for each case, finding further support to the broad numbers presented from previous data. 
It is almost certain these reported costs are conservative. Costs were found by sorting through all the available case file 
boxes for each case. For each case, there were between five and ten boxes of files, with close to 2,500 pages in each. 
To research the costs alone, roughly fifty hours were spent simply sorting through the files and finding each cost by 
hand. Due to this, not all files for the case may have been analyzed as deeply or intently as needed to arrive at the most 
accurate numbers. There is also limited access to needed relevant court records that contained other associated costs.  
Likewise, due to the complex nature of death penalty cases, it is not always clear which costs are associated with what 
piece of the trial, and the systemic lack of adequate record keeping stifled our ability to find all appropriate costs. Notes on Methodology20 21Endnotes
1 Robert Higgs,  “Poll finds Ohioans 
support death penalty, but results 
vary greatly with change of question, ” 
Cleveland.com, (May 14, 2014)
https://www.cleveland.com/
open/2014/05/poll_finds_ohioans_
support_dea.html
2Jeffrey M. Jones, “Americans Now 
Support Life in Prison Over Death 
Penalty, ” Gallup, (Nov. 25, 2019) 
https://news.gallup.com/poll/268514/
americans-support-life-prison-death-
penalty.aspx
3Megan Brenan, “Record-Low 54% in US 
Say Death Penalty Morally Acceptable, ” 
Gallup, (June 23, 2020)  https://news.
gallup.com/poll/312929/record-low-say-
death-penalty-morally-acceptable.aspx
4 “Smart on Crime: Reconsidering the 
Death Penalty in a Time of Economic 
Crisis, ” Death Penalty Information 
Center, (Oct. 2009) pg. 14.  https://
files.deathpenaltyinfo.org/legacy/
documents/CostsRptFinal.pdf.  
5 “The Economic Impact of the Death 
Penalty on the State of Nebraska: 
A Taxpayer Burden?” Death Penalty 
Information Center, (Aug. 15, 2016) pg.  
2. https://files.deathpenaltyinfo.org/
legacy/files/pdf/The-Economic-Impact-
of-the-Death-Penalty-on-the-State-of-
Nebraska.pdf
6 Laura A. Bischoff and Josh Sweigart, 
“Execution costs rising, ” Dayton Daily 
News, Cox Enterprises, Inc., (Feb. 22, 
2014)
7 Stephanie Warsmith, “Death penalty 
needed for ‘worst of the worst, ’ chief 
counsel for Summit County prosecutor 
says, ” Akron Beakon Journal, (Feb. 19, 
2017) https://www.beaconjournal.com/
article/20170219/NEWS/302199570
8 Jack Herbert and Raymond Faller, 
Hamilton County Public Defender, 
Personal Interview, July 2019.
9 “Why is the death penalty so 
expensive?” Death Penalty Information 
Center, (accessed June 10, 2020) https://
deathpenaltyinfo.org/policy-issues/costs
10 Kendra Cashman, “Hamilton County 
Death Penalty: Economic Implications, ” 
(December, 2019). 
11 Wolniewicz, Maggie. “Fiscal 
Note and Local Impact Statement 
(HB 81, 132 GA) , ” Ohio Legislative 
Service Commission, (Nov. 26, 2018) 
https://www.legislature.ohio.gov/download?key=10445&format=pdf.
12 Darryl Gumm’s compiled costs are 
substantially lower than the rest of the 
cases because his files did not contain 
as much of the needed costs as other 
analyzed examples. Difficulty in tracking 
the exact case numbers resulted in less 
substantial case files that would have 
likely created higher trackable costs.
13 Hope Lane, “How the criminalization 
of mental illness and substance use 
disorders impacts African-Americans 
in Ohio, ” The Center for Community 
Solutions, (February 2020) https://
www.communitysolutions.com/
criminalization-mental-illness-sud-
impacts-african-americans-ohio/
14 “Advocacy Day 2020 Fact Sheet, ” 
National Association of Social Workers, 
Ohio Chapter (accessed July 2020) 
https://www.naswoh.org/page/
advocacyday2
15The Ohio Attorney General, “2019 
Annual Capital Crimes Report, ” 
(accessed May 2020)  https://www.
ohioattorneygeneral.gov/Files/Reports/
Capital-Crimes-Annual-Reports/2019-
Capital-Crimes-Annual-Report 
16 Data calculated using “Former 
Death Row Residents Under 1981 Law” 
and “Death Row Residents Executed 
under 1981 Law” , Office of the Ohio 
Public Defender,(accessed May 2020) 
https://opd.ohio.gov/Portals/0/PDF/
DP/August2019/Former%20Death%20
Row%20Residents%20Under%20
1981%20Law.pdf and https://opd.
ohio.gov/Portals/0/PDF/DP/Mar2019/
Executed-Under-Law-1981.pdf, 
respectively. Contact IJPC for data 
compilation.
17  “Crime by County 2017, ”ODPS Office 
of Criminal Justice Services, (accessed 
July 6, 2020) https://www.ocjs.ohio.
gov/crime_stats_reports.stm#gsc.
tab=0 
18 Frank R. Baumgartner, “The Impact of 
Race, Gender, and Geography on Ohio 
Executions, ” University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill  (January 2016) https://
www.dispatch.com/assets/pdf/archive/
baumgartnerexecutionstudy.pdf
19 Data calculated using “Supreme 
Court of Ohio Indictment Table, ” 
Supreme Court of Ohio, (accessed May 
2020) https://www.sconet.state.oh.us/
Clerk/capitalIndictment/default.asp. Contact IJPC for data compilation.
20 “The Death Lottery: How Race and 
Geography Determine Who Goes to 
Ohio’s Death Row, ” Ohioans to Stop 
Executions, (2014)  http://otse.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/05/OTSE-Report-
The-Death-Lottery.pdf
21 Dan Horn, “Why is a murder trial here 
so much more likely to end with a death 
sentence?” Cincinnati Enquirer, (Feb. 14, 
2018) https://www.cincinnati.com/story/
news/politics/2018/02/14/why-does-
hamilton-county-send-so-many-death-
row-its-complicated/316507002/
22 Andrew Welsh-Huggins, No Winners 
Here Tonight (Athens: Ohio University 
Press, 2009), pg. 96.
 23 “Outliers and Outcomes, ” Ohioans to 
Stop Executions, (2017) http://otse.org/
wp-content/uploads/2018/05/outliers-
and-outcomes-otse-2017-report.pdf
24 “Arbitrariness: Widely disparate use 
of the death penalty in Ohio raises 
concerns, ” Associated Press summarized 
in Death Penalty Information Center, 
(May 22, 2012)https://deathpenaltyinfo.
org/news/arbitrariness-widely-disparate-
use-of-the-death-penalty-in-ohio-raises-
concerns 
25 This includes commutations, 
ineligible because of intellectual 
disability, or vacated by judicial action. 
See The Ohio Attorney General, 
“2019 Annual Capital Crimes Report, ” 
(accessed May 2020)  https://www.
ohioattorneygeneral.gov/Files/Reports/
Capital-Crimes-Annual-Reports/2019-
Capital-Crimes-Annual-Report
26 Baumgartner notes in his own 
scholarship that,“the race of the victim 
has an impact on the likelihood of a 
death sentence is hardly new. It is one 
of the most consistent findings in all 
empirical legal scholarship relating to 
capital punishment. ”  (pg. 2) See Frank 
R. Baumgartner, Amanda J. Grigg & Alisa 
Mastro, “#BlackLivesDon’tMatter: race-of-
victim effects in US executions, 1976–
2013, ” Politics, Groups, and Identities, 
(April 2015) http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/21
565503.2015.1024262
27 See note 21, pg. 80Endnotes
28 84% of white victims were killed 
by white people,  93% of Black victims 
were killed by Black people.(1980-
2008, when trend data is most recently 
available). See “Homicide Trends in 
the United States, 1980-2008, ” Bureau 
of Justice Statistics, (November 2011) 
https://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/
htus8008.pdf. 
29 Frank R. Baumgartner; Emma 
Johnson; Colin Wilson; Clarke 
Whitehead, “These Lives Matter, Those 
Ones Don’t: Comparing Execution Rates 
by the Race and Gender of the Victim 
in the U.S. and in the Top Death Penalty 
States, ” Albany Law Review 79, no. 3, 
(2015)
30 See note 26, pg. 6-7.
31 See  note 26, pg. 7.
32 “Ohio: 2010 Census of Population and 
Housing, ” US Census Bureau (October 
2012) https://www.census.gov/prod/
cen2010/cph-1-37.pdf
33 33% of those who have been 
executed and 56% of those who are 
currently on death row are Black. See 
data calculated using  “Death Penalty 
Proportionality Statistics, ” Office of the 
Ohio Public Defender (March 2020) 
https://opd.ohio.gov/Portals/0/PDF/DP/
March2020/Proportionality_Statistics.
pdf. Contact IJPC for data compilation.
34 Frank Spisak, Jr. was executed 
on 2/17/11; two victims were Black, 
one was white. Frederick Treesh was 
executed on 3/16/13. He is the only 
white person executed with a single 
Black victim. Harry Mitts, Jr. was 
executed 9/25/13; one victim was Black 
and one was white. See “Former Death 
Row Residents Under 1981 Law, ” note 
16. 
35 “DPIC Analysis: Racial Disparities 
Persisted in US Death Sentences and 
Executions in 2019, ”  Death Penalty 
Information Center (Jan. 21, 2020) 
https://deathpenaltyinfo.org/news/
dpic-analysis-racial-disparities-persisted-
in-the-u-s-death-sentences-and-
executions-in-2019 
36 R. Rosie Gorn, “Adequate 
Representation: The Difference Between 
Life and Death, ” American Criminal Law 
Review, Vol. 55:463 (2018) https://www.
law.georgetown.edu/american-criminal-
law-review/wp-content/uploads/
sites/15/2018/04/55-2-Adequate-Representation-The-Difference-Between-
Life-and-Death.pdf
37 “Slamming the Courthouse Doors, ” 
American Civil Liberties Union 
(December 2010) https://www.aclu.org/
files/assets/HRP_UPRsubmission_annex.
pdf#page=7
38 Adele Shank, “The Death Penalty in 
Ohio: Fairness, Reliabili
39 Adele Shank, “The Death Penalty in 
Ohio: Fairness, Reliability, and Justice at 
Risk, ” Ohio State Law Journal: Volume 63, 
Issue 1 (2002),  pg. 376  https://kb.osu.
edu/handle/1811/70490
40 See note 39. See also Terance Miethe,  
“Estimates of Time Spent in Capital and 
Non-Capital Murder Cases: A Statistical 
Analysis of Survey Data from Clark 
County Defense Attorneys, ” (Feb. 21, 
2020) https://files.deathpenaltyinfo.org/
legacy/documents/ClarkNVCostReport.
pdf 
41 This might not seem particularly low, 
but keep in mind that private attorneys 
appointed to capital cases often have 
private practices; rent, salaries, office 
expenses, etc. all come out of that 
hourly wage. Additionally, there is a 
significant opportunity cost for private 
attorneys with other work that would 
pay significantly more.
42 See note 36. 
43 Summarized in, “Inadequate Defense 
Underscored in Ohio Study, ” Death 
Penalty Information Center, (April 17, 
2007) https://deathpenaltyinfo.org/
news/inadequate-capital-defense-
underscored-in-ohio-study
44 “Death Penalty: Inadequate Counsel, ” 
Equal Justice Initiative, (Accessed July 
2020) https://eji.org/issues/death-
penalty/
45 “Execution Database, ” Death Penalty 
Information Center, (accessed July 5, 
2020) https://deathpenaltyinfo.org/
executions/execution-database
46 “Innocence Database, ”  Death 
Penalty Information Center, (accessed 
July 5, 2020) https://deathpenaltyinfo.
org/policy-issues/innocence-
database?filters%5Bstate%5D=Ohio
47Samuel R. Grossa, Barbara O’Brien, 
Chen Hu, and Edward H. Kennedy, 
“Rate of false conviction of criminal 
defendants who are sentenced to death, ” 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, (April 2014) https://www.pnas.org/content/pnas/111/20/7230.full.pdf
48 “Furman v. Georgia, 408 US 238 – 
Supreme Court 1972” United States 
Supreme Court, (June 1972) scholar.
google.com/scholar_
49 Michael L. Radelet and Traci 
L. Lacock, “Do executions lower 
homicide rates?: The views of leading 
criminologists, ” 99 Journal of Criminal 
Law & Criminology 489, Northwestern 
University (2009)
50 See note 19. 
51 “Victim’s Families, ” Death Penalty 
Information Center, (accessed June 1, 
2020) https://deathpenaltyinfo.org/
facts-and-research/new-voices/victims-
families
52 A relatively small number of murders 
are death-eligible; of those indicted for 
capital murder, only 10% are sentenced 
to death; even fewer of those are 
actually executed. See note 11.
53 Abraham Bonowitz, personal 
interview, June 2020. 
54 OTSE Staff, “Homicide Victims Ignored 
in Study of Victim’s Needs, ” Ohioans to 
Stop Executions, (April 13, 2016)  http://
otse.org/homicide-survivors-ignored-
study-victims-needs/
55 See note 6.