JUSTICE TAKES A FIGHTSPRING  2021 NEWSLETTER
The future is waiting 
to be written, and with 
your help, we can write 
it together. With your 
crucial partnership, this 
could be the year we all 
see justice blossom.
Thank you for your unwavering partnership!  
You are building the world we want to see, where power is 
redistributed to those on the margins. We are dismantling:
n  Abusive state power
n  Structural racismn  Patriarchy
n  Oppressive economic structures
persons from detention, stop assaults on the asylum system, 
challenge police violence, and protect the social safety net 
for non-citizens from Trump. We did this in partnership with 
courageous clients and movement partners who heroically 
mobilized to take on new threats, and we did this with you, 
who made sure we had the resources to be nimble and try new 
approaches while never losing sight of our long-term work.
I am deeply proud of all the ways our staff, board, movement 
partners, and you persisted in the face of the unprecedented 
challenges of 2020. Together, we ensured that the fight for 
justice wasn’t on lockdown. This year marks the Center for 
Constitutional Rights’ 55th year in 
the fight of (and for) our lives. Our 
half a century of work equips us 
with the experience, relationships, 
and perspectives required to be 
transformational in this moment. 
Our history also teaches us 
that these pivotal moments can 
disappear and we must make the 
most of them. Together, we can celebrate lessons learned and 
important recent wins, including a long-fought Supreme Court 
victory challenging Muslim profiling by law enforcement, 
and halting relentless government attacks on low-income 
immigrants of color .
The future is waiting to be written, and with your help, we can 
write it together. With your crucial partnership, this could be 
the year we all see justice blossom.
In Gratitude and Solidarity,
Vince Warren  
Executive DirectorLet us make 
the most of 
our spring 
lest we forget 
the winter 
we survived. 
As spring brings 
blossoms of hope 
on the pandemic 
front, it is also a 
season in which we 
continue to harvest 
the deadly effects 
of white supremacy 
and anti-Black 
racism. For the Center for Constitutional Rights, the promise 
of new springs and the cruelty of past winters ground our 
work and mission. We recognize that while America can 
organize itself with dispatch to vaccinate hundreds of millions 
of people against COVID, it also chooses not to put resources 
into eradicating systemic anti-Black racism. Moreover, 2020 
exposed the systemic failures of the American version of 
democracy and clarified the need for transformational change. 
Like the videos we’ve seen showing Black people taking their 
last breaths, these systemic failures could not be more clear.
But clarity is a precursor to a solution if one can stay focused 
on the problem long enough. Thanks to you , we did. You 
helped us pivot through the obstacles put in our path so that 
we could tackle obstacles put in the paths of our movement 
and community partners. With your steadfast support, 
the Center for Constitutional Rights is unrelenting and 
unapologetic in our commitment to fight white supremacy, 
patriarchy, violent state power, and economic repression, and 
to work towards transformational change.  
At times, I think we even surprised ourselves with the 
incredible pace of the work in the past year, filing emergency 
case after emergency case to free COVID-vulnerable LETTER FROM THE 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 
Photo by Vlad Archin22sued to keep police disciplinary records shielded 
from the public, we intervened and obtained near 
total victory in the suit on behalf of long-term 
partner Communities United for Police Reform to 
demonstrate how police secrecy harms communities 
and the struggle for accountability. In Scott v. 
Pennsylvania Board of Probation and Parole, we are 
working to show the human impact of Death by 
Incarceration (DBI) sentences (also known as life 
without parole) in a complaint that explains the 
inherent irrationality, injustice, and inhumanity of 
Pennsylvania’s carceral system. To raise awareness 
and shift public narratives about the issue, we  
co-hosted a virtual community forum in January that 
centered the voices and visions of those impacted by 
DBI sentences. 
We honored Black History Month and celebrated 
Black futures in February with programming around 
the theme “Agendas for Black Liberation”, including 
weekly calls to action, a live-art event, and a 
screening of Nationtime. 
Thank you for your unfailing support  
through all of this.T  he Center for Constitutional Rights was born 
out of the fight for racial justice, when our 
work began on behalf of Civil Rights Movement 
activists in the 1960s. Understanding that white 
supremacy has shaped the law in profoundly 
harmful ways, we place the struggle to uproot 
racist oppression at the core of all we do. Thank 
you for partnering with us in our work to dismantle 
structural racism and advance liberation. One of 
our earliest cases was Hamer v. Campbell, in 1966, 
when we represented legendary voting rights activist 
Fannie Lou Hamer in a historic suit that led to the 
overturning of racist elections in Mississippi. 
Today, our dedication to advancing racial justice 
continues with timely cases like Belton v. Gautreaux, a 
federal class action suit that sought immediate release 
amid the COVID pandemic of medically vulnerable 
people and an overhaul of health procedures at a 
notoriously decrepit Louisiana prison housing almost 
entirely Black persons, in a state that is the carceral 
capital of the world. 
In New York, we sought to end the City curfew on 
protests following the Floyd uprisings and sued to 
stop discriminatory police enforcement of social 
distancing requirements. When the police unions  
“   They call me lifer but that’s 
not my name. I am human,  
I am fallible, I am change”— From “They Call Me Lifer” by Matthew Garcia,  
who is serving a Death by Incarceration sentence  
in PennsylvaniaSTRUCTURAL RACISM
DISMANTLING WHITE SUPREMACY
Along with Communities United 
for Police Reform (CPR),
WE ARE FIGHTING BACK.Police Unions are trying to 
roll back #Repeal50A 
eﬀorts and re-establish 
police secrecy.23PATRIARCHY
FIGHTING GENDER-BASED OPPRESSION 
Ashley Diamond, Art courtesy of Micah Bazant (they/them)We are r epresenting Black trans 
prisoners’ rights activist Ashley 
Diamond in a lawsuit that is one 
piece of a multifaceted fight for 
systemic change for incarcerated 
trans people.rule change that would have permitted discrimination 
against trans people seeking to access homeless 
shelters—and thanks to you, we won! After public 
backlash, HUD backed away from the proposal. 
Then, in February, HUD announced that for the first 
time, the agency will enforce the Fair Housing Act 
to prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual 
orientation and gender identity. In recent years, 
we have been working to support fair treatment of 
LGBTQIA+ and disabled people in the NYC homeless 
shelter system through Lopez v. NYC Department of 
Homeless Services, and are honored to walk with our 
courageous clients. 
We could not do this crucial work without your 
steadfast partnership.  A      series of attacks on cis/trans women and 
non-binary people during this year’s Women’s 
History Month laid bare to how prevalent 
and deadly misogyny and patriarchy remain, 
particularly for those who are marginalized 
due to racism, transphobia, and xenophobia. 
On Trans Day of Visibility 2021, the Center for 
Constitutional Rights reaffirmed our commitment to a 
broad-based vision of gender self-determination and 
dismantling patriarchy. 
Our work to dismantle patriarchy dates back 50 
years to when public agencies forced employees who 
became pregnant to take unpaid leave. In 1971, New 
York social worker Jane Monell sued for forced loss of 
work and income, and the Center for Constitutional 
Rights fought alongside her all the way to the U.S. 
Supreme Court, which made a landmark decision that 
local governments could be held liable for damages in 
such cases under the Civil Rights Act. 
Today, we are challenging patriarchy and patriarchal 
violence on multiple fronts. We are representing 
Black trans prisoners’ rights activist Ashley Diamond  
in a lawsuit that is one piece of a multifaceted fight 
for systemic change for incarcerated trans people. 
We recently submitted public comment opposing a 
proposed Housing and Urban Development (HUD) 4community. Our amicus argument in Local 1330, 
United States Steelworkers of America vs. U.S. Steel was 
intentionally educational and political, using the courts 
to frame the legal question in political terms, and 
highlight the impacts on communities.
The question of corporations’ responsibility for their 
impact remains. In October, we joined more than a 
dozen human rights organizations in filing an amicus 
brief in a case against Nestlé USA and Cargill, two 
U.S. corporations alleged to have contributed to child 
slavery and forced labor in the Ivory Coast. We argued 
the Alien Tort Statute must apply to U.S. corporations. 
The case was heard by the Supreme Court in 
December; a decision is forthcoming. 
We continue supporting community struggles against 
environmental racism in “Cancer/Death Alley,” a 
100-mile stretch of Louisiana known for the cancer 
risks associated with a high number of petrochemical 
plants. In January, we successfully advocated on 
behalf of Concerned Citizens of St. John in their fight 
for public records and transparency against the local 
school board, as the 
community fights 
to protect children 
from the pollution 
emitted from a 
Denka/Dupont 
chemical plant a  
half a mile from  
an elementary 
school where 90 
percent of the 
students are Black.  Whether it’s defending labor rights or 
challenging corporate environmental 
racism, the Center for Constitutional Rights 
has decades of experience exposing and 
combating oppressive economic structures. 
Thank you for your generous support as we 
fight alongside movements for social, environmental, 
and economic justice. 
When more than 10,000 steelworkers lost their jobs 
in Youngstown, Ohio in the late 1970s as a result of 
private steel companies’ decisions, the Center for 
Constitutional Rights argued that corporations with 
enormous economic power that receive substantial 
benefits from government sources must act in a 
manner consistent with the best interests of the OPPRESSIVE ECONOMIC STRUCTURES
COMBATING ABUSIVE CORPORATE POWER
Thank you for your unwavering partnership 
as we continue the fight!
We continue supporting 
community struggles against 
environmental racism in 
“Cancer/Death Alley,” a 
100-mile stretch of Louisiana 
known for the cancer risks 
associated with a high number 
of petrochemical plants.
Protesters at Death Alley, Photo by Rise St. James25ABUSIVE STATE POWER
CHALLENGING UNJUST GOVERNMENT POLICIES 
...we organized 
more than 100 
non-governmental 
organizations in 
February to call 
on Biden to close 
the prison in 
Guantánamo...
Art courtesy of Vy Vu @vyvu.art“   I do not want to become an informant, but the government 
says I must in order to be taken off the No-Fly List. How can the 
government tell me that the only way I can see my family again 
is if I turn my back on my community?” —Awais Saijad, a plaintiff in Tanvir v. Tanzin  Make the Road New York v. Department of Homeland 
Security). The cases challenged rules that created a 
wealth test to bar immigrants from seeking permanent 
residency. In February, the Biden administration 
rescinded the regulations. 
Continuing to demand concrete actions for justice 
and human rights in the first 100 days of the new 
administration, we organized more than 100  
non-governmental organizations in February to call 
on Biden to close Guantánamo and end indefinite 
detention. We currently represent victims from 
Palestine and the Palestinian diaspora before the 
International Criminal Court (ICC). In March, after 
extensive advocacy from our allies and us, the 
prosecutor announced the opening of an investigation 
into crimes against humanity and war crimes in 
Palestine.  This victory follows our win before the ICC  
last year to authorize an investigation into crimes in 
Afghanistan, including the U.S. torture program. Challenging abuses of power is at the heart of 
our work, and we could not do it without you.
From American Indian Movement leaders to 
antiwar activists, the Center for Constitutional 
Rights has defended protestors in the face of 
illegal government surveillance and repression. 
Our historic work in cases like U.S. v. Banks and 
Means/Wounded Knee and Kinoy v. Mitchell exposed 
government abuses. Today’s work includes pushing 
back against government attacks on low-income 
communities of color, challenging racial and religious 
profiling by law enforcement, calling for the closure 
of Guantánamo, and demanding accountability for 
international crimes in Palestine. 
We are glad to announce a flurry of positive 
developments:
In December, the U.S. Supreme Court unanimously 
held that individuals can sue federal law enforcement 
officials for damages under the Religious Freedom 
Restoration Act. In our long-running case, Tanvir v. 
Tanzin,  we are challenging law enforcement targeting 
of Muslims and highlighting the FBI’s abuse of the 
No-Fly List to coerce American Muslims into spying 
on their religious communities. 
We fought the Trump administration’s attacks on low-
income immigrants of color and people with medical 
conditions through three cases with the grassroots, 
immigrant-led Make the Road ( Make the Road New York 
v. Pompeo, Make the Road New York v. Cuccinelli, and 26Thelma Newman Planned 
Giving Society 
Supporting Justice for Generations to Come 
Thelma Newman was not a wealthy woman, yet she 
made a six-figure gift to the Center for Constitutional 
Rights to support our work into the future. And she 
hoped to inspire others to do the same. 
Newman was the legal assistant to our co-founder 
Morty Stavis at the United Electrical Workers.  
She knew the fight for justice is long, and wanted  
to support it even beyond her own lifetime. 
The members of our Thelma Newman Planned  
Giving Society have included us in their estate plans. 
Join them and make the struggle for justice an 
enduring part of your legacy at ccrjustice.org/TNS.Double the Impact of  
Your Gift 
Take Advantage of Board Chair Katherine 
Franke’s Match
Thanks to Katherine Franke’s generous match, you can 
double the impact of your commitment by making a 
new or increased gift to the Michael Ratner Campaign 
for the Next Generation at ccrjustice.org/MRC. 
Justice Sustainers 
Monthly Donors Make Our Work Possible
Thank you, Justice Sustainers! 
The fight for justice never stops—and it makes a huge 
difference to have funding we can count on to sustain 
our work. Recurring monthly gifts allow us to plan ahead 
and to leverage resources to respond to challenges and 
opportunities as they arise. That means more hope for 
our clients, more support for grassroots movements, and 
more justice for all.   
Don’t forget to give by establishing an automatic 
monthly gift at ccrjustice.org/donate. If you would like  
to learn more about:
Becoming a Justice Sustainer, joining the Thelma 
Newman Society or supporting the Michael Ratner 
Campaign for the Next Generation, please contact 
our Director of Development Theda Jackson-Mau 
at tjackson-mau@ccrjustice.org or 212-614-6448.
THANK YOU!MAKE A GIFT AT: 
ccrjustice.org/donate  
Online gifts are a quicker 
and greener way to give!
FOLLOW THE CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS ON SOCIAL MEDIA:BY MAIL TO:
Theda Jackson-Mau
Center for Constitutional Rights
666 Broadway, 7th Floor
New York, NY 10012
Center for  
Constitutional Rights@ccrjustice @theCCR Center for  
Constitutional Rights
Graphic Design:
Vlad Archin
varchin@gmail.com
Research and Writing:
Jessica Hoffmann
jess@jessicahoffmann.com