In the summer of 2011, hunger strikes protesting prolonged solitary 
confinement conditions and policies in the Security Housing Unit (SHU) at Pelican Bay State Prison, in California, shone a bright light on the miscarriage of human rights associated with the practice. Nearly 12,000 prisoners from over a dozen California prisons participated in the strikes, which garnered national and international media attention and support. The hunger strikes ended in October 2011 after prisoner representatives were assured that the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation was working on new regulations and would continue conversations about other improvements sought by the prisoners.
On May 31, 2012, CCR filed a lawsuit on behalf of SHU prisoners at Pelican 
Bay challenging prolonged solitary confinement as a form of torture. The class action suit was filed in conjunction with several legal and advocacy organizations in California and plaintiffs include leaders and participants from the hunger strike. The lawsuit alleges that prolonged solitary confinement violates the Eighth Amendment prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment and that the absence of meaningful review for SHU placement violates the prisoners’ right to due process.
Situated on the coast of California just south of Oregon, Pelican Bay State 
Prison is located in a remote area hundreds of miles from the nearest city. Prisoners in the SHU at Pelican Bay spend between 22 ½ and 24 hours each day alone in cramped, windowless cells. They are not allowed phone calls, food is often rotten and inedible, and medical care is frequently withheld. Class Action Challenge  
to Solitary Conﬁnement
Aerial shot of Pelican Bay State Prison, a supermax facility.Summer 2012
On May 16, CCR and our clients won an 
enormous victory when a federal judge granted class certification in our law-suit, Floyd, et al. v. City of New York, et al., 
challenging the NYPD’s stop-and-frisk practices as unconstitutional and racially discriminatory. This ruling allows anyone who has been unlawfully stopped and frisked since 2005 (hundreds of thousands of individuals) to join our lawsuit as a plaintiff. The individuals and communi-ties who have endured the brunt of these unconstitutional practices will finally get their day in court!
The NYPD reported a record 685,724 stops 
in 2011 alone—a 600 percent increase since Raymond Kelly took over as NYPD commissioner in 2002. Of those stopped, 84 percent were Black or Latino—despite representing only 52 percent of the city’s total population. According to Columbia University law professor Jeffrey Fagan, who has analyzed six years of NYPD data CCR Wins Class  
Certiﬁcation in  
Case Challenging  
Stop-and-Frisk
continued on page 3continued on page 3
CCR staff Ibraham Qatabi and Nahal Zamani with 
Ashwini Shrikant at the Father’s Day March to End Stop-and-Frisk in NYC.CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook“Terrorist,” “traitor” and “treason” are 
labels used, since 9/11, to justify the severe repression of constitutionally protected activities, such as protest of U.S. government policies. We are in an era of profound repression, scapegoating and secret trials not seen in decades, which extend far beyond Guantánamo to the targeting, detaining and silencing of political activists and whistleblowers here at home. 
As I write, Private First Class Bradley 
Manning, perhaps the most important alleged whistleblower of this generation, is being court-martialed at Fort Meade in Maryland. Manning, nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize by members of the Icelandic Parliament, is charged with releasing thousands of documents exposing U.S. government secrets to WikiLeaks. The government has also apparently issued a secret indictment against WikiLeaks founder and publisher Julian Assange for the public dissemination of those documents. The United States is embarrassed by the facts that have come out, but not by the profound illegality of their conduct that has been exposed. Much like an entitled child, the government is stomping its feet—sorry that it got caught, but not for what it has done.  
Indeed, the documents allegedly leaked 
by Manning and published by WikiLeaks expose lies, human rights violations, abuse and other crimes committed by the U.S. and other countries. One of the most devastating pieces leaked was a 39-minute video entitled “Collateral Murder,” which shamefully depicts three brutal attacks on civilians by U.S. soldiers in just one day of the Iraq war. The video belies the military’s blatant mischaracterization of the events as engagement with a “hostile force,” as the footage clearly shows attacks against civilians, not militants. 
It is abundantly clear that what WikiLeaks 
published should not have been classified as secret information. To cover up this problem, the government has opted to silence and vilify Manning, holding him in brutal isolated detention, and then shrouding his entire trial in secrecy. Indeed, the proceedings against Manning are even more restrictive and opaque than those at Guantánamo. In order to expose these proceedings in the light of day, on May 23, 2012, CCR successfully filed a petition with the U.S. Army Court of Criminal Appeals, seeking public disclosure of secret filings and court orders in the Manning proceedings. The petition was brought on behalf of CCR and joined by Glenn Greenwald, Jeremy Scahill and The Nation , Amy Goodman 
and Democracy Now!, Manning biographer Chase Madar, Kevin Gostola and Firedoglake blog, and Julian Assange and WikiLeaks. The petition asks this military appellate court to order the judge in the Manning proceedings to, consistent with its obligations under the First Amendment, make public the government filings and court orders in the case and to cease private, in camera, deliberations with counsel where rulings are made in secret.  
As counsel for WikiLeaks and Julian 
Assange, CCR will continue to monitor the Manning hearings—both because Manning stands accused of providing evidence of U.S. war crimes to our clients and because the proceedings are inextricably linked to a grand jury in Virginia reported to be issuing subpoenas for information on Assange and WikiLeaks. 
CCR will continue to pry open the doors 
of our democracy and counter the grim prediction made by Federal Court of Appeals Judge Damon Keith, who famously wrote in Detroit Free Press v. Ashcroft , 
“Democracies die behind closed doors.” CCR remains committed to challenging the calcification of the culture of secrecy within our government in the Manning case, and to countering the increasing suppression of our First Amendment right to dissent.
Sorry It Got Caught
CCR is 
excited to announce that Purvi Shah, lawyer and law professor, has joined the Center as the director of the Social Justice Institute (SJI). For over a decade, Purvi has worked for economic and racial justice at various civil rights organizations across the country. She has also been engaged in teaching, training, and building the next generation of social justice attorneys,  
which made her the perfect candidate to head up the newly created SJI.
Following law school in 2006, 
Purvi launched the Community Justice Project (CJP) at Florida Legal Services to provide legal, policy, and training support to community organizations in Miami. At the CJP, Purvi created and directed the Social Justice Summer (SJS) Fellowship Program, a 10-week summer institute that trains progressive law students on the theory and practice of community lawyering. In addition to her role at Florida Legal Services, Purvi was an adjunct professor as well as co-director and co-founder of the Community Lawyering Clinic at the University of Miami School of Law. 
The SJI is made possible 
by support from the Bertha Foundation. The Bertha Foundation was honored at this year’s President’s Reception for their tremendous contributions to CCR.
We will be sharing more details about the growing 
SJI throughout the coming months. You can ﬁnd out more about Purvi at: www.ccrjustice.org/about-us/staff-board/shah%2C-purvi.
2
CCR Welcomes  
Purvi Shah
Vincent Warren. Photo by Lindsay BeyersteinCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookPrisoners are let out only to shower 
in a locked stall or to exercise in what is referred to as the “dog pen,” a small cement yard with 15-foot walls. 
Despite the fact that the SHU was 
originally built to hold prisoners for no more than 18 months, some prisoners have been held there since it opened in 1989. California, alone among all 50 states, imposes extremely prolonged solitary confinement if a prisoner is merely alleged to be associated with a gang—rather than based on actual gang activity—and is often grounded on the flimsiest of evidence.
Gabriel Reyes, a plaintiff in our 
lawsuit, has been at Pelican Bay for 18 years—16 of which he has spent in extreme isolation. Sentenced to 25 years in prison following a burglary that fell under California’s “three strikes” law, Reyes was assigned to the SHU for supposed “gang affiliation,” which he has repeatedly, but unsuccessfully, attempted to refute. Another plaintiff, George Ruiz, who has been in the SHU for 22 years, was denied review based on searches of unnamed prisoners’ cells that uncovered his name on a laundry list of purported gang members and associates, as well as his possession of photocopied drawings that were allegedly gang-related. 
The only way to get transferred out of the SHU is to inform on the activities 
of other prisoners, but for Reyes, Ruiz, and others in solitary confinement at Pelican Bay, this is not a possibility. Not only do many prisoners refute the gang affiliations that put them in the SHU, but they have also been isolated from the rest of the prison population for over 10 years, so any information they might have would likely be irrelevant. Additionally, most prisoners fear retaliation and don’t wish to put their own lives or those of their families at risk. There is essentially no way out.
We are all too aware of the effects of long-term isolation, the lack of decent 
food and sunlight, the absence of human contact, and the dehumanization that results from such treatment. As Reyes reminds us, “Our Constitution protects everyone living under it; fundamental rights must not be left at the prison door.” It is CCR’s hope that this case will extend these basic human rights to the prisoners at Pelican Bay, strike a blow to the increasing use of solitary confinement in our nation’s prisons, and bring national attention to the international consensus that prolonged solitary confinement is a form of torture.
3SOLITARY  CONFINEMENT  
(continued from cover)  
and will provide expert testimony in our 
case, even after adjustments are made for other factors—including crime rates and allocations of police resources—race is the primary factor determining NYPD stops. Most stops occur in Black and Latino neighborhoods and, even in predominantly white neighborhoods, Blacks and Latinos are significantly more likely to be stopped. 
In her decision to grant class certifica -
tion, Judge Scheindlin wrote: “Sus-
picionless stops should never occur. Defendants’ cavalier attitude towards the prospect of a ‘widespread practice of suspicionless stops’ displays a deeply troubling apathy towards New Yorkers’ most fundamental constitutional rights.”
Apart from these stops being uncon-
stitutional and racially discriminatory, they also do little to keep New Yorkers safe. In fact, there is no evidence that the NYPD’s stop-and-frisk practices are responsible for the drop in New York’s crime rate, which began to decline long before the program was put into place. 
In addition to the litigation, public 
education, outreach and organizing have been and continue to be critical. To that end, on Father’s Day, CCR, the NAACP and the Al Sharpton’s National Action Network (NAN) organized a silent march to protest stop-and-frisk. It was reported to be the largest police accountability march in the city in over a decade and was covered on the front page of The New York Times the following day. Building public awareness of, and opposition to, the NYPD’s discrimina -
tory stop-and-frisk program is critical to ending this practice.
For more information about the lawsuit and to read Judge 
Scheindlin’s class certification ruling, go to: www.ccrjustice.org/ourcases/current-cases/floyd-et-al STOP-AND-FRISK
(continued from cover)  
Our Constitution protects 
everyone living under it;  fundamental rights must not be left at the prison door.A “dog pen” at Pelican Bay State Prison: 
a small, enclosed cement “yard” where prisoners can exercise.CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookOn June 11, 2012, the Supreme Court 
denied cert to the habeas cases brought by seven Guantánamo detainees. By refusing to hear these cases—or any Guantánamo cases since its 2008 Boumediene decision—the Court has effectively abandoned the promise of its own ruling that guaranteed detainees a constitutional right to meaningful review of the legality of their detention. The fate of these detainees is now left in the hands of the hostile D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals, which has erected innumerable, unjustified legal obstacles that have made it practically impossible for a detainee to win a habeas case in the trial courts. 
Despite the challenges and our 
disappointment with the Supreme Court, these setbacks are just the latest in the hundreds we’ve faced since beginning this litigation in 2002. CCR remains as committed as ever to challenging injustices at Guantánamo. For us, this fight is not yet over, nor can it be measured by court victories alone. Fred Korematsu is powerful proof that history will make critical judgments about a movement’s success. Similarly, Augusto Pinochet provides compelling evidence that the judgment of international law is patient. To continue this work, we are redoubling our efforts to fight for resettlement and repatriation of detainees; challenging the legal authority to charge detainees under the Military Commissions systems; seeking accountability for torture and abuse in a range of domestic and international law forums; and speaking tirelessly about the record—past, present and future—of injustice at Guantánamo and beyond.  
We also must, in order to remain 
committed to these efforts, take the time to celebrate our successes. We were greatly encouraged by the recent acceptance of jurisdiction over CCR client and Guantánamo detainee, Djamel Ameziane, by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR). This marks the first time the IACHR has accepted such jurisdiction and also underscores the fact that there has been no effective domestic remedy available to victims of unjust detentions and other abuses at Guantánamo. We were thrilled, as well, by the April release of two Guantánamo detainees, Chinese Uighurs, to El Salvador. These two men marked the first releases from Guantánamo in over 15 months—the longest period of time since its inception without any men being released. 
In 2002, CCR was a lone voice leading 
the call for justice and human rights at Guantanamo; in 2012 and beyond, even as others have despaired or fallen quiet, CCR has not, and cannot, give up on this historic, if now long-term, fight. 
4CCR Is Grateful to Our Foundation Funders for Their Support *
Anonymous • craigslist Charitable Fund • David Kimmel Foundation • Fowey Light Fund • Landau Family Foundation • Lee & Luis 
Lainer Family Foundation • Morgan Stanley Smith Barney Global Impact Fund, Inc. • Open Society Foundations • Ralph E. Ogden Foundation, Inc. • Rotonda Foundation • Seymour & Sylvia Rothchild Family 2004 Charitable Foundation • Silicon Valley Community Foundation • The 1848 Foundation • The Alfred and Jane Ross Foundation • The Angelina Fund • The Atlantic Philanthropies (USA) • The Bardon-Cole Foundation • The Blue Oak Foundation • The CS Fund/Warsh-Mott Legacy • The Epstein Teicher Philanthropies • The FireDoll Foundation • The Fritz and Yvonne Pappenheim Fund of the Tides Foundation • The Grodzins Fund • The Jewish Com-munal Fund • The JKW Foundation • The Key Foundation • The Lehman-Stamm Family Fund • The Liberty Hill Foundation • The Libra Foundation • The Lois and Irving Blum Foundation Inc. • The New York Community Trust • The Normandie Foundation • The Oak Foundation • The Posel Foundation • The San Francisco Foundation • The Spingold Foundation • The Tides Foundation • The Tom Fund at the National Philanthropic Trust • The Vanguard Charitable Endowment Program • The Wallace Global Fund • The William B. Wiener, Jr. Foundation
*The foundations listed above provided leadership-level grants of $5,000 or more between Dec 15, 2011- Jun 15, 2012.
Guantánamo:  
Setbacks and Victories 
Leili Kashani, CCR staff member, stands up for 
Djamel Ameziane at a protest in D.C.
Photo by Sarah K. HogarthCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook
5Readers of our newsletter will know 
that on January 27, 2012, CCR argued before 14 members of the Fourth Circuit seeking review of the earlier dismissal of our cases Al-Quraishi v. Nakhla and L-3 
and Al Shimari v. CACI, et al. These cases seek to hold private military contractors accountable for torture and abuse of Iraqi prisoners at Abu Ghraib and in prisons across Iraq.
On May 11, we won a majorvictory when the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, sitting en banc, dismissed the appeals of the private military contractors, thereby allowing the cases to proceed to discovery in the district courts. The 
contractors had argued that they should receive the same protections as the U.S. government and, therefore, any of their wartime activities are beyond review of the courts. However, the court was unwilling to grant such a broad immunity to these corporate defendants.
As reported in the last newsletter, the 
U.S. government, when asked for its opinion by the court, argued that our cases should be allowed to proceed—the first time the government has said that victims of Abu Ghraib should be allowed to make their case and could sue contractors. However, the government carved this out as a narrow exception allowing these particular cases to proceed, potentially limiting the class of cases to those involving torture by contractors in the context of the war in Iraq.  
Although defendants have indicated 
they will ask the Supreme Court to review the Fourth Circuit’s decision, we are hopeful that we will soon proceed with fact-finding and discovery—and move one step closer to the plaintiffs having their day in court and hopefully achieving some measure of justice.CACI Victory and  
Moving Forward
CCR has filed a new case challenging the Obama administration’s program 
of “targeted killing” of terror suspects—premeditated killing of people who have not been charged or tried—outside of countries in which the United States is engaged in armed conflict. CCR and the ACLU filed Al-Aulaqi v. 
Panetta against senior U.S. officials seeking accountability for the killing by 
drone strikes in Yemen last year of three U.S. citizens, including a teenage boy, in violation of the U.S. Constitution and international law. The case relates to our long-standing work to challenge the Obama administration’s targeted killing program. Our first case, Al-Aulaqi v. Obama , as readers of 
our newsletter will remember, was filed in August 2010, and challenged the widely-reported authorization of the killing of U.S. citizen Anwar Al-Aulaqi in Yemen, which we argued could not lawfully be carried out unless he presented a specific, concrete and imminent threat, and lethal force was a last resort. The case was dismissed by the D.C. district court in December 2010. The U.S. carried out the targeted killing of Al-Aulaqi on September 30, 2011, killing not only him, but also U.S. citizen Samir Khan in the same strike. A second strike, on October 14, 2011, killed Al-Aulaqi’s 16-year-old son, Abdulrahman Al-Aulaqi, also a U.S. citizen, as he was eating dinner outside with his teenage cousin. These killings are the subject of our newly-filed case.
Outside the courtroom, CCR continues to keep this issue at the forefront 
of the public debate. In April 2012, CCR, CODEPINK and Reprieve hosted a two-day conference on the issue of drones in Washington, D.C. The International Drone Summit: Killing and Spying by Remote Control  had 
dual objectives to better inform the public about the reality and significance of the U.S. government’s increasing use of both killer and surveillance drones, and to facilitate networks and strategies to resist this expansion. The conference was a huge success with over 230 people in attendance.
CCR Continues to Challenge
Targeted Killing and Drones
Thelma Newman Society
We welcome and thank the newest members of the Thelma Newman Planned Giving  
Society, a group of individuals who decided to include CCR in their estate plans or 
established annuities with the Center. These gifts build our endowment, ensuring CCR’s progressive legal work for future generations.
Our donors and supporters make our cutting-edge human rights work possible. 
Thank you so much!  The individuals listed joined between December 15, 2011-June 15, 2012.Elizabeth Alexander 
Frank and Blythe Baldwin 
Carol F . Drisko Eva K. Millette Coombs 
Kelly Pomeroy and John Broussard 
Jeremy RyeCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookTraining the next generation of 
people’s lawyers has always been part of the Center’s mandate. With the newly launched Social Justice Insti-tute (described in more detail in our Spring 2012 Newsletter’s Letter from the Executive Director), CCR is able to do this on a much larger scale. Part of scaling up this work includes confer-ences and trainings for lawyers and law students. To this end, CCR held two amazing conferences this year on movement lawyering—one in March and one in June—and trained more than 250 law students!
In March, CCR joined with lawyers 
and law students from across the Deep South for a two-day “People’s Law Conference” in New Orleans, Louisi-ana, that rooted the practice and study of law in social justice principles and firsthand experience. The conference highlighted the struggles of communi-ties traditionally neglected or criminal-ized in casebooks and law classrooms, focusing on communities of color, immigrants, and LGBTQ communi -
ties. Attendees learned from elders, youth leaders, and fellow law students who are engaged in on the ground advocacy and waging justice in the courts. Issues discussed included environmental injustice, lack of access to housing and education, and oppres-sive policing and incarceration prac-tices. Peers thought collectively about the role of law students and lawyers in social justice work, and how we can support ourselves, each other, and the people at the center of these struggles. This conference was attended by more than 100 students and we hope the result will be greater cooperation for people working in New Orleans, a  city that desperately needs these  collaborations to address the systemic problems facing its most vulnerable communities.
In June, CCR held its first Social 
Justice Institute Conference in New York City. We were thrilled to have Michelle Alexander, Professor of Law at OSU Moritz College of Law and author of the book, The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Color-blindness, as our keynote speaker. Ms. Alexander captivated the audience with her radical views on movement lawyering, setting the tone for a day filled with learning, strategy sharing, and cross-organizational collabora-tion. The goals of the conference were to teach our incoming class of 2012 Ella Baker students, as well as law student interns from allied organiza-tions across the city, a broad array of principles and methods of community and social justice lawyering that they would ordinarily not be exposed to in law school or perhaps even during their own summer internship experi-ences. The conference provided con-crete strategies, tools, and forums that these budding lawyers can use as part of their practice serving underprivi-leged communities and, we hope, the experience inspired students to com-mit themselves to social justice work. The conference was attended by 150 students from across the city, and the country, and was followed by CCR’s Annual Social Justice Throwdown. The Throwdown is an annual dance party organized by the Center—this year it featured the music of M.A.K.U. Soundsystem and CCR’s own Legal Worker, (DJ) Ian Head.
6CCR Trains (and Dances with) the Next Generation  
of People’s Lawyers
Nikki Thanos, a 2009 Ella Baker Fellow, says that her summer at CCR “inaugurated her into a 
community of lawyers that are deeply committed to lifting up base-level struggles.” Nikki gradu -
ated in 2010 from Loyola University New Orleans College of Law, and then took a job as the New Orleans Workers’ Center for Racial Justice’s Legal Fellow. “Of all the classes I took and experiences I’ve had, nothing prepared me to be a movement lawyer like a summer at CCR,” she said. “When peoples’ movements are the true engines driving a case, the lawyering takes on a unique structure and cadence. CCR helped me tune into a power-building approach to lawyering. You cannot read a book and grasp that concept. You have to be immersed in the work, and you have to see your mentors in action. As I organize for immigrant 
rights in New Orleans, there is not a day that goes by that I do not call up someone at CCR, or draw on an experience I had at CCR. CCR has absolutely shaped the way I do my work today, and the vision I have for my work down the road.”
Update from an Ella: Nikki Thanos Beatrice Lindstrom, Institute for Justice & Democracy in Haiti, Socra Saint Joy, Bureau Des Avocats  
Internationaux (BAI), Pam Spees, CCR, and Mario Joseph, BAI, present at the People’s Law Conference.
 Photo: Rafael ShimunovCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookRecent developments in Doe v. Jindal, our challenge to Loui-
siana’s discriminatory Crime Against Nature by Solicitation (CANS) statute, have been twofold. 
As a reminder, people accused of soliciting sex for a fee in 
Louisiana can be criminally charged in two ways: either under the prostitution statute or under the solicitation pro-vision of the Crime Against Nature statute. Until recently, a CANS conviction carried harsher penalties than a pros-titution conviction, including the mandatory sex offender registration requirement, even though the statutes outlaw the same conduct. 
With our case, filed in collaboration with Women With A 
Vision and its allies, and legislative developments as a re -
sult of the pressure our lawsuit brought, CCR successfully challenged this practice. In April, we received very exciting news for our plaintiffs: In addition to declaring that requir -
ing individuals convicted under this archaic statute to reg-ister as sex offenders is unconstitutional, the court ordered the state to stop placing individuals convicted of CANS on the registry and to remove our clients from the sex offender registry within 30 days. 
However, despite the court declaring the registration re-
quirement unconstitutional for people convicted of CANS, Louisiana has still not removed the almost 500 hundred in-dividuals who remain on the registry as a result of a CANS conviction. In response to the inaction, we filed a federal class action lawsuit on June 27, seeking to remove these individuals from the registry.
“Being forced to register as a sex offender has made it 
much harder for me to find housing and work,” said one of the plaintiffs in the lawsuit. “This has affected every aspect of my life, is humiliating, and has prevented me from moving on.” 
It is our hope that this challenge will extend the arm of 
justice to all those affected by this unconstitutional practice. Doe v. Jindal  Victory and New Case 
7If you would like to ﬁnd out more about joining the Founders Circle or making a planned gift to CCR, contact Sara Beinert at 212-614-6448 
or SBeinert@CCRjustice.org. Our donors and supporters make our cutting-edge human rights work possible. Thank you so much!
CCR offers a special thank you to those who joined the Founders Circle whose members make  
leadership gifts totaling $1,000 or more to the Center during the year, and so doing, provide  
critical core support. The individuals listed joined between December 15, 2011-June 15, 2012.
Paul J. Allen
Shane Baggs
Frank C. Baldwin
Gale Bartle
Alexis Bleich
Linda Bollag
Eve Borenstein
Elizabeth Branch
David Broiles
Richard J. Brown
Tim CaroCigy Cyriac
David P . Dean
Theresa Del Pozzo
Thomas Durst
Tony Elias
Dolores Emspak
Joseph Esposito
Martha S. Farley
Solomon Fisher
Jane Foster
Katherine FrankeFranklin E. Fried
Mary G. Gleysteen
Tom Goetzl
Ivan Green
Marge Harburg
Louis R. Hellwig
Embry M. Howell
Kenneth Malcom Jones
Terry Lynn Karl
Annie Makhijani
Jeanne E. MirerL. David Mirkin
Charles O. Moore
Rachel Mustin
Shirley Nash
Peter J. Neufeld
Sanford M. Orlow
Mary R. Page
Ellen Posel
Margaret J. Randall
Tim Robbins
Jill RohdeSarah Rosenwald Varet
Eric C. Rudin
Arnold S. Saks
Edmund Sassoon
Evan D. Shaad
Franklin Siegel
Lawrence E. Silverton
Dianne V . Thiel
Ian Michael Wallach
Stephen Warren
Ann WrightCCR Attorney Alexis Agathocleous, and Deon Haywood, Executive Direc-
tor of Women With A Vision (WWAV) at this year’s President’s Reception.  WWAV was honored with the 2012 CCR Ally for Social Change Award.
On May 25, the ofﬁces of Women With A Vision (WWAV) 
were attacked, ransacked and several ﬁres were started inside. While the ofﬁces sustained major ﬁre damage, we are grateful no one was hurt. WWAV has tirelessly and fearlessly served the New Orleans community for years and is one of CCR’s clos-
est allies and partners. We urge our supporters to con-sider contributing to WWAV, so that they may rebuild and carry on their heroic work: www.wwav-no.org
 Photo: Yanick Salazar Photo: Rafael ShimunovMitchel and Linda Bollag have known 
about the Center for Constitutional Rights for years. Mitchel’s parents were also supporters, and together, they felt the work CCR did around U.S. intervention in Central America in the 1980s was extremely important. 
Mitchel and Linda have 
been donors to CCR since 1992 and recently decided to become Founders Circle members. They are supportive of all of the Center’s work, but they are particularly interested in CCR’s work around corporate human rights abuse. They also feel strongly about opposing U.S. military intervention in other sovereign nations.
“There is so much work that needs to be 
done, and CCR is the best organization in their field. We wanted to do more to help the Center.”
Mitchel has worked as a rag dealer for the last 33 years, buying and selling rags and cutting, textile waste and byproducts, and fiber and textile raw materials. 
Mitchel and Linda have three 
children, who all have a very progressive sense of, and work for, social and economic 
justice (their son, Sascha Bollag, was a 2011 intern at CCR!). Mitchel says, “We are happy that the third Bollag generation is already supporting CCR! Hasta la victoria siempre!”
To join Mitchel and Linda and make a donation to CCR please visit 
www.CCRjustice.org/donate666 Broadway, 7th Floor, New York, NY 10012 • www.CCRjustice.org
The Center for Constitutional Rights is dedicated to advancing and protecting the rights guaranteed by the United States Constitution and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Founded in 1966 
by attorneys who represented civil rights movements in the South, CCR is a non-profit legal and educational organization committed to the creative use of law as a positive force for social change.Michael Ratner
At the 2012 President’s Reception, CCR presented outgoing Board President, now President Emeritus, Michael Ratner, with the Relentless Radical award for his over forty years of visionary leadership, and people’s lawyering with the Center. Michael continues with CCR in his new role with OWS, WikiLeaks and in working to close Guantánamo. Please go to www.CCRjustice.org/michael40 for a video about Michael and CCR’s groundbreaking work together, and to make a gift in honor of Michael’s four decades (and counting) of  
service to CCR.Mitchel and Linda Bollag CCR Spotlight
Breaking News:
CCR Challenges  
Solitary Conﬁnement
Targeted Killing  
and DronesCCR Wins in  
Stop-and-Frisk 
Details Inside