CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.orgSpring 2009 Newsletter
2 Shell Ordered to Trial
3 Wiwa Trial
4 Guantánamo  
 Litigation Update
5 100 Days Campaign  
 Policy Papers
6 Arar v. Ashcroft  
 Oral Argument
7 CACI and Titan/L3   
 Updates
8 CCR in New Orleans
9 CCR Releases  
 NYPD Racial  
 Profiling Data
10 Donor SpotlightInsideCCR Releases Two Reports on GuantánamoIn early March, the Obama admin-
istration released nine new “secret” memos that were written by Bush’s Office of Legal Counsel staff. The contents of these memos were chilling because they further exposed what we already know to be true:  George W. Bush was waging war on the law itself. He was intent on consolidating the power of the presidency even if  it meant breaking the law. These  
new memos presented a brazen and unjustifiable assault on both constitu-tional and international law. Among other things, they condoned the mobilization of the military to operate domestically and conduct search and seizure on people living in this coun-try; gave the president a blank check to suspend the First Amendment and the freedom of the press; to conduct warrantless wiretapping at his leisure; and unilaterally end treaties, all in  the name of national security.  This  is but further evidence of a broad criminal conspiracy to violate the  most fundamental of our laws.
But we’ve all known this for years through CCR’s litigation. The  
evidence is exceedingly well docu -
mented already in the memos, FOIA documents, congressional hearings, our court documents, the testimony of our clients and other victims, and direct admissions by intelligence,  military and administration officials. The evidence shows that officials at the very highest level including Bush himself, Vice President Dick Cheney, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, and CIA Director George Tenet were directly involved in illegal activities, including torture and war crimes.  The question for us now is, what do we do about it? 
Maj. Gen. Antonio M. Taguba,  
who investigated the Abu Ghraib 
Accountability Time: Prosecute Bush Administration Officials
continued on page 2
Within days of his inauguration, President Obama issued several key executive orders concerning Guantánamo and U.S. policies on executive detention. One of these  requires the closure of the prison within one year, and mandates a review of the status of all of the men held there. The order requires “humane standards of confinement” during this review and “conformity with all appli-cable laws governing the conditions of such confinement, including Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions.”
In response, CCR immediately released: 
Closing Guantánamo and Restoring the Rule of Law, which includes a comprehensive analysis of the numbers and nationalities of detainees remaining at Guantánamo and outlines the steps that need to be taken to close the camp. A second report, Current Conditions of  
Confinement at Guantánamo, provides an  in depth description of conditions in  
Guantánamo Camps 5, 6, and Echo and makes recommendations for bringing them into compliance with the law, as required by the president’s executive order.
The full text of both reports is available 
online at:  CCRjustice.org/reports.
How Should Guantánamo  
Be Closed?
The Bush administration consistently  
overstated both the threat posed, and  
the intelligence value presented by the Guantánamo detainees. The new admin-istration must repatriate those who can be 
continued on page 4
Executive Director, Vince Warren
© Lindsay BeyersteinCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org2
scandal, said, “there is no longer any doubt as to 
whether the current [Bush] administration has com-mitted war crimes. The only question that remains to be answered is whether those who ordered the use of torture will be held to account.” The answer is that they must be held to account. To do so, there can be nothing short of a full criminal investigation and prosecution. Now is the time for accountability.
In light of the compelling evidence of torture  
and abuse, Article 4 of the Convention Against  Torture requires  the Obama administration convene 
a criminal investigation into the illegal acts and those responsible for them. Thus, a full investigation and prosecution of these actions by the Bush  administration is necessary for the Obama admin -
istration to meaningfully reassert the rule of law in the United States. Government officials are not above the law. Prosecuting them for their illegal activities is a meaningful mechanism for securing justice for the victims and the survivors of torture and war crimes, as well as for deterring future  
government officials from the temptation to  lawlessness in the event of a future terrorist attack. 
However, even knowing what we know now  
(setting aside the revelations that are sure to come  
with the release of more memos) some, including  
President Obama, have said that the end of the Bush  
administration presents an opportunity to ”look  
forward, and not back.” And Senator Pat Leahy has  
proposed a “Truth Commission” which would tell  
us what we already know and provide amnesty to 
the officials who perpetrated these crimes. Both of these concepts are bald excuses designed to sidestep that which the law and our values compel us to do. The United States as a nation should not – and the victims of its policies cannot – move forward without holding those responsible for torture, war crimes and other abuses accountable. And the only way to both punish illegal activity and ensure deterrence in future administrations is to prosecute. Now.
I hope that you will join CCR in our campaign  
for criminal prosecutions. You can find out how  
to help with this by visiting our website at  
www.CCRjustice.org/prosecutebushofficials. 
Thank you for standing with CCR!Vince Warren, Executive DirectorThe Center is delighted to announce that 
the highly respected, longtime human rights attorney, Bill Quigley, will join CCR as our new Legal Director in May.
Bill has been an extraordinary public 
interest lawyer for more than 30 years. Before coming to CCR, Bill was a law professor and director of the poverty law clinic at Loyola University in New 
Orleans. He has served as counsel on critical issues ranging from post-Katrina social justice to the right to dissent, and from public housing in the U.S. to human rights in Haiti. About his book,  
Ending Poverty as We Know It, Lani Guiner wrote:  “Bill Quigley draws on the common sense of Thomas Paine, the moral  
inspiration of Martin Luther King, Jr., and the political wisdom  of Franklin Delano Roosevelt to issue a bold challenge for our society…in a book that is both visionary and practical.”
We look forward to Bill’s leadership in helping the Center  
reinvigorate our racial, social, and economic justice work. CCR was founded by attorneys who represented civil rights  movements in the South, and we are happy to have a new Legal Director with deep ties to current civil rights struggles in southern communities, including post-Katrina New Orleans, where there is still so much work to do. 
Accountability Time (continued from cover) Renowned Activist Lawyer Bill  
Quigley to Join CCR as Legal Director
CCR welcomes its newest members of the  
Thelma Newman Planned Giving Society
Thomas and Donna Ambrogi
Marie Henderson Rothman
George and Mary Ferger 
The Thelma Newman Planned Giving Society is comprised of  
individuals who have included CCR in their estate plans or established annuities with CCR. These gifts form the bedrock of CCR’s efforts to 
build its endowment and ensure that the Center’s work will continue 
into the future.
The Society is named after CCR co-founder Mort Stavis’ legal  
secretary at the United Electrical Workers. Thelma was not a wealthy woman, but she left a lifetime’s savings of $150,000 to further the work of CCR. She hoped that her generosity would inspire others to join her to ensure the promise of progressive legal work for the next generation.
If you would like to find out more about making a planned gift to 
CCR, contact Sara Beinert at 212-614-6448. CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org3
The Case Against Shell:  
CCR Begins a Landmark Trial for Corporate Accountability
After 12 years of dogged litigation, CCR is poised to make 
history again as Wiwa v. Royal Dutch Shell and Wiwa v. Anderson  proceed to trial. The trial date is set for April 27, 
2009.
Wiwa v. Royal Dutch Shell and Wiwa v. Anderson are law -
suits for the torture, detention, and execution of Nigerian 
activists because of their political organizing efforts. Ever since Shell began using land in the Ogoni area of Nigeria for oil production in 1958, industry pollution has contaminated the local water supply and agricul -
tural land. The cases were filed by CCR, including CCR cooperating attorney Judith Chomsky, and joined by co-counsel EarthRights International, and human rights attorneys Anthony DiCaprio and Paul Hoffman.
In the early 1990’s, when the people of Nigeria began to 
protest, Shell financed, armed, and otherwise colluded with the government forces that used deadly force and conducted massive, brutal raids against the Ogoni  
people. In 1995, Shell and its Nigerian subsidiary  
conspired with Nigeria’s military government to bring  
about the arrest and execution of the “Ogoni 9,”  
leaders of the nonviolent Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni People (MOSOP) who were tragically hanged after a sham trial by a military tribunal. The internation -
ally renowned writer and activist, Ken Saro-Wiwa, was among the nine activists executed. 
The defendants in these cases are charged with  
complicity in human rights abuses against the Ogoni 
people, including summary execution, crimes against humanity, and torture. The cases were brought under the Alien Tort Stature (ATS), which establishes jurisdiction for non-citizens to sue for violations of customary inter -
national law in U.S. courts. The outcome of these cases will impact several important legal precedents.  
The lawsuit against Shell established the right to bring  
a case in the United States against a foreign-based  
corporation, and it was one of the first human rights cases filed against a multinational corporation for human rights violations under the ATS. The case against Royal Dutch Shell is also the first case to go trial charging a corporation with racketeering charges for human rights violations under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO) Act. 
CCR and ERI have launched www.WiwavShell.org to 
provide a clearinghouse for information related to these important cases.
© Ed Kashi© Ed Kashi
Top:  A Shell worker holds a machete during a cleanup operation of an 
oil spill at an abandoned Shell Petroleum Development Company well in Oloibiri, while disgruntled locals watch. Wellhead 14 was closed in 1977 but has been leaking for years. 
Bottom:  Heat and smoke force back villagers checking on an oil fire 
erupting from a leaking wellhead in Ogoniland. The wellhead had been spilling oil for a week, coating the ground around it before catching fire. The fire burned for more than two months. 
Please visit the website to learn more about these cases, stay 
up to date on developments in the trial as they happen, and find out how you can get involved:
www.WiwavShell.orgCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org4
released safely, secure safe haven in the United States and 
other countries for those who cannot be repatriated safely, and prosecute in federal criminal courts those who should be prosecuted. Fewer than 250 men (of 779 in total) remain in the prison camp today. Most can be returned to their home countries through vigorous diplomacy. A smaller number need to be offered protection in the United States or third countries. There is no justification for continued detention without trial or the creation of special courts; such proposals would continue the human rights disaster rather than end it. 
Those at Guantánamo now – seven years on – are, in 
large part, the unlucky ones:  diplomatic pressure has not resulted in release, or they cannot be safely repatriated. The single most important factor that determines whether an individual remains at Guantánamo in 2009 is his coun -
try of nationality. The men from European countries were released early on, while virtually all the Yemenis remain behind. Ironically, it took a conviction in the military  commissions to allow Salim Hamdan to return to his native Yemen, while scores of other Yemenis, including more than a dozen cleared for release, remain in Guantánamo waiting for an end to the diplomatic impasse. In addition, approxi -
mately 60 men remain at Guantánamo because they cannot be returned to their home countries safely due to a fear of torture or persecution, and they await safe haven in the United States or elsewhere.Current Conditions of Confinement
After over seven years of unlawful executive detention,  the men who remain imprisoned at Guantánamo continue to be held in inhumane conditions that violate U.S.  obligations under the Geneva Conventions, the U.S. Con-stitution, and international human rights law. Most of these men have never been charged nor had an opportunity to challenge the legality of their detention in a habeas hearing.
Contrary to statements by the military, conditions at  
Guantánamo have not improved for the majority of  detainees and are still in violation of the law. The factual information in CCR’s report is based on direct accounts from detainees and their attorneys, including recent  accounts received in January and February 2009. 
The majority of detainees are being held in conditions  
of solitary confinement in one of two super-maximum  
facilities – Camps 5 and 6 – or in Camp Echo. The  
conditions in these camps are harshly punitive and  
violate international and U.S. legal standards for the  humane treatment of persons deprived of their liberty. 
Solitary confinement, sensory deprivation, environmental 
manipulation, and sleep deprivation are daily realities  for these men and have led to the steady deterioration  of their physical and psychological health. In addition, detainees are subjected to brutal physical assaults by the Immediate Reaction Force (IRF), a team of military guards Guantánamo Reports (continued from cover)
Despite President Obama’s executive 
orders of January 22, 2009, the men at 
Guantánamo remain imprisoned and the 
massive effort to challenge their detention through the habeas process is ongoing.
Several federal judges have begun hear-
ing habeas cases, and nearly 200 addi-
tional cases continue to progress through 
the courts. 23 of the 27 habeas cases that 
have been heard so far have produced a 
determination that another man at Guan-
tánamo is wrongfully detained.
This litigation is moving forward even 
as the new administration is conducting its inter-agency review of Guantánamo. 
Unfortunately, the legal positions taken by 
the new government have largely mirrored those of the Bush administration. In a recent filing, the government dropped the term ‘enemy combatant,’ but made only a 
slight change to its detention policy:  the 
addition of the word ‘substantially’ before ‘supported.’ This position continues to 
thwart the nation’s ability to move beyond 
Guantánamo and provide justice for those who have be so cruelly mistreated by our 
government.
Even those men who have had a judge 
determine that they are being wrongfully 
detained have not yet been released. Aside from three Bosnians, all of the men 
who won their habeas cases in U.S. fed-
eral courts remain imprisoned at Guan-tánamo today.
Included in this group are 17 Uighurs, 
members of a Muslim ethnic group in China, who face persecution and torture if returned to China. A federal judge 
ordered their release into the United 
States last October, but they remain at Guantánamo after a successful govern-
ment appeal. The Uighurs’ attorneys are 
appealing this new decision and hope for a policy change from the new administra-
tion on the Uighurs’ resettlement.
CCR plays a coordinating role in these 
over 200 cases, as well as directly rep-
resenting a number of individual habeas clients. CCR will continue to work on 
behalf of the detainees and to uphold 
constitutional principles until Guantánamo is closed and all the detainees have been 
charged or released to a safe country.Guantánamo Litigation UpdateCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org5
comparable to a riot squad. Detainees have also been  
deprived of virtually all meaningful contact with their  
families, and have suffered interference with and abuse related to their right to practice their religion.
The inhumane practices of the Bush administration  
persist today at Guantánamo and should be remedied 
immediately. Join us in encouraging President Obama to implement the recommendations offered in these report and to work swiftly to close Guantánamo, prosecute individuals in federal criminal courts if necessary, or release them.
CCR’s Recommendations
The time to close Guantánamo is long overdue – and it can 
be done in three months. Here’s how:
• Announce the immediate restoration of fundamental   
 principles of the rule of law. 
• Rapidly implement a charge or release policy. 
• Ensure the safe and speedy repatriation of those detainees   releasable to their home countries. 
• Secure safe haven for those detainees who cannot be  
 released to their home countries for fear of torture or   
 persecution, or because of statelessness. 
• Prosecute individuals for crimes through tested methods   and end the military commissions. 
During the interim period while the closure of Guantánamo is being implemented, it is critical that the conditions of detention be improved. 
• End solitary confinement and close Camps 5, 6 and Echo.
• End religious abuse of detainees.• End physical and psychological abuse of detainees  
 including the use of the Immediate Reaction Force.
• End forced feeding of individuals against their will or    under coercive circumstances. 
• Allow detainees immediate access to independent  
 medical and psychological professionals and cease  
 the practice of forcible medication of detainees.
• Cease illegal interrogations.• Allow access to detainees by independent domestic  
 and international human rights observers.Our series of white  
papers outlining policy recommen -
dations to restore the Constitution in the first 100 days of the Obama  administration  is available on our 100 Days Campaign page:  www.CCRjustice.org/100days.
The Right to Dissent
 explores the attacks upon and 
criminalization of dissent, from the surveillance of 
activists to the federalization of local law enforce-ment, to the labeling of activists as “terrorists.” 
Ending Arbitrary Detention, Torture and  
Extraordinary Rendition includes an overview of the 
Bush administration’s policies of torture, arbitrary detention and extraordinary rendition, and calls for swift action to end these practices, restore the rule of law, and hold those responsible accountable for their illegal actions.
Amend the War Powers Resolution provides an  
overview of executive abuse of war-making  power, and calls for restoring checks and  
balances. It calls for reform and revision of the  
War Powers Resolution to prohibit all executive acts of war without Congressional authorization, and for an end to the illegal wars launched by the Bush administration.
Stop Warrantless Wiretapping exposes the last  
eight years of secret surveillance, including the  expansion of warrantless wiretapping and the severe erosion of privacy rights. It calls for  
restoring protections against government spying, uncovering the full extent of illegal surveillance and prosecution of those responsible for violations of the law.
to restore the constitutionCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org6
In December, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals heard 
oral argument in CCR’s extraordinary rendition case,  Arar v. Ashcroft . A three judge panel of the same court had 
affirmed the dismissal of this case earlier last year, but  
in an extremely rare move, the Court decided of its own accord to re-hear it before the full 12 judge panel.
In 2002, Maher Arar, a Syrian-born Canadian, was  
detained at JFK airport while changing planes on his way back to Canada. He was interrogated, detained for two weeks, denied his right to go to court, and sent to Syria where he was tortured and held in a grave-like cell for  ten months. Mr. Arar was returned to Canada in 2003  and was eventually cleared of all allegations by a  Canadian government inquiry. He was never charged with any crime.
The lawsuit charges former Attorney General Ashcroft 
and other officials with violating Mr. Arar’s right to be free from torture and arbitrary detention as well as his right to have access to a court. 
CCR and Witness Against Torture coordinated a rally  
and procession to the courthouse before the argument. 
Supporters filled the courtroom and two overflow rooms and many others were turned away due to space. The Court permitted C-SPAN to air the argument live, and  it can be viewed online at:  CCRjustice.org/ourcases/  
current-cases/arar-v.-ashcroft. Mr. Arar continues to speak out on behalf of human rights as he awaits the Court’s decision on whether this case can proceed, and is pursuing a doctorate of Electrical Engineering at the University of Ottawa.  From the judges during the Arar v. Ashcroft oral argument
The minute the executive raises the specter of foreign 
policy/national security, it is the government’s position that that is a license to torture anyone? 
Judge Sonia Sotomayor
In a world where the government can allege foreign policy concerns and terrorism concerns, what role are there for judges at all? Or is this the third rail of the new 
environment in which judges are cut out of the separa-
tion of powers?
Judge Rosemary PoolerOral Argument in Arar v. Ashcroft Rendition Case
CCR board member David Cole arguing for Maher Arar at the Second 
Circuit Court of Appeals
CCR is Grateful to our Foundation Funders for Their Support*
The 1848 Foundation • The Alfred and Jane Ross Foundation • The Angelina Fund • The Aquidneck Foundation  
• The Atlantic Philanthropies (USA) • The Blue Oak Foundation • The Bydale Foundation • The Common Counsel 
Foundation • The Frances and Benjamin Benenson Foundation • The Funding Exchange National Community Funds  
• Iara Lee and George Gund III Foundation • The JKW Foundation • The John Merck Fund • The Key Foundation  
• Landau Family Foundation • The Liberty Hill Foundation • The Libra Foundation • The Lois and Irving Blum Founda-tion Inc. • Nathan & Lena Seiler Family Foundation Inc. • The New Prospect Foundation • The Open Society Institute  
• Ralph E. Ogden Foundation, Inc. • The San Francisco Foundation • The Tides Foundation • The Wallace Global Fund • The William B. Wiener, Jr. Foundation
*The foundations listed above provided leadership-level grants of $5,000 or more between 11/15/08 - 3/1/09.CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org7
Holding Private Contractors Accountable for Torture in Iraq
CCR and co-counsel (Burke O’Neil 
LLC and Akeel & Valentine, P.C.)  
have three cases pending against  
corporate military contractors and  
their employees for torture and other abuse of prisoners in detention centers across Iraq, including the infamous Abu Ghraib.
One of these cases, Al Shimari v. CACI 
International, scored a major victory for corporate accountability in March, when the judge rejected CACI’s  
immunity and political question claims, allowing the case to move forward.  
The company had argued that it should not be sued because its interrogators were acting under contract with the government, and that since this case also involves actions by the military, it was inherently “political” and therefore the court lacked authority to hear it.
Titan/L-3 and CACI are two corpora-
tions with headquarters in the U.S. that contracted with the United States to provide translation and interrogation services in Iraq. Employees from both corporations are alleged to be part of the conspiracy to torture Iraqi detainees at Abu Ghraib and other prisons.
Saleh v. Titan
In 2004, the Center for Constitutional Rights and co-counsel filed Saleh v. Titan, charging Titan/L-3 and CACI with violating international, federal and state law by participating in a tor-ture conspiracy, along with certain U.S. government personnel, that led to the rape and other acts of torture, assault and killing of Iraqi detainees held at Abu Ghraib and other prisons in Iraq. The plaintiffs include over 250 men and women who were swept up in military raids and detained at prisons under the control of the U.S. Some claims are by family members on behalf of relatives who died at Abu Ghraib.
In November 2007, the judge dismissed 
the case against Titan/L-3 based on the “government contractor defense” ruling that Titan/L-3 translators were acting under the exclusive control of the U.S. military and therefore the claims were preempted. However, he also ruled that CACI had maintained control over its decision-making and  
allowed the claims against it to  
proceed, ordering a jury trial. Appeals from both sides are pending. Oral  
argument was heard in February. 
In 2008, CCR and co-counsel filed five 
new cases against CACI and Titan/L-3 and individual torturers on behalf of new plaintiffs. These cases have since been condensed into two lawsuits:  
Al Shimari v. CACI International and Al-Quraishi v. Nakhla and L-3 Services, Inc.
Al Shimari v. CACI International
Al-Shimari v. CACI International was brought on behalf of four “hard site” victims of torture at Abu Ghraib prison. Plaintiffs were subjected to electric shocks; sexual assaults; being stripped and kept naked; sensory deprivation; From the Time of Morning Prayers is a portrait by Daniel Heymen of a CCR client in our case, Saleh v. Titan. Heyman is a Philadelphia artist who has met many of CCR’s Iraqi clients and captured their images and words in portraits such as this one in an effort to humanize our plaintiffs and bring their stories to a larger audience. www.danielheyman.com
While it is true that the events at Abu Ghraib pose an  
embarrassment to this country, it is the misconduct alleged 
and not the litigation surrounding that misconduct that  
creates the embarrassment. This court finds that the only  
potential for embarrassment would be if the court declined to hear these claims on ‘political questions’ grounds.
U.S. District Court Judge Gerald Bruce Lee in Al Shimari v. CACI Internationalcontinued on page 8CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org8
mock executions; stress positions; broken 
bones; deprivation of oxygen, food and water; as well as other brutal and dehumanizing acts of torture. According to statements by military personnel who were charged and convicted for their roles in the abuse, CACI employees Steven Stefanowicz and Daniel Johnson directed and caused some of the most egregious torture and abuse at Abu Ghraib. No private contractor employees have yet faced criminal charges. 
Al-Quraishi v. Nakhla and  
L-3 Services, Inc.
Al-Quraishi v. Nakhla and L-3 Services, Inc. includes claims of torture and war crimes as well as state law tort claims brought on behalf of 72 plaintiffs detained and abused at more than 25 prisons in Iraq. 
Plaintiffs were subjected to rape and other 
forms of sexual assault; sleep deprivation; beatings; painful stress positions; sensory deprivation; electric shocks; threats (including with unleashed dogs); denial of medical  
treatment and other brutal acts. Oral  
arguments in this case were heard in March. 
Victims of torture at Abu Ghraib and other 
prisons in Iraq have long waited to have their day in court. Stand with CCR as we continue their struggle to hold torturers accountable, no matter who they are or where they torture.
Mr. Al-Janabi, a plaintiff in Al-Quraishi v. Nakhla 
and L-3 is an Iraqi blacksmith who was held and tortured at Abu Ghraib prison for nearly a year.
Maximize Your Support of CCR and  
Magnify the Impact of Your Gift
The Normandie Foundation has been an ardent and stalwart 
supporter of CCR’s work on issues of civil and other human rights 
for many years. After 9/11 the Foundation joined the Center in 
its efforts to challenge the Bush administration’s use of torture, extraordinary rendition and indefinite and illegal detention. They believed these programs and policies represent some of the most 
destabilizing forces at play in the world today. The Normandie 
Foundation wishes to preserve CCR’s ability to always continue its important work; and in light of both the economic challenges and political opportunities of the day, has offered to match gifts to the 
Center during this time – up to $50,000! – doubling (if you are a 
current CCR donor), or tripling (if you are a first time donor), the impact of your gift.CCR in New Orleans
This March, CCR Staff joined May Day New Orleans, a housing rights 
organization, and the National Economic and Social Rights Initiative (NESRI), a national human rights advocacy organization, in conducting a surveying project in New Orleans. The group surveyed tenants  receiving local and federal housing assistance to determine the impact that US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)  regulations are having on their daily lives. 
The surveying project was initiated by May Day New Orleans, a local 
housing advocacy group. Organizers are concerned that overbroad regulations are being aggressively used by the local housing authority (currently under the control of HUD), private landlords who partici-pate in the Section 8 program, and HUD, to push low-income families, especially those who are vocal opponents of the destruction of public housing, out of the city to make way for wealthier, whiter residents.
Black Firefighters Lawsuit  
Scheduled for Trial
Trial is scheduled in a class action lawsuit charging the Fire Department of New York (FDNY) with racially discriminatory hiring practices. This case is the culmination of CCR’s long-time partnership with the Vulcan Society, the fraternal organization of Black New York City firefighters, to increase racial diversity and opportunity within the FDNY.
Oral arguments were heard in March on a request for summary  
judgment in favor of the Vulcan Society in light of overwhelming  
evidence. United States of America and Vulcan Society v. City of New York will go to trial in June if the request is denied. Co-counsel on this case  is Levy Ratner, P.C., and Scott & Scott, LLP.Private Contractors (continued)CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org9
In September 2008, the U.S.  
District Court in Manhattan ordered 
the New York Police Department (NYPD) to provide all of its  
“stop-and-frisk” data from 1998 for-ward, to the Center for Constitutional Rights. This is the first time this data has been made publicly available. CCR released a preliminary analysis of the data for 2005 through the first half of 2008, the years covered in our ongoing case, Floyd v. City of New York. The NYPD is required to keep a database of its stop-and-frisks as a result of CCR’s 1999 racial profiling lawsuit filed in the wake of the  
Amadou Diallo shooting, Daniels v. City of New York.
CCR filed Floyd on behalf of plain-
tiffs who were illegally stopped and frisked by NYPD officers on one or more occasions without reason-able suspicion and because of their race. The lawsuit alleges that the NYPD engages in racial profiling and suspicionless stop-and-frisks of law-abiding New York City residents. The plaintiffs represent hundreds of thousands of New Yorkers who over the past several years have been stopped on the way to work, in front of their homes or just walking down the street without any cause, primar-ily because of their race or ethnicity. 
CCR analyzed the nearly 1,600,000 
NYPD stops of New Yorkers from 2005 to mid 2008. During this pe-riod approximately 80 percent of total stops made were of Blacks and Latinos, who comprise 25 percent and 28 percent of New York City’s total population, respectively. Dur-ing this same time period, only 11 percent of stops were of Whites, yet they comprise 44 percent of the city’s population.
Blacks and Latinos are also more like-
ly to be frisked after a NYPD-initiated stop than Whites and more likely to have physical force used against them during a NYPD-initiated stop than Whites. Yet the rates of summons and arrests from all stops is not only extremely low, but nearly the same across racial categories.
Police stops-and-frisks without rea-
sonable suspicion violate the Fourth Amendment, and racial profiling is a violation of fundamental rights and protections of the Fourteenth Amendment and the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The record number of New Yorkers being stopped-and-frisked is a quality of life issue for all New Yorkers and the targeting of African American and Latino City residents creates a climate of fear, aggression and distrust, particularly in commu-nities of color. The data confirms that there is a serious need for reform and oversight of the NYPD and an end to its racially biased policing.Racial Disparity in NYPD Stop and Frisks
New York City Police Department’s stop-and-frisk practices 
are on the rise. Over 80% of those stops targeted Blacks or 
Latinos while 11% were of Whites.*
*from January 2005 through half of 2008
Data released as part of CCR’s ongoing racial 
profiling case, Floyd v. City of New York, 
shows that New York City Police Department’s 
stop-and-frisk practices are on the rise, with 
nearly 1,600,000 stops in the 3 1/2 years 
beginning in 2005. Over 80% of those stops 
targeted Blacks or Latinos while 11% were of 
Whites. 
CCR’s report and supporting data is available 
at CCRjustice.org/stopandfrisk.NYPD “stop-and-frisk” 2005 to mid 2008
3% Asian/Pacific Islander5% Other81% Black/Latino
11% WhiteCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org10
Salah Al-Askari trained as a doctor in 
his native Iraq and came to New York in the mid-1950s for advanced studies in urology. When he returned home in 1958, the military had staged a coup, assassinating the King and his family and the Prime Minister. Dr. Al-Askari and his wife Catherine left the country, fearing that there would be massacres and oppression. They have been part of the movement for peace and justice ever since. Both are involved with a local peace group in their town of Leonia, New Jersey, and among other activities, hold a vigil for peace and equality every Sunday afternoon. 
The Al-Askaris have been donors to the Center for Constitutional 
Rights since 2000 because they were “impressed by the Center’s fight for individuals who have had their rights curtailed and  infringed upon.” When they prepared their estate plan a few years ago, they decided to include CCR as a beneficiary of their family Trust. Dr. Al-Askari says, “We wanted to provide CCR with a continuous source of support and permanency. We have been giving regularly but those donations sometimes fluctuate. We included CCR in our Trust so that the organization can  function with a base of support that is known from year to year, to keep it stable and strong.”
For more information about IRA gifts, CCR’s Founders Circle, or the 
Thelma Newman Society (CCR’s planned giving program), contact Sara Beinert at 212-614-6448 or write:  Sara Beinert, CCR, 666 Broadway, 7th Floor, New York, NY 10012. Email:  SBeinert@ccrjustice.org
In January, CCR joined the Legal Aid Society 
of New York as co-counsel in DHS v. Ander-
son, a case defending a mentally disabled and mentally ill lawful permanent resident facing deportation from the United States.
Gary Anderson is a 42-year-old Jamaican-born 
lawful permanent resident that has lived in the United States for over 22 years. Mr. Anderson was placed in removal proceedings in January 2007, following a conviction for simple posses -
sion of drugs. He has a history of struggling with mental illness and mental disability (low cognitive ability) including hospitalizations due to his diagnosis of schizophrenia and placement in special education schools. Despite his condition, he was transferred to a detention facility in El Paso, Texas, far from his family and support structure. 
Harsh mandatory detention provisions, that 
defined two or more convictions for simple possession of drugs as “drug trafficking”  
for immigration purposes, prevented the  immigration court from granting bail or  discretionary relief from deportation. In  January 2009, with the help of the ACLU- Immigrant Rights Project, CCR filed a habeas petition in federal court, challenging his  prolonged detention as unlawful. After the  Second Circuit addressed the legal issue of misdemeanor drug offenses as “aggravated felonies” in an unrelated case, an immigra -
tion judge finally granted a “cancellation of removal” in February – ending the deportation process and allowing Anderson to remain  
in the United Sates. He was released that  evening, after two years of detention in the Bergen County Jail defending his right to  
be heard.
This case illustrates the numerous challenges 
that mentally ill and mentally disabled detain-ees face in immigration deportation proceed -
ings, including:  harsh mandatory detention provisions, a lack of adequate due process, and exceptional hardship to family members. Throughout these proceedings, Mr. Anderson remained in jail. The length of his detention – 2 years – is over 100 times the length of the time he served for his criminal convictions.
New fact sheets at www.CCRjustice.org/faqs
• The Alien Tort Statute
• Accountability and Prosecutions for Torture
• The Case Against Avi Dichter
• Guns for Hire in Iraq:  The Cases Against Blackwater
• Corporations & Torture in Prisons in Iraq:  
 The Cases Against Titan/L-3 and CACIDonor Spotlight: 
Salah and Catherine Al-AskariVictory for Mentally Ill  
Immigration DetaineeCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org11
In Memoriam
John Leonard
The memorial for 
John Leonard, culture critic, CCR contributor and stepfather of CCR staff  member Jen Nessel, was held during the bliz -
zard on March 2 with 400 people in attendance. He died in November after a seven-year battle with lung cancer at the age of 69. Leonard began his career at Pacifica radio in Berkeley and went on to edit The New York Times Book Review, including putting out the historic Vietnam War issue, and to co-edit the culture pages of The Nation with his wife, Sue. He was daily book reviewer at the Times for many years and wrote monthly reviews for Harper’s, among count -
less publications. His wit, wisdom and passion will be missed. The Center is honored that his family asked for gifts in his memory to be made to CCR.
Edwin Salpeter
The Center for Constitutional Rights is saddened by the recent passing of our longtime friend and supporter Edwin Salpeter at the age of 83. He was an eminent theoretical astrophysicist at Cornell University, known for his wide-ranging research encompassing black holes and debunking the Reagan administration’s “Star Wars” missile defense system. Ed and his wife, Antonia Lhamo Shouse, gave generously to CCR, both financially – and in the  occasional gift of opera tickets!  We are very grateful that the  family designated CCR as a  recipient of gifts in his memory.The Center for Constitutional Rights scored an important victory for the right to dissent when our case, Bell v. Miami-Dade County  settled in January. 
The case was filed with co-counsel  
Rob Ross and others, on behalf of  
29 activists, including CCR staff  attorney Matthew Strugar, against  police officers and their supervisors from Miami-Dade County. The  majority of plaintiffs were arrested  at a jail solidarity vigil for arrests  that occurred earlier that week  during the November 2003 FTAA  protests. (Those arrestees were part  of CCR’s landmark Killmon  case, 
which challenged the government’s deliberate and coordinated disruption of protest, and settled for a substantial sum in April 08.)
Several plaintiffs were pepper 
sprayed, held facedown on the ground at gunpoint and then held in a garage in “dog kennel-like fences.” Some of the women plaintiffs were strip-searched by male officers. CCR brought this case as part of our long history of fighting the mistreatment of protestors and to dissuade Miami and other cities from overreacting during mass demonstrations as well as to compensate the victims of these abuses. 
Affirming our Right to Dissent
CCR would like to thank our supporters who voted for us in the 2008 
CREDO Mobile/Working Assets Donation Pool. Thanks to your efforts, CCR received almost  $53,000 in a donation from the company!
We also thank CREDO Mobile/Working Assets for continuing to support CCR’s work by offering us a place in their annual donation pool four times in the last five years. We are so grateful to them for conducting this socially conscious program and for partnering with CCR in this effort. 
Please support CCR in CREDO Mobile/Working Assets’ Donation Pool, by 
visiting www.WorkingAssets.com/Voting and registering your support for CCR. The more votes we get, the more funding. It’s a small way to make a big difference. Tell others about this option, too!
Finally, if you believe in CCR’s work and would like to see us in  
CREDO Mobile/Working Assets’ Donation Pool in 2010, please consider nominating us for a position in their pool for 2010 by visiting their website at www.WorkingAssets.com/nominate/to fill out their easy form!Free Trade of the Americas (FTAA)  
protest in Miami, November 2003
Thank you to our Supporters and  
CREDO Mobile/Working Assets
tk
666 Broadway, 7th Floor, New York, NY 10012
The Center for Constitutional Rights is dedicated to advancing and protecting the rights guaranteed by the United States Constitution and  
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Founded in 1966 by attorneys who represented civil rights movements in the South, CCR is a  
non-profit legal and educational organization committed to the creative use of law as a positive force for social change.Inside
CCR takes Shell  
and military  
contractors to court!
CCRjustice.org
Thank you for your con-
tinued support!
SIGN THE PETITION
CCR has launched a new online campaign calling for account-
ability – and criminal prosecutions – of those Bush administration officials responsible for torture and war crimes. Help us make the 
point by signing on to our petition.
 SEND A LETTER
CCR is calling upon Senator Patrick Leahy and the Senate Judiciary Committee to support prosecutions of government officials who vio-lated the law and to oppose any immunity for the architects of these 
torture programs. Send a letter at:Take Action!we already know the truth...  
what we need is a  PROSECUTOR!
www.CCRjustice.org/prosecutebushofficials