JUSTICE TAKES A FIGHTSPRING  2020
NEWSLETTER
1
overseen by, of all people, William Barr, who was then the Attorney 
General under George H. W. Bush. With your steady partnership, the 
Center for Constitutional Rights challenged and defeated this horrible 
policy despite the hysteria around disease and immigrants that made 
the exclusion and detention of HIV+ people seem like a perfectly 
reasonable measure. Everyone in detention was released.
Three decades later, we need you even 
more as we prepare for the upcoming 
consolidation of power. Now is the time 
for you to stand with us as we stand with 
those who are vulnerable and largely 
forgotten in our current situation. Today, 
we continue to work with movement and 
community groups who are leading the 
call for a reprioritization of government 
resources towards people who are in crisis, 
like prisoners and immigrant detainees, 
those seeking safe, reliable reproductive care, and those who work at 
the margins of our economy. We ask you to please lift up our work with 
your financial support so that we may lift up the voices of the people 
who have lost the most during this pandemic. With your support, we 
will never advocate only for the status quo, but, will continue to work 
on the cutting edge with our eyes fixed on a more just future. We will 
accept no limits on justice as, together, we demand from power what 
needs to be demanded – regardless of the risk. 
In Gratitude and Solidarity,
Vince Warren  
Executive DirectorThank you for your unwavering partnership!  
You are building the world we want to see, where power is 
redistributed to those on the margins. We are dismantling:
Haywood Burns was a legend in the social justice and civil 
rights fields. He was a brilliant lawyer who, at 15, successfully 
desegregated a swimming pool in his hometown of Peekskill,  
NY. He was also a trustee of the Center for Constitutional 
Rights. In 1990, I met with Haywood to ask for advice as I was 
considering law school. He told me something that I’ve never 
forgotten: “The most treacherous limitation on justice is one’s own 
discomfort with demanding from power what needs to be demanded.”
“The most treacherous limitation 
on justice is one’s own discomfort 
with demanding from power what 
needs to be demanded.” 
 
In the moment we find ourselves in, I fully appreciate the power of these 
words and I am especially grateful for the generous financial support 
from donors like you who breathe life into them every single day.
As my colleagues Baher Azmy and Nadia Ben-Youssef so compellingly 
articulate in their letters, the current coronavirus pandemic is no 
doubt chilling, but it is also clarifying. We know this because of 
three key lessons we’ve learned during our more than five decades 
of tireless work: First, crises have always been golden opportunities 
for the consolidation of oppressive power; second, that this power 
is always consolidated on the backs of those with the least access to 
justice; and third, the consolidation happens under the noses of those 
who are only comfortable advocating for the status quo ante. 
We saw this play out in 1991, when U.S. law barred entry to 
immigrants with communicable diseases. Using a public health 
framework, right under our noses, the government created the 
world’s first detention camp for HIV+ refugees, housing 310 Haitian 
men, women, and children in, of all places, Guantanamo Bay Naval Base n  Abusive state power
n  Structural racismn  Patriarchy
n    Oppressive economic structures
Now is the time for 
you to stand with 
us as we stand 
with those who 
are vulnerable and 
largely forgotten 
in our current 
situation. 2
asserted crisis is over. But, history teaches us that power 
is not a rubber band, ready to snap back into its previous 
shape when the immediate need passes. Hindsight teaches 
us to be ready to resist. 
But, as you know, hindsight also 
teaches us that crises present an 
opportunity to critique power and 
mobilize communities in a durable 
way.  We know that crises can 
often clarify our collective failure 
to support vulnerable members of 
our community – domestically and globally – as well as the 
imperative to radically transform our society for everyone 
to thrive. With your crucial support, we have filed cases to 
free dozens of medically-vulnerable persons who are in ICE 
detention facilities in the deep South, to save lives of course, 
but also more broadly to showcase, alongside regional and 
national movement partners, the deeply destructive detention 
system in the U.S. and the perverse, self-destructive logic of 
this country’s pervasive, punitive reflex. 
However, crises can also afford important opportunities 
for change and mobilization. Immigrant, Muslim, Arab, 
and South Asian communities were decimated by the 
Bush Administration’s immediate post-9/11 policies, but 
in the intervening years built many dozens of grassroots 
groups that were more prepared than ever to challenge 
– in coalition – government overreach, and develop an 
affirmative vision for a just society. Today’s crisis has 
incontrovertibly exposed the yawning structural failures 
in our economic and public health systems in a way that 
can provide a meaningful opportunity for us to demand 
government policies that adequately resource community 
needs, provide economic and legal security to vulnerable 
people, and ensure that all persons are treated with dignity 
and respect. That is the foresight we are able to have 
thanks to your unwavering partnership.
 
In Gratitude and Solidarity,
Baher Azmy  
Legal Director“We are left to wonder why we 
cannot see with foresight what we 
see so clearly with hindsight.” 
 
“We are left to wonder why we cannot see with foresight 
what we see so clearly with hindsight.” So wrote a 
Philadelphia-based federal appeals court in Hassan v. City 
of New York, a case in which you, our supporters, helped us 
successfully challenge the New York City Police Department’s 
program of suspicionless surveillance of Muslims. The court 
reflected that the overbroad “national security” rationale for 
targeting Muslims, resembled destructive roads the country 
has traveled before, when targeting Jews during the Red 
Scare, African Americans during the Civil Rights Movements, 
and Japanese Americans during World War II. 
At the Center for Constitutional Rights, hindsight drives us 
to action. This is why we knew to quickly and aggressively 
respond to the predictable human rights crisis created by 
the Bush Administration’s hyper-militaristic response to 
9/11 and to the Trump Administration’s xenophobic drive 
to dismantle our long-standing human rights commitments 
to asylum seekers and other immigrant communities. 
Innocuous as they may seem, public health emergency 
narratives, like “national security” emergency narratives, 
are not politically neutral. Every crisis narrative gives the 
powerful the opportunity to consolidate power, divert 
attention and resources away from real, root causes of 
community harm, and to leverage xenophobia and racism 
to punish and exclude. We are seeing early efforts by 
the Trump Administration to use this crisis to give courts 
broad power to suspend habeas corpus, to close the 
border completely to asylum seekers, and to enrich private 
industries that only fuel deeper financial insecurity and 
climate catastrophe. The state will demand emergency 
powers, and institutions tend to acquiesce to the muscular 
demand for more executive power, often in the false hope 
that power will recede and rights will return once the Looking at the Problem with  
Both Hindsight and Foresight
But, as you know, 
hindsight also teaches 
us that crises present 
an opportunity to 
critique power and 
mobilize communities 
in a durable way.Baher AzmyA MESSAGE FROM OUR LEGAL DIRECTOR3
in her 1988 address to Spelman College, Dr. Angela 
Davis leaned into the definition of the word “radical,” 
the etymology of which is simply “to grasp something 
at its root.” It is to inquire past the symptoms of a 
problem and to fix one’s attention on the cause. To 
be radical is to ask why? And to ask why, again. Once the 
problem is clearly understood, so too is the solution. But 
because most social problems are designed to benefit 
those with power, much effort is made to craft master 
narratives that muddy the waters, bury the root cause 
under impenetrable layers of “complexity,” window-dress 
or otherwise justify the problem, and crucially misdirect 
the inquiry and blame. These master narratives (otherwise 
known as myths) are captured in public education 
curriculums, reflected in popular media and imagination,  
and deeply embedded in a society’s institutions,  
policies, and practices. 
Radical, then, is a commitment, and searching for the root 
causes of social harm is a lifelong practice. But there are 
moments of collective unearthing. Perhaps you remember 
clearly where you were on key dates in 1968. Or the early 
fall of 1990 or 2001. The summer of 2014. March 2020.
Like the moments of crisis and clarity that came before it, 
the coronavirus pandemic has exposed both the problem 
and the solution. The root of this crisis is a society that is 
premised on the disposability of certain human life, and 
the protection of corporate interests. The pandemic is 
a symptom of a society that has consistently prioritized 
prisons and endless wars over community safety and public 
health. While a vaccine will ultimately help us address the 
COVID-19 symptoms, the pandemic is not in essence a 
biomedical problem. The problem is social and political, and 
with your support, we have both 
an opportunity and an obligation 
to co-create the solution. 
Helpfully, and unlike many of the 
crises we have faced together, 
inherent to the very nature of this public health catastrophe is the key to our collective 
survival. We breathe, live, and die together. Solidarity is the 
simple, radical, life-saving solution.
At the Center for Constitutional Rights, we know that 
solidarity ensures that those people who were made most 
vulnerable to this virus are centered and protected. Your 
important support will be crucial to our ability to join 
with movement partners to demand that our people’s 
material needs are equitably met in this moment, retain our 
ability to resist, and ensure that the full scope of our civil, 
political, social, and economic rights are guaranteed. And 
because this is an opening unlike we’ve ever seen, we are 
deepening our dedication to our freedom dreams. With 
you on our side, we are anticipating release from prisons, 
jails, and detention centers. We are anticipating housing 
as a human right. We are anticipating the just distribution 
of resources, power, and capital. We are anticipating an 
end to security theater and the 
dawn of a new era of community 
safety and mutual aid. We are 
anticipating a reordered society of 
solidarity and radical love. Thank 
you for building it with us. 
In Gratitude and Solidarity,
Nadia Ben-Youssef  
Advocacy Director
We breathe, live, and  
die together. Solidarity 
is the simple, radical, 
life-saving solution.We are anticipating  
a reordered society of 
solidarity and radical 
love. Thank you for 
building it with us. Solidarity is the Solution Nadia Ben-YoussefA MESSAGE FROM OUR ADVOCACY DIRECTOR4Justice Sustainers 
Our Incredible Monthly Donors
We are very thankful to our loyal Justice Sustainers, a special 
group of people who support the Center for Constitutional 
Rights on a monthly basis throughout the year. 
Collectively, these monthly gifts create a pool of funds  
that we can count on to thoughtfully plan thereby  
providing more hope for vulnerable populations, 
more support for social movements, more justice and 
accountability, and more flexibility during these uncertain 
times — and for that, we are deeply grateful!  
Every amount counts and is greatly appreciated. The CARES Act:  
Two Incentives for you to Give Now! 
“As always, I am lost in admiration 
for the wonderful work you do in 
these heartbreaking times.”
 
–  David Halperin, Michigan  
Justice Sustainer
Other Ways to  
Support the Center for 
Constitutional Rights Donors can now deduct their gifts  
up to $300
For the rest of 2020, you can deduct up to  
$300, irrespective of whether or not you itemize 
your deductions. 
Donors can now deduct a much higher 
percentage of their AGI (adjusted  
gross income)
You can make a cash gift and deduct it up to 
100% of your AGI for the year 2020. This allows 
you to make charitable gifts that eliminate your 
tax burden. Please take advantage of these two measures* in the 
Act that makes renewing your commitment to the fight 
for social justice more financially beneficial for you.
WE ARE CALLINGDonate. Act. Share. 
Join forces with activists, lawyers, and storytellers  
to fight oppression and build power. You have a role  
to play.
Make an Online Gift  
ccrjustice.org/donate  
 
Honor your Loved Ones through a Tribute Gift  
ccrjustice.org/donate  
 
Donate Stock  
ccrjustice.org/gifts-stockfunds  
 
Host a Virtual Meet for Justice House Party  
 
Attend a Virtual Event  
ccrjustice.org/calendar  
 
Stay up-to-date and Share Our News  
ccrjustice.org/up-to-dateFor more information, please contact:
Theda Jackson-Mau  
Director of Development  
tjackson-mau@ccrjustice.org  |  212-614-6448*Note: Both of the above measures apply to cash 
gifts only
ON YOU5
Amna Akbar 
Columbus, OH  
Associate Professor of Law  
at Ohio State University
Amna’s research and teaching focus  
on social movements, critical theory, 
and policing, race, and inequality. Her 
scholarship explores the intersections of national security and 
criminal law, and the potential of social movements to transform 
our thinking about law, law enforcement, and law reform. She writes 
broadly for academic and popular audiences in outlets like NOMOS, 
Citizenship Studies, Journal of Legal Education, Law and Political 
Economy,  
The Nation, Boston Review, and more. In her teaching and lawyering 
work, she is deeply engaged with law and organizing in Ohio and 
around the country.
Before coming to Ohio State, Amna taught at New York University 
(NYU) Law School and the City University of New York (CUNY) 
Law School. She received her B.A. from Barnard College, Columbia 
University, and her J.D. from the University of Michigan, where she 
served as editor-in-chief of the Michigan Law Review. After law school, 
she clerked for Judge Gerard E. Lynch in the U.S. District Court, 
Southern District of New York, and worked as a staff attorney at 
Queens Legal Services Corp. in a community-based battered women’s 
project. She is a former Law and Public Affairs Fellow and Visiting 
Scholar at Princeton University. 
Jumana Musa
Takoma Park, MD  
Human rights attorney and racial justice 
activist, Director of the Fourth Amendment 
Center at the National Association of 
Criminal Defense Lawyers (NACDL)
As director, Jumana oversees NACDL’s 
initiative to build a new, more durable Fourth Amendment legal 
doctrine for the digital age. The Fourth Amendment Center educates 
the defense bar on privacy challenges in the digital age, provides a 
dynamic toolkit of resources to help lawyers identify opportunities to 
challenge government surveillance, and establishes a tactical litigation 
support network to assist in key cases.Prior to joining NACDL, Jumana served as Deputy Director for the 
Rights Working Group, a national coalition of civil rights, civil liberties, 
human rights, and immigrant rights advocates, where she coordinated 
the “Face the Truth” campaign against racial profiling. She was also 
the Advocacy Director for Domestic Human Rights and International 
Justice at Amnesty International USA, where she addressed the 
domestic and international impact of U.S. counterterrorism efforts 
on human rights. Jumana holds a B.A. in International Relations from 
Brown University and a J.D. from Georgetown University Law Center.
Vincent M. 
Southerland
Brooklyn, NY  
Executive Director, Center on Race, 
Inequality, and the Law at NYU Law  
Vincent has dedicated his career to 
advancing racial justice and civil rights.  
He came to NYU after serving as an Assistant Federal Public  
Defender with the Federal Defenders for the Southern District of  
New York since 2015. Prior to his time at the Federal Defenders, 
Vincent spent seven years at the NAACP Legal Defense and 
Educational Fund, Inc. (LDF), where he was a Senior Counsel. While 
at LDF, he engaged in litigation and advocacy at the intersection of 
race and criminal justice, including the successful representation of 
people sentenced to death across the South and children sentenced 
to life imprisonment without parole. He also led LDF’s advocacy 
efforts around race and policing, and was lead counsel in school 
desegregation and employment discrimination matters. 
Vincent previously served as a staff attorney at the Bronx Defenders, 
and an E. Barrett Prettyman Fellow at Georgetown University Law 
Center. He began his career as a law clerk to the Honorable Theodore 
McKee, Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third 
Circuit, and the Honorable Louis H. Pollak, of the United States 
District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania. Vincent holds 
an L.L.M. from Georgetown University Law Center, and received 
his J.D. from Temple University School of Law and his B.A. from 
the University of Connecticut. He serves on the boards of The Bail 
Project and the Federal Defenders of New York.NEW BOARD MEMBER PROFILES6
Thelma Newman  
Planned Giving Society
A special group of donors who have committed 
to supporting justice for years to come
 
Justice must be built forward. We are extraordinarily 
grateful to the members of the Thelma Newman Planned 
Giving Society, who have included us in their estate plans, 
making a vital investment in freedom now and in the 
future. 
Our Thelma Newman Planned Giving Society  is named for 
Center for Constitutional Rights co-founder Morty Stavis’s 
legal assistant at the United Electrical Workers. Thelma 
Newman was not a wealthy woman, but she left  
an estate of $150,000 to further the work of the Center  
for Constitutional Rights in hopes that her generosity  
would inspire others to join her in continuing the fight  
for future generations.
Please consider making a planned gift  
to the Center for Constitutional Rights.  
In doing so, you will ensure that we can 
continue the fearless fight for justice  
for generations to come.“In a sea of worthy organizations 
asking for support, I continue 
to feel that CCR remains on the 
cutting edge of challenges to 
everything that is going wrong.  
And that is why my support has 
been consistent.” 
–   Barbra Apfelbaum, New Jersey  
Thelma Newman Society Member and Justice Sustainer 
Our heartfelt thanks go to those who made gifts to the 
Michael Ratner Campaign for the Next Generation. The 
Ratner initiative is a five-year campaign launched in 2016 
to institutionalize Michael’s spirit and vision. It seeks to 
accomplish three objectives: build the next generation of 
movement lawyers by training law students and young 
attorneys, serve as the “911” for social justice movements 
with rapid response to emergent issues, and work shoulder 
to shoulder with our movement partners – closer to the 
ground on which they fight. 
For those who have given, we ask you to 
renew your support. If you haven’t renewed 
your support, please consider designating 
your gift to the campaign today! Michael Ratner Campaign 
for the Next GenerationTHANK YOU!
Make a gift at:  
ccrjustice.org/donate  
Online gifts are a  
quicker and greener  
way to give!
Center for  
Constitutional 
Rights
@ccrjustice @theCCR Follow the Center for Constitutional Rights on social media:By mail to:
Theda Jackson-Mau
Center for Constitutional Rights
666 Broadway, 7th Floor
New York, NY 10012If you would like  
to learn more about: 
Becoming a Justice Sustainer, joining the  
Thelma Newman Society or supporting the Michael Ratner 
Campaign for the Next Generation, please contact our 
Director of Development Theda Jackson-Mau at  
tjackson-mau@ccrjustice.org or 212-614-6448.
Center for  
Constitutional 
Rights