CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.orgWinter 2007 Newsletter
Holding Private Security Contractors  
Accountable: The Case Against Blackwater
On October 11, the Center 
for Constitutional Rights 
filed a civil case against the 
notorious private security 
contractor Blackwater USA 
for the killing of innocent 
Iraqi civilians. The case 
was brought in cooperation 
with Burke O’Neil LLC and 
Akeel & Valentine, P .C.
Blackwater USA is a private 
military contractor whose 
heavily armed personnel 
opened fire on innocent 
Iraqi civilians in Baghdad’s 
crowded Nisoor Square on 
September 16, 2007, killing 
17 civilians. Media coverage of this incident has put an 
international spotlight on 
how private contractors in 
Iraq have operated outside 
of the law through the use 
of mercenaries who disre -
gard all legal constraints. 
CCR is working to ensure 
that these companies are 
not shielded from account -
ability for their actions and 
to show that government 
contracts are not a license 
for impunity. 
CCR’s lawsuit asserts that 
Blackwater violated U.S. 
law and “fostered a culture 
of lawlessness amongst its employees, encouraging 
them to act in the com -
pany’s financial interests 
at the expense of innocent 
human life.” The case, Estate 
of Himoud Saed Atban, et al. 
v. Blackwater USA, et al. , was 
filed on behalf of an Iraqi 
citizen who was injured 
by Blackwater employees 
during the incident and the 
families of three deceased 
men. 
In the lawsuit, CCR alleges 
that Blackwater violated 
the Alien Tort Statute (ATS) 
in committing extrajudicial On December 5, CCR will return to the 
Supreme Court on behalf of the men 
at Guantánamo with the cases Al Odah 
v. U.S.  and Boumediene v. Bush . These 
cases are the first to directly challenge 
the constitutionality of the Military 
Commissions Act of 2006 and its strip -
ping of habeas corpus  jurisdiction from 
federal courts.
Al Odah v. United States , filed jointly  
by CCR and co-counsel law firms,  
consists of eleven habeas petitions, 
including many of the first ones filed 
after CCR’s 2004 victory in Rasul v. 
Bush .  Boumediene v. Bush  is on behalf 
of six Bosnian-Algerian humanitarian 
workers seized by the U.S. military 
2 From the  
 Executive Director
2 Victory Against CACI
3 Filing Charges   
 Against Rumsfeld
3 CCR Welcomes New  
 Board Members
4 Guantánamo
6 Maher Arar
7 Pakistan and the U.S.
7 Victory for the LA 8
8 CCR’s New Website
9 New Orleans
10 New Board Members
11 Donor SpotlightInsideCCR Returns to Supreme Court over Guantánamo
continued on page 4
continued on page 2CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org2
From the Executive Director
This is a crucial and exciting 
time in CCR’s history and 
in the U.S. judicial system.  
The Supreme Court of the 
United States will be hear -
ing oral arguments in CCR’s 
landmark cases Al Odah v. 
U.S. and Boumediene v. Bush . 
This case will demand the 
detainees’ right to know 
why they are being held.  
Our campaign,  Beyond 
Guantánamo: Rescue the 
Constitution  is issuing a call 
to action to all Americans concerned about the drastic 
erosion of rights in our country. It’s about more than one 
person, or one place, or one time. Moving Beyond Guan -
tánamo means we must carry the fight to Guantánamo 
and beyond to all the areas where the government is 
taking the law into its own hands, and, as a people, we 
must move beyond the example of torture and dehu -
manization set by our government. We need to restore 
justice and once again become a nation whose values are 
a beacon to other nations, not an embarrassment.
The expansion of executive power and the limitation of 
rights to all people, especially people of color and the 
disempowered, had tragic consequences during and 
after Hurricane Katrina.  CCR’s recent hearing, “New 
Orleans Coming Home: A National Hearing on the Role 
of Law Enforcement in the Reconstruction,” examined 
the ways that law enforcement has had a negative 
impact on the ability of residents to access housing, 
education, employment, and other public services post-
Katrina. New Orleans has become a national and even 
international symbol of government neglect and racism, 
but we also know that these times of crisis offer us  
opportunities as a national community to create innova -
tive new solutions to problems that plague so many of 
our neighborhoods. 
Looking back on my first year at the Center for Consti -
tutional Rights, I’m grateful to have worked with such 
dedicated and passionate colleagues and allies to fight 
against this government’s unprecedented expansion of 
power.  I’m glad to have had the opportunity to meet 
some of our many donors around the country who help 
make our work possible. I look forward to meeting 
more of our committed donors at our upcoming events.
Vincent Warren  
Executive Director
Important Victory in Case Against 
CACI Corporation for Torture at 
Abu Ghraib
In a key victory in the fight to end torture, a federal court 
ruled on November 6 that CCR’s lawsuit against a private 
military contractor in Iraq should be heard by a jury of 
Americans. The action was filed in 2004 against CACI and 
Titan, both of which were named in the military investiga -
tion of the Abu Ghraib scandal. 
The court today ruled that the case could go forward 
against CACI, whose employees worked as interrogators  
in the prison. The court found that that there was a dual 
chain of command where corporate employees were 
obliged to report abuse up the chain of command at  
CACI. The court dismissed the claims against Titan,  
whose employees worked as translators, reasoning that  
the military exercised exclusive control over translators.
The denial of summary judgment in the case means there 
will be a jury trial of a private military contractor for 
torture. We hope this decision will send a message to all 
contractors that they cannot act with impunity and outside 
the law.  
“…No federal interest requires CACI be relieved of state law 
liability,” wrote the judge. “…The task of sorting through 
the disputed facts regarding the military’s command and 
control of CACI’s employees will be for the jury.”
The Center for Constitutional Rights, Burke O’Neil LLC, 
and Akeel Valentine PLC brought the suit as a class  
action on behalf of the hundreds of Iraqi torture victims  
at Abu Ghraib.  •killing and war crimes, and that Blackwater should be  
liable for torts such as assault and battery; wrongful death; 
intentional and negligent infliction of emotional distress; 
and negligent hiring, training and supervision. The suit 
seeks compensatory damages for death; physical, mental, 
and economic injuries; and punitive damages.
It was revealed in late October that the U.S. State Depart -
ment had promised immunity to the Blackwater guards in -
volved in the shooting in exchange for telling their stories 
to department investigators. The State Department’s action 
demonstrates the importance of civil damages cases like 
ours for seeking justice when the government is protecting 
corporate interests at the expense of human life.  •Blackwater  (continued from cover)CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org3
While former Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld 
was visiting Paris on October 26 for a Foreign Policy  
magazine-sponsored talk, CCR, in conjunction with 
the European Center for Constitutional and Human 
Rights and the French League for Human Rights,  
 filed a complaint with the Paris prosecutor, charging  
Rumsfeld with ordering and authorizing torture. As  
a result, Rumsfeld was forced to leave his meeting  
by a side door connected to the U.S. Embassy in  
order to avoid journalists and human rights attorneys 
waiting outside. CCR President Michael Ratner noted 
that the filing of this case “demonstrates that we 
will not rest until those U.S. officials involved in the 
torture program are brought to justice. Rumsfeld must 
understand that he has no place to hide.” 
The criminal complaint brings charges under the 1984 
Convention against Torture, which has been ratified 
by both the U.S. and France. The complaint argues 
that France is legally obligated to take up the case  
because authorities in the U.S. and Iraq have failed  
to do so, despite a well-documented paper trail  
implicating Rumsfeld and other high-level U.S.  
officials in direct as well as command responsibility 
for torture, and because the U.S. has refused to  
join the International Criminal Court. In addition, 
the complaint argues that French courts have an 
obligation under the Convention against Torture to prosecute individuals responsible for acts of torture if 
they are present on French territory. Having resigned 
as Secretary of Defense a year ago, Rumsfeld can no 
longer try to claim immunity as a government official. 
When the French prosecutor failed to act on the case, 
CCR formally requested the intervention of the U.N. 
Special Rapporteurs on the Independence of Judges 
and Lawyers, and on Torture or Other Cruel, Inhuman 
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment who had  
co-authored a February 2006 U.N. Report on  
Guantánamo. Their report found that interrogation 
techniques authorized by Rumsfeld constituted  
torture and cruel treatment and were a direct  
violation of the Convention against Torture.  
CCR will continue to work towards holding former 
Donald Rumsfeld accountable for his role in the Bush  
administration’s post-9/11 program of torture in 
Guantánamo, Abu Ghraib, and elsewhere. CCR had 
filed two previous criminal complaints in Germany 
under its universal jurisdiction statute, which allows 
Germany to prosecute serious international crimes 
regardless of where they occurred or the nationality  
of the perpetrators. 
Visit our website at CCRjustice.org to view a video 
with Michael Ratner discussing this case.  •
CCR is Grateful to our Foundation Funders for Their Support*
Anonymous F The Atlantic Philanthropies  F Fidelity Charitable Gift Fund  F The Fiduciary Trust Company Inter -
national  F The Firedoll Foundation  F The Ford Foundation  F The Frances and Benjamin Benenson Foundation  F 
The Friendship Fund  F The Helena Rubinstein Foundation  F The HKH Foundation  F Institute of International 
Education  F The Jack P . Tate Foundation II  F The JEHT Foundation  F Joseph and Sally Handleman Foundation 
Trust B  F The Libra Foundation  F The New York Community Trust  F The Normandie Foundation  F Samuel Rubin 
Foundation  F The Vanguard Charitable Endowment Program  F The Vital Projects Fund, Inc.
*The foundations listed above provided leadership-level grants of $5,000 or more between 6/1/07 and 11/15/07.No Place to Hide:  Filing Charges in France Against RumsfeldCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org4
 In November the Department of Defense transferred 
fourteen Saudi, eight Afghani, and three Jordanian 
detainees to their home countries.  Approximately 75 
detainees have been transferred out of Guantánamo this 
year.  An additional 50 have been cleared for release, 
but fear torture or persecution in their home countries 
and remain at Guantánamo because no other countries 
have offered them resettlement. CCR is working to find 
safe third countries willing to accept these detainees  
so they will not remain indefinitely in isolation cells 
simply awaiting release.
 
Most detainees who are transferred to the custody of 
their home governments are released within a few days 
or months of their return.  At the time of publication, 
CCR received word that the three recently transferred 
Jordanians have been released and are home safe with their families.  Not all detainees are so lucky, and  
CCR works closely with human rights organizations  
to monitor and advocate on behalf of detainees who 
trade one prison for another.  
Two Tunisian detainees who were returned to Tunisia 
this year have been sentenced to three and seven years 
of imprisonment.  Meanwhile, since the opening of the 
newly constructed “security wing” of Pul-e-Charkhi 
prison in Afghanistan, Afghan detainees from  
Guantánamo are no longer being released after their 
repatriation.  Reports indicate that they are all being 
transferred to further detention in Pul-e-Charkhi, a 
prison notorious for torture and abuse.  This national 
security wing of the prison was built by the U.S.  
government and is staffed by U.S. interrogators  
and guards.  •Update on Guantánamo Transfersin Sarajevo and transferred to Guan -
tánamo.  Both cases were moving 
through the courts until February 
2007, when the D.C. Circuit Court of 
Appeals ruled that, as a result of the 
Military Commissions Act of 2006 
(MCA), the Guantánamo detainees  
no longer had the right to habeas  
corpus  review. 
 
In April, the Supreme Court had  
declined to review these cases.  
However, in a highly unusual move, 
the Court reversed itself on its final 
day in session and announced in June 
that it would in fact hear them in the 
coming court term.
CCR brought the first Guantánamo 
case more than five years ago, leading 
to our 2004 Supreme Court victory  
in Rasul , which established U.S. 
courts’ jurisdiction over Guantánamo 
detainees and affirmed their right to 
habeas corpus  review of their detention 
and treatment in custody. Ever since, 
the administration has been trying 
to evade that decision, most signifi -
cantly by introducing the Military Commissions Act, which was  
passed in the final days of the  
previous Congress.
At stake in Al Odah  are the essential 
building blocks of our democracy and 
our system of constitutional rights.  
Enshrined in Article I of the United 
States Constitution, habeas corpus  is 
one of the most fundamental demo -
cratic rights, guaranteeing that no one 
can be arrested or detained without 
being brought before a judge, charged 
with a crime and having evidence brought forward establishing  
probable cause.
Over twenty supporting amicus  briefs 
were filed simultaneously, demon -
strating support from, retired military 
officers; retired federal judges; former 
U.S. diplomats; a sitting Republi -
can U.S. Senator; Canadian, British 
and European Parliamentarians; the 
American Bar Association; the Com -
monwealth Lawyers Association; law 
professors and legal historians; the 
United Nations High Commissioner 
for Human Rights (UNHCR); and 
domestic and international non-  
governmental organizations.
Despite growing demands for  
closing the prison at Guantánamo 
Bay,  the Bush administration contin -
ues to deny Guantánamo detainees 
the most fundamental legal protec -
tions afforded by U.S. law and the 
Geneva Conventions. We hope the 
Supreme Court will end this travesty 
once and for all and provide full, fair 
and prompt hearings, which are the 
very foundation of a free society.  •CCR Returns to Supreme Court over Guantánamo  (continued from cover)
CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org
5
In November, CCR filed an amicus  brief in a 
Guantánamo case before the European Court of 
Human Rights.  The petitioners in this case are 
some of the same petitioners in the case which 
will be heard by the U.S. Supreme Court in Al 
Odah v. United States  and Boumediene v. Bush .
Boumediene and others v. Bosnia and Herzegovina  
is the first case on behalf of Guantánamo 
prisoners before an international tribunal. It is 
also the first case to address the issue of what 
responsibility other countries that assisted the 
U.S. in transferring men to Guantánamo have 
for the violations that occur there.
The petitioners are Bosnian Algerians who 
were detained in October 2001 in Bosnia on 
the basis of a diplomatic note delivered by 
the U.S. Embassy in Sarajevo to the Bosnian 
government.  Though the note did not allege 
any supporting evidence, it asked the Bosnian 
government to arrest the men because of fears 
that they were involved in a plan to attack 
the Embassy.  After an extensive investigation 
yielded no evidence to justify the arrests, the 
investigative judge of the Supreme Court of 
Bosnia ordered the men released for lack of  
evidence.  However, immediately upon their 
release, the men were transferred to Guantána -
mo where they have been detained without 
charge since January 2002.
One of the issues the court will rule on is 
whether Bosnia has an obligation to do more 
diplomatically to try to get its citizens and  
residents out of Guantánamo, given that it 
helped put them there in the first place when  
it delivered the six men to U.S. authorities  
immediately after they had been cleared of  
any wrongdoing by a Bosnian court. 
Many countries are guilty of unlawfully assist -
ing the U.S. in its “war on terror” by illegally 
handing people over to U.S. authorities, letting 
the U.S. use their territory or airspace to con -
duct renditions to torture or as sites for secret 
CIA prisons, and committing other violations 
of national and international law.  This is the 
first case that addresses the responsibility of a 
country for redressing these violations. •Bringing Guantánamo Cases  
to International Courts
After a year of fighting to gain access to our client, Majid 
Khan, CCR attorneys were finally able to meet with him 
at Guantánamo in October. He is the first of 14 former CIA 
“ghost” detainees being held there to meet with a lawyer.
While visiting his brother’s home in Pakistan, Majid and 
other relatives were kidnapped by Pakistani intelligence 
personnel in the middle of the night in March 2003. He then 
disappeared for 3-and-a-half years, until he was transferred 
from a CIA secret detention facility to military custody at 
Guantánamo Bay in September 2006. CCR immediately filed  
a habeas  petition on his behalf, but was denied access to our 
client because the government considers the CIA program 
and its interrogation techniques to be “top secret.” 
According to President Bush, detainees in CIA custody  
were subjected to “an alternative set of procedures” during 
interrogations. 
While the contents of their client interview are still classified 
and cannot be released publicly, CCR attorneys have written 
to members of the U.S. Senate requesting a classified briefing 
to discuss our client’s experience in CIA secret detention.  •CCR Attorneys Visit Former  
CIA “Ghost” Detainee
Send Bush an  
early holiday gift, 
courtesy of CCR
The President needs to be reminded 
that he swore an oath to uphold the 
Constitution of the United States—his 
administration has been systematically 
destroying the Constitution since he 
took office.
With your help, CCR will flood  
the Oval Office with copies of  
the Constitution this holiday season. 
Visit our website to sign a letter to  
Bush, and CCR will send it along  
with a copy of the Constitution to  
the White House as a seasonal  
reminder that the Constitution  
needs to be upheld, not destroyed.CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org6
In the most renowned case of the  
Bush administration’s practice of 
“extraordinary rendition,” Syrian-born 
Canadian citizen Maher Arar was 
detained at JFK Airport in 2002 while 
changing planes on his way home to 
Canada.  The Bush administration 
labeled him a member of al Qaeda  
and detained him for nearly two 
weeks, interfering with his access  
to counsel, and preventing his access  
to the courts.  Rather than sending  
him home to Canada, they delivered 
him to Syrian intelligence authorities 
renowned for torture. He was tor -
tured, interrogated and detained in  
a tiny underground cell for nearly  
a year before the Syrian government 
released him, stating they had found 
no connection to any criminal or ter -
rorist organization or activity. 
Just three months after he returned 
home to Canada, CCR filed suit  
on Mr. Arar’s behalf against John Ash -
croft and other U.S. officials, the first 
legal challenge to an “extraordinary 
rendition.”  In 2006 the District Court 
dismissed the case,  Arar v. Ashcroft , 
citing national security and foreign 
policy considerations. CCR immedi -
ately appealed.  In November, CCR 
board member David Cole argued the 
case before the Second Circuit. 
Meanwhile, more information about 
the circumstances of Mr. Arar’s  
rendition continues to come to light. 
After an exhaustive public inquiry,  
the Canadian government found  
that Mr. Arar had no connection  
to terrorism and, in early 2007,  
apologized to Mr. Arar for Canada’s 
role in his ordeal and awarded him  
a multi-million-dollar settlement. 
This past August, previously secret 
sections of the Canadian Commis -
sion’s report that had been redacted 
on purported national security 
grounds were released pursuant to 
a Canadian court order.  The newly released information revealed that the 
CIA was involved in Mr. Arar’s deten -
tion starting when he was detained 
in New York, despite U.S. officials’ 
arguments that Mr. Arar was merely 
“deported.” Two weeks after Mr. Arar 
was detained at JFK, a Canadian Secu -
rity Intelligence Service official wrote, 
“I think the U.S. would like to get Arar 
to Jordan where they can have their 
way with him.”  
On October 18, Mr. Arar testified  
before a House Joint Committee  
Hearing convened to investigate his  
rendition to Syria. Because the Bush 
administration continues to bar his 
entry to the United States, his testi -
mony had to be given via video-link 
from Ottawa.  During the hearing, 
individual members of Congress pub -
licly apologized to him. The following week, Secretary of State Condoleezza 
Rice admitted to Congress that the 
government mishandled Mr. Arar’s 
case.  CCR is calling on the U.S.  
government to issue a full admission 
and formal apology to Maher Arar. 
In his testimony, Mr. Arar told mem -
bers of Congress, “In sharing my  
experiences with you, I hope that the 
effects of torturing a human being will 
be better understood. I also hope to 
convey how fragile our human rights 
have become, and how easily they can 
be taken from us by the same gov -
ernments that have sworn to protect 
them.” 
CCR continues its work to clear Mr. 
Arar’s name in the United States and 
to demand an end to the practice of 
outsourcing torture. •Seeking Justice on Behalf of Maher Arar
“In sharing my experiences 
with you, I hope that  
the effects of torturing a 
human being will be better 
understood. I also hope  
to convey how fragile our 
human rights have become, 
and how easily they can be 
taken from us by the same 
governments that have sworn to protect them.”  
– Maher Arar in his testimony to Congress
Consider a Stock Gift to CCR
If you have appreciated stocks, donating them directly to CCR may be tax-wise,  
allowing you to avoid capital gains tax. You are also eligible to receive a charitable  
contribution deduction equal to the mean value of the stock the day it is transferred. 
If you plan on making a gift of stock, please contact us at 212-614-6489 or at  
development@CCRjustice.org. We will need some information about the transfer in 
order to be able to properly acknowledge receipt of your generous gift. 
To transfer stock, contact our broker, Michael Moffitt at 800-272-1370
c/0 Smith Barney, 120 Albany Street, 4th Floor, New Brunswick, NJ 08901
DTC #: 418   (Please contact CCR for the account number)CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org7
by Bipasha Ray 
A horrific terrorist attack kills and 
maims scores of people. An ensuing 
crackdown results in illegal detentions, 
suspension of habeas corpus , appoint -
ment of judicial cronies, warrant-less 
spying on citizens, and endless exten -
sions of executive power – all justified 
in the name of national security. Mush -
arraf’s Pakistan or Bush’s America? 
A presidential declaration of emer -
gency and a constitution in “abey -
ance”– effective martial law – as seen 
in Pakistan cannot be imagined in  
the U.S. today. But the gradual degra -
dation of civil liberties, continued  
illegal and extrajudicial detentions, 
and inching erosion of legal checks 
and balances has started the U.S.  
down a path that could lead to where 
Pakistan is today. 
In his televised speech declaring emer -
gency, Musharraf borrowed rhetorical 
themes from the Bush administration, 
couching his actions as unavoidable  
in the face of terrorists who threaten 
national security and activist judges 
who “overstep the limits of judicial authority.” Framing Pakistan as a 
country “on the verge of destabiliza -
tion,” he claimed that “inaction at this 
moment is suicide for Pakistan.” He 
urged Pakistanis to trust him as their 
war-time leader and asked for patience 
– all very similar to Bush’s exhorta -
tions in his “war on terror.”
Perhaps, most indicative of his  
borrowing from Bush’s line, was 
Musharraf evoking U.S. history to 
defend his emergency declaration. 
Switching to English for Western  
observers, Musharraf recalled  
Abraham Lincoln’s suspension of 
habeas corpus  during the Civil War: 
“[Lincoln] broke laws, he violated  
he Constitution, he usurped arbitrary 
power, he trampled individual liber -
ties. His justification was necessity.” 
By eroding freedom in the name 
of preserving it, and shredding the 
constitution in the name of democracy, 
dictators ossify their reign. Almost 75 
percent of Americans think the U.S. is 
on the wrong track ( Washington Post-
ABC  poll). The events in Pakistan need 
to serve as a wakeup call to get the 
U.S. back on the right track. •
?The federal government has finally 
agreed to drop its attempts to de -
port the final two members  
of the “Los Angeles 8.” On October 
30, the Board of Immigration  
Appeals dismissed all charges 
against Khader M. Hamide and 
Michel I. Shehadeh and approved 
a settlement in the case. 
The settlement follows a January 
decision by the immigration judge 
to end the deportation proceedings 
because of the government’s  
refusal to disclose evidence  
favorable to the immigrants  
in compliance with his orders,  
calling the government’s actions 
in the twenty-year-long case “an 
embarrassment to the rule of law.” 
The government had been seeking 
to deport Hamide and Shehadeh 
since January 1987 based on their 
alleged support for the Popular 
Front for the Liberation of  
Palestine (PFLP), a group within 
the Palestinian Liberation Orga -
nization. The ‘support’ consisted 
entirely of lawful First Amendment 
activities, including distributing 
newspapers, participating in  
demonstrations and organizing  
humanitarian aid fundraisers.  
CCR has doggedly worked on  
this case, along with our cooper -
ating attorneys and the National 
Lawyers Guild, for over 20 years!  • 
Victory for the LA 8Pakistan and the United States:
All in the Name of Security
Quiz: Identify Presidents A and B 
“The year ahead will demand more patience, sacrifice, and resolve. It can be  
tempting to think that (Country A) can put aside the burdens of freedom. Yet times  
of testing reveal the character of a nation... Now (Country A) is engaged in a new  
struggle that will set the course for a new century. We can, and we will, prevail.”  
—President A 
 “Often in history, there comes a time for difficult decisions. For (Country B) also,  
this time has come, for important and difficult decisions. And if this is not done  
now, (Country B)’s wellbeing is in danger… Whatever I do, whatever I decide, it’s in 
(Country B)’s best interests and this is my guiding principle – above all (Country B).”  
— President B
(President A is George W. Bush, quote from his “2007 Address to the Nation.”  
President B is Gen. Pervez Musharraf, quote from his address declaring emergency 
on Nov. 10, 2007.  Translation from Urdu by Bipasha Ray)From left: Marc Van Der Hout, David 
Cole, Phyllis Bennis, Michel Shehadeh, 
Amjad ObeidCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org8
CCR Celebrates Forty Years on the Frontlines for Social Justice
 
This year, the Center for Constitutional Rights celebrated our 40th Anniversary. In May, we kicked off 
the year-long celebration at our President’s Reception, honoring the work and the people who make the 
Center what it is: our staff, board members, supporters, clients and allies.
 
Clips from our 40th anniversary video highlighting the four decades including historical footage and 
commentary by CCR staff and clients, can be viewed on our new website at CCRjustice.org/videos.
 
Thank you again, to all of you who have made special gifts in honor of the Center ’s four decades  
of fearless fighting for social justice.  We couldn’t do the work without you!Tell us what you think of our rede -
signed website at CCRjustice.org.
You’ll find an updated and expand -
ed case index; issue area pages; a 
much improved search function; 
as well as new features like video 
clips, audio clips from historic cases 
and podcasts with our attorneys 
speaking about our issues, clients 
and cases. 
We now have dozens of videos 
posted. Our newest are, What I Fear 
Most  with Eve Ensler, author of The 
Vagina Monologues , and Stress Test , 
about a U.S. soldier returning from 
Iraq, both speak about Guantánamo and the current constitutional crisis.
Please take some time today to  
go to our new website, explore  
all it has to offer, and read about 
our new campaign, Beyond  
Guantánamo. Check back regularly 
as we will continue to add updates 
on actions you can take on the  
issues you care about. 
If you have any suggestions or 
feedback on the website, please 
send them to info@CCRjustice.org.  
You can also donate online  
(one-time or recurring monthly 
donations). Given the holiday 
season and upcoming new year, we have added gift categories of “In 
memory of…” and “In honor of…” 
so you can make a gift in the name 
of someone you care about.  •Visit our completely redesigned website at www.CCRjustice.org
Vanessa Redgrave reading a letter 
from a former Guantánamo detainee. 
See the video at CCRjustice.orgCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org9
On October 27, the Center 
for Constitutional Rights, in 
partnership with the New 
Orleans-based community 
organization Safe Streets, 
Safe Communities, spon -
sored a national hearing  
entitled, New Orleans  
Coming Home: Law Enforce -
ment in the Reconstruction .
Representatives of national 
organizations and the House 
Judiciary Committee came 
together to hear compelling 
testimony from advocates 
and members of the commu -
nity on how the role of polic -
ing has had an enormously 
negative impact on poor 
communities of color as  
they attempt to resettle  
in the storm-ravaged city  
of New Orleans. Aggressive 
law enforcement tactics  
and partnerships with 
private interests combined 
with an absence of sound 
public policy and commu -
nity economic development 
were recurrent themes heard 
throughout the proceedings.
Panel members were vis -
ibly moved as witness after 
witness recounted harrow -
ing accounts of harassment, 
brutality and police killings; 
consistent targeting of youth 
of color for minor infractions 
and school incidents; law 
enforcement collusion in the 
exploitation of day laborers 
by employers; and the use 
of police to intimidate and 
otherwise mistreat residents 
of so-called “mixed income” 
housing developments in an 
effort to drive low-income 
residents out. Among the most moving 
testimony came from Yvette 
Thierry, a nurse whose 
brother-in-law was killed 
in 2006 when police arrived 
at his mother’s home while 
he was in a crisis brought 
about by a lack of medica -
tion. Police later claimed to 
have been fired upon, but 
the coroner’s report found 
no evidence of gunpowder 
residue on the victim.
The closing of the city’s 
only public hospital, Char -
ity Hospital, and with it a 
total absence of medical 
care, has resulted in the 
incarceration of people with 
psychiatric disabilities with 
no opportunity for assess -
ment and treatment. Crimi -
nal Court Judge Calvin 
Johnson tearfully testified 
that he is forced to advise 
families with mentally ill 
loved ones in crisis to call 
the police. To help deal with 
this unacceptable “diver -
sion” program, Judge John -
son now presides over an 
innovative Mental Health 
Court intended to intercept 
people with mental health 
issues as they enter the 
criminal justice system, but 
he was emphatic about the 
injustice and inadequacy of 
funneling individuals into 
the prisons and jails due 
solely to a lack of medical 
services.
As New Orleans’ school-
aged youth continue to wait 
for a fully functional public 
school system, the city has 
paid $20 million to a private 
security firm to install metal 
detectors and maintain a heavy security presence in 
schools, including elemen -
tary schools. This massive  
investment in security 
comes at the expense of 
devoting resources to the 
“educational” part of the 
educational system and 
further puts young people 
at risk of harassment and 
abuse by police. Incredibly, 
the school administrator’s 
authority is usurped by 
these firms, leaving them 
powerless to intervene and 
prevent arrests of youn  
g people and children  
of color. 
Public housing projects  
that were destroyed by 
Katrina have been replaced 
with “mixed-income”  
developments that land -
lords and police appear  
intent on ridding of their 
low-income tenants. Under the guise of “police protec -
tion,” residents of these  
federally funded housing 
projects are being threat -
ened with eviction for 
minor or perceived  
incidents and face daily 
police harassment.
CCR is now working 
towards creating specific 
recommendations based on 
these hearings, directed to 
local, state and national offi -
cials with benchmarks that 
can be evaluated and mea -
sured. Each organization 
represented on the hear -
ing panel is committed to 
continuing to work closely 
with CCR and Safe Streets, 
Strong Communities—as 
well as with the authorities 
responsible for instituting 
the reforms—to ensure that 
the recommendations are 
brought to fruition.  •New Orleans Coming Home: Law Enforcement in the Reconstruction
clairegren Creative CommonsCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org10
CCR Welcomes New Board Members
As of July 2007
Radhika Balakrishnan  is a Professor of Economics 
and International Studies at Marymount Manhattan 
College, where she coordinates the International  
Studies Program. Having earned her Ph.D. in econom -
ics from Rutgers University, she also has worked as a 
program officer at the Ford Foundation. Her fields of 
research include gender and economic development, 
global inequality and labor issues. She is interested in 
the connection between global economic institutions 
and cross border organizing; the relationship among 
changing conditions of work, gender dynamics, and the global economy;  
in addition to theology and ethics.
 
Ajamu S. Baraka  is Executive Director of the U.S. 
Human Rights Network, which serves more than 250 
U.S.-based member organizations working on the full 
spectrum of human rights issues, and is a veteran  
grassroots organizer with roots in the Black Libera -
tion Movement, anti-apartheid, and Central American 
solidarity struggles. Previously, he was Amnesty 
International’s (USA) Southern Regional Director.  
In 1998, Baraka was honored by UN Secretary General 
Kofi Annan as one of 300 human rights defenders 
from around the world. He has received the  
“ Abolitionist of the Year” award from the National Coalition to Abolish the 
Death Penalty, and the “Human Rights Guardian” award from the National 
Center for Human Rights Education. Baraka has taught political science at  
various universities, including Clark Atlanta University and Spelman College. 
 
Julie F. Kay  is a Staff Attorney at Legal Momentum 
in the Sexuality and Family Rights Program. She 
works to expose the federal government’s promotion 
of a harmful, right-wing agenda about women’s  
autonomy, sexuality, and role in society and the  
family. In particular, Ms. Kay challenges gender  
bias and sex discrimination promoted by federal 
“abstinence-only” programs. Before joining Legal 
Momentum, Ms. Kay was a Legal Consultant to the 
Irish Family Planning Association where she designed 
and filed a lawsuit at the European Court of Human 
Rights on behalf of women deprived of their human rights by Ireland’s abor -
tion ban. Prior to that, Ms. Kay’s experience included work as a Staf f Attorney at 
the Center for Reproductive Rights and as a law clerk for United States District 
Judge Mark L. Wolf in Boston, Massachusetts. She graduated with a B.A. in 
Women’s Studies and Social Studies from Harvard University and earned her 
law degree from Brooklyn Law School.
CCR President Michael 
Ratner Awarded Puffin/
Nation Prize for Creative 
Citizenship
Each year, The Puffin Foundation and 
The Nation Institute recognize an indi -
vidual who has challenged the status 
quo through distinctive, courageous, 
imaginative, and socially responsible 
work of significance. This year, the 
prize will be awarded to CCR board 
President Michael Ratner.
CCR Receives Frederick 
Douglass Human Rights 
Award
On November 1, 2007, the CCR 
was honored to receive the Frederick 
Douglass Human Rights Award, given 
annually by the Southern Center for 
Human Rights to those who have  
made outstanding contributions to the 
protection of human rights.  CCR was 
chosen for having “chosen principle 
over popularity to stand by those  
detained at Guantánamo Bay.”In Memorium
Alfred K nobler
The Center for Constitutional Rights 
is saddened by the recent passing 
of our longtime friend and supporter 
Alfred Knobler at the age of 92. Over 
the course of his 20 year relationship 
with CCR, Alf hosted many parties 
for us at his home on Fire Island 
and was instrumental in introducing 
our work to many of his friends. His 
lifelong passion for social and racial 
justice was evident in his every act, 
and we are grateful that he chose to 
leave a legacy gift for CCR in his will.CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org11
Barbara and Bert Aubrey are staunch CCR supporters who 
recently increased their support by making a Leadership-
level gift and joining CCR’s Founders Circle. They did so 
by making a gift from Barbara’s IRA. 
Both native New Yorkers, Barbara attended CUNY and 
worked at Time Inc. (now Time Warner) for 20 years where 
her last position was Assistant Business Manager in charge 
of the Domestic and Foreign bureaus. Bert holds a bachelor’s 
degree in engineering from NYU and a doctorate in physics 
from MIT, with a specialty in atomic physics. He worked for 
the NYC Environmental Protection Agency for 25 years. Bar -
bara and Bert met 42 years ago at the Corner Bistro in New 
York’s City’s West Village and were married three years later.
  
Since retirement, the Aubreys have had more time to  
become politically involved, and in 2003 they joined CCR 
as donors. They see supporting CCR’s litigation as an effec -
tive way to combat the Bush administration’s human rights 
abuses.  In particular, they appreciate the Center’s efforts to 
hold Donald Rumsfeld and other high ranking U.S. officials 
accountable for war crimes, through our cases in Germany 
and France which seek to prosecute these individuals for 
their complicity in torture. 
Says Barbara, “If I had known that I could make a gift  
directly from my IRA last year, I would have done it sooner! It’s a great way to avoid taxes that would otherwise 
be used to fund the war and Bush’s torture policies, as well 
as a way for me and Bert to further support CCR’s fight for 
justice.” 
For more information about IRA gifts, CCR’s Founders Circle, or 
the Thelma Newman Society (CCR’s planned giving program), 
contact Sara Beinert at 212-614-6448 or write: Sara Beinert, 
CCR, 666 Broadway, 7th Floor, New York, NY 10012  •
Special Opportunity in 2007–Donate from your IRA
If you’re looking for the most tax-effective gift to make, your IRA may very well be the best choice.
The Pension Protection Act of 2006 presents a new giving opportunity. The law now allows individuals aged 70 
1/2 and older to make gifts to qualified charitable organizations like ours, using funds transferred directly from their 
IRAs. You can donate any amount up to $100,000 on or before Dec. 31, 2007 and will not have to pay taxes on the 
amount transferred. 
Your Benefits 
•	 The	transfer	counts	toward	your	minimum	required	distribution	as	long	as	you	have	not	yet	received	  
your 2007 distribution.
•	 The	transfer	generates	neither	taxable	income	nor	a	tax	deduction,	so	you	will	receive	the	benefit	  
even if you do not itemize your tax deductions. 
•	 You	can	witness	the	difference	your	philanthropic	dollars	make.Donor Spotlight: 
Barbara and Bert AubreyCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 
Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org
Get Involved: www.BeyondGuantanamo.orgBEYOND GUANTANAMO
RESCUE THE CONSTITUTION