CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookFor the better part of a decade, CCR has defended animal 
rights activists targeted by government and corporate repression known as the “Green Scare.” From defending attacks on free speech to battling trumped-up terrorism charges for civil disobedience, CCR has led the charge on some of the most significant battles to protect this marginal -
ized movement.
Unfortunately, on November 10th the Supreme Court 
denied cert in our case challenging the cornerstone of the 
Green Scare—the Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act (AETA). The AETA punishes causing loss to an animal enterprise, but makes no distinction between loss caused by criminal acts and loss caused by boycotts and other constitutionally-protected activity.  The First Circuit Court of Appeals had ruled in the case, Blum v. Holder, that the plaintiffs could not sue to challenge the AETA because they had not shown that their prosecution under the law was “certainly impending.”  While we are very disappointed by the Court’s decision not to review this unprecedented procedural roadblock, activ -
ists should take some solace from the government’s and the First Circuit’s litigation position in Blum—that the AETA 
cannot be used to punish First Amendment protected activ-ity that impacts corporate profits.
Meanwhile, CCR has vehemently condemned charges of 
“animal enterprise terrorism” against two activists who allegedly freed mink and foxes from fur farms. They face 20 years in federal prison for a nonviolent act. CCR will be On October 31—one year to the day after it stayed Judge Scheindlin’s rul-ing and remedial order—the Second Circuit Court of Appeals granted the city’s request to withdraw its appeal of those orders and lifted the stay. It also rejected the motion to intervene filed by five NYPD police unions, asking the court to allow them to continue the appeal even though the city had petitioned to withdraw it. With these actions, the last remaining obstacles to the reform process were swept away. Fifteen years after CCR first sued the city to end its abusive stop-and-frisk practices, we now stand on the threshold of meaningful reform.
Over the past year, union leaders had 
sought to overturn the district court’s orders finding the City’s stop-and-frisk practices unconstitutional and requiring comprehensive reforms, long after the de Blasio Administra-tion accepted the court’s rulings and sought to withdraw its appeal. This had kept the parties in court and away from the reform table. Many rank and file union members indi-cated the leadership did not represent 
CCR, Floyd plaintiffs, and co-counsel from Beldock, Levine & Hoffman at a press conference announcing a 
victory in our lawsuit challenging the NYPD’s racially discriminatory stop-and-frisk practices.WINTER 2014
Victory! Stop-and-Frisk Reform to Begin
continued on page 3
continued on page 3CCR’s Support for Animal Rights Movement  
Takes Next StepsCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookOutrage spread throughout CCR’s of -
fice when the news broke that Michael 
Brown, a young man in Ferguson, MO, unarmed and with his hands in the air saying “don’t shoot,” was shot by Ferguson police officer Darren Wil -
son.  It was a story we have heard far too many times in far too many cities including our own. The reaction was quickly followed  by the determination to do something; we gathered in the office kitchen, ideas, blank wall and chalk in hand. Within a week we had staff people on the ground in Ferguson; marching in solidarity—and getting tear gassed—with the local community, meeting with activists and legal advo-cates, making the connections to figure out what our long-term contribution to this struggle should be. 
CCR is of course no stranger to issues of systemic police 
abuse and institutional racism. In fact, while Bertha Justice Institute Director Purvi Shah and others were still in Fergu -
son during that first trip in August, CCR’s Floyd team was 
in court filing our latest response in our ongoing battle to end the NYPD’s abusive stop-and-frisk practices—a practice that all too often leads to the same fatal encounters we saw in Ferguson.
With the Second Circuit’s ruling in October (see article on 
page 1), the appeals process in Floyd is finally over and the joint remedial process ordered by Judge Scheindlin in Au -
gust 2013 can now begin. 
It has been a long journey to get to the threshold of reform. 
In the wake of community protest after the Amadou Diallo shooting in 1999, we filed the Daniels case, the predecessor case to Floyd, and have been working relentlessly ever since to dismantle the NYPD’s discriminatory practices.  The progress we have made—especially the landmark ruling in August 2013 and now the removal of the final barrier to the reform process—proves that police can be held accountable and reform is possible. 
“How [is a police officer] going to be my hero in life knowing 
that [he was] the one who destroyed me?” – A fifteen year old Ferguson activist
This is an important question for the movement in Ferguson 
and for black and brown communities across the nation. A new generation of community activists is rising up, and in the months since Michael Brown’s murder they have gotten quickly organized and drawn widespread support from all over the country. CCR has been back to Fergu -
son several times supporting these very young activists, including  a national strategic convening that CCR helped organize and I attended in October. Our unique contribution to this new chapter in the long struggle against institution -
alized racist violence and repression is the expertise we have developed in 
combining cutting-edge litigation and community advocacy to create lasting change. 
Closer to home, we have also stood in solidarity with the 
family and community of Eric Garner, killed by police in Staten Island in July. In the immediate wake of the kill -
ing, I was on several talk shows putting the Garner case in context. CCR participated in the massive community protest march in August, and we have and will continue to draw attention to the case through our social media platforms. 
As CCR supporters know, we’ve been in this struggle for a 
long time, and we are in it for the long haul. And we can’t do it without you. You are there with us at the marches and meetings in Ferguson. You are there with us as we support the 15 year old who asks us why the civil rights movement didn’t finish the job, why they are having to deal with this in 2014, and how can we help them make a better world. 
You’ll be hearing much more from us in the coming months 
about our work in both Floyd and Ferguson. Whether it’s 
in the streets or in the courts, we will continue to tirelessly work to bring about that day when no one has to think twice about going to the corner for a quart of milk because they might get stopped, and that day when no parent has to hear that her child was gunned down by cops. Letter from the Executive Director
2Vince Warren and CCR Education & Outreach  
Associate Meejin Richart at CCR strategy meeting on Ferguson.
From Ferguson to Floyd: A new generation ﬁghts police  
violence and discrimination
Vincent WarrenCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook
3their interests on this issue.
The appellate court’s decision 
comes after it heard oral arguments earlier in October. At the time, four amicus briefs were submitted in support of CCR: on behalf of Com-munities United for Police Reform, representing more than sixty grass -
roots and civil liberties organiza -
tions; elected officials; organizations representing police officers of color; and a group of law professors.
With the withdrawal of the City’s 
appeal, CCR, co-counsel, commu -
nity members, and other stakehold-ers—including the unions—can finally work together in the joint reform process and develop mean-ingful, lasting reforms to end the NYPD’s unconstitutional and dis -
criminatory practices and to build a better, safer city for all New Yorkers.
At one point during the October 
oral argument, Judge Parker had responded to a union lawyer’s com-plaint that community groups were “driving the bus” on the reform process.  “The people driving the bus,” said Parker, “are the commu-nities you serve, and they should be driving the bus.”
And now they are, and we are fi -
nally on the road to actual reform.
For more information go 
to www.CCRjustice.org/stop-and-friskmoving to dismiss the case on grounds that the AETA is unconstitutional on its face and that terrorism charges for saving lives is a denial of due process.
Aided by efforts like CCR’s, the tide of repression against the animal rights 
movement is starting to turn.  State-level efforts to enact “ag-gag” legislation, which punishes undercover investigations and whistleblowing inside of ani-mal agricultural facilities, have roundly backfired.  A coalition of animal activ -
ists, journalists, workers’ rights organizations, environmental groups, and civil liberties defenders have joined forces to defeat an aggressive industry attempt to stem the flow of, to-date, more than 80 undercover investigations inside of animal agricultural facilities. Over 20 ag-gag bills in over a dozen states failed in the past year.  
In September, a federal judge denied a motion by the state of Idaho to dismiss 
a federal lawsuit, in which CCR filed an amicus brief, challenging one of the few ag-gag bills that have become law. As CCR commented, “The Constitution does not permit special laws to protect the animal agriculture industry from public scrutiny simply because it is not winning [the] debate.”
CCR is building bridges with this growing movement.  For several years, CCR 
Senior Staff Attorney Rachel Meeropol has been invited to speak on a keynote plenary panel at the annual, national Animal Rights Conference.  This year, Rachel, who was joined on the panel by CCR’s Lauren Gazzola (a plaintiff in Blum as well as a member of our Communications Department), not only dis -
cussed CCR’s work on behalf of animal rights activists, but drew connections between this work and CCR’s broader efforts to defend many communities being targeted, surveilled, harassed, and criminalized.  Our work has not only helped turn the tide of repression against animal rights activists—it has also introduced thousands of animal rights activists to CCR’s broader social justice and human rights work.
Photo: Sarah Jane Hardt
Speakers on this year’s national Animal Rights Conference plenary panel “Animal Activism and the Legal 
System, ” L to R: Odette Wilkens of the Equal Justice Alliance ; CCR AETA plaintiff Ryan Shapiro; CCR Communications Associate and AETA plaintiff Lauren Gazzola; CCR Senior Staff Attorney Rachel Meero-pol;  journalist Will Potter; Natalie Prosin of the Nonhuman Rights Project.Stop-and-Frisk Victory  
(continued from cover)Animal Rights Movement (continued from cover)
Fifteen years after CCR  
ﬁrst sued the city to end  
its abusive stop-and-frisk 
practices, we now stand  
on the threshold of  
meaningful reform.CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook
4As we approach the 13th anniver -
sary of the opening of the prison 
at Guantánamo, CCR continues to fight for justice on several fronts—international advocacy, litigation, resettlement efforts and thought leadership via media work. Here are a few highlights:
In November, CCR took the fight 
for accountability to Geneva, where the UN Committee Against Torture reviewed the U.S.’s compliance with the Convention Against Torture (CAT). For the first time in its his -
tory, the committee heard directly from one of the men tortured at Guantánamo, CCR client Murat Kurnaz. Murat was joined by CCR Legal Director Baher Azmy, and both gave powerful testimony before the U.S. delegation about the torture Murat experienced and that the men at Guantánamo continue to experience at the hands of the U.S. Murat also spoke at an event co-sponsored by CCR that featured the parents of Mike Brown, the 18-year old killed by police in Ferguson, MO, and others, speaking to a wide range of CAT violations.
In advance of the UN Committee 
Against Torture review of the U.S., CCR submitted a shadow report highlighting the impact that over a decade of indefinite detention has had on our clients—a situation the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture has said may constitute torture—and the failure of the U.S. to mean -
ingfully address the lack of effec -
tive legal or administrative review.
In August, CCR and co-counsel pe -
titioned the court to vacate former 
Guantánamo prisoner David Hicks’ conviction in the military commis -
sions for “material support for ter-rorism.” Hicks’ appeal was stayed pending the ruling in Al-Bahlul v. United States , which held that mate -
rial support is not a war crime and cannot be tried by military com -
mission. 
In support of our resettlement ef -
forts CCR staff traveled to a re -
mote village in Yemen to meet and 
interview the family and friends of our client Fahd Ghazy. It was the journey home that Fahd has been waiting 13 years to make, but he re -
mains trapped at Guantánamo—al -
most entirely because of his Yemeni citizenship. Fahd has spent close to half of his life in Guantánamo. He has not seen his family, including his young daughter, since he was 17. Fahd is now 30 years old.
One reason for this trip was to com -
plete a short documentary, Waiting 
for Fahd: One Family’s Hope for Life Beyond Guantánamo , in which Fahd’s 
story is told through his fam -
ily—the anguish they’ve endured because of his absence, yet their unwavering hope for his return. The film transports viewers to a life that exists only in Fahd’s dreams. 
The film will serve as a critical tool 
to advocate for Fahd’s release, and others like him, by showing that there are families and communities waiting to be reunited with their loved ones and to support them in rebuilding their lives. The film was a joint project with the New Media Advocacy Project (N-Map) and was made possible with generous fund -
ing from the Bertha Foundation. 
To learn more visit:www.CCRjustice.org/fahd 
CCR staff with Fahd Ghazy’s family in Yemen.Bittersweet Progress at Guantánamo
The ﬁlm will serve as a critical tool to advocate for Fahd’s 
release, and others like him, by showing that there are families and communities waiting to be reunited with their loved onesCCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookCCR has taken on the fight for free 
speech and academic freedom with our representation of Professor Steven Salaita. The distinguished scholar had his tenured faculty position at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) yanked away over personal tweets criticizing Israel’s assault on Gaza this summer.  Documents released pursuant to open records requests show that wealthy alumni—one describing himself as a “multiple 6-figure donor”—pressured the university to terminate Salaita’s position.  
CCR has moved forward on multiple 
fronts in this critical free speech case, working with First Amendment and Palestinian human rights activists inside and outside the university. We sent a letter to the UIUC chancel-lor, outlining how the university’s retaliatory firing violates the First Amendment and imperils academic freedom. Meanwhile, Professor Salaita spoke publicly about his dismissal for the first time at a CCR press confer -
ence, against the backdrop of a mass student walk out demanding his reinstatement. He also published an op-ed in the Chicago Tribune. We are doing ongoing media work in this high-profile case, and pressing Profes-sor Salaita’s cause in our social media venues. Meanwhile, we are preparing to take legal action, along with Chi-cago co-counsel Loevy & Loevy. 
The University’s action has been 
widely condemned, sparking wither-ing editorial criticism; letters from faculty as well as legal and academic organizations; and a petition garner-ing over 19,000 signatures. More than 5,000 scholars have pledged to boycott the University, and many– includ-ing CCR Board member Katherine Franke—have already cancelled lectures at UIUC. At least two national conferences to be hosted there were cancelled, and 16 UIUC departments have cast votes of “no confidence” in the chancellor.  
Salaita’s termination is part of a broad-
er campus crackdown on Palestinian human rights activism that threatens both the foundational role of the uni-versity as a place of critical thinking and debate and the ability to advocate for Palestinian rights. Our work on Salaita’s behalf, part of our ongoing work on behalf of Palestinian human rights activists, ensures that there is no “Palestine exception” to the First Amendment and academic freedom.
For more info go to www.CCRjustice.org/salaita
CCR Fights for Free Speech and Academic Freedom
5
CCR client Professor Steven Salaita.
CCR Is Grateful to Our Foundation 
Funders for Their Support
The Advocacy Fund • The Altschul Foundation • The Atlantic Philanthro -
pies (USA) • Bertha Foundation • The Chicago Community Foundation 
• The Columbus Foundation • CREDO Mobile • David Kimmel Founda -
tion • The Firedoll Foundation • The Frances and Benjamin Benenson Foundation • The Grodzins Fund • Horizons Foundation • The Jewish Communal Fund • Jon and Katherine Dart Charitable Foundation • The Libra Foundation • The New York Community Trust • North Star Fund • Open Society Foundations • Schwab Charitable Fund • Silicon Valley Community Foundation • The Spingold Foundation • The Stewart R. Mott Foundation • The Tides Foundation • Wallace Action Fund • The Wallace Global Fund
The foundations listed above provided leadership-level grants of $5,000  
or more between 2/16/14 – 10/30/14.Thelma Newman  
Society
We welcome and thank the newest mem-
bers of the Thelma Newman Planned Giving Society, a group of individuals who decided to include CCR in their estate plans or established annuities with the Center. These gifts build our endowment, ensuring CCR’s progressive legal work for future generations.
Caitlin K. Henry
Julie Kay
Fayette F . Krause
Susan E. Manuel
 
Our donors and supporters make our cutting-
edge human rights work possible.  
Thank you so much! 
The individuals listed joined between   
2/16/14 – 10/30/14CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook
6Following up on successes in NDLON v. ICE, Argueta v. 
Myers and Aguilar v. ICE, CCR has filed two Freedom of In-
formation Act (FOIA) cases in the Southern District of New York seeking to expand the rights of immigrants.  
In January 2014, CCR and the Detention Watch Network 
(DWN) filed a FOIA lawsuit seeking documents related to the “detention bed mandate,” a provision of the annual federal appropriations bill which ICE has interpreted to require the filling of 34,000 detention beds at any given time. This lockup quota has been a boon to private prison corporations profiting off our immigration system, and is both unprecedented and inextricably linked to the Obama administration’s record-breaking 2 million deportations. Our partner and client, DWN, is engaged in a legislative campaign to end the quota, and the litigation is a crucial part of its strategy to inform the public of the quota’s moral and financial costs. 
We still had not received any documents as Congress began 
marking up its appropriations bill, so CCR filed a prelimi -
nary injunction motion in February 2014. In May, Judge Lor -
na Schofeld ordered the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) to begin producing documents on a monthly schedule. While we did not receive documents before the passage of this year’s appropriations bill, CCR and DWN are now engaged in a collaborative process to review the monthly productions and to find information that can help support the movement to challenge the mass incarceration of immigrants.
In August 2014, CCR filed a second FOIA lawsuit with 
Immigrant Defense Project (IDP) and the Hispanic Interest Coalition of Alabama (HICA) seeking to compel DHS and ICE to comply with a request to produce policies and data related to ICE’s home raids. Our goal is to illuminate ICE’s enforcement practices and their effects on immigrant com-munities, and to support our client partners in organizing for accountability.CCR Files New Challenges to Ensure the Rights  
of Immigrants
ICE agents detain record numbers of non-citizens to ensure 34,000 remain in 
detention each day.
If you would like to ﬁnd out more about joining the Founders Circle or making a planned gift to CCR, contact Sara Beinert at 212-614-6448 
or SBeinert@CCRjustice.org. Our donors and supporters make our cutting-edge human rights work possible. Thank you so much!CCR offers a special thank you to those who joined the Founders Circle whose members 
make leadership gifts totaling $1,000 or more to the Center during the year, and in doing so, 
provide critical core support. The individuals listed joined between 2/16/14 – 10/30/14.
Judy Austermiller and  
 Warren Betty
Joseph Baribeau
Bruce E. Barkley and Dr. Sonia BaurJay BearSara E. BeinertLila BraineEdward and Marion BronsonJudith ButlerAnnemarie CongdonSusan R. Curtiss and  
 John M. Gresham
Jeron E. Donalds and  
 Marjorie B. Donalds
Julian N. Gaa and Ruth Y . Gaa-SpanoHarriet S. Goldberg and  
 Gregory C. Johnson
Bernard Harcourt and Mia RuyterGuy M. HarrisHans HimeleinJohn W. and Claudia LampertiMarcia MasonWarren and Joyce MathewsAaron McGrathJoyce MillerJohn MuellerJohn Crow and Wendy R. OleskerBenjamin PiperDennis A. Rosenblitt and Arlene M. 
PitmanPhillip M. Runkel
Susan L. SheinfeldDorothy Slater-BrownLinda K. SleffelStephen S. SmithLawrence SpearsIan E. StockdaleDaniel StroockMartin ThomsonJoseph and Cornelia TierneyAnne Venhuizen and James KingRussell WilliamsMichael J. Zigmond and  
 Naomi P . Zigmond
Photo: Keith Allison CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook
7In a major victory in June, a federal appeals court in Rich -
mond, Virginia ruled that our clients in Al Shimari v. CACI, 
who are victims of torture and abuse in the notorious Abu 
Ghraib prison, could pursue their Alien Tort Statute (ATS) claims against the private military contractor for its role in the abuse.  
In 2004, U.S. military investigators concluded that CACI 
and its employees engaged in “sadistic, blatant, and wan-ton criminal abuses” of detainees, yet a judge ruled that the 2013 Supreme Court decision in Kiobel v. Shell/Royal Dutch Petroleum (which narrowed the scope of ATS ap-plicability) barred our claims because they arose abroad. The June reversal is the second CCR case to overcome the Kiobel restrictions on the scope of ATS cases—and the first in a court of appeals—which we hope breathe more life into this vital human rights tool.  
We are now back in the trial court pursuing more dis -
covery in the ultimate hope that our clients will have the 
chance to tell their stories in court and achieve some mea -
sure justice for their treatment at the hands of CACI.To learn more about Al Shimari v. CACI,  visit www.CCRjustice.org/alshimari. There, you can also watch a Democracy Now! interview of CCR client 
and Al Shimari plaintiff, Salah Hassan Al-Ejaili: Impris-
oned Al Jazeera Journalist Details Abu Ghraib Torture & Why He’s Suing U.S. Contractor CACIElla Baker alumni Nyasa Hickey chose a legal career because of her firm believe that it is both a privilege and a duty to advocate on behalf of marginalized communities. As a staff attorney in the Immigration Practice at Brooklyn Defender Services (BDS), Nyasa works with clients and de-fense attorneys on criminal defense strategy in an effort to avoid poten-
tially devastating immigration consequences. She advocates for client’s release from Immigration Customs Enforcement custody to prevent immigration detention and removal proceedings. Nyasa remains an active member of the Ella Baker alumni network and regularly attends CCR events in the New York area.
“As an Ella Baker Fellow, I was not only given the real life 
hands on lawyering experience I needed as a law student, but I was provided with a context to better understand my role as a lawyer to the individuals and communities I serve.  Now, as an Ella Baker alumni, I am connected with a network of social justice advocates on whom I rely on for inspiration, new perspectives and other insights to help me continue to engage in community lawyering in a more effective way.”
Update from an Ella: Nyasa Hickey
Linda Sleffel, J.D., of Columbus, OH, was drawn to CCR because of our Guantánamo work: “I  have never practiced law, but I follow legal issues, and it was easy to see that Cheney and Bush were creating at Gitmo ‘law-free zone’ where prisoners had neither the rights of people charged with crimes nor the rights of prisoners of war.  One of the things I have always loved about America is that everyone has rights. Anyone eliminat-ing rights throws up a big red flag for me.”
“That’s why I decided to leave CCR in my estate 
plans. The courage and determination of your lawyers who work for prisoners’ rights is inspiring. I see my donation to CCR as an investment in the kind of future that I would like to see for my neph-ews and other kids—a world where everyone’s rights are respected.”Donor Proﬁle: Linda Sleffel
To Linda, the unrolling of 
a fern frond represents justice increasing
Abu Ghraib Torture Case Moves ForwardFor more information on how you can make a 
planned gift, including charitable gift annuities and bequests, please contact Sara Beinert at sbeinert@ccrjustice.org or 212-614-6448.666 Broadway, 7th Floor, New York, NY 10012 • www.CCRjustice.org
The Center for Constitutional Rights is dedicated to advancing and protecting the rights guaranteed by the United States Constitution and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Founded in 1966 
by attorneys who represented civil rights movements in the South, CCR is a non-profit legal and educational organization committed to the creative use of law as a positive force for social change.Breaking News:
Stop and Frisk Victory
Supporting the Animal 
Rights Movement
Policing and FergusonProgress with GuantánamoEnsuring Immigrant Rights
For even more information on 
these cases and all of CCR’s work check out our newly released 2014 Annual Report at:  CCRjustice.org/annual-report
GIVE NOW AND HAVE 2X THE IMPACT! Donate 
now and gifts from new donors and increased donations from 
existing supporters will be matched, dollar for dollar, up to $500,000.  YOU can fuel the ﬁght for justice by going to www.
CCRjustice.org/donatetoday.
GIVE THE GIFT OF CCR! Ask friends and family 
to make gifts to CCR in your honor this holiday season OR make gifts to CCR in honor of the folks on your shopping list. These gifts will pay tribute to our shared social justice values, while fueling CCR’s continued efforts to seek justice on behalf of our clients and the communities we serve. Do this online at www.CCRjustice.org/donate
USE SOCIAL MEDIA AND SHARE THE NEWS!  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and retweet us. Like  “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook and  share our posts. Subscribe to our email list at www.CCRjustice.org and forward our newsletters and  
action alerts to your friends.  MAKE AN ONLINE GIFT AND CONSIDER MAKING IT 
RECURRING. It’s fast, easy and secure, and your gift will 
go to work right away. Online gifts are a greener way to give 
– reducing mailing expenses and supplies so more of your gift goes to programs. Even better, make it recurring – recurring gifts provide CCR with a reliable, steady source of support making it possible for us to plan better and take on more cases. Sign up for a monthly or quarterly recurring gift at: www.CCRjustice.org/donatetoday.
DONATE STOCK. With the stock market at an all-time high in 2014, 
now is a great time to make a gift of stock. If you donate appreciated securities to CCR, you may avoid capital gains taxes and receive a charitable deduction. Please contact CCR at 212-614-6489 for more information.
HOST A HOUSE PARTY to fundraise for CCR and 
to introduce friends and allies to CCR’s work. Attend a local event if CCR is in your neighborhood—and bring a friend! If you are on our email list you will receive invitations, or you can view public events on our calendar at www.CCRjustice.org/calendar.Ways You Can Support CCR This Holiday Season
