U.S. government seeks death pen-
alty against six detainees in mili-
tary commissions 
 On February 11, 2008, the U.S. govern-
ment announced that it was filing charges 
against six individuals in the military commis-sions, and seeking the death penalty against these detainees. The six detainees charged 
are: Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, Walid Mu-hammad Salih Mubarek Bin 'Attash,  Ramzi 
Binalshibh, Ali Abdul Aziz Ali, Mustafa Ah-
med Adam al Hawsawi and Mohammed al Qahtani.  Al-Qahtani is the Guantanamo detainee 
whose leaked interrogation log helped to 
shed light on the use of torture and cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment at Guantanamo Bay. The leaked log of the 
interrogation of Al-Qahtani, in which interro-
gators used "enhanced interrogation meth-
ods," revealed the use of beatings, severe sleep deprivation, sexual humiliation, threats of rendition to countries where he would be tortured or executed, abusive exposure to 
prolonged cold temperatures and loud mu-
sic, attacks by dogs, religious abuse and over 160 days of severe isolation. against Al Qahtani.  
The military commissions allow for the use of 
evidence obtained through coercion, as well as classified and secret evidence, and there is a high likelihood that torture evi-dence will be allowed into the commissions. 
If the charges are approved by the military 
authorities, these six detainees will be facing the death penalty in the commissions, de-spite the fact that many protections provided to criminal defendants or soldiers facing 
court-martial do not exist for defendants in 
military commissions, and there is a real potential for the execution of detainees based on torture evidence and secret evi-dence. 
 
U.S. Congress votes to prohibit  
waterboarding and other forms of torture 
 As part of the intelligence authorization bill, which permits U.S. government spending on intelligence agencies and related expenses, 
the U.S. Senate voted on February 13, 
2008 to prohibit U.S. intelligence agencies, 
including the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), from using techniques not allowed by a procedures manual for U.S. military per-sonel, the Army Field Manual.  The manual 
prohibits harsh interrogation techniques such 
as waterboarding and other forms of torture and cruel, inhumane and degrading treat-ment.  The U.S. House of Representatives had already voted to support the bill. 
 
However, President Bush has threatened to veto the bill. In secret CIA detention, Guantánamo and in other detention facili-ties, it is known that many forms of coercive 
interrogation prohibited by the U.S. Army 
Field Manual have been used over the last six years.  The Bush administration has re-fused to acknowledge that waterboarding is torture, and has stated that although the CIA 
used waterboarding in the past, it may not 
do so at present, but may use waterboard-ing again in the future should it be approved by the president.  Waterboarding is a form of torture that induces drowning in a victim.   
 
Bush Administration Appeals to 
Supreme Court in Bismullah Case 
 The Bush Administration filed an appeal in the U.S. Supreme Court on February 14, 
2008, seeking to halt a court order requir-
ing it to produce full information about how and why Guantanamo detainees were clas-sified as "enemy combatants."   
In Bismullah v. Gates, the U.S. Court of Ap-
peals for the District of Columbia Circuit ruled that the government must turn over to detainees challenging their classification under the Detainee Treatment Act all of the 
information that its tribunals - the Combatant 
Status Review Tribunals - considered in de-termining detainees to be "enemy combat-ants."  
When the government argued that it had 
not preserved all of this evidence, the court stated that the government could convene new tribunals in such circumstances.   Bismullah v. Gates is an appeal under the 
Detainee Treatment Act, utilizing the DTA's 
appeal process in an attempt to reverse the 
classifications of the detainees bringing the appeal. It is a separate case from Al Odah/Boumediene, the case currently pending before the U.S. Supreme Court, 
that challenges the DTA and the Military 
Commissions Act's attemp t to strip the right 
to habeas corpus hearings from detainees. The Supreme Court ruled in 2004 in Rasul v. Bush that the Guantanamo detainees have 
a right to habeas corpus hearings, challeng-
ing their detention in a court of law.   
Yemen Conference Convenes to 
Advocate for Repa triation of  
Yemeni Detainees 
 An international conference, "Let Our Peo-ple Go," was convened in Sana'a, Yemen, 
on January 9-10, 2008. The conference 
was convened in order to share information about the status of Yemeni detainees and develop a strategy to secure their trial or release.  
 
The conference was widely attended by over 200 enthusiastic par ticipants, including 
the Yemeni Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Minister for Human Rights. 64 Yemeni 
imams attended the conference, pledging to 
preach about a peaceful  resolution to the 
plight of the prisoners at Friday prayers, and 
for each mosque to adopt one of the re-maining 100 Yemeni deta inees. 60 family 
members of Guantanamo detainees also 
attended the conference, as did 6 former detainees, including one former "ghost" detainee who spoke about his experience  in CIA secret prison  A number of Members 
of Parliament attended, as did many local 
NGOs, coordinated by HOOD, a Yemeni NGO.  
European Parliament calls for the European Union to Offer  
Humanitarian Protection to  
Guantanamo's Refugees 
 On December 12, 2007, the European Parliament adopted an amendment that 
calls for the  European Union countries to 
guantánamo  global justice initiative  
news briefing center for 
constitutional  
rights 
march  2008 
Center for Constitution al Rights         www.ccrjustice.org  (continued on  pg. 2) work towards offering humanitarian pro-
tection to Guantánamo detainees who 
cannot return to their home countries for 
fear of torture. The resolution calls for the European Commission and the Council of 
Europe to "launch an initiative at the Euro-pean and international level for the reset-
tlement of Guantánamo prisoners from 
third states that cannot be returned to their countries of origin because they risk being persecuted or tortured." On Febru-ary 28, 2008, a joint committee meeting 
in the European Parliament convened to 
hear further appeals for the European Union to offer humanitarian protection to refugees unable to return to their home countries. 
 
There  are approximately 50 detainees at Guantánamo from "high-risk" countries where, should they be forcibly returned, they would be in danger of persecution 
or torture. To date, Albania - one of the 
poorest countries in Europe - has been the only country that has accepted a small number of Guantánamo's refugees who could not safely be  returned to their 
home countries. In early August, in a land-
mark policy change, the British govern-
ment also called for the release of five non-citizens currently detained in Guan-tanamo.  Three of these men were re-
leased to Britain in December 2007. 
 
Protests around the world mark 
sixth anniversary of Guan-tanamo camp 
 On January 11, 2008, protests and ac-tions held around th e world marked the 
sixth anniversary of the arrival of the first 
prisoners at the detention camp at the US 
Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay. Pro-tests were held in major cities around the world and across the United States.   
These protests were organized by many 
groups and organizations, including the Center for Constituti onal Rights, Witness 
Against Torture, Amnesty International and the International Federation for Hu-
man Rights-over 100 groups in total. In 
Washington, DC, 400 protesters gath-ered for an outdoor rally, followed by a solemn march led by protesters clad in orange jumpsuits and black hoods to the 
U.S. Supreme Court. At the U.S. Supreme 
Court, 80 protesters who stood on the steps of the Supreme Court or entered 
the Court building and spoke about the 
plight of the Guantanamo detainees, 
were arrested in a civil disobedience action.   
Former chief prosecutor Morris 
Davis to serve as witness for 
Salim Hamdan in military  commission 
 In a surprising turn of events, on February 21, 2008, former chief prosecutor at 
Guantanamo Morris Davis stated that he 
would serve as a defense witness for detainee Salim Hamdan, who is currently facing a military commission. Air Force Col. Morris Davis has described re-
peated political interference in the military 
commissions process. Hamdan's lawyers will challenge the validity of the commis-sions process due to such political inter-ference.  
 
Hamdan is charged with conspiracy and providing material support to terrorism. It was in his challenge to the initial military commissions process, Hamdan v. Rums-feld, that the Suprem e Court declared the 
first military commissions process to be 
invalid and upheld the Geneva Conven-tions rights of detainees.  In addition, Hamdan is seeking to intro-
duce evidence and written testimony from 
former CIA ghost detainees that his attor-neys argue prove that his actions were minor.  
Exculpatory evidence revealed at Omar Khadr military  
commission, although child  
soldier expert denied access 
 Recent events have raised more contro-
versy regarding the validity of military 
commission charges against Canadian citizen Omar Khadr, who was only 15 when he was detained by the U.S. in 2002.  Khadr should be recognized by 
treaty as a child soldier requiring protec-
tion, but he could face a life sentence for charges of murder, conspiracy and mate-rial support for terrorism.  However, on February 5, 2008, the commission re-
viewed a document that was accidently 
released to the public, that indicated that a U.S. soldier did not know whether it was Khadr or another man who threw 
the grenade that killed a U.S. soldier in a 
battle. 
 On January 24, 2008, the U.S. govern-ment rejected a request by a leading United Nations child soldier expert to 
attend the Khadr military commission. 
Khadr's attorneys have petitioned to dis-miss the case against him based on his protected status, but the judge in the mili-tary commission has not yet ruled on the 
motion. 
 
Court Refers Motion on  
Treatment of Former Ghost 
 Detainee for Arguments 
 
On February 15, 2008, a U.S. federal 
appeals court referred a motion made on behalf of Majid Khan, former CIA "ghost detainee" held at secret black sites be-fore his transfer to Guantanamo Bay in 
2006, to judges who will hear arguments 
about the preservation of evidence relat-ing to torture and whether the treatment of Khan constituted torture.  In December, the same appeals court 
issued a preliminary order requiring the 
government to preserve evidence of inter-rogations, just days after the CIA re-vealed it destroyed hundreds of hours of videotapes of interrogations of at least 
two men held in CIA secret detention.  
 Majid Khan was taken from Pakistan in 2003, and spent three and a half years in secret CIA prisons before being trans-
ferred to Guantanamo in September 
2006.  In the first m eetings between Mr. 
Khan and his attorneys at Guantánamo in October 2007, his attorneys learned extensive details about his treatment and 
his current conditions. 
 
President Fidel Castro declines to 
run for a new term in Cuba; Raul 
Castro elected President  
 On February 24, 2008, Raul Castro was elected the new President of Cuba, fol-
lowing a public letter by former President 
Fidel Castro on February 19, 2008, in which he declined to run for any addi-tional government office in Cuba.   
Fidel Castro has served as President of 
Center for Constitution al Rights         www.ccrjustice.org  (continued from pg. 1) 
(continued on page 3) about the news briefing.. 
This news briefing is produced monthly 
by the Center for Co nstitutional Rights, 
which coordinates the representation of 
detainees at Guantánamo Bay with a 
network of over 500 pro bono habeas counsel. It is transl ated into Arabic and 
Dari and is available online at   
http://www.ccrjustice.org/learn-more/reports/
Guantanamo-newsletter 
 
If you would like to receive this newslet-ter, send us more information, or get in contact: 
 
Center for Constitutional Rights 
666 Broadway, 7th Floor 
New York, NY 10012 
http://www.ccrjustice.org/ 
(212) 614-6443  
 LKates@ccrjustice.org Cuba since the 1959 revolution that 
overthrew the U.S.-friendly Batista re-
gime and established Cuba as a so-
cialist country. The Cuban government 
has argued since 1959 that the U.S. 
military base at Guantanamo Bay is 
an invalid occupation of Cuban terri-
tory, and refuses to cash checks paid 
by the U.S. government for rent of the 
facility or provide electricity, water, or 
other services to the base. 
 
 
Judges Dismiss Suit Seeking 
Damages for Guantanamo 
 Torture 
 
On January 11, 2008, an appeals 
court in Washington, D.C. dismissed a 
lawsuit brought by four former British 
detainees against former U.S. Defense 
Secretary Donald Rumsfeld and senior 
military officers for ordering torture and 
religious abuse. The British detainees - 
Shafiq Rasul, Asif Iqbal, Rhuhel Ahmed 
and Jamal Al-Harith - spent more than 
two years in Guantánamo and were 
released to the U.K. in 2004.  They 
suffered abuses in Afghanistan and 
Guantánamo before their release.  
 
The court dismissed the complaint 
which asserted that the U.S. officials 
had violated the U.S. Constitution, 
international law, and a U.S. statute 
that protects religious expression.  In a 
controversial and disappointing deci-
sion, the court ruled that the Religious 
Freedom Restoration Act did not apply 
to detainees at Guantánamo.  The 
Court ruled that the defendents had 
not violated the law because "torture 
is a foreseeable consequence of the 
military's detention of suspected en-
emy combatants."  Finally, the Court 
found that, even if torture and religious 
abuse were illegal U.S. law, defen-
dants could not be held responsible 
because they could not have reasona-
bly known that U.S. law applied to the 
detainees at Guantánamo.  
 
Eric Lewis, an attorney for the plaintiffs, 
said "It is an awful day for our tradition of respect for religious freedom and 
for our moral standing in the world 
when a court finds that these detainees 
are not 'persons' whose rights to ob-
serve their religion with dignity and 
without harassment are worthy of pro-
tection." 
 
Death of Abdul Razzaq Hek-
mati at Guantanamo 
 
On December 30, 2007, Afghan de-
tainee Abdul Razzaq Hekmati died of 
cancer at the Guantanamo Bay Naval 
Base, the first detainee thought to have 
died of natural causes - although his 
death was certainly hastened by his 
detention and poor medical treatment. 
Hekmati, a long-time opponent of the 
Taliban government in Afghanistan, 
had lived in exile from the Taliban 
since 1999, only returning to Afghani-stan in 2002 after the U.S. invasion, 
the fall of the Taliban government, and 
the installation of the Karzai regime.  
 
Despite his record of strong opposition 
to the Taliban, he was arrested by 
local political and family rivals and 
turned over to the United States, possi-
bly in return for a bounty. An investiga-
tive report published in the New York 
Times on February 5, 2007, revealed 
that his attempts to call witnesses to 
prove his accounts of his experiences 
in Afghanistan were foiled by the gov-
ernment's process of reviewing detain-
ees at Guantanamo, where he was 
held for nearly six years despite alli-
ances with high-profile members of the 
U.S. backed Karzai government in 
Afghanistan and his record of opposi-
tion to the Taliban, before he died. 
 
The inadequacy of medical care at 
Guantanamo Bay has been raised on 
numerous occasions by attorneys for 
sick and ill detainees needing more 
extensive medical care. 
 
Releases from Guantanamo 
 
In December 2007, 10 Saudis were 
released from Guantanamo and re-turned to Saudi Arabia, leaving only 
12 Saudis in Guantánamo in March 
2008. In addition, two Sudanese aid 
workers, Adel Hassan Hamad and 
Salim Muhood Adem, were released 
in December as well and returned 
home to their families, where they have 
since recounted their experiences and 
demanded compensation for their 
years of unjust imprisonment. Also, 
three British residents, Omar 
Deghayes, Jamil el-Banna and Abden-
nour Sameur, were released in De-
cember to the United Kingdom.  The 
British government, after years of refus-
ing to call for the release of its non-
citizen residents, appealed to the U.S. 
government to release the men. 
Deghayes and el-Banna are currently 
fighting Spanish attempts to extradite 
them to Spain, and all three are home 
with their families. Approximately 275 
detainees remain at Guantanamo Bay 
Naval Base. (continued from pg. 2) 