Saudis, Afghans, Jordanians  
Repatriated from Guantánamo Bay 
On November 5, eight Afghans and three 
Jordanians were returned to their home 
countries.   On November 9, 14 Saudi citizens were repatriated from Guantánamo Bay to 
Saudi Arabia. The total number of Saudis 
who were ever held in Guantánamo is approximately 129.  Following this repa-triation, only approximately 22 Saudis remain at the detention camp.  
 
The three Jordanian detainees returned home have been released.  After their return to Saudi Arabia, Saudi detainees are generally released after a short period 
in detention.  Afghan detainees, on the 
other hand, face an uncertain fate and potential long-term detention after their transfer from Guantánamo to Afghan cus-tody.  Many recently released Afghan 
detainees are being returned to a newly 
constructed “security wing” of Pul-e-Charkhi prison.  This wing of the prison was built by the U.S. government and the U.S. is involved in interrogations and secu-rity there. 
 Guantánamo Detainee Case  
Proceeds in European Court of 
Human Rights 
 Boumediene and others v. Bosnia and 
Herzegovina  is the first case on behalf of 
Guantánamo prisoners before an interna-tional tribunal.  It is also the first case to address the issue of what  the responsibility 
is of other countries that assisted the U.S. in 
transferring men to Guantánamo.  The 
case was brought by the law firm of Wil-merHale, the U.S. attorneys for the de-tained men.  In November, several organi-zations filed  documents to the court sup-
porting the detainees in the case.  The 
organizations who offered their support were the Center for Co nstitutional Rights 
(CCR), Interights, and the International Commission of Jurists. 
 
The petitioners in the case are Bosnian 
Algerians detained in Guantanamo for nearly six years.  They are some of the same men who were involved in the case that was heard by the U.S. Supreme Court 
on December 5.   The men were first de-
tained in Bosnia after the United States government sent a letter to the Bosnian government requesting their detention.  After an extensive investigation in Bosnia 
produced no evidence to justify the arrests, 
the judge of Bosnia’s Supreme Court or-dered the men to be released for lack of evidence. However, immediately upon their release, the men were transferred to 
Guantánamo where they have been de-
tained without charge  since January 2002. 
 One of the issues the European Court of Human Rights will rule on is whether Bos-
nia has an obligation to do more to try to 
get its citizens and residents out of Guantánamo.  The Bosnian government helped put the men in Guantánamo when it delivered them to U.S. authorities immedi-
ately after they had been cleared of any 
wrongdoing by a Bosnian court.  This is the first case that addresses the responsibil-ity of a country for these violations. The European Court of Human Rights is one of 
the strongest and most respected interna-
tional human rights tribunals, and its deci-sions are enforceable.  
U.S. Supreme Court Rejects  
Algerian Detainee’s Petition 
 
On November 13, the U.S. Supreme Court refused to consider the case of a 
Guantánamo Bay detainee fighting U.S. 
plans to return him to Algeria.  Ahmed Belbacha, an Algerian held in Guantánamo, stated that his life was in danger, and that he would face torture 
and persecution if returned to Algeria.  
 
guantánamo  global justice initiative  
news briefing center for 
constitutional  
rights 
december  2007 
legal updates...  
Center for Constitution al Rights         www.ccrjustice.org  Supreme Court Hears Arguments in 
Key Guantánamo Case 
On December 5, 2007, the U.S. Supreme 
Court heard arguments in the key 
Guantánamo case, A l  O d a h  v .  U n i t e d  
States / Boumediene v. Bush .  The case marks 
the third time the case of the detainees has come to the Supreme Court.  In each prior 
case, the Supreme Court decided against the 
government and for the men detained at Guantánamo.  In 2004, in the case Rasul v. Bush , the highest 
court in the United States decided that a non-
citizen detained based only on the President’s assertion that he is an “enemy combatant” – must have an opportun ity to challenge his 
detention in court through a fundamental rem-
edy known as habeas corpus .  In 2006, in 
Hamdan v. Rumsfeld , the Supreme Court 
ruled that the President does not have the authority to establish military trials that violate U.S. laws. 
 
In Al Odah / Boumediene , the case that was 
heard on December 5, the detainees at Guantánamo again urged the Supreme Court to recognize their righ t to challenge their de-
tention in a U.S. court. 
 The detainees at Guantánamo have received support in this case from a broad range of people including former federal judges, for-
mer military officers, former diplomats, legal 
historians, and 383 British and European par-liamentarians.  All assert that the men de-tained at Guantánamo in U.S. custody have a right to bring a challenge to their detention 
within U.S. courts.   
 At the time of the argument, and in the day before, there were protests and vigils in cities and towns across the United States.  Many 
people in Boston, New York, Washington 
D.C., as well as many smaller towns, pro-tested the continued detention of hundreds of men in Guantánamo without charge or trial for nearly six years.  
(continued on  pg. 2)  
Belbacha is eligible for release from 
Guantánamo, but is seeking asylum in a 
safe third country.  "Belbacha cannot safely return to Algeria," his lawyers wrote in asking the Supreme Court to take the case. Belbacha was an account-
ant in Algeria, but fl ed to Pakistan after 
facing threats against his life and en-forced military service.  There are approximately fifty men de-tained in Guantánamo who cannot be 
returned to their home countries for fear 
of torture or persecution.  Half of these men have been cleared for release but have no country that has agreed to ac-
cept them.   
ADVOCACY UPDATES 
 Attorneys for Man Detained in 
CIA Secret Detention for Years 
Ask to Provide Information About Secret Detention to U.S. 
Congress 
 
On November 1, CCR attorneys sent a 
letter to U.S. Senators asking them for an opportunity to present information on the experiences of Majid Khan. Khan, a former “ghost detainee,” was held in CIA 
secret custody for several years.  He was 
transferred in September 2006 to Guantánamo. He had been denied ac-cess to attorneys for one year after his arrival at Guantánamo.  In October 
2007, Khan met for the first time with his 
attorneys. His attorneys are subject to stringent restrictions on their ability to discuss Khan’s experi ences in CIA secret 
detention. 
 
Shortly after their return from Guantánamo Bay, the two lawyers who met with Khan asked the Senators for a meeting to discuss Khan’s experiences in 
CIA secret detention.  No meeting has 
taken place yet.  
Despite Position on  
Waterboarding and Torture,  
Mukasey Confirmed as Attorney 
General 
 
  Despite his controversial position on wa-
terboarding and torture, Michael Mu-
kasey was confirmed on November 8 as 
Attorney General, replacing Alberto Gonzales. Mukasey was confirmed by a 53-40 vote.  His confirmation followed weeks of public debate sparked by his 
refusal to label waterboarding and other 
“enhanced interrogation techniques,” torture. Waterboarding is controlled drowning.  Water is poured over the face of the victim so that it is forced into 
the lungs.  It has been reported that the 
U.S. government has used waterboard-ing on detainees in CIA secret detention. It is reportedly one of the coercive interro-gation tactics that President Bush has 
authorized, even though these tactics 
have been categorize d as torture.  Mu-
kasey’s refusal to label waterboarding as torture was widely seen as an attempt to prevent prosecution against those govern-
ment officials responsi ble for ordering the 
use of torture techniques at Guantánamo Bay and in CIA secret detention.   
2003 Guantánamo Manual 
Leaked, Reveals Lack of ICRC 
Access 
 On November 16, the 2003 Standard 
Operating Procedures Manual for Camp 
Delta at Guantánamo Bay Naval Base was released on the Internet.  It was re-leased through an anonymous leak on the website, wikileaks.org. (The manual 
can be downloaded from the CCR web-
site, www.ccrjustice.org.)   The manual describes many of the details of the op-eration of Guantanamo at the time.  It includes rules about everything from mail 
and facilities operations to medical care, 
religious practice, and interrogations.  The manual restricts Red Cross access to 
Guantánamo prisoners.  This is a direct 
violation of Common Article III the Ge-
neva Convention of 1949. The manual states that “All detainees will have a level of ICRC contact designated for them” – the four levels being “No Access,” 
“Restricted,” “Unrestricted,” and “Visual.” 
Yet the Geneva Convention on the treat-ment of prisoners of war states that the ICRC “shall have access to all premises occupied by prisoners of war,” be able to interview the prisoners without wit-
nesses present, and that the “duration 
and frequency of these visits shall not be 
restricted.”  
 
CCR Launches “Beyond Guantánamo” Campaign 
The Center for Cons titutional Rights 
launched a new campaign, “Beyond Guantánamo.” This campaign is intended to build public pressure upon the U.S. 
Government to shut down Guantánamo 
and ensure basic Constitutional rights.  The CCR campaign includes multimedia presentations, videos, an extensive media campaign, and action items, including a 
campaign to send a copy of the U.S. 
Constitution to President Bush. More than 30,000 people have responded to this campaign saying that they are angered that President Bush has undermined the 
U.S. Constitution during his presidency.  
 The “Beyond Guantánamo” campaign is designed to draw attention to the many ways—at Guantánamo and elsewhere—
the current U.S. administration has en-
gaged in an assault upon basic constitu-tional and human rights, and to educate people about how they can work to re-store the Constitution and move “beyond 
Guantánamo.”  
  
Center for Constitution al Rights         www.ccrjustice.org  advocacy  updates...  
about the news briefing.. 
This news briefing is produced monthly 
by the Center for Co nstitutional  Rights, 
which coordinates the representation of 
detainees at Guantánamo Bay with a 
network of over 500 pro bono habeas counsel. It is transl ated into Arabic and 
Dari and is available online at  
http://www.ccrjustice.org/
learn-more/reports/
Guantanamo-newsletter 
If you would like to receive this newslet-ter, send us more information, or get in 
contact: 
Center for Constitutional Rights 
666 Broadway, 7th Floor 
New York, NY 10012 
http://www.ccrjustice.org/ 
(212) 614-6443  
 LKates@ccrjustice.org (continued from pg. 1) 