15 detainees currently face mili- 
tary commissions 
 
Guantanamo’s military commissions contin-
ued as 15 detainees have now been 
charged before the commissions. No trials 
have been completed and 1 conviction, 
resulting from the guilty plea of Australian 
David Hicks, have resulted. The military com-
missions, created by the October 2006 
passage of the Military Commissions Act, 
provide far fewer protections than either 
standard courts-martial, which try soldiers in 
times of war, or the U.S. federal criminal 
court system, which historically has tried 
cases involving charges of terrorism. For 
example, the military commissions allow the 
introduction of hearsay evidence and evi-
dence obtained through coercion, require 
only 2/3 jury vote for conviction, and the 
jury is composed solely of members of the 
military. 
 
On March 31, 2008 charges were sworn 
against detainee Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani, 
a Tanzanian man who was transferred to 
Guantánamo from secret CIA detention in 
September 2006. Mr. Ghailani was in the 
CIA interrogation program for over two 
years and is accused of playing a role in 
the 1998 bombing of the U.S. Embassy in 
Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. A Manhattan 
Federal court indicted him 10 years ago. 
Rather than trying him in the federal courts, 
the government opted instead to try him in 
the military commissions, where it faces an 
unfair advantage and where the secrets of 
its CIA detention program will continue to 
be hidden. The government plans to seek 
the death penalty for Ghailani, as it has for 
six other detainees facing military commis-
sions. 
 
On April 7, 2008, charges were referred 
against Afghan detainee Mohammad 
Kamin, who was charged with “providing 
material support for terrorism” during the 
U.S. war on Afghanistan. Twelve other de-
tainees currently face military commissions, 
including six detainees against whom the 
government is seeking the death penalty, 
accusing them of involvement with the at-
tacks of September 11, 2001. The military has stated on numerous occasions that it 
plans to try up to 80 detainees in the military 
commissions, but has moved slowly in filing 
charges. The vast majority of the approxi-
mately 275 men currently held at Guan-
tanamo have never been charged with any 
crime and have been held for over six years 
in arbitrary detention without charge or trial 
throughout that time. 
 
Former CIA “ghost” detainee trans- 
ferred to Guantanamo 
 
On March 14, 2008, the U.S. military an-
nounced that it had transferred Muhammad 
Rahim al-Afghani to Guantanamo Bay, and 
that he had previously been held in secret 
CIA “ghost” detention. The CIA secret 
“ghost” detention program was allegedly 
emptied in September 2006, when 14 for-
mer ghost detainees were transferred to 
Guantanamo Bay; the military transferred 
another detainee in April 2007. Inside the 
secret CIA detention program, the use of so-
called “enhanced interrogation techniques,” 
including cruel, inhumane and degrading 
treatment, as well as techniques amounting 
to torture, including waterboarding (a torture 
technique that simulates drowning), have 
been officially and explicitly allowed. The 
U.S. government accuses him of involvement 
with Al-Qaeda. At the time the transfer was 
announced, the CIA refused to state if it was 
currently holding any other detainees in its 
secret prisons. 
 
Former military commissions chief 
prosecutor testifies for the defense 
in Salim Hamdan commission; mili- 
tary judge allows prosecution of 
former child soldier 
 
 
On April 28, 2008, former chief military 
commissions prosecutor Col. Mo Davis took 
the stand and testified for the defense in a 
pretrial hearing for the military commission 
of Guantanamo detainee Salim Ahmad 
Hamdan. Davis argued that the commissions 
process is fundamentally flawed, and cor-
rupted by political involvement and de-
mands for convictions on the part of high-
ranking military and administration officials.  In further developments in the Hamdan hear-
ings, on April 30, 2008, the military judge 
presiding over the military commission, Lt. 
Col. Keith Allred, ordered that Hamdan 
would be allowed to contact four of the so-
called “high value detainees” – former CIA 
secret prisoners – via a written communica-
tion bearing his signature, seeking their testi-
mony to support his defense. However, this 
falls far short of what was requested by 
Hamdan’s attorneys, including two-way 
communication between Hamdan and the 
former ghost detainees, and a meeting with 
one of Hamdan’s military defense attorneys, 
assuring the former ghost detainees of the 
request’s sincerity. Hamdan is currently boy-
cotting the military commissions process. The 
2006 landmark U.S. Supreme Court case, 
Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, which invalidated an 
earlier military commissions process and 
affirmed the applicability of Common Article 
3 of the Geneva Conventions to Guan-
tanamo detainees, resulted from Hamdan’s 
earlier challenge of the military commissions. 
 
Also on April 30, 2008, military judge Col. 
Peter Brownback, presiding over the military 
commission of accused former child soldier, 
Canadian citizen and Guantanamo de-
tainee Omar Khadr, ruled that the prosecu-
tion of Khadr continued despite the fact that 
he was only 15 when seized by U.S. forces 
in Afghanistan and brought to Guantanamo 
Bay. By treaty, Khadr should be recognized 
as a child soldier entitled to protection, but 
the military – and now the military commis-
sions courts – have refused to acknowledge 
this status. Khadr’s attorneys have also ap-
pealed to a federal appeals court in Wash-
ington, D.C. to have his initial determination 
as an “enemy combatant” overturned due to 
his juvenile status at the time. 
 
Detainees Ahmad al-Darbi and Ibrahim al-
Qosi, also charged before the military com-
missions, have, to date, refused to partici-
pate in what they have termed “sham” pro-
ceedings. 
 
Bush vetoes anti-waterboarding 
measure 
 
On March 9, 2008, President George W. 
guantánamo global justice initiative 
news briefing center for 
constitutional 
rights 
may  2008 
Center for Constitutional Rights         www.ccrjus tice.org  (continued on  pg. 2) Bush vetoed a bill passed by Congress 
that would have prohibited the CIA from 
using waterboarding and other forms of 
torture against detainees.  The intelli-
gence authorization bill, which permits 
U.S. government spending on intelligence 
agencies and related expenses, prohib-
ited U.S. intelligence agencies, including 
the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 
from using techniques not allowed by a 
procedures manual for U.S. military per-
sonnel, the Army Field Manual.  The man-
ual prohibits harsh interrogation tech-
niques such as waterboarding and other 
forms of torture and cruel, inhumane and 
degrading treatment. 
 
Waterboarding is a form of torture that 
induces drowning in a victim; the drown-
ing is stopped before the point of death 
by the use of a rag, plastic wrap, or an-
other obstruction placed in the victim’s 
mouth. Its use against detainees by the 
CIA has been confirmed. Bush’s veto 
confirms his continued position that the 
president has the authority to allow the 
CIA to use waterboarding and other 
forms of torture, despite clear prohibitions 
in U.S. and international law. 
 
Reports: Bush Administration 
officials directly approved tor- 
ture program 
 
On April 9, 2008, news reports revealed 
that the highest-level Bush administration 
officials were deeply involved in discus-
sions and authorization of torture against 
secret CIA “ghost” detainees. In an inter-
view, President Bush also acknowledged 
that he knew about these discussions and 
approved of them. 
 
Reports clarified that these discussions 
were not general but instead featured 
specific discussions of individual detain-
ees and detailed discussions of so-called 
“enhanced interrogation techniques,” to 
the level of mapping out interrogation 
sessions and the number of times a par-
ticular tactic would be used., including 
slapping, pushing, sleep deprivation, or 
waterboarding. 
 
This committee included Vice President 
Dick Cheney, former National Security 
Adviser Condoleezza Rice, Defense 
Secretary Donald Rumsfeld and Secre-tary of State Colin Powell, as well as CIA 
Director George Tenet and Attorney 
General John Ashcroft, who all directly 
participated in approving the CIA’s use 
of cruel, inhumane and degrading treat-
ment against detainees.  
 
Also, on April 1, 2008, the legal memo 
from March of 2003 by former admini-
stration attorney John Yoo that purported 
to authorize the use of torture was de-
classified. The memo was widely at-
tacked within the legal community for 
attempting to provide a legal safeguard 
for torture and protect government offi-
cials from prosecution for authorizing 
torture.  Many organizations, including 
the Center for Constitutional Rights, 
called upon Boalt Hall Law School at the 
University of California – Berkeley, Yoo’s 
current employer, to fire or sanction him 
for unethical conduct regarding this 
memo. 
 
Attorney Gives Classified Brief- 
ing to Senate Intelligence Com- 
mittee on Details of CIA Torture 
Program 
Gitanjali Gutierrez, an attorney at the 
Center for Constitutional Rights represent-
ing former CIA “ghost” detainee Majid 
Khan, who was held in secret CIA pris-
ons for three years before his transfer to 
Guantanamo Bay, spoke with the Senate 
Intelligence Committee on March 28, 
2008. 
 
Gutierrez briefed staff members on the 
torture and abuse of Khan while he was 
held in the secret CIA prisons. Gutierrez 
is the first attorney to speak with Con-
gress after such a meeting with a former 
CIA secret detainee. 
 
The 90-minute meeting was closed, and 
Gutierrez is forbidden from revealing 
what Khan has told her about his treat-
ment because the government declared 
prisoners’ statements to be classified. 
Gutierrez said her testimony was aimed 
at giving Congress independent informa-
tion on the C.I.A. program, which she 
said “is operating criminally, shamefully 
and dangerously.” 
 
Rep. Delahunt Holds Field Brief- 
ing in Boston on Guantánamo’s 
Refugees Representative William Delahunt, mem-
ber of Congress, held a field briefing in 
Boston on March 26, 2008, focusing on 
Guantanamo’s refugees. The briefing, 
held on behalf of the  House Subcommit-
tee on International Organizations, Hu-
man Rights, and Oversight, addressed 
the plight of dozens of Guantanamo 
detainees who cannot return home due 
to fear of persecution. 
 
Emi Maclean, attorney at the Center for 
Constitutional Rights, as well as attorneys 
Sabin Willett and Michael Mone, who 
represent refugees held at Guantanamo 
Bay, addressed the briefing, detailing the 
needs of refugees at Guantanamo to find 
safe havens. 
 
An estimated 50 detainees cannot return 
home for fear of torture. At least two of 
those men had been designated refu-
gees by the United Nations High Com-
missioner for Refugees before they ar-
rived at Guantánamo. So far, neither the 
United States nor European countries, 
where some detainees have relatives, 
have been willing to give them safe ha-
ven. In fact, the U.S. has already sent 
almost 40 detainees back to countries 
that are known for human rights abuses, 
including Uzbekistan, Libya, Tunisia, and 
Egypt.  
 
Former detainee Murat Kurnaz 
releases new book 
 
Former Guantanamo detainee Murat 
Kurnaz released his new book, “Five 
Years of My Life: An Innocent Man in 
Guantanamo” in English in April 2008. 
Kurnaz, a Turkish citizen and German 
resident, was seized in Pakistan in 2002 
where he was involved with religious 
studies and turned over to U.S. forces, 
likely in exchange for a bounty. He was 
held first in Kandahar, Afghanistan and 
then in Guantanamo Bay for nearly five 
years, enduring countless interrogations 
and sleep deprivation. Kurnaz was finally 
released in August 2006 and returned to 
Germany, where he lives with his mother. 
Kurnaz’ book details the harrowing ex-
perience of his detention without legal 
process as an innocent man for five 
years. It includes a foreword by singer 
Patti Smith and an afterword by Baher 
Azmy, Kurnaz’s U.S.-based attorney, who 
Center for Constitutional Rights         www.ccrjus tice.org  (continued on  pg. 3)  
about the news briefing.. 
This news briefing is produced 
monthly by the Center for Consti-
tutional Rights, which coordinates 
the representation of detainees at 
Guantánamo Bay with a network 
of over 500 pro bono habeas 
counsel. It is translated into Ara-
bic and Dari and is available 
online at  
 
http://www.ccrjustice.org/ 
learn-more/reports/ 
Guantanamo-newsletter 
 
If you would like to receive this 
newsletter, send us more informa-
tion, or get in contact: 
 
Center for Constitutional Rights 
666 Broadway, 7th Floor 
New York, NY 10012 
http://www.ccrjustice.org/ 
(212) 614-6443  
 LKates@ccrjustice.org represented him in U.S. courts. 
 
CIA refuses to turn over 7,000 
documents in lawsuit 
 
The Central Intelligence agency filed a 
motion on April 23, 2008 seeking to 
end a lawsuit by human rights groups 
and avoid turning over more than 7000 
documents related to its secret “ghost” 
detention and extraordinary rendition 
program. 
 
Among other assertions, the CIA 
claimed that it did not have to release 
the documents because many consist of 
correspondence with the White House 
or top Bush administration officials, or 
because they are between parties seek-
ing legal advice on the programs, in-
cluding guidance on the legality of 
certain interrogation procedures. The 
CIA confirmed that it requested—and 
received—legal advice from attorneys at 
the Department of Justice Office of Le-
gal Counsel concerning these proce-
dures. 
 
The Center for Constitutional Rights, 
Amnesty International USA, and the 
Center for Human Rights and Global 
Justice at New York University filed 
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) 
requests with several U.S. government 
agencies, including the CIA. These 
FOIA requests sought information about 
individuals who are—or have been—held 
by the U.S. government or detained 
with U.S. involvement, and about whom 
there is no public record. The requests 
also sought information about the gov-
ernment’s legal justifications for its secret 
detention and extraordinary rendition 
program 
 
Although the CIA did release a paltry 
number of documents in response to the 
FOIA request, most were already in the 
public domain, such as newspaper 
articles and a single copy of the Fourth 
Geneva Convention which governs the 
treatment of civilians in times of war. The 
limited relevant documents that were 
released were documents pertaining to 
briefings demanded by the House and 
Senate Intelligence Committees regard-
ing various aspects of the overseas 
detention and interrogation program.  
9 Guantanamo prisoners trans- 
ferred out of Guantánamo in 
May 2008 
 
On May 1, 2008, nine Guantanamo 
detainees were transferred from the 
detention camp, including Al Jazeera 
cameraman Sami al-Haj, a Sudanese 
detainee whose fate was the subject of 
a worldwide campaign for his release. 
Al-Haj’s release came the day before 
World Press Freedom Day. Two other 
Sudanese, Amir Yacoub al-Amir and 
Walid Ali, were repatriated as well, as 
was one Moroccan detainee, Said 
Boujaadia. 5 Afghan detainees were 
also repatriated to Afghanistan. 
 
 
Center for Constitutional Rights         www.ccrjus tice.org  