In the early 80s, in California, Rita was 
planning to become a nun. But at just 16, she began to be sexually molested by her parish priest, Father Santiago Tamayo. It began with inappropriate touching in the confessional booth, and escalated over two years to Tamayo, and a second priest, coercing sex. Rita was then “introduced” to six other priests and coerced into sex with each of them as often as once a week. Unsurprisingly, Rita soon became pregnant. Father Tamayo urged her to get an abortion but unable to bring herself to that decision, he (with the assistance (financial and otherwise) of the Church and Diocese) arranged for her to be sent to the Philippines under the auspices of a “scholarship” and threatened her into silence. While there, at Father Tamayo’s brother’s clinic, Rita was neglected and malnourished falling into a coma and eventually giving birth to her daughter in that state. Fortunately, Rita’s mother discovered her whereabouts and that she was ill and tracked her down and was able to help nurse her daughter back to health. Rita attempted to bring a civil case, but church officials insisted they did not know the whereabouts of the priests. The case was ultimately dismissed on statute of limitations grounds. In March 1991, Tamayo returned to California and confessed and apologized face-to-face to Rita, announcing at a news conference that the Los Angeles Archdiocese had been paying him  to 
remain in the Philippines for years after the baby was born. Tamayo also produced letters which showed that he was being paid by the Diocese and urged to keep that fact secret. No “higher ups” in the Church ever took any responsibility. 
CCR and SNAP Charge Vatican Ofﬁcials With Crimes  Against Humanity
continued on page 3
January 11, 2012, will mark ten years since the first men 
rounded up in the “war on terror” were brought to 
Guantánamo Bay, Cuba. In this time, nearly 800 men have 
passed through the prison; at this moment 171 men remain detained. 89 of those remaining have been cleared for transfer, yet, in the last year, only one detainee has left alive, and that was via forcible repatriation to Algeria where the man had a credible fear of continued persecution. 
Innumerable lies have been told over the past decade 
justifying this system of indefinite detention: “these men are the worst of the worst;” “The U.S. doesn’t torture;” We will close Guantánamo “to restore the standards of due process and the core constitutional values that have made this country great even in the midst of war, even in dealing with terrorism.” As time goes on, the gravity of these lies compound. The men are not the worst of the worst. By the Government’s own accounts, 92% of them were not al-Qaeda combatants. Torture happened throughout the war on terror and continues to this day with the subjection of Guantánamo detainees to indefinite detention. And, thanks to a recalcitrant Congress and a feckless President, the courts have abdicated their responsibility by continually rubber stamping the military’s detention decisions.
President Bush thwarted the law in order to create the prison 
and inflict torture. President Obama is thwarting the law to maintain the prison Guantánamo Still Matters
continued on page 4Winter 2011
Survivors and allies spread the word about the ICC ﬁling during European tour.CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook2
No one born in the half-generation 
since Bill Clinton was elected knows a time when the President of the United States didn’t claim the power to arbitrarily detain, torture or kill anyone (including U.S. citizens), anyplace in the world, solely on his own say so.  The young people in this “9/11 generation” have never known a time when the government needed a warrant to spy on them; people accused of the crime of terrorism were guaranteed their day in court; or U.S. war criminals were held accountable for torture.  This is not the world that any of us want.  As we outline in our current Annual Report, for the past decade CCR has steadfastly fought these illegal policies with your generous support and partnership.  And we will continue to do so because we know that Constitutions don’t fix themselves and rights not fought for are lost forever.
But even from within such a dark 
time for this nation, we see clear signs of change and fresh beginnings, not from the President, Congress or the Judiciary, but from the fourth branch of government – the people.  At the same time that the 9/11 generation has witnessed the failure of its government to protect its rights; they’ve seen brilliant displays of democracy in action from ordinary people in some of the harshest dictatorships around the world.  Hosni Mubarak and Muammar Qaddafi claimed the power to kill and repress dissent by any means necessary. But the populations in Egypt and Libya didn’t just hope for change, they demanded it, and Mubarak and Qadaffi are no longer in power. We hope that the 9/11 decade, now coming of age, as well as all of us that care about rights and freedom, will engage in the awakening movement of activism we’ve seen with Occupy Wall Street and the protests in Wisconsin.
A long time CCR supporter recently 
told me that we have to fight an American Revolution about once a generation to keep things on track, to keep rights protected and to keep government power in check.  This is precisely the battle that CCR, with your help, is engaged in: like David beating back Goliath – we constantly look for and use new stones.  We know you share our commitment to fight even harder in the years ahead, even as this government continues to avoid facing its past or changing its future.  We can’t do it without you.  Please support CCR as we continue to speak truth to power, demand our rights and create the world we want for this and future generations.
We at CCR wish everyone the best in 
the New Year.
As 2011 comes to a close, with the New Year nearly upon us, the tendency 
is to look forward to fresh beginnings.  This year, however, our joy at what is to come is tempered as we remember that a decade ago – in the months between September and January – George Bush and Congress took swift and decisive steps to push us into an endless war whose  many casualties were not just human, they also included transparency and accountability and our democracy.  January 11, 2012, marks the tenth year of operation of the Guantánamo Bay Prison, the most notorious legal black hole in the world that, to this day, still detains 171 men.Letter from the Executive Director
Vincent Warren. Photo by Lindsay Beyerstein
In May of 2011, Albert Ruben published the first-ever overview of 
the Center for Constitutional Rights’ rich history of movement law -
yering: The People’s Lawyer: The Center for Constitutional Rights and the Fight for Social Justice from Civil Rights to Guantánamo. In The People’s Lawyer Ruben examines CCR’s singular approach 
to defending the Constitution, often in direct opposition to the will of the U.S. government and powerful corporate lobbies. In addi -
tion, the book chronicles a dynamic history of impact litigation and advocacy efforts, ranging from defending the rights of blacks during the Civil Rights Movement to our contemporary defense of habeas corpus rights at Guantánamo. 
The book has prompted other long-time CCR supporters, including Amy Goodman 
(host of Democracy Now!), Danny Glover (actor and activist), and Anthony D. Romero (Executive Director of the ACLU) to engage in discussion about the critical role that CCR has played in shaping national and international law. We are grateful to Mr. Ruben for the care, thought and love he put into this book chronicling CCR’s history.Albert Ruben Chronicles the History of CCR 
CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook3
Megan was a young teen when she 
was raped repeatedly by her priest in Minnesota. The priest fled to India and, with the help of his bishop and the Vatican office charged with handling allegations of sexual abuse by priests, ignored an extradition warrant and Interpol red notice. He currently oversees some 40 schools in India. Megan is now a 21-year-old student and artist. When asked how she felt about her perpetrator having access to children, Megan’s reply was forward-looking: “It shakes me to my core that he is still out there and could do the same thing to other kids.” (Megan is center in accompanying photo.)
Benjamin is a 44-year-old man 
originally from the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) who now lives in Missouri. As a child (ages 12-16) in the DRC, he was repeatedly raped by a Belgian priest who was studying at a seminary there.  Benjamin knew of other boys who had also been sexually assaulted by the priest.  Benjamin alerted Diocese officials in Belgium about his case and the others he knew about and later discovered that the priest had previously abused in Belgium before being sent to the DRC.  The priest was sent back to Belgium where he was alleged to have abused again, though the Diocese never reported this to an Investigative Commission that was assisting the survivor with his case.  Still not having faced consequences, the priest is now in Rwanda where he is working with orphans, through a non-profit he started.
On September 13, 2011, CCR, in 
partnership with the 10,000-strong Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests (SNAP) filed a landmark complaint before the International Criminal Court (ICC) at The Hague urging the Court to investigate and prosecute the Pope and other high level Vatican officials for enabling and facilitating the systematic and widespread rape and sexual violence by priests and others associated with the church around the world. If we prevail, this would be the first
time that an international court asserted jurisdiction over Vatican officials.  
CCR began working with SNAP last 
year to develop an international legal strategy to address the numerous and steadily emerging allegations of sexual violence by priests and other officials associated with the Catholic Church all over the world. Analysis of the factual records as established in a number of civil cases and grand jury investigations in the U.S. and reports of relevant commissions of inquiry in Canada, Ireland, Austria, Germany, Belgium and the U.K., as well as interviews with legal experts in the field, led to the conclusion that the sexual violence in these circumstances met the legal criteria for crimes against humanity. We brought this case to the ICC because it belongs there; what remains to be seen is whether there is enough political will at the ICC to ensure that the law is applied equally to all.
Clergy sex crimes are nothing less 
than a global pandemic and in order to address the true scope and systemic nature of these crimes, it is imperative that not only individual perpetrators be held responsible for their actions, but that higher level officials within the Church, who have fostered this system and who have helped hide or move offenders to other Dioceses or churches, often where they are able to reoffend, also be held accountable. For far too long, Vatican officials have enjoyed the immunities afforded to heads of state, foreign officials and diplomats and have not had to provide remedy or preventative measures for the rape and violence committed against men, women, and children, that has occurred under their watch. With SNAP , CCR seeks to attack the root of the problem by holding relevant officials in the Catholic Church accountable. Without accountability for this violence there can be no justice for its victims.
SNAP  (continued from cover)  
Survivors hold up photos of themselves at age of abuse.CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook4
and provide impunity for torture. While no one expected 
President Bush to close Guantánamo, failing to close it is a stain on President Obama’s record, a profound failure of leadership. 
Though President Obama has improved conditions in 
the prison, made moderate adjustments to the military commissions and stopped the worst of the Bush administration’s torture and abuse of detainees, he is still responsible for a system of indefinite detention (which CCR believes is torture) that keeps 171 men in brutal and unjust legal limbo. 
Despite his criticism during the presidential campaign of 
trial-by-military-commission as a “second class” system, President Obama has since rejected the core constitutional principle that individuals have a right to Due Process, and embraced justice-by-military-commission, which CCR believes exists primarily to admit evidence procured by coercion and torture, and to ensure convictions—a result that may be vulnerable in a fair trial in a federal court. 
The failure to close the Base is also that of the court’s. The Boumediene victory at the U.S. Supreme Court, which came 
after a six-year battle, beginning with CCR’s filing of the first habeas corpus case in 2002, firmly held that detainees have a constitutional right to pursue habeas corpus petitions before neutral federal court judges. Following Boumediene, the district courts granted numerous detainee habeas petitions, finding the evidence in most of cases to be weak, unreliable or procured by torture. Yet, the very conservative Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit—a court that has been reversed three consecutive times by the Supreme Court in detainee cases—has clamped down on detainee cases, reversing every case before it in which a detainee won his habeas petition, and affirming every case in which the detainee lost his habeas petition at the trial court. It appears that this court is in open contempt of the Supreme Court’s Boumediene ruling. As a result, 
there is effectively no meaningful judicial review of the legality of the detention of individual men, and the court has been acting as a cheerleader for the Executive Branch’s “wartime” decision-making. 
Lastly, the U.S. Congress is also culpable for this failure.
In the months following President’s Obama’s election, the State Department—often with the assistance of CCR and other habeas counsel—began resettling detainees to 
January 22, 2009. President Barack Obama signing an executive order promising to close the prison at Guantánamo “no later than 1 year from the date of this order.”
Guantánamo Still Matters  
(continued from cover)  
CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebookthird countries, with some initial successes. However, in 
early 2011, Congress passed a provision of the Defense Authorization Act that prevents the military from transferring Guantánamo detainees to the U.S. for trial and transfer to foreign countries unless the Secretary of Defense certifies that the receiving country can irrefutably ensure a detainee will not engage in any harmful acts against the U.S. Needless to say, these provisions present a significant obstacle to CCR’s resettlement and litigation efforts. This Congressional action, like the jurisdiction-stripping and accountability-stripping provisions of the Military Commissions Act of 2006, is emblematic of the role that Congress has played in enabling and perpetuating the lawlessness of Guantánamo. 
“Today—four years of litigation and two adverse liability rulings later—the City still doesn’t get it,” the Judge wrote.  “In 
testimony and depositions in this case, the City’s senior leaders have routinely denied that they are responsible for doing anything to remedy nearly forty years of discrimination.” -Judge Nicholas 
Garaufis 
On October 5th, 2011, in the federal class-action lawsuit 
filed by CCR and co-counsel Levy Ratner, and Scott & Scott, on behalf of the Vulcan Society, the fraternal organization of Black firefighters, U.S. District Judge Garaufis ruled the New York City Fire Department’s hiring practices to be broadly discriminatory on the basis of race and ordered major reforms to be overseen by the court. Judge Garaufis’ ruling goes well beyond the initial findings of the Court in July 2009 that the FDNY written entrance exams for the firefighter job were racially discriminatory and unlawful under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. 
“It is clear from Judge Garaufis’ decision that the city will now 
have to fix much more than its written examination to remedy over forty years of racial discrimination against Black and Hispanic firefighter candidates,” said CCR attorney Darius Charney. 
This latest ruling, which followed a three-week trial in 
August looking into the extent of the FDNY’s discriminatory practices, finds racial discrimination and other problems to be intentional and that they run rampant through the department, from the department’s recruitment practices and candidate background checks to the way it handles on-the-job racial bias complaints. Among other reforms, the Judge ordered that the FDNY hire independent consultants to identify best practices for recruiting and hiring Black and Hispanic candidates and ensure a non-discriminatory work environment; train all FDNY candidate investigators regarding city, state, and federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) laws and policies; and conduct a top-to-bottom assessment of the FDNY’s entire firefighter hiring process. Further, to ensure compliance the court will appoint a monitor to oversee the City’s implementation of its order over the next 10 years.
This landmark ruling grew out of two EEOC filings by the 
Center in 2002 and 2005. Based on the EEOC’s findings in 2007, the United States Department of Justice sued the City of New York for violating Title VII, and later that year the Vulcan Society and several individual Black firefighter applicants intervened to join the suit as plaintiffs.“The City Still Doesn’t Get it”:
Judge Rules again that the FDNY Hiring 
Process is Broadly Racially Discriminatory 
CCR demands that the President fully and finally 
shutter the disgraceful Guantánamo Prison Camp and promise that there will be no new “Guantánamos”.  To close Guantánamo the Obama administration must: 
1) Transfer 89 men who high-level administration 
ofﬁcials have ofﬁcially “cleared for release.” This 
requires the administration to end its internal restriction on transferring cleared detainees to Yemen and other “unstable” countries and to ﬁght to end Congressional restrictions on transferring detainees out of Guantánamo, a ﬁght the administration could win if it tried; 
2) End the Military Commissions system. Those who 
have committed crimes can be tried in a civilian court, with full and fair constitutional protections; 
3) Transfer the remaining detainees who cannot be 
charged with a crime. The number of individuals who are “too dangerous to release” but who could not be charged with a crime is zero. Indeﬁnite detention is not acceptable.
We are disheartened that we are still making these demands 10 years after Guantánamo Bay received its first prisoner, 3 1/2 years after the Supreme Court ruled in Boumediene, and 3 years after President Obama pledged to shutter this grotesque symbol of American militarism and injustice. Yet CCR will continue to make these demands until justice is done.
For ways you can be involved in helping CCR 
to close Guantánamo please visit our website at www.CCRjustice.org/closegitmo5CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook6
On October 7, Yemeni activist and 
journalist Tawakkul Karman became one of three women to share the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize. Karman is a prominent leader of Yemen’s non-violent revolutionary movement demanding a democratic government that protects human rights. While the Nobel Committee honored this year’s recipients “for their non-violent struggle for the safety of women and for women’s rights to full participation in peace-building work,” Karman has stressed that her prize is a victory for all Yemenis and all freedom, justice and peace-seeking people. 
Last fall, CCR organized a public 
discussion featuring Karman called “The U.S. and Yemen: Destroying Lives in the Name of National Security.” The discussion was co-sponsored by the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the Brecht Forum in New York, where the event was held before a full house. During the discussion, Karman and others described how U.S. military aid to Yemen rationalized by the “War on Terror” enabled the Yemeni government to violently repress its critics and commit egregious human rights violations. She described the ongoing efforts of Yemeni human rights activists to resist this mounting repression and to create a meaningfully democratic and peaceful future. Just four months later, these efforts— encouraged by popular uprisings in Tunisia and Egypt— grew into a national movement in which Karman played a pivotal role. 
Karman additionally expressed support 
for CCR’s opposition to U.S. military strikes in Yemen and backs CCR’s demand that the Obama administration release the Yemeni men at Guantánamo who are cleared to be sent back home yet remain indefinitely detained based solely on their nationality.The September panel also included CCR attorney Pardiss Kebriaei and CCR Advocacy Program Manager Leili Kashani, along with Yemeni journalist and human rights defender Ezz-Adeen Al-Asbahi. 
Video of this panel can be found at CCRjustice.org/targetedkillings 
CCR Congratulates Yemeni Activist and Ally Tawakkul Karman  
on Nobel Peace Prize
CCR is proud to recognize 
our ally, Frank Mugisha, Executive Director of Sexual Minorities Uganda (SMUG), for winning the 2011 Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights Award. CCR nominated Frank for the award in honor of his extraordinary courage as an openly gay and visible activist in Uganda, a danger -
ous and hostile environment for members of the LGBTI community, period, let alone for those who speak out against the repression and violence endured by members of that targeted minority.
Frank has demonstrated heroic perseverance at great 
personal risk in his role as the spokesperson of SMUG, including advocating against the U.S. evangelical driven “Kill the Gays” bill that’s been under con-sideration in Uganda for the last 18 months. Says Frank: “For me, it is about standing out and speaking in an environment where you are not sure if you will survive the next day; it is this fear that makes me strong, to work hard and fight on to see a better life for LGBTI persons in Uganda.”  
SMUG was founded in 2004 as a 
coalition of organizations to unify and strengthen sexual minority groups and communities in Uganda. CCR is working with SMUG to support their advocacy efforts  
as well as to identify human rights litigation and other challenges to the “Kill the Gays” bill.
Frank Mugisha Receives Robert F . Kennedy Human Rights AwardNobel Peace Prize Laureate Tawakkul 
Karman with CCR attorney Pardiss Kebriaei at a September 2010 event.
CCR ally Frank Mugisha (center) of Sexual Minorities 
Uganda receives the RFK Human Rights Award.CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on FacebookCCR is grateful to our donors whose gifts sustain our work. 
We also appreciate those who cannot give financially, but who support the Center by encouraging their communities to be involved.
CCR offers a special thank you to those who joined the Found-ers Circle whose members make leadership gifts totaling $1,000 or more to the Center during the year, and so doing, provide critical core support.
Rainer C. Baum
Edward J. and Marion Bronson
Richard J. Brown
Ira Carp
Jerry Cohen
John Di Stefano
J. Kenneth Donnelly and Catherine Bishop
Alvin and Rochelle Dorfman
Shirley Evenitsky
Richard Hesik and Barbara Johns
Richard C. Mehl
Marcus Rediker and Wendy Goldman
Joyce L. Richardson
Shoshana Rihn
Dorothy Rinaldo
Gilbert Saucedo
James Squire
Marilyn R. Stern and Elaine Reily
John Wetherhold
Richard K. WorthingtonThanks to Our Donors
Thelma Newman Society
We also welcome and thank the newest members of the Thelma Newman Planned Giving Society, a group of individuals who decided to include CCR in their estate plans or established annuities with the Center. These gifts build our endowment, ensuring CCR’s progressive legal work for future generations.
Elizabeth Alexander 
Frank and Blythe Baldwin 
Carol F. Drisko 
Eva K. Millette Coombs 
Kelly Pomeroy and John Broussard 
Jeremy Rye
If you would like to find out more about joining the Founders 
Circle or making a planned gift to CCR, contact Sara Beinert at 
212-614-6448 or SBeinert@CCRjustice.org
Our donors and supporters make our cutting-edge human 
rights work possible. Thank you so much!
The individuals listed joined between March 1, 2011-November 15, 2011.Quick Updates
Bush can run but can’t hide from CCR’s 
campaign to hold him accountable
On 10/20/11, CCR lodged a private torture prosecution 
in Canada on behalf of four men who claim they were tortured under Bush’s command. This prosecution was filed with a British Columbia court as Bush visited Surrey for a speaking engagement.  Received by a Justice of the Peace in the provincial court a hearing date was set for January, 2012. However, four days later, the Canadian Attorney General blocked this ruling, thwarting the men’s pursuit of justice. CCR is not alone in this work—our efforts are currently supported by an ever increasing number of human rights organizations and people across the world. We believe that it is only a matter of time before the arc will bend towards justice. For more information on these and other accountability efforts check out: CCRjustice.org/ourcases/current.cases/bush-torture-indictment 
CCR Fights to Hold Honduran Coup 
Leader Accountable
On 11/3/11, in our case against Honduran coup 
leader, Roberto Micheletti Baín (described in our last newsletter), CCR attorneys filed papers before the Houston Division Court of the Southern District of Texas emphasizing that the case is one of the few opportunities for accountability for the wave of human rights abuses committed during and in the aftermath of the coup. For more information please visit the case page at: CCRjustice.org/honduras-coup 
84 leading Archaeologists urge halt to 
“Museum of Tolerance” Construction on Ancient Muslim Cemetery
Our work continues with families who have ances-
tors buried in the historic Muslim Mamilla cemetery in Jerusalem to stop Israel and the Los Angeles-based Simon Wiesenthal Center from destroying the cemetery in order to build a “Museum of Tolerance.” On  
10/20/11, 84 leading archaeologists, with support from CCR and the Campaign to Preserve Mamilla Jerusalem Cemetery, urged Board Members of the Simon Wiesen-thal Center, the mayor of Jerusalem, and the Head of the Israeli Antiquities Authority (IAA) to immediately halt current and future construction of the “Museum of Tol-erance” on the site of Mamilla. For more information on this work visit: CCRjustice.org/ourcases/current-cases/mamilla7CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook8
Victory for the First Amendment!  
Settlement in Goodman, et al. v. St. Paul, et al. 
On October 3, 2011, CCR client and 
award-winning journalist Amy Goodman announced that a final settlement had been reached in CCR’s lawsuit brought on behalf of Goodman and fellow producers from Democracy Now!: Sharif Abdel Kouddous and Nicole Salazar, against the cities of Minneapolis-St. Paul and the U.S. Secret Service. The lawsuit challenged the policies and conduct of law enforcement at the 2008 Republican National Convention (RNC) in the Twin Cities. Goodman and her colleagues were unlawfully arrested and subject to excessive force while reporting on public protest and political dissent surrounding the Convention. 
Their arrests occurred in the 
context of pre-emptive raids and mass coordinated actions by local and federal law enforcement that interfered with the media’s ability to report on public protest, civic engagement and law enforcement activity around the Convention—not to mention the rights of protestors to take peacefully to the streets.“When journalists are arrested, it is not only a violation of the freedom of the press, but of the public’s right to know,”said Goodman. “When journalists are 
handcuffed and abused, so is democracy. We should not have to get a record when we put things on the record.”
Under the terms of the settlement, 
the plaintiffs will receive the very substantial sum of $100,000, to be paid jointly by St. Paul ($90,000) and the U.S. Secret Service ($10,000). Even better, the St. Paul police department has agreed to implement a training program to educate officers regarding the First Amendment rights of the press and public with respect to police operations, including police handling of media coverage of mass demonstrations, and to pursue implementation of the training program in Minneapolis and statewide.
CCR Is Grateful to our Foundation Funders for their Support *
The 1848 Foundation • The Altschul Foundation • The Atlantic Philanthropies (USA) • The Bertha Foundation • Caipirinha 
Foundation • The Charles Evans Hughes Memorial Foundation • The CS Fund/Warsh-Mott Legacy • David Kimmel Foun-dation • The Ford Foundation • The Frances and Benjamin Benenson Foundation • The Friendship Fund • The Fritz and Yvonne Pappenheim Fund of the Tides Foundation • The Grodzins Fund • The Helena Rubinstein Foundation • The Herb Block Foundation • Jon and Katherine Dart Charitable Foundation • Maine Community Foundation • The Normandie Foundation • The Posel Foundation • The Richard A. Busemeyer Atheist Foundation • Samuel Rubin Foundation • The San Francisco Foundation • The Scherman Foundation, Inc. • Schwab Charitable Fund • Seymour & Sylvia Rothchild Family 2004 Charitable Foundation • The Spingold Foundation • The Stewart R. Mott Foundation • The Tides Foundation • The Vanguard Charitable Endowment Program • The Vital Projects Fund, Inc.
*The foundations listed above provided leadership-level grants of $5,000 or more between Feb 1, 2011- Nov 15, 2011CCR attorney Anjana Samant announces settlement in Democracy Now! case to press at 
Occupy Wall Street.CCR 666 Broadway, 7th floor, New York, NY 10012 • Phone (212) 614-6489 • Fax (212) 614-6422 Email info@CCRjustice.org • www.CCRjustice.org  
Follow @theCCR on Twitter and “Center for Constitutional Rights” on Facebook9
What began as a humble encampment in a 
lower-Manhattan park has quickly become a dynamic, youth-powered movement spreading across the United States and beyond: Occupy Wall Street (#OWS).
Since its launch on Sept. 19, #OWS has targeted 
the bailout of major banks, corporations and the super-rich (the 1%) amidst growing unemployment, poverty and homelessness among the people (the 99%).
CCR has supported the Occupy movement 
since its beginning. Staff, interns, volunteers and board members have participated as activists, legal observers, advisers and technical experts. CCR has opened its offices to #OWS supporters for meetings and trainings and to provide a safe work space.
In late October and early November, police in 
several cities carried out coordinated attacks on #OWS encampments, including Oakland, Atlanta, and New York. When the New York Police Department brutally raided the flagship encampment at 1 a.m. on Nov. 8, arresting many, CCR staff mobilized in conjunction with the National Lawyers Guild to provide legal observers and court support throughout the day. 
CCR also participated in the November 17 
National Day of Action, in which at least 30,000 students, trade unionists and community members rallied and marched over the Brooklyn Bridge demanding economic and social justice and an end to police raids on #OWS. That day, many acts of police brutality were recorded, including the now-infamous pepper-spraying of peaceful student protesters at the University of California-Davis.
As we go to press, police raids are continuing 
throughout the country, but #OWS shows no signs of slowing down. CCR will continue to be on the front lines, supporting this important new movement for people’s rights. 
For updates on #OWS and CCR’s participation, 
follow CCR on social media such as Twitter and Facebook, visit our website, and be sure to check out the Occupy Wall Street homepage at occupywallstreet.org.CCR Supports  
Occupy Wall Street
1. Make a gift online at:  www.CCRjustice.org/
donate. It’s fast, easy and secure!  Even better, 
sign up for monthly giving - a recurring gift provides CCR with a reliable, steady source of income and is a “greener” way to give by reducing  mailing expenses and supplies.
2. Ask friends and family to make gifts to CCR 
in your honor as a gift to you. OR make gifts to CCR in honor of the folks on your shopping list.  Your gifts will pay tribute to their social justice values, while fueling CCR’s efforts! Honorees will receive a personalized card acknowledging the gift and will be added to CCR’s mailing list to receive our newsletter and other informational mailings to see the difference this gift makes.
3.  If you’ve got stocks that have declined in value, 
sell the stocks and give the proceeds to CCR. If you’ve got stocks that have gone up, give them to CCR and avoid capital gains taxes. Contact CCR at 212-614-6489 for stock transfer instructions. Help us make sure that you are properly thanked for your generosity by contacting us with your name and that of the stock being transferred.
4.  Until December 31st, make a gift from your 
IRA. If you’re at least 70½ years of age, you may transfer money from your IRA tax-free directly to CCR and have it count towards your  mandatory distribution. Just ask the fund manager for their withdrawal request form and ﬁll in Center for  Constitutional Rights.
All of this information and more is available on our website at 
www.CCRjustice.org/donate but if you have questions or wish to speak with someone in our Development Ofﬁce, please call 212-614-6489 or email us at Development@CCRjustice.org. Thank you for your support!Top Ways You Can Support 
CCR This Holiday Season
CCR’s groundbreaking work is only made possible through the generosity of our supporters!  We know you have many options for your end of year giving, please consider giving to CCR!tk
666 Broadway, 7th Floor, New York, NY 10012 • www.CCRjustice.org
The Center for Constitutional Rights is dedicated to advancing and protecting the rights guaranteed by the United States Constitution and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Founded in 1966 
by attorneys who represented civil rights movements in the South, CCR is a non-profit legal and educational organization committed to the creative use of law as a positive force for social change.Breaking News:
Vatican Crimes 
Against Humanity
Guantánamo  
Still MattersOccupy Wall Street
Details Inside
Nancy Stearns was an attorney at CCR from 1969 to 1981, 
working on a range of pioneering cases on reproductive  and women’s rights, and representing anti-Vietnam war, civil rights, and Native American rights activists. After she left the Center to do environmental enforcement for New York State, she made her first gift to CCR. 
Over the years she has contributed loyally, even donating 
proceeds from her musical performances to the Center. Recently, Nancy increased her gift to the Founders Circle level, moved by the loss of her colleague Rhonda Copelon 
and the creation of the Copelon Fund for Gender Justice at CCR. 
Reflecting on her support of the Center, Nancy commented: “I spoke at many  
benefits for CCR when I was on staff, so it is thrilling to be able to host my own 
cabaret benefits now. I was so fortunate to be able to work for CCR as a young lawyer. The work CCR does is tremendously important and it means a great deal  to me to support it.” 
Nancy’s support underlies the variety of roles that people can play to be a part of 
long term progressive change through the Center’s work. Nancy Stearns
 CCR Donor Spotlight
To join Nancy Stearns and make a donation to CCR 
 please visit www.CCRjustice.org/donateConnect with CCR Online!
CCR’s online community has been a critical component in advancing our social justice work. Social network-ing has organized, strengthened and connected movements around the world. Join our network, take action and stay up-to-date on CCR’s work:
• Like the “Center for Constitutional  
 Rights” on Facebook
• Follow @theCCR on Twitter
• Subscribe to CCRmedia  
 on YouTube
