1
Cultural Survival // 2016 Annual Report
 annual Report
2016 This report covers the period from January 1, 2016 
to December 31, 2016 and financial information for 
September 1, 2015 to August 31, 2016.
Copyright © 2016 Cultural Survival
Cultural Survival
Main Office:
PO Box 381569
Cambridge, MA 02238 USA
t: 617.441.5400
f: 617.441.5417
culturalsurvival@cs.org
www.cs.org
Facebook.com/CulturalSurvival
Twitter @CSORG
Cover: Cultural Survival partnered with Julian Cho Society and the 
Maya Leaders Alliance by organizing a training program in community 
journalism and radio production to Q‘eqchi‘ and Mopan Maya in Punta 
Gorda, Belize and Guatemala.3
Cultural Survival // 2016 Annual Report
OUR VISION
Cultural Survival advocates for Indigenous Peoples rights and 
supports Indigenous communities’ self-determination, cultures and 
political resilience.
OUR MISSION
Cultural Survival envisions a future that respects and honors 
Indigenous Peoples inherent rights and dynamic cultures, deeply and 
richly interwoven in lands, languages, spiritual traditions, and artistic 
expression, rooted in self-determination and self-governance.
OUR HISTORY
Since 1972, Cultural Survival has partnered with Indigenous 
communities to advance Indigenous Peoples’ rights and cultures 
worldwide. The core of our efforts rest on the principles of 
supporting, amplifying efforts and raising awareness of self-
determination for Indigenous communities. Cultural Survival employs 
a participatory, rights-based approach to our relationships that 
respects and strengthens Indigenous rights while honoring traditional 
Indigenous worldviews and lifeways. Our programs work to inform, 
create resources for, support access to information, bolster freedom 
of expression, and assist Indigenous communities to organize 
and shape their futures in ways consistent with their traditions, 
languages, cultures. We publicize Indigenous Peoples’ issues through 
our award-winning Cultural Survival Quarterly; we mount on the 
ground campaigns and other advocacy efforts to stop environmental 
destruction and abuses of Indigenous Peoples’ rights, always at the 
community’s invitation. Headquartered in Cambridge, Massachusetts, 
we have satellite offices in Guatemala and Colorado. Cultural Survival 
also holds consultative status with the United Nations Economic 
Social and Cultural Council.4
Cultural Survival // 2016 Annual ReportA MESSAGE FROM 
THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
Dear Friends:
2016 was a year that brought Cultural Survival to a new level of advancing 
Indigenous Peoples’ rights and cultures worldwide, thanks to our generous 
donors and partners. 
In 2016, friends like you helped Cultural Survival:
• Launch our new Community Media Grant Project providing opportunities for 
international Indigenous radio stations to strengthen their broadcast systems and 
train community journalists in broadcasting, audio editing, technical skills, and 
journalism. 
• Convene the first Central American Network of Indigenous Community Radio 
Stations and contract with the Indigenous Media Foundation in Nepal to 
broadcast Indigenous Rights Radio programs in 10 Indigenous languages at 21 
radio stations.  
• Deliver over 100 new Indigenous Rights Radio programs to over 1,640 (+200 
radios in 2016) radio stations in 76 (+20 countries in 2016) countries to inform 
an estimated 10 million Indigenous listeners on their rights in 33 languages! 
•  Submit stakeholder reports to the United Nations (UN) Human Rights Council 
during its Universal Periodic Review process of evaluating human rights issues 
affecting Indigenous Peoples in Brazil, Ecuador, India, Timor-Leste, Uganda, 
Venezuela, and Zimbabwe.
Cultural Survival works every day towards making the rights in the United Nations 
(UN) Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples a reality.
Three of our programs work in partnership to achieve the goals of the 
Declaration:
Our COMMUNITY MEDIA PROGRAM provides important grants and 
support to a network of Indigenous community radio stations around the 
globe and develops critically needed programming. These stations also 
have the opportunity to learn how to improve their operations through a 
series of training workshops and exchanges.
Our ADVOCACY PROGRAM  brings international attention to places 
where governments and corporations have violated these rights. 
Our INDIGENOUS RIGHTS RADIO PROGRAM  expanded our 
innovative radio series that promotes the rights guaranteed by the UN 
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.  Water is Life. Protest at 
Standing Rock, ND.5
Cultural Survival // 2016 Annual Report
In 2016, we continued our mission to support Indigenous communities by
• Launching our environmental convening series to bring Indigenous 
knowledge  to the global conversation on climate change and adaptation; 
• Working with Indigenous women  in Central America to strengthen their 
skills in community radio and leadership in their communities; 
• Continuing to provide Indigenous rights-based radio content produced by 
Indigenous producers for Indigenous audiences; and
• Continuing our Community Media Grants Project to provide financial 
support to Indigenous communities as they  develop and advance media 
strategies.
“I would like to have a community radio where the community expresses 
what they feel, where the children can also participate, where they can 
also sing in their Native language [Q’eqchi],” says Elena Metii about the 
launch of Radio Xyaab’ Tzuul Taq’a in El Estor, Guatemala thanks to support from 
Cultural Survival’s Community Media Grants Project.  
“I consider it very important to have a [community radio] station with 
our participation as women. We have been limited, and this is a right 
that protects all women,” says El Estor community member Angelina Ba Caal. 
As we look forward, we will strive to ensure that the advancements we have 
made are not rolled back or undermined. We will continue to speak out and take 
action. 
Our collective voices will be far greater than one of us alone. Thank you for being 
part of our vision and work.
Sincerely,
Suzanne Benally  (Navajo and Santa Clara Tewa)
Executive Director6
Cultural Survival // 2016 Annual ReportOUR PROGRAMS
Cultural Survival’s Advocacy Program supports Indigenous communities around the globe 
by amplifying grassroots movements to bring awareness and international pressure to 
their struggles while enhancing Indigenous communities’ capacity, always at the invitation 
of community leaders, to demand and assert their rights outlined in the United Nations 
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. In addition to providing expert testimony 
on Indigenous, human and environmental violations and coordinating Indigenous 
participation at international bodies like the United Nations Permanent Forum on 
Indigenous Issues and the Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (EMRIP) 
in Geneva, Cultural Survival’s Advocacy team coordinates reports to the Human Rights 
Council’s Universal Periodic Review.
6ADVOCACY
The Cultural Survival Bazaars are a series of cultural festivals that provide Indigenous 
artists, cooperatives, and their representatives from around the world the chance 
to sell their work directly to the American public. Each event features traditional and 
contemporary crafts, artwork, clothing, jewelry, home goods, and accessories from dozens 
of countries. In addition, the Bazaars offer cultural performances and presentations, 
including live music, storytelling, craft-making demonstrations, and the unique chance to 
talk directly with makers and community advocates. The Cultural Survival Bazaars work to 
support the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples’ articles 11, 
20, and 31.BAZAARS
Cultural Survival supports Indigenous Peoples’ struggle in defense of their identities, lands, 
and human rights through Indigenous community-operated and controlled radio stations. 
Cultural Survival partners with Indigenous media producers who are amplifying Indigenous 
voices on issues that matter to their communities. Radio’s universal and free nature and 
its ability to access many remote communities makes it a key medium to reach Indigenous 
audiences. Indigenous-produced programming strengthens Indigenous peoples’ capacity 
to claim their rights and enables access to essential information and broadcasting in 
Indigenous languages ensures widespread understanding and cultural continuity.COMMUNITY MEDIA
Indigenous Rights Radio uses the power of community radio to inform Indigenous 
communities of their rights. We envision a world in which Indigenous communities, 
equipped with knowledge of their rights, are empowered to protect their lands, languages, 
and cultures. Cultural Survival’s Indigenous radio producers gather stories from Indigenous 
Peoples around the world. In English, Spanish, and a growing array of Indigenous 
languages, we bring the voices of the native peoples of Australia, Asia, Africa, Europe, and 
the Americas into dynamic dialogue about the meaning of Indigenous Peoples’ rights, their 
common struggles, and their evolving and innovative solutions to the problems they face 
today.INDIGENOUS RIGHTS RADIO
7
Cultural Survival // 2016 Annual Report7NEW INITIATIVES
The Community Media Program launched the Community 
Media Grant Project in August 2016. This initiative will provide 
opportunities for Indigenous radio stations to strengthen 
their broadcast infrastructure and systems, and provide 
specific training opportunities in community journalism, 
broadcasting, audio editing, and technical skills to Indigenous 
community radios around the world.  First year grantees 
will be selected from four major regions: Central America, 
Kenya, Peru/Bolivia, and Nepal. Projects will be selected 
and mentored through a program design process based on 
the needs of their communities, best practices in the field, 
community values, and capacities. Grantees will be selected 
with the criteria of immediate need, promise for continued 
success, and the ability to participate fully in the initiative.COMMUNITY MEDIA GRANT 
PROJECT
In January 2016, we hosted the first ever Central American 
Conference of Indigenous Community Radio Stations. 44 
Indigenous community radio volunteers and Indigenous 
leaders from all seven countries of Central America 
participated in the conference. The event promoted 
Indigenous women’s leadership and achieved a 50/50 gender 
balance. As a result of the conference, the Central American 
Indigenous Community Radio Network was founded, in 
addition to a Regional Commission that will advise on the 
direction and actions of this network. The network will 
support the various Indigenous community radio movements 
in Guatemala, El Salvador, Mexico, Belize, Panama, Costa 
Rica, Nicaragua, and Honduras. In June 2016, members of 
the Regional Commission for the Central American Network 
of Indigenous Community Radios assembled in La Antigua, 
Guatemala for their first in-person strategic planning 
meeting. Over the course of an intensive two-day meeting, 
the Commission established the Mission and Vision for the 
Network, an Operational Plan, a Communications Plan, and 
Memorandums of Understanding were signed between 
Cultural Survival, each of the accompanying organizations, and 
the Regional Commission.CENTRAL AMERICAN INDIGENOUS 
COMMUNITY RADIO NETWORK
Grantee Radio Ixchel in Sumpango, Sacatepéquez, Guatemala.
Press conference announcing the launch of the Central American 
Network of Indigenous Community Radios, January 2016.8
Cultural Survival // 2016 Annual Report2016 HIGHLIGHTS
Eight Cultural Survival staff members 
attended this year’s UN Permanent 
Forum on Indigenous Issues 
(UNPFII) . We held two side events, 
one on Indigenous Women’s Role in 
Peacebuilding through Community Media 
and the other on the Universal Periodic 
Review and the implementation of 
Indigenous Peoples Rights.In January 2016, Cultural Survival 
partnered with the Indigenous 
Media Foundation to broadcast 
radio programs in 10 Indigenous 
Nepalese languages at 21 
radio stations to a listener 
audience of 8 million people , 
almost doubling our reach 
worldwide.We began producing USB 
snap bracelets  loaded with 
our full Indigenous Rights 
Radio program library and 
distributed them at various 
conferences, including the 
Central American Conference 
of Indigenous Community 
Radios and the UNPFII. 
In a survey of 22 Central 
American community radio 
representatives who received 
our USB snap bracelets, 
100% of respondents 
reported that the content 
was interesting, useful, and 
responded to the needs of 
their community.In February 2016, a Cultural Survival staff member attended a meeting at 
the Greenpeace UK headquarters in London with organizations who are 
members of the coalition working on the Herakles Farms campaign  in 
Cameroon. Following the meeting, Cultural Survival hosted monthly webinars 
with the coalition team to discuss plans moving forward and to facilitate better 
communication among members internationally and locally.
We submitted stakeholder 
reports to the Universal 
Periodic Review (UPR)  on 
human rights issues affecting 
Indigenous Peoples in Brazil, 
Ecuador, India, Timor-Leste, 
Uganda, Venezuela, and 
Zimbabwe.We held three summer bazaars in Plymouth, MA, Tiverton, RI, 
and Jamaica Plain (Boston), MA.  Our 16th annual summer bazaar in 
Tiverton saw a 27% increase in sales over 2015.
The two winter bazaars took place in Boston, MA and Cambridge, 
MA. Our winter bazaars implemented a new booth fee system and jury 
process, which are industry standards among artisan craft markets.
Cultural Survival and the Maya 
Leaders Alliance of Belize 
commenced a three-year 
project to train six Maya 
men and women to become 
radio producers/journalists  in 
southern Belize.
Our important role in 
disseminating information about 
international Indigenous rights at 
the global level was recognized 
by Vicky Tauli-Corpuz, UN Special 
Rapporteur on the Rights of 
Indigenous Peoples, who joined 
us in a partnership to produce 
an ongoing series on her work as 
Special Rapporteur. To date we 
have produced 10 programs in 
English and 1 in Spanish based 
on interviews with her.
Indigenous Rights Radio Producer Avexnim Cotji interviews dele -
gates at the UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Peoples.9
Cultural Survival // 2016 Annual ReportBOARD OF DIRECTORS, STAFF AND INTERNS
Board of Directors
Sarah Fuller,  President
Duane Champagne  (Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa), Vice Chair 
Steven Heim , Treasurer
Nicole Friederichs,  Clerk
Evelyn Arce Erickson
Jason Campbell (Spokane)
Laura R. Graham
Jean Jackson
Lesley J. Kabotie (Crow)
Stephen Marks
Joseph Mutangah
Stella Tamang (Tamang) 
StaffSuzanne Benally  (Navajo and Santa Clara Tewa), Executive Director
Kaimana Barcarse  (Native Hawaiian), Senior Radio Producer
Mark Camp , Deputy Executive Director
Jessie Cherofsky , Indigenous Rights Radio Production Coordinator and Bazaar Program Manager
Avexnim Cojti  (Maya K’iche’),  Community Media Grants Project Manager
Danielle DeLuca , Advocacy Program Manager and Indigenous Rights Radio Distribution Coordinator
Shaldon Ferris (Khoisan), Radio Producer
Sofia Flynn , Accounting & Office Manager
Cesar Gomez  (Pocomam), Content Production & Training Coordinator, Community Media Program
John Kisimir (Maasai), Senior Fellow 
María del Rosario ‘Rosy’ Sul  González (Kakchiquel Maya), Radio Producer
Michael Johnson (Arikara/Hidatsa/Ojibwe), Director of Development
Jamie Malcolm-Brown , Communications & Information Technology Manager
Katharine Norris, Program Assistant 
Teresita Orozco Mendoza, Community Media Program Regional Coordinator 
Agnes Portalewska , Communications Manager
Angelica Rao , Executive Coordinator
Miranda Vitello , Development Associate
Ancelmo Xunic (Kachikel), Community Media Program Manager
Interns and Volunteers
Beryl Akuffo-Kwapong
Amanda Aldridge
Nicolette Archambault
Madeline Black
Stephanie Borcea
Lauren Bukenberger
Don ButlerHannah Currier
Aviva DeKornfeld
Diana Estrella
Kieron Farrelly
Linda Ferrer
Anna Hernandez
Detmer KremerAkiko Kuno-Lewis
Margaret LeLacheur
Bruna Luniere
Giulia McDonnell
Stephen Muntet
Libby Pell
Edwin PoolDominique Seles
Shaina Semiatin
Lucas Tatarsky
Jeremy Vale
Kristen Williams
Jeanette Wittstein
Michael Zaccaro10
Cultural Survival // 2016 Annual Report
Benefactors ($1,000+)
Al Jazeera
Susana Raquel Berger
Duane Champagne
Channel Foundation
Donna L. Ching and Richard F. Leman
The Christensen Fund
Asho Craine
Wendy Emrich
Full Circle Fund of RSF Social Finance
Sarah and William Fuller
Fundación Comunicándonos
Grace Jones Richardson Trust
Laura R. Graham and T.M. Scruggs
William and Jeanie Graustein
Donald Hindley
Karin Holser
International Center for JournalistsJean E. Jackson
Julian Cho Society
Waud H. Kracke
George Martin
Anthony Maybury-Lewis and Chikako Kuno
The Middle Passage Foundation
Mildred M. Simmons Charitable Lead Annuity 
Trust
Gerrish Milliken
Rosemary Mudd
Randy Muth and Patricia Matson
P. Ranganath and Sandra Nayak
New England Biolabs Foundation
Nancy S. Nordhoff
NoVo Foundation
The Oak Foundation
Phyllis OdiseosSusanna B. Place and Scott Stoll
Quitiplas Foundation
Tina Ramme
Jerome C. and Janet Regier
Robinhood Cove Fund of the Essex 
County Community Foundation
Barbara Rogoff
Michael J. Sheridan and Kristina L. 
Simmons
Teresa M. and Anthony Smith
Nancy Stetson
The Pentera Trust
Tides Foundation
P. Roy Vagelos
Dan S. and Beth Whittemore
David S. Wilkie
Winky FoundationTHANK YOU TO OUR SUPPORTERS!
Cultural Survival would like to thank our donors for your continued support. We simply could not do 
all that we do without you by our side!
Patrons ($500-$999)
Stephan Beyer
Shirley and Tim Blancke
Jerry D. Busch
Mary Ann Camp
Jason Campbell
John Coley and Rebekah Levine 
Coley
Bharat Das
Robert L. Deshotels
William and Katy Durham
Kirk and Karen Endicott
Beebe Frazer
John Fries
Douglas Fry
Steven and Katherine HeimMichael H. Horn
James and June N. Howe
Jantz Management LLC
Louis Kampf
Sarah Knox
Matthew Lindholm
Jesse W. Markow
Stephen P. Marks
Matson-Muth Charitable Fund
Janet U. McAlpin
Kerri Meelia
Carol Newell
Sandra J. Occhipinti
Angus Parker
10 Cultural Survival // 2016 Annual ReportDenise Peine
Pat Picciano
Edna N Roberts
David Rosenstein
Katherine Sanchez
Jonathan Scheuer
Emily Siegel
Christopher Simpson
Thomas Sneed
Ann Sprayregen
Martha Stampfer
Genevieve Vaughan
Terry and Mary Vogt
Richard Wilk11
Cultural Survival // 2016 Annual Report1,387,958 
82%178,828 
11%121,331 
7%Expenses FY 2016
Programs and Publications
Fundraising
General Administrative825,861 
49%
483,041 
29%372,695 
22%316 
0%179 
0%2,201 
0%Revenue FY 2016
Contributions and Subscriptions
Grant Revenue
Indigenous Crafts Bazaar
Income
Investment  Income
Realized and Unrealized Gain
(Loss) on Investments
Sales of Publications
Other incomeFINANCIAL REPORT
REVENUES FY 2016
Contributions and Subscriptions  825,861 
Grant Revenue  483,041 
Indigenous Crafts Bazaar Income  372,695 
Investment  Income  316 
Realized and Unrealized Gain 
(Loss) on Investments 179 
Sales of Publications  2,201 
Other income  2,562 
Total Revenues  1,684,293
EXPENSES FY 2016
Programs and Publications  1,387,958 
Fundraising  178,828 
General Administrative  121,331 
Total Expenses  1,688,177
Revenue FY 2016 Expenses FY 2016
895,019 
59% 214,758 
14%393,289 
26%7,198 
1%(1,345)
0% 6,268 
0%Revenue FY 2015
Contributions and
Subscriptions
Grant Revenue
Indigenous Crafts BazaarIncome
Investment  Income
Realized and Unrealized Gain(Loss) on Investments
Sales of Publications
Other income1,180,158 
80%146,464 
10%145,935 
10%Expenses FY 2015
Programs and Publications
Fundraising
General AdministrativeMaya radio trainees Juan Mes and Frani Ba from Belize, conduct interviews 
for broadcast on radio.