July 2007                                                  
                                               Number 2  
  
Application No. 2947/06: Ismoilov and Others v. Russia 
Intervention Submitted by Human Rights Watch and AIRE Centre 
I. Introduction .................................................................................................. 1  
II. Treatment of Uzbek Nationa ls Returned to Uzbekistan.................................. 1  
Ill-Treatment of Retur nees from Kazakhstan ...................................................2  
Incommunicado Detention of Uzbek Refugees Extradited from Kyrgyzstan .....3  
Illegal Returns f rom Ukraine...........................................................................4  
III. No Effective Monitoring of Places of Detention in Uzbekistan........................5  
IV.        International Recognition of Risk of Torture for Persons Returned to 
Uzbekistan....................................................................................................7  
V.         The Prohibition on Exposure to a Real Risk of Torture and Ill-Treatment ........9  
VI. International Jurisprudence: UN Tr eaty Bodies and Individual Petitions ...... 15  
VII. European Court of Human Rights................................................................. 17  
VIII. National Courts ........................................................................................... 19  
Netherlands ................................................................................................20  
United Kingdom...........................................................................................20  
DD and AS v. The Secretary of St ate for the Home Department .....................20  
Russia v. Zakaev..........................................................................................22  
Canada........................................................................................................23  
Lai Cheong Sing v. Minister of Citizenship and Immigration..........................23  
Mahjoub v. Minister of Citiz enship and Immigration ....................................23  
IX. UNHCR’s Position on Diplomatic Assu rances and Recognized Refugees ......24   1 
I. Introduction 
1. This intervention by Human Rights Wa tch and the AIRE Centre includes 
commentary on the treatment of Uzbek nationals extradited or otherwise returned to Uzbekistan; analysis of the lack of i ndependent access to places of detention in 
Uzbekistan; and an assessment of the grow ing international recognition of the real 
risk of torture and ill-treatment faced by  persons wanted by the Uzbek authorities. It 
analyzes states’ reliance upon diplomatic assurances against torture and ill-treatment in extradition and other transfer contexts, and includes relevant international, regional, and national jur isprudence regarding the use of assurances 
against torture and ill-treatment.  It provides an analysis on the nexus between reliance on such assurances and the prohibit ion on return to face a real risk of 
treatment prohibited by Article 3.   
II. Treatment of Uzbek Nationals Returned to Uzbekistan 
2. Pressure from the Uzbek government  and possible collusion between Uzbek 
security forces and the security services of several Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) countries has led to the extradition, deportation, or rendition without legal process of dozens of Uzbek refugees either alleged to be associated with the May 2005 Andijan protests and subsequent massacre by Uzbek security forces or perceived to be “independent Muslims”—tha t is, people who practice Islam outside 
state institutions and guidelines.
1  Most of those returned are held for some period in 
incommunicado detention and there has been  little, if any, independent access to 
the returnees.2  The few interviews that have been conducted with returnees, their 
family members, or lawyers indicate that some of the returnees were tortured or ill-
treated upon return to Uzbekistan. Torture and ill-treatment in Uzbekistan are systematic and in the vast majority of cases there is no accountability for torture 
abuses committed by state actors.
3   
                                                      
1Human Rights Watch, “Bullets were Falling Like Rain:”  The Andijan Massacre, May 13, 2005 , volume 17, no. 5(D), June 2005, 
http://hrw.org/reports/2005/uzbekistan0605/.  
2 Amnesty International Report 2007, Uzbekistan, http: //thereport.amnesty.org/eng/Regions/Europe-and-Central-
Asia/Uzbekistan (accessed July 10, 2007).  
3 The applicants’ submissions and response to the Russian government’s observations in the Ismoilov  case include numerous 
references to the longstanding practice of torture in Uzbek istan, which the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture has labeled  2Ill-Treatment of Returnees from Kazakhstan 
3. In November 2005 at least nine Uzbek nationals seeking refuge from religious 
persecution were forcibly returned from K azakhstan to Uzbekistan without any legal 
process.4 All of the men were independent Muslim s. Four of the men were formally 
registered as asylum seekers with th e office of the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Human Rights Watch’s research indicates that 
some of the men were ill-trea ted in Uzbek custody on return: 
• The wife of one returnee told Human Rights Watch that when she first saw her 
husband, two months after his return to  Uzbekistan from Kazakhstan, he told 
her that he was severely beaten by th e security services of both Kazakhstan 
and Uzbekistan.5  He told her they took his clot hes because they were full of 
blood. According to his wife, he was very scared, could hardly speak, and 
had lost a great deal of weight. The returnee’s lawyer told the wife that when the lawyer saw the returnee, he had an  injury to his head but the lawyer 
believed he was coerced to say that he had fallen to explain the bandage on his head. 
• The wife of another returnee told H uman Rights Watch that at the end of 
February 2006, the wives of some of the returnees from Kazakhstan were 
summoned to the Ministry of Internal Affa irs (MVD) and told to “shut up and 
stay at home.”
6 When she saw her husband in March 2006 in a Tashkent 
prison, she said that he made her u nderstand through subtle arm gestures 
that he had been severely beaten. He told  his wife that 20 men lived in his 
cell, there were no mattresses, and the inmates slept in shifts on the ground.  
When he was transferred to the Tashkent prison in January 2006, other inmates demanded that he give them his gold teeth. They beat him until he 
agreed and they extracted all his teeth with “some tool.” He received no 
                                                                                                                                                             
 
“systematic.” See Report of the Special Ra pporteur on Torture, Mission to Uzbek istan, E/CN.4/2003/68/a dd.2, February 2, 
2003, p. 21, para. 68. http://daccess dds.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G03/107/66/PDF/ G0310766.pdf?OpenEle ment  (accessed 
July 10, 2007). 
4 Letter from Human Rights Watch to President Nursultan Naza rbaev, “Kazakhstan: Letter Details Kazakh Involvement in 
Forced Return of Uzbeks,” March 28, 2006, http: //hrw.org/english/docs/2006/03/29/kazakh13092.htm. 
5 Human Rights Watch interview, Tashkent, July 10, 2006. The names of the interviewees have been kept confidential to 
protect their identities. Human Rights Watch retains the full names of all the interviewees in detailed notes on file with Huma n 
Rights Watch. 
6 Human Rights Watch interview, Tashkent, July 15, 2006.   3medical care until four days after this attack when he was taken to the MVD 
for medical evaluation.  His wife told Human Rights Watch, “It was difficult for me to listen to this and I did not want  him to tell me this, but he could not 
stop and we cried together.” 
• The lawyer for another returnee told H uman Rights Watch that she first saw 
her client at the MVD with an investigator and police agent present, in 
January 2006, two months after his return from Kazakhstan:
7 “I asked him, 
somehow with gestures, if they be at him at the MVD and he nodded his 
head.” The lawyer said that the ma n should have been in a pre-trial 
detention center under judicial supervisio n, but he was being kept in the 
basement at the MVD. She saw him aga in in March 2006 and asked him why 
he was wearing a dirty old jacket, to which he replied, “when they kick then 
one wallows on the floor, in such a jacket, one wallows.” 
 
Incommunicado Detention of Uzbe k Refugees Extradited from 
Kyrgyzstan 
4. Between June 2005 and August 2006, the government of Kyrgyzstan returned 
two groups of Uzbek refugees allegedly linked to the May 2005 events in Andijan. In June 2005, four Uzbek nationals registered as asylum seekers with UNHCR in Kyrgyzstan were returned to Uzbekistan. No independent person or group had access 
to the men before their extraditions to  Uzbekistan. The Kyrgyz Ministry of Internal 
Affairs subsequently produced identical statem ents signed by the four men giving 
their consent to be returned to Uzbekist an. UNHCR and the ICRC have been denied 
access to the men in Uzbekistan.  
 5. When all efforts to track the men’s wh ereabouts and treatment in Uzbekistan 
failed, Human Rights Watch in July 2005 referred the men’s cases to the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearanc es (WG). In its response to the WG, 
the Uzbek government said that the men were in a detention facility in Tashkent, charged with committing crimes during the Andijan events of May 13, 2005, and had voluntarily returned to Uzbekistan, making  it unnecessary for the Kyrgyz authorities 
                                                     
 
7 Human Rights Watch interview, Tashkent, July 21, 2006.  4to consider Uzbekistan’s extradition request in full. 8 The fact that the men were 
registered asylum seekers and claimed fear of persecution if returned to Uzbekistan 
seriously undermines the Uzbek authorities’ claim that the men voluntarily returned 
and confessed.  According to Amnesty International, one of the returnees was tortured in prison post-return.
9 
 6. In August 2006 the Kyrgyz government extradited four Uzbek refugees and one asylum seeker to Uzbekistan.
10  The United Nations, United States, and 
European Union had all urged the Kyrgyz author ities not to extradite the men. In the 
conclusions issued following the annual meeting between the EU and the Kyrgyz government in July 2006, the EU expressed “its strong concern over the fate of the …four [refugees], urging the Kyrgyz side to respect its international obligations 
and release them to UNHCR for resettlement.”
11  In December 2006 the German 
government, in its capacity as incoming president of the EU, wrote a letter to the Uzbek government requesting permission to  visit the men in prison. The Uzbek 
authorities refused the request, saying they  would consider the question of a visit 
again at the beginning of 2007. To da te, neither the EU nor any other independent 
actor or organization has been granted access to the men.
12  
 
Illegal Returns from Ukraine  
7. The government of Ukraine extradited 10  Uzbek asylum seekers to Uzbekistan 
in February 2006.13  The Uzbek authorities alleged th at the men were involved in the 
                                                      
8 Letter and Report from the Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances, January 16, 2006, on file with Human 
Rights Watch. 
9 Amnesty International Report 2006, Uzbekistan, http://web .amnesty.org/report2006/uzb-summary-eng (accessed July 5, 
2007). 
10 “Kyrgyzstan: Return of Uzbek Refugees Illegal,” Human Rights Watch news release, August 9, 2006, 
http://hrw.org/english/docs/2006/08/09/kyrgyz13950.htm. 
11 Ibid. 
12 Human Rights Watch interview, Tashkent, July 5, 2007. Th e European diplomat who shared this information with Human 
Rights Watch requested anonymity. 
13 “Ukraine: Uzbek Asylum Seekers Sent Back to Face Abuse,” Human Rights Watch news release, February 17, 2006, 
http://hrw.org/english/docs/2006/02/17/ukrain12686.htm.  5May 2005 events in Andijan. In the immediat e aftermath of the extraditions, UNHCR 
issued a statement deploring the forced return of the group.14   
 8. A group of Ukrainian nongovernmental organizations wrote to the Ukrainian Ministry of Justice in late February 2006 condem ning the extraditions. In a May 3, 
2006 response letter, the ministry acknowledged that torture in Uzbekistan is systematic; the men had a right to appeal against their extraditions, but were not 
given the opportunity; and that UNHCR a nd human rights groups did not have access 
to the men before they were extradited.
15  The ministry concluded that: “The 
extradition request from the Prosecutor’s O ffice of Uzbekistan on the basis of the 
charges for terrorist activities cannot be a sufficient ground for the forced expulsion 
of a refugee without a proper considerat ion of the asylum application about 
persecution [for] political reasons.”16  Despite what appears to be the ministry’s 
acknowledgement of Ukraine’s responsibility f or violating the human rights of the 10 
Uzbek returnees, at least 14 more Uzbek nationals allegedly involved in the Andijan events were returned from Ukraine in April 2006 alone.
17 
 9. While little is known about the trea tment of the returnees from Ukraine (see 
section below on lack of access to returnees), two Uzbek lawyers engaged in defending the men were arrested and charged with fraud in the run-up to the men’s trials. One lawyer was convicted, lost his li cense to practice law for six months, and 
was sentenced to corrective labor.
18 
 
III. No Effective Monitoring of Places of Detention in Uzbekistan 
10. The absence of independent, universal, and transparent monitoring of places 
of detention increases the risk that a person subject to return to Uzbekistan will be 
tortured and ill-treated—and makes it extr emely difficult to track the treatment of 
                                                      
14 “UNHCR Appalled by Deportation of Uzbek Asylum Seekers  from Ukraine,” UNHCR news release, February 16, 2006, 
http://www.unhcr.org/news/ NEWS/43f48dd8c.html (acce ssed July 10, 2007).  
15 Ministry of Justice Response Letter in Ukrainian and English tr anslation by UNHCR Kiev, on file with Human Rights Watch.  
16 Ibid. 
17 Human Rights Watch interview, lawyer for some of the men re turned from Ukraine, Tashkent, April 13, 2006 and June 29, 
2006. The lawyer’s name is on file with Human Rights Watch.   
 18 Human Rights Watch interview, representatives of the Americ an Bar Association’s Europe and Eurasia Program (ABA/CEELI), 
Tashkent, June 26, 2006.   6Uzbek nationals extradited or otherwise transferred from abroad back to Uzbekistan. 
According to the International Crisis Group, “It is virtually impossible to find information about the returnees and guarantee their safety.”
19  Under the 
subheading “disappearance,” the 2007 United States Department of State Country Report on Human Rights Practices in Uzbek istan states:  “There were numerous 
unconfirmed reports of earlier disappearanc es in 2005 of persons who were present 
at the violent disturbances in May 2005 in Andijon. (See section 1.a.). The welfare and whereabouts of several of the refugees who were forcibly returned to the country 
during the year remained unknown.”
20  
 11. In April 2006 the offices of the United Nations High Commissioner for 
Refugees in Uzbekistan were closed on  request of the Uzbek government.
21  It is 
widely believed that UNHCR assistance to refugees from Andijan, including 
facilitating the resettlement of hundreds of  refugees, led to the Uzbek refusal to 
continue to host a UNHCR presence.22 Although the United Nations Development 
Program has assumed responsibility for the material well-being of UNHCR’s refugee 
caseload in Uzbekistan, which is comprised primarily of Afghan refugees, UNDP does not conduct visits to places of detention or track the treatment of persons returned to Uzbekistan from abroad.   12. The International Committee of th e Red Cross (ICRC) does not monitor places 
of detention in Uzbekistan.  The organi zation suspended its activities in 2004 
because the Uzbek government failed to abide by its commitments under its 
agreement with ICRC. Although  the European Union is said to be encouraged that the 
                                                     
 
19 International Crisis Group Policy Briefing, “Uzbekistan: Europe ’s Sanctions Matter,” Asia Briefing No. 54, November 6, 2006, 
p. 7, http://www.internal-
displacement.org/8025708F004CE90B/(h ttpDocuments)/7051343CE5CDC8E6C125728 10031BBEF/$file/ICG_uzbekistan___eu
ropes_sanctions_matte.pdf (accessed July 3, 2007).   
20 US State Department Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, an d Labor, “Country Report on Human Rights Practices 2007: 
Uzbekistan,” March 6, 2007, http: //www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/2006/78848.htm (accessed July 3, 2007). 
21 UNHCR, “Uzbekistan: UNHCR Regrets Office Closure, Alternative Arrangements in Place for Care of Refugee Caseload,” April 
18, 2006, http://www.unh cr.org/news/NEWS/4444cb6516.html  (accessed July 3, 2007).  
22 See International Committee of the Red Cross Annu al Report 2007: Tashkent Regional Delegation, 
http://www.icrc.org/Web/Eng/siteeng0.nsf/ht mlall/738D85/$FILE/icrc_ar _06_tashkent.pdf?OpenEleme nt (accessed July 10, 
2007).   7ICRC will resume visits to places of detention soon, to the best of our knowledge, no 
such resumption of ICRC visits has commenced.23  
 13. The lack of access to returnees should be seen in the context of the Uzbek 
government’s broader campaign of repression of civil society, which has included 
expelling numerous international organizations (e.g. Freedom House and the American Bar Association’s Europe and Euras ia Program, known as  ABA/CEELI) from 
the country—and harassing those few, including  Human Rights Watch, that remain.
24  
 14. The Optional Protocol to the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment  (the Protocol) has been signed by 57 
parties and establishes monitoring mechanisms that ensure independent 
international experts access to places of detention through inspection mechanisms 
similar to those used by the European Commi ttee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT). 
Uzbekistan has neither signed nor ratified the Optional Protocol.  
IV.      International Recognition of Risk of Torture for Persons 
Returned to Uzbekistan 
15. In recognition of the numerous credible  sources on the routine use of torture 
in Uzbekistan, governments in North Amer ica, Europe, and Central Asia have 
acknowledged that returning to Uzbekistan persons detained by these governments and who are wanted by the Uzbek authori ties—either because of their alleged 
association with the May 2005 events in A ndijan or because they are perceived to be 
independent Muslims—would violate their  international legal obligations.  
 
16. Several European governments, including Czech Republic, Germany, Norway, Romania, and Sweden have granted full refugee status or UNHCR-mandated resettlement to Uzbek nationals fleeing  persecution by the Uzbek authorities 
                                                     
 
23 Council Conclusions on Uzbekistan, Ge neral Affairs and External Relations, 
http://www.delkaz.cec.eu.int/j oomla/index.php?optio n=com_content&task=view&id=145 &Itemid=43 (accessed July 5, 
2007). It is important to note that ICRC monitoring is not tran sparent. Its findings are confiden tial and shared only with the 
host government, thus ICRC monitoring wo uld be of little benefit in terms of revealing publicly and with a view toward 
accountability, any breach of diplomatic assurances against torture that may occur post-return.  
24 Letter from Human Rights Watch to EU Foreign Ministers, “EU: Maintain Sanctions on Uzbekistan,” May 7, 2007, 
http://hrw.org/english/docs/2007/05/10/eca15905.htm.  8pursuant to the Andijan events or as a result of their religious or political 
affiliations.25      
 17. In October 2006 the United States abandoned efforts to deport a detained Uzbek national, Bekhzod Yusupov, in reli ance on diplomatic assurances against 
torture from the Uzbek authorities.
26  A US court had previously ruled that it was 
“more likely than not” that Yusupov, an independent Muslim, would be tortured if 
returned to Uzbekistan. In a September 2006 letter, Human Rights Watch and the American Civil Liberties Union reminded the US government that “[i]t is routine for the Uzbek authorities to charge and detain political and religious dissidents (including refugees who fled the country af ter the May 2005 massacre in Andijan) 
with supporting ‘illegal religious movements. ’ Recognizing the high risk of torture 
and other ill-treatment faced by dissidents charged with supporting ‘illegal religious 
movements’ in Uzbekistan, the US Stat e Department has urged other governments 
not to give in to Uzbek demands to repatriate such dissidents.”
27 Human Rights 
Watch and the ACLU argued that any assu rances from the Uzbek authorities would 
be inherently unreliable.  The US reconsidered its misguided effort and in October 2006 informed Yusupov that it was no lon ger seeking “no torture” assurances from 
the government of Uzbekistan.
28   
 18. The government of Kazakhstan rejected an extradition request in July 2005 from Uzbekistan for the transfer of Lu tfullo Shamsudinov, a human rights defender 
and eyewitness to the Andijan massacre.
29 Shamsudinov fled Uzbekistan on May 26, 
2005, fearing torture and persecution at the hands of the Uzbek authorities. He was 
recognized as a refugee by UNHCR in Kazakh stan. On July 12, the Kazakh authorities 
made the decision to turn Shamsudinov and his family over to UNHCR for protection 
and they were flown out of Kazakhstan for resettlement in a safe third country.     
                                                      
25 Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (RFE/RL), “Uzbekistan: Tough Times for Uzbek Refugees Abroad,” February 17, 2006, 
http://www.rferl.org/featuresarticle/2006/0 2/2c995eda-56f6-426d-a490-e743c3547c5d. html (accessed July 3, 2007).   
26 Human Rights Watch, “Cases Involving Diplomatic Assuranc es Against Torture: Developments Since May 2005,” no. 1, 
January 2007, p. 18, http://www.hrw.org/b ackgrounder/eca/eu01 07/eu0107web.pdf.  
27 Ibid. p. 19. 
28 Ibid. 
29 “Central Asia: Follow Kazakh Example,” Human Rights Watch news release, July 14, 2005, 
http://hrw.org/english/docs/ 2005/07/14/uzbeki11323.htm.  9 
19. In August 2006 the Kazakh authori ties released Uzbek national Gabdurafikh 
Temirbaev into the care of the UNHCR, and allowed him and his family to be permanently resettled in a third country.
 30  Gabdurafikh Temirbaev had reportedly 
been in Kazakhstan since 1999, after feeling  persecution in Uzbekistan for his 
religious beliefs.   
V.       The Prohibition on Exp osure to a Real Risk of Torture and Ill-
Treatment 
20. International law is clear: torture and ill-treatment are prohibited absolutely, 
in all situations and at all times, as is the return by extradition, deportation or other transfer of any person under any circumsta nces to a place where she or he is at real 
risk of such abuse (the 
nonrefoulement  obligation).31   
  21. The 
nonrefoulement  obligation clearly applies in the extradition context 
(Soering v. UK ). Some governments have argued that states offering diplomatic 
assurances against torture and ill-treatment to  facilitate extraditions have a greater 
incentive to abide by the guarantees in extradition cases to ensure future 
cooperation in judicial and legal matters.32  It is precisely because the extraditing 
                                                      
30 Amnesty International Annu al Report, Kazakhstan, http://thereport.amnesty.org/eng/Regions/Europe-and-Central-
Asia/Kazakstan (accessed July 11, 2007).  
31 The prohibition is enshrined in Articles 1 and 3 of the UN Conv ention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading 
Treatment or Punishment (CAT); Article 7 of the International Co venant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR); Article 3 of the 
European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights an d Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR); Article 5 of the American 
Convention on Human Rights (ACHR); and Article 5 of the Africa n Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights (Banjul Charter). The 
prohibition against torture has risen to the level of jus cogens  and is a peremptory norm of international law. For the purposes 
of this paper, the word “torture” when used alone includes cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment in 
conformity with the instruments noted above and the UN Huma n Rights Committee’s General Comment No. 20 (1992), which 
states: “In the view of the Committee, States parties must not expose individuals to the danger of torture or cruel, inhuman or  
degrading treatment or punishment upon return to anot her country by way of their extradition, expulsion or refoulement . 
States parties should indicate in their reports what measures they have adopted to that end,” See http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/(Symb ol)/6924291970754969c1256 3ed004c8ae5?Opendocument   (accessed July 10, 
2007).  Though the language of 
nonrefoulement is most commonly associated with the 1951 Convention relating to the Status 
of Refugees and the 1967 Protocol relating to  the Status of Refugees, the obligation of non-refoulement has much broader 
application vis-à-vis the CAT and other instruments referenced abov e, and thus applies to the return of any person at risk of 
torture or ill-treatment, not only refugees. 
32 Reply Letter from Human Rights Watch to Swiss President Calm y-Rey, “Regarding the Use of Diplomatic Assurances in 
Pending Extradition Cases,” June 28, 2007, http ://hrw.org/backgrounder/eca/switzerland0607/.  10government would desire continuing cooperation—particularly in respect to its future 
requests for extradition to its territory—that it  has little, if any, incentive, however, to 
acknowledge a possible breach of diplomat ic assurances, initiate an independent 
and impartial investigation, and hold those responsible for acts of torture accountable. The distinction between th e use of diplomatic assurances in 
deportation or expulsion cases and their use in extradition cases is artificial, and 
ignores an extensive body of research that strongly indicates that diplomatic assurances are an ineffective safeguard against torture and ill-treatment in all transfer contexts where a risk of such abuse exists.     
 22. The judiciary in Canada (
Pacificador v. Canada ), Germany ( In re Metin Kaplan ), 
Netherlands ( In re Nuriye Kesbir ), and United Kingdom ( Russia v. Zakaev ) have 
stayed or halted formal extraditions be cause diplomatic assurances obtained by the 
executive were determined to be unreliable and insufficient to mitigate the acknowledged risk of torture and ill-treatment.
 33  These courts have concluded that 
there is little added incentive for a governm ent to abide by its assurances when the 
proposed transfer takes place in the extradition context.  These cases underscore that formal extradition offers no additional protection for a person subject to return, 
particularly for transfers to countries where torture and ill-treatment are endemic or 
where specific groups are routinely targeted for such abuse.    23. An extradited person would almost certainly go directly into the requesting government’s criminal justice or internal security system, the very locales where 
clandestine acts of torture and ill-treatment are  most likely to occur.  As some of the 
                                                     
 
33 These cases are documented in Human Rights Watch’s extens ive research on diplomatic assurances, including: Human 
Rights Watch, Cases Involving Diplomatic  Assurances Against Torture: Developmen ts Since May 2005, no. 1, January 2007, 
http://www.hrw.org/backgrounder/ eca/eu0107/eu0107web.pdf; Human Rights Watch,  Diplomatic Assurances Against Torture: 
Questions and Answers, November 2006, http://hrw.org/backg rounder/eca/ecaqna1106/ecaqna1106web.pdf; Human Rights 
Watch, Still at Risk: Diplomatic Assurances No Safeguard Against Torture , vol. 17, no. 4(D), April 2005, 
http://hrw.org/reports/2005/eca0405/eca0405.pdf; Human Rights Watch, Empty Promises: Diplomatic Assurances No 
Safeguard Against Torture , vol. 16, no. 4(D), April 2004, http://hrw.org /reports/2004/un0404/diplomatic0404.pdf.  These 
reports and briefing papers are attached as appendices to this intervention.   All of Human Rights Watch’s work on diplomatic 
assurances can be found at http://hrw.org/doc/?t=da.  In th e case of Metin Kaplan, the German government eventually 
deported Kaplan to Turkey in October 2004.  In May 2003, ho wever, a German court halted his extradition based on human 
rights concerns, including the insufficiency of diplomatic as surances against torture and unfair trial from the Turkish 
authorities. In response to the judgment, the German authorit ies vowed that they would find a way to remove Kaplan.  See 
Human Rights Watch, Empty Promises,  pp. 31-32; Human Rights Watch, Still at Risk , p. 72; and Human Rights Watch, Cases 
Involving Diplomatic Assurances, pp. 9-10.  11testimonies above illustrate (see section above on treatment of returnees in 
Uzbekistan), the dynamics of torture, the absence of basic procedural safeguards, 
the lack of independent access to detainees, a nd the absence of accountability for 
acts of torture in states where torture is practiced are all factors that militate against compliance with diplomatic assurances by  the state requesting extradition.  
 24. The growing weight of evidence and of international expert opinion indicates that diplomatic assurances cannot protect pe ople at risk of torture from such 
treatment on return, whether by extradit ion or otherwise.  Many of the governments 
offering diplomatic assurances have long histories and continuing records of employing torture, a fact that most sending governments acknowledge.  Governments with poor records on torture routinely deny that torture 
is used and fail to initiate investigations when allegations of torture are made. There 
is no reason to suppose that these governments, which persistently breach the international ban on torture, would k eep their promises not to torture a single 
individual. In a June 2006 article, Council of Europe Human Rights Commissioner Thomas Hammarberg stated:  
The governments concerned have already violated binding 
international norms and it is plain wron g to subject anyone to the risk 
of torture on the basis of an even less solemn undertaking to make an 
exception in an individual case.
34 
 
25. Torture is criminal activity of the most serious kind. It is practiced in secret using techniques that often defy detec tion (for example, mock drowning, sexual 
assault, internal use of electricity). The Court is aware that in many countries, including Uzbekistan, returned persons are often held incommunicado, without access to lawyers, family members, a nd the media (see paragraph 108 of the 
Mamatkulov  judgment).  Even when lawyers are given permission to see their clients, 
interviews are often conducted in the pr esence of prison officials and security 
services personnel in breach of Articles 6 §3(c) and 8. Under these circumstances, 
                                                      
34 Thomas Hammarberg, Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights, “Viewpoints: Torture Can Never, Ever Be 
Accepted,” June 27, 2006, h ttp://www.coe.int/t/commissioner/Viewpoints/060 626_en.asp (accessed July 5, 2007).   12detainees subjected to torture are often afraid to complain to anyone about the 
abuse for fear of reprisals against them or their family members.    26. Maher Arar, a Canadian-Syrian citizen sent back to Syria from the United States based on diplomatic assurances, personally experienced this dilemma.  In 
September 2002 US authorities apprehended Arar at JFK airport, in transit from 
Tunisia through New York to Canada, where he had lived for many years.
 After 
holding him for nearly two weeks, US immigration authorities flew Arar to Jordan, where he was driven across the border a nd handed over to the Syrians. The US 
government claimed that prior to Arar’s transfer, it obtained diplomatic assurances from the Syrian government that Arar would not be tortured upon return.
35 After his 
release in late October 2002, Arar told a gru esome tale of abuse and torment that 
included severe beatings, incarceration in a tomb-like cell infested with rats, and 
psychological abuse. During a visit by Ca nadian consular officials in October 2002, 
Arar said that he was taken from his cell and his beard was shaved:  
The interrogation and beating ended three days before I had my first 
consular visit. . .I was told not to te ll anything about the beating, then I 
was taken into a room for a ten minute meeting with the consul. The colonel was there, and three other Syrian officials including an 
interpreter. I cried a lot at that meeting. I could not say anything about 
the torture. I thought if I did, I would not get any more visits, or I might be beaten again…The consular visits were my lifeline, but I also found them very frustrating. There were seven consular visits, and one visit from members of Parliament. After th e visits I would bang my head and 
my fist on the wall in frustration. I needed the visits, but I could not say 
anything there.
36 
 
27. The final report of a special Canadian commission of inquiry into Canada’s 
role in Arar’s transfer confirmed that Arar “liv ed through a nightmare” of torture while 
imprisoned in Syria, with profound, devastating, and continuing effects on his 
                                                      
35 Human Rights Watch, Still at Risk , April 2005, pp. 33-36.  
36 Maher Arar’s Statement, CanWest News Service, November 4, 2003, 
http://www.informationclearingho use.info/article5156.htm (a ccessed July 9, 2007).   13physical, psychological, social, and economic well-being.  On the issue of diplomatic 
assurances, the commission acknowledged that  Arar’s case is a clear example of the 
problems inherent in relying on diplomatic assurances against torture.37  
  28. Even if a detainee does complain of abuse, there is no accountability for 
torture in many countries where torture is routinely used, including Uzbekistan, in breach of Article 12 of the UN Convent ion Against Torture. Occasional post-return 
monitoring by diplomats from the s ending country is thus unlikely to provide 
protection against torture and ill-trea tment (see also paragraphs 35-38 below 
concerning Agiza).  29. A number of high-level international experts have opposed reliance on 
diplomatic assurances against torture and ill- treatment in the extradition context.  In 
a February 2006 speech, the United Nati ons High Commissioner on Human Rights 
stated categorically that the absolute prohibition on return to risk of torture and ill-treatment included transfer by extradition and that assurances should not be relied 
upon in any transfer context.
38  In a March 2006 letter from the High Commissioner 
opposing the establishment of guidelines for the use of assurances against torture in 
the Council of Europe region, the High Commissioner stated, “I strongly share the 
view that diplomatic assurances do no t work as they do not provide adequate 
protection against torture and ill-treatment.”39 
    30. In its final report of January 30, 2007, the European Parliament’s Temporary 
Committee on illegal CIA activity in Europe (TDIP) called on European Union member 
states to rule out the acceptance of mere  diplomatic assurances from third countries 
“as a basis for any legal extradition prov ision, where there are substantial grounds 
                                                     
 
37 Commission of Inquiry into the Actions of Canadian Officials in Relation to Maher Arar, “Report of the Events Relating to 
Maher Arar,” September 18, 2006, p. 176,  fn. 19, http://www.ararcommission.ca/en g/AR_English.pdf , (accessed July 10, 
2007). 
38 Speech by Louise Arbour, UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, “In Our Name and On Our Behalf,” Chatham House, 
February 15, 2006, http://www.chathamhouse.org.uk/pdf/research/il/ILParbour.pdf (accessed July 5, 2007). 
39 Statement by UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Louise Arbo ur to the Council of Europe’s Group of Experts on Human 
Rights and the Fight Against Terrorism (DH-S-TER), Marc h 29-31, 2006, on file with Human Rights Watch.  14for believing that individuals would be in da nger of being subjected to torture or ill-
treatment.”40 
 31. The UN Special Rapporteur on Torture has stated his firm opposition to reliance upon diplomatic assurances against torture and ill-treatment in all transfer contexts, expressing concern that this practice reflects a tendency on the part of states to circumvent the international obligation not to deport a person if there is a serious risk that he or she might be subjected to torture.
41  Specifically referring to 
the situation of torture in Uzbekistan and returns to torture effected in reliance upon diplomatic assurances from the Uzbek auth orities, the special rapporteur has stated: 
 
[T]he practice of torture in Uzbekistan is systematic, as indicated in the 
report of my predecessor Theo van Boven's visit to the country in 2002.  
Lending support to this finding, my mandate continues to receive serious allegations of torture by Uzbek law enforcement officials…Moreover, with respect to  the events in May 2005 in Andijan, 
the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights reported that there is strong, consistent and credible testimony to the effect that Uzbek military and security forces committed grave human rights violations there. The fact that the Government has rejected an international 
inquiry into the Andijan events, ind ependent scrutiny of the related 
proceedings, and that there is no internationally accepted account of the events, is deeply worrying. Against  such significant, serious and 
credible evidence of systematic torture by law enforcement officials in Uzbekistan, I continue to find myself appealing to Governments to refrain from transferring persons to Uzbekistan. The prohibition of torture is absolute, and States risk violating this prohibition—their obligations under international law—by transferring persons to countries where they may be at risk of torture. 
I reiterate that 
diplomatic assurances are not legally binding, undermine existing 
                                                      
40 European Parliament Temporary Committee on Illegal CIA Activi ty in Europe, Final Report on the Alleged Use of European 
Countries by the CIA for the Transportation and Illegal Detention of Prisoners, Janu ary 30, 2007, p. 8, para. 
21, http://www.europarl.europa.eu/co mparl/tempcom/tdip/final _report_en.pdf (accessed July 10, 2007).  
41 United Nations, Press Conference by  United Nations Representative on Torture Convention, October 23, 2006, 
http://www.un.org/News/briefings/docs/2006/06102 3_Nowak.doc.htm (access ed July 10, 2007).  15obligations of States to prohibit torture, are ineffective and unreliable 
in ensuring the protection of retur ned persons, and therefore shall not 
be resorted to by States (emphasis added).42  
 
32. Moreover, the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture’s 15th General 
Report expressed concern about reliance on  diplomatic assurances in light of the 
absolute prohibition against torture: “Fe ars are growing that the use of diplomatic 
assurances is in fact circumventing the prohib ition of torture and ill-treatment. The 
seeking of diplomatic assurances from countries with a poor overall record in 
relation to torture and ill-treatment is giving rise to particular concern.”43 
 
VI. International Jurisprudence: UN Treaty Bodies and Individual 
Petitions 
33. United Nations treaty-bodies have  considered three individual petitions 
involving transfers to risk of torture and diplomatic assurances. In each case, the 
Committee has determined that the diplomat ic assurances against torture did not 
provide an effective safeguard against abus e and the transfer thus violated the 
nonrefoulement obligation enshrined in human rights law under Article 3 of the UN 
Convention Against Torture and Other Cr uel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or 
Punishment and/or Article 7 of the Intern ational Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights.     34. In the June 2007 UN Committee Against Torture case of 
Pelit v.  Azerbaijan , the 
Committee determined that Azerbaijan’s Octo ber 2006 extradition to Turkey of Elif 
Pelit violated Article 3 of the Convention Against Torture, despite diplomatic assurances of humane treatment from the Tu rkish authorities prior to her transfer.
44  
Pelit, alleged by the Turkish authorities to  be associated with the PKK (Kurdish 
                                                      
42 Statement of the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture Manfred Nowak to the 2nd Session of the UN Human Rights Council, 
Geneva, September 20, 2006,  
http://www.unhchr.ch/huricane/huricane .nsf/0/57A079661D6696A1C1257 1F10046A4E5?opendocument  (accessed July 5, 
2007).  
43 European Committee for the Prevention of Torture, 15th General Report on the CPT’s Activities, covering the period 1 August 
2004 to 31 July 2005, CPT/Inf (2005) 17, paras. 38-39, http: //www.cpt.coe.int/en/annual/rep-1 5.htm (accessed July 9, 2007). 
44 United Nations Committee Against Torture, Pelit v. Azerbaijan,  Communication No. 281/2005, CAT/C/38/D/281/2005, June 5, 
2007, http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/cat/decision s/281-2005.html (accessed June 25, 2007).  16Worker’s Party), had been granted refugee status by Germany in 1998 based on her 
claims of having been tortured in detentio n in Turkey between 1993 and 1996. The 
Committee found Azerbaijan in violation of Ar ticle 3, despite the State party’s claim 
that it had monitored Pelit’s treatment post-return and claim that in a private 
conversation with an Azeri embassy represent ative after her return, Pelit “confirmed 
that she had not been subjected to torture or ill-treated by the penitentiary authorities.”
45 The Committee Against Torture in Pelit  questioned why the Azeri 
authorities failed to respect Pelit’s refugee status, particularly “in circumstances where the general situation of perso ns such as the complainant and the 
complainant's own past experiences raised real issues under Article 3.”
46  
  35. In another proceeding, the Committee Against Torture and UN Human Rights 
Committee both considered individual peti tions from asylum seekers Mohammed al-
Zari and Ahmed Agiza, who were transfe rred from Stockholm to Cairo in December 
2001 in the custody of CIA agents aboard a United States government-leased airplane.
47 The government of Sweden expelled al-Z ari and Agiza, both suspected of 
terrorist activities, following written assu rances from the Egyptian authorities that 
the men would not be subject to the death pe nalty, tortured or ill-treated, and that 
they would receive fair trials. Swedish and Egyptian authorities also agreed on a post-return monitoring mechanism inv olving visits to the men in prison. 
  36. The Human Rights Committee in No vember 2006 concluded that Sweden’s 
involvement in the transfer of Mohammed al-Z ari to Egypt breached the absolute ban 
on torture, despite assurances of humane treatment provided by the Egyptian 
authorities prior to the men’s transfer. The Committee stated that Sweden “has not 
shown that the diplomatic assurances procured were in fact sufficient in the present 
case to eliminate the risk of ill-treatment to a level consistent” with the ban on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
48 
 
                                                      
45 Ibid., para. 9.4. 
46 Ibid., para. 11. 
47 Human Rights Watch, Still at Risk , pp. 57-66. 
48 UN Human Rights Committee, Decision: Alzery v. Sweden, CCPR/C/88/D/1416/2005, November 10, 2006, 
http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/0ac7e03e4fe8f2bdc125 698a0053bf66/13fac9ce4f35d 66dc12572220049e394?OpenDocu
ment  (accessed July 2, 2007), para. 11.5.  1737. That decision followed a May 2005 determination by the Committee Against 
Torture in Ahmed Agiza’s case. The Committ ee held that Sweden violated the ban on 
torture with respect to Ahmed Agiza’s t ransfer, stating that the “procurement of 
diplomatic assurances [from Egypt], whic h, moreover, provided no mechanism for 
their enforcement, did not suffice to  protect against this manifest risk.”49 
 38. In the al-Zari and Agiza cases, it is important to note that Swedish diplomats conducted dozens of post-return monitoring  visits. The men complained of torture 
and other abuse during the first such visit, but the government of Sweden redacted those complaints from the official monitoring report and failed to share that information with the Committee Against Torture. An unedited version of the first monitoring report was obtained by a Swedish television station and only made 
public two years after the men were retu rned to Egypt. The Swedish government thus 
went to great lengths to keep the men’ s abuse secret—and the Egyptian government 
denied that the men were ill-treated and refused to conduct an investigation when their allegations of torture came to light.   These dynamics amply demonstrate the 
futility of relying on diplomatic assurances against torture for transfers to countries where such abuse is not only rou tinely practiced, but routinely denied. 
      
VII. European Court of Human Rights 
39. The absolute prohibition against transferring a person, including by 
extradition, to a place where he or she is at  risk of torture has been confirmed in the 
jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights ( Chahal v. UK , et al.). The 
Chahal decision also cautions against reliance on diplomatic assurances against 
torture from a state where torture is endem ic or persistent, or where the authorities 
in the state of return do not have effe ctive control over those state actors who 
perpetrate acts of torture.   40. The Grand Chamber in 
Mamatkulov and Askarov v. Turkey  expressly linked 
the Article 34/Rule 39 violation—Turkey’s precipitous extradition of the men to 
Uzbekistan, despite an order from the Court for interim measures—to the fact that it 
                                                      
49 UN Committee Against Torture, Decision: Agiza v. Sweden, CAT/C/34/D/233/2003, May 20, 2005, 
http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/cat/ decisions/233-2003.html (accessed July 2, 2007), para. 13.4.  18did not have before it sufficient evidence to conclude that an Article 3 violation had 
occurred. The Court said that since the men were extradited in violation of Article 34, they had no meaningful opportunity to place before the Court evidence that could have substantiated an Article 3 violation:  
In the present case, the applicants were extradited and thus, by 
reason of their having lost contact with their lawyers, denied an 
opportunity to have further inquiries made in order for evidence in support of their allegations under Article 3 of the Convention to be obtained. As a consequence, the Court was prevented from properly assessing whether the applicants were exposed to a real risk of ill-treatment and, if so, from ensuring in this respect a “practical and effective” implementation of the Convention's safeguards, as required 
by its object and purpose.
50 
 
41. The Court in Mamatkulov  recognized that it was unable to conduct a proper 
assessment of the Article 3 issue.  The dissenting judges in Mamatkulov  found a 
violation of Article 3, stating that “…an assurance, even one given in good faith, that an individual will not be subjected to ill-treatment is not of itself a sufficient safeguard where doubts exist as to its effective implementation.”
51  
 42. In 
Shamayev and Others v. Georgia and Russia  the Court found that the 
evidence was insufficient to find a violation of Article 3 and instead found that the Georgian government had violated Article 34 by extraditing five individuals to Russia, 
in spite of the Court’s request for interim measures.
52  Where a person has already 
been extradited or otherwise transferred (as opposed to being threatened with 
extradition or transfer) and there is insuffi cient evidence to establish an Article 3 
violation, the Court, therefore, has always chosen to censure the state by finding a 
                                                      
50 Mamatkulov and Askarov v. Turkey , (Application nos. 46827/99 and 46951/99), February 4, 2005, p. 32, para. 108, 
http://cmiskp.echr.coe.int////tkp197/viewhbkm.asp?actio n=open&table=F69A27FD8FB86142BF01C1166DEA398649&key=9
835&sessionId=1270741&skin=hudoc-en&attac hment=true (accessed July 10, 2007). 
51 Ibid., Joint Partly Dissenting Opinion of Judges Sir Nicolas  Bratza, Bonello and Hedigan, pp. 46-47, para. 10.  
52 Shamayev and Others v. Georgia and Russia , (Application no. 36378/02), April 12, 2005, 
http://cmiskp.echr.coe.int/tkp197/vi ew.asp?item=7&portal=hbkm&action=html&highlight=shamayev%20%7C%2036378/0
2&sessionid=1270984&skin=hudoc-pr -en (accessed July 10, 2007).  19violation of Article 34 for failure to co mply with Rule 39 indications.  This procedural 
safeguard, however, is merely a legal me chanism and not a statement that 
diplomatic assurances can trump a real risk of torture. In fact, there has been no 
case in which a state has extradited or otherwise transferred a person based on, 
inter alia , diplomatic assurances against torture and ill-treatment where the Court 
has ruled that the transfer was in full compliance with the Convention.  43. Finally, in 
Salah Sheekh v. Netherlands  the Court held that there would be a 
violation of Article 3 if a Somali national seeking asylum in the Netherlands were forcibly returned to Somalia.
53 This violation was found in part because the Dutch 
government could not ensure the safety of  the Somali national upon return, even 
though the areas to which the asylum seek er would be returned were “relatively 
safe.” While this case did not concern extradition or diplomatic assurances, the 
Court was unwilling to rely on the Dutch government’s assessment of the situation in 
Somalia, especially as the Dutch government had no way in which to monitor treatment post-return.
54 Therefore, in the Article 3 context the government’s pre-
return assurances about the post-return safety of the returnee appeared to be 
deemed insufficient.  
VIII. National Courts 
44. Since the 1990s, courts in several member states and in Canada considering extradition requests and deportations have ruled that diplomatic assurances against 
torture and ill-treatment did not provide an effective safeguard against such abuse 
and halted transfers in these contexts. The following profiles of such cases indicate that courts rightly view diplomatic assurances of humane treatment from states that practice torture as inherently unreliable a nd insufficient to protect against Article 3 
violations:    
                                                     
 
53 Salah Sheekh v. the Netherlands , (Application no. 1948/04), January 11, 2007,  
http://cmiskp.echr.coe.int////tkp197/viewhbkm.asp?actio n=open&table=F69A27FD8FB86142BF01C1166DEA398649&key=6
0417&sessionId=1271423&skin= hudoc-en&attachment=true (accessed July 10, 2007).  
54 Ibid., paras. 46 and 143.  20Netherlands 
45. On September 15, 2006, the Dutch Su preme Court upheld a Court of Appeal 
decision preventing the extradition of  a Kurdish woman wanted in Turkey.55 Nuriye 
Kesbir, an official of the PKK then resident in the Netherlands, was the subject of an 
extradition warrant from Turkey alleging th at she had committed war crimes as a PKK 
military operative during the time she fought in the civil war in Turkey’s southeast. In 
May 2004 a Dutch district court determined that although her fears of torture and unfair trial in Turkey were not completely unfounded, there were insufficient grounds 
to halt the extradition. The Court gave ex clusive authority to the government to either 
grant or reject the extradition request, but advised the Dutch minister of justice to 
seek enhanced diplomatic assurances against torture and unfair trial from Turkey.   46. The Dutch Court of Appeal ruled on January 20, 2005, against Kesbir’s extradition, concluding that diplomatic assurances could not guarantee that she 
would not be tortured or ill-treated upon return to Turkey. On September 15, 2006, 
the Dutch Supreme Court upheld the decision of the Court of Appeal barring Kesbir’s 
extradition to Turkey. The Supreme Cour t issued a statement, concluding that “an 
extradition could result in a breach of  European human rights laws” since Kesbir 
“runs a real risk of being tortured or suffe ring inhumane or humiliating treatment” if 
returned to Turkey.
56  The Supreme Court accepted the Court of Appeal’s reasoning 
that the diplomatic assurances against torture and ill-treatment offered by Turkey were insufficient to prevent such abu se were Kesbir to be returned.   
 
United Kingdom 
DD and AS v. The Secretary of State for the Home Department 
47. A British court ruled on April 27, 2 007, that two terrorism suspects cannot be 
returned safely to Libya, despite promises of humane treatment from the Libyan government.
57 The Special Immigration Appeals Commission (SIAC) ruled that Libyan 
guarantees of humane treatment and fair trials for the men upon return were not 
                                                      
55 Human Rights Watch, Cases Involving Diplomatic Assurances, January 2007, 
http://www.hrw.org/backg rounder/eca/eu0107/5 .htm#_Toc156894656. 
56 “Dutch Court Blocks Extradition of PKK Leader,” Reuters News, September 15, 2006. 
57 DD and AS v. The Secretary of State for the Home Department ,  SC/42 and 50/2005, April 27, 2007, 
http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/SIAC/2007/4 2_2005.html (accessed July 10, 2007).  21reliable. In a “memorandum of understanding” (MOU) signed by the UK and Libyan 
governments in 2005, Tripoli gave assurances that no person returned under the 
MOU’s terms would be subjected to abuse.     48. The Court concluded that the men, know n only as “DD” and “AS,” would be at 
risk of torture and a “complete” denial of a fair trial if returned to Libya. They are 
alleged to be members of the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group (LIFG), an armed 
opposition group whose aim is the overth row of Libyan leader Muammar al-
Qadhafi.  The SIAC concluded that t orture is “extensively used against political 
opponents among whom Islamist extremists a nd LIFG members are the most hated 
by the Libyan Government, the Security  Organisations and above all by Colonel 
Qadhafi.” It also noted that the inco mmunicado detention of political opponents, 
often without trial for many years, “is a disfiguring feature of Libyan justice and 
punishment.”     49. The UK government argued that the Libyan government would respect the guarantees in the MOU in order to maintain good relations with Europe and the United States. But the SIAC ruled that the assurances in the memorandum are vulnerable to breach because the Libyan government continues to use 
incommunicado detention and tortur e against prisoners and detainees. 
  50. The SIAC decision in the Libyan cases is in contrast to a February 2007 decision by the same court, which accept ed that a similar agreement between Jordan 
and the UK was reliable.
58 However, Human Rights Watch has also documented the 
routine reliance on torture and abuse by  the Jordanian internal security division.59  
The United Nations special rapporteur on  torture confirmed these findings in his 
most recent report on Jordan.60 Appeals are pending in both cases. 
  
                                                     
 
58 Omar Othman (aka Abu Qatada) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department , SC/15/2005, February 26, 2007. 
59 Human Rights Watch, United Kingdom: Human Rights Watc h Statement in Omar Othman (Abu Qatada) Case, May 2006, 
http://www.hrw.org/backgroun der/eca/ecaqna1106/witnessstatementjuliahall.pdf.  
60 UN Special Rapporteur on Torture, Mission to  Jordan, A/HRC/4/33/Add.3, January 5, 2007, 
http://daccessdds.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G07/101/07/PDF/G0 710107.pdf?OpenElement (acc essed July 11, 2007).   22Russia v. Zakaev 
51. In 2003 Bow Street Magistrates’ Court in London considered Russia’s 
extradition request for the surrender of  Akhmed Zakaev, an envoy for the Chechen 
government in exile, for alleged crimes committed in Chechnya in 1995 and 1996.61 
The Deputy Minister responsible for the Russian prison system gave testimony in 
court that Zakaev would come to no harm  in detention in Russia. The Court accepted 
that the trial process in Russia might be fa ir, but focused on “the conditions in which 
Mr. Zakaev would be likely to be detained and to consider whether they would have 
any prejudicial effect on his trial,” in particu lar whether he would be at risk of torture 
if surrendered.62 The Court considered material from the European Committee for the 
Prevention of Torture and the UN Committee Against Torture expressing concern about the continuing practice of torture a nd ill-treatment by Russian law enforcement 
officers operating in Chechnya.   52. In addition to testimony from form er Russian officials about the specific 
vulnerability of Chechens in the Russian criminal justice system, including the 
increased risk to a near certainty that they will be tortured or ill-treated, the Court heard evidence from a credible witness who said he made a statement, extracted under torture, to Russian authorities im plicating Zakaev in the crimes of which he 
was accused. The Court gave particular weight to this evidence and came to the “inevitable conclusion” that if the Russian au thorities resorted to torturing a witness, 
“there is a substantial risk that Mr. Zakae v would himself be subject to torture;”
63 
and that such treatment would be met ed out as a consequence of Mr. Zakaev’s 
nationality and political beliefs.   53. In refusing to accept Russian diplomatic assurances, the Court in 
Zakaev  
relied on the fact that torture is widespre ad in Russia; that Chechens, in particular, 
are more likely than not to be tortured; that the Russian government could not have 
effective control over the vast prison system in such a manner as to guarantee that 
                                                      
61 The Government of the Russian Federation v. Akhmed Zakaev , Bow Street Magistrates’ Court, Decision of Hon. T. Workman, 
November 13, 2003, http://www.tjetjenien.org/Bo wstreetmag.htm (accessed July 10, 2007). 
62 Ibid., p. 7.  
63 Ibid., p. 10.  23Zakaev will not be tortured; and that Ru ssian guarantees of placement in a specific 
detention facility could not be relied upon. Extradition was refused.   
Canada 
Lai Cheong Sing v. Minister of Citizenship and Immigration 
54. In May 2006 the Federal Court of Canada  halted the deportation of Lai Cheong 
Sing, accused by the Chinese authorities of smuggling and bribery.64 The Chinese 
government offered diplomatic assurances against his execution and torture, notwithstanding the fact that co-defendant s in Lai’s case had already been executed 
and family members of the co-defendants ill-treated in China. Acknowledging the 
pervasive practice of torture and the use of the death penalty in China, the Court 
halted Lai’s imminent deportation stating, “T he issue of assurances lies at the heart 
of the debate” and that there was a serious likelihood of jeopardy to Lai’s life or safety if he were returned to China.
65  
 
Mahjoub v. Minister of Citizenship and Immigration 
55. On December 14, 2006, a Canadian federal court ordered the government to 
conduct a new risk assessment with respect to a January 2006 decision by the minister of immigration and citizenship to  deport Egyptian national Mohammad Zeki 
Mahjoub, in detention under a security certificate since June 2000 and a recognized 
refugee.
66  The Court concluded that the gover nment “consistently ignored critical 
evidence, failed to take important factors into consideration and arbitrarily relied on selected evidence. This flawed approach can be considered nothing short of patently 
unreasonable with regard to the su bstantial risk of torture issue.”
67  With respect to 
the Egyptian government’s diplomatic assurances that Mahjoub would not be tortured or otherwise ill-treated upon return, the Court agreed with Mahjoub that the 
                                                     
 
64 Federal Court of Canada, Lai Cheong Sing v. Minister of Citizenship and Immigration , 2006 FC 672, June 1, 2006, 
http://decisions.fct-cf.gc.ca/en/2006/2006fc672/ 2006fc672.html (accessed July 10, 2007).  
65 Ibid., para. 27. 
66Mohammad Zeki Mahjoub v. Minister of Citizenship and Immigration , IMM-98-06, 2006 FC 1503, December 14, 2006, p. 37, 
para. 97, http://cas-ncr-nter03.cas-satj.gc.ca/fct-c f/docs/IMM-98-06.pdf (acce ssed July 10, 2007). 
67 Ibid.  24government “disregarded the bulk of evidence f rom a multitude of sources that cited 
Egypt’s non-compliance with assurances.”68    
 
IX. UNHCR’s Position on Diplomatic Assurances and Recognized 
Refugees 
56. According to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, a host 
State’s obligation to respect the principle of nonrefoulement as guaranteed under 
Article 33 of the 1951 Convention Relat ing to the Status of Refugees (Refugee 
Convention) applies to persons who have been recognized as refugees by its own asylum authorities and persons determined to be refugees by UNHCR through 
UNHCR’s “refugee status determination ” (RSD) procedures.
69  In cases where a 
refugee who enjoys the protection of Article  33(1) of the 1951 Refugee Convention is 
threatened with, or subject to, refoulement  to her or his country of origin, whether 
directly or indirectly, UNHCR has stated that diplomatic assurances against torture 
and ill-treatment should be given “no weight. ”70 In such cases, the country of 
refuge or UNHCR through its RSD procedur es has already made a determination in 
the individual case and recognized the refug ee to have a well-founded fear of being 
persecuted in the country of origin. Once refugee status has been conferred, “it 
would be fundamentally inconsistent with the protection afforded by the 1951 
Convention for the sending State to look to  the very agent of persecution for 
assurance that the refugee will be well-treated upon refoulement .”71  
                                                      
68 Ibid., p. 35, para. 88. 
69 Under its international protection mandate, UNHCR may cond uct refugee status determination where this is required for 
protection reasons. UNHCR’s authority to do so derives from the Office’s 1950 Statute (annexed to General Assembly 
resolution 428 (V) of 14 December 1950), as developed and ref ined in subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly 
and the Economic and Social Council.  
70 UNHCR, “Note on Diplomatic Assurances and International Re fugee Protection,” p. 13, para . 30, http://www.unhcr.org/cgi-
bin/texis/vtx/refworld/rwmain /opendocpdf.pdf?docid=44dc81164 (accessed July 2, 2007). 
71 Ibid. 