"No Justice Just Adds to the Pain": Killings, Disappearances, and Impunity in the Philippines | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload summary and recommendations: photo featureDownload the response letter from Director General Raul M. Bacalzo of the Philippine National PoliceDownload the summary and recommendations in TagalogDownload the full reportDonate NowDownloadsDownload summary and recommendations: photo featureDownload the response letter from Director General Raul M. Bacalzo of the Philippine National PoliceDownload the summary and recommendations in TagalogDownload the full reportJuly 18, 2011"No Justice Just Adds to the Pain"Killings, Disappearances, and Impunity in the PhilippinesThis 96-page report details strong evidence of military involvement in seven killings and three enforced disappearances of leftist activists since President Benigno Aquino III took office on June 30, 2010.SummaryArmedmen [in military uniforms] entered the house and immediately began beating Totowith their rifles. They beat him continuously; he was trying to escape …but they kept pulling him back and beating him…. Then they shot him.—“Jaime,”a witness to the October 1, 2010 killing of leftist activist Rene QuiranteCases of extrajudicial killings need to be solved, not justidentify the perpetrators but have them captured and sent to jail.[1]—Benigno Aquino III, June 1, 2010, then Philippinepresident-electIt is almost four years now. My family is living in agony.It is torture on my part, financial, emotional, psychological. The only normalpart of my life now is the abnormality around my daughter Karen’sdisappearance.—Concepcion Empeño, whose daughter wasallegedly abducted by soldiers on June 26, 2006, and has not been seen sinceOn the morning of July 5, 2010, Fernando Baldomero becamethe first reported victim of an extrajudicial killing under President BenignoAquino III’s newly minted administration.Baldomero—the provincial coordinator of the leftistBayan Muna political party, and a town councilor in Lezo, Aklanprovince—was leaving home to take his 12-year-old son to school when agunman approached, aimed a .45 caliber pistol at the 61-year-old, and shot himin the head and neck before fleeing on a motorcycle.Two decades earlier, Baldomero had been a member of the NewPeople’s Army (NPA), the armed wing of the Communist Party of thePhilippines (CPP), but had left the NPA following his release from prison in1994. Police and the military had continued to tag Baldomero as an NPA member.In the days before he was killed, several witnesses had seen men in militaryuniforms around Baldomero’s residence.Charges have been filed against the alleged gunman, acivilian, but police have not pursued evidence of military involvement. Norhave they executed the court’s January 10, 2011 arrest warrant, leavingthe alleged gunman at large.During his campaign for president, Benigno Aquino IIIpledged to end serious violations of human rights in the Philippines. Yet sincetaking office on June 30, 2010, the Philippine military continues to beimplicated in apparently politically-motivated extrajudicial killings—deliberateunlawful killings by state security forces—and enforced disappearances.These abuses persist in part because of the Philippine police’s failureto conduct thorough and impartial investigations, particularly when evidencepoints to military involvement. The ability to bring the perpetrators tojustice has also been hindered by the Justice Department’s inadequateprotection program for witnesses, who have been subject to harassment andintimidation.Human Rights Watch has documented seven extrajudicialkillings implicating the military and three enforced disappearances of leftistactivists since Aquino took office. We were not able to investigate severalother suspected extrajudicial killings reported by local media due to timeconstraints. In addition to recent abuses, this report also examines thegovernment’s lackluster efforts to investigate and prosecute serioushuman rights violations perpetrated during the last decade, and thestate’s continuing failure to hold perpetrators accountable.Baldomero’skilling has a familiar ring to it. Like many of the victims of killings and“disappearances” detailed in this report, Baldomero was a leftistactivist. Some, like Baldomero, were previously members of the CPP-NPA.However, in none of these cases is there evidence they were still NPA membersor actively participating in combat at the time of the killing.Like Baldomero, several victims were killed or abducted infront of witnesses, either when gunmen entered the victims’ property andshot them in cold blood, or shot them from atop motorbikes. The perpetratorseither wore civilian clothes with bonnets (balaclavas), or wore militaryuniforms and made no attempt to hide their faces. In several cases there isevidence that soldiers worked with members of paramilitaryforces—primarily the Citizen Armed Force Geographical Unit(CAFGU)—or paid military “assets,” including “rebelreturnees” (former NPA members).The military appears to have targeted several of thesevictims as CPP-NPA members because of their involvement with leftistorganizations, work on land reform, or opposition to military presence in theircommunities. The military operating in areas affected by the NPA conflict oftenconsiders all leftist organizations to be fronts for the armed group and anyindividuals who oppose military presence to be NPA members.For more than four decades the NPA has engaged in aninsurgency against the Philippine government, with their armed strength at itspeak in the mid-1980s. In addition to attacks on government military targets,the NPA has claimed responsibility for killing—among others—civilians,government officials, and tribal leaders allegedly associated with themilitary, in violation of international humanitarian law (the laws of war).They have also unlawfully executed military personnel and others considered tobe “enemies of the people” after conviction by so-calledPeople’s Courts or Hukumang Bayan. NPA attacks on civilians andmistreatment and execution of all persons in custody are serious violations ofthe laws of war. Those who carry out or order such abuses are responsible forwar crimes.The Philippine government has a duty and obligation toprotect the population from insurgent attacks. However, abuses by insurgentsnever justify violations of the laws of war or human rights violations bygovernment security forces. This includes extrajudicial killings and enforceddisappearances of any person, including alleged members of political groups andcivil society organizations that are deemed to be sympathetic to theinsurgents’ cause.A former soldier, “Ricardo” (not his real name),gave a detailed account of military structure and practices. He told HumanRights Watch he had been ordered to kill and “disappear” leftistactivists from the late 1990s until about 2007. Ricardo spoke of how seniormilitary commanders ordered him to kill leftist activists and hide or burn thebodies, and how the military had trained him and his fellow soldiers to maketargeted killings look like the NPA’s Special Partisan Unit (SPARU) hadperpetrated them, by using a .45 caliber pistol and wearing bonnets(balaclavas), thought to be favored by the NPA. While much of Ricardo’saccount could not be independently confirmed, his information seemed crediblebased on its consistency and detail.Extrajudicial killings have long been a problem in thePhilippines. Hundreds of members of left-wing political parties, politicalactivists, critical journalists, and outspoken clergy have been killed orforcibly disappeared in the Philippines during the past decade. The militaryand police, as well as paramilitary forces, have been implicated in many ofthese killings. As a result of international and local pressure, the number ofextrajudicial killings has dropped since 2007, but they still occur withimpunity. To date, there have been only seven successfully prosecuted cases ofextrajudicial killings, resulting in the conviction of 12 defendants. There hasnot been a single conviction of active military personnel at the time of thekilling. No senior military officers have been convicted either for directinvolvement in these violations or as a matter of command responsibility.The public rhetoric of senior military officers has changedsomewhat since Aquino took office—one need only drive along EpifanioDelos Santos Avenue (EDSA) in Manila to see the “I am a soldier and ahuman rights advocate” sign outside the headquarters of the armed forcesat Camp Aguinaldo. But this change in language has not yet been reflected inaction, such as improved military cooperation with investigating authorities,comprehensive internal investigations of implicated military personnel, orincreased openness within the military structure. In the recent casesdocumented by Human Rights Watch, the military continues to deny allallegations of soldiers’ involvement in extrajudicial killings and otherserious abuses, despite evidence to the contrary.Police investigations into alleged extrajudicial killingsand enforced disappearances are woefully inadequate. Several core aspects ofinvestigations are often disregarded by investigators, including effectivelyexamining crime scenes and canvassing for witnesses. Investigators routinelyfail to pursue evidence of military involvement and the absence of militarycooperation exacerbates this problem. Witness protection is rarely provided,and where it is the protection program is inflexible.Longstanding problems of the criminal justice system areexacerbated in human rights cases, where victims and witnesses may justifiablyfear retribution from soldiers. Despite official orders requiring prosecutorsand police to work together in order to ensure that a strong case is presentedto court, such cooperation remains extremely unusual. Once a case is filed incourt, hearings occur only at monthly intervals. Often they are less frequent,with some breaks lasting several months, so that trials typically last foryears. Court delays and a judicial hesitancy to act when the authorities areimplicated in crimes have also hampered the Supreme Court writs of amparo andhabeas data, which were designed to compel military and other government officialsto release information on people in their custody, thereby preventing“disappearances.”The widespread impunity enjoyed by perpetrators ofextrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances in the Philippines isexacerbated by the inadequacies of institutions charged with promoting humanrights and accountability, including the Department of Justice, the Commissionon Human Rights, the Ombudsman, and the Joint Monitoring Committee. The JointMonitoring Committee is specifically tasked with implementing an agreement onhuman rights and international humanitarian law between the government and theNational Democratic Front of the Philippines (NDFP), including the CPP and theNPA.Abusive behavior by security forces persists whenperpetrators are not held accountable for their actions. Curtailing humanrights violations requires more than new policies and senior officialscommitted to reform; it requires that would-be perpetrators know that they willgo to prison and their careers will end if they order or participate in seriousabuses. The Philippine government should adopt effective measures to endextrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances, hold perpetratorsaccountable, and prevent them from recurring.KeyRecommendationsTothe Philippine Government:Investigate and prosecute all those responsible in each case ofextrajudicial killing and enforced disappearance detailed in this report.Issue an executive order directing police and National Bureau ofInvestigation (NBI) investigators to vigorously pursue crimes allegedlycommitted by the military, or themselves be subject to disciplinary measures.Communicate fully to all military personnel that officers andsoldiers who provide evidence or testimony in cases of human rights violationswill be eligible for witness protection and other measures to ensure theirsafety.Order the inspector general and the provost marshal of the ArmedForces of the Philippines (AFP) to investigate and report publicly within 90days on the involvement of military personnel in extrajudicial killings, and toidentify failures within AFP investigative agencies to prosecute officers underprinciples of command responsibility.Order the military to cease targeted attacks on civilians, tocease the practice of denying military involvement in all extrajudicialkillings, and to cease labeling leftist groups as fronts for the CPP-NPA, whichplaces group members at considerable risk.Take all necessary measures, including reforming the witnessprotection program, to ensure the safety of survivors of serious crimes,witnesses, and families of victims and witnesses before, during, and aftertrial.Submit a bill to Congress that prohibits and protects againstenforced disappearances and ratify the International Convention for theProtection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance.To Donors and External Partners,including the United States, European Union, Japan, and Australia:Publicly press the Philippine government to investigate andprosecute members of the military for extrajudicial killings, including thoseliable under command responsibility. Diplomats based in Manila should closelymonitor Philippine government investigations of individual extrajudicialkilling and enforced disappearance cases.Full recommendations—of both a general nature and withrespect to specific cases—appear at the end of this report.Map of the PhilippinesKillings and EnforcedDisappearances Documented by Human Rights WatchClick to expand ImageGlossary of Terms andAbbreviationsAFPArmed Forces of the PhilippinesBarangayA village or an urban neighborhood; the smallestadministrative unit of local government in the PhilippinesBarangay tanodA village-based law enforcement officer, similar to apoliceman but not a member of the Philippine National PoliceBonnetA balaclava or ski mask, often worn by criminals toprotect their identitiesCAFGUCitizen Armed Force Geographical Unit; a paramilitaryforce formally under AFP commandCIDGCriminal Investigation and Detection Group; theinvestigatory arm of the PNPCPPCommunist Party of the PhilippinesDPWHDepartment of Public Works and HighwaysDSWDDepartment of Social Welfare and DevelopmentIBInfantry BattalionIDInfantry DivisionNBINational Bureau of Investigation; a civilian investigatoryagency under the Department of JusticeNDFPNational Democratic Front of the PhilippinesNPANew People’s Army; military wing of the CPPPNPPhilippine National PolicePurokTerritorial enclave inside a barangay, especiallyin rural areasSangguniang BayanLegislature of municipal governmentsTricycleA motorcycle with a sidecar on a third wheel for carryingpassengersWaiting shedAn open, sheltered structure built along most roads in thePhilippines, where people wait for public transportMethodologyThis report is based on Human Rights Watch research in thePhilippines from February to April 2011. Researchers travelled to the provincesof Agusan del Sur, Aklan, Bataan, Batangas, Compostela Valley, Davao del Norte,Davao del Sur, Laguna, Negros Occidental, Negros Oriental, Nueva Ecija, andSurigao del Sur, and to Davao City to investigate recent alleged extrajudicialkillings and enforced disappearances.Human Rights Watch conducted a total of 45 interviews withvictims of abuses, their family members and friends, and eyewitnesses. Manywere reached by referral from local community groups. We spoke with multiplesources to verify the veracity of statements.Human Rights Watch interviewed 16 police officials, 11military officers, and three public prosecutors. We also spoke to barangay andother local officials.One of the most detailed accounts of military structure andpractices came from a former soldier. “Ricardo,” not his real name,told Human Rights Watch that military officers had ordered him to kill and“disappear” leftist activists from the late 1990s to about 2007. Hedied of natural causes during the course of this research.Human Rights Watch spoke with more than two dozen localhuman rights activists, academics, lawyers, and journalists who have beenlooking into extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances for many yearsand who, in many cases, were able to provide corroborating evidence.Human Rights Watch has also drawn on its own past research.Since August 2009, we have researched the progress of government investigationsand prosecutions into more than 20 targeted killings and enforceddisappearances perpetrated between 2004 and 2010 in several provincesthroughout the Philippines. In the course of this research, researchersinterviewed more than 50 victims of abuses, their family members and friends,and eyewitnesses in Bicol, Central Luzon, and Negros.Interviews were conducted in English or in Tagalog, Cebuano,Ilonggo or Bikol with the aid of interpreters. The names of many intervieweeshave been withheld for security reasons, and pseudonyms used for thoserepeatedly quoted. Where pseudonyms are used the name is given in quotationmarks. Wherever possible and in the majority of cases, interviews wereconducted on a one-on-one basis. None of those interviewed received payment.In May 2011, Human Rights Watch sent letters to thePhilippine officials listed below to obtain data and solicit views onextrajudicial killings:Hon. Leila de Lima, secretary of the Department of JusticeGen. Eduardo Oban, Jr., chief of staff of the Armed Forcesof the PhilippinesRaul M. Bacalzo, director general of the PhilippineNational PoliceOfficer-in-Charge,deputy ombudsman for Military and Other Law Enforcement OfficesHuman Rights Watch also sent a letter to the CentralCommittee of the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP). One of the lettersto the government and the letter to the CPP is attached as an appendix. Therest of the letters are posted on the Philippines page of the Human RightsWatch website: www.hrw.org.At this writing, Human Rights Watch has received a responsefrom the Ombudsman’s office, which is attached as an appendix. Futureresponses will be posted on the website.I. The Philippine ContextTheCommunist Insurgency, Government Response, and Peace TalksKillings and enforced disappearances in the Philippinesoccur in the context of a four-decade-long communist insurgency that affectsmany of the country’s 80 provinces.The New People’s Army (NPA) is the armed wing of theCommunist Party of the Philippines (CPP), which since 1969 has been engaged inan armed rebellion with the goal of establishing a Marxist state.[2]The National Democratic Front of the Philippines (NDFP) is charged with forgingalliances with so-called people’s organizations to develop arevolutionary united front.[3]Military estimates put the armed strength of the NPA at around 4,100guerrillas, backed by a broad network of non-combatantsupporters.[4]Membership in the CPP has been legal since 1992.[5]During the course of this 42-year conflict, the CPP-NPA hassplintered with evolving and conflicting ideologies and personalitydifferences, leading to the creation of other communist armed groups such asthe Revolutionary Proletarian Army-Alex Boncayao Brigade (RPA-ABB) in 1992 andthe Revolutionary People’s Army (Rebolusyonaryong Hukbong Bayan, RHB) in1998.[6]These groups continue to perpetrate numerous serious human rightsabuses—including abductions, torture, and killings—againstsuspected adversaries and ordinary civilians.The CPP-NPA has admitted killing numerous former members,government officials, soldiers and police officers, and civilians since itscreation in 1969. Since June 30, 2010, it has claimed responsibility forkilling or executing several civilians, government officials, tribal leadersallegedly associated with the military, and soldiers, in circumstances that mayviolate international humanitarian law.Often, the CPP-NPA seeks to justify the killings by arguingthat a “people’s court” has condemned the victim to deathbecause of various crimes against the people, sometimes criminal acts such asrape and murder, and other times spying on the NPA for the military. Forinstance, on July 23, 2010, NPA members shot and killed sugar farmer SergioVilladar in Escalante City, Negros Occidental. The NPA, which claimedresponsibility for the killing, said it was forced to kill Villadar because heresisted arrest after being charged before the NPA’s “revolutionarypeople’s court” for a 2007 killing and involvement in severalbeatings.[7]Philip Alston, then-UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial executions, hasstated this court system “is either deeply flawed or simply asham.”[8]The CPP-NPA has targeted indigenous leaders who are viewedas allied with the military. For instance, on August 6, 2010, at around 10a.m., approximately 30 NPA fighters reportedly ambushed several peopleincluding Datu Ruben Labawan, the Supreme Tribal Council for Peace andDevelopment, which is affiliated with the AFP, in Paquibato district, DavaoCity. Labawan was travelling with two soldiers, his wife, and other indigenousleaders. Two soldiers, Pfc. Elansio Alonsagay and Pfc. Kimpio Labawan, togetherwith one civilian, Datu Enecencio Dangkay, died from gunshot wounds.[9]The NPA has also targeted members of the RevolutionaryProletarian Army (RPA), which broke away from the CPP in 1992 due toideological differences and has worked with government forces since 2000 whenit signed a peace accord with the government.[10] On November 2,2010, NPA fighters shot and killed former RPA leader and barangay tanodRenante Cañete in Sagay City, Negros Occidental. According to newsreports, the NPA alleged Cañete was a hired gunman used by landlords incollaboration with the military, and that it had summoned Cañete toresolve the complaints against him but he had not responded.[11]Attacks on civilians and the torture or execution of anyprisoner constitute serious violations of the laws of war and may be warcrimes. The Philippine government has a duty and obligation to protect thepopulation from insurgent attacks. However, abuses by insurgents never justifyviolations of the laws of war or human rights violations by government securityforces. This includes attacks on members of political groups and civil societyorganizations viewed as sympathetic to the insurgents’ cause.Members of the military and policeoften lump members of leftist organizations, labor unions, and party-listgroups together with the NPA—frequently with deadly outcomes. Leftistorganizations in the Philippines encompass a range of views towards theCPP-NPA, which rejects the Philippine government and constitution. Somemilitant left-wing organizations support the NPA and its armed struggle, if notopenly. Other organizations share the CPP’s political ideology, orelements of it, but advocate peaceful reform. Others fully reject theCPP’s perspective but are still targeted by the military and police.Since members of these groups are not NPA fighters, who are armed andcombat-ready, they are less dangerous targets of attack for the military andpolice. In any case, attacks on members of leftist organizations, whatever theextent of their support for the CPP-NPA, is unlawful under the laws of war,unless they are directly participating in hostilities. Also unlawful is thekilling of any person in government custody, including surrendered members ofthe NPA.Themilitary has over the years publicly labeled a number of organizations, unions,and party-list groups as “NPA fronts.” The affect is pernicious.Once labeled—and the labels are hard to remove—the members of suchorganizations may be the targets of government attack.The military’s designations may reflect the whims ofindividual commanders in a locale. Lt. Col. Oliver Artuz, commander of the 39thInfantry Battalion based in Davao del Sur, told Human Rights Watch that all unionsare linked to the NPA, whose aim is to raise wages so high that companies goout of business, thus creating more recruits for the NPA.[12]Several military officers have labeled protesting as a form of violence.According to one officer, “Once the organizations have been infiltrated[by the NPA] you will notice they are being violent.... They will join massprotests.”[13]A police insider explained how political activism is alsomisunderstood within the police force. Speaking of a recent victim of extrajudicialkilling, he said, “Some police officers have a misconception of what[activists] are doing. They say that [the targeted person] is a traitor to thegovernment. But I have never heard of him being involved in a criminal act; hejust leads rallies.”[14]Many government-targeted killings over the years had theinvolvement of state-supported paramilitary forces, “vigilantegroups” such as Alsa Masa (“Masses Arise”), and“private armies.”[15]The official status of these forces has changed over time, but they have longbeen responsible for abuses against suspected NPA members and supporters, andother politically-motivated targets. Most notoriously, members of a privatearmy, along with soldiers and police, were implicated in the November 2009massacre of 58 relatives and supporters of a political candidate and mediaworkers in Maguindanao on the island of Mindanao.[16]Despite this, successive Philippine governments have taken no serioussteps to dismantle or disarm paramilitary forces or militias on a large scale.Only a few militia or paramilitary members have been prosecuted for abuses, andeven fewer military and police officers overseeing their crimes have been prosecuted.According to government sources, in 2010 the NPA killed 176soldiers and 11 police officers, while the government killed 141 suspected NPAmembers in military and police operations.[17]In his July 2010 State of the Nation Address, PresidentAquino announced that the government was prepared to declare a ceasefire withthe CPP-NPA and resume peace talks. The CPP-NPA agreed to move toward peacetalks, but not a ceasefire. Formal negotiations between the government and theNDFP, which negotiates on behalf of the CPP-NPA, resumed on February 15, 2011.Both sides agreed on a general time frame for completing the draftcomprehensive agreements on the remaining items of the agenda, which includesocial and economic reforms, political and constitutional reforms, and endinghostilities and disposing of forces.[18]They also discussed confidence-building measures, such as the release ofcaptured NPA/CPP members and government soldiers.[19]Extrajudicial killings have continued since the peace talkscommenced.TheLegacy of Extrajudicial KillingsExtrajudicial killings are an enduring problem in thePhilippines, but they received international attention in 2006 when the numberof alleged extrajudicial killings skyrocketed.[20] During theadministration of President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, who was in office from2001 to 2010, hundreds of leftist politicians and political activists,journalists, and clergy were killed or abducted.[21]In 2007, the number of killings dropped significantly due to domestic andinternational pressure, but killings have nonetheless continued.ArroyoAdministration Initiatives to Address Extrajudicial KillingsInresponse to domestic and international pressure, the Arroyo administrationinstituted several initiatives to address extrajudicial killings, includingcreating special bodies within the Philippine National Police and theDepartment of Justice to investigate and prosecute political killings. Whilethe number of killings dropped, there was virtually no accountability for thoseresponsible. During Arroyo’s nine-year term, only 11 people wereconvicted for politically-motivated killings, none for the abductions, and nomember of the military active at the time of the killing has been brought tojustice. These initiatives are briefly discussed below.Melo CommissionIn August 2006 Arroyo created a commission under formerSupreme Court Associate Justice Jose Melo to probe the killings of journalistsand leftist activists since 2001.[22]The commission’s report, made public in February 2007 after much publicpressure, concluded:There is no official or sanctioned policy on the part ofthe military or its civilian superiors to resort to what other countrieseuphemistically call “alternative procedure”—meaning illegalliquidations. However, there is certainly evidence pointing the finger ofsuspicion at some elements and personalities in the armed forces, in particularGen. Palparan, as responsible for an undetermined number of killings, byallowing, tolerating, and even encouraging the killings.[23]In its initial report, the commission made severalrecommendations relating to command responsibility, witness protection, and theneed for thorough investigations.[24]Thesereports were expanded upon in an August 2007 letter from the commission tothen-Executive Secretary Eduardo Ermita, which has not been made public. Amongits recommendations, the commission called on Arroyo to investigate seniormembers of the military, in particular Gen. Jovito Palparan, and order themilitary to do away with its continuing “state of denial” mindsetand to stop labeling left-wing or cause-oriented groups mere“fronts” for the CPP-NPA and “enemies of the state.”[25]Arroyo never implemented these or the commission’sother recommendations, nor has Aquino since taking office.[26]Task Force UsigIn August 2006 Arroyo created Task Force Usig, a specialpolice body, which she charged with solving 10 cases of killings of politicalactivists or journalists within 10 weeks. Task Force Usig has continued tooperate beyond its 10-week mandate. In practice, it does not itself investigatekillings, but oversees the work of local investigators and monitors the statusof investigations.Task Force 211In November 2007, Arroyo created the Task Force againstPolitical Violence, known as Task Force 211. Officially, the task force was:Created to harness and mobilize government agencies,political groups, the religious, civil society and sectoral organizations andthe public for the prevention, investigation, prosecution and punishment ofpolitical violence, the care and protection of people and communitiesvictimized and threatened with violence, and the promotion of a culture opposedto violence and for the advancement of reconciliation and peace.[27]In practice, however, Task Force 211 interpreted its mandateas limited to killings, excluding enforced disappearances and other forms of politicalviolence, and operated with a small staff simply monitoring the status ofcertain alleged extrajudicial killings. For instance, it refused to investigatethe enforced disappearance of Sherlyn Cadapan and Karen Empeño inBulacan, Central Luzon on June 26, 2006, even when an eyewitness had testifiedthat the military had detained, tortured, and most likely killed them.DuringTask Force 211’s tenure, it has looked into more than 200 cases, 53 ofwhich were classed as having progressed through the justice system and four inwhich convictions were secured.[28]In December 2010, Justice Secretary Leila de Lima created atask force that she says has a broader mandate than Task Force 211.[29]De Lima directed the new task force to review all reported and unsolved casesof extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances, with the intention ofspeeding up the resolution of cases with sufficient evidence andreinvestigating cases in which the trail of evidence has gone cold.Human Rights DesksIn 2007, the PNP and AFP each created human rights offices.Since then, they have pledged to create such offices or human rights desks atdifferent levels of command to monitor and maintain records regarding personnelallegedly involved in human rights violations.[30]The desks were notto have an investigative function; rather, they were to maintain and analyzerecords of reported violations and to provide human rights training. At theirManila headquarters, these desks mainly seek information from the commanders inareas where alleged human rights violations have occurred. Outside Manila, thedesks don’t appear to function. Many provincial police offices that aremeant to have such desks, do not.[31]President Aquino’s CommitmentsBenigno Aquino III waselected president and inaugurated on June 30, 2010, after campaigning toaddress extrajudicial killings, enforced disappearances, and other human rightsviolations by government security forces.Aquino has acknowledged the problems of impunity. In ameeting with European Union ambassadors a month before his inauguration, hesaid, “Cases of extrajudicial killings need to be solved, not justidentify the perpetrators but have them captured and sent to jail.”[32]In his inauguration speech he said, “There can be no reconciliation withoutjustice. When we allow crimes to go unpunished, we give consent to theiroccurring over and over again.”[33]While Aquino’s language has been strong, he has notimplemented the systemic reforms necessary to stop the killings and holdperpetrators accountable.II. Extrajudicial Executions and EnforcedDisappearancesAnextrajudicial killing is a deliberate, unlawful killing by state securityforces. In the Philippines, there is much debate about the terminology, inparticular extrajudicial killing versus extralegal killing; but the meaningsare the same. An enforced disappearance is when an individual is deprived ofliberty by or with the state’s acquiescence, and officials refuse toprovide information regarding the victim’s detention, whereabouts, or fate.[34]Extrajudicial killings andenforced disappearances violate basic human rights, including the right tolife, the right to liberty and security of the person, the right to a fair andpublic trial, as well as the prohibition on torture and cruel, inhuman, anddegrading treatment or punishment.[35]Human Rights Watch investigated seven apparent extrajudicialkillings and three enforced disappearances that occurred since June 30, 2010,in which there was significant evidence of military involvement (see below).News media have reported other possible cases during that period that HumanRights Watch was not able to investigate due to time constraints. In threeother cases, Human Rights Watch found no evidence of military involvement;another reported case could not be adequately investigated because of ongoingmilitary hostilities in the area. In all of these cases we examined theresponse of police and other authorities to the killings.The investigated cases show no consistent patterns. Severalvictims were leftist activists who may have been killed because of perceivedassociation with the New People’s Army (NPA), while others appear to havebeen ordinary farmers involved in land disputes with local officials. In onecase local politics was at issue.A former soldier, “Ricardo,” told Human RightsWatch that commanding officers of his battalion ordered him to carry outseveral extrajudicial killings during his time in the Philippine Army from themid-1980s to the mid-2000s. While much in Ricardo’s account could not beindependently confirmed, his information seemed credible based on itsconsistency and detail.Ricardo said army intelligence had determined that thetargets were working for the NPA. He said that in 2005, an officer in thearmy’s 8th Infantry Division ordered him to kill FeliditoDacut, a lawyer and Bayan Muna-Eastern Visayas regional coordinator because,“as a human rights lawyer, he was hampering military activities.”Ricardo said a fellow soldier shot and killed Dacut with a .45 caliber pistolon March 14, 2005, near Tacloban City in Leyte.[36]He said that military officers trained him to make such assassinations looklike they were perpetrated by the NPA’s Special Partisan Unit (SPARU) byusing a .45 caliber pistol and wearing bonnets (balaclavas).“Ricardo” also said that military officers onseveral occasions ordered him to help dispose of victims’ bodies. Hedescribed one instance in 2007 at Fort Bonifacio, the Philippine Armyheadquarters in Manila, where commanding officers ordered him and severalintelligence officers to put a male corpse inside a steel drum, seal it, andplace the drum in a vehicle as it was to be taken elsewhere, but he was notaware where. He said he was unable to describe the dead man because his facewas covered with blood.Killingof Fernando “Nanding” Baldomero, July5, 2010At about 6.30 a.m. on July 5, 2010, an armed man ridingtandem on a motorcycle gunned down Fernando Baldomero with a .45 caliber pistoloutside his family home along the national highway in barangay Estancia,Kalibo, Aklan. Baldomero, 61, had just mounted his motorcycle with his12-year-old son, whom he was taking to school, as he did every day. An NPAmember until his release from prison in 1994, Baldomero was the provincialcoordinator of the leftist political party Bayan Muna and a town councilor inLezo, Aklan.[37]Several witnesses saw men in military uniforms aroundBaldomero’s residence in the days before he was killed. A witness toldHuman Rights Watch that she saw a military truck parked for three consecutivedays at a waiting shed (an open, sheltered structure built along the road) justa few meters from Baldomero’s house, about one week before he was killed.She said that she saw the identified suspect, Dindo Lovon Ancero, standing withsoldiers, and had even teased Baldomero, “Maybe they are looking for you?”[38]On January 10, 2011, the Aklan regional trial court issuedan arrest warrant for Ancero and several “John Does,” orunidentified suspects.[39]However, there is no evidence that police have pursued evidence of militaryinvolvement. When a relative asked a police investigator why he had not pursuedleads regarding military involvement, he said, “Tigok tayo dyan”or “We’re dead”—indicating that he thought his lifewould be at risk if he investigated military involvement.[40]The family said that the provincial police director told them that pursuingmilitary personnel “only complicates the investigation.”[41]To date the arrest warrant has not been served on Ancero, despite having sworna counter-affidavit before a prosecutor in Mandaue City, Cebu, on August 14,2010. The warrant has since been returned to the court.[42]On several occasions both the military and the police hadtagged Baldomero as a current member of the CPP-NPA.[43] OnMarch 19, 2010, just four months before he was killed, unidentified men threwtwo hand grenades into Baldomero’s ancestral home in Lezo, Aklan. Whilecharges were never brought against the perpetrators, a police report said theprime suspects were political rivals of Baldomero with links to the PhilippineArmy.[44]Relatives said that motorcycles had often tailed Baldomero since he left prisonin the mid-1990s.[45]Killingof Pascual Guevarra, July 9 2010On July 9, 2010, at about 4:30 pm, an unidentified manwalked onto the property of Pascual Guevarra, 78, within Fort Magsaysaymilitary reservation in barangay San Isidro, Laur, Nueva Ecija provinceand shot him dead with a 9mm pistol.[46]The gunman’s accomplice waited nearby on a motorcycle without a licenseplate and they drove off in tandem.[47]Guevarra was the leader of two local leftist organizations, one of which waspressing the government to compensate farmers for land resumed by thegovernment for widening a road.[48]According to the family and police investigators, an officerof the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) had contacted Guevarraand asked him to stay home on the day he was killed, telling him that theywould deliver the compensation for the land resumption.[49]While the police formed a task force to investigate this killing, theinvestigation has stalled primarily, a police investigator alleges, because theDPWH has not cooperated with the investigation. He told Human Rights Watch:We tried to invite [the DPWH officer]; however he is veryhesitant to cooperate because he is the one implicated in the case….[Regional, provincial, and district DPWH offices] told us that they havecreated their own investigative body, however they [would not provide] anyreport [as to the] outcome of the investigation…. It is“heated,” … because they don’t want to give us thedocuments we needed to file a complaint against [the suspect].[50]Neither the police nor the NBI have investigated possiblemilitary involvement in the killing, despite the killing taking place on a militaryreserve. The military had previously tagged Guevarra’s organization asaffiliated with the CPP-NPA. A military officer from the 702nd IBtold Human Rights Watch, “In our opinion, this group is an organizationof the farmers that was being infiltrated by the NPA, the local terrorists. Butwe do not [have evidence of this].”[51]Military officers said the police had initially suspectedmilitary involvement, but this ceased when a DPWH official was implicated.[52]Investigators never pursued a possible military role, such as a soldier beingused as the gunman. According to military officials, officers stationed at FortMagsaysay did investigate the killing but there was no independentinvestigation by the provost marshal or an independent unit. An officer withthe 702nd IB stationed away from Fort Magsaysay said that, “Wedon’t have a special report on this … because [the killing was]within the military reservation.”As a result, he explained, it was forofficials stationed at Fort Magsaysay to investigate. Military officials atFort Magsaysay confirmed the provost marshal had not been tapped to investigatebecause, “It came out in our intelligence operation that no military wereinvolved, [so] we turned it over to the police.”Guevarra’s relatives told Human Rights Watch thatsince the killing they have answered telephone calls from unknown numbers inwhich no one speaks, and received blank text messages from unknownnumbers—unusual and intimidating occurrences they interpret as a signalnot to push the investigation. Relatives have also noticed strangers passing byGuevarra’s house at night.[53]According to a relative, some six months after the killing, an army truckstopped almost in front of Guevarra’s property and someone insidephotographed the house and farmland.[54]EnforcedDisappearance of Agustito Ladera and Renato Deliguer, August/September 2010In late August and early September 2010, farmers AgustitoLadera, 35, and Renato Deliguer, 21, were working at their respective familyfarms in barangay Mahaba, Marihatag, Surigao del Sur when militaryoperations against the NPA began.[55]Both farms are remote—about a half-day walk from the center of barangayMahaba.Deliguer had gone to his family farm on September 1, 2010.He would routinely stay there for about a week at a time and the family, whohas not seen him since, initially assumed that he was unable to return homebecause of the military operations.[56]Ladera, who had been at the family farm with his parents andbrother, was waiting for abacafibers from a banana plant to dry, so hesent his parents to evacuate first. His brother left the farm on August 28, andLadera said he would follow. His family has not seen him since.[57]In early September, when the evacuees were able to return tobarangay Mahaba, Ladera’s father and brother and Deliguer’sfather went to the farms to find their missing relatives. The Ladera familyfound that all belongings were secure, as if Agustito had packed everything upand left the farm hut.[58]Deliguer’s father, Hipolito, said he saw the distinctive prints ofcombat shoes around the hut.[59]Inside the hut, he found used sleeping mats and mosquito nets that were notreturned to their proper place, and cooked rice in the pot. His family’s bolo,or machete knife, was missing.[60]Hipolito Deliguer said that he concluded that the military had passed the hutand taken his son around dawn.[61]Ladera’s father heard that the military had arrestedboth Ladera and Deliguer, so he went to San Isidro, Marihatag, a place where heknew the soldiers would have passed, to ask people if they had seen anything.He said a local resident told him that soldiers had tied up and gagged two men.Another person told him that soldiers had taken the two men to the militarycamp.[62]Someone else told Hipolito Deliguer that a man was in police custody.[63]The families have visited the military camp and policestation several times asking for their relatives. A police officer said toHipolito Deliguer, “Maybe your son went to the mountains and joined theNPA.”[64]Soldiers at the military camp in Dayo-an, Tago, said that they had arrestedsomeone from San Isidro and San Pedro, but not from Mahaba, and did not allowthe relatives to see the arrested men.[65]Both families reported to the police that the men weremissing, but at no time did the police visit any of their residences or farmsto investigate.[66]A police report dated October 8, 2010, recommended that the police “begiven ample time to conduct [a] thorough and in depth investigation.”However, when interviewed in March 2011, neither the chief investigator nor thepolice chief could speak of any steps taken to investigate since this date,indicating that no further steps had been taken since October 2010.[67]In the police report, the police superintendent wrote:There were unconfirmed reports also that the two missingpersons could be possible members of the CTs [Communist Terrorists] operatingin the area and might have been casualties in the recent encounters in the areawhere the military were conducting intensified and large scale operations.[68]Chief Investigator Joel Vertudazo, reading from a moredetailed police report, said that perhaps the “casualties had alreadybeen buried by the NPA without informing the families, in order to [avoid]discouraging other recruitees.”[69]The families sought the help of Governor Johnny Pimentel ofSurigao del Sur and the Sangguniang Panlalawigan, the provincial legislature.[70]On October 4, 2010, the Sangguniang Panlalawigan Committee on Laws and Justiceand Human Rights in Surigao del Sur met to discuss the missing men.[71]The commanding officer of the 36th IB did not respond to a requestto appear.[72]The Sangguniang Panlalawigan also sent requests to the police and regionalNational Bureau of Investigation, among other government bodies, to investigatethe case. At this writing, the Sangguniang Panlalawigan has not received aresponse from any of these agencies.Killingof Reynaldo “Naldo” L. Labrador, September 3, 2010In the early evening of September 3, 2010, two menapproached Reynaldo “Naldo” Labrador’s home in PaquibatoProper, Paquibato District, Davao City in Mindanao. Labrador was a member ofthe local Paquibato District Peasant Alliance (PaDiPA). Several witnessesidentified one of the assailants as Roberto “Kulot” Repe, a knownlocal CAFGU member. Repe allegedly kept watch while the second man entered thehouse and shot and killed Labrador with a .45 caliber pistol.[73]Labrador’s wife, Leonisa Labrador, told Human RightsWatch:I was doing the washing when a man called out, “Nalds,come and receive this.” I told the man [who I did not recognize],“He is upstairs.” The man went upstairs. Then I heard threegunshots. My 11-year-old son went and saw his father with blood all over him.My children and I left the house calling to our neighbors for help…. Thegunman [then] escaped.[74]Reylun, Reynaldo’s then 10-year-old son, said thatRepe made a sign to him “not to say any word (his finger crossing hismouth) when he was outside the house.”[75] Leonisa said thegunman had a note, which she thought he wanted to give Labrador. Witnessesfound a note at the crime scene that read, “You are evil and you will bedealt with.”[76]According to the barangay captain, a neighbor sawRepe together with a soldier from the 69th IB nearLabrador’s residence at around 2 p.m. on the day he was killed.[77]Repe’s relative told Human Rights Watch that Repe hehad been working with the military since 2009.[78] He personally sawRepe working with the military on two occasions, wearing full army uniform andcarrying an M16 assault rifle. The community assumed that he was a CAFGUbecause he would patrol with the military in full uniform.[79] Fromtime to time, he would send cell phone text messages warning his relatives tobe careful of upcoming military operations. For instance, on one occasion, hesent a message saying something like, “People in barangay Lumiad[a nearby barangay in Paquibato district] had better watch out becausewe are going to take one out.”[80]NPA members killed Repe on November 28, 2010, which they saywas in line with a standing order from the revolutionary authorities to do so.[81]Fearful of reprisals from seeking justice forLabrador’s death, Leonisa moved from the family home. Neighbors said thatin October—one month after Labrador was killed—soldiers visited thefamily house asking where Leonisa was and whether her children were with her.[82]Killingof Rene “Toto” Quirante, October 1, 2010On the evening of September 30, 2010, after visiting hisfarm, Rene “Toto” Quirante and his companion Romeo Gador soughtshelter from heavy rain in the house of a friend, Tito, in barangay Trinidad,Guihulngan, Negros Oriental.[83]Early the next morning, uniformed men entered the house and brutally beatQuirante, the provincial vice-chair of the leftist political party, Anakpawis.They then shot him dead in front of several witnesses, including children. Awitness described what happened:Around 2 a.m. [I awoke to hear] someone banging on the door[of the house]. They were shouting, “NPA ni!” and “NPAito!” [“This is the NPA”]. No one was answering. The armedmen used their rifle butts to enter the house. They saw Toto immediately andused their rifles to beat him. They beat him continuously; he was trying toescape to the second floor of the house, but they kept pulling him back andbeating him….Together with others, I was trying to pull Toto onto thesecond floor. When we finally succeeded in doing so, the soldiers followed andcontinued to beat him…. They pulled him away from us and pushed him tothe ground floor. Then the soldiers jumped down. One soldier shouted to anotherto hold on to him; then they shot him [three times].The commander then ordered the soldiers to move, so theyleft. We were very scared. We couldn’t do anything, not even shout orutter a word.[84]Another witness explained how she shouted, “This is… Toto Quirante, a barangay tanod and peace officer.” Butthe uniformed men continued to beat him.[85]Several witnesses have identified the perpetrators as DandyQuilanan, a CAFGU member, Junel Librado, a former member of the NPA working asa “guide” for the military, and six unidentified soldiers.[86]One witness described the men:They were wearing head lamps. One of them was wearingcamouflage fatigues. It had the army patch on the sleeve…. All of themhad rifles and ammunition wrapped around their shoulders…. They were allwearing black combat shoes…. I’m very sure [Quilanan] is a CAFGUbecause they patrol our area…. I know Librado as a “rebelreturnee” [a former member of the NPA working as a “guide”for the military] because when he was still active with the NPA, from time totime he would come to my house and ask for food.[87]Quirante had received warnings the military was targetinghim. According to a relative, months before his death a friend who was a CAFGUhad told Quirante that four leaders of leftist organizations, including him,were on a list of people to be “shot on sight,” and that themilitary had set up ambush positions ready to “get him.”[88]Quirante’s colleague told Human Rights Watch that during a meetingseveral years earlier, Quirante said that during a military operation an armylieutenant had warned him that the military considered Anakpawis to be an NPAfront organization and he should stop being active because his family was knownto support the NPA.[89]On February 1, 2011, the court in Guihulngan City issued awarrant of arrest for Quilanan and Librado.[90] At this writing,the warrants have not been served.[91]Sincethe killing, the military has harassed the Quirante family. For instance, onNovember 22, 2010, about 12 soldiers in full combat gear visitedQuirante’s relative’s home. More than a dozen other soldiers werein the wider area. A soldier asked the relative, “Where are the firearmsthat the NPA left in your house?” The relative replied, “The NPAnever left firearms in my house.” The soldier said, “What do youwant? Do you want us to kill you and all of your [family]?”[92]Killingof Ireneo “Rene” Rodriguez, November 7, 2010In the early morning of November 7, 2010, two men ridingtandem on a motorcycle and wearing bonnets shot and killed IreneoRodriguez, a former leftist activist, in Balayan town, Batangas province.Days before he was killed, several armed and uniformed menfrom the Philippine Air Force visited Rodriguez’s father’s homeasking for Rodriguez, who was not there.[93]At thiswriting, police investigators have not questioned the soldiers who made thisvisit.[94]Several relatives and friends said the Air Force had showninterest in Rodriguez for some years. Rodriguez’s neighbor said that he,Rodriguez, and 11 other members of a local organization were called up to theAir Force camp in 2004 and told they were on the “order of battle”—alist of those considered military targets—because they were NPAsympathizers.[95]His father said that he heard the military had tagged Rodriguez as an NPAmember and were looking for him in about 2005, and that he went to the camp toclear his son’s name.[96]Another relative said that the military often approached herin around 2002 and 2003 and asked her to encourage Rodriguez to surrender.[97]Lt. Col. Vincent Incognito, the commander of the 730th Combat Group,Philippine Air Force, confirmed to Human Rights Watch that Rodriguez “isone of the ‘target’ personalities, one [of] the sympathizers of theNPA.”[98]In recent years, Rodriguez had been less active with leftistorganizations. A relative said that about two months before he was killed,Rodriguez would frequently receive text messages from different numbers saying,“Ang galling monce magtago” (Hiding yourself pretty well).[99]Lieutenant Colonel Incognito told Human Rights Watch thathis soldiers had visited Rodriguez to try to convince him that the “timefor a change is now.”[100]He said:And that’s all. We are doing it in front of otherpeople so that others may see that we frequent the area and that’sit.… If we want him killed why would we visit him? … Of course wecould be the one suspected of killing him.[101]Rodriguez’s relatives have received threatening textmessages since his death. One relative received a message saying, “Goodmorning. Your time is near, be careful, I’ll wait for you in Balayan.Sorry, but this is both of your payment [you and Rene], hehehe, okay,bye.”EnforcedDisappearance of Alfredo Bucal, November 10, 2010On November 10, 2010,tricycle driver Alfredo Bucal passed by a joint Philippine Air Force andPhilippine National Police checkpoint in barangay Lutal, Tuy, Batangas. Theauthorities allege that he was driving his tricycle (a motorcycle taxi with asidecar) in convoy with another tricycle driver and that both were carryingpassengers who were NPA members. According to witnesses, the military took himinto custody. His family has not seen him since.A government official told Human Rights Watch that a witnesstold him that he had seen uniformed Philippine Air Force personnel captureBucal, drag him to a vehicle, and force him inside. The official said, “Iam afraid that if I get involved, the Philippine Air Force might come and getme.”[102]A witness who had initially agreed to testify in court proceedings against theAir Force told the family that she would no longer do so as she was afraid forher life after soldiers threatened her.[103]The day after Bucal went missing, relatives searched for himand found the tricycle impounded at a police station. Police officers told thefamily that there had been an “encounter”—that is, afirefight with the NPA—so to inquire after Bucal at the Air Force camp.At the camp, an Air Force lieutenant initially joked with the family, saying“Don’t worry, if he’s with us, surely he’ll be eatingsome choice food.” The family asked to speak to the commanding officerbut was denied; instead the same lieutenant told family members that whilethere had been an encounter, they did not have Bucal in their custody.[104]Police and military officials have acknowledged that two alleged NPA members,Roberto Garcia and Tomas Sitag, were killed during an encounter at an AirForce/PNP checkpoint in barangay Lutalon November 10, and athird person escaped.[105]At this writing, government agencies have not conducted anyindependent investigation into this incident. Relatives told Human Rights Watchthat when they visited a Commission on Human Rights office in San Pablo City,Batangas, staff said that they could not assist because of an internal issue,directing them instead to the Integrated Bar of the Philippines, the nationalorganization of lawyers.[106]Killing of Rudy and Rudyric Dejos,February 27, 2011On the afternoon of February27, 2011, unidentified assailants killed Rudy Dejos, age 50, and his adult sonRudyric, age 26, at their farmhouse in Santa Cruz, Davao del Sur. Rudy, atribal chieftain, held several leadership positions in the community, includingbarangay human rights officer.Rudy’s body showed signs of torture. Mercy Dejos,Rudy’s wife and Rudyric’s mother, described the scene sheencountered on returning to the farmhouse at about 5 p.m. on February 27, afterselling vegetables in town:I saw droplets of blood. When I walked around the corner, Isaw the bodies of my husband and son. My husband was lying with open wounds onhis chest and neck…. His fingernails were removed…. His forearmswere scratched like his arms had been tied up…. His chest was bruised asif he had been beaten with the butt of a rifle. My son, Rudyric, was curled upon his side and I could see bullet wounds on his back with exit wounds on hisupper chest…. I then fell unconscious.[107]A note was left in a box, a short distance from the housewhere the men were killed, which read: “The NPA killed you because yourwrongdoings against the NPA were already too much.”[108]However, the family does not believe that the NPA are behind the killing asthey had not threatened or harassed Rudy or Rudyric in the past and aside fromthis note, there is no evidence of NPA involvement in the killing. According tothe family, the NPA has denied killing the two men.[109]The police immediately blamed the NPA for the killing, before gathering anyevidence.[110]At this writing, the police have not filed charges.Prior to the killing, according to Rudy’s wife,soldiers from the 39th Infantry Battalion of the Philippine Army hadon several occasions threatened and harassed Rudy. Mercy said that in June 2010soldiers visited the farmhouse, accused Rudy of being an NPA, and tried toencourage him to surrender and join the Barangay Defense System, amilitary-allied community defense force. One of the soldiers threatened Rudy,saying, “You are too proud. If we’re able to find you, we will skinyou.”[111]Later that year, on December 4, armed soldiers surrounded the family house inthe main area of Santa Cruz while Rudy was watching television. Irene,Rudyric’s wife, heard someone yell, “You NPAs come out!” Shethen heard what sounded like a gunshot. Sgt Morales of the 39th IB saidthat he had received a text message saying the NPAs were in the area and thatthe presumed gunshot was merely a firecracker. He apologized to Rudyric for theincident later that day, after the Dejos family filed a complaint at the barangayhall.[112]Officers and soldiers from the 39th IBintimidated the Dejos family in the days following the killings. Human RightsWatch witnessed more than 20 soldiers armed with M16s and pistols present atthe March 9 funeral march. One soldier filmed the march, while another tookstill photographs.[113]Lt. Col. Oliver Artuz, the commander of the 39th IB, said that theyattended the march fully armed because NPA members were participating, and werefilming and taking photographs for documentation purposes.[114]Officers also visited the wake.[115]III.Military Failure to Address Extrajudicial KillingsThe Philippine military has repeatedly denied allegations ofsoldiers participating in extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances,is uncooperative with civilian investigations into military involvement, hasnot reformed policies and practices that foster an environment in which suchabuses are tolerated, and does not adequately investigate via internal militarymechanisms abuses in which soldiers are implicated.Since President Aquino assumed office on June 30, 2010, therhetoric of some senior military officers has changed. For instance, in July2010, Brig. Gen. Francisco Cruz, head of the armed forces civil relationsservice, stated in relation to the families of victims of extrajudicialkillings that, “We deeply empathize with their loss and we offer thehighest degree of cooperation to help resolve these cases. The AFP [ArmedForces of the Philippines] firmly asserts that these violent incidents runcontrary to its stance on human rights as the cornerstone of all itsoperations.”[116]However, this change in language has not been reflected inimproved military cooperation with investigating authorities, comprehensiveinternal investigations of implicated members of the armed forces, or increasedopenness within the military structure. One soldier told Human Rights Watch,“You’ll never get information [about extrajudicial killings] fromwithin the service as mishandling of confidential information [is treatedharshly].”[117]A former soldier, “Ricardo,” told Human RightsWatch that when he tried to stop an extrajudicial killing in 2000, a militaryofficer accused him of being a rebel for sympathizing with the victims. Themilitary officer told him, “I will kill you because you are also arebel.”[118]Such behavior sends a clear message to soldiers not to question even clearlyillegal conduct of other military personnel. There is little evidence thatsenior military officers have tried to change this message.Military Labeling of Civilians as NPAMembersThe trouble began when themilitary entered Maco [a town in Compestela Valley province, Mindanao]. Theysaid they had come to help build schools, improve the water system, and providemedical care. But since they arrived, they have not done any of this. Insteadthe military has been calling on civilians and tagging them as NPAs.—“Rosa,” resident of barangayMagangit, Maco town, Compostela Valley[119]The AFP Internal Peace and Security Plan (IPSP) “OplanBayanihan,” which went into effect in January 2011, stresses theimportance of “winning the peace.” Community-based peace anddevelopment efforts, along with meaningful engagement of the local community,are core elements of this strategy.[120]While this strategy appears to be an attempt to improve relations betweencivilians and security forces in conflict-affected areas, Human Rights Watchresearch has found little change in military operations in the field. Themilitary still fails—both in its words and actions—to differentiatebetween the armed NPA and NGOs and political parties that may espouse someelements of communist or other leftist ideology. Several officers told HumanRights Watch that in their view military practice had not changed since January2011 when Oplan Bayanihan was launched.[121]When asked how the military identifies CPP-NPA members whenthey enter a community, a officer said, “Immediately when the soldiersarrive in the barangay, those [people] that have violent reactions [areidentified as allied with the CPP-NPA]; if they don’t want the soldiersthere immediately [when they arrive].”[122] There is awidespread belief in the military that the only reason that community memberswould oppose a military presence is because they actively support the CPP-NPA.[123]The officer said the military then typically conductsinformation-gathering in the locale. This involves conducting communityseminars known as pulong-pulong and talking to residents to find outwhich people belong to what organizations.[124] Failing to attendthe pulong-pulong invariably gets noticed by the military.[125]The officer continued:Once we identify an organization or person, we talk tothem. When we talk to them most will admit that they are supporting the NPA bygiving this ... by being the courier ... by being the one that givesinformation.... Once we learn that, that they are being forced to do that bythe NPA, we ask them to take an Oath of Allegiance. [If they don’t takethe oath,] we just tolerate him.... But if we know that he is being visited bythe NPA we conduct operations…. We just monitor them.[126]Human Rights Watch was told of several incidences in whichsoldiers threatened and harassed civilians because military informantsallegedly identified them as providers of food or shelter for the NPA. But asone civilian said, “We were in the mountain, so if the NPA asked forhelp, then we would help.”[127]Whether civilians provide food or shelter to the NPA because they are scared ofNPA retribution, because of Filipino hospitality, or because they are NPAsupporters, should not make them subject to military threats, harassment, orassault. Should they be implicated in a criminal offence, the authoritiesshould arrest and charge them.A resident of Paquibato district, a rural area in DavaoCity, told Human Rights Watch of one such incident:Early in the morning one day, I was planting coconut treeswhen I felt an M60 [machine gun] placed on my shoulders, pointing to my neck. Asoldier asked, “Who is inside your house? Where is the NPA?” Isaid, “My family.” The soldier then went inside my house and mywife followed him. I was punched with a closed fist in my stomach. I asked,“Why did you do that to me?” He said, “We have seen NPAs inthe area and in your house.” I said, “Maybe you just saw mychildren?” Soldiers were also pointing their guns at my children. Hesaid, “I don’t believe you.”[128]Soldiers, paramilitary members, and “rebelreturnees” working with the military have continued to refer to an“order of battle” and similar lists in threatening ways. Accordingto the government, “an ‘order of battle’ is a compilation ofdata on various threat groups … which aims to better understand thestrengths and weaknesses of these threat groups and to anticipate their futureactions.”[129]Philip Alston, then-UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary, orarbitrary executions, reported that in a leaked order of battle provided tohim—the authenticity of which he had no reason to doubt—hundreds ofprominent civil society groups and individuals were listed as members of organizationsthat the military deemed “illegitimate.”[130]For example, several residents in the Paquibato district ofDavao City said that they saw the army carrying a list when accompanied by arebel returnee whom they assumed had become a CAFGU. According to a former barangaycaptain, the rebel returnee told several people in the community that he hadseen the “list” of the 69th IB. He would threatenmembers of the community, saying, “You’d better watch out oryou’ll be included in the list.”[131]Theresidents believed the list was of people to be targeted for having links withthe NPA.[132]Military’sDenial of Involvement in Extrajudicial KillingsThe highest ranks of the military have consistently deniedresponsibility for extrajudicial killings, rather than recognizing the gravityof the problem, investigating how and why the military is involved, and holdingperpetrators accountable, regardless of rank. Less than a week after the 2010killing of Fernando Baldomero, armed forces spokesman Brig. Gen. Jose Mabantareportedly said:“Certainly we are not involved in that…. We allknow that in the leftist organization, purging from within has always beeninstituted or is a strategy of the underground armed organization.”[133]More broadly, Mabanta has said: “The performance of our duty is hinderedwhen our personnel are faced with human rights violations…. [M]ost humanright violations are in the line of duty.”[134]At the lowest ranks, the military has created an environmentin which foot soldiers have readily participated in killings of leftistactivists. A military insider told Human Rights Watch that even if the localcommander did not give the order to kill, “he knows of everything”and will protect his soldiers.[135]Soldiers have also been paid as hired killers, acting on behalf of privateinterests or other government agencies.The extent of participation by senior commanding officers inthe killing of leftist activists—and how far up the chain ofcommand—is less clear. There is much evidence of involvement of certainsenior officers, most prominently now-retired Gen. Jovito Palparan. As early as2004 the House of Representatives’ Committee on Civil, Political andHuman Rights recommended that Palparan be relieved of his position andinvestigated for his involvement in the killings. The Arroyo government’sMelo Commission also recommended that the Justice Department investigate hisinvolvement.[136]Failure to investigate and prosecute perpetrators in themilitary sends a message that killing leftist activists is allowed and anacceptable part of counterinsurgency operations.MilitaryFailure to Cooperate with Police and Other InquiriesThe military has not cooperated with police investigationsin the cases that Human Rights Watch investigated.For instance, in relation to the September 2010 killing ofleftist activist Rene Quirante, the Guihulngan police chief, Carlos Lacuesta,said the military failed to respond to a formal request for information aboutthe two identified suspects—one of whom is an alleged paramilitarymember, the other an alleged military “asset”—or provide anyinformation to assist in identifying the six accused, unidentified members ofthe Philippine Army.[137]Lacuesta said that police investigators had not formally interviewed anysoldiers. The police have attempted to determine what military operations werebeing conducted that night, but the military claims that no operations tookplace.At the same time, army investigators from the 11thIB interviewed the police investigator about the case.[138] Theoutcomes of the army investigation have not been shared with the police.[139]Even more concerning, Lacuesta described the close, informal military andpolice relationship, saying “[Lt. Col. Bitong, commander of the 11thIB, and I are] friends and can have a casual talk about [the killing].”[140]In the September 2010 killing of Vicente Felisilda in theCompostela Valley of Mindanao, police are investigating reports that a CAFGUmember whose father was allegedly killed by Felisilda some years earlier hadkilled Felisilda out of revenge.[141]The police investigator sought a copy of the log book, which indicated thatthis CAFGU member was on duty at the time of the killing, but the commander ofthe 72nd IB would not release it, saying it is necessary for thearmy’s defense if charges are filed at a later date.[142]The military has also failed to cooperate with localgovernment inquiries. For instance, on October 4, 2010, the Surigao del SurSangguniang Panlalawigan Committee on Laws and Justice and Human Rights met todiscuss the late August, early September 2010 forcible disappearances of RenatoDeliguer and Agustito Ladera.[143]The commanding officer of the 36th IB was invited to shed light onwhat happened, but he did not appear.[144] Nor did he send arepresentative or explain his non-appearance.[145]The military’s lack of cooperation with civilianauthorities extends to the very top. Despite a Supreme Court order thatrequired the AFP chief to provide to the Commission on Human Rights allevidence that may be relevant to the case of Jonas Burgos, the military judgeadvocate’s office refused to provide certain documents. To do so, hesaid, would “sanction a fishing expedition conducted at the expense ofmilitary personnel whose names will be unnecessarily dragged into[question].”[146]The military’s failure to cooperate with policeinvestigations is an old excuse for inaction by police investigators. In June2007, the Philippine government said, with respect to the August 2006 killingof Pastor Isias Santa Rosa, “Police investigators are having difficultysolving the case due to the noncooperation of the Philippine Army in theinvestigation.”[147]In this case there was clear physical evidence of involvement by militarypersonnel.[148]Failureof the Military to InvestigateThe military inspector general and the provost marshal aretasked with investigating soldiers and officers for administrative violations.The inspector general has the power to direct a board of inquiry to conductsuch investigations.[149]Human Rights Watch researchers have been unable to identify any case whereeither offices have investigated any member of the armed forces or paramilitaryforces for alleged involvement in extrajudicial killings or enforceddisappearances.Neither office has forwarded information suggesting it hasconducted such investigations. A letter from Human Rights Watch to the AFPrequesting clarification on the issue remained unanswered at this writing.Several military officers said the inspector general willonly direct a board of inquiry to investigate a case when the local commanderthinks it is “a serious case.”[150] Similarly, theprovost marshal will only investigate when “tapped” by seniormilitary commanders to do so.[151]Military officials at Fort Magsaysay told Human Rights Watch the provostmarshal had not been asked to investigate the Guevara killing, for instance,because, “It came out in our intelligence operation that no military wereinvolved, [so] we turned it over to the police.”[152]In practice, local military officers in the area where thekilling took place are often tasked with investigating the killing,compromising independence since it is typically the battalion stationed in thearea that is implicated in the killing. First, a spot report is completed. Then,often, a more detailed special report is commissioned. The AFP has not providedHuman Rights Watch with copies of any such reports to date.[153]The military’s public statements suggest that a coregoal of these reports is to absolve implicated soldiers. In the 2006 killing ofPastor Santa Rosa, the AFP investigation was confined to investigating thedeath of a military officer whose body was found near Santa Rosa’s bodyshortly after 10 armed men in fatigue uniforms abducted Santa Rosa from hishome. Santa Rosa’s wife identified the dead military officer as one ofher husband’s abductees. The report concluded the NPA was responsible,without citing any evidence to support such a conclusion.[154]Human Rights Watch research found only one extrajudicialkilling case in which a soldier has testified against members of the armedforces in the last decade.The military subjected this whistleblower—formerSgt. Esequias Duyogan—to harassment and financial sanctions, and thegovernment did nothing to secure his safety from the time he came forward totestify in 2007 until early 2011, when the Justice Department admitted himinto the witness protection program. The accused, on the other hand, hasreceived preferential treatment in jail.On October 14, 2000, six friends, Romualdo Orcullo,Jovencio Legare, Arnold Dangquiasan, Joseph Belar, Diosdado Oliver, andArtemio Ayala, were at a barangay fiesta—a village streetparty—when Army Cpl. Rodrigo Billones of the 62nd InfantryBattalion arrested them and took them to the nearby military camp. Their familieshave not seen them since.Some years later, Duyogan came forward and told how,following the arrests, he witnessed a dozen soldiers from his unit beat thesix young men to death with an iron rod and bury them. Three days later, theydug up the bodies, loaded them on a service vehicle, and brought them to aremote area where they burned the corpses. The Regional Trial Court in Agusandel Sur in July 2008 convicted Cpl. Billones of kidnapping and “seriousillegal detention” of the six men and sentenced him to 9 to 15 years inprison for each of the six victims. He has appealed his conviction to theCourt of Appeals.[155]Military personnel and other unidentified individuals havethreatened and harassed Duyogan, his family, and human rights defendersworking with him on several instances since he came forward to testify.[156]In August 2007, a military officer visited him at his Agusan del Sur home,purportedly at the behest of the divisional commander, and offered him200,000 pesos (US$4,600) to “go back to the folds of themilitary.”[157]Further, military officers told Duyogan that his salary, which he had notreceived since he agreed to testify, was being used for Cpl. Billones’legal defense.[158]Despitehis conviction and sentencing for a serious offense, Cpl. Billones lives withhis wife and two children in a house outside of the fence surrounding theAgusan del Sur provincial jail, though within the prison compound. Anofficial at the jail told Human Rights Watch that the jail warden, who is amilitary reservist, had granted Billones this privilege out of“camaraderie.”[159]Granting extraordinary privileges to soldiers convicted ofserious crimes reinforces impunity and sends a message that abuses will gounpunished.IV. Failure to Investigate and ProsecuteI just want a thorough investigation. We don’t expectit to be speedy…. We just want it to be thorough.—Wife of a leftist activist allegedly killed by themilitary, February 2011The Philippine government has consistently failed in itsobligations under international human rights law to hold accountableperpetrators of politically-motivated killings and enforced disappearances.Victims’ families are denied justice as killers literally get away withmurder. With inconclusive investigations, implausible suspects, warrants ofarrest infrequently executed, and no convictions, impunity prevails.Prosecutions in human rights cases are stymied by the poorpolicing that affects all criminal investigations in the Philippines. But eventhe most common problems will be exacerbated in cases where military personnel,police, and paramilitary members are implicated. Police investigations intoalleged extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances are not onlywoefully inadequate because of poor investigative skills and lack of capacity,but they face the further obstacles of little will to uncover abuses by thesecurity forces. Many obstacles remain for those investigations that progressto the prosecutor, including lack of cooperation between police and the prosecutorand lengthy trial processes, all of which heighten the risks for victims andwitnesses when government officials are the perpetrators.The government institutions charged with promoting humanrights and accountability have done little to end the widespread impunityenjoyed by perpetrators of extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances.Reforms to curtail “disappearances,” such as Supreme Court writs ofamparo and habeas data, which were designed to compel the military to releaseinformation on people in their custody, have been largely ineffectual.PoorPolicingInstead of “to serve and protect,” [the policelogo should be] “to hide and to run.” … Justice is all wewant…. No justice just adds to the pain.—Maridezda and Arnel Guran, parents of Rei Mon Guran,a student activist killed in July 2006Poor and indifferent policing, and profound public mistrustin the government’s investigative efforts, affects all criminalinvestigations in the Philippines. Several witnesses and victims’families whom Human Rights Watch interviewed said they expect no real resultsfrom government investigations. The wife of a victim told how her family isslowly conducting the investigation themselves, which she feels is her onlyoption.[160]In several cases, the family only had contact with the police once, often atthe wake, when they were interviewed.[161] Then, as onerelative said, “nothing more happened.”[162]Neither police nor prosecutors regularly update victims’ families;rather, families said, police often ask them for updates.Police still frequently believe that it is thefamilies’ duty to push the investigation, and conduct only the mostrudimentary of investigations. Too often, police fail to visit and adequatelyexamine the crime scene. Police continue to pressure victims’ relativesto provide information on witnesses and motives, and at times identify unlikelyperpetrators. Investigators routinely cease their investigation afteridentifying one suspect, rather than pursuing accomplices, particularly thosewho ordered the killing.Since investigators do not visit the crime scene,unqualified barangay officials or even family members collect obviousevidence from the site of the killing, often contaminating the evidence andinterrupting the evidentiary chain-of-custody. For example, the purokleader and barangay tanods visited the place where Julius Tamondez waskilled on August 12, 2010, to recover the body. They collected the bulletcasing and turned it over to barangay officials who wrapped it incellophane and kept it at the barangay hall. At some later date, thepolice collected it from the barangay hall.[163] Despitea barangay official reporting the crime to a police investigator overthe phone on the day of the killing and requesting that police investigate,police did not visit the crime scene or interview any first responders aboutit.[164]Investigatorscollect only the most obvious evidence, such as bullet casings. In each caseHuman Rights Watch examined, investigators have not collected shoe marks,cigarette butts, or phone records, and have not sought more advanced forensicexamination for obvious evidence.[165]Some police officers blamed inadequate investigations onlack of appropriate equipment. One investigator explained that his policestation does not own a camera and has only one patrol car, which can only beused in the town proper.[166]These are valid concerns and investigators should have viable transport andnecessary equipment for evidence collection, particularly cameras.Even in cases where investigators did visit the crime scene,they often did not invite forensic experts from Scene of the Crime Operatives(SOCO) to assist. Several police officers explained that SOCO only getsinvolved when the first responder or investigator requests their involvement.[167]A local police chief explained that he only requests SOCO involvement afterinitial processing of the evidence. However, he chose not to in the Dejos casebecause the investigator was “handling the situation.”[168]Investigators typically interview only the most obvious witnesses—familymembers or eyewitnesses who come forward and present themselves at policestations. They do not routinely proactively look for witnesses in the placewhere the crime was committed. For example, a review of the policeinvestigation into the killing of Baldomero revealed that police did not go door-to-doorin the area canvassing for possible witnesses, even though he was killed in apopulated area along a national highway. Often, the family or privateprosecutors are expected to identify witnesses.[169]Toooften police only file cases if a relative is willing to be a complainant. In aNovember 2010 case in which the victim of an alleged extrajudicial killing wasseparated from his wife, his colleague explained that police officers had toldhim that, “According to law, the first dependent needs to push thecase…. If the family doesn’t push for the case the case isconsidered closed.”[170] Since the wife is not doingso, police are not actively pursuing the investigation.In a break with this practice, the police departmentinvestigating the July 12, 2010 killing of Josephine Estacio in Bataan filed acase against Alfred Alipio—allegedly a member of a breakaway communistgroup—saying that a witness had come forward and identified Alipio as thegunman.[171]However, this reform has not been institutionalized and this case presents aquestionable example as the charges were filed against an unlikely perpetrator.Several things indicate that this witness may not actually have seen thegunman, and the witness identified Alipio from a “photo board” thatshowed only his photograph.[172]Investigators told Human Rights Watch that the witness was under theirprotective custody, but he failed to appear at a hearing called by theprosecutor and police said that they were not concerned for his welfare.[173]Furthermore, the tricycle driver who drove Estacio on the day she was killedhad described the gunman as wearing a mask, not that tall, and with a slightlyrounded body. Alipio is tall and well built. On this basis, the prosecutor was“not convinced” that the new witness had positively identifiedAlipio as the gunman.[174]There is a widespread belief that families have to pay foran investigation to be thorough. In particular, colleagues of a victimdescribed investigators telling them that they would have to pay money toinvolve the National Bureau of Investigation in the case.[175]In one case, the wife of a victim said that she refused to consent to havingher husband’s body autopsied because she did not have the money.[176]There is very little oversight of police investigations andpolice stations are disorganized. In one incident, the city police chiefexplained that the investigator was not around and “I do not know evenwhere he placed the investigation folder.”[177]In another, the deputy city police chief explained that he had only recentlybeen transferred and did not know where investigation folders were kept. Hesaid, “Usually the investigator manages his case folder” ratherthan there being a central filing cabinet.[178] In cases thatHuman Rights Watch examined, investigations often stalled due to a personnelchange within a police station, which is a regular occurrence.[179]Investigationsof Extrajudicial Killings and Enforced DisappearancesInvestigationsin Conflict AreasThe investigator is just like a desk officer; just makingreports from his table.—Wifeof a human rights activist allegedly killed by the military, February 2011In addition to the serious shortcomings that all criminalinvestigations experience in the Philippines, police investigations into crimesallegedly committed by military personnel face further hurdles. Policeinvestigations often rely entirely on witnesses; in several killingsinvestigated by Human Rights Watch, investigators did not go to the scene ofthe crime at all.[180]In others, they only examined the immediate vicinity where the body was found,even if evidence suggested the person was killed elsewhere.Given that killings of suspected CPP-NPA supporters oftentake place in the vicinity of conflict areas between the NPA and the military,the police’s security concerns in reaching the crime scene may begenuine. For instance, the police officer in charge of Mawab police stationsaid security concerns meant that investigators could not go to the area whereFelisilda was killed. “There are a lot of land mines in the area,”he said.[181]In several cases, investigators instead asked the family to bring witnesses tothe police station.Thelocal police chief in Guihulngan said that investigators did not visit thescene of the crime as the area is “three or four hours walking distanceand is very hostile.”[182] The investigator said:I wanted to go to the crime scene to collect evidence, butno other police officer would accompany me because [they were afraid for their]security. Also, because we have only one patrol car that can only go on thehighway, we had to rely on the mayor for transport.[183]In other instances, police failure to investigate reflectedlack of willingness on the part of authorities to pursue a case implicating themilitary. In the forcible disappearances of Deliguer and Ladera, both familiesreported to the police that the men were missing. However, at no time didpolice visit their residences or farms to investigate.[184] Accordingto a police report, the chief of police in Marihatag asked the commandingofficer of the 36th IB if the two were in military custody. He had“no knowledge of the ‘disappearance,’” but directed hisintelligence operatives to assist in locating the missing persons.[185]The October report recommended that the police “be given ample time toconduct thorough and in depth investigation.” However, when interviewedin March 2011, neither the chief investigator nor the police chief couldidentify any investigative steps taken since this date.[186]Failure to Pursue Evidence of MilitaryInvolvementPolice routinely avoid pursuing evidence of militaryinvolvement. A foreign police officer who has been working with Philippinepolice investigators said that he had found investigations went cold as soon asthey pointed to the military.[187]The relative of an alleged perpetrator explained that although police visit theremote area where her husband was killed to investigate regular criminal cases,“police distance themselves from abuses by the military.”[188]Investigators have not formally interviewed any soldiers or commanders in anyof the cases investigated by Human Rights Watch, despite evidence of militaryinvolvement.This has long been a problem. “Ricardo,” theformer soldier, told Human Rights Watch that when he was ordered to kill twoalleged NPA runners in the 1990s, the police “pointed to the NPA [as theperpetrators] since they are afraid of us (the Philippine Army)…. Theywere afraid that they might be [the] next [target, if they properly investigatedthe army].”[189]He said that the police did not question any member of the military about thekillings.[190]Police have captured and charged two alleged soldiers forthe June 14, 2010 killing of Benjamin Bayles in Negros Occidental. Policearrested the suspects after an alert was placed for a black Honda TMXmotorcycle without a plate number, being ridden by two men.[191] Policesaw the two, arrested them, and found them in possession of unregisteredfirearms.[192]Initially, the police chief said over radio that the two accused had introducedthemselves as members of the 61st IB of the Philippine Army.[193]The next day he withdrew this statement: the suspects now claim to be fishermenand deny any links to the military.[194]The registered owner of motorcycle they were riding, Pfc. Reygine Laus, is asoldier with the 61st IB.[195] During a budgethearing, Defense Secretary Voltaire Gazmin accepted that the accused men were PhilippineArmy personnel.[196]In addition, Bayles’ neighbor has testified that armed men in militarycamouflage who introduced themselves as members of the army visited her placeand asked her about Bayles on several occasions.[197]The police investigator has not interviewed anyone in themilitary about the case. He said that his only action to determine whether theaccused are members of the armed forces was to give the case to an intelligenceofficer and ask him to profile the suspects.[198] Nor has hemonitored or attempted to determine whether members of the military arevisiting the accused in jail. He told Human Rights Watch that since the jailwas “a long way away” he had no way to find out who visits them.[199]Moreover, he said that to further investigate this case would violate the subjudice rule—a rule that prevents people from commenting on theoutcome of a case while it is before the court.[200]In several cases implicating military personnel, policeinvestigators sought to show that the motive was personal. This may have beendue to camaraderie with the military and the police force’s “withus or against us” attitude, fear of military reprisal, or the additionalpressure and reporting obligations that local police officers face inextrajudicial killing cases.Investigators have claimed personal motives from seeminglyarbitrary evidence. For instance, in the case of Carlo “Caloy”Rodriguez, union president of the Calamba Water District who was gunned downalong the National Highway in Calamba City on November 12, 2010, investigatorsdetermined that, because he suffered multiple gunshot wounds, he was the victimof a crime of passion fuelled by a personal grudge.[201] Thisis a dubious conclusion: while police may dismiss any motive relating to alabor dispute because several witnesses spoke of Rodriguez having a goodrelationship with the general manager, the number of gunshots was no basis todetermine that the killing was “not politically motivated.”[202]Rodriguez was affiliated with the Confederation for Unityand Recognition Advancement Government Employee (COURAGE) and the Samahan ngWater District Sa Buong Pilipinas (WATER), broader leftist organizations thatthe military has said are connected with the CPP-NPA.[203] Policehave not investigated this potential motive.Since President Aquino came to office, several policeinvestigators and local police chiefs have said that provincial and nationalpolice headquarters have pressured them to file cases in extrajudicial killingcases. However, families have said this pressure often unintentionally meansthat investigators fail to investigate the killing thoroughly; instead, they rushthe investigation and file charges against only one of several suspects, andpressure families to identify witnesses and—essentially—conduct theinvestigation themselves and report back to police. A victim’s relativesaid, “[The police investigator] was pleading because he was beingquestioned by provincial and national PNP why a case hadn’t been filed.He wanted to fast track the filing of a case as they were under suchpressure.”[204]TaskForces Established to Investigate CasesIn four of the seven extrajudicial killing cases that HumanRights Watch investigated, the police established some form of a task force toinvestigate. No such task forces were created in the three cases of enforceddisappearances. The task forces have had negligible effect.In one case, an investigator explained that although“a Special Investigation Task Group had been formed to investigate thecase, the group has just relied on me to do the work.”[205]In several cases, the formation of the task force appears tobe little more than a public relations exercise. For example, the police formedTask Group Baldomero the day after the killing and the day before Baldomero wasburied on July 17, 2010. The task group held a press conference to announcethat a suspect had been identified and that charges were to be filed.[206]But the task group was active for a month at most, a relative told Human RightsWatch, and the family “felt the pressure to file the case” beforeinvestigators had sufficiently examined the involvement of other suspects,particularly the military. The family said the press conference made them feel used.[207]HastyDiscontinuance of InvestigationsIn the cases of alleged extrajudicial killings that HumanRights Watch investigated, investigations ceased once a first suspect was identified.Perhaps because it would have meant investigating up the military chain ofcommand, investigators did not continue with the aim of identifying accomplicesor people who may have ordered the killing. For instance, once one of thealleged perpetrators in the Baldomero killing was identified and police filedcharges with the prosecutor, investigators did not continue to work to identifyhis accomplice, whoever ordered the killing, or to investigate reports ofmilitary involvement. Investigators told Human Rights Watch it was now up tothe courts.[208]In the Guevarra case, the military ceased to be suspected when a DPWH officerwas implicated.[209]However, investigators did not continue to investigate the possibility thatmilitary members were involved, including as the gunmen.The October 25, 2005 killing of Ricardo “Ric”Ramos, then-president of Central Azucarera de Tarlac Labor Union, is anotherexample of police discontinuing an investigation once a suspect has beenidentified, and the military failing to help police identify military suspects.In Ramos’ case, a gunman shot him twice in the head as he sat at a tablewith about 20 men, killing him.[210]On the morning of his death, Ramos had had a stern conversation with soldiers,who were present when wages were being distributed to union workers following adeal made during a strike. That afternoon and evening, two soldiers had visitedhim three times and were sent away. Ramos had received a funeral wreath thatsaid “RIP Ricardo Ramos” a month earlier. The night after Ramos waskilled, the small army detachment, which had been set up about 50 meters fromwhere the killing occurred, was removed.[211]Pfc.Roderick dela Cruz has been identified as one of the soldiers that visitedRamos on October 25, 2005, and is currently standing trial. However, there isdebate over who the second soldier was. At least three witnesses identifiedSgt. Romeo Castillo as the second solider; as such, he was included as arespondent in the complaint.[212] He denied that he visitedRamos at all that day and presented further evidence at the preliminaryinvestigation before the Office of the City Prosecutor to support this. Theassistant provincial prosecutor, Ma. Lourdes D. Soriano, recommended that he bedropped as a party from the complaint.[213]Dela Cruz and 2d Lt. Alberto Tolledo informed the Office of the City Prosecutorthat Sgt. Melchor Santos was the soldier who accompanied dela Cruz. Police havenot filed charges against Santos or investigated the local commander. Still,they have classified this case as solved.At present, the PNP does not have a central database ormethod for collecting information about criminal investigations to allow forcross-checking of evidence. The EU is set to fund the creation of such a systemin 2011.PoliceFears of Military RetaliationSeveral police officers expressed fears about investigatingalleged extrajudicial killings implicating the military. When a relative toldone investigator about witnesses seeing soldiers near where her husband waskilled, he told her to forget about the military’s involvement. “Tigoktayo dyan” or “We’re dead” he said—indicatingthat he thought his life would be at risk if he investigated militaryinvolvement.[214]In another case, the police told a victim’s son the “suspects are military,but it is dangerous to investigate about the case.”[215] Onepolice investigator told how police officers avoid becoming involved ininvestigating extrajudicial killing cases implicating the military, either outof a belief that it is disloyal or because they fear reprisal. He said:On the day of the killing, [the police chief called me and]asked [me] to handle the case. Other investigators did not want to[investigate] the case because the victim was seen as an NPA member and themilitary were accused [as the perpetrators]. They did not want to [because] themilitary would be unhappy with them.[216]Colleagues have ostracized and threatened this policeofficer for investigating the killing—treatment that he said is notunusual. The officer has received several threatening text messages fromunknown numbers.[217]He said:[Most of my fellow police officers] have created a threateningenvironment for me…. One time when I arrived at the police station, onepolice officer shouted at me that I am an enemy of the state…. There is agroup influence…. I just avoid them and … do my work. One day inthe station a fellow officer said to me, “There will be a time ofreckoning because you’re going out of your way [to investigate this case].”[218]Human Rights Watch is unaware of any police officer whoharassed or threatened investigators for working on such cases beinginvestigated or sanctioned.[219]Mistreatment has at times directly interfered with investigation of the case.In one case that Human Rights Watch investigated, someone—supposedly afellow police officer—stole the case folder of an extrajudicial killinginvestigation from the police station. It has never been recovered.[220]Fearsof Retaliation Against Witnesses and Victim’s RelativesThere has been harassment. They are monitoring what I amdoing… I am cautious. I fear for my life. How can I carry this? I want toget justice. But at the same time I am scared they might go after my family.—Sonia Santa Rosa, whose husband, Pastor Isias deLeon Santa Rosa, was allegedly killed by soldiers in 2006Each witness and relative of victims that Human Rights Watchinterviewed spoke of fears for their safety. One police officer said,“Here in the Philippines, if you talk, you will be killed.”[221]Several police investigators said witnesses were too afraid to tell them whatthey saw.[222]A local government official told Human Rights Watch how themilitary harassed someone who had witnessed military abuse. He said that thewitness:Told me five men came to her house and [one] introducedhimself as Ka Ben [a name suggesting an NPA nom de guerre]. However, sherecognized “Ka Ben’s” face from the [incident she witnessed].They were from the military. Ka Ben then threatened her that if she[testified], something would happen to her family…. He said, “I amnot bluffing and very serious about this conversation.” Since then,people have told her that people have been regularly visiting [her place].She’s not been staying in her house since.[223]A witness in the case filed against two alleged soldiersregarding the June 2010 killing of Benjamin Bayles reported to police that onNovember 5, 2010, she was sleeping with her six children when about 20unidentified armed men wearing army fatigues woke her around midnight. It wasthe second time that armed men in fatigues had visited and threatened her sinceshe had agreed to testify in an extrajudicial killing case in which the accusedwere allegedly soldiers.[224]She said one of them said to her, “Do you want me to shoot you in thehead?” while pointing a .38 caliber pistol at her.[225]Retribution takes various forms. A witness to the November2010 killing of Carlo Rodriguez—a security guard—was reassigned toanother place after he cooperated with the police investigation.[226]His employer later terminated his employment, he believes, because hecooperated with the investigation.[227]A police investigator explained that some businesses consider it risky tocooperate with investigations, so discourage employees from doing so.[228]Military harassment of witnesses and victims’ familieshas long been a problem in the Philippines. “Ricardo,” the formersoldier, told Human Rights Watch that he was ordered to harass witnesses andrelatives of extrajudicial killings from time to time. He said that in a casein which a fellow soldier had been accused of shooting and killing a civilian,a senior commanding officer ordered him and his fellow soldiers to wearcivilian clothes and fill the court room.[229] He said:“The purpose was to frighten the complainant and witnesses so as they couldnot speak.”[230]In several cases prior to the Aquino administration thatHuman Rights Watch has previously reported on, relatives of victims continue tofear for their safety.[231]The parents of student leader Rei Mon “Ambo” Guran—who waskilled on July 31, 2006, at around 6 a.m. on a crowded bus in Bulan,Sorsorgon—said that when they wrote to the National Bureau ofInvestigation to seek their assistance, they were told, “Our enemy isstrong.”[232]Inadequate,Inflexible Witness ProtectionThere have been improvements in the implementation of thewitness protection program since Aquino took office, but substantial reformsare still needed.Anyonewho has witnessed or has information about a serious crime who will testifybefore any investigating authority or court may be admitted to the JusticeDepartment’s witness protection program, provided the testimony can becorroborated and there is a real threat to the safety of the witness or his orher family.[233] The witness must sign anundertaking, among other things, to testify.[234]Under the program, witnesses are to be provided with secure housing (until theyhave testified, the threat disappears, or is reduced to a manageable level),assistance in obtaining means of livelihood, financial assistance, health care,and job protection.[235] When the circumstanceswarrant, the witness and immediate family members are entitled to relocationand/or change of identity at the department’s expense.[236]Investigating agencies and the courts are to ensure speedy trials in cases inwhich witnesses are in protection, with the aim of concluding the case withinthree months.[237]In practice, witnesses admitted to the witness protectionprogram are confined to safe houses for years on end. Although witnessesreceive financial assistance, it is limited and they have little to no abilityto earn a livelihood. In reality, trials that involve protected witnesses arenot dealt with more swiftly than others, and witnesses do not receive newidentities at the end of proceedings.[238] JusticeDepartment officials on occasion continue to construe the witness protectionprogram in an inflexible, limited way, and do not adequately assist witnessesand families in applying for protection.Witnesses have told Human Rights Watch that they believeauthorities will detain them under the program. A barangay official saidof a witness, “He wants to be free; he doesn’t want his liferearranged because of witness protection.”[239] Thisunderstanding is not far removed from the reality. One couple under protectionsaid, “Sometimes they let us out…. They’ve even allowed us toplant a small garden in the yard.”[240] Witnessprotection needs to address security and also economic concerns of witnesseswho do not want to leave their businesses or sources of livelihood. Severalwitnesses have sought the protection of NGOs or churches. A private prosecutorexplained, “They don’t trust authorities.”[241]Few police officers and prosecutors appear familiar with theprogram, and provide incorrect or limited information about it. The chief investigatorin one case said incorrectly that the program only provides security once thewitness testifies.[242]In a 2010 case where a child was an eyewitness to a killing, the prosecutorclaimed only the child would be protected:As far as I know, it is the [witness] who would betransferred to a safe-house, but certain protections would be extended to therest of the family. However, according to the [witness’s] mother, thiswould add further trauma [for the child witness].[243]In fact, the witness protection program would accommodatethe immediate family of a child witness. The child’s mother sought aflexible form of witness protection that includes funding her and herchild’s relocation to another town of her choice where she has family andthe necessary support for raising a child alone. She did not want to go into asafe house as she did not want her son isolated from society.[244]She said that regional justice department officers told her that she would haveto accept the terms they set out for her: “This is a package…. Theytold me only the DOJ can choose the place [for relocation].”[245]Thegovernment has provided some form of protection for witnesses or family membersof victims in only two of the recent cases that Human Rights Watchinvestigated. In a positive move reflecting what was hoped to be increasedflexibility in applying protection, police provided security outside the homeof witnesses and victims’ relatives immediately after the killings inthese two cases.[246] In the Estacio case,protection was provided for a short period as the family relocated itself, forits own protection. However, in the Baldomero case police withdrew protectionat short notice without providing a justified reason, when the risk to thewitnesses remained high. When Human Rights Watch raised concerns about thiswith the Justice Department in May 2011, the department said it had told thefamily in writing that witnesses could apply for witness protection but had notreceived any applications.[247]Obstaclesto ProsecutionProsecutions in the Philippines have long been hindered byvarious obstacles, many of which affect the Philippine justice systemgenerally, but which appear to be exaggerated in cases involving serious humanrights violations. These include the failure of police and prosecutors tocoordinate their efforts to develop a strong case, failure of police to servearrest warrants, and delays throughout departmental and court processes.Out of hundreds of killings and enforced disappearancessince 2001, there have been only seven successfully prosecuted cases, resultingin the conviction of 12 defendants.[248]There has not been a single conviction of active military personnel at the timeof the killing. No senior military officers have been convicted either fordirect involvement in these violations or as a matter of commandresponsibility.Anadditional hurdle in “disappearance” cases is the fact thePhilippines lacks specific legislation criminalizing enforced disappearances.Rather, these must be prosecuted under the crimes of kidnapping and unlawfuldetention. The Philippines has yet to sign the International Convention for theProtection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, which outlines theinternational standards on preventing and punishing enforced disappearances.[249]Cooperationbetween prosecutors and police in human rights cases appears to be theexception rather than the norm despite several departmental orders toprosecutors and police to work together. The recent alleged extrajudicialkillings investigated by Human Rights Watch demonstrated no evidence of realpolice collaboration with prosecutors, which contributes to the lack ofprosecutions.Twocases that Human Rights Watch previously investigated illustrate severalobstacles to justice that arise after police file a case with the prosecutor.Despite strong evidence of military involvement in the August 3, 2006 killingof Pastor Isias Santa Rosa in Bicol, prosecutors have twice dismissed chargesthat police filed against a military officer, citing insufficient evidence.[250] The prosecutors never worked with thepolice to identify what evidence should be gathered to sustain a case thatcould go to court. Nor have the prosecutors requested that police investigatefurther, indicated to police what evidence is necessary, or taken an active rolein acquiring this evidence.TheSeptember 8, 2004 killing of Bacar and Carmen Japalali shows many of thechallenges present in even those cases that are properly investigated.Morethan 30 soldiers allegedly shot to death Bacar Japalali—a suspectedmember of the Moro National Liberation Front, an ethnic Moro armedgroup—and his wife, Carmen while they were asleep. Bacar’sbrother, Talib Japalali, described what he saw when he arrived at hisbrother’s house: “There were bullet holes everywhere; pieces ofbone were splattered around the house.” Meanwhile, his brother’sbody still lay on his sleeping mat under his mosquito net. A soldier toldTalib that they had had to kill Bacar because he fought back. Police investigators,including forensic experts, and the governor arrived promptly at the Japalaliresidence and conducted a full investigation.Despiteforensic evidence revealing no traces of gunpowder on the hands of the coupleand two eyewitness accounts countering the military’s response that thedeaths were the result of an armed encounter, the prosecutor dismissed thecomplaint for lack of probable cause without attempting to gather additionalevidence, or informing the family.[251]After some time, the deputy ombudsman overturned this decision, resolving tofile murder charges against 32 soldiers and referred the case back to the localprosecutor, for prosecution.TheRegional Trial Court judge—without a motion from the defense—downgradedthe charges to the lesser charge of homicide and dismissed the chargesagainst all but 8 of the 32 soldiers whom the ombudsman had said should becharged. He delayed issuing even these eight arrest warrants. One day whenTalib went to the court to follow up on the case, he received a message thatthe judge would see him. Talib said the judge told him in a private meeting,“They’re willing to pay.” Talib answered, “I did notcome here for money; I want justice.”[252]TheJapalali family filed a complaint against the judge with the Supreme Court. Thejudge recused himself from hearing the case but has not been disciplined orcriminally charged.[253] The new judge issued theeight warrants of arrest, however even then, arrest warrants were not serveduntil the family placed considerable pressure on the police and an NGOassisted with serving the warrants. The eight have now been arrested and areconfined to the military camp. Five years later, the court is still hearingevidence, and no new charges have been brought against the 24 soldiers whosecharges were dismissed.Failureto Serve Arrest WarrantsThe process for serving arrest warrants does not encouragepolice to take the initiative, which becomes especially problematic where thesuspect to be served is a member of the armed forces. Once a court issues anarrest warrant, the standard procedure is that the court sends it to the policechief, who gives it to the warrant server, a police officer solely responsiblefor serving warrants and subpoenas.[254]Within 10 days, the warrant server is required to serve the warrant and thennotify the court. A clerk of court told Human Rights Watch that if a warrant isnot served, the court will wait six months, then archive the case.[255]In one case, after the court had issued a warrant of arrest,the police investigator told the victim’s family to make an officialrequest to a certain police official to serve the warrants, because otherpolice stations cover the scope of the addresses of the two suspects.[256]In another case, the clerk of the court said:Hopefully the family of the victim is working for thearrest of the accused. If the family has friends in the military, they can askthem to coordinate with the police or hire a private agent. If there is nomotion from the family, [the court] has no choice but to archive [the case].[257]The military appears to be less than willing in serioushuman rights cases to assist police in serving warrants of arrest on soldiers.The Guihulngan police chief, Carlos Lacuesta, told Human Rights Watch that hisoffice had provided the commander of the 11th IB, Lt. Col. RamilBitong, with a copy of the warrant of arrest in the Quirante case shortly afterit was issued.[258]However, a military officer said the “warrant hasn’t reachedus” and that it is not the military’s role to assist in the serviceof warrants.[259]In the case of the October 25, 2005 killing of labor leaderRicardo Ramos, the police did not serve the warrant for the arrest of an armyprivate, Pfc. Roderick dela Cruz, for nearly two years.[260] DelaCruz continued to serve the army during this period and was eventually arrestedon May 21, 2008, after Task Force 211 intervened, at the armed forcesheadquarters in Taguig City.[261]Human Rights Watch is unaware of any police officers being disciplined orprosecuted for failing to make proper efforts to serve arrest warrants in casesof human rights violations. Nor have any military officers been disciplined forfailing to cooperate with the police. The court archived the Ramos case whenthe warrant against dela Cruz was not served within six months of issuance.Courts have similarly archived numerous cases despite strong evidence againstthe accused.Failureof the Special CourtsIn March 2007, Chief Justice Reynato Puno designated 99regional trial courts “special courts,” with orders to resolveextrajudicial killing cases within 90 days.[262] These courts weremandated to hold a continuous trial in such cases, as trials in the Philippinesinvolve scheduling several half-day sessions over several months, with manypostponements. The trial was to be completed within 60 days of when the casewas filed in court, and judgment was to be rendered within a further 30 days.If an extrajudicial killing case was sent (“raffled”) to a courtthat was not designated a “special court,” the court was still tocomply with these guidelines. Special courts were to submit a status report tothe chief justice on the tenth day of each month. These guidelines were neverimplemented.Writ of AmparoWe did everything for theirrelease but nothing happened…. The last case we filed was a motion forreview in the Supreme Court [in March 2009]. Until now it has not beenresolved…—Mother of Karen Empeño, who disappeared in2006, October 2009. The Supreme Court handed down its decision more than twoyears after the motion was filed, on May 31, 2011.Optimismover Supreme Court writs to compel military and other government agents torelease information about people in their custody has been dampened by thedifficulty in enforcing them and long court delays. The writs of amparo andhabeas data empower courts to issue orders to protect a person; produceinformation needed to establish a missing person’s whereabouts; inspectlikely detention facilities; update, rectify, suppress, or destroy informationabout a threatened person; and provide other relief to people whose right tolife, liberty, and security is unlawfully violated or threatened withviolation.[263] These remedies go beyond thebetter known writ of habeas corpus, which—in a bid to overcome thestate’s blanket denial of custody—empowers a court to free adetainee if the public body detaining the person does not prove he or she islawfully detained. Rather than merely ordering the release, authorities mayhave to exercise great diligence to determine the missing person’s whereabouts.In September 2008, the Court of Appeals granted writs forthe release of Karen Empeño, 22, Sherlyn Cadapan, 29, and Manuel Merino,57, whom the military arrested in mid-2006 in Haganoy, Bulacan.[264]The court ordered the military to “immediately release” the threedetainees[265]Several witnesses have testified to seeing the three in military custody.[266]Raymond Manalo, who together with his brother Reynaldo escaped military custodyin 2008, has told how he witnessed soldiers kill Merino and burn his body. Hehas also told of the horrific torture and sexual violence that he witnessedsoldiers force Cadapan and Empeño to endure.[267]Cadapan’s mother, Erlinda, told Human Rights Watch how she thinks ofManalo’s testimony of what her daughter was forced to endure:When I can recall [what] the military [had] been doing toher—as a lady being hung upside down when naked and being played like ananimal, it’s really painful for me.Despite this evidence indicating that the women are at graverisk, as of March 2009, the court had not enforced the writs.[268]On March 5, 2009, the Court of Appeals issued a resolutiondenying the Cadapan and Empeño families’ motion to citerespondents in contempt for failing to comply with the court’s order torelease the two women detainees. Justice Mendoza said in the resolution:Whilethe Court, in the dispositive portion, ordered the respondents “toimmediately RELEASE, or cause the release from detention the persons of SherlynCadapan, Karen Empeño and Manuel Merino,” the decision is not ipsofacto [or, by the fact itself] executory. The use of the term “immediately”does not mean that it is automatically executory. There is nothing in the Ruleon the Writ of Amparo which states that a decision rendered is immediatelyexecutory.[269]Further, the judge ruled that the parties’ petitionsfor review stopped the decision from being final and executory.[270]On March30, 2009, Cadapan and Empeño’s families filed a petition forreview of this decision by the Supreme Court. The court, which took more thantwo years to decide this urgent matter, ruled on May 31, 2011, that theappellate court erred in ruling that its directive to immediately releaseSherlyn, Karen, and Merino was not automatically executed and that there was noneed to file a motion for execution in amparo or habeas datacases—effectively removing a procedural delay in enforcing the writs.[271] The court found that the appellate courtalso erred when it did not specifically name the respondents that it found tobe responsible for the abduction and continued detention of the three and namedLt. Col. Anotado, Lt. Mirabelle, Gen. Palparan, Lt. Col. Boac, Arnel Enriquez,and Donald Caigas as apparently responsible. “They should thus be made tocomply with the September 17, 2008 Decision of the appellate court toimmediately release Sherlyn, Karen and Merino,” the court said.[272]In recognizing the urgency of such cases, the court said:Sincethe right to life, liberty and security of a person is at stake, theproceedings should not be delayed and execution of any decision thereon must beexpedited as soon as possible since any form of delay, even for a day, mayjeopardize the very rights that these writs seek to immediately protect.[273]The court did not explain its two-year delay in decidingthis matter, which further jeopardized the lives as well as the rights ofCadapan, Empeño, and Merino.[274]Weaknessof Human Rights InstitutionsThe widespread impunity enjoyed by perpetrators ofextrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances is exacerbated by theinadequacies of institutions charged with promoting human rights andaccountability, including the Commission on Human Rights, the Ombudsman, andthe Joint Monitoring Committee.During the past several years, agencies at all levels ofgovernment have created their own human rights mechanisms. For instance, thePNP and the AFP have created human rights desks within their agencies.[275]In addition, many barangay, municipal, provincial, and regional councilshave committees responsible for human rights. However, there are reallimitations, particularly at local levels. One member of a barangay humanrights committee told Human Rights Watch, “We don’t know how to dothe job. When we approach a local office, they tell us to go to other offices.We don’t know the processes.”[276]NationalCommission on Human RightsThe Commission on Human Rights (CHR) is an autonomousgovernment body charged with, among other things, investigating “on itsown or on complaint by any party, all forms of human rights violationsinvolving civil and political rights,” and recommending prosecution whenits investigation establishes a prima facie case of a violation.[277]In several recent cases that Human Rights Watch hasinvestigated, the CHR did not actively investigate the killing or “disappearance,”did not provide updates to relatives on the status of their investigations, andplaced significant burdens on family members who were applying for compensationfrom the commission. The CHR did not provide psychological support to the victims’relatives or witnesses in any of the investigated cases.The commission has a central office in Metro Manila, andregional and sub-regional offices throughout the rest of the country.[278]The commission’s effectiveness largely depends on thepersonnel at the regional or sub-regional office, or whether the central officehas taken a particular interest in the case.[279] Certain directorsare proactive in investigating extrajudicial killings and enforceddisappearances, carrying on their own investigation while actively following upwith other investigating agencies; others are not. In the course of HumanRights Watch’s research, only in one case did a family speak of the CHRactually visiting the crime scene.[280]In each of the cases from 2010 that Human Rights Watch investigated,commission staff did not—on even one occasion—providevictims’ families with an update of their investigation. LeonisaLabrador, whose husband was killed on September 3, 2010, allegedly by a soldierwith the assistance of a paramilitary member, said, “I filed the casewith the CHR but until now I have not received an update.”[281]Several relatives of victims said that the commission didnot actively investigate the killing or disappearance of their family member.[282]Atty. Alberto Sipaco, Jr. of the Region XI office told Human Rights Watch,“There is a problem of witnesses not coming into the office. People aregetting more silent.”[283]In each “disappearance” case discussed here, the CHR has not beenat all involved in assisting the families or investigating the alleged abuse,as is required under its mandate.[284]Sonia Santa Rosa recounted one conversation with the Region V CHR officefollowing her husband’s death:I told them that it’s their job to investigate. Butthey said that they had no fare, or transport, or allowance…. Theirinvestigation involved recording the events; as for what action should betaken, they did not do anything.…I asked for their help [whenI felt I was under military surveillance], but said they couldn’t doanything.[285]In each incident of a killing, the commission is supposed todetermine whether it was an extrajudicial killing and if so, provide the familywith 10,000 pesos [US$230] in compensation. This process often becomes anadditional burden for the victim’s family. Porcino Tamondez, whose sonwas killed in Davao City in August 2010, told Human Rights Watch: “Wefiled a complaint with them, but there were lots of requirements, each whichcost money [in transport] and time—they require a police report, a reportfrom the embalmer.”[286]Similarly, the family of an activist killed in Negros said:The CHR promised to give us financial help, but it’shard for us to process all the necessary requirements to claim the money. Weare just farmers, we live a very humble life here in the province and for us toget the claim the money would be very tedious and very hard for us.[287]The CHR does not provide any form of psychological supportto families of victims or witnesses. In a case in which a child witnessed thekilling, the mother said she requested counseling for her son and was told shewould have to pursue it at her own expense.[288]On occasion, CHR employees are subject to threats andharassment, particularly in cases in which the military or police areimplicated. One regional director told Human Rights Watch that someone calledhim and advised him to “go slow,” because the suspect is ahigh-ranking officer.[289]Officeof the OmbudsmanThe Office of the Ombudsman is a government body tasked withinvestigating complaints filed against government officers or employees andenforcing administrative, civil, and criminal liability.[290] Formallyindependent of the executive branch and the armed forces, it is in a positionto effectively investigate allegations of abuse by local government officials andsecurity force personnel. However, it has a poor record when it comes toresolving complaints brought to its attention.Human Rights Watch had found that the Office of theOmbudsman has done almost nothing to investigate the involvement of members ofthe security forces in extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearancesduring the administration of President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo. It is hopedthat under the new ombudsman, not yet appointed at this writing, the officewill actively investigate cases for prosecution.[291]JointMonitoring CommitteeThe Joint Monitoring Committee, created under theComprehensive Agreement on Respect for Human Rights and InternationalHumanitarian Law, which the government and NDFP signed in 1998, is charged withmonitoring implementation of the agreement by receiving complaints and makingrecommendations to the parties. The committee is to comprise six members andfour observers, who are to be representatives of human rights organizations,half of whom the government is to appoint, half of whom the NDFP is to appoint.[292]It is to operate by consensus, receiving complaints of violations, requestinginvestigation of complaints by the party concerned, and making recommendations.Although the committee was formed in 2004, peace negotiationscollapsed later that year and the government was not willing to convene thecommittee outside of peace talks. The government and NDFP-nominated sections ofthe committee continued to operate, however, receiving complaints and makingsome queries to act on them. The committee reconvened during the February 2011formal peace talks and discussed the supplemental guidelines for thecommittee’s operation, the process for consolidating complaints receivedthus far, and parameters for the conduct of joint investigations.[293]V. Legal FrameworkDuty toInvestigate and Prosecute Human Rights ViolationsUnder international law, the Philippines has a duty toinvestigate serious violations of international human rights law and punish theperpetrators.[294]As a state party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights(ICCPR), the Philippines has an obligation to ensure that any person whoserights are violated “shall have an effective remedy” whengovernment officials or agents have committed the violation. Those seeking aremedy shall have this right determined by competent judicial, administrative,or legislative authorities. When granted, these remedies shall be enforced bycompetent authorities.[295]In accordance with the UN Principles on the EffectivePrevention and Investigation of Extra-Legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions,all suspected cases of unlawful killings, including in response to complaintsby relatives and reliable reports, should have a “thorough, prompt andimpartial investigation.” This investigation should “determine thecause, manner and time of death, the person responsible, and any pattern orpractice which may have brought about that death.” The investigationshould result in a publicly available written report.[296]The United Nations has developed guidance for theinvestigation of extrajudicial executions, the Model Protocol for a LegalInvestigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions(“Minnesota Protocol”). The Minnesota Protocol, drawing on lessonslearned from major inquiries into serious human rights violations, detailsprocedures for conducting investigations consistent with international law.They include:Where the political views, religious or ethnic affiliation,or social status of the victim give rise to suspicion of government involvementor complicity in the death because of any one or combination of the followingfactors:Where thevictim was last seen alive in police custody or detention;Where the modusoperandi is recognizably attributable to government-sponsored death squads;Where persons in the government orassociated with the government have attempted to obstruct or delay theinvestigation of the execution;Where the physical ortestimonial evidence essential to the investigation becomes unavailable.… [A]n independent commission of inquiry or similarprocedure should also be established where a routine investigation isinadequate for the following reasons:The lackof expertise; orThe lack ofimpartiality; orThe importance of the matter; orThe apparent existence of apattern of abuse; orComplaints fromthe family of the victim about the above inadequacies or other substantialreasons.[297]ThePhilippines has not signed or ratified the 2006 International Convention forthe Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, which sets outspecific standards on preventing and punishing enforced disappearances.[298] The convention is based on the 1992 UNDeclaration on the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearances.[299] Enforced disappearances are a grave threatto the right to life and violate many fundamental rights, including the rightto liberty and security of the person and the right not to be subjected totorture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.[300]States should “take effective legislative, administrative, judicial orother measures to prevent and terminate acts of enforced disappearance”in their territory.[301] Acts of enforceddisappearance should be criminal offenses punishable by penalties that takeinto account their extreme seriousness.[302]Individuals who order extrajudicial killings or enforceddisappearances can be held criminally liable. In addition, under internationalprinciples of command (or superior) responsibility, superior officers can beheld criminally liable for the actions of their subordinates, when the superiorknew or had reason to know that their subordinate was about to commit or hadcommitted a crime, and the superior failed to take necessary and reasonablemeasures to prevent the crime or to punish the perpetrator.[303]PhilippineNational LawIn line with international standards, the PhilippineConstitution guarantees fundamental human rights, including the right to life,liberty, and security of person, the right to a fair trial, and a prohibitionagainst torture.[304]Most abuses detailed in this report would be covered bycriminal offenses found in the Philippines criminal code, including murder,kidnapping and serious illegal detention, and arbitrary detention.[305]The Anti-Torture Act of 2009 criminalizes “torture andother cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment,” and providesremedies and redress for victims of torture.[306] It prohibitssecret detention places, solitary confinement, incommunicado, or other forms ofdetention where torture may be carried out with impunity.[307] Asa preventative measure, it requires the PNP and the AFP to make an updated listof all detention facilities under their jurisdiction together with informationon persons detained.[308]Although partly addressed by other offenses, there is no specific crime ofenforced disappearance in the Philippine criminal code.Duties ofLaw Enforcement Officials and ProsecutorsUnder Philippine law, police have a duty to protect livesand property, investigate and prevent crimes, arrest criminal offenders, bringoffenders to justice and assist in their prosecution, and exercise powers ofarrest, search, and seizure in accordance with the law, among others.[309]PNP guidelines further detail the duties of police officers in crime sceneinvestigations, including interviewing witnesses, gathering physical evidence,and arresting suspects, among other tasks.[310]The Philippine Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards forPublic Officials and Employees mandates that all government employees,including police officers, attend to the problems of the public promptly.[311]The code further specifies that public officials have a duty to respond toletters and requests by the public within 15 working days of receipt.[312]UnderAdministrative Order 181 of 2007, the National Prosecution Service is directedto work closely with police and NBI investigators from the start of a criminalinvestigation into an extrajudicial killing until the termination of the casein court, and the PNP and NBI are directed to consult with prosecutors at allstages of such investigations.[313] This order provides that aseparate prosecutor should undertake the preliminary investigation of the case,to protect the independence of this process. In determining whether a killingis a political offense, agencies are to consider the political affiliation ofthe victim, the method of attack, and reports state agents are involved in thecommission of the crime or have acquiesced in them.[314]This order was never implemented in the absence of implementing rules andregulations.Further,Administrative Order 249 of 2008 provides that the Department of Justice is“to exhaust all legal means for the swift and just resolution of cases ofalleged human rights violations against political and media personalities, andleaders in the labor, urban poor, and agricultural sectors, and to ensure thatthe perpetrators are held accountable before the law.”[315]CommandResponsibilityCommand responsibility for criminal offenses was integratedinto Philippine criminal law in December 2009 by Republic Act No. 9851.[316]Some academics have argued that prior to the passage of this act, commandresponsibility was already incorporated into Philippine law.[317]However, to date, no superior officer has been tried as a matter of commandresponsibility in the Philippines.[318]Supervising officers can also be held administrativelyaccountable for neglect of duty under the doctrine of command responsibilityunder Executive Order No. 226 (1995).[319]VI. Role of the International CommunityBilateraltrade partners and donors to the Philippines should encourage the Philippinegovernment to vigorously investigate extrajudicial killings and enforceddisappearances, prosecute perpetrators regardless of position orrank—including under principles of command responsibility—andimplement systemic reforms to prevent such abuses in the future.Pressure from the international community was effective inreducing extrajudicial killings in the Philippines in the past. In 2006, at theheight of the killings under the administration of President Arroyo, the UnitedStates, Japan, and the European Union, among others, condemned the widespreadkillings in the Philippines and pressed the government to take action. Thisfollowed a high-profile visit from the then-UN special rapporteur onextrajudicial executions, Philip Alston, and his subsequent report. Althoughkillings continued, in 2008 the numbers fell drastically to about 30 percent ofprevious levels.[320]A month after the April 2009 follow-up report by Alston,President Arroyo abolished the Inter-Agency Legal Action Group, implementingone of Alston’s recommendations. Alston had reported that theinter-agency group had used prosecutions to dismantle civil societyorganizations and political groups that the government deemed to be frontorganizations for the Communist Party of the Philippines.[321]Despite the positive results that its pressure had generatedin the past, the international community has been near silent on extrajudicialkillings and enforced disappearances since President Aquino came to office inJune 2010.The US is the Philippines’ most influential ally and,together with Australia and Japan, one of its three largest bilateral donors,yet the Obama administration has been largely silent on extrajudicial killings.Up until the release of the US State Department’s annual human rightsreport in April 2011, the US government had failed to publicly raise militaryabuses including extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances sinceAquino took office.This silence extended to US Ambassador Harry Thomas,Jr.’s address on April 5, 2011, at the opening of the 27thBalikatan exercises—annual joint US-Philippines military exercisesdesigned to promote professionalism—which was just days before the launchof the human rights report. As these exercises indicate, the United Statesmaintains considerable military ties with the Philippines. The US armed forceshave access to specified land and sea areas under a Visiting Forces Agreement.In fiscal year for 2009-2010 the US government authorized US$32 million to beprovided to the Philippines under Foreign Military Financing for procurement ofUS military equipment, services, and training. Under US appropriations law,US$2 million is contingent on the Philippine government showing progress inaddressing human rights violations, including extrajudicial killings.[322]Australia signed a Status of Visiting Forces Agreement withthe Philippines in May 2007; this agreement remains before the PhilippineSenate. On June 17, 2010, the Australian embassy in Manila hosted a policyforum on human rights at which experts discussed the problem of extrajudicialkillings.In October 2009, the EU announced a €3.9 million(US$5.5 million) program to address extrajudicial killings and strengthen thecriminal justice system by providing training and technical assistance in2009-2011. A considerable component of this program was directed at improvingpolice investigation skills. The EU’s police expert worked withPhilippine police to develop a criminal investigation manual, a field manualfor crime scene investigations, and a case management manual, to develop atraining of trainers course—pursuant to which at least two investigatorsat each police station are to be trained by the end of 2011, and conductedworkshops on case management, which involved reviewing investigations of numerousextrajudicial killings.Ongoing plans exist to work with the Philippine NationalPolice to develop a new criminal intelligence system for extrajudicial killingsand enforced disappearance cases, including a national database of missingpersons corroborated with medical and dental records.However, since Aquino took office, EU ambassadors have notmatched this investment in training with persistent advocacy for improvements.Capacity building alone is not enough. None of the investigators haveimplemented recommendations of the EU’s police expert or Task Force Usig,which came out of the case management workshops.VII. Action Required on Extrajudicial Killingsand Enforced DisappearancesThe Philippine government should promptly act to investigateand prosecute each of the extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearancesoutlined in this report. Outlined below are several initial steps that thegovernment should take in relation to each of these abuses.Killingof Fernando “Nanding” Baldomero, July 5, 2010National Bureau of Investigation (NBI) investigatorsshould investigate military involvement in the killing of FernandoBaldomero. In particular, they should search for witnesses who sawsoldiers around Baldomero’s residence in the days and weeks beforehe was killed, and investigate threats the military made against him.Police and NBI investigators should actively work to servethe arrest warrant against Dindo Lovon Ancero.The Department of Justice should act to protect witnessesto the killing. In particular, officials in charge of witness protectionshould meet with witnesses and discuss what measures can be taken, withinthe confines of the witness protection program, which would be acceptablefor the witnesses and particularly the child witness.Internalpolice investigators should investigate police officers in Aklan whorefused to pursue evidence of military involvement and considerdisciplinary measures for insubordination or a criminal investigation forobstruction of justice or graft and corruption.In conjunction with other relevant government agencies,including the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD), theCommission on Human Rights (CHR) should offer the witnesses, particularlythe child witness, counseling and psycho-social support.Killingof Pascual Guevarra, July 9, 2010Police and NBI investigators should investigate theinvolvement of Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) staff andmilitary involvement in the killing, including subpoenaing any relevantpublic documents, interviewing soldiers, and compelling departmental staffto cooperate with the investigation.DPWH should investigate its staff for failing to cooperatewith a police investigation and, if appropriate, commence disciplinaryproceedings.The Justice Department should discuss with thevictim’s family and witnesses any concerns about their safety andtake steps to protect them if necessary.EnforcedDisappearance of Agustito Ladera and Renato Deliguer, August/September 2010Police and NBI investigators should vigorously investigatethe disappearance of Agustito Ladera and Renato Deliguer, including byinterviewing all people with information about the disappearances,canvassing for witnesses in areas surrounding the farms, questioningsoldiers who were involved in operations in the area, and having crimescene experts examine the Ladera and Deliguer farms.The AFP inspector general and provost marshal shouldindependently investigate the disappearances, publicly report findings,and commence disciplinary proceedings against any military personnel asappropriate.The CHR should actively investigate the disappearances,provide appropriate assistance to the families, and recommend to theJustice Department any charges that should be brought.Internal police investigators should investigate police officersin Surigao del Sur who failed to properly investigate these disappearancesand consider disciplinary measures for insubordination or a criminalinvestigation for obstruction of justice or graft and corruption.The AFP should investigate the commander of the 36thIB for failing to comply with a request to appear before the SangguniangPanlalawigan Committee on Laws and Justice and Human Rights in Surigao delSur on October 4, 2010, and, if appropriate, bring disciplinaryproceedings.The NBI and police directors should investigate regionaldirectors for failing to respond to correspondence from the SangguniangPanlalawigan Committee on Laws and Justice and Human Rights and issuedirectives to require personnel to comply with such inquiries in future.Killingof Reynaldo “Naldo” L. Labrador,September 3, 2010Police and NBI investigators should investigate militaryinvolvement in the killing of Reynaldo Labrador, including by canvassingfor witnesses who saw the alleged soldier who was with Roberto “Kulot”Repe and questioning military personnel.The Justice Department should discuss with thevictim’s family and witnesses any concerns about their safety andtake steps to protect them if necessary.The CHR should actively investigate the killing and threatsagainst the family and other residents in Paquibato district, provideappropriate assistance to the families, and recommend to the justicedepartment any charges that should be brought.Killingof Rene “Toto” Quirante, October 1, 2010The PNP should send an independent team to serve arrestwarrants against Dandy Quilanan, a CAFGU member, and Junel Librado, aformer member of the NPA allegedly working as a “guide” forthe military.NBI investigators should investigate the killing of ReneQuirante with the aim of identifying the six unidentified soldiers whomwitnesses have testified were involved in the killing.The Justice Department should discuss with thevictim’s family and witnesses any concerns about their safety andtake steps to protect them if necessary.The CHR should actively investigate the killing andthreats against the family, provide appropriate assistance to thefamilies, and recommend to the Justice Department any charges that shouldbe brought.PNP headquarters should investigate why policeinvestigators did not visit and examine the scene of the crime, and takesteps to ensure that investigators examine such crime scenes in future.Killingof Ireneo “Rene” Rodriguez, November 7, 2010NBI investigators should investigate Air Force involvementin the killing of Ireneo Rodriguez. In particular, they should investigatethe Air Force personnel that attempted to visit Rodriguez days before hewas killed and canvass for witnesses close to where he was killed.The AFP inspector general and provost marshal shouldindependently investigate the killing, publicly report findings, andcommence disciplinary proceedings against any Air Force personnel asappropriate.The Justice Department should discuss with thevictim’s family and witnesses any concerns about their safety andtake steps to protect them if necessary.The CHR should actively investigate the killing andthreats against the family, provide appropriate assistance to the family,and recommend to the Justice Department any charges that should bebrought.Enforced Disappearance of Alfredo Bucal,November 10, 2010NBI investigators shouldinvestigate Air Force and police involvement in the killing of AlfredoBucal. In particular, they should individually interview each member ofthe police and Air Force that was present at the checkpoint in barangayLutal, Tuy, Batangas and investigate how Bucal’s tricycle endedup in police possession.NBI investigators should investigate all reports of Air Forceand police personnel threatening witnesses with view to filing charges.The AFP and PNP inspector general and provost marshalshould independently investigate the disappearance and the shooting at thecheck point, publicly report findings, and commence disciplinaryproceedings against any military and police personnel as appropriate.Internalpolice investigators should investigate police officers in Batangas whodid not actively investigate this disappearance and consider disciplinarymeasures for insubordination or a criminal investigation for obstructionof justice or graft and corruption.The Justice Department should discuss with thevictim’s family and witnesses any concerns about their safety andtake steps to protect them if necessary.The CHR should actively investigate the killing andthreats against the family, provide appropriate assistance to the family,and recommend to the justice department any charges that should bebrought.Killingof Rudy and Rudyric Dejos, February 27, 2011NBI investigators should investigate military involvementin the killing of Rudy and Rudyric Dejos. In particular, they shouldinvestigate threats made by the military against Rudy Dejos.The AFP inspector general and provost marshal shouldindependently investigate the killings, publicly report findings, and commencedisciplinary proceedings against any military personnel as appropriate.They should also investigate the 39th IB’s presence atthe Dejos’ wake and funeral march, commence discipline commanders asappropriate, and issue directives not to attend such events other than inexceptional circumstances.Internal police investigators should investigate policeofficers in Sta. Cruz, Davao del Sur, who did not actively investigatethese killings and consider disciplinary measures for insubordination or acriminal investigation for obstruction of justice or graft and corruption.PNP headquarters should investigate reports that policeinvestigators did not visit and examine the scene of the crime, and thatthe local police director chose not to seek Scene of Crime Operatives(SOCO) assistance and take steps to ensure that investigators thoroughlyexamine such crime scenes in future.The Justice Department should discuss with thevictim’s family and witnesses any concerns about their safety andtake steps to protect them if necessary.The CHR should actively investigate the killing andthreats against the family, provide appropriate assistance to the family,and recommend to the Justice Department any charges that should bebrought.Killingof Bacar and Carmen Japalali, September 8, 2004TheDepartment of Justice should review the dismissal of charges against 24 ofthe 32 soldiers accused of killing Bacar and Carmen Japalali and considerbringing new charges.Police investigators should investigate the Regional TrialCourt judge who dismissed charges against 24 of the 32 accused soldiers,without a motion from the defense, for obstruction of justice or graft andcorruption.EnforcedDisappearance of Sherlyn Cadapan, Karen Empeño, and Manuel Merino, June26, 2006The Department of Justice should work with the police,NBI, and CHR to gather evidence and file charges against those that theSupreme Court has named as apparently responsible for the abduction andcontinued detention of Sherlyn Cadapan, Karen Empeño, and ManuelMerino—being Lt. Col. Anotado, Lt. Mirabelle, Gen. Palparan, Lt.Col. Boac, Arnel Enriquez, and Donald Caigas.Police and NBI investigators should urgently exert allnecessary measures to locate the missing three.NBI investigators should investigate military commandersfor involvement in the abduction and continued detention of the three andthe cover up of these crimes.The Department of Justice should act to protect witnessesto the abduction and continued detention.Internal police investigators should investigate policeofficers who refused to investigate this “disappearance” andconsider disciplinary measures for insubordination or a criminalinvestigation for obstruction of justice or graft and corruption.In conjunction with other relevant government agencies,including the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD), theCommission on Human Rights (CHR) should offer the witnesses and thevictims’ families counseling and psycho-social support.The Supreme Court should investigate why it took more thantwo years to decide on this case and take steps to avoid such delays onwrit of amparo and habeas data cases in the future.VIII. RecommendationsThe Philippine government could implement severalrecommendations immediately. Others should be instituted without delay but canbe expected to take longer to fully implement.To demonstrate resolve about ending extrajudicial killingsand enforced disappearances and holding perpetrators accountable, PresidentAquino should immediately:Orderthe Philippine National Police (PNP) and the National Bureau ofInvestigation (NBI) to take all necessary steps to investigate and serveoutstanding arrest warrants in the cases discussed in this report.Issue an executive order directing police and NBIinvestigators to vigorously pursue crimes allegedly committed by themilitary or themselves be subject to disciplinary measures.Order the inspector general and provost marshal of the AFPto investigate and report publicly within 90 days on the involvement ofmilitary personnel in extrajudicial killings, and to identify failureswithin the AFP investigative agencies to thus far prosecute officers underprinciples of command responsibility.Order the military to cease targeting all civilians, tocease the practice of denying military involvement in all extrajudicialkillings and to cease labeling leftist groups as fronts for the CPP-NPA,which places group members at considerable risk.Communicate fully to all military personnel thatofficers and soldiers who provide evidence or testimony in cases of humanrights violations that they will be eligible for witness protection andother measures to ensure their safety.Tothe President of the PhilippinesIssue an executive order directing police and NationalBureau of Investigation (NBI) investigators to vigorously pursue crimesallegedly committed by the military, or themselves be subject todisciplinary measures for insubordination or a criminal investigation forobstruction of justice or graft and corruption.Direct the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) to takeall necessary measures to end military involvement in extrajudicialkillings.Ensure AFP compliance at all levels with investigations ofother agencies, including the police, NBI, Commission on Human Rights(CHR), the ombudsman, and inquiries by legislative bodies and other publicofficials.Produce a plan for the implementation of therecommendations contained in the reports of the United Nations specialrapporteur on extrajudicial, summary, or arbitrary executions, the MeloCommission, and human rights NGOs reporting on extrajudicial killings.Ask congress to create a nationwide emergency assistancenumber for family members and witnesses to killings and“disappearances.”Sign the International Convention for the Protection ofAll Persons from Enforced Disappearance, and transmit to the Senate forprompt ratification.Invite the UN Working Group on Enforced or InvoluntaryDisappearances and the special rapporteur on human rights defenders tovisit the Philippines.To theDepartment of JusticeDirect the NBI to give priority to investigating allegedextrajudicial killings and other serious abuses that may involvegovernment officials, security forces, or militia forces.Direct the NBI to investigate the role of senior militaryofficials in extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances, includingretired Gen. Jovito Palparan—in line with a 2004 recommendation ofthe Committee on Civil, Political and Human Rights of the House ofRepresentatives that the Department of Justice investigate then-Col.Jovito Palparan and similar recommendations from several other bodies.Direct the NBI to investigate and report publicly within90 days on the failure of police to adequately investigate militaryinvolvement in extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances,including threats and harassment of investigators who try to conductproper investigations. Conduct such an investigation in a manner thatensures the safety of those providing information.Broaden the witness protection program to ensure that itis accessible, flexible, and properly funded. Implement mechanisms forwitnesses to change identity, transfer locations other than their placesof residence, including to other provinces, for as long as necessary. Thisprogram should provide protection for witnesses from the onset of a policeinvestigation until after trial, when necessary.Institute measures for witnesses to offer testimoniessafely, while protecting the rights of defendants, for example by usingvideo-conferenced testimonies, closed courtrooms, or depositions.In cooperation with the Department of Interior and LocalGovernment, circulate an explicit set of operational guidelines for thepolice regarding:Individual police officer’s duties to provideprotection to witnesses and individuals who report threats on theirlives;Information to provide to witnesses about the witnessprotection program and at what stages to provide this information;Clear sanctions for officers who fail to providenecessary protection in conformity with these guidelines.Order Task Force 211 or an alternative body in theDepartment of Justice tasked with monitoring extrajudicial killings andenforced disappearances to publish a list of all cases under its mandateand the status of the case. Publish regular and frequent status reports onall cases.Produce and disseminate information for victims of crimethat explains their legal rights, such as the state’s requirement topay for autopsies in alleged murder cases and to be informed of the statusof relevant investigations. Adopt mechanisms to facilitate the filing ofcomplaints by people whose rights have been infringed by law enforcementofficers.Improve access to social services such as medical care,including counseling, and legal aid for victims of and witnesses toserious human rights violations.To theDepartment of Interior and Local GovernmentDirect police to consult with prosecutors regarding thecollection of evidence in alleged extrajudicial killings and enforceddisappearances to bring all the perpetrators to justice.In cooperation with the Department of Justice, circulatean explicit set of operational guidelines for the police regarding:Individual police officer duties to provide protection towitnesses and individuals who report threats on their lives;Information to provide to witnesses about the witnessprotection program and at what stages to provide this information;Clear sanctions for officers who fail to providenecessary protection in conformity with these guidelines.To theSupreme CourtOrder all trial courts to comply with the procedures underSupreme Court Administrative Order 25-2007 in extrajudicial killing cases,which means they must:Complete trials in extrajudicial killing cases within 60days of when the case is filed in court, and render judgment within afurther 30 days.Submit to the chief justice of the Supreme Court a listof such cases and a report on their status monthly. The chief justiceshould publish a quarterly report on the status and progress of suchcases.To overcome difficulties identifying extrajudicial casesin which Administrative Order 25-2007 applies, order all trial courts toexpedite the disposition of murder, homicide, and kidnapping cases inwhich a police officer, member of the Armed Forces of the Philippines orparamilitary force, or government official is implicated, and to hear suchcases on a continuous basis.Order all courts to expedite writ of amparocases—including the Supreme Court—to hear and decide themwithin five days, be they in the first instance or on appeal.Tothe Philippine National PolicePromptlyand fully investigate all alleged cases of extrajudicial killings andenforced disappearances, including those discussed in this report.Seekto establish command responsibility during investigations of allegedextrajudicial killings, enforced disappearances, and other serious humanrights violations.ThroughTask Force Usig, work with all police agencies to coordinateinvestigations of extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearance cases,and to routinely follow up ongoing cases. In particularly complex orpolitically sensitive cases of human rights violations, bring in speciallyqualified investigators from outside the area to assist in theinvestigation.OrderTask Force Usig to publish a list of all cases under its mandate and thestatus of the cases. Publish regular and frequent status reports.Review“closed” cases of alleged extrajudicial killings that have notresulted in convictions with a view to identifying and obtaining newevidence and bringing prosecutions.Openhotlines or comparable lines of communication to receive anonymousinformation on abuses perpetrated by local government officials andsecurity force members.Sanctionofficers who do not thoroughly and promptly investigate alleged humanrights violations.Developa national database on missing persons, corroborated with medical anddental records.Draft specific protocol for police officers to ensure fullcooperation with prosecutors and other government officials, particularlyin human rights cases. The protocol should be incorporated in the relevantpolice manual.Make operational procedures, the investigators’manual, and other guidelines setting out duties of police officers easilyaccessible to the public. Ensure that the guidelines place a duty on lawenforcement officers to investigate alleged crimes irrespective of whethera formal complaint has been filed.Createstandards for file management of criminal cases including thechronological documentation of all police and judicial interventionmeasures that have been met.Sanctionofficers who fail to provide necessary witness protection in accordancewith the law.To the ArmedForces of the PhilippinesCease all targeting of civilians, and extrajudicialkillings and enforced disappearances of all persons in custody.Issue a public order to all forces stating clearly thatpolitical activists, unionists, and members of civil society groups are tobe distinguished from combatants involved in the armed conflict.Fully assist all prosecutorial authorities in apprehendingmembers of the armed forces, regardless of rank, implicated inextrajudicial killings and other serious human rights violations.End abusive uses of intelligence lists of suspectedNPA/CPP members, known as “orders of battle” and “watchlists.” Hold commanding officers responsible for abuses committedagainst individuals placed on such lists. Issue public guidelines thatwould permit a person who suspects they are named on such a list tochallenge their inclusion before a civilian authority.Fully comply with all inquiries by investigative bodiesincluding legislative committees and public officials.Cease the routine denial of involvement in reported casesof extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances. Instead, condemnsuch abuses and order the Inspector General and the Provost Marshal topromptly and impartially investigate.Suspend military personnel implicated in extrajudicialkillings or enforced disappearances while an investigation is ongoing.To theNational Bureau of InvestigationGivepriority to investigating alleged extrajudicial killings and other serioushuman rights violations that may involve government officials, securityforces, or militia forces.Investigate the involvement of senior military officialsin ordering and failing to investigate extrajudicial killings and enforceddisappearances, including the role of retired Gen. Jovito Palparan.To thePhilippine CongressConduct hearings on the involvement of the AFP in orderingand perpetrating extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances.Provide necessary protections to all those who provide information.Enact legislation to prohibit and protect against enforceddisappearances.Conduct committee hearings on best practices forpreserving the testimonies of witnesses to extrajudicial killings andenforced disappearances and enact appropriate legislation to establish thenecessary mechanisms for this purpose.In line with House bills 265 and 1123 of the 14thCongress, enact legislation mandating autopsy examinations in all cases ofsuspected extrajudicial killings.Pass a resolution urging the president to promptly signthe International Convention for the Protection of All Persons fromEnforced Disappearance and file it with the Senate for ratification.To theCommission on Human RightsInvestigate and report publicly and promptly on cases ofalleged extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances.Publish regular and frequent lists of all cases of killingsand abductions in which police, military, or other government officialsare suspected, including when the case was referred to the office and thestatus of the case.Investigate and report publicly within 90 days onobstacles to investigations of extrajudicial killings and the enforceddisappearances, particularly collusion between the police and military.Provide all necessary safeguards to those willing to provide information.To theOffice of the OmbudsmanInvestigate police, military, and other governmentofficials, regardless of rank, suspected of perpetrating extrajudicialkillings and enforced disappearances.Publish regular and frequent lists of all cases ofkillings and abductions in which police, military, or other governmentofficials are suspected, including when the case was referred to the officeand the status of the case.To the NewPeople’s Army/Communist Party of the PhilippinesCease all targeting of civilians, and the killing of allpersons in custody.Consistentwith the above, provide safe passage to police and NBI investigators whoare investigating extrajudicial killings, enforced disappearances, orother serious abuses.Tothe Joint Monitoring CommitteeExpedite the drafting of supplemental guidelines for thecommittee’s operation, the process for consolidating complaintsreceived thus far, and parameters for the conduct of joint investigationsbetween the NDFP and the government monitoring committees. Ensure that allprocesses and investigations are transparent.Promptly commence conducting joint investigations intoserious abuses by all sides.ToDonors and External Partners, including the United States, European Union,Japan, Australia, the World Bank, and the Asian Development BankTo promote human rights, the rule of law, and goodgovernance in the Philippines, press the Philippine government to initiateinvestigations into the involvement of senior military officials inextrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances perpetrated by militarypersonnel, and prosecute the perpetrators.All programs to assist the PNP or AFP should vet allparticipating police officers and military personnel to ensure that theyhave not been implicated or complicit in extrajudicial executions,enforced disappearances, or other serious human rights abuses. The vettingprocess should be transparent.Offer to support external law enforcement assistance withinvestigations into serious human rights violations, particularly inforensic analysis, witness protection, case preparation, and tracing of fugitives.Support NGOs that work with victims’ families toclosely follow individual cases and push for thorough investigations,filing of cases, execution of arrest warrants, and protection of thefamilies and witnesses.To theUnited States, European Union Member States, Japan, Australia, and otherConcerned GovernmentsPublicly press the Philippine government to improve efforts toinvestigate and prosecute members of the military for extrajudicial killingsand enforced disappearances, including those liable under commandresponsibility. Be clear that failing to conduct full investigations andprosecutions will increasingly call into question aspects of the relationshipwith the Philippines.Through embassies in Manila, monitor Philippine government investigationsof alleged extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances.Offer to work with the Philippine government to provide witnessprotection abroad for witnesses who are under grave threat, in particularwhistleblowers within the AFP.To the UnitedStates GovernmentEncourage the US Millennium Challenge Corporation tospecifically include the Philippines’ record in failing to prosecuteextrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances as an indicator of thecountry’s progress in the areas of civil liberties, politicalrights, accountability, and the rule of law. The Millennium ChallengeCorporation should condition future funding to the Ombudsman’sOffice on the latter’s prosecution of government officials forabuses within the office’s mandate.The US Pacific Command, US Agency for InternationalDevelopment (USAID), Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Department ofDefense, Drug Enforcement Agency, International Criminal InvestigativeTraining Assistance Program (ICITAP) , and all other US agencies that workwith the PNP or AFP should vet all police officers and military personnelenrolling in US-funded programs in accordance with the Leahy Law to ensurethat participants have not been implicated or complicit in extrajudicialexecutions, enforced disappearances, or other serious human rights abuses.The US government should consult NGOs and the Philippine Commission onHuman Rights during this vetting process.Closelymonitor the progress and effectiveness of police investigations intomilitary abuses, particularly alleged extrajudicial killings and enforceddisappearances, and the cooperation of the AFP with these investigations.If there is no progress in prosecuting military personnel for involvementin extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances, the US shouldsuspend the next annual bilateral Balikatan exercises.IX. AppendixLetter from Human Rights Watch to Justice Secretary Leila de LimaClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageLetter from Human Rights Watch to the Central Committee of theCommunist Party of the PhilippinesClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageLetter to Human Rights Watch from the Office of the OmbudsmanClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageIX. AcknowledgmentsThis report was researched and written by Jessica Evans,researcher in the Asia Division of Human Rights Watch.Diana Parker, associate for the Asia Division, providedresearch, administrative and technical assistance. Veejay Villafranca, a photojournalist,provided research assistance together with his professional photography.Elaine Pearson, deputy Asia director, edited the report.James Ross, legal and policy director, provided legal review. Danielle Haas,senior editor, provided program review. Mai Nguyen, an intern with the AsiaDivision, provided research assistance. Kathy Mills and Fitzroy Hepkins providedproduction assistance for the report.Human Rights Watch would like to thank the victims,families, and eyewitnesses who agreed to talk to us for this report. We areindebted to the many NGOs, lawyers, and activists who generously assisted usduring our research. We would also like to thank several independent expertreviewers who provided comments and feedback on our work.[1]NikkoDizon and Alex Pal, “Aquino vows closure to human rights killings,”Philippine Daily Inquirer, June 1, 2010, http://newsinfo.inquirer.net/inquirerheadlines/nation/view/20100601-273180/Aquino-vows-closure-to-human-rights-killings(accessed May 8, 2011).[2] Theisland of Mindanao in the southern Philippines has a large Muslim populationknown as Moros. Various Moro armed opposition groups, unconnected to theCommunist insurgency, are engaged in armed hostilities for independence orautonomy against the government. These include the Moro Islamic LiberationFront (MILF), the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF), and the Abu SayyafGroup (ASG).[3] TheNDFP, established in 1973, says it is the “united front organization ofthe Filipino people fighting for national independence and for the democraticrights of the people,” including the CPP-NPA. National Democratic Frontof the Philippines, “About the NDFP,” undated, http://ndfp.net/joomla/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=21&Itemid=27(accessed May 7, 2011).[4]“AFP Gears Up for 2011 with ‘Bayanihan,’” AFP press release, December 31, 2010, http://www.afp.mil.ph/0/news/31Dec-AFPGEARSUP.pdf(accessed May 6, 2011).[5] RepublicAct No. 7636, which took effect on October 11, 1992, repealed theAnti-Subversion Act, R.A. 1700, which had outlawed the CPP in 1957.[6] For adiscussion of the various armed groups in the Philippines, see Soliman Santosand Paz Verdades Santos, Primed and Purposeful: Armed Groups and HumanSecurity Efforts in the Philippines (Geneva: South-South Network forNon-State Armed Group Engagement and the Small Arms Survey, 2010). Thesplintering of the CPP-NPA also affected nongovernmental organizations. In 1992the leader of the CPP-NPA, Jose Maria Sison, sought to reassert certain Maoistprinciples into the movement, including the primacy of the rural armed struggle, and rejecting more moderate positions of political engagement.Those who supported Sison have been labeled “reaffirmists” or“RAs,” and thosewho rejected this realignment of the CPP-NPA have been labeled“rejectionists” or “RJs.” This same division remainsevident in nongovernmental organizations and political parties today. See HumanRights Watch, The Philippines — Scared Silent: Impunity forExtrajudicial Killings in the Philippines, June 2007, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2007/06/27/scared-silent-0,pp. 11-17. For discussion of this and other developments since the 1992 division, see International CrisisGroup, “The Communist Insurgency in the Philippines: Tactics andTalks,” Asia Report No. 202, February 14, 2011, http://www.crisisgroup.org/en/regions/asia/south-east-asia/philippines/202-the-communist-insurgency-in-the-philippines-tactics-and-talks.aspx(accessed May 7, 2011), pp. 6-10.[7] CarlaGomez, “NPA admits killing sugar farmer inNegros,” Philippine Daily Inquirer, July 27, 2010, http://newsinfo.inquirer.net/breakingnews/regions/view/20100727-283506/NPA-admits-killing-sugar-farmer-in-Negros,(accessed May 6, 2011).[8]UNHuman Rights Council, Report of the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial,summary or arbitrary executions, Philip Alston, Mission to the Philippines,A/HRC/8/3/Add.2, April 16, 2007, http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G08/130/01/PDF/G0813001.pdf(accessed May 7, 2011), p. 14.[9] “Anothervictim in Davao ambush dies,” Sun Star, August 8, 2010, http://www.sunstar.com.ph/network/another-victim-davao-ambush-dies(accessed May 6, 2011). Labawan believes that the NPA was targeting him.Similarly, on July 31, 2010, two NPA members shot and killed Leonardo“Andot” Behing, a leader of LUPACA (Lumadnong Pakigbisog saCARAGA), which is reported to have been formerly affiliated with the AFP andnow largely a bandit group, in Sibagat town, Agusan del Sur. According to newsreports, Maria Malaya, spokesperson of the NPA’s NorthEastern Mindanao Regional Committee said,“Behing was a legitimate military target for his anti-revolutionary workand crimes against the people like rape, kidnapping, illegal logging andharassments.” Franklin A. Caliguid, “NPAadmits killing Manobo man over ‘crimes against people,’” Philippine Daily Inquirer, August 3, 2010, http://newsinfo.inquirer.net/breakingnews/regions/view/20100803-284695/NPA-admits-killing-Manobo-man-over-crimes-against-people(accessed May 6, 2011).[10] Knownas the Revolutionary Proletarian Army-Alex Boncayao Brigade (RPA-ABB). The NPAcalled on RPA-ABB members to “desist from doing its worst against themainstream revolutionary organization and surrender so that any appeal theywant to present could be processed.” Edgar Cadagat, “Slain RPA-ABB Leader Led Hold-Up Gang, Death Squad in NegrosCombined,” Daily Bulletin, November 9, 2010, http://www.ndb-online.com/nov0910/negros-local-news/Slain+RPA-ABB+Leader+Led+Hold-Up+Gang-Death+Squad+in+Negros+Combined(accessed May 6, 2011).[11]“NPA hitmen kill former comrade,” Dateline, November 3,2010, http://dateline.ph/2010/11/03/npa-hitmen-kill-former-comrade/ (accessedMay 6, 2011); “RPA-ABB, Karapatan hit Negroskillings,” Dateline, November 10, 2010, http://dateline.ph/tag/rpa-abb/(accessed May 6, 2011); Edgar Cadagat, “SlainRPA-ABB Leader Led Hold-Up Gang, Death Squad in Negros Combined,” DailyBulletin, November 9, 2010, http://www.ndb-online.com/nov0910/negros-local-news/Slain+RPA-ABB+Leader+Led+Hold-Up+Gang-Death+Squad+in+Negros+Combined(accessed May 6, 2011).[12] HumanRights Watch interview with Lt. Col. Oliver Artuz and 2nd Lt. Dueñas, 39th IB, Davao del Sur, March 9, 2011.[13] HumanRights Watch interview with a representative of the 702nd IB, NuevaEcija, February 26, 2011.[14] HumanRights Watch interview with a police investigator, place name and datewithheld.[15] For adiscussion of the paramilitary and militia forces in the Philippines, see HumanRights Watch, The Philippines — “They Own the People”: The Ampatuans, State-Backed Militias, and Killings in the SouthernPhilippines, November 2010, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2010/11/16/they-own-people-0,pp. 19-24.[16] Ibid.[17] USState Department, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights,and Labor, “Country Reports on Human Rights Practices — 2010: ThePhilippines,” April 8, 2011, http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/2010/eap/154399.htm(accessed May 7, 2011). This figure does not include members of paramilitaryforces.[18] Thedraft Comprehensive Agreement on Social and Economic Reforms (CASER) may becompleted and signed by the Panels in September 2011; the draft ComprehensiveAgreement on Political and Constitutional Reforms (CAPCR) may be completed andsigned by the Panels in February 2012; and lastly the draft ComprehensiveAgreement on End of Hostilities and Disposition of Forces (CAEHDF) may becompleted and signed by the Panels in June 2012. The Joint Statement ofGPH-CPP-NPA-NDF at the Conclusion of the Current Round of Peace Talks in Oslo,Norway, February 21, 2011, http://gphndfpeacetalks.wordpress.com/2011/03/08/joint-statement-of-gph-cpp-npa-ndf-at-the-conclusion-of-the-current-round-of-peace-talks-in-oslo-norway/(accessed May 6, 2011).[19] Ibid.[20]SeeUN Human Rights Council, Report of the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial,summary or arbitrary executions, Philip Alston, Addendum: Follow-up countryrecommendations – Philippines, A/HRC/11/2/Add.8, April 29, 2009, http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrcouncil/docs/11session/A.HRC.11.2.Add.8.pdf(accessed May 7, 2011); UN Human Rights Council, Report of the SpecialRapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, Philip Alston,Mission to the Philippines, A/HRC/8/3/Add.2, April 16, 2007; Human RightsWatch, Scared Silent; and Amnesty International, “Philippines:Political Killings, Human Rights and the Peace Process,” AI Index: ASA35/006/2006, August 15, 2006 http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/ASA35/006/2006/en(accessed May 7, 2011).[21]Thenumber of alleged extrajudicial killings recorded during Arroyo’s2001—2010 presidency varies greatly between organizations, from about 150victims according to the lowest government figures to about 1200 according to Karapatan,a Philippine NGO. See UN Human Rights Council, Report of the Special Rapporteuron extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, Philip Alston, Addendum:Follow-up country recommendations – Philippines, A/HRC/11/2/Add.8, April29, 2009; Atty. Al A. Parreño, “Report on the PhilippineExtrajudicial Killings (2001 – August 2010),”http://www.scribd.com/doc/37530361/FULL-Report-on-the-Philippine-EJKs-2001-2010,(accessed July 6, 2011); Karapatan, “Karapatan Monitor,”January-March 2010, http://www.karapatan.org/files/2010_KarapatanMonitor_Jan-March.pdf(accessed July 6, 2011).[22] Fordiscussion of the work of the Melo Commission, see Human Rights Watch, ScaredSilent, pp. 18-22.[23]Independent Commission to Address Media and Activist Killings, “Report,”January 22, 2007, p.53.[24]See Human Rights Watch, Scared Silent, p. 20.[25] Theletter went on to say, “That there was a marked increase in the incidenceof killings in all the areas where Gen. Palparan was assigned—which headmitted—should be enough to justify his investigation. Indeed, Gen.Palparan’s statements and cavalier attitude about the killings shouldhave warranted early on at the very least administrative or disciplinaryactions by his superiors.” Letter from Jose A. R. Melo, chairman of theMelo Commission, to Eduardo R. Ermita, executive secretary, August 21, 2007,pp. 3, 9.[26] Arroyodid implement an earlier recommendation, seeing to the passage in December 2009of a law providing for command responsibility as a basis for criminalliability; however, this has not yet been applied. Republic Act No. 9851 of thePhilippines. See also Republic Act No. 9745 of thePhilippines, sec. 13.[27] Administrative Order No. 211, November 26, 2011, sec. 1.[28] Letter from Ricardo Blancaflor, former chairman, Task Force 211, to Human Rights Watch, May 27, 2011. On June 10, 2008,Joel Flores was convicted of murder for the May 16, 2006 killing of Bayan Munasecretary general Jose Doton. On March 6, 2009, Rafael Cardeño wasconvicted of murder for the December 31, 2001 killing of reported whistleblowerand Young Officer’s Union spokesperson Baron Cervantes. On April 29,2009, Joy Anticamara was convicted of homicide for the July 18, 2006 killing ofbroadcaster Armando Pace. On January 29, 2010, Robert Woo was convicted ofmurder, as an accomplice, of the May 4, 2005 killing of radio commentator KleinCantoneros.[29]Justice Department Order 848.[30]Philippine National Police Commission, Resolution No. 2009-072,“Approving the activation of the human rights desks at the differentlevels of command in the Philippine National Police,” February, 2009.“All AFP units ordered to set up human rights office,” GMA News,November 15, 2010,http://www.gmanews.tv/story/206015/all-afp-units-ordered-to-set-up-human-rights-office(accessed May 13, 2011).[31] Forinstance, a police officer at the PNP provincial headquarters in Nueva Ecijasaid that they did not have a human rights desk there. He said, “Maybethere is one at the regional headquarters?” Human Rights Watch interviewwith P/Supt. Eduardo B. Soriano, Nueva Ecija, February 25, 2011.[32] NikkoDizon and Alex Pal, “Aquino vows closure to human rights killings,”Philippine Daily Inquirer, June 1, 2010, http://newsinfo.inquirer.net/inquirerheadlines/nation/view/20100601-273180/Aquino-vows-closure-to-human-rights-killings(accessed May 8, 2011).[33] InauguralSpeech of President Benigno S. Aquino III in English, June 30, 2010, http://www.philstar.com/Article.aspx?articleid=589090(accessed May 8, 2011).[34]International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from EnforcedDisappearance (Convention against EnforcedDisappearance),adopted September 23, 2005, E/CN.4/2005/WG.22/WP.1/Rev.4 (2005), art. 2. Seealso United NationsDeclarationon the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearances (Declarationagainst Enforced Disappearances),adopted December 18, 1992, G.A. res.47/133, 47 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 207, U.N. Doc. A/47/49 (1992), preamble.[35]UNHuman Rights Council, Report of the Special Rapporteur onextrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, Philip Alston, A/HRC/14/24, May20, 2010,http://www2.ohchr.org/english/issues/executions/annual.htm(accessed December 17, 2010). See especially, “Killingsby Law Enforcement Officials or Other Security Forces.”[36]SenateCommittee Report No. 150, submitted jointly by the Committees on Public Orderand Illegal Drugs, Justice and Human Rights, and Public Information and MassMedia on October 12, 2006, http://www.senate.gov.ph/lisdata/62415173!.pdf(accessed June 14, 2011), p. 9; Julie V. Tolentino, “Evenmagistrates and lawyers are targets,” Manila Times, July 17, 2007,http://fromthenews.net/even-magistrates-and-lawyers-are-targets.htm (accessedJune 14, 2011); Johann Hein B. Arpon, “Wife of Slain Lawyer Cries Out forJustice” Bultalat, March 19-25, 2006, http://www.bulatlat.com/news/6-7/6-7-wife.htm(accessed June 14, 2011); US State Department, Bureau of Democracy, HumanRights, and Labor, “Country Reports on Human Rights Practices —2005: The Philippines,” March 8, 2006, http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/2005/61624.htm(accessed June 14, 2011).[37] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative, “Rosita,” a pseudonym,Aklan, March 22, 2011.[38] HumanRights Watch interview, name, place and date of interview withheld. A familymember told Human Rights Watch that several witnesses had told members of thefamily that they had seen uniformed men watching Baldomero’s home in theweeks prior to the killing, but that they were scared to testify: Human RightsWatch interview with Ernan Baldomero, Aklan, March 23, 2011.[39]Republicof the Philippines v. Dindo Ancero Y Lovon and John Does, Order, RegionalTrial Court, 6th Judicial Region, Branch 2, Kalibo, Aklan, January10, 2011, copy on file with Human Rights Watch.[40] HumanRights Watch interviews with a relative, “Rosita,” Aklan, March 22,2011 and Ernan Baldomero, Aklan, March 23, 2011.[41] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative, “Rosita,” Aklan, March 22,2011.[42] HumanRights Watch interview with the Clerk of Court, Regional Trial Court, SixthJudicial Region, Branch 2, Kalibo, Aklan, Lina S. Candoleta, Kalibo, Aklan,March 22, 2011.[43] Policefiled charges against Baldomero in 2005 and 2007 alleging involvement inkillings and arson allegedly perpetrated by the NPA. Police records indicatethat Baldomero was “neutralized” when he was arrested on August 18,2005, indicating that they believed he was an NPA member: Undated documententitled, “MUG SHOTS” and “BIOGRAPHICAL PROFILE”obtained from the Philippine National Police on March 22, 2011, on file withHuman Rights Watch. The charges were dismissed. A relative and colleague alsospoke of a “tit for tat” between a military commander from the 47thIB’s civil military operation and Baldomero over the radio station, justweeks before he was killed, in which the military official spoke of Baldomero,as a Bayan Muna leader, being a legal front of the CPP-NPA and a communistterrorist. Human Rights Watch interview with a relative, “Rosita,”and an activist colleague, George Calaor, provincial chair of Bagong AlyansangMakabayan (BAYAN), Aklan, March 22, 2011.[44]Memorandum from Chief of Police of Lezo, Aklan, PSI. JoelC. Triñanes to Aklan Provincial Director, July 22, 2010.[45] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative, “Rosita,” Aklan, March 22, 2011.[46] Manyfarmers live on the reservation as it extends over agricultural land.[47] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative, place name and date withheld.[48]Agrarian Reform Beneficiaries Association (ARBA) and Alyansa ng Magbubukid naNagkakaisa (ALMANA).[49] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative, place name and date withheld; HumanRights Watch interview with PO3 Ricardo Lopez, Nueva Ecija, February 26, 2011.[50] HumanRights Watch interview with PO3 Ricardo Lopez, Nueva Ecija, February 26, 2011. Thetask force comprised several agencies, including police representatives fromvarious stations and the CIDG, together with the NBI.[51] HumanRights Watch interview with a representative of the 702nd IB, NuevaEcija, February 26, 2011.[52] HumanRights Watch interview with several representatives from G7, Fort Magsaysay,February 26, 2011.[53] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative, place name and date withheld.[54] Ibid.[55] It isdifficult for the families to identify precisely when their relatives went missingbecause they would often go to the farm for some days. The Deliguer family onlyrealized Renato was missing after he did not return home after more than aweek.[56] HumanRights Watch interview with Hipolito P. Deliguer, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur,March 15, 2011.[57] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Ladera, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur,March 15, 2011.[58] Ibid.[59]Extract copy from the police blotter, Marihatag Police Station, September 15,2010, Entry 206, Page 169.[60] HumanRights Watch interview with Hipolito P. Deliguer, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur,March 15, 2011.[61] Ibid.[62] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Ladera, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur,March 15, 2011.[63] HumanRights Watch interview with Hipolito P. Deliguer, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur,March 15, 2011.[64] Ibid.[65] Ibid.; Human Rights Watch interview with a relative of Ladera, SanAgustin, Surigao del Sur, March 15, 2011.[66] Ibid.[67]Memorandum from Provincial Director, Surigao del Sur Police Provincial Office,to Regional Director, Police Regional Office 13, October 8, 2010.[68] Ibid.[69] HumanRights Watch interview with Chief Investigator Joel Vertudazo, Tandag, March14, 2011.[70] HumanRights Watch interview with Hipolito P. Deliguer, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur,March 15, 2011. Human Rights Watch interview with a relative of Ladera, SanAgustin, Surigao del Sur, March 15, 2011.[71]Excerpt from the minutes of the 14th regular session of the 16thSangguniang Panlalawigan of Surigao del Sur, Resolution No. 115 and 116, Seriesof 2010, October 5, 2010.[72] Ibid.[73] HumanRights Watch interview with Leonisa Labrador, Davao City, March 10, 2011; HumanRights Watch interview with Pronillo Soriño, a former barangaycaptain, Davao City, March 10, 2011.[74] HumanRights Watch interview with Leonisa Labrador, Davao City, March 10, 2011.[75]Affidavit of Reylun Labrador, October 8, 2010.[76] HumanRights Watch interview with Leonisa Labrador, Davao City, March 10, 2011; HumanRights Watch interview with Pronillo Soriño, a former barangaycaptain, Davao City, March 10, 2011. The note was given to the police.[77] HumanRights Watch interview with Pronillo Soriño, a former barangaycaptain, Davao City, March 10, 2011.[78] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Kulot, Davao del Norte, March 12,2011. This relative told how Kulot had been engaging in various criminalactivities and had become a problem for the family and the community, so theysent him off to the NPA to learn discipline. After less than a year, in 2009,he defected to the Philippine Army and had been working with them until he waskilled in December 2010.[79] HumanRights Watch interview with Pronillo Soriño,a former barangay captain, Davao City, March 10, 2011.[80] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Kulot, Davao del Norte, March 12,2011.[81] KaParago of the 1st Pulang Bagani Company, Merardo Arce Command, SouthernMindanao Regional Operations Command of the NPA announced in a press releasethat, “Last November 28, Red partisans carried out the standing orderagainst Roberto Kulot Repe (Serial Number DS-G10-000241) in Barangay Paquibato,Davao City.” “1003rd Brigade-10th ID-AFP death squad operativepunished; 1003rd Bde-AFP Tutaan as AFP human rights chief, a mockery to humanrights,” NPA press release, December 9, 2010, http://theprwcblogs.blogspot.com/2010/12/1003rd-brigade-10th-id-afp-death-squad.html(accessed May 3, 2011). A former barangay captain confirmed that Repehad been killed: Human Rights Watch interview with Pronillo Soriño, aformer barangay captain, Davao City, March 10, 2011.[82] HumanRights Watch interview with Leonisa Labrador, Davao City, March 10, 2011.[83] HumanRights Watch interview with “Jaime,” a pseudonym, place name anddate withheld. Human Rights Watch interview with “Elsa,” apseudonym, a relative of Quirante, Guihulngan, March 19, 2011.[84] HumanRights Watch interview with “Jaime,” place name and date withheld.Several witnesses have corroborated this account. Resolution Republic of thePhilippines v. Junel Librado and others, Regional Trial Court, 7thJudicial Region, Branch 64, Guihulngan, Negros Oriental, signed by associateprovincial prosecutor, Amelia Lourdes U. Mendoza and approved by ProvincialProsecutor, Diosdado D. Hermosa, December 20, 2010; Memorandum, PoliceInvestigation Report, from SPO2 Samuel C. Cañete to provincialprosecutor, October 22, 2010.[85] HumanRights Watch interview with “Elsa,” a relative of Quirante,Guihulngan, March 19, 2011.[86] HumanRights Watch interview with “Jaime,” place name and date withheld.Human Rights Watch interview with “Elsa,” a relative of Quirante,Guihulngan, March 19, 2011. Resolution Republic of the Philippines v. JunelLibrado and others, Regional Trial Court, 7th Judicial Region,Branch 64, Guihulngan, Negros Oriental, signed by Associate ProvincialProsecutor, Amelia Lourdes U. Mendoza and approved by provincial prosecutor,Diosdado D. Hermosa, December 20, 2010; Memorandum, Police InvestigationReport, from SPO2 Samuel C. Cañete to provincial prosecutor, October 22,2010.[87] HumanRights Watch interview with “Jaime,” place name and date withheld.Several witnesses have corroborated this account. Resolution Republic of thePhilippines v. Junel Librado and others, Regional Trial Court, 7thJudicial Region, Branch 64, Guihulngan, Negros Oriental, signed by associateprovincial prosecutor, Amelia Lourdes U. Mendoza and approved by provincialprosecutor, Diosdado D. Hermosa, December 20, 2010; Memorandum, PoliceInvestigation Report, from SPO2 Samuel C. Cañete to provincialprosecutor, October 22, 2010.[88] HumanRights Watch interview with “Elsa,” a relative of Quirante,Guihulngan, March 19, 2011.[89] HumanRights Watch interview with a leader of an allied progressive organization,Guihulngan, March 19, 2011.[90]Warrant of Arrest, Republic of the Philippines v. Junel Librado and others, RegionalTrial Court, 7th Judicial Region, Branch 64, Guihulngan, NegrosOriental, February 1, 2011.[91] HumanRights Watch interview with Guihulngan City Prosecutor Constantino Trinidad,Guihulngan, March 21, 2011.[92] HumanRights Watch interview with “JR,” a pseudonym, a relative ofQuirante, Guihulngan, March 20, 2011.[93] HumanRights Watch interviews with a relative, Batangas, February 19, 2011; Isidro T.Rodriguez, Ireneo’s father, Batangas, February 23, 2011; Lt. Col. Vincent B. Incognito, commander, 730th Combat Group,Philippine Air Force, Nasugbu, Batangas, February 23, 2011.[94] HumanRights Watch interview with Lt. Col. Vincent B.Incognito, commander, 730th Combat Group, Philippine Air Force, Nasugbu,Batangas, February 23, 2011.[95] HumanRights Watch interview with Gigi Bautista, Calaca, February 19, 2011.[96] HumanRights Watch interview with Isidro T Rodriguez, Ireneo’s father, Calaca,Batangas, February 23, 2011.[97] HumanRights Watch interviews with a relative, Batangas, February 19, 2011.[98] HumanRights Watch interview with Lt. Col. Vincent B. Incognito, commander, 730thCombat Group, Philippine Air Force, Nasugbu, Batangas, February 23, 2011.[99] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative, Calaca, February 19, 2011.[100] HumanRights Watch interview with Lt. Col. Vincent B.Incognito, commander, 730th Combat Group, Philippine Air Force, Nasugbu,Batangas, February 23, 2011.[101] Ibid.[102] HumanRights Watch interview with a local government official, place name and datewithheld.[103] HumanRights Watch interview with relatives of Fred Bucal, Batangas, Nasugbu,February 19, 2011.[104] Ibid.[105] HumanRights Watch interview with Lt. Col. Vincent B.Incognito, commander, 730th Combat Group, Philippine Air Force, Nasugbu,Batangas, February 23, 2011. Human Rights Watch interview with PNP Fetizananand Castilla, Batangas, February 21, 2011. See also “2 NPA patay saencounter (2 killed in NPA encounter),”Pilipino Star Ngayon, November11, 2011, http://www.philstar.com/Article.aspx?articleId=628921&publicationSubCategoryId=49(accessed May 3, 2011).[106] HumanRights Watch interview with relatives of Fred Bucal, Batangas, Nasugbu,February 19, 2011.[107] HumanRights Watch interview with Mercy Dejos, Davao del Sur, March 12, 2011.[108] Ibid.[109] Ibid.[110] The policespot report states: “The gunmen were unidentified but believe[d] to bemembers of the New People’s Army under the command of Roberto CastilloteAKA Kumander Marvin of Front Committee 51:” Note from Maj. DemetriusEmuardo Taypin, Police chief inspector, Sta. Cruz, Davao del Sur, February 27,2011.[111] HumanRights Watch interview with Mercy Dejos, Davao del Sur, March 12, 2011.[112] HumanRights Watch interview with Irene Dejos, Davao del Sur, March 12, 2011.[113] Videofootage and photographs on file with Human Rights Watch.[114] HumanRights Watch interview with Lt. Col. Oliver Artuz, 39th IB,Philippine Army, March 9, 2011.[115] HumanRights Watch interview with Mercy Dejos, Davao del Sur, March 12, 2011.[116] JaimeLaude, “AFP welcomes creation of ‘superbody’ on killings,” The PhilippineStar, July 15, 2010, http://www.philstar.com/Article.aspx?articleId=593394&publicationSubCategoryId=63(accessed May 20, 2011).[117] HumanRights Watch interview with a solder, “Gio,” a pseudonym, Aklan, March 23, 2011.[118] HumanRights Watch interview with a military insider, “Ricardo,” apseudonym, place name and date withheld.[119] HumanRights Watch interview with “Rosa,” a pseudonym, Davao City, February 15, 2011.[120] ArmedForces of the Philippines, Internal Peace and Security Plan, 2010, p. vi.[121] Lt.Col. Incognito said, “Before [Oplan Bayinhan] was published we had beendoing that, it’s just that it wasn’t documented.” HumanRights Watch interview with Lt. Col. Vincent B. Incognito, commander, 730thCombat Group, Philippine Air Force, Nasugbu, Batangas, February 23, 2011. HumanRights Watch interview with a member of the 702nd IB, Nueva Ecija,February 26, 2011.[122] HumanRights Watch interview with a member of the 702nd IB, Nueva Ecija,February 26, 2011.[123]“Amanda,” a pseudonym, told how a soldierhad warned her “to stay away from the twins because they areanti-military.” Human Rights Watch interview with “Amanda,”Davao City, February 15, 2011.[124] HumanRights Watch interview with a representative of the 702nd IB, NuevaEcija, February 26, 2011.[125] HumanRights Watch interview with a representative of the 702nd IB, NuevaEcija, February 26, 2011. Several community members said that the militarytakes notice of the people that do not attend the pulong-pulong.A soldier explained, “Of course, the soldiers will notice whois not around.... If they are not around, of course they will make an extraeffort to talk to that person.”[126] HumanRights Watch interview with a representative of the 702nd IB, NuevaEcija, February 26, 2011.[127] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Ladera, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur,March 15, 2011. A barangay official said, “If the NPA comes andasks me for food, I give it. But if I don’t have it, we don’t giveit.” Human Rights Watch interview with a barangayofficial, place name and date withheld.[128] HumanRights Watch interview with a resident of Paquibato district, Davao City, March8, 2011.[129]Government of the Philippines, Consolidated Reply of the Government of thePhilippines to the Alston Report, A/HRC/8/G/6, June 2, 2008, para. 89.[130]UNCommission on Human Rights, Report of the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial,summary or arbitrary executions, Philip Alston, Mission to Philippines,A/HRC/8/3/Add.2, April 16, 2008, para. 17.[131] HumanRights Watch interview with a former barangay captain, Davao City, March10, 2011.[132] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of the rebel returnee, Davao del Norte,March 12, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with a former barangaycaptain, Davao City, March 10, 2011.[133] KatherineEvangelista, “Military says ‘Purging’ could be cause of BayanMuna activist’s death,” Philippine Daily Inquirer, July 6,2010, http://newsinfo.inquirer.net/breakingnews/nation/view/20100706-279537/Purging-could-be-cause-of-Bayan-Muna-activists-death(accessed May 20, 2011).[134]“Military seeks help from House in human rights case,” The DailyTribune, October 1, 2010, http://www.tribuneonline.org/nation/20101001nat6.html(accessed May 20, 2011).[135] HumanRights Watch interview with a soldier, “Gio,” Aklan, March 23,2011.[136] Thecommission said, “There is certainly evidence pointing the finger ofsuspicion at some elements and personalities in the armed forces, in particularGen. Palparan, as responsible for an undetermined number of killings, by allowing,tolerating, and even encouraging the killings.”Independent Commission to Address Media and Activist Killings,“Report,” January 22, 2007, p. 53. A subsequent letter from thecommission to the government went on to say, “That there was a markedincrease in the incidence of killings in all the areas where General Palparanwas assigned—which he admitted—should be enough to justify hisinvestigation. Indeed, General Palparan’s statements and cavalierattitude about the killings should have warranted early on at the very leastadministrative or disciplinary actions by his superiors.” Letter fromJose A. R. Melo, chairman of the Melo Commission, to Eduardo R. Ermita,executive secretary, August 21, 2007, p. 3.[137] HumanRights Watch interviews with P/C Insp. Carlos Lacuesta, Guihulngan chief ofpolice, Guihulngan, March 21, 2011 and SPO2 Samuel Cañete, Manila, April21, 2011. Cañete said that the request sought various details about thetwo identified suspects, in particular their personal and duty details, duty,appointment and assignment status, and issued armaments.[138] HumanRights Watch interview with Carlos Lacuesta, Guihulngan chief of police,Guihulngan, March 21, 2011. Lt. Jim Obias confirmed that the 11th IBundertook its own investigation into Quirante’s killing and that thereport has been forwarded to higher headquarters: Human Rights Watch interviewwith Lt. Jim Obias, 11th IB Philippine Army, Guihulngan, March 21,2011.[139] HumanRights Watch interview with Carlos Lacuesta, Guihulngan chief of police, Guihulngan,March 21, 2011.[140] HumanRights Watch interview with P/CInsp. Carlos Lacuesta, Guihulngan chief ofpolice, Guihulngan, March 21, 2011.[141] HumanRights Watch interview with police investigator Joel Lumakang, Mawab, March 15,2011. Memorandum from PO1 Joel D. Lumakang, investigator, to Compostela Valleyprovincial police director, November 6, 2010. Armed men killed Felisilda inMawab, Compestela Valley, in Mindanao on September 9, 2010. Human Rights Watchwas unable to visit the remote area in Mawab where Felisilda was killed by thetime of this writing because of ongoing fighting between the AFP and the NPA.[142] HumanRights Watch interview with police investigator Joel Lumakang, Mawab, March 15,2011.[143]Excerpt from the minutes of the 14th regular session of the 16thSangguniang Panlalawigan of Surigao del Sur, Resolution No. 115 and 116, Seriesof 2010, October 5, 2010.[144] Ibid.[145] HumanRights Watch interview with several members of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan ofSurigao del Sur Committee on Laws, Justice, and Human Rights, March 14, 2011.[146]EditaBurgos v. Gloria Macapagal Arroyo et al., G.R. No. 183711, InvestigationReport submitted by Commissioner Jose Manuel Mamaug, March 15, 2011, p. 8. InApril 2007, armed men abducted Jonas Burgos in broad daylight from a mall inQuezon City. Burgos’ mother, Edita, petitioned the court for a writ ofamparo—a habeas corpus-like procedure in which state agencies arecompelled to reveal to the court the whereabouts of named persons, disclosedocumentary evidence or allow court-authorized searches of premises. In 2010,the Supreme Court ordered the Commission on Human Rights to investigateBurgos’ “disappearance,” and report back to it. In June 2010,Edita Burgos filed with the Justice Department charges of arbitrary detentionagainst the military personnel identified in the report, including Maj. HarryBaliaga, Jr., Lt. Col. Melquaides Feliciano, Col.Eduardo Ano and several unidentified soldiers. At this writing, the departmentis considering the complaint.[147] UNHuman Rights Council, Report of the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial,summary or arbitrary executions, Addendum: Summary of cases transmitted toGovernment and replies received, A/HRC/8/3/Add.1, May 30, 2008, p. 319.[148] SeeHuman Rights Watch, Scared Silent, pp. 29-32.[149] HumanRights Watch interview with several representatives from G7, Fort Magsaysay,February 26, 2011.[150] Ibid.[151] Ibid.[152] Ibid.[153] Lt.Col. Vincent B. Incognito, commander, 730th Combat Group,Philippine Air Force, told Human Rights Watch that thereare no AFP reports relating to either the killing of Ireneo Rodriguez or thedisappearance of Alfredo Bucal. Human Rights Watch interview with Lt. Col. Vincent B. Incognito, commander, 730th Combat Group,Philippine Air Force, Nasugbu, Batangas, February 23, 2011.[154] 9thPublic Affairs Office, AFP, Investigation Report, August 7, 2006; Affidavit ofMaj. Ernest Marc Rosal, October 6, 2006. The August 7, 2006 report of the 9thID concludes that on August 3, 2006, Pfc LordgerPastrana encountered undetermined number of SPARU elements; “he was ableto draw his firearm however he was killed by the SPARU.” SPARU is theterm used for the Special Partisan Unit of the NPA.[155]Philippinesv. Cpl. Rodrigo L. Billones, Crim. Case No. 4864, Regional Trial Court, 10thJudicial Region, Branch 6, Prosperidad, Agusan del Sur.[156] HumanRights Watch interview with Sgt. Esequias Duyogan, place name and datewithheld.[157] Ibid.[158] HumanRights Watch interview with Sgt. Esequias Duyogan, place name and datewithheld. Cpl. Billones confirmed that his battalion covered his legal costs.Human Rights Watch interview with Cpl. Rodrigo Billones, Prosperidad, August24, 2010.[159] HumanRights Watch interview with official at the Agusan del Sur provincial jail,Prosperidad, August 24, 2010.[160] HumanRights Watch interview with the wife of an extrajudicial killing victim, placename and date withheld. The family is canvassing for witnesses that they canlater present to the police.[161] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Guevarra, place name and datewithheld; a relative of R. Rodriguez, place name and date withheld; a relativeof Baldomero, place name and date withheld; a friend of Labrador, place nameand date withheld.[162] HumanRights Watch interview with the father of an extrajudicial killing victim,place name and date withheld.[163] HumanRights Watch interview with Antonio Billera, Davao City, March 16, 2011. Similarly,in the Dejos case, a former barangay tanod, Rudy’s brother, ArnoldDejos, collected the four empty bullet casings and provided them to the police.Note from Maj. Demetrius Emuardo Taypin, police chief inspector, Sta. Cruz,Davao del Sur, February 27, 2011.[164] HumanRights Watch interview with Antonio Billera, Davao City, March 16, 2011.[165]European Union police expert Bo Astrom has confirmed that he also found thatinvestigators had not collected evidence—other than the mostobvious—and regularly did not seek advanced forensic examination ofevidence collected.[166] HumanRights Watch interview with a police investigator, place name and datewithheld.[167] Ibid.; Human Rights Watch interview with MajDemetrius E. Taypin, Davao del Sur, March 9, 2011.[168] HumanRights Watch interview with Maj Demetrius E. Taypin, Davao del Sur, March 9,2011.[169]Benjamin Bayles was killed on a national highway during a busy period, in frontof many witnesses. However, the police did not canvass for witnesses. All ofthe witnesses to be presented in the trial were identified by the privateprosecutors in the case. Human Rights Watch interview with private prosecutorAtty. Ben Ramos, March 18, 2011.[170] HumanRights Watch interview with several colleagues of Carlo Rodriguez, CalambaCity, February 22, 2011.[171] HumanRights Watch interview with Romel Morales, CIDG, investigating the killing ofEstacio, Bataan, February 24, 2011. This case is not discussed above as HumanRights Watch research indicated that it does not fit the pattern of anextrajudicial killing and did not find evidence of security force involvementin the killing. On July 12, 2010, a masked gunman killed Josephine Estacio, ateacher, outside the school at which she was teaching in Balanga City, Bataan.Estacio was not associated with any leftist organization. Police investigatorsare yet to identify a motive behind this killing.[172]Resolution, Balanga City Police v. Alfredo Alipio, NPS Docket No.III-02-INV-10H-00102, November 23, 2010; Case file, shown to Human Rights Watchduring an interview with Investigator Canare, Bataan,February 24, 2011. A photograph of this process shows only the enlarged IDpicture of Alipio, posted on a wall, with the witness pointing to it, ratherthan a photo board showing several possible suspects. The investigatormaintains the photo board showed photographs of several people.[173] HumanRights Watch interviews with Investigator Canare, Bataan, February 24, 2011, and Romel Morales, CIDG, investigating the killing of Estacio,Bataan, February 24, 2011. Resolution, Balanga City Police v. Alfredo Alipio,NPS Docket No. III-02-INV-10H-00102, November 23, 2010.[174]Resolution, Balanga City Police v. Alfredo Alipio, NPS Docket No.III-02-INV-10H-00102, November 23, 2010.[175] Forinstance, in one case colleagues of the victim told Human Rights Watch,“The NBI is asking for at least 100,000 pesos as a primer to start toinvestigate the case.” Human Rights Watch interview with severalcolleagues of an extrajudicial killing victim, place name and date withheld.[176] HumanRights Watch interview with Leonisa Labrador, Davao City, March 10, 2011.[177] HumanRights Watch interview with Carlos Lacuesta, Guihulngan chief of police,Guihulngan, March 21, 2011.[178] HumanRights Watch interview with Balais, deputy chief ofpolice, Kalibo, Aklan, March 22, 2011.[179]Police Officer Deris said, with respect to the killing of Carlo Rodriguez, thatthe chief of the investigation who had handled the case had been transferred,so she and other investigators had to wait to consult a new chief beforecontinuing the investigation. Human Rights Watch interview with PO2 Lilly Ann“Leah” Deris, Calamba City, February 22, 2011.[180]Investigators did not visit the crime scene in the cases of Quirante, Tamondez,Felisilda, Deliguer, or Ladera. The Dejos family also said that investigatorsdid not visit the crime scene, though the local police chief disputes this.Human Rights Watch interviews with Carlos Lacuesta, Guihulngan chief of police,Guihulngan, March 21, 2011; PSI Allan Reginald L. Basiya, Mawab Officer inCharge, Mawab, March 15, 2011; Porciso Tamondez, Davao del Norte, March 12,2011; Hipolito P. Deliguer, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur, March 15, 2011; and arelative of Ladera, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur, March 15, 2011.[181] HumanRights Watch interview with PSI Allan Reginald L. Basiya, Mawab Officer inCharge, Mawab, March 15, 2011.[182] HumanRights Watch interview with P/CInsp. Carlos Lacuesta, Guihulngan chief ofpolice, Guihulngan, March 21, 2011.[183] HumanRights Watch interview with SPO2 Samuel Cañete, place name and datewithheld.[184] HumanRights Watch interview with Hipolito P. Deliguer, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur,March 15, 2011 and a relative of Ladera, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur, March15, 2011.[185]Memorandum from provincial director, Surigao del Sur Police Provincial Office,to regional director, Police Regional Office 13, October 8, 2010.[186] Ibid.Human Rights Watch interview with Chief Investigator Joel Vertudazo, Tandag,March 14, 2011, and with Provincial Director Surigaodel Sur, Tandag, March 14, 2011.[187] HumanRights Watch interview with a foreign police officer, Manila, March 2, 2011.[188] HumanRights Watch interview with the relative of an alleged perpetrator, place nameand date withheld.[189] HumanRights Watch interview with a military insider, “Ricardo,” placename and date withheld.[190] Ibid.[191]Kabankalan City Police Station, excerpt from the Police Blotter, Entry No.0477, Page No. 177, June 14, 2010. Human Rights Watch interview with SPOIVirgilio D. Parcon, Himamylan City, March 20, 2011.[192]Firearms and Explosives Office, Certification, July 29, 2010.[193] Memorandumfrom P/Supt. Antonietto Cañete, officer in charge, Himamaylan CityPolice Station, to provincial director, June 14, 2010.[194] HumanRights Watch interview with private prosecutor Atty. Ben Ramos, March 18, 2011.[195]According to barangay officials, no one by the names of either of thesuspects reside at the barangays where they claimed they lived. HumanRights Watch interview with private prosecutor Atty. Ben Ramos, March 18, 2011.[196] HumanRights Watch interview with private prosecutor Atty. Ben Ramos, March 18, 2011.[197]Affidavit of Vilma E. Tejada, February 10, 2011.[198] HumanRights Watch interview with SPOI Virgilio D. Parcon, Himamylan City, March 20,2011.[199] Ibid.[200]Memorandum from SPO1 Virgilio D. Parcon, Himamaylan City Police Station, toPolice Regional Office 6, February 25, 2011. For further discussion of thiscase, see above Failure to Pursue Evidence of MilitaryInvolvement. The sub judice rule does notprevent police from continuing investigations and filing further informationwith prosecutors.[201]Medico-Legal Report No. M-1044-10, Carlo O. Rodriguez, November 15, 2010.[202]Memorandum from P/Supt. Nestor Barba Dela Cueva, officer in charge, CalambaCity Police Station, to PD, Laguna PPO, November 23, 2010. PO2 Lilly Ann Derissaid, “Our assumption [is that Rodriguez was killed] due to a personalgrudge as this is far different to an EJK [extrajudicial killing]. When it isan EJK, the assailant usually only had one or two shots.” Deris went onto say that Rodriguez has been labeled a womanizer because they recoveredphotographs of him with several women on his cell phone. His colleagues,however, suggest that many of these photographs came from an evening workgathering all taken during one night. Human Rights Watch interview with PO2Lilly Ann Deris, Calamba City, February 22, 2011.[203]Rodriguez’s colleagues said, “Caloy was lending his talents toother unions in southern Tagalog, to help them negotiate…. His specialty[was assisting] in developing collective negotiating agreements.” HumanRights Watch interview with several colleagues of Carlo Rodriguez, CalambaCity, February 22, 2011.[204] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of an extrajudicial killing victim,place name and date withheld.[205] HumanRights Watch interview with a police investigator, Manila, date withheld.[206] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative, “Rosita,” Aklan, March 22,2011.[207] Ibid.The police were praised for the “expeditious solution” of theBaldomero case: Memorandum from Aklan Provincial chief of police, PSupt. GeorbyC. Manuel, to regional chief, July 22, 2010.[208] HumanRights Interviews with Balais, deputy chief of police, Kalibo, Aklan, March 22,2011 and with a relative, “Rosita,” Aklan, March 22, 2011.[209] HumanRights Watch interview with several representatives from G7, Fort Magsaysay,February 26, 2011.[210] HumanRights Watch, Scared Silent, pp. 32-33.[211] Ibid.[212]Office of the City Prosecutor, Tarlac City, Lily Ramos versus. Sgt. Roderickdela Cruz, Sgt. Romeo Castillo et. al; Romeo Ramos versus. Glendel Gutierrez deGuzman, Resolution, IS No. 05-1704; 2848, April 26, 2006. Ramos’sbrother, Romero, also brought a complaint against a neighbor, Glendel deGuzman, who he alleged conspired with the soldiers to kill Ramos. The assistantprovincial prosecutor found no sufficient evidence to indict de Guzman.[213]Office of the City Prosecutor, Tarlac City, Lily Ramos versus. Sgt Roderickdela Cruz, Sgt. Romeo Castillo et. al; Romeo Ramos versus. Glendel Gutierrez deGuzman, Resolution, IS No. 05-1704; 2848, April 26, 2006.[214] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of an extrajudicial killing victim,place name and date withheld.[215]On July 19, 2006, Danilo Hagosojos was riding home in Sorsorgon,Bicol, on his motorbike with his seven-year-old daughter when he was shotmultiple times in the chest and head by two unidentified assailants. Thiskilling has not been thoroughly investigated and no charges have been filed.Human Rights Watch, Scared Silent, pp. 41.[216] HumanRights Watch interview with a police investigator, place name and date withheld.[217] Ibid.[218] Ibid.[219] Ibid.[220] Ibid.[221] HumanRights Watch interviews with a police officer, Nueva Ecija, February 25, 2011;and SPOI Virgilio D. Parcon, Himamylan City, March 20, 2011.[222] HumanRights Watch interviews with Police Supt. Eduardo B. Soriano, Nueva Ecija,February 25, 2011; SPOI Virgilio D. Parcon, Himamylan City, March 20, 2011.Parcon said, “We recognize witnesses’ rights—right to anattorney, right to remain silent—these are the rights of witnesses aswell as the accused.”[223] HumanRights Watch interview with a local government official, place name and datewithheld. Human Rights Watch has changed the names used in this statement; KaBen was not the name used. The term Ka is short for comrade, used as part ofNPA noms de guerre.[224] OnOctober 27, 2010, at about 5 p.m., the witness was three armed men in fatiguesvisited the witness and threatened her. Complaint Police Blotter of HimamaylanCity Police Station, Entry No. 2010-3016, Page No. 0182, October 29, 2010.Affidavit of Vilma E. Tejada, February 10, 2011.[225]Thearmed man said, “Gusto mo ba iputok ko sa ulo mo?” Complaint PoliceBlotter of Himamaylan City Police Station, Entry No. 2010-3089, Page No.0200—0201, November 6, 2010. Affidavit of Vilma E. Tejada, February 10,2011.[226] HumanRights Watch interviews with several colleagues of Carlo Rodriguez, CalambaCity, February 22, 2011, and SPO1 Herbert Mendoza,Calamba City, February 22, 2011.[227] HumanRights Watch interview with SPO1 Herbert Mendoza, Calamba City, February 22,2011.[228] Ibid.[229] HumanRights Watch interview with a military insider, “Ricardo,” placename and date withheld.[230] Ibid.[231] HumanRights Watch, Scared Silent, p. 45.[232] HumanRights Watch interview with Marideza and Arnel Guran, Bicol, September 6, 2009.[233] RA6981, s. 3. The legislation explicitly excludes law enforcement personnel fromcoverage, even when testifying against fellow law enforcement officers.[234]RA 6981, s. 5.[235]RA 6981, s. 8.[236]RA 6981, s. 3.[237]RA 6981, s. 9.[238]Telephone conversation with Att.Martin Meñez, acting program director, Witness Protection Program,Department of Justice, July 4, 2011. Meñez said that other governmentagencies had been reluctant to cooperate with the Justice Department inchanging the identity of witnesses, despite provision for this in RA 6981.Therefore, the department has proposed legislative change to enable thesecretary of justice to order relevant government agencies to take thenecessary steps to effect changes of identity. The bill proposing thislegislative change has been passed by the House of Representatives but remainsbefore the Senate.[239] HumanRights Watch interview with a local government official, place name and datewithheld.[240] HumanRights Watch interview with a couple in witness protection, place name and datewithheld.[241] HumanRights Watch interview with private prosecutor Atty. Ben Ramos, March 18, 2011.[242] HumanRights Watch interview with Chief Investigator Joel Vertudazo, Tandag, March14, 2011.[243] HumanRights Watch interview with a prosecutor, date and place withheld.[244] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of an extrajudicial killing victim,place name and date withheld.[245] Ibid.[246] Thisprotection was provided in relation to the July 5, 2010 killing of FernandoBaldomero and the July 12, 2010 killing of Josephine Estacio.[247]Letter from Atty. Martin Meñez, acting program director, WitnessProtection Security and Benefits Program, Department of Justice, to HumanRights Watch, May 10, 2011 (delivered via email on May 19, 2011).[248] On January 29, 2010, Robert Woo was convicted of murder, as anaccomplice, for the May 2005 killing of radio commentator Klein Cantoneros. OnApril 29, 2009, Joy Anticamara was convicted for the July 2006 murder of radiobroadcaster Armando Pace. In March 2009, Rafael Cardeño was convictedfor the December 31, 2001 murder of reported whistleblower and YoungOfficer’s Union spokesperson Baron Alexander Cervantes; Jaime Centeno,Joseph Mostrales, and Erlindo Flores had been convicted in August 2004. In June2008, Joel Flores, formermilitary at the time of murder, was convictedfor the May 16, 2006 murder of Bayan Muna Secretary-General Jose Doton. InOctober 2006, Gerry Cabayag, Randy Grecia, and Estanislao Bisamos wereconvicted for the March 2005 murder of journalist Marlene Esperat. In January2006, Edgar Belandres was convicted for the November 2004 murder of AllanDizon, a photographer for The Freeman. In November 2005, GuillermoWapili, a formerpolice officer was convicted for the May 2002murder of radio commentator Edgar Damalerio.[249]InternationalConvention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance(Convention against EnforcedDisappearances), adopted September23, 2005, E/CN.4/2005/WG.22/WP.1/Rev.4 (2005).[250]Office of the Provincial Prosecutor, Legazpi City Atty. Ruben M. Azanes v.Ernest Marc P. Rosal and Arnaldo L. Majares, Resolution, June 8, 2007; Officeof the Regional State Prosecutor, Region V., Sonia Sta. Rosa v. Ernest Marc P.Rosal et al., Resolution, November 9, 2007; Human Rights Watch interview with SoniaSanta Rosa, Bicol, September 7, 2009. About an hour after 10 armed men enteredSanta Rosa’s home and abducted him, and about 30 minutes after his wifehad heard nine gunshots, local police found two bodies by the a nearbystream—Santa Rosa and a man wearing a balaclava over his face, carryingan AFP identification card in the name of Corporal Lordger Pastrana. SoniaSanta Rosa later identified Pastrana by the clothes he was wearing as theleader when the men entered her house. In Pastrana’s possession, policefound a mission order marked “SECRET” from the 9th MilitaryIntelligence Battalion, signed by Major Ernest Marc P. Rosal, for Pfc. LordgetPastrana, authorizing him to carry a .45 caliber Llama pistol from July 1,2006, until September 30, 2006. They also found a .45 caliber Llama pistol withsilencer and with one magazine loaded was found near Pastrana’s body. Theevidence suggests that Pastrana may have been shot by accident by anothermember of his team while either he or another team member attempted to executePastor Santa Rosa. PNP, Daraga Municipal Police Station, Shooting Incident atBrgy. Malobago, Daraga, Albay, resulting [in the] Death of Isais Sta. Rosa,August 21, 2009.[251] Emailcommunication from Raissa Jajurie, private prosecutor, to Human Rights Watch,June 29, 2011.[252] HumanRights Watch interview with Talib Japalali, Manila, October 15, 2009.[253] Ibid.[254] HumanRights Watch interview with a police investigator, place name and datewithheld.[255] HumanRights Watch interview with the clerk of court, Regional Trial Court, SixthJudicial Region, Branch 2, Kalibo, Aklan, Lina S. Candoleta, Kalibo, Aklan,March 22, 2011.[256] HumanRights Watch interview with “Elsa,” a relative of Quirante,Guihulngan, March 19, 2011.[257] HumanRights Watch interview with the clerk of court, Regional Trial Court, SixthJudicial Region, Branch 2, Kalibo, Aklan, Lina S. Candoleta, Kalibo, Aklan,March 22, 2011.[258] HumanRights Watch interview with Carlos Lacuesta, Guihulngan chief of police,Guihulngan, March 21, 2011. Lt. Col. Bitong has publicly blamed the NPA forQuirante’s killing, without citing any evidence for this conclusion.Philippine Army Public Affairs Office, “NPA’s Killings Up by 150%as Army Appeals to Rebels: Spare the Civilians,” October 13, 2010, http://www.facebook.com/note.php?note_id=164828943542528(accessed April 19, 2011). See also, Pro-Democracy Movement, “Man killedin Guihulngan,” http://www.facebook.com/topic.php?uid=113621142013721&topic=228and “NPA killings up 150% in Negros, Army says,” http://www.facebook.com/topic.php?uid=113621142013721&topic=234(accessed April 19, 2011).[259] HumanRights Watch interview with Lt. Jim Obias, 11th IB Philippine Army,Guihulngan, March 21, 2011.[260] RegionalTrial Court of Tarlac City, Branch 65, in Criminal Case No. 14419 People of thePhilippines v PFC Roderick dela Cruz a.k.a. Joshua dela Cruz. On June 6, 2006,Judge Viliran, Regional Trial Court, Tarlac City, issued a warrant for his arrest,specifying that he was not eligible for bail. Police did not serve the warrant,so on December 14, 2006, the court ordered that the case be archived“without prejudice to reactivation upon the apprehension of the accusedas the accused are still at large notwithstanding the lapse of six months sincethe order of arrest was issued.” At this time an alias arrest warrant wasissued.[261] RTC,Tarlac City, Branch 65, Crim. Case No. 14419, Return of Warrant of Arrest, May21, 2008; Task Force 211, Press Statement No. 08-05-29: Task Force 211 LaudsAFP for Full Cooperation, May 29, 2008.[262]Supreme Court Administrative Order 25-2007, March 1, 2007.[263]Supreme Court Rule on the Writ of Amparo Resolution, A.M. No. 07-9-12-SC,September 25, 2007; Supreme Court Rule on the Writ of Habeas Data, A.M.08-1-16, January 22, 2008.[264] HumanRights Watch, Scared Silent, pp. 39-40.[265] HumanRights Watch interview with Concepcion Empeño, Manila, October 13, 2009.Empeño told Human Rights Watch what happened when she found out that thewrit of amparo had been granted: “I brought the newspaper [to the policestation], it was on the front page of the newspaper. I was so very happy atthat time. I said to the police, ‘The military are going to release herand there is already an order from the court of appeals.’… I was sohappy—but nothing has happened.”[266] Petitionfor the Writ of Amparo, Erlinda Cadapan et al. versus Gloria Macapagal Arroyoet al., October 27, 2007, para 13.[267] HumanRights Watch interview with Raymond Manalo, place name and date withheld.[268] HumanRights Watch interview with Atty. Rex Fernandez, Manila, August 18, 2009.[269] CAG.R. SP-WR-A No. 00002 & CA G.R. SP 95303, Resolution per Mendoza J, p. 3.[270] Ibid.[271]Lt.Col. Rogelio Boac, et al. v. Erlinda T. Cadapan and Concepcion E. Empeno,Supreme Court of the Philippines, G.R. Nos. 184461-62/G.R. No. 184495/G.R. No.187109, May 31, 2011.[272] Ibid.[273] Ibid.[274] Cadapan’smother told Human Rights Watch, “I do not know how to continue my searchnow. I am just waiting for the decision of the court. That’s my life,waiting for the decision.”Human Rights Watch interview withErlinda T. Cadapan, Manila, October 13, 2009. On May 4, 2011, the families ofCadapan and Empeño filed with the Justice Department charges againstRet. Maj. Gen. Jovito Palparan Jr., for rape, arbitrary detention, seriousphysical injuries, maltreatment of prisoners, grave threats, and gravecoercion. At this writing, the department is considering these charges.[275]Seeabove, Section I. ThePhilippine Context, HumanRights Desks.[276]Human Rights Watch interview withDomidor Ariola, Barangay Kagawad, Barangay New Casay, Davao delNorte, March 12, 2011.[277] PhilippinesConstitution 1987, art. XIII, sec. 18(1); Exec. Order No 163, May 5, 1087.[278] Thecommission does not have a regional office in Autonomous Region of MuslimMindanao (ARMM). Instead, the offices of Regions IX, X, and XII in Mindanaocover certain provinces in ARMM.[279] Forexample, the central office actively investigated the 2007 enforceddisappearance of Jonas Burgos, including by identifying and interviewing an AFPwitness. The CHR has recommended that the Supreme Court direct the PhilippineArmy to produce Burgos and that the Justice Department file criminal chargesagainst several soldiers. However, this investigation was only completed afterthe Supreme Court referred the case to the CHR, following a petition for writof amparo, nearly four years after Burgos disappeared. And the CHR, which theSupreme Court had asked to report within 90 days, sought three extensions oftime, totaling almost six months. Edita Burgos v. Gloria Macapagal Arroyo etal., G.R. No. 183711, Investigation Report submitted by Commissioner JoseManuel Mamaug, March 15, 2011.[280] HumanRights Watch interview with relatives of an extrajudicial killing victim, placename and date withheld. The CHR office that investigated was Region III.[281] HumanRights Watch interview with Leonisa Labrador, Davao City, March 10, 2011.[282] HumanRights Watch interview with Porciso Tamondez, Davao del Norte, March 12, 2011.[283] HumanRights Watch interview with Atty. Alberto B. Sipaco, Jr., Commission on HumanRights, Region XI, Davao City, February 11, 2011.[284] HumanRights Watch interview with Hipolito P. Deliguer, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur,March 15, 2011. Deliguer said, “The CHR has not contacted us orcommunicated with us in any way.”[285] HumanRights Watch interview with Sonia Santa Rosa, September 7, 2009.[286] HumanRights Watch interview with Porciso Tamondez, Davao del Norte, March 12, 2011.[287]Human Rights Watch interview with arelative, place name and date withheld. Often, NGOs assist victims’families in this respect.[288] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of a victim, place name and datewithheld.[289] HumanRights Watch interview with head of regional office, Commission on HumanRights, place name and date withheld.[290] RepublicAct. No. 6770 of the Philippines, sec. 13, Philippines Constitution 1987, art.XI, sec. 12.[291] Theoverall deputy ombudsman, Orlando C. Casimiro, is currently acting ombudsman.He is also covering the vacant offices of deputy ombudsman for Luzon and deputyombudsman for military and other law enforcement offices. The president is toappoint the ombudsman from a list of at least sixnominees prepared by the Judicial and Bar Council. At this writing, theJudicial and Bar Council has not submitted this list to the president. Theombudsman shall serve for a term of seven years without reappointment.Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines, 1986, secs. 8-11.[292] ComprehensiveAgreement on Respect for Human Rights and International Humanitarian Law(CARHRIHL), between the Government of the Republic of the Philippines and theNational Democratic Front of the Philippines, including the Communist Party ofthe Philippines and the New People’s Army, August 7, 1998, part 5.[293] The JointStatement of GPH-CPP-NPA-NDF at the Conclusion of the Current Round of PeaceTalks in Oslo, Norway, February 21, 2011, http://gphndfpeacetalks.wordpress.com/2011/03/08/joint-statement-of-gph-cpp-npa-ndf-at-the-conclusion-of-the-current-round-of-peace-talks-in-oslo-norway/(accessed May 6, 2011).[294] Theduty to try and punish those responsible for grave violations of human rightshas its legal basis in such treaties as the International Covenant on Civil andPolitical Rights (art.2); and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment (arts. 4, 5, and 7).[295]InternationalCovenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adopted December 16, 1966, G.A.Res. 2200A (XXI), entered into force March 23, 1976, art. 2. The Philippinesratified the ICCPR in October 1986.[296]Principles on the Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra-Legal,Arbitrary and Summary Executions, E.S.C. res. 1989/65, annex, 1989 U.N. ESCOR Supp.(No. 1) at 52, U.N. Doc. E/1989/89 (1989), http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/instree/i7pepi.htm(accessed May 13, 2011).[297]United Nations Manual on the Effective Prevention andInvestigation of Extra-Legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions, U.N. Doc. E/ST/CSDHA/.12(1991), http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/instree/executioninvestigation-91.html(accessed May 13, 2011).[298]InternationalConvention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance(Convention against EnforcedDisappearance),adopted September 23, 2005, E/CN.4/2005/WG.22/WP.1/Rev.4 (2005).[299] Declarationon the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearances (Declaration on EnforcedDisappearances), G.A. res. 47/133, 47 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 207, U.N.Doc. A/47/49 (1992), adopted by General Assembly resolution 47/133 of 18December 1992.[300] Declarationon Enforced Disappearances, art. 1.[301]Ibid., art. 3.[302]Ibid., art. 4. The Declaration on Enforced Disappearances also includesprovisions intended to reduce the likelihood of enforced disappearances andresolve ongoing cases.[303]Command responsibility and itselements are well-established under customary international law. SeeInternational Criminal Court for the former Yugoslavia, Delalic and Others, Judgment,IT-96-21-T, Nov. 16, 1998, sec. 333. See e.g., Rome Statute of theInternational Criminal Court, art. 28; First Additional Protocol of 1977 to theGeneva Conventions, art. 86(2). The Convention against Torture in articles 4and 16 provide that superior officials may be found guilty of complicity oracquiescence if they knew or should have known of torture or ill-treatmentpracticed by persons under their command. See Manfred Nowak and ElizabethMcArthur, The United Nations Convention Against Torture: A Commentary (Oxford:Oxford Univ. Press, 2008), p. 248.[304] 1987 Constitutionof the Republic of the Philippines, art. III, sec. 12.[305] RepublicAct No. 3815 of the Philippines, The Revised Penal Code of the Philippines,arts. 248 (murder), 249 (homicide), 335 (rape), 342 (forcible abduction), 267 (kidnappingand serious illegal detention), 268 (slight illegal detention), 269 (unlawfularrest) 270 (kidnapping and failure to return a minor), 124 (arbitrarydetention), 125 (delay in the delivery of detained persons to the proper judicialauthorities), 125 (delaying release), 235 (maltreatment of prisoners), and 262,263, 264, and 266 (physical injury offenses).[306] RepublicAct No. 9745 of the Philippines, signed into law on November 10, 2009.[307]Ibid., sec. 7.[308] Ibid.[309]RepublicAct No. 6975 of the Philippines, Chapter III, sec. 24.[310]PNPOperational Procedures, 2010, Rule 18. PNP Crime Scene Response Procedures.[311]RepublicAct No. 6713 of the Philippines.[312]RepublicAct No. 6713 of the Philippines, sec 5: Duties of Public Officials and Employees.“In the performance of their duties, all public officials and employeesare under obligation to (a) Act promptly on letters and requests. All publicofficials and employees shall, within fifteen (15) working days from receiptthereof, respond to letters, telegrams or other means of communications sent bythe public. The reply must contain the action taken on the request.”[313]Administrative Order 181, July 3, 2007.[314] Thesefactors are outlined in the Supreme Court’s administrative order 25-2007.[315] AdministrativeOrder No. 249, sec. (1)(a), December 10, 2008.[316] Thepresident signed Republic Act No. 9851 of the Philippines into law December 11,2009. Section 10 provides, Responsibility of Superiors. “Inaddition to other grounds of criminal responsibility for crimes defined andpenalized under this Act, a superior shall be criminally responsible as aprincipal for such crimes committed by subordinates under his/her effectivecommand and control, or effective authority and control as the case may be, asa result of his/her failure to properly exercise control over suchsubordinates, where:(a) That superior either knew or,owing to the circumstances at the time, should have known that the subordinateswere committing or about to commit such crimes;(b) That superior failed to take allnecessary and reasonable measures within his/her power to prevent or represstheir commission or to submit the matter to the competent authorities forinvestigation and prosecution.”See also Republic Act No. 9745, sec.13.[317] Prof.Diane Desierto, “The Contours of Command Responsibility: PhilippineIncorporation and Customary Evolution,” Asia-Pacific Yearbook ofInternational Humanitarian Law, vol. 2, no. 2, 2006, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1485557 (accessedJune 1, 2010).[318]At ameeting with then Justice Secretary Agnes Devanadera in October 2009, at whichtime Republic Act No. 9851 remained before the Congress, JusticeDepartment officials told Human Rights Watch that command responsibility is relevant only to disciplinary proceedings.Human Rights Watch meeting with Agnes Devanadera,Secretary for Justice, Rolando B. Faller, Chief of Staff, Department ofJustice, Atty. Nestor Mantaring, NBI Director, Undersecretary RicardoBlancaflor, Task Force 211, Leo Dacera, Director, Witness Protection, Manila,October 20, 2009.Then ChiefProsecutor Jovencito Zuño said that command responsibility is not really a theory in criminallaw in the Philippines. When asked whether he would consider bringing a testcase, utilizing ordinary principles of criminal responsibility in conjunctionwith international humanitarian law principles of command responsibility, he saidhe might, but he was concerned that then even the president may be a commander.Human Rights Watch meeting with Chief Prosecutor JovencitoZuño, Manila, October 21, 2009.[319]Executive Order 226, Institutionalization of the doctrine of “Command Responsibility” in allGovernment Offices, Particularly At All Levels Of Command In The PhilippineNational Police and other law enforcement agencies, sec. 1 provides: “Neglectof Duty Under the Doctrine of ‘CommandResponsibility.’” Any government officialor supervisor, or officer of the Philippine National Police or that of anyother law enforcement agency shall be held accountable for “Neglect ofDuty” under the doctrine of “command responsibility” if hehas knowledge that a crime or offense shall be committed, is being committed,or has been committed by his subordinates, or by others within his area ofresponsibility and, despite such knowledge, he did not take preventive orcorrective action either before, during, or immediately after its commission.”[320] Thehighest documented numbers of alleged extrajudicial killings of leftistactivists were 220 in 2006, 94 in 2007, and 64 in 2008. UN Human RightsCouncil, Report of the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary orarbitrary executions, Philip Alston, Addendum: Follow-up countryrecommendations – Philippines, A/HRC/11/2/Add.8, April 29, 2009, para 7.[321] Ibid., para 29.[322] H.R.3081: Department of State, Foreign Operations, and Related ProgramsAppropriations Act, 2010, sec. 7070(f).“No Justice Just Adds to thePain”Killings, Disappearances, and Impunityin the PhilippinesMap of thePhilippinesKillings andEnforced Disappearances Documented by Human Rights WatchGlossary ofTerms and AbbreviationsSummaryKeyRecommendationsTo thePhilippine Government:To Donorsand External Partners, including the United States, European Union, Japan,Australia, the World Bank, and the Asian Development Bank:MethodologyI. The Philippine ContextTheCommunist Insurgency, Government Response, and Peace TalksThe Legacyof Extrajudicial KillingsArroyoAdministration Initiatives to Address Extrajudicial KillingsPresidentAquino’s CommitmentsII. Extrajudicial Executions andEnforced DisappearancesKilling ofFernando “Nanding” Baldomero, July 5, 2010Killing ofPascual Guevarra, July 9 2010EnforcedDisappearance of Agustito Ladera and Renato Deliguer, August/September 2010Killing ofReynaldo “Naldo” L. Labrador, September 3, 2010Killing ofRene “Toto” Quirante, October 1, 2010Killing ofIreneo “Rene” Rodriguez, November 7, 2010EnforcedDisappearance of Alfredo Bucal, November 10, 2010Killing ofRudy and Rudyric Dejos, February 27, 2011III. Military Failure to AddressExtrajudicial KillingsMilitaryLabeling of Civilians as NPA MembersMilitary’sDenial of Involvement in Extrajudicial KillingsMilitaryFailure to Cooperate with Police and Other InquiriesFailure ofthe Military to InvestigateIV. Failure to Investigate and ProsecutePoorPolicingInvestigationsof Extrajudicial Killings and Enforced DisappearancesInvestigationsin Conflict AreasFailure toPursue Evidence of Military InvolvementTask ForcesEstablished to Investigate CasesHastyDiscontinuance of InvestigationsPolice Fearsof Military RetaliationFears ofRetaliation Against Witnesses and Victim’s RelativesInadequate,Inflexible Witness ProtectionObstacles toProsecutionFailure toServe Arrest WarrantsFailure ofthe Special CourtsWrit ofAmparoWeakness ofHuman Rights InstitutionsNationalCommission on Human RightsOffice ofthe OmbudsmanJointMonitoring CommitteeV. Legal FrameworkDuty toInvestigate and Prosecute Human Rights ViolationsPhilippineNational LawDuties ofLaw Enforcement Officials and ProsecutorsCommandResponsibilityVI. Role of the International CommunityVII. Action Required on Extrajudicial Killings andEnforced DisappearancesKilling ofFernando “Nanding” Baldomero, July 5, 2010Killing ofPascual Guevarra, July 9, 2010EnforcedDisappearance of Agustito Ladera and Renato Deliguer, August/September 2010Killing ofReynaldo “Naldo” L. Labrador, September 3, 2010Killing ofRene “Toto” Quirante, October 1, 2010Killing ofIreneo “Rene” Rodriguez, November 7, 2010EnforcedDisappearance of Alfredo Bucal, November 10, 2010Killing ofRudy and Rudyric Dejos, February 27, 2011Killing ofBacar and Carmen JapalaliEnforcedDisappearance of Sherlyn Cadapan, Karen Empeño, and Manuel Merino, June26, 2006VIII. RecommendationsTo thePresident of the PhilippinesTo theDepartment of JusticeTo theDepartment of Interior and Local GovernmentTo theSupreme CourtTo the PhilippineNational PoliceTo the ArmedForces of the PhilippinesTo theNational Bureau of InvestigationTo thePhilippine CongressTo theCommission on Human RightsTo theOffice of the OmbudsmanTo the NewPeople’s Army/Communist Party of the PhilippinesTo the JointMonitoring CommitteeTo Donorsand External Partners, including the United States, European Union, Japan,Australia, the World Bank, and the Asian Development BankTo theUnited States, European Union Member States, Japan, Australia, and otherConcerned GovernmentsTo theUnited States GovernmentIX. AppendixLetter fromHuman Rights Watch to Justice Secretary Leila de LimaLetter fromHuman Rights Watch to the Central Committee of the Communist Party of thePhilippinesLetter toHuman Rights Watch from the Office of the OmbudsmanIX. AcknowledgmentsMap of the PhilippinesKillings and EnforcedDisappearances Documented by Human Rights WatchClick to expand ImageGlossary of Terms andAbbreviationsAFPArmed Forces of the PhilippinesBarangayA village or an urban neighborhood; the smallestadministrative unit of local government in the PhilippinesBarangay tanodA village-based law enforcement officer, similar to apoliceman but not a member of the Philippine National PoliceBonnetA balaclava or ski mask, often worn by criminals toprotect their identitiesCAFGUCitizen Armed Force Geographical Unit; a paramilitaryforce formally under AFP commandCIDGCriminal Investigation and Detection Group; theinvestigatory arm of the PNPCPPCommunist Party of the PhilippinesDPWHDepartment of Public Works and HighwaysDSWDDepartment of Social Welfare and DevelopmentIBInfantry BattalionIDInfantry DivisionNBINational Bureau of Investigation; a civilian investigatoryagency under the Department of JusticeNDFPNational Democratic Front of the PhilippinesNPANew People’s Army; military wing of the CPPPNPPhilippine National PolicePurokTerritorial enclave inside a barangay, especiallyin rural areasSangguniang BayanLegislature of municipal governmentsTricycleA motorcycle with a sidecar on a third wheel for carryingpassengersWaiting shedAn open, sheltered structure built along most roads in thePhilippines, where people wait for public transportSummaryArmedmen [in military uniforms] entered the house and immediately began beating Totowith their rifles. They beat him continuously; he was trying to escape …but they kept pulling him back and beating him…. Then they shot him.—“Jaime,”a witness to the October 1, 2010 killing of leftist activist Rene QuiranteCases of extrajudicial killings need to be solved, not justidentify the perpetrators but have them captured and sent to jail.[1]—Benigno Aquino III, June 1, 2010, then Philippinepresident-electIt is almost four years now. My family is living in agony.It is torture on my part, financial, emotional, psychological. The only normalpart of my life now is the abnormality around my daughter Karen’sdisappearance.—Concepcion Empeño, whose daughter wasallegedly abducted by soldiers on June 26, 2006, and has not been seen sinceOn the morning of July 5, 2010, Fernando Baldomero becamethe first reported victim of an extrajudicial killing under President BenignoAquino III’s newly minted administration.Baldomero—the provincial coordinator of the leftistBayan Muna political party, and a town councilor in Lezo, Aklanprovince—was leaving home to take his 12-year-old son to school when agunman approached, aimed a .45 caliber pistol at the 61-year-old, and shot himin the head and neck before fleeing on a motorcycle.Two decades earlier, Baldomero had been a member of the NewPeople’s Army (NPA), the armed wing of the Communist Party of thePhilippines (CPP), but had left the NPA following his release from prison in1994. Police and the military had continued to tag Baldomero as an NPA member.In the days before he was killed, several witnesses had seen men in militaryuniforms around Baldomero’s residence.Charges have been filed against the alleged gunman, acivilian, but police have not pursued evidence of military involvement. Norhave they executed the court’s January 10, 2011 arrest warrant, leavingthe alleged gunman at large.During his campaign for president, Benigno Aquino IIIpledged to end serious violations of human rights in the Philippines. Yet sincetaking office on June 30, 2010, the Philippine military continues to beimplicated in apparently politically-motivated extrajudicial killings—deliberateunlawful killings by state security forces—and enforced disappearances.These abuses persist in part because of the Philippine police’s failureto conduct thorough and impartial investigations, particularly when evidencepoints to military involvement. The ability to bring the perpetrators tojustice has also been hindered by the Justice Department’s inadequateprotection program for witnesses, who have been subject to harassment andintimidation.Human Rights Watch has documented seven extrajudicialkillings implicating the military and three enforced disappearances of leftistactivists since Aquino took office. We were not able to investigate severalother suspected extrajudicial killings reported by local media due to timeconstraints. In addition to recent abuses, this report also examines thegovernment’s lackluster efforts to investigate and prosecute serioushuman rights violations perpetrated during the last decade, and thestate’s continuing failure to hold perpetrators accountable.Baldomero’skilling has a familiar ring to it. Like many of the victims of killings and“disappearances” detailed in this report, Baldomero was a leftistactivist. Some, like Baldomero, were previously members of the CPP-NPA.However, in none of these cases is there evidence they were still NPA membersor actively participating in combat at the time of the killing.Like Baldomero, several victims were killed or abducted infront of witnesses, either when gunmen entered the victims’ property andshot them in cold blood, or shot them from atop motorbikes. The perpetratorseither wore civilian clothes with bonnets (balaclavas), or wore militaryuniforms and made no attempt to hide their faces. In several cases there isevidence that soldiers worked with members of paramilitaryforces—primarily the Citizen Armed Force Geographical Unit(CAFGU)—or paid military “assets,” including “rebelreturnees” (former NPA members).The military appears to have targeted several of thesevictims as CPP-NPA members because of their involvement with leftistorganizations, work on land reform, or opposition to military presence in theircommunities. The military operating in areas affected by the NPA conflict oftenconsiders all leftist organizations to be fronts for the armed group and anyindividuals who oppose military presence to be NPA members.For more than four decades the NPA has engaged in aninsurgency against the Philippine government, with their armed strength at itspeak in the mid-1980s. In addition to attacks on government military targets,the NPA has claimed responsibility for killing—among others—civilians,government officials, and tribal leaders allegedly associated with themilitary, in violation of international humanitarian law (the laws of war).They have also unlawfully executed military personnel and others considered tobe “enemies of the people” after conviction by so-calledPeople’s Courts or Hukumang Bayan. NPA attacks on civilians andmistreatment and execution of all persons in custody are serious violations ofthe laws of war. Those who carry out or order such abuses are responsible forwar crimes.The Philippine government has a duty and obligation toprotect the population from insurgent attacks. However, abuses by insurgentsnever justify violations of the laws of war or human rights violations bygovernment security forces. This includes extrajudicial killings and enforceddisappearances of any person, including alleged members of political groups andcivil society organizations that are deemed to be sympathetic to theinsurgents’ cause.A former soldier, “Ricardo” (not his real name),gave a detailed account of military structure and practices. He told HumanRights Watch he had been ordered to kill and “disappear” leftistactivists from the late 1990s until about 2007. Ricardo spoke of how seniormilitary commanders ordered him to kill leftist activists and hide or burn thebodies, and how the military had trained him and his fellow soldiers to maketargeted killings look like the NPA’s Special Partisan Unit (SPARU) hadperpetrated them, by using a .45 caliber pistol and wearing bonnets(balaclavas), thought to be favored by the NPA. While much of Ricardo’saccount could not be independently confirmed, his information seemed crediblebased on its consistency and detail.Extrajudicial killings have long been a problem in thePhilippines. Hundreds of members of left-wing political parties, politicalactivists, critical journalists, and outspoken clergy have been killed orforcibly disappeared in the Philippines during the past decade. The militaryand police, as well as paramilitary forces, have been implicated in many ofthese killings. As a result of international and local pressure, the number ofextrajudicial killings has dropped since 2007, but they still occur withimpunity. To date, there have been only seven successfully prosecuted cases ofextrajudicial killings, resulting in the conviction of 12 defendants. There hasnot been a single conviction of active military personnel at the time of thekilling. No senior military officers have been convicted either for directinvolvement in these violations or as a matter of command responsibility.The public rhetoric of senior military officers has changedsomewhat since Aquino took office—one need only drive along EpifanioDelos Santos Avenue (EDSA) in Manila to see the “I am a soldier and ahuman rights advocate” sign outside the headquarters of the armed forcesat Camp Aguinaldo. But this change in language has not yet been reflected inaction, such as improved military cooperation with investigating authorities,comprehensive internal investigations of implicated military personnel, orincreased openness within the military structure. In the recent casesdocumented by Human Rights Watch, the military continues to deny allallegations of soldiers’ involvement in extrajudicial killings and otherserious abuses, despite evidence to the contrary.Police investigations into alleged extrajudicial killingsand enforced disappearances are woefully inadequate. Several core aspects ofinvestigations are often disregarded by investigators, including effectivelyexamining crime scenes and canvassing for witnesses. Investigators routinelyfail to pursue evidence of military involvement and the absence of militarycooperation exacerbates this problem. Witness protection is rarely provided,and where it is the protection program is inflexible.Longstanding problems of the criminal justice system areexacerbated in human rights cases, where victims and witnesses may justifiablyfear retribution from soldiers. Despite official orders requiring prosecutorsand police to work together in order to ensure that a strong case is presentedto court, such cooperation remains extremely unusual. Once a case is filed incourt, hearings occur only at monthly intervals. Often they are less frequent,with some breaks lasting several months, so that trials typically last foryears. Court delays and a judicial hesitancy to act when the authorities areimplicated in crimes have also hampered the Supreme Court writs of amparo andhabeas data, which were designed to compel military and other government officialsto release information on people in their custody, thereby preventing“disappearances.”The widespread impunity enjoyed by perpetrators ofextrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances in the Philippines isexacerbated by the inadequacies of institutions charged with promoting humanrights and accountability, including the Department of Justice, the Commissionon Human Rights, the Ombudsman, and the Joint Monitoring Committee. The JointMonitoring Committee is specifically tasked with implementing an agreement onhuman rights and international humanitarian law between the government and theNational Democratic Front of the Philippines (NDFP), including the CPP and theNPA.Abusive behavior by security forces persists whenperpetrators are not held accountable for their actions. Curtailing humanrights violations requires more than new policies and senior officialscommitted to reform; it requires that would-be perpetrators know that they willgo to prison and their careers will end if they order or participate in seriousabuses. The Philippine government should adopt effective measures to endextrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances, hold perpetratorsaccountable, and prevent them from recurring.KeyRecommendationsTothe Philippine Government:Investigate and prosecute all those responsible in each case ofextrajudicial killing and enforced disappearance detailed in this report.Issue an executive order directing police and National Bureau ofInvestigation (NBI) investigators to vigorously pursue crimes allegedlycommitted by the military, or themselves be subject to disciplinary measures.Communicate fully to all military personnel that officers andsoldiers who provide evidence or testimony in cases of human rights violationswill be eligible for witness protection and other measures to ensure theirsafety.Order the inspector general and the provost marshal of the ArmedForces of the Philippines (AFP) to investigate and report publicly within 90days on the involvement of military personnel in extrajudicial killings, and toidentify failures within AFP investigative agencies to prosecute officers underprinciples of command responsibility.Order the military to cease targeted attacks on civilians, tocease the practice of denying military involvement in all extrajudicialkillings, and to cease labeling leftist groups as fronts for the CPP-NPA, whichplaces group members at considerable risk.Take all necessary measures, including reforming the witnessprotection program, to ensure the safety of survivors of serious crimes,witnesses, and families of victims and witnesses before, during, and aftertrial.Submit a bill to Congress that prohibits and protects againstenforced disappearances and ratify the International Convention for theProtection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance.To Donors and External Partners,including the United States, European Union, Japan, and Australia:Publicly press the Philippine government to investigate andprosecute members of the military for extrajudicial killings, including thoseliable under command responsibility. Diplomats based in Manila should closelymonitor Philippine government investigations of individual extrajudicialkilling and enforced disappearance cases.Full recommendations—of both a general nature and withrespect to specific cases—appear at the end of this report.MethodologyThis report is based on Human Rights Watch research in thePhilippines from February to April 2011. Researchers travelled to the provincesof Agusan del Sur, Aklan, Bataan, Batangas, Compostela Valley, Davao del Norte,Davao del Sur, Laguna, Negros Occidental, Negros Oriental, Nueva Ecija, andSurigao del Sur, and to Davao City to investigate recent alleged extrajudicialkillings and enforced disappearances.Human Rights Watch conducted a total of 45 interviews withvictims of abuses, their family members and friends, and eyewitnesses. Manywere reached by referral from local community groups. We spoke with multiplesources to verify the veracity of statements.Human Rights Watch interviewed 16 police officials, 11military officers, and three public prosecutors. We also spoke to barangay andother local officials.One of the most detailed accounts of military structure andpractices came from a former soldier. “Ricardo,” not his real name,told Human Rights Watch that military officers had ordered him to kill and“disappear” leftist activists from the late 1990s to about 2007. Hedied of natural causes during the course of this research.Human Rights Watch spoke with more than two dozen localhuman rights activists, academics, lawyers, and journalists who have beenlooking into extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances for many yearsand who, in many cases, were able to provide corroborating evidence.Human Rights Watch has also drawn on its own past research.Since August 2009, we have researched the progress of government investigationsand prosecutions into more than 20 targeted killings and enforceddisappearances perpetrated between 2004 and 2010 in several provincesthroughout the Philippines. In the course of this research, researchersinterviewed more than 50 victims of abuses, their family members and friends,and eyewitnesses in Bicol, Central Luzon, and Negros.Interviews were conducted in English or in Tagalog, Cebuano,Ilonggo or Bikol with the aid of interpreters. The names of many intervieweeshave been withheld for security reasons, and pseudonyms used for thoserepeatedly quoted. Where pseudonyms are used the name is given in quotationmarks. Wherever possible and in the majority of cases, interviews wereconducted on a one-on-one basis. None of those interviewed received payment.In May 2011, Human Rights Watch sent letters to thePhilippine officials listed below to obtain data and solicit views onextrajudicial killings:Hon. Leila de Lima, secretary of the Department of JusticeGen. Eduardo Oban, Jr., chief of staff of the Armed Forcesof the PhilippinesRaul M. Bacalzo, director general of the PhilippineNational PoliceOfficer-in-Charge,deputy ombudsman for Military and Other Law Enforcement OfficesHuman Rights Watch also sent a letter to the CentralCommittee of the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP). One of the lettersto the government and the letter to the CPP is attached as an appendix. Therest of the letters are posted on the Philippines page of the Human RightsWatch website: www.hrw.org.At this writing, Human Rights Watch has received a responsefrom the Ombudsman’s office, which is attached as an appendix. Futureresponses will be posted on the website.I. The Philippine ContextTheCommunist Insurgency, Government Response, and Peace TalksKillings and enforced disappearances in the Philippinesoccur in the context of a four-decade-long communist insurgency that affectsmany of the country’s 80 provinces.The New People’s Army (NPA) is the armed wing of theCommunist Party of the Philippines (CPP), which since 1969 has been engaged inan armed rebellion with the goal of establishing a Marxist state.[2]The National Democratic Front of the Philippines (NDFP) is charged with forgingalliances with so-called people’s organizations to develop arevolutionary united front.[3]Military estimates put the armed strength of the NPA at around 4,100guerrillas, backed by a broad network of non-combatantsupporters.[4]Membership in the CPP has been legal since 1992.[5]During the course of this 42-year conflict, the CPP-NPA hassplintered with evolving and conflicting ideologies and personalitydifferences, leading to the creation of other communist armed groups such asthe Revolutionary Proletarian Army-Alex Boncayao Brigade (RPA-ABB) in 1992 andthe Revolutionary People’s Army (Rebolusyonaryong Hukbong Bayan, RHB) in1998.[6]These groups continue to perpetrate numerous serious human rightsabuses—including abductions, torture, and killings—againstsuspected adversaries and ordinary civilians.The CPP-NPA has admitted killing numerous former members,government officials, soldiers and police officers, and civilians since itscreation in 1969. Since June 30, 2010, it has claimed responsibility forkilling or executing several civilians, government officials, tribal leadersallegedly associated with the military, and soldiers, in circumstances that mayviolate international humanitarian law.Often, the CPP-NPA seeks to justify the killings by arguingthat a “people’s court” has condemned the victim to deathbecause of various crimes against the people, sometimes criminal acts such asrape and murder, and other times spying on the NPA for the military. Forinstance, on July 23, 2010, NPA members shot and killed sugar farmer SergioVilladar in Escalante City, Negros Occidental. The NPA, which claimedresponsibility for the killing, said it was forced to kill Villadar because heresisted arrest after being charged before the NPA’s “revolutionarypeople’s court” for a 2007 killing and involvement in severalbeatings.[7]Philip Alston, then-UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial executions, hasstated this court system “is either deeply flawed or simply asham.”[8]The CPP-NPA has targeted indigenous leaders who are viewedas allied with the military. For instance, on August 6, 2010, at around 10a.m., approximately 30 NPA fighters reportedly ambushed several peopleincluding Datu Ruben Labawan, the Supreme Tribal Council for Peace andDevelopment, which is affiliated with the AFP, in Paquibato district, DavaoCity. Labawan was travelling with two soldiers, his wife, and other indigenousleaders. Two soldiers, Pfc. Elansio Alonsagay and Pfc. Kimpio Labawan, togetherwith one civilian, Datu Enecencio Dangkay, died from gunshot wounds.[9]The NPA has also targeted members of the RevolutionaryProletarian Army (RPA), which broke away from the CPP in 1992 due toideological differences and has worked with government forces since 2000 whenit signed a peace accord with the government.[10] On November 2,2010, NPA fighters shot and killed former RPA leader and barangay tanodRenante Cañete in Sagay City, Negros Occidental. According to newsreports, the NPA alleged Cañete was a hired gunman used by landlords incollaboration with the military, and that it had summoned Cañete toresolve the complaints against him but he had not responded.[11]Attacks on civilians and the torture or execution of anyprisoner constitute serious violations of the laws of war and may be warcrimes. The Philippine government has a duty and obligation to protect thepopulation from insurgent attacks. However, abuses by insurgents never justifyviolations of the laws of war or human rights violations by government securityforces. This includes attacks on members of political groups and civil societyorganizations viewed as sympathetic to the insurgents’ cause.Members of the military and policeoften lump members of leftist organizations, labor unions, and party-listgroups together with the NPA—frequently with deadly outcomes. Leftistorganizations in the Philippines encompass a range of views towards theCPP-NPA, which rejects the Philippine government and constitution. Somemilitant left-wing organizations support the NPA and its armed struggle, if notopenly. Other organizations share the CPP’s political ideology, orelements of it, but advocate peaceful reform. Others fully reject theCPP’s perspective but are still targeted by the military and police.Since members of these groups are not NPA fighters, who are armed andcombat-ready, they are less dangerous targets of attack for the military andpolice. In any case, attacks on members of leftist organizations, whatever theextent of their support for the CPP-NPA, is unlawful under the laws of war,unless they are directly participating in hostilities. Also unlawful is thekilling of any person in government custody, including surrendered members ofthe NPA.Themilitary has over the years publicly labeled a number of organizations, unions,and party-list groups as “NPA fronts.” The affect is pernicious.Once labeled—and the labels are hard to remove—the members of suchorganizations may be the targets of government attack.The military’s designations may reflect the whims ofindividual commanders in a locale. Lt. Col. Oliver Artuz, commander of the 39thInfantry Battalion based in Davao del Sur, told Human Rights Watch that all unionsare linked to the NPA, whose aim is to raise wages so high that companies goout of business, thus creating more recruits for the NPA.[12]Several military officers have labeled protesting as a form of violence.According to one officer, “Once the organizations have been infiltrated[by the NPA] you will notice they are being violent.... They will join massprotests.”[13]A police insider explained how political activism is alsomisunderstood within the police force. Speaking of a recent victim of extrajudicialkilling, he said, “Some police officers have a misconception of what[activists] are doing. They say that [the targeted person] is a traitor to thegovernment. But I have never heard of him being involved in a criminal act; hejust leads rallies.”[14]Many government-targeted killings over the years had theinvolvement of state-supported paramilitary forces, “vigilantegroups” such as Alsa Masa (“Masses Arise”), and“private armies.”[15]The official status of these forces has changed over time, but they have longbeen responsible for abuses against suspected NPA members and supporters, andother politically-motivated targets. Most notoriously, members of a privatearmy, along with soldiers and police, were implicated in the November 2009massacre of 58 relatives and supporters of a political candidate and mediaworkers in Maguindanao on the island of Mindanao.[16]Despite this, successive Philippine governments have taken no serioussteps to dismantle or disarm paramilitary forces or militias on a large scale.Only a few militia or paramilitary members have been prosecuted for abuses, andeven fewer military and police officers overseeing their crimes have been prosecuted.According to government sources, in 2010 the NPA killed 176soldiers and 11 police officers, while the government killed 141 suspected NPAmembers in military and police operations.[17]In his July 2010 State of the Nation Address, PresidentAquino announced that the government was prepared to declare a ceasefire withthe CPP-NPA and resume peace talks. The CPP-NPA agreed to move toward peacetalks, but not a ceasefire. Formal negotiations between the government and theNDFP, which negotiates on behalf of the CPP-NPA, resumed on February 15, 2011.Both sides agreed on a general time frame for completing the draftcomprehensive agreements on the remaining items of the agenda, which includesocial and economic reforms, political and constitutional reforms, and endinghostilities and disposing of forces.[18]They also discussed confidence-building measures, such as the release ofcaptured NPA/CPP members and government soldiers.[19]Extrajudicial killings have continued since the peace talkscommenced.TheLegacy of Extrajudicial KillingsExtrajudicial killings are an enduring problem in thePhilippines, but they received international attention in 2006 when the numberof alleged extrajudicial killings skyrocketed.[20] During theadministration of President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, who was in office from2001 to 2010, hundreds of leftist politicians and political activists,journalists, and clergy were killed or abducted.[21]In 2007, the number of killings dropped significantly due to domestic andinternational pressure, but killings have nonetheless continued.ArroyoAdministration Initiatives to Address Extrajudicial KillingsInresponse to domestic and international pressure, the Arroyo administrationinstituted several initiatives to address extrajudicial killings, includingcreating special bodies within the Philippine National Police and theDepartment of Justice to investigate and prosecute political killings. Whilethe number of killings dropped, there was virtually no accountability for thoseresponsible. During Arroyo’s nine-year term, only 11 people wereconvicted for politically-motivated killings, none for the abductions, and nomember of the military active at the time of the killing has been brought tojustice. These initiatives are briefly discussed below.Melo CommissionIn August 2006 Arroyo created a commission under formerSupreme Court Associate Justice Jose Melo to probe the killings of journalistsand leftist activists since 2001.[22]The commission’s report, made public in February 2007 after much publicpressure, concluded:There is no official or sanctioned policy on the part ofthe military or its civilian superiors to resort to what other countrieseuphemistically call “alternative procedure”—meaning illegalliquidations. However, there is certainly evidence pointing the finger ofsuspicion at some elements and personalities in the armed forces, in particularGen. Palparan, as responsible for an undetermined number of killings, byallowing, tolerating, and even encouraging the killings.[23]In its initial report, the commission made severalrecommendations relating to command responsibility, witness protection, and theneed for thorough investigations.[24]Thesereports were expanded upon in an August 2007 letter from the commission tothen-Executive Secretary Eduardo Ermita, which has not been made public. Amongits recommendations, the commission called on Arroyo to investigate seniormembers of the military, in particular Gen. Jovito Palparan, and order themilitary to do away with its continuing “state of denial” mindsetand to stop labeling left-wing or cause-oriented groups mere“fronts” for the CPP-NPA and “enemies of the state.”[25]Arroyo never implemented these or the commission’sother recommendations, nor has Aquino since taking office.[26]Task Force UsigIn August 2006 Arroyo created Task Force Usig, a specialpolice body, which she charged with solving 10 cases of killings of politicalactivists or journalists within 10 weeks. Task Force Usig has continued tooperate beyond its 10-week mandate. In practice, it does not itself investigatekillings, but oversees the work of local investigators and monitors the statusof investigations.Task Force 211In November 2007, Arroyo created the Task Force againstPolitical Violence, known as Task Force 211. Officially, the task force was:Created to harness and mobilize government agencies,political groups, the religious, civil society and sectoral organizations andthe public for the prevention, investigation, prosecution and punishment ofpolitical violence, the care and protection of people and communitiesvictimized and threatened with violence, and the promotion of a culture opposedto violence and for the advancement of reconciliation and peace.[27]In practice, however, Task Force 211 interpreted its mandateas limited to killings, excluding enforced disappearances and other forms of politicalviolence, and operated with a small staff simply monitoring the status ofcertain alleged extrajudicial killings. For instance, it refused to investigatethe enforced disappearance of Sherlyn Cadapan and Karen Empeño inBulacan, Central Luzon on June 26, 2006, even when an eyewitness had testifiedthat the military had detained, tortured, and most likely killed them.DuringTask Force 211’s tenure, it has looked into more than 200 cases, 53 ofwhich were classed as having progressed through the justice system and four inwhich convictions were secured.[28]In December 2010, Justice Secretary Leila de Lima created atask force that she says has a broader mandate than Task Force 211.[29]De Lima directed the new task force to review all reported and unsolved casesof extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances, with the intention ofspeeding up the resolution of cases with sufficient evidence andreinvestigating cases in which the trail of evidence has gone cold.Human Rights DesksIn 2007, the PNP and AFP each created human rights offices.Since then, they have pledged to create such offices or human rights desks atdifferent levels of command to monitor and maintain records regarding personnelallegedly involved in human rights violations.[30]The desks were notto have an investigative function; rather, they were to maintain and analyzerecords of reported violations and to provide human rights training. At theirManila headquarters, these desks mainly seek information from the commanders inareas where alleged human rights violations have occurred. Outside Manila, thedesks don’t appear to function. Many provincial police offices that aremeant to have such desks, do not.[31]President Aquino’s CommitmentsBenigno Aquino III waselected president and inaugurated on June 30, 2010, after campaigning toaddress extrajudicial killings, enforced disappearances, and other human rightsviolations by government security forces.Aquino has acknowledged the problems of impunity. In ameeting with European Union ambassadors a month before his inauguration, hesaid, “Cases of extrajudicial killings need to be solved, not justidentify the perpetrators but have them captured and sent to jail.”[32]In his inauguration speech he said, “There can be no reconciliation withoutjustice. When we allow crimes to go unpunished, we give consent to theiroccurring over and over again.”[33]While Aquino’s language has been strong, he has notimplemented the systemic reforms necessary to stop the killings and holdperpetrators accountable.II. Extrajudicial Executions and EnforcedDisappearancesAnextrajudicial killing is a deliberate, unlawful killing by state securityforces. In the Philippines, there is much debate about the terminology, inparticular extrajudicial killing versus extralegal killing; but the meaningsare the same. An enforced disappearance is when an individual is deprived ofliberty by or with the state’s acquiescence, and officials refuse toprovide information regarding the victim’s detention, whereabouts, or fate.[34]Extrajudicial killings andenforced disappearances violate basic human rights, including the right tolife, the right to liberty and security of the person, the right to a fair andpublic trial, as well as the prohibition on torture and cruel, inhuman, anddegrading treatment or punishment.[35]Human Rights Watch investigated seven apparent extrajudicialkillings and three enforced disappearances that occurred since June 30, 2010,in which there was significant evidence of military involvement (see below).News media have reported other possible cases during that period that HumanRights Watch was not able to investigate due to time constraints. In threeother cases, Human Rights Watch found no evidence of military involvement;another reported case could not be adequately investigated because of ongoingmilitary hostilities in the area. In all of these cases we examined theresponse of police and other authorities to the killings.The investigated cases show no consistent patterns. Severalvictims were leftist activists who may have been killed because of perceivedassociation with the New People’s Army (NPA), while others appear to havebeen ordinary farmers involved in land disputes with local officials. In onecase local politics was at issue.A former soldier, “Ricardo,” told Human RightsWatch that commanding officers of his battalion ordered him to carry outseveral extrajudicial killings during his time in the Philippine Army from themid-1980s to the mid-2000s. While much in Ricardo’s account could not beindependently confirmed, his information seemed credible based on itsconsistency and detail.Ricardo said army intelligence had determined that thetargets were working for the NPA. He said that in 2005, an officer in thearmy’s 8th Infantry Division ordered him to kill FeliditoDacut, a lawyer and Bayan Muna-Eastern Visayas regional coordinator because,“as a human rights lawyer, he was hampering military activities.”Ricardo said a fellow soldier shot and killed Dacut with a .45 caliber pistolon March 14, 2005, near Tacloban City in Leyte.[36]He said that military officers trained him to make such assassinations looklike they were perpetrated by the NPA’s Special Partisan Unit (SPARU) byusing a .45 caliber pistol and wearing bonnets (balaclavas).“Ricardo” also said that military officers onseveral occasions ordered him to help dispose of victims’ bodies. Hedescribed one instance in 2007 at Fort Bonifacio, the Philippine Armyheadquarters in Manila, where commanding officers ordered him and severalintelligence officers to put a male corpse inside a steel drum, seal it, andplace the drum in a vehicle as it was to be taken elsewhere, but he was notaware where. He said he was unable to describe the dead man because his facewas covered with blood.Killingof Fernando “Nanding” Baldomero, July5, 2010At about 6.30 a.m. on July 5, 2010, an armed man ridingtandem on a motorcycle gunned down Fernando Baldomero with a .45 caliber pistoloutside his family home along the national highway in barangay Estancia,Kalibo, Aklan. Baldomero, 61, had just mounted his motorcycle with his12-year-old son, whom he was taking to school, as he did every day. An NPAmember until his release from prison in 1994, Baldomero was the provincialcoordinator of the leftist political party Bayan Muna and a town councilor inLezo, Aklan.[37]Several witnesses saw men in military uniforms aroundBaldomero’s residence in the days before he was killed. A witness toldHuman Rights Watch that she saw a military truck parked for three consecutivedays at a waiting shed (an open, sheltered structure built along the road) justa few meters from Baldomero’s house, about one week before he was killed.She said that she saw the identified suspect, Dindo Lovon Ancero, standing withsoldiers, and had even teased Baldomero, “Maybe they are looking for you?”[38]On January 10, 2011, the Aklan regional trial court issuedan arrest warrant for Ancero and several “John Does,” orunidentified suspects.[39]However, there is no evidence that police have pursued evidence of militaryinvolvement. When a relative asked a police investigator why he had not pursuedleads regarding military involvement, he said, “Tigok tayo dyan”or “We’re dead”—indicating that he thought his lifewould be at risk if he investigated military involvement.[40]The family said that the provincial police director told them that pursuingmilitary personnel “only complicates the investigation.”[41]To date the arrest warrant has not been served on Ancero, despite having sworna counter-affidavit before a prosecutor in Mandaue City, Cebu, on August 14,2010. The warrant has since been returned to the court.[42]On several occasions both the military and the police hadtagged Baldomero as a current member of the CPP-NPA.[43] OnMarch 19, 2010, just four months before he was killed, unidentified men threwtwo hand grenades into Baldomero’s ancestral home in Lezo, Aklan. Whilecharges were never brought against the perpetrators, a police report said theprime suspects were political rivals of Baldomero with links to the PhilippineArmy.[44]Relatives said that motorcycles had often tailed Baldomero since he left prisonin the mid-1990s.[45]Killingof Pascual Guevarra, July 9 2010On July 9, 2010, at about 4:30 pm, an unidentified manwalked onto the property of Pascual Guevarra, 78, within Fort Magsaysaymilitary reservation in barangay San Isidro, Laur, Nueva Ecija provinceand shot him dead with a 9mm pistol.[46]The gunman’s accomplice waited nearby on a motorcycle without a licenseplate and they drove off in tandem.[47]Guevarra was the leader of two local leftist organizations, one of which waspressing the government to compensate farmers for land resumed by thegovernment for widening a road.[48]According to the family and police investigators, an officerof the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) had contacted Guevarraand asked him to stay home on the day he was killed, telling him that theywould deliver the compensation for the land resumption.[49]While the police formed a task force to investigate this killing, theinvestigation has stalled primarily, a police investigator alleges, because theDPWH has not cooperated with the investigation. He told Human Rights Watch:We tried to invite [the DPWH officer]; however he is veryhesitant to cooperate because he is the one implicated in the case….[Regional, provincial, and district DPWH offices] told us that they havecreated their own investigative body, however they [would not provide] anyreport [as to the] outcome of the investigation…. It is“heated,” … because they don’t want to give us thedocuments we needed to file a complaint against [the suspect].[50]Neither the police nor the NBI have investigated possiblemilitary involvement in the killing, despite the killing taking place on a militaryreserve. The military had previously tagged Guevarra’s organization asaffiliated with the CPP-NPA. A military officer from the 702nd IBtold Human Rights Watch, “In our opinion, this group is an organizationof the farmers that was being infiltrated by the NPA, the local terrorists. Butwe do not [have evidence of this].”[51]Military officers said the police had initially suspectedmilitary involvement, but this ceased when a DPWH official was implicated.[52]Investigators never pursued a possible military role, such as a soldier beingused as the gunman. According to military officials, officers stationed at FortMagsaysay did investigate the killing but there was no independentinvestigation by the provost marshal or an independent unit. An officer withthe 702nd IB stationed away from Fort Magsaysay said that, “Wedon’t have a special report on this … because [the killing was]within the military reservation.”As a result, he explained, it was forofficials stationed at Fort Magsaysay to investigate. Military officials atFort Magsaysay confirmed the provost marshal had not been tapped to investigatebecause, “It came out in our intelligence operation that no military wereinvolved, [so] we turned it over to the police.”Guevarra’s relatives told Human Rights Watch thatsince the killing they have answered telephone calls from unknown numbers inwhich no one speaks, and received blank text messages from unknownnumbers—unusual and intimidating occurrences they interpret as a signalnot to push the investigation. Relatives have also noticed strangers passing byGuevarra’s house at night.[53]According to a relative, some six months after the killing, an army truckstopped almost in front of Guevarra’s property and someone insidephotographed the house and farmland.[54]EnforcedDisappearance of Agustito Ladera and Renato Deliguer, August/September 2010In late August and early September 2010, farmers AgustitoLadera, 35, and Renato Deliguer, 21, were working at their respective familyfarms in barangay Mahaba, Marihatag, Surigao del Sur when militaryoperations against the NPA began.[55]Both farms are remote—about a half-day walk from the center of barangayMahaba.Deliguer had gone to his family farm on September 1, 2010.He would routinely stay there for about a week at a time and the family, whohas not seen him since, initially assumed that he was unable to return homebecause of the military operations.[56]Ladera, who had been at the family farm with his parents andbrother, was waiting for abacafibers from a banana plant to dry, so hesent his parents to evacuate first. His brother left the farm on August 28, andLadera said he would follow. His family has not seen him since.[57]In early September, when the evacuees were able to return tobarangay Mahaba, Ladera’s father and brother and Deliguer’sfather went to the farms to find their missing relatives. The Ladera familyfound that all belongings were secure, as if Agustito had packed everything upand left the farm hut.[58]Deliguer’s father, Hipolito, said he saw the distinctive prints ofcombat shoes around the hut.[59]Inside the hut, he found used sleeping mats and mosquito nets that were notreturned to their proper place, and cooked rice in the pot. His family’s bolo,or machete knife, was missing.[60]Hipolito Deliguer said that he concluded that the military had passed the hutand taken his son around dawn.[61]Ladera’s father heard that the military had arrestedboth Ladera and Deliguer, so he went to San Isidro, Marihatag, a place where heknew the soldiers would have passed, to ask people if they had seen anything.He said a local resident told him that soldiers had tied up and gagged two men.Another person told him that soldiers had taken the two men to the militarycamp.[62]Someone else told Hipolito Deliguer that a man was in police custody.[63]The families have visited the military camp and policestation several times asking for their relatives. A police officer said toHipolito Deliguer, “Maybe your son went to the mountains and joined theNPA.”[64]Soldiers at the military camp in Dayo-an, Tago, said that they had arrestedsomeone from San Isidro and San Pedro, but not from Mahaba, and did not allowthe relatives to see the arrested men.[65]Both families reported to the police that the men weremissing, but at no time did the police visit any of their residences or farmsto investigate.[66]A police report dated October 8, 2010, recommended that the police “begiven ample time to conduct [a] thorough and in depth investigation.”However, when interviewed in March 2011, neither the chief investigator nor thepolice chief could speak of any steps taken to investigate since this date,indicating that no further steps had been taken since October 2010.[67]In the police report, the police superintendent wrote:There were unconfirmed reports also that the two missingpersons could be possible members of the CTs [Communist Terrorists] operatingin the area and might have been casualties in the recent encounters in the areawhere the military were conducting intensified and large scale operations.[68]Chief Investigator Joel Vertudazo, reading from a moredetailed police report, said that perhaps the “casualties had alreadybeen buried by the NPA without informing the families, in order to [avoid]discouraging other recruitees.”[69]The families sought the help of Governor Johnny Pimentel ofSurigao del Sur and the Sangguniang Panlalawigan, the provincial legislature.[70]On October 4, 2010, the Sangguniang Panlalawigan Committee on Laws and Justiceand Human Rights in Surigao del Sur met to discuss the missing men.[71]The commanding officer of the 36th IB did not respond to a requestto appear.[72]The Sangguniang Panlalawigan also sent requests to the police and regionalNational Bureau of Investigation, among other government bodies, to investigatethe case. At this writing, the Sangguniang Panlalawigan has not received aresponse from any of these agencies.Killingof Reynaldo “Naldo” L. Labrador, September 3, 2010In the early evening of September 3, 2010, two menapproached Reynaldo “Naldo” Labrador’s home in PaquibatoProper, Paquibato District, Davao City in Mindanao. Labrador was a member ofthe local Paquibato District Peasant Alliance (PaDiPA). Several witnessesidentified one of the assailants as Roberto “Kulot” Repe, a knownlocal CAFGU member. Repe allegedly kept watch while the second man entered thehouse and shot and killed Labrador with a .45 caliber pistol.[73]Labrador’s wife, Leonisa Labrador, told Human RightsWatch:I was doing the washing when a man called out, “Nalds,come and receive this.” I told the man [who I did not recognize],“He is upstairs.” The man went upstairs. Then I heard threegunshots. My 11-year-old son went and saw his father with blood all over him.My children and I left the house calling to our neighbors for help…. Thegunman [then] escaped.[74]Reylun, Reynaldo’s then 10-year-old son, said thatRepe made a sign to him “not to say any word (his finger crossing hismouth) when he was outside the house.”[75] Leonisa said thegunman had a note, which she thought he wanted to give Labrador. Witnessesfound a note at the crime scene that read, “You are evil and you will bedealt with.”[76]According to the barangay captain, a neighbor sawRepe together with a soldier from the 69th IB nearLabrador’s residence at around 2 p.m. on the day he was killed.[77]Repe’s relative told Human Rights Watch that Repe hehad been working with the military since 2009.[78] He personally sawRepe working with the military on two occasions, wearing full army uniform andcarrying an M16 assault rifle. The community assumed that he was a CAFGUbecause he would patrol with the military in full uniform.[79] Fromtime to time, he would send cell phone text messages warning his relatives tobe careful of upcoming military operations. For instance, on one occasion, hesent a message saying something like, “People in barangay Lumiad[a nearby barangay in Paquibato district] had better watch out becausewe are going to take one out.”[80]NPA members killed Repe on November 28, 2010, which they saywas in line with a standing order from the revolutionary authorities to do so.[81]Fearful of reprisals from seeking justice forLabrador’s death, Leonisa moved from the family home. Neighbors said thatin October—one month after Labrador was killed—soldiers visited thefamily house asking where Leonisa was and whether her children were with her.[82]Killingof Rene “Toto” Quirante, October 1, 2010On the evening of September 30, 2010, after visiting hisfarm, Rene “Toto” Quirante and his companion Romeo Gador soughtshelter from heavy rain in the house of a friend, Tito, in barangay Trinidad,Guihulngan, Negros Oriental.[83]Early the next morning, uniformed men entered the house and brutally beatQuirante, the provincial vice-chair of the leftist political party, Anakpawis.They then shot him dead in front of several witnesses, including children. Awitness described what happened:Around 2 a.m. [I awoke to hear] someone banging on the door[of the house]. They were shouting, “NPA ni!” and “NPAito!” [“This is the NPA”]. No one was answering. The armedmen used their rifle butts to enter the house. They saw Toto immediately andused their rifles to beat him. They beat him continuously; he was trying toescape to the second floor of the house, but they kept pulling him back andbeating him….Together with others, I was trying to pull Toto onto thesecond floor. When we finally succeeded in doing so, the soldiers followed andcontinued to beat him…. They pulled him away from us and pushed him tothe ground floor. Then the soldiers jumped down. One soldier shouted to anotherto hold on to him; then they shot him [three times].The commander then ordered the soldiers to move, so theyleft. We were very scared. We couldn’t do anything, not even shout orutter a word.[84]Another witness explained how she shouted, “This is… Toto Quirante, a barangay tanod and peace officer.” Butthe uniformed men continued to beat him.[85]Several witnesses have identified the perpetrators as DandyQuilanan, a CAFGU member, Junel Librado, a former member of the NPA working asa “guide” for the military, and six unidentified soldiers.[86]One witness described the men:They were wearing head lamps. One of them was wearingcamouflage fatigues. It had the army patch on the sleeve…. All of themhad rifles and ammunition wrapped around their shoulders…. They were allwearing black combat shoes…. I’m very sure [Quilanan] is a CAFGUbecause they patrol our area…. I know Librado as a “rebelreturnee” [a former member of the NPA working as a “guide”for the military] because when he was still active with the NPA, from time totime he would come to my house and ask for food.[87]Quirante had received warnings the military was targetinghim. According to a relative, months before his death a friend who was a CAFGUhad told Quirante that four leaders of leftist organizations, including him,were on a list of people to be “shot on sight,” and that themilitary had set up ambush positions ready to “get him.”[88]Quirante’s colleague told Human Rights Watch that during a meetingseveral years earlier, Quirante said that during a military operation an armylieutenant had warned him that the military considered Anakpawis to be an NPAfront organization and he should stop being active because his family was knownto support the NPA.[89]On February 1, 2011, the court in Guihulngan City issued awarrant of arrest for Quilanan and Librado.[90] At this writing,the warrants have not been served.[91]Sincethe killing, the military has harassed the Quirante family. For instance, onNovember 22, 2010, about 12 soldiers in full combat gear visitedQuirante’s relative’s home. More than a dozen other soldiers werein the wider area. A soldier asked the relative, “Where are the firearmsthat the NPA left in your house?” The relative replied, “The NPAnever left firearms in my house.” The soldier said, “What do youwant? Do you want us to kill you and all of your [family]?”[92]Killingof Ireneo “Rene” Rodriguez, November 7, 2010In the early morning of November 7, 2010, two men ridingtandem on a motorcycle and wearing bonnets shot and killed IreneoRodriguez, a former leftist activist, in Balayan town, Batangas province.Days before he was killed, several armed and uniformed menfrom the Philippine Air Force visited Rodriguez’s father’s homeasking for Rodriguez, who was not there.[93]At thiswriting, police investigators have not questioned the soldiers who made thisvisit.[94]Several relatives and friends said the Air Force had showninterest in Rodriguez for some years. Rodriguez’s neighbor said that he,Rodriguez, and 11 other members of a local organization were called up to theAir Force camp in 2004 and told they were on the “order of battle”—alist of those considered military targets—because they were NPAsympathizers.[95]His father said that he heard the military had tagged Rodriguez as an NPAmember and were looking for him in about 2005, and that he went to the camp toclear his son’s name.[96]Another relative said that the military often approached herin around 2002 and 2003 and asked her to encourage Rodriguez to surrender.[97]Lt. Col. Vincent Incognito, the commander of the 730th Combat Group,Philippine Air Force, confirmed to Human Rights Watch that Rodriguez “isone of the ‘target’ personalities, one [of] the sympathizers of theNPA.”[98]In recent years, Rodriguez had been less active with leftistorganizations. A relative said that about two months before he was killed,Rodriguez would frequently receive text messages from different numbers saying,“Ang galling monce magtago” (Hiding yourself pretty well).[99]Lieutenant Colonel Incognito told Human Rights Watch thathis soldiers had visited Rodriguez to try to convince him that the “timefor a change is now.”[100]He said:And that’s all. We are doing it in front of otherpeople so that others may see that we frequent the area and that’sit.… If we want him killed why would we visit him? … Of course wecould be the one suspected of killing him.[101]Rodriguez’s relatives have received threatening textmessages since his death. One relative received a message saying, “Goodmorning. Your time is near, be careful, I’ll wait for you in Balayan.Sorry, but this is both of your payment [you and Rene], hehehe, okay,bye.”EnforcedDisappearance of Alfredo Bucal, November 10, 2010On November 10, 2010,tricycle driver Alfredo Bucal passed by a joint Philippine Air Force andPhilippine National Police checkpoint in barangay Lutal, Tuy, Batangas. Theauthorities allege that he was driving his tricycle (a motorcycle taxi with asidecar) in convoy with another tricycle driver and that both were carryingpassengers who were NPA members. According to witnesses, the military took himinto custody. His family has not seen him since.A government official told Human Rights Watch that a witnesstold him that he had seen uniformed Philippine Air Force personnel captureBucal, drag him to a vehicle, and force him inside. The official said, “Iam afraid that if I get involved, the Philippine Air Force might come and getme.”[102]A witness who had initially agreed to testify in court proceedings against theAir Force told the family that she would no longer do so as she was afraid forher life after soldiers threatened her.[103]The day after Bucal went missing, relatives searched for himand found the tricycle impounded at a police station. Police officers told thefamily that there had been an “encounter”—that is, afirefight with the NPA—so to inquire after Bucal at the Air Force camp.At the camp, an Air Force lieutenant initially joked with the family, saying“Don’t worry, if he’s with us, surely he’ll be eatingsome choice food.” The family asked to speak to the commanding officerbut was denied; instead the same lieutenant told family members that whilethere had been an encounter, they did not have Bucal in their custody.[104]Police and military officials have acknowledged that two alleged NPA members,Roberto Garcia and Tomas Sitag, were killed during an encounter at an AirForce/PNP checkpoint in barangay Lutalon November 10, and athird person escaped.[105]At this writing, government agencies have not conducted anyindependent investigation into this incident. Relatives told Human Rights Watchthat when they visited a Commission on Human Rights office in San Pablo City,Batangas, staff said that they could not assist because of an internal issue,directing them instead to the Integrated Bar of the Philippines, the nationalorganization of lawyers.[106]Killing of Rudy and Rudyric Dejos,February 27, 2011On the afternoon of February27, 2011, unidentified assailants killed Rudy Dejos, age 50, and his adult sonRudyric, age 26, at their farmhouse in Santa Cruz, Davao del Sur. Rudy, atribal chieftain, held several leadership positions in the community, includingbarangay human rights officer.Rudy’s body showed signs of torture. Mercy Dejos,Rudy’s wife and Rudyric’s mother, described the scene sheencountered on returning to the farmhouse at about 5 p.m. on February 27, afterselling vegetables in town:I saw droplets of blood. When I walked around the corner, Isaw the bodies of my husband and son. My husband was lying with open wounds onhis chest and neck…. His fingernails were removed…. His forearmswere scratched like his arms had been tied up…. His chest was bruised asif he had been beaten with the butt of a rifle. My son, Rudyric, was curled upon his side and I could see bullet wounds on his back with exit wounds on hisupper chest…. I then fell unconscious.[107]A note was left in a box, a short distance from the housewhere the men were killed, which read: “The NPA killed you because yourwrongdoings against the NPA were already too much.”[108]However, the family does not believe that the NPA are behind the killing asthey had not threatened or harassed Rudy or Rudyric in the past and aside fromthis note, there is no evidence of NPA involvement in the killing. According tothe family, the NPA has denied killing the two men.[109]The police immediately blamed the NPA for the killing, before gathering anyevidence.[110]At this writing, the police have not filed charges.Prior to the killing, according to Rudy’s wife,soldiers from the 39th Infantry Battalion of the Philippine Army hadon several occasions threatened and harassed Rudy. Mercy said that in June 2010soldiers visited the farmhouse, accused Rudy of being an NPA, and tried toencourage him to surrender and join the Barangay Defense System, amilitary-allied community defense force. One of the soldiers threatened Rudy,saying, “You are too proud. If we’re able to find you, we will skinyou.”[111]Later that year, on December 4, armed soldiers surrounded the family house inthe main area of Santa Cruz while Rudy was watching television. Irene,Rudyric’s wife, heard someone yell, “You NPAs come out!” Shethen heard what sounded like a gunshot. Sgt Morales of the 39th IB saidthat he had received a text message saying the NPAs were in the area and thatthe presumed gunshot was merely a firecracker. He apologized to Rudyric for theincident later that day, after the Dejos family filed a complaint at the barangayhall.[112]Officers and soldiers from the 39th IBintimidated the Dejos family in the days following the killings. Human RightsWatch witnessed more than 20 soldiers armed with M16s and pistols present atthe March 9 funeral march. One soldier filmed the march, while another tookstill photographs.[113]Lt. Col. Oliver Artuz, the commander of the 39th IB, said that theyattended the march fully armed because NPA members were participating, and werefilming and taking photographs for documentation purposes.[114]Officers also visited the wake.[115]III.Military Failure to Address Extrajudicial KillingsThe Philippine military has repeatedly denied allegations ofsoldiers participating in extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances,is uncooperative with civilian investigations into military involvement, hasnot reformed policies and practices that foster an environment in which suchabuses are tolerated, and does not adequately investigate via internal militarymechanisms abuses in which soldiers are implicated.Since President Aquino assumed office on June 30, 2010, therhetoric of some senior military officers has changed. For instance, in July2010, Brig. Gen. Francisco Cruz, head of the armed forces civil relationsservice, stated in relation to the families of victims of extrajudicialkillings that, “We deeply empathize with their loss and we offer thehighest degree of cooperation to help resolve these cases. The AFP [ArmedForces of the Philippines] firmly asserts that these violent incidents runcontrary to its stance on human rights as the cornerstone of all itsoperations.”[116]However, this change in language has not been reflected inimproved military cooperation with investigating authorities, comprehensiveinternal investigations of implicated members of the armed forces, or increasedopenness within the military structure. One soldier told Human Rights Watch,“You’ll never get information [about extrajudicial killings] fromwithin the service as mishandling of confidential information [is treatedharshly].”[117]A former soldier, “Ricardo,” told Human RightsWatch that when he tried to stop an extrajudicial killing in 2000, a militaryofficer accused him of being a rebel for sympathizing with the victims. Themilitary officer told him, “I will kill you because you are also arebel.”[118]Such behavior sends a clear message to soldiers not to question even clearlyillegal conduct of other military personnel. There is little evidence thatsenior military officers have tried to change this message.Military Labeling of Civilians as NPAMembersThe trouble began when themilitary entered Maco [a town in Compestela Valley province, Mindanao]. Theysaid they had come to help build schools, improve the water system, and providemedical care. But since they arrived, they have not done any of this. Insteadthe military has been calling on civilians and tagging them as NPAs.—“Rosa,” resident of barangayMagangit, Maco town, Compostela Valley[119]The AFP Internal Peace and Security Plan (IPSP) “OplanBayanihan,” which went into effect in January 2011, stresses theimportance of “winning the peace.” Community-based peace anddevelopment efforts, along with meaningful engagement of the local community,are core elements of this strategy.[120]While this strategy appears to be an attempt to improve relations betweencivilians and security forces in conflict-affected areas, Human Rights Watchresearch has found little change in military operations in the field. Themilitary still fails—both in its words and actions—to differentiatebetween the armed NPA and NGOs and political parties that may espouse someelements of communist or other leftist ideology. Several officers told HumanRights Watch that in their view military practice had not changed since January2011 when Oplan Bayanihan was launched.[121]When asked how the military identifies CPP-NPA members whenthey enter a community, a officer said, “Immediately when the soldiersarrive in the barangay, those [people] that have violent reactions [areidentified as allied with the CPP-NPA]; if they don’t want the soldiersthere immediately [when they arrive].”[122] There is awidespread belief in the military that the only reason that community memberswould oppose a military presence is because they actively support the CPP-NPA.[123]The officer said the military then typically conductsinformation-gathering in the locale. This involves conducting communityseminars known as pulong-pulong and talking to residents to find outwhich people belong to what organizations.[124] Failing to attendthe pulong-pulong invariably gets noticed by the military.[125]The officer continued:Once we identify an organization or person, we talk tothem. When we talk to them most will admit that they are supporting the NPA bygiving this ... by being the courier ... by being the one that givesinformation.... Once we learn that, that they are being forced to do that bythe NPA, we ask them to take an Oath of Allegiance. [If they don’t takethe oath,] we just tolerate him.... But if we know that he is being visited bythe NPA we conduct operations…. We just monitor them.[126]Human Rights Watch was told of several incidences in whichsoldiers threatened and harassed civilians because military informantsallegedly identified them as providers of food or shelter for the NPA. But asone civilian said, “We were in the mountain, so if the NPA asked forhelp, then we would help.”[127]Whether civilians provide food or shelter to the NPA because they are scared ofNPA retribution, because of Filipino hospitality, or because they are NPAsupporters, should not make them subject to military threats, harassment, orassault. Should they be implicated in a criminal offence, the authoritiesshould arrest and charge them.A resident of Paquibato district, a rural area in DavaoCity, told Human Rights Watch of one such incident:Early in the morning one day, I was planting coconut treeswhen I felt an M60 [machine gun] placed on my shoulders, pointing to my neck. Asoldier asked, “Who is inside your house? Where is the NPA?” Isaid, “My family.” The soldier then went inside my house and mywife followed him. I was punched with a closed fist in my stomach. I asked,“Why did you do that to me?” He said, “We have seen NPAs inthe area and in your house.” I said, “Maybe you just saw mychildren?” Soldiers were also pointing their guns at my children. Hesaid, “I don’t believe you.”[128]Soldiers, paramilitary members, and “rebelreturnees” working with the military have continued to refer to an“order of battle” and similar lists in threatening ways. Accordingto the government, “an ‘order of battle’ is a compilation ofdata on various threat groups … which aims to better understand thestrengths and weaknesses of these threat groups and to anticipate their futureactions.”[129]Philip Alston, then-UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary, orarbitrary executions, reported that in a leaked order of battle provided tohim—the authenticity of which he had no reason to doubt—hundreds ofprominent civil society groups and individuals were listed as members of organizationsthat the military deemed “illegitimate.”[130]For example, several residents in the Paquibato district ofDavao City said that they saw the army carrying a list when accompanied by arebel returnee whom they assumed had become a CAFGU. According to a former barangaycaptain, the rebel returnee told several people in the community that he hadseen the “list” of the 69th IB. He would threatenmembers of the community, saying, “You’d better watch out oryou’ll be included in the list.”[131]Theresidents believed the list was of people to be targeted for having links withthe NPA.[132]Military’sDenial of Involvement in Extrajudicial KillingsThe highest ranks of the military have consistently deniedresponsibility for extrajudicial killings, rather than recognizing the gravityof the problem, investigating how and why the military is involved, and holdingperpetrators accountable, regardless of rank. Less than a week after the 2010killing of Fernando Baldomero, armed forces spokesman Brig. Gen. Jose Mabantareportedly said:“Certainly we are not involved in that…. We allknow that in the leftist organization, purging from within has always beeninstituted or is a strategy of the underground armed organization.”[133]More broadly, Mabanta has said: “The performance of our duty is hinderedwhen our personnel are faced with human rights violations…. [M]ost humanright violations are in the line of duty.”[134]At the lowest ranks, the military has created an environmentin which foot soldiers have readily participated in killings of leftistactivists. A military insider told Human Rights Watch that even if the localcommander did not give the order to kill, “he knows of everything”and will protect his soldiers.[135]Soldiers have also been paid as hired killers, acting on behalf of privateinterests or other government agencies.The extent of participation by senior commanding officers inthe killing of leftist activists—and how far up the chain ofcommand—is less clear. There is much evidence of involvement of certainsenior officers, most prominently now-retired Gen. Jovito Palparan. As early as2004 the House of Representatives’ Committee on Civil, Political andHuman Rights recommended that Palparan be relieved of his position andinvestigated for his involvement in the killings. The Arroyo government’sMelo Commission also recommended that the Justice Department investigate hisinvolvement.[136]Failure to investigate and prosecute perpetrators in themilitary sends a message that killing leftist activists is allowed and anacceptable part of counterinsurgency operations.MilitaryFailure to Cooperate with Police and Other InquiriesThe military has not cooperated with police investigationsin the cases that Human Rights Watch investigated.For instance, in relation to the September 2010 killing ofleftist activist Rene Quirante, the Guihulngan police chief, Carlos Lacuesta,said the military failed to respond to a formal request for information aboutthe two identified suspects—one of whom is an alleged paramilitarymember, the other an alleged military “asset”—or provide anyinformation to assist in identifying the six accused, unidentified members ofthe Philippine Army.[137]Lacuesta said that police investigators had not formally interviewed anysoldiers. The police have attempted to determine what military operations werebeing conducted that night, but the military claims that no operations tookplace.At the same time, army investigators from the 11thIB interviewed the police investigator about the case.[138] Theoutcomes of the army investigation have not been shared with the police.[139]Even more concerning, Lacuesta described the close, informal military andpolice relationship, saying “[Lt. Col. Bitong, commander of the 11thIB, and I are] friends and can have a casual talk about [the killing].”[140]In the September 2010 killing of Vicente Felisilda in theCompostela Valley of Mindanao, police are investigating reports that a CAFGUmember whose father was allegedly killed by Felisilda some years earlier hadkilled Felisilda out of revenge.[141]The police investigator sought a copy of the log book, which indicated thatthis CAFGU member was on duty at the time of the killing, but the commander ofthe 72nd IB would not release it, saying it is necessary for thearmy’s defense if charges are filed at a later date.[142]The military has also failed to cooperate with localgovernment inquiries. For instance, on October 4, 2010, the Surigao del SurSangguniang Panlalawigan Committee on Laws and Justice and Human Rights met todiscuss the late August, early September 2010 forcible disappearances of RenatoDeliguer and Agustito Ladera.[143]The commanding officer of the 36th IB was invited to shed light onwhat happened, but he did not appear.[144] Nor did he send arepresentative or explain his non-appearance.[145]The military’s lack of cooperation with civilianauthorities extends to the very top. Despite a Supreme Court order thatrequired the AFP chief to provide to the Commission on Human Rights allevidence that may be relevant to the case of Jonas Burgos, the military judgeadvocate’s office refused to provide certain documents. To do so, hesaid, would “sanction a fishing expedition conducted at the expense ofmilitary personnel whose names will be unnecessarily dragged into[question].”[146]The military’s failure to cooperate with policeinvestigations is an old excuse for inaction by police investigators. In June2007, the Philippine government said, with respect to the August 2006 killingof Pastor Isias Santa Rosa, “Police investigators are having difficultysolving the case due to the noncooperation of the Philippine Army in theinvestigation.”[147]In this case there was clear physical evidence of involvement by militarypersonnel.[148]Failureof the Military to InvestigateThe military inspector general and the provost marshal aretasked with investigating soldiers and officers for administrative violations.The inspector general has the power to direct a board of inquiry to conductsuch investigations.[149]Human Rights Watch researchers have been unable to identify any case whereeither offices have investigated any member of the armed forces or paramilitaryforces for alleged involvement in extrajudicial killings or enforceddisappearances.Neither office has forwarded information suggesting it hasconducted such investigations. A letter from Human Rights Watch to the AFPrequesting clarification on the issue remained unanswered at this writing.Several military officers said the inspector general willonly direct a board of inquiry to investigate a case when the local commanderthinks it is “a serious case.”[150] Similarly, theprovost marshal will only investigate when “tapped” by seniormilitary commanders to do so.[151]Military officials at Fort Magsaysay told Human Rights Watch the provostmarshal had not been asked to investigate the Guevara killing, for instance,because, “It came out in our intelligence operation that no military wereinvolved, [so] we turned it over to the police.”[152]In practice, local military officers in the area where thekilling took place are often tasked with investigating the killing,compromising independence since it is typically the battalion stationed in thearea that is implicated in the killing. First, a spot report is completed. Then,often, a more detailed special report is commissioned. The AFP has not providedHuman Rights Watch with copies of any such reports to date.[153]The military’s public statements suggest that a coregoal of these reports is to absolve implicated soldiers. In the 2006 killing ofPastor Santa Rosa, the AFP investigation was confined to investigating thedeath of a military officer whose body was found near Santa Rosa’s bodyshortly after 10 armed men in fatigue uniforms abducted Santa Rosa from hishome. Santa Rosa’s wife identified the dead military officer as one ofher husband’s abductees. The report concluded the NPA was responsible,without citing any evidence to support such a conclusion.[154]Human Rights Watch research found only one extrajudicialkilling case in which a soldier has testified against members of the armedforces in the last decade.The military subjected this whistleblower—formerSgt. Esequias Duyogan—to harassment and financial sanctions, and thegovernment did nothing to secure his safety from the time he came forward totestify in 2007 until early 2011, when the Justice Department admitted himinto the witness protection program. The accused, on the other hand, hasreceived preferential treatment in jail.On October 14, 2000, six friends, Romualdo Orcullo,Jovencio Legare, Arnold Dangquiasan, Joseph Belar, Diosdado Oliver, andArtemio Ayala, were at a barangay fiesta—a village streetparty—when Army Cpl. Rodrigo Billones of the 62nd InfantryBattalion arrested them and took them to the nearby military camp. Their familieshave not seen them since.Some years later, Duyogan came forward and told how,following the arrests, he witnessed a dozen soldiers from his unit beat thesix young men to death with an iron rod and bury them. Three days later, theydug up the bodies, loaded them on a service vehicle, and brought them to aremote area where they burned the corpses. The Regional Trial Court in Agusandel Sur in July 2008 convicted Cpl. Billones of kidnapping and “seriousillegal detention” of the six men and sentenced him to 9 to 15 years inprison for each of the six victims. He has appealed his conviction to theCourt of Appeals.[155]Military personnel and other unidentified individuals havethreatened and harassed Duyogan, his family, and human rights defendersworking with him on several instances since he came forward to testify.[156]In August 2007, a military officer visited him at his Agusan del Sur home,purportedly at the behest of the divisional commander, and offered him200,000 pesos (US$4,600) to “go back to the folds of themilitary.”[157]Further, military officers told Duyogan that his salary, which he had notreceived since he agreed to testify, was being used for Cpl. Billones’legal defense.[158]Despitehis conviction and sentencing for a serious offense, Cpl. Billones lives withhis wife and two children in a house outside of the fence surrounding theAgusan del Sur provincial jail, though within the prison compound. Anofficial at the jail told Human Rights Watch that the jail warden, who is amilitary reservist, had granted Billones this privilege out of“camaraderie.”[159]Granting extraordinary privileges to soldiers convicted ofserious crimes reinforces impunity and sends a message that abuses will gounpunished.IV. Failure to Investigate and ProsecuteI just want a thorough investigation. We don’t expectit to be speedy…. We just want it to be thorough.—Wife of a leftist activist allegedly killed by themilitary, February 2011The Philippine government has consistently failed in itsobligations under international human rights law to hold accountableperpetrators of politically-motivated killings and enforced disappearances.Victims’ families are denied justice as killers literally get away withmurder. With inconclusive investigations, implausible suspects, warrants ofarrest infrequently executed, and no convictions, impunity prevails.Prosecutions in human rights cases are stymied by the poorpolicing that affects all criminal investigations in the Philippines. But eventhe most common problems will be exacerbated in cases where military personnel,police, and paramilitary members are implicated. Police investigations intoalleged extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances are not onlywoefully inadequate because of poor investigative skills and lack of capacity,but they face the further obstacles of little will to uncover abuses by thesecurity forces. Many obstacles remain for those investigations that progressto the prosecutor, including lack of cooperation between police and the prosecutorand lengthy trial processes, all of which heighten the risks for victims andwitnesses when government officials are the perpetrators.The government institutions charged with promoting humanrights and accountability have done little to end the widespread impunityenjoyed by perpetrators of extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances.Reforms to curtail “disappearances,” such as Supreme Court writs ofamparo and habeas data, which were designed to compel the military to releaseinformation on people in their custody, have been largely ineffectual.PoorPolicingInstead of “to serve and protect,” [the policelogo should be] “to hide and to run.” … Justice is all wewant…. No justice just adds to the pain.—Maridezda and Arnel Guran, parents of Rei Mon Guran,a student activist killed in July 2006Poor and indifferent policing, and profound public mistrustin the government’s investigative efforts, affects all criminalinvestigations in the Philippines. Several witnesses and victims’families whom Human Rights Watch interviewed said they expect no real resultsfrom government investigations. The wife of a victim told how her family isslowly conducting the investigation themselves, which she feels is her onlyoption.[160]In several cases, the family only had contact with the police once, often atthe wake, when they were interviewed.[161] Then, as onerelative said, “nothing more happened.”[162]Neither police nor prosecutors regularly update victims’ families;rather, families said, police often ask them for updates.Police still frequently believe that it is thefamilies’ duty to push the investigation, and conduct only the mostrudimentary of investigations. Too often, police fail to visit and adequatelyexamine the crime scene. Police continue to pressure victims’ relativesto provide information on witnesses and motives, and at times identify unlikelyperpetrators. Investigators routinely cease their investigation afteridentifying one suspect, rather than pursuing accomplices, particularly thosewho ordered the killing.Since investigators do not visit the crime scene,unqualified barangay officials or even family members collect obviousevidence from the site of the killing, often contaminating the evidence andinterrupting the evidentiary chain-of-custody. For example, the purokleader and barangay tanods visited the place where Julius Tamondez waskilled on August 12, 2010, to recover the body. They collected the bulletcasing and turned it over to barangay officials who wrapped it incellophane and kept it at the barangay hall. At some later date, thepolice collected it from the barangay hall.[163] Despitea barangay official reporting the crime to a police investigator overthe phone on the day of the killing and requesting that police investigate,police did not visit the crime scene or interview any first responders aboutit.[164]Investigatorscollect only the most obvious evidence, such as bullet casings. In each caseHuman Rights Watch examined, investigators have not collected shoe marks,cigarette butts, or phone records, and have not sought more advanced forensicexamination for obvious evidence.[165]Some police officers blamed inadequate investigations onlack of appropriate equipment. One investigator explained that his policestation does not own a camera and has only one patrol car, which can only beused in the town proper.[166]These are valid concerns and investigators should have viable transport andnecessary equipment for evidence collection, particularly cameras.Even in cases where investigators did visit the crime scene,they often did not invite forensic experts from Scene of the Crime Operatives(SOCO) to assist. Several police officers explained that SOCO only getsinvolved when the first responder or investigator requests their involvement.[167]A local police chief explained that he only requests SOCO involvement afterinitial processing of the evidence. However, he chose not to in the Dejos casebecause the investigator was “handling the situation.”[168]Investigators typically interview only the most obvious witnesses—familymembers or eyewitnesses who come forward and present themselves at policestations. They do not routinely proactively look for witnesses in the placewhere the crime was committed. For example, a review of the policeinvestigation into the killing of Baldomero revealed that police did not go door-to-doorin the area canvassing for possible witnesses, even though he was killed in apopulated area along a national highway. Often, the family or privateprosecutors are expected to identify witnesses.[169]Toooften police only file cases if a relative is willing to be a complainant. In aNovember 2010 case in which the victim of an alleged extrajudicial killing wasseparated from his wife, his colleague explained that police officers had toldhim that, “According to law, the first dependent needs to push thecase…. If the family doesn’t push for the case the case isconsidered closed.”[170] Since the wife is not doingso, police are not actively pursuing the investigation.In a break with this practice, the police departmentinvestigating the July 12, 2010 killing of Josephine Estacio in Bataan filed acase against Alfred Alipio—allegedly a member of a breakaway communistgroup—saying that a witness had come forward and identified Alipio as thegunman.[171]However, this reform has not been institutionalized and this case presents aquestionable example as the charges were filed against an unlikely perpetrator.Several things indicate that this witness may not actually have seen thegunman, and the witness identified Alipio from a “photo board” thatshowed only his photograph.[172]Investigators told Human Rights Watch that the witness was under theirprotective custody, but he failed to appear at a hearing called by theprosecutor and police said that they were not concerned for his welfare.[173]Furthermore, the tricycle driver who drove Estacio on the day she was killedhad described the gunman as wearing a mask, not that tall, and with a slightlyrounded body. Alipio is tall and well built. On this basis, the prosecutor was“not convinced” that the new witness had positively identifiedAlipio as the gunman.[174]There is a widespread belief that families have to pay foran investigation to be thorough. In particular, colleagues of a victimdescribed investigators telling them that they would have to pay money toinvolve the National Bureau of Investigation in the case.[175]In one case, the wife of a victim said that she refused to consent to havingher husband’s body autopsied because she did not have the money.[176]There is very little oversight of police investigations andpolice stations are disorganized. In one incident, the city police chiefexplained that the investigator was not around and “I do not know evenwhere he placed the investigation folder.”[177]In another, the deputy city police chief explained that he had only recentlybeen transferred and did not know where investigation folders were kept. Hesaid, “Usually the investigator manages his case folder” ratherthan there being a central filing cabinet.[178] In cases thatHuman Rights Watch examined, investigations often stalled due to a personnelchange within a police station, which is a regular occurrence.[179]Investigationsof Extrajudicial Killings and Enforced DisappearancesInvestigationsin Conflict AreasThe investigator is just like a desk officer; just makingreports from his table.—Wifeof a human rights activist allegedly killed by the military, February 2011In addition to the serious shortcomings that all criminalinvestigations experience in the Philippines, police investigations into crimesallegedly committed by military personnel face further hurdles. Policeinvestigations often rely entirely on witnesses; in several killingsinvestigated by Human Rights Watch, investigators did not go to the scene ofthe crime at all.[180]In others, they only examined the immediate vicinity where the body was found,even if evidence suggested the person was killed elsewhere.Given that killings of suspected CPP-NPA supporters oftentake place in the vicinity of conflict areas between the NPA and the military,the police’s security concerns in reaching the crime scene may begenuine. For instance, the police officer in charge of Mawab police stationsaid security concerns meant that investigators could not go to the area whereFelisilda was killed. “There are a lot of land mines in the area,”he said.[181]In several cases, investigators instead asked the family to bring witnesses tothe police station.Thelocal police chief in Guihulngan said that investigators did not visit thescene of the crime as the area is “three or four hours walking distanceand is very hostile.”[182] The investigator said:I wanted to go to the crime scene to collect evidence, butno other police officer would accompany me because [they were afraid for their]security. Also, because we have only one patrol car that can only go on thehighway, we had to rely on the mayor for transport.[183]In other instances, police failure to investigate reflectedlack of willingness on the part of authorities to pursue a case implicating themilitary. In the forcible disappearances of Deliguer and Ladera, both familiesreported to the police that the men were missing. However, at no time didpolice visit their residences or farms to investigate.[184] Accordingto a police report, the chief of police in Marihatag asked the commandingofficer of the 36th IB if the two were in military custody. He had“no knowledge of the ‘disappearance,’” but directed hisintelligence operatives to assist in locating the missing persons.[185]The October report recommended that the police “be given ample time toconduct thorough and in depth investigation.” However, when interviewedin March 2011, neither the chief investigator nor the police chief couldidentify any investigative steps taken since this date.[186]Failure to Pursue Evidence of MilitaryInvolvementPolice routinely avoid pursuing evidence of militaryinvolvement. A foreign police officer who has been working with Philippinepolice investigators said that he had found investigations went cold as soon asthey pointed to the military.[187]The relative of an alleged perpetrator explained that although police visit theremote area where her husband was killed to investigate regular criminal cases,“police distance themselves from abuses by the military.”[188]Investigators have not formally interviewed any soldiers or commanders in anyof the cases investigated by Human Rights Watch, despite evidence of militaryinvolvement.This has long been a problem. “Ricardo,” theformer soldier, told Human Rights Watch that when he was ordered to kill twoalleged NPA runners in the 1990s, the police “pointed to the NPA [as theperpetrators] since they are afraid of us (the Philippine Army)…. Theywere afraid that they might be [the] next [target, if they properly investigatedthe army].”[189]He said that the police did not question any member of the military about thekillings.[190]Police have captured and charged two alleged soldiers forthe June 14, 2010 killing of Benjamin Bayles in Negros Occidental. Policearrested the suspects after an alert was placed for a black Honda TMXmotorcycle without a plate number, being ridden by two men.[191] Policesaw the two, arrested them, and found them in possession of unregisteredfirearms.[192]Initially, the police chief said over radio that the two accused had introducedthemselves as members of the 61st IB of the Philippine Army.[193]The next day he withdrew this statement: the suspects now claim to be fishermenand deny any links to the military.[194]The registered owner of motorcycle they were riding, Pfc. Reygine Laus, is asoldier with the 61st IB.[195] During a budgethearing, Defense Secretary Voltaire Gazmin accepted that the accused men were PhilippineArmy personnel.[196]In addition, Bayles’ neighbor has testified that armed men in militarycamouflage who introduced themselves as members of the army visited her placeand asked her about Bayles on several occasions.[197]The police investigator has not interviewed anyone in themilitary about the case. He said that his only action to determine whether theaccused are members of the armed forces was to give the case to an intelligenceofficer and ask him to profile the suspects.[198] Nor has hemonitored or attempted to determine whether members of the military arevisiting the accused in jail. He told Human Rights Watch that since the jailwas “a long way away” he had no way to find out who visits them.[199]Moreover, he said that to further investigate this case would violate the subjudice rule—a rule that prevents people from commenting on theoutcome of a case while it is before the court.[200]In several cases implicating military personnel, policeinvestigators sought to show that the motive was personal. This may have beendue to camaraderie with the military and the police force’s “withus or against us” attitude, fear of military reprisal, or the additionalpressure and reporting obligations that local police officers face inextrajudicial killing cases.Investigators have claimed personal motives from seeminglyarbitrary evidence. For instance, in the case of Carlo “Caloy”Rodriguez, union president of the Calamba Water District who was gunned downalong the National Highway in Calamba City on November 12, 2010, investigatorsdetermined that, because he suffered multiple gunshot wounds, he was the victimof a crime of passion fuelled by a personal grudge.[201] Thisis a dubious conclusion: while police may dismiss any motive relating to alabor dispute because several witnesses spoke of Rodriguez having a goodrelationship with the general manager, the number of gunshots was no basis todetermine that the killing was “not politically motivated.”[202]Rodriguez was affiliated with the Confederation for Unityand Recognition Advancement Government Employee (COURAGE) and the Samahan ngWater District Sa Buong Pilipinas (WATER), broader leftist organizations thatthe military has said are connected with the CPP-NPA.[203] Policehave not investigated this potential motive.Since President Aquino came to office, several policeinvestigators and local police chiefs have said that provincial and nationalpolice headquarters have pressured them to file cases in extrajudicial killingcases. However, families have said this pressure often unintentionally meansthat investigators fail to investigate the killing thoroughly; instead, they rushthe investigation and file charges against only one of several suspects, andpressure families to identify witnesses and—essentially—conduct theinvestigation themselves and report back to police. A victim’s relativesaid, “[The police investigator] was pleading because he was beingquestioned by provincial and national PNP why a case hadn’t been filed.He wanted to fast track the filing of a case as they were under suchpressure.”[204]TaskForces Established to Investigate CasesIn four of the seven extrajudicial killing cases that HumanRights Watch investigated, the police established some form of a task force toinvestigate. No such task forces were created in the three cases of enforceddisappearances. The task forces have had negligible effect.In one case, an investigator explained that although“a Special Investigation Task Group had been formed to investigate thecase, the group has just relied on me to do the work.”[205]In several cases, the formation of the task force appears tobe little more than a public relations exercise. For example, the police formedTask Group Baldomero the day after the killing and the day before Baldomero wasburied on July 17, 2010. The task group held a press conference to announcethat a suspect had been identified and that charges were to be filed.[206]But the task group was active for a month at most, a relative told Human RightsWatch, and the family “felt the pressure to file the case” beforeinvestigators had sufficiently examined the involvement of other suspects,particularly the military. The family said the press conference made them feel used.[207]HastyDiscontinuance of InvestigationsIn the cases of alleged extrajudicial killings that HumanRights Watch investigated, investigations ceased once a first suspect was identified.Perhaps because it would have meant investigating up the military chain ofcommand, investigators did not continue with the aim of identifying accomplicesor people who may have ordered the killing. For instance, once one of thealleged perpetrators in the Baldomero killing was identified and police filedcharges with the prosecutor, investigators did not continue to work to identifyhis accomplice, whoever ordered the killing, or to investigate reports ofmilitary involvement. Investigators told Human Rights Watch it was now up tothe courts.[208]In the Guevarra case, the military ceased to be suspected when a DPWH officerwas implicated.[209]However, investigators did not continue to investigate the possibility thatmilitary members were involved, including as the gunmen.The October 25, 2005 killing of Ricardo “Ric”Ramos, then-president of Central Azucarera de Tarlac Labor Union, is anotherexample of police discontinuing an investigation once a suspect has beenidentified, and the military failing to help police identify military suspects.In Ramos’ case, a gunman shot him twice in the head as he sat at a tablewith about 20 men, killing him.[210]On the morning of his death, Ramos had had a stern conversation with soldiers,who were present when wages were being distributed to union workers following adeal made during a strike. That afternoon and evening, two soldiers had visitedhim three times and were sent away. Ramos had received a funeral wreath thatsaid “RIP Ricardo Ramos” a month earlier. The night after Ramos waskilled, the small army detachment, which had been set up about 50 meters fromwhere the killing occurred, was removed.[211]Pfc.Roderick dela Cruz has been identified as one of the soldiers that visitedRamos on October 25, 2005, and is currently standing trial. However, there isdebate over who the second soldier was. At least three witnesses identifiedSgt. Romeo Castillo as the second solider; as such, he was included as arespondent in the complaint.[212] He denied that he visitedRamos at all that day and presented further evidence at the preliminaryinvestigation before the Office of the City Prosecutor to support this. Theassistant provincial prosecutor, Ma. Lourdes D. Soriano, recommended that he bedropped as a party from the complaint.[213]Dela Cruz and 2d Lt. Alberto Tolledo informed the Office of the City Prosecutorthat Sgt. Melchor Santos was the soldier who accompanied dela Cruz. Police havenot filed charges against Santos or investigated the local commander. Still,they have classified this case as solved.At present, the PNP does not have a central database ormethod for collecting information about criminal investigations to allow forcross-checking of evidence. The EU is set to fund the creation of such a systemin 2011.PoliceFears of Military RetaliationSeveral police officers expressed fears about investigatingalleged extrajudicial killings implicating the military. When a relative toldone investigator about witnesses seeing soldiers near where her husband waskilled, he told her to forget about the military’s involvement. “Tigoktayo dyan” or “We’re dead” he said—indicatingthat he thought his life would be at risk if he investigated militaryinvolvement.[214]In another case, the police told a victim’s son the “suspects are military,but it is dangerous to investigate about the case.”[215] Onepolice investigator told how police officers avoid becoming involved ininvestigating extrajudicial killing cases implicating the military, either outof a belief that it is disloyal or because they fear reprisal. He said:On the day of the killing, [the police chief called me and]asked [me] to handle the case. Other investigators did not want to[investigate] the case because the victim was seen as an NPA member and themilitary were accused [as the perpetrators]. They did not want to [because] themilitary would be unhappy with them.[216]Colleagues have ostracized and threatened this policeofficer for investigating the killing—treatment that he said is notunusual. The officer has received several threatening text messages fromunknown numbers.[217]He said:[Most of my fellow police officers] have created a threateningenvironment for me…. One time when I arrived at the police station, onepolice officer shouted at me that I am an enemy of the state…. There is agroup influence…. I just avoid them and … do my work. One day inthe station a fellow officer said to me, “There will be a time ofreckoning because you’re going out of your way [to investigate this case].”[218]Human Rights Watch is unaware of any police officer whoharassed or threatened investigators for working on such cases beinginvestigated or sanctioned.[219]Mistreatment has at times directly interfered with investigation of the case.In one case that Human Rights Watch investigated, someone—supposedly afellow police officer—stole the case folder of an extrajudicial killinginvestigation from the police station. It has never been recovered.[220]Fearsof Retaliation Against Witnesses and Victim’s RelativesThere has been harassment. They are monitoring what I amdoing… I am cautious. I fear for my life. How can I carry this? I want toget justice. But at the same time I am scared they might go after my family.—Sonia Santa Rosa, whose husband, Pastor Isias deLeon Santa Rosa, was allegedly killed by soldiers in 2006Each witness and relative of victims that Human Rights Watchinterviewed spoke of fears for their safety. One police officer said,“Here in the Philippines, if you talk, you will be killed.”[221]Several police investigators said witnesses were too afraid to tell them whatthey saw.[222]A local government official told Human Rights Watch how themilitary harassed someone who had witnessed military abuse. He said that thewitness:Told me five men came to her house and [one] introducedhimself as Ka Ben [a name suggesting an NPA nom de guerre]. However, sherecognized “Ka Ben’s” face from the [incident she witnessed].They were from the military. Ka Ben then threatened her that if she[testified], something would happen to her family…. He said, “I amnot bluffing and very serious about this conversation.” Since then,people have told her that people have been regularly visiting [her place].She’s not been staying in her house since.[223]A witness in the case filed against two alleged soldiersregarding the June 2010 killing of Benjamin Bayles reported to police that onNovember 5, 2010, she was sleeping with her six children when about 20unidentified armed men wearing army fatigues woke her around midnight. It wasthe second time that armed men in fatigues had visited and threatened her sinceshe had agreed to testify in an extrajudicial killing case in which the accusedwere allegedly soldiers.[224]She said one of them said to her, “Do you want me to shoot you in thehead?” while pointing a .38 caliber pistol at her.[225]Retribution takes various forms. A witness to the November2010 killing of Carlo Rodriguez—a security guard—was reassigned toanother place after he cooperated with the police investigation.[226]His employer later terminated his employment, he believes, because hecooperated with the investigation.[227]A police investigator explained that some businesses consider it risky tocooperate with investigations, so discourage employees from doing so.[228]Military harassment of witnesses and victims’ familieshas long been a problem in the Philippines. “Ricardo,” the formersoldier, told Human Rights Watch that he was ordered to harass witnesses andrelatives of extrajudicial killings from time to time. He said that in a casein which a fellow soldier had been accused of shooting and killing a civilian,a senior commanding officer ordered him and his fellow soldiers to wearcivilian clothes and fill the court room.[229] He said:“The purpose was to frighten the complainant and witnesses so as they couldnot speak.”[230]In several cases prior to the Aquino administration thatHuman Rights Watch has previously reported on, relatives of victims continue tofear for their safety.[231]The parents of student leader Rei Mon “Ambo” Guran—who waskilled on July 31, 2006, at around 6 a.m. on a crowded bus in Bulan,Sorsorgon—said that when they wrote to the National Bureau ofInvestigation to seek their assistance, they were told, “Our enemy isstrong.”[232]Inadequate,Inflexible Witness ProtectionThere have been improvements in the implementation of thewitness protection program since Aquino took office, but substantial reformsare still needed.Anyonewho has witnessed or has information about a serious crime who will testifybefore any investigating authority or court may be admitted to the JusticeDepartment’s witness protection program, provided the testimony can becorroborated and there is a real threat to the safety of the witness or his orher family.[233] The witness must sign anundertaking, among other things, to testify.[234]Under the program, witnesses are to be provided with secure housing (until theyhave testified, the threat disappears, or is reduced to a manageable level),assistance in obtaining means of livelihood, financial assistance, health care,and job protection.[235] When the circumstanceswarrant, the witness and immediate family members are entitled to relocationand/or change of identity at the department’s expense.[236]Investigating agencies and the courts are to ensure speedy trials in cases inwhich witnesses are in protection, with the aim of concluding the case withinthree months.[237]In practice, witnesses admitted to the witness protectionprogram are confined to safe houses for years on end. Although witnessesreceive financial assistance, it is limited and they have little to no abilityto earn a livelihood. In reality, trials that involve protected witnesses arenot dealt with more swiftly than others, and witnesses do not receive newidentities at the end of proceedings.[238] JusticeDepartment officials on occasion continue to construe the witness protectionprogram in an inflexible, limited way, and do not adequately assist witnessesand families in applying for protection.Witnesses have told Human Rights Watch that they believeauthorities will detain them under the program. A barangay official saidof a witness, “He wants to be free; he doesn’t want his liferearranged because of witness protection.”[239] Thisunderstanding is not far removed from the reality. One couple under protectionsaid, “Sometimes they let us out…. They’ve even allowed us toplant a small garden in the yard.”[240] Witnessprotection needs to address security and also economic concerns of witnesseswho do not want to leave their businesses or sources of livelihood. Severalwitnesses have sought the protection of NGOs or churches. A private prosecutorexplained, “They don’t trust authorities.”[241]Few police officers and prosecutors appear familiar with theprogram, and provide incorrect or limited information about it. The chief investigatorin one case said incorrectly that the program only provides security once thewitness testifies.[242]In a 2010 case where a child was an eyewitness to a killing, the prosecutorclaimed only the child would be protected:As far as I know, it is the [witness] who would betransferred to a safe-house, but certain protections would be extended to therest of the family. However, according to the [witness’s] mother, thiswould add further trauma [for the child witness].[243]In fact, the witness protection program would accommodatethe immediate family of a child witness. The child’s mother sought aflexible form of witness protection that includes funding her and herchild’s relocation to another town of her choice where she has family andthe necessary support for raising a child alone. She did not want to go into asafe house as she did not want her son isolated from society.[244]She said that regional justice department officers told her that she would haveto accept the terms they set out for her: “This is a package…. Theytold me only the DOJ can choose the place [for relocation].”[245]Thegovernment has provided some form of protection for witnesses or family membersof victims in only two of the recent cases that Human Rights Watchinvestigated. In a positive move reflecting what was hoped to be increasedflexibility in applying protection, police provided security outside the homeof witnesses and victims’ relatives immediately after the killings inthese two cases.[246] In the Estacio case,protection was provided for a short period as the family relocated itself, forits own protection. However, in the Baldomero case police withdrew protectionat short notice without providing a justified reason, when the risk to thewitnesses remained high. When Human Rights Watch raised concerns about thiswith the Justice Department in May 2011, the department said it had told thefamily in writing that witnesses could apply for witness protection but had notreceived any applications.[247]Obstaclesto ProsecutionProsecutions in the Philippines have long been hindered byvarious obstacles, many of which affect the Philippine justice systemgenerally, but which appear to be exaggerated in cases involving serious humanrights violations. These include the failure of police and prosecutors tocoordinate their efforts to develop a strong case, failure of police to servearrest warrants, and delays throughout departmental and court processes.Out of hundreds of killings and enforced disappearancessince 2001, there have been only seven successfully prosecuted cases, resultingin the conviction of 12 defendants.[248]There has not been a single conviction of active military personnel at the timeof the killing. No senior military officers have been convicted either fordirect involvement in these violations or as a matter of commandresponsibility.Anadditional hurdle in “disappearance” cases is the fact thePhilippines lacks specific legislation criminalizing enforced disappearances.Rather, these must be prosecuted under the crimes of kidnapping and unlawfuldetention. The Philippines has yet to sign the International Convention for theProtection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, which outlines theinternational standards on preventing and punishing enforced disappearances.[249]Cooperationbetween prosecutors and police in human rights cases appears to be theexception rather than the norm despite several departmental orders toprosecutors and police to work together. The recent alleged extrajudicialkillings investigated by Human Rights Watch demonstrated no evidence of realpolice collaboration with prosecutors, which contributes to the lack ofprosecutions.Twocases that Human Rights Watch previously investigated illustrate severalobstacles to justice that arise after police file a case with the prosecutor.Despite strong evidence of military involvement in the August 3, 2006 killingof Pastor Isias Santa Rosa in Bicol, prosecutors have twice dismissed chargesthat police filed against a military officer, citing insufficient evidence.[250] The prosecutors never worked with thepolice to identify what evidence should be gathered to sustain a case thatcould go to court. Nor have the prosecutors requested that police investigatefurther, indicated to police what evidence is necessary, or taken an active rolein acquiring this evidence.TheSeptember 8, 2004 killing of Bacar and Carmen Japalali shows many of thechallenges present in even those cases that are properly investigated.Morethan 30 soldiers allegedly shot to death Bacar Japalali—a suspectedmember of the Moro National Liberation Front, an ethnic Moro armedgroup—and his wife, Carmen while they were asleep. Bacar’sbrother, Talib Japalali, described what he saw when he arrived at hisbrother’s house: “There were bullet holes everywhere; pieces ofbone were splattered around the house.” Meanwhile, his brother’sbody still lay on his sleeping mat under his mosquito net. A soldier toldTalib that they had had to kill Bacar because he fought back. Police investigators,including forensic experts, and the governor arrived promptly at the Japalaliresidence and conducted a full investigation.Despiteforensic evidence revealing no traces of gunpowder on the hands of the coupleand two eyewitness accounts countering the military’s response that thedeaths were the result of an armed encounter, the prosecutor dismissed thecomplaint for lack of probable cause without attempting to gather additionalevidence, or informing the family.[251]After some time, the deputy ombudsman overturned this decision, resolving tofile murder charges against 32 soldiers and referred the case back to the localprosecutor, for prosecution.TheRegional Trial Court judge—without a motion from the defense—downgradedthe charges to the lesser charge of homicide and dismissed the chargesagainst all but 8 of the 32 soldiers whom the ombudsman had said should becharged. He delayed issuing even these eight arrest warrants. One day whenTalib went to the court to follow up on the case, he received a message thatthe judge would see him. Talib said the judge told him in a private meeting,“They’re willing to pay.” Talib answered, “I did notcome here for money; I want justice.”[252]TheJapalali family filed a complaint against the judge with the Supreme Court. Thejudge recused himself from hearing the case but has not been disciplined orcriminally charged.[253] The new judge issued theeight warrants of arrest, however even then, arrest warrants were not serveduntil the family placed considerable pressure on the police and an NGOassisted with serving the warrants. The eight have now been arrested and areconfined to the military camp. Five years later, the court is still hearingevidence, and no new charges have been brought against the 24 soldiers whosecharges were dismissed.Failureto Serve Arrest WarrantsThe process for serving arrest warrants does not encouragepolice to take the initiative, which becomes especially problematic where thesuspect to be served is a member of the armed forces. Once a court issues anarrest warrant, the standard procedure is that the court sends it to the policechief, who gives it to the warrant server, a police officer solely responsiblefor serving warrants and subpoenas.[254]Within 10 days, the warrant server is required to serve the warrant and thennotify the court. A clerk of court told Human Rights Watch that if a warrant isnot served, the court will wait six months, then archive the case.[255]In one case, after the court had issued a warrant of arrest,the police investigator told the victim’s family to make an officialrequest to a certain police official to serve the warrants, because otherpolice stations cover the scope of the addresses of the two suspects.[256]In another case, the clerk of the court said:Hopefully the family of the victim is working for thearrest of the accused. If the family has friends in the military, they can askthem to coordinate with the police or hire a private agent. If there is nomotion from the family, [the court] has no choice but to archive [the case].[257]The military appears to be less than willing in serioushuman rights cases to assist police in serving warrants of arrest on soldiers.The Guihulngan police chief, Carlos Lacuesta, told Human Rights Watch that hisoffice had provided the commander of the 11th IB, Lt. Col. RamilBitong, with a copy of the warrant of arrest in the Quirante case shortly afterit was issued.[258]However, a military officer said the “warrant hasn’t reachedus” and that it is not the military’s role to assist in the serviceof warrants.[259]In the case of the October 25, 2005 killing of labor leaderRicardo Ramos, the police did not serve the warrant for the arrest of an armyprivate, Pfc. Roderick dela Cruz, for nearly two years.[260] DelaCruz continued to serve the army during this period and was eventually arrestedon May 21, 2008, after Task Force 211 intervened, at the armed forcesheadquarters in Taguig City.[261]Human Rights Watch is unaware of any police officers being disciplined orprosecuted for failing to make proper efforts to serve arrest warrants in casesof human rights violations. Nor have any military officers been disciplined forfailing to cooperate with the police. The court archived the Ramos case whenthe warrant against dela Cruz was not served within six months of issuance.Courts have similarly archived numerous cases despite strong evidence againstthe accused.Failureof the Special CourtsIn March 2007, Chief Justice Reynato Puno designated 99regional trial courts “special courts,” with orders to resolveextrajudicial killing cases within 90 days.[262] These courts weremandated to hold a continuous trial in such cases, as trials in the Philippinesinvolve scheduling several half-day sessions over several months, with manypostponements. The trial was to be completed within 60 days of when the casewas filed in court, and judgment was to be rendered within a further 30 days.If an extrajudicial killing case was sent (“raffled”) to a courtthat was not designated a “special court,” the court was still tocomply with these guidelines. Special courts were to submit a status report tothe chief justice on the tenth day of each month. These guidelines were neverimplemented.Writ of AmparoWe did everything for theirrelease but nothing happened…. The last case we filed was a motion forreview in the Supreme Court [in March 2009]. Until now it has not beenresolved…—Mother of Karen Empeño, who disappeared in2006, October 2009. The Supreme Court handed down its decision more than twoyears after the motion was filed, on May 31, 2011.Optimismover Supreme Court writs to compel military and other government agents torelease information about people in their custody has been dampened by thedifficulty in enforcing them and long court delays. The writs of amparo andhabeas data empower courts to issue orders to protect a person; produceinformation needed to establish a missing person’s whereabouts; inspectlikely detention facilities; update, rectify, suppress, or destroy informationabout a threatened person; and provide other relief to people whose right tolife, liberty, and security is unlawfully violated or threatened withviolation.[263] These remedies go beyond thebetter known writ of habeas corpus, which—in a bid to overcome thestate’s blanket denial of custody—empowers a court to free adetainee if the public body detaining the person does not prove he or she islawfully detained. Rather than merely ordering the release, authorities mayhave to exercise great diligence to determine the missing person’s whereabouts.In September 2008, the Court of Appeals granted writs forthe release of Karen Empeño, 22, Sherlyn Cadapan, 29, and Manuel Merino,57, whom the military arrested in mid-2006 in Haganoy, Bulacan.[264]The court ordered the military to “immediately release” the threedetainees[265]Several witnesses have testified to seeing the three in military custody.[266]Raymond Manalo, who together with his brother Reynaldo escaped military custodyin 2008, has told how he witnessed soldiers kill Merino and burn his body. Hehas also told of the horrific torture and sexual violence that he witnessedsoldiers force Cadapan and Empeño to endure.[267]Cadapan’s mother, Erlinda, told Human Rights Watch how she thinks ofManalo’s testimony of what her daughter was forced to endure:When I can recall [what] the military [had] been doing toher—as a lady being hung upside down when naked and being played like ananimal, it’s really painful for me.Despite this evidence indicating that the women are at graverisk, as of March 2009, the court had not enforced the writs.[268]On March 5, 2009, the Court of Appeals issued a resolutiondenying the Cadapan and Empeño families’ motion to citerespondents in contempt for failing to comply with the court’s order torelease the two women detainees. Justice Mendoza said in the resolution:Whilethe Court, in the dispositive portion, ordered the respondents “toimmediately RELEASE, or cause the release from detention the persons of SherlynCadapan, Karen Empeño and Manuel Merino,” the decision is not ipsofacto [or, by the fact itself] executory. The use of the term “immediately”does not mean that it is automatically executory. There is nothing in the Ruleon the Writ of Amparo which states that a decision rendered is immediatelyexecutory.[269]Further, the judge ruled that the parties’ petitionsfor review stopped the decision from being final and executory.[270]On March30, 2009, Cadapan and Empeño’s families filed a petition forreview of this decision by the Supreme Court. The court, which took more thantwo years to decide this urgent matter, ruled on May 31, 2011, that theappellate court erred in ruling that its directive to immediately releaseSherlyn, Karen, and Merino was not automatically executed and that there was noneed to file a motion for execution in amparo or habeas datacases—effectively removing a procedural delay in enforcing the writs.[271] The court found that the appellate courtalso erred when it did not specifically name the respondents that it found tobe responsible for the abduction and continued detention of the three and namedLt. Col. Anotado, Lt. Mirabelle, Gen. Palparan, Lt. Col. Boac, Arnel Enriquez,and Donald Caigas as apparently responsible. “They should thus be made tocomply with the September 17, 2008 Decision of the appellate court toimmediately release Sherlyn, Karen and Merino,” the court said.[272]In recognizing the urgency of such cases, the court said:Sincethe right to life, liberty and security of a person is at stake, theproceedings should not be delayed and execution of any decision thereon must beexpedited as soon as possible since any form of delay, even for a day, mayjeopardize the very rights that these writs seek to immediately protect.[273]The court did not explain its two-year delay in decidingthis matter, which further jeopardized the lives as well as the rights ofCadapan, Empeño, and Merino.[274]Weaknessof Human Rights InstitutionsThe widespread impunity enjoyed by perpetrators ofextrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances is exacerbated by theinadequacies of institutions charged with promoting human rights andaccountability, including the Commission on Human Rights, the Ombudsman, andthe Joint Monitoring Committee.During the past several years, agencies at all levels ofgovernment have created their own human rights mechanisms. For instance, thePNP and the AFP have created human rights desks within their agencies.[275]In addition, many barangay, municipal, provincial, and regional councilshave committees responsible for human rights. However, there are reallimitations, particularly at local levels. One member of a barangay humanrights committee told Human Rights Watch, “We don’t know how to dothe job. When we approach a local office, they tell us to go to other offices.We don’t know the processes.”[276]NationalCommission on Human RightsThe Commission on Human Rights (CHR) is an autonomousgovernment body charged with, among other things, investigating “on itsown or on complaint by any party, all forms of human rights violationsinvolving civil and political rights,” and recommending prosecution whenits investigation establishes a prima facie case of a violation.[277]In several recent cases that Human Rights Watch hasinvestigated, the CHR did not actively investigate the killing or “disappearance,”did not provide updates to relatives on the status of their investigations, andplaced significant burdens on family members who were applying for compensationfrom the commission. The CHR did not provide psychological support to the victims’relatives or witnesses in any of the investigated cases.The commission has a central office in Metro Manila, andregional and sub-regional offices throughout the rest of the country.[278]The commission’s effectiveness largely depends on thepersonnel at the regional or sub-regional office, or whether the central officehas taken a particular interest in the case.[279] Certain directorsare proactive in investigating extrajudicial killings and enforceddisappearances, carrying on their own investigation while actively following upwith other investigating agencies; others are not. In the course of HumanRights Watch’s research, only in one case did a family speak of the CHRactually visiting the crime scene.[280]In each of the cases from 2010 that Human Rights Watch investigated,commission staff did not—on even one occasion—providevictims’ families with an update of their investigation. LeonisaLabrador, whose husband was killed on September 3, 2010, allegedly by a soldierwith the assistance of a paramilitary member, said, “I filed the casewith the CHR but until now I have not received an update.”[281]Several relatives of victims said that the commission didnot actively investigate the killing or disappearance of their family member.[282]Atty. Alberto Sipaco, Jr. of the Region XI office told Human Rights Watch,“There is a problem of witnesses not coming into the office. People aregetting more silent.”[283]In each “disappearance” case discussed here, the CHR has not beenat all involved in assisting the families or investigating the alleged abuse,as is required under its mandate.[284]Sonia Santa Rosa recounted one conversation with the Region V CHR officefollowing her husband’s death:I told them that it’s their job to investigate. Butthey said that they had no fare, or transport, or allowance…. Theirinvestigation involved recording the events; as for what action should betaken, they did not do anything.…I asked for their help [whenI felt I was under military surveillance], but said they couldn’t doanything.[285]In each incident of a killing, the commission is supposed todetermine whether it was an extrajudicial killing and if so, provide the familywith 10,000 pesos [US$230] in compensation. This process often becomes anadditional burden for the victim’s family. Porcino Tamondez, whose sonwas killed in Davao City in August 2010, told Human Rights Watch: “Wefiled a complaint with them, but there were lots of requirements, each whichcost money [in transport] and time—they require a police report, a reportfrom the embalmer.”[286]Similarly, the family of an activist killed in Negros said:The CHR promised to give us financial help, but it’shard for us to process all the necessary requirements to claim the money. Weare just farmers, we live a very humble life here in the province and for us toget the claim the money would be very tedious and very hard for us.[287]The CHR does not provide any form of psychological supportto families of victims or witnesses. In a case in which a child witnessed thekilling, the mother said she requested counseling for her son and was told shewould have to pursue it at her own expense.[288]On occasion, CHR employees are subject to threats andharassment, particularly in cases in which the military or police areimplicated. One regional director told Human Rights Watch that someone calledhim and advised him to “go slow,” because the suspect is ahigh-ranking officer.[289]Officeof the OmbudsmanThe Office of the Ombudsman is a government body tasked withinvestigating complaints filed against government officers or employees andenforcing administrative, civil, and criminal liability.[290] Formallyindependent of the executive branch and the armed forces, it is in a positionto effectively investigate allegations of abuse by local government officials andsecurity force personnel. However, it has a poor record when it comes toresolving complaints brought to its attention.Human Rights Watch had found that the Office of theOmbudsman has done almost nothing to investigate the involvement of members ofthe security forces in extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearancesduring the administration of President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo. It is hopedthat under the new ombudsman, not yet appointed at this writing, the officewill actively investigate cases for prosecution.[291]JointMonitoring CommitteeThe Joint Monitoring Committee, created under theComprehensive Agreement on Respect for Human Rights and InternationalHumanitarian Law, which the government and NDFP signed in 1998, is charged withmonitoring implementation of the agreement by receiving complaints and makingrecommendations to the parties. The committee is to comprise six members andfour observers, who are to be representatives of human rights organizations,half of whom the government is to appoint, half of whom the NDFP is to appoint.[292]It is to operate by consensus, receiving complaints of violations, requestinginvestigation of complaints by the party concerned, and making recommendations.Although the committee was formed in 2004, peace negotiationscollapsed later that year and the government was not willing to convene thecommittee outside of peace talks. The government and NDFP-nominated sections ofthe committee continued to operate, however, receiving complaints and makingsome queries to act on them. The committee reconvened during the February 2011formal peace talks and discussed the supplemental guidelines for thecommittee’s operation, the process for consolidating complaints receivedthus far, and parameters for the conduct of joint investigations.[293]V. Legal FrameworkDuty toInvestigate and Prosecute Human Rights ViolationsUnder international law, the Philippines has a duty toinvestigate serious violations of international human rights law and punish theperpetrators.[294]As a state party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights(ICCPR), the Philippines has an obligation to ensure that any person whoserights are violated “shall have an effective remedy” whengovernment officials or agents have committed the violation. Those seeking aremedy shall have this right determined by competent judicial, administrative,or legislative authorities. When granted, these remedies shall be enforced bycompetent authorities.[295]In accordance with the UN Principles on the EffectivePrevention and Investigation of Extra-Legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions,all suspected cases of unlawful killings, including in response to complaintsby relatives and reliable reports, should have a “thorough, prompt andimpartial investigation.” This investigation should “determine thecause, manner and time of death, the person responsible, and any pattern orpractice which may have brought about that death.” The investigationshould result in a publicly available written report.[296]The United Nations has developed guidance for theinvestigation of extrajudicial executions, the Model Protocol for a LegalInvestigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions(“Minnesota Protocol”). The Minnesota Protocol, drawing on lessonslearned from major inquiries into serious human rights violations, detailsprocedures for conducting investigations consistent with international law.They include:Where the political views, religious or ethnic affiliation,or social status of the victim give rise to suspicion of government involvementor complicity in the death because of any one or combination of the followingfactors:Where thevictim was last seen alive in police custody or detention;Where the modusoperandi is recognizably attributable to government-sponsored death squads;Where persons in the government orassociated with the government have attempted to obstruct or delay theinvestigation of the execution;Where the physical ortestimonial evidence essential to the investigation becomes unavailable.… [A]n independent commission of inquiry or similarprocedure should also be established where a routine investigation isinadequate for the following reasons:The lackof expertise; orThe lack ofimpartiality; orThe importance of the matter; orThe apparent existence of apattern of abuse; orComplaints fromthe family of the victim about the above inadequacies or other substantialreasons.[297]ThePhilippines has not signed or ratified the 2006 International Convention forthe Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, which sets outspecific standards on preventing and punishing enforced disappearances.[298] The convention is based on the 1992 UNDeclaration on the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearances.[299] Enforced disappearances are a grave threatto the right to life and violate many fundamental rights, including the rightto liberty and security of the person and the right not to be subjected totorture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.[300]States should “take effective legislative, administrative, judicial orother measures to prevent and terminate acts of enforced disappearance”in their territory.[301] Acts of enforceddisappearance should be criminal offenses punishable by penalties that takeinto account their extreme seriousness.[302]Individuals who order extrajudicial killings or enforceddisappearances can be held criminally liable. In addition, under internationalprinciples of command (or superior) responsibility, superior officers can beheld criminally liable for the actions of their subordinates, when the superiorknew or had reason to know that their subordinate was about to commit or hadcommitted a crime, and the superior failed to take necessary and reasonablemeasures to prevent the crime or to punish the perpetrator.[303]PhilippineNational LawIn line with international standards, the PhilippineConstitution guarantees fundamental human rights, including the right to life,liberty, and security of person, the right to a fair trial, and a prohibitionagainst torture.[304]Most abuses detailed in this report would be covered bycriminal offenses found in the Philippines criminal code, including murder,kidnapping and serious illegal detention, and arbitrary detention.[305]The Anti-Torture Act of 2009 criminalizes “torture andother cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment,” and providesremedies and redress for victims of torture.[306] It prohibitssecret detention places, solitary confinement, incommunicado, or other forms ofdetention where torture may be carried out with impunity.[307] Asa preventative measure, it requires the PNP and the AFP to make an updated listof all detention facilities under their jurisdiction together with informationon persons detained.[308]Although partly addressed by other offenses, there is no specific crime ofenforced disappearance in the Philippine criminal code.Duties ofLaw Enforcement Officials and ProsecutorsUnder Philippine law, police have a duty to protect livesand property, investigate and prevent crimes, arrest criminal offenders, bringoffenders to justice and assist in their prosecution, and exercise powers ofarrest, search, and seizure in accordance with the law, among others.[309]PNP guidelines further detail the duties of police officers in crime sceneinvestigations, including interviewing witnesses, gathering physical evidence,and arresting suspects, among other tasks.[310]The Philippine Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards forPublic Officials and Employees mandates that all government employees,including police officers, attend to the problems of the public promptly.[311]The code further specifies that public officials have a duty to respond toletters and requests by the public within 15 working days of receipt.[312]UnderAdministrative Order 181 of 2007, the National Prosecution Service is directedto work closely with police and NBI investigators from the start of a criminalinvestigation into an extrajudicial killing until the termination of the casein court, and the PNP and NBI are directed to consult with prosecutors at allstages of such investigations.[313] This order provides that aseparate prosecutor should undertake the preliminary investigation of the case,to protect the independence of this process. In determining whether a killingis a political offense, agencies are to consider the political affiliation ofthe victim, the method of attack, and reports state agents are involved in thecommission of the crime or have acquiesced in them.[314]This order was never implemented in the absence of implementing rules andregulations.Further,Administrative Order 249 of 2008 provides that the Department of Justice is“to exhaust all legal means for the swift and just resolution of cases ofalleged human rights violations against political and media personalities, andleaders in the labor, urban poor, and agricultural sectors, and to ensure thatthe perpetrators are held accountable before the law.”[315]CommandResponsibilityCommand responsibility for criminal offenses was integratedinto Philippine criminal law in December 2009 by Republic Act No. 9851.[316]Some academics have argued that prior to the passage of this act, commandresponsibility was already incorporated into Philippine law.[317]However, to date, no superior officer has been tried as a matter of commandresponsibility in the Philippines.[318]Supervising officers can also be held administrativelyaccountable for neglect of duty under the doctrine of command responsibilityunder Executive Order No. 226 (1995).[319]VI. Role of the International CommunityBilateraltrade partners and donors to the Philippines should encourage the Philippinegovernment to vigorously investigate extrajudicial killings and enforceddisappearances, prosecute perpetrators regardless of position orrank—including under principles of command responsibility—andimplement systemic reforms to prevent such abuses in the future.Pressure from the international community was effective inreducing extrajudicial killings in the Philippines in the past. In 2006, at theheight of the killings under the administration of President Arroyo, the UnitedStates, Japan, and the European Union, among others, condemned the widespreadkillings in the Philippines and pressed the government to take action. Thisfollowed a high-profile visit from the then-UN special rapporteur onextrajudicial executions, Philip Alston, and his subsequent report. Althoughkillings continued, in 2008 the numbers fell drastically to about 30 percent ofprevious levels.[320]A month after the April 2009 follow-up report by Alston,President Arroyo abolished the Inter-Agency Legal Action Group, implementingone of Alston’s recommendations. Alston had reported that theinter-agency group had used prosecutions to dismantle civil societyorganizations and political groups that the government deemed to be frontorganizations for the Communist Party of the Philippines.[321]Despite the positive results that its pressure had generatedin the past, the international community has been near silent on extrajudicialkillings and enforced disappearances since President Aquino came to office inJune 2010.The US is the Philippines’ most influential ally and,together with Australia and Japan, one of its three largest bilateral donors,yet the Obama administration has been largely silent on extrajudicial killings.Up until the release of the US State Department’s annual human rightsreport in April 2011, the US government had failed to publicly raise militaryabuses including extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances sinceAquino took office.This silence extended to US Ambassador Harry Thomas,Jr.’s address on April 5, 2011, at the opening of the 27thBalikatan exercises—annual joint US-Philippines military exercisesdesigned to promote professionalism—which was just days before the launchof the human rights report. As these exercises indicate, the United Statesmaintains considerable military ties with the Philippines. The US armed forceshave access to specified land and sea areas under a Visiting Forces Agreement.In fiscal year for 2009-2010 the US government authorized US$32 million to beprovided to the Philippines under Foreign Military Financing for procurement ofUS military equipment, services, and training. Under US appropriations law,US$2 million is contingent on the Philippine government showing progress inaddressing human rights violations, including extrajudicial killings.[322]Australia signed a Status of Visiting Forces Agreement withthe Philippines in May 2007; this agreement remains before the PhilippineSenate. On June 17, 2010, the Australian embassy in Manila hosted a policyforum on human rights at which experts discussed the problem of extrajudicialkillings.In October 2009, the EU announced a €3.9 million(US$5.5 million) program to address extrajudicial killings and strengthen thecriminal justice system by providing training and technical assistance in2009-2011. A considerable component of this program was directed at improvingpolice investigation skills. The EU’s police expert worked withPhilippine police to develop a criminal investigation manual, a field manualfor crime scene investigations, and a case management manual, to develop atraining of trainers course—pursuant to which at least two investigatorsat each police station are to be trained by the end of 2011, and conductedworkshops on case management, which involved reviewing investigations of numerousextrajudicial killings.Ongoing plans exist to work with the Philippine NationalPolice to develop a new criminal intelligence system for extrajudicial killingsand enforced disappearance cases, including a national database of missingpersons corroborated with medical and dental records.However, since Aquino took office, EU ambassadors have notmatched this investment in training with persistent advocacy for improvements.Capacity building alone is not enough. None of the investigators haveimplemented recommendations of the EU’s police expert or Task Force Usig,which came out of the case management workshops.VII. Action Required on Extrajudicial Killingsand Enforced DisappearancesThe Philippine government should promptly act to investigateand prosecute each of the extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearancesoutlined in this report. Outlined below are several initial steps that thegovernment should take in relation to each of these abuses.Killingof Fernando “Nanding” Baldomero, July 5, 2010National Bureau of Investigation (NBI) investigatorsshould investigate military involvement in the killing of FernandoBaldomero. In particular, they should search for witnesses who sawsoldiers around Baldomero’s residence in the days and weeks beforehe was killed, and investigate threats the military made against him.Police and NBI investigators should actively work to servethe arrest warrant against Dindo Lovon Ancero.The Department of Justice should act to protect witnessesto the killing. In particular, officials in charge of witness protectionshould meet with witnesses and discuss what measures can be taken, withinthe confines of the witness protection program, which would be acceptablefor the witnesses and particularly the child witness.Internalpolice investigators should investigate police officers in Aklan whorefused to pursue evidence of military involvement and considerdisciplinary measures for insubordination or a criminal investigation forobstruction of justice or graft and corruption.In conjunction with other relevant government agencies,including the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD), theCommission on Human Rights (CHR) should offer the witnesses, particularlythe child witness, counseling and psycho-social support.Killingof Pascual Guevarra, July 9, 2010Police and NBI investigators should investigate theinvolvement of Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) staff andmilitary involvement in the killing, including subpoenaing any relevantpublic documents, interviewing soldiers, and compelling departmental staffto cooperate with the investigation.DPWH should investigate its staff for failing to cooperatewith a police investigation and, if appropriate, commence disciplinaryproceedings.The Justice Department should discuss with thevictim’s family and witnesses any concerns about their safety andtake steps to protect them if necessary.EnforcedDisappearance of Agustito Ladera and Renato Deliguer, August/September 2010Police and NBI investigators should vigorously investigatethe disappearance of Agustito Ladera and Renato Deliguer, including byinterviewing all people with information about the disappearances,canvassing for witnesses in areas surrounding the farms, questioningsoldiers who were involved in operations in the area, and having crimescene experts examine the Ladera and Deliguer farms.The AFP inspector general and provost marshal shouldindependently investigate the disappearances, publicly report findings,and commence disciplinary proceedings against any military personnel asappropriate.The CHR should actively investigate the disappearances,provide appropriate assistance to the families, and recommend to theJustice Department any charges that should be brought.Internal police investigators should investigate police officersin Surigao del Sur who failed to properly investigate these disappearancesand consider disciplinary measures for insubordination or a criminalinvestigation for obstruction of justice or graft and corruption.The AFP should investigate the commander of the 36thIB for failing to comply with a request to appear before the SangguniangPanlalawigan Committee on Laws and Justice and Human Rights in Surigao delSur on October 4, 2010, and, if appropriate, bring disciplinaryproceedings.The NBI and police directors should investigate regionaldirectors for failing to respond to correspondence from the SangguniangPanlalawigan Committee on Laws and Justice and Human Rights and issuedirectives to require personnel to comply with such inquiries in future.Killingof Reynaldo “Naldo” L. Labrador,September 3, 2010Police and NBI investigators should investigate militaryinvolvement in the killing of Reynaldo Labrador, including by canvassingfor witnesses who saw the alleged soldier who was with Roberto “Kulot”Repe and questioning military personnel.The Justice Department should discuss with thevictim’s family and witnesses any concerns about their safety andtake steps to protect them if necessary.The CHR should actively investigate the killing and threatsagainst the family and other residents in Paquibato district, provideappropriate assistance to the families, and recommend to the justicedepartment any charges that should be brought.Killingof Rene “Toto” Quirante, October 1, 2010The PNP should send an independent team to serve arrestwarrants against Dandy Quilanan, a CAFGU member, and Junel Librado, aformer member of the NPA allegedly working as a “guide” forthe military.NBI investigators should investigate the killing of ReneQuirante with the aim of identifying the six unidentified soldiers whomwitnesses have testified were involved in the killing.The Justice Department should discuss with thevictim’s family and witnesses any concerns about their safety andtake steps to protect them if necessary.The CHR should actively investigate the killing andthreats against the family, provide appropriate assistance to thefamilies, and recommend to the Justice Department any charges that shouldbe brought.PNP headquarters should investigate why policeinvestigators did not visit and examine the scene of the crime, and takesteps to ensure that investigators examine such crime scenes in future.Killingof Ireneo “Rene” Rodriguez, November 7, 2010NBI investigators should investigate Air Force involvementin the killing of Ireneo Rodriguez. In particular, they should investigatethe Air Force personnel that attempted to visit Rodriguez days before hewas killed and canvass for witnesses close to where he was killed.The AFP inspector general and provost marshal shouldindependently investigate the killing, publicly report findings, andcommence disciplinary proceedings against any Air Force personnel asappropriate.The Justice Department should discuss with thevictim’s family and witnesses any concerns about their safety andtake steps to protect them if necessary.The CHR should actively investigate the killing andthreats against the family, provide appropriate assistance to the family,and recommend to the Justice Department any charges that should bebrought.Enforced Disappearance of Alfredo Bucal,November 10, 2010NBI investigators shouldinvestigate Air Force and police involvement in the killing of AlfredoBucal. In particular, they should individually interview each member ofthe police and Air Force that was present at the checkpoint in barangayLutal, Tuy, Batangas and investigate how Bucal’s tricycle endedup in police possession.NBI investigators should investigate all reports of Air Forceand police personnel threatening witnesses with view to filing charges.The AFP and PNP inspector general and provost marshalshould independently investigate the disappearance and the shooting at thecheck point, publicly report findings, and commence disciplinaryproceedings against any military and police personnel as appropriate.Internalpolice investigators should investigate police officers in Batangas whodid not actively investigate this disappearance and consider disciplinarymeasures for insubordination or a criminal investigation for obstructionof justice or graft and corruption.The Justice Department should discuss with thevictim’s family and witnesses any concerns about their safety andtake steps to protect them if necessary.The CHR should actively investigate the killing andthreats against the family, provide appropriate assistance to the family,and recommend to the justice department any charges that should bebrought.Killingof Rudy and Rudyric Dejos, February 27, 2011NBI investigators should investigate military involvementin the killing of Rudy and Rudyric Dejos. In particular, they shouldinvestigate threats made by the military against Rudy Dejos.The AFP inspector general and provost marshal shouldindependently investigate the killings, publicly report findings, and commencedisciplinary proceedings against any military personnel as appropriate.They should also investigate the 39th IB’s presence atthe Dejos’ wake and funeral march, commence discipline commanders asappropriate, and issue directives not to attend such events other than inexceptional circumstances.Internal police investigators should investigate policeofficers in Sta. Cruz, Davao del Sur, who did not actively investigatethese killings and consider disciplinary measures for insubordination or acriminal investigation for obstruction of justice or graft and corruption.PNP headquarters should investigate reports that policeinvestigators did not visit and examine the scene of the crime, and thatthe local police director chose not to seek Scene of Crime Operatives(SOCO) assistance and take steps to ensure that investigators thoroughlyexamine such crime scenes in future.The Justice Department should discuss with thevictim’s family and witnesses any concerns about their safety andtake steps to protect them if necessary.The CHR should actively investigate the killing andthreats against the family, provide appropriate assistance to the family,and recommend to the Justice Department any charges that should bebrought.Killingof Bacar and Carmen Japalali, September 8, 2004TheDepartment of Justice should review the dismissal of charges against 24 ofthe 32 soldiers accused of killing Bacar and Carmen Japalali and considerbringing new charges.Police investigators should investigate the Regional TrialCourt judge who dismissed charges against 24 of the 32 accused soldiers,without a motion from the defense, for obstruction of justice or graft andcorruption.EnforcedDisappearance of Sherlyn Cadapan, Karen Empeño, and Manuel Merino, June26, 2006The Department of Justice should work with the police,NBI, and CHR to gather evidence and file charges against those that theSupreme Court has named as apparently responsible for the abduction andcontinued detention of Sherlyn Cadapan, Karen Empeño, and ManuelMerino—being Lt. Col. Anotado, Lt. Mirabelle, Gen. Palparan, Lt.Col. Boac, Arnel Enriquez, and Donald Caigas.Police and NBI investigators should urgently exert allnecessary measures to locate the missing three.NBI investigators should investigate military commandersfor involvement in the abduction and continued detention of the three andthe cover up of these crimes.The Department of Justice should act to protect witnessesto the abduction and continued detention.Internal police investigators should investigate policeofficers who refused to investigate this “disappearance” andconsider disciplinary measures for insubordination or a criminalinvestigation for obstruction of justice or graft and corruption.In conjunction with other relevant government agencies,including the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD), theCommission on Human Rights (CHR) should offer the witnesses and thevictims’ families counseling and psycho-social support.The Supreme Court should investigate why it took more thantwo years to decide on this case and take steps to avoid such delays onwrit of amparo and habeas data cases in the future.VIII. RecommendationsThe Philippine government could implement severalrecommendations immediately. Others should be instituted without delay but canbe expected to take longer to fully implement.To demonstrate resolve about ending extrajudicial killingsand enforced disappearances and holding perpetrators accountable, PresidentAquino should immediately:Orderthe Philippine National Police (PNP) and the National Bureau ofInvestigation (NBI) to take all necessary steps to investigate and serveoutstanding arrest warrants in the cases discussed in this report.Issue an executive order directing police and NBIinvestigators to vigorously pursue crimes allegedly committed by themilitary or themselves be subject to disciplinary measures.Order the inspector general and provost marshal of the AFPto investigate and report publicly within 90 days on the involvement ofmilitary personnel in extrajudicial killings, and to identify failureswithin the AFP investigative agencies to thus far prosecute officers underprinciples of command responsibility.Order the military to cease targeting all civilians, tocease the practice of denying military involvement in all extrajudicialkillings and to cease labeling leftist groups as fronts for the CPP-NPA,which places group members at considerable risk.Communicate fully to all military personnel thatofficers and soldiers who provide evidence or testimony in cases of humanrights violations that they will be eligible for witness protection andother measures to ensure their safety.Tothe President of the PhilippinesIssue an executive order directing police and NationalBureau of Investigation (NBI) investigators to vigorously pursue crimesallegedly committed by the military, or themselves be subject todisciplinary measures for insubordination or a criminal investigation forobstruction of justice or graft and corruption.Direct the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) to takeall necessary measures to end military involvement in extrajudicialkillings.Ensure AFP compliance at all levels with investigations ofother agencies, including the police, NBI, Commission on Human Rights(CHR), the ombudsman, and inquiries by legislative bodies and other publicofficials.Produce a plan for the implementation of therecommendations contained in the reports of the United Nations specialrapporteur on extrajudicial, summary, or arbitrary executions, the MeloCommission, and human rights NGOs reporting on extrajudicial killings.Ask congress to create a nationwide emergency assistancenumber for family members and witnesses to killings and“disappearances.”Sign the International Convention for the Protection ofAll Persons from Enforced Disappearance, and transmit to the Senate forprompt ratification.Invite the UN Working Group on Enforced or InvoluntaryDisappearances and the special rapporteur on human rights defenders tovisit the Philippines.To theDepartment of JusticeDirect the NBI to give priority to investigating allegedextrajudicial killings and other serious abuses that may involvegovernment officials, security forces, or militia forces.Direct the NBI to investigate the role of senior militaryofficials in extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances, includingretired Gen. Jovito Palparan—in line with a 2004 recommendation ofthe Committee on Civil, Political and Human Rights of the House ofRepresentatives that the Department of Justice investigate then-Col.Jovito Palparan and similar recommendations from several other bodies.Direct the NBI to investigate and report publicly within90 days on the failure of police to adequately investigate militaryinvolvement in extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances,including threats and harassment of investigators who try to conductproper investigations. Conduct such an investigation in a manner thatensures the safety of those providing information.Broaden the witness protection program to ensure that itis accessible, flexible, and properly funded. Implement mechanisms forwitnesses to change identity, transfer locations other than their placesof residence, including to other provinces, for as long as necessary. Thisprogram should provide protection for witnesses from the onset of a policeinvestigation until after trial, when necessary.Institute measures for witnesses to offer testimoniessafely, while protecting the rights of defendants, for example by usingvideo-conferenced testimonies, closed courtrooms, or depositions.In cooperation with the Department of Interior and LocalGovernment, circulate an explicit set of operational guidelines for thepolice regarding:Individual police officer’s duties to provideprotection to witnesses and individuals who report threats on theirlives;Information to provide to witnesses about the witnessprotection program and at what stages to provide this information;Clear sanctions for officers who fail to providenecessary protection in conformity with these guidelines.Order Task Force 211 or an alternative body in theDepartment of Justice tasked with monitoring extrajudicial killings andenforced disappearances to publish a list of all cases under its mandateand the status of the case. Publish regular and frequent status reports onall cases.Produce and disseminate information for victims of crimethat explains their legal rights, such as the state’s requirement topay for autopsies in alleged murder cases and to be informed of the statusof relevant investigations. Adopt mechanisms to facilitate the filing ofcomplaints by people whose rights have been infringed by law enforcementofficers.Improve access to social services such as medical care,including counseling, and legal aid for victims of and witnesses toserious human rights violations.To theDepartment of Interior and Local GovernmentDirect police to consult with prosecutors regarding thecollection of evidence in alleged extrajudicial killings and enforceddisappearances to bring all the perpetrators to justice.In cooperation with the Department of Justice, circulatean explicit set of operational guidelines for the police regarding:Individual police officer duties to provide protection towitnesses and individuals who report threats on their lives;Information to provide to witnesses about the witnessprotection program and at what stages to provide this information;Clear sanctions for officers who fail to providenecessary protection in conformity with these guidelines.To theSupreme CourtOrder all trial courts to comply with the procedures underSupreme Court Administrative Order 25-2007 in extrajudicial killing cases,which means they must:Complete trials in extrajudicial killing cases within 60days of when the case is filed in court, and render judgment within afurther 30 days.Submit to the chief justice of the Supreme Court a listof such cases and a report on their status monthly. The chief justiceshould publish a quarterly report on the status and progress of suchcases.To overcome difficulties identifying extrajudicial casesin which Administrative Order 25-2007 applies, order all trial courts toexpedite the disposition of murder, homicide, and kidnapping cases inwhich a police officer, member of the Armed Forces of the Philippines orparamilitary force, or government official is implicated, and to hear suchcases on a continuous basis.Order all courts to expedite writ of amparocases—including the Supreme Court—to hear and decide themwithin five days, be they in the first instance or on appeal.Tothe Philippine National PolicePromptlyand fully investigate all alleged cases of extrajudicial killings andenforced disappearances, including those discussed in this report.Seekto establish command responsibility during investigations of allegedextrajudicial killings, enforced disappearances, and other serious humanrights violations.ThroughTask Force Usig, work with all police agencies to coordinateinvestigations of extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearance cases,and to routinely follow up ongoing cases. In particularly complex orpolitically sensitive cases of human rights violations, bring in speciallyqualified investigators from outside the area to assist in theinvestigation.OrderTask Force Usig to publish a list of all cases under its mandate and thestatus of the cases. Publish regular and frequent status reports.Review“closed” cases of alleged extrajudicial killings that have notresulted in convictions with a view to identifying and obtaining newevidence and bringing prosecutions.Openhotlines or comparable lines of communication to receive anonymousinformation on abuses perpetrated by local government officials andsecurity force members.Sanctionofficers who do not thoroughly and promptly investigate alleged humanrights violations.Developa national database on missing persons, corroborated with medical anddental records.Draft specific protocol for police officers to ensure fullcooperation with prosecutors and other government officials, particularlyin human rights cases. The protocol should be incorporated in the relevantpolice manual.Make operational procedures, the investigators’manual, and other guidelines setting out duties of police officers easilyaccessible to the public. Ensure that the guidelines place a duty on lawenforcement officers to investigate alleged crimes irrespective of whethera formal complaint has been filed.Createstandards for file management of criminal cases including thechronological documentation of all police and judicial interventionmeasures that have been met.Sanctionofficers who fail to provide necessary witness protection in accordancewith the law.To the ArmedForces of the PhilippinesCease all targeting of civilians, and extrajudicialkillings and enforced disappearances of all persons in custody.Issue a public order to all forces stating clearly thatpolitical activists, unionists, and members of civil society groups are tobe distinguished from combatants involved in the armed conflict.Fully assist all prosecutorial authorities in apprehendingmembers of the armed forces, regardless of rank, implicated inextrajudicial killings and other serious human rights violations.End abusive uses of intelligence lists of suspectedNPA/CPP members, known as “orders of battle” and “watchlists.” Hold commanding officers responsible for abuses committedagainst individuals placed on such lists. Issue public guidelines thatwould permit a person who suspects they are named on such a list tochallenge their inclusion before a civilian authority.Fully comply with all inquiries by investigative bodiesincluding legislative committees and public officials.Cease the routine denial of involvement in reported casesof extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances. Instead, condemnsuch abuses and order the Inspector General and the Provost Marshal topromptly and impartially investigate.Suspend military personnel implicated in extrajudicialkillings or enforced disappearances while an investigation is ongoing.To theNational Bureau of InvestigationGivepriority to investigating alleged extrajudicial killings and other serioushuman rights violations that may involve government officials, securityforces, or militia forces.Investigate the involvement of senior military officialsin ordering and failing to investigate extrajudicial killings and enforceddisappearances, including the role of retired Gen. Jovito Palparan.To thePhilippine CongressConduct hearings on the involvement of the AFP in orderingand perpetrating extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances.Provide necessary protections to all those who provide information.Enact legislation to prohibit and protect against enforceddisappearances.Conduct committee hearings on best practices forpreserving the testimonies of witnesses to extrajudicial killings andenforced disappearances and enact appropriate legislation to establish thenecessary mechanisms for this purpose.In line with House bills 265 and 1123 of the 14thCongress, enact legislation mandating autopsy examinations in all cases ofsuspected extrajudicial killings.Pass a resolution urging the president to promptly signthe International Convention for the Protection of All Persons fromEnforced Disappearance and file it with the Senate for ratification.To theCommission on Human RightsInvestigate and report publicly and promptly on cases ofalleged extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances.Publish regular and frequent lists of all cases of killingsand abductions in which police, military, or other government officialsare suspected, including when the case was referred to the office and thestatus of the case.Investigate and report publicly within 90 days onobstacles to investigations of extrajudicial killings and the enforceddisappearances, particularly collusion between the police and military.Provide all necessary safeguards to those willing to provide information.To theOffice of the OmbudsmanInvestigate police, military, and other governmentofficials, regardless of rank, suspected of perpetrating extrajudicialkillings and enforced disappearances.Publish regular and frequent lists of all cases ofkillings and abductions in which police, military, or other governmentofficials are suspected, including when the case was referred to the officeand the status of the case.To the NewPeople’s Army/Communist Party of the PhilippinesCease all targeting of civilians, and the killing of allpersons in custody.Consistentwith the above, provide safe passage to police and NBI investigators whoare investigating extrajudicial killings, enforced disappearances, orother serious abuses.Tothe Joint Monitoring CommitteeExpedite the drafting of supplemental guidelines for thecommittee’s operation, the process for consolidating complaintsreceived thus far, and parameters for the conduct of joint investigationsbetween the NDFP and the government monitoring committees. Ensure that allprocesses and investigations are transparent.Promptly commence conducting joint investigations intoserious abuses by all sides.ToDonors and External Partners, including the United States, European Union,Japan, Australia, the World Bank, and the Asian Development BankTo promote human rights, the rule of law, and goodgovernance in the Philippines, press the Philippine government to initiateinvestigations into the involvement of senior military officials inextrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances perpetrated by militarypersonnel, and prosecute the perpetrators.All programs to assist the PNP or AFP should vet allparticipating police officers and military personnel to ensure that theyhave not been implicated or complicit in extrajudicial executions,enforced disappearances, or other serious human rights abuses. The vettingprocess should be transparent.Offer to support external law enforcement assistance withinvestigations into serious human rights violations, particularly inforensic analysis, witness protection, case preparation, and tracing of fugitives.Support NGOs that work with victims’ families toclosely follow individual cases and push for thorough investigations,filing of cases, execution of arrest warrants, and protection of thefamilies and witnesses.To theUnited States, European Union Member States, Japan, Australia, and otherConcerned GovernmentsPublicly press the Philippine government to improve efforts toinvestigate and prosecute members of the military for extrajudicial killingsand enforced disappearances, including those liable under commandresponsibility. Be clear that failing to conduct full investigations andprosecutions will increasingly call into question aspects of the relationshipwith the Philippines.Through embassies in Manila, monitor Philippine government investigationsof alleged extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances.Offer to work with the Philippine government to provide witnessprotection abroad for witnesses who are under grave threat, in particularwhistleblowers within the AFP.To the UnitedStates GovernmentEncourage the US Millennium Challenge Corporation tospecifically include the Philippines’ record in failing to prosecuteextrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances as an indicator of thecountry’s progress in the areas of civil liberties, politicalrights, accountability, and the rule of law. The Millennium ChallengeCorporation should condition future funding to the Ombudsman’sOffice on the latter’s prosecution of government officials forabuses within the office’s mandate.The US Pacific Command, US Agency for InternationalDevelopment (USAID), Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Department ofDefense, Drug Enforcement Agency, International Criminal InvestigativeTraining Assistance Program (ICITAP) , and all other US agencies that workwith the PNP or AFP should vet all police officers and military personnelenrolling in US-funded programs in accordance with the Leahy Law to ensurethat participants have not been implicated or complicit in extrajudicialexecutions, enforced disappearances, or other serious human rights abuses.The US government should consult NGOs and the Philippine Commission onHuman Rights during this vetting process.Closelymonitor the progress and effectiveness of police investigations intomilitary abuses, particularly alleged extrajudicial killings and enforceddisappearances, and the cooperation of the AFP with these investigations.If there is no progress in prosecuting military personnel for involvementin extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances, the US shouldsuspend the next annual bilateral Balikatan exercises.IX. AppendixLetter from Human Rights Watch to Justice Secretary Leila de LimaClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageLetter from Human Rights Watch to the Central Committee of theCommunist Party of the PhilippinesClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageLetter to Human Rights Watch from the Office of the OmbudsmanClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageClick to expand ImageIX. AcknowledgmentsThis report was researched and written by Jessica Evans,researcher in the Asia Division of Human Rights Watch.Diana Parker, associate for the Asia Division, providedresearch, administrative and technical assistance. Veejay Villafranca, a photojournalist,provided research assistance together with his professional photography.Elaine Pearson, deputy Asia director, edited the report.James Ross, legal and policy director, provided legal review. Danielle Haas,senior editor, provided program review. Mai Nguyen, an intern with the AsiaDivision, provided research assistance. Kathy Mills and Fitzroy Hepkins providedproduction assistance for the report.Human Rights Watch would like to thank the victims,families, and eyewitnesses who agreed to talk to us for this report. We areindebted to the many NGOs, lawyers, and activists who generously assisted usduring our research. We would also like to thank several independent expertreviewers who provided comments and feedback on our work.[1]NikkoDizon and Alex Pal, “Aquino vows closure to human rights killings,”Philippine Daily Inquirer, June 1, 2010, http://newsinfo.inquirer.net/inquirerheadlines/nation/view/20100601-273180/Aquino-vows-closure-to-human-rights-killings(accessed May 8, 2011).[2] Theisland of Mindanao in the southern Philippines has a large Muslim populationknown as Moros. Various Moro armed opposition groups, unconnected to theCommunist insurgency, are engaged in armed hostilities for independence orautonomy against the government. These include the Moro Islamic LiberationFront (MILF), the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF), and the Abu SayyafGroup (ASG).[3] TheNDFP, established in 1973, says it is the “united front organization ofthe Filipino people fighting for national independence and for the democraticrights of the people,” including the CPP-NPA. National Democratic Frontof the Philippines, “About the NDFP,” undated, http://ndfp.net/joomla/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=21&Itemid=27(accessed May 7, 2011).[4]“AFP Gears Up for 2011 with ‘Bayanihan,’” AFP press release, December 31, 2010, http://www.afp.mil.ph/0/news/31Dec-AFPGEARSUP.pdf(accessed May 6, 2011).[5] RepublicAct No. 7636, which took effect on October 11, 1992, repealed theAnti-Subversion Act, R.A. 1700, which had outlawed the CPP in 1957.[6] For adiscussion of the various armed groups in the Philippines, see Soliman Santosand Paz Verdades Santos, Primed and Purposeful: Armed Groups and HumanSecurity Efforts in the Philippines (Geneva: South-South Network forNon-State Armed Group Engagement and the Small Arms Survey, 2010). Thesplintering of the CPP-NPA also affected nongovernmental organizations. In 1992the leader of the CPP-NPA, Jose Maria Sison, sought to reassert certain Maoistprinciples into the movement, including the primacy of the rural armed struggle, and rejecting more moderate positions of political engagement.Those who supported Sison have been labeled “reaffirmists” or“RAs,” and thosewho rejected this realignment of the CPP-NPA have been labeled“rejectionists” or “RJs.” This same division remainsevident in nongovernmental organizations and political parties today. See HumanRights Watch, The Philippines — Scared Silent: Impunity forExtrajudicial Killings in the Philippines, June 2007, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2007/06/27/scared-silent-0,pp. 11-17. For discussion of this and other developments since the 1992 division, see International CrisisGroup, “The Communist Insurgency in the Philippines: Tactics andTalks,” Asia Report No. 202, February 14, 2011, http://www.crisisgroup.org/en/regions/asia/south-east-asia/philippines/202-the-communist-insurgency-in-the-philippines-tactics-and-talks.aspx(accessed May 7, 2011), pp. 6-10.[7] CarlaGomez, “NPA admits killing sugar farmer inNegros,” Philippine Daily Inquirer, July 27, 2010, http://newsinfo.inquirer.net/breakingnews/regions/view/20100727-283506/NPA-admits-killing-sugar-farmer-in-Negros,(accessed May 6, 2011).[8]UNHuman Rights Council, Report of the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial,summary or arbitrary executions, Philip Alston, Mission to the Philippines,A/HRC/8/3/Add.2, April 16, 2007, http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G08/130/01/PDF/G0813001.pdf(accessed May 7, 2011), p. 14.[9] “Anothervictim in Davao ambush dies,” Sun Star, August 8, 2010, http://www.sunstar.com.ph/network/another-victim-davao-ambush-dies(accessed May 6, 2011). Labawan believes that the NPA was targeting him.Similarly, on July 31, 2010, two NPA members shot and killed Leonardo“Andot” Behing, a leader of LUPACA (Lumadnong Pakigbisog saCARAGA), which is reported to have been formerly affiliated with the AFP andnow largely a bandit group, in Sibagat town, Agusan del Sur. According to newsreports, Maria Malaya, spokesperson of the NPA’s NorthEastern Mindanao Regional Committee said,“Behing was a legitimate military target for his anti-revolutionary workand crimes against the people like rape, kidnapping, illegal logging andharassments.” Franklin A. Caliguid, “NPAadmits killing Manobo man over ‘crimes against people,’” Philippine Daily Inquirer, August 3, 2010, http://newsinfo.inquirer.net/breakingnews/regions/view/20100803-284695/NPA-admits-killing-Manobo-man-over-crimes-against-people(accessed May 6, 2011).[10] Knownas the Revolutionary Proletarian Army-Alex Boncayao Brigade (RPA-ABB). The NPAcalled on RPA-ABB members to “desist from doing its worst against themainstream revolutionary organization and surrender so that any appeal theywant to present could be processed.” Edgar Cadagat, “Slain RPA-ABB Leader Led Hold-Up Gang, Death Squad in NegrosCombined,” Daily Bulletin, November 9, 2010, http://www.ndb-online.com/nov0910/negros-local-news/Slain+RPA-ABB+Leader+Led+Hold-Up+Gang-Death+Squad+in+Negros+Combined(accessed May 6, 2011).[11]“NPA hitmen kill former comrade,” Dateline, November 3,2010, http://dateline.ph/2010/11/03/npa-hitmen-kill-former-comrade/ (accessedMay 6, 2011); “RPA-ABB, Karapatan hit Negroskillings,” Dateline, November 10, 2010, http://dateline.ph/tag/rpa-abb/(accessed May 6, 2011); Edgar Cadagat, “SlainRPA-ABB Leader Led Hold-Up Gang, Death Squad in Negros Combined,” DailyBulletin, November 9, 2010, http://www.ndb-online.com/nov0910/negros-local-news/Slain+RPA-ABB+Leader+Led+Hold-Up+Gang-Death+Squad+in+Negros+Combined(accessed May 6, 2011).[12] HumanRights Watch interview with Lt. Col. Oliver Artuz and 2nd Lt. Dueñas, 39th IB, Davao del Sur, March 9, 2011.[13] HumanRights Watch interview with a representative of the 702nd IB, NuevaEcija, February 26, 2011.[14] HumanRights Watch interview with a police investigator, place name and datewithheld.[15] For adiscussion of the paramilitary and militia forces in the Philippines, see HumanRights Watch, The Philippines — “They Own the People”: The Ampatuans, State-Backed Militias, and Killings in the SouthernPhilippines, November 2010, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2010/11/16/they-own-people-0,pp. 19-24.[16] Ibid.[17] USState Department, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights,and Labor, “Country Reports on Human Rights Practices — 2010: ThePhilippines,” April 8, 2011, http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/2010/eap/154399.htm(accessed May 7, 2011). This figure does not include members of paramilitaryforces.[18] Thedraft Comprehensive Agreement on Social and Economic Reforms (CASER) may becompleted and signed by the Panels in September 2011; the draft ComprehensiveAgreement on Political and Constitutional Reforms (CAPCR) may be completed andsigned by the Panels in February 2012; and lastly the draft ComprehensiveAgreement on End of Hostilities and Disposition of Forces (CAEHDF) may becompleted and signed by the Panels in June 2012. The Joint Statement ofGPH-CPP-NPA-NDF at the Conclusion of the Current Round of Peace Talks in Oslo,Norway, February 21, 2011, http://gphndfpeacetalks.wordpress.com/2011/03/08/joint-statement-of-gph-cpp-npa-ndf-at-the-conclusion-of-the-current-round-of-peace-talks-in-oslo-norway/(accessed May 6, 2011).[19] Ibid.[20]SeeUN Human Rights Council, Report of the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial,summary or arbitrary executions, Philip Alston, Addendum: Follow-up countryrecommendations – Philippines, A/HRC/11/2/Add.8, April 29, 2009, http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrcouncil/docs/11session/A.HRC.11.2.Add.8.pdf(accessed May 7, 2011); UN Human Rights Council, Report of the SpecialRapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, Philip Alston,Mission to the Philippines, A/HRC/8/3/Add.2, April 16, 2007; Human RightsWatch, Scared Silent; and Amnesty International, “Philippines:Political Killings, Human Rights and the Peace Process,” AI Index: ASA35/006/2006, August 15, 2006 http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/ASA35/006/2006/en(accessed May 7, 2011).[21]Thenumber of alleged extrajudicial killings recorded during Arroyo’s2001—2010 presidency varies greatly between organizations, from about 150victims according to the lowest government figures to about 1200 according to Karapatan,a Philippine NGO. See UN Human Rights Council, Report of the Special Rapporteuron extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, Philip Alston, Addendum:Follow-up country recommendations – Philippines, A/HRC/11/2/Add.8, April29, 2009; Atty. Al A. Parreño, “Report on the PhilippineExtrajudicial Killings (2001 – August 2010),”http://www.scribd.com/doc/37530361/FULL-Report-on-the-Philippine-EJKs-2001-2010,(accessed July 6, 2011); Karapatan, “Karapatan Monitor,”January-March 2010, http://www.karapatan.org/files/2010_KarapatanMonitor_Jan-March.pdf(accessed July 6, 2011).[22] Fordiscussion of the work of the Melo Commission, see Human Rights Watch, ScaredSilent, pp. 18-22.[23]Independent Commission to Address Media and Activist Killings, “Report,”January 22, 2007, p.53.[24]See Human Rights Watch, Scared Silent, p. 20.[25] Theletter went on to say, “That there was a marked increase in the incidenceof killings in all the areas where Gen. Palparan was assigned—which headmitted—should be enough to justify his investigation. Indeed, Gen.Palparan’s statements and cavalier attitude about the killings shouldhave warranted early on at the very least administrative or disciplinaryactions by his superiors.” Letter from Jose A. R. Melo, chairman of theMelo Commission, to Eduardo R. Ermita, executive secretary, August 21, 2007,pp. 3, 9.[26] Arroyodid implement an earlier recommendation, seeing to the passage in December 2009of a law providing for command responsibility as a basis for criminalliability; however, this has not yet been applied. Republic Act No. 9851 of thePhilippines. See also Republic Act No. 9745 of thePhilippines, sec. 13.[27] Administrative Order No. 211, November 26, 2011, sec. 1.[28] Letter from Ricardo Blancaflor, former chairman, Task Force 211, to Human Rights Watch, May 27, 2011. On June 10, 2008,Joel Flores was convicted of murder for the May 16, 2006 killing of Bayan Munasecretary general Jose Doton. On March 6, 2009, Rafael Cardeño wasconvicted of murder for the December 31, 2001 killing of reported whistleblowerand Young Officer’s Union spokesperson Baron Cervantes. On April 29,2009, Joy Anticamara was convicted of homicide for the July 18, 2006 killing ofbroadcaster Armando Pace. On January 29, 2010, Robert Woo was convicted ofmurder, as an accomplice, of the May 4, 2005 killing of radio commentator KleinCantoneros.[29]Justice Department Order 848.[30]Philippine National Police Commission, Resolution No. 2009-072,“Approving the activation of the human rights desks at the differentlevels of command in the Philippine National Police,” February, 2009.“All AFP units ordered to set up human rights office,” GMA News,November 15, 2010,http://www.gmanews.tv/story/206015/all-afp-units-ordered-to-set-up-human-rights-office(accessed May 13, 2011).[31] Forinstance, a police officer at the PNP provincial headquarters in Nueva Ecijasaid that they did not have a human rights desk there. He said, “Maybethere is one at the regional headquarters?” Human Rights Watch interviewwith P/Supt. Eduardo B. Soriano, Nueva Ecija, February 25, 2011.[32] NikkoDizon and Alex Pal, “Aquino vows closure to human rights killings,”Philippine Daily Inquirer, June 1, 2010, http://newsinfo.inquirer.net/inquirerheadlines/nation/view/20100601-273180/Aquino-vows-closure-to-human-rights-killings(accessed May 8, 2011).[33] InauguralSpeech of President Benigno S. Aquino III in English, June 30, 2010, http://www.philstar.com/Article.aspx?articleid=589090(accessed May 8, 2011).[34]International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from EnforcedDisappearance (Convention against EnforcedDisappearance),adopted September 23, 2005, E/CN.4/2005/WG.22/WP.1/Rev.4 (2005), art. 2. Seealso United NationsDeclarationon the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearances (Declarationagainst Enforced Disappearances),adopted December 18, 1992, G.A. res.47/133, 47 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 207, U.N. Doc. A/47/49 (1992), preamble.[35]UNHuman Rights Council, Report of the Special Rapporteur onextrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, Philip Alston, A/HRC/14/24, May20, 2010,http://www2.ohchr.org/english/issues/executions/annual.htm(accessed December 17, 2010). See especially, “Killingsby Law Enforcement Officials or Other Security Forces.”[36]SenateCommittee Report No. 150, submitted jointly by the Committees on Public Orderand Illegal Drugs, Justice and Human Rights, and Public Information and MassMedia on October 12, 2006, http://www.senate.gov.ph/lisdata/62415173!.pdf(accessed June 14, 2011), p. 9; Julie V. Tolentino, “Evenmagistrates and lawyers are targets,” Manila Times, July 17, 2007,http://fromthenews.net/even-magistrates-and-lawyers-are-targets.htm (accessedJune 14, 2011); Johann Hein B. Arpon, “Wife of Slain Lawyer Cries Out forJustice” Bultalat, March 19-25, 2006, http://www.bulatlat.com/news/6-7/6-7-wife.htm(accessed June 14, 2011); US State Department, Bureau of Democracy, HumanRights, and Labor, “Country Reports on Human Rights Practices —2005: The Philippines,” March 8, 2006, http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/2005/61624.htm(accessed June 14, 2011).[37] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative, “Rosita,” a pseudonym,Aklan, March 22, 2011.[38] HumanRights Watch interview, name, place and date of interview withheld. A familymember told Human Rights Watch that several witnesses had told members of thefamily that they had seen uniformed men watching Baldomero’s home in theweeks prior to the killing, but that they were scared to testify: Human RightsWatch interview with Ernan Baldomero, Aklan, March 23, 2011.[39]Republicof the Philippines v. Dindo Ancero Y Lovon and John Does, Order, RegionalTrial Court, 6th Judicial Region, Branch 2, Kalibo, Aklan, January10, 2011, copy on file with Human Rights Watch.[40] HumanRights Watch interviews with a relative, “Rosita,” Aklan, March 22,2011 and Ernan Baldomero, Aklan, March 23, 2011.[41] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative, “Rosita,” Aklan, March 22,2011.[42] HumanRights Watch interview with the Clerk of Court, Regional Trial Court, SixthJudicial Region, Branch 2, Kalibo, Aklan, Lina S. Candoleta, Kalibo, Aklan,March 22, 2011.[43] Policefiled charges against Baldomero in 2005 and 2007 alleging involvement inkillings and arson allegedly perpetrated by the NPA. Police records indicatethat Baldomero was “neutralized” when he was arrested on August 18,2005, indicating that they believed he was an NPA member: Undated documententitled, “MUG SHOTS” and “BIOGRAPHICAL PROFILE”obtained from the Philippine National Police on March 22, 2011, on file withHuman Rights Watch. The charges were dismissed. A relative and colleague alsospoke of a “tit for tat” between a military commander from the 47thIB’s civil military operation and Baldomero over the radio station, justweeks before he was killed, in which the military official spoke of Baldomero,as a Bayan Muna leader, being a legal front of the CPP-NPA and a communistterrorist. Human Rights Watch interview with a relative, “Rosita,”and an activist colleague, George Calaor, provincial chair of Bagong AlyansangMakabayan (BAYAN), Aklan, March 22, 2011.[44]Memorandum from Chief of Police of Lezo, Aklan, PSI. JoelC. Triñanes to Aklan Provincial Director, July 22, 2010.[45] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative, “Rosita,” Aklan, March 22, 2011.[46] Manyfarmers live on the reservation as it extends over agricultural land.[47] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative, place name and date withheld.[48]Agrarian Reform Beneficiaries Association (ARBA) and Alyansa ng Magbubukid naNagkakaisa (ALMANA).[49] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative, place name and date withheld; HumanRights Watch interview with PO3 Ricardo Lopez, Nueva Ecija, February 26, 2011.[50] HumanRights Watch interview with PO3 Ricardo Lopez, Nueva Ecija, February 26, 2011. Thetask force comprised several agencies, including police representatives fromvarious stations and the CIDG, together with the NBI.[51] HumanRights Watch interview with a representative of the 702nd IB, NuevaEcija, February 26, 2011.[52] HumanRights Watch interview with several representatives from G7, Fort Magsaysay,February 26, 2011.[53] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative, place name and date withheld.[54] Ibid.[55] It isdifficult for the families to identify precisely when their relatives went missingbecause they would often go to the farm for some days. The Deliguer family onlyrealized Renato was missing after he did not return home after more than aweek.[56] HumanRights Watch interview with Hipolito P. Deliguer, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur,March 15, 2011.[57] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Ladera, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur,March 15, 2011.[58] Ibid.[59]Extract copy from the police blotter, Marihatag Police Station, September 15,2010, Entry 206, Page 169.[60] HumanRights Watch interview with Hipolito P. Deliguer, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur,March 15, 2011.[61] Ibid.[62] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Ladera, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur,March 15, 2011.[63] HumanRights Watch interview with Hipolito P. Deliguer, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur,March 15, 2011.[64] Ibid.[65] Ibid.; Human Rights Watch interview with a relative of Ladera, SanAgustin, Surigao del Sur, March 15, 2011.[66] Ibid.[67]Memorandum from Provincial Director, Surigao del Sur Police Provincial Office,to Regional Director, Police Regional Office 13, October 8, 2010.[68] Ibid.[69] HumanRights Watch interview with Chief Investigator Joel Vertudazo, Tandag, March14, 2011.[70] HumanRights Watch interview with Hipolito P. Deliguer, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur,March 15, 2011. Human Rights Watch interview with a relative of Ladera, SanAgustin, Surigao del Sur, March 15, 2011.[71]Excerpt from the minutes of the 14th regular session of the 16thSangguniang Panlalawigan of Surigao del Sur, Resolution No. 115 and 116, Seriesof 2010, October 5, 2010.[72] Ibid.[73] HumanRights Watch interview with Leonisa Labrador, Davao City, March 10, 2011; HumanRights Watch interview with Pronillo Soriño, a former barangaycaptain, Davao City, March 10, 2011.[74] HumanRights Watch interview with Leonisa Labrador, Davao City, March 10, 2011.[75]Affidavit of Reylun Labrador, October 8, 2010.[76] HumanRights Watch interview with Leonisa Labrador, Davao City, March 10, 2011; HumanRights Watch interview with Pronillo Soriño, a former barangaycaptain, Davao City, March 10, 2011. The note was given to the police.[77] HumanRights Watch interview with Pronillo Soriño, a former barangaycaptain, Davao City, March 10, 2011.[78] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Kulot, Davao del Norte, March 12,2011. This relative told how Kulot had been engaging in various criminalactivities and had become a problem for the family and the community, so theysent him off to the NPA to learn discipline. After less than a year, in 2009,he defected to the Philippine Army and had been working with them until he waskilled in December 2010.[79] HumanRights Watch interview with Pronillo Soriño,a former barangay captain, Davao City, March 10, 2011.[80] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Kulot, Davao del Norte, March 12,2011.[81] KaParago of the 1st Pulang Bagani Company, Merardo Arce Command, SouthernMindanao Regional Operations Command of the NPA announced in a press releasethat, “Last November 28, Red partisans carried out the standing orderagainst Roberto Kulot Repe (Serial Number DS-G10-000241) in Barangay Paquibato,Davao City.” “1003rd Brigade-10th ID-AFP death squad operativepunished; 1003rd Bde-AFP Tutaan as AFP human rights chief, a mockery to humanrights,” NPA press release, December 9, 2010, http://theprwcblogs.blogspot.com/2010/12/1003rd-brigade-10th-id-afp-death-squad.html(accessed May 3, 2011). A former barangay captain confirmed that Repehad been killed: Human Rights Watch interview with Pronillo Soriño, aformer barangay captain, Davao City, March 10, 2011.[82] HumanRights Watch interview with Leonisa Labrador, Davao City, March 10, 2011.[83] HumanRights Watch interview with “Jaime,” a pseudonym, place name anddate withheld. Human Rights Watch interview with “Elsa,” apseudonym, a relative of Quirante, Guihulngan, March 19, 2011.[84] HumanRights Watch interview with “Jaime,” place name and date withheld.Several witnesses have corroborated this account. Resolution Republic of thePhilippines v. Junel Librado and others, Regional Trial Court, 7thJudicial Region, Branch 64, Guihulngan, Negros Oriental, signed by associateprovincial prosecutor, Amelia Lourdes U. Mendoza and approved by ProvincialProsecutor, Diosdado D. Hermosa, December 20, 2010; Memorandum, PoliceInvestigation Report, from SPO2 Samuel C. Cañete to provincialprosecutor, October 22, 2010.[85] HumanRights Watch interview with “Elsa,” a relative of Quirante,Guihulngan, March 19, 2011.[86] HumanRights Watch interview with “Jaime,” place name and date withheld.Human Rights Watch interview with “Elsa,” a relative of Quirante,Guihulngan, March 19, 2011. Resolution Republic of the Philippines v. JunelLibrado and others, Regional Trial Court, 7th Judicial Region,Branch 64, Guihulngan, Negros Oriental, signed by Associate ProvincialProsecutor, Amelia Lourdes U. Mendoza and approved by provincial prosecutor,Diosdado D. Hermosa, December 20, 2010; Memorandum, Police InvestigationReport, from SPO2 Samuel C. Cañete to provincial prosecutor, October 22,2010.[87] HumanRights Watch interview with “Jaime,” place name and date withheld.Several witnesses have corroborated this account. Resolution Republic of thePhilippines v. Junel Librado and others, Regional Trial Court, 7thJudicial Region, Branch 64, Guihulngan, Negros Oriental, signed by associateprovincial prosecutor, Amelia Lourdes U. Mendoza and approved by provincialprosecutor, Diosdado D. Hermosa, December 20, 2010; Memorandum, PoliceInvestigation Report, from SPO2 Samuel C. Cañete to provincialprosecutor, October 22, 2010.[88] HumanRights Watch interview with “Elsa,” a relative of Quirante,Guihulngan, March 19, 2011.[89] HumanRights Watch interview with a leader of an allied progressive organization,Guihulngan, March 19, 2011.[90]Warrant of Arrest, Republic of the Philippines v. Junel Librado and others, RegionalTrial Court, 7th Judicial Region, Branch 64, Guihulngan, NegrosOriental, February 1, 2011.[91] HumanRights Watch interview with Guihulngan City Prosecutor Constantino Trinidad,Guihulngan, March 21, 2011.[92] HumanRights Watch interview with “JR,” a pseudonym, a relative ofQuirante, Guihulngan, March 20, 2011.[93] HumanRights Watch interviews with a relative, Batangas, February 19, 2011; Isidro T.Rodriguez, Ireneo’s father, Batangas, February 23, 2011; Lt. Col. Vincent B. Incognito, commander, 730th Combat Group,Philippine Air Force, Nasugbu, Batangas, February 23, 2011.[94] HumanRights Watch interview with Lt. Col. Vincent B.Incognito, commander, 730th Combat Group, Philippine Air Force, Nasugbu,Batangas, February 23, 2011.[95] HumanRights Watch interview with Gigi Bautista, Calaca, February 19, 2011.[96] HumanRights Watch interview with Isidro T Rodriguez, Ireneo’s father, Calaca,Batangas, February 23, 2011.[97] HumanRights Watch interviews with a relative, Batangas, February 19, 2011.[98] HumanRights Watch interview with Lt. Col. Vincent B. Incognito, commander, 730thCombat Group, Philippine Air Force, Nasugbu, Batangas, February 23, 2011.[99] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative, Calaca, February 19, 2011.[100] HumanRights Watch interview with Lt. Col. Vincent B.Incognito, commander, 730th Combat Group, Philippine Air Force, Nasugbu,Batangas, February 23, 2011.[101] Ibid.[102] HumanRights Watch interview with a local government official, place name and datewithheld.[103] HumanRights Watch interview with relatives of Fred Bucal, Batangas, Nasugbu,February 19, 2011.[104] Ibid.[105] HumanRights Watch interview with Lt. Col. Vincent B.Incognito, commander, 730th Combat Group, Philippine Air Force, Nasugbu,Batangas, February 23, 2011. Human Rights Watch interview with PNP Fetizananand Castilla, Batangas, February 21, 2011. See also “2 NPA patay saencounter (2 killed in NPA encounter),”Pilipino Star Ngayon, November11, 2011, http://www.philstar.com/Article.aspx?articleId=628921&publicationSubCategoryId=49(accessed May 3, 2011).[106] HumanRights Watch interview with relatives of Fred Bucal, Batangas, Nasugbu,February 19, 2011.[107] HumanRights Watch interview with Mercy Dejos, Davao del Sur, March 12, 2011.[108] Ibid.[109] Ibid.[110] The policespot report states: “The gunmen were unidentified but believe[d] to bemembers of the New People’s Army under the command of Roberto CastilloteAKA Kumander Marvin of Front Committee 51:” Note from Maj. DemetriusEmuardo Taypin, Police chief inspector, Sta. Cruz, Davao del Sur, February 27,2011.[111] HumanRights Watch interview with Mercy Dejos, Davao del Sur, March 12, 2011.[112] HumanRights Watch interview with Irene Dejos, Davao del Sur, March 12, 2011.[113] Videofootage and photographs on file with Human Rights Watch.[114] HumanRights Watch interview with Lt. Col. Oliver Artuz, 39th IB,Philippine Army, March 9, 2011.[115] HumanRights Watch interview with Mercy Dejos, Davao del Sur, March 12, 2011.[116] JaimeLaude, “AFP welcomes creation of ‘superbody’ on killings,” The PhilippineStar, July 15, 2010, http://www.philstar.com/Article.aspx?articleId=593394&publicationSubCategoryId=63(accessed May 20, 2011).[117] HumanRights Watch interview with a solder, “Gio,” a pseudonym, Aklan, March 23, 2011.[118] HumanRights Watch interview with a military insider, “Ricardo,” apseudonym, place name and date withheld.[119] HumanRights Watch interview with “Rosa,” a pseudonym, Davao City, February 15, 2011.[120] ArmedForces of the Philippines, Internal Peace and Security Plan, 2010, p. vi.[121] Lt.Col. Incognito said, “Before [Oplan Bayinhan] was published we had beendoing that, it’s just that it wasn’t documented.” HumanRights Watch interview with Lt. Col. Vincent B. Incognito, commander, 730thCombat Group, Philippine Air Force, Nasugbu, Batangas, February 23, 2011. HumanRights Watch interview with a member of the 702nd IB, Nueva Ecija,February 26, 2011.[122] HumanRights Watch interview with a member of the 702nd IB, Nueva Ecija,February 26, 2011.[123]“Amanda,” a pseudonym, told how a soldierhad warned her “to stay away from the twins because they areanti-military.” Human Rights Watch interview with “Amanda,”Davao City, February 15, 2011.[124] HumanRights Watch interview with a representative of the 702nd IB, NuevaEcija, February 26, 2011.[125] HumanRights Watch interview with a representative of the 702nd IB, NuevaEcija, February 26, 2011. Several community members said that the militarytakes notice of the people that do not attend the pulong-pulong.A soldier explained, “Of course, the soldiers will notice whois not around.... If they are not around, of course they will make an extraeffort to talk to that person.”[126] HumanRights Watch interview with a representative of the 702nd IB, NuevaEcija, February 26, 2011.[127] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Ladera, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur,March 15, 2011. A barangay official said, “If the NPA comes andasks me for food, I give it. But if I don’t have it, we don’t giveit.” Human Rights Watch interview with a barangayofficial, place name and date withheld.[128] HumanRights Watch interview with a resident of Paquibato district, Davao City, March8, 2011.[129]Government of the Philippines, Consolidated Reply of the Government of thePhilippines to the Alston Report, A/HRC/8/G/6, June 2, 2008, para. 89.[130]UNCommission on Human Rights, Report of the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial,summary or arbitrary executions, Philip Alston, Mission to Philippines,A/HRC/8/3/Add.2, April 16, 2008, para. 17.[131] HumanRights Watch interview with a former barangay captain, Davao City, March10, 2011.[132] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of the rebel returnee, Davao del Norte,March 12, 2011; Human Rights Watch interview with a former barangaycaptain, Davao City, March 10, 2011.[133] KatherineEvangelista, “Military says ‘Purging’ could be cause of BayanMuna activist’s death,” Philippine Daily Inquirer, July 6,2010, http://newsinfo.inquirer.net/breakingnews/nation/view/20100706-279537/Purging-could-be-cause-of-Bayan-Muna-activists-death(accessed May 20, 2011).[134]“Military seeks help from House in human rights case,” The DailyTribune, October 1, 2010, http://www.tribuneonline.org/nation/20101001nat6.html(accessed May 20, 2011).[135] HumanRights Watch interview with a soldier, “Gio,” Aklan, March 23,2011.[136] Thecommission said, “There is certainly evidence pointing the finger ofsuspicion at some elements and personalities in the armed forces, in particularGen. Palparan, as responsible for an undetermined number of killings, by allowing,tolerating, and even encouraging the killings.”Independent Commission to Address Media and Activist Killings,“Report,” January 22, 2007, p. 53. A subsequent letter from thecommission to the government went on to say, “That there was a markedincrease in the incidence of killings in all the areas where General Palparanwas assigned—which he admitted—should be enough to justify hisinvestigation. Indeed, General Palparan’s statements and cavalierattitude about the killings should have warranted early on at the very leastadministrative or disciplinary actions by his superiors.” Letter fromJose A. R. Melo, chairman of the Melo Commission, to Eduardo R. Ermita,executive secretary, August 21, 2007, p. 3.[137] HumanRights Watch interviews with P/C Insp. Carlos Lacuesta, Guihulngan chief ofpolice, Guihulngan, March 21, 2011 and SPO2 Samuel Cañete, Manila, April21, 2011. Cañete said that the request sought various details about thetwo identified suspects, in particular their personal and duty details, duty,appointment and assignment status, and issued armaments.[138] HumanRights Watch interview with Carlos Lacuesta, Guihulngan chief of police,Guihulngan, March 21, 2011. Lt. Jim Obias confirmed that the 11th IBundertook its own investigation into Quirante’s killing and that thereport has been forwarded to higher headquarters: Human Rights Watch interviewwith Lt. Jim Obias, 11th IB Philippine Army, Guihulngan, March 21,2011.[139] HumanRights Watch interview with Carlos Lacuesta, Guihulngan chief of police, Guihulngan,March 21, 2011.[140] HumanRights Watch interview with P/CInsp. Carlos Lacuesta, Guihulngan chief ofpolice, Guihulngan, March 21, 2011.[141] HumanRights Watch interview with police investigator Joel Lumakang, Mawab, March 15,2011. Memorandum from PO1 Joel D. Lumakang, investigator, to Compostela Valleyprovincial police director, November 6, 2010. Armed men killed Felisilda inMawab, Compestela Valley, in Mindanao on September 9, 2010. Human Rights Watchwas unable to visit the remote area in Mawab where Felisilda was killed by thetime of this writing because of ongoing fighting between the AFP and the NPA.[142] HumanRights Watch interview with police investigator Joel Lumakang, Mawab, March 15,2011.[143]Excerpt from the minutes of the 14th regular session of the 16thSangguniang Panlalawigan of Surigao del Sur, Resolution No. 115 and 116, Seriesof 2010, October 5, 2010.[144] Ibid.[145] HumanRights Watch interview with several members of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan ofSurigao del Sur Committee on Laws, Justice, and Human Rights, March 14, 2011.[146]EditaBurgos v. Gloria Macapagal Arroyo et al., G.R. No. 183711, InvestigationReport submitted by Commissioner Jose Manuel Mamaug, March 15, 2011, p. 8. InApril 2007, armed men abducted Jonas Burgos in broad daylight from a mall inQuezon City. Burgos’ mother, Edita, petitioned the court for a writ ofamparo—a habeas corpus-like procedure in which state agencies arecompelled to reveal to the court the whereabouts of named persons, disclosedocumentary evidence or allow court-authorized searches of premises. In 2010,the Supreme Court ordered the Commission on Human Rights to investigateBurgos’ “disappearance,” and report back to it. In June 2010,Edita Burgos filed with the Justice Department charges of arbitrary detentionagainst the military personnel identified in the report, including Maj. HarryBaliaga, Jr., Lt. Col. Melquaides Feliciano, Col.Eduardo Ano and several unidentified soldiers. At this writing, the departmentis considering the complaint.[147] UNHuman Rights Council, Report of the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial,summary or arbitrary executions, Addendum: Summary of cases transmitted toGovernment and replies received, A/HRC/8/3/Add.1, May 30, 2008, p. 319.[148] SeeHuman Rights Watch, Scared Silent, pp. 29-32.[149] HumanRights Watch interview with several representatives from G7, Fort Magsaysay,February 26, 2011.[150] Ibid.[151] Ibid.[152] Ibid.[153] Lt.Col. Vincent B. Incognito, commander, 730th Combat Group,Philippine Air Force, told Human Rights Watch that thereare no AFP reports relating to either the killing of Ireneo Rodriguez or thedisappearance of Alfredo Bucal. Human Rights Watch interview with Lt. Col. Vincent B. Incognito, commander, 730th Combat Group,Philippine Air Force, Nasugbu, Batangas, February 23, 2011.[154] 9thPublic Affairs Office, AFP, Investigation Report, August 7, 2006; Affidavit ofMaj. Ernest Marc Rosal, October 6, 2006. The August 7, 2006 report of the 9thID concludes that on August 3, 2006, Pfc LordgerPastrana encountered undetermined number of SPARU elements; “he was ableto draw his firearm however he was killed by the SPARU.” SPARU is theterm used for the Special Partisan Unit of the NPA.[155]Philippinesv. Cpl. Rodrigo L. Billones, Crim. Case No. 4864, Regional Trial Court, 10thJudicial Region, Branch 6, Prosperidad, Agusan del Sur.[156] HumanRights Watch interview with Sgt. Esequias Duyogan, place name and datewithheld.[157] Ibid.[158] HumanRights Watch interview with Sgt. Esequias Duyogan, place name and datewithheld. Cpl. Billones confirmed that his battalion covered his legal costs.Human Rights Watch interview with Cpl. Rodrigo Billones, Prosperidad, August24, 2010.[159] HumanRights Watch interview with official at the Agusan del Sur provincial jail,Prosperidad, August 24, 2010.[160] HumanRights Watch interview with the wife of an extrajudicial killing victim, placename and date withheld. The family is canvassing for witnesses that they canlater present to the police.[161] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of Guevarra, place name and datewithheld; a relative of R. Rodriguez, place name and date withheld; a relativeof Baldomero, place name and date withheld; a friend of Labrador, place nameand date withheld.[162] HumanRights Watch interview with the father of an extrajudicial killing victim,place name and date withheld.[163] HumanRights Watch interview with Antonio Billera, Davao City, March 16, 2011. Similarly,in the Dejos case, a former barangay tanod, Rudy’s brother, ArnoldDejos, collected the four empty bullet casings and provided them to the police.Note from Maj. Demetrius Emuardo Taypin, police chief inspector, Sta. Cruz,Davao del Sur, February 27, 2011.[164] HumanRights Watch interview with Antonio Billera, Davao City, March 16, 2011.[165]European Union police expert Bo Astrom has confirmed that he also found thatinvestigators had not collected evidence—other than the mostobvious—and regularly did not seek advanced forensic examination ofevidence collected.[166] HumanRights Watch interview with a police investigator, place name and datewithheld.[167] Ibid.; Human Rights Watch interview with MajDemetrius E. Taypin, Davao del Sur, March 9, 2011.[168] HumanRights Watch interview with Maj Demetrius E. Taypin, Davao del Sur, March 9,2011.[169]Benjamin Bayles was killed on a national highway during a busy period, in frontof many witnesses. However, the police did not canvass for witnesses. All ofthe witnesses to be presented in the trial were identified by the privateprosecutors in the case. Human Rights Watch interview with private prosecutorAtty. Ben Ramos, March 18, 2011.[170] HumanRights Watch interview with several colleagues of Carlo Rodriguez, CalambaCity, February 22, 2011.[171] HumanRights Watch interview with Romel Morales, CIDG, investigating the killing ofEstacio, Bataan, February 24, 2011. This case is not discussed above as HumanRights Watch research indicated that it does not fit the pattern of anextrajudicial killing and did not find evidence of security force involvementin the killing. On July 12, 2010, a masked gunman killed Josephine Estacio, ateacher, outside the school at which she was teaching in Balanga City, Bataan.Estacio was not associated with any leftist organization. Police investigatorsare yet to identify a motive behind this killing.[172]Resolution, Balanga City Police v. Alfredo Alipio, NPS Docket No.III-02-INV-10H-00102, November 23, 2010; Case file, shown to Human Rights Watchduring an interview with Investigator Canare, Bataan,February 24, 2011. A photograph of this process shows only the enlarged IDpicture of Alipio, posted on a wall, with the witness pointing to it, ratherthan a photo board showing several possible suspects. The investigatormaintains the photo board showed photographs of several people.[173] HumanRights Watch interviews with Investigator Canare, Bataan, February 24, 2011, and Romel Morales, CIDG, investigating the killing of Estacio,Bataan, February 24, 2011. Resolution, Balanga City Police v. Alfredo Alipio,NPS Docket No. III-02-INV-10H-00102, November 23, 2010.[174]Resolution, Balanga City Police v. Alfredo Alipio, NPS Docket No.III-02-INV-10H-00102, November 23, 2010.[175] Forinstance, in one case colleagues of the victim told Human Rights Watch,“The NBI is asking for at least 100,000 pesos as a primer to start toinvestigate the case.” Human Rights Watch interview with severalcolleagues of an extrajudicial killing victim, place name and date withheld.[176] HumanRights Watch interview with Leonisa Labrador, Davao City, March 10, 2011.[177] HumanRights Watch interview with Carlos Lacuesta, Guihulngan chief of police,Guihulngan, March 21, 2011.[178] HumanRights Watch interview with Balais, deputy chief ofpolice, Kalibo, Aklan, March 22, 2011.[179]Police Officer Deris said, with respect to the killing of Carlo Rodriguez, thatthe chief of the investigation who had handled the case had been transferred,so she and other investigators had to wait to consult a new chief beforecontinuing the investigation. Human Rights Watch interview with PO2 Lilly Ann“Leah” Deris, Calamba City, February 22, 2011.[180]Investigators did not visit the crime scene in the cases of Quirante, Tamondez,Felisilda, Deliguer, or Ladera. The Dejos family also said that investigatorsdid not visit the crime scene, though the local police chief disputes this.Human Rights Watch interviews with Carlos Lacuesta, Guihulngan chief of police,Guihulngan, March 21, 2011; PSI Allan Reginald L. Basiya, Mawab Officer inCharge, Mawab, March 15, 2011; Porciso Tamondez, Davao del Norte, March 12,2011; Hipolito P. Deliguer, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur, March 15, 2011; and arelative of Ladera, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur, March 15, 2011.[181] HumanRights Watch interview with PSI Allan Reginald L. Basiya, Mawab Officer inCharge, Mawab, March 15, 2011.[182] HumanRights Watch interview with P/CInsp. Carlos Lacuesta, Guihulngan chief ofpolice, Guihulngan, March 21, 2011.[183] HumanRights Watch interview with SPO2 Samuel Cañete, place name and datewithheld.[184] HumanRights Watch interview with Hipolito P. Deliguer, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur,March 15, 2011 and a relative of Ladera, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur, March15, 2011.[185]Memorandum from provincial director, Surigao del Sur Police Provincial Office,to regional director, Police Regional Office 13, October 8, 2010.[186] Ibid.Human Rights Watch interview with Chief Investigator Joel Vertudazo, Tandag,March 14, 2011, and with Provincial Director Surigaodel Sur, Tandag, March 14, 2011.[187] HumanRights Watch interview with a foreign police officer, Manila, March 2, 2011.[188] HumanRights Watch interview with the relative of an alleged perpetrator, place nameand date withheld.[189] HumanRights Watch interview with a military insider, “Ricardo,” placename and date withheld.[190] Ibid.[191]Kabankalan City Police Station, excerpt from the Police Blotter, Entry No.0477, Page No. 177, June 14, 2010. Human Rights Watch interview with SPOIVirgilio D. Parcon, Himamylan City, March 20, 2011.[192]Firearms and Explosives Office, Certification, July 29, 2010.[193] Memorandumfrom P/Supt. Antonietto Cañete, officer in charge, Himamaylan CityPolice Station, to provincial director, June 14, 2010.[194] HumanRights Watch interview with private prosecutor Atty. Ben Ramos, March 18, 2011.[195]According to barangay officials, no one by the names of either of thesuspects reside at the barangays where they claimed they lived. HumanRights Watch interview with private prosecutor Atty. Ben Ramos, March 18, 2011.[196] HumanRights Watch interview with private prosecutor Atty. Ben Ramos, March 18, 2011.[197]Affidavit of Vilma E. Tejada, February 10, 2011.[198] HumanRights Watch interview with SPOI Virgilio D. Parcon, Himamylan City, March 20,2011.[199] Ibid.[200]Memorandum from SPO1 Virgilio D. Parcon, Himamaylan City Police Station, toPolice Regional Office 6, February 25, 2011. For further discussion of thiscase, see above Failure to Pursue Evidence of MilitaryInvolvement. The sub judice rule does notprevent police from continuing investigations and filing further informationwith prosecutors.[201]Medico-Legal Report No. M-1044-10, Carlo O. Rodriguez, November 15, 2010.[202]Memorandum from P/Supt. Nestor Barba Dela Cueva, officer in charge, CalambaCity Police Station, to PD, Laguna PPO, November 23, 2010. PO2 Lilly Ann Derissaid, “Our assumption [is that Rodriguez was killed] due to a personalgrudge as this is far different to an EJK [extrajudicial killing]. When it isan EJK, the assailant usually only had one or two shots.” Deris went onto say that Rodriguez has been labeled a womanizer because they recoveredphotographs of him with several women on his cell phone. His colleagues,however, suggest that many of these photographs came from an evening workgathering all taken during one night. Human Rights Watch interview with PO2Lilly Ann Deris, Calamba City, February 22, 2011.[203]Rodriguez’s colleagues said, “Caloy was lending his talents toother unions in southern Tagalog, to help them negotiate…. His specialty[was assisting] in developing collective negotiating agreements.” HumanRights Watch interview with several colleagues of Carlo Rodriguez, CalambaCity, February 22, 2011.[204] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of an extrajudicial killing victim,place name and date withheld.[205] HumanRights Watch interview with a police investigator, Manila, date withheld.[206] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative, “Rosita,” Aklan, March 22,2011.[207] Ibid.The police were praised for the “expeditious solution” of theBaldomero case: Memorandum from Aklan Provincial chief of police, PSupt. GeorbyC. Manuel, to regional chief, July 22, 2010.[208] HumanRights Interviews with Balais, deputy chief of police, Kalibo, Aklan, March 22,2011 and with a relative, “Rosita,” Aklan, March 22, 2011.[209] HumanRights Watch interview with several representatives from G7, Fort Magsaysay,February 26, 2011.[210] HumanRights Watch, Scared Silent, pp. 32-33.[211] Ibid.[212]Office of the City Prosecutor, Tarlac City, Lily Ramos versus. Sgt. Roderickdela Cruz, Sgt. Romeo Castillo et. al; Romeo Ramos versus. Glendel Gutierrez deGuzman, Resolution, IS No. 05-1704; 2848, April 26, 2006. Ramos’sbrother, Romero, also brought a complaint against a neighbor, Glendel deGuzman, who he alleged conspired with the soldiers to kill Ramos. The assistantprovincial prosecutor found no sufficient evidence to indict de Guzman.[213]Office of the City Prosecutor, Tarlac City, Lily Ramos versus. Sgt Roderickdela Cruz, Sgt. Romeo Castillo et. al; Romeo Ramos versus. Glendel Gutierrez deGuzman, Resolution, IS No. 05-1704; 2848, April 26, 2006.[214] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of an extrajudicial killing victim,place name and date withheld.[215]On July 19, 2006, Danilo Hagosojos was riding home in Sorsorgon,Bicol, on his motorbike with his seven-year-old daughter when he was shotmultiple times in the chest and head by two unidentified assailants. Thiskilling has not been thoroughly investigated and no charges have been filed.Human Rights Watch, Scared Silent, pp. 41.[216] HumanRights Watch interview with a police investigator, place name and date withheld.[217] Ibid.[218] Ibid.[219] Ibid.[220] Ibid.[221] HumanRights Watch interviews with a police officer, Nueva Ecija, February 25, 2011;and SPOI Virgilio D. Parcon, Himamylan City, March 20, 2011.[222] HumanRights Watch interviews with Police Supt. Eduardo B. Soriano, Nueva Ecija,February 25, 2011; SPOI Virgilio D. Parcon, Himamylan City, March 20, 2011.Parcon said, “We recognize witnesses’ rights—right to anattorney, right to remain silent—these are the rights of witnesses aswell as the accused.”[223] HumanRights Watch interview with a local government official, place name and datewithheld. Human Rights Watch has changed the names used in this statement; KaBen was not the name used. The term Ka is short for comrade, used as part ofNPA noms de guerre.[224] OnOctober 27, 2010, at about 5 p.m., the witness was three armed men in fatiguesvisited the witness and threatened her. Complaint Police Blotter of HimamaylanCity Police Station, Entry No. 2010-3016, Page No. 0182, October 29, 2010.Affidavit of Vilma E. Tejada, February 10, 2011.[225]Thearmed man said, “Gusto mo ba iputok ko sa ulo mo?” Complaint PoliceBlotter of Himamaylan City Police Station, Entry No. 2010-3089, Page No.0200—0201, November 6, 2010. Affidavit of Vilma E. Tejada, February 10,2011.[226] HumanRights Watch interviews with several colleagues of Carlo Rodriguez, CalambaCity, February 22, 2011, and SPO1 Herbert Mendoza,Calamba City, February 22, 2011.[227] HumanRights Watch interview with SPO1 Herbert Mendoza, Calamba City, February 22,2011.[228] Ibid.[229] HumanRights Watch interview with a military insider, “Ricardo,” placename and date withheld.[230] Ibid.[231] HumanRights Watch, Scared Silent, p. 45.[232] HumanRights Watch interview with Marideza and Arnel Guran, Bicol, September 6, 2009.[233] RA6981, s. 3. The legislation explicitly excludes law enforcement personnel fromcoverage, even when testifying against fellow law enforcement officers.[234]RA 6981, s. 5.[235]RA 6981, s. 8.[236]RA 6981, s. 3.[237]RA 6981, s. 9.[238]Telephone conversation with Att.Martin Meñez, acting program director, Witness Protection Program,Department of Justice, July 4, 2011. Meñez said that other governmentagencies had been reluctant to cooperate with the Justice Department inchanging the identity of witnesses, despite provision for this in RA 6981.Therefore, the department has proposed legislative change to enable thesecretary of justice to order relevant government agencies to take thenecessary steps to effect changes of identity. The bill proposing thislegislative change has been passed by the House of Representatives but remainsbefore the Senate.[239] HumanRights Watch interview with a local government official, place name and datewithheld.[240] HumanRights Watch interview with a couple in witness protection, place name and datewithheld.[241] HumanRights Watch interview with private prosecutor Atty. Ben Ramos, March 18, 2011.[242] HumanRights Watch interview with Chief Investigator Joel Vertudazo, Tandag, March14, 2011.[243] HumanRights Watch interview with a prosecutor, date and place withheld.[244] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of an extrajudicial killing victim,place name and date withheld.[245] Ibid.[246] Thisprotection was provided in relation to the July 5, 2010 killing of FernandoBaldomero and the July 12, 2010 killing of Josephine Estacio.[247]Letter from Atty. Martin Meñez, acting program director, WitnessProtection Security and Benefits Program, Department of Justice, to HumanRights Watch, May 10, 2011 (delivered via email on May 19, 2011).[248] On January 29, 2010, Robert Woo was convicted of murder, as anaccomplice, for the May 2005 killing of radio commentator Klein Cantoneros. OnApril 29, 2009, Joy Anticamara was convicted for the July 2006 murder of radiobroadcaster Armando Pace. In March 2009, Rafael Cardeño was convictedfor the December 31, 2001 murder of reported whistleblower and YoungOfficer’s Union spokesperson Baron Alexander Cervantes; Jaime Centeno,Joseph Mostrales, and Erlindo Flores had been convicted in August 2004. In June2008, Joel Flores, formermilitary at the time of murder, was convictedfor the May 16, 2006 murder of Bayan Muna Secretary-General Jose Doton. InOctober 2006, Gerry Cabayag, Randy Grecia, and Estanislao Bisamos wereconvicted for the March 2005 murder of journalist Marlene Esperat. In January2006, Edgar Belandres was convicted for the November 2004 murder of AllanDizon, a photographer for The Freeman. In November 2005, GuillermoWapili, a formerpolice officer was convicted for the May 2002murder of radio commentator Edgar Damalerio.[249]InternationalConvention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance(Convention against EnforcedDisappearances), adopted September23, 2005, E/CN.4/2005/WG.22/WP.1/Rev.4 (2005).[250]Office of the Provincial Prosecutor, Legazpi City Atty. Ruben M. Azanes v.Ernest Marc P. Rosal and Arnaldo L. Majares, Resolution, June 8, 2007; Officeof the Regional State Prosecutor, Region V., Sonia Sta. Rosa v. Ernest Marc P.Rosal et al., Resolution, November 9, 2007; Human Rights Watch interview with SoniaSanta Rosa, Bicol, September 7, 2009. About an hour after 10 armed men enteredSanta Rosa’s home and abducted him, and about 30 minutes after his wifehad heard nine gunshots, local police found two bodies by the a nearbystream—Santa Rosa and a man wearing a balaclava over his face, carryingan AFP identification card in the name of Corporal Lordger Pastrana. SoniaSanta Rosa later identified Pastrana by the clothes he was wearing as theleader when the men entered her house. In Pastrana’s possession, policefound a mission order marked “SECRET” from the 9th MilitaryIntelligence Battalion, signed by Major Ernest Marc P. Rosal, for Pfc. LordgetPastrana, authorizing him to carry a .45 caliber Llama pistol from July 1,2006, until September 30, 2006. They also found a .45 caliber Llama pistol withsilencer and with one magazine loaded was found near Pastrana’s body. Theevidence suggests that Pastrana may have been shot by accident by anothermember of his team while either he or another team member attempted to executePastor Santa Rosa. PNP, Daraga Municipal Police Station, Shooting Incident atBrgy. Malobago, Daraga, Albay, resulting [in the] Death of Isais Sta. Rosa,August 21, 2009.[251] Emailcommunication from Raissa Jajurie, private prosecutor, to Human Rights Watch,June 29, 2011.[252] HumanRights Watch interview with Talib Japalali, Manila, October 15, 2009.[253] Ibid.[254] HumanRights Watch interview with a police investigator, place name and datewithheld.[255] HumanRights Watch interview with the clerk of court, Regional Trial Court, SixthJudicial Region, Branch 2, Kalibo, Aklan, Lina S. Candoleta, Kalibo, Aklan,March 22, 2011.[256] HumanRights Watch interview with “Elsa,” a relative of Quirante,Guihulngan, March 19, 2011.[257] HumanRights Watch interview with the clerk of court, Regional Trial Court, SixthJudicial Region, Branch 2, Kalibo, Aklan, Lina S. Candoleta, Kalibo, Aklan,March 22, 2011.[258] HumanRights Watch interview with Carlos Lacuesta, Guihulngan chief of police,Guihulngan, March 21, 2011. Lt. Col. Bitong has publicly blamed the NPA forQuirante’s killing, without citing any evidence for this conclusion.Philippine Army Public Affairs Office, “NPA’s Killings Up by 150%as Army Appeals to Rebels: Spare the Civilians,” October 13, 2010, http://www.facebook.com/note.php?note_id=164828943542528(accessed April 19, 2011). See also, Pro-Democracy Movement, “Man killedin Guihulngan,” http://www.facebook.com/topic.php?uid=113621142013721&topic=228and “NPA killings up 150% in Negros, Army says,” http://www.facebook.com/topic.php?uid=113621142013721&topic=234(accessed April 19, 2011).[259] HumanRights Watch interview with Lt. Jim Obias, 11th IB Philippine Army,Guihulngan, March 21, 2011.[260] RegionalTrial Court of Tarlac City, Branch 65, in Criminal Case No. 14419 People of thePhilippines v PFC Roderick dela Cruz a.k.a. Joshua dela Cruz. On June 6, 2006,Judge Viliran, Regional Trial Court, Tarlac City, issued a warrant for his arrest,specifying that he was not eligible for bail. Police did not serve the warrant,so on December 14, 2006, the court ordered that the case be archived“without prejudice to reactivation upon the apprehension of the accusedas the accused are still at large notwithstanding the lapse of six months sincethe order of arrest was issued.” At this time an alias arrest warrant wasissued.[261] RTC,Tarlac City, Branch 65, Crim. Case No. 14419, Return of Warrant of Arrest, May21, 2008; Task Force 211, Press Statement No. 08-05-29: Task Force 211 LaudsAFP for Full Cooperation, May 29, 2008.[262]Supreme Court Administrative Order 25-2007, March 1, 2007.[263]Supreme Court Rule on the Writ of Amparo Resolution, A.M. No. 07-9-12-SC,September 25, 2007; Supreme Court Rule on the Writ of Habeas Data, A.M.08-1-16, January 22, 2008.[264] HumanRights Watch, Scared Silent, pp. 39-40.[265] HumanRights Watch interview with Concepcion Empeño, Manila, October 13, 2009.Empeño told Human Rights Watch what happened when she found out that thewrit of amparo had been granted: “I brought the newspaper [to the policestation], it was on the front page of the newspaper. I was so very happy atthat time. I said to the police, ‘The military are going to release herand there is already an order from the court of appeals.’… I was sohappy—but nothing has happened.”[266] Petitionfor the Writ of Amparo, Erlinda Cadapan et al. versus Gloria Macapagal Arroyoet al., October 27, 2007, para 13.[267] HumanRights Watch interview with Raymond Manalo, place name and date withheld.[268] HumanRights Watch interview with Atty. Rex Fernandez, Manila, August 18, 2009.[269] CAG.R. SP-WR-A No. 00002 & CA G.R. SP 95303, Resolution per Mendoza J, p. 3.[270] Ibid.[271]Lt.Col. Rogelio Boac, et al. v. Erlinda T. Cadapan and Concepcion E. Empeno,Supreme Court of the Philippines, G.R. Nos. 184461-62/G.R. No. 184495/G.R. No.187109, May 31, 2011.[272] Ibid.[273] Ibid.[274] Cadapan’smother told Human Rights Watch, “I do not know how to continue my searchnow. I am just waiting for the decision of the court. That’s my life,waiting for the decision.”Human Rights Watch interview withErlinda T. Cadapan, Manila, October 13, 2009. On May 4, 2011, the families ofCadapan and Empeño filed with the Justice Department charges againstRet. Maj. Gen. Jovito Palparan Jr., for rape, arbitrary detention, seriousphysical injuries, maltreatment of prisoners, grave threats, and gravecoercion. At this writing, the department is considering these charges.[275]Seeabove, Section I. ThePhilippine Context, HumanRights Desks.[276]Human Rights Watch interview withDomidor Ariola, Barangay Kagawad, Barangay New Casay, Davao delNorte, March 12, 2011.[277] PhilippinesConstitution 1987, art. XIII, sec. 18(1); Exec. Order No 163, May 5, 1087.[278] Thecommission does not have a regional office in Autonomous Region of MuslimMindanao (ARMM). Instead, the offices of Regions IX, X, and XII in Mindanaocover certain provinces in ARMM.[279] Forexample, the central office actively investigated the 2007 enforceddisappearance of Jonas Burgos, including by identifying and interviewing an AFPwitness. The CHR has recommended that the Supreme Court direct the PhilippineArmy to produce Burgos and that the Justice Department file criminal chargesagainst several soldiers. However, this investigation was only completed afterthe Supreme Court referred the case to the CHR, following a petition for writof amparo, nearly four years after Burgos disappeared. And the CHR, which theSupreme Court had asked to report within 90 days, sought three extensions oftime, totaling almost six months. Edita Burgos v. Gloria Macapagal Arroyo etal., G.R. No. 183711, Investigation Report submitted by Commissioner JoseManuel Mamaug, March 15, 2011.[280] HumanRights Watch interview with relatives of an extrajudicial killing victim, placename and date withheld. The CHR office that investigated was Region III.[281] HumanRights Watch interview with Leonisa Labrador, Davao City, March 10, 2011.[282] HumanRights Watch interview with Porciso Tamondez, Davao del Norte, March 12, 2011.[283] HumanRights Watch interview with Atty. Alberto B. Sipaco, Jr., Commission on HumanRights, Region XI, Davao City, February 11, 2011.[284] HumanRights Watch interview with Hipolito P. Deliguer, San Agustin, Surigao del Sur,March 15, 2011. Deliguer said, “The CHR has not contacted us orcommunicated with us in any way.”[285] HumanRights Watch interview with Sonia Santa Rosa, September 7, 2009.[286] HumanRights Watch interview with Porciso Tamondez, Davao del Norte, March 12, 2011.[287]Human Rights Watch interview with arelative, place name and date withheld. Often, NGOs assist victims’families in this respect.[288] HumanRights Watch interview with a relative of a victim, place name and datewithheld.[289] HumanRights Watch interview with head of regional office, Commission on HumanRights, place name and date withheld.[290] RepublicAct. No. 6770 of the Philippines, sec. 13, Philippines Constitution 1987, art.XI, sec. 12.[291] Theoverall deputy ombudsman, Orlando C. Casimiro, is currently acting ombudsman.He is also covering the vacant offices of deputy ombudsman for Luzon and deputyombudsman for military and other law enforcement offices. The president is toappoint the ombudsman from a list of at least sixnominees prepared by the Judicial and Bar Council. At this writing, theJudicial and Bar Council has not submitted this list to the president. Theombudsman shall serve for a term of seven years without reappointment.Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines, 1986, secs. 8-11.[292] ComprehensiveAgreement on Respect for Human Rights and International Humanitarian Law(CARHRIHL), between the Government of the Republic of the Philippines and theNational Democratic Front of the Philippines, including the Communist Party ofthe Philippines and the New People’s Army, August 7, 1998, part 5.[293] The JointStatement of GPH-CPP-NPA-NDF at the Conclusion of the Current Round of PeaceTalks in Oslo, Norway, February 21, 2011, http://gphndfpeacetalks.wordpress.com/2011/03/08/joint-statement-of-gph-cpp-npa-ndf-at-the-conclusion-of-the-current-round-of-peace-talks-in-oslo-norway/(accessed May 6, 2011).[294] Theduty to try and punish those responsible for grave violations of human rightshas its legal basis in such treaties as the International Covenant on Civil andPolitical Rights (art.2); and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment (arts. 4, 5, and 7).[295]InternationalCovenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adopted December 16, 1966, G.A.Res. 2200A (XXI), entered into force March 23, 1976, art. 2. The Philippinesratified the ICCPR in October 1986.[296]Principles on the Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra-Legal,Arbitrary and Summary Executions, E.S.C. res. 1989/65, annex, 1989 U.N. ESCOR Supp.(No. 1) at 52, U.N. Doc. E/1989/89 (1989), http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/instree/i7pepi.htm(accessed May 13, 2011).[297]United Nations Manual on the Effective Prevention andInvestigation of Extra-Legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions, U.N. Doc. E/ST/CSDHA/.12(1991), http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/instree/executioninvestigation-91.html(accessed May 13, 2011).[298]InternationalConvention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance(Convention against EnforcedDisappearance),adopted September 23, 2005, E/CN.4/2005/WG.22/WP.1/Rev.4 (2005).[299] Declarationon the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearances (Declaration on EnforcedDisappearances), G.A. res. 47/133, 47 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 207, U.N.Doc. A/47/49 (1992), adopted by General Assembly resolution 47/133 of 18December 1992.[300] Declarationon Enforced Disappearances, art. 1.[301]Ibid., art. 3.[302]Ibid., art. 4. The Declaration on Enforced Disappearances also includesprovisions intended to reduce the likelihood of enforced disappearances andresolve ongoing cases.[303]Command responsibility and itselements are well-established under customary international law. SeeInternational Criminal Court for the former Yugoslavia, Delalic and Others, Judgment,IT-96-21-T, Nov. 16, 1998, sec. 333. See e.g., Rome Statute of theInternational Criminal Court, art. 28; First Additional Protocol of 1977 to theGeneva Conventions, art. 86(2). The Convention against Torture in articles 4and 16 provide that superior officials may be found guilty of complicity oracquiescence if they knew or should have known of torture or ill-treatmentpracticed by persons under their command. See Manfred Nowak and ElizabethMcArthur, The United Nations Convention Against Torture: A Commentary (Oxford:Oxford Univ. Press, 2008), p. 248.[304] 1987 Constitutionof the Republic of the Philippines, art. III, sec. 12.[305] RepublicAct No. 3815 of the Philippines, The Revised Penal Code of the Philippines,arts. 248 (murder), 249 (homicide), 335 (rape), 342 (forcible abduction), 267 (kidnappingand serious illegal detention), 268 (slight illegal detention), 269 (unlawfularrest) 270 (kidnapping and failure to return a minor), 124 (arbitrarydetention), 125 (delay in the delivery of detained persons to the proper judicialauthorities), 125 (delaying release), 235 (maltreatment of prisoners), and 262,263, 264, and 266 (physical injury offenses).[306] RepublicAct No. 9745 of the Philippines, signed into law on November 10, 2009.[307]Ibid., sec. 7.[308] Ibid.[309]RepublicAct No. 6975 of the Philippines, Chapter III, sec. 24.[310]PNPOperational Procedures, 2010, Rule 18. PNP Crime Scene Response Procedures.[311]RepublicAct No. 6713 of the Philippines.[312]RepublicAct No. 6713 of the Philippines, sec 5: Duties of Public Officials and Employees.“In the performance of their duties, all public officials and employeesare under obligation to (a) Act promptly on letters and requests. All publicofficials and employees shall, within fifteen (15) working days from receiptthereof, respond to letters, telegrams or other means of communications sent bythe public. The reply must contain the action taken on the request.”[313]Administrative Order 181, July 3, 2007.[314] Thesefactors are outlined in the Supreme Court’s administrative order 25-2007.[315] AdministrativeOrder No. 249, sec. (1)(a), December 10, 2008.[316] Thepresident signed Republic Act No. 9851 of the Philippines into law December 11,2009. Section 10 provides, Responsibility of Superiors. “Inaddition to other grounds of criminal responsibility for crimes defined andpenalized under this Act, a superior shall be criminally responsible as aprincipal for such crimes committed by subordinates under his/her effectivecommand and control, or effective authority and control as the case may be, asa result of his/her failure to properly exercise control over suchsubordinates, where:(a) That superior either knew or,owing to the circumstances at the time, should have known that the subordinateswere committing or about to commit such crimes;(b) That superior failed to take allnecessary and reasonable measures within his/her power to prevent or represstheir commission or to submit the matter to the competent authorities forinvestigation and prosecution.”See also Republic Act No. 9745, sec.13.[317] Prof.Diane Desierto, “The Contours of Command Responsibility: PhilippineIncorporation and Customary Evolution,” Asia-Pacific Yearbook ofInternational Humanitarian Law, vol. 2, no. 2, 2006, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1485557 (accessedJune 1, 2010).[318]At ameeting with then Justice Secretary Agnes Devanadera in October 2009, at whichtime Republic Act No. 9851 remained before the Congress, JusticeDepartment officials told Human Rights Watch that command responsibility is relevant only to disciplinary proceedings.Human Rights Watch meeting with Agnes Devanadera,Secretary for Justice, Rolando B. Faller, Chief of Staff, Department ofJustice, Atty. Nestor Mantaring, NBI Director, Undersecretary RicardoBlancaflor, Task Force 211, Leo Dacera, Director, Witness Protection, Manila,October 20, 2009.Then ChiefProsecutor Jovencito Zuño said that command responsibility is not really a theory in criminallaw in the Philippines. When asked whether he would consider bringing a testcase, utilizing ordinary principles of criminal responsibility in conjunctionwith international humanitarian law principles of command responsibility, he saidhe might, but he was concerned that then even the president may be a commander.Human Rights Watch meeting with Chief Prosecutor JovencitoZuño, Manila, October 21, 2009.[319]Executive Order 226, Institutionalization of the doctrine of “Command Responsibility” in allGovernment Offices, Particularly At All Levels Of Command In The PhilippineNational Police and other law enforcement agencies, sec. 1 provides: “Neglectof Duty Under the Doctrine of ‘CommandResponsibility.’” Any government officialor supervisor, or officer of the Philippine National Police or that of anyother law enforcement agency shall be held accountable for “Neglect ofDuty” under the doctrine of “command responsibility” if hehas knowledge that a crime or offense shall be committed, is being committed,or has been committed by his subordinates, or by others within his area ofresponsibility and, despite such knowledge, he did not take preventive orcorrective action either before, during, or immediately after its commission.”[320] Thehighest documented numbers of alleged extrajudicial killings of leftistactivists were 220 in 2006, 94 in 2007, and 64 in 2008. UN Human RightsCouncil, Report of the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary orarbitrary executions, Philip Alston, Addendum: Follow-up countryrecommendations – Philippines, A/HRC/11/2/Add.8, April 29, 2009, para 7.[321] Ibid., para 29.[322] H.R.3081: Department of State, Foreign Operations, and Related ProgramsAppropriations Act, 2010, sec. 7070(f).Related ContentJuly 18, 2011News ReleasePhilippines: New Killings as Impunity ReignsInvestigate Military Involvement, Prosecute AbusersJuly 18, 2011News ReleasePhilippines: New Killings as Impunity ReignsRegion / CountryAsia PhilippinesProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch