Perpetual Fear: Impunity and Cycles of Violence in Zimbabwe | HRWSkip to cookie privacy noticeSkip to main contentHelp us continue to fight human rights abuses. Please give now to support our workHuman Rights WatchShare this via FacebookShare this via TwitterShare this via WhatsAppShare this via EmailOther ways to shareShare this via LinkedInShare this via RedditShare this via TelegramShare this via PrinterDownloadsDownload summary and recommendations: photo featureDownload the full reportDonate NowDownloadsDownload summary and recommendations: photo featureDownload the full reportMarch 8, 2011Perpetual FearImpunity and Cycles of Violence in ZimbabwePerpetualFearImpunityand Cycles of Violence in ZimbabweSummaryMethodologyI.BackgroundA History ofImpunityImpunity inthe Context of ElectionsII. Impunityand International Law..III.Impunity through Amnesties and ClemencyIV. Failureto Investigate and Prosecute Serious Political CrimesV. Failureto Investigate Torture by State AgentsVI. Responseof the Power-Sharing GovernmentRecommendationsTo theGovernment of National UnityTo theMember States of the Southern African Development CommunityTo theEuropean Union and the United StatesAcknowledgementsClick to expand ImageMap of Zimbabwe © 2011 Human Rights WatchSummaryIt’s a painful experience knowing that ourneighbors, who we see every day, were the perpetrators. I feel angry. Theperpetrators have made it clear at their rallies that at the next electionsthey will do it again because they didn’t get arrested. We now live inperpetual fear. We can’t do anything about it. We have received no helpfrom the state.–Tendai L., whose parents were murdered by soldiersand suspected ZANU-PF supporters on June 25, 2008Two years since the formation of a power-sharing governmentthat was expected to end human rights abuses and restore the rule of law, politicallymotivated violence and the lack of accountability for abuses remain a serious problemin Zimbabwe. Members of the security forces, the former ruling party, theZimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF), and groups allied toZANU-PF continue to commit human rights violations, including arbitrary arrestsand abductions, beatings, torture, and killings of members and supporters ofthe former opposition party, the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), and thosecritical of the ZANU-PF and its officials.There has been little or no accountability for these crimes.Cases of political violence that have been filed by victims or their relativeshave been largely ignored by the police, or have stalled in the courts. The governmenthas failed to respond to calls by local nongovernmental organizations for the governmentto investigate these abuses. Ending impunity for past and ongoing abuses isessential if Zimbabwe is to end violence and firmly establish the rule of law.The power-sharing governmentcomprised of ZANU-PF and the two factions of the MDC, claimed a commitment tohuman rights reform, but has shown no political will to address longstandingimpunity for human rights abuses. With a referendum and elections planned forthis year, the lack of accountability and justice for past abuses raises thespecter of further violence, and poses a significant obstacle to the holding offree, fair, and credible elections.For more than a decade, elections in Zimbabwe have beenmarked by widespread human rights violations committed by thesecurity forces and supporters and allies of ZANU-PF, such as “youthmilitia” and war veterans. Thousands of MDC supporters, officials, andhuman rights activists have been targets of abuses with little or noaccountability, encouraging further attacks.This report highlights the impunity that prevails inZimbabwe. It provides an update on illustrative cases of political killings,torture, and abductions that took place during the presidential electionrun-off in 2008 and in the aftermath of the elections. Human RightsWatch’s June 2008 report on the violence, “Bullets for Each ofYou:” State-Sponsored Violence since Zimbabwe’s March 29 Elections,documented how the ZANU-PF-led government, at the highest levels, wasresponsible for widespread and systematic abuses that led to the killing of upto 200 people, the beating and torture of 5,000 more, and the displacement of about36,000 people. Instead of pursuing accountability for the crimes committed bythe security forces and other ZANU-PF sympathizers, since the release of thatreport, the government has not made any genuine effort to investigate, muchless discipline or prosecute any of the individuals responsible.The power-sharing government has also failed to hold toaccount security agents who abducted and tortured over 40 MDC officials andhuman rights activists in November and December 2008, despite court rulingsthat acts of torture were committed, and the activists having identified someof the agents responsible.The top leadership of Zimbabwe’s security forces, includingthe armed forces, police, prison service, and Central Intelligence Organization,remain partisan and aligned to President Robert Mugabe and ZANU-PF. The leadersof the security forces who previously publicly declared their support for ZANU-PFand who were implicated in serious human rights violations associated withelectoral violence in 2008 have not been disciplined, removed from their posts,or charged with criminal offenses.Local human rights groups have reported that those who committedserious crimes during the 2008 elections often continue to live in the samecommunities in which they committed the crimes, sometimes next door to theirvictims. In some cases security agents and ZANU-PF supporters who tortured andbeat people during the 2008 election run-off have threatened victims withfurther violence, ahead of a proposed referendum and new elections scheduledfor 2011.[1]The victims of human rights abuses continueto be denied their right to justice and an effective remedy, as required underinternational human rights law. At the same time, perpetrators of abuses enjoyde facto immunity from prosecution by virtue of their association with ZANU-PF.President Mugabe has also politicized use of the powers under the constitutionto grant pardons, amnesty, or clemency to those implicated in or convictedof serious human rights violations. A compromised judiciary and a highlypartisan police force, whose members have also been implicated in abuses, leavelittle hope of justice for victims of abuses.The failure of the power-sharing government to end impunity—thedifficulties involved notwithstanding—has further complicated theprospects of restoring the rule of law in Zimbabwe. Unless the power-sharinggovernment finds the political will to impartially investigate, prosecute,and ensure appropriate punishment and reparations, human rightsviolations will continue.Human Rights Watch calls on the power-sharing government toimmediately embark on credible, impartial and transparent investigations into serioushuman rights abuses and discipline or prosecute those responsible, regardlessof their position or rank. The government should put transitional justicemechanisms in place while reforming the criminal justice system to ensure thatit meets international legal standards.MethodologyThis report is based on Human Rights Watch researchconducted in Zimbabwe in September and November 2010 and provides an update ofcases previously investigated between May and July 2008. Human Rights Watchresearchers visited the capital, Harare, and Manicaland province, and interviewed35 victims and witnesses of human rights violations, human rights defenders,MDC officials, human rights lawyers, and representatives of nongovernmentalorganizations (NGOs). Human Rights Watch researchers also interviewed five MDCactivists in Johannesburg, South Africa, and conducted five telephoneinterviews with NGO representatives in Harare and Johannesburg in October 2010.Human Rights Watch researchers sought but were unable to getappointments to interview officials of the Government of National Unity andZANU-PF officials.Human Rights Watch gathered updated information on furthercases that highlighted impunity which were filed by local human rights organizationsin Mashonaland, Midlands, and Masvingo provinces. Human Rights Watchresearchers examined court records and documents, police affidavits, relevantdomestic laws, medical reports, media accounts and reports by local andinternational human rights organizations.In addition, materials from previous Human Rights Watchresearch missions in 2008 contributed to this report. This report followsearlier field research and advocacy on accountability for human rights abusespublished in “Bullets for Each of You”: State-Sponsored Violencesince Zimbabwe’s March 29 Elections (June 2008), “They BeatMe Like a Dog”: Political Persecution of Opposition Activists andSupporters in Zimbabwe (August 2008), and “Our Hands Are Tied”:Erosion of the Rule of Law in Zimbabwe (November 2008).The interviews for this research were conducted in Englishand Shona.For security reasons, names of some victims have beenchanged and full details of locations withheld when such information couldplace a person at risk.I. BackgroundA History of ImpunityZimbabwe’s history has been marked by impunity forgrave human rights abuses.In the 1970s, Rhodesian African nationalist guerrillas wageda civil war for independence against the Rhodesian government.  In thecourse of this armed conflict, both the Rhodesian army and nationalistguerrillas committed widespread abuses against civilians.[2]  Theperpetrators from both sides were never prosecuted or otherwise held to accountafter Zimbabwe’s independence in 1980.[3] Instead, senior Rhodesianofficials from the Central Intelligence Organization (CIO) and otherhigh-ranking military and police commanders who participated in serious humanrights violations were allowed to keep their positions in the newly independentZimbabwe.[4]In the early 1980s,President Robert Mugabe ordered the Zimbabwe National Army to conductcounter-insurgency operations against “dissident” ex-guerrillafighters in the Matabeleland and Midlands provinces.[5] In the course of this fighting, the army’sFifth Brigade was involved in the deaths of at least 10,000 civilians and theenforced disappearances of many others.[6] Inaddition, the Zimbabwe National Army arbitrarily detained, beat and torturedthousands of civilians. The report of the Commission of Inquiry set up by thegovernment to investigate the events in Matabeleland and Midlands was neverpublished.[7]Impunity in theContext of ElectionsThe scale and nature of the involvementof Zimbabwe’s security forces in human rights abuses has varied over timesince the 1980s.  However, the unwillingness of the Mugabe government tohold members of the security forces and those linked to ZANU-PF—“youthmilitia,” war veterans and ZANU-PF officials and supporters—toaccount has been a constant.Violence around elections hasintensified since the MDC emerged as a strong political contender to ZANU-PF in1999. Few of the perpetrators of this violence have been held to account.  In the run-up to the parliamentary elections of June 2000, humanrights organizations documented extrajudicial executions, torture, beatings andabductions—mainly committed by ZANU-PF supportersand state security agents, including the police and CIO officers.[8]Zimbabwe’s 2002 presidentialelections were similarly marked by widespread abuses by ZANU-PF supporters andstate security agents.[9]Local and international human rights organizations reported that those who hadcommitted abuses in 2000 were also implicated in human rights violations duringthe 2002 elections.[10]Few if any of those responsible for these crimes were ever prosecuted.During the general elections andpresidential run-off in 2008, Human Rights Watch documented widespreadatrocities by the military, state security agents, war veterans,[11]and ZANU-PF supporters, including the killing of at least 200 people and thebeating and torture of 5,000 others.[12]As this report will show, there have beenfew prosecutions for the serious human rights abuses that took place during thoseelections. The perpetrators remain at large, in some cases continuing to livein the same communities as their victims.II. Impunity and International LawTheZimbabwean government’s repeated failure to act against human rightsviolations by its security forces and others acting on behalf of the governmenthas created a crisis of impunity.  International human rights law placesobligations on states to end impunity for serious human rights violations byundertaking prompt, thorough, and impartial investigations of violations ofhuman rights law, ensuring that those responsible for serious crimes areprosecuted, tried and duly punished, and providing an effective remedy forvictims.[13]Impunity has beendefined as the impossibility, in law or in fact, of holding perpetrators ofhuman rights violations accountable. De facto impunity takes place when thestate fails to prosecute human rights abusers due to lack of capacity orpolitical will. De jure impunity occurs when laws or regulationsproviding immunity or amnesty extend and strengthen the impact of de facto impunityby limiting or making it impossible to prosecute a perpetrator for human rightsabuses.[14] Zimbabwe has suffered fromboth forms of impunity, which has led to grave human rights violations byallowing past perpetrators to commit future crimes, and it has undermined faithin the government, the security forces, and the criminal justice system.By permitting a climate of impunity, Zimbabwe has failed tomeet its obligations under international human rights law. Internationaltreaties impose on Zimbabwe the obligation to deter and prevent gross violationsof human rights, and to investigate, prosecute, and remedy abuses.[15]This also entails addressing thevictim's rights to justice, knowledge, and reparations.[16]The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights(ICCPR), to which Zimbabwe is party, requires that states adopt measures,including through the legal system, to protect fundamental rights.[17]According to the UN Human Rights Committee, the independent expert body thatmonitors compliance with the ICCPR, a state’s failure to investigate andbring perpetrators to justice, particularly with respect to crimes such askillings, torture and other ill-treatment, could in itself be a violation of theCovenant.[18]Similarly, the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights placesobligations on states to ensure protection of charter rights, and forindividuals to have rights violations against them heard by competent nationalinstitutions.[19]Various international standards also seek to promote stateefforts to obtain justice for victims. For instance, the Principles on theEffective Prevention and Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and SummaryExecutions call upon states to remove officials implicated in such crimes fromdirect or indirect power over the complainants and witnesses, as well as thoseconducting the investigation.[20]The UN Declaration against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or DegradingTreatment or Punishment provides that thecompetent authorities impartially investigate allegations of torture even ifthere has been no formal complaint, and to institute criminal proceedings iftorture appears to have been committed.[21]Combating impunityrequires the identification of the specific perpetrators of the violations. Thedoctrine of superior or command responsibility imposes liability onsuperiors—with either de jure or de facto command—for the unlawfulacts of their subordinates, where the superior knew or had reason to know ofthe unlawful acts, and failed to prevent or punish those acts.[22]In addition to the obligation to investigate and prosecute,states have an obligation to provide victims with information about theinvestigation into the violations. Victims should be entitled to seek and obtain information on the causes andconditions resulting to rights violations against them.[23] Theformer UN Commission on Human Rights adopted principles that “irrespectiveof any legal proceedings, victims, their families and relatives have theimprescriptible right to know the truth about the circumstances in whichviolations took place.”[24]Under the ICCPR, states also have an obligation “toensure that any person whose rights or freedoms as herein recognized areviolated shall have an effective remedy.”[25]The ICCPR imposes on states the duty to ensure that any person shall have theirright to an effective remedy “determined by competent judicial,administrative or legislative authorities, or by any other competent authorityprovided for by the legal system of the state, and to develop the possibilitiesof judicial remedy.”[26]The state is under a continuing obligation to provide an effective remedy;there is no time limit on legal action and the right cannot be compromised evenduring a state of emergency.[27]III. Impunity through Amnesties and ClemencySince independence in 1980, the government of President RobertMugabe has used various amnesty and clemency provisions under the constitutionto unjustifiably prevent the prosecution or reduce the punishments of membersof the state security forces and ZANU-PF allies responsible for serious humanrights violations. Mugabe’s misuse of these provisions for partisanpolitical purposes has added to the pervasive climate of impunity in thecountry, keeping rights violators in positions of authority and sending amessage that accountability is irrelevant. The Zimbabwe constitution in section31(i) empowers the president to exercise the “prerogative of mercy”by granting amnesty, pardons or clemency to those implicated in or convicted ofa crime.[28]While no legal or judicial limits have been placed on thispower in Zimbabwe, the UN Human Rights Committeehas repeatedly stated thatamnesties and other legal measures that prevent investigation, prosecution, andpunishment of perpetrators of human rights violations and hinder the victims ofsuch violations from being granted reparations are incompatible with a state'sobligations under the ICCPR.[29] The Committee stated that where public officials have committedserious crimes such as killings, torture and enforced disappearances,governments “may notrelieve perpetrators from personal responsibility, as has occurred with certainamnesties.”[30]Mugabe has used hispresidential power of clemency to improperly excuse or reduce the punishmentsof individuals for politically motivated human rights violations. He issuedClemency Order No. 1 of April 18, 1988, “with respect to all human rightsviolations committed by the state security forces and so-called dissidentsbetween 1982 and the end of 1987.”[31] This clemency waspart of the Unity Accord between the Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU) andthe Zimbabwe African Peoples’ Union (ZAPU), which led, in 1987, to thecreation of ZANU- Patriotic Front. Those who benefitted from the clemency weremainly members of the state security forces involved in serious human rightsviolations.InOctober 2000, Mugabe issued Clemency Order No. 1 of 2000, which granted generalamnesty for all political crimes, including torture and kidnappings committedby ZANU-PF supporters, youth militia and state security forces –exempting only rape, murder and fraud.[32]Clemency Order No. 1 of 2008, issued in June 2008, coveredthose arrested between March 29 and June 16, 2008, from the day of the generalelections to the eve of the presidential run-off. Among other things, it grantedindemnity to all prisoners convicted of culpable homicide and given adeterminate sentence as of June 16, 2008,[33] thus coveringthose who were convicted of acts such as torture and abductions, excluding murder,rape, and fraud. Most abuses committed by ZANU-PF supporters, officials andsoldiers took place in the period between the general elections in March andthe presidential run-off on June 17, 2008.[34]However, as indicated in this report, there were few, if any, prosecutions forthe serious crimes committed during this period.  It is therefore highlyunlikely that any of those involved in the pre and post election violencebenefitted from this clemency.IV. Failure to Investigate and Prosecute Serious PoliticalCrimesZimbabwe’s criminal justice system has promotedimpunity by rarely providing justice for serious human rights violations. Thepolice and judiciary are severely compromised and have largely ignored callsfor investigations into past and recent human rights abuses.[35]Police who fail or refuse to file criminal complaints by victims ofpolitical violence are rarely investigated or disciplined. The ZANU-PFgovernment, which remains in charge of the judiciary under the GNU, hasroutinely undermined its independence by appointing partisan judges to hearcases, disregarding high court orders and threatening and attacking independentjudges and magistrates.[36]ZANU-PF supporters, war veterans, and the armed forceskilled up to 200 people following the 2008 general elections.[37] Theysubjected those accused of supporting the MDC to severe beatings and torturewith heavy wooden sticks and iron bars, often resulting in fatalinjuries.  Others were abducted and then murdered. To Human Rights Watch’sknowledge, there have been no serious investigations let alone prosecutions forthe serious crimes that took place during this time.Human Rights Watch followed up on a number of politicallymotivated killings that it previously documented in 2008.  In many of thesecases in which police reports were filed, even when alleged perpetrators werenamed by their victims or witnesses, the police failed to follow up on thecases, as highlighted below:Archiford Chipiyo and two friends were killed by a groupof alleged ZANU-PF supporters on June 18, 2008. A police report was filedand police requested a post mortem report from a government doctor, whichindicated that all three had died from skull fractures and head injuriesdue to gunshot wounds.Gibbs Chironga was killed by a groupcomprising up to 150 armed alleged ZANU-PF supporters, youth militia and warveterans on June 20, 2008. Two other people were killed on the same day. Apolice report was filed by Chironga’s mother and sister but bizarrely,they were arrested on charges of violence. They were later released and thepolice took no further action.Abigail Chiroto and her four year old son wereabducted from their home on June 16, 2008, by suspected CIO officials. Thekidnappers abandoned the little boy at a nearby police station and hismother’s body was later found on a farm in Borrowdale. A police reportwas filed but the police took no action.Tonderai Ndira was abducted and killed byalleged ZANU-PF supporters in May 2008. His wife filed a police report but noaction was taken by the police.Beta Chokururama, Godfrey Kauzani and CainNyevhe were abducted and killed on May 7, 2008, by suspected ZANU-PFsupporters. Their relatives filed police complaints in the days after they werekilled. No action was taken by the police.Peter K. was killed on June 28, 2008, bysuspected ZANU-PF supporters and officials. A police report was filed andwitnesses provided the police with the names of the alleged perpetrators.Police promised to return for further interviews but never came back. No actionhas been taken since.Tariro M., his wife and another elderlycouple were abducted and beaten to death by suspected ZANU-PF supporters, youthmilitia and soldiers on June 25, 2008. Police took a statement from TariroM’s wife, in which she named some of the perpetrators before she died. Apolice report was filed and the police took a further statement from her sonsin July 2008, but no further action was taken.The failure of police to act has left many communities, in provincesaround the country, vulnerable to further violence. Many victims and their familymembers believe that they remain at risk because of the failure of the police toprosecute perpetrators, some of whom still live in the areas in which theycommitted the crimes.[38]The Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum, which has filed hundreds of civil lawsuits across the country on behalf of victims of the 2008 election-relatedviolence, informed Human Rights Watch that the majority of perpetrators namedin its lawsuits continue to live in the same communities in which they hadperpetrated the violence. Said a representative of the Forum: “Perpetratorsin most of the cases we are working on, were named by their victims, and inmost cases were people the victims knew who lived in the same community.”[39]The Forum has documented cases where alleged perpetrators threatened theirvictims with further violence after court summons were issued against them. Inone case, an alleged perpetrator assaulted his victim after a civil law suitwas filed against him.[40]In Headlands, Manicaland, Farai C. told Human Rights Watchthat no one was arrested or prosecuted for killing her 45-year-old son on June22, 2008, even though members of the community knew the perpetrators –who were ZANU-PF officials and supporters – and that most of theperpetrators lived in neighboring villages. Farai C. told Human Rights Watch:We reported the case to the police and a police docket wasopened. The police came a few days later saying they wanted to follow up on thesuspects. I didn’t have the answers because I wasn’t there when myson was killed but other members of the community knew who the perpetratorswere and told the police. They even gave the names to the police. The policesaid they would return but nothing has happened since and it’s now over twoyears. I find it hard to forgive. My son was the sole breadwinner in thefamily. Yet, the people who killed my son are roaming free in the community.[41]In another case, on June 25, 2008, a group of ZANU-PFofficials, supporters, and soldiers abducted and beat to death four elderlypeople in Manicaland province whom they suspected of voting for the MDC duringthe elections.James D., whose parents were among the four people killed,told Human Rights Watch:I was told by a certain lady that my parents were severelyassaulted near a farm house. We went there and found them. My parents were withanother couple. My father and the other two had already passed away and only mymother was alive but barely. She could still speak. We took the bodies home. Weimmediately went to make a police report and a police officer went to thehospital where my mother was admitted. She told him the names of the people whohad beaten her and my father, as well as the other couple. The following morningmy mother died. The policeman who took my mother’s statement was fromMarondera police station. We understand the report was made to the CriminalInvestigation Department in Mutare and an investigating officer from the Lawand Order section was put in charge.[42]James D. informed Human Rights Watch that police came once,on July 1, 2008, to take a statement, but did not return. He said that many ofthe alleged perpetrators were from the surrounding areas and one of those wholed the beatings actually lived next door to James D. and his family.Tendai L., whose parents were also killed in the incident,told Human Rights Watch:It’s a painful experience knowing that our neighborswho we see every day were the perpetrators. I feel angry. The perpetrators havemade it clear at their rallies that at the next elections they will do it againbecause they didn’t get arrested. We now live in perpetual fear. We can’tdo anything about it. We have received no help from the state.[43]Tendai L.’s brother Richard informed Human RightsWatch that the family had received further threats. He said, “One of theperpetrators has threatened us several times. He keeps saying that we are theones who are left who need to be dealt with. They are going around saying thatby the time of the next elections we shouldn’t be in this area.”[44]Plaxedes Ndira, whose husband Tonderai was abducted and killedin May 2008 by alleged ZANU-PF supporters and officials told Human Rights Watch:“Forgiveness isn’t enough because they left wounds that can’tbe healed. They need to go to jail for the rest of their lives. If this doesn’thappen when elections come next year, it [violence] will start again.”[45]Despite filing a police report in 2008, Ndira has received no response from thepolice.Because of the police’s failure to investigate reportsof political violence, local organizations have filed legal complaints andwritten letters to various government agencies calling for investigations onbehalf of victims, but the organizations said the police have not responded.For example, in November 2010, lawyers for Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights,representing 12 victims of political violence from Muzarabani district,northeast of Harare, wrote to Attorney General Johannes Tomana, the police inMuzarabani, and the Minister of Home Affairs, calling for an investigation intothe cases. Tomana ignored their letters,[46] instead, he wasquoted by the Zimonline news site as saying that the letter was“political and trivial” and that he would not bother looking at thedossier because it was not compiled by the police.[47]On August 20, 2009, theMDC sent a letter to the attorney general that listed 183 victims of politicalkillings by name and location of the killings. The letter called on the AttorneyGeneral to use his constitutional powers to order the Commissioner General ofpolice to investigate the killings. Over a year and a half later, the MDC hasnot received a response from Tomana.[48]V. Failure to Investigate Torture by State AgentsThe use of torture by state agents is endemic in Zimbabwe.In the aftermath of the 2008 general elections, Human Rights Watch reported thatthe army established bases across the country to torture people as a form ofpunishment for voting for the MDC.[49]The police have also routinely arrested human rights activists and journalistsand subjected them to torture, cruel, degrading and inhumane treatment. Thetorture and ill-treatment inflicted has included severe beatings on the back,buttocks and soles of the feet with blunt objects, forcing victims to seat orstand in uncomfortable positions for hours on end, as well as false executionsand threats of death. The government has repeatedly refused to investigateallegations of torture by police and other state agents, despite court orders.[50]The Zimbabwe constitution guarantees freedom from tortureand inhuman or degrading treatment.[51]Zimbabwe is party to several international agreements that prohibit the use oftorture and other forms of ill-treatment, including the I ICCPR,[52]and the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights.[53]As noted above, a state’s failure to investigate and bring perpetratorsof torture and ill-treatment to justice can be a violation of the ICCPR.[54]The African Union Guidelines and Measures for the Prohibition of Torture,Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in Africa (also known asthe Robben Island Guidelines) also state that there should be no immunity fromprosecution for nationals suspected of torture and that those responsible foracts of torture or ill-treatment be subject to legal process.[55]In October 2009, Manfred Nowak, the then UN SpecialRapporteur on torture, and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment wasdeported from Harare International Airport after he was invited by PrimeMinister Morgan Tsvangirai to investigate cases of torture.[56]The ZANU-PF  wing of the government claimed that it had withdrawn itsinvitation to Novak because it was engaged in a consultative process in Harare.[57]In a case that has received widespread internationalattention, Human Rights Watch documented the abduction or arbitrary arrest andtorture of prominent human rights activist Jestina Mukoko and 14 otheractivists by state agents between October and December 2008. In total, stateagents abducted or arbitrarily arrested 43 people—including MDCofficials—in that period. The authorities later accused them ofinvolvement in acts of banditry and training others in banditry, sabotage andinsurgency.[58]The activists were held in secret detention for periods ranging from two toeight weeks, before being handed over to the police. They reported that stateagents subjected them to various acts of torture and ill-treatment, includingbeatings on the soles of the feet and denial of food and medication.On September 28, 2009, the Supreme Court upheld anapplication by Jestina Mukoko, in which she argued that her constitutionalrights to liberty, full protection of the law, and freedom from torture hadbeen infringed.[59]The court dismissed terrorism charges against Mukoko and the other activistsand ordered a permanent stay of prosecution in the criminal case against them.However, at the time of writing more than a year later, a full report of thejudgment has not been released.In a series of civil law suits, Mukoko and other activistsfiled complaints against the Attorney General, the Minister of Home Affairs,and several other senior CID, police and CIO officers as being responsible fortheir abduction, torture, and ill-treatment.[60] At the time ofwriting, the court has not reached a decision in Mukoko’s case.Chris Dhlamini, MDC security head who was one of the 43abducted, told Human Rights Watch that during a month in solitary confinement,state agents tortured him on several occasions. He said that he was beaten withblunt objects, subjected to a fake execution and simulated drowning, and hangedupside down on a tree, in order to force him to confess that he was involved inthe training of  bandits in Botswana.  He said that on a number of occasionshe was tortured in front of several senior police officers, two of whom heidentified by name. Although Dhlamini named the senior police officers in hiscomplaint to the authorities and the Supreme Court ruled that the activistswere tortured, the government has not investigated or arrested any of thesecurity agents and police officers accused of organizing and carrying out theabduction of Mukoko, Dhlamini, and other activists. None of the men named byDhlamini in his formal complaint have been removed from their posts orprosecuted.[61]In August 2010, Mapfumo Garutsa, another activist abductedat the same time, brought a civil law claim against the state.[62]Garutsa made the claim for unlawful arrest and detention, and maliciousprosecution and has accused state agents of subjecting him to torture, inhumanand degrading treatment, including beatings on the soles of his feet anddenying him medical treatment. In his claim, Garutsa named seven ministers andsecurity force commanders in their official capacities and seven police, CIDand CIO officers in their personal capacities. The case is ongoing.In a number of cases, the rights of those who were subjectedto torture and other ill- treatment in the aftermath of the 2008 generalelections have been violated by the same security agents who beat and torturedthem. Several people informed Human Rights Watch that they had since receivedthreats of further violence which they believe is related to this year’s proposedreferendum and elections.Fatsirai N., a 50-year old MDC official who was arrested andtortured by police and central intelligence officers in June 2008 told HumanRights Watch:On August 31, 2010 I was attending a COPAC [constitutionaloutreach] meeting when I saw three CIO members who arrested and beat me in2008. At the meeting they threatened me and told me that they would come afterme and kill me. They threatened to cut off my hand in the upcoming referendum.Later in the evening I saw the same unmarked vehicle they were driving pass bymy home. I then left my home and ran away. I hid in the mountains for twoweeks. I then came here. I’m scared to go back because with these COPACmeetings and the referendum they could kill me.[63]Josiah K., who was held and tortured at a base inMashonaland East by ZANU-PF officials and soldiers for two days in 2008, toldHuman Rights Watch:I had a terrible experience at the base during that time.They handcuffed me and would beat me with rods every day, telling me to repentand stop supporting the MDC. After my release I needed counseling. And nowthese same people are roaming around. They have held meetings during theoutreach programs in our village and made threats against all of us in thecommunity saying they would make things even worse for us if we supported theMDC. One of them has made particular threats against me and told me to watchout because he knows I still support the MDC.[64]VI. Response of the Power-Sharing GovernmentInternational human rights law obligates Zimbabwe’spower-sharing government to promptly, impartially and credibly investigateserious violations of human rights, prosecute those implicated by the evidence,and, if their guilt is established following a fair trial, impose proportionatepenalties. Implied in this is that all victims shall have the opportunity toassert their rights and receive a fair and effective remedy, that thoseresponsible stand trial, and that the victims themselves obtain reparations.Human Rights Watch is unaware of serious investigations by the power-sharing governmentinto serious human rights violations, let alone prosecuting and convicting theperpetrators, or providing remedies and reparations to the victims.Zimbabwe’s Global Political Agreement (GPA), which ledto the formation of the power-sharing government in 2009, was signed by the twofactions of the MDC and ZANU-PF on September 15, 2008, at a time when scores ofvictims of human rights abuses were seeking justice and accountability forabuses that took place during the 2008 elections.[65]In the preamble to the agreement, the parties agreed to end polarization,divisions, conflict and intolerance that had characterized Zimbabwean politicsand society.[66]They further expressed determination to act in a manner that demonstratedrespect for the democratic values of justice, fairness, openness, tolerance,equality, and respect for all persons and human rights.[67]Sadly, the GPA was largely silent on the issue of justice.Crucially, it did not lay out clear steps or timelines for fundamental justicesystem reforms that would help restore fundamental human rights protections andthe rule of law. Human Rights Watch has long called for justice-centeredpolicies in Zimbabwe, and had hoped the power-sharing agreement would at leastsend a clear message to abusers on the likelihood of accountability and offerthe hope of justice to victims of human rights violations.In the end, the power-sharing agreement only made a passingreference to this central issue, noting the duty of all political parties andindividuals to “respect and uphold the Constitution and other laws of theland, and adhere to the principles of the rule of law.”[68]In accordance with GPA provisions to promote issues ofconcern to the general population, the new government set up the Organ for NationalHealing, Reconciliation, and Integration, comprising three ministers of state,one from each of the three main political parties.[69]However, local human rights organizations have criticized the absence ofjustice and accountability in the organ’s mandate.[70] Thecases in this report make clear that ”national healing” has notbeen interpreted by the government to mean justice and reparations for victimsof serious abuses.Progress in implementing many aspects of the GPA has beenslow. The main obstacles are ongoing disputes of key provisions of the GPA, anda lack of trust between the MDC and ZANU-PF. This lack of progress has had adirect impact on the human rights situation and the climate of impunity.Two years into Zimbabwe’s power-sharing government,the former opposition party, the MDC lacks real power to end human rightsabuses and end  impunity. President Mugabe and ZANU-PF, through the use ofpoliticized and partisan senior government officials and state security forces,continue to maintain power and dominate government institutions such as thepolice, army and the judiciary.The MDC’s lack of effective power and its apparentprioritizing of the survival of the power-sharing government over all else isseverely inhibiting the party’s ability to push for accountability andjustice. The MDC has not forcefully insisted on justice and accountability forhuman rights abuses, nor has it attempted to bring the perpetrators of thoseabuses to book. At a press conference in Johannesburg, South Africa, onSeptember 16, 2010, Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai ruled out any criminalprosecution of Robert Mugabe and allies of ZANU-PF after they left office. He toldjournalists that the power-sharing deal and the possibility of a newconstitution were processes of finding reconciliation and that a retributiveagenda would be counterproductive to such a process. Tsvangirai stated that, “Reconciliationis the only solution for that country to have assured stability, peace andprogress.”[71]As currently constituted, any national healing process thatdoes not address issues of justice, accountability for past abuses, impunity,and redress for victims weakens the country’s ability to end the cycle ofimpunity and violence. The power-sharing government should take the lead inending abuses and impunity by putting in place mechanisms to ensure that thosewho have committed abuses in the past and those who continue to do so, are heldto account for their crimes.With a referendum and elections proposed for the coming year,the current atmosphere of impunity raises the specter of further violence, notonly committed by the same perpetrators, but by the targets of violence aswell. Local human rights activists have argued that the lack of accountabilityfor serious crimes that took place in 2008 could lead to acts of revenge byvictims. Rashid Mahiya, the director of Heal Zimbabwe Trust, an organizationwhich works with victims of political violence, told Human Rights Watch, “Thereshould be a consequence for committing a crime. If people don’t feel thisthey will find another form of justice and it may not be within the law.”[72]RecommendationsTo the Government of National UnityEnsure full accountability, including prosecutions, forthe perpetrators of serious human rights violations, regardless ofpolitical affiliation, position or rank, and press for appropriateremedies for victims of abuses. Hold accountable as a matter of commandresponsibility commanders and other superiors who knew or should haveknown of abuses, and who failed to prevent or punish it.Take all necessary measures to end impunity. Set up anindependent Commission of Inquiry, with credible civil society panelmembers, to investigate serious past human rights violations, includingthose committed during the 2008 election period.Take all necessary measures to end the security forcesinvolvement in extrajudicial executions, torture and ill-treatment, andother violations of human rights.Establish an independent civilian authority charged withreceiving complaints and investigating allegations of crimes committed bymembers of the police, military, and other armed forces.Promptly publish past and future reports of inquirycommissions tasked with investigating alleged violations of human rights.Ensure that administrative and judicial proceedingsregarding alleged violations of human rights are open to the public asprovided by international law.Ratify and rigorously implement the Convention againstTorture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.Invite relevant United Nations special mechanisms, such asthe Special Rapporteur on Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or DegradingTreatment or Punishment and the Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial,Summary or Arbitrary Executions, to Zimbabwe to investigate and makerecommendations.Adopt legislation to qualify, or completely nullify, pastclemencies and amnesties involving perpetrators of serious human rightsabuses. These include the Clemency Order (1) of 18 April 1988, theClemency Order (1) of 1995, and the Clemency Order (1) of 2000.To the Member Statesof the Southern African Development CommunityPress the Zimbabwean governmentthrough public and private diplomacy to implement the aboverecommendations.As guarantor of the September 15, 2008 Global PoliticalAgreement, and to ensure that future elections in Zimbabwe are held in anatmosphere free of violence and intimidation, call on the Zimbabweangovernment to institute human rights and rule of law reforms, includingending impunity and reforming the criminal justice system.Promote compliance with the Global Political Agreement andmonitor the progress of all parties in fulfilling their human rights commitmentsmade under the agreement.Condition the lifting of restrictions against individualsin Zimbabwe with specific actions by ZANU-PF and the achievement of clearhuman rights benchmarks.Support Zimbabwe in holding free and fair elections thatmeet international standards and publicly support full, unfetteredinternational monitoring of future elections well in advance of pollingday.To the European Union and the United StatesMaintain targeted travel sanctions and asset freezesagainst ZANU-PF and its leadership until ZANU-PF meets specific humanrights benchmarks. Such benchmarks should include measurable progress onjustice, providing reparations and ensuring that no blanket amnesties forpast human rights abuses are granted.Support any government efforts to end impunity and reformthe criminal justice system.AcknowledgementsThis report was written and researched by Tiseke Kasambala,senior researcher in the Africa division of Human Rights Watch. It was reviewedby Rona Peligal, deputy director in the Africa division; James Ross, legal andpolicy director; and Babatunde Olugboji, deputy program director.Thomas Gilchrist, research assistant; Rachel Nicholson andCharlene Harry, associates in the Africa division edited and formatted thisreport. Grace Choi, Kathy Mills, and Fitzroy Hepkins prepared the report forpublication.Human Rights Watch is grateful to all the individuals whoprovided information for this report, including: Heal Trust Zimbabwe, theZimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum, and Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights.[1] The referendum andelections may not be held this year, due to disagreements between the MDC andZANU-PF over the constitution, the timing of the elections and other issues.[2]See, for example, BrianRaftopolous and Aloys Mlambo, eds., Becoming Zimbabwe: A History from thePre-Colonial Period to 2008, ([Harare]: Weaver Press, 2008); “War inRhodesia, 1965-1980,” Joseph Mtisi, Munyaradzi Nyakudya, and TeresaBarnes. pp. 141-66.[3]Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace in Zimbabwe and LegalResources Foundation in Harare, Gukurahundi in Zimbabwe: A Report on theDisturbances in Matabeleland and the Midlands, 1980-1988 ([Johannesburg]:Jacana Media, 2007), p. 43.[4] Ibid. pp 43[5]Brian Raftopolous and AloysMlambo, eds., Becoming Zimbabwe: A History from the Pre-Colonial Period to2008, ([Harare]: Weaver Press, 2008); “War in Rhodesia,1965-1980,” Joseph Mtisi, Munyaradzi Nyakudya, and Teresa Barnes. pp.141-66[6]Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace in Zimbabwe and LegalResources Foundation in Harare, Gukurahundi in Zimbabwe: A Report on theDisturbances in Matabeleland and the Midlands, 1980-1988 ([Johannesburg]:Jacana Media, 2007), p. 43[7]ShariEppel, “Gukurahundi: The need for truth and reparation,” in BrianRaftopolous and Tyrone Savage, eds., Zimbabwe: Justice and Political Reconcilliation,([Cape Town]: Institute for Justice and Reconciliation, 2004).pp 43 - 46[8]Amnesty International,“Zimbabwe: Terror tactics in the run-up to parliamentaryelections,” AI Index: AFR 46/014/2000, June 2000, http://amnesty.name/en/library/info/AFR46/014/2000/en(accessed January 4, 2011).[9] See various reports on theelections, including Commonwealth Observer Report, “Preliminary Report ofthe Commonwealth Observer Group to the Zimbabwe Presidential Election,9–10 March 2002,” March 14, 2002, http://www.afrol.com/Countries/Zimbabwe/documents/commonw_elections_group.htm(accessed October 14, 2010); “Preliminary Statement on PresidentialElections by the Norwegian Observer Team,” Oslo, March 13, 2002,http://www.afrol.com/Countries/Zimbabwe/documents/commonw_elections_group.htm(accessed October 14, 2010); and “Statement on the ZimbabweElections,” SADC Parliamentary Forum Observer Mission, Harare, March 13,2002, http://www.africaaction.org/docs02/zim0203.htm (accessed October 14,2010).[10] Amnesty International,“Zimbabwe: The toll of impunity,” AI Index: AFR 46/034/2002, June25, 2002, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/AFR46/034/2002(accessed October 11, 2010).[11]The terms war veteranrefers to those who fought during Zimbabwe’s liberation struggle in the1970s. However, many of the “war veterans” implicated in recentabuses are believed to be individuals hired by the government to commit abusesunder the guise of being “war veterans”. Many are too young to begenuine war veterans or have fought during the liberation struggle.[12]Human Rights Watch, “Bulletsfor Each of You”: State-Sponsored Violence since Zimbabwe’s March29 Elections, ISBN: 1-56432-324-2, June 2008, http://www.hrw.org/node/40484.[13]See UN Commission on HumanRights, “Report of the independent expert to update the set of principlesto combat impunity,” E/CN.4/2005/102/Add.1, February 8, 2005, para. 19.[14]The UN Commission on HumanRights has defined impunity as the “impossibility, de jure or de facto,of bringing the perpetrators of violations to account - whether in criminal,civil, administrative or disciplinary proceedings - since they are not subjectto any inquiry that might lead to their being accused, arrested, tried and, iffound guilty, sentenced to appropriate penalties, and to making reparations totheir victims.” UN Commission on Human Rights, “Report of theindependent expert to update the set of principles to combat impunity,”E/CN.4/2005/102/Add.1, February 8, 2005 para. A. p.6.[15] International Covenant onCivil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adopted December 16, 1966, G.A. Res. 2200A(XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 52, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S.171, entered into force March23, 1976, accededto by Zimbabwe August 13, 1991; African [Banjul] Charter on Human andPeoples’ Rights(AfricanCharter), adopted June 27, 1981, OAU Doc.CAB/LEG/67/3 REV.5,21I.L.M.58 (1982),entered into force October 21, 1986, ratified by Zimbabwe May 30, 1986.[16]See HumanRights Committee, General Comment 31, Nature of the General Legal Obligation onStates Parties to the Covenant, U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.13 (2004) , para.15 ("States Parties must ensure that individuals also have accessible andeffective remedies to vindicate those rights" protected by the ICCPR). Seealso Impunity Principles, principle I; Basic Principles and Guidelines on theRight to a Remedy and Reparation for Victims of Gross Violations ofInternational Human Rights Law and Serious Violations of InternationalHumanitarian Law ("Reparations Principles"), adopted December 16,2005, G.A. res. 60/147, U.N. Doc. A/RES/60/147 (2005), principle 11.[17]ICCPR, article 2(2) &(3).[18]Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 31,Nature of the General Legal Obligation Imposed on States under the Covenant,CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.13, May 26, 2004,articles 15 & 18.[19] African Charter, articles1 & 7.[20] Principles on theEffective Prevention and Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and SummaryExecutions: Recommended by Economic and Social Council resolution 1989/65 of 24May 1989, http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/executions.htm (accessed January 4,2011), principle 15.[21]Declaration on the Protection of All Personsfrom Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatmentor Punishment,G.A. res. 3452 (XXX), annex, 30 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 34) at 91, U.N.Doc. A/10034 (1975), articles 9 & 10..[22]See Prosecutor v. Delalic, International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY),Case No. IT-96-21-T, November 16, 1998, para. 346 (Celebici). In Celebici, theTrial Chamber of the ICTY traced the development of the concept of superiorresponsibility from its first international judicial recognition in theNuremberg and Tokyo trials of World War II. The Trial Chamber broke down theprincipal of superior responsibility into three essential elements: (i) theexistence of a superior-subordinate relationship; (ii) the superior knew or hadreason to know that the criminal act was about to be or had been committed; and(iii) the superior failed to take the necessary and reasonable measures toprevent the criminal act or punish the perpetrator thereof.  See also RomeStatute of the International Criminal Court, 2187 U.N.T.S. 90, entered intoforce July 1, 2002, article 28.[23] Basic Principles andGuidelines on the Right to a Remedy and Reparation for Victims of GrossViolations of international Human Rights Law and Serious Violations ofInternational Humanitarian Law, March 21, 2006, adopted by the 60thsession of the United Nations General Assembly, A/RES/60/147, paras. 11(c) and24.[24] Set of Principles for theProtection and Promotion of Human Rights Through Action to Combat Impunity,October 2, 1997, adopted by the UN Commission on Human Rights,E/CN.4/Sub.2/1997/20/Rev.1, principle 3.[25] ICCPR, art. 2(3)(a).[26] ICCPR, art. 2 (3)(b).Basic Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and Reparation forVictims of Gross Violations of International Human Rights Law and SeriousViolations of International Humanitarian Law, March 21, 2006, adopted by the60th session of the United Nations General Assembly, A/RES/60/147, principle II.3.(d):“The obligation to respect, ensure respect for and implementinternational human rights law andinternational humanitarian law as provided for under the respective bodies oflaw, includes, inter alia, the duty to: (d) Provide effective remedies tovictims, including reparation, as described below.”[27] Human Rights Committee,General Comment 29, States of Emergency (art. 4), U.N. Doc.CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.11 (2001), para. 14 (“Even if a State party, during astate of emergency, and to the extent that such measures are strictly requiredby the exigencies of the situation, may introduce adjustments to the practicalfunctioning of its procedures governing judicial or other remedies, the Stateparty must comply with the fundamental obligation, under article 2, paragraph3, of the [ICCPR] to provide a remedy that is effective.”).[28] Constitution of Zimbabwe,1979, as amended, art 31(i). Although the constitution does not use the word“amnesty,” it refers to pardons of any person “concernedin” but not convicted of a crime, which is what an amnesty is.[29] See UNHuman Rights Committee, General Comment No. 20, Prohibition of Torture andCruel Treatment or Punishment (Forty-fourth session, 1992), , para. 15. See,e.g.  UN Human Rights Committee, "Consideration of Reports Submittedunder Article 40 of the Covenant, Comments of the Human Rights Committee,Argentina," CCPR/C/79/Add.46, 1995,http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/hrcommittee/ARGENTNA.htm (accessed January 23,2011), paras. 3 and 11; "Consideration of Reports Submitted by StateParties under Article 40 of the Covenant, Concluding Observations of the HumanRights Committee, Argentina," CCPR/CO/70/ARG, November 3, 2000,"Consideration of Reports Submitted by State Parties under Article 40 ofthe Covenant, Concluding Observations of the Human Rights Committee, France,"CCPR/C/79/Add.80, August 4, 1997,http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/(Symbol)/CCPR.C.79.Add.80.En?Opendocument(accessed January 23, 2011), para. 13; and "Consideration of ReportsSubmitted by State Parties under Article 40 of the Covenant, ConcludingObservations of the Human Rights Committee, Croatia," CCPR/CO/71/HRV,April 30, 2001,http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/(Symbol)/CCPR.CO.71.HRV.En?Opendocument(accessed January 23, 2011), para. 11.[30] UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 31,“Nature of the General Legal Obligation Imposed on States Parties to theCovenant,” CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.13, May 26, 2004, para. 18.[31]Shari Eppel,“Gukurahundi: The need for truth and reparation,” in BrianRaftopolous and Tyrone Savage, eds., Zimbabwe: Justice and PoliticalReconcilliation, [Cape Town]: Institute for Justice and Reconcilliation,2004).pp 45-46; Seealso Amnesty International, “The Toll of Impunity” AFR46/034/2002,June 25, 2002, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/AFR46/034/2002(accessed October 11, 2010).[32] Shari Eppel, Gukurahundi:The need for truth and reparation,  pp.50[33] General Notice 85A/2008 -Clemency Order No. 1 of 2008.[34] Ibid.[35] Since 2000, the ZANU-PFled government has appointed to the bench judges with previous connections andknown sympathies to ZANU-PF.  To ensure their loyalty the governmentallocated land seized under its controversial land reform program to judges.Similarly, ZANU-PF has appointed senior policemen with known sympathies to theparty and purged the police force of those police perceived as not being loyalto ZANU-PF.[36]Human Rights Watch, “OurHands are Tied”:Erosion of the Rule of Law in Zimbabwe,November 2008, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2008/11/19/our-hands-are-tied.[37] Human Rights Watch,“Bullets for Each of You”: State Sponsored Violence sinceZimbabwe’s March 29 Elections, June 2009,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2008/zimbabwe0608.[38] Human Rights Watchinterview with Rashid Mahiya, Director, Heal Zimbabwe Trust and Cleto Manjova,Senior Progammes Officer, Heal Zimbabwe Trust, Harare, September 9, 2010. HumanRights Watch telephone interview with representative of Zimbabwe Human RightsNGO Forum, Harare, October 29, 2010.[39]Human Rights Watchtelephone interview with representative of Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum,Harare, October 29, 2010.[40] Ibid.[41]Human Rights Watchinterview with Farai C, Manicaland province, September 15, 2010[42]Human Rights Watchinterview with James D, Manicaland province, September 15, 2010[43]Human Rights Watchinterview with Tendai L, Manicaland province, September 15, 2010[44] Human Rights Watchinterview, Manicaland province, September 15, 2010[45]Human RightsWatch interview with Plaxedes Ndira, Harare, November 24, 2010.[46]Human Rights Watchinterview with lawyers from Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights, Harare,September and November 2010; see also Tererai Karimakwenda, “AttorneyGeneral Dismisses Lawyers Call to Prosecute Political Violence,” SWAfrica Radio, November 19, 2010, http://allafrica.com/stories/201011200108.html(accessed on January 12, 2011).[47] Sebastian Nyamhangambiri,“Lawyers want rights abusers prosecuted,” ZimOnline, November 18,2010, http://www.zimonline.co.za/Article.aspx?ArticleId=6454(accessed on January 12, 2011).[48]Human Rights Watchinterview with Lawrence Paganga, MDC Information and Publicity Coordinator,Harare, November 22, 2010.[49] Human Rights Watch,“Bullets for Each of You”: State Sponsored Violence sinceZimbabwe’s March 29 Elections, June 2008,http://www.hrw.org/reports/2008/zimbabwe0608.[50] The international prohibitionagainst torture includes the intentional infliction of severe mental orphysical pain or suffering against an individual by or involving a publicofficial for punishing or intimidating the individual or others. See Declaration on the Protection of All Personsfrom Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatmentor Punishment,G.A.res. 3452 (XXX), annex, 30 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 34) at 91, U.N. Doc. A/10034(1975); Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, G.A. res. 39/46, annex,39 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 51) at 197, U.N. Doc. A/39/51 (1984), entered intoforce June 26, 1987.[51]Zimbabwe Constitution,article 15.[52]ICCPR, article 7.[53]African Charter on Humanand Peoples’ Rights, article 5.[54] Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 31,Nature of the General Legal Obligation Imposed on States under the Covenant,CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.13, May 26, 2004,articles 15 & 18.[55]Guidelines and Measures forthe Prohibition of Torture, Cruel, Inhumane or Degrading Treatment orPunishment in Africa, October, 2002,  article 1 (b), http://www.achpr.org/english/declarations/declaration_robbenislands_en.html (accessed October 4,2010), article 16 (b)..[56]“U.N. rights expertNowak deported from Zimbabwe,” Reuters, October 29, 2009, http://www.alertnet.org/thenews/newsdesk/WEA7394.htm(accessed October 29, 2009).[57]Ibid.[58] See Human Rights Watch newsreleases, “Zimbabwe: Investigate Whereaboutsof Abducted Human Rights Activist,” December 3, 2008,http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2008/12/03/zimbabwe-investigate-whereabouts-abducted-human-rights-activist;“Zimbabwe: Free Detained Rights Activist,” December 24, 2008,http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2008/12/24/zimbabwe-free-detained-rights-activist;“Zimbabwe: Drop PoliticallyMotivated Charges Against Activists,” May 6, 2009,http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2009/05/06/zimbabwe-drop-politically-motivated-charges-against-activists.[59]Misa/IFEX, “SupremeCourt Verdict Quashes Case against Human Rights Activist,” September 30,2009, http://www.ifex.org/zimbabwe/2009/09/30/application_upheld/ (accessedOctober 29, 2010).[60]Voice of America,“Zimbabwe Party Leaders, Security Chiefs Sued by Former Detainees,”August 31, 2010, http://www.voanews.com/english/news/africa/Zimbabwe-Party-Leaders-Security-Chiefs-Sued-by-Former-Detainees-101884088.html(accessed August 31, 2010). On July 27, Jestina Mukoko filed for compensationfor her torture and mistreatment while in detention. Mukoko listed the Ministryof State Security, Lands, Land Reform and Resettlement and its Minister DidymusMutasa in his individual capacity. Co-Ministers of Home Affairs Ministers,Kembo Mohadi and Giles Mutsekwa, Defence Minister Emmerson Mnangagwa,Commissioner General of Police Augustine Chihuri, Chief SuperintendentMagwenzi, Attorney General Johannes Tomana and Brig. Gen. Asher Tapfumaneyiwere also cited as respondents.[61]Human Rights Watchinterview with Chris Dhlamini, Harare, September 13, 2010.[62] Human Rights Watchinterview with Mapfumo Garutsa’s lawyers, Harare, September 13, 2010. Seealso, Alex Bell, SWRadio Africa, “ZANU-PF Torture Trial Postponed,”September 1, 2010, http://allafrica.com/stories/201009020014.html,(accessed September 1, 2010).[63] Human Rights Watchinterview with Fatsirai N, Harare, September 13, 2010.[64]Human Rights Watchinterview with Josiah K, Harare, November 23, 2010.[65] Human Rights Watch, FalseDawn: The Zimbabwe Power-Sharing Government’s Failure to Deliver HumanRights Improvements, August 2009,http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2009/08/31/false-dawn[66]Agreement between theZimbabwe African National Union – Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF) and the twoMovement for Democratic Change formations, on resolving the challenges facingZimbabwe, September 15, 2008, http://www.kubatana.net/docs/demgg/mdc_zpf_agreement_080915.pdf(accessed January 30, 2011)[67]Ibid.[68]Agreement between theZimbabwe African National Union – Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF) and the twoMovement for Democratic Change formations, on resolving the challenges facingZimbabwe, article XI (a), September 15, 2008, http://www.kubatana.net/docs/demgg/mdc_zpf_agreement_080915.pdf(accessed January 30, 2011)[69] Human Rights Watch, FalseDawn[70] Human Rights Watch interviewwith local NGO representatives, Harare, September 9 and 13, 2010.[71]David Smith, “MorganTsvangirai praises Robert Mugabe ‘the hero,’” The Guardian(London), September 16, 2010, http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/16/morgan-tsvangirai-praises-robert-mugabe(accessed October 21, 2010)[72]Human Rights Watchinterview with Rashid Mahiya, Harare, September 9, 2010.Related ContentMarch 8, 2011News ReleaseZimbabwe: No Justice for Rampant Killings, TortureImpunity Fuels New Abuses, Imperils Future ElectionsMarch 8, 2011News ReleaseZimbabwe: No Justice for Rampant Killings, TortureRegion / CountryAfrica ZimbabweProtecting Rights, Saving LivesHuman Rights Watch defends the rights of people in 90 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justiceDonate NowGet Updates On Rights Issues From Around The GlobeSign UpConnect With UsTwitterFacebookYouTubeInstagramFooter menuContact UsCorrectionsPrivacy PolicyPermissionsBlackbaud Security IncidentSite MapChild Safeguarding© 2022 Human Rights WatchHuman Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700Human Rights Watchis a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808Human Rights Watch